==PAGE:1==
Post occupancy evaluation of 
neighborhoods in Copenhagen 
Source: (Det Kongelige Bibliotek)
Master thesis
Casper Emil Alberts
==PAGE:2==
ii
Technical University of Denmark
Department of civil engineering
Section for architectual engineering
Casper Emil Alberts
Master thesis, 35 ETCS point:
Post occupancy evaluation of neighborhoods in Copenhagen
© july 2018 by the author
Head supervisor:
Per Sieverts Nielsen, senior researcher
Department of Management Engineering, Technical University of Denmark
Started: 22nd of January 2018
Submitted: 22th of July 2018
==PAGE:3==
iii
Intentionally left blank
==PAGE:4==
iv
Preface
	
For the past 5 years, I have worked to find my specialty in the field of 
architectual engineering, which now has been narrow down to a special focus on 
the development of the cities of the future. I have always been keen to draw and 
solve various issues - an interest that derives from my grandfather who introdu­
ced me to his work as an engineer at B&W, teaching me to draw in an early age 
and working structured when facing new challenges. For many years, I expected 
to go to the architectural school, but when I was introduced to architectural en­
gineering at DTU, I saw it as an obvious opportunity to develop my more ma­
thematical and technical interests in a creative context.
	
In connection with my time at DTU, I have come to terms with a wide 
range of different fields within civil engineering but also other engineering sec­
tors. Architectural engineering is an interdisciplinary practice that aims to devel­
op the construction industry with the development of new technologies and new 
innovative practices. Over time, I have focused my specialty towards first energy 
design, then transferred this knowledge to microclimate in smaller urban en­
vironments and lately I have focused on urbanism as an overall complex system.
	
This study is not a product of solely my own work. There is a big thanks 
to all the people around me who have helped to write this master thesis. First 
of all, I would like to thank my supervisor Per Sievert Nielsen, who, in additi­
on to guidance and sparring, has given me both inspiration through courses at 
DTU and the possibility of starting this study at all. In this regard, my fellow 
student and colleague Mikkel Stein thank you for being available to daily discus­
sion of various issues. In addition, there should be a big thanks to the surveyed 
occupants and experts who would have participated in the study. Finally, a huge 
thanks should be made to my family, who has had great abundance with me and 
has contributed with funds and resources so that it has been possible to complete 
this master thesis.
	
As a reader of this master thesis, you will be introduced to the problems 
the development of the future cities is facing, and at the same time a method of 
accessing the city’s complexity. It is not the master thesis intention to claim that 
this method is crucial to the success of cities. It should be considered an early 
attempt to find a different approach to urban planning with the purpose of con­
tributing to a discussion on how to develop the city of tommorrow.
Casper Emil Alberts.
==PAGE:5==
v
Abstract
	
Throughout history, the city has changed character in relation with urba­
nisation in order to solve various issues as they arise, which in several omissions 
has meant that the city has gone through major urban transistions. Today, the 
city is facing a new urban transition, which is responsible for creating a sustai­
nable future. Increased complexity and fast emerging new technologies question 
whether existing planning processes can support a successful city.
	
This master thesis aims at investigating whether the post occupancy eva­
luation (POE) method can be used to strengthen Copenhagen by overcoming 
21st century urbanisation. In addition, it is intended to study what contributions 
to the academic field urban planning, which can be deduced from the research. 
To do so, this research uses a constructed POE framework to assess 3 neighbor­
hoods in Copenhagen, which consists of different practical approaches that are 
compared across each case to make an overall evaluation. 
	
Based on the research this master thesis concludes that it possible to per­
form a POE assessment on a neighborhood scale that can generate results that 
could strengthen cities. It has been found that great insight can be gained in va­
rious local conditions that contribute negatively to the individual neighborhood. 
With these findings it is clear that there are major differences between the 3 diffe­
rent neighborhoods in Copenhagen, while at the same time exhibiting a number 
of issues that are not consistent with a sustainable transition. Finally, it is con­
cluded that urban development can benefit from using POE, which, in addition 
to the scope of this master thesis, provides an agile and flexible planning that is 
iteratively adapted to the outcome of performance evaluation.
	
It is the purpose of this master thesis to contribute to a discussion whether 
the existing planning practise should be reevaluated in relation to the imminent 
urban transition. In this context, this master thesis contributes first with a POE 
framework that can be used to assess other neighborhoods that at the same time 
can be further developed in relation to the results of this research. Next, a num­
ber of results are presented for the 3 individual cases that could be used in the 
context of creating new design proposals for better neighborhoods. Finally, the 
master thesis purpose a number of different contributions, which the POE based 
on the research in general can provide to the field urban planning.
==PAGE:6==
vi
Table of content
Preface	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
iv
Abstract	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
v
Chapter 1: Introduction	 	
	
	
	
	
	
2
	
1.1 Background	
	
	
	
	
	
	
2
	
1.2 Problem area	 	
	
	
	
	
	
5
	
1.3 Problem statement	
	
	
	
	
	
7
	
1.4 Delimitations	 	
	
	
	
	
	
9
Chapter 2: Method		
	
	
	
	
	
	
12
	
2.1 Research design	
	
	
	
	
	
13
	
2.2 Literature study	
	
	
	
	
	
14
	
	
2.2.1 Theoretical domains	
	
	
	
	
14
	
2.3 Case study	
	
	
	
	
	
	
16
	
	
2.3.1 Empirical data collection	
	
	
	
16
Chapter 3: Literature study	
	
	
	
	
	
24
	
3.1 Post occupancy evaluation on a 
	
neighbourhood scale	
	
	
	
	
	
24
	
	
3.1.1 Purpose and benefits of POE	
	
	
	
25
	
	
3.1.2 Methodology	
	
	
	
	
	
26
	
	
3.1.3 Levels of POE	
	
	
	
	
	
29
	
	
3.1.4 Performance of urban planning		
	
	
30
	
	
3.1.5 Stakeholder analysis	
	
	
	
	
31
	
3.2 Urban planning	
	
	
	
	
	
34
	
	
3.2.1 Urban design	
	
	
	
	
	
34
	
	
3.2.2 Rationales and strategies for improving 
	
	
urban qualitees	
	
	
	
	
	
37
	
	
3.2.3 Key issues in urban planning	
	
	
	
42
	
3.3 Future urbanism	
	
	
	
	
	
46
	
	
3.3.1 Urban development	
	
	
	
	
46
	
	
3.3.2 Transport 	
	
	
	
	
	
48
==PAGE:7==
vii
Chapter 4: POE framework	
	
	
	
	
	
52
	
4.1 Framework setting	
	
	
	
	
	
52
	
	
4.1.1 Planning phase	 	
	
	
	
	
52
	
	
4.1.2  Conducting phase	
	
	
	
	
54
	
	
4.1.3 Applying phase	 	
	
	
	
	
59
5 Case study 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
62
	
5.1 Case descriptions	
	
	
	
	
	
62
	
	
5.1.1 Nordhavnen	
	
	
	
	
	
64
	
	
5.1.2 Carlsberg Byen	 	
	
	
	
	
66
	
	
5.1.3 Ørestad	 	
	
	
	
	
	
68
	
5.2 Data processing	
	
	
	
	
	
70
	
5.3 Results	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
71
	
	
5.3.1 Nordhavnen	
	
	
	
	
	
72
	
	
5.3.2 Carlsberg byen	 	
	
	
	
	
74
	
	
5.3.3 Ørestad	 	
	
	
	
	
	
76
	
5.4 Cross case comparison	
	
	
	
	
78
	
	
5.4.1 Neighborhood performance	
	
	
	
78
	
	
5.4.2 Case specific findings	
	
	
	
	
85
Discussion	 87
6 Discussion	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
88
	
6.1 Contribution to urban planning	
	
	
	
88
	
	
6.1.1 Implementation of case specific findings	
	
90
	
	
6.1.2 General findings		
	
	
	
	
90
	
6.2 Barriers to POE of urban planning		
	
	
92
	
	
6.2.1 Perception of POE of urban planning	 	
	
92
	
	
6.2.2 Responsibility
	
6.3 Research limitations	 	
	
	
	
	
94
	
	
6.3.1 Method criticism
	
	
6.3.2 Exclusion of the diagnostic level
	
	
6.3.3 Future work
7 Conclusion	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
98
8 Bibliography 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
101
9 Appendices	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
108
==PAGE:8==
viii
Figure list
Figure 1.1.1: Holmens kanal in Copenhagen 		
	
	
	
3
Figure 1.2.1: Copenhagen municipality population forecast	 	
 	
5
Figure 2.2.1: Research design	 	
	
	
	
	
	
13
Figure 2.3.1: Grouped Likert scale 	
	
	
	
	
	
18
Figure 3.1.1: Basic feedback system	
	
	
	
	
	
26
Figure 3.1.2: Continuous development of POE method 	
	
	
27
Figure 3.1.3: POE process model	
	
	
	
	
	
28
Figure 3.1.4: Level of POE	
	
	
	
	
	
	
29
Figure 3.1.5: Urban performance dimensions	
	
	
	
30
Figure 3.1.6: Stakeholder analysis 	
	
	
	
	
	
32
Figure 3.2.1: Top 25 liveable cities	
	
	
	
	
	
38
Figure 3.2.2: 12 essential quality criteria	
	
	
	
	
40
Figure 3.2.3: The 5 elements of the city	
	
	
	
	
41
Figure 3.3.1: Different applications of the smart city 	concept	
	
46
Figure 3.3.2: Framework for urban transport planning, environmental 
	
	
exposures, physical activity and health	
	
	
49
Figure 3.3.3: Structure of the magnetic levitation	
	
	
	
50
Figure 4.1.1: Occupant questionaire	 	
	
	
	
	
55
Figure 4.1.2: Place observation template for Ørestad		
	
	
57
==PAGE:9==
ix
Figure 4.1.3: Question for semi-structured interview with Jay Gregg Sterling 	
	
	
focussed on Ørestad	 	
	
	
	
	
58
Figure 5.1.1: Location of 3 case neighbourhoods	
	
	
	
63
Figure 5.1.2: Nordhavn location and boundary	
	
	
	
64
Figure 5.1.3: Nordhavn masterplan	
	
	
	
	
	
65
Figure 5.1.4: Carlsberg Byen location and boundary	 	
	
	
66
Figure 5.1.5: Carlsberg byen masterplan 	
	
	
	
	
67
Figure 5.1.6: Ørestad location and boundary		
	
	
	
68
Figure 5.1.7: Ørestad masterplan	
	
	
	
	
	
69
Figure 5.2.1: Collected data	
	
	
	
	
	
	
70
Figure 5.3.1:  Result dashboard for Nordhavn	
	
	
	
72
Figure 5.3.2:  Result dashboard for Carlsberg byen	
	
	
	
74
Figure 5.3.3:  Result dashboard for Ørestad	 	
	
	
	
76
Figure 5.4.1: Total performance 	
	
	
	
	
	
78
Figure 5.4.2: Aesthetic performance 	 	
	
	
	
	
80
Figure 5.4.3: Functional performance 	
	
	
	
	
82
Figure 5.4.4: Technical performance 	 	
	
	
	
	
83
==PAGE:10==
Intentionally left blank
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
	
In 2007 the world’s cities rounded a huge milestone as over 50% of the 
earth’s population inhabited urban areas for the first time in history (UN, 2014). 
The part of urban residents has increased even further to 54,6% in 2016, which 
is a massive proportion compared to numbers from 1900 and 1950 where only 
respectively 9% and 30% were residing in urban areas (UN, 2016). This develop­
ment in cities has been continuous for many years and by 2050, the UN (2014) 
predicts that yet another 2.5 billion people will be projected to be urban resi­
dents. Thereby the urban population will add up to almost 70% of the world’s 
total population by the year 2050. 
	
This enormous expansion in urban areas up until today has had a decisive 
influence on the world and urbanisation has been an essential part of the devel­
opment of modern society (Christensen, 2006). The city’s central position in the 
modern society will thus only be enhanced, as more and more of the world’s po­
pulation will reside urban areas. According to The United Nations Environmen­
tal Program (UNEP) among others the prospect of an on-going urbanisation has 
lead to that cities today possess both the potential and the task to reconcile en­
vironmental initiatives, economic growth and human life quality (UNEP, 2013). 
In order to redeem the potential to generate a sustainable development, an urban 
transition is is to take place with new ways of imagine the city that further will 
result in new urban structures and forms (UNEP, 2013; Hajer et al., 2014). 
	
Throughout history the city has had many different functions in relation 
1.1 Background
==PAGE:13==
3
to the development of society and also it has had just as many different shades 
of definitions. In continuation cities’ function therefore has varied greatly in re­
lation to the purpose the city had to fill in society. Urban planners have inter­
minably developed various theories and methods to how the city best would be 
able to solve contemporary societal issues (Christensen, 2006). Urbanisation has 
throughout history caused huge changes in cities typology with either implemen­
tation of new planning principles or emerging new neighbourhoods adjacent to 
the existing urban areas. In the vast majority of cases cities were not being torn 
down in order to pave the way for the urban development or alternative ways 
of imagining the city. Consequently today’s cities are outlined as a patchwork 
of different neighbourhoods of certain planning principles or adjusted existing 
structures (Kostof & Tobias, 2012), that that have emerged from the changing 
demands to the cities. 
	
In a historical perspective the western cities has been subjected to 2 larger 
transitions that more than others have affected cities’ urban structure and form 
(Nielsen, 2013). In the 19th century the steam engine created a new world order, 
which resulted in a radical change in the requirements to the city. Industrialisati­
on led to the demolition of the medieval city’s walls and an opening of the dense 
closed strongholds that protected the citizens. The large amount of new factories 
demanded new infrastructure especially in the form of extensive rail networks 
and large harbour facilities. In addition the need for housing for the city’s new 
workers expanded rapidly in reach of the factories. In line with the heavy density 
of the new inhabitants, diseases became more and more widespread, which even­
tually were solved by implementing extensive sanitation infrastructure (Chri­
stensen, 2006). 
	
During the 20th century, the proliferation of the car meant that the city 
again should readapt to new demands. It was during the post-industrial time that 
Figure 1.1.1: Holmens kanal in Copenhagen. Source: (Det Kongelige Bibliotek)
==PAGE:14==
4
suburbs emerged and new road infrastructure began to be formed so that the 
car could be integrated in the best way. Different experimental building types, 
regional roads and ring roads made it possible to live outside the polluted city in 
green surroundings with plenty of space and clean air. The introduction of the 
car made it possible to live outside the city while being in daily reach of job op­
portunities in the inner parts of the city (Kostof & Tobias, 2012). Urban planning 
has thought of resolving current societal issues when encountering them most 
efficient according to present principles, however in practice, the outcome of the 
planning has not always matched the intention. Therefore, cities have failed in 
several occasions where the cities structure and form has contributed in creating 
negative societal impacts (Christensen, 2006). Now a similar transition seems on 
the verge with new demands to cities that have to be the center of a sustainable 
development. Each urban transition has resulted in major changes in the urban 
structures and forms and the imminent urban transition will likewise form a new 
city with new unknown issues.
	
As of today Copenhagen is considered a pioneer example of a city that is 
trying to reconcile environmental initiatives with economic growth and human 
life quality. Copenhagen has since the 90s experienced a very dramatic develop­
ment from a poor and worn down city populated by elderly and industrial wor­
kers to a dynamic and expansive city populated by young people in the creative 
class with a comprehensive economic growth. Through the 60s, 70s and 80s resi­
dents fled the city and major economic downturns due to failed planning resul­
ted in the capital losing 200,000 residents, so by the 90s the danish government 
recognised the need for action (Bisgaard, 2010). The need for action resulted first 
in the report “Hovedstaden - hvad vil vi med den?”, der fremlagde 20 initiativer 
til at skabe en positiv urban udvikling i København. The report focuses on devel­
oping the capital with firstly giant infrastructure projects (The Øresund connec­
tion, the metro and the airport), secondly large investments in cultural qualities 
and qualities of life enchanting actions and lastly long-term clear plans for the 
city that should make it more attractive for developers and companies to invest 
in Copenhagen (Initiativgruppen om hovedstadsregionen, 1989).
	
Today these initiatives and a continued focus on developing Copenha­
gen as an economic driver for the whole country seem to have contributed to a 
world-renowned successful city. Copenhagen receives as a consequence nume­
rous awards for its various qualities, and in all, Copenhagen received 54 different 
awards or accolades from 2013-2017 within the categories: liveability and design, 
accessibility and infrastructure, business and climate and sustainability, includ­
ing the world’s most liveable city in 2014 (CCB, 2017). The development over the 
last 30 years have undoubtedly been hugely successful, but the planning has so far 
been aimed at solving the problems that previous planning has caused. Now the 
city is faced with a new agenda, for which existing practices can not be expected 
to solve imminent problems and thus new ways to plan the city should be consi­
dered.
==PAGE:15==
5
1.2 Problem area
	
Copenhagen has already undergone dramatic development over 30 years 
and is currently considered as a successful city, recognized as one of the world’s 
most liveable cities, a economic driver for all of Denmark and a pioneer in urban 
environmental sustainable approaches. During this 30 year development period, 
it has been possible to use existing practices to succeed, but in spite of its success, 
the city is still facing a number of other problems that need to be addressed. It is 
so unlikely that the current success can be maintained unless the city continues 
to adapt to the ongoing urbanisation (Bisgaard, 2010).
	
First of all with an increasing population Copenhagen are subject to a 
large urban development towards 2030, which is going to densify many parts of 
the existing city (Københavns Kommune, 2015).
Figure 1.2.1: Copenhagen municipality population forecast. Source: (Økonomiforvaltningen, 
Velfærdsanalyseenheden, 2017)
	
Furthermore there is placed greater and bigger demands on the city to 
be the center for sustainable development. Even though Copenhagen is already 
regarded as a sustainable pioneer city, this is a focus that will greatly affect the 
agenda for Copenhagen as well as other cities in the years to come and change 
the way cities are designed. At the same time fast growing new technologies are 
emerging at a speed never seen before, and are creating huge uncertainties about 
how the cities of the future will be shaped (Hajer et al., 2014). The state of urbani­
sation thus makes the process of planning to a sustainable future a “complex and 
multi-faceted endeavour” to which new ways of imagining the city is needed if 
==PAGE:16==
6
cities must succeed in meeting the set goals (Hajer et al., 2014). Because of cities 
growing central position and its importance to society, the impact of not plan­
ning right to the right agenda will correspondingly have larger negative impacts. 
A reassessment of the way planning is perceived is needed if the consequences of 
planning to the iminent urban transition should not make the city fail. 
==PAGE:17==
7
1.3 Problem statement
	
The city is faced with a new agenda with new requirements for the city 
which also Copenhagen should comply. The city is on the verge of a sustainable 
transition with the responsibility to globally reconcile human welfare, economic 
growth and environmental initiatives and for such a transition to succeed new 
innovative ways of planning and imagining the city are required.
	
This thesis assumes the need for a systematic method to learn from pra­
ctise and experience, accepting that current urban planning in general, with the 
complexity and the lack of knowledge about how to plan for a sustainable transi­
tion, is unable to solve the challenges of 21st century urbanisation. By evaluating 
the exerted urban planning in systematically and continuously iterations, it is 
expected that knowledge to support a sustainable conversion can be generated. 
Unless the urban development is continuously adapted to the outcome of such an 
evaluation, the city has a high possibility of failing in achieving the goals set and 
therefore not be able to support a sustainable transition.
- The first purpose of the master thesis is to establish a framework for 
evaluating urban planning in Copenhagen based on the premise that the 
city is dependent on learning from exerted practice to succeed.
- Then it is the second purpose to assess a set of specific neighbourhoods 
in Copenhagen with the established evaluation framework to analyse 
to which extend evaluation of the neighbourhood’s urban planning can 
strengthen Copenhagen in general to meet the challenges of future urba­
nism.
- By doing so, the final purpose of this research is to contribute with 
knowledge to urban planning theory on how a general practice of con­
tinuously evaluating the performed planning can be implemented in the 
existing methods.
	
In order to achieve these purposes and make a contribution to the field of 
urban planning, this thesis assesses the following overall problem formulation:
How can post occupancy evaluation strengthen Copenhagen to 
meet the challenges of 21st century urbanisation and to what 
extent can urban planning benefit from post occupancy by lear­
ning systematically from previous experience?”
==PAGE:18==
8
	
To answer the overall problem formulation this thesis poses 5 specific 
research questions (RQ#1-5) that will determine an order and structure of how 
the thesis will answer to the overall problem formulation. Throughout the thesis 
each of the 5 research questions will be answered fluently with the progress of the 
research and eventually they will contribute to an overall conclusion to the main 
problem formulation.
RQ#1: What is the current state of urban planning and how is it reflected 
in Copenhagen today? 
RQ#2: How should a post occupancy evaluation framework be construc­
ted in order to analyse the urban planning of Copenhagen neighbor­
hoods?
RQ#3: What neighbourhoods in Copenhagen are subjects to an on-going 
urban development and appear suitable for a case study?
RQ#4: Which results is provide by the case study and how was the per­
formance of each case neighbourhood according to the post occupancy 
evaluation assessment?
RQ#5: How do the constructed post occupancy evaluation perform and 
what contribution can the assessment give to the field of urban planning?
==PAGE:19==
9
1.4 Delimitations
	
Prior to the work of this master thesis, different delimitations have prede­
termined the scope and set some boundaries for what is possible to investigate.
This master thesis is written as the final paper on a 5 year engineering degree. The 
assignment is bound by both different academic prerequisites and requirements, 
which at the same time accompanies a number of logistical challenges.
Resources and location
	
This task has been done by the individual author for a period of exactly 6 
months, which first of all has determined to which extend it is possible to inve­
stigate the problem in question. In this context, it has been necessary to balance 
between making thorough research that yields useful results but does not cover 
too many elements of the problem field. By first creating a useful mail occupancy 
evaluation framework for evaluating urban planning on a neighborhood scale, 
it is possible to uncover to what extent resources in terms of time and resources 
make it possible to collect empirical data.
	
The assignment uses the designed POE framework for a case study of 
different neighborhoods to answer the problem statement.  In the context of re­
sources and location it seems that the thesis’ origin set certain boundaries to use 
Danish neighborhoods as cases. The thesis analysis is dependent on being able 
to access the selected neighborhoods on a regular basis, which furthermore sets 
certain boundaries for the location of the selected neighborhoods. The academic 
basis for using Copenhagen and the selection of the specific neighborhoods is 
discussed later in the methodical chapter.
Prior academic knowledge
	
The author of this master thesis has a master’s degree in architectural en­
gineer at the time of submission and presentation, and thus has a great prior 
knowledge within this academic field of knowledge. Architectural engineering 
focuses on interdisciplinary in particular architecture, energy and indoor clima­
te, supporting structures as well as urban planning and development. The educa­
tion equips the student with tools to access complex issues and use interdisci­
plinary knowledge to develop new innovative technologies and processes. The 
thesis is based on this existing knowledge, and thus it is bound to consider the 
city as a mechanism and urban development based on the interdisciplinary lear­
ning achieved through an architectural engineer perspective.
	
The actual POE method and how it is used to evaluate urban planning is 
new to the author and therefore great importance is placed on a literature study 
to obtain the right knowledge. Outside of the student’s and the master thesis’ 
knowledge boundaries are technical aspects of urban mechanisms that relate to 
e.g. energy consumption and supply, air pollution, microclimate conditions and 
financial aspects. When the assignment deals with the above, it must be consi­
==PAGE:20==
10
dered in relation to their significance for the city’s form and structure that form 
the space in which the occupants are influenced by and themselves influence. 
The thesis’ are thus delimited to consider how the occupants perceive the urban 
planning that is being carried out.
Academic scope
	
The master thesis aims at researching how the POE method can contribu­
te to the development of future cities. This focuses especially on how the outcome 
of the case study can help solve urbansation’s increasing complexity. So, even 
though the case study is carried out on specific neighborhoods with individual 
issues, the task is delimited to making design proposals only to the extent that 
it contributes in an academic sense to urban planning. The stated problem de­
scribes that the research should help to strengthen Copenhagen towards the 21st 
century urbanisation. Therefore, the thesis is bound to considering the results 
in this context and on the basis thereof discussing the contribution on a general 
plan.
==PAGE:21==
2
Method
==PAGE:22==
12
	
This thesis deals with the challenges of 21st century urbanism and more 
specific how present urban planning practises appears to be unable to support a 
sustainable transition. To gain insight in the subject in question the thesis con­
tains a comprehensive literature study of different theoretical fields and an ca­
se-study consisting of a post occupancy evaluation (POE) of 3 different neigh­
bourhoods in Copenhagen.
	
First of all, 21st century urbanism and urban planning are often consi­
dered to be social studies and especially acclaims the designed space as a social 
structure (Buciek & Simonsen, 2006). However, modern urban planning cannot 
be processed with merely traditional social perspectives if a global sustainable 
transition is to take place. The presented problem statement addresses a com­
plex and multi-faceted planning process that constitutes a field of many different 
agendas and multiple stakeholders. 
	
This thesis assumes that the complexity of existing and future city struc­
tures will make a successful sustainable transition impossible unless the perfor­
med urban planning is able to learn and adapt to a continuous evaluation. It is 
therefore in the nature of this thesis that an appropriate research method can eva­
luate the performed urban planning in different neighbourhoods by combining 
multiple approaches and different analytical methods. Such a method makes it 
possible to gather information and knowledge that ideally can process the com­
plexity of the problem in question. In addition, an appropriate research method 
should also enable different neighbourhoods to be compared across the indivi­
dual evaluations and thereby contribute to the overall research question in an 
academic sense. In the following sections the specific method, for how this thesis 
evaluates the performed urban planning, will be elaborated and in addition the 
connections between each section will likewise be presented.
	
First of all the overall final research design is presented in a coherent dia­
grammatic representation with the purpose of illustrating how prior and subse­
quent activities are connected to the different parts of the thesis. Secondly, the 
literature study will be further elaborated with focus on specially the 3 major 
theoretical fields used in the thesis and furthermore to where each field con­
tributes to the research. Subsequently the case study, defined by a general POE 
approach, is described and at the same time the basis for the particular choice of 
POE approach is presented. Finally, the process of selecting the empirical data for 
the case study is presented, both in relation to the chosen cases and the empirical 
data needed to perform the POE of the selected cases. Furthermore the proces­
sing of the registered empirical data will also be specified in the final section.
2 Method
==PAGE:23==
13
2.1 Research design
	
The research in the thesis is intended to be within a POE framework, 
combining different empirical methods into 1 approach that can be applied on 
multiple cases. Underlining the POE framework, a literature study of 3 theoreti­
cal fields informs and guides the research by referring to current and relevant 
urban issues and also allowing theoretical concepts and relations to be imple­
mented correctly in the right context. Eventually both the literature study and the 
empirical study lead to a discussion on the obtained knowledge, which, as the last 
part of the study, allows for a conclusion on the problem in question. 
Chapter 1
Introduction
Chapter 2
Method
Chapter 4
Framework
Chapter 5
Case study
Chapter 6
Discussion
Chapter 7
Conclusion
Chapter 8
Bibliography
Chapter 9
Appendix
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Chapter 3
Literature study
POE
Urban planning
Future urbanism
Figure 2.2.1: Research design
==PAGE:24==
14
	
To gain insight and state-of-the-art knowledge about the presented pro­
blem, a literature study of 3 theoretical fields is conducted. The literature stu­
dy undertake: first a delineation of urban planning literature focused on urban 
design and the concept of space as a social structure, then a cover of available 
literature on the overall analysis method post occupancy evaluation and finally 
an examination of possible visions of future urbanism. The literature study aims 
primarily to form the academic basis for the case study with insight into relevant 
aspects of a POE assessment of the urban planning of cities, more specific urban 
planning on a neighborhood scale. Furthermore the literature study must form 
the basis for a reasoned discussion of how the outcome of the case study can 
contribute to general knowledge about planning for future cities. As a research 
method, POE is not traditionally designed to evaluate urban planning on a neig­
hborhood scale, and the method therefore needs be adapted for this purpose. It is 
therefore essential for the literature study to relate to how the method is adapted 
to a different object than buildings within the 3 theoretical fields.
	
The used literature has been found by using different search engines like 
dtu.findit.dk where different keywords related to the problem statement have di­
rected the search. The literature found is then sorted for non relevant material 
and examined across the individual publications for any academic deficiencies. 
Previous academic experience and experience from earlier projects has helped to 
focus the search so that the final literature appears relevant, state-of-the-art and 
together ensure that there are no shortcomings in the research.
	
In total, more than 100 academic articles, books or websites have been 
found within the 3 theoretical domains. However, not all, despite relevant 
keywords or topics, seemed appropriate for the study. The following section de­
scribes the context as well as the focus areas and decisions that precedes the cho­
sen literature.
2.2.1 Theoretical domains
Post occupancy evaluation
	
The main focus of this part of the analysis is to gain knowledge about 
POE as a tool and how it is actively used as a method. Thus, literature, that gui­
des to how POE is used as a tool or how studies of different specific objects use 
a POE framework, are used. From the journals “Introduction to Building Per­
formance Evaluation: Milestones in Evolution” (Mallory-Hill et al., 2012) and 
“ARCHITECTURAL CRITICISM IN PRACTICE: FROM AFFECTIVE TO EF­
FECTIVE EXPERIENCE” (Davis & Preiser, 2012) 2 more or less identical lists 
of all notable publications regarding POE as tool and method appear. Over the 
years, many updated and new publications about POE have been published, as 
2.2 Literature study
==PAGE:25==
15
the method is constantly being developed. In general, it can be deduce that most 
publications are either written by or referred to Wolfgang F.E. Preiser, who is 
also the author of the 2 works used in the literature study to gain knowledge of 
the method. Furthermore, several different academic papers or articles are used 
that have different aspects than the general method, which can contribute to the 
master thesis.
Urban planning
	
Urban planning is a wide theoretical field, with many different historical 
ideologies and purposes. Therefore, there are as many aspects of the field that can 
be investigated. In general the field urban design is investigated which especially 
relates to the creation of space and the urban environment’s impact on humans 
(Buciek et. al., 2006). When operating in the academic field urban design, the 
analysis will include literature from especially Henri Lefebvre, Kevin Lynch, Jan 
Gehl and Jane Jacobs. Focusing on how the city and the created space affect hu­
mans, the literature study will investigate which parametres a POE should assess 
in order to provide a useful result.
Future urbanism
	
In the context of this study; urbanism is seen as to how the modern and 
future cities are developing in terms of size, structure and form due to change in 
demographics and politics. The analysis intends to answer where the city is mo­
ving and what trends are the cities of the future. This intention is to investigate 
first whether POE has a role in the planning of the modern city and secondly 
whether the ambitions for the city are at all achievable without changing the ap­
proach to urban planning.
==PAGE:26==
16
2.3 Case study
	
The method post occupancy evaluation (POE), the process of evaluating 
built environments after being occupied, is an essential part of the research. Since 
this master thesis tries to investigate whether the well-known and well-defined 
method can be adapted and used actively in urban planning, selecting an alterna­
tive analytic method will be very difficult to find without changing the structure 
of the entire thesis.
	
Generally, the POE methodology has been developed and used to evalu­
ate specific building types. In particular the method grew big in the 1980s when 
used in cross-case evaluations to develop better commercial real estate, schools, 
military facilities and other federal building (Federal Facilities Council, 2001). 
The POE method’s focus is furthermore concluded by Preiser et al. (1988), which 
originally denotes POE, which clearly emphasises buildings as the main object of 
evaluation:
“the process of evaluating buildings in a systematic and rigorous 
manner after they have been built and occupied for same time“
(Federal Facilities Council, 2001)
	
Overall POE is most often related to analyses of closed environments such 
as offices or entire buildings, with focus on how the technical performance of the 
closed environment interacts with the user (Preiser & Vischer, 2005). Thus a fair 
question would be if POE is even an appropriate method and can be adapted to 
assessing cities and neighborhoods that are considered to be much more complex 
systems than one specific building. The question is found answered by Church­
man & Ginosar (1999) which has developed a theoretical basis that validates the 
use of POE on a neighbourhood scale. Although Churchman & Ginosar (1999) 
are not working with specific cases where they use a specific POE assessment, it 
is concluded that the use of POE to asses neighbourhoods is academically valid. 
	
In context of this master thesis, a POE framework is developed and used 
to evaluate the selected cases (See chapter 4). The theoretical assessment of the 
specific content and design of the POE framework will be found in section 3.1, 
the literature study of the theoretical method POE, as well as to how and where 
POE of urban planning can contribute.
2.3.1 Empirical data collection
	
Within the set POE framework, the assessment uses 3 different approa­
ches to data collecting. This is done to create an as strong POE assessment as pos­
sible, that crasps as many aspects of the performance of the selected case neigh- 
borhoods within reasonable resources. 3 activities have been identified, there will 
be carried through in the POE: a occupant questionaire, place observations, and 
a structured interview. In the following a description of each activity is presented 
==PAGE:27==
17
- They can be handed out in large quantities
- Possible to get a large amount of data within reasonable time frame
- There is no relationship between the interviewer and the respondent
- Combination of different question can be interpreted easily
- No interviewer variability to influent the answer (Bryman, 2016)
	
When designing the self-completion questionnaire it is important to ob­
tain the above listed benefits to create a easy-to-read and understandable ques­
tionnaire, which also will make the answers more useful. Likewise the visual 
expression itself is a decisive factor in the quality of the study. First and foremost 
the answers should be able to be placed next to the question, and then it is prefe­
rable that the answers is listed horizontal rather than vertical (Bryman, 2016).
	
In relation to the specific content of the questionnaire, it is relevant to 
get input from the literature study before formulating the individual questions. 
Based on the knowledge gained from there, a number of questions are formu­
lated that will be understandable to the respondent and at the same time yield 
useful results. The actual data processing of the answers from the self-completion 
questionnaire is based on the way the questions can be answered. The questi­
ons are primarily answered in the 5 steps of the Likert scale: strongly disagree, 
disagree, undecided, agree or strongly agree (Bryman, 2016). Additionally the 
questionnaire will also contain a series of questions answered differently to gain 
insight into the context of the occupant’s answer. Furthermore the questionnaire 
will also contain one or more open-ended questions to answer other types of 
questions. 
	
After counting the answered questionnaires, the questions answered by 
the Likert scale are grouped in 3 steps instead of 5, see figure 2.3.1. The answers 
to the open ended question will be summarized and categorised so it possible to 
used it in the final evaluation.
with focus on methodological content.
Occupant questionnaire
	
To evaluate the performance the neighborhood from a occupant point of 
view, a self-completion questionnaire is handed out to the occupants present in 
each neighborhood. The advantage of doing this is:
==PAGE:28==
18
Figure 2.3.1: Grouped Likert scale 
	
After grouping the answers, it is possible to present relevant representa­
tions of how each neighborhood performs in relation to the individual questi­
ons or groups of questions. The performance of each neighborhood is calculated 
by accumulating the percentages of satisfied, indecisive and dissatisfied answers 
from the grouped Likert scale. See appendix G for the data processing of the 
occupant questionnaire.
Place obervation
	
In relation to place observations, the POE assessment uses a method de­
veloped to the municipality of Copenhagen. The developer of the method descri­
bes the purpose of conducting place observations as:
Agree
Strongly agree
Neither agree
nor disagree
Disagree
Strongly disagree
Satisﬁed
Indecisive
Dissatisﬁed
“This method is a variation of general observation, but instead 
of monitoring human behavior, the specific physical place is the 
framework for the study. By observing a district, a place, a park 
or a city space, it is possible to obtain a deeper understanding 
of the particular characteristics of the place as well as the acti­
vity that is taking place and how the space is used by different 
actors”  (Is it a bird, 2015)
	
Furthermore the specific approach describes that it is crucial to make a 
plan for how the collection of observations should take place. This is done by 
delimiting the area concerned and printing a map out of the area where space 
allows for the pattern of movement and interaction to be interpreted while provi­
ding room for descriptions of the observer’s experiences of the place (Is it a bird, 
2015).
Semi-structured interview
	
To be able to process the results of the observations and the occupant sur­
veys and ultimately also the measured performance of the neighborhoods as best 
as possible, a semi-structured interview with various experts in urban design 
and development is conducted. A semi-structured interview distinguishes from 
other interview types by assuming that the interviewee have some insight and 
knowledge about the aim and topic of the project. Therefore the semi-structured 
interview also allows the interviewer to do some probing (Silverman, 2011). The 
interview’s focus is targeted on the specific case neighborhoods and future urba­
==PAGE:29==
19
nisation, so the interviewed experts must at least also have insight into minimum 
one of the selected cases.
	
The interview was conducted after positivist style rather than more emo­
tionalistic or contructionalistic interview methods. This style or method is cho­
sen mainly because of the 6 different kinds of knowledge this style generates: 
facts, beliefs about facts, feelings and motives, standard of action, present of past 
behavior and conscious reasons (Silverman, 2011). Where both emotionalism 
and constructionism are used to derive other elements of the interview than 
the immediate answers, the constructed POE uses the positivist style as it needs 
expert knowledge and attitudes towards the problem in question.
	
The interview will be done with an audio recorder so after conducting the 
semi-structured interview with the given expert there lies a great task in transcri­
bing the audio file. To do so the basic method for transcripting audio taped inter­
views described in “Interpreting qualitative data: Methods for analyzing talk, text 
and interaction” is used.
Case selection
	
The POE framework for assessing urban planning on a neighborhood 
scale presupposes different criteria when selecting appropriate cases for the case 
study. A thorough POE analysis requires that the analysed build environment is 
completed and occupied preferably at least 6-12 months so that the users have 
become accustomed to the surroundings (Voordt, 1999). In general it is to be 
understood that a neighborhood is not completely built and then taken into use 
from day to day. Although this practice has been the instance for some projects 
over the years, especially with the influence of CIAM and Le Corbusier’s thinking 
(Corbusier, 1995) on post modern large scale buildings and neighbourhoods, e.g. 
the danish project Bellahøj (Henning Larsen Architects et al., 2017), the majority 
of cities in the future are not considered to be planned in this manner. Within 
the problem area of this master thesis future urban planning are considered to 
focus heavily on the existing city, and how changes in the city’s form and struc­
ture can contribute to a sustainable transition. The POE frame setting should 
then not be seen only in relation to a defined project that was newly built and put 
into service from day to day. Instead, the POE analysis of the neighborhood in 
question must be assessed in relation to the period from when the urban plan­
ning is commenced. In addition, POE evaluates how the actual performance of 
a designed space after occupancy correlate with the goal and intentions of the 
designed space (Özkan et al., 2015). Therefore a very clear goal and strategy for 
the neighbourhood must be able to create, if not given directly, in order to ana­
lyse the neighbourhood’s performance with POE. The neighbourhood cannot be 
undefined or determined randomly with a self-chosen delimiter, because then 
there is not basis for comparison of the outcome of the POE.
	
Furthermore this thesis assumes that more and more people will reside 
existing larger metropolitan areas. POE of urban planning should then also be 
used to identify what changes in the existing neighbourhoods could increase the 
==PAGE:30==
20
- The case neighbourhood has to be a well-defined area with a clear de­
fined planning strategy and be focussed on contributing to a sustainable 
city.
- The case neighborhood must have undergone new urban planning 
focussed on sustainability and then commenced restructuring of the area 
within the last years.
- The urban planning framework of the case neighborhood should allow 
areas for development of new urban structures that can strengthen the 
neighbourhood’s existing qualities, form and structure. At the same time, 
there must be room within the existing form and structure to enable 
adaptations in relation to the outcome of the POE of the area.
	
In addition to whether a given case is appropriate, based on the criteria 
set out, in relation to the POE framework itself, the cases should also be able to 
answer whether urban planning can benefit and be adjusted to the evaluation 
performed. The cases must also be relevant in a theoretical context in order to 
answer the academic question.
	
It is described by Seawright & Gerring (2008) that case studies cannot 
be randomly selected when not working with large-N cross-case analysis. There 
should be given greater attention to the selection of individual cases when ana­
lysing a small number of cases. As Seawright & Gerring (2008) states “Evidently, 
the problem of representativeness cannot be ignored if the ambition of the case 
study is to reflect on a broader population of case." Furthermore, a specific doub­
le criterion is presented when selecting appropriate cases for small-N cross-case 
studies; (1) the chosen cases must be representative and (2) they must achieve a 
large variety of relevant aspects in the theoretical field. This results in 7 method to 
selecting cases when working with a small test size: typical, miscellaneous, extre­
me, deviant, influential, most similar and most different (Seawright & Gerring, 
2008).
	
The case study in this master thesis builds on the typical cross-case sele­
ction method, with focus of selecting cases that embrace as many aspects of 21st 
century urbanism challenges. In a Copenhagen planning perspective, all neig­
quality of the city. That is, within the planning framework, there should be room 
for change in the existing form and structure. At the same time, it must be de­
fined how future new development is being placed. That way, it will be possible 
to evaluate on the existing planning, while providing suggestions on how the 
forward looking planning should focus.
	
All in all the following criteria is applied when selecting cases in the case 
study in order to be able to answer the thesis problem at best:
==PAGE:31==
21
hbourhoods are set to contribute to the greater sustainability of Copenhagen 
(Københavns Kommune, Miljø- og Teknikforvaltningen, 2017) and thereby any 
neighbourhood must be perceived as being typical when exploring causal me­
chanism to the performance of a given neighbourhood. After the case study, it 
may be shown that some neighborhoods are perceived very as for example very 
deviant, to where other studies could answer why this is so. However, this is not 
within the delimiter of the master thesis.
	
A total of 3 appropriate cases: Nordhavn, Carlsberg Byen and Ørestad, 
where found to meet the set criteria and which are accepted in terms of being re­
presentative and achieve variation on relevant dimensions. Copenhagen is prior 
chosen to be the basis for where the selected cases are to be found. A decision 
that has neither been taken on a random basis. Copenhagen is the main econo­
mic driver in Denmark and is considered to be one of the world’s leading cities 
in relation to sustainable transition by being; one of the world’s greenest cities, 
the world’s best bike city and also CO2 neutral by 2025 (Københavns Kommune, 
Miljø- og Teknikforvaltningen, 2017). Copenhagen thus provides a perfect basis 
for evaluating whether the planning of different neighborhoods actually supports 
a global sustainable conversion. Specific descriptions of the selected cases are 
given in later sections, where this section only describes why the cases have been 
selected.
==PAGE:32==
22
Intentionally left blank
==PAGE:33==
3
Literature 
study
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Literature study
3.1 Post occupancy evaluation 
on a neighbourhood scale
	
The following section will analyse how post occupancy evaluation (POE) 
works in practice, thus enabling a urban planning assessment on neighbourhood 
scale using the POE method focusing on whether the carried through planning 
supports a sustainable transition. 
	
In general, there are many variations of the definition of POE. As previ­
ously described, Preiser et al. (1988) has presented the most widely accepted defi­
nition, but furthermore many other relevant actors have also tried to provide de­
scriptions of the POE processes. The lack of an overall definition, accepted by all 
stakeholders, reflects that, despite major proven gains and benefits, the method 
is not standardised and implemented very well in the building industry (Hadjri 
& Crozier, 2009). Based on the lack of a common standardisation it is tried, not 
to give POE a new definition across the industry, but to sum up a state-of-the-art 
description of POE by gathering how other definitions describe POE:
“POE is a process that involves a rigorous approach to the asses­
sment of both the technological and anthropological elements 
of a building in use. It is a systematic process guided by research 
covering human needs, building performance and facility ma­
nagement” (Hadjri & Crozier, 2009)
	
As shown the summary describes that the primary use of POE still relates 
to buildings even though the method is theoretical accepted in the assessment of 
neighbourhoods or other objects (Churchman & Ginosar, 1999). It is expected 
that the used literature will more often than not describe the process in relation 
to the assessment of a specific building. Although the method academically is not 
limited to physical buildings, it has historically and traditionally been used in this 
context. It is therefore important that the analysis is critical and clear in relation 
to where and how the method is adapted to the right focus, urban planning on 
neighbourhood scale. Immediately, it is not necessary to adapt the process itself, 
as often the literature only denotes POE for buildings and according to Church­
man & Ginosar (1999), there is no limitation in using the method on neighbor­
hood scale. Therefore, it is usually only in the denotation of the POE process that 
the method is to be adapted, but other aspect such as performance criteria and 
stakeholders might have to be changed. 
	
In this section, the literature study deals with the 3 different levels and 9 
different phases given by the method. In addition, relevant aspects of the use of 
==PAGE:35==
25
POE and the outcome of the assessment will also be seen in the analysis. Keeping 
in mind that the context of POE in this master thesis is urban transitions and 
urban planning, relevant deviations and alterations to assessing buildings with 
POE is also explored.
3.1.1 Purpose and benefits of POE
	
The benefits and applications are numerous in the use of POE, which hig­
hly depends on the specific definition and the purpose for which the assessment 
is based. As mentioned, there have been many different purposes with the use of 
POE, in spite of that,  it is emphasized that, across all intentions, there exists a 
fundamental purpose:
“The overarching benefit from conducting POE is the provision 
of valuable information to support the goal of continuous im­
provement”  (Zimmerman & Martin, 2001)
	
So the fundamental purpose of conducting POE clearly emphasizes how 
the method by its nature is relevant in urban planning. The outcome of the asses­
sment is precisely the solution the city needs to overcome the challenges of 21st 
century urbanism and undergo a sustainable transition. By constantly evaluating 
the conducted planning, crucial knowledge is obtained that can help the city im­
prove and thereby succeed. Furthermore, Hadjri & Crozier (2009) highlight that 
in line with the overall purpose, numerous specific plausible benefits can be spe­
cified when conducting POE on an occupied environment:
- Applying design skills more effectively
- Improving commissioning process
- Improving user requirements
- Improving management procedures
- Providing knowledge for design guides, regulatory processes and targe­
ting of refurbishment (Hadjri & Crozier, 2009)
	
In order to achieve these benefits and make a accurate and strong ana­
lysis, it is crucial that the POE assessment focuses on relevant issues and stake­
holders instead of trying to analyse everything and incorporate huge amounts of 
data (Hadjri & Crozier, 2009). The method does not prescribe that POE requires 
to uncover all conceivable aspects of the object of evaluation. As long there is 
clarity about which design criteria are compared to the actual performance in 
context of the right stakeholder, the results will be accepted.
==PAGE:36==
26
3.1.2 Methodology
	
As the name suggests, POE is the process of evaluating how a built en­
vironment performs after being occupied. The central structure of the method is 
based in a basic feedback system, that compares different performance criteria 
set by the evaluator for a specific object to the measured performance. By doing 
so the method enables the evaluator to analyse if the performance actually meets 
the goals set (Federal Facilities Council, 2001). 
Goals
Performance
criteria
Performance
measured
Object of
evaluation
Comparison
Evaluator
Figure 3.1.1: Basic feedback system. Reproduction from (Federal Facilities Council, 2001)
	
In its structure, the underlying feedback system furthermore makes it 
possible to access the relationship between humans and their interchangeable en­
vironment, which before POE lacked a coherent theoretical analytic framework 
in the building design field (Preiser & Vischer, 2005). Furthermore, the method 
is described as:
“...appropriate for this field because it holistically links diverse 
phenomena that influence relationships between people, pro­
cesses and their surroundings, including the physical, social 
and cultural environments” (Preiser & Vischer, 2005)
	
The POE method is by its nature designed with a multi-disciplinary ap­
proach in order to analyze complex mechanisms that contain humans, processes 
and their surroundings together with the specific physical environment (Federal 
Facilities Council, 2001). Although the POE methodology has been developed to 
evaluate buildings, it is clear with the given structure of the method that it most 
likely also fits without major underlying adjustments to assess urban planning, 
==PAGE:37==
27
an even more complex field. The problem in question deals with urban planning 
processes, people (both residents, planners and decision makers), the existing 
urban form and structures together with designed spaces that contains both phy­
sical and social constructions, all of which are aspects of the method.Accepting 
that POE embraces the elements of urban planning complexity, there is a clear 
basis for using the method more or less directly to evaluate urban planning. 
	
An important element of the structure of the method is its ultimate inten­
tion or goal that the results of the analysis should be implemented in further de­
sign processes to ensure further improvements (Preiser & Nasar, 2008). The pro­
cess is so an iterative method that continuously is developed each time making a 
POE. The findings from the individual performed POE can thus be used in new 
projects, so the project will be optimized in terms of past experience. At the same 
time, a new POE can be based on these previous findings and help develop the 
POE assessment itself so that new findings can occur. Figure 3.1.2 illustrates how 
POE has traditionally contributed to develop buildings and the way in which the 
quality of POE assessments has increased. Likewise, an implementation of POE 
in the planning of future cities could provide immediate results to better cities, 
while at the same time the method can be developed in line with urban and plan­
ning development.
Figure 3.1.2: Continuous development of POE method (Preiser & Nasar, 2008)
==PAGE:38==
28
	
After examining the basic mechanisms that underlie the POE assessment, 
the analysis still lacks to answer how the actual execution the method is perfor­
med. There is, as figure 3.1.3 illustrates, a total of 9 phases of the method descri­
bing the process of assessing a occupied environment. In addition to the 9 pha­
ses, the method is vertically divided into 3 different levels, which later in section 
3.1.3 will be elaborated, as they are of great relevance in order to use the method 
properly. The 9 phases describe an iterative process that should be seen in context 
of the method's use in the private sector and that the method is actively used as 
a tool in various companies to improve the performance of buildings (Federal 
Facilities Council, 2001). In context of an academic research, the 9 phases are 
seen more fluidly, so e.g. resource planning and reporting takes place as part of 
the task itself. The 9 phases can furthermore be gathered in 3 overall categories 
for more spontaneously use of the method: planning, conducting and applying.
1 2 3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Planning
Conducting
Applying
1. Indicative POE
2. Investigative POE
3. Diagnostic POE
Resource 
planning
Resource 
planning
Iniating on site
data collection
process
Monitoring/
managing data
collection
procedures
Analysing
data
Reporting
ﬁndings
Recommending
actions
Reviewing 
outcome
Reconnais-
sance and
feasibility
Figure 3.1.3: POE process model. Reproduction from (Preiser & Vischer, 2005).
	
In relation to the problem in question Churchman & Ginosar (1999) has 
determined that the method theoretically can be used directly to assess neigh­
borhoods and furthermore the method is considered to be of great relevance to 
the field of urban planning. There is therefore no limitation to use the method as 
==PAGE:39==
29
shown in figure 3.1.3, when assessing the urban planning of specific neighbour­
hoods.
	
Something that does not appear so clearly from the 9 phases of figure 
3.1.3, but which is considered to be essential POE, is the use of different data col­
lecting activities that are relevant to the specific assessment. It is furthermore es­
sential that the occupants are involved when collecting data (Mastor & Ibrahim, 
2010). As seen the conduction of POE only emphasises data collection, not spe­
cifying that the occupants are an essential part of that data collection. So even 
though the POE process model don’t prescribe the specific participatory activiti­
es, a POE assessment of neighbourhoods must be based on such.
3.1.3 Levels of POE
	
In addition to the POE method, which runs over the 9 phases, POE is 
characterized, in particular, by its iterative process described with the 3 levels: 
indicative POE, investigative POE and diagnostic POE (Preiser & Vischer, 2005). 
The 3 levels can be performed as an analysis that moves over all 3 levels or as dif­
ferent combinations of some of the different levels. Thus, the desired outcome is 
decisive for what kind of POE is being conducted.
“The degree and extent of POE studies primarily depends on 
the necessity and purpose of the POE to meet either the short, 
medium or long term benefits, and the availability of fund.” 
(Mastor & Ibrahim, 2010)
	
More detailed each level of POE can be described with each of its diffe­
rent outcomes as follows in figure 3.1.4.
Figure 3.1.4: Level of POE. Adapted from (Turpin‐Brooks & Viccars, 2006)
==PAGE:40==
30
3.1.4 Performance of urban planning
	
Throughout the analysis it has been made clear how a POE assessment 
can be carried out, but it is not yet highlighted which parameters such an asses­
sment should measure. Overall, urban performance is assigned to measure the 
meeting between the occupant and the built environment.
“...enable detailed and systematic information to be collected 
on the quality of the mutual interactions between the residents 
and the physical environment.” (Churchman & Ginosar, 1999)
	
But what should the POE assessment specifically measure when it is ur­
ban planning that is the object of evaluation? Previously, it was pointed out that 
the evaluation measurements of buildings over time has evolved as greater know­
ledge and insight into building performance through POE has been obtained. 
Likewise, the correct measurement of POE of urban planning must be developed 
over time. When processing the collected data new results will emerge that can 
create new relevant aspects to measure. However, in the general literature it is 
found difficult to find studies showing the use of POE on a neighborhood scale 
and thus taking a starting point in these results. Immediately (Özkan et al., 2015) 
appears to be the only found literature that prescribes how the performance of 
urban qualities can be measured with a POE assessment. It is described that ur­
ban performance in relation to urban public spaces should be measured on how 
the occupants needs and requirements are met within the 3 performance dimen­
sions: technical, functional and aesthetic performance. The content of each per­
formance dimension are shown below in figure 3.1.5.
Figure 3.1.5: Urban performance dimensions. Adapted from (Özkan et al., 2015).
T
e
c
h
n
i
c
a
l 
p
e
r
f
o
r
m
a
n
c
e
F
u
n
c
t
i
o
n
a
l 
p
e
r
f
o
r
m
a
n
c
e
A
e
s
t
h
e
ti
c
 
p
e
r
f
o
r
m
a
n
c
e
Harmony
Comfort
Variery of possibilities
Adequacy
Security
Continuity and
integrity
Clean and
well-maintained
Infrastructure
Visual 
perception
Architectual 
quality
Access
==PAGE:41==
31
	
As seen, Özkan et al., 2015 presents a basis for measuring urban qua­
lities of urban space. However, it is not known how a POE assessment should 
measure on the individual elements of the 3 performance dimensions in relation 
to urban planning of neighborhoods in Copenhagen. In the next section of the 
literature study on urban planning and future urbanism, specific aspects of each 
performance dimension are explored and specified, before creating the final POE 
framework to apply on the selected cases. As the 3 performance criteria are very 
general, it is important to look at the outcome of the literature analysis and con­
sider what makes sense to evaluate. Thus, the final POE rating will add elements 
to each of the 3 performance dimensions.
	
In order to ensure that correct and relevant elements are added, it is exa­
mined what the 3 performance dimension generally covers in an urban planning 
context. Aesthetic performance is a measure for the appearance and expression of 
the urban environment. It constitutes of the elements that contribute to the city’s 
visual expression and the quality of the architectural impression. The functional 
performance describes the experienced comfort and adequacy of the equipment 
and elements that form the urban space. It relates to the experience of using the 
city to move and stay in. The last performance dimension, technical performan­
ce, relates to the quality of the solutions that make up the neighborhood. In par­
ticular, it can be seen that the technical performance consists of evaluating the 
basic features that the city possess (Özkan et al., 2015).
3.1.5 Stakeholder analysis
	
As previously pointed out, the POE assessment is highly dependent on 
context and thus which stakeholders are relevant to the assessment. In order to 
use the POE method correctly and achieve the most useful results, the perfor­
mance of the neighborhoods is progressed in context to relevant stakeholders 
(Hadjri & Crozier, 2009). In order to best estimate the assessment, a stakeholder 
analysis was made. A stakeholder analysis aims to put relevant stakeholders in 
context with their expectations and relationships with an object (Andreasen et 
al., 2016). Thus, there will be clear understanding of how the specific occupant 
relates to the assessment.
==PAGE:42==
32
Figure 3.1.6: Stakeholder analysis 
	
The method proves to be useful for evaluating urban planning, although 
there is no literature that has attempted to make such an evaluation. The met­
hod is inherently useful for dealing with the relationship between humans and 
their interchangeable environment, which means that method can actually help 
to address the complexity of future urbanisation. At the same time, others have 
considered that the method can greatly contribute to the academic field of urban 
planning with knowledge and know-how that can strengthen planning proces­
ses.
	
Although there is an academic evidence of using the POE method of exp­
loring city planning on a neighborhood scale, there is no description of how such 
==PAGE:43==
33
an investigation should be conducted. The forward-looking literature analysis 
is now endeavoring to investigate how urban planning can provide measurable 
parameters within the 3 performance dimensions that allow a POE assessment 
of the selected Copenhagen case neighborhoods. The results and findings of the 
POE assessment are largely related to the 3 different iterative layers. The design 
of a POE framework should therefore be based on what extent the thesis wants to 
assess the neighborhood within the purpose and given resources.
==PAGE:44==
34
3.2 Urban planning
	
In this section, the literature study examines the academic field urban 
planning in order to answer which qualities and structures make up the good 
city. The purpose of the study is to find knowledge that can be used to design the 
academic content of the case study as a POE assessment of neighborhoods of that 
character does not seem to have taken place before. In particular, the analysis 
strives to find a basic understanding of the practices used today and moreover, 
how the field of urban planning is perceived today. In the previous section it was 
highlighted that urban performance should be measured within 3 performance 
dimensions (aesthetic, functional and technical), which is why it is the purpose 
of identifying the individual parameters that lies in this part of the study. Fi­
nally, the study tries to identify the current issues that urban planning faces in 
the forward looking urbanisation. This specific part of the study is conducted to 
guide the case study in the right direction while allowing perspectives on which 
aspects future POE assessments can focus on.
	
In order to be able to find relevant content for the case study as best as 
possible, it focuses in particular on the part of urban planning called urban de­
sign. This focus is based on the fact that this part of urban planning is especially 
related to the human (the occupant with a POE mindset) and social structures 
in the designed urban environment. In addition, urban design is in an academic 
context termed a multidisciplinary or hybrid academic field that emerged as a 
consequence of mid-century architecture and policy driven planning’s inability 
to shape the desired city of the future (Larice & Macdonald, 2013). Urban design 
is characterized by being a search for a common ground that brings together all 
the practicing actors in the city’s development (architects, landscape architects, 
engineers, urban planners, socialists, economists etc.) on the (re)urbanisation of 
the future. More specifically, the development of the cities of the future must be 
targeted towards humans and to create the good city for humans to live in (Mil­
ler, 2013).
3.2.1 Urban design
	
The expansion of the urban design field is based on the critique of mo­
dernism in urban planning, its urban structures and shapes and the enormous 
influence it has had on the world’s cities today. Modernism’s planning with lar­
ge-scale residential developments with prescriptive models of the relationship 
between greening and constructions turned out to inspire low quality suburbs 
or stultifying new urban areas. Similarly, CIAM and Le Corbusier’s visions of the 
modern city with the rational mechanical perception of planning did not create 
the well-functioning city, which was intended. The critique of the outcome of the 
modernism’s planning ideology resulted in a vision of urban design that focused 
on creating a more holistic view of the city rather than a centered focus on the 
city’s mechanical functions (Larice & Macdonald, 2013).
==PAGE:45==
35
	
Modernism in urban planning was formed by the ideology that the new 
human, created by modern society, is rational and uses the city for a number of 
distinct features that make up the modern lifestyle. The city must be organized 
so that it is possible to access: work, recreation, culture, transport and housing 
separately. In this way, it is the vision to achieve the best conditions for humans 
by separating housing, transport opportunities, jobs and recreation areas. At the 
same time, the architecture itself must also be rational in its design, for example 
with optimized aspect ratios, leaving the city only as the optimal solution to the 
functions that make up the modern human life (Kristensen, 2013). Furthermo­
re, Kristensen (2013) argues that modernism in urban planning presented the 
most comprehensive change in urban structures and its propagation can still be 
found because of its uniqueness across all the cities of the world. Urban design 
emerges as a rebellion against modernism in urban planning and the intentions 
lack of positive outcome. In continuation of this, urban design must be seen as a 
wide-ranging wish for a rethinking of the city and a reorganization of the distinct 
functions defined by, among other things CIAM and Le Corbusiers among other 
(Miller, 2013).
	
Urban design has developed many different ideologies, strategies and 
practices that, despite its diversity, all have a common goal of creating the good 
city for people to live in. Opposite modernism in urban planning that rationalises 
the city and focuses exclusively on the different features in the modern human’s 
lifestyle, so urban design focuses on the complex relationship between humans 
and the city. Acknowledging that humans are social creatures, influenced by the 
physical environment of the city, makes distinctly different demands to the per­
ception of urban space than modernism’s rational approach to planning (Buciek 
et al., 2006; Corbusier, 1995; Kristensen, 2013; Miller, 2013).
Urban space
	
A central, almost fundamental concept in the academic field urban de­
sign is space. In an urban context, space must be understood as more than just 
only the material together with the physical structures and forms constituting 
a defined volume. Space are a social structure as social relations between the 
occupants define the space. That said space is also constituted of the response 
that occupants have on the material and shapes, but space can not be threatened 
as merely an actual physical volume (Buciek et. al., 2006). Thus, space is a term 
not assigned to a single location or only a defined volume between individual 
urban forms. One of the most important inspirations for the perception of space 
is Henri Lefebvre’s triad concept of space concept.
- Spatial space (the experience room) consists of experiences between 
institutional systems and everyday practices of occupants occupying the 
space. Thus, the experienced space describes interactions, routes and 
networks that connect places with people and materialities to actions/
experiences.
==PAGE:46==
36
- Representations of space (the conceptual space) is the space that society 
forces and the values and knowledge that is attached to the space. It is the 
conceptualisation of space that the designer makes when materialized th­
rough planning, architecture or other character systems. The conceptual 
space is so the disseminations and discourses that professional experts 
use to present designed space.
- Representational spaces (the lived space) is defined by the occupant’s 
various ways of acquiring or modifying the surrounding structure. The 
lived space has its foundation in the subjective and bodily attitude, and 
how creative activities, imaginations, gender and cultural conditions 
create space (Lefebvre, 1991).
	
Lefebvre’s three concepts can each appear analytically distinct, but it is 
essential to understand that the three concepts exist in an inseparable harmony. 
There is no space consisting only of one of the concepts, but on the other hand, 
the three concepts each describe different modes that makes up any space. Space 
are in with this perception perceived solely as a social structure in which both 
physical and material structures are contained (Simonsen, 2010).
	
In continuation of the triad production of the concept of space, terms 
such as socio-material factuality, demand materiality and the gravity of experien­
ce are used by Østerberg (2006) to explain the influence of physical environments 
on occupant practices. It is clearly seen that the physical structures and materia­
lity have an influence on the designed space (Østerberg, 2006). This connection 
can also be indirectly derived from Lefebvre’s experienced space, where inter­
actions, routes, networks and actions are dictated by the institutional systems. 
Furthermore, Østerberg (2006) contributes to this relationship between human 
and space, that materials and shapes actually affect the factuality. Thus it is neces­
sary for urban design to relate to space as a social construction that recognizes 
the impact of materiality and shapes on these social structures. 
The presented perception of space and its complexity forms the basis of urban 
design and the practices used to design cities. Similarly, this understanding of 
space must be fundamental to the design of the case study’s POE assessment.
Perception of space
	
Imageability is a term used by Kevin Lynch to describe the understanding 
and perception of cities and fysiske structures through distinctive images. In the 
book ”The image of the city” Lynch works with the relationship between the ci­
ty’s design and how the city is psychologically perceived by the occupants. Lynch 
(1960) states that it is possible to decode a pattern in the physical structure of the 
space, thus perceiving the city in special images. The underlying understanding 
of imageability is that occupants mentally receive and treat urban environments 
through specific physical conditions and objects (Lynch, 1960). The significance 
==PAGE:47==
37
of this understanding of the physical expression of the space is described by La­
rice & Macdonald (2013) to be crucial for the development of urban design as it 
allows to compare different urban environments through the same objects and 
conditions.
	
In “The Consive Townscape”, Cullen (1995) also provides an understan­
ding of how the occupant’s view is crucial for understanding the relationships 
between the individual physical elements and the occupied space. Instead of 
focusing on mapping and readability across urban environments, Cullen (1995) 
emphasizes the emotional perception of the city. The city is perceived as a series 
of visual scenes that are formed from a moving persons point of view. In order to 
create good spaces it is therefore crucial to design for an overall visual framework 
based on two courses; first the general path of human activity and secondly the 
chain of physical elements along the path (Cullen, 1995).
	
Common to both Cullen and Lynch is that the physical structure and 
materiality of the room can be analyzed and assessed from an occupant’s point 
of view. Thus, it is also possible to investigate and design spaces to create the best 
conditions for people to live in. There is also an academic basis for investigating 
how the occupant is affected by the physical structures of the room. Further­
more, the outcome of a POE on a neighborhood scale with an assessment of the 
occupant’s perception of the neighborhood could help to develop an understan­
ding of what constitutes the good city.
3.2.2 Rationales and strategies for improving 
urban qualitees
	
As previously stated, urban space and urban environments consists of 
social structures influenced by the physical structure. Occupants furthermore 
perceive space in certain ways, making it possible to create strategies and design 
solutions that create better cities focused on providing more quality to the people 
who occupy the urban space. In order to find these, it is necessary first and fore­
most to define which specific goals urban design should strive for.
Liveable cities
	
It is clear that urban design is about creating the good life that supports 
human needs by basically considering the city’s spaces as social structures. 
Furthermore, the goal of creating the good city for people is often linked to the 
concept of liveability or liveable cities. The term itself appears already in 1987 
”Towards an urban design manifesto”, in which the term is introduced as:
“A city should be a place where everyone can live in relative 
comfort. Most people want a kind of sanctuary for their living 
environment, a place where they can bring up children, have 
privacy, sleep, eat, relax, and restore themselves. This means a 
==PAGE:48==
38
wellmanaged environment relatively devoid of nuisance, over­
crowding, noise, danger, air pollution, dirt, trash, and other 
unwelcome intrusions.” (Jacobs & Appleyard, 1987)
	
Liveability compose with “identity 
and control”, “access to opportunity, imagi­
nation and joy”, “authenticity and meaning”, 
“open communities and public life”, “self-re­
liance” and “justice” a number of equal goals 
that the city must achieve (Jacobs & Ap­
pleyard, 1987). In recent times, however, the 
concept of liveability seems to have become 
widespread to a more general term that is not 
just in-line with the 7 other goals stated. Wa­
itt & Knobel (2017) describes that liveability 
today is the fore of urban policy. Furthermo­
re, in recent times, various actors, including 
The Monocle magazine as the most common 
and well-known, have taken this concept as 
the ultimate goal for urban design. The Mo­
nocle has also developed a metrics that ranks 
cities from 60 different parameters, which 
is developed and expanded with more and 
more parameters year by year (The Monocle, 
2017). Figure 3.2.1 shows top 25 liveable citi­
es from 2017 and gives a sense of which cities 
today, by many actors, are considered to be 
successful in their planning.
	
In general, liveable cities appears as a 
term of many different goals that creates good 
cities. But what specific physical structures 
or which parametres support these goals? 
Furthermore can any physical structures be 
translated so that they are measurable in a 
POE assessment?
Figure 3.2.1: Top 25 liveable cities. 
Source (The Monocle, 2017).
Urban qualities and structural characteristics
	
I “Towards an urban design manifesto” Jacobs & Appleyard (1987) de­
scribes 5 essential physical characteristics that creates the good city:
- Livable streets and neighborhoods; that is designed with adequate sun­
light, clean air, trees, vegetation, gardens, open space, pleasantly scaled 
and designed buildings,  cleanliness and physical safety.
==PAGE:49==
39
- Some minimum density of residential development as well as intensity 
of land use.
- An integration of activities - living, working, shopping - in some reaso­
nable proximity to each other.
- A manmade environment, particularly buildings, that defines public 
space (as opposed to buildings that, for the most part, sit in space).
- Many, many separate, distinct buildings with complex arrangements 
and relationships (as opposed to few, large buildings). (Jacobs & Ap­
pleyard, 1987).
	
If these 5 structural characteristics are compared with the objectives 
found in Copenhagen's architecture policy, which also aims to create a city that 
meets human needs (Københavns Kommune, Teknik- og Miljøforvaltningen, 
2017) large parallels can be drawn between both perceptions of which structures 
make up the good city. The 5 urban qualities should therefore play an essential 
role in the design of the POE assessment. Although the POE assessment basically 
compares the individual neighborhood's goals with their evaluation, the archite­
ctural policy will affect the expression of all neighborhoods in Copenhagen, by 
underlying their goals and strategy.
	
Furthermore, other understandings of which qualities or parameters 
make up the good city are in line with the already presented 5 structural charac­
teristics. According to Jane Jacobs, one of the earliest advocates for creating dy­
namic and vibrant cities for humans, 4 necessary urban structural features form 
the basis for this dynamic city life: multifunctional neighborhoods, short blocks 
and connected street systems, varied age residential areas and high concentration 
of people (Jacobs, 2013). Kevin Lynch has also designed 7 urban qualities that 
can be used to assess urban design: vitality, sense, fit, access, control, efficiency 
and justice (Lynch, 2001). These urban qualities and structural characteristics are 
general goals for how good cities should perform. They do not describe formulas 
or direct normative measures for what constitutes a successful city. Therefore, it is 
necessary to process these goals and find ways within POE framework activities 
that can measure the performance of the neighborhoods in relation to them.
	
Furthermore, the Danish architect Jan Gehl has designed 12 criteria in 
his publication ”Cities for People”, which describes the conditions that create the 
good city for people to move as a pedestrian in (Gehl, 2010). 
==PAGE:50==
40
Figure 3.2.2: 12 essential quality criteria [In danish]. Adapted from (Svarre, 2013).
==PAGE:51==
41
	
In relation to the design of the POE assessment on a neighborhood scale, 
Gehl's 12 quality criteria are highly transferable, more than the other goals and 
qualities. They are made to be used directly in design practices, and can be dire­
ctly transferred activities within the set POE framework. This said, they should 
not only constitute the content of the case study. A common understanding of 
the presented urban qualities and structural characteristics comes to form the 
content of the individual elements or activities in the POE assessment.
	
Earlier, Kevin Lynch’s concept of imageability became introduced as a 
way people perceive the city through a variety of physical elements. In relation to 
urban qualities and structures, these physical elements are considered as a way 
to characterize the physical environment. More precisely, the 5 specific elements 
include the basis for the evaluator’s perception of the urban environment.
Figure 3.2.3: The 5 elements of the city. Source (Lynch, 1960).
	
The 5 physical elements become relevant in that they can be used as a way 
of analysing the city's structure. Although the POE assessment necessarily does 
not map the entire city with these 5 elements, they provide an understanding of 
structure and form that can be used for place observations and to compare the 
outcome of the evaluation with the neighborhood’s actual structure.
==PAGE:52==
42
3.2.3 Key issues in urban planning
	
In the study of the good city, there exists a wide range of conditions and 
major problems as urban design for many years has tried to solve. In order to 
correct the POE assessment against improving cities, it is essential to relate to the 
issues that have been shown to affect different cities negatively, repeatedly. Espe­
cially if it can be shown that these conditions are not current for a neighborhood, 
then it surely have been highly successful by either solving or being planned so 
that these negative conditions have not occurred. Likewise, it is relevant to relate 
to the issues that urban planning continues to focus on solving to ensure that the 
POE assessment is targeting the right areas of urban planning.
Urban Sprawl
	
The term urban sprawl is use to describe a certain type of urban structure, 
that is characterised especially by low-density housing and automobile-oriented 
infrastructure with little comprehensive urban planning to enhance the vibrant 
urban life, described in this section. The problem related to is categorised by 4 
major headlines: economic efficiency, social equity,  environmental sustainability 
and aesthetic value (Brugmann, 2015). Urban sprawl is also given responsibility 
for creating traffic congestion, contributing indirectly to major parts of cities air 
and water pollution and grant a less pleasing urban landscape (Stoel Jr, 1999).
	
Urban sprawl thus describes in many ways diametrically opposed qualiti­
es than those that apply to a liveable city. Often it is seen that different targets are 
measured and set for areas that are characterized by the consequences of urban 
sprawl. By using anti-sprawl techniques, governments try to change the structure 
of many of the areas outside of all the world’s cities today characterized by urban 
sprawl (Brugmann, 2015). In relation to the cases selected, they must be expe­
cted not to suffer from trends of urban sprawl based on their location and role 
in the development of Copenhagen. Nevertheless, it is relevant in the future de­
velopment of these neighborhoods to look at whether they develop in a negative 
direction by considering these characteristics of areas plagued by urban sprawl. 
Also the problem in question is investigating whether POE has a role in general 
urban planning, so if it is to be developed to assess other neighborhoods outside 
Copenhagen, urban sprawl is a crucial issue. The specific POE assessment will 
use urban sprawl as a way of designing the performance criteria to investigate for 
signs of any negative consequences caused by urban sprawl.
Transport
	
Transport as a general term for various infrastructural networks as well as 
the movement of people and resources is a dominant aspect of urban planning, 
which in many ways forms the basis for an ongoing discussion. Underlying every 
city is a superimposed and interconnected infrastructure network consisting of 
different categories of systems. There are so energy and power supply, waste and 
water flows, motor vehicle infrastructure of roads, airport and harbours, digital 
==PAGE:53==
43
and electronic communication and also social movements. These infrastructural 
network coexist and influence each other in more and more complex relations­
hips as the city evolves, which are raising questions about emerging influence 
and how they will affect future urban structures (Graham & Marvin, 2001). The 
central position of transport and infrastructure in cities means that the POE as­
sessment must largely relate to how the conducted planning solves transport or 
infrastructural issues.
	
In modern planning, the concept of accessibility is very much used. It de­
scribes, in particular, that more dense areas, less distance to public transport and 
mixed functions will encourage less car travel (Loder et al., 2017). Accessibility or 
the ease of reaching destinations is a measure which is highly discussed though. 
Many studies also show, that traffic congestion necessarily does not disappears 
when focussing on accessibility enhancing initiatives (Mondschein & Taylor, 
2017). Nonetheless in a sustainable urban future, accessibility must be seen as to 
how a neighborhood is planned to encourage a car free living.
Segregation and ghettoization
	
In the discussion of urbanisation and urban planning one of the most 
discussed topics is spatial-social segregation (Bógus, 2008). Segregation in gene­
ral is a consequence of social structure that causes separation of different social 
groups within the urban space.
 “segregation is the expression of social inequalities within the 
territory of cities, and reflects the unequal appropriation of 
land, goods and services by different social classes” (Bógus, 
2008).
	
The problem of segregation are furthermore most like to increase as the 
average proportion of foreign-born humans in OECD countries has risen from 
9,5% in 2000 to 13% in 2014. The increasing cultural diversity challenges social 
integration and social cohesion in cities and will cause  spatial-social segregation 
related issues (Bezin & Moizeau, 2017).
 	
Spatial-social segregation especially concerns about inequality and how 
different social classes are forced to live in certain areas due to 3 phenomenons: 
dissemination of liberal ideas, real estate prices and privatisation of urban ser­
vices (Bógus, 2008). Ultimately the segregation discourse leads to a discussion of 
ghettoization and how residential areas with identical composition of residents 
can have negative social consequences. Although similar ethnicities may show 
satisfaction of living in the same residential area, a composition of identical re­
sidents can have a negative impact on the social capital and the individual's life 
chances (Aner, & Mazanti, 2015). 
==PAGE:54==
44
Environmental issues
	
Besides the problems that have arisen in connection with the city’s de­
velopment, cities now also face other challenges, which undeniably threatens the 
city’s opportunity to succeed. Climate changes and increased urbanization have 
meant that cities worldwide are potentially facing a number of environmental 
threats (Dizikes, 2013). Below is a collection of the issues. They are presented so 
that they describe the most common issues and such that they take into account 
the size and location together with the extent and the cause.
- Site based hazards: Risks of landslides, regularly flooding and sites at 
risk from earthquakes.
- Locally based pollution: Air and water pollution from generally motori­
sed vehicles in the close microclimate. 
- City/regional based pollution: Ambient air pollution and water pollu­
tion. Mostly generated from industry and motor vehicles, that increases 
with motor vehicles’ role generally growing in the city.
- Unpredicted natural disasters: ’Unnaturally large’ impacts on the city 
because of inadequate attention to prevention and mitigation, e.g extre­
me stormwater events and rising sea levels.
- Heat island effect and thermal inversions: Raised temperatures can 
cause health risk, especially for vulnerable groups (e.g. elderly and very 
young). Air pollutants may also become trapped, increasing the concen­
tration of particles and the length of people’s exposure to them.
- Resource degradation: Fresh water for city pre-empting its use for ag­
riculture; expansion of pave. Loss of biodiversity.
- Non-renewable resource use: Fossil fuel use and use of other mineral 
resources. This also includes loss of non-renewable resources in urban 
waste streams.
- Overuse of ’finite’ renewable Resources: Scale of consumption that is in­
compatible with global limits for soil, forests and freshwater (The World 
Bank Group, 2000).
	
In the worst case, just 1 of the listed issues could have catastrophic con­
sequences for the individual neighborhood or the entire city. Therefore, it can 
be difficult to measure how well the neighborhood performs in dealing with en­
vironmental issues, when they are yet to be exposed to them. However, planning 
==PAGE:55==
45
may show particular attention to specific issues that can be considered in relation 
to how the neighborhood performs.
Lack of empirical evidence in urban design
	
Always the eternal struggle for urban design has been, that any user of 
the room or city has or may have an attitude to what constitutes the good city. 
It is difficult to determine a normative deficit that creates a common empirical 
consensus about what cities should be and how they should be designed (Larice 
& Macdonald, 2013). Despite the fact that everyone can agree on the goal of crea­
ting the good city for people to live in, it still seems difficult to create a common 
empirical measure for what constitute a good city.
“Every user of the city has an opinion on what makes a “good 
city” - in this way urban design can be very inclusive. At the 
same time, urban design becomes dominated then by unen­
ding debates over what constitutes that “good city” (Larice & 
Macdonald, 2013). 
	
Although Jane Jacobs and Kevin Lynch describe different qualities that 
make up the good city, there are no empirical evidence for which specific rela­
tionships that constitute these qualities (Source). Thus, POE can play a key role 
in urban planning, as evaluation of the planned planning with the method over 
time can develop empirical evidence for what constitutes the good city.
	
The main understanding of current urban planning practice and urban 
design is found in the origin as a counterpart to existing planning processes 
inability to create a well-functioning city. A POE assessment of urban planning 
should assess space as a social construction, that is made up of social relations 
between the occupants and the physical structures. Without knowledge in the 
field of urban design, it will not be possible to steer the POE assessment against 
the relevant qualities that underlie the perception of the good city. The literature 
analysis of urban planning focusing on urban design is thus essential in order to 
design the right activities in the POE framework. In particular, Jane Jacobs, Ke­
vin Lynch and Jan Gehl’s urban qualities to achieve the good city will be used as 
a direction for the set performance parameters.
==PAGE:56==
46
3.3 Future urbanism
	
In this section the literature study illustrates some of the different aspects 
which is predicted to change the way the city is perceived. With the sections on 
vertical gardens and the hyperloop this sections provides examples of how new 
features and technologies of the city will influent the urban structure and form, 
thus creating new issues for the planning to handle. 
3.3.1 Urban development
Smart city
	
The concept of a smart city is still relatively new. The demand for smar­
ter, effective, efficient and more sustainable cities that can improve the ability to 
forecast and manage the physical, digital and institutional spaces of a regional 
agglomeration is increasing. Citizens and other stakeholders are expecting high 
quality standards of public services and technologies that transform and enhance 
their daily quality of life. According to Caragliu et al. (2011) a city can be cal­
led smart when the city has invested in human and social capital together with 
the investment in traditional and modern information and telecommunication 
infrastructure, which generates sustainable economic development and a high 
quality of life while promoting cautious management of our natural resources. 
A further investigation of the smart city and what areas of how it can unfold its 
applications is seen in figure 3.3.1.
Figure 3.3.1: Different applications of the smart city concept. Adapted from 
(Caragliu et al.,2011).
Smart city concept
Smart energy and smart 
grid (energy savings, 
reduced costs from outages)
Smart buildings (cutting 
energy use)
Smart water (reduction of
water losses)
Smart public services (faster, 
more productive, more
economical)
Smart lighting (enery 
eﬃciency)
Smart mobility (reduction of 
travel time and traﬃc delays)
Smart waste management
(improved cleanliness and 
optimization)
Smart energy and smart 
grid (energy savings, 
reduced costs from outages)
==PAGE:57==
47
	
From figure 3.3.1 it gets clear that the spectrum of applications is broad 
and has many needs that have to be meet before the applications can be succes­
sfully integrated. There are yet also a wide range of applications and services that 
can improve the everyday life. A important part of the concept is the information 
systems and collection of data. In this context the term “big data” is often used, 
which represents the huge increasing amount of data that is being produced and 
used in relation to develop towards a smarter city. The data gives the motivation 
that drives the development of a smart city, as it brings new opportunities and 
challenges and urges to expedite technology innovation and research related to 
big data that will promote and speed up the development of the service industry, 
better implementation of different applications in a smart city, allowing more and 
better applications to serve the society and making city operations more scienti­
fic, efficient, sustainable and safe (Novotny et al., 2015).
Climate adaptation 
	
As mentioned a earlier in the thesis the climate adaptation to emerging 
environmental issues is an important part of the future urbanism, especially for 
the cities near coasts as it needs to be a active part of the future planning due the 
rising water levels and climate changes. 
	
There is a huge development area towards coastal resilience technologies 
in an effort of protecting our cities. There are several technologies that can be im­
plemented as the adaptation to rising sea level turns necessary. The establishment 
of seawalls that are built as hard engineered structures with primary function 
of preventing further erosion of the shoreline, dikes that are used for low-lying 
coastal areas that have the function to protect from inundation from the sea un­
der extreme conditions. Furthermore nourishment strategies that can be imple­
mented to adapt for shoreline erosion as well as flood reduction. Storm surge and 
closure dams are part of a strategy where engineered structures prevent flooding 
and shorten the required length of defenses behind the barrier (Zhu et al., 2010). 
There are already many existing and successful working technologies that have 
been put into play for adapting to the climate. As more cities are starting to pre­
pare and adapt to environmental issues, more cities are also starting to develop 
huge adaptation plans, e.g. New York that are putting 19.5 billion dollars into 
the plans (Gallucci, 2013). The increased focus will create better solutions as the 
effort will be concentrated and pave the way for the future enhancement leaps 
in the development of climate change adaptation and urban coastal resiliency. 
Urban resilience and adaptation to rising sea levels need to ensure the quality of 
life today and for future generations. To ensure a successful adaptation efficient 
urban planning and coastal protection which integrates urban spaces and in­
frastructures as well as using water as a resource and for energy conversion are 
essential Zhu et al., (2010). 
==PAGE:58==
48
Vertical gardens
	
More and more area is been taking by buildings and other urban structu­
res, that leaves less space to greening and agriculture. Especially in high density 
cities green areas can become a major challenge. Throughout the years, replace­
ment of green areas that are paved and impervious surfaces in the urban areas 
have increased the temperature as compared to rural areas, because the paved 
surfaces absorbs, retain and reradiate more solar energy than vegetation. As a 
part of the imminent urban transistion, society are slowly beginning to realise 
the necessity of bringing more green into the urban areas and architecture. 
	
Vertical gardens are related or referred to as green walls, living wall or Bio 
walls. A green wall can be a freestanding wall or part of a building that is partial­
ly or completely covered with vegetations and in some cases can have soil or an 
inorganic growing ground. There are several benefits by the usage of green walls 
as they increase insulation by keeping cool in summer and warmth in winter. 
Furthermore it also improves the indoor and outdoor climate and reduces gre­
enhouse gases such as Carbon dioxide ect. and can also improve the aesthetics. 
According to the U.S. Department of Energy’s National Renewable Energy Labo­
ratory, a well-designed landscape can protect home from winter wind and sum­
mer sun and save up to 25 % of a household's energy consumption for heating 
and cooling and add 10-15 % to the home’s values. According to Jain & Janakiram 
(2016) there are four fundamental mechanisms that characterise such a green 
vertical system as a passive system for energy savings. The vegetation creates 
shadows, insulation provided by  vegetation and substrate evaporative cooling 
by evapo-transpiration and the barrier effect to wind which all are dependent 
on different parameters. These walls are extremely good for the environment in 
more than just one way, especially when they are installed in built up urban are­
as, the green walls/vertical garden will therefore likely be a popular trend for the 
future (Jain & Janakiram, 2016). 
3.3.2 Transport 
Car free cities 
	
The car appears an important part of the infrastructure in society which 
in many year have affected the cities greatly. Although the car possess an im­
portant role in today’s modern world, more and more cities are focusing on the 
transformation to shift their mobility solution away from the private owned cars 
towards more environmentally friendly and citizen-focused means. Cities like 
Oslo and Madrid are both developing car free centers. Madrid will from start 
may 2019 only allow access to bikes, buses and taxis as part of the larger effort to 
ban all diesel cars in Madrid 2025. Oslo are also making drastic changes by ban­
ning all cars from its city center by 2019 which is six years before Norway’s coun­
try-wide ban of fossilie fulled cars will go into effect together with many other 
==PAGE:59==
49
countries that are taking action towards fewer cars in the city centers (Garfield, 
2017).    
Figure 3.3.2: Framework for urban transport planning, environmental exposures, physical acti­
vity and health. Source (Garfield, 2017).
	
The decreasing of cars in the city centers is a complex engagement as the 
extent will depend on various factors that determines the contribution of traffic 
to pollutants such as the traffic fleet mix, density, conditions and layout of the 
cities and active transport provision. The key to a future which holds less private 
cars, are the numerous of cities that will make the necessary changes and plan 
towards a city, that as a result will have less air pollution, noise and a potential 
increase in active transport (Khreis, 2016).
Hyperloop 
	
The hyperloop is still in the early stages of development as it was propo­
sed in 2012 by Elon Musk. Hyperloop is the latest mode of transportation which 
is both extremely fast and inexpensive. It works by linear electric motor which 
makes it accelerate through the tube at a high speed. By using passive magnetic 
levitation or air bearing, capsule will run above the track (Shinde et al., 2017).
==PAGE:60==
50
	
The development of the Hyperloop can potentially revolutionise trans­
portational infrastructure as it will help people to travel longer distances in a 
very small amount of time and at the same time at a low cost. The hyperloop can 
potentially outplay transportation in the air as it will be cheaper and by that put 
pressure on the airlines which would be good for the environment as the air tra­
velers cost a lot of air pollution.   
	
The concept in which the users are lead through a tube at speeds of more 
than 1130 km/h may seems like a fantasy, as there are still lots of reasons to be 
sceptical about. Although the companies behind it are making huge progress and 
are working towards their first operational tunnels (Dhote, 2017).	
	
Figure 3.3.3: Structure of the magnetic levitation. Source (Shinde et al., 2017).
==PAGE:61==
4
POE
framework
==PAGE:62==
52
	
In this chapter it will be elaborated how the thesis poses to conduct the 
post occupancy evaluation on a neighborhood scale of the 3 selected appropriate 
cases. Particular attention is focused on the basis for choosing the individual 
activities that constitute the overall evaluation. The choice of the POE’s specific 
activities is based mainly on the conducted literature study, which has pointed 
out elements to be covered by the assessment. In particular, the literature stu­
dy of the academic field urban planning has contributed to the design of the 
occupant questionnaire, where the analysis of literature on POE has contributed 
to the actual framework setting for the assessment. The third part of the literatu­
re study contributes in particular to parts of the conducted POE relating to the 
implementation of the results. However all 3 academic fields have contributed to 
a common understanding of the object of evaluation, why they are essential for 
the design of the specific post occupancy evaluation framework.
	
The purpose of this POE assessment is, in addition to assessing the actual 
performance of the case neighborhood related to academic purposes. This is an 
essential aspect of the design of the POE framework as it will greatly affect the 
design of the different phases in the POE. If the academic purpose is not taken 
into consideration, the outcome of the assessment could probably not form the 
basis for a discussion of the problem in question set by the master thesis.	
	
The constructed POE framework is supported by the 9 different phases 
of the POE Method, which make up 3 overall phases: planning, conducting and 
applying. The assessment is not carried out directly after the 9 phases, which, 
however, are spontaneously included in the assessment and underlines the fra­
mework. On the other hand the assignment distinguishes more sharply between 
the 3 overall phases with clear descriptions of the individual activities of the as­
sessment and the phase in which they are occur.
4.1.1 Planning phase
	
During the planning phase it is decided to what extent the POE should 
investigate the performance when conducted on a neighborhood scale. It must 
be reconciled, which results from the evaluation is sought, so the results can be 
treated properly. To take this into account the planning phase takes it starting 
point in the various in-depth layers for which the POE assessment can be done 
(Indicative, investigative or diagnostic level). Further it is important to relate to 
what makes sense in terms of resources within the given timeframe, budget and 
logistic possibilities. If the POE conducted is too ambitious it can cause that the 
amount of data will cause the problem area to not be treated adequately. Similar­
ly, there is a danger in performing a too superficial POE, so that the assessment 
4.1 Framework setting
4 POE framework
==PAGE:63==
53
will not provide sufficient results to answer the thesis problem.
	
This master thesis is performed over a time period of 6 months and in 
addition to the POE assessment itself, the time available will also be used for 
other elements in the master thesis. Thus, much time is not left to conduct a POE 
on a diagnostic level that used sophisticated data gathering over a longer period 
of time and finds mathematical relations and causes to the outcome of the POE. 
However, the thesis does not distinguish itself from this part of the method. To a 
large extent, the study will relate to this particular layer of post occupancy evalu­
ation of neighborhoods. The conducted POE will just not be on a directly diag­
nostic level which is further based on the main aspect of the problem in question 
that the thesis uses the cases to investigate whether POE as an academic method 
can be used in urban planning and for the development of future cities. The study 
uses the cases to investigate whether the method can contribute to a development 
of the city that otherwise would not be possible with current practices. Or if it 
is possible to find reasons or issues in each neighborhoods that will prevent a 
sustainable transition. It is so not in the interest of the study to assess the case 
neighborhoods to such an extent that mathematical guidelines for specific con­
ditions that will benefit the neighbourhood or city will occur. It is estimated to be 
sufficient to assess the neighborhoods to an extent where relevant issues are in­
dicated and investigated for an immediate evaluation. By doing so the study will 
answer the problem in question by performing a POE on primarily an indicative 
and investigative level.
	
The investigation is in a tension between performing a thorough POE 
with useful results across multiple cases, without becoming an over time-consu­
ming and informative process for each neighborhood. To solve this paradox, 3 
different activities are set up within the POE framework to collect data.
- Occupant questionnaire
- Place observation
- Semi-structured interview
	
Both the questionnaire, the place observations and the semi-structured 
interview are all found on both the indicative and investigative level. However, 
the semi-structured interview has a further aim to contribute to the basis for a 
discussion of what influence an incorporation of the third level of a POE study 
(diagnostic) can have on urban planning. Basically the assessment is conducted 
in this manner to find immediate reasons to the problems of the neighborhoods. 
The purpose of doing so is to enable a discussion on how future work can further 
investigate or make more detailed measurements of specific conditions.
==PAGE:64==
54
4.1.2  Conducting phase
	
This phase of the POE framework deals with the actual 3 methodical acti­
vities performed to collect data for the POE assessment on a neighborhood scale. 
The way in which the execution is completed is by going to the specific neighbor­
hood in the time period from 16:00 to 17:00 (same time period across all cases). 
During this period of time, the questionnaire is handed to occupants in the di­
strict, while the evaluator makes observations based on the given guidelines for 
conducting place observations. The questionnaires and place observations for 
the various neighborhoods were conducted at the following dates:
- Nordhavn, 9th may 2018
- Carlsberg Byen, 14th may 2018
- Ørestad, 17th may 2018
	
Subsequently, semi-structured interviews have been conducted with the 
various relevant persons, determined by when the person had the opportunity to 
participate. The following experts have participated in the semi-structured inter­
views on given dates:
- Jakob Strømann-Andersen, 12th june 2018
- Jay Sterling Gregg, 19th june 2018
- Kenneth Wulff, 21th june 2018
	
The following sections presents the specific tool to how the collected data 
has been found. It includes the schemes for the place observation, questionnaire 
and semi-structured interview for the selected neighborhood (Ørestad) conduc­
ted with Jay Gregg Sterling. In the appendices it is possible to find all answered 
questionnaires, the completed place observations and the transcripted structured 
interviews for all 3 neighbourhoods together with the schemes for these activiti­
es.
==PAGE:65==
55
Occupant questionnaire
 
Post occupancy evaluation of neighbourhoods in Copenhagen 
Occupant questionnaire 
Bemærkninger: Af dette notat fremgår spørgeskemaets spørgsmål, men i praksis er spørge-
skemaet udleveret og besvaret af den enkelte beboer i et andet format (Appendix A1, A2 
and A3) 
2. maj 2018 
Revision: 5 
CEA 
+45 31 407 507 
casper.e.alberts@g
mail.com 
Beboer kontekst 
1. Hvilken af følgende beskriver bedst formålet med dit ophold i bydelen? 1) beboer 2) rekreativt 
3) professionelt 4) gennemgang 5) andet 
2. Hvor ofte opholder du dig i bydelen i forbindelse med rekreative formål? 1) første gang 2) 
dagligt 3) ugentligt 4) månedligt 5) årligt 
3. Hvad er gennemsnits længden af dine ophold? 1) >0,5 time 2) 0,5-1 time 3) 1-2 timer 4) 2-3 
timer 5) >3 timer 
 
De næste 3 kategorier af spørgsmål (spørgsmål 4 -20) besvares med 1) meget uenig 2) uenig 3) hverken 
uenig eller enig 4) enig 5) meget enig 
 
Æstetisk performance 
4. Størrelsen og udformningen af bygningerne gør det behageligt at færdes i bydelen. 
5. Facadernes materialer er velvalgte og oplevelse generelt sammenhængende. 
6. Veje og offentlige rum (stationer, busstoppesteder og diverse offentlige pladser) fremstår 
pæne og vedligeholdte. 
7. Mængden af grønne og blå elementer, som bidrager positivt til byens udseende, er tilfreds-
stillende. 
Funktional performance 
8. Det er nemt og overskueligt at bevæge sig rundt til fods eller med cykel. 
9. Mængden af rekreative områder (parker, naturområder, havnebade eller lignende) er til-
fredsstillende. 
10. Udbuddet af siddepladser og kvaliteten af lysudstyr, klimaskærme, skraldespande, skiltning 
samt størrelse på cykelstier og fortove er tilstrækkelig. 
11. Materialerne i byrummene gør det behageligt at færdes i bydelen. 
12. Bydelen er en integreret del af resten af København, og der er ikke områder, som fremstår 
afskåret for resten bydelen. 
13. Mængden af mennesker og belysningen om aftenen gør det trygt at færdes alene.  
Teknisk performance 
14. Udbuddet af offentlig transport er så godt og varieret, at det muliggør en bilfri levestil. 
15. Det er nemt og billigt at parkere i bydelen.  
16. Kvaliteten og variationen af rekreative områder gør jeg bruger byen mere. 
17. Bydelen har formået at integrere et tilfredsstillende udvalg af løsninger, der gør det nem-
mere at leve en bæredygtig hverdag. 
18. Det er nemt at finde bæredygtige boliger til salg i bydelen. 
19. Det er muligt at anskaffe almene eller andre billige boliger i bydelen. 
20. Bydelen gør, at jeg dagligt interagerer med ”smart city” løsninger. 
Yderligere spørgsmål 
21. Opfatter du bydelen som bæredygtig, og er det derfor du har valgt at bosætte dig eller 
opholde dig i bydelen? 1) Ja, det var vigtigt for mit valg 2) ja, men det har ikke betydet noget 3) 
nej, jeg opfatter ikke bydelen som bæredygtig 
22. Tror du den igangværende udvikling vil gavne bydelen? 1) ja 2) nej 3) ved ikke 
23. Vil du vurdere, at bydelen er succesfuld? 1) ja 2) nej 3) ved ikke 
24. Baseret på følgende spørgeskema, hvad mangler bydelen for at være mere succesfuld i 
dine øjne? 1) åbent spørgsmål, der besvares af beboeren 
Figure 4.1.1: Occupant questionaire [In danish due to danish occupants]. Different lay-out is 
handed out (See appendices A1, A2 and A3)
==PAGE:66==
56
Place observation
==PAGE:67==
57
Figure 4.1.2: Completede place observation template for Carlsberg byen by one evaluator
==PAGE:68==
58
Semi-structured interview
 
Structured Interview 
DATO 
19.06.2018 
This structured interview is conducted with Jay Sterling Gregg from DTU fo-
cussed on the specific neighbourhood Ørestad 
19. juni 2018 
Revision: 4 
/CEA 
+45 31 407 507 
Casper.e.alberts@gmail.com 
 
Background and professional profile 
1) What is your professional background and how do you related to urbanization and urban 
planning? 
2) How much is your daily work affected by sustainable urban planning and the development 
of future cities? 
3) In your professional opinion what is good urban planning and which urban qualities are 
essential to obtain a good and well-functioning city? 
Neighbourhood specific question (Ørestad) 
4) With your professional knowledge, how would you characterize the neighborhood in terms 
of overall vision, strategy, planning and its performance in relation to the essential urban 
qualities earlier mentioned? 
5) What aspects or special characteristics of the neighborhood’s vision, strategy and planning 
distinguish it from other neighborhoods? 
6) In your opinion would you consider the neighborhood to be successful? 
7) Based on the previous questions, what are the neighborhood’s specific shortcomings and 
what elements should be improved in order for the neighborhood to be considered sustain-
able and thus support a well-functioning city? 
Performance and POE of urban planning 
8) In connection with your work on urban projects, do you experience that urban project's 
performance is processed after it has been occupied and are you actively using the perfor-
mance results to improve a specific design or to gather experience? 
9) Based on your professional knowledge, what parameters could be significant to measure in 
order to improve neighborhoods? 
10) Do you think it will benefit the quality of future cities if relevant stakeholders undertook to 
systematically evaluate, for example, the performed urban planning? 
11) What challenges can you see if certain stakeholders are to evaluate city planning? 
The future city 
12) How would you describe future cities and what are the main themes/aspects to address in 
order for it succeed? 
13) What challenges do you see as the most important to achieve a sustainable urban transi-
tion? 
Figure 4.1.3:  Question for semi-structured interview with Jay Gregg Sterling focussed on Øre­
stad
==PAGE:69==
59
4.1.3 Applying phase
	
The collected data from the different sources must first be converted from 
respectively sporadic observations, answered questionnaires and semi-structu­
red interviews to an overall evaluation of the different neighbourhoods. In addi­
tion, the results must be translated so that it is possible to analyze how the POE 
method can be implemented in urban planning and the development of the city 
in terms of a transition to a more sustainable future.
	
Firstly, the collected data is processed and presented in a way to enable 
other than the evaluator to use the results forwards. At the same time, this pro­
cess allows the evaluator to comment on the results for each neighborhood. The 
method is inherently built on using different approaches and methods, where an 
evaluator compares the results of the different methods with each other. In conti­
nuation of this finding, the implementation phase will especially be reflected in a 
discussion of the POE assessment results that is compared with the findings from 
the literature study. The purpose of the POE assessment is to use these results to 
investigate whether the POE method can theoretically contribute to the develop­
ment of future cities. Therefore, the implementation phase will also especially be 
concerned with reporting the findings of the study. In continuation of this, the 
study will finally propose actions for what to do with POE in urban planning and 
development based on the results while reflecting on the outcome of the entire 
POE assessment
==PAGE:70==
60
Intentionally left blank
==PAGE:71==
5
Case study
==PAGE:72==
62
	
In this section the 3 different neighbor­
hoods assessed with the POE framework is pre­
sented with a dual purpose. Firstly the aim is to 
introduce the different neighborhood in terms 
of planning strategy, size, context and extent. 
Secondly the purpose is to determine the neig­
hborhood’s goal and vision so that there exists 
a basis for comparing the study’s results with 
the desired outcome. As seen in figure 5.1.1 
the three cases are located differently around 
Copenhagen and varies much in size. Therefore 
it is expected, that there will be big differences 
between the different neighborhoods.
5.1 Case 
descriptions
5 Case study
==PAGE:73==
63
Figure 5.1.1: Location of 3 case neighbourhoods. [Not in scale]. Source: Københavns Kommune, (n.d.)
==PAGE:74==
64
5.1.1 Nordhavnen
Facts
Neighborhood: Nordhavnen
Year of final plan: 2008
Architect: COBE, Sleth, Polyform 
	
     & Rambøll
Developer: By & Havn
Size: 3.600.000 m2
Floor space: 4.000.000 m2
Density: 111%
Projected residents: 40.000
Projected employees: 40.000
Projected students: N/A
Figure 5.1.2: Nordhavn location and boundary [Not in scale]. 
Source: Københavns Kommune, (n.d.)
Goal and vision
	
The main purpose and incentive of the development of Nordhavnen is to 
handle the increasing 45.000 new Copenhagen residents by 2025. Nordhavnen is 
the largest and most ambitious development project in Scandinavia in the coming 
years and will be a symbol of Copenhagen's development in the last decade from 
a industrial city to a leading sustainable knowledge city. Underlying the develop­
ment of Nordhavnen, there exists a clear vision of being the sustainable city of the 
future. The neighborhood must therefore, as a whole, contribute to a sustainable 
Copenhagen by demonstrating how a sustainable urban area should embrace not 
only environmental responsibility but also economic growth and social respon­
sibility. Nordhavnen’s vision is made up of 6 well defined themes: an eco-friendly 
city, a city at the water, a city for everyone, a dynamic city, a city of sustainable 
mobility and a vibrant city. The neighborhood’s position 4km from the city center 
with water for 3 sides, large self-propelled green areas and a great infrastructural 
basis provides a fertile ground for fulfilling the ambitious sustainable vision set 
(By & Havn I/S et al, 2009).
==PAGE:75==
65
Figure 5.1.3: Nordhavnen masterplan [Not in scale]. Source: By & havn (2009)
Masterplan
	
The master plan for Nordhavnen is the result of an open international 
idea competition in 2008 with the "Nordholmene - Urban Delta" project as win­
ner (By & havn, 2018). The masterplan contains a structural plan for the expan­
sion of the entire Nordhavnen. The basic idea of the masterplan is to divide the 
area into a number of island that is separated by different channels and smal­
ler harbours. The different islet serves as independent urban areas with diffe­
rent identities connected to each other and the rest of Copenhagen with a “green 
loop” that consists of bicycle paths and a new metroline while serving as a green 
public space. By using flexible islets and channels to define the neighborhood 
the masterplan supports a long-term development in different stages and can be 
adapted along with the development and expansion (COBE, 2018). 
==PAGE:76==
66
5.1.2 Carlsberg byen
Facts
Neighborhood: Carlsberg Byen
Year of final plan: 2007 and revised 	 	
	
	
     2015
Architect: Entasis (2007) adapted by 		
	
     C.F. Møller (2015)
Developer: Carlsberg Byen P/S
Size: 200.000 m2
Floor space: 600.000 m2
Density: 300%
Projected residents: 8.000
Projected employees: 10.000
Projected students: 10.000
Figure 5.1.4: Carlsberg Byen location and boundary [Not in scale]. 
Source: Københavns Kommune, (n.d.)
Goal and vision
	
After Carlsberg in 2006 decided to move their brewing activities to Fre­
derikssund, the independent company Carlsberg Byen P/S was formed. The 
company is owned by Carlsberg (25%), PFA (30%), Topdanmark (22.5%) and 
PenSam (22.5%), and aims to transform the old history filled industrial area into 
Copenhagen's new neighborhood. Carlsberg Byen consists of a mix of housing, 
urban spaces, shops, institutions, city life, culture and business premises. The 
goal is to create a neighborhood that reflects Copenhagen's modern vibrant life­
style, where you live, work, educate, actively use the urban spaces for exercise or 
other recreational purposes, manage shopping or simply just pass through. With 
mixed features and a daily synergy between the city's various actors, the vision 
for the neighborhood is to create an attractive vibrant area, located in the cen­
ter of Copenhagen as an integrated part of the existing city (Carlsberg City P/S, 
2018).
Masterplan
	
Entasis’ original development plan from 2007 is based on the vision of 
blending new modern architecture with Carlsberg’s cultural heritage and on the 
basis of this focus the masterplan won  a prize for the world’s best master plan in 
2009 (Carlsberg Byen P/S, 2015). Excerpts of entasis’ (2007) competition motiva­
tion furthermore state: 
==PAGE:77==
67
“this entry is not a proposal for the creation of a historical city 
and museumification of Carlsberg but a development oriented, 
robust proposal for a modern city featuring contrast between 
high and low, existing and new elements, and labyrinthic and 
axial experiences of the site”. (Entasis, 2007)
	
The first master plan drew a neighborhood with very close courtyards 
and narrow streets, defined by different building bodies with mixed features. 
Because it was difficult to achieve mixed functions for all buildings, a renewed 
master plan was developed by C.F. Møller Architects with a clear reference to the 
existing one. The revised master plan retains the narrow street paths, but in order 
to maintain the vision of a vibrant urban life, both the dense yards and several 
building bodies are restructured to compensate for the lack of mixed features that 
initially should have created the vibrant life. In addition, the new master plan 
contributes a structural framework for the new building body, which will be used 
to bring more light into the narrow streets. Finally, it includes the location and 
design of 8 different high-rise buildings, so they contribute optimally to both the 
microclimate and the overall visibility (C.F. Møller, 2015)
Figure 5.1.5: Carlsberg byen masterplan [Not in scale]. Source: Carlsberg Byen P/S  (n.d.)
==PAGE:78==
68
5.1.3 Ørestad
Facts
Neighborhood: Ørestad
Year of final plan: 1995
Architect: ARKKI (A joint venture of 	
	
     APRT and KHR Arkitekter)
Developer: ØrestadsselskabetI/S. From 	
      	
       2007, By & Havn
Size: 3.100.000 m2
Floor space: 3.100.000 m2
Density: 100%
Projected residents: 20.000
Projected employees: 80.000
Projected students: 20.000
Figure 5.1.6: Ørestad location and boundary [Not in scale]. 
Source: Københavns Kommune, (n.d.)
Goal and vision
	
The goal and vision of Ørestaden must be seen in a historical perspective 
to really understand the main purpose of the development. By the end of the 
last century, Copenhagen was in a great crisis, the population dropped 30% to 
500,000, and the remaining poor population lived in fallen and desolate neig­
hborhoods. In order to get the capital back on track, a number of strong politi­
cians in the 1990s made a number of major infrastructural investments to start 
an economic growth. It is in this context Ørestad as a neighborhood is menti­
oned for the first time as both financing for the new metro, a modern city with 
clear relationships to the nature and an urban development engine for the rest of 
Copenhagen (Jensen, P. B., 2013). Today, the developer of Ørestad describes the 
==PAGE:79==
69
Figure 5.1.7: Ørestad masterplan [Not in scale]. Source: APRT. (n.d.)
Masterplan
	
The winning proposal for the de­
velopment of Ørestad is based on the 1992 
architectural program, highlighting 4 main 
themes: near stations urban areas, the city 
by the water, the green city and the city's 
profile. The metro is located as a backbone 
for the entire neighborhood with 6 stations 
distributed along the 600 m wide Ørestad, 
which means that all areas appear stati­
on near. With interfaces to Amager Fælled 
along the entire western side, the nature is 
almost inevitable an integral part of urban 
life in Ørestad. In relation to concerns about 
the large size of the neighborhood, the ma­
sterplan builds on using channels and lakes 
as a continuous element to bind the vast 
urban area together (Jensen, P. B., 2013). In 
addition to the size of the area, Ørestad is 
divided into 4 districts to make the planning 
more manageable: Ørestad Nord, Ama­
ger Fælled Quarter, Ørestad City, Ørestad 
Syd, each with distinctive characteristics in 
terms of different sizes, functions, materials 
etc. (APRT, n.d.; KHR arkitekter, n.d.).
vision for the neighborhood to appear as a 
modern counterpart to the old neighbor­
hoods of inner Copenhagen, while archite­
ctural and environmental qualities must be 
of the highest standard (By & havn, n.d.)
==PAGE:80==
70
5.2 Data processing
	
In this part of the case study the collected data produced respectively by 
the place observations, the occupant questionnaires and structured interviews is 
introduced and also how the assignment in the rest of the chapter relates to it. 
The data processing is based primarily on structuring the collected data, so it is 
possible to treat it statistically and then interpret the results. Regarding the struc­
tured data the study strives to analyze how each neighborhood performs both in 
relation to own goals but also in relation to general goals for the city. Furthermo­
re, the structured data is presented, so it is possible to compare different aspects 
across the 3 individual cases. This allows the evaluator to analyse correlations 
to why neighborhoods perform as they do and on the basis thereof provide re­
commendations for further improvements for the use of POE in urban planning. 
Below, figure 5.2.1 illustrates an overview of the collected data for the individual 
analytic activities.
Figure 5.2.1: Collected data
	
In order to process the evaluators collected data a further detailed excel 
sheet is developed so that a statistical process can be established (See appendix 
H). The data obtained from each the different activities are processed according 
to the methods described in section 2.3.2. 
	
The next section will present the collected data with a focus on the per­
formance of each neighborhood from a overall perspective, with respect to the 
3 performance dimensions and also for relevant parameters. Furthermore rele­
vant place observations and general results from the open question in the questi­
onnaire will be presented in the right context. In the final section of this chapter, 
answers and quotes from the structured interview will be used as guidance and 
reference for the cross case comparison. 
==PAGE:81==
71
5.3 Results
	
After processing the results individually for the 3 activities within the 
set POE framework, all the results must be presented in such a way that they 
can be used to make an overall evaluation of the 3 neighborhoods. Furthermore, 
the overall evaluation should be used in an academic context to find out how 
POE can strengthen the planning of Copenhagen. As previously pointed out, it 
is essential that the results are produced so that other than the evaluator in this 
master thesis can use the results in other contexts to develop the POE method of 
assessing urban planning on a neighborhood scale.
	
To solve this task, a ”dashboard” is created, which first shows the distri­
bution of occupants types. Next, the measured performance is presented by the 
distribution of satisfied, indecisive and dissatisfied from the occupant survey for 
both the total performance and the 3 performance dimensions. Finally, the fre­
quency of use in the recreation areas and the distribution of the length of recrea­
tional time are presented. In addition to the dashboard, the occupant’s evaluation 
of the neighborhood’s shortcomings from the open question is categorized and 
listed by the most common answers. In addition, the same process will be used 
for displaying the evaluators’ observed conditions and for the acquired knowled­
ge on the neighborhood’s status from the conducted interviews. 
==PAGE:82==
72
5.3.1 Nordhavnen
0,25
0,5
0
0,75
1
Residental
Recreational
Professionel
transportational
Other
Recreational frequency
Recreational duration
Total performance
Technical performance
Functional performance
Aesthetic performance
Satisfied
45%
Dissatisfied
20,2%
Indecisive
34,8%
Indecisive
25%
Dissatisfied
15,4%
Satisfied
59,6%
Indecisive
28,1%
Dissatisfied
20%
Satisfied
51,9%
Satisfied
30,7%
Dissatisfied
23,1%
Indecisive
46,2%
Occupant type distribution
Figure 5.3.1:  Result dashboard for Nordhavnen
First
Daily
Weekly
Monthly
Yearly
<0.5
Hours
0.5-1
1-2
2-3
>3
==PAGE:83==
73
Occupant feedback
- Few green areas and almost no green elements in the general cityscape.
- The apartments are too expensive (both rent and buy). Need for more diversity in the resi­
dents’ composition, since only wealthy residents live in the neighborhood today.
- The on-going construction need to be done as fast as possible.
- Poor connection to the rest of Copenhagen and there is a wish for better internal connec­
tion by tying the different moles better together.
- Expensive parking.
- There are no public restrooms, and the district is missing more trash cans
Place observations
- Primary construction sites or unspoiled areas furthest out, but still finished parts that are 
occupied, closest to the existing city. Still dominated by large office domiciles.  
- Well-educated and high-ranking residents. They had high insight into the subject and 
were very curious and wanted to hear about the study. Many expensive cars and expensive 
clothes among the occupants. 
- Water is almost visible at all times, when occupying the neighborhood.
- Very mixed features are experienced on street level: ”People on their way to work”, “people 
are picking up children”, “people are shopping”, “people leasure on street corners”. There is 
further seen play studies in the dwellings. So instead of central places for activities (Such as 
a gym hal) play agreements are an integral part of the neighborhood.
- Very high concentration of recreational activity along the quayside, with many young pe­
ople from outside the neíghborhood.
- Attractive buildings with common expressions, mostly in bricks. Exciting architecture. 
Very large and expensive apartments of high quality with good view of the water from many 
of the apartments.
Planning remarks
- High-end residential quarter in terms of square meters and square meter prices, which 
has resulted in a very similar resident composition. It will require new building types (eg 
student accommodation) to change the social composition of the neighborhood.
- Robust sustainable planning that mimics the close density in Copenhagen. Constant de­
velopment in the area, where new cafés are constantly evolving and more live occurs at the 
piers.
==PAGE:84==
74
5.3.2 Carlsberg byen
0,25
0,5
0
0,75
1
Residental
Recreational
Professionel
Transportational
Other
Recreational frequency
Recreational duration
Total performance
Technical performance
Functional performance
Aesthetic performance
Satisfied
44,8%
Dissatisfied
20,5%
Indecisive
34,7%
Indecisive
25,6%
Dissatisfied
20,7%
Satisfied
53,7%
Indecisive
27,3%
Dissatisfied
13,4%
Satisfied
59,3%
Satisfied
27,2%
Dissatisfied
26,5%
Indecisive
46,3%
Occupant type distribution
Figure 5.3.2:  Result dashboard for Carlsberg byen
First
Daily
Weekly
Monthly
Yearly
<0.5
Hours
0.5-1
1-2
2-3
>3
==PAGE:85==
75
Occupant feedback
- The architecture needs to be more organic and generally more exciting.
- More green in the general cityscape and more green areas and parks.
- Complete the construction as fast as possible.
- There are poor and only expensive parking possibilities.
- Only very expensive apartments today.
- Poor breakdown of bicycles and pedestrians zone. Many dangerous encounters. 
Place observations
- The neighborhood is experienced to be very unfinished. Many large construction projects 
run sporadically around completed buildings. Also large, ugly and worn boards with infor­
mation about new buildings are very dominating to the occupant.
- Large amount of older cultural objects.
- All urban life is centered around the station and the few shops that are located along with 
the university.
- Generally lack of places and recreational areas in the neighborhood.
- The large building bodies around the station provides a bad microclimate several places 
when you stay there.
- Few recreational users of the urban space in general, and the large landscaped beautiful 
park was used only by under 10 people.
- Very mixed types of people, both students, elderly and parents with small children.
- A huge amount of cyclists use the area for transit. It was hard to make them answer.
Planning remarks
- Very ambitious and interesting urban plan, which takes a formative language, reminiscent 
of inner Copenhagen, that is an old medieval center where roads break and the scale is re­
latively small but dense.
- On top of the given urban scale several high rise tower are placed, which creates a very 
high building density in the neighborhood, much denser than the rest of Copenhagen. 
- It will require some form of philanthropy if many of the characteristics of planning are to 
be realized. It first of all requires some stakeholders to take responsibility and pay for the 
actions. Something that the neighborhood so far has not been very lucky with.
- A major concern for the neighborhood is whether there is room for everyone. Because 
there are some really expensive apartments you can fear it will end as a wealthy ghetto.
==PAGE:86==
76
5.3.3 Ørestad
0,25
0,5
0
0,75
1
Residental
Recreational
Professionel
Transportational
Other
Occupant type distribution
Recreational frequency
Recreational duration
Total performance
Technical performance
Functional performance
Aesthetic performance
Satisfied
52,8%
Dissatisfied
18,8%
Indecisive
28,4%
Indecisive
21,4%
Dissatisfied
16,4%
Satisfied
62,1%
Indecisive
19%
Dissatisfied
16,7%
Satisfied
64,3%
Satisfied
37,6%
Dissatisfied
22%
Indecisive
40,4%
Figure 5.3.3:  Result dashboard for Ørestad
First
Daily
Weekly
Monthly
Yearly
<0.5
Hours
0.5-1
1-2
2-3
>3
==PAGE:87==
77
Occupant feedback
- There are missing cafes and shops on street level.
- Great wish for continued conservation of “Fælleden”.
- New buildings should break the very streamlined architecture.
- New infrastructures need to be made for better integration with the rest of Copenhagen.
- Too expensive parking.
- There is a lack of integrated recreational areas that encourage activity and exercise.
- The neighborhood is characterized by too much traffic.
Place observations
- Very large neighborhood with many different areas. Large institutional buildings in the 
north, located very far from the rest of the neighborhood. Large urban area in the center of 
the city on very a large scale. In the south there is a lot of construction going on and there 
are also some larger hotels and cultural buildings.
- The metro is a very dominant element and it is experienced everywhere in the city.
- Very few people, when moving in the neighborhood in general. However, in the big park 
and outside Fields (the shopping mall) and the hotels there is a high concentration of pe­
ople.
- The central park was used by many people who interacted in cross-sections of different 
activities.
- Many occupants who do not resident in the neighborhood and many non Danish spea­
king occupants.
- Brutal building blocks on many floors and no connection between the buildings. The 
overall architecture is uninteresting and boring. You get a sense of walking in a moder­
nist-inspired metropolis (Bangkok).
Planning remarks
- Ørestad is really struggling into growing into a vibrant livable community, especially with 
the market appeal of ”newness” wearing off.
- Fundamentally, it lacks identity. People reside there, but they do not live there. This is a 
consequence of the economic development was overly prioritized. 
- It still has potential to develop into a successful area, but you could raise the question if a 
development should take so much time to become successful as is the case.
==PAGE:88==
78
5.4 Cross case comparison
	
With the presented results from the POE assessment this sections compa­
res the results from each of the 3 neighborhoods. Furthermore the data is proces­
sed and managed across the 3 different activities within the POE framework, so 
it is possible to report case specific findings given by the overall POE assessment.
5.4.1 Neighborhood performance
	
To begin comparing the selected neighborhoods it is firstly considered, 
how each neighborhood performs compared to the measured performance from 
the occupant questionnaire. Overall, according to the overall performance, it is 
concluded that Ørestad performs best with a total satisfaction of 52.8% among 
the occupants. Below, 10 percentage points lower, they rank Carlsberg byen and 
Nordhavn close to each other with a total satisfaction of respectively 44.8% and 
45%. The precise distribution of satisfied, indecisive and dissatisfied answers for 
the overall performance can be seen in figure 5.4.1.
Figure 5.4.1: Total performance 
	
Immediately, it is an interesting outcome of questionnaire survey that 
Ørestad performs best overall as Ørestad, as a whole, has been exposed to very 
sharp criticism by various urban planning experts. Especially the neighborhood's 
inability to create an vibrant urban life has been the focal point for criticism (Cor­
neliussen, 2002; Kjeldtoft, 2018). Jan Gehl states as follows:
 “There is said and written ugly about Ørestad, which was an­
nounced as a hub for the Ørestad region, but has ended up as a 
detached suburb in nine storeys height”   (Kjeldtoft, 2018).
	
The design of the POE assessment has been focused on measuring the 
parameters or qualities that urban design in particular describes as the good city. 
It is thus remarkable that the outcome of the analysis shows that the best perfor­
ming neighborhood generally experiences problems creating a vibrant urban life 
to support a liveable city. Recognizing the framework for the POE assessment to 
be properly designed to address relevant issues, there may be a number of logical 
reasons why Ørestad performs better with the occupied occupants than both 
Nordhavnen and Carlsberg byen.
==PAGE:89==
79
	
First of all, the actual distribution of the respondents is considered. In 
Nordhavnen you see a very even distribution of residents, employees and re­
creational users, where the distribution in Carlsberg byen is highly dominated 
by employees, and Ørestad was predominantly residents. From the observations 
made across the various cases, residents generally seemed to have a more positi­
ve attitude towards the district than the employees in particular. The employees 
tended mostly to focus on technical performance and to some extent neglect the 
more aesthetic and functional aspects of the urban environment. Thus, it can 
be immediately concluded that residents based on this assessment are generally 
more satisfied with the planning than other occupant types. As the study is the 
first of its kind and has a different focus, one can not scientifically conclude in a 
broad sense that residents generally are very satisfied than other occupant types. 
However, in this analysis, the number of residents answers has had an impact on 
the overall performance.
	
In addition to the type of occupants themselves, the POE showed that 
there was also a great difference in how the residents in the different neighbor­
hoods perceive urban planning. Residents in Nordhavnen differ significantly by 
showing great interest in the development of their neighborhoods. It was very 
high-end residents who were highly critical of how planning is going to affect 
their future neighborhoods. Based on the place observations and the conducted 
interview with Jakob Strømann-Andersen, the residents’ attitude to planning is 
influencing to a great extent, especially why Nordhavn scores lower than Øre­
stad.
	
Furthermore, a very central difference between Ørestad and the other ne­
ighborhoods is how far the development is projected and thus the length which 
the neighborhood has been occupied. The overall POE assessment shows that 
primarily the occupants in Nordhavnen and Carlsberg byen demand that con­
struction is completed as soon as possible. In this way, it can be said that there 
is still a lot of construction going on and the occupants experience of the urban 
space is adversely affected by this close development. Likewise, it is pointed out 
by the evaluator’s place observations and the conducted interviews that the neig­
hborhoods are at a very early stage in their planning. It is therefore striking that 
Nordhavnen and Carlsberg byen score less than 0.2% from each other when they 
are both in the same stage with close on-going development and are in phase 
where more and more occupants begin to acquire the place. Although Ørestaden 
is still experiencing major expansion, large parts of the neighborhood have been 
completed for a relatively long time, and residents have had the opportunity to 
acquire the finished neighborhood. Not said the total amount of occupation time 
is crucial to the overall performance, but to some degree the occupant needs time 
to adapt to the completed environment. In this context with 2 neighborhood 
under development and a significantly more completed neighborhood, it is a sig­
nificant factor.
==PAGE:90==
80
	
Another aspect of this research is the first of its kind is that the total sa­
tisfaction of 52.8% among the respondents involved necessarily does not tell if 
Ørestad is at all successful. There are no existing number that makes it possible 
to determine whether this number describes successful or failed planning. It is 
merely a reference based on this master thesis analysis of how well the 3 selected 
cases perform in relation to each other. It is not a magic number that could be 
used to verify if a neighborhood is successful or failed. However, it will still be 
part of future POE assessments and, in time, will help to develop an understan­
ding of what constitutes the good city. In understanding the overall performance, 
Jay Gregg Sterling also asks whether or not Ørestad is successful at all.
“It still has the potential to develop into a successful area, 
but people have been saying that for quite a while now, and a 
development should not need so much time to become succes­
sful.”  Sterling (2018, June 19). Structured interview.
	
52.8% overall satisfaction does not support an overall goal for the good 
city. In spite of the fact that Ørestad do not perform very well despite the highest 
satisfaction, the planning for the other neighborhoods is not failed, even though 
they score lower than Ørestad. As mentioned earlier, they are in another stage 
where occupants will show dissatisfaction with a number of unfinished conditi­
ons. To investigate what findings the POE assessment provides for the planning 
of the 3 neighborhoods, the results within the 3 performance dimensions are 
compared individually.
Aesthetic performance
	
1 of the 3 performance dimensions, which has the best satisfaction among 
the requested occupants is the aesthetic. Ørestad again has the best score with 
62.1%. The remaining results are as follows in figure 5.4.2.
Figure 5.4.2: Aesthetic performance 
	
In general, the occupants across all neighborhoods accept the architectu­
re and design of the buildings. This can be a result of the clear architecture policy 
plan for Copenhagen, which demands high visual quality across all projects (Kø­
benhavns Kommune, Teknik- og Miljøforvaltningen, 2017). This said, different 
aspects of the different neighborhoods that challenge the aesthetic quality can be 
derived.
	
First of all, you can look at Ørestad, which has its aesthetic qualities in 
==PAGE:91==
81
its focus on creating a modern expression in its form and materiality as well as 
function and technical characteristics.
“The buildings are bold and innovative, and many are environ­
mentally sustainable by different international certification 
schemes”  Sterling (2018, June 19). Structured interview.
	
Furthermore, Jay Gregg Sterling states in the interview:
“There are no links to the past, as with other redevelopment 
areas in Copenhagen, so the challenge with Ørestad is to crea­
te”  Sterling (2018, June 19). Structured interview.
	
The neighborhood does not try to imitate Copenhagen’s existing expres­
sion, but to create a brand new modern addition to the existing city. Furthermo­
re, Jay Gregg Sterling describes in the interview that Ørestad has a market appeal 
of ”newness”. As the neighborhood has its qualities of being new and modern, 
there is also a great danger that it eventually becomes outdated and loses its ap­
peal of ”newness” to the occupants.
	
Opposite Ørestad, Nordhavn and Carlsberg byen both try to acquire the 
existing expression in Copenhagen. Both in the interview performed with Ja­
kob Strømann-Andersen and Kenneth Wulff, it appears that both neighborhoods 
imitate the existing urban scale and structural expression. In addition, Nordhavn 
especially tries to use the materiality to imitate the architectural expression of 
Copenhagen.
“And then there is of course materiality, which has chosen to 
be built in bricks, which means that you get a characteristic 
and a reference to old Copenhagen”  Strømann-Andersen 
(2018, June 11). Structured interview.
	
Nevertheless, there is a difference in the score for Nordhavnen and Carls­
berg byen, where Carlsberg byen is the city's lowest-performing neighborhood. 
With relatively high scores for both Ørestad and Nordhavnen, the 6-9 percentage 
points lower satisfaction is a result that stands out when the neighborhood strives 
for the same qualities as Nordhavnen. With the design of the POE assessment, it 
can not be concluded which specific details are the reason for this result. Howe­
ver, several occupants pointed out that the facades of Carlsberg byen seem inor­
ganic and the architecture generally appears very rigid. 
	
A further repeated criticism of Carlsberg byen, which also applies to 
Nordhavnen, is the lack of green and blue elements in the urban space. Although 
Nordhavnen is surrounded by water for 3 sides, it is clear that residents demand 
more green and blue in the overall urban image. For Ørestad, the POE assess­
ment experienced no problems with the adequacy of green and blue elements, 
==PAGE:92==
82
which casually can be explained by the fact that the neighborhood has the ad­
vantage that it is located next to Amager fælled along the entire west side, and the 
occupants thus can access or see green from all places in the neighborhood .
Functional performance
	
With 0.1 percentage points better average satisfaction than for the avera­
ge satisfaction of aesthetic performance, the functional performance is the 1 of 
the 3 performances that scores best. As shown in Figure 5.4.3, this is the only one 
of the 3 performance in which Carlsberg byen does not score the lowest. Here it is 
located together with Ørestad respectively 7.2 and 11.2 percentage points higher 
than Nordhavnen.
Figure 5.4.3: Functional performance 
	
This POE has investigated the overall comfort when occupying the urban 
space caused by the physical structure and materials and adequacy of the equip­
ment in the urban environment. The reasons for the current performance prove 
to be very related to the occupant perception, thus showing the final performan­
ce is in line with what the occupant satisfaction.
	
The most eye-catching reason why Nordhavnen scores the lowest is that 
it lacks in particular green recreation areas among the residential areas. Obser­
vations in the area also clearly show that the available recreational areas that are 
in the neighborhood are all close to 100% permeable. Despite being integrated 
in innovative ways in the urban environment, it is clear that the occupants miss 
larger and more green areas.
Another problem that was highlighted by the open question in the questionnaire 
is that both Ørestad and Nordhavnen lack a better connection with the rest of 
Copenhagen. Although Ørestad is built around a metro line, which goes straight 
to the center of the city, the neighborhood is still cut off from the rest of Copen­
hagen. Nordhavn is likewise described as cut off from the rest, especially the 
Østerbro part of Copenhagen. The planning expects the metro to solve this pro­
blem over time, but with experience from Ørestad, it can not be expected that a 
metro alone can integrate the neighborhood in the rest of Copenhagen. Other 
planning tools must be used to prevent new development areas from ending like 
Ørestad, cut off from the rest of the city.
==PAGE:93==
83
Technical performance
	
Out of the 3 performance dimensions, it is clear that all 3 neighborhoods’ 
total performance are negatively impacted most of the technical performance. As 
shown below in figure 5.4.4, the satisfaction is very low in all neighborhoods.
Figure 5.4.4: Technical performance 
	
To find reasons for this relationship, the overall discourse for the techni­
cal performance of urban planning of the neighborhoods and the actual content 
of the POE assessment is considered. 
	
The technical performance is the quality of the solutions that make up the 
neighborhood. In the actual POE assessment, this turned into the opportunity to 
buy homes in general or acquire sustainable housing, accessibility of infrastruc­
ture and the quality of the city's various functions.
	
Infrastructural features actually perform relatively well, although the 
overall score is very low. However, it should be noted that parking for almost 
everyone surveyed across the 3 neighborhoods is a huge problem. This master 
thesis does not want to assess whether it is positive or negative, or if the poor 
/ expensive parking calls for less car transport. This is a discussion for another 
study. The problem is indicated along with the perception of the occupant who 
finds it as a huge problem
	
One of the greatest problems in planning in Copenhagen and the de­
velopment of new neighborhoods is the price and the opportunity to acquire 
housing. This problem, as shown in literature studies, can have a large number 
of negative consequences with spatial-social segregation. About Nordhavn the 
following is described:
“It is a bit of a relatively high-end residential quarter in terms 
of square meters and square meters prices. It could be a bigger 
social mix out there”  Strømann-Andersen (2018, June 11). 
Structured interview.
	
Furthermore, the same relationship about Carlsberg byen is described in 
the interview with Kenneth Wulff:
“What may worry... it is whether there will be room for every­
one in that city because it is some super expensive apartments 
that are being built”  Wulff (2018, June 22). Structured inter­
view.
==PAGE:94==
84
	
For both neighborhoods it is indicated in the interviews conducted, that 
square meters prices are among the highest in Copenhagen and that it is already 
feared that the neighborhoods will lack social diversity because the housing mix 
becomes too unilateral.
	
In addition to residential aspects, the POE assessment made a final ques­
tion in the examination of the technical performance, which equally contributes 
negatively to the performance. The question of the occupant's interaction with 
smart city solutions was asked to investigate how the occupants accept digitali­
sation. However, it was found that most occupants were not aware of what smart 
city solutions are or whether they interact with them. Therefore, they rarely re­
sponded positively to the question.
	
All in all, the technical performance of urban planning may be the part 
of the planning that the neighborhoods in Copenhagen should be most aware of. 
In order to create a successful city, the literature study shows that it is necessary 
to take into account all three performance dimensions. Additionally to the poor 
scores, an enormously development takes place in the use of different technolo­
gies in the city and the digitization of various urban functions. At the same time, 
a number of environmental issues threaten the city, which together, with the in­
creasing complexity and uncertainty surrounding future urban structures, will 
place greater demands on the technical performance.
The significance of the vision and goal
	
There seems to be a clear difference between how the 3 neighborhoods 
perform. Although there is a striking resemblance to the overall performance 
from the occupant questionnaire, there are widely different reasons for the cur­
rent performance. Mostly, Ørestad differs significantly from the other two ne­
ighborhoods. The POE method is based in comparing the goal of the object of 
evaluation with the outcome of the evaluation. In this case, it is seen that the 
biggest difference between the performance of the 3 neighborhoods is found in 
the actual goal of the development and planning. Both Nordhavn and Carlsberg 
aim to cope with increasing population growth by building new sustainable and 
attractive areas. Although they differ in different ways, for example by having 2 
different types of developers, Ørestaden has especially played another role in the 
development of Copenhagen. 
“Fundamentally, it lacks an identity. People reside there, but 
they do not live there. I believe this has happened because the 
economic development was over prioritised.”  Sterling (2018, 
June 19). Structured interview.
	
From the interview with Jay Gregg Sterling, it can be seen that Ørestad's 
purpose of starting economic growth and making Copenhagen attractive to in­
==PAGE:95==
85
vestors has helped to contribute to its current status. Ørestad's goal and its per­
formance therefore also support the fact that it is crucial for the development of 
Copenhagen to set ambitious goals to create a better city for people to live in.
5.4.2 Case specific findings
	
By processing the data found in the POE assessment in this applying pha­
se of the assessment a number of findings can be derived, which are reported 
below. These findings are listed to answer the first part of the master thesis overall 
problem formulation.
“How can post occupancy evaluation strengthen Copenhagen 
to meet the challenges of 21st century urbanisation…”
	
In this sense, the case specific findings must be written in such a way that 
they answer how the POE performed can strengthen Copenhagen. Necessarily, 
they should not be represented as specific design recommendations, but they 
must be reported such that they indicate problematic conditions or generally 
show which aspects of planning create the good city.
- There is a clear correlation between how well the 3 different neighbor­
hoods perform and what vision and goals are set.
- It is clear that both Nordhavn and Carlsberg byen are still in a very early 
stage compared with the final development. The neighborhoods still do 
not work as planned even though they are considered occupied.
- It should be pointed out that while the 2 neighborhoods are performing 
almost evenly today, they are faced with far different problems, which 
require a wide variety of actions and insight into the context of each ne­
ighborhood.
- Furthermore, Ørestad is specifically predetermined to perform worse 
in relation to liveable city qualities, as the goal of the district was to drive 
economic growth in Copenhagen with investments and improved attra­
ctivity for other investors.
- The square meter price of homes in the newer neighborhoods is very 
high-end, which has already shown to contribute to social-spatial segre­
gation.
- The close development in Copenhagen affects the occupant’s satisfacti­
on with the neighborhood and thus also the entire city. In order to solve 
this, planning should take into account in particular how the building 
==PAGE:96==
86
sequence is designed.
- There is an indication that the longer a neighborhood has been occu­
pied, the more successful, as the residents take the area, the neighbor­
hood will be.
- The most successful neighborhoods will be achieved if the development 
of new neighborhoods strives to imitate Copenhagen’s existing architec­
tural expressions.
- The amount of green and blue elements in the urban environment gre­
atly influences how occupants perceive the neighborhood’s aesthetic per­
formance.
- There is no focus on environmental issues in the planning of each ne­
ighborhood. This said, it may be that planning takes place on a larger 
regional scale and will not be seen by evaluating on a neighborhood scale. 
Or it may be, it’s not a problem yet.
- Either Copenhagen is not very advanced in the development of smart 
city solutions or the occupants don not know that they interact with them.
==PAGE:97==
6
Discussion
==PAGE:98==
88
	
This chapter is intended to discuss the results from the previous chapters. 
The purpose of discussion is to find out how POE generally can be used in urban 
planning processes and so respond to the second part of the master thesis' pro­
blem formulation.
6 Discussion
“...to what extent can urban planning benefit from post occupan­
cy by learning systematically from previous experience?”
	
Furthermore, it is the purpose of the chapter to discuss what barriers are 
in the way of implementing the POE method in planning future cities. Finally, 
the limitations chosen by the methodology for the outcome of the study are high- 
lighted and, as a consequence, how it is possible to continue working with the 
POE of neighborhoods.
6.1 Contribution to urban 
planning
	
In the introductory chapter of the assignment, a number of factors de­
scribe the urbanisation of the future and the issue of future cities as very complex 
and furthermore exposed to an imminent urban transition. Throughout the re­
search, the urbanisation of the future has shown to design new urban structures 
and forms, which does not seem to be supported by traditional urban planning. 
This attitude is also elaborated in the interview with Jakob Strømann-Andersen:
"The major challenge is that the city is developed over a very 
long period of time, 10, 20, 50 years, but the development of 
our society, with the way in which new technology and digiti­
zation and infrastructure are implemented, goes much faster 
than city planning traditionally does”  Strømann-Andersen 
(2018, June 11). Structured interview.
	
In addition to the fact that the development of technology and increased 
digitalisation create a new planning agenda that needs to be more dynamic and 
agile than traditional planning processes, it is further elaborate in the interview:
"... there will be a development in the future where digital and 
technical developments will overtake the planned develop­
ment, so suddenly we will have solutions that our cities are not 
ready for, or we are planning some cities that we do not know 
==PAGE:99==
89
how will look in 30 years. So it is our biggest challenge, how do 
we plan for a reality that we do not know?”  Strømann-Ander­
sen (2018, June 11). Structured interview.
	
The planning of the cities of the future must therefore be reconsidered in 
order to handle the development of society and the implementation of new te­
chnologies that take place faster than it is possible to find solutions for emerging 
issues. The biggest challenge for planning the cities of the future is to plan for 
unknown relationships that arise in line with society's fast growing development. 
Jay Gregg Sterling describes in the interview that, above all, it requires more fle­
xibility in planning to handle the imminent urban transition.
“Cities are going through a revolution right now, with smart 
technology and optimization through big data. Transportation 
developments on the horizon (e.g. autonomous vehicles) have 
the potential to be huge game changers, and so one of the main 
themes for success is to allow for some degree of flexibility in 
planning”  Sterling (2018, June 19). Structured interview.
	
It is clear that there is a need for a new form of perception of urban plan­
ning in order to create successful cities. The purpose of the research was to in­
vestigate how the known method post occupancy evaluation can contribute to 
urban planning that can handle the increasing complexity of urbanisation.
	
By looking at the method of POE, it appears that the method consists of 
underlying mechanisms that compare the goal of the object with the outcome of 
the specific assessment. The method acknowledges different approaches to ma­
king this assessment, and it is possible to use different data gathering methods. 
A further aspect of the multi-oriented approach is that the method can be devel­
oped over time. It is seen that the method is an iterative process that can be per­
formed at different levels for the same object and developed over time to adapt 
to new outcomes of the assessment. Since the POE method evaluates in multiple 
iterations and is constantly adapted to the outcome, the POE method will the­
oretically handle the unpredictable aspect of future planning. By evaluating in 
several laps, issues will be indicated by the assessment while experience about 
current causes can be collected.
	
All in all, the method seems to be capable of handling the complexity 
of the imminent urban transition and helping to create successful cities. This is 
further supported by the fact that all respondents in the structured interviews 
uniquely answered that POE could contribute to urban planning. By recognising 
the potential of POE in urban planning, the method could begin a urban discou­
rse described that was dominated by smart urbanism rather than just smart ci­
ties. POE can finally contribute to urban planning with a method that solves a 
large number of the problems traditional urban planning holds for planning for 
future cities.
==PAGE:100==
90
6.1.1 Implementation of case specific findings
	
It is clear that the POE method in its methodological approach may be 
of great relevance in the development of the cities of the future, but what specific 
knowledge can be deduced from the research. It has been answered in the previ­
ous chapter how the case study can help strengthen the planning of the 3 selected 
cases in Copenhagen. Based on these findings, efforts are now being made to 
discuss what general findings can be deduced from the conducted POE on how 
urban planning especially can benefit from POE.
	
A number of case-specific findings have been found that can be catego­
rised to point out in which areas urban planning can generally benefit. First, it 
is seen that the POE assessment has been able to identify current issues for the 
individual neighborhoods, and it has also been possible to find casual causes of 
the problems. It has been possible to compare the goal and vision of the planning 
against the measured performance, and on the basis hereof, rank the the different 
plans with each other. In addition, it was also found that planning can be greatly 
enhanced by the fact that increased focus on the building sequences creates a 
better development. This relationship also shows that the method will support 
dynamic and flexible planning, as Jay Gregg Sterling assumes crucial, as the as­
sessment is able to assess sequential and temporal aspects of development. Lastly, 
the POE assessment also, based on the literature analysis, could identify if there 
are non-addressed focus areas in the neighborhoods that need to be assessed 
with future POEs.
6.1.2 General findings
	
By designing a POE framework adapted to urban planning on a neigh­
borhood scale, it has been possible to undergo a case study of 3 different neigh­
borhoods in Copenhagen, which is still being developed. The result is this POE 
has been able to provide a number of case-specific findings where it now have 
been possible to generate the following general findings within the field of urban 
planning.
- The city's growing central role in society and general technological de­
velopment causes that traditional planning is not able to support the im­
minent urban transition, to which POE proposes an approach that itera­
tively evaluates planning and adapt it to new conditions.
- The research has shown that it is possible to access urban planning with 
a POE framework derived from the literature study. Despite the method 
originates in more limited environments, there is both a theoretical and 
practical basis for using the method in planning future cities.
- POE of urban planning is able to check whether the individual neigh­
==PAGE:101==
91
borhood achieves the goals set for the entire city or specifically for the 
individual neighborhood. Likewise, it has been confirmed that increased 
focus on ambitious goals and visions will more likely create more succes­
sful planning.
- It is possible to indicate issues that cause dissatisfaction among the 
occupants and ultimately will reduce the neighborhood's livability. 
Furthermore it is possible to deduce a set of casual causes to these diffe­
rent urban issues. 
- A POE assessment supports dynamic planning that is agile and flexible, 
so it is possible to handle planning for an unknown future.
- In addition to evaluating current addressed issues, POE may also in­
dicate new focus areas to address in future development. Similarly, POE 
may also reveal if there are focus areas that the planning is neglecting or 
missing.
- With the task of studying the POE of urban planning, it is clear that 
there is a need for a review of how planning is perceived. Therefore, POE 
also provide a basis for reassessing or discussing how the city of the futu­
re is to be developed.
==PAGE:102==
92
6.2 Barriers to POE of urban 
planning
	
Up to now, it has been answered how POE can contribute to the academic 
field of urban planning, but it has so far been left unsaid which challenges are 
involved in implementing POE. In this section, it is considered from the con­
ducted interviews how the use of POE in urban planning is perceived by relevant 
stakeholders and who should be responsible for implementing the method.
6.2.1 Perception of POE of urban planning
	
First and foremost, it is clear that great benefits can be derived from using 
POE and converting into a flexible and interchangeable planning. Which parts 
of the existing planning processes are so that make it difficult to switch to such a 
process? Based on the interviews conducted, it is clear that lack of knowledge and 
focus on collecting results from projects is the immediate reason for acquiring 
the method. When asked about which barriers exist to implement POE in urban 
planning, Kenneth Wulff answers:
"The research that takes place in the university environment or 
elsewhere - how can there be better exchange with them and 
those who are actually building cities and the like. There must 
be better contact between research and us architects and city 
planners."  Wulff (2018, June 22). Semi-structured interview.
	
From this point of view, it is clear that it will require great effort to de­
ploy new methods and practices to the people who design the city. In additi­
on, there is a delivery process for architecture and urban planning that puts a 
stop to the implementation among the practitioners. In the interview with Jakob 
Strømann-Andersen, this process is clarified when asked how general practice 
uses data gathering from previous projects.
"Traditionally, architects are really bad at learning from their 
projects. We have the idea and the tendency to constantly look 
for the next thing when we dip the red string, the red thread 
for the construction, and we will continue to the next project”  
Strømann-Andersen (2018, June 11). Semi-structured inter­
view.
	
However, some kind of opening or demand can be traced to using POE 
similar methods to collect data across projects to create better designs. Although 
Jakob Strømann-Andersen describes a tendency to constantly pursue projects, he 
==PAGE:103==
93
	
The desire to use more data among the practitioners must be seen in the 
light of the fact that society increasingly demands more attention and use of data. 
With the city as a worldwide phenomenon facing a greater transition than ever 
before, society is increasingly beginning to seek ways to solve this. Smart city 
solutions using big data have previously been described as a solution to urbani­
sation’s growing complexity. It can therefore be feared that the desire to use data 
gathering and POE exclusively for winning new projects, which is why it is still 
considered a barrier.
6.2.2 Responsibility
	
In addition to the practitioners’ perception of how POE is to be imple­
mented in urban planning and architecture, it is important to ask who should 
take responsibility for doing that? It will require a joint effort across projects and 
different interests to implement POE and use the method of creating flexible and 
agile planning. This challenge is highlighted very clearly in the interview conduc­
ted with Jay Gregg Sterling.
further elaborates a new movement within the academic field.
”... architecture is a social and cultural understanding, but at 
the same time there is a tendency both from the academy and 
from the students and from the industry that the more mea- 
surability and the more value creation we can put into the 
architecture, the stronger our architecture towards society also 
become.”  Strømann-Andersen (2018, June 11). Semi-structu­
red interview.
 “The challenge here is that each of the stakeholders have diffe­
rent interests and incentives. For example, the land owner/ de­
veloper will want to maximize the return on their investment, 
which would mean high density living conditions and little in 
the way of parks and public space. They are also incentivized 
to use cheaper materials and design. The architect/ planner is 
incentivized to create designs that give the firm recognition, 
and this can sometimes result in trying too hard to be original 
or iconic at the expense of the residents' comfort or the general 
aesthetic of the area. The city will want to preserve aspects of 
its historical heritage (old industrial buildings) and will want 
to area to conform to the image of the city and building codes. 
The city is often the actor that is pushing for sustainability 
aspects.” Sterling (2018, June 19). Semi-structured interview.
	
As previously illustrated through the study, the problem in question is a 
==PAGE:104==
94
very complex field characterised by many different agendas from different stake­
holders. Therefore, a further intensified academic focus is needed to investigate 
who to perform and how the assessments should be performed. In the interview 
with Kenneth Wulff, it is also cleared that the academic world has a major re­
sponsibility to integrate systematic urban planning assessments, but at the same 
time it also requires the opportunity to share the knowledge gained with the right 
stakeholders.
"Certainly, it must, in one way or another, take place on a 
scientific, systematic basis, right? So that's it again. There is 
therefore someone in need of a research environment that can 
think systematically. So I almost say there will be a need for 
teams in different disciplines, right? That there is some form of 
cooperation that takes place when evaluating urban planning. 
I think that is really important. And I think that, just now, I 
talked about the need for this academic approach to it and that 
it's only superficial that it comes into the real world and may 
not only observe but comes in dialogue with architects and 
city planners.”  Wulff (2018, June 22). Semi-structured inter­
view.
	
By considering the perception of the challenges involved in implemen­
ting the method and who is responsible for implementing the POE assessment, it 
is clear that there is no clear strategy for who is responsible for carrying out the 
assessments. The development of the method of assessing urban planning may 
partly take place in academic environments, but ultimately it must also be accep­
ted and acquired by the practitioner.
==PAGE:105==
95
6.3 Research limitations
Research questions
RQ#1: What is the current state of urban planning and how is it reflected 
in Copenhagen today? 
RQ#2: How should a post occupancy evaluation framework be construc­
ted in order to analyse the urban planning of Copenhagen neighbor­
hoods?
RQ#3: What neighbourhoods in Copenhagen are subjects to an on-going 
urban development and appear suitable for a case study?
RQ#4: Which results is provide by the case study and how was the per­
formance of each case neighbourhood according to the post occupancy 
evaluation assessment?
RQ#5: How do the constructed post occupancy evaluation perform and 
what contribution can the assessment give to the field of urban planning?
	
This last section before the conclusion is intended to ask questions about 
which aspects the study is not responding to, both within the stated problem 
statement but also in relation to other issues raised. Similarly, the section addres­
ses the areas in which the study is not limited to responding, but which can be 
further developed in other academic contexts.
6.3.1 Method criticism
	
The master thesis should throughout the study answer the 5 established 
research questions. In order to review the chosen method these 5 questions are 
compared to the completed work to see if they are met sufficiently. 
	
To begin with, RQ#1 is answered by highlighting the historical develop­
ment of urbanisation, focusing on urban transitions and recent developments 
in Copenhagen. In addition, the literature study focused on urban planning and 
design, which forms the basis for designing the occupied urban space. In this 
way, the study answers this question, which forms the basis for commencing the 
POE assessment based on existing practice.
	
In relation to RQ#2, the designed POE framework has proven to be able 
to generate useful results, so it is possible to answer the overall problem formu­
lation. In particular, the literature study of the 3 academic fields has helped to 
create the final framework. Through the study however, it has been made clear 
that the method is an iterative process that should be adjusted every time the 
==PAGE:106==
96
assessment is performed. At times, they 3 performance dimensions seem to do­
minating, as their performance showed they performed alike without illustrating 
the wide variety of problems each neighborhood possessed. The decision to de­
sign the POE framework with the 3 performance dimensions was based on the 
only existing literature on POE of urban planning that used them. In the future, 
however, it should be investigated whether just these three dimensions should 
be so dominant or whether they should be subdivided into some subcategories. 
Furthermore the interview with Jay Gregg Sterling describes the following:	
“There are many sustainability indicators and plenty of re­
search on this that tends to organize them around the three 
traditional pillars of sustainability (social, environmental, and 
economic). However, I think it is more important to focus this 
around the goals of the project and ask whether it is successful 
in meeting the needs and desires of those who live in and use 
the buildings and structures”.  Sterling (2018, June 19). Se­
mi-structured interview.
	
Thus, it is essential, if measured on parameters other than the 3 exact 
performance dimensions that the goal and vision for the neighborhood remains 
crucial. While it seems obvious to use the 3 traditional pillars of sustainability, 
evaluation of urban planning should still be based on how the occupant experi­
ences the planning. In addition, the 3 performance dimensions remains a good 
starting point, even though they appear to benefit from being divided into smal­
ler subcategories.
	
The outcome of POE assessment is in addition to the framework, chara­
cterised by the neighborhood that are used. The 3 case neighborhoods to answer 
RQ#3 are chosen on a academic basis and the master plan for an area has defi­
ned what constitutes these neighborhoods. This perception of what constitutes a 
neighborhood has meant that especially Ørestad proved to be a very large area 
to treat. There were many internal conditions that were different for each other, 
which have been presented as an overall evaluation. Although this relationship is 
described in the POE assessment, future assessments may benefit from dividing 
large neighborhoods into independent individual neighborhoods.
	
Finally, both RQ#4 and RQ#5 depend on the previous work. They are an­
swered based on the results generated through the study. By acknowledging the 
established POE framework and the underlying theory, the study answers these 
2 research questions to the extent that the POE assessment allows. The most ob­
vious limitation in this context is the resource decision to exclude the diagnostic 
level of the POE method. This last level of POE provides a different assessment, 
which is much more sophisticated in terms of collecting data. Because it is not 
included, the master thesis is limited in its research of how POE can be used to 
create generic mathematical models for what conditions create a good city. In an 
academic context, the study can still answer, with the completed literature, how 
==PAGE:107==
97
the diagnostic level could contribute to urban planning and how it can be inclu­
ded in the development of new planning approaches.
6.3.2 Exclusion of the diagnostic level
	
In order to respond to the overall problem statement, it may be discussed 
whether the master thesis should directly include all 3 levels (indicative, inve­
stigative and diagnostic) of the POE method. First of all, within the given de­
limitation, it has not been possible to include the diagnostic level as there has 
been no resources or funds to carry out such a comprehensive evaluation. In 
addition, the study has shown that it is possible to answer whether Copenhagen 
can be strengthened by POE and what contributions POE can provide for urban 
planning using the indicative and investigative levels. For the actual answer to 
the problem formulation, it has meant that the master thesis does not answer 
whether the diagnostic level could use sophisticated data collection to make ma­
thematical models for various reasons for the problems encountered. Thus, there 
is a great potential in using POE to quantify and qualify which conditions create 
the good city. This is also emphasised by Jakob Strømann-Andersen, who sees a 
great potential in using data to create better conditions for the people in the city.
"It could be interesting to get success criteria and guidelines 
for the neighborhoods combined with some more data-dri­
ven contradictions in relation to, for example, social health or 
security or so that you could quantify or qualify the success of 
one's urban development.”  Strømann-Andersen (2018, June 
11). Semi-structured interview.
	
Without involving the diagnostic level, it has been possible to answer 
adequately on the problem formulation as the POE method allows to use the 
different levels separately. Had the method been dependent and compelled by all 
3 levels, it would of course not have been possible. However, it is clear that the 
study does not answer this wish and whether POE could help create mathemati­
cal models to quantify and qualify conditions that create the good city. Based on 
the literature study and the POE method's underlying mechanisms, it seems ob­
vious and plausible to create strong mathematical models based on the described 
sophisticated data collection. However, it has not been analyzed in the selected 
cases with the constructed POE framework to what extent and what models the 
method could generate.
6.3.3 Future work
	
Through the literature and case study the assignment has answered the 
problem formulation within the given delimiter. However, there is a very inte­
resting aspect of being able to use the findings obtained to further develop the 
==PAGE:108==
98
POE method and to create planning that is more flexible and interchangeable to 
the problems that urbanisation brings. Based on the study, the following obvious 
focus points have been identified in the prevalence of the POE method for urban 
planning beyond the master thesis delimitation.
- First and foremost, it is possible to develop the method and the POE 
framework as prescribed by the method of iterative origin. There must 
be many iterations to develop the assessment, to which the results and 
the knowledge gained will be better and more profound with the devel­
opment of the assessment.
- Clearly, the exclusion of the diagnostic level limits the thesis to fully 
responding to how POE can contribute to the problem area. Therefore, 
it is obvious that there is a great potential in investigating whether to 
involve diagnostic levels in creating successful cities.
- In this context, it would be natural to expand the assessment to several 
neighborhoods to create an even larger database of issues and cause. 
Thus, it will be possible to create an even bigger basis for deciding what 
creates the good city under different conditions and parameters. Even 
by working exclusively at an indicative and investigative level, it will be 
possible to create more knowledge about the issues that arise in line 
with the development of neighborhoods.
- In the same way, it will create an even bigger basis by expanding to 
more countries than just Denmark. Although cultural differences can 
produce quite different results, these will simply create even greater 
knowledge if properly treated with the POE method.
- Based on a large database created from all 3 levels of POE methodo­
logy, there is a huge potential in developing mathematical models that 
generate quantitative and qualitative reasons for the identified conditi­
ons. There is a huge demand with given urban development in finding 
models that can handle the increasing complexity and create a succes­
sful sustainable urban transition, so the city does not fail as before.
==PAGE:109==
7
Conclusion
==PAGE:110==
100
7 Conclusion
	
In this chapter of the master thesis the conclusion will be answered by 
summing up on how the posed problem formulation has been answered and 
to what degree the intended purpose is met. In the previous chapter, the 5 re­
search questions were reviewed to assess whether the chosen method was desig­
ned accurately. Based on the findings of the study and the method chosen, this 
chapter summarises an overall conclusion.
Problem formulation
	
This master thesis is based on a general evaluation in society and urba­
nisation that constitutes a very complex problem area with an imminent urban 
transition. To investigate how to handle this planning task, an overall problem 
formulation has been established. The problem formulation has been answe­
red in previous chapters, where the cross-case comparison first answers to how 
Copenhagen can, through a POE assessment, be strengthened to meet the chal­
lenges of 21st century urbanisation. Next, the literature study and the outcome of 
the case study are used to determine whether the academic field urban planning 
can benefit from undergoing a systematic evaluation of the executed planning.
Repsons to the set purposes
	
In addition to responding to the overall problem formulation by follow­
ing the 5 research questions spontaneously throughout the research, the master 
thesis had to fulfill the 3 set purposes in order to contribute in an academic sense 
to the field of urban planning. 
- The first purpose of the master thesis is to establish a framework for 
evaluating urban planning in Copenhagen based on the premise that the 
city is dependent on learning from exerted practice to succeed.
- Then it is the second purpose to assess a set of specific neighbourhoods 
in Copenhagen with the established evaluation framework to analyse 
to which extend evaluation of the neighbourhood’s urban planning can 
strengthen Copenhagen in general to meet the challenges of future urba­
nism.
- By doing so, the final purpose of this research is to contribute with 
knowledge to urban planning theory on how a general practice of con­
tinuously evaluating the performed planning can be implemented in the 
existing methods.
	
To achieve the first purpose, a POE framework has been established to 
evaluate urban planning on a neighborhood scale consisting of 3 different activi­
==PAGE:111==
101
ties (a occupant survey, place observations and a semi-structured interview). Be­
fore designing the specific POE framework, the study has conducted a compre­
hensive literature study of 3 theoretical dimensions (Post occupancy evaluation, 
urban planning and future urbanism), in order to target the assessment specific 
to urban planning of the selected cases.
	
The other purpose is especially achieved with the conducted case stu­
dy of the 3 selected neighborhoods Nordhavnen, Carlsberg byen and Ørestad. 
By performing a POE assessment of the 3 neighborhoods, it has been possible 
to evaluate how well they perform within the 3 performance criteria: aesthetic, 
functional and technical performance. It has been possible to post a result dash­
board that illustrates the current performance of each neighborhood, so that the 
results also can be used by other urban designers to improve the neighborhoods 
with changes to existing design proposals. In addition, it has been possible to find 
issues and immediate causes using the POE method on an indicative and investi­
gative level. By presenting the existing performance for different neighborhoods 
in Copenhagen, the method can be used to strengthen the city by discovering 
various problems while contributing to the cause and thus also the possibility of 
finding a solution.
	
The third and final purpose is primarily answered by comparing the lite­
rature study with the outcome of the POE assessment. In this context, the study 
has been able to respond with different results on how urban planning theory can 
use POE in existing methods. On the basis of choice of method and the extent of 
the POE assessment, it has furthermore been highlighted that the last level (the 
diagnostic level) has great potential in qualifying and quantifying which conditi­
ons constitutes the good city. By excluding the diagnostic level, the master thesis 
proposes to continue working with POE as a basic method of collecting sophisti­
cated data and formulating mathematical models that can be used to handle the 
increasing complexity of urbanisation.
	
With the conducted research, this master thesis has taken a step towards 
implementing systematic evaluations of the executed urban planning. Accepting 
that the complexity of the problem area are not supported by existing practices, 
urban planning seems to benefit greatly by implementing such an evaluation 
process based on the POE method. By acknowledging that planning can benefit 
from systematic evaluations, it has been answered whether POE of urban plan­
ning can contribute to overcome 21st century urbanism issues. All in all, through 
out the study, the master thesis has met the stated objectives and answered the 
overall problem formulation satisfactorily within the problem area and the given 
delimitations. In particular, the 5 research questions have helped manage and 
guide the master thesis to achieve the desired results.
==PAGE:112==
102
Intentionally left blank
==PAGE:113==
8
Bibliography
==PAGE:114==
104
Andreasen, M. M., Hansen, C. T., & Cash, P. (2016). CONCEPTUAL DESIGN. 
Place of publication not identified: SPRINGER INTERNATIONAL PU.
Aner, L. G., & Mazanti, B. (2015). Bosætningens betydning. Ghettoer I Danmark, 
45, 3rd ser., 12-15.
APRT. (n.d.). APRT Ørestad. Retrieved June 04, 2018, from http://www.aprt.fi/
projects/orestad/
Bezin, E., & Moizeau, F. (2017). Cultural dynamics, social mobility and urban 
segregation. Journal of Urban Economics, 99, 173-187
Bisgaard, H. (2010). Københavns Genrejsning, 1990-2010. Bogværket.
Bógus, L. M. (2008). URBAN SEGREGATION: A Theoretical Approach. Retri­
eved May 26, 2018, from http://www.observatoriodasmetropoles.ufrj.br/urban_
segregation.pdf
Brugmann, R. (2015). Urban sprawl. International Encyclopedoa of the Social & 
Behavioral Sciences, 24(2). 
Bryman, A. (2016). Social research methods. Oxford: Oxford University Press.  
Buciek, K., & Simonsen, K., 2006. Rumlig praksis: Festskrift til Kirsten Simonsen. 
Frederiksberg: Roskilde Universitetsforlag.
By & havn. (n.d.). Fra vision til bydel. Retrieved May 28, 2018, from http://www.
nordhavnen.dk/fra vision til bydel.aspx
By & havn. (2009, September 16). Måske verdens bedste masterplan. Retrieved 
May 17, 2018, from http://www.nordhavnen.dk/presse/nyheder/2009/maske 
verdens bedste masterplan.aspx
By & Havn. (n.d.). Ørestad in five minutes. Retrieved June 04, 2018, from http://
www.orestad.dk/english/uk-5minutes.aspx
By & Havn I/S, COBE, SLETH MODERNISM, Polyform, & Rambøll. (2009). 
Udviklingsstrategi Nordhavn. 
8 Bibliography
==PAGE:115==
105
C.F. Møller. (2015). Cfmoller. Retrieved June 04, 2018, from https://www.cfmol­
ler.com/p/-da/Carlsberg-Byen-lokalplan-i3354.html 
Caragliu, A., Del Bo, C., Nijkamp, P., (2011) Smart Cities in Europe. Journal of 
Urban Technology 18 (2) 65-82.  
Carlsberg Byen P/S . (n.d.). Carlsberg Byen. Retrieved June 15, 2018, from http://
www.carlsbergbyen.dk/
Carlsberg Byen P/S. (n.d.). Carlsbergbyen. Retrieved June 4, 2018, from http://
www.carlsbergbyen.dk/ 
Carlsberg Byen P/S. (2015). Københavns Nye Bykvarter Carlsberg Byen [Pamph­
let]. København
Christensen, S.B. (Ed.), 2006. Den moderne by (Danske Bystudier 3). Århus: 
Aarhus Universitetsforlag.
Churchman, A., & Ginosar, O. (1999). A Theoretical Basis For The Post-Occupan­
cy Evaluation Of Neighborhoods. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 19(3), 
267-276. 
COBE. (n.d.). Nordhavn. Retrieved May 28, 2018, from http://www.cobe.dk/pro­
ject/nordhavn#0
Copenhagen Convention Bureau (CCB). (2017, June 23). Awards & Accolades 
for Copenhagen. Retrieved February 20, 2018, from https://www.copenhagen­
cvb.com/copenhagen/awards-accolades-copenhagen 
Corbusier, L. (1995). Vers une architecture. Paris: Flammarion. 
Corneliussen, C. J. (2002, July 28). Hård kritik af Ørestads udformning. Retri­
eved June 19, 2018, from https://jyllands-posten.dk/indland/kbh/ECE3414383/
Hård-kritik-af-Ørestads-udformning/ 
Cullen, G. (1995). The concise townscape. Oxford: Elsevier
Davis, A., & Preiser, W. (2012). ARCHITECTURAL CRITICISM IN PRACTICE: 
FROM AFFECTIVE TO EFFECTIVE EXPERIENCE. Archnet-IJAR, 6(2), 24-
42.
De Jong, M., et al. (2015) Sustainable-smart-resilient-low carbon-eco-knowledge 
cities; making sense of a multitude of concepts promoting sustainable urbaniza­
tion. Journal of Cleaner Production.
==PAGE:116==
106
Det Kongelige Bibliotek. (n.d.). Danmark set fra Luften. Retrieved March 8, 2018, 
from http://www.kb.dk/danmarksetfraluften/
Dhote, A. S. (2017). Hyperloop New Mode of Transportation. International Jour­
nal of Innovative Science and Research Technology.
Dizikes, P. (2013). The new challenges for urban planners. Retrieved April 26, 
2018, from http://news.mit.edu/2013/shaun-donovan-hud-mit-0508
Entasis. (2007, May 15). Entasis. Retrieved June 04, 2018, from http://entasis.
dk/1138
F.E. Preiser, W., & C. Vischer, J. (2005). Assessing Building Performance. Oxford: 
Elsevier.
F.E. Preiser, W., & Nasar, J. (2008). ASSESSING BUILDING PERFORMANCE: 
ITS EVOLUTION FROM POST-OCCUPANCY EVALUATION. Archnet-IJAR, 
2(1). 
F.E. Preiser, W., Z. Rabonowitz H. & T. White E., (1988). Post-occupancy Evalu­
ation. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold Company.
Federal Facilities Council. (2001). Learning from our buildings: A sta­
te-of-the-practice summary of post-occupancy evaluation. Washington, D.C.: 
National Acad. Press.
Garfield, L. (2017, February 02). 12 cities that are starting to go car-free. Business 
Insider Nordic. Retrieved May 12, 2018, from https://nordic.businessinsider.
com/cities-going-car-free-2017-2
Gehl, J., 2010. Byer for mennesker. Copenhagen: Arkitektens Forlag.
Graham, S., & Marvin, S. (2001). Splintering urbanism: Networked infrastructu­
res, technological mobilities and the urban condition. London: Routledge.
Görkem Özkan, D., Merve Alpak, E., Yilmaz, S., Düzenli, T., & Özbilen, A. (2015). 
Post occupancy evaluation and user satisfaction in urban open space. PSP, 24(5).
Hadjri, K., & Crozier, C. (2009). Post‐occupancy evaluation: Purpose, benefits 
and barriers. Facilities, 27(1/2), 21-33.
Hajer, M. A., Dassen, A., Ettema, C., & Righart, A., 2014. Smart about cities: visu­
alizing the challenges for 21st century urbanism. Rotterdam: Nai010.
==PAGE:117==
107
Henning Larsen Architects, Erik Møller Arkitekter, & GHB Landskabsarkitekter. 
(2017). Illustreret Byggeprogram - Bellahøj (2nd ed.). RE. 
Initiativgruppen om hovedstadsregionen. (1989). Hovedstaden: Hvad skal vi 
med den? (Rep.). 
Is it a bird. (2015). Metodekort - Samspil med omverdenen [Pamphlet]. Køben­
havn: Københavns Kommune, teknik- og miljøforvaltningen. 
Jacobs, J. (2013). The death and life of great american cities. In The urban design 
reader (2nd ed., The routledge urban readers, pp. 139-151). New York, NY: Rout­
ledge. 
Jacobs, A., & Appleyard, D. (1987). Towards an urban design manifesto. Re­
trieved June 13, 2018, from https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/293a/15cd8ad1e­
63d3676e577dca120872a80e771.pdf
Jain, R., & Janakiram, T. (2016). Vertical Gardening: A New Concept of Modern 
Era. ResearchGate.
Jensen, P. B. (2013). Er ørestaden en By? Menneske Og BY - Ideologi Og Plan­
lægning, 72.
KHR arkitekter. (n.d.). Ørestad Masterplan. Retrieved June 04, 2018, from http://
www.khr.dk/projekter/oerestad-masterplan
Khreis, H. (2016). Car free cities: Pathway to healthy urban living. ResearchGate.
Kjeldtoft, S. S. (2018, February 14). ’Jeg har svært ved at pege på én vellykket ny 
bydel i København’. Retrieved June 05, 2018, from https://www.information.dk/
indland/2016/07/svaert-ved-pege-paa-vellykket-ny-bydel-koebenhavn
Kostof, S., & Tobias, R. (2012). The city shaped: Urban patterns and meanings 
through history. New York: Bulfinch Press. 
Kristensen, H. (2013). Indledning. Menneske Og by - Ideologi Og Planlægning, 
72, dansk byplanlaboratorium - byplanhistoriske skriftserie, 4-7
Københavns Kommune, Teknik- og Miljøforvaltningen. (2017). Arkitekturpoli­
tik København 2017-2025. København: Byens udvikling. 
Københavns Kommune. (2015). Københavns kommune plan 2015 - Den sam­
menhængende by. København: Københavns Kommune, Økonomiforvaltningen.
==PAGE:118==
108
Københavns Kommune. (n.d.). Københavner kortet. Retrieved June 4, 2018, 
from https://kbhkort.kk.dk/
Laplante, M. (2010). Evidence-based urban planning. Planetizen. 
Larice, M., & Macdonald, E. (2013). Introduction to part 2. In The urban design 
reader (2nd ed., The routledge urban readers, pp. 103-105). New York, NY: 2013. 
Larice, M., & Macdonald, E. (2013). “The image of the Environment” and “the 
City Image and Its Elements”. In The urban design reader (2nd ed., The routledge 
urban readers, pp. 125-138). New York, NY: 2013. 
Lefebvre, H. (1991). The Production of Space. Malden: Blackwell.
Loder, A., Tanner, R., & Axhausen, K. W. (2017). The impact of local work and 
residential balance on vehicle miles traveled. Journal of Transport Geography
Lord, C. (Writer), & Sinnerton, L. (Producer). (2017, June 28). Quality of Life 
Survey: Top 25 cities, 2017 [Video file]. Retrieved June 08, 2018, from https://
monocle.com/film/affairs/quality-of-life-survey-top-25-cities-2017/
Lynch, K. (1960). The image of the city. Cambridge: The Mit Press.
Lynch, K. (2001). Good city form. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mallory-Hill, S., F. E. Preiser, W., & Watson, C. (2012). Introduction to Building 
Performance Evaluation: Milestones in Evolution. Enhancing Building Perfor­
mance, (1). 
Mastor, S.H., & Ibrahim, N. (2010). Post Occupancy Evaluation Practices: A Pro­
cedural Model For A Successful Feedback. CIB 2010 World Congress, Salford 
Quays, United Kingdom.
Miller, R. (2013). Josep Lluis Sert’s Urban Design Legacy. In The urban design 
reader (2nd ed., The routledge urban readers, pp. 106-118). New York, NY: Rout­
ledge. 
MIT. (2016). Data mining reveals the four urban conditions that creates vibrant 
city life. Emerging Technology, arxiv. 
Mondschein, A., & Taylor, B. D. (2017). Is traffic congestion overrated? Exami­
ning the highly variable effects of congestion on travel and accessibility. Journal 
of Transport Geography. 
==PAGE:119==
109
Nielsen, T. (2013). Byen som begreb. Menneske Og by - Ideologi Og Planlæg­
ning, 72, dansk byplanlaboratorium - byplanhistoriske skriftserie, 14-24. 
Novotny, R., Kuchtová, Z., Kuchta, R., Kadlec, J., & Vrba, R. (2015). Smart City 
Aspects, Services and Application. 52-56.
Næss, P., & Vogel, N. (2012). Sustainable urban development and the multi-level 
transition perspective. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions, 4, 36-
50. DOI: 10.1016/j.eist.2012.07.001
Seawright, J., & Gerring, J. (2008). Case Selection Techniques in Case Study Re­
search - A Menu of Qualitative and Quantitative Options. Political Research Qu­
arterly, 61(2), 294-308
Shinde, R. T., Raijade, V. B., Lahare, A. S., & Sarode, V. B. (2017). Hyperloop 
Transportation System. International Research Journal of Engineering and Te­
chnology, 763-766.
Silverman, D. (2011). Interpreting qualitative data: Methods for analyzing talk, 
text and interaction. London: SAGE. 
Simonsen, K. (2010). Rumlig praksis - Konstitution af rum mellem materialitet 
og repræsentation.
Stoel, T., Jr. (1999). Reining in Urban Sprawl. Environment: Science and Policy 
for Sustainable Development, 41(4). 
Svarre, B. (2013). Attraktive byrum - De 12 kvalitetskriterier [Powerpoint sli­
de]. 
Retrived 
from 
https://www.db.dk/files/Mini%C3%B8velser%20intro_
DB_12Kvalitetskriterier_bbs_GA_Aarhus%20-%202x.pdf
The World Bank Group. (2000). What are Key Urban Environmental Problems? 
Retrieved from http://web.mit.edu/urbanupgrading/urbanenvironment/issues/
key-UE-issues.html
Turpin‐Brooks, S., & Viccars, G. (2006). The development of robust methods of 
post occupancy evaluation. Facilities, 24(5/6), 177-196. 
UNEP (2013). City-Level Decoupling: Urban resource flows and the governance 
of infrastructure transitions. A Report of the Working Group on Cities of the In­
ternational Resource Panel. Swilling M., Robinson B., Marvin S. and Hodson M.
United Nations, department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division 
(2016). The World’s Cities in 2016 – Data Booklet
==PAGE:120==
110
Voordt, D.J.M. van der. (1999), Objectives and methods of POE. Lecture at FAU, 
Sao Paulo, Brasil, August 1999.
Waitt, G., & Knobel, H. (2017). Embodied geographies of liveability and urban 
parks. Urban Studies Journal. 
Zhu, X., Linham, M. M., & Nicholls, R. J. (2010): “Technologies for Climate 
Change Adaptation - Coastal Erosion and Flooding”, Danmarks Tekniske Uni­
versitet, Risø Nationallaboratoriet for Bæredygtig Energi, Roskilde. TNA Guide­
book Series
Zimmerman, A. & Martin, M. (2001), Post-occupancy evaluation: benefits and 
barriers, Building Research and Information, Vol. 29 No. 2, 168-74.
Økonomiforvaltningen, Velfærdsanalyseenheden. (2017). Status på København 
2017, nøgletal for København (Rep.). København: Københavns Kommune.
Østerberg, D. (2006). De store tætheders materialitet. Rumlig Praksis, (1), 140-
154.
==PAGE:121==
9
Appendices
==PAGE:122==
112
Appendix 	A: Occupant questionaire templates
	
	
A1) Nordhavnen
	
	
A2) Carlsberg byen
	
	
A3) Ørestad
Appendix 	B: Answered occupant questionaires
	
	
B1) Nordhavnen
	
	
B2)  Carlsberg byen
	
	
B3) Ørestad
Appendix 	C: Counted occupant questionaires 
	
	
C1) Nordhavnen
	
	
C2) Carlsberg byen
	
	
C3) Ørestad
Appendix 	D: Place obsevation templates
	
	
D1) Nordhavnen
	
	
D2) Carlsberg byen
	
	
D3) Ørestad
	
	
 
Appendix 	E: Completed place obsevations
	
	
E1) Nordhavnen
	
	
E2) Carlsberg byen
	
	
E3) Ørestad
Appendix	 F: Semi-structured interviews 
Appendix 	G: Transcripted interviews
	
	
G1) Jakob Strømann-Andersen
	
	
G2) Jay Gregg Sterling
	
	
G3) Kenneth Wulff
Appendix 	H: Processed occupant questionaires
9 Appendices
==PAGE:123==
113
Intentionally left blank
==PAGE:124==
