==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Algorithms for the Optimization of Redun-
dant Storage Allocation on a Fog Com-
puting Platform
Christopher Vik - (s154919)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
In this thesis, we consider fault-tolerance on Fog Computing Platforms where Fog
Nodes with computational and storage capabilities are moved to the edge of the net-
work.
The general problem with current redundancy principles used in Fog Computing
is the typical use of the primary backup model (master/slave paradigm) which results
in big performance and storage impacts as the back-up resources are occupied and
wasted in case of no failures.
In this thesis we are interested in developing a replica placement strategy which
meets the requirements for Fog Computing.
It is a goal to optimize the storage-
overhead in redundancy mechanisms currently seen in Fog Computing while keeping
the latency between the Fog Nodes low.
The problem is formulated as a combinatorial optimization problem. Hence we
propose two constructive heuristic algorithms which work as initialization solutions
for the local heuristic search algorithm.
Because of the presence of failure-groups in geo-distributed Fog Continuums, the
first constructive heuristic is identifying failure-groups in a network topology by
searching for maximal cliques. Afterwards the algorithm allocates an arbitrary set of
user defined storage-requirements into a Distributed Data Storage.
The second algorithm is a replication strategy which takes advantage of the era-
sure coding scheme Pyramid Codes. The replication strategy places three kinds of
parity-blocks which is able to tolerate failure-groups crashing simultaneously as well
the ability to reconstruct crashed nodes as long as the number of available parity-
blocks are ≥to number of crashed data-blocks.
Through experimental experimentation, it was found that the use of parity-blocks
resulted in a reduction on up to 46.7% on the amount of occupied nodes compared
to the 1:1 replica scheme.
It is further argued, that the replication strategy offers significantly higher fault-
tolerance than the 1:1 scheme and 3-replication schemes. This is because, it is least
==PAGE:4==
ii
Summary
able to tolerate a failure-group and it is in some cases able to tolerate the same
amount of arbitrary failures as the amount of available parity-blocks.
The local heuristic search algorithm Simulated Annealing is used in order to min-
imize the latency between nodes.
Trough the experimentation of cooling schedules in the simulated annealing algo-
rithm, it was possible to reduce the overall latency of the solution by 21%.
The evaluation demonstrated that scaling the algorithm is time and computational
demanding which might be unacceptable for some Fog Platforms. Hence, a distributed
Genetic Algorithm is proposed in order to suggest a possible approach to make the
parity placement strategy suitable for large-scale network topologies
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring a Master of Science degree in Computer Science and Enginering.
The work has been supervised by Prof. Paul Pop.
Kongens Lyngby, July 31, 2018
Christopher Vik - (s154919)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First I would like to thank my supervisor Professor Paul Pop for the assistance and
patience of understanding my problems and questions, his always concrete and un-
ambiguous feedback has been an enormous help throughout this project.
Also I would like to thank my girlfriend and my parents for their endless help and
support.
Lastly I want to make a shout-out to all my friends for the support and under-
standing of my absence.
==PAGE:8==
vi
Acknowledgements
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations and
Nomenclature
List of Abbreviations
AV B
Audio Video Bridging
BPC
Basic Pyramid Codes
CA
Configuration Agent
CBS
Credit-Based Shaping Function
CMI
class measurement interval
CNC
Central Network Configura- tor
CNC
Centralized Network / Distributed User Model
CUC
A fully centralized model - Central User Configurator
DDS
Distributed Data Storage - In this thesis - Cassandra
ERC
Erasure Coding
FCS
Frame check sequence
FIFO First in First Out
HDFS The Hadoop Distributed File System
IFG
Minimum interframe gab
IoT
Internet of Things
MDS Maximum distance separable codes
OPCUA Open Platform Communications - Unified Architecture
OT
Operations Technology
==PAGE:10==
viii
Acknowledgements
PLC
Programmable Logic Control
PRM
Purdue Reference Model
PV FS Parallel Virtual File System
RTOS Real-time operating system
SOF
State of frame pattern
SRP
Steam Reservation Protocol
TSN
Time Sensitive Networking
UNI
User Network Interface
V M
Virtual Machine
Nomenclature
Ca
The fully centralized Configuration Agent
E
The edges which are the physical links interconnecting the FN’s
FN
Fog Nodes - In this thesis we consider them as heterogeneous, containing CPU,
memory and I/Os. The Fog Nodes has random amount of storage-capabilities
due to their heterogeneity
FN d
Fog Node with a data-block
FN gg Fog Node with global-block
FN g
Fog Node with Group-block
FN sg Fog Node with Sub-Group-block
F
A failure-group
G(V, E) an undirected graph
R
The users storage-requirements
S
A Fog Node’s storage-capability
V)
denotes the set of all Fog-Nodes (FN) and network switches
C
parity blocks
G′
Constructor Matric
k
Data-blocks
==PAGE:11==
Acknowledgements
ix
mk
describes the partiy-block in the Constructor Matrix
n
total blocks
wk
data vector - identifies the data-block in the Constructor Matrix
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Fog Platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Distributed Storage in Fog Computing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
FogStore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Pyramid Codes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Time-Sensitive Networking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.6
Configuration Agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
System Model
23
3.1
Architecture Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Application Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Fault Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Problem Formulation
27
4.1
Motivational Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Solution Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
Problem Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Concept
37
5.1
Allocation of Distributed Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Placement of Parity Blocks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3
Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
Experimental Evaluation
53
==PAGE:14==
xii
Contents
6.1
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.2
Test Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.3
Allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.4
Parity placement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.5
Latency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7
Discussion
73
7.1
LRC and Pyramid Codes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
7.2
Scalability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
7.3
Chosen Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
8
Conclusion
83
8.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
A Appendix
87
A.1 Cooling schedules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
Bibliography
89
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Cloud computing is becoming essential in a myriad of applications and businesses
and through the years the abilities of cloud computing have lowered the expectations
of computation resources on local edge devices. At the same time, we see an increas-
ing focusing on the ’Internet of Things’, which challenges the current performance
of Cloud Computing, where especially the unpredictable and large communication
latencies make Cloud Computing unsuitable for safety-critical and real-time IoT sys-
tems.
These performance issues call for a reality where the difference between Opera-
tional and Information Technologies (OT and IT) is converged. This convergence is
the main reason and driving force for the development of the Fog Computing concept.
[al17]
According to the OpenFog consortium, Fog Computing is a “system-level architec-
ture that distributes resources and services of computing, storage, control and network-
ing anywhere along the continuum from Cloud to Things”. [Ope17] Fog computing is
a network composed of Fog Nodes. A Fog Node is a modular communication device,
such as switches and routers extended with computational, control and networking
capabilities. The modular design makes these capabilities scalable. [SP16]
Fog Nodes consist of multicore processors that use hypervisors. These hypervisors
enable separation of critical and non-critical functions on different partitions.[SP16]
In combination with the IEEE standard Time-Sensitive Networking (TSN), determin-
istic communication can be used to increase the geographical distance between the
physical edge device and the Fog Node which controls it.[VS17] This allows for Fog
Nodes with computational and storage resources to meet the sufficient non-functional
requirements for Operational Technology such as latency and dependability.
This is the reason for the recent trend of Fog Computing, where computational
and storage capabilities is placed close to the edge of the network. This is differ-
ent from Cloud computing, because Fog Nodes are not necessarily placed in data
centers, but instead in hardened routers, cellular access points and smart home gate-
ways.[May+17]
Because of the Fog Node’s networking and computational capabilities, it is possible
to implement in e.g. industrial PCs or industrial network switches with low failure
probabilities. [SP16]
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
However, we are currently seeing big commodity suppliers developing Fog Nodes
with lower costs and with higher failure probability. The failure probability is crucial
for Fog Nodes in order to meet dependability and availability requirements of Oper-
ation Technology. Fog Nodes represent single-points of failures and therefore require
redundancy.
The problem with current redundancy principles used in Fog Computing is the
typical use of the primary backup model (master/slave paradigm), which results in big
performance and storage impacts, as the back-up resources are occupied and wasted
in case of no failures.
By trying to avoid occupying extra physical nodes, virtual machines (VM) mecha-
nisms for backup have also been studied. A prerequisite for these kinds of mechanisms
is that the primary Virtual Machine cannot be deployed on the same physical nodes
with the backup Virtual machine. Normally this approach is efficient in Cloud Com-
puting with computational powerful servers, but the low capacity of Fog Nodes might
not tolerate running two or more virtual machines in parallel. [LFM16]
Besides, the current replication approaches do not consider the failures that hap-
pen in Fog Computing. Different from Cloud Computing, network partition can be
a huge problem in Fog Computing. Cloud data centers are typically connected via
redundant links to the rest of the network. In Fog Computing it is possible that
whole groups of Fog Nodes can be connected over a single link.[May+17]
In this thesis we are interested in developing a replica placement strategy, which
meets the requirements for Fog Computing. It is a goal to optimize the storage over-
head in redundancy mechanisms currently seen in Fog Computing, while keeping the
latency between the Fog Nodes low.
In order to meet these requirements we firstly concentrate on investigating exist-
ing replication strategies which could fulfill some of the Fog Computing requirements.
Afterwards we investigate how these replication strategies can be applied in a Fog
Computing setting.
These investigations build the base for developing a replica placement algorithm
which meets our objectives; secondly we develop two algorithms to help placing the
Fog Nodes and its replicas at optimal positions in order to lower the latency.
By evaluating the algorithms in a variety of scenarios and demonstrating its ef-
fectiveness we found that the algorithm contributes to a 41% reduction in storage-
overhead compared to the primary backup model. Despite this, it is argued that the
replication strategy presented in this thesis operates without affecting the Fog Nodes
with parallel and computation heavy Virtual Machine partitions.
Finally, the replication strategy allows for tolerance of whole failure-groups failing
simultaneously and is in some cases able to tolerate the same amount of arbitrary
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Related Work
3
failures as the amount of available parity-blocks.
1.1
Related Work
Replication schemes is a well-studied area which is also widely adapted in large-scale
systems by companies such as Amazon, Google and Microsoft.
Amazon’s DynamoDB automatically allocates the data and traffic for a particular
table among a sufficient number of servers to handle requests, while maintaining
consistency and performance. [PJS15]
Google File System is a distributed system that runs on clusters. The architecture
followed is a Master/Slave pattern, where the master is responsible for managing and
monitoring clusters and data is stored on slaves called chunk-servers. [PJS15]
As mentioned, the problem with the common replication schemes does not apply
to Fog Computing.
In Fog Computing there are multiple procedures that result in possibilities of
failures in many steps—not only computational failures, but also in transmissions.
Resource limitation in Fog Nodes also impacts the design of fault tolerant schemes.
This is the reason J. Balasangameshwara et al. [BR13] point at a scheme which
replicates the fragments of a task and lets each primary sub-task have a backup for
robustness.
However, this primary backup model, which is often mentioned in this topic, would
degrade the overall performance if no failure occurs because the backup resources are
wasted. [LFM16]
In order to avoid occupying extra physical nodes, virtual machine (VM) mecha-
nisms for backup are well studied instead of using physical nodes. [LFM16]
From a Fog Computing perspective, N. Tziritas et al. [Tzi+17] conducted some
interesting research on algorithms for data replication and VM assignments, consider-
ing which data should be replicated and where the VM must be migrated in order to
minimize network overhead among Cloud systems. [Tzi+17] Their evaluation demon-
strates that their proposed algorithms save up to 53% network overhead compared
to state-of-the-art algorithms found in the literature. [Tzi+17]
Another interesting solution is H. Goudarzi et al.’s [GP12] energy-efficient VM
placement in Cloud Computing. Where they place multiple copies of a VM on dif-
ferent servers and distributes the incoming requests. The copies reduces the resource
requirements for each VM copy.
However, because the low computational capacity of Fog Nodes it may degrade
the performance severely when loading two or more VMs[LFM16]. Hence, this thesis
==PAGE:18==
4
1 Introduction
does not consider the use of VM replication strategies.
The choice of replication scheme landed on erasure-codes as result of their abil-
ities to reduce storage overhead and operate without running computational heavy
parallel processes on Fog Nodes.
The replication scheme considered in this thesis is an erasure-code based scheme
also seen in Windows Azure Storage.
In contrary to Amazon and Google, Windows Azure Storage stores the bits on
disk and is in charge of distributing and replicating the data across many servers to
keep it durable. [PJS15]
State-of-the-art erasure codes designed specifically for storage systems are LRC,
HoVer, Stepped Combination, Weaver and Pyramid Codes. [12]
Erasure codes in Fog Computing is currently a limited study-area.
S. Li et al.’s [LMA] is the only research we know of on the subject. The research
conducted argued that the coding concepts reduce the bandwidth consumption and
latency of computing.
However, the MDS erasure scheme used in the research is considered to be an
older and now ineffective scheme compared to the erasure scheme chosen in this
thesis. Hence, the relevance of this article has been limited.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Background
This chapter defines the background concepts which this project is based on. Through-
out the chapter a reasoning for the relevance of the concepts is presented.
First a definition of a fog platform is conducted, in order to understand its ca-
pabilities and inabilities. Afterwards, an explanation of distributed storage in Fog
Computing will be presented. This leads to the explanation of the replica strategy
of FogStore, which takes some of the problems concerning distributed storage in Fog
Platforms into account.
However, FogStore does not consider the storage-overhead in its replication. Hence,
we explain the erasure coding schemes: Pyramid Codes used in modern largescale
storage systems.
These schemes are proposed to reduce storage overhead without compromising
reliability. We present the core ideas of Time-Sensitive Networking, because it enables
us to increase the spatial distance between the physical process and the Fog Node that
controls the physical process. Lastly, the Configuration Agent is introduced with the
responsibility to monitor the network for failures and reconfigure the TSN streams in
such a case
2.1
Fog Platform
It is hard to find a static definition for what Fog Computing is. Current proposals
have their own definition of what a Fog Node is, usually in relation to a specific edge
device, a specific use case or an application. In this regard E. Marín-Tordera et al.
[al17] try to define an open definition for a Fog Node. The challenge of formulating
this definition was that authors proposed a variety of devices as candidates for pos-
sible Fog Nodes. However, one common characteristic was that all proposals were
embedded computing devices, with storage and network capabilities, which is essen-
tial to execute IoT applications. [al17]
Today, industries broadly follow the Purdue Reference Model (PRM) showed on
Figure 2.1.
PRM1 represents the device level which could be sensors which sense the physical
processes
==PAGE:20==
6
2 Background
PRM2 represents the process control, often PLCs which calculate responses to the
inputs measured by the sensors and send the responses to actuators.
PRM3 and PRM4 manage the data PRM1 and PRM2 in different ways. [SP16]
Figure 2.1: The Purdue Reference Model.
Since the communication between the different levels is based on different tech-
nologies the structure is restricted. PRM1 and PRM2 are fundamentally operations
technology products (OT), while PRM3 and PRM4 leverages typical IT technologies.
OT is in general designed to meet non-functional requirements e.g. real-time proper-
ties, where hard-deadlines are required. Previous IT-equipment was not capable of
delivering these requirements, but current developments try to change this situation.
[SP16]
An ideal alternative to the pyramid model would be to deploy the whole IoT archi-
tecture on Cloud Computing, resulting in all sensors and actuators being connected
directly to the Cloud. This is ideal as control functions easily can be updated. The
setup also offers a high level of flexibility in the production process.
However, it is difficult to get knowledge about non-functional properties in Cloud-
based infrastructure. This is the major reason for the development of the Fog Com-
puting level. [SP16]
2.1.1
Fog Nodes
The Fog Computing level is composed of a network of Fog Nodes. A Fog Node is a
modular device, which possess both computational and networking capabilities. The
modular design makes the nodes’ computational resources and networks capacity scal-
able. Despite this, it is possible to characterize the non-functional properties of the
Fog Node’s hardware and software. [SP16]
Because of the Fog Node’s networking and computational capabilities, it is possible
to implement it in e.g. industrial PCs, industrial network switches, gateways and
I/O devices. This makes it possible to develop configurations where the Fog Node
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Distributed Storage in Fog Computing
7
e.g. can execute multiple independent controls with different levels of criticality or
execute processes which are normally run on the higher PRM levels. [SP16]
Because of the mentioned characteristics of a Fog Platform it is possible for a Fog
Platform to move the computation of tasks to the edge of the network in the Fog
Nodes. Statistics can be gathered on the Fog level and information from the edge
level of the network e.g. sensors and actuators can seamlessly be accessed everywhere
in the system. [PRS]
Deterministic Virtualization
Two important technologies in Fog Computing are
deterministic virtualization and deterministic networking.
Deterministic virtualization is the technology which makes it possible for the node
to execute functions with different criticalities, e.g. by having a real-time operating
system (RTOS) running in parallel to a standard operating system (Rich OS). [SP16]
With time, hardware has become powerful, by increasing the number of CPU cores
per chip. Hence, virtualization has been a technique to share the hardware between
multiple applications with a limited interference on each other.
This report considers hosted hypervisor as FogOS, which forms a thin software
layer which is on top of an operating system (OS). The system structure of a hosted
hypervisor can be seen in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Hardware Supported Virtualization at Chip Level.
2.2
Distributed Storage in Fog Computing
The main idea in DDS is to deploy smaller data-centers at the edge of the network.
This is done to bring Cloud Computing and storage resources closer to the end-usages.
In this project we choose to concentrate on the Distributed File System, Cassandra.
This is done because it offers software abstractions for identifying geographical areas
without using a central server.
==PAGE:22==
8
2 Background
This is in contrast to Distributed file systems such as PVFS, Lustre and HDFS,
which could be argued not to be appropriate for a decentralized Fog Computing
platform, as they are designed around the concept of a centralized entity which is
responsible for maintaining the storage name-space.
Because Cassandra uses P2P mechanisms, object and key/value store systems we
see it as a better candidate to fulfill the requirements of Fog Computing. [CLP17]
Another reason for selection of Cassandra is that Fog Nodes can benefit from local
computing and storage resources but the resources in Fog Nodes devices are limited
compared to Cloud devices. The Cassandra storage system is designed to work at
the edge of the network. [CLP17]
Fundamentally, Cassandra is a distributed NoSQL database designed to manage
big amounts of structured data across a bunch of commodity servers.
Cassandra
possesses an architecture that delivers distribution, linear scale performance and is
capable of handling large amounts of data. [CLP17]
Partitioning
A key feature in Cassandra is its ability to incrementally scale. The
scaling requires the ability to dynamically partition the data over a set of nodes in
a cluster. This is done using consistent hashing and uses an order preserving hash
function to do so.[LM10]
In consistent hashing the output range of a hash function is treated as a ring,
where the largest hash value wraps around the smallest hash value. Each node has a
random value which represents its position in the ring.
Each data item identified by a key is assigned to a node by hashing the data item’s
key in order to receive its position in the ring. Then it iterates the ring in round-robin
way to find the first node with position larger than the item’s position. The node
with the larger position is nominated as coordinator for the key. [LM10]
Figure 2.3: Hashed value of data key determines data position in the ring.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 FogStore
9
Replication
Data is replicated at N (replication factor) hosts. Each key, k, is as-
signed to the coordinator node. The coordinator is responsible for replication of the
data items that fall within its range. Besides this, the coordinator replicates these
keys at the N-1 nodes in the ring. In addition to locally storing each key within its
range, the coordinator replicates these keys at the N-1 nodes in the ring. [LM10]
Cassandra provides replication strategies such as rack unaware, rack aware and
datacenter aware. [LM10] However, Cassandra’s use of these replications is not rele-
vant for this thesis.
Failure Detection
Failure detection is a mechanism which allows nodes to locally
know if any other node in the system is running or has crashed.
In Cassandra failure detection is also used to avoid attempts to communicate with
unreachable nodes during various operations.
Cassandra uses a version of the Accrual Failure Detector. The concept of Accrual
Failure Detection is that the failure detector does not send Boolean values affirming
if a node is crashed or not. Instead, it sends a value which expresses a suspicion level
for each of the monitored nodes. The basic idea is to express the value on a scale
that is dynamically adjusted to reflect network and load conditions at the monitored
nodes. [LM10]
2.3
FogStore
In the previous section we explained that Fog Computing requires nodes with compu-
tational and storage capabilities to be placed at the edge of the network. When Fog
Nodes are placed at the edge of the network, they can take advantage of the locality
of clients, applications and data. Hence, it is possible to achieve lower latency and
network load. [May+17]
In order for Distributed Storage Systems to benefit from Fog Computing, they
need to be deployed in the Fog infrastructure rather than in the Cloud.
The problem regarding Cloud data centers is that they are designed on assump-
tions which are not appropriate for Fog Computing. Firstly, the replication placement
strategies used in the Cloud are based on data center failure models. Rack-aware
placement algorithms, as used in Cassandra, are dominating the landscape . They
avoid placing multiple replicas of the same data on the same server rack. This place-
ment is often not suited for Fog Computing which could be a more heterogeneous
infrastructure that does not provide classical server racks. For instance, network par-
titioning can become a large problem in Fog Computing, while in Cloud data centers
the components are usually connected via redundant links. In Fog computing whole
groups of Fog Nodes can be disconnected if a single (maybe even wireless) link fails.
==PAGE:24==
10
2 Background
[May+17]
To overcome the limitations of existing DDSs, such as Cassandra, in Fog Com-
puting, this project considers R. Mayer and H. Ramachandran’s FogStore ’Fog-aware
replica placement strategy’. [May+17]
FogStore contains three components: a Query API, a Consistency API and a
Consistency Mapper. This project will only concentrate on the consistency mapper,
because that is where the replica placement algorithm is handled.
FogStore suggests a placement strategy for Fog Computing which takes the net-
work topology and heterogeneity of Fog Nodes into account. The Fog-aware replica
placement algorithm is based on the notion of failure groups. A failure group is a
group of Fog Nodes which would fail for the same technical reason.
This could be local power outages, cooling failures, network failures or natural
disasters. A failure group could be nodes on a server rack, but also a group of nodes
that would be disconnected because they access the Fog continuum via the same
physical link. In FogStore the failure groups are set up by a domain expert who can
group an arbitrary amount of Fog Nodes in failures groups. The domain expert is
familiar with the physical conditions of the Fog continuum. [May+17]
The Algorithm 2.3 lists the replica placement algorithm in FogStore. The concept
of placing the replication in the nearest node outside of the failure-group is seen as
an important detail, as it ensures the tolerance of failure-groups and ensures low
latencies.
However, the FogStore replication strategy does not consider storage-overhead
and optimization. This leads to the next section about Pyramid Codes.
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Pyramid Codes
11
2.4
Pyramid Codes
As mentioned in earlier sections the current redundancy principles in Fog and Cloud
computing points at the typical primary backup model (master/slave paradigm). An
often used master/slave paradigm is the traditional 3-replication scheme, where each
data block is stored on two slave replicas. [CL13]
Figure 2.4: 3-replica scheme.
As mentioned in section 2.2 and 2.3, the data in Cassandra and FogStore is repli-
cated at N hosts - such that N-1 where N is the replication factor. This means that
every node has at least one full replication stored.
The benefit of this scheme is that writing to a data block only takes N-1 write
operations. (one write to itself and one to each of its replicas) and reading only takes
one read operation. [CL13]
However, this replication model has a big performance and storage impact, as the
back-up resources are wasted in case of no failures in the system. The scheme can,
in some cases, result in a massive storage overhead. The scheme consumes at least
double the storage space of the data collection itself—in a 3-replication scheme.
This storage overhead would be extremely expensive in a massive Fog continuum.
In that regard erasure resilient coding (ERC) schemes are considered in order to
reduce storage overhead without compromising reliability.[CL13] A benefit of the
use of ERC schemes is that it does not require parallel virtual machines occupying
and affecting the Fog Nodes which might not tolerate running two or more virtual
machines in parallel. [LFM16]
==PAGE:26==
12
2 Background
2.4.0.1
ERC-schemes
The most common Erasure Resilient Coding-schemes (ERC) uses MDS codes. MDS is
a method which divides a system into data and parity-blocks. If a data-block crashes,
it can be reconstructed by assembling the remaining data from the system’s available
data and parity-blocks. ERC-schemes have the ability to reconstruct a crashed node,
if the number of available parity blocks is ≥to number of failed data-blocks. [Pla09]
Figure 2.5: ERC scheme, with 6 data blocks and 4 parity blocks.
ERC-schemes work by creating a bit constructor matrix where the first rows con-
sists of an identify matrix of the data-blocks. The rows beneath are constructed by
matrices representing the parity-blocks.
By multiplying the matrix of a vector build of the data-blocks’ bits we achieve
a product vector which contains the bits of the entire network. The first elements
represent the data vector for the data-blocks. The last elements represent the parity
bits. [Pla09]
Encode To encode the matrix each bit of each parity-block is calculated as the
dot product of the bit’s row in the matrix. Each block in the system is presented as
a bit. Hence, the dot product is computed using a XOR operation on every data bit
in the parity-block’s row. [Pla09]
This is demonstrated on Figure 2.6
Figure 2.6: Generating the Generator matrix .
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Pyramid Codes
13
Decode
When a block crashes, the constructor matrix is decoded and if there are enough
available blocks, it is possible to reconstruct the missing rows from the remaining
rows in the constructor matrix. To decode we follow two steps. [Pla09]
• Invert the constructor matrix and multiply it by the available blocks.
This
enables us to compute the lost data
• When it is computed, the original matrix is used to extract the lost blocks.
The procedure is visualized in Figure 2.7
Figure 2.7: Reconstructing the original data.
The advantages of The ERC-scheme compared to the common 3-replica scheme
are a reduction of storage overhead from 3x to 1.5x (50%) and the option of flexibility
between performance and fault-tolerance by modifying the ratio of data-blocks and
parity-blocks.
However, the disadvantage of the ERC-scheme is the costs of updating data-blocks.
This procedure costs 8 read/write operations while the reassembly of a data-block
requires reading from 6 data and parity-blocks. This results in heavy network traffic.
[CL13]
The ERC-scheme does not contemplate the network traffic. Hence, this project
considers Pyramid Codes which in general are said to be optimal when parity-blocks
and data-blocks are partially associated. [CL13] This is the case in a global divided
storage system in a Fog continuum.
2.4.0.2
Basic Pyramid Codes
Basic Pyramid Codes (BPC) work by splitting six data-blocks into two equal size
groups and then a parity-block is computed for each group.
After this, two supplementary parity-blocks are allocated using the ERC-scheme.
These blocks are derived from the six data-blocks in both groups. Hence, this block is
called global-blocks - because it is derived from all data-blocks in the network. [CL13]
BPC is demonstrated on Figure 2.8.
==PAGE:28==
14
2 Background
Figure 2.8: Visualization of the Basic Pyramid Code scheme.
2.4.0.3
Multi-hierarchical Pyramid Codes
To further decrease the network traffic, BPC is extended into a multi-hierarchical
structure composed of 3 layers. In the first layer, the data-blocks are divided into two
groups which are further split into four sub-groups. Each group (layer 1) is assigned a
group-block. Every second group (layer 2), a subgroup, are assigned a subgroup-block.
Lastly, in the third layer, two global-blocks are placed which are able to reconstruct
nodes from all groups. This structure is demonstrated on Figure 2.9. [CL13]
Failure recovery
In case of a disk failure, the BPC performs a decoding. This are analogues to
climbing a pyramid where it begins from layer 1 and reconstructs all the crashed data-
blocks and marks them available. If there are not enough parity-blocks to reconstruct
the failed-blocks the decoding moves to layer 2 and so on to layer 3 in case of 3
failures.[CL13]
This is demonstrated in Figure 2.9.
If the number of surviving parity-blocks are ≥to the amount of failed blocks,
the BPC will recover all crashed blocks. If this is impossible the crashed blocks are
marked as unrecoverable. [CL13]
==PAGE:29==
2.5 Time-Sensitive Networking
15
Figure 2.9: An example of a situation where the amount of disk failures are bigger
than the amount of parity-blocks and the BPC has to proceed to the
third layer.
2.5
Time-Sensitive Networking
TSN guarantees bounded latency communication between the Fog Node and the sys-
tem. This guarantee enables the execution of real-time critical tasks in Fog Nodes.
TSN enable sensor data to be accessible anywhere in the system by the appropriate
configuration of the switch’s forwarding table. [PRS]
This chapter starts out by presenting the core principles of TSN, by introducing
the core ideas of TSN.
Afterwards, the chapter investigates current trends and concepts in fault-tolerance
regarding TSN networks.
IEEE 802.1 working group standardizes protocols that use Ethernet messages with
functions and mechanisms to handle messages in the switches and end nodes. Hence,
this chapter is concerned with the real-time safety and availability enhancements for
Ethernet in the IEEE 802.1 developments.
==PAGE:30==
16
2 Background
2.5.1
Ethernet
TSN builds on the IEEE 802.3 Ethernet standard, where nodes are indirectly con-
nected by switches which forward the messages from the sending talker either to the
receiving listener or to a to switch which is closer to the listener.
These messages are transported in the Ethernet frame format, which consists of
a preamble and a start of frame pattern—SOF—followed by information concerning
addressing the message’s destination—MAC-Destination and MAC-Source. [Ste15]
The Type / Length field defines which protocol is used for transporting the frame.
The field can also be used to indicate the frame’s length. The Payload stores the
actual data and optional metadata. The FCS is a frame-check sequence, which is a
32-bit long cycling redundancy check. IFG is a minimum inter frame gap which needs
to be respected.[Ste15]
Figure 2.10: The Anatomy of a TSN Frame.
2.5.2
Audio/Video Bridging
AVB is defined in IEEE 802.1QBA and is an approach for achieving deterministic
end-to-end latency in Ethernet networks. AVB tries to preserve room for low-priority
traffic by using three concepts: the Stream Reservation Protocol (SRP), the Clocksyn-
chronization Protocol and the Credit-based Shaping Function. [Ste15]
Stream Reservation Protocol (SRP)
The SRP protocol makes it possible to
establish, control and tear down data streams with determined Quality of Service re-
quirements. The end stations of the Ethernet network are said to be ’talkers’, which
are the communication sources that transmit stream frame to the network. The ‘lis-
teners’ receive the stream frame, hence acting as communication sinks. [Oli12]
For each stream there can only be one talker, but multiple listeners. In SRP a
talker can advertise its stream to the Ethernet network, allowing listeners to indicate
interest in the stream. The SRP also has the function of allocating bandwidth re-
sources, as the switches between the talker and listener only allow a new stream if
sufficient bandwidth is available.[Ste15]
==PAGE:31==
2.5 Time-Sensitive Networking
17
Credit-Based Shaping Function
In the IEEE 802.1Qav the credit-based schedul-
ing algorithm is described. The purpose of this algorithm is to reduce latency for data
streams with high real-time requirements. [Oli12] The algorithm works in the Ether-
net switches by queuing the received messages in one or several virtual queues.
In order to avoid starvation a variable ’credit’ is implemented, which allows the
switch to only select messages from the queue when the respective credit is nonnega-
tive. If the credit of the queue is negative, the messages will be chosen from a different
queue, preventing mitigation. [Ste15]
CBS is not improving transmission latency of the real-time traffic. It is the STP
and CBS in combination that makes it possible to allocate bandwidth resources. As
the SRP is limiting the number of time-critical streams and the CBS shaped traffic,
generated by the talkers, limits the burst-size of time-critical traffic. [Ste15]
The class measurement interval (CMI) makes the talker only send a given maxi-
mum of data within a given time interval. Two CMI priorities are given to the class
A defined as 125µs and 250µs for class B. This enables streams to be transmitted
from a talker to a listener in a 2-ms. This allows a maximum of six switches, where
each hop adds at most a 125-us delay. This means that a node can transmit audio
requesting that it be played 2 ms in the future, and all samples will arrive in time to
be played out at the right time.
Clock Synchronization
The IEEE 802.1AS standard describes the time synchro-
nization principle used in AVB and is a profile of the IEEE 1588 precision time
protocol.[Oli12] The algorithm uses a master-slave paradigm with automatic master
election by using a synchronization spanning tree which defines how the synchroniza-
tion data from the master clock is distributed to the end nodes and switches.
Ports in end systems and switches that lead to the master clock are stated to be
in a slave state, while the ports leading away from the master clock are stated to be
in master state. Ports not used in the spanning tree are stated to be in a passive
state. If the master clock fails, the algorithm elects a new master clock and a new
spanning tree is generated. [Ste15]
2.5.3
Fault-Tolerance Concepts
AVB offers some Real-Time capabilities, but it does not meet the requirements for
industrial automation. This is the motivation for the development of TSN. [Oli14]
As mentioned in the previous section 2.5.2, the master clock re-election algorithm in
AVB does provide fault-tolerance in clock synchronization. [Ste15]
However, the TSN Technology which is currently being developed extends the
capabilities of AVB. TSN makes it possible to guarantee worst case latency behav-
ior, reliability and fault-tolerance, which is achieved though seamless redundancy
==PAGE:32==
18
2 Background
mechanisms. These mechanisms enable Ethernet networks to be used in industrial
applications with strict end-to-end latency and fault-tolerance requirements. [Oli14]
Seamless Redundancy
The TSN group currently standardizes redundancy man-
agement mechanisms to increase availability by using redundant copies of the same
messages. This eliminates the interruption of communication when a fault appears.
TSN has not yet finalized the standardization of particular redundancy management
mechanisms.[Ste15]
The IEEE P802-1CB standard describes mechanisms to identify frames requiring
redundant transmission at the source. This is done to identify and eliminate dupli-
cates at the destination. This duplication of frames is a prerequisite for seamless
redundancy. [Oli14] This is achieved by transmitting the duplicated frames over two
separated reserved TSN streams, in combination with IEEE P802.1Qca disjunctive
paths through the network. This enables a transmission to be fault-resistant and it
is seamless if a problem occurs along one of the two reserved streams paths. [Oli14]
Considering Path Control and Reservation the IEEE P802.1Qca will describe a
control protocol which improves the capabilities of the Shortest Path Bridging (SBP)
by extending the application of Intermediate System to Intermediate System (ISIS)
to control bridged networks. These extensions to the protocol make it possible to
explicitly control forwarding paths and use non-shortest paths for redundant TSN
streams. This and other enhancements in the protocol achieves reservation of multiple
disjunctive paths, required for seamless redundancy with IEEE p802.1CB. [Oli14]
2.6
Configuration Agent
In order to execute the placement strategies and configure the network streams, we
introduce a Configuration Agent (CA),which is an entity which monitors the network
to detect changes and self-configures to the changes. [GAS17]
The CA is a component which uses the capabilities of TSN and OPC UA to
make run-time configurations in the network.
This configuration is supported by
the extension IEEE 802.10cc.
One of the key concepts in the configuration of a
TSN network is the User Network Interface (UNI) that enables the user to customize
stream requirements in the network without domain knowledge. [PRS]
The user specifies a requirement for the streams it wants to transmit, without hav-
ing domain knowledge and the network analyzes the information along with network
capabilities and configures the switches to meet the user’s requirements. [GAS17]
To realize this configuration paradigm, IEEE 802.1Qcc defines three different con-
figuration architectures with regards to their architecture. [GAS17]
• A fully distributed model:
==PAGE:33==
2.6 Configuration Agent
19
In this model the UNI is placed between the source and the destination and the
access switch. The user communicates its requirements and the network spreads
them though the relevant streams[PRS] The management of switches is done
locally with the information available to that switch. This architecture can be
used to configure the CBS, and for that, SRP can be used as UNI.[GAS17]
Figure 2.11: Fully Distributed Architecture.
• Centralized Network / Distributed User Model (CNC):
In this architecture a CNC component with complete knowledge about all
streams and the switches’ capabilities in the network topology is considered.
Configuration requirements messages are deployed from the CNC. The UNI is
still placed between the source and its access switch.[PRS] The access switch
communicates the requirements directly to the CNC. The CNC uses a network
management protocol to control the switches. The end-stations are not man-
aged by the CNC. The CNC can exist as end-station or in a switch.[GAS17]
Figure 2.12: Centralized Network / Distributed User Model.
• A fully centralized model - Central User Configurator (CUC).
In this architecture the source and destination communicate the requirement
to the CUC. The CUC exchanges the information with the CNC via the UNI.
The CNC and CUC can be in the same component. [GAS17] This model allows
a CUC component to retrieve source station capabilities and configure TSN
features. In this model the UNI is still in between CUC and CNC. [PRS]
In this thesis we focus mainly on the CNC because it has knowledge about the
capabilities of devices in the network topology and the transmissions rates of
the links. Besides this, it is able to reconfigure the streams in the network in
cases of failures. [PRS]
==PAGE:34==
20
2 Background
In the above Figure 2.6 we see a CA component run-time configures the network.
The CUC transforms the stream requests from sources to traffic parameters.
The parameters are transferred to the CNC by the UNI. [PRS]
Figure 2.13: Fully Centralized Architecture.
==PAGE:35==
2.6 Configuration Agent
21
Brief Recap
Based on the concepts explained in this chapter we present a brief
recap in order to clarify the essential aspects of the presented concepts.
==PAGE:36==
22
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3
System Model
This chapter defines the system model used in this thesis. It describes the architecture,
application and fault model.
3.1
Architecture Model
The architecture is considered to represent the Edge level tiers in a network.
We consider the architecture as a TSN network represented as an undirected
graph G(V, E). Where vertices V denotes the set of all Fog-Nodes (FN) and network
switches. The edges E are the physical links interconnecting the FN’s. An ES can
be of several types. In this thesis we consider that the ES are heterogeneous Fog
Nodes, containing CPU, memory and I/Os. The Fog Nodes have a random amount
of storage-capabilities due to their heterogeneity. A FN’s storage-capability is de-
noted as S
Fog Nodes have different attributes. They can be associated with a failure-group
F. We denote the failure group as F ⊂G and F where FN ⊂F
Besides this, a FN’s local storage can be reserved for either storing data in a DDS
or working as a parity-block for replication. We denote FNs containing a data-block
as FN d. There exist three types of parity-blocks, which we denote as; Group-block
FN g, sub-group-block FN sg and global-block FN gg.
We consider that the topology is hybrid peer-to-peer, where the FN’s in the Fog
Layer works as super-peers, meaning that a set of sensors and actuators at the Edge
layer are mediated through the Fog-node like a star-topology. The Fog-Nodes are
independent of each other, meaning they are not dependent on each other’s compu-
tation.
Each Fog Node has a switch or bridge attached. The Fog Nodes can be both
industrial computers with high MTTF as well as commodity computers with a higher
failure rate.
The switches in the FN ’s all have monitors attached such that all the switches in
the network are constantly monitoring the traffic that they forward. In order for the
switches to have reconfiguring and learning capabilities, the switches are equipped
==PAGE:38==
24
3 System Model
with a monitor and a local extractor.
These monitors are essential for extracting relevant traffic parameters and the
generation of new configurations. This extraction calls for a centralized view of the
network. Thus the extractor and scheduler are integrated in one of the Fog Nodes.
This FN is called the masterbox and should be seen as a fully centralized CA archi-
tecture. In the fully centralized CA, the CNC and CUC is integrated in the same
Fog Node denoted as Ca.
FN1
SW1
S1
Montor
FN2
SW2
S2
Montor
FN3
SW3
S3
Montor
FN4
SW4
S4
Montor
Sensor
Actuator
Sensor
Actuator
Sensor
Actuator
Sensor
Actuator
F - Failure-group
Ca
SW1
Montor
Figure 3.1: The architecture model with 4 Fog Nodes inside a failure-group.
3.2
Application Model
Mentioned in the earlier Section 3.1 we introduce a Ca in the architecture in order to
perform configuration and re-configurations of the network in runtime. The CNC and
CUC are integrated into the Ca. The end systems send stream requests to the CUC,
which transforms it into traffic parameters. The traffic parameters are communicated
to CNC via the UNI. [PRS]
The centralized Ca has knowledge of the network topology, the capabilities of the
individual devices in the network, and transmission rates of the links. [PRS] It is
able to monitor if a failure occurs, and it is possible for it to quickly reconfigure the
network.
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Application Model
25
In this regard, we put the responsibility of executing the replica placement algo-
rithm on the Ca. When the inputs of the monitor recognize that a node has failed, it
sends a signal to the Ca, which computes the new replica placement.
When the Ca has computed the new replica placement it runs a scheduling appli-
cation which maps stream request to the physical routes in the network and schedules
the forwarding time of individual frames of a stream on every link on the route from
sender to receiver. The updated configuration is distributed to the network devices.
Once the configuration is updated the CUC is informed of the stream IDs through
the UNI, in order for the end systems to start transmitting via the scheduled streams.
[PRS]
In the network a job will fail when the resource of a FN fails due to hardware
faults. Faults can be transient or permanent. Ca handles both types of failures that
can happen in a grid environment. If a resource shuts down manually, it sends a
notice message to its backup and other neighbors and, in case of failure, the identity
of the backup and notice message regarding failure of primary is sent to all neighbor
and partner resources.
For the exchange of network configuration information, IEEE 802.1Qcc mentions
that a variety of protocols can be used, e.g., Simple Network Management Protocol
(SNMP), NETCONF (RFC 6241) and RESTCONF (RFC 8040) and suggests YANG
(IETF RFC 7950) or Type- Length-Value (TLV) for modeling the data.
More details on how the Ca re-configures the network can be found in Pop et. al’s
article. [PRS]
Assumptions
• In this thesis all messages are transmitted through disjunctive redundant and
deterministic TSN streams in order to ensure seamless redundancy.
• Heterogeneous software and hardware is not considered in the FN due to vir-
tualization technology.
• The latency between each switch in the network is constant, meaning that the
latency between the source and the listener is determined by the amount of
switches it passes.
• We assume that the network topology is semi-unstructured meaning that the
addresses of FN are known to the Ca but not their physical locations.
• We assume stateful applications that have an inherent locality of their data
sources and sinks, meaning that data sources and sinks are located in the same
physical region.
==PAGE:40==
26
3 System Model
3.3
Fault Model
This section deals with the failure model, which defines ways in which failure may
occur. This is done in order to provide an understanding of the impact of the failures.
FNs can fail according to the fail-recovery model, where an arbitrary number
of nodes may fail and restart at any time. The connection between FNs can be
interrupted or delayed. Hence, sets of FNs can become temporarily incapable of
communicating with each other, i.e., temporary network partitioning is possible.
Because of the geo-distribution of FNs it is possible for whole failure-groups con-
sisting of physically close FNs to fail simultaneously, e.g. due to network partition
or a local power outrage.
If a data-block FN d fails, it can be restored by assembling the remaining data
from the network’s surviving FN ds, including the parity blocks. The restoring of a
crashed node is only possible if the number of available parity blocks is ￿to number
of crashed FN ds.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Problem Formulation
In this project we address the problem of optimizing storage-overhead in a Fog Plat-
form architecture, by allocating redundant parity blocks. The problem is formulated
as:
Given a TSN network topology G(V, E) where nodes represents FN ’s (Fog Nodes)
contains random storage-capabilities S and user defined storage-requirements R which
determines the amount of data that should be stored in the DDS. The edges E repre-
sents the TSN communication links between the Fog Nodes.
We are interested in determining an optimized solution in a Fog Platform architecture,
that allocates a DDS and its corresponding set of redundant parity blocks, Group-
block FN g, sub-group-block FN sg and global-block FN gg, such that the following
objectives are met.
• The replication model should tolerate partition failures including failure-groups
F.
• The latency between a DDS in a local failure-group F is minimized
• The latency between the local failure-group F and it’s corresponding parity
blocks is minimized.
• The storage-overhead is minimized
• The existing FN’s computational resources are unaffected
• Nodes Communicates through redundant disjoint routes over separated TSN
network streams.
==PAGE:42==
28
4 Problem Formulation
4.1
Motivational Example
The following Use Case should be seen as a motivational example demonstrating the
current problems and requirements concerning replication of DSS in a geo-distributed
Fog continuum.
Modern utility wind turbines have a flexible structure equipped with multiple
closed control loops responsible for improving the wind power capture and the power
quality (which is affected by harmonic distortion), as well as reducing structural load-
ing, which tries to extend the lifetime and decrease the maintenance cost. [Bon+14]
Each wind turbine has a semi-autonomous controller to prevail the wind conditions.
Coordination on a higher level is required for maximum optimization. Because, if each
individual turbine is controlled independently it might “wind starve” its neighbors.
When assessing a wind farm it is important to study the atmospheric stability
and wind patterns on a yearly and monthly basis, as well as terrain properties. A
wind farm requires accurate wind forecasting on different time scales. [Bon+14]
Based on the wind farm use case, we can derive valuable characteristics and re-
quirements of Fog Computing.
• Need for a global controller. - A controller that manages the overall picture,
from data derived from the wind turbines. Collecting data, constructing a global
state and determining the policy requires low latency locally at the edge.
• Need for real time data analytics. - The system produces huge amounts of data
that is used for the control loops. Besides this, data is also used to run analytics
over longer periods. -Can be characterized as a soft-real time constraint.
• Need efficient Network Infrastructure. - A wide geographical operation of a large
system consisting of sub-systems in form of Fog Nodes. The communication
between the Fog Nodes and the Cloud requires low latencies.
Many IoT use cases, including this wind farm, are geo-distributed.
When we
consider e.g.
the monitoring of a pipeline, or we measure the pollution in a city,
the concern of these scenarios is not the amount of data or the data rate, but the
number of sensors and actuators that are distributed, which need to be managed like
a coherent unit.
This calls for a paradigm where we move the processing power to the data - a
distributed intelligent platform at the Edge of the network that manages computing,
networking and storage resources. [Bon+14]
Considering these requirements for the wind farm, it is clear that Fog Nodes at
the edge of the network need storage capabilities and low transmission latencies.
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Motivational Example
29
On Figure 4.1 we demonstrate a geo-distributed Fog Platform within a wind farm,
where a Fog Node is controlling an arbitrary amount of individual wind turbines.
Because of the geographical spread of the wind turbines, they can be grouped into
failure-groups containing a group of Fog Nodes physically close together. Each Fog
Node has local storage attached to store the wind turbines’ storage requirements.
Figure 4.1: A geo-distributed Fog continuum, where a subsystem is crashed.
As we mentioned in section 2.3 a problem with Fog Computing is the presence of
failure-groups. Figure 4.1 demonstrates the concept of failure-groups is highly relevant
in the wind farm use case. A power outrage in an area or a broken communication
link could leverage the data access to a whole group of wind turbines. In some parts
of the world, wind farms can also be exposed to natural disasters, such as tornadoes,
earthquakes, etc.
==PAGE:44==
30
4 Problem Formulation
4.2
Solution Example
In this section we use the problem described in the wind-farm example to demonstrate
how the concept presented in this thesis is able to optimize the replication placement
and how it meets the objectives presented in Section 4.
A more thorough explanation and reasoning of the algorithms used in the concept
is found in Section 5.
In these examples we consider the motivational wind-farm example from Section
4.1, where the wind-turbines are placed in a star-topology consisting of 5 groups,
allowing for memberships consisting of a maximum of 5 Fog Nodes.
4.2.1
Traditional approach
In order to avoid data loss in such cases of failure-groups failing simultaneously, the
Fog Nodes’ data requires to be redundant. The concept of failure-groups would in
general be solved though widespread Cloud replication strategies such as a rack-aware
replication strategy, where a replication of each node is stored in a cluster placed at
another geographical location.
Data-block
Slave Replica
Figure 4.2: Demonstration of a rack-aware setup in the wind-farm example.
On Figure 4.2 it is demonstrated how the rack-aware scheme could be arranged
in the Wind-Farm. It is seen that every data-block in the network needs a slave as
back-up.
Using this scheme in a large scale wind-farm, the number of slave replicas would
end up being enormous.
Considering that these back-ups are not contributing to any computation only
makes the scheme more costly.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Solution Example
31
In section 3 it is presented how the Fog Node hosts a hypervisor as FogOS, which
is a thin software layer on top of an OS. This could be interesting from a replication
perspective, as the VM mechanisms have been widely studied for backup.
As mentioned previously these concepts could potentially minimize the storage
overhead. However, the concept is not suitable for Fog Computing, as their computa-
tional capabilities might not tolerate running two or more VM in parallel. [LFM16]
Running VM backup mechanisms in the wind farm could therefore cause interrup-
tions and jitter in the Fog Nodes’ real-time operating system (RTOS), which could
potentially result in violation of real-time communication constraints.
Besides the problems about replication, it is crucial to consider how this rack-
aware replication scheme complies with the wind-farm’s soft real-time deadlines. In
case of a failure resulting in a broken Fog Node, every request to the broken Fog Node
is going to be rerouted to a subsystem in order to access its data. This rerouting will
pass more switches and the data is transferred across a wider area. It is critical to
provide dependability of the replicated data, as these data have to be available for the
other wind turbines in order to include their data when they adjust to the weather
conditions.
If this data is delayed, it can potentially cause an ineffective use of the weather
conditions, or even worse, inflict a “wind starve”.
Because of this, there is a need for an approach where the latency between the
replicas is minimized in order to meet the soft real time requirements.
4.2.2
Optimization
4.2.2.1
Allocation of DDS
Considering the Wind farm example in Section 4.1, it is clear that a crucial aspect
of Fog Computing is to place data close to the processing power. One of the main
reasons for this is to provide real-time capabilities in the system. This means that
the latency between data stored and the consumer needs to be as low as possible.
We consider that the user of a system has some storage-requirements R which the
system has to fulfill.
As the storage-capabilities S in the Fog Nodes is limited, we need to distribute
the storage between the Fog Nodes. Because of the latency concern, it makes sense
firstly to place the data close to the sensors and actuators which have to read or write
from the storage; secondly it makes sense to place the DDS in Fog Nodes close to each
other in order to minimize the amount of switches through which the traffic between
the source and the listener has to pass.
Hence, we wish to group the DDS on Fog Nodes which has low latency connection
to each other in order to minimize the latency on read and write queries to the DDS.
These groups are characterized as failure groups.
==PAGE:46==
32
4 Problem Formulation
The grouping is done by identifying maximal cliques in the topology.
4.2.2.2
Placement of parity-blocks
In order to tolerate whole failure groups of Fog Nodes failing at once, we borrow an
aspect from the replica placement algorithm FogStore as described in Section 2.3.
FogStore places the replica of a node in the closest node outside of the failure
group. We see this as a crucial detail as it ensures that the data inside of a failure
group is still reachable while trying to keep latency low.
However, as mentioned before, we want to minimize the storage-overhead in com-
mon Fog replication schemes. Hence, we introduce the concept of Pyramid Codes and
use it in combination with the FogStore replication placement algorithm. In order to
use pyramid codes we have to consider how to place the parity blocks.
As mentioned in Section 2.4 we use three kinds of parity blocks.
• Group blocks - can restore all nodes in one failure group
• Sub-group blocks - can restore nodes in two neighboring groups
• Global Blocks - can restore all Fog Nodes in a network
Failure-group 5
Failure-group 4
Failure-group 3
Data-block
Subgroup-block
Group-block
Global-block
Failure-group 5
Figure 4.3: Example of the placement of parity-blocks.
The trick with pyramid codes is that if a disk fails, the way it decodes is analogous
to climbing a pyramid. It starts with the group-level, meaning the group-block, which
is the closest of the blocks. This scenario is the most likely example. If there are not
enough group-blocks, the decoding moves to sub-group level, with higher latency and
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Solution Example
33
if there is still not enough parity-blocks to recover the crashed data-blocks it moves
to the global-blocks, where the latency is even higher.
The ratio of global-blocks / sub-group blocks is decided by the domain expert and
should be calculated based on the amounts of nodes allowed in failure-groups and the
probability of failure.
The concepts presented are capable of restoring a crashed node if the number of
available parity-blocks is ≥to number of crashed data-blocks. [CL13]
Failure-group 5
Failure-group 5
Failure-group 5
Failure-group 5
Failure-group 4
Failure-group 3
Data-block
Subgroup-block
Group-block
Global-block
Failure-group 6
Covered by
group-block
Covered by
subgroup-
block 
Covered by
global-block 
Covered by
subgroup-
block 
Covered by
global-block 
Covered by
global-block 
Figure 4.4: Demonstration of the three blocks reconstruction ability.
The reason for this division of parity blocks is due to reconstruction bandwidth.
Because of the dependability requirements of real-time systems, we are interested in
keeping the latency from the cluster to its parity block as low as possible.
As mentioned, the concept of the replication placement strategy is that if a data-
block crashes it is revived by assembling the remaining data from the surviving
datablocks including the parity-blocks. This assembly consumes bandwidth in the
network and if the surviving data-blocks are distant the latency of the assembly is
impacted.
In order to consider the latency problem, we place parity-blocks by following some
rules.
The placement of the parity blocks is first done by allocating the group-block in
the neighboring failure-group. After that the subgroup-block is placed. The subgroup-
block has the responsibility of two failure-groups, hence we place a sub-group block
for every two neighboring failure-groups, in another nearby failure-group. Lastly, the
==PAGE:48==
34
4 Problem Formulation
globalblock(s), which has the responsibility of all failure-groups, is placed in the center
of the topology.
Failure-group 1
Failure-group 5
Failure-group 4
Failure-group 3
Failure-group 2 
Data-block
Subgroup-block
Group-block
Global-block
Master Controller / CA 
Failure-group 5
Figure 4.5: Example of the reconstruction of a whole failure-group.
4.2.2.3
Improvements
In this section, we explain how the replication strategy presented in this thesis is an
improvement compared to the common replication scheme.
Storage-overhead
It is already mentioned in section 2.1 that the 1:1 rack-aware
replication scheme results in a massive storage-overhead. From Figure 4.2 demonstrat-
ing the 1:1 rack-aware replication schema, it is seen that each data-block requires a
back-up replication. In this case it means that for the 15 data-blocks in the network,
15 rack-aware replicas are stored in the network.
This is a heavy storage-overhead as there is a significant chance that a replica
would never be used.
The replication strategy presented in this thesis optimizes the storage-overhead.
In contrary to the 1:1 replication scheme this strategy uses the global-block which is
able to recover all data-blocks in the network. It is seen in Figure 4.5 how it reduces
storage-overhead as only 13 nodes are used for replication.
A benefit of using erasure codes as replication schemes , in contrary to the mas-
ter/slave paradigm, is that the parity-blocks are able to recover several data-blocks -
the global block even allows for recovering of all data-blocks in the system.
This allows for flexibility of performance vs. fault-tolerance. If a data-block is
unavailable because it is hot due to e.g. high loads, it is possible for the client to
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Solution Example
35
reconstruct a copy.[12] The sub-group block and the global-block would still be ready
to recover the two data-blocks.
Fault-tolerance
The ability of parity-blocks to recover several data-blocks increases
the Fault-tolerance drastically compared to the 1:1 scheme.
In Figure 4.5 the replication strategy is able to tolerate whole failure-groups but it
is also possible to restore 13 of arbitrary failures in the network as long as the number
of available parity blocks is ≥to number of crashed data-blocks.
This means that it at least is able to tolerate three arbitrary failures in the same
failure-group and, in some cases where all the failures are happening in different
failure-groups, up to 13 arbitrary failures simultaneously.
Besides this, due to constraints in the allocation DDS and parity placement al-
gorithms the concept described in this thesis also ensures communication through
redundant disjoint routes over separated TSN network streams. This is ensured by
checking if a Fog Node has two neighbors before placing a block.
Latency
This setup comes with a cost of network traffic and latencies, because a
parity-block has to receive data fragments from the data-blocks in order to recover
the data.
This is a problem because of the real-time data analytics and the global controller’s
ability to quickly run on the wind-farm.
The 1:1 offers significantly lower network traffic and latencies because the read
operations from data-blocks consist of one write to itself and one to each of its replica
and a replica does not have to be reconstructed in case of data-block failure. It is
already running and consistent.
The distance and latency becomes a problem in the parity placement because we,
inspired by the FogStore replication strategy, want to place the parity blocks outside
of a failure group. This means that the distance to the blocks included in the assem-
bly is increased.
Hence the replication scheme presented in this thesis considers multiple decisions
to lower the latency and two optimization algorithms are presented in order to mini-
mize the overall latency of the allocated blocks.
Unaffected computational resources
It has been mentioned numerous times
that the VM replication strategies has been widely studied. However, the concepts
are not suitable for Fog Computing, as their computational capabilities might not
tolerate running two or more VM in parallel. [LFM16]
==PAGE:50==
36
4 Problem Formulation
The use of erasure codes has the benefit of reducing the physical nodes occupied
for replication without running parallel VMs, leaving the Fog Nodes computational
resources unaffected. This is a strong argument against the various VM replication
schemes.
4.3
Problem Complexity
Maximal Clique problem.
Most clique problems are hard. The clique decision
problem is NP-complete. The problem of finding the maximum clique is both fixed
parameter difficult and hard to approximate. Besides this, itemization of all maximal
cliques may require exponential time as there exist graphs with exponentially many
maximal cliques. [GJS76a]
The Bron–Kerbosch algorithm is used to itemize all maximal cliques in worst-case
optimal time. The algorithm also makes it possible to list them in polynomial time
per clique.[GJS76b]
Constraint satisfaction problems
The problem of allocating the DDS and parity-
blocks is considered as a constraint satisfaction problem (CSP), where a set of storage-
requirements must satisfy a number (4) of constraints in order to be allocated. CSPs
are often relatively complex and require a combination of heuristics and combinato-
rial search methods to be solved in a reasonable time. [Var00] In that regard the
problem is also considered to be a combinatorial optimization problem where we are
searching for the best solution of a set of discrete items.
A constraint satisfaction problem on a finite domain is in general said to be a
NP-complete problem. This is a consequence of the number of other NP-complete
problems which is characterized as a constraints satisfaction problems. Relevant to
this thesis is the Boolean satisfiability problem (3-SAT). [Var00]
Assuming that P = NP, the problem of allocating the DDS and parity-blocks
is not optimally solved with a polynomial-time algorithm because the number of
possible solutions increases exponentially as the network topology increases. As the
problem could be applied in large-scale network topologies we need to use heuristic
optimization strategies in order to navigate and find an acceptable solution in the
enormous amount of combinations in the solution space.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 5
Concept
Based on the previously described problems, this section connects the dots and intro-
duces a concept based on the Background Sections 2. Through this section it will be
argued how the concept meets the objectives stated in Section 4.
We present a replication placement strategy which firstly considers an algorithm
for allocation of a DDS placed in cliques. Afterwards we place the parity-blocks in
order to benefit from the Pyramid Codes explained in 2.4 and combine them with
the FogStore replication placement strategy in order to provide a replica placement
strategy which meets this project’s objectives.
The replication placement strategy is thought to be executed by the fully central-
ized CA, which monitors for failures and re-configures the network in such a case.
5.1
Allocation of Distributed Storage
In Section 5.1 it is explained why we need to allocate the DDS. To achieve this we
present a constructive heuristic algorithm which allocates the DDS in cliques. The
output of the algorithms should be seen as a ’good guess’ on how to most optimally
place the DDS.
As input we get:
• An undirected graph G representing a network topology
• A set of storage-requirements S which has to be allocated to DDS.
5.1.0.1
Grouping
Before we can group the Fog Nodes we have to identify cliques in the network topology.
To achieve this we use the Bron-kerbocsh algorithm, which presents a depth-first
search algorithm for generating all the maximal cliques in an undirected graph. [06]
A clique is defined as a complete subgraph of an undirected graph G.
e.g.
a
subgraph where any two vertices are adjacent.
The set of vertices of a maximal
==PAGE:52==
38
5 Concept
clique of the complementary graph of G is a maximal independent set of G. [06] A
visualization of a maximal clique is found on Figure 5.1
Figure 5.1: Visualization of maximal cliques.
The nodes in a maximal clique are seen as a failure-group as the nodes in the
cliques are adjacent to each other.
This could mean that they are close together
physically, which might mean they will all fail simultaneously in the event of power
outages or natural disasters.
The complexity of the Bron-kerbosch algorithm is in O(n2 log n)
5.1.0.2
Initialization
Before we allocate the Fog Nodes in the DDS we set up some shortcuts in order to
optimize the algorithm. The grouping of G functions as a divide and conquer tactic
which decreases the amount of search iterations through the whole graph by iterating
sub-sets of G instead. Examples of this is demonstrated throughout this section.
We start by finding all the nodes’ storage-capacities S in the identified cliques.
The procedure is listed on Algorithm 1. The procedure runs in O(n2).
Algorithm 1 Find Storage Capacities
Require: A graph with a DDS Ga ∧a list of identified cliques L
1: Lc ←∅{List of storage-capabilities}
2: for cliques ∈L do
3:
for nodes ∈cliques do
4:
Sc ←current node
5:
CPSc ←’s storage-capacity
6:
CSc ←’s clique
7:
FindSc ∧CPSc ∈Ga
8:
(Sc, CPSc, CSc) →Lc {Adds the node’s storage-capacity to list}
9:
end for
10: end for
11: return Lc
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Allocation of Distributed Storage
39
The storage-capacities are used to calculate the whole storage-capacity sum of the
entire clique.
The purpose of doing this is to increase the chance of the storage-requirement
fitting in the clique. The sum of the cliques allows us to start from the clique with the
biggest storage-capacity and match it with the highest storage-requirement instead
of trying to allocate high storage-requirements in small cliques.
This is beneficial because if the local DSS has the capacity it is possible to store
the requirements in one group, which makes the latency to its members shorter. The
procedure is described in Algorithm. 2.
Algorithm 2 Find Clique Sum
Require: A graph with a DDS Ga AND a list Cc of the highest nodes in each clique
1: Tsc ←Total storage capacity
2: Ccs ←Capacity sum of cliques
3: Temp ←Temporary storage-capacity
4: Lc ←List of storage-capabilities
5: for nodes ∈Lc −1 do
6: Sc ←current node
7: CSc ←current clique
8: CPsc ←current storage capacity
9: nextcap ←Lc[i + 1]
10: Temp ←Temp + Csc
11: if nextcap! = CSc then
12:
(CSc, Tsc, Sc) →Ccs
13: end for
14: sort.Ccs {Sorts the list such that the biggest clique is first}
15: return Ccs
The Algorithm runs in O(N)
5.1.0.3
Allocation
The allocation algorithm starts by taking a node from the clique with the highest
storage-capacity and matches it with the highest storage requirement.
The algorithm tries to allocate the DDS by checking the node for the following
hard constraints:
• Node should have storage capacities
• Node should not contain any data
==PAGE:54==
40
5 Concept
• Node should have at least two neighbors—in order to ensure connectivity and
redundant disjoint routes in TSN communication.
The node should preferably (soft constraint) be in the same group as the searching
Fog Node, in order for the DDS to be placed in one local group. Only if none of the
neighbors are able to meet the constraints is the DDS allowed to be placed outside
of the group.
In such a case the node is assigned with the same ’cluster-ID’ as the other nodes
which are physically in the same cluster.
If the algorithm does not succeed in fulfilling the constraints or if the storage re-
quirement is bigger than the node, the algorithm picks the node’s neighbor and tries
again. A benefit of the maximal clique is that all the node’s neighbors should be in
the same clique.
When a storage-requirement is fulfilled it is popped from its FIFO queue. When
this is done, the algorithm is presented with a new storage-requirement.
The algorithm then moves on to the next clique (the second biggest).
The algorithm is given the name Allocate DDS and is listed as Algorithm 3. The
algorithm has the complexity O(n2).
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Placement of Parity Blocks
41
Algorithm 3 Allocate DSS
Require: Graph Ga ∧The cliques’ biggest nodes Ccs ∧sorted list of requirements R
1: Bn ←pop node from Ccs {biggest node in clique}
2: CBn ←Bn’s clique
3: CPBn ←Bc’s storage-capacity
4: CUBn ←Bc’s storage-usage
5: NnBn ←Bc’s neighbours
6: while R ̸= ∅do
7: if CPSc¬ ∧CUSc = 0 ∧NnSc ≥2 then
8:
Bn →Ga {Adds the data-block to graph}
9:
R −CUSc
10: else
11:
if R ̸= ∅then
12:
for N ∈Nn do
13:
CN ←N’s clique
14:
CUN ←N’s storage-usage
15:
NnN ←N’s neighbours
16:
if CN = CBn ∧CUN ̸= 0 ∧NnN ≥2 then
17:
N →Ga {Adds the data-block to graph}
18:
R −CUSc
19:
else
20:
if CN ̸= CBn ∧CUN ̸= 0 ∧NnN ≥2 then
21:
N →Ga {Adds the data-block to graph}
22:
R −CUSc
23:
end for
24:
end if
25:
end if
26:
end if
27: end while
5.2
Placement of Parity Blocks
In this section the algorithms behind the replication strategy as explained in Section
4.2.2.2 are explained and reasoned.
As input we get:
• An undirected graph G representing a network topology
• An allocated DDS grouped in maximal cliques.
==PAGE:56==
42
5 Concept
5.2.1
Replication placement algorithm
We present another constrictive heuristic algorithm for parity placement, which like
the algorithm explained in Section 5.1 should be seen as nothing more than a ’good
guess’ on where to store the parity-blocks.
Firstly the algorithm takes the list of cliques found by the Allocate DDS algorithm
explained in Section 5.1 and sorts them, in such a way that the clique with the highest
storage-capacity is first in FIFO order. The list works as a queue.
Because a parity-block needs to have the same or more storage-capacity than the
data-block it replicates, it is important that the parity block has the capacity to
replicate the Fog Node with the highest storage-capacity in order to function.
The algorithm finds the node by popping the clique with the highest storage
capacity. The node with the highest storage-capacity is then found by iterating and
comparing all the nodes within the clique.
This example again shows how the grouping of the graph works as a divide and
conquer tactic.
Algorithm 4 Find Biggest Node in Each Clique
Require: A list S of the data-blocks Allocated in DDS
1: Cc ←∅{list of highest nodes}
2: for data-blocks ∈S do
3:
Sc ←current data-block
4:
Sn ←next data-block
5:
for nodes ∈data-block do
6:
if Sc ̸= Sn then
7:
Cc ←Sc’s clique
8:
Cn ←Sn’s clique
9:
if Cc == Cn then
10:
if Sn == highest node seen then
11:
Hn ←higgest node
12:
(Cc, Hn) →Cc
13:
end for
14: end for
15: remove duplicates in Cc
16: return Cc
Place Group-block
In order to place the group block, the algorithm takes the
node with the highest storage-capacity in the clique and makes a Breath-First-Search
until it finds a node which fulfills the following hard constraints:
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Placement of Parity Blocks
43
• Parity is not in the same cluster
• Parity is (preferably) in a cluster (soft constraint)
• Parity has a capacity higher than the biggest node in replicated cluster
• Parity has at least two neighbors—in order to achieve disjoint redundant routes
in the TSN communication.
The benefit of using a Breath-First-Search is that it finds the first occurring neigh-
boring clique. When it is found it is possible for the algorithm to find the shortest
path between the two neighboring cliques.
Hence, the result of this is preferably that the group-block is placed in the neigh-
boring clique (measured by the amount of nodes between).
The reason why the algorithm checks if the node has two neighbors is to ensure
the connectivity of the allocated node. If the group-block is placed at the edge of a
network and is only connected to the rest of the network by one link, the group-block
is more likely to be unavailable.
The Algorithm 5 listed has the complexity O(n2).
Algorithm 5 Place Group-blocks
Require: A graph with a DDS Ga AND a list Cc of the highest nodes in each clique
1: Rb ←∅
2: while Cc ̸= ∅do
3: Sc ←pop node from Cc
4: Perform Breath-First-Search with Sc as root node
5: for nodes ∈BFS do
6: N ←current node in BFS search
7: Cn ←N’s cluster
8: Cs ←Sc’s clutser
9: CPs ←Sc’s storage-capacity
10: CPn ←N’s storage-capacity
11: CUs ←Sc’s storage-usage
12: Nn ←Sc’s neighbours
13: if Cn ̸= Cs ∧Cn ̸= ∅∧CPs ≥CPn ∧CUs ̸= ∧Nn ≥2 then
14: (Sn, Cs, Cn) →Rb {Adds the Group-block for clique Cs ∈Sn}
15: CONTINUE
16: return Rb
==PAGE:58==
44
5 Concept
Place Sub-group block
When all the nodes have been popped from the list, each
group has a group-block allocated in a neighboring cluster. In order to place a sub-
group block, we need to find the group-blocks’ neighboring groups.
By iterating a list of group-blocks and performing Djikstra’s shortest path algo-
rithm from all group-blocks to all group-blocks it is possible to find pair of neighbors
with the lowest latencies to each other.
The subgroup-block, which is able to restore Fog Nodes from two groups, is placed
by taking the pair of neighboring redundant-blocks and making a breath-first search
from one of the redundant-blocks until it finds a node which fulfills the same con-
straints as those mentioned in the group-block placement.
Algorithm 6 Find Neighbour Clique
Require: A graph with a DDS Ga ∧a list Rb of group-blocks for each clique
1: Nn ←∅{list of neighbours}
2: Ln ←∅{list of latencies}
3: Ll ←∞{lowest latency}
4: for blocks ∈Rb(−1) do
5:
Sc ←current group-block
6:
Cs ←Sc’s clique
7:
for blocks ∈Rb do
8:
N ←next group-block
9:
Cn ←N’s clique
10:
if Cn ̸= Cs then
11:
Ls ←shortest path between N ∧Sc
12:
if Ls ≤Ll then
13:
Ll ←Ls
14:
(Ll, N, Sc) →Ln {Adds the latency between the two nodes}
15:
else if Ls ≥Ll then
16:
CONTINUE
17:
end for
18: end for
19: Iterate list Lnfor the neighbours with lowerst latency →Nn
20: Remove duplicates in Nn
21: return Nn {List of pair of neighbouring cliques}
However, the subgroup placement is only executed if a group contains more than
three data-block nodes. This is done because the group-block is able to recover one
and the global-block is able to recover one as well, leaving the sub-group with no
purpose.
The algorithm 7 listed has the complexity O(n2).
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Placement of Parity Blocks
45
Algorithm 7 Place Sub-group blocks
Require: Ga ∧Rb ∧Nn ∧S
1: P ←¬ {Boolean}
2: Sgb ←∅{list of sub-group-blocks}
3: while P¬ do
4: Sn ←pop pair of neighbours from Nn
5: S1 ←One of the neighbours from N
6: Cn ←Number of nodes in N1’s clique
7: if Cn ≥3 then
8: Perform Breath-First-Search with S1 as root node
9: for nodes ∈BFS do
10:
N ←current node in BFS search
11:
CN ←N’s clique
12:
CS1 ←S1’s clique
13:
CPS1 ←S1’s storage-capacity
14:
CPN ←N’s storage-capacity
15:
CUS1 ←S1’s storage-usage
16:
NN ←S1’s neighbours
17:
if CN ̸= CS1 ∧CS1 ̸= ∅∧CPS1 ≥CPS1 ∧CUS1¬ ∧Nn ≥2 then
18:
CS2 ←S2’s clique
19:
(N, CS1,CS2) →Sgb {Adds the sub-group-block for clique CPS1 ∧CPS2 →
N}
20: end for
21: return Sgb
Place Global-block
The placement of the global-block algorithm finds the Fog
Node in the network with the highest storage-capacity. It then finds the center and
tries to place the global-block, based on the same constraints listed in the group-block
section.
The algorithm 8 listed has the complexity O(n).
The reconstruction bandwidth and the ratio of parity-blocks is further discussed
in Section 7.1.
==PAGE:60==
46
5 Concept
Algorithm 8 Place Global-group blocks
Require: Ga ∧Rb ∧Cc
Gb ←list of global blocks
max(Cc) →MaxCc {Biggest data-block in graph}
Gcomponent ←Giant component of Ga
Gc ←Finding center of Ga
while P ←¬ do
Cap ←Gc’s storage-capacity
Cpl ←Boolean - Is Gc node vacant
NN ←Gc’s neighbours
if Cap ≥Cc ∧Cpl ∧NN ≥2 then
(Gc) →Gb
else
if then
Pick NN’s neigbour and try again
end if
end if
5.3
Optimization
The previously described constructive heuristic algorithms should be seen as a good
guess on how to allocate the DDS and its parity-blocks.
Multiple actions have been taken in the design of the algorithms to ensure that
the latency between data-blocks and parity-blocks is low.
The grouping of nodes in cliques ensures that the DDS is allocated on nodes close
to each other. Djikstra’s shortest path is used to compare and find a pair of neigh-
boring clusters with the smallest latency. The breath-first-search is used in order to
search for the shortest path to a cluster which meets the constraints for placing parity
blocks.
Despite these actions, it is still possible to minimize the latency between nodes.
This is due to the huge amount of possible data and parity-block placement combi-
nations and because of the relatively big amount of constraints which the blocks has
to meet in order to be allocated.
It is interesting to ensure that the latency between the nodes in a local DDS
and its parity-blocks is as low as possible. In order to ensure this, we introduce two
simulated annealing algorithms—one for optimizing the allocation of the DDS and
one for optimizing the placement of the parity-blocks.
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Optimization
47
Simulated Annealing
Simulated annealing is a heuristic local search algorithm
that performs sudden transitions leading to worse solutions. The reason for this is to
ensure that the search is not stuck in a local optima. [Ski08]
Simulated annealing is among the best known local search algorithms. It performs
quite well and is widely applicable. [Ken05] Simulated Annealing is an analogy of the
physical process of cooling molten materials down into solid state.
The processing consist of the following two steps:
• Increase the temperature of the heat to a maximum value at which the solid
melts. [Ken05]
• Carefully decrease the temperature of the heat bath until the particles arrange
themselves in the ground state of the solid. [Ken05]
In the liquid phase the particles organize randomly, but in the ground state of
the solid the particles organizes immensely structured. In order to reach the ground
state the maximum value of the temperature has to be adequately high and cooling
should be decreased slowly. [Ken05]
The algorithm includes a representation of the solution space, which in this case
is the initial solution generated by the constructive heuristic algorithms explained
earlier in this section.
The algorithm also includes a cost function which measures the fitness of the
solution and a cooling schedule which controls the probability of accepting a bad
transition as a function of time. [Ski08]
Each search starts by using randomness to widely explore the search space; this
means that the acceptance probability of accepting bad transitions should be high. As
the process continues the algorithms narrow the transitions to accept improvements
instead.
In this thesis we use the Boltzmann acceptance 5.1 criterion, which formulates the
probability of transitions from a high-energy state to a lower energy state; however,
there is a nonzero probability of accepting transitions into a high-energy state. The
higher the temperature, the higher the chances of energy jumps. [Ski08]
a = eCnew −Cold
Temp
(5.1)
The simulated annealing algorithm used in this thesis is found on Algorithm 9.
==PAGE:62==
48
5 Concept
Algorithm 9 Optimize DDS placement (Simulated Annealing)
Require: A graph with a DDS Ga ∧a list of allocated nodes (solution) S
1: T ←Start Temperature
2: Tmin ←Stop temperature
3: α ←Cooling schedule {Despends on the implementation}
4: i ←Iterator
5: while i < Length do
6:
Newsol ←Neigbour(){See Algortihm XX}
7:
newcost ←Cost(){See Algortihm XX}
8:
ap ←acceptance probability { e.g. Boltzmann criterion}
9:
if ap > random then
10:
Oldsol ←Newsol
11:
oldcost ←newcost
12:
end if
13:
i + 1
14:
T ←T ∗α
15:
return Oldsol
16: end while
5.3.0.1
Optimizing Allocation of DDS
In the following section we describe the simulated annealing algorithm for optimizing
the allocation of the DDS.
New solution
The SA searches for the best solution, by generating an initial so-
lution. This means that it runs the Allocate DDS algorithm presented in Section
5.1.0.3 and makes small random changes in the solution. If the new solution is better
than the current one, it moves to it.
The new solution is made by picking a random node in the current solution and
thereafter picking a random neighbor to that node. If the node fulfills the allocation
constraints mentioned in Section 5.1.0.3 it is placed and a new solution is generated.
The procedure is listed in Algorithm 10 and has the complexity O(n2).
Cost / Objective Function
The simulated annealing judges the new solution by
calculating the cost. The cost in this case is the overall latency between all the placed
data-blocks in the network topology.
The cost is derived by iterating a list of the allocated data-blocks.
The procedure takes a node in the solution and searches for other nodes in the
same clique. When it finds one it uses Djikstra’s shortest path algorithm to find the
latency—the number of nodes between the two nodes. It does that for every node
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Optimization
49
Algorithm 10 Neighbour
Require: Ga ∧Oldsol
1: Oldsol →Newsol
2: while Node ¬placed do
3: Np ←Pick random node from Newsol
4: Nn ←Pick a random neighbour from Np
5: CPNp ←Np’s storage-capacity
6: CPNn ←Nn’s storage-capacity
7: CUNn ←Nn’s storage-usage
8: NN ←S1’s neighbours
9: if CPNp ≥CPNn∧CUNn = ∅∧NN ≥2 then
10:
Nn →Newsol
11:
Remove Np from {Switch N′
ps place withNn}
12: end if
13: return Newsol
with the same ’clique-ID’, meaning that they are not necessarily in the same physical
clique but might be associated with the same local DDS.
When all nodes with the same ’clique-ID’ have been measured the sum of all the
latencies between the nodes is calculated.
Then the algorithm iterates the next clique, until all cliques have been searched
through.
At the end it takes the sum of all latencies between the nodes.
This overall latency sum is what the simulated annealing uses to compare the new
solution with the old one.
We are aware that there exist more optimal ways of solving this objective function,
e.g. by considering the cost function as a path-finding problem. This is discussed in
Section 7.3
The algorithm 11 has the complexity O(n2 log n).
==PAGE:64==
50
5 Concept
Algorithm 11 Cost
Require: Ga ∧Oldsol
1: L ←∅{List of latency between nodes}
2: for nodes ∈Oldsol −1 do
3:
Sc ←current node
4:
Sn ←next node
5:
for nodes ∈Oldsol do
6:
St ←Target
7:
if Sc ̸= Sn ∧St ̸= Sc then
8:
Cs ←Sc’s clique
9:
Ct ←Sc’s clique
10:
if Cs = Ct then
11:
Ls ←shortest path between Sc ∧Sn
12:
(Ls) →L {Adds the latency between the two nodes}
13:
CONTINUE
14:
end for
15: end for
16: Cost ←sum(L)
17: return Cost {Overall latency between all nodes in the DDS}
5.3.0.2
Optimizing the parity-block placement
As mentioned, a simulated annealing for the parity-block placement has also been
developed.
New solution
This method is quite similar to the previously described new solution
method in Section 5.3.0.1.
The difference is that in this algorithm the new solution is generated by moving
to a random parity-block’s random neighbor instead of a data-block.
Because of the similarity the algorithm is not listed here. It has the complexity
O(n).
Cost / Objective Function
The cost method uses in general the same way of
measuring the overall latency sum of the nodes as seen in the previously described
cost method in Section 5.3.0.1.
However, in order to calculate the sum of the overall latency of the parity-blocks
the algorithm first has to iterate a list of the group-blocks and perform a Breath-First-
Search in order to find its neighboring group-block. When a neighboring group-block
is found, Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm is run in order to find the latency between
the two neighbors.
This is done until all group-blocks in the list have been searched through.
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Optimization
51
The measurement of the sub-groups is done in the exact same way.
When all the parity-blocks have been searched through, the latencies are summed
in order to achieve the overall latency of the parity blocks.
Because of the simularity of the two objective functions the algortihm is not listed
here. It has the complexity O(n2 log n).
==PAGE:66==
52
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 6
Experimental
Evaluation
In this chapter we evaluate the algorithms presented in Section 5. First we explain
the implementation details. After that we run the algorithms in different test-cases
in order to prove the hypothesis stated in Section 4.
All test cases was run on a ThinkPad T420 suited with an Intel i5-2540M dualcore
processor and 8 GB ram. The machine runs a lightweight distribution of Linux, with
only necessary processes running in the background. The machine is from 2011 which
means it is relatively old. However, this is argued to be beneficial as Fog Nodes might
not have the same computational resources as new computational heavy computers.
6.1
Implementation
The test cases are implemented in Python. We are aware that the implementation
could have been done more effectively in another more low level programming lan-
guage. However, the reason for choosing Python was primarily because of its effective
and well-documented graph library NetworkX.
Because of the limited memory and computational resources of the computer on
which the test cases are conducted and of the Fog Nodes, the implementation has
prioritized resources over performance. This is done as we assume that the CA Fog-
Node running the algorithms has multiple processes running in parallel and in order
for the parallel processes not to be interrupted by a reconfiguration of replication
placement.
This is done by deriving all allocated data-blocks and parity blocks in lists instead
of iterating and duplicating the whole network topology graph. Hence, this is also
done out of concern for scalability.
The implementation is thought to be run on an actual CA Fog Node, hence we
assume that the CA has knowledge of all nodes and their relationship as well as their
storage-capabilities.
==PAGE:68==
54
6 Experimental Evaluation
6.2
Test Cases
The results focus on two different network topologies—a connected caveman graph
and Erdős–Rényi graph, which both represent realistic network topologies. We will
test the topologies in different settings, manipulating the amount of members in a
caveman clique and the amount of edges created in the Erdős–Rényi .
All the tests, besides the Simulated Annealing cases, are based on random gener-
ated network topologies where nodes have a random storage-capacity attribute rang-
ing from 1 to 3.
The choice of network topology is chosen because of the topologies often being
used to represent networks. However, the two graphs have significantly different char-
acteristics. The connected caveman graph is already grouped, meaning that it might
be easier to find cliques in this setup. The Erdős–Rényi is dependent on the edge
creation probability, denser and randomly created, meaning that finding meaningful
cliques might be a harder task.
Connected-caveman w. 180 nodes and membership 
of 6 
Erdős-Rényi w. 100 nodes and edge creation prob. Se
0.04% 
Figure 6.1: A visualization of the two topologies.
In order to test storage-overhead of the allocation, both the amount of occupied
nodes used for parity-blocks and the amount of actual storage-usage is measured.
The way this is tested is by adding more storage-requirements to the allocation.
Because of the possibility of a storage-requirement of 1 to occupy a node with a
storage-capability of 3, leaving a storage overhead 2, there is a reason to believe
==PAGE:69==
6.3 Allocation
55
that the storage usage will grow as the amounts of storage-requirements increases. It
should be noted that the storage-usage measured includes this storage overhead.
The growth of elements of storage-requirements is done in intervals of 5 and looks
like the following;
Storage requirements = (1,4,5,10,4,6,3,10,4,8,7,20,4,6,10,4,6,8,14,5, 12,3,8,10,1,3,5,15,5,8,
5,1,9,16,2,5,8,17,4,25, 5,7,14,6,1,6,1,30,4,2,5,40,5,10,3)
To achieve quantification of the results the test-cases has been run 20 times. This
is done to calculate an acceptable average.
This is relevant because we run the test-cases on random graphs, hence the results
from one test-case can diverge from the next case. In order to get an acceptable
average, we need to run a significant number of cases.
To clarify the randomness in the results, box-plot and scatter diagrams of the
results are presented.
The problems with making test-cases in this setting include that most of the algo-
rithms are in O(N 2), meaning the execution times grow exponentially. Hence, testing
the scalability and the storage overhead in large topologies might be a challenge due
to the limited computational resources of the test hardware.
6.3
Allocation
In this section the Allocate DDS algorithm explained in Section 5.1 is tested and
evaluated.
Firstly it is interesting to test how the algorithm scales, in order to evaluate
if reconfiguration of the network’s DDS allocation can be done in acceptable time
frames.
Secondly it is interesting to test how much storage overhead the allocated DDS
engenders. This question is important because it gives us a hint about how much
storage is wasted on the allocation and if there is reason for optimizing the placement
of the DDS
Besides this, the grouping efficiency is also tested. The algorithm’s ability to make
meaning-full groupings of the nodes on the two different topologies is essential for the
network to meet the requirement of partition and failure-group failures.
Scaling
In order to test the scaling of the algorithm we run it on different sizes of
graphs on both topologies and measure how long it takes.
The first test is run on the connected-caveman topology, with a membership of 5
nodes in each clique. We start with a graph with 300 nodes and end with a graph
with 2000 nodes.
==PAGE:70==
56
6 Experimental Evaluation
The second test is run on the Erdős–Rényi topology, tested with a probability of
edge creation 0.04%. The interval runs from 300 to 2000 nodes.
Figure 6.2: Allocation of DSS scalability.
On Figure 6.2 we see the results of the two topologies. It is clear that the execu-
tion time increases exponentially with the amount of nodes in the graph. The reason
for this is the maximal clique finding algorithm.
Besides this, Figure 6.2 also demonstrates that the time consumption for allocation
of DDS in the Erdős–Rényi topology is 2.7X higher than on the connected-caveman
topology.
The reason for this might may be the fact that the connected-caveman topology is
almost arranged in cliques, while the edges in the Erdős–Rényi topology are randomly
pointing to nodes, leaving the maximal clique algorithm with a more complex task.
The exponential time increasing can be a problem. Looking at the two last steps
it is clear that 136.07 seconds might too long for the CA to calculate a new recon-
figuration of the replica placement. This problem regarding scalability is discussed
further in Section 7.2
Storage Overhead
The nodes in the graphs have random storage capabilities,
going from 1 to 3. Hence, there will be situations where a storage-requirement will
occupy the whole node without filling its storage capacity. E.g. a storage-requirement
of 1 could potentially occupy a node with the storage-capacity of 3, leaving a storage
==PAGE:71==
6.3 Allocation
57
overhead of 2. In this test-case we investigate how much this aspect impacts the
storage overhead.
We do this by starting with 10 requirements and continuously running the algo-
rithm until we hit 55 requirements. This test-case will show how much the storage
overhead increases as we scale the amount of nodes which have to be allocated.
The test-case is run on both connected-caveman and Erdős–Rényi graph contain-
ing 500 nodes.
The result is based the 55 requirements listed above:
Storage requirements = (1,4,5,10,4,6,3,10,4,8,7,20,4,6,10,4,6,8,14,5, 12,3,8,10,1,3,5,15,5,8,
5,1,9,16,2,5,8,17,4,25, 5,7,14,6,1,6,1,30,4,2,5,40,5,10,3)
Figure 6.3: Visualization of the difference between the storage-requirements and the
actual allocated storage-usage.
Figure 6.4: Visualization of the difference in percentage.
==PAGE:72==
58
6 Experimental Evaluation
Figure 6.3 and 6.4 demonstrates the storage-overhead. That the storage-overhead
varies from 8.2% to 11.4%. It is clear, that the amount of storage-requirements is not
connected to the storage-overhead. In contrary it is seen that the storage-overhead is
decreasing as the number of storage-requirements increases. However it is clear that
the storage-overhead of 8.2% could be improved.
Grouping
Using the storage requirements presented in Section 6.2 forces the algo-
rithm to put requirements in a clique.
The test-case is conducted by comparing the two topologies. With the connected
caveman topology we adjust the amounts of memberships in a clique in order to force
the algorithm to allocate nodes of a given group outside a failure group.
Afterwards we test the algorithm on an Erdős–Rényi topology, where we adjust
the probabilities of edge creation. In the Erdős–Rényi topology the nodes are not
placed in memberships, hence it is harder for the algorithm to find clear failure
groups. Increasing the probability of edges makes the graph denser.
Figure 6.5: Data-blocks allocated in groups.
Figure 6.3 makes it clear that the structure of the connected-caveman topology
makes the allocation of DSS in failure-groups easier for the algorithm. Looking at the
Erdős–Rényi topology it is clear that grouping becomes harder as the graph turns
==PAGE:73==
6.4 Parity placement
59
dense.
The result was expected and it is important to mention that the DDS is still
allocated in the graph and the use of Pyramid Codes still tolerates the same arbitrary
failures as the amount of available parity-blocks.
However, the objective of tolerating whole failure-groups is not met, though we
argue that failure-groups do not exist to the same extent on these kind of topologies.
This problem is discussed further in the Future Work Section 8.1, where it is
stated that some Fog Nodes consist of multiple computers in the same chassis. These
architectures are interesting because a chassis has the characteristics of a failure-
group.
6.4
Parity placement
In this section the Parity Placement Algorithm explained in Section 4.2.2.2 is tested
and evaluated.
First the scalability of the algorithm is tested, in order to determine if the algo-
rithm provides acceptable time frames for reconfiguration of the placement.
Afterwards, we compare the storage overhead of the parity scheme with the tradi-
tional replication schemes. This is done in order to prove that the parity placement
scheme presented in this thesis is more efficient than previous methods.
6.4.1
Scaling
The scalability of the algorithm is again tested by running it on different sizes of
graphs on both topologies and measures how long it takes. The first test is run on
the connected-caveman topology, with a membership of 5 nodes in each clique. We
start with a graph with 300 nodes and end with a graph with 2000 nodes.
The second test is run on the Erdős–Rényi topology, tested with a probability of
edge creation 0.04%. The interval runs from 300 to 2000 nodes.
Looking at Figure 6.6 it is again seen that the algorithm’s execution time increases
exponentially.
However, in contrary to the Allocation DDS algorithm the Erdős–
Rényi topology now seems to be 6.5X faster than the connected-caveman topology.
The reason behind this might be found in the global-block placement algorithm.
The global-block should be placed in the center of the graph and this seems to be a
less complex task on the Erdős–Rényi topology.
This result might not meet acceptable timing constraints for reconfiguration of
new parity blocks in a real-time system.
==PAGE:74==
60
6 Experimental Evaluation
Figure 6.6: Scalability of a connected-caveman and Erdős–Rényi graph containing
300 nodes.
6.4.2
Storage Overhead
In Section 1 it is argued that common replication mechanisms occupy whole physical
nodes, which might never be used. Hence, an objective in this thesis is to minimize
the amounts of occupied nodes. In that regard, we start by testing the concentration
of occupied data blocks and parity blocks. The concentration of parity blocks is pre-
ferred to be as low as possible, as it means fewer occupied replication nodes.
Based on a connected-caveman topology the storage overhead is considered by
measuring the amount of nodes occupied for replication.
This is tested on a connected-caveman graph containing 700 nodes and with 8
nodes per membership. We change the storage-requirement starting with 5 require-
ments and continuously running the algorithm until we hit 20 requirements.
Looking at Figure 6.9 we clarify the percentage gap between data-blocks and
parity-blocks. We wish the gap to be as high as possible, because it means that the
amount of storage used to ensure tolerance in the network is low.
The figure shows that with a storage-requirement of 5 the difference is 13,7% and
ends up on 47,3% on 20 storage-requirements. In combination with the demonstra-
tion at Figure 6.8 it is clear that the storage overhead gets lower as more storage-
requirements are covered.
==PAGE:75==
6.4 Parity placement
61
Figure 6.7: Boxplots of the results.
Figure 6.8: The share of data blocks and parity blocks.
The reason for this should be found in the Global-block, which is placed in the
middle of the network.
The role of the Global parity-block is discussed further in Section 7.1.
The previous test saw storage overhead in the way of physical nodes occupied. It
is also interesting to measure the storage overhead in the amount of storage-usage
consumed, because as mentioned in Section 6.3 there is a chance that a storage-
requirement of e.g. 1 could occupy a node with the storage-capacity of 3, leaving a
storage overhead of 2.
Looking at Figure 6.11 and Figure 6.12 we can see that with a storage-requirement
of 5 elements, the storage-usage of the parity blocks is higher than the actual data it
replicates.
This concludes that in order for the replication strategy presented in this thesis to
be advantageous, the size of the system should have a given size. In this case we need
a system which can cope with 15 storage-requirements in order to get a significant
advantage.
==PAGE:76==
62
6 Experimental Evaluation
Figure 6.9: The percentage difference between data blocks and parity blocks.
Figure 6.10: Boxplot of the data-block and parity-block storage-usage.
In other words, the bigger the topology, the lower the storage overhead.
Comparison
In Section 5 it is argued that the replication strategy presented in
this thesis offers lower storage overheads than common replication schemes such as
the rack-aware 1:1 replica scheme and the traditional 3-replication scheme. Hence we
compare the three schemes.
We start by comparing the amount of nodes they occupy.
It should be noted that an extra global-block is inserted in the parity scheme
in order to ensure tolerance of whole failure-groups. The ratio between sub-group
blocks and global blocks is a trade-off between storage overhead and reconstruction
bandwidth. This is further discussed in Section 7.1.
Figure 6.14 shows the comparison of the three replication schemes. It is seen that
the parity scheme starts out by almost the same ratio of blocks allocated for replica-
tion as the 1:1 scheme. However, it is seen, as pointed out earlier, that the parity
==PAGE:77==
6.4 Parity placement
63
Figure 6.11: Amount of storage used on data blocks and parity blocks.
Figure 6.12: The percentage difference between data blocks and parity blocks.
scheme has a lower storage-usage as the storage-requirements scales.
In Figure 6.15 is the ratio between data-blocks and parity-blocks found. Here it
is shown that the 3-replication scheme offers a 200% storage overhead of the data-
blocks, while the 1:1 scheme offers 100%. Meanwhile we see that the parity scheme
starts out by offering a 86.7% but ends with a much lower overhead at 53,3%.
This leaves the Parity scheme superior to the 1:1 scheme by 46.68%.
Figure 6.16 shows a comparison of the storage-usage between the three replication
schemes.
Looking at the previous test-cases which compare the replication schemes, it is
clearly demonstrated how the storage overhead is optimized compared to the tradi-
tional replication schemes when we scale the storage-requirements.
The results of the 1:1 scheme is calculated based on the assumption that a data-
block require a whole node for replication, such that the amount of replications are
the same as the number of data-blocks.
The results of the 3-replication scheme was calculated based on the assumption
that a data-block require two replications. This means that for every data-block there
==PAGE:78==
64
6 Experimental Evaluation
Figure 6.13: Comparison of three replication schemes storage-usage.
Figure 6.14: Comparison of three replication schemes regarding occupied nodes.
are two replications.
It should be noted that the comparisons are for the traditional schemes advantage
as the calculation does not consider if the occupied node has a bigger storage-capacity
as the node it replicates. This leaves the schemes more effective than they might be
in real use.
==PAGE:79==
6.5 Latency
65
Figure 6.15: The percentage difference between data blocks and parity blocks.
Figure 6.16: Comparison of three replication schemes storage-usage.
6.5
Latency
An objective for this thesis is to minimize the latency between the local failure-group
and its corresponding parity blocks.
As mentioned in Section 5.3, multiple actions have been taken in the design of the
algorithms in order to ensure that the latency between data-blocks and parity-blocks
is low. However, because of the amount of combinations and the set of constraints
which has to be met, the two algorithms Allocate DSS and Place parity should only
be seen as a way of achieving good guesses.
Hence, we want to test the Simulated Annealing algorithm presented in Section
5.3 to see if it is able to find a better solution.
We are interested in understanding how much the latency can be reduced by the
algorithm. In order to test this we run the Simulated Annealing on the two topologies
connected-caveman and Erdős–Rényi.
==PAGE:80==
66
6 Experimental Evaluation
Figure 6.17: Comparison of three replication schemes storage-usage.
Figure 6.18: Three examples of the Simulated Annealing progress on a connected-
caveman topology.
Figure 6.25 demonstrates how the simulated annealing algorithms works. It is
clear that the algorithm is able to minimize the latency of the DSS blocks. In the
following we test more concretely how much it is able to minimize the latency, and
by adjusting the simulated annealing’s cooling schedules, we test how to optimize the
algorithms.
In order to determine how the changing of parameters in the cooling schedule
affects the performance of the algorithm, we test the exponential, logarithmic, linear
and linear-exponential hybrid schedules.
As mentioned in the beginning of this chapter the test-cases are run 20 times in
order to achieve quantification of the results. This is necessary in simulated anneal-
ing as it is classed as a Monte Carlo optimization algorithm, where improvements are
achieved by performing random changes in the data.
To achieve a consistent simulation environment, we use the same graph at each
test-case. A connected-caveman topology containing 300 nodes. We use the same
==PAGE:81==
6.5 Latency
67
graph in order to get some consistency in the results; this is necessary because of the
random nature of the simulated annealing.
6.5.1
Cooling Schedules
The temperature parameter is crucial in simulated annealing. It impacts when we
want to reach the final solution and how much computation we need to get there.
In this test-case we test the following cooling schedules: exponential, logarithmic,
linear and adaptive are individually simulated and then compared to one another to
determine which cooling strategy performs the best optimization.
Exponential schedule
This test-case uses the often used implementation of the
exponential schedule. In this implementation a temperature factor contains a value
between 0 and 1, for which the temperature will decrease in the next iteration. The
greater the factor is specified, the bigger is the number of temperatures to explore.
Hence, a greater temperature factor results in longer execution time where the num-
ber of searches are increased.
Figure 6.19: Exponential schedule.
In this test-case, the cooling ratio was varied from the default value of 0.9 down
to 0.1 in intervals of 0.2.
==PAGE:82==
68
6 Experimental Evaluation
Figure 6.20: Results from the exponential schedule.
Logarithmic schedule
The next schedule is described in Geman et. al [GG84].
An implementation of the logarithmic schedule can be found at A.1
d is set to one and c is greater than or equal to the largest energy barrier in the
problem. This method is effective to find the global minimum of an objective function
but in the limit of infinite time. [Vig11]
Figure 6.21: Logarithmic schedules.
The problem with the logarithmic schedule is typically its slow temperature de-
crease. When using the logarithmic schedule it is important to set a variable which
limits of the number iterations of simulated annealing. As seen in Figure 6.25 the
schedule seems to freeze after 75-100 iterations.
==PAGE:83==
6.5 Latency
69
Figure 6.22: Logarithmic schedules.
Linear schedule
Different from the exponential and logarithm schedule, the linear
scheduling decreases the temperature by a linear constant through the iterations.
Figure 6.23: Linear cooling schedule.
In this test-case we manipulate the linear constant. Going from 0,0000025 to 0,25.
==PAGE:84==
70
6 Experimental Evaluation
Figure 6.24: Linear schedules.
Adaptive schedule
The adaptive cooling schedule has a lot of the same charac-
teristics as the exponential schedule. However the adaptive schedule’s cooling ratio
increases through the iterations. This adaptive function is implemented by breaking
down the temperatures of the schedule in three steps, with a correlated cooling ratio.
We test three steps with the following parameters.
A example of implementation of the schedule can be found in Appendix A.1
Figure 6.25: Adaptive schedule.
==PAGE:85==
6.5 Latency
71
Figure 6.26: The results of manipulating the cooling ratio in the adaptive schedule.
Best schedules
By the conduction of this test-case, every cooling schedule was
able to achieve the cost of 140. However it is seen in Figure 6.27 and 6.20 that an
exponential cooling ratio at 0,5 and a C value at 0.5 results in low averages.
However it can be hard to argue which cooling schedule is better at finding a more
optimal solution.
Hence, it was interesting to see which setup of cooling schedules gave the best
results, regarding numbers of iterations.
The best setup observed is the adaptive schedule, with the cooling ratio set to 0.5.
This has been proven to find the best solution of 140 on around 100 iterations. Most
of the schedules needed as least 200 iterations to find the cost of 140.
Figure 6.27: The adaptive schedule with parameter 0.5 is observed to be the most
optimal schedule.
==PAGE:86==
72
6 Experimental Evaluation
The test-case was run on 600 iterations, but with the linear-exponential adaptive
schedule we can run the annealing with 150 iterations. However, it is important to
note that the schedule does not get this result on every run.
The initial cost of these test-cases is 170 and the most optimal solution found is
140. Hence the simulated annealing is able to find solution resulting in an overall
latency reduction of 21%.
Precautions
There are a few precautions to take with these results.
As it is seen on Figure 6.20 and 6.22. The simulated annealing tends to not always
take the most optimal solution, even though it have explored it. The reason for this
is yet unknown, but it is important to note when looking at the results.
The random nature of the algorithm makes it hard to evaluate. As mentioned,
this test was made on the same graph. However, if we were to use it in a dynamic
environment the results would differ significantly, which makes it hard to deduce any
general rules about the algorithm and its progress.
The reader might have noticed that the results for the simulated annealing for
optimizing the parity placement are not included in this test-case.
The reason for this is because the implementation outputs unexpected results. It is
still unknown why we get these outputs. However, if the implementation was working
properly, the same test-cases presented in this section would have been conducted on
the algorithm.
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
In this section we aim to discuss and reason about choices made throughout this thesis.
Firstly the reasoning for not choosing a more modern erasure-coding approach called
Local Recontruction Codes (LRC) is discussed. Secondly the performance regarding
scalability is discussed - we propose an alternative and distributed approach to replica
placement. Lastly we reason about the algorithms chosen in this thesis.
7.1
LRC and Pyramid Codes
Local Reconstruction Codes (LRC) are the erasure codes used in Window Azure
Storage. LRC should be seen as more modern approach to the use of erasure codes
in big storage-centers.
The concept of LRC is based on the same fundamental technology of calculated
parity-blocks as seen in Pyramid Codes described in Section 2.4.
Data-blocks might be offline for a few reasons and if there is an on-demand read
from a client to the data-blocks the LRC would read from the other data and parity-
blocks in order to dynamically reconstruct the requested data. [12]
LRC tries to optimize the time to reconstruct data-blocks for on-demand client
requests. LRC deals with the bottleneck problem that a reconstruction procedure
can only be as fast as the slowest storage node’s ability to send responses to reading
requests. [12]
The main difference between LRC and Pyramid Codes is the way of structuring the
parity-blocks. LRC divides the data-blocks into two equal size groups and computes
a local-parity for each group (A local is parity equal to the group-block in Pyramid
Codes) is computed from the three data-blocks in one group. In addition, it computes
a global-block per group from all the data fragments. Hence, the reconstruction of
any single data fragment requires only three fragments.
A demonstration of the LRC setup is found on Figure 7.1
Comparing the figure with the demonstration of Pyramid Codes found on Figure
2.8 Section 2.4.
==PAGE:88==
74
7 Discussion
Figure 7.1: A (6,2,2) LRC example.
The main difference between the two approaches is that pyramid codes use the
sub-group block; this results in a bigger amount of parity-blocks resulting in bigger
storage overhead, as the number of nodes occupied increases.
However, it is argued that because of the often geo-distributed nature of the Fog
Continuum the use of sub-group blocks are crucial, because it lowers the latency
between the failure-group and the parity-block.
We can also take this argument even further and only place global-blocks for re-
construction. This approach would drastically decrease the storage overhead because
we could place 5 global-blocks and tolerate up to 5 arbitrary failures, hence tolerating
failure-groups of up to 5 could fail simultaneously.
However, in a geo-distributed setting the spatial distance to a global-block can be
long, leaving the reconstruction with a potential huge latency which might not meet
the dependability requirements of Fog Computing. This also means that the recon-
struction uses more bandwidth and reads as the global block needs data fragments
from all nodes in the network in order to restore the failed data-block.
Hence, the global-block setup could be used in small local networks, where the
number of switches between the global-block and the data-blocks does not result in
significant latencies.
The use of a global-block only setup could also be relevant in a more homoge-
neous setup, where all nodes in the Fog Continuum consist of industrial PCs with
low failure-probabilities and which rarely have to make update restarts.
This is the argument for the use of sub-group-blocks in Fog Computing and the
reason why this thesis points at Pyramid Codes as the most suitable erasure coding
scheme.
With Pyramid Codes the use of the global-blocks is avoided instead of sought.
The hierarchical nature of the scheme reduces the possibility of the global-block’s
relevance. Inserting both the group and sub-group-block reduces the possibility of
the global-block’s relevance, because the likelihood of three simultaneous arbitrary
failure is lower than two.
This is relevant in a heterogeneous Fog Continuum where the failure-probabilities
of the Fog Nodes vary, from everything from industrial PC’s to commodity hardware
==PAGE:89==
7.2 Scalability
75
It is crucial to mention that a Fog Node does not necessarily need to be perma-
nently failed; it can be restarting due to a software update or a data-block can run hot.
It is important to mention that the parity placement algorithm is easily modi-
fied to LRC. By skipping the sub-group-block placement and instead changing the
constraints on the group-block allocation algorithm to place a group-block for every
three nodes in a clique. It is also possible to modify the placement algorithm to a
global-block only setup.
These choices should be taken by a domain expert, when setting up the replication
strategy.
7.2
Scalability
Looking at the evaluation it is clear that the algorithm is more effective as it scales;
however, the evaluation also shows that scaling the algorithm is computationally
heavy because the execution time for the algorithms is exponential. As Fog Nodes
might not be suited for that heavy computation it is interesting to think about how
we can solve the scalability issue.
We argue that the concept and implementation presented in this thesis might be
sufficient in most systems, as the system only lacks one parity-block until the new
parity placement has been computed and the reconfiguration has been communicated
to all devices in the network.
This of course depends on the failure probabilities of the components in the net-
work, but the chances of e.g.
three arbitrary failures in the time-frame of 133.7
seconds as seen in Section 6.4.1 on a network topology consisting of 1000 nodes in-
tuitively seems highly unlikely. Even if a whole failure-group fails it seems unlikely
that a data-block would fail within the time-frame.
However, there might be safety-critical systems where this is not sufficient or there
might be large-scale real-time systems, where the placement of parity-blocks should
be done quickly. In a large-scale Fog Continuum with e.g. hundreds of thousands of
Fog Nodes, failures or temporary updates might happen quite often.
In these situations a Fully Centralized CA could potentially exhaust, because of
the huge amount of computations.
In that regard we present a brief concept, where the parity-placement algorithm
is run in a distributed and much more scalable manner.
==PAGE:90==
76
7 Discussion
7.2.1
Distributed Concept
We consider a Centralized Network / Distributed User Model CA, as presented in
Section 2.6, where the CNC component has complete knowledge about the streams
and the switches’ capabilities in the network.
Each clique elects a Node which takes the responsibility of being the CA a so
called ’mastermind’.
The CAs in the network will perform a genetic algorithm.
Without going into too much detail, a genetic algorithm is a search heuristic in-
spired by the theory of natural selection—’survival of the fittest’.
The algorithm
selects the fittest individuals, which are selected for reproduction of offspring in the
next generation [BBM93]
There are five phases in a genetic algorithm.
Initial population: This corresponds to the two constructive heuristic solutions,
Allocate DDS and Parity Placement, as presented in Section 5. In this case we con-
sider the outcome of the replication strategy, which is a list containing data and
parity-blocks. This list is called an individual. In the genetic algorithm we would run
the algorithms several times in order to get multiple individuals, called a population.
[BBM93]
Fitness function: The fitness function or objective function determines how fit
an individual is. It gives a fitness score to each individual. The probability that an
individual will be selected for reproduction is based on its fitness score.[[BBM93]
The fitness function corresponds to the cost function in the simulated annealing
algorithm, which optimizes the parity placement presented in Section 5.3.0.2.
Selection: In the selection phase the fittest individuals are chosen and they pass
their genes (the solution list) to the next generation.
Two pairs of individuals (should be seen as parents) are chosen based on their fit-
ness scores. Individuals with high fitness have a better probability of being selected
for reproduction. [BBM93]
Crossover and Mutation: The crossover phase is crucial in the genetic algo-
rithm, because it takes the best solutions (parents) and pairs their genes (Allocated
Blocks) by a randomly chosen crossover point. [BBM93]
The generated offspring can, by a low random probability, be inflicted by mutation,
where some of the Blocks in the solution are changed to a new location (A neighboring
node) [BBM93]
In this setup the genes of the solution are represented in a graph or, more con-
cretely, a list of nodes.
==PAGE:91==
7.2 Scalability
77
In order to apply crossover and mutation on a graph, the NEAT algorithm is
introduced. NEAT uses historical scoring linked to each gene in order to line up the
genes of two individuals during the crossover. [SM02]
Looking at Figure 7.3 each gene is represented in a square which represents a
connection between two nodes. The number shown at the top of a gene is the historical
scoring.
Figure 7.2: The NEAT algorithm performs a crossover on a graph.
7.2.1.1
Distributed genetic algorithm
The reason for choosing a genetic algorithm is the possibility to distribute the algo-
rithm to each Fog Node in the system. This is the archipelago version of the genetic
algorithm.
The parallel genetic algorithm is such an algorithm that uses multiple genetic
algorithms to solve a single task. [Can95]
It works in such a way that all Fog Nodes in each clique concentrate on computing
their own replica placement solution, and later on in the crossover phase the CA node
gathers the best solutions from each cluster. [Can95]
This approach is often called ‘island model’ because populations are isolated from
each other, just as real-life populations may be living isolated on different islands.
[Can95]
Again we see the effectiveness and the benefits of the divide and conquer tactic of
the maximal clique grouping of the graph.
==PAGE:92==
78
7 Discussion
We now present the procedures, one of which demonstrates the procedure of the
master-node CA.
The master-node
1. The CA detects a failure in its clique.
2. CA multicasts election to all nodes in the cluster saying that it is the master
node and that the clique’s CA should execute the selection of a population
3. The CA awaits answers from all the clique CA’s.
4. When answers are received, it selects the best solution.
5. Reconfigres the network
The CA clique
1. Receives signal.
2. Multicasts the information needed to perform the algorithm and a signal to
start the genetic algorithm to the Fog Nodes in the clique
3. Awaits responses
4. When all responses is received - select the two best solutions
5. Crossover and mutation
6. Evaluate
7. Send the fitness value to the master-node
The Fog Node
1. Receives signal
2. Runs the parity strategy placement algorithm
3. Evaluate
4. Answer back the fitness value and the solution
This version might result in more network traffic because of the multicast commu-
nication in the consensus voting and in the transfer of fitness results. It is a trade-off
between spending computational resources at a single node which potentially could
stagnate the CA and a potentially heavy network traffic.
However, the benefit of the distributed genetic algorithm is that it is highly scal-
able because it does not require significant CPU resources as the load is distributed.
Besides this, the final solution would be based on a diverse set of genes as it is com-
puted by an arbitrary and potentially huge amount of independent Fog Nodes.
==PAGE:93==
7.3 Chosen Algorithms
79
Master
node
Fog Nodes: 
 
Calculates Parity
Placement Algortihm 
 
and Objective
Function
Clique CA:  
Crossover the two
best solution
received from the
Fog Nodes
Island 2
Island 1 
Island 3 
Island 4 
Island 5 
Master Node:  
Receives solution
from all Clique CAs.
Picks the best one
A Solution: 
Each Island
proposes the best
solution
Figure 7.3: An overview of the distributed genetic algorithm.
7.3
Chosen Algorithms
In this section the choice of algorithms is reasoned and discussed. Firstly the choice
of using constructive heuristic algorithms for placement of data and parity-blocks is
discussed. Secondly the algorithm used to identify cliques in the graph is reasoned.
Lastly the heuristic search algorithms presented in this thesis are reasoned and the
cost function used is discussed.
Constructive heuristic
The Allocate DDS and Parity Placement algorithms de-
scribed in Section 5 should be seen as a constructive heuristic, which builds an initial
solution from scratch. Constructive heuristics is often used in combination with a
local search algorithm as a starting point and is usually thought of as being a fast
and often single-pass approach. [Ken05]
The algorithms finds the best local option from all available choices without know-
ing the global structure. This means that the heuristics would grab the best possible
solution first without considering the future state. [Ski08]
Concretely the algorithms pick the first node found in the Breath-First-Search
which fulfills the constraints.
An imagined example could be that the algorithms place a block and do not
consider if the chosen block affects the placement of the next node.
Maybe the
chosen block was the shortest for the next node, while the current block could have
picked another node with the same latency.
==PAGE:94==
80
7 Discussion
This is one of the reasons for using local search heuristics to optimize the place-
ment of the blocks.
As mentioned, this should be seen as a constructive heuristic which constructs an
initial solution or a ’good-guess’. The reason for running them is the believe that a
good guess would lower the amount of iterations in the local heuristic search instead
of trying from a random solution.
Clique algorithm
Any edge in a graph represents a clique of two vertices. Hence
the challenge is not to find a clique, but to find a large one. The problem of finding
a maximum clique is NP-complete.[Ski08]
Luckily there are different ways of looking at cliques - they can be either maximum
or maximal. Here we present the arguments for choosing the maximal clique.
In order to find a maximum clique we can inspect all subsets in a brute-force
search.
However, that quickly turns out to be time-consuming.
There exists no
algorithm which can find a maximum graph solution in P. [Ski08]
On the other hand, the Bron-Kerbosch algorithm used in this thesis is able to list
all maximal cliques in polynomial time per clique. [Ski08]
Based on the problem complexity of finding the maximum clique it is relevant to
ask: will the maximal clique suffice?
We are not interested in finding the maximum clique as we are not interested in
finding the largest cliques in the graph.
It is more interesting to find a clique / sub-graph which cannot be extended by
adding more nodes to it, because if it was possible to add more nodes to a failure-
group it would not be complete. Hence this project defines cliques to be maximal.
As an extra argument, the Bron–Kerbosch algorithm has been widely reported as
being faster in practice than its alternatives. [GJS76b]
Local Heuristic search
In the Section 4.3 it is argued that the problem is NP-
complete. Hard problems must be handled in practice. [Ken05] There exist two types
of algorithms of different natures.
The first type is optimization algorithms which are able to find optimal solutions
often by using a large amount of execution time. The second type is heuristic al-
gorithms, which find near-optimal solutions in a small amount of execution time.
[Ken05]
In the case of the problem presented in this thesis the latter type is most relevant
because of the need of calculating and re-configuring the network in run-time. This
==PAGE:95==
7.3 Chosen Algorithms
81
is the reason why we choose a local search heuristic.
There are three well-known heuristic methods which have proved to be quite
efficient in combinatorial problems solution: Simulated Annealing, Tabu Search Al-
gorithm and Genetic Algorithm. [ADR99]
A study by A. Augugliaro et al. [ADR99] found that the Tabu Search algorithm
turned out to be the most efficient method, even when unusual load situations took
place.
As explained Section 5.3 this thesis uses the simulated annealing. In defence of
simulated annealing, it is still one of the best known local search algorithms and still
performs well. [Ken05]
In addition, the major argument for choosing the local search heuristic was the
fact that it is widely applicable [Ken05], making it simpler to practically implement.
Besides this, we already, in Section 7.2.1 accepted the inefficiency of the Simulated
Annealing in large-scale topologies.
Instead we are considering the genetic algorithm’s ability to distribute computa-
tional tasks across the Fog Continuum. This is without any concrete proof considered
to be drastically more scalable.
Cost function
The cost functions or, in other terms, the objective functions, in
the simulated annealing algorithms are explained in Section 5.3.
The Cost function computes the cost by iterating every node and running Djik-
stra’s shortest path algorithm to every node in the solution. This is a procedure
taking O(V E log V ) which can go (V 3 log V ) in worst case. This is ineffective.
The fact that the objective function is so ineffective has a huge impact on the
overall performance of the Simulated Annealing, as the function is run for every
iteration.
Instead, we investigate alternative methods in order to optimize the function.
At first glance the cost function could seem to have the same characteristics as
the traveling salesman problem, where the objective is to find the shortest cycle that
visits all the vertices (a Hamiltonian cycle).
However, when it is investigated further, it is closer to a simple pathfinding prob-
lem. Rather than needing to visit each and every node, we simply need to visit a
particular set of nodes in the shortest time (distance) possible.
Hence the Floyd-Warshall algorithm would be an obvious optimization.
The Floyd–Warshall algorithm compares all possible paths through the graph
between each pair of vertices.
==PAGE:96==
82
7 Discussion
It is able to do this with O(N3) comparisons in a graph. It does this by incre-
mentally improving an estimate on the shortest path between two vertices, until the
estimate is optimal.[Ray13]
Another crucial aspect of the Floyd Warshall algorithm is that it is suitable for
distributed systems. Which unlike Djikstra’s algorithms can be implemented for data
structures such as Graph of Graphs. [Ray13]
This makes it relevant for the use in the Distributed Genetic Algorithm.
==PAGE:97==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
This thesis designs and develops a set of algorithms for optimizing replication and
fault-tolerance in a Fog Computing platform.
The algorithms are run on a fully centralized Configuration Agent (CA) which
has the knowledge and capabilities to reconfigure the TSN streams in the network in
case of failures..
In Fog Computing there is a need to tolerate failures of whole groups; this need
derives from the requirement of placing data capacity close to sensors and actuators
in order to fulfill real-time deadlines.
Hence, the first constructive heuristic algorithm, Allocate DDS, is identifying
failure groups in a network topology by searching for maximal cliques. Afterwards
the algorithm allocates an arbitrary set of user defined storage-requirements into a
Cassandra Distributed Data Storage (DDS). The allocation of the DDS follows given
constraints which try to ensure that the nodes in a local DDS are placed inside a
failure group.
This is done in order to minimize the amount of switches between the nodes inside
a local DDS.
The second constructive heuristic algorithm Parity Placement is a replication strat-
egy, which takes advantage of the erasure coding scheme Pyramid Codes. The repli-
cation strategy places three kinds of parity-blocks, which are able to tolerate the
failure-groups crashing simultaneously and restoring of a crashed node if the number
of available parity blocks is ￿to number of crashed data-blocks.
The reason for the three parity-blocks is an attempt to lower the network band-
width and latency in data-block reconstruction.
The problem of latency is crucial in the replication strategy, because the placement
of the parity follows a constraint which determines that a parity cannot be placed in
the same failure-group as the data-blocks it recovers. This results in higher latencies
because the reconstruction of a data-block has to pass more switches in order to reach
its source.
In order to minimize latency, the Parity Placement algorithm also uses another
mechanism. Dijkstra’s shortest path is used to compare and find a pair of neighboring
==PAGE:98==
84
8 Conclusion
clusters with the smallest latency.
In the design of the algorithms various procedures are used to minimize the latency
between data-blocks and parity-blocks.
However, because of the importance of low latency in Fog Computing and the
exponentially increasing combinations of solutions, the thesis presents a simulated
annealing algorithm in order to optimize the solution based on the objective function
of minimizing latency.
Through experimentation of cooling schedules in simulated annealing it was pos-
sible to reduce the overall latency of the solution by 21%.
Through experimental experimentation it was also found that the use of parity-
blocks resulted in a reduction on up to 46.68% on the amount of occupied nodes
compared to 1:1 replica scheme and 147% of the 3-replication scheme.
Besides reducing storage overhead, the placement strategy is also argued to pro-
vide significantly better fault-tolerance than the 1:1 and 3-hierarchy schemes.
Because it is possible to restore an arbitrary amount of failures in the network as
long as the number of available parity blocks is ≥to number of crashed data-blocks,
the parity-blocks are at least able to tolerate a failure-group. If all the failures are
happening in different failure-groups, it is possible to tolerate the same amount of
arbitrary failures as the amount of available parity blocks simultaneously.
It is also argued that the parity placement strategy is superior to common VM
replication schemes. A great argument for using VM replication is to lower the amount
of physical occupied nodes by running replications in parallel.
As computational
resources are limited in Fog Nodes, VM replication is not suitable.
However, as mentioned previously, the replication placement strategy has been
proved to reduce the amount of occupied nodes in a network. Besides this the era-
sure codes enables replication of Fog Nodes without the need to run any parallel VM
processes. This leaves the resources unaffected.
The mentioned benefits of using the parity placement strategy presented in this
thesis might be a trade-off between increasing fault-tolerance and decreasing storage
overhead versus increasing latency and network traffic.
It is seen that the more
the network topology scales, the more the storage overhead is reduced.
However,
the algorithms are run in O(N2), which means that the execution time increases
exponentially as the network topology scales.
In a Fog Continuum where both time and computational resources are limited,
this solution might not be appropriate for certain types of systems.
Hence, a distributed Genetic Algorithm is proposed in order to suggest a possi-
ble approach to make the parity placement strategy suitable for large-scale network
topologies.
==PAGE:99==
8.1 Future work
85
8.1
Future work
This section briefly discus interesting aspects which could be researched further in
the future.
Multi objective
In the placement of both data and parity-blocks there is a soft
constraint which does not necessarily have to be met. The constraint is that the node
is preferably placed inside a group.
The reason why it is chosen to be a soft constraint is because of the latency con-
cern. We want it to be placed in a clique; however, there might be situations where it
is not possible, e.g. because the clique is already filled with nodes. However, in some
cases it is not, and the simulated annealing would just place it on a node outside of
the closer because the latency is low.
In order to avoid this situation it would be interesting to extend the simulated
annealing with a multi-objective function.
Where a penalty is given when the constraint is not fulfilled. E.g. This could be
done by adding extra cost to the solution if it picks a node outside of the clique
Multi-objectives could also make the simulated annealing find solutions where
the storage overhead is even lower, by punishing the selection of a node with higher
storage-capacity than the required-usage.
Distributed Genetic Algorithm
It could be interesting to implement and test
the distributed genetic algorithm.
The algorithm is interesting because it makes it possible to distribute the com-
putational tasks to the nodes in the network, making the solution much more scalable.
However, due to the high development complexity it has been out of the scope of
this thesis to implement it.
Multi Instance Fog Nodes
Fog Nodes consisting of multiple computers inside
one chassis have been seen, e.g. Intel’s NW200 Roke - Fog Reference Design.
The interesting aspect of this architecture is that the chassis can be characterized
as a failure group.
The Fog Node might run some internal RAID configurations in order to ensure
failures of internally components. However, if the power supply of the chassis breaks
or if a local power outrage happens, the data of the whole chassis would be unavailable.
Hence the replication strategy presented in this thesis would be relevant as it
would be able to reconstruct the whole chassis on other available Fog Nodes.
==PAGE:100==
86
8 Conclusion
The benefit of this is that the Fog Nodes do not need to be grouped in a connected-
caveman topology in order to take advantage of the Pyramid Codes as each Fog Node
would represent a failure-group.
Hot parity-blocks
It could also be interesting to investigate the possibility of ’Hot’
parity-blocks where the parity-blocks are active with executing e.g. low prioritized
tasks which could be interrupted at every moment.
This would be an improvement as the parity-blocks would not be passively waiting
for a failure to happen.
This would drastically lower the storage overhead.
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
A.1
Cooling schedules
Adaptive cooling parameter
1 X =
Adaptive cooling parameter
2 if temp < 0.0X:
3
temp = temp * 0.9
4 elif temp < 0.X:
5
temp = temp * 0.5
6 else:
7
temp = temp * 0.1
.
Logarithmic cooling schedule
1
2 i = i + 1;
3 if (i < 151)
4
temp = c/(log(index) + 1);
5 else
6
temp = 0;
.
==PAGE:102==
88
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
[06]
“The worst-case time complexity for generating all maximal cliques and
computational experiments”. In: Theoretical Computer Science 363.1 (2006),
pages 28–42.
[12]
“Erasure Coding in Windows Azure Storage”. In: (2012), page 12.
[ADR99]
A. Augugliaro, L. Dusonchet, and E. Riva. “Genetic, simulated annealing
and tabu search algorithms: Three heuristic methods for optimal reconfig-
uration and compensation of distribution networks”. In: European Trans-
actions on Electrical Power 9.1 (1999), pages 35–41. issn: 1430144X.
[al17]
E.Marin-Torderat et al. “Do we all really know what a Fog Node is? Cur-
rent trends towards an open definition”. In: Computer Communications,
(2017), vol. 109, vol. 109.
[BBM93]
David Beasley, David R. Bull, and R. R. Martin. “An overview of genetic
algorithms : Part 1, fundamentals”. In: University Computing 2.15 (1993),
pages 1–16.
[Bon+14]
Flavio Bonomi et al. Big Data and Internet of Things: A Roadmap for
Smart Environments. Volume 546. 2014, pages 169–186. isbn: 978-3-319-
05028-7. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-05029-4.
[BR13]
Jasma Balasangameshwara and Nedunchezhian Raju. “Performance-Driven
Load Balancing with a Primary-Backup Approach for Computational
Grids with Low Communication Cost and Replication Cost”. In: IEEE
Computer Society 62.5 (2013), pages 990–1003.
[Can95]
E Cantú-Paz. “A summary of research on parallel genetic algorithms”. In:
(1995).
[CL13]
Minghua Chen Cheng Huang and Jin Li. “Pyramid Codes: Flexible Schemes
to Trade Space for Access Efficiency in Reliable Data Storage Systems”.
In: ACM Transactions on Storage 9, No. 1 (2013).
[CLP17]
Bastien Confais, Adrien Lebre, and Benoit Parrein. “Performance analy-
sis of object store systems in a fog/edge computing infrastructures”. In:
Proceedings of the International Conference on Cloud Computing Tech-
nology and Science, CloudCom (2017), pages 294–301. doi: 10.1109/
CloudCom.2016.0055.
==PAGE:104==
90
Bibliography
[GAS17]
Marina Gutiérrez, Astrit Ademaj, and Wilfried Steiner. In: (2017).
[GG84]
S. Geman and D. Geman. “Stochastic relaxation, Gibbs distributions,
and Bayesian restoration of image”. In: ournal of Applied Statistic 20.5
(1984), pages 721–741.
[GJS76a]
M. R. Garey, D. S. Johnson, and L. Stockmeyer. “Some simplified NP-
complete graph problems”. In: Theoretical Computer Science 1.3 (1976),
pages 237–267.
[GJS76b]
M. R. Garey, D. S. Johnson, and L. Stockmeyer. “Some simplified NP-
complete graph problems”. In: Theoretical Computer Science 1.3 (1976),
pages 237–267.
[GP12]
Hadi Goudarzi and Massoud Pedram. “Energy-efficient virtual machine
replication and placement in a cloud computing system”. In: Proceedings
- 2012 IEEE 5th International Conference on Cloud Computing, CLOUD
2012 (2012), pages 750–757.
[Ken05]
Edmund K. Burke Graham Kendall. Search Methodologies - Introduc-
tion tutorials in Optimization and Decision Support Techniques. Springer,
2005. isbn: 0-387-23460-8.
[LFM16]
Yang Liu, Jonathan E Fieldsend, and Geyong Min. “A Framework of
Fog Computing: Architecture, Challenges and Optimization”. In: IEEE
ACCESS 4 (2016), pages 1–10. doi: 10.1109.
[LM10]
Avinash Lakshman and Prashant Malik. “Cassandra - A Decentralized
Structured Storage System”. In: ACM SIGOPS Operating Systems Review
44 (2010). doi: 10.1145/1773912.1773922.
[LMA]
Songze Li, Mohammad Ali Maddah-ali, and A Salman Avestimehr. “Cod-
ing for Distributed Fog Computing”. In: (), pages 1–7.
[May+17]
Ruben Mayer et al. “FogStore: Toward a Distributed Data Store for Fog
Computing”. In: 2017 IEEE Fog World Congress (FWC17) (2017).
[Oli12]
Donal Heffernan Oliver Kleineberg Peter Fröhlich. “Fault-tolerant Au-
dio and Video Bridging (AVB) Ethernet: A novel method for redundant
stream registration configuration”. In: (2012).
[Oli14]
Donald Heffernan Oliver Kleineberg. “A comparison of Fault-Tolerance
Concepts for IEEE 802.1 Time Sensitive Networks (TSN)”. In: (2014).
[Ope17]
OpenFog Consortium Architecture Working Group. “OpenFog Reference
Architecture for Fog Computing”. In: OpenFogConsortium February (2017),
pages 1–162. doi: OPFRA001.020817.
[PJS15]
Rashmi Ranjana T P, D S Jayalakshmi, and R Srinivasan. “On Repli-
cation Strategies for Data Intensive Cloud Applications”. In: 6.3 (2015),
pages 2479–2484.
[Pla09]
James S. Plank. “The Raid-6 Liber8tion code”. In: The International
Journal of High Performance Computing Applications, 23, No. 3 (2009).
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
91
[PRS]
Paul Pop, Michael Lander Raagaard, and Wilfried Steiner. “Enabling Fog
Computing for Industrial Automation through Time-Sensitive Network-
ing (TSN)”. In: (), pages 1–7.
[Ray13]
Michel Raynal. “Distributed algorithms for message-passing systems”. In:
Distributed Algorithms for Message-Passing Systems (2013).
[Ski08]
Steven S. Skiena. The Algorithm Design Manual. 2008. isbn: 9781848000698.
[SM02]
Kenneth O. Stanley and Risto Miikkulainen. “Evolving Neural Networks
Through Augmenting Topologies”. In: Evolutionary Computation 10.2
(2002), pages 99–127.
[SP16]
Wilfried Steiner and Stefan Poledna. “Fog Computing as Enabler for the
Industrial Internet of Things”. In: Elektrotech. Inftech (2016), 133:310.
[Ste15]
Wilfried Steiner. “Deterministic Ethernet for Real-Time and Critical Ap-
plications”. In: (2015).
[Tzi+17]
Nikos Tziritas et al. “Data Replication and Virtual Machine Migrations
to Mitigate Network Overhead in Edge Computing Systems”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Sustainable Computing 2.4 (2017), pages 1–1. issn: 2377-
3782.
[Var00]
Moshe Y. Vardi. “Constraint satisfaction and database theory”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the nineteenth ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGART symposium
on Principles of database systems - PODS ’00 February (2000), pages 76–
85.
[Vig11]
Arya Vigeh. “Investigation of a Simulated Annealing Cooling Schedule
used to Optimize the Estimation of the Fiber Diameter Distribution in a
Peripheral Nerve Trunk”. In: (2011).
[VS17]
Paul Pop Voica Gavrilut Bahram Zarrin and Soheil Samii. “Fault-Tolerant
Topology and Routing Synthesis for IEEE Time-Sensitive Networking”.
In: (2017), Pages 267-276.
==PAGE:106==
