==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Nanotech
FABRICATION OF SOLAR CELLS WITH TUNNEL
OXIDE PASSIVATED CONTACTS
A comparison of the TOPCon structure on planar and textured
silicon substrates
Master Thesis
Maren Elisabeth Kloster
Supervisors:
Postdoc. Beniamino Iandolo
Prof. Ole Hansen
July 2018
==PAGE:2==
ii
==PAGE:3==
iii
Anything that can go wrong, will go wrong.
— Murphy’s law
==PAGE:4==
iv
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Tunnel oxide passivated contacts (TOPCon) is a silicon solar cell structure which has shown
promising results in recent years. It can be fabricated by relatively cheap ways and can easily
be implemented on the industrial scale. The aim of this thesis has been to develop and test a
fabrication method for solar cells with the TOPCon structure on the lab scale. Furthermore,
to implement the developed process ﬂow for both planar and textured surfaces – particularly
to test the compatibility of the process ﬂow with the promising black-silicon surface texturing.
The TOPCon structure was produced by hot nitric acid oxidation of silicon wafers, followed
by an in-situ doped LPCVD process to deposit p- and n-type polysilicon on the front and the
back of the sample. The polysilicon layers were developed with diﬀerent thicknesses. This was
followed by atomic layer deposition of aluminum doped zinc oxide, and metal contacting using
aluminum deposited by e-beam evaporation.
In the ﬁrst part of the project, symmetrical lifetime samples were produced in the hope of
optimizing the diﬀerent steps in the process ﬂow. The eﬀective lifetime of minority carriers
where measured by microwave detected photoconductivity. In the second part of the project,
complete solar cells were produced. Czochralski n-type and p- type silicon substrates and ﬂoat
zone p-type silicon substrates were tested in combination with three types of surface texturing.
The solar cells were characterized by I-V measurements and quantum eﬃciency.
The best results were obtained for planar solar cells based on n-type substrates, which showed
maximum eﬃciency of 15.2% along with a ﬁll factor of 73.5%. The worst results were ob-
tained from textured samples based on p-type substrates which did not display any solar cell
characteristics. Overall the eﬃciency of the solar cells appeared to be very limited by high
recombination, giving rise to very bad open circuit voltage values. Various reasons for the poor
results have been discussed, and further means of optimizing the process has been proposed.
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
ABSTRACT
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis is written as the ﬁnal work of the M.Sc.Eng. degree in Advanced and Applied
Chemistry at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU. The thesis work has been carried
out at the Department of Micro- and Nanotechnology, DTU Nanotech, in the period 22nd of
June to the 7th of July in 2018, corresponding to 32.5 ECTS points.
The project was supervised by professor Ole Hansen and postdoc Beniamino Iandolo at DTU
Nanotech, the department of Micro- and Nanotechnology at the Technical University of Den-
mark, DTU. All of the fabrication procedures executed during the course of this thesis has
been carried out at the DTU Danchip facilities.
The thesis is a continuation of a project executed at DTU Nanotech by the same author and
supervisors in fall 2017 named ”Passivation of Silicon Surfaces for Solar Cells - Fabrication of
the TOPCon Structure”.
vii
==PAGE:8==
viii
PREFACE
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgments
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors, professor Ole Hansen and postdoc
Beniamino Iandolo, for wonderful guidance and support during the course of this thesis.
I would sincerely like to thank Rasmus Schmidt Davidsen, Chantal Silvestre and A. Pamela
Sanchez Nery at DTU Nanotech. To Rasmus especially for all the advice during development
of the process ﬂow and when interpreting the obtained results, and furthermore for all the
help with I-V measurements. To Chantal for her wonderful assistance during the use of laser
micromachining. Lastly, to Pamela for great help in the cleanroom and for all her support
during the entire thesis.
A thank you to the DTU Danchip staﬀ, especially to Thomas Pedersen, Pernille Voss Larsen
and Rebecca Bolt Ettlinger, for all their help and assistance in the cleanroom.
I am grateful to my whole family, especially my parents, for all their love and support during
all my endeavours.
Finally, I would like to particularly thank Enzo Hacquin and Emanuele D’Angelo. Thank
you for the indispensable help, motivation, love, support, proofreading and advice. You are
both the best.
ix
==PAGE:10==
x
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
v
Preface
vii
Acknowledgments
ix
Nomenclature
xiii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Absorption and generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Recombination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Intrinsic recombination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.2
Shockley-Read-Hall recombination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Silicon photovoltaics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Junctions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Surface passivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
Passivated Contacts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6.1
The HIT Cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6.2
The TOPCon Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.7
Light Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.7.1
Parasitic Absorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.7.2
Reﬂection and Light Trapping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Methods
17
3.1
Fabrication Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.1
Tunnel Oxide Fabrication: Nitric Acid Oxidation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.2
Chemical Vapor Deposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.3
Other Fabrication Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Characterization methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.1
Variable Angle Spectroscopic Ellipsometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.2
Quantum eﬃciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.3
I-V characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.4
Eﬀective lifetime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Preliminary study
29
4.1
Lifetime samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.1
Lifetime measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.2
Boron ﬂow in LPCVD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.3
Polysilicon thickness variation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1.4
Forming gas annealing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
xi
==PAGE:12==
xii
CONTENTS
5
Fabrication of solar cells
35
5.1
Process ﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2.1
Quantum eﬃciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2.2
I-V characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Discussion
47
7
Conclusion
53
Bibliography
55
Appendix A Individual curves
63
A.1 Batch 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.2 Batch 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.3 Batch 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
==PAGE:13==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
ALD
Atomic layer deposition
AlOx
Aluminum Oxide
AZO
Aluminum doped zinc oxide
B-O
Boron-Oxygen complex
B2H6
Diborane
Black-Si, b-Si
Black silicon
BSF
Back surface ﬁeld
c-Si
Crystalline silicon
Cz-Si
Czochralski silicon
DRIE
Deep reactive ion etch
EHP
Electron-Hole Pair
EQE
External quantum eﬃciency
FCA
Free-carrier absorption
FZ-Si
Float zone silicon
HF
Hydroﬂouric acid
HIT
Heterojunction intrinsic thin-ﬁlm
HNO3
Nitric acid
IBC
Interdigitated back contact
IQE
Internal quantum eﬃciency
ISFH
Institute for Solar Energy Research Hamelin
ITO
Indium doped tin oxide
ITRPV
International technology roadmap for photovolatic
KOH
Potassium Hydroxide
LPCVD
Low pressure chemical vapor deposition
MDP
Microwave detected photoconductance
PA
Parasitic absorption
PECVD
Plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition
PERC
Passivated emitter rear cell
POLO
Polysilicon on oxide
poly-Si
Polysilicon
PPh3
Phosphine
PV
Photovoltaic
QE
Quantum eﬃciency
QSSPC
Quasi steady dtate photoconductance
RCA
Radio Corporation of America
SF6
Sulfur hexaﬂuoride
SiH4
Silane
SiNx
Silicon Nitride
SiOx
Silicon Oxide
SRH
Shockley-Read-Hall
TCO
Transparent conducting oxide
TOPCon
Tunnel Oxide Passivated Contacts
VASE
Variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry
xiii
==PAGE:14==
Symbols
α
Absorption Coeﬃcient
cm
−1
χ
Electron aﬃnity
V
∆n
Excess minority carriers / Injection level
cm−3
η
Eﬃciency
%
η
Eﬃciency
%
λ
Wavelength
cm
Φ
Work function
V
τeff
Eﬀective minority carrier lifetime
s
τauger
Auger lifetime for minority carriers
s
τrad
Radiative lifetime for minority carriers
s
τSRH
SRH lifetime for minority carriers
s
A
Area
cm2
d
Thickness
cm
E
Energy
eV
EB
Power of beam
W
EC
Conduction band energy
eV
EF
Fermi energy
eV
Eg
Bandgap energy
eV
EV
Valence band energy
eV
EV ac
Vacuum energy
eV
G
Generation rate
EHP/cm3s
I
Light intensity/Photon intensity
mW/cm
i −Voc
Implied open circuit voltage
mV
Icell
Photocurrent generated by cell
A
Imp
Maximum current point
A
Isc
Short circuit current
A
P
Power
W
Pmax
Power, maximum
W
q
Elementary charge, 1.602·10−19
C
R
Reﬂectance
%
Vmp
Maximum voltage point
V
Voc
Open circuit voltage
V
Jsc
Short circuit current density
mA/cm2
A
Area
m2
D
Diﬀusion constant
cm2s−1
FF
Fill Factor
%
I0,S1
Radiative saturation current
A
I0,S2
Non-radiative saturation current
A
J
Current density
A/cm2
k
The Boltzmann constant, 1.38*10−23
J/K
Ni
Doping density. Donor dopant: i=D. Acceptor dopant: i=A
cm−3
ni
Intrinsic carrier concentration
cm−3
RS
Series resistance
RSh
Shunt resistance
S
Surface recombination velocity
cms−1
T
Temperature
K
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The eﬀect of climate change has been known for several years, and a need for a shift to
”greener” technology in all aspects of human life is becoming more and more critical. At the
same time, the human population is increasing annually, along with the overall global standard
of living and the amount of technological advances. The global energy demand is rising with
it. It has risen by 35% in the last 15 years, however new trends are imminent and expected
to take place in the forthcoming years due in part to a slowing increase in global population
and increases in energy eﬃciency from renewable energy sources. In 2015 the global energy
consumption was 4 · 1014MJ, and it is expected to rise only 7% totally by 2030 before it is
likely to ﬂatten out giving an expected yearly global energy demand of 4.3 · 1014MJ by 2050.
However, while this stagnation in the growing energy demand is hopeful, oil and gas is still
expected to account for 44% of the total energy supply in 2050. [1, 2] The damaging eﬀect
of fossil fuels and in particular the eﬀect of harmful chemical emissions are well documented.
If the 2◦goal set forth by the Paris agreement is to be met, a drastic change towards the
utilization of renewable energy sources is of paramount importance. [3]
Solar energy can be said to be the oldest renewable energy source, as the basis of all life
on earth is based on photosynthesis, where solar energy is converted into chemical energy nec-
essary to sustain life. The earth continuously receives 1.73·1014kW in incident solar radiation
from the sun. This amounts to a total of 5.5 · 1021MJ per year - in other words more than
10 million times more than what the global energy demand is predicted to be in 2050. If
mankind can utilize just a percentage of what is sent to the earth from the sun each year, all
of our energy needs could be met from one single energy technology. Furthermore, that single
energy technology would be based on a renewable, almost inﬁnitely large energy source which
is available for all areas of the planet. [4] However, despite the promising theory behind solar
energy, in 2010 solar power made up less than 2% of the global energy production. [5] This is
largely due to insuﬃcient eﬃciency of industrial cells combined with high production prices.
Silicon is the second most abundant material in the crust of the earth, and has been the
main component in solar panels ever since the ﬁrst successful pn-junction silicon solar cell was
produced by Bell laboratories in year 1954. [6, 7] Since then the eﬃciency of solar cells has
been on a steady increase, with the average industrial cell nowadays having an eﬃciency of
around 20% and the highest eﬃciency lab-scale solar cell been shown to produce 26.4% in
2017. [8–10] Other solar cell technologies made from diﬀerent materials than silicon has also
shown good eﬃciency results in recent years. A beneﬁt of silicon compared to other materials
is that it already has been implemented in the industry for long time due to integrated circuit-
technology - resulting in relatively low production cost of silicon on an industrial scale. [6,11]
If solar power is to be the main energy source in the future, it is important that the technology
is made with the highest possible eﬃciency from cheap, abundant and low toxic materials -
seen from both a economical and environmental perspective.
1
==PAGE:16==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
The eﬃciency of solar cells is often severely limited by losses from electronic recombination at
the solar cell surface. One of the more promising technologies of the recent years regarding
improving the eﬃciency of solar cells is to include so-called passivating contacts. Passivat-
ing contacts has both an excellent carrier-selectivity and a good passivation at the contact
interfaces. [12, 13] A development of cheap, industrially viable methods for solar cells with
passivating contacts is therefore of signiﬁcant interest.
A promising new silicon solar cell
technology developed in recent years, which has accomplished producing passivated contacts
of high quality, is the so-called TOPCon (Tunnel Oxide Passivated Contacts) structure. [14]
The TOPCon solar cells are high eﬃciency silicon solar cells consisting of only silicon, and
silicon oxide along with a thin conducting oxide which can be made from aluminum doped
zinc oxide. In other words, it can be made entirely from relatively environmentally friendly
materials. The TOPCon structure consists of a silicon wafer with an ultra-thin high-quality
silicon oxide on each side, covered with phosphorus-doped and boron-doped polysilicon layers
on the top/bottom. The technology was ﬁrst introduced by Feldmann and coworkers in 2013
with an eﬃciency of 23%, and a similar structure has since been improved to above 26.1%
under the name POLO (POLysilicon on Oxide), which uses the same structure but with a
slightly thicker oxide layer. [14–17] In short, the TOPCon structure has naturally good passi-
vating contacts, very promising eﬃciency and can be made by relatively low-cost fabrication.
Though it is still mainly produced at the lab-scale, a beneﬁt of the TOPCon structure is that
the process steps can be easily incorporated in industrial process lines and is thereby a good
candidate for industrially produced solar panels. [18]
Another limitation of silicon solar cells, is the fact that ﬂat silicon reﬂects more than 30%
of the sunlight arriving at the surface. Reducing the amount of the reﬂected light will au-
tomatically increase the amount of absorbed light in the substrate, and is therefore likely
to increase eﬃciency. A way of reducing the surface reﬂection is to texturize the surface of
silicon, which has shown to be quite eﬀective and easily lowers the reﬂection of the surface
drastically. [13] A new method for surface-texturizing silicon surfaces has emerged in recent
years in which the surface is treated with reactive ion etching and the resultant outcome is
labelled ”Black silicon” due to the appearance of the ﬁnished product. Black silicon has indeed
been known to reduce the reﬂection to below 1%. [19–21] A limitation to texturized silicon
surfaces is the increased recombination at the surface which in some cases can be so severe
that it makes the eﬃciency increase due to lower reﬂectance redundant. Good passivation of
texturized surfaces is therefore quite important.
The objective of this thesis project has been to develop a functioning process ﬂow for fabricat-
ing TOPCon solar cells, and, furthermore, to compare the eﬀect of diﬀerent surface texturing
in combination with the TOPCon structure in the hope to achieve high eﬃciency solar cells.
The ﬁrst part of the project consisted of preliminary studies of the diﬀerent process steps,
to optimize each layer in the TOPCon structure. The second half of the project consisted in
implementing the full process ﬂow for fabricating complete solar cells with planar, black-Si and
industrial standardized pyramid-surface texturing respectively. Among these, of particular in-
terest was the unusual fabrication of the cell based on a black-Si textured wafer paired with
TOPCon technology on the back and front contact. In fact, to date there has not been found
any evidence of this particular conﬁguration in literature and for this reason it is important to
evaluate its performance and compare it with references as aid for future development. The
solar cells have subsequently been characterized by quantum eﬃciency, reﬂectance and I-V
measurements and possible future optimization have been suggested.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Theory
The basis of all solar cells is the photovoltaic eﬀect. Materials which exhibit the photovoltaic
eﬀect generate a voltage or electrical current when exposed to irradiance, typically from the
sun. [22] The bandgap in the material determines whether the photovoltaic eﬀect can be
present or not. Light with a energy higher than the bandgap can excite an electron from the
valence band to the conduction band and thus initiate the electrical current. Materials with a
too high a bandgap will give a very high voltage diﬀerence, but only a few photons will have a
high enough energy to be absorbed, and thus the produced current will be very low. Materials
with a too low bandgap will, on the other hand, give a high current (as most photons will
be absorbed) but with a low voltage. [23] When looking at eﬃciency of solar cell materials
as a function of the bandgap for the solar spectrum on the surface of the earth (the AM1.5
solar spectrum), it becomes clear that optimum solar cell materials should have a bandgap
of 1-1.5eV, see Figure 2.1, as it is a compromise between photocurrent and photovoltage. A
material that ﬁts this requirement very well is lightly doped silicon, with a bandgap of 1.1eV.
Silicon is indeed the most used material for solar cells. [6, 23] Silicon as a material for solar
cells will be further introduced in Section 2.3, after introducing the concepts of absorption,
generation and recombination in solar cells.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.1:
(a) The AM1.5G solar spectrum, which is the solar spectrum on the surface on the earth.
(b) Solar cell eﬃciency as a function of band gap, for the AM1.5 solar spectrum. Assuming only radiative
recombination. [23]
3
==PAGE:18==
4
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.1
Absorption and generation
The most fundamental process in a solar cell is photogeneration. Photogeneration (EHP/cm3s)
is the process when a photon with energy greater than the bandgap is absorbed into the solar
cell material, and an electron-hole pair is produced. An electron-hole pair, often referred to
as carriers, is produced by an electron being excited from the valence band to the conduction
band, leaving behind a “hole” in the valence band, due to the incident photon energy. Gener-
ally, photogeneration is the term used when the density of holes and or electrons is increased
due to incident photon energies, leading to the generation of photo-current and –voltage. The
generation rate, G, is the rate at which the electron-hole pairs are produced. It is dependant
on the light intensity, I, and absorption coeﬃcient, α. The rate of photogeneration at any
speciﬁc energy, E, and point in the sample, x, is given by the product of the photon intensity
and absorption coeﬃcient, see Equation (2.1). The absorption coeﬃcient has the unit cm−1,
and determines how far light can travel in the material before it is absorbed. [6,23]
g(E, x) = α(E)I(E, x)
(2.1)
The light intensity is predicted to have an exponential decay with distance, presented through
the Beer-Lambert law. [6]
I(E, x) = I0(E)e−α(E)x
(2.2)
When applying the Beer-Lambert law to Equation (2.1), and taking reﬂective and transmittive
losses into consideration, the general photo-generation rate at any speciﬁc photon energy, and
position in sample is produced. It is shown in Equation (2.3). Here, R is the reﬂectance
from the surface. It is a wavelength/energy dependent unit, which is distinctive to diﬀerent
materials and surface texturing. [6]
g(E, x) = [1 −R(E)]α(E)I0(E)e−α(E)x
(2.3)
The total generation rate can be found by integrating Equation (2.3) with respect to total
thickness of a sample, d, and the energy interval of the light. [6] When measuring the eﬃciency
of a solar cell, a ﬁlter is used so the light in the equipment corresponds to the AM1.5 spectrum.
However, some equipment used for other purposes of solar cell characterization only employ
a laser which has a single wavelength. In the case when the light source is a laser, and only
one energy is used, the resultant total generation rate becomes Equation (2.4). The energy of
the laser is given by the energy of a photon at the relevant wavelength ( h·c
λ ), where h, c and
λ denotes the Planck constant, the speed of light, and the wavelength respectively.
G(E) = I0(1 −R)(1 −e−αd)1
d
λ
h · c
(2.4)
For a laser, the light intensity is deﬁned as the power of the laser hitting the solar cell, divided
by the area of the light/laser-spot, as shown in Equation 2.5, with the unit W/cm2. [24]
I0(λ) = Plaser
Alaser
(2.5)
The average generation rate for a solar cell irradiated by a laser with a known wavelength and
spot size then becomes (2.6).
G(E) =
Plaser · λ
Alaser · h · c(1 −R)(1 −e−αd)1
d
(2.6)
For experiments where multiple lasers have been employed to irradiate one sample, i.e. if
several light sources has been used in combination, the overall generation rate can be found
by adding the separate generation rates together. This is only valid if the lasers have the same
spot size.
==PAGE:19==
2.2. RECOMBINATION
5
2.2
Recombination
Recombination is the opposite process of generation, and is (as the name indicates) when
separated electrons and holes recombine. The recombination works to restore the equilibrium
EHP population, which gets distorted by the incident sunlight. There are three diﬀerent types
of recombination processes in a solar cell; radiative recombination, Auger recombination and
Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) recombination. Radiative and Auger recombination are intrinsic
properties of the semiconductor material, whereas the SRH recombination depends on the
purity and quality of the material. [6] The excess minority carrier lifetime, is the average
time a carrier exists before recombination occurs. Photogenerated charge carriers, also called
excess minority carriers (∆n), are generally assumed to recombine at a rate R. Deﬁnition of
the carrier lifetime (τ) can then be seen in Equation (2.7). Under steady state conditions, the
generation and recombination will be in equilibrium and thus equal to each other. [25]
τ(∆n) = ∆n(t)
R(t)
(2.7)
(a)
Radiative recombina-
tion.
(b) Auger recombination.
(c) Shockley-Read-Hall recombinaiton.
Figure 2.2: The three types of recombination processes. [6]
2.2.1
Intrinsic recombination
Recombination mainly occurs at defect sites in the semiconductor, but even in a perfect semi-
conductor intrinsic recombination will still be present through the radiative and Auger pro-
cesses.
Radiative recombination is when an electron in the conduction band recombines with a hole
in the valence band, and a photon is emitted with the energy of the bandgap (Eg). It is
illustrated in Figure 2.2a. The recombination rate will depend on the absorption coeﬃcient
of the material, and the photon ﬂux from the semiconductor. The radiative lifetime (τrad)
is deﬁned as the time between generation, and recombination due to radiative recombination
for a carrier. For indirect bandgap materials the τrad is much longer than for direct bandgap
materials. In indirect bandgap materials, the other recombination processes tend to dominate,
since they are more probable. [6]
Auger recombination is a type of non-radiative recombination. It is a three carrier process in
which the energy released by recombination is dissipated by increasing the energy of a second
free carrier. An example of the process is shown in Figure 2.2b, where two excited electrons
collide, resulting in the recombination of the ﬁrst electron, while the resulting energy increase
the kinetic energy of the second electron. Shortly after (< 1ps), the second electron thermal-
izes and returns to its original energy in the conduction band. The Auger lifetime is denoted
==PAGE:20==
6
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
by τAuger. In silicon solar cells, the Auger recombination is particularly signiﬁcant in highly
doped regions and in the bulk when the eﬃciency of the cell reaches more than 25%. [6,13]
2.2.2
Shockley-Read-Hall recombination
Shockley-Read-Hall recombination is named after the people who ﬁrst derived the recombina-
tion rate for this process, but it is also often referred to as ”non-radiative recombination” or
”trap-assisted recombination”. It is based on the fact that all semiconductors contain some
amount of imperfections in the crystal lattice, such as Shottky and Frenkel defects, or contam-
ination sites, referred to here as defect sites. At these defect sites so-called traps within the
bandgap of the structure occur. These states are spatially localized defect energy levels, which
have the tendency to capture free carriers thus providing a low-energy pathway for recombi-
nation, as shown in Figure 2.2c. Meaning that recombination occurs frequently at impurities
and defects in the semiconductor material. The lifetime of carriers which recombine due to
the SRH process is denoted by τSRH, and it is deﬁned as the minimum lifetime for a carrier
when all of the trap states are occupied by a carrier of the opposite type. In most solar cells,
the SRH recombination is the dominant recombination process, giving a short τSRH.
In addition to the typical defect sites in the semiconductor, complexes between elements can
also occur. This gives an extra contribution to the SRH recombination. The most abundant
one is a boron-oxygen (B-O) complex, occurring in p-type Czochralski (Cz) silicon. Czochral-
ski is the standard method for producing silicon ingots, but it can often be limited by an
unwanted high concentration of oxygen. [6, 26] The B-O complex forms as a result of pro-
longed illumination, leading to what is called light-induced degradation of the lifetime of the
cell. Diﬀerent methods for subduing the degradation exist, such as using high quality silicon
- typically ﬂoat zone (FZ) silicon. An alternative to the high quality (and high price) silicon,
is to deactivate the complex by illumination or applied forward bias, both at slightly elevated
temperature. [27]
The surface of the solar cell is a severe interruption from the crystal structure. Here, a very
high density of trap states forms just about a continous distrubution cross the bandgap. This is
due to unpassivated, dangling bonds, as well as adsorbed impurities. If left unpassivated, it is
the origin for extensive eﬃciency losses in the solar cell. Passivation will be further introduced
in Section 2.5. [6]
2.3
Silicon photovoltaics
Silicon is the second most abundant element in the earth crust, and deﬁnitely one of the most
studied elements in the periodic table. Before the photovoltaic (PV) industry, silicon was
already well established in the integrated circuit industry. Eﬃcient production techniques are
already in place for silicon. All of this contributes to making silicon a well suited and cheap
material for industrial solar cells. [6,13]
Silicon is an indirect bandgap material. Meaning that in an energy-momentum (E-k) diagram,
the conduction band minimum and the valence band maximum occur at diﬀerent positions
along the crystal wave vector (see Figure 2.3). A consequence of this is that a single photon
with an energy higher than the bandgap energy will not be enough to excite an electron, as it
does not have enough momentum. Due to this diﬀerence in bandgap, indirect bandgap materi-
als have lower absorption than direct bandgap materials. Indirect bandgap materials therefore
need a much larger bulk thickness (> 100µm) than direct bandgap materials (about 3µm).
However, this also gives a much slower recombination of electrons and holes, as explained in
Section 2.2. [6]
There are many diﬀerent structures of solar cells, varying in complexity, material and eﬃ-
ciency. However, some components are common for all of them, and necessary for making a
working solar cell. The main constituent for all solar cells is the absorber, which is the bulk
silicon layer (the wafer) in silicon photovoltaics. The absorber, as the name indicates, absorbs
==PAGE:21==
2.3. SILICON PHOTOVOLTAICS
7
Figure 2.3: Direct and indirect bandgap. [28]
the light and it is where the electron-hole pairs are generated. Furthermore, all solar cells
nowadays also include selective contacts - often in the form of a pn-junction as will be intro-
duced in the next section. Selective contacts ensure the separation of the charge carriers, so
that only one type of carriers reach each of the contacts, thus preventing recombination. The
third fundamental component of all solar cells is the metal contacts, typically in the form of a
metal grid on the front and a complete metal layer on the back of the cell - though many other
variations also exist, such as interdigitated back contact (IBC) cells, where both contacts are
on the back of the cell. [13] During operation, the two metal contacts are connected through
an external circuit, and current is generated by the cell. Given these three components, a
functional solar cell can be realized.
Several other components are usually added to modern solar cells to increase the eﬃciency.
Most solar cells these days also include for instance surface texturing of the wafer to achieve
light trapping and/or anti-reﬂective coatings, and a passivating coating. Due to new research,
solar cell eﬃciency has been improving a lot in recent years.
On the industrial scale, the
standard solar cell has typically been a simple pn-junction cell, with a pyramid textured
surface, silicon nitride as a passivating and anti-reﬂective layer, metal grid on the front and
full aluminium coverage on the back, as shown in Figure 2.4. The aluminum on the back also
creates a back surface ﬁeld (BSF), which helps limit rear surface recombination to some extent.
Typical values for the industrial cells for single junctions at 1 sun with BSF technology is 18-
19.8%. [8,9,17] The cell is simple to produce while still providing a decent eﬃciency, though
relatively far from the theoretical maximum of 29.4%. [29]
Figure 2.4: (a) A standard P-type solar cell with BSF technology. Full covering aluminium contact on the
back. [17] (b) A PERC cell with localized back surface ﬁeld technology, and a full covering aluminium contact
on the back. [17]
Many new structures have emerged on the lab scale with much improved eﬃciencies. The
one most adapted to the industrial sector is the passivated emitter rear cell (PERC), which is
rather similar to the BSF cell, but it has optimized the rear surface by adding a passivating ﬁlm
with local openings to form the rear contact (see Figure 2.4). It was introduced in the early
eighties, and by 1989 it was reported with a record eﬃciency of 22.8%. [17,30,31] It is highly
compatible with current PV production lines, and though it requires a slightly increased cost it
is preferred due to the improved eﬃciency. The eﬃciency for the PERC cell has recently been
==PAGE:22==
8
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
raised even higher to 23.26%, and is expected to increase even further. [17,32] The International
technology roadmap for PV technology (ITRPV) has predicted the market share of the PERC
cell to be 30% by 2020, with an expected further increase in subsequent years. [17,33] Similar
to the PERC cell is the PERL cell (passivated emitter and rear local diﬀusion), but with local
boron diﬀusion at the rear contact points. The PERL cell had the record for highest eﬃciency
for many years with its 25%, but have remained at the lab-scale as it is too complicated and
expensive for the industry. [13,34] The silicon solar cell with highest eﬃciency overall to date is
a heterojunction cell called HIT (Heterojunction with Intrinsic Thin ﬁlm), which has achieved
a groundbreaking 26.4%. [10] It will be described in further detail in Section 2.6.
2.4
Junctions
Doping silicon with impurities alters the conductivity of silicon, thus producing a higher cur-
rent. [13] Silicon is a group IV element, so doping with either a group III or group V element
will give positive (p-type) or negative (n-type) doping respectively. Typically Boron is used
for p-type doping, and Phosphorous for n-type. Boron doped in silicon becomes a substitu-
tional acceptor, while phosphorous becomes a substitutional donor. The resulting acceptor
and donor band in the bandgap shift the Fermi energy. There are diﬀerent methods for doping
silicon. The three most common methods are diﬀusion from either a doped silicon oxide or a
gaseous source (typically POCl3 or BBr3), or ion implantation.
The most common architecture of a solar cell is a homojunction, made of p- and n-type silicon
in contact (a pn-juntion). When a p and n type silicon comes into contact, the electrons will
ﬂow towards the p-type, and the holes toward the n-type, due to the large diﬀerence in carrier
density of the two materials. This forms a depletion region of ﬁxed charges on either side of
the junction. The band structure of the energy diagram will realign according to the Fermi
energy, as seen in Figure 2.5a. The junction now works as a rectiﬁer of the light, and the solar
cell can therefore be described as a large area diode. Furthermore, the rectifying property of
the junction also increases the photovoltaic eﬀect of the material. On the p-side, the minority
carrier electrons close to the depletion region will be easily swept over to the n-side, while the
holes will be blocked, due to the electric ﬁeld. Similarly, on the n-side the minority carrier
holes will be easily swept to the p-side, while the majority carrier electrons will be blocked.
The separated charge pairs will therefore drive a photocurrent, instead of merely recombining
immediately. A variation of the pn-junction is called heterojunction where two diﬀerent semi-
conductor materials make up the junction. [6]
A heterojunction is formed when two semiconductor materials, with a diﬀerence in bandgap,
are put into contact, leading to discontinuities and oﬀsets in the band structure. An example
of a pn heterojunction is shown in Figure 2.5b, where a wide bandgap n-type semiconductor
is on the left and a narrow bandgap p-type semiconductor on the right. Depending on the
band structure of materials used, the depletion region can still occur, but typically along with
band-discontinuities. The example in Figure 2.5b displays such band-discontinuities, here in
the form of a ”spike” in the middle of the region in which holes can accumulate. [13] The most
well known heterojunction solar cell is the aforementioned HIT structure.
==PAGE:23==
2.5. SURFACE PASSIVATION
9
(a) The band diagram for a pn-junction [6]
(b) Example of a possible band diagram of for a pn
heterojunction. [13]
Figure 2.5: Band diagrams of pn homo- and hetero-junction. Fermi energy denoted by EF , energy of the
conduction band denoted by EC, energy of the valence band denoted by EV , energy of vacuum denoted by
Evac, bandgap denoted by Eg, electron aﬃnities denoted by χ, work function denoted by Φ, the elementary
charge is denoted by q.
2.5
Surface passivation
The surface of a silicon wafer can be thought of as a severe interruption in the crystal struc-
ture, acting like an inﬁnite sink of lifetime. The amount of dangling bonds combined with
the high fraction of impurities at the surface (as compared to the bulk) provides an almost
continuous distribution of trap states across the bandgap, indicating that the recombination
at the surface is almost entirely dominated by the SRH mechanism. By passivating the sur-
face, this recombination is subdued, and the generated carriers are free to contribute to the
photocurrent instead. The are two typical methods for passivating the surface: ﬁeld-eﬀect and
chemical passivation. [13]
Field eﬀect passivation takes advantage of the fact that both electrons and holes need to be
present for recombination to occur. By adding an electric ﬁeld right below the surface, ei-
ther electrons or holes will be repelled depending on the ﬁeld polarity, leading to a repressed
recombination. Typically, this is achieved by utilization of a doping proﬁle below the sur-
face/interface, or by ﬁxed charge density at the interface. [13]
Chemical passivation encompasses saturating the dangling bonds, and thereby reducing the
amount of defects. Typically, this is done by growing or depositing a dielectric ﬁlm on the
surface. After depositing the dielectric, the interface defect density often needs to be further
reduced by hydrogen passivation. This is done by annealing the sample at elevated temper-
ature, either utilizing hydrogen atoms already in the dielectric ﬁlm, or in a hydrogen-rich
atmosphere to introduce new hydrogen (e.g. forming gas annealing). The most used material
for surface passivation is Silicon Nitride (SiNx), typically added by plasma enhanced chem-
ical vapour deposition (PECVD). One of the main advantages of SiNx, is that in addition
to providing a good passivation, it simultaneously acts as an anti-reﬂective coating - further
increasing the eﬃciency of the cell. It is a positive-charge dielectric, and therefore particularly
good at passivating n-type Si surfaces. One of the best passivation layers for silicon surfaces,
is thermally grown Silicon Oxide (SiOx). The silicon oxide grows into the wafer, giving a much
lower interface defect density than other ﬁlms which are simply deposited onto the surface.
In cases where the high temperature of the thermal growing of silicon oxide is unﬁt, it is also
possible to deposit the silicon oxide by PECVD, though this does not give as good results
as the thermally grown oxide. Another typical passivating ﬁlm is Aluminium Oxide (AlOx),
which has been shown to give good results. One drawback of AlOx, is that it is synthesized
by atomic layer deposition (ALD), which is a slow and expensive technique - though it has
started to become more common on an industrial scale in recent years. [13]
==PAGE:24==
10
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Quantifying the passivation
By measuring the recombination activity, it is possible to quantify how well the solar cell is
passivated. Two typical parameters for quantifying are the eﬀective carrier lifetime (τeff) and
the surface recombination velocity (S). The eﬀective lifetime can be separated into the lifetime
from the surface (τs) and from the bulk (τb). The bulk lifetime can further be separated in
to its contribution from the diﬀerent recombination mechanisms, as presented in Section 2.2.
The diﬀerent components are related together by the sum of the inverse values as shown in
Equation (2.8). Furthermore, as mentioned in the same section, under steady state conditions
with a known generation rate, the eﬀective lifetime and amount of excess carriers are related
according to Equation (2.9). [25]
1
τeff
= 1
τs
+ 1
τb
= 1
τs
+
 1
τrad
+
1
τAuger
+
1
τSRH

(2.8)
∆n(t) = τ(∆n) · G(t)
(2.9)
In high quality wafers, the radiative and SRH recombination can be assumed negligible. When
the surface passivation is the limiting factor in Equation (2.8), the Auger recombination can
also be assumed negligible. In this case the surface and eﬀective lifetime is the same. The
surface lifetime often gets represented through the surface recombination velocity. As seen
in Equation (2.10), it is a parameter dependant on thickness of the wafer (d), and the diﬀu-
sion constant of minority carriers (D). It is a particularly good parameter for comparing the
passivation of solar cells with diﬀerent thicknesses (if the bulk is of the same quality). [25]
S =
d
2

τs −1
D
  d
π
2
(2.10)
2.6
Passivated Contacts
An especially challenging area for passivation is at the metal contacts. Metal contacts are
in place on both sides of the cell to extract the power that has been generated, and are of
big importance. At the back side they cover the entire surface, but on the front they form
a metal grid in order to minimize shadow loss. In samples with a dielectric passivating ﬁlm
on top, the metal ﬁngers are going through the dielectric ﬁlm, and in direct contact with the
silicon surface. At this interface, the bandgap of the semiconductor is alongside the continuous
distribution of states which are in the metal conduction band. At the interface, charge carriers
from the semiconductor moves into the metal independently into unoccupied states around
the Fermi energy. In addition, the dangling bonds at the semiconductor gets badly passivated
by the metal, leading to a lot of defect states in the bandgap. The surface recombination
velocity at the interface is almost inﬁnitely large, merely limited by the current density of the
minority carriers. [23] It is therefore of great importance to hinder the loss of current at the
metal-semiconductor interface. [13] The traditional way of doing this is to add a highly doped
region right below the surface, which will reduce the minority charge carrier and prevent re-
combination. However, in highly doped regions, the Auger recombination becomes dominant,
thus preventing the solar cell to reach its maximum eﬃciency of 29.4%. [29] A tried and tested
way of overcoming this conundrum is to reduce the metallized area of the front surface, and to
limit the highly doped regions to be only locally above the metallization. This is the approach
of the aforementioned PERL, which had the record for highest eﬃciency solar cell for several
years. [34] See Figure 2.6a for an illustration of the PERL cell with inverted texturing of the
front surface. With this improved eﬃciency, the part of the surface with metallization in the
PERL cell is merely 1.1%, but the metallized area still account for 66% of the recombination
in the entire emitter. [35] Therefore, if the eﬃciency limit of 29.4% is to be reached, alternative
methods are imperative. Furthermore, by reducing the area of the front contact the transport
==PAGE:25==
2.6. PASSIVATED CONTACTS
11
route of the majority carriers is lengthened, increasing the chance that they recombine before
reaching the contact leading to resistive losses. [36] The required alternative contacts need
to allow for a undemanding transport of the majority carriers, whilst still suppressing the
minority carrier recombination. Since the recombination cannot be reduced by highly doped
regions (due to the Auger limitations), the interface needs to be passivated. To summarize,
an ideal contact will be selective towards the majority carriers, while still eﬀectively reducing
the recombination at the interface. Such contacts are frequently referred to as ”passivated
contacts”, or ”carrier-selective contacts” (though the term ”carrier-selective contacts” does
not take into consideration the need for good passivation). [13]
To date, two categories of passivated contacts have been experimentally realized with good
results: the silicon heterojunction and the semiconductor-insulator-semiconductor (SIS) junc-
tion. [13] The silicon heterojunction in question is the aforementioned HIT structure. SIS
junctions, which stem from the metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) junction, consist of two
semiconductors in contact, separated by a thin insulator. The insulator is typically silicon
oxide, and is around 15˚A thick.
The best example of such a junction is the tunnel oxide
passivated contacts (TOPCon) structure, which is the focus of this master thesis.
(a) The PERL solar cell structure. [34]
(b) A cross-section of the HIT
structure, as presented in [37].
Black lines at top/bottom rep-
resent the metal contacts. Sizes
not to scale.
Figure 2.6
2.6.1
The HIT Cell
The HIT cell is a junction of doped amorphous silicon on a silicon wafer, separated by a thin
intrinsic silicon buﬀer layer (Figure 2.6b). The intrinsic layer has a low defect density, and
acts as a passivator for the a-Si/c-Si interface. [38] The doped amorphous silicon layer forms a
junction with the c-Si, and by inducing band bending reduces the amount of minority carriers
at the interface. It is an eﬃcient separator of the charge carriers, as the built-in ﬁeld is higher
than for typical pn-junction silicon devices. [17] Furthermore, by having a high enough doping
of the a-Si layer, an unhindered transport of the majority carriers is ensured. The HIT cell
has received a lot of attention due to its excellent eﬃciency, and has shown a steady increase
in eﬃciency since its original 20% in 1994. [17] It is currently holding the record for highest
eﬃciency silicon solar cell with its 26.4%, which has been achieved by Kaneka by utilizing the
HIT structure as an IBC cell. [10] A special characteristic for the HIT cell, is the need for a low
temperature process ﬂow. Since it employs the use of amorphous silicon, the temperature must
be under 200◦C at all times. [17] Even though it may be argued that this leads to a cheaper
and more environmentally friendly process, due to energy savings from the high-temperature
processes, it makes the cell rather incompatible with current industrial process lines. [39]
==PAGE:26==
12
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.6.2
The TOPCon Structure
As mentioned, the SIS junction consists of two semiconductors separated by a thin ﬁlm dielec-
tric insulator. The SIS junction relies on the good passivation by the thin ﬁlm insulator, and
the depletion of the minority carriers because of band bending induced due to an appropriately
doped semiconductor. An example of the resulting band structure when using two semicon-
ductors with diﬀerent doping is shown in Figure 2.7a. Band-bending occurs between the two
semiconductors, and properties similar to the pn-junction. An appropriate thin ﬁlm insulator
is typically silicon dioxide. The silicon dioxide layer then passivates the interface, and further
works as a hindrance to the one of the carriers (while ideally letting the other carrier-type
through). For an n-type substrate as example, the holes will easily tunnel through the oxide
on the front to the poly of opposite polarity, while the electrons will be hindered - while on
the back the electrons will easily tunnel through while the oxide will act as a hindrance for
the holes. In other words, the oxide layer will act as a hindrance to the minority carriers with
respect to the poly (while ideally letting through the majority carriers with respect to the
poly). This makes it a valid candidate for both passivating and carrier-selective contacting.
The most common SIS structure is amorphous or polycrystalline silicon on a silicon wafer
separated by a thin silicon oxide - which is the structure frequently referred to as TOPCon.
Since the 1980s, diﬀerent versions of the TOPCon structure has been produced in various
ways, and under diﬀerent names. [40] The term Tunnel Oxide Passivated Contacts (TOPCon)
was ﬁrst coined by Feldmann and coworkers in 2013, and has since been a standard term for
the structure. [39] Since the beginning, it has produced promising eﬃciencies, starting at 23%
when it was ﬁrst produced in 2013 as a back contact by Feldmann and co-workers, reaching
25.1% shortly later. [14, 39, 41] Employing polysilicon rather than amorphous silicon has by
far shown the best results, very recently reaching 26.1% under the name POLO (polysilicon
on oxide) contact, as produced by The Institute for Solar Energy Research Hamelin (ISFH) in
the form of an IBC cell. [15–17]
(a) The band diagram for a SIS junction [13]
(b) TEM image of the cross-section of a
TOPCon structure, based on amourphous sil-
icon as the top semiconductor. [13]
Figure 2.7
The general structure of TOPCon cells is either polycrystalline or amorphous silicon (partly
crystallized due to high temperature annealing) thin layer on a silicon wafer, separated by a
ultrathin oxide. The silicon oxide acts as a separator between the two silicon layers, eﬀectively
prohibiting epitaxial regrowth of the silicon. [42] Band bending is induced in the two silicon
layers, and has a higher ﬁeld than normal pn-junctions due to the heterojunction-like nature
of the structure. This means a more eﬀective carrier separation at the interface. The most
important part of the structure can be said to be the ultra thin oxide. As explained in Section
==PAGE:27==
2.7. LIGHT MANAGEMENT
13
2.5, silicon oxide is an excellent surface passivator. Since it grows into the structure, it eﬀec-
tively passivates all the dangling bonds at the interface. In addition to this, the oxide layer
also helps act as a hindrance for carriers, as explained above. All dielectric ﬁlms will act as an
energy barrier for both the minority and majority carriers, but if the oxide layer is thin enough
the majority carriers can tunnel through - giving extra strength to the carrier selectivity of
the junction. For tunneling to be possible, the silicon oxide needs to be around 10-15˚A and
of a constant thickness throughout the surface. [43] Other mechanisms for the transport of
majority carriers through the oxide have also been suggested, for instance that the majority
carriers are actually transported through pinholes in the oxide layers, especially if the oxide
thickness exceeds 15˚A. [42,44,45]
The TOPCon structure can be processed in considerably simple ways, that are quite compati-
ble with the industrial process lines. The general fabrication scheme for the TOPCon structure
involves cleaning the substrate wafer, followed by the formation of the thin tunnel-oxide and
generating the doped poly-Si layers. After the deposition of the poly-Si layer, annealing is
required to increase the crystallization fraction, alleviate built-up stress in the layers, and
improving the surface passivation which in turn gives better junction properties. [46–48] A
thin conducting oxide (TCO) is necessary between the top poly and the front contact, and is
deposited to the structure last. The poly-Si eﬀectively transport carriers vertically, but TCO
is required for good lateral transport to the metal contact. Typical TCOs are aluminum doped
zinc oxide (AZO) and indium doped tin oxide (ITO). ITO gives the highest conductivity and is
the current state of the art. [49,50] Forming gas annealing is often performed after the initial
annealing to improve the passivation. Atomic hydrogen easily diﬀuses within silicon due to
its low atomic mass, and is eﬃcient in passivating dangling bonds, which might be lingering
at the SiO2/poly-Si interface. [46] Many diﬀerent routes to making the TOPCon structure
have been tried and tested. In this thesis the structure has been constructed by using warm
nitric acid to form the tunnel oxide, and low pressure chemical vapor deposition to form the
poly-silicon layers. AZO has been deposited as the TCO, by atomic layer deposition. Each
of the fabrication methods are explained in more detail in Section 3.1, and the process ﬂow is
presented in Section 5.1.
2.7
Light Management
Light management in Si solar cells is the process of tuning the optical properties of the cell so
that as much of the light as possible will be absorbed in the absorber. In an ideal solar cell, all
the light hitting the surface would be absorbed and directly contribute to the photo-current.
However, this is not the general case. A lot of the light hitting the surface is reﬂected oﬀ
rather than absorbed. Furthermore, light with wavelengths in the upper region of the bandgap
(i.e. infrared light) can easily get transmitted through the silicon, due to the low absorption
coeﬃcient. Another loss of current is parasitic absorption, in which the light does get absorbed,
but in another layer in the structure rather than the wafer (and thus not contributing to the
photo-current). [13] For light management to be successful, it is therefore required that the
light hitting the cell must be transmitted into the cell itself, only be absorbed in the wafer
(and not one of the outer layers), and have a long path length within the wafer (to increase
the probability of this happening).
2.7.1
Parasitic Absorption
Parasitic absorption (PA) is when light is absorbed in a layer that is not the absorber. Thereby
the intensity of the light is reduced before it has the chance to be absorbed in the absorber. In
silicon solar cells, two types of parasitic absorbance are particularly common. This is inter-band
absorption and free-carrier absorption (FCA). Inter-band absorption, also called band-to-band
absorption, occurs mainly at the front of the substrate, thus generating an electron hole pair
==PAGE:28==
14
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
that is not contributing to the photo-current. The reason for the light to be absorbed at the
front of the substrate is because only short-wavelength light has a high enough energy for band-
to-band absorption, and this light will typically be completely absorbed before passing through
the substrate. To limit the inter-band absorption at the front it is wise to use large band-gap
materials on top of the substrate. An example is AZO which is frequently used as a TCO in
the TOPCon structure, and has a band-gap of around 3eV. [50] If this is not possible, like the
poly-Si layer in the TOPCon structure, indirect band-gap materials are better candidates than
direct band-gap materials. In this case the thickness of the layer directly inﬂuences the amount
of light parasitically absorbed, and should therefore be kept suﬃciently thin. [13] For poly-Si,
it has been shown that layers of 20nm and less give an acceptable total parasitic absorption of
1.1mA/cm2. Increasing the layer thickness gives an unacceptable parasitic absorption in the
front layer, see Figure 2.8. Increasing the doping-level in the poly will also give increased PA,
particularly for n-type poly, but at <20nm it is insigniﬁcant. [51]
Figure 2.8: Short circuit current density parasitic absorption losses for n- and p-type poly-Si at variable
thickness. [51]
The other type of parasitic absorption, FCA, is a resonance phenomenon. Here, free carriers
(electrons or holes) absorb photons whose energy is near their plasma frequency, through their
collective oscillation. It is particularly a problem in doped semiconductors and in TCOs. The
FCA can occur both at the front and back of the cell. A way of reducing the FCA, besides
limiting the thickness of the parasitically absorbing layers, is to use lightly doped materials
as they will have less free carriers. However, this has other negative consequences. A lightly
doped poly-layer will give less band-bending in the junction interface. A less doped TCO will
give a higher sheet resistance, and thus have reduced lateral transport of the photo-carriers in
the layer. A compromise must be made. [13,50,52]
FCA also occurs in metals, and is often largely seen for the back contact in solar cells at
long wavelengths. To limit the FCA in the metal, a highly reﬂective metal will help. An
example of a highly reﬂective metal is silver, but it is however expensive which limits its
use. Aluminum is a decent reﬂector, which is quite cheap. However, it should be noted that
the dominant parasitic absorption mechanism is FCA in the rear contact for many full-area
aluminum back contact silicon solar cells. [13,53] Furthermore, a cell with an absorbing back
contact for photons with energy below the band-gap will heat up when exposed to sunlight
over time, which in turn will give a lower maximum voltage point. [13,54]
2.7.2
Reﬂection and Light Trapping
Oﬀof a planar, plain silicon surface more than 30% of the incident light is reﬂected - due to
both the low absorption coeﬃcient and the diﬀerence in refractive index from that of air. [13]
It is therefore of signiﬁcant interest to reduce the reﬂectance, in order to increase the eﬃciency.
The two main methods for combating reﬂection from the cell is anti-reﬂective coatings and
texturing of the surface. Anti-reﬂective coatings are typically integrated in an existing layer
==PAGE:29==
2.7. LIGHT MANAGEMENT
15
in the structure, which is then required to have two tasks. The two typical layers, which can
be additionally used as anti-reﬂective coating, is the passivating layer (such as SiNx), or the
TCO used to help the lateral transport of carriers at the surface (see Figure 2.6b). The ﬁlm
creates a destructive interference between the light that is reﬂected and incident, and it is
chosen based on its refractive indices as compared to that of air and silicon, and its reﬂectance
minimum. [13,55]
The other main method for reducing the reﬂectance is through surface texturing.
By do-
ing this, the light which is reﬂected when hitting the surface, can be reﬂected onto the surface
again - thus getting a second chance of absorption. This is shown in Figure 2.9.
Figure 2.9: Incident and reﬂected light on a uncoated textured silicon surface. [13]
The predominant method for texturing monocrystalline silicon, is random pyramid texturing.
This is done relatively easily in potassium hydroxide (KOH) solution, which will etch silicon
along the [100] planes, resulting in random pyramids with [111] facets, and a base angle of
50-52◦. KOH etching is a cheap and quick process, and the resultant texturing reduces the re-
ﬂectance from ∼34 % to ∼10%. [13] Other textures are also used, though they are often harder
to achieve and only give slight improvement in subduing the reﬂectance, an example of this
is the inverted pyramids implemented in the PERL cell (Figure 2.6a). In recent years, a new
way of texturing the silicon surface has been developed, with the nickname black silicon (b-Si),
due to its completely black and non-reﬂective surface. [19,56] Black-silicon surface structuring
is a promising way of reducing surface reﬂection to eliminate the need for an anti-reﬂective
coating. The high light absorption in b-Si is achieved by using nanostructures smaller than
the wavelength of the incident light, and in this way more closely match the refractive index
of the Si/air interface. Black-Si nanostructure can be made with diﬀerent shapes. In recent
years an eﬃcient method for producing it with reactive ion etching (RIE) has been developed.
The resultant structure consists of randomly oriented nanocones and has been used for solar
cells with above 22% eﬃciency. Eﬀective use of the reactive ion etching produces surface with
less than 1% reﬂectance. [19–21] Reactive ion etching will be further introduced in Section 3.1.
Another source of reﬂectance loss is the light reﬂected from the metal contacts, often referred
to as ”shading”. For this reason, it is important that the size of the front contact is as small
as possible. As explained in Section 2.6, if the front contacts are too small, transport losses
of the majority carriers will occur. A compromise must therefore be made. A typical sizing
for the front grid in small lab scale solar cells is ﬁngers of ∼60 µ width, spaced approximately
2mm apart, connected together by a wider busbar. The ﬁngers will then account for a short
circuit current density loss of about 3-5%, while the busbar account for an additional 2-3%. [13].
The light that is neither absorbed, nor reﬂected upon impinging the silicon surface, gets
transmitted through. This is particularly a problem for the light in the IR region. A way of
subduing this problem is by light trapping. Light trapping refers to the technique of increasing
the path length of the light through the silicon, thus increasing the chance of absorption. This
is partially obtained through surface texturing, as the light then can be absorbed diagonally
==PAGE:30==
16
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
into the silicon and thus travelling for a longer distance before reaching the back surface. If
the cell has full backside coverage, the light which would normally be transmitted through the
cell will be reﬂected and its path length will be doubled. Again increasing the probability of
absorption. In this case, a fraction of the light hitting the back contact will also be parasiti-
cally absorbed in the metal. This can be almost completely removed by adding a transparent
thin ﬁlm dielectric between the back contact and the silicon (like in the PERL cell) - though
this often requires an increase in process steps. [13]
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3
Methods
3.1
Fabrication Methods
The main steps for fabricating the TOPCon structure are the growth of the tunnel oxide and
deposition of the polysilicon layers. However many diﬀerent process methods utilizing diﬀerent
physical and chemical concepts are required to produce the complete solar cell. In this section
the theory behind each of the employed fabrication methods will be brieﬂy presented, along
with a description of the relevant instruments used for fabricating the TOPCon cell. Since
the surface texturing has been done externally, the methods for these processes have not been
presented.
3.1.1
Tunnel Oxide Fabrication: Nitric Acid Oxidation
Apart from an initial cleaning of the wafers, the ﬁrst step of the process is the formation of
the tunnel oxide. The tunnel oxide plays a crucial role in the passivation of solar cells with the
TOPCon structure, and it is important that the oxide is of high quality. The natural native
oxide that forms on top of silicon must therefore be removed and replaced with a high purity
oxide.
A well tested method for generating the oxide is through oxidation in warm nitric
acid. [57] By placing the wafers in a nitric acid (HNO3, 69%) bath, with a temperature of
about 95◦C, a high quality, ultra-thin oxide is grown. This process is self-limiting, and stops
after the growth of an oxide with a thickness of 1.4-1.7nm. [14, 57, 58] The oxide layer has
shown to be stable at high temperatures. However, for annealing at above 900◦C a distinct
decrease in passivation is reported. A proposed reasoning for this is that the high temperature
causes a reaction to occur between the silicon oxide and the silicon, see Equation (3.1). [14]
SiO2(s) + Si(s) −→2SiO(g)
(3.1)
This creates local disruptions in the oxide layer, which leads to areas of unpassivated silicon
layers in direct contact with each other. Other methods for generating the oxide layer include
thermal oxidation, and the ozone-based techniques UV/O3 photo-oxidation and wet-chemical
oxidation in ozonized DI −H2O. These techniques opens for a wider temperature range during
annealing, as they show good stability at 900◦C. [59]
3.1.2
Chemical Vapor Deposition
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is the common name for a group of thin ﬁlm deposition
techniques, which are all based on the same basic principle. In all CVD processes, the same four
steps occur. The reactant gases are ﬁrst transported to the sample surface, where they adsorb
onto the sample. Thereafter, the reaction takes place, after which the left-over reactant gases
are removed from the surface. The way in which the reactants are introduced and removed
from the chamber depends on the CVD type. The type of chemical vapor deposition depends
17
==PAGE:32==
18
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
on the type of reactors used. The procedure can be done at atmospheric or low pressure. At
low pressure, the chemical reaction can either be induced purely thermally, or enhanced by a
plasma source. [48,60]
Low pressure chemical vapor deposition
Low pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) is a CVD technique performed in a tube
reactor at low pressure, with a thermally activated reaction. Due to the very low pressure in
a LPCVD process, the diﬀusion rate of the reactant gases are very slow, leading to a good
homogeneity of the thin ﬁlm and a uniform thickness. [60]
LPCVD is a particularly good method for deposition of poly-Silicon, which has been the
purpose of the method in this thesis. When depositing poly-Si, the resultant characteristics
of the poly is very dependant on the temperature and pressure during the LPCVD process.
The silicon deposited through an LPCVD process is the product of thermally decomposited
silane gas (SiH4). If deposited at 580◦C, the outcome is amourphous silicon. Increasing the
temperature induces the nucleation of ﬁne grains in the structure, and the deposited material
becomes polycrystalline at 610◦C. When deposited at higher temperature (i.e. 620◦C) slightly
larger grains are formed with a column-like structure, which only shows minimal change after
high-temperature annealing. [48] This behaviour is seen at 100mTorr. Increasing the pressure
will alter the morphology of the deposited silicon. The grain size is known to decrease with
increasing pressure. [61] By introducing a dopant gas in the LPCVD process can produce in-
situ doped poly-Si. Typical dopant gases are phosphine for n-type polysilicon, and diborane
for p-type polysilicon.
There are many ways of making the doped poly-Si, and several diﬀerent methods have been
tried and tested for the speciﬁc purpose of TOPCon fabrication. In 2013, Feldmann et al. [14]
proposed employing the aforementioned method of in-situ doped amorphous silicon layers,
followed by annealing to crystallize and generate the polysilicon. Yan and coworkers [58] has
proposed depositing undoped poly-Si by plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition, followed
by doping with POCl3 pre-deposition and subsequent drive in at high temperatures. In addi-
tion, deposition of undoped poly-Si with LPCVD followed by ion-implantation has also shown
promising results. [62]
In this project in-situ doped poly-Si has been produced in a horizontal Tempress LPCVD
Polysilicon furnace at 620◦C at a 200-250mTorr pressure. See Figure 3.1a for a schematic
illustration of the furnace. Silane gas was used at a ﬂow rate of 80sccm. Phosphorous doped
poly included phosphine (PPh3) as a dopant gas at a ﬂow rate of 7sccm. Boron doped poly
included diborane (B2H6) as a dopant gas at nominally 7sccm ﬂow rate.
Plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition
Plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) is another CVD process executed at
low pressure. In PECVD the reaction is activated by a plasma, allowing a lower process tem-
perature. For the reactions to occur at these temperatures (100-400◦C, the chemical reaction
must be enhanced by supplying radicals from a self-sustained plasma. PECVD can be used for
depositing a variety of ﬁlms, most commonly amorphous silicon and silicon dioxide. The qual-
ity of ﬁlms deposited are generally lower than the ones deposited by LPCVD, and can often
include a higher amount of contaminations. [48] Unlike LPCVD, PECVD does not typically
allow for a batch process. However, an advantage of PECVD is that it allows for a one-sided
deposition on the wafer. See illustration in Figure 3.1b.
In this project a 200-300 nm thick protective silicon dioxide layer was deposited by a SPTS
Multiplex PECVD system (no. MP0692) at a pressure of 550 mTorr with a combination of
silane (Si4, 12 sccm), nitrous oxide (N2O, 1420 sccm) and nitrogen (N2, 392 sccm) gases.
==PAGE:33==
3.1. FABRICATION METHODS
19
(a) Schematic overview of a horizontal LPCVD furnace.
[63]
(b) Schematic overview of a PECVD reactor.
Figure 3.1
Atomic layer deposition
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a version of low pressure CVD, in which the process occurs at
relatively low temperature (∼200◦C) and with extremely high precision. The concept of ALD
is to employ self-terminating reaction chemistry, in which a single atomic layer is deposited at
a time. One reactant gas (reactant A) is introduced in the chamber, followed by a purge and
introduction of the next reactant gas (reactant B), wherein reactant B reacts with the single
atomic layer adhered to the sample surface from reactant A. This is followed by yet another
purge to remove the extra reactant gas and generated byproducts. This is called one cycle (See
Figure 3.2), and by having a good separation between the reactant gases, the ﬁlm thickness can
be accurately predicted by choosing the amount of cycles. The two main limitations of ALD
processes lies in the slowness of the deposition, and the fact that only a selection of materials
can be produced (since the process relies on carefully chosen surface chemistry reactions.) [64]
In this project ALD has been employed for the fabrication of a 75nm thick aluminum doped
zinc oxide. This was produced by running 19 cycles of Diethylzinc (DEZ, 150sccm) precursor
as reactant A, and water (200sccm) as reactant B. This is followed by one cycle of Trimethyl
aluminium (TMA, 150sccm) as reactant A, and water (200sccm) as reactant B. The total 20
cycles forms one macrocycle, and 25 macrocycles was performed to form 75nm AZO. The
process was excecuted in a Picosun thermal ALD model R200, with deposition temperature
200◦C.
Figure 3.2: The steps of one cycle of atomic layer deposition. [64]
==PAGE:34==
20
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
3.1.3
Other Fabrication Techniques
Wafer cleaning
Before fabrication of the tunnel oxide, it is of utmost importance that the surface of the wafer
is completely clean, this way a good surface passivation is achieved at the interface when the
silicon oxide is grown. The cleaning procedure can also help passivate dangling surface-bonds
to some extent. [13] This is typically done in a RCA (Radio Corporation of America) cleaning
process. This removes organic contaminations on the surface by etching in a 5:1:1 solution
of water, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2, 30%) and ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH, 25%) at 70◦C
for 10 minutes. Inorganic metallic contaminations are subsequently removed by etching in a
5:1:1 mixture of water, hydrogen peroxide (30%) and hydrochloric acid (HCl, 37%) at 70◦C
for 10 minutes. Any oxide layer is furthermore removed by dipping in a hydroﬂoric acid (HF,
5%) bath for 30 seconds - which is a selective etch towards e.g.
silicon oxide and silicon
nitride, but which leaves the silicon untouched. [64] After an RCA etch, the surface of the
wafer should be contamination-free, and temporarily stable - but further processing should
proceed immediately to prevent the growth of the native oxide on the crystalline silicon (c-Si)
surface. [13,65]
Another type of wafer cleaning, particularly used to get rid of unwanted potassium-contamination,
is a version of the piranha method where wafers are cleaned at 80◦C for 10 minutes in a bath
consisting of a mixture of sulfuric acid (H2SO4, 98%) and ammonium persulfate ((NH4)2S2O8,
∼10g). [66]
Physical vapor deposition
Physical vapor deposition (PVD) is, as the name entails, the term for vapor deposition tech-
niques based on physical processes. It is similar to CVD, except that in PVD the precursor
starts out in solid form (compared to gasous form in CVD). [67] E-beam evaporation and
sputtering are two common PVD techniques, both of which are line-of-sight techniques. This
means that they only deposit material on substrates right in the ”line-of-sight” of the physical
vapor, and not for instance on side-walls or behind any blockage. In E-beam evaporation, an
electron beam is generated and gets directed at the material to be evaporated (e.g. aluminum).
The aluminum then heats up quickly until it sublimes, and evaporates. The vapor reach the
substrate surface and deposits there as a thin ﬁlm. [68]
In this project thin ﬁlms of aluminum was deposited at 0.001mTorr by a Temescal FC-2000
e-beam evaporator from Ferrotec, with an Inﬁcon quartz crystal monitor for in-situ thickness
measurements.
Deep reactive ion etching
Deep reactive ion etching (DRIE) is a form of reactive ion etching (also called dry etching and
plasma etching). In plasma etching, the material is etched from the surface of a wafer by a
combination of chemical and physical processes - speciﬁcally ion-bombardment, ion induced
damage, chemical etching and generation of radicals. The technique employs a plasma induced
by a radio frequency electromagnetic ﬁeld. The etch gases in the plasma are chosen based on
the material to be etched. Etching silicon can be easily done by a halogen plasma, giving the
corresponding silicon tetrahalides as the main reaction product. [69]
In this project silicon was etched by a Advanced Deep Reactive Ion Etching Pegasus (no.
MP0636), at 10◦C and 10mTorr pressure with a 5W platen power and 150W coil power. The
reactant gas was sulfur hexaﬂuoride (SF6, 80sccm).
Laser micromachining
Laser micromachining is a technique that can be used for removing material from very precise
areas of a substrate. In essence, a pulsed laser beam hits the substrate surface and deposits
ﬁnite amounts of energy into the sample, resulting in a very precise, small material removal.
==PAGE:35==
3.2. CHARACTERIZATION METHODS
21
In this project, laser micromachining has been used to form a shadow mask out of a steel
sheet, and to cleave the ﬁnished solar cell wafers in four. The accuracy of the cleaved areas
are dependant on the pulse time, amount of repetitions used, wavelength of the laser, and the
distribution of intensity in the laser. [70] In this project a microSTRUCT vario laser micro-
machining tool from 3D-Micromac AG was employed, with a 50W picosecond laser FUEGO
from Time Bandwidth used at a 1064nm wavelength.
3.2
Characterization methods
In this work, the main method for characterization of speciﬁc layers during the fabrication
has been ellipsometry. The complete solar cells were subsequently characterized by I-V and
quantum eﬃciency measurements, along with some measurements of reﬂectance. In addition
to this, eﬀective lifetime measurements were performed to measure lifetime samples prior to
fabrication of the solar cells.
3.2.1
Variable Angle Spectroscopic Ellipsometry
Variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry (VASE) is a non-destructive technique which can be
helpful in determining an accurate thickness of thin ﬁlms. In ellipsometry, polarized light is
directed at a sample from diﬀerent angles and the reﬂected light is subsequently re-polarized
and measured with respect to change in intensity. It is an indirect method, meaning that
the results are not useful by themselves, but must be analyzed by an appropriate model.
The physics of light reﬂection is very well understood, so precise models based on classical
electromagnetic theory are available. When the refractive index of a material is known, precise
ﬁlm thicknesses can thereby be determined. [71] Ellipsometry measurements done during the
course of this thesis was performed with a J.A. Woolam Ellipsometer VASE.
3.2.2
Quantum eﬃciency
Quantum eﬃciency (QE) is a characterization method that gives information about the cells
performance in short-circuit conditions as a function of wavelength. The cell is illuminated
at speciﬁc wavelengths and the generated current is measured for each wavelength.
This
is repeated for all the wavelengths of interested, which for silicon is ∼300-1100nm.
The
conversion eﬃciency is then calculated by comparing the generated current to the incident
photon ﬂux.
The photon ﬂux can be known by calibrating with a photodiode of known
characteristics. [25] The external quantum eﬃciency (in percent) of the cell can be calculated
according to Equation (3.2), for each wavelength. Here, the current generated by the cell at
each wavelength λ is denoted by Icell, and the power of the monochromatic beam is denoted
by EB.
QE(λ) = 100 · Icell(λ)
EB(λ) · hc
λq
(3.2)
Since the resulting graph will include both reﬂective and internal carrier recombination losses,
it is referred to as the external quantum eﬃciency (EQE). An ideal graph will be showing
100% eﬃciency up until the bandgap wavelength - which for silicon is 1.1µm. [72] However,
due to various losses, this is never the case.
A typical graph is shown in Figure 3.3a.
A
decrease in the short bandgap region is typically due to blue parasitic absorption in the top
layers. A decrease in the long bandgap region, is typically due to parasitic absorption in the
bottom layers and at the rear contact. [53] A decrease in eﬃciency in the middle region (i.e.
the green light region) is often due to poor diﬀusion in the wafer. The green light is absorbed
in the absorbed, but if the diﬀusion is poor the carriers will recombine before reaching the
contact. [73] Reﬂection losses cause a decrease in absorption in all areas of the cell. By doing
reﬂectance and EQE measurements on the same cell, and plotting the (1-R) and EQE in the
same plot - the contribution from reﬂective losses can be quantiﬁed, see illustration in Figure
==PAGE:36==
22
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
3.3b. The area above the reﬂectance graph indicates the reﬂective losses. The reﬂective losses
in the IR region is typically what is called ”escape reﬂection” and is IR-light that has been
transmitted through the cell and reﬂected oﬀthe back contact, and then transmitted back
through the front. The area between the (1-R) graph and the EQE graph shows the losses
due to parasitic absorption and diﬀusion losses. [53]
The EQE also gives information about the short circuit current density (Jsc), which can be
calculated based on the area under the EQE graph. [53]
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.3: (a) An ideal QE curve is labelled ”ideal”. Due to various losses, the actual graphs tend to more
resemble the line labelled ”EQE”. Adjusting for reﬂectance (in an e.g. high reﬂecting case) provides the IQE
curve. (b) External quantum eﬃciency and (1-R) plotted for an arbitrary planar silicon solar cell.
By subtracting the amount of reﬂected light from the external quantum eﬃciency graph, the
quantity called internal quantum eﬃciency (IQE) can be determined according to Equation
(3.3), as shown with a red line in Figure 3.3a. IQE is the quantum eﬃciency without any
reﬂective losses.
IQE(λ) =
EQE(λ)
(1 −R(λ))
(3.3)
In this project a QEXL Solar Cell Quantum Eﬃciency Measurement System from PV Mea-
surements have been used. The same equipment was used for hemispherical reﬂectance mea-
surements with an integrating sphere. Before each session, the system was calibrated using a
silicon calibration photodiode, with measurements in the 300-1100nm range.
3.2.3
I-V characteristics
The most important parameter for characterizing the solar cell is the energy conversion ef-
ﬁciency η.
It is calculated as shown in Equation (3.4), and is the ratio of energy in and
energy out. Pmax is the maximum power generated by the solar cell when irradated, I is the
light intensity reaching the cell, and A is the area of the cell. The light intensity of 1 sun is
1000Wm−2. FF, Voc and Isc represent the ﬁll factor, open circuit voltage and short circuit
current respectively, and will be introduced shortly. [25]
η = Pmax
I · A = FF · Voc · Isc
I · A
(3.4)
Information about the maximum power of the cell can easily be extracted from I-V charac-
teristics. I-V curves display a lot of useful information about a solar cell, speciﬁcally about
the relationship between the output current and voltage. An ideal I-V curve looks like a diode
curve, but inverted to show the positive current and shifted to take into account the produced
current generated by the incident light. The open circuit voltage (Voc) can be extracted from
==PAGE:37==
3.2. CHARACTERIZATION METHODS
23
where the curve intersects the x-axis, and in an ideal curve the slope should be almost com-
pletely vertical in this point. The short circuit current (Isc) can be extracted from where the
curve intersects the y-axis, and in an ideal curve the slope should be horizontal in this point.
By multiplying the current and voltage values, the power curve for the cell can be obtained.
The maximum point in the power curve will then be the Pmax value. An example I-V curve
along with its power curve is shown in Figure 3.4. Another parameter to be extracted from
the I-V curve is the ﬁll factor (FF). The ﬁll factor gives information about the maximum
power of the cell, and is calculated from the maximum voltage (Vmp) and maximum current
(Imp), divided by the product of the open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current - as seen in
Equation (3.5). It is reported either as a number between 0 and 1, or in percent. For an ideal
solar cell, the FF would be 100% (though this is never the case). [23,25]
FF = Vmp · Imp
Voc · Isc
=
Pmax
Voc · Isc
(3.5)
Figure 3.4: I-V and Power curve for a solar cell under irradiation with the AM1.5G solar spectra. [25]
For results to be useful when comparing to other groups, it is important to use a solar simu-
lator with the AM1.5G solar spectra, and a temperature around 25◦C. These conditions are
chosen to closely mimic full-sunlight conditions at a 37 degree angle for a solar cell at sea-level.
When the I-V measurements are made, it is useful to use a four-wire setup. This is since solar
cells are typically low-voltage, high-current devices. Therefore additional series resistance can
occur due to current ﬂowing through the contact terminals, which will lead to a reduced ﬁll
factor. This is avoided by a four-wire measurement, in which one set of probes is connected
to the adjustable load and another set to the voltmeter. Thereby, the voltage drop in the con-
nections occurs only in the current circuit and does not interfere with the measured results. [25]
The expected I-V characteristics of an ideal diode is described by the ideal diode in the dark
equation (see Equation (3.6)). The saturation current (I0,S1) is the diode leakage current in
complete darkness. k, T and q are the Boltzmann constant, temperature and the elementary
charge respectively. When plotted on a linear scale, this would give an ideal I-V curve, shown
in Figure 3.5a. [6,23]
I(V ) = I0,S1(e
qV
kT −1)
(3.6)
This equation is based on the assumption that generation occurs in the cell only sure to band-
to-band excitation - the opposite process of radiative recombination. In real cells, one must also
take into consideration the generation caused by non-radiative processes (i.e. the opposite of
non-radiative recombination). In general this is caused by impurities, leading to defect states in
the band-gap. This is accounted for pn-junctions by the two diode model, which takes account
for both the band-to-band recombination and the impurity recombination.
It is shown in
Equation (3.7), where I0,S2 is the charge current due to non-radiative processes (impurities).
The two recombination processes have a diﬀerent voltage dependence, and therefore it would
==PAGE:38==
24
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.5: Theoretical dark current vs voltage for ideal and non-ideal diodes. [6] (a) I-V behaviour of an
ideal silicon diode plotted on the linear scale. (b) I-V behaviour of a diode plotted on the semilog scale. Ideal
diode behavior is depicted by a dashed line. Actual diode behavior of a high-quality device is depicted by a
solid black line.
be expected that the impurity recombination is dominant at lower voltages, and band-to-band
recombination is dominant at higher voltages. [6,23]
I(V ) = I0,S1(e
qV
kT −1) + I0,S2(e
qV
2kT −1)
(3.7)
In high quality solar cells, the two recombination processes are easily distinguishable in a
semi-log plot - as shown in Figure 3.5b. However, in lower quality cells more than one process
can be prominent and the regions might not be so easily separated.
For these cases the
general diode equation is deﬁned in Equation (3.8), in which n is referred to as the ideality
factor. For ideal diodes with only radiative recombination the ideality factor is 1, for diodes
dominated by impurities the ideality factor is 2. From the equation it can be deduced that
the inverse slope of the semi-log plot in the ideal region would be 60mV/decade, while in the
non-radiative dominated region it would be expected to be 120mV/decade. Higher values for
the ideality factor can sometimes occur in heterojunctions and in non-ideal cells. The physical
signiﬁcance of the ideality factor in those cases is limited. The diode equation in light (i.e.
taking into account the photogenerated current) is shown in Equation (3.9), where Iphoto is
the photogenerated current. [6,23]
I(V ) = I0,S1(e
qV
nkT −1)
(3.8)
I(V ) = I0,S1(e
qV
nkT −1) + Iphoto
(3.9)
Parasitic resistance occurs in most cells to some extent, and will aﬀect the I-V curve. In-
formation about this can thereby be retrieved by analyzing the I-V characteristics. Parasitic
resistance in the cell typically leads to a lowered measured ﬁll factor than the actual. The
parasitic resistances of most importance are shunt and series resistance. The slope of the curve
as it crosses the y-axis indicates the amount of shunt resistance. Shunt resistance is generally
due to manufacturing issues, rather than the solar cell design. A high shunt resistance means
that the resistance is high for the current to go in any pathways other than the external cir-
cuits. Other pathways can be due to for instance metal connection of the front and back of
the cell (due to unwanted metal wrapping on the side), or through pinholes in the structure. If
the curve is horizontal around the Isc value, it indicates that no signiﬁcant shunting is taking
place. An accurate estimate of the shunt resistance (Rsh) is given by the inverse slope at the
==PAGE:39==
3.2. CHARACTERIZATION METHODS
25
Figure 3.6: Calculation of series and shunt resistance from an I-V plot. [74]
Isc value, as depicted by Figure 3.6. [74,75]
The series resistance will aﬀect the other part of the curve, and will alter the slope around
the Voc value. Series resistance occurs in the cell for a variety of reasons, the main ones being
transport issues of the current. For instance, if the spacing of the front metal grid is too large,
then the transport losses of the majority carriers would lead to an increased series resistance.
Other causes for an increased series resistance can be bad or non-ideal contacts. The series
resistance can be accurately estimated by analyzing the dark I-V semilog plot. In the high-
voltage region, the curve will at some point deviate from the straight radiative-recombination
region if series resistance is present. By extrapolating the linear region (n=1) and analyzing
the voltage diﬀerence between the deviating curve and the extrapolated line, an exact value of
the series resistance can be determined. However, this is only accurate when the measurement
is made in complete darkness, so that no light contributes to a photocurrent. [76,77] An other,
simple method for estimating the series resistance (Rs) is to calculate the inverse slope at Voc,
as depicted by Figure 3.6. [74,75]
Most I-V experiments are performed under 1 sun conditions. However, should the measure-
ment be done at other light intensities, there is a direct connection between the open circuit
voltage/short circuit current and the light intensity. Isc has a linear dependence on the light
intensity, whereas the open circuit voltage has a logarithmic dependence - as shown in Equation
(3.10) and (3.11). The ratio of actual light intensity over 1 sun is denoted by X, the measured
variables are denoted by ∗, while variables without an asterisk represent the theoretical value
at 1 sun. [23]
I∗
sc = X · Isc
(3.10)
V ∗
oc = Voc + kT
q ln(X)
(3.11)
In this project I-V measurements have been done with a Newport model 92190 solar simulator
with a 1.6kW Xe large area light source from Oriel Instruments, along with a Keithley 2600
SourceMeter.
All measurements were done with a 4 wire setup, and at 1 sun ±5% light
intensity.
3.2.4
Eﬀective lifetime
As explained in Section 2.5, measuring the eﬀective lifetime gives information about the re-
combination occurring in the cell. When the generation rate is known, the eﬀective lifetime
and the injection level can be determined. There are diﬀerent methods for measuring eﬀec-
tive lifetime. One of the most common techniques is the quasi-steady-state photoconductance
(QSSPC) method. QSSPC uses a ﬂash lamp to illuminate the sample, and by measuring the
change in photoconductance determines the injection level (from which the eﬀective lifetime is
obtained). The QSSPC method allows for measuring the average eﬀective lifetime for a whole
==PAGE:40==
26
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
wafer at a large range of injection levels. [78]
In this thesis a lifetime mapper based on microwave detected photoconductivity (MDP)
has been used, which enables high resolution mapping of the eﬀective lifetime in whole wafers
at speciﬁc injection levels. MDP is a relatively new technique which is based on measuring
the photoconductivity of a sample by microwave reﬂection during and after excitation by a
laser pulse. [79] During the pulse, free carriers will be generated in the sample until it reaches
saturation. The pulse is then abruptly switched oﬀ, and the decay in photoconductance is
measured per time, as the free carriers recombine - see Figure 3.7a. The average lifetime can
thereby be determined, and from this the injection level can be found.
(a) Steady state signal in MDP mea-
surement for eﬀective lifetime. The
outcome after averaging a series of
identical pulses. [79]
(b) How the bias light and main laser pulse change
over time in a lifetime measurement with summa-
tion=19 [80]
Figure 3.7
Several factors inﬂuence the results of lifetime measurements, therefore it can be troublesome
to compare diﬀerent results, particularly when diﬀerent techniques have been used. Speciﬁcally
the penetration depth of the laser, traps in the material and injection level (or, the amount
of excess minority carriers) which is determined by the light intensity (dependant on both the
laser power and the spot size). Varying one parameter can give very diﬀerent lifetimes, and so
comparing lifetime results from diﬀerent labs is not straightforward. [81–84] In particular the
injection level can have a paramount eﬀect on the measured lifetime. At diﬀerent injection
level, the diﬀerent recombination methods (radiative, Auger, SRH) becomes limiting. In Fig-
ure 3.8, a plot of the bulk minority carrier lifetime is shown for diﬀerent injection levels. At
high injection, the Auger recombination becomes limiting. At low injection, the SRH recom-
bination can alter the outcome a lot. Depending on the amount of impurities, and the type
of defect levels in the bandgap, SRH recombination can dictate the measured lifetime at low
injection in very diﬀerent ways. [78]
In some cases where the SRH recombination is due to a high density of trap states, a falsely
high lifetime can be measured at low injection. When calculating the eﬀective lifetime it is
assumed that the majority and minority carriers contribute equally. That is, that one photon
generates one electron and one hole. However, if minority carrier trap states are present in
the material this is no longer valid. If an amount of minority carriers is ”trapped”, then the
majority carriers contribute to a larger degree to the measured photoconductance. Further-
more, as the trapped carriers are unable to combine, the concentration of majority carriers
will increase, until a new (shifted) equilibrium is established between generation and recombi-
nation. At high injection, this will not be as pronounced as all the states will be ﬁled quickly,
but high injection will lead to a extra high amount of Auger recombination. [25,85] An easy
==PAGE:41==
3.2. CHARACTERIZATION METHODS
27
Figure 3.8: Eﬀective lifetime of a p-type silicon solar cell at diﬀerent injection level shown for two cases
of diﬀerent SRH recombination.
Modelled for diﬀerent amounts of doping concentrations (1014, 1015 and
1016). [78]
way of overcoming this problem is to employ a bias light, sometimes referred to as background
light, which is intended to ﬁll the trap states. The bias light will then be on constantly as a
series of MDP measurements are done, and the average value is calculated, see Figure 3.7b.
The eﬀective lifetime is then based on the ∆n measured relative to the baseline provided by
the bias light (and so the excess carrier density generated by the bias light should not be taken
into consideration for the calculation.) The light intensity of the bias light will aﬀect how well
it saturates the states, and a light intensity around 3 suns have been shown optimum. [85]
The excess carrier concentration in a minority carrier lifetime measurement can be directly
related to the open circuit voltage. More speciﬁcally the implied open circuit voltage (i−Voc),
which will be slightly higher than the actual open circuit voltage of the cell in question, but the
diﬀerence is generally small. Converting to i −Voc can give results that are easier to compare
to what is expected from a full cell in terms of I-V measurements, and is done according to
Equation (3.12). The intrinsic carrier concentration is denoted by ni, and the doping concen-
tration is denoted by N, in this example it is the acceptor doping concentration (NA). [25]
i −Voc = kT
q ln
(NA + ∆n)∆n
n2
i

(3.12)
The lifetime measurements in this thesis was made by a lifetime scanner MDPMap from
Freiberg Instruments, with a 977nm laser and a 405nm bias laser at variable powers.
==PAGE:42==
28
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4
Preliminary study
4.1
Lifetime samples
Before fabricating complete solar cells, symmetrical lifetime samples were fabricated and opti-
mized with respect to their eﬀective lifetime. An example of the structure is shown in Figure
4.1. All four possibilities were fabricated: p-type poly-Si on p-type wafer (P on P), n-type
poly-Si on p-type wafer (N on P), n-type poly-Si on n-type wafer (N on N) and p-type poly-Si
on n-type wafer (P on N).
Figure 4.1: An example of a lifetime sample. P-type poly-Si on N-type wafer (P on N). Polysilicon is shown
by purple layers, tunnel oxide layer by orange and the silicon wafer by dark grey.
These lifetime samples were investigated as a continuation of a separate project executed in fall
2017. In the previous project it was concluded that structures with a 40nm polysilicon thickness
was superior to 10nm and 80nm. Furthermore it was concluded that annealing at 850◦C at 20
minutes was preferred, as annealing at 800◦C would be too low temperature for annealing and
at 900◦C the tunnel oxide would decompose. Attempts for improving the eﬀective lifetime by
forming gas annealing were also performed, but the results were inconclusive. In this thesis, a
wider selection of poly-Si thicknesses were investigated. Furthermore, a variation in the dopant
ﬂow gas for boron doped polysilicon via LPCVD were investigated, in hopes of increasing the
quality of the boron doped samples. Further attempts of improving the lifetime by forming
gas annealing were also executed. First, improvements were made in the way the lifetime
measurements were made.
4.1.1
Lifetime measurements
As explained in the previous section, many parameters are known to inﬂuence the outcome
of lifetime measurements. In the MDP method the eﬀective lifetime is determined from the
microwave detected changes in photoconductive decay. The generation rate is then calculated
based on the light intensity (laser power, bias light power and spot size). From the generation
rate and the eﬀective lifetime, the excess carrier density is determined. Unlike other methods
like QSSPC, where the lifetime is measured directly at a range of injection levels - in MDP the
29
==PAGE:44==
30
CHAPTER 4. PRELIMINARY STUDY
measurements have to be done individually for each setting of light intensity. For injection-
dependant τeff measurements, MDP mapping becomes a rather impractical technique. For
MDP measurements it can therefore be rather diﬃcult to obtain a straightforward procedure
from literature in order to develop a method in which all the results of diﬀerent samples are
comparable to each other. In addition, there are diﬀerent trends in the usage of bias light, and
not a lot of literature has been available on its exact function during measurements. During
the ﬁrst part of the project, a method attempting to do all samples with the same injection
level was tried - which requires the use of diﬀerent light intensities. It was shown that diﬀer-
ent combinations of main laser power and bias light intensity would produce similar injection
level, but rather large variations in measured lifetime/i −Voc. This is likely because the total
lifetime can vary a lot even by relatively small variations in the injection level, especially in
samples limited by SRH recombination as (Figure 3.8 in Section 3.2.4).
When comparing
diﬀerent samples with each other, the resulting values for lifetime and injection-level refer to
two completely diﬀerent points in the respective τeff −∆n plots. The best way of comparing
result would be to scan a large range of injection level and measure the produced lifetime plot,
and then compare the peak values with each other. This is not an option when doing a MDP
measurement. In this project, only a MDP mapper is available for lifetime measurements,
which is why this technique has been used instead of e.g. QSSPC.
In an eﬀort to achieve as similar characterization conditions to real life as possible, even-
tually all samples were irradiated with the same laser power, spot size and bias light intensity
- as close to 1 sun in total as possible.
Due to limitations with the equipment available,
the lowest bias laser gives the corresponding light intensity to 1.6 sun. A low injection was
therefore chosen of the main laser, with a laser power of 200µW and a 2mm spot diameter,
corresponding to 0.05 sun. The reasoning for measuring at values close to one sun is that the
general goal of doing lifetime measurements is to give an indication of the performance of the
ﬁnal product - that is the eﬃciency of the ﬁnished solar cell. Therefore, it is important that
the lifetime is measured at similar steady state conditions as the ones obtained from the sun
shining on a solar cell. A light intensity close to 1 sun, and a suﬃciently long pulse duration
should be chosen, along with a bias light ensuring a constant photovoltage. [23,79]
Figure 4.2: An example of a lifetime map. Colorscale is shown on the right.
==PAGE:45==
4.1. LIFETIME SAMPLES
31
Furthermore it should be noted that the equipment used is a lifetime mapper. This means
that on each wafer the eﬀective lifetime and injection level have been determined for all points
on the wafer. The reported values used in the coming sections are then the average value over
the entire map. An advantage of this is that it gives a high resolution description on how
much the quality varies locally in one wafer. The entire wafer is mapped at the same light
intensity, giving rather large variations in measured lifetime and injection level. An example
of a lifetime map is shown in Figure 4.2.
For all the lifetime measurements presented in this report, a 977nm laser has been used at vari-
able powers. The bias laser available is a 405nm laser. The used laser power, bias light intensity
and average injection level for each presented set of measurements are reported alongside the
graphs. However, due to the aforementioned uncertainties with the lifetime measurements it
would be unwise to put too much weight to the comparison of the values in diﬀerent graphs.
For all samples, both the eﬀective lifetime and implied open circuit voltage are reported. The
implied open circuit voltage was calculated according to Equation (3.12). When calculating
the implied open circuit voltage, the temperature has been assumed to be 25◦C giving an
intrinsic carrier concentration of 8.2×109cm−3. [86] The resistivity of the N-type wafers was 4
Ωcm, giving a doping density of 1.13·1015cm−3. The resistivity of P-type wafers was 2.4 Ωcm
giving a doping density of 5.83·1015cm−3. [87]
4.1.2
Boron ﬂow in LPCVD
Since the samples with p-doped poly-Si has shown a generally worse i −Voc than the samples
with n-doped poly-Si, eﬀorts were made to investigate the possibility of increasing the quality
of the p-type poly-Si. This was done by attempting diﬀerent ﬂow rates of the dopant gas
used in LPCVD p-type poly-Si deposition. The standard rate for the equipment used is 7sccm
diborane gas. Samples made with 20sccm, 3sccm and 40sccm were also tested. Two samples
were made at each setting. All samples were made with about 40nm poly-Si thickness, and
annealed for 20min at 850◦C. The results are shown in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: The eﬀect on the open circuit voltage (i-Voc) and mean lifetime of diﬀerent ﬂow rates of the
boron dopant gas in LPCVD deposition of P-type polysilicon. P-poly on N-type wafer is shown by red circles.
P-poly on P-type wafer is shown by black squares. Two samples were made with each set of settings. The
measurements were done under the same light intensity, with a bias laser of 405nm at a 6.35sun light intensity.
The main laser (977nm) was kept at 200µW for all samples, corresponding to a low-injection measurement
(∆n on the order of 1013).
==PAGE:46==
32
CHAPTER 4. PRELIMINARY STUDY
As seen in Figure 4.3, the voltage seems to initially drop with increasing ﬂow rate, before
increasing slightly again at the highest rate (40 sccm). Since 7sccm showed best results for
both P on P samples and the P on N samples, it was chosen not to alter the standard recipe
with respect to ﬂow rate.
4.1.3
Polysilicon thickness variation
In the aforementioned pre-thesis project, lifetime samples with thickness 10nm, 40nm and
80nm were compared. The 40nm sample appeared to be superior. In the beginning of this
thesis, samples with thickness 10nm, 20nm and 30nm were therefore created, to further analyze
the eﬀect of the thickness of polysilicon. This showed a preference for 10nm and 30nm as
compared to 20nm, but generally worse results than the old 40nm samples. However, since
the old samples have been measured at diﬀerent light intensities and injection level, and are
no longer available for measurements they are not included in the ﬁgure. From the results
of the ﬂow-variations, it became apparent that samples in some cases appeared to have quite
diﬀerent results, even when prepared at the same time in each process step. Therefore, a new
batch of lifetime samples with thickness 10-15nm and 40nm were produced as a check of the
reproducibility, with three of each sample. These samples generally showed much worse results
than the previous ones, and the previously seen good results for 40nm samples could not be
achieved. The results are shown in Figure 4.4.
(a) Lifetime results for variable poly-Si thickness.
(b) i-Voc results for variable poly-Si thickness.
Figure 4.4: Lifetime samples with varying thickness. The hollow points are the results of the new batch of
samples, and each hollow point represents the average of the three samples made at the same settings. All P on
N, P on P and N on N samples have been measured at the same settings. They have had a bias laser with 1.6
sun light intensity and main laser of 0.06 sun light intensity. The N on P samples could not be measured at the
same settings since it would not give a stable transient measurement. They have been measured at 1.6 sun bias
laser intensity, and 0.95sun main laser intensity. Measuring at the same light intensity for all samples gives a
large variation in average injection level for each sample. For the N on N samples it varied from 5·1014cm−3 to
2·1015cm−3, for the P on P samples it varied from 2.1·1014cm−3 to 4.4·1014cm−3, the P on N samples varied
from 9.6 · 1014cm−3 to 3.9 · 1015cm−3, and the N on P samples varied from 1.2 · 1014cm−3 to 1.7 · 1015cm−3.
When looking at the plot, it should be noted that the N on P samples could not be measured at
1.66 sun, and were measured at 2.54 sun instead, Meaning that a 3mW laser was used instead
of a 200µW laser. This is because it was impossible to obtain an equilibrium of the transient
lifetime measurement at 1.66 sun. Comparing between N on P and the other combinations is
not very accurate.
In general, it appears to be no speciﬁc trend when it comes to the eﬀect of the poly-Si thick-
ness. Furthermore, it appears to not be a very robust method when it comes to reproducibility.
Overall, the i −Voc results indicate that eﬀorts should be made to improve the poly overall.
The Voc is decent for a solar cell, but would not produce eﬃciencies close to the state of the
art.
==PAGE:47==
4.1. LIFETIME SAMPLES
33
Since it was not possible to draw any conclusions regarding the optimum thickness for the
polysilicon layers based on the lifetime studies, the chosen thicknesses in the complete solar
cells were chosen based on literature review instead. For the front contact a thickness of about
15nm was chosen, since polysilicon is expected to suﬀer from too high parasitic absorption at
higher thicknesses. The back contact was chosen to be 40 nm to ensure a uniform layer. [51]
4.1.4
Forming gas annealing
In an attempt to improve the implied open circuit voltage of the cells, forming gas anneal-
ing was performed on various lifetime samples.
This was originally tried in the pre-thesis
project, and produced very varying and inconsistent results. Some samples had almost 100%
improvement, while others had over 50% decrease in mean lifetime measured. In an attempt to
improve the eﬀect of forming gas annealing before trying a new batch of samples, the furnace
was cleaned with a high temperature oxygen program in an empty furnace. Furthermore, a
cleaner setup for holding the samples was used to limit metal traces in the furnace. A set of
new samples was annealed with two 15nm poly-Si samples and two 40nm poly-Si samples from
each P and N combination. The results are shown in Figure 4.5.
(a) Lifetime results
(b) i-Voc results
Figure 4.5: Results of forming gas annealing. Black symbols represent the value before forming gas annealing,
red symbols represent the value after forming gas annealing. All samples measured with light intensity 1.66
sun, except for N on P samples which were measured at 2.54. Measuring at the same light intensity for all
samples gives a large variation in average injection level for each sample. For the N on N samples it varied
from 9 · 1015cm−3 to 2 · 1016cm−3, for the P on P samples it varied from 2.7 · 1014cm−3 to 3.3 · 1014cm−3, the
P on N samples varied from 2 · 1015cm−3 to 4 · 1015cm−3, and the N on P samples varied from 5 · 1014cm−3
to 6 · 1015cm−3.
As can be seen in Figure 4.5, only the annealing of P poly-Si on N type wafer gave any
improvement. The rest of the combinations showed either a decrease in i −Voc (N on N and
P on P), or inconsistent results (N on P). It should be noted, that also in this case the N on P
samples had to be measured at 2.54 sun. The results would indicate that forming gas annealing
used on a solar cell sample based on a P-type wafer would be completely counterproductive.
For a N-type wafer based solar cell, forming gas annealing might give an improvement. The
P on N side will be on the front, while the N on N side will be on the back. The decrease in
lifetime of the back will therefore not be as important as the hopefully improved lifetime in
the absorber. However, since the results were not very promising, no forming gas annealing
was performed on the complete solar cells in this project.
==PAGE:48==
34
CHAPTER 4. PRELIMINARY STUDY
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 5
Fabrication of solar cells
In this chapter, the process ﬂow for fabricating the solar cells is presented, along with the
results from the characterization of the solar cells. The thin tunnel oxide for the cells in this
project was made by hot nitric acid oxidation. The motivation for choosing this type of oxide-
fabrication was that it is one of the best techniques available, and provides a good control of
the produced thickness. The other alternative available at the DTU facilities would be thermal
oxidation, but this would give less control of the oxide thickness. The polysilicon for the solar
cells was produced by an in-situ doped LPCVD process. The motivation for doing this was
to look into the eﬀect of diﬀerent polysilicon thicknesses, as the process allows for diﬀerent
thickness of the polysilicon layer on the front and the back. Furthermore, the aforementioned
method of ion-implantation was not available at the current facilities, and ex-situ doping of the
polysilicon by diﬀusion from a silicon oxide was not possible as this requires high temperature
annealing which is not suitable for the tunnel oxide. Lastly, aluminum doped zinc oxide was
chosen as the TCO layer instead of ITO because the ITO available at the facilities is of low
quality, and is deposited in a method which can be harmful to textured surfaces. An additional
bonus of choosing AZO compared to ITO is that AZO is made from more environmentally
friendly elements, and is as such better suited from an environmental perspective.
5.1
Process ﬂow
For fabricating the complete solar cells, all the silicon wafers underwent the same fabrication
process. All of the process steps until ﬁnished samples were executed in the cleanroom facilities
at DTU Danchip. Both textured and planar wafers were used as substrate for comparison.
The textured wafers was prepared by Beniamino Iandolo for the black-Si texturing, and A.
Pamela Sanchez Nery for the pyramidal texturing. Initially pre-textured wafers underwent a
chemical cleaning, followed by the deposition of a 2-300nm silicon dioxide through a PECVD
process on both the pre-textured wafers and the un-textured wafers (new wafers straight from
initial packaging). The samples underwent an RCA clean, followed by the growth of a thin
silicon oxide through a hot nitric acid oxidation. A ∼15nm poly-Si layer of opposite polarity of
the respective wafers was then deposited by LPCVD processing. This was followed by a deep
reactive ion etching on the backside to remove the poly-Si layer on the back. The samples was
subsequently etched in a HF bath to remove the protective PECVD silicon dioxide layer on
the back. A 300nm PECVD silicon dioxide layer was then deposited on the front side of the
samples, followed by a RCA clean and another hot nitric acid oxidation to grow the tunnel
oxide. A LPCVD process was then performed where ∼40nm poly-Si of the same polarity as
the respective wafers were deposited. The samples were annealed at 850◦C for 20 minutes,
before the poly-Si on the front was then etched of through DRIE etching. This was followed by
a HF etch to remove the PECVD oxide on the front. The AZO (∼75nm) was then deposited
through an ALD process on all samples. The front and back contacts were then deposited
through E-beam evaporation. Both contacts consisted of aluminium, with 500nm on the back
35
==PAGE:50==
36
CHAPTER 5. FABRICATION OF SOLAR CELLS
and 250-500nm on the front. The front contact was created with the help of a shadow mask.
The ﬁnished samples were subsequently cleaved by a laser outside of the cleanroom to produce
four cells per wafer. An example of a ﬁnished cell is shown in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Image of a ﬁnished cell with black silicon texturing.
The whole process carried out in the cleanroom is depicted in Figure 5.2, and the speciﬁcations
for each step were detailed in Section 3.1. In total three sets of cells were made with the same
process. The ﬁrst and second batch consisted of planar and black-textured wafers. The third
batch consisted exclusively of black and pyramid textured wafers, so as to compare the two
textures. In total, six diﬀerent combinations of structures were prepared. N-type and P-type
wafers with planar, black, and pyramid texturing. For the P-type wafers, both cz-Si and FZ-Si
wafers were produced with planar and black texturing. All the samples are listed in Table 5.1.
Figure 5.2: Process ﬂow for fabricating the solar cells produced in this thesis, with a p-type wafer as an
example. For the n-type wafers the polarity of the poly-layers was opposite of what is shown in this process.
The ﬁgures are not to scale. In the steps where materials are deposited, the material is written in italic and in
parentheses. The process step numbers are shown in yellow circles.
During the fabrication of the ﬁrst batch of solar cells a problem appeared after the ﬁrst HF
etch (process step 5), where gray stains occured at the surface of several wafers. The stain-like
contamination is of unknown origin, where a possible explanation might be dirty residue in the
HF bath. The wafers were cleaned with a piranha procedure, but the contamination did not
disappear. Due to this, there was some concerns that the ﬁrst batch might be compromised.
==PAGE:51==
5.2. CHARACTERIZATION
37
To save time, a second batch of wafers with the same texturing as the ﬁrst batch was started
and fabricated alongside the last half of the process for the ﬁrst batch. It appeared that the
RCA clean (step 7) of the ﬁrst batch of samples helped reducing the contamination on the
backside (as the front side was now protected by a PECVD oxide those stains remained). For
the second batch of wafers, some contamination occured again after the ﬁrst HF etch. This
time, an RCA clean was attempted immediately after HF-etching and the contamination was
completely removed.
Table 5.1: An overview of the solar cells made in this thesis project. Cz and FZ refers to Czochralski or ﬂoat
zone substrate. P and N refers to the polarity of the substrate.
Batch 1
Batch 2
Batch 3
Sample
Type
Texture
Sample
Type
Texture
Sample
Type
Texture
1P01
cz-P
Planar
2P01
cz-P
Planar
3PK1
cz-P
Pyramid
1P02
cz-P
Planar
2P02
cz-P
Planar
3PK2
cz-P
Pyramid
1P03
cz-P
Planar
2P03
cz-P
Planar
3PB1
cz-P
Black
1F01
FZ-P
Planar
2N01
cz-N
Planar
3FB1
FZ-P
Black
1N01
cz-N
Planar
2N02
cz-N
Planar
3FB2
FZ-P
Black
1N02
cz-N
Planar
2N03
cz-N
Planar
3NK1
cz-N
Pyramid
1N03
cz-N
Planar
2FB1
FZ-P
Black
3NK2
cz-N
Pyramid
1PB1
cz-P
Black
2FB2
FZ-P
Black
3NB1
cz-N
Black
1PB2
cz-P
Black
2PB1
cz-P
Black
3NB2
cz-N
Black
2NB1
cz-N
Black
2NB2
cz-N
Black
5.2
Characterization
During the solar cell fabrication, small tests were performed after most process steps to con-
ﬁrm that the addition/removal of each thin ﬁlm had been successful. After addition of the
PECVD oxide (process steps 1 and 6 in Figure 5.2), the oxide thickness of a couple wafers
was investigated by ellipsometry. The rest was simply conﬁrmed to have the same oxide color
as the ﬁrst. This is because the color of thin ﬁlm dielectrics depends on the thickness of the
ﬁlm and the angle at which the light is hitting it. [88] On the black-Si wafers color change
upon addition/removal of thin dielectric ﬁlms is not visible, due to the light-trapping abilities
of the texture - but as they were processed after and at the same conditions as the planar
wafers, it is assumed that the depositions were successful. All processes in the LPCVD and
ALD were included with test wafers, at which the thickness of the deposited layer was con-
ﬁrmed by ellipsometry. The DRIE procedure in process step 4 and 10 was optimized for each
batch on planar samples - where a color change was observed upon successful removal of the
poly-Si. Etching of the textured samples was performed after the planar wafers, and at the
optimized process conditions. Successful HF etch of the silicon dioxide layers (process step
5 and 11) was conﬁrmed by checking that the sample surface was hydrophobic after etching.
Due to the nanostructure of the black-Si samples, it is not straightforward to see the eﬀect
of the hydrophobic surface. As the black-Si samples were etched in the same HF bath and
for the same amount of time as the planar wafers - it was assumed the etching was success-
ful. For the E-beam evaporation of the aluminium contacts, the thickness of the layers are
measured in-situ during the evaporation process. Furthermore, scanning electron microscope
(SEM) imaging was performed on the cross-section of a black-Si sample to investigate the layer
structure. The tunnel-oxide layer was too narrow to be visible in SEM, and the poly-Si layer
has a very similar contrast to the c-Si wafer. Therefore it was not possible to visualize those
layers in SEM. However, the AZO layer was clearly visible, and showed a good coverage. See
Figure 5.3 (b)-(d), for SEM images of the black silicon nanostructure with poly-Si, AZO, and
Al respectively.
==PAGE:52==
38
CHAPTER 5. FABRICATION OF SOLAR CELLS
(a) Black-Si nanostructure.
(b) Black-si with a ∼15nm poly-Si layer on top
after annealing.
(c) Black-si with ∼15nm poly-Si and a layer of
∼75nm AZO.
(d) Black-si with ∼15nm poly-Si, ∼75nm AZO
and a layer of ∼500nm aluminium on top.
Figure 5.3: SEM images of the b-Si structure, with poly, AZO and Al. The SEM imaging was performed
by Beniamino Iandolo. All of the images are taken at the same magniﬁcation, detector and working distance.
(150 000 magniﬁcation)
The front grid was also visualized both by SEM and optical microscope, see Figure 5.4. Each
cell has 25 ﬁngers, with a length of 2.5cm. Across the middle of the ﬁngers is a 1.32mm high
busbar (depicted in Figure 5.4c). The busbar has a width of 2.4cm. The average width of each
ﬁnger is 60µm, but it should be noted that the ﬁngers show very large variations. Some of the
ﬁngers are as narrow as 20µm, while the thickest ones reach 140µm. Furthermore, on some of
the ﬁngers, the metal is not continuous. Narrow gaps could be seen on a small fraction of the
ﬁngers in the optical microscope, depicted in Figure 5.4b. These gaps appeared to be more
frequent closer to the tips of the ﬁngers, and less frequent closer to the busbar. Assuming an
average ﬁnger-width of 60µm, the overall area of the front grid is 0.672cm2. The size of one
cell is 2.7×2.7cm, however the area of the metal grid is 2.5×2.4cm (See Figure 5.1) Assuming
that the area of the cell not covered by the metal grid (the outer 1 and 1.5 mm on each side)
does not contribute signiﬁcantly to the collected photocurrent, the area of the cell has been
assumed to be 2.5×2.4=6cm2.The aperture area of the cell is then estimated to be 5.382cm2.
Furthermore, the front metal grid accounts for shading 11.2% of the front surface. Current
densities calculated in this report are based on a 6cm2 cell area.
==PAGE:53==
5.2. CHARACTERIZATION
39
(a) SEM image of a cleaved b-Si
wafer seen from above. The SEM
imaging was performed by Beni-
amino Iandolo. Dark grey vertical
line is a metal ﬁnger from the front
grid.
(b) Optical microscope image of a
section of the front grid, showing
a section with gaps in the metal
for the metal ﬁnhers.
(c) Optical microscope image of a
section of the busbar.
Figure 5.4: Images of the front metal grid.
5.2.1
Quantum eﬃciency
The external quantum eﬃciency has been measured for all samples. A minimum of two mea-
surements have been made at two diﬀerent spots in one cell for each sample, for some samples
multiple cells have been measured at multiple positions. Due to time constraints, it was not
possible to measure all the cells for all the samples.
Quantum eﬃciency curves for the solar cells based on n-type wafers, are shown in Figure 5.5.
It can be seen that the planar samples (Figure 5.5a) on average show a higher peak eﬃciency
(around 600nm) than the textured cells, but that the eﬃciency decay rather quickly at longer
wavelengths. The black-Si curves in Figure 5.5b show a lower peak eﬃciency around 80% at
∼750nm. The peak eﬃciency is generally broader for a larger fraction of the wavelengths than
for the planar curves. The pyramid-textured samples, depicted by hollow triangles in Figure
5.5b, show a better quantum eﬃciency than the black-Si samples, as well as a much broader
peak over a larger selection of the wavelengths. Individual QE graphs are shown in Appendix
A.
(a) Planar N-type solar cells.
(b) Textured N-type solar cells.
Figure 5.5: External quantum eﬃciency for the solar cells based on N-type planar cz-Si wafers. Samples
from batch 1, 2 and 3 are depicted by squares, circles and triangles respectively. Planar, black and pyramid
texturing are depicted by solid, half-ﬁlled and hollow symbols respectively.
==PAGE:54==
40
CHAPTER 5. FABRICATION OF SOLAR CELLS
The external quantum eﬃciency curves for the P-type cells is shown in Figure 5.6. As it can be
seen from the ﬁgure, there are large variations between diﬀerent samples even within the same
batch. Except for the outlier (sample 1P02) in Figure 5.6a, the planar samples show a much
better EQE than the textured samples. Some of them even have an equal peak eﬃciency
as that of the planar n-type samples. The planar P-type samples show the same decaying
curve for the wavelengths after the peak eﬃciency as seen for the N-type planar samples. The
textured samples, on the other hand, indeed show very bad QE. The worst ones appear for
batch 2 (depicted by circle-symbols in Figure 5.6b), where the lowest is sample 2PB1 which
has a QE around 1%. Sample 2FB2 is not shown, as the QE was even worse and no stable
measurement could be obtained. In general, the pyramid-textured samples (depicted by an
hollow triangle) does not appear to be better than the black-Si samples. With such small
eﬃciency it is diﬃcult to see any substantial trends.
(a) Planar P-type solar cells.
(b) Textured P-type solar cells.
Figure 5.6: External quantum eﬃciency for the solar cells based on P-type cz-Si wafers. Samples from batch
1, 2 and 3 are depicted by squares, circles and triangles respectively. Planar, black and pyramid texturing
are depicted by solid, half-ﬁlled and hollow symbols respectively. Cz- and FZ-silicon is depicted by solid and
dashed lines respectively.
Reﬂection measurements have also been performed on a selection of the samples. The results
for the diﬀerent textures are shown in Figure 5.7. It can be seen that the planar cells suﬀer
from a lot of reﬂectance, while the KOH is a bit better, and black-Si show the lowest reﬂectance
(except for wavelengths >1050nm). It should be noted that the reﬂectance was measured on
cells with a front metal grid, so some of the losses are due to reﬂection from the grid.
==PAGE:55==
5.2. CHARACTERIZATION
41
Figure 5.7: Reﬂectance measurements for the diﬀerent surface texturing types.
Furthermore, the reﬂectance measurements have been used to calculate the internal quantum
eﬃciency, and a result for each type of surface texturing for both p- and n-type samples is
shown in Figure 5.8a and 5.8b. In addition, plots of EQE and (1-R) is shown for a selection
of the N-type samples for better clarity (Figure 5.8, (c)-(e)). It should be noted that is just a
random selection of a sample of each type, and neither an average nor the values of the best
sample. From this it is possible to see that in the case of n-type planar and pyramid type
samples the peak eﬃciency is directly limited by the front surface reﬂectance - while for the
black sample (Figure 5.8d) it also appear to be additional problems to limit the peak eﬃciency.
(a) Internal and external QE for n-type wafers.
(b) Internal and external QE for p-type wafers.
(c) EQE and (1-R) for a n-type
planar sample.
(d) EQE and (1-R) for a n-type
black sample.
(e) EQE and (1-R) for a n-type
pyramid sample.
Figure 5.8: Quantum eﬃciency results with reﬂectance measurements. In (a) and (b), external quantum
eﬃciency is depicted by dotted lines, and the respective IQE is depicted by solid lines in the same color.
==PAGE:56==
42
CHAPTER 5. FABRICATION OF SOLAR CELLS
5.2.2
I-V characteristics
For all samples the current-voltage characteristics were investigated to analyze the eﬃciency
of the cells. All the cells were measured at 1 sun ±5%, with a Newport solar simulator with a
four wire measurement. The measurements were done in both darkness and in light. However,
it was not possible to achieve complete darkness due to the instrument setup, therefore a small
contribution of light is present in the dark measurements. The series and shunt resistance for
each sample were determined from the inverse slope at Voc and Isc as described in Section
3.2. The short-circuit current densities and eﬃciencies were calculated assuming a cell-area of
6cm2.
(a) Batch 1
(b) Batch 2
Figure 5.9: I-V characteristics for the solar cells based on N-type planar cz-Si wafers. Both the dark and
light I-V curves is depicted for all samples, where the dark curves are depicted with the dotted lines.
Table 5.2: Open circuit voltage, short circuit current, ﬁll factor, eﬃciency and parasitic resistances of the
N-type planar samples.
Sample
Voc [mV]
Isc [mA]
FF [%]
η [%]
Jsc [mA/cm2]
Rs [Ωcm2]
Rsh [Ωcm2]
1N01
568,8
205,8
57,7
11,2
34,3
5,4
705,2
1N02
569,7
211,5
59,0
11,8
35,3
2,2
109,9
1N03
417,1
225,2
58,1
9,1
37,5
2,2
5454,6
2N01
563,2
215,5
71,2
14,4
35,9
0,8
2069,0
2N02
587,5
219,9
70,4
15,2
36,7
0,6
854,7
2N03
576,1
215,0
73,5
15,2
35,8
1,1
1477,8
The I-V characteristics for the solar cells based on N-type planar wafers are shown in Figure 5.9.
For batch 1, the short-circuit currents densities vary from ∼34mA/cm2 to ∼37.5mA/cm2 and
the open-circuit voltage varies from ∼420mV to ∼570mV. The ﬁll factors show less variation,
and is around 57% for all three samples, resulting in eﬃciencies between ∼9% to ∼12%.
The ﬁrst batch shows rather high series resistance, and large variations in shunt resistance.
The exact values are shown in Table 5.2. The cells from the second batch (Figure 5.9b) show
better shunt and series resistance, along with less variation of the I-V parameters. With Voc
values ∼560-580mV, Jsc ∼36-37mA/cm2 and FF ∼70-74%. The resulting eﬃciency is then
∼14-15% as calculated with Equation 3.4. The individual dark and light I-V curves for the
solar cells are shown in Appendix A.
==PAGE:57==
5.2. CHARACTERIZATION
43
The I-V characteristics for the solar cells based on N-type textured wafers are shown in Figure
5.10. For all the black-Si cells, the short-circuit current densities are similar and vary only
from ∼33mA/cm2 to ∼35mA/cm2. The open-circuit voltage varies more between the two
batches, from ∼240mV to ∼300mV for the cells in the second batch, while for the third batch
it is on the order of ∼440-520mV. The ﬁll factors are around 50% for both batches, the highest
reaching 66% for cell 2NB1 in batch 2. The third batch generally shows better both voltage
and (slightly) current, but appears to be limited to some extent by both series and shunt
resistance - giving a lower overall ﬁll factor and eﬃciency. This results in eﬃciency between
∼4% and ∼9% for all the n-type black silicon cells. The exact values are shown in Table 5.3.
The pyramid-textured cells (Figure 5.10b) show similar, but slightly improved values. With
Jsc values ∼34-38mA/cm2, Voc ∼515-600mV, and FF around 50%. The resulting eﬃciency
is then ∼10%. All the textured n-type cells from the third batch have rather poor shunt and
series resistance, the exact values are shown in Table 5.3. The individual dark and light I-V
curves for the solar cells are shown in Appendix A.
(a) Batch 2
(b) Batch 3
Figure 5.10: I-V characteristics for the solar cells based on N-type textured cz-Si wafers. Both the dark and
light I-V curves are depicted for all samples, where the dark curves are depicted with the dotted lines. Lines
with no symbols represent black texturing, lines with square symbols represent pyramid texturing.
Table 5.3: Open circuit voltage, short circuit current, ﬁll factor, eﬃciency and parasitic resistances of the
N-type textured samples.
Sample
Voc [mV]
Isc [mA]
FF [%]
η [%]
Jsc [mA/cm2]
Rs [Ωcm2]
Rsh [Ωcm2]
2NB1
302,2
198,2
66,2
6,6
33,0
0,4
232,0
2NB2
241,3
206,6
48,1
4,0
34,4
2,5
53,2
3NB2
521,8
199,2
49,8
8,6
33,2
4,7
53,2
3NB2
437,3
208,8
54,4
8,3
34,8
4,0
269,9
3NK2
516,1
227,7
49,0
9,6
38,0
6,5
516,8
3NK3
597,5
206,2
49,5
10,2
34,4
14,1
219,6
The I-V characteristics for the solar cells based on P-type planar wafers are shown in Figure
5.11. They show substantially worse results than the n-type cells. The second batch again
shows better result than the ﬁrst batch. For the second batch the Jsc is around 33-35[mA/cm2]
for all three cells, whereas the Voc seems to suﬀer and is on the range of 130-400mV which is
very low compared to industrial standards. The ﬁll factor is around 50%, giving very poor
eﬃciency with the worst one at 2,1% and the best at 8,0%. The ﬁrst batch shows much worse
results, where the highest eﬃciency for all the cells is 1%. The extremely poor eﬃciency is
==PAGE:58==
44
CHAPTER 5. FABRICATION OF SOLAR CELLS
(a) Planar p-type solar cells, Batch 1
(b) Planar p-type solar cells, Batch 2
Figure 5.11: I-V characteristics for the solar cells based on P-type planar cz-Si wafers. Both the dark and
light I-V curves are depicted for all samples, where the dark curves is depicted with the dotted lines. Cz-Si
samples have ”P” in the label, FZ-Si samples have ”F” in the label.
due to a combination of poor Voc (∼50-210mV), Jsc (∼18-29[mA/cm2]) and FF (∼20-35%),
along with very bad values for both shunt and series resistance. The exact values for both
batches are shown in Table 5.4. The individual dark and light I-V curves for the solar cells
are shown in Appendix A.
Table 5.4: Open circuit voltage, short circuit current, ﬁll factor, eﬃciency and parasitic resistances of the
P-type planar samples.
Sample
Voc [mV]
Isc [mA]
FF [%]
η [%]
Jsc [mA/cm2]
Rs [Ωcm2]
Rsh [Ωcm2]
1P01
112,3
149,2
25,8
0,7
24,9
4,5
6,5
1P02
51,7
175,9
34,6
0,5
29,3
1,0
4,6
1P03
207,0
153,3
19,1
1,0
25,6
15,3
7,6
1F01
112,3
107,0
22,7
0,5
17,8
7,0
5,8
2P01
137,8
199,0
45,5
2,1
33,2
1,1
42,7
2P02
280,8
208,8
58,9
5,8
34,8
1,4
886,3
2P03
372,1
212,2
61,1
8,0
35,4
1,7
1054,5
The I-V characteristics for the solar cells based on P-type textured wafers are shown in Figure
5.12. As can be seen in the graphs, the results are very bad, where most of them do not even
display a diode-like curve. As there are no current-voltage current characteristics, it does not
make sense to calculate ﬁll factor and eﬃciency for such curves.
==PAGE:59==
5.2. CHARACTERIZATION
45
(a) P-type solar cells with b-Si texturing, Batch 1
(b) P-type solar cells with b-Si texturing, Batch 2
(c) P-type solar cells with b-Si texturing, Batch 3
(d) P-type cells with pyramid texturing, Batch 3
Figure 5.12: I-V characteristics for the solar cells based on P-type textured cz-Si wafers. Both the dark and
light I-V curves are depicted for all samples, where the dark curves are depicted with the dotted lines. Cz-Si
samples have ”P” in the label, FZ-Si samples have ”F” in the label.
==PAGE:60==
46
CHAPTER 5. FABRICATION OF SOLAR CELLS
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 6
Discussion
The purpose of this thesis was to develop a fabrication process for the TOPCon structure from
simple lifetime samples to complete solar cells, and furthermore to investigate how well suited
this process is for textured versus planar surfaces. Particularly interesting was to see how well
the TOPCon structure works for passivating a black silicon surface - as a thorough literature
search on the relevant topic showed no indication that this combination has been tested before.
In this chapter the performance of the produced solar cells is discussed in comparison to each
other, and with a focus on how the process steps can be optimized to improve the performance
of the mentioned solar cells. Obviously, from the results, the solar cells made in this project
overall show quite bad eﬃciencies. The planar samples generally show much better character-
istics than the textured, and the N-type samples show much better characteristics than the
P-type samples.
Comparing QE of diﬀerent samples, the planar ones overall show better eﬃciencies than the
textured samples, and the n-type samples show better results than the p-type samples. This
furthermore corresponds well to the I-V characteristics. For the planar samples, the EQE
showed a peak around 600nm at about 90% followed by a rapid linear decline in eﬃciency
until about 1000nm and QE around 75% (Figure 5.5a and 5.6a). This was seen to an equal
extent in both n- and p-type planar cells. Possible reasons for this decay in QE at longer
wavelengths can be parasitic absorption in the back layers, a bad performing back junction,
parasitic absorption in the back contact and front surface reﬂection. When adjusted for front
surface reﬂection, as shown in Figures 5.8a and 5.8b, this decaying curve between 600nm and
1000nm becomes much less pronounced, indicating that it is indeed largely due to front surface
reﬂection. The IQE curves for planar samples shown a peak eﬃciency of 100%. However, even
in the IQE curves, a slight decay in QE is shown between 600nm and 1000nm. Likely due to
either parasitic absorption in the back, or a bad back junction.
It should be pointed out once again at this point, that IQE curves are just based on one cell
for each type chosen at random, and not an average. As it is expected that the reﬂectance is
about the same for all samples (as shown in Figure 5.7, where a selection of diﬀerent samples
has been measured for reﬂectance), the eﬀect of adjusting for reﬂectance should have about
the same eﬀect between EQE and IQE for all of the cells (a shift of 15% increase at the peak,
and about 20% at λ=1000nm). However, as the p-type planar cells have shown very large
variations in EQE, the IQE will give equally large variations merely shifted up 15-20%.
Looking at the QE curves for the textured n-type samples (Figure 5.5b), the pyramid-texture
samples show a much broader peak, while the black-Si samples show a narrower, and on average
slightly lower in percent, peak eﬃciency. The pyramid-textured samples particularly show a
better eﬃciency at shorter wavelengths (400-550nm) and longer wavelengths (900-1100nm).
As the two cell-types have exactly the same layered structure, it is not likely that the diﬀerence
is due to any other layers than the substrate itself, and in particular the eﬀect of the surface
texturing.
For the short wavelength diﬀerence, this is likely to be a loss occuring at the
front of the cell. A likely reason in this case is therefore an increased surface recombination
47
==PAGE:62==
48
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
velocity for the black-Si texture. Furthermore, comparing the pyramid-textured EQE with the
planar-surface EQE it is clear that the pyramid-textured samples suﬀer a small loss at short
wavelengths when compared to the planar samples (particularly visible in Figure 5.8a) which
is probably again due to a higher surface recombination velocity in the textured surface as
compared to the planar. Comparing the two n-type textured samples at longer wavelengths,
the loss in eﬃciency for the black silicon at longer wavelengths is likely due to a loss mechanism
coming into eﬀect further back in the cell. As the back junction and contact is the same in the
two texturing types, this point to a problem with the bulk characteristics in the substrate of
the b-Si samples. Perhaps the RIE etching somehow damages the bulk, in ways yet unknown.
When comparing the eﬀect of reﬂection on the two texturing types (See Figure 5.8(d) and
(e)), adjusting for reﬂectance in the pyramid sample indicates that the majority of losses at
longer wavelengths is front surface reﬂection. Indeed, the IQE curve for pyramid-texture is
almost at 100% for the complete 600-1000nm region.
The b-Si texture however has lower
reﬂectance and still shows large eﬃciency losses, even in the IQE curve. This indicates further
problems with the bulk-Si for black-Si substrates. At even longer wavelengths, close to the IR
region, the light trapping abilities of the texture become important - and it is apparent that
the nanocones in the b-Si are not as eﬃcient at light trapping as the pyramid-texture. This
is furthermore a likely reason as to why the pyramid-texture shows a better IQE than planar
samples in the near-IR region.
At short wavelengths, the planar samples appear to have a better IQE than the textured sam-
ples. Reasons for losses in the UV-region are typically either due to parasitic absorbance or
a bad front junction. Since it is not expected that the amount of parasitic absorbance should
vary a lot between planar and textured surfaces, this indicates a worse front junction in the
textured cells, than in the planar cells. A theory for this might be that the coverage of the
poly-Si on top of the textured surface is not uniform, giving a bad junction. In some areas the
TCO might even be in contact with the silicon wafer directly, giving a lower shunt resistance.
Shifting the focus to the QE results for the p-type cells show rather diﬀerent results. The
best planar p-type cells show a comparable EQE to the planar n-type cells, but overall the
p-type cells show very large variations between cells - even though they all have the same
structure. Comparing this to the I-V results, the same large variation is seen, as well as very
bad voltage results. As it can be seen from Figure 5.11, the ﬁrst batch of cells shows a much
larger variation than the second batch. This is also the case for the planar n-type cells as shown
in Figure 5.9. This large variation between the two batches is attributed to the contamination
which occured in the ﬁrst batch under production, as mentioned in Section 5.1. Regardless
of this, the p-type cells show very large variations even within the second batch, depicted for
instance in Figure 5.6. In order to test whether bad and inconsistent p-type results obtained
from earlier lifetime samples might be due to B-O complexes which are known to occur in
P-type cz-silicon, FZ-Si wafers were used alongside the cz-P wafers during fabrication of solar
cells for this project. As seen in Figure 5.6, these show no improvement. Reasons for these
large variations in p-type samples might either be due to the p-type substrate itself, or a worse
performance of the n-type polysilicon on top of the substrate. It is assumed that the top layer
of polysilicon has a bigger inﬂuence than the back layer. Possible defects with the n-type
polysilicon will be discussed a little later in the section.
A couple of diﬀerent theories exist, which might help explain defects in p-type wafers occur-
ring in both FZ and cz type silicon. For instance, P-type wafers have shown to react to high
temperature processes. Especially, annealing at 450-700◦C has been shown to vastly degrade
the lifetime of p-type wafers. [89] In the case of this thesis, it is thereby a chance that the
bulk-quality of the p-type wafers has deteriorated during the LPCVD processes. Literature
suggests that a pre-processing high temperature anneal at >1000◦C can prevent this degra-
dation. [89] Furthermore, a method for improving the quality of the bulk in cz-Si wafer can
be to include a so-called Tabula Rasa process, prior to any fabrication steps. The Tabula
Rasa process helps remove oxygen-contamination from the bulk by a long high temperature
annealing procedure. [90]
==PAGE:63==
49
Looking at the QE-results from the textured P-type samples speciﬁcally (Figure 5.6b), the
results are extraordinarily bad.
Not only are there variations between all of the samples,
but they are also all below 30% QE which indicates that detrimental obstacles have occured.
Comparing to the corresponding I-V curves (Figure 5.12) further conﬁrms that a detrimental
occurrence has taken place during processing.
Notably, the results are equally bad for all
three batches. The I-V curves either almost cross straight through the origin, as in the case
of Figure 5.12 (d) and (b), or display a resistor-like I-V characteristics when looking only at
the ﬁrst quadrant (Figure 5.12 (a) and (c)). A likely reason for the poor results is again that
the problem is related to the n-type poly which is on top of the textured surface. A possible
reason for this is that since the thickness of the n-poly might not be entirely uniform, a good
surface coverage of the textured surfaces is not achieved. Perhaps large areas, likely among
the top of the cones/pyramids, are not covered by poly-Si. In this case the AZO will be in
direct contact with the substrate (since the tunnel oxide would have been unprotected during
processing, and subsequently has been etched oﬀ), leading to a ohmic contact as the current
will move directly vertically from top to bottom. This would account for both the non-existent
I-V characteristics and for the poor QE results. The fact that the textured p-type samples
is so drastically much worse than the n-type might further indicate that the n-type poly has
bigger problems than the p-type.
Looking at the I-V results for the remaining types of cells (planar p- and n-types, and textured
n-types), the photocurrent is generally quite stable with an average of 35mA/cm2 (disregarding
the ﬁrst batch of planar p-types due to the contamination discrepancy) and does not show too
large variations. The main problem appears to be with the Voc however. For the second batch
of the planar n-type cells the Voc is pretty stable and around 600mV - which is a decent but not
remarkably great value. For all other types of cells however, it is exceptionally and unaccept-
ably bad. The main reason for a voltage to be reduced is a high amount of recombination in
the cell. As it also has been suspected by analyzing the QE-results, a likely reason for the high
amount of recombination is the faulty junctions. There are several plausible reasons as to why
the junctions would show high recombination, one of which is due to problems with the tunnel
oxide. Perhaps the tunnel oxide grown in this thesis are not thick enough, and thus does not
properly act as a barrier for the minority carriers. Some groups have recently started using
slightly thicker oxides in recent years (around 2nm) with very good results. [45,91] Where the
transport through the oxide might be explained by the pinhole-transport theory, rather than
carrier tunneling. Furthermore, another possible improvement by using another fabrication
method for creating the oxide is that it can allow for higher annealing temperatures - which
have shown to create a more defect-free junction and higher eﬃciencies. [92] However, taking
into consideration the fact that several other groups have used the hot nitric acid oxidation
for creating the oxide with good results, it would be unlikely that problems with the oxide is
the main reason for faulty junctions in this case. [46,93]
Another very likely reason for the bad junctions is due to problems with the polysilicon. As
mentioned, LPCVD is a stable method for producing polysilicon with small grains, which show
little to none growth during annealing. However, introducing dopant gases in-situ, the material
properties of the deposited poly-Si becomes very aﬀected. The doped poly-Si will produce
larger grains at the same working conditions, which furthermore will increase drastically in
size when subjected to a high temperature annealing. [48,61] Diﬀerent theories cover the shape
of the bands in semiconductors, one of which is the quantum conﬁnement eﬀect which can come
into play in polycrystalline materials and in particular in thin ﬁlms. In essence, the conﬁnement
eﬀect simply refers to the physical conﬁnement of a material to the nanometer length scale,
which makes the properties of the material deviate from the bulk. [94] A theory for the good
carrier selectivity of the TOPCon contact, is that the poly-layer has a larger band-gap than
the c-Si, and thus gives an increased band junction at the front and back contact and therefore
an increased carrier selectivity (which in combination with the silicon oxide gives very good
contacts). [13] However the increased band-gap in polycrystalline silicon might be in-part due
to the aforementioned conﬁnement eﬀect in the grains when they are on the nanoscale. [94,95]
In addition to this, the thickness of the ﬁlm also aﬀects the conﬁnement eﬀect, as the grain
==PAGE:64==
50
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
size in the z-direction can be directly limited by the thickness of the ﬁlm. [95] The conﬁnement
eﬀect induces a larger band-gap, but the eﬀect decreases with increasing grain size as the
dimensions move away from the nanometer length scale. However, other parameters are also
known to inﬂuence the band structure of nanoscale thin ﬁlms, such as crystalline order, to give
en example - so a direct correlation between the conﬁnement eﬀect due to grain size and the
poor performance of the junctions cannot be drawn. [96]
If in fact the conﬁnement eﬀect was to reduce the bandgap of the polysilicon-layers to be the
same as c-Si, at the front junction, the resulting band structure would likely be similar to a
regular pn-junction (separated by a tunnel oxide). Except for a higher recombination from
the grains in the top layer, and a more defect prone interface. The higher amount of defects
at the interface would be because in typical pn-junctions, the boron is merely driven into the
substrate by diﬀusion, and so there is no clear interface at the junction, and hence an almost
non-existent density of dangling bonds. At the back contact, the resultant structure would
in essence be like adding just silicon on silicon, separated by a thin oxide, with no signiﬁcant
band bending (except for the band-narrowing induced in highly doped silicon, though this
should be relatively minor).
In the case of this project, a standard LPCVD process was used for making the polysilicon, in
which the poly is grown at 625◦C at 200-250mTorr. It has not been possible to measure the
grain size directly, but based on literature the eﬀect of in-situ doping in LPCVD would likely
give slightly large grains already at this point. Furthermore, the grains of doped polysilicon
grow even larger during the annealing step at 850◦C for 20 min. SEM images taken after
annealing, Figure 5.3b, clearly show visible grains on the poly-surface.
While the average
diameter of the grains has not been measured, the mere fact that they are visible in a SEM
image conﬁrms rather large grain diameter, and might give a reduced conﬁnement eﬀect. In
particular, doping with phosphorus by an in-situ LPCVD process can be diﬃcult. phosphorus
has been known to drastically reduce the growth rate in the LPCVD process, by up to a 25
times slower process than undoped poly-Si deposition. Other side-eﬀects of in-situ phosphorus
doping includes a deposition dependence on the distance between samples during deposition
and severe non-uniformity of the deposited thickness. [97, 98] phosphorus in polysilicon is
furthermore known to segregate at interfaces and grain boundaries, depending on the process
conditions. [99] The lowered growth rate is likely due to a strong adsorption of phosphine
to the substrate surface, thus preventing the adsorption of silane in its place. Furthermore,
disturbing the nucleation of polysilicon, leads to a larger grain size. [100,101] Moreover, this
further helps explainning the worse eﬀect of p-type samples compared to n-types. The high
temperature LPCVD and annealing processes, would be expected to have caused a higher grain
size growth rate in the n-type poly as compared to the p-type. This might also be causing
a worse coverage of the textured surfaces in the process. A way of testing this theory can
be to make samples where the poly-Si is deposited at lower temperatures if possible. Adding
in-situ phosphorus doping to amorphous silicon in an LPCVD process has been shown to
give improved results, which can be subsequently annealed to recrystallize and form doped
polysilicon. [102] Another test could be to deposit poly-Si on a fused silica substrate, and then
do transmission measurements in order to determine the band-gap of the polysilicon. A third
test, speciﬁcally for the textured substrates, would be to use a thicker top-layer of poly-Si
on a textured surface, and subsequently measure I-V on the ﬁnished cell which would then
hopefully give better diode-like I-V characteristics (though a thicker poly-layer is expected to
give rise to a higher parasitic absorption.)
As mentioned, phosphorus in polysilicon is known to segregate at interfaces and grain bound-
aries. [99] Work by Franco and co-workers has shown that the size of the grains can strongly
aﬀect the interface between n-type polysilicon and an underlying oxide layer.
With small
grains, phosphorus tent to migrate towards the grain interfaces and segregate here.
With
larger grains, the phosphorus has fewer grain-to-grain interfaces in the vicinity and migrates
rather to the poly-oxide interface, thus damaging the silicon-oxide interface. [99] This can be
another reason so as to explain the worse performance of p-type cells compared to n-type cells.
==PAGE:65==
51
A discussion about the I-V characteristics of the cells would not be complete without looking
into the parasitic resistances in the cells. Looking at the series and shunt resistance for the
planar n-type samples, both they are both rather good for the second batch. The ﬁrst batch
shows large variations in both the parasitic resistances, but as the ﬁrst batch of planar n-
and p- samples were compromised due to the aforementioned contamination, they will not
be included in the discussion. Looking at the planar p-type samples, the series resistance is
overall slightly higher but still decent. The Rsh shows extremely large variations for the second
batch of planar p-type samples (See Table 5.4). However, looking at the corresponding graphs
(Figure 5.11b) it appears that the problem is not actually with shunt resistance, but rather a
very high amount of recombination that shifts the entire graphs to the left (lower Voc values),
and in the extreme case ends up giving the appearance of a very low shunt resistance as the
curve crosses the y-axis. Looking at the n-type textured cells, the second batch shows a rather
big diﬀerence in series resistance. A possibility is that the 2NB2 suﬀered from problems with
the front metal grid more than the 2NB1 sample. This will be further discussed in the next
paragraph. Both the black-Si samples from the second batch show rather poor Rsh values,
but by looking at the graphs it again appears to be due to a very large recombination in the
cell, which shifts the Voc to the left. It is likely due to bad junctions in the cells. For the third
batch of textured cells, both series and shunt resistance values are rather poor, resulting in low
ﬁll factor values. The low shunt resistance might be due to the poor coverage of the poly-Si
on textured surfaces, which might give point contacts between TCO and c-Si in the sample,
which would surely give low shunt resistance. Overall, the series resistance is higher in the
textured cells compared to the planar cells. A possible reason for this might be a worse metal
contacting on a textured surface, or perhaps a higher resistance in the bulk (though the QE
results indicate a worse bulk in b-Si samples than pyramid samples, and the series resistance
is equally bad in the two.)
As mentioned, a possible reason for the variation in series resistance between samples in the
same batch might be connected to the front metal contact, i.e. the metal grid. As mentioned
in Section 5.2 the width of the metal ﬁngers in the front grid vary a lot in size, both between
ﬁngers and at diﬀerent spots in the same ﬁnger. This is likely due to unavoidable inaccu-
racies when producing the shadow mask by laser micromachining, and might also be due to
diﬃculties with properly mounting the shadow mask suﬃciently close to the sample during
the E-beam evaporation. The shadow mask is made of a thin steel sheet, which easily bends
slightly. The measured diﬀerences in ﬁnger-width will cause more transport losses, and less
shading in certain areas, and more shading but less transport loss in other areas. The ideal case
would be completely uniform ﬁnger-width over the entire cell, with an optimized width of both
ﬁngers and busbar to give minimal shadowing but also minimal series resistance. However,
optimizing the metal grid is outside the scope of this report. What’s more worrying, regarding
the grid, is the fact that not all the metal ﬁngers are continuous (seen in Figure 5.4b). This is
likely due to some dust that might have been present during the aluminum evaporation. When
there appear gaps in the ﬁngers, the produced current collected in part of the wafer will not
be transported to the busbar, and out in the external circuit and a lower overall photocurrent
is produced. Furthermore, the large variations in ﬁnger-width and continuity will give higher
transport losses in the aﬀected areas of the cell, which will appear as series resistance in the
resultant I-V curves. The method for calculating series and shunt resistance based on the I-V
curve slope is based on the assumption that the series resistance is uniform across the cell -
meaning that even local increases in series resistance will alter the slope of the I-V curve. [74,75]
An interesting phenomenon occurs in a selection of the I-V curves, speciﬁcally the curves
for sample 1P02, 1F01, 3NK3, 3PK3 and 3PK2 in Figure 5.11a, 5.10b and 5.12d. In these
samples an S-like shape of the I-V curve appear. Such S-shaped I-V curves has also been ob-
served for other heterojunction silicon (particularly in the HIT structure) solar cells, in which
case the shape has been attributed to a variety of reasons. [103,104] One reason for S-shapes to
appear in I-V curves, can be an insuﬃciently doped p-poly layer. The ZnO in AZO is a n-type
layer, and if the p-poly is not suﬃciently doped it can potentially form a blocking pn-junction,
according to Wang and coworkers. [103] It is not likely to be the case in this project, mainly
==PAGE:66==
52
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
because all the samples have the same p- and n- poly depending on the substrate polarity,
and so it would expected to see the S-shape in all the I-V curves and not just such a small,
random selection. Another possible reason for S-shapes to occur can be cross-contamination
of dopant ions during the process. This might rather be the case, for instance if the chamber
had not been suﬃciently cleaned after previous PECVD depositions before the PECVD oxide
was deposited. [103] Another reason for a non-exponential I-V curve can be a high amount of
defect states at the interface between the substrate and the silicon oxide, and/or the silicon
oxide and poly-Si layer. Previous studies have indeed shown a high defect density for tunnel
oxides, and subsequent S-shaped I-V curves, but again, if this was the case here it would be
expected to see it for a larger amount of the samples (since the tunnel oxide is grown on 10
samples at the time and should be equal for all of them). [105,106] Another cause of S-shaped
I-V curves can be a bad contacting between metal and semiconductor, but this should in the-
ory be avoided in this speciﬁc case due to the interfacial TCO layer. [107] Since the S-shaped
curves observed in this project only appeared in a couple of samples, and with no trend as to
substrate type, surface texturing or batch, it is deemed most likely to merely be caused by
contamination.
Lastly, when looking at the Voc results from the I-V curves for the complete solar cells in
this project compared to the reported i −Voc results from the lifetime samples in the early
stages of this project, it is clear that the implied Voc and the actual produced Voc do not
match. Only for a couple planar cells are the i −Voc and Voc relatively similar. For the rest,
the Voc is much lower than i −Voc. One reason for this is likely the fact that the lifetime
samples are symmetric, while the full solar cells are not, which probably inﬂuences the results.
Furthermore, when calculating the i −Voc, the samples have been illuminated by a 977nm
laser. Meaning that all the charge carriers are likely to have been generated in the same re-
gion, relatively far back in the sample. The I-V measurements are done with a solar simulator
illuminating at all wavelengths from 300nm to 1100nm. The lifetime measurements therefore
do not give a strong indication about the surface recombination losses, which will aﬀect the
I-V results to a much stronger degree. Furthermore, as mentioned in Section 3.2, lifetime
measurements are aﬀected by many diﬀerent parameters. Particularly in this method they are
limited due to the diﬃculties with analyzing eﬀective lifetime for a broad range of injection
level. Converting to i −Voc therefore brings along many uncertainties. Care should be taken
when comparing results from lifetime measurements to other characterization methods, as well
as when comparing diﬀerent lifetime results with each other.
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
In this project, silicon solar cells of diﬀerent surface texturing have been fabricated with the
TOPCon structure. The solar cells was made following a preliminary study on symmetrical
lifetime samples to optimize the chosen process steps. The full solar cells were fabricated with
a tunnel oxide from a hot nitric acid oxidation. On top of this a 15nm poly-Si layer on the front
and a 40nm poly-Si layer on the back with opposite polarity from the front were added with
LPCVD. The structure was subsequently annealed at 850◦C for 20min, before a layer of 75nm
AZO was deposited by an ALD process. The ﬁnished structure was subsequently metallized
by e-beam evaporation of aluminum through a shadow mask. All of the fabrication steps were
done in a cleanroom environment. Eight diﬀerent types of cells were produced from cz-n- and
cz-p- and FZ-p- type wafers with planar, pyramid-textured and black-Si surfaces. Particular
attention has been directed at the black-Si texture cell and its performances, because of its
innovative application.
Characterization of the produced samples revealed rather low eﬃciencies, with the highest
one being 15.2% for a planar n-type sample. Overall the n-type samples showed better perfor-
mance over p-type samples. I-V results showed that the cells, with the p-type in particular,
were largely limited by recombination giving a very low open circuit voltage in most cases.
Overall, the planar samples were better than the textured samples, indicating a poor passiva-
tion of the texturized surface. Furthermore, quantum eﬃciency results for the n-type samples
showed that the internal quantum eﬃciency of the pyramid-texture was equal to, and for
some wavelengths even better than, the planar samples. However, the black-Si showed lower
QE even when accounting for the reﬂection, indicating that the RIE process for fabricating
black-Si might damage the substrate in ways yet unknown.
Neither the black silicon nor the pyramid-texture p-type samples were successful, and did
not show diode characteristics in the I-V curves. A likely reason for this is problems with
the uniformty and reproducibility of the n-poly layer fabricated through the LPCVD process
available for this project. It is likely that the thin poly-layer did not uniformly cover the tex-
tured surfaces either directly from the LPCVD, or due to grain growth and subsequent shift
in coverage from the high-temperate annealing.
Overall, the fabrication of TOPCon solar cells with the proposed process ﬂow shows some
promise but deﬁnitely requires further work. Improvements might be made by producing the
tunnel oxide by other means, such as thermal oxidation for instance. This would allow for
higher annealing temperatures, and can thereby help improving the junction properties. For
future work it would be of high importance to improve the polysilicon layer. In particular, in-
situ LPCVD of amorphous silicon with subsequent crystallization during annealing is expected
to produce polysilicon of higher quality compared to the current technology. Lastly, improving
the TCO layer and metal contacts would help with the overall eﬃciency of the structure. For
the metal contacts, attempting other methods for creating a more uniform front grid can be
helpful.
53
==PAGE:68==
54
CHAPTER 7. CONCLUSION
Certainly the n-type samples proved to be the most promising and might be easier to improve.
However, should it be desirable to improve the texturized p-type samples further, eﬀorts should
be made to increase the bulk quality and for depositing the polysilicon uniformly. A good test
to see if the poly-Si is in fact the problem can be to produce a texturized p-type cell with a
thick front poly to ensure good coverage.
In conclusion, the fabrication process developed in this thesis showed successful outcome in
the production of the TOPCon structure. However, the fabricated solar cells presented limited
eﬃciency. This is likely due to a variety of plausible reasons, i.e. poor quality and uniformity
of the polysilicon, defect-related issues with the bulk, limitations from the tunnel oxide and
non-ideal TCO and metal contacts. Therefore, it was not possible to attribute the poor per-
formance of the cells to only one reason, but it is likely a combination of several. Future work
is required to investigate the cells in order to determine the exact causes of poor eﬃciency,
and to achieve improved performance.
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1] DNV-GL. Oil and gas Forecast to 2050. 2018.
[2] Willis Towers Watson. Power and Renewable Energy Market Review 2018. pages 1–128,
2018.
[3] United Nations/Framework Convention on Climate Change.
21st Conference of the
Parties.
[4] Efstathios E. Michaelides. Solar energy. In Alternative Energy Sources, Green Energy and
Technology, chapter 7, pages 195–230. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,
2012.
[5] M. Hosenuzzaman, N.A. Rahim, J. Selvaraj, M. Hasanuzzaman, A.B.M.A. Malek, and
A. Nahar. Global prospects, progress, policies, and environmental impact of solar pho-
tovoltaic power generation. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 41:284 – 297,
2015.
[6] Pierre Verlinden, Ang`ele Reinders, and Seth Hubbard. Basic Functional Principles of
Photovoltaics. In Ang`ele Reinders, Wilfred van Sark, Pierre Verlinden, and Alexandre
Ferundlich, editors, Photovoltaic Solar Energy: From Fundamentals to Applications,
chapter 2, pages 15–63. John Wiley & Sons, ﬁrst edition, 2017.
[7] DM CHAPIN, CS FULLER, and GL PEARSON. A new silicon p-n junction photocell for
converting solar radiation into electrical power. Journal of Applied Physics, 25(5):676–
677, 1954.
[8] Y. F. Zhuang, S. H. Zhong, Z. G. Huang, and W. Z. Shen. Versatile strategies for im-
proving the performance of diamond wire sawn mc-Si solar cells. Solar Energy Materials
and Solar Cells, 153:18–24, 2016.
[9] Kexun Chen, Yunyu Liu, Xusheng Wang, Lingjun Zhang, and Xiaodong Su.
Novel
texturing process for diamond-wire-sawn single-crystalline silicon solar cell. Solar Energy
Materials and Solar Cells, 133:148–155, 2015.
[10] Kunta Yoshikawa, Hayato Kawasaki, Wataru Yoshida, Toru Irie, Katsunori Konishi,
Kunihiro Nakano, Toshihiko Uto, Daisuke Adachi, Masanori Kanematsu, Hisashi Uzu,
and Kenji Yamamoto. Silicon heterojunction solar cell with interdigitated back contacts
for a photoconversion eﬃciency over 26%. Nature Energy, 2(5), 2017.
[11] W.E. Beadle, J.C.C. Tsai, and R.D. Plummer. Quick reference manual for silicon inte-
grated circuit technology. Wiley-Interscience publication. Wiley, 1985.
[12] G Dingemans and W M M Kessels. Status and prospects of Al 2 O 3 -based surface
passivation schemes for silicon solar cells. Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology
A, 30(4):1–27, 2012.
55
==PAGE:70==
56
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[13] Andrew Blakers and Ngwe Zin. Crystalline silicon technologies. In Ang`ele Reinders,
Pierre Verlinden, Wilfried van Sark, and Alexandre Freundlich, editors, Photovoltaic
solar energy: From fundamental concepts to applications, chapter 3, pages 67–166. Wiley,
ﬁrst edition, 2017.
[14] Frank Feldmann, Martin Bivour, Christian Reichel, Martin Hermle, and Stefan W.
Glunz. Passivated rear contacts for high-eﬃciency n-type si solar cells providing high
interface passivation quality and excellent transport characteristics. Solar Energy Mate-
rials and Solar Cells, 120(PART A):270–274, 2013.
[15] Felix Haase, Fabian Kiefer, S¨oren Sch¨afer, Christian Kruse, Jan Kr¨ugener, Rolf Brendel,
and Robby Peibst. Interdigitated back contact solar cells with polycrystalline silicon
on oxide passivating contacts for both polarities. Japanese Journal of Applied Physics,
56(8S2):08MB15, 2017.
[16] F
Haase
and
R
Peibst.
26.1%
record
eﬃciency
for
p-
type
crystalline
si
solar
cells.
https://isfh.de/en/
26-1-record-efficiency-for-p-type-crystalline-si-solar-cells/,
02
2018.
Accessed 16.06.2018.
[17] J. Liu, Y. Yao, S. Xiao, and X. Gu. Review of status developments of high-eﬃciency
crystalline silicon solar cells. Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics, 51(12):1–12, 2018.
[18] F Feldmann, B Steinhauser, V Arya, A B¨uchler, A A Brand, S Kluska, M Hermle, and
S W Glunz. EVALUATION OF TOPCON TECHNOLOGY ON LARGE AREA SOLAR
CELLS.
In 33rd European PV Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, volume 33,
Amsterdam, 2017.
[19] Hele Savin, P¨aivikki Repo, Guillaume von Gastrow, Pablo Ortega, Eric Calle, Moises
Gar´ın, and Ramon Alcubilla. Black silicon solar cells with interdigitated back-contacts
achieve 22.1% eﬃciency. Nature Nanotechnology, 10(7):624–628, 2015.
[20] Beniamino Iandolo, Maksym Plakhotnyuk, Maria Gaudig, Rasmus Schmidt Davidsen,
Dominik Lausch, and Ole Hansen. Dry etch black silicon with low surface damage: Eﬀect
of low capacitively coupled plasma power. Proceedings of the 33rd European Photovoltaic
Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, pages 841–843, 2017.
[21] Maksym M. Plakhotnyuk, Maria Gaudig, Rasmus Schmidt Davidsen, Jonas Michael
Lindhard, Jens Hirsch, Dominik Lausch, Michael Stenbæk Schmidt, Eugen Stamate,
and Ole Hansen.
Low surface damage dry etched black silicon.
Journal of Applied
Physics, 122(14), 2017.
[22] Ang`ele Reinders, Wilfred van Sark, and Pierre Verlinden. Introduction to photovoltaics.
In Ang`ele Reinders, Wilfred van Sark, Pierre Verlinden, and Alexandre Ferundlich, ed-
itors, Photovoltaic Solar Energy: From Fundamentals to Applications, chapter 1, pages
6–11. John Wiley & Sons, ﬁrst edition, 2017.
[23] Peter W¨urfel and Uli W¨urfel. Physics of Solar Cells. Wiley - VCH, Berlin, third edition,
2016.
[24] Justin Peatross and Ware Michael. Reﬂection and Refraction. In Physics of Light and
Optics, chapter 3, pages 73–88. Brigham Young University, 2015.
[25] Halden Field, Thorsten Trupke, Angus Rockett, Geoﬀrey S. Kingsey, and Henner Kam-
pwerth. Characterization and measurement methods. In Ang`ele Reinders, Pierre Ver-
linden, Wilfried van Sark, and Alexandre Freundlich, editors, Photovoltaic solar energy:
From fundamental concepts to applications, chapter 7, pages 303–369. Wiley, ﬁrst edition,
2017.
==PAGE:71==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
57
[26] L Valek and J Sik. Defect Engineering During Czochralski Crystal Growth and Silicon
Wafer Manufacturing. In Modern Aspects of Bulk Crystal and Thin Film Preparation,
chapter 3, pages 43–70. IntechOpen, 2012.
[27] Meng Xie, Changrui Ren, Liming Fu, Xiaodong Qiu, Xuegong Yu, and Deren Yang. An
industrial solution to light-induced degradation of crystalline silicon solar cells. Frontiers
in Energy, 11(1):67–71, 2017.
[28] Bahram Jalali, Dimitris Dimitropoulos, Varun Raghunathan, and Sasan Fathpour. Sili-
con Lasers. In Graham T. Reed, editor, Silicon Photonics: The State of the Art, chap-
ter 5, page 148. John Wiley & Sons, 2008.
[29] A Richter, M Hermle, and S W Glunz. Crystalline Silicon Solar Cells Reassessment of the
Limiting Eﬃciency for Crystalline Silicon Solar Cells. IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics,
3(4):1184–1191, 2013.
[30] M. A. Green and A. W. Blakers. High eﬃciency silicon solar cells. Ireecon International
(convention Digest) (institution of Radio and Electronics Engineers Australia), pages
6–8, 1983.
[31] M. A. Green, A. W. Blakers, J. Zhao, A. M. Milne, A. Wang, and X. Dai. Characteri-
zation of 23-percent eﬃcient silicon solar cells. IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices,
37(2):331–336, Feb 1990.
[32] B. Min, H. Wagner, M. Muller, H. Neuhaus, R. Brendel, and P. P. Altermatt. Incremental
eﬃciency improvements of mass-produced perc cells up to 24and wafer materials. 31st
European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference 2015 (eupvsec), pages 473–6, 473–476,
2015.
[33] ITRPV. International Technology Roadmap for Photovoltaic Results 2016, eight edition.
Technical report, September 2017.
[34] Martin A. Green. The Path to 25% Silicon Solar Cell Eﬃciency: History of Silicon Cell
Evolution. Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 17:183–189, 2009.
[35] Jan Benick, Bram Hoex, M. C.M. Van De Sanden, W. M.M. Kessels, Oliver Schultz,
and Stefan W. Glunz. High eﬃciency n-type Si solar cells on Al2O3-passivated boron
emitters. Applied Physics Letters, 92(25):2006–2009, 2008.
[36] Andres Cuevas. Electrons and holes in solar cells with partial rear contacts. Progress in
Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 22:764–774, 2014.
[37] Mikio Taguchi, Ayumu Yano, Satoshi Tohoda, Kenta Matsuyama, Yuya Nakamura,
Takeshi Nishiwaki, Kazunori Fujita, and Eiji Maruyama. 24.7% Record eﬃciency HIT
solar cell on thin silicon wafer. IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2014.
[38] Bin Zhang, Yu Zhang, Ridong Cong, Yun Li, Wei Yu, and Guangsheng Fu. Superior
silicon surface passivation in HIT solar cells by optimizing a-SiO x :H thin ﬁlms: A
compact intrinsic passivation layer. Solar Energy, 155:670–678, 2017.
[39] F Feldmann, M C Bivour Reichel, M Hermle, and S W Glunz. A passivated rear contact
for high-eﬃciency n-type silicon solar cells enabling high Vocs and FF>82%. In 28th
European PV Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, Paris, 2013.
[40] G. R. Wolstenholme, N. Jorgensen, P. Ashburn, and G. R. Booker. An investigation
of the thermal stability of the interfacial oxide in polycrystalline silicon emitter bipolar
transistors by comparing device results with high-resolution electron microscopy obser-
vations. Journal of Applied Physics, 61(1):225–233, 1987.
==PAGE:72==
58
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[41] S W Glunz, F Feldmann, A Richter, M Bivour, C Reichel, H Steinkemper, J Benick, and
M Hermle. The Irresistible Charm of a Simple Current Flow Pattern – 25% With a Solar
Cell Featuring a Full-Area Back Contact. Proceedings of the 31st European Photovoltaic
Solar Energy Conference and Exibition, (September):259–263, 2015.
[42] Ian R.C. Post, Peter Ashburn, and Graham R. Wolstenholme. Polysilicon Emitters for
Bipolar Transistors: A Review and Re-Evaluation of Theory and Experiment. IEEE
Transactions on Electron Devices, 39(7):1717–1731, 1992.
[43] J. Shewchun, R. Singh, and M. A. Green. Theory of metal-insulator-semiconductor solar
cells. Journal of Applied Physics, 48(2):765–770, 1977.
[44] R. Peibst, U. R¨omer, K. R. Hofmann, B. Lim, T. F. Wietler, J. Kr¨ugener, N. P. Harder,
and R. Brendel. A simple model describing the symmetric ihbox−−v characteristics of
hboxp polycrystalline si/ hboxn monocrystalline si, and hboxn polycrystalline si/hboxp
monocrystalline si junctions. IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 4(3):841–850, May 2014.
[45] R. Peibst, U. R¨omer, Y. Larionova, M. Rien¨acker, A. Merkle, N. Folchert, S. Reiter,
M. Turcu, B. Min, J. Kr¨ugener, D. Tetzlaﬀ, E. Bugiel, T. Wietler, and R. Brendel.
Working principle of carrier selective poly-si/c-si junctions: Is tunnelling the whole story?
Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, 158:60 – 67, 2016.
Proceedings of the 6th
International Conference on Silicon Photovoltaics.
[46] Qiang Li, Ke Tao, Yun Sun, Rui Jia, Shao-Meng Wang, Zhi Jin, and Xin-Yu Liu. Replac-
ing the amorphous silicon thin layer with microcrystalline silicon thin layer in TOPCon
solar cells. Solar Energy, 135:487–492, 2016.
[47] Frank Feldmann, Maik Simon, Martin Bivour, Christian Reichel, Martin Hermle, and
Stefan W Glunz. Eﬃcient carrier-selective p- and n-contacts for Si solar cells. Solar
Energy Materials and Solar Cells, 131:100–104, 2014.
[48] A Stoﬀel, A Kovacs, W Kronast, and B Muller. Lpcvd against pecvd for micromechanical
applications. Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering, 6(1):1–13, 1996.
[49] Frank Feldmann, Kurt-Ulrich Ritzau, Martin Bivour, Anamaria Moldovan, Siddharth
Modi, Jan Temmler, Martin Hermle, and Stefan W. Glunz. High and low work function
materials for passivated contacts. Energy Procedia, 77:263 – 270, 2015. 5th International
Conference on Silicon Photovoltaics, SiliconPV 2015.
[50] Klaus Ellmer, Andreas Klein, and Bernd Rech. Transparent Conductive Zinc Oxide:
Basics and applications in thin ﬁlm solar cells. Springer, Berlin, 2008.
[51] Sina Reiter, Nico Koper, Rolf Reineke-Koch, Yevgeniya Larionova, Mircea Turcu, Jan
Kr¨ugener, Dominic Tetzlaﬀ, Tobias Wietler, Uwe H¨ohne, Jan-Dirk K¨ahler, and Robby
Peibst. Parasitic Absorption in Polycrystalline Si-layers for Carrier-selective Front Junc-
tions. Energy Procedia, 92:199–204, aug 2016.
[52] H Peelaers, E Kioupakis, and C G Van De Walle. Fundamental limits on optical trans-
parency of transparent conducting oxides: Free-carrier absorption in SnO 2. Applied
Physics Letters, 100(1), 2012.
[53] Z.C. Holman, a Descoeudres, S. De Wolf, and C. Ballif. Record Infrared Internal Quan-
tum Eﬃciency in Silicon Heterojunction Solar Cells With Dielectric/Metal Rear Reﬂec-
tors. IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 3(4):1243–1249, 2013.
[54] Malte R Vogt, Hendrik Holst, Matthias Winter, Rolf Brendel, and Pietro P Altermatt.
Numerical modeling of c-Si PV modules by coupling the semiconductor with the thermal
conduction, convection and radiation equations. Energy Procedia, 77(77):215–224, 2015.
==PAGE:73==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
59
[55] S. Zuccon, P. Zuppella, A.J. Corso, and M.G. Pelizzo. Bilayer structures optimization as
antireﬂective coating for silicon solar cells. In Proceedings of SPIE - The International
Society for Optical Engineering, volume 9177, pages 1–8, San Diego, 2014.
[56] J. Bendick, R. M¨uller, F. Schindler, A. Richter, H. Hauser, F. Feldmann, P. Krenckel,
S. Riepe, M. C. Schubert, M Hermle, and S. W Glunz. APPROACHING 22% EFFI-
CIENCY WITH MULTICRYSTALLINE N-TYPE SILICON SOLAR CELLS. In Euro-
pean PV Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, number 33, pages 25–29, Amsterdam,
2017.
[57] Hikaru Kobayashi Asuha, Osamu Maida, Masao Takahashi, and Hitoo Iwasa. Nitric
acid oxidation of Si to form ultrathin silicon dioxide layers with a low leakage current
density. Journal of Applied Physics, 94(11):7328–7335, dec 2003.
[58] Di Yan, Andres Cuevas, James Bullock, Yimao Wan, and Christian Samundsett.
Phosphorus-diﬀused polysilicon contacts for solar cells.
Solar Energy Materials and
Solar Cells, 142:75–82, 2015.
[59] Anamaria Moldovan, Frank Feldmann, Martin Zimmer, Jochen Rentsch, Jan Benick, and
Martin Hermle. Tunnel oxide passivated carrier-selective contacts based on ultra-thin
SiO 2 layers. Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, 142:123–127, 2015.
[60] Jan-Otto Carlsson and Peter M. Martin. Chapter 7 - chemical vapor deposition. In
Peter M. Martin, editor, Handbook of Deposition Technologies for Films and Coatings
(Third Edition), pages 314 – 363. William Andrew Publishing, Boston, third edition
edition, 2010.
[61] P Joubert, B Loisel, Y Chouan, and L Haji. The Eﬀect of Low Pressure on the Structure
of LPCVD Polycrystalline Silicon Films. J. Electrochem. Soc., 134(10):2541–2544, 1987.
[62] Frank Feldmann, Christian Reichel, Ralph M¨uller, and Martin Hermle. The application
of poly-Si/SiOx contacts as passivated top/rear contacts in Si solar cells. Solar Energy
Materials and Solar Cells, 159:265–271, 2017.
[63] S.N.R. Kazmi, Alexey Kovalgin, A.A.I. Aarnink, C Salm, and Jurriaan Schmitz. Low-
stress highly-conductive in-situ boron doped ge0.7si 0.3 ﬁlms by lpcvd. 1:P222–P226, 08
2012.
[64] Simo Er¨anen. Thin Films on Silicon. In Markku Tilli, Teruaki Motooka, Veli-Matti
Airaksinen, Sami Franssila, Mervi Paulasto-Kro ckel, and Veikko Lindroos, editors,
Handbook of Silicon Based MEMS Materials and Technologies, chapter 6, pages 124–
205. Elsevier, second edition, 2015.
[65] W KERN and DA PUOTINEN. Cleaning solutions based on hydrogen peroxide for use
in silicon semiconductor technology. Rca Review, 31(2):187–, 1970.
[66] Peter M. Martin.
Surface preparation for ﬁlm and coating deposition processes.
In
Handbook of Deposition Technologies for Films and Coatings, chapter 3, pages 93–134.
Elsevier Inc., 3rd edition, 2010.
[67] A.S.H. Makhlouf. Current and advanced coating technologies for industrial applications.
In Nanocoatings and Ultra-Thin Films, chapter 1, pages 3–23. Woodhead Publishing,
jan 2011.
[68] Charles A. Bishop. Electron Beam (E-Beam) Evaporation. In Vacuum Deposition onto
Webs, Films and Foils, chapter 15, pages 289–300. 2015.
[69] Franz Laermer, Sami Franssila, Lauri Sainiemi, and Kai Kolari.
Deep Reactive Ion
Etching. In Markku Tilli, Teruaki Motooka, Veli-Matti Airaksinen, Sami Franssila, Mervi
Paulasto-Kro Ckel, and Veikko Lindroos, editors, Handbook of Silicon Based MEMS
==PAGE:74==
60
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Materials and Technologies: Second Edition, chapter 21, pages 444–469. Elsevier Inc.,
second edition, 2015.
[70] Udo Klotzbach, Andr´es Fabi´an Lasagni, Michael Panzner, and Volker Franke. Laser
Micromachining. In Fabrication and Characterization in the Micro-Nano Range, pages
29–46. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011.
[71] G.E. Jellison. Ellipsometry*. In Encyclopedia of Spectroscopy and Spectrometry, pages
475–483. Elsevier, 1999.
[72] S.M. Sze and K. Ng. Kwok. Physics and Properties of Semiconductors, chapter 1, pages
1–20. Wiley-Blackwell, 2006.
[73] Christiana Honsberg and Stuart Bowden. PVEducation: Quantum Eﬃciency. https://
www.pveducation.org/pvcdrom/solar-cell-operation/quantum-efficiency, 2018.
Accessed 07.06.2018.
[74] D.S.H. Chan, J.R. Phillips, and J.C.H. Phang. A comparative study of extraction meth-
ods for solar cell model parameters. Solid-State Electronics, 29(3):329–337, 1986.
[75] D. T. Cotfas, P. A. Cotfas, and S. Kaplanis. Methods to determine the dc parameters
of solar cells: A critical review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 28:588–596,
2013.
[76] Abdelhalim Zekry and Abdulhameed Yousef Al-Mazroo. A distributed SPICE-model of
a solar cell. IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, 43(5):691–700, 1996.
[77] G H Yordanov, O M Midtg˚ard, and T O Saetre. TWO-DIODE MODEL REVISITED:
PARAMETERS EXTRACTION FROM SEMI-LOG PLOTS OF I-V DATA. In 25th
European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, pages 4156–4163, 2010.
[78] S. Rein. Theory of lifetime spectroscopy. In Lifetime Spectroscopy, chapter 2-3, pages
59–255. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2005.
[79] K. Dornich, N. Schueler, B. Berger, and J. R. Niklas. Fast, high resolution, inline contact-
less electrical semiconductor characterization for photovoltaic applications by microwave
detected photoconductivity. Materials Science and Engineering B-advanced Functional
Solid-state Materials, 178(9):676–681, 2013.
[80] Phil Calado, Dan Burkitt, Jizhong Yao, Joel Troughton, Trystan M. Watson, Matt J.
Carnie, Andrew M. Telford, Brian C. O’Regan, Jenny Nelson, and Piers R. F. Barnes.
Identifying dominant recombination mechanisms in perovskite solar cells by measuring
the transient ideality factor. 2018.
[81] N. Sch¨uler, T. Hahn, S. Schmerler, S. Hahn, K. Dornich, and J. R. Niklas. Simulations
of photoconductivity and lifetime for steady state and nonsteady state measurements.
Journal of Applied Physics, 107(6):064901, 2010.
[82] N. Sch¨uler, T. Hahn, K. Dornich, J.R. Niklas, and Bianca Gr¨undig-Wendrock. Theoret-
ical and experimental comparison of contactless lifetime measurement methods for thick
silicon samples. Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, 94(6):1076 – 1080, 2010.
[83] Keung L. Luke and Li-Jen Cheng. Analysis of the interaction of a laser pulse with a
silicon wafer: Determination of bulk lifetime and surface recombination velocity. Journal
of Applied Physics, 61(6):2282–2293, 1987.
[84] Ronald A. Sinton and Andres Cuevas.
Contactless determination of current–voltage
characteristics and minority-carrier lifetimes in semiconductors from quasi-steady-state
photoconductance data. Applied Physics Letters, 69(17):2510–2512, 1996.
==PAGE:75==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
61
[85] Daniel Macdonald, Ronald A. Sinton, and Andr´es Cuevas. On the use of a bias-light cor-
rection for trapping eﬀects in photoconductance-based lifetime measurements of silicon.
Journal of Applied Physics, 89(5):2772–2778, 2001.
[86] Konstantinos Misiakos and Dimitris Tsamakis. Accurate measurements of the silicon
intrinsic carrier density from 78 to 340 K Contactless determination of current–voltage
characteristics and minority-carrier lifetimes in semiconductors from quasi-steady-state
photoconductance data Accurate measuremen. Journal of Applied Physics Journal of
Applied Physics Journal of Applied Physics Journal of Applied Physics Journal of Applied
Physics Applied Physics Letters Journal of Applied Physics, 74(10):1598–2944, 1993.
[87] PVlighthouse.
Resistivity
calculator.
https://www.pvlighthouse.com.au/
resistivity, 2018. Accessed 02.02.2018.
[88] Justin Henrie, Spencer Kellis, Stephen M Schultz, and Aaron Hawkins. Electronic color
charts for dielectric ﬁlms on silicon. Optics express, 12(7):1464–1469, 2004.
[89] Nicholas E. Grant, Vladimir P. Markevich, Jack Mullins, Anthony R. Peaker, Fiacre
Rougieux, and Daniel Macdonald.
Thermal activation and deactivation of grown-in
defects limiting the lifetime of ﬂoat-zone silicon. Physica Status Solidi - Rapid Research
Letters, 10(6):443–447, 2016.
[90] M. Meduˇna, O. Caha, J. Kubˇena, A. Kubˇena, and J. Burˇs´ık. Homogenization of CZ Si
wafers by Tabula Rasa annealing. Physica B: Condensed Matter, 404(23-24):4637–4640,
2009.
[91] D. Tetzlaﬀ, J. Kr¨ugener, Y. Larionova, S. Reiter, M. Turcu, F. Haase, R. Brendel,
R. Peibst, U. H¨ohne, J.-D. K¨ahler, and T.F. Wietler.
A simple method for pinhole
detection in carrier selective polo-junctions for high eﬃciency silicon solar cells. Solar
Energy Materials and Solar Cells, 173:106 – 110, 2017. Proceedings of the 7th interna-
tional conference on Crystalline Silicon Photovoltaics.
[92] Jan Kr¨ugener, Felix Haase, Michael Rien¨acker, Rolf Brendel, H.J¨org Osten, and Robby
Peibst. Improvement of the srh bulk lifetime upon formation of n-type polo junctions
for 25% eﬃcient si solar cells. Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, 173:85 – 91, 2017.
Proceedings of the 7th international conference on Crystalline Silicon Photovoltaics.
[93] Frank Feldmann, Martin Bivour, Christian Reichel, Heiko Steinkemper, Martin Hermle,
and Stefan W Glunz. Tunnel oxide passivated contacts as an alternative to partial rear
contacts. Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, 131:46–50, 2014.
[94] R.E. Smallman and A.H.W. Ngan. Physical metallurgy and advanced materials. chap-
ter 12, pages 610–612. Elsevier Science, 2011.
[95] Emmanouil Lioudakis, Andreas Othonos, and A. G. Nassiopoulou. Determination of
critical points on silicon nanoﬁlms: Surface and quantum conﬁnement eﬀects. Physica
Status Solidi (C) Current Topics in Solid State Physics, 5(12):3776–3779, 2008.
[96] Naifei Ren, Zhenghao Liu, and Quan Wang. Investigating the eﬀects of microstructure
on optical properties of diﬀerent kinds of polysilicon thin ﬁlms. Physics Letters, Section
A: General, Atomic and Solid State Physics, 379(16-17):1153–1160, 2015.
[97] B. S. Meyerson and M. L. Yu. Phosphorus-Doped Polycrystalline Silicon via LPCVD.
Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 131(10):2366, oct 1984.
[98] C. Azzaro, P. Duverneuil, and J. P. Couderc. Comments on the inﬂuence of the entrance
zone in LPCVD reactors for in situ phosphorus-doped polysilicon deposition. Chemical
Engine&q Science No. IO, 33(48):191–922, 1908.
==PAGE:76==
62
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[99] G. Franco, M. Priulla, G. Renna, and G. Scerra. Inﬂuence of the polysilicon doping
on the electrical quality of thin oxides: A confrontation between vertical and horizontal
furnaces. Materials Science in Semiconductor Processing, 4(1-3):153–157, 2001.
[100] W Ahmed, R D Pilkington, and D B Meakin. UHV CHEMICAL VAPOUR DEPO-
SITION OF UNDOPED AND IN-SITU DOPED POLYSILICON FILMS. Journal de
Physique, 11(1), 1991.
[101] SJ Paik, Y Park, and DI Cho. Roughened polysilicon for low impedance microelectrodes
in neural probes. Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering, 13(3):373–379, 2003.
[102] M Sarret, A Liba, O Bonnaud, M Mokhtari, and B Fortin. CONDITIONS FOR OB-
TAINING IN-SITU PHOSPHORUS DOPED LPCVD POLYSILICON LAYERS WITH
HIGH CONDUCTIVITY ONTO GLASS SUBSTRATES. Journal de Physique IV Col-
loque Journal de Physique, 11(1), 1991.
[103] T. h. Wang, E. Iwaniczko, M. R. Page, Q. Wang, Y. Xu, Y. Yan, D. Levi, L. Roybal,
R. Bauer, and H. M. Branz. High-eﬃciency silicon heterojunction solar cells by hwcvd.
In 2006 IEEE 4th World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conference, volume 2, pages
1439–1442, May 2006.
[104] Maarten W. M. van Cleef, Francisco A. Rubinelli, Rita Rizzoli, Roberto Pinghini, Ruud
E. I. Schropp, and Werner F. van der Weg. Amorphous silicon carbide/crystalline sil-
icon heterojunction solar cells: A comprehensive study of the photocarrier collection.
Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, 37(7R):3926, 1998.
[105] A Froitzheim, K Brendel, L Elstner, W Fuhs, K Kliefoth, and M Schmidt. Interface
recombination in heterojunctions of amorphous and crystalline silicon.
[106] A S Gudovskikh, J P Kleider, A Froitzheim, W Fuhs, and E I Terukov. Investigation of a-
Si:Hyc-Si heterojunction solar cells interface properties. Thin Solid Films, 451(452):345–
349, 2004.
[107] A Zekry and G Eldallal. EFFECT OF MS CONTACT ON THE ELECTRICAL BE-
HAVIOUR OF SOLAR CELLS. Solid-State Electronics, 31(1):91–91, 1988.
==PAGE:77==
Appendix A
Individual curves
A.1
Batch 1
Figure A.1: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 1P01.
Figure A.2: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 1P02.
63
==PAGE:78==
64
APPENDIX A. INDIVIDUAL CURVES
Figure A.3: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 1P03.
Figure A.4: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 1F01.
Figure A.5: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 1N01.
==PAGE:79==
A.1. BATCH 1
65
Figure A.6: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 1N02.
Figure A.7: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 1N03.
Figure A.8: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 1PB1.
==PAGE:80==
66
APPENDIX A. INDIVIDUAL CURVES
Figure A.9: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 1PB2.
A.2
Batch 2
Figure A.10: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 2P01.
Figure A.11: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 2P02.
==PAGE:81==
A.2. BATCH 2
67
Figure A.12: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 2P03.
Figure A.13: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 2N01.
Figure A.14: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 2N02.
==PAGE:82==
68
APPENDIX A. INDIVIDUAL CURVES
Figure A.15: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 2N03.
Figure A.16: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 2FB1.
Figure A.17: I-V curve for sample 2FB2. QE could not be obtained.
==PAGE:83==
A.2. BATCH 2
69
Figure A.18: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 2PB1.
Figure A.19: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 2NB1.
Figure A.20: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 2NB2.
==PAGE:84==
70
APPENDIX A. INDIVIDUAL CURVES
A.3
Batch 3
Figure A.21: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 3PK1.
Figure A.22: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 3PK2.
Figure A.23: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 3PB1.
==PAGE:85==
A.3. BATCH 3
71
Figure A.24: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 3FB1.
Figure A.25: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 3FB2.
Figure A.26: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 3NK1.
==PAGE:86==
72
APPENDIX A. INDIVIDUAL CURVES
Figure A.27: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 3NK2.
Figure A.28: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 3NB1.
Figure A.29: I-V (left) and QE (right) curves for sample 3NB2.
