==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Deep Learning for Language Correction
Sequence-to-sequence neural network for character-
level spellchecking
Wacim Belblidia (s161892)
2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This paper sums up my Master’s Thesis which goal was to develop a deep learning
language correction model to correct misspelled French sentences. The training of
such a model has been motivated by the possible improvement of a chatbot’s intent
recognition model. The data used to train the spellchecking network comes from mas-
sive French text corpus. This data is artificially noised to simulate spelling mistakes:
insertion, deletion, replacement or switch of characters. The computed couples are
fed into an LSTM-based sequence-to-sequence neural network. The network learns to
generate, at a character-level, the correct sentence. The spellchecker is plugged into
the chatbot’s text classification pipeline in order to correct the incoming sentences.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was realized as part of the Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science department at the Technical University of Denmark. It has been prepared in
close collaboration with Illuin Technology’s team that welcomed me and helped me
developing the researches described in this paper. The work was carried out from
January 2018 to July 2018.
Paris, August 1, 2018
Wacim Belblidia (s161892)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to thank my supervisor Professor Ole Winther for his collaboration
and guidance during my education at DTU, and during the development of this thesis.
I would also like to express my gratitude to the professors that I had the chance to
meet and who tought me the methods and principles that led my work in the recent
months.
I would also like to warmly thank the company that hosted me during these
months: Illuin Technology. Its members have been of great help for developing, dis-
cussing and challenging my thoughts and intuitions. Welcoming this Master’s thesis
as a complete part of the Research and Development roadmap of the company gave
me strong support and ideal atmosphere to conduct my project.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
All the abbreviations, symbols and variables mentioned in this document are described
below.
==PAGE:10==
viii
Nomenclature
AI
Artificial Intelligence
ANN
Artificial Neural Networks
RNN
Recurrent Neural Networks
CNN
Convolutional Neural Networks
POS
Part-Of-Speech
MLP
Multi Layer Perceptron
GD
Gradient Descent
SGD
Stochastic Gradient Descent
BPTT
Back Propagation Through Time
LSTM
Long Short Term Memory
GRU
Gated Recurrent Units
BOW
Bag Of Words
TFIDF
Term Frequency Inverse Document Frequency
AWS
Amazon Web Services
NLP
Natural Language Processing
E
Loss function of a neural network
U, V , W
Weights connection between layers in an RNN
W k
W k = (wk
ij) Weight vector of the kth layer of a network
Bk
Bias vector of the kth layer of a network
ˆyi
Estimation of a ground truth output yi
xi
xi = (x(1)
i , ..., x(k)
i
) input vector of dimension k
zi
Activity of a neuron i
hi
hi = f(zi) activation of neuron, computed with a non-linear activation function f
η
Gradient Descent learning rate
θt
Parameters of the network at training iteration t
λ
Norm penalty factor for L1 or L2 regularization
lmin
Minimum length of the encoder-decoder input sequence
lmax
Maximum length of the encoder-decoder input sequence
nchars
Number of characters considered as known for language correction
hdim
Hidden space dimension in the encoder-decoder LSTM layers
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Nomenclature
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical background
3
2.1
Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Artificial Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Recurrent neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Deep learning applied to Natural Language
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Related Work
21
3.1
Algorithmic spell checking method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Learning methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Data
27
4.1
Raw data description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
From raw data to a learning dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Noise generation process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
Encoding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Model
33
5.1
The encoder module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
The decoder module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3
The classification module
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.4
Loss function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.5
Initialization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.6
Model summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
6
Experiments
41
6.1
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.5
Obstacles in training large neural networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.6
Consistency with the initial usecase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7
Implementation
47
7.1
Ensembling models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.2
Correcting chunks of text
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8
Conclusions
53
A An Appendix
55
A.1 Network training script
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.2 Using the spell checker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.3 Correction examples on chatbot sentences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
Bibliography
71
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Illuin Technology is a 25-people french company that creates and implements artifi-
cial intelligence products based on state-of-the-art machine and deep learning models.
Among those AI projects, conversational assistants help various companies facing
their customer support, e-commerce, or hiring challenges. These chatbots embed a
couple of AI modules such as machine learning and deep learning intent detection
algorithms, Named Entity Recognition or POS Tagging modules.
Those modules are implemented and trained on either customer’s datasets or
French text corpuses. Moreover, the intent recognition strongly relies on the state-
of-the-art word embeddings such as Word2Vec, FastText or GloVe. Custom word
embeddings are also trained on-the-go to improve classification performances. This
text classification works very well on correct French sentences. Yet, at inference time,
the intent recognition models face some difficulties when spelling mistakes come up.
My Master’s Thesis consists in developing a deep learning based language correc-
tion model. This spell checker will be plugged within the chatbot’s AI pipelines. The
goal is to improve classification performances on misspelled sentences. The approach
is very simple: by randomly inserting spelling mistakes into correct French text (char-
acter deletions, insertions, replacements or reordering), we can feed a neural network
with training data. The inputs of the network are the misspelled sentences, and the
outputs are the corresponding correct sentence. It’s actually training the equivalent
of a denoising autoencoder for text data.
This document will first detail the theoretical background needed to walkthrough
the technical developments, and the related research works on language correction.
We’ll then deep dive in the spellchecking model itself: the data and its processing,
the neural network structure and training. We’ll finally walkthrough and challenge
the training results and performances.
==PAGE:14==
2
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Theoretical
background
We will cover here the theory required to walkthrough this master thesis.
2.1
Machine Learning
Let’s quickly recap the Machine Learning paradygm, on which the deep learning prin-
ciples relies.
A Machine Learning algorithm is a mapping ϕ that estimates an output y = ϕ(x)
based on an input variable x. The mapping ϕ is learned from a training dataset that
contains known associations between input vectors x and outputs y. These outputs
can be either real continuous variables (regression), or categorical variables (classi-
fication). The learning phase is conducted by specifying Machine Learning models
that define the learning rules.
Let’s consider a training set of n couples (x1, y1), ..., (xn, yn). Each element is an
association between an input xi = (x(1)
i , ..., x(k)
i
) of dimension k, and a target value yi.
The model is trained to estimate a set of predicted outputs (ˆy1, ..., ˆyn). The quality
of the mapping is then assessed with a cost function that gives a distance between
the set of known outputs, and the estimated outputs. Here is an example of a cost
function, the Mean Square Error (MSE) :
MSE = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(2.1)
Deep Learning models follow the same formulations by estimating outputs and
evaluating them with a cost function. Let’s introduce the central paradygm on which
the spellchecking algorithm relies: Artificial Neural Networks.
==PAGE:16==
4
2 Theoretical background
2.2
Artificial Neural Network
As a subset of Machine Learning algorithms, Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) have
been developed to further explore complex patterns in data. ANN were built in a
close similarity with the human brain structure. In human brain, large networks of
interconnected brain neurons communicate with each other to transmit information.
Each neuron receives information from its connected neurons, and each neuron have
an activation threshold. When the total signal exceeds the activation threshold, the
neuron is ”activated”, and information is transmitted to the next connections.
The same paradygm applies to ANN (Figure 2.1): an artificial neuron is fed with
information incoming from all its connected neurons. It has an activation function,
that transforms and transmits the incoming piece of information to the next neuron.
Neurons are organized by layers, one layer communicating through the next with var-
ious types of connections. The tremendous amount of connections between one brain
neuron and the others is replicated in the ANN paradygm, as well as the activation
processe.
Figure 2.1: Comparison between a brain neuron and a neural network elementary
neuron.
Several surrounding neurons’ activations are weighted and
summed so that the central neuron’s activation is computed (right red
arrow). Source: [Yan].
Theses models usually outperform standard Machine Learning algorithms when
it comes to large amounts of data (Figure 2.2). They also bring very powerful feature
extraction capabilities, especially for unstructured data. Indeed, some specific neural
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Artificial Neural Network
5
network structures can learn to extract relevant features from raw inputs such as
images, voice records, or large text sequences (Figure 2.3).
Figure 2.2: Amount
of
data
dependency.
Source:
https://www.edureka.co/blog/what-is-deep-learning.
Figure 2.3: Feature
extraction
capabilities.
Source:
Blog
http://towardsdatascience.com.
Let’s deep dive in the mathematical formulations of ANN.
2.2.1
Initial formulation
The elementary piece of architecture in ANN is the single artificial neuron (Figure 2.4).
The single neuron (also called perceptron) is a mathematical function that takes as
input a vector x = (x1, ..., xn), and computes an activation value h. The neuron is
parameterized with a parameter vector w = (w1, ..., wn), and an activation function
f. The parameter w weights the incoming inputs, and a bias unit b is added, so
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Theoretical background
that internal biases in the incoming input x can be fitted. z = b + ∑n
i=1 wixi is
called the activity of this neuron. This activity is then passed through a non-linear
differentiable function f (the activation function). The whole pipeline applied by the
single neuron sums up as:
h = f(b +
n
∑
i=1
wixi)
(2.2)
Figure 2.4: Basic Artificial Neuron.
Most common activation functions f are shown on Figure 2.5. Well, this single
neuron simply applies a non-linear transformation to a linear combination of the input
vector components. Combined together, thousands of these neurons will generate
powerful models.
−3
−2
−1
1
2
3
−2
−1
1
2
3
x
f(x)
sigmoid
tanh
relu
Figure 2.5: Most common activation functions.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Artificial Neural Network
7
2.2.2
Feed forward neural network
Based on this perceptron, feed forward neural networks are built by concatenating
several layers of these units.
In particular, adding together several layers of per-
ceptron units builds a Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP) also called dense network or
fully-connected network. More specifically, an MLP (Figure 2.6) is composed of the
following elements:
• The input layer, that processes the input data. One unit corresponds to one
dimension of the training data.
• One or several hidden layers, that will flow the information from the input
to the end.
• The output layer, processes the last hidden layer as an input, and estimates
the target y
Figure 2.6: Feed-forward neural network, typical architecture of MLPs.
Let’s explore a bit further the mathematical formulation for MLPs.
Let’s consider a layer made of n single perceptrons (u1, ..., un). Each unit ui has an
associated weight vector wi = (wi1, ..., wik), corresponding to the connection’s weights
with the k previous layer’s neurons. Following the calculation rule of a perceptron,
the activation hi of the neuron ui is:
hi = f(bi +
k
∑
j=1
wijxj)
(2.3)
Running this operation for all the units (u1, ..., un) of the layer, we define n weight
vectors (w1, ..., wn), so that the matrix W = (wij) of shape n X k represents all the
connections between this layer and the previous one. Thus W and the bias matrix
B = (bi) completely parameterize this layer.
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Theoretical background
Considering m layers in a feed-forward neural network, the matrices W(1), ..., W(m),
along with the biases B(1), ..., B(m) completely define the network. We define :
θ = W(1), ..., W(m), B(1), ..., B(m)
(2.4)
as the set of network parameters. Training the network finally consists in learning
an optimal value of the set of parameters θ, from a set of training data (x1, ..., xn)
and its associated targets (y1, ..., yn).
Hence, to flow information throughout the network, we feed-forward the input data
in the successive network layers. Each layer will weight and apply non-linearities to
the incoming vector, and transmit the result to the next layer. Once the information
has been flowed, the last layer of the ANN returns an estimate ˆy = Φ(x, θ). The soft-
max (normalized exponential) activation function is often applied to the final layer’s
activities, so that the network prediction is a categorical probability distribution over
the possible outputs.
2.2.3
Training, loss function and optimizers
As we already set up basics of the neural networks theory, we now need to understand
how those complex models are trained.
The first step is to define a metric that evaluates how good the network performs
for each estimation. This error will evaluate a distance between the ground truth y
and the network prediction ˆy for each data point. For each feed-forward (propagation
of one data point), the value of the error (the cost) will indicate whether and how we
should update the network weights to get closer to the expected output.
Let’s get more precise. A cost function E is defined to be the error distance. This
cost E is computed for each feed-forward, so that we have a value E(xi) for each
training point xi. This value indicate how close is the estimate ˆyi from the ground
truth value yi. Of course, the cost function E is highly dependent on the network
parameter set θ. Hence, training the network is equivalent to finding the optimal set
of parameters θ that minimizes the cost function E(θ) over all the training points.
The obvious approach to tackle this optimization problem would be to compute the
solution of the gradient equation:
∂E
∂θ = 0
(2.5)
As this theoretical solution is highly complex to compute, a gradient descent
algorithm within the solution’s vector space is preferred: we will use consecutive
gradient values to update the set of parameters towards, hopefully, a global minimum.
Figure 2.7 illustrates how complex the cost function can be, and how tough it can be
to find its global minimum.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Artificial Neural Network
9
Figure 2.7: An error surface. The red point indicates an optimal solution for the
gradient descent algorithm. Source: [Yan].
At a timestep t, the set of parameters θt is updated with the usual gradient descent
operation:
θt+1 = θt −η ∂E
∂θt
(2.6)
η is the learning rate of the algorithm: at each timestep, θ is updated following
the steepest slope on the cost function surface, weighted with the factor η. Of course,
tuning the value of η will be crucial. A too large η might lead to missing the minimum
or diverging (Figure 2.8). A too small value of η might get the iteration stuck into a
local minima, or would just converge very slowly (Figure 2.9).
Figure 2.8: Convergence difficulties with a too large η.
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Theoretical background
Figure 2.9: Convergence difficulties with a too small η.
Two gradient updates are illustrated on Figure 2.10. The loss is moving by a
small amount ∆x in the direction x, and ∆y in the direction y. The cost E (cor-
responding to z on the figure) then follows the direction ∂E
∂x ∆x + ∂E
∂y ∆y. These
element-wise changes are defined so that the global loss is minimized. This projection
of the global loss onto x and y dimensions perfectly illustrates the neural network
loss optimization: in order to update each weights and biases of the network, we need
to relate the global error ∂E
∂θt
with each weights-wise elementary error
∂E
∂wl
jk
, with
wl
jk the weight between the kth neuron of the (l −1)th layer and the jth neuron of
the lth layer. This relationship is computed thanks to the back-propagation algorithm.
Figure 2.10: Gradient Descent on a complex loss function. Source: [Yan].
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Recurrent neural networks
11
The back-propagation mathematical formulation requires heavy calculus details
that we won’t develop here. Quickly, the principle is to back-propagate the global
error throughout the layers, from the output towards the first layer. Each layer-wise
loss will be developed as a sum of neuron-wise loss.
Initially, the gradient descent (GD) algorithm would need to run through all the
samples of the training set before being able to make each update of E. This is way
too heavy and long to compute. The stochastic gradient descent (SGD) paradygm
answers this issue: instead of feed-forwarding then back-propagating all the samples,
we will propagate only a small number of samples, gathered in a batch (the term
SGD usually stands for the extended name Mini-Batch SGD). It’s called stochastic
because the computed gradient will be a stochastic approximation of the full gradi-
ent on all the samples. We rely on the strong hypothesis that this approximation is
good enough to estimate the right direction for the loss function updates. The SGD
algorithm converges much faster than the GD, while keeping a very good level of
minimization for the loss function.
Finally, a lot of adjustments can be brought to the basic update θt+1 = θt −
η∇θE(θ) in order to improve the learning behaviour. Among others, the useful mo-
mentum technique helps speeding up the convergence and attenuating local minima
oscillations. This method adds to the update vector ut+1 a fraction γ of the previous
update vector ut so that the previous move is still taken into account. This formulates
as:
ut+1 = γut + η ∂E
∂θt
(2.7)
θt+1 = θt −ut+1
(2.8)
2.3
Recurrent neural networks
We now set up the basics of neural network design and training. Let’s now focus on
the network architectures that we will use in the next chapters of this thesis: the
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs).
2.3.1
Formulation
RNNs are a specific neural network architecture that process sequences of data. These
sequences can be a time serie, a sequence of words, a sequence of genes, or even a
sequence of tones in a song. Each element of the sequence is considered as a timestep.
While feed-forward neural networks propagates once the input through each neuron,
RNNs use feedback loops to enrich the input at timestep t + 1 with outputs from the
timestep t. The RNN feedback loop is shown on Figure 2.11. RNNs also have the
specificity to use neurons with a hidden state: each unit has an internal vector that is
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Theoretical background
supposed to encode the information that has been already propagated. Hence, each
unit is provided with an input from a training data point (a particular timestep in
a sequence), and the hidden state of the previous unit. Different types of recurrent
cells are detailed in Chapter 1.3.2. For any type of recurrent cell, the paradygm is
the same: for each propagation, both the hidden state and the output of the neuron
are updated:
ht = f1(ht−1, xt)
(2.9)
yt = f2(ht)
(2.10)
Figure 2.11: Feedback loop in RNNs compared to feed-forward neural networks.
RNNs are used over simple ANNs for their abilities to take into account sequential
dependencies in data: the fact that an input x1 appears before or after another input
x2 might affect the result. That’s why RNNs are the reference architecture for NLP
applications, in which the apparition order of the words play a crucial role. Because
of the hidden state paradygm, RNNs are usually considered as having a memory :
decisions are made with the previous inputs in mind.
RNNs are usually visualized on an unfolded view, to highlight the information
flow, as we can see on Figure 2.12. As the hidden state flows throughout the cells,
the output at timestep t, ot, depends on both the timestep input xt, but also on all
the previous inputs x1, ..., xt−1. It’s important to note that the weight sets U, V , and
W are shared across the timesteps. This reflects the fact that the network performs
the same task at each timestep, only with different inputs.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Recurrent neural networks
13
Figure 2.12: Unfolded traditional view of RNN. The horizontal layers show the
flow of hidden states throughout the recurrent cells. U, V, W are the
layer weights, that respectively processed the input vectors xt, the hid-
den states st and the outputs ot. Source : Recurrent Neural Networks
Tutorial, Part 3 – Backpropagation Through Time and Vanishing Gra-
dients – WildML.
RNNs can be used in various frameworks, depending on the desired input and
output structure. Figure 2.13 introduces the main RNN structures. The first one-to-
one corresponds to the basic Dense architecture. It’s not part of the RNN paradygm,
but is still represented on the figure for a comparison purpose.
The one-to-many structure stands for a single output and several RNN cells. Usu-
ally, the only input is repeated as much times as the number of timesteps.
This
kind of architecture is particularly used for generation applications, when the net-
work needs only an initialization point to iteratively generate outputs. For example,
captioning networks use this kind of architecture to initialize an RNN layer with a
hidden layer of a trained CNN.
The many-to-one corresponds to a large portion of the RNN applications, where
a single vector has to be estimated from a sequence of data. This architecture is
typically used for text classification tasks: words are successively fed at each timesteps,
and the output of the last unit is used as a set of extracted features for a dense layer
that classifies the right category.
Finally, the many-to-many architecture outputs a sequence of vectors, and not a
single vector. This paradygm is used when several RNN layers are stacked, in order
to used every output as the recurrent inputs of the next recurrent layer. It’s also
widely used in sequence-to-sequence networks (details in Section 2.3.3).
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Theoretical background
Figure 2.13: Various RNN architectures. Red boxes represent the input data, Green
are the recurrent units, and blue are the network output. Source: The
Unreasonable Effectiveness of Recurrent Neural Networks.
2.3.2
Vanishing gradients and gated units
In order to train RNNs, a particular adaptation of the back-propagation algorithm,
called Back Propagation Through Time (BPTT), is used. The BPTT extends the
usual back-propagation with the propagation of the gradients along the recurrent
connections: the local gradient of the loss function at a particular recurrent cell de-
pends on the input gradient, and on the gradient from the previous cell’s hidden state
flowed through the recurrent connection. We won’t walkthrough the derivations defin-
ing the BPTT algorithm.
The BPTT participates in specific training challenges for RNN architectures. The
basic RNN structure (called Vanilla RNN) is described on the unfolded view of Fig-
ure 2.12. Those networks are usually very hard to train, as they often present vanish-
ing or exploding gradient problems. Indeed, as any gradient at timestep t depends on
all the previous timesteps’ gradients, the gradient exponentially diverges or vanishes
along with the timesteps. The gradients are especially hard to control for very long
sequences.
Various solutions exist to fight these convergence difficulties.
Adjusted activa-
tion function or gradient clipping are often used for exploding gradients. Yet, for
vanishing gradients, the best solution provided so far is to use more complex RNN
cells, called gated units, that manages to attenuate the vanishing gradient difficulties.
Long Short Term Dependency (LSTM) cells are one of those gated units. It follows
the same paradym than Vanilla RNN : computing a hidden state based on previous
hidden state and current input, creating an output based on the hidden state, and
passing forward the hidden state to the next cell. It has input it, forget ft and output
ot gates that ”filters” respectively the input, hidden and output vectors to let through
only a part of those vectors. This filtering part is learnt with the training data. It can
hence decide how much of the vector has to be used for the next steps. The complete
composition of the LSTM cell is introduced on (Figure 2.14). Let’s deep dive into the
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Recurrent neural networks
15
mathematical formulation of LSTM units:
ft = σ(Wf[ht−1, xt] + bf)
(2.11)
it = σ(Wi[ht−1, xt] + bi)
(2.12)
ot = σ(Wo[ht−1, xt] + bo)
(2.13)
˜Ct = tanh(WC[ht−1, xt] + bC)
(2.14)
Ct = ft ∗Ct−1 + it ∗˜Ct
(2.15)
ht = ot ∗tanh(Ct)
(2.16)
Ct is the internal memory of the cell. It’s calculated based on the input and forget
gates, to merge the knowledge from the current input and the previous state. This
memory is flowed at eached timstep, and enriched by the new input information. ht
is the hidden state, and also encodes the information memorized from the first loop.
It’s directly flowed to the next layers. When it has to be an output at each timestep,
the hidden state is often processed with a softmax or a Dense layer to become the
output of the cell.
Figure 2.14: LSTM Gated Unit.
Source:
http://colah.github.io/posts/2015-08-
Understanding-LSTMs/ .
Finally, Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) have been designed recently (2014) in the
same mindset than the LSTM, but with a simpler paradygm. It merges the forget
and input gates, and also merges the hidden state and the cell state. They are hence
faster to train, while keeping the LSTM strenghts.
2.3.3
Sequence-to-sequence networks
The particular type of recurrent network we will use is the sequence-to-sequence ar-
chitecture. These networks are trained to predict sequences of outputs. An encoder
part first transforms the input data into a hidden space, and a decoder part decodes
this reduced representation into an estimation of the target data.
Of course, the
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Theoretical background
encoder and decoder can bear any kind of architecture : for example, captioning task
usually uses a CNN to encode an input image, and a RNN to decode the hidden rep-
resentation and generate a text description for this image. The sequence-to-sequence
architecture uses RNN paradygm for the encoder and the decoder. This architecture
is for example the usual model for learning translation tasks. Figure 2.15 shows the
use of an LSTM-based sequence-to-sequence network.
Figure 2.15: Sequence to sequence architecture. The decoder paradygm is repre-
sented at inference time: prediction at each timestep is fed back to
the next cell as an input vector. Source: Deep Learning for Chatbots,
Part 1 – Introduction – WildML.
It’s important to note the difference between training time and inference time for
sequence-to-sequence networks. At training time, we feed the decoder layer with the
the ground truth tokens of the previous timestep. But at inference time, as no label
is available for a new data point, the output at each timestep is fed back as input to
the next cell.
2.3.4
Regularization techniques
Various techniques can prevent a neural network to overfit on the training data.
The dropout technique applies, to each feed-forward, a random drop of a given
proportion of neurons. The goal is to back-propagate the loss gradient on only a
share of the weights, so that the neural doesn’t rely too much on certain connections
(as they can randomly be dropped). For each batch, a random mask is computed
and applied. Of course, the value of the loss highly relies on the dropout rate: for
a given deleted neuron, all the connections that are linked to this neuron doesn’t
contribute to the loss calculation (as the information doesn’t flow throughout this
specific neuron). The loss value hence decreases. Therefore, at inference time, as we
want to take into account all the trained connections, we can’t drop any neuron. The
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Recurrent neural networks
17
validation loss is then evaluated by multiplying the loss value by the dropout ratio, so
that it can be compared with the training losses. Figure 2.16 shows the basic dropout
principle applied on a MLP network.
Figure 2.16: Dropout on a MLP network.
Left figure shows the standard feed-
forward process.
The right figure shows the dropped out feed-
forward.Source: [Srivastava2014Dropout:Overfitting].
A particular implementation of dropout, the recurrent dropout, is formulated for
the RNN optimisation. A lot of different connections occur in a RNN architecture.
Classical dropout applies for the input and the outputs of the layer. The recurrent
dropout corresponds to the dropout masks on the recurrent connections (the hidden
state flow between the recurrent cells). Figure 2.17 illustrates the recurrent dropout.
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Theoretical background
Figure 2.17: Recurrent dropout. Vertical arrows correspond to inputs and outputs
of the RNN layers.
The horizontal arrows represent the recurrent
connections. One color corresponds to one dropout mask. The paper
A Theoretically Grounded Application of Dropout in Recurrent Neural
Networks from Yarin Gal et.
al. recommends to always apply the
same dropout mask for all the equivalent connections, as shown on
the right figure.
Finally, norm penalties consist in reducing the amplitude of the weight matrices.
To do so, the loss function is completed with a penalization on the weight vectors
norm. Penalizing the L1-norm or the L2-norm will give different regularization results.
This process aims at reducing the amplitude of the weight vectors, so that they are
less sensitive to any noise in the input data. L1 and L2 regularization paradygms are
introduced below:
Eregul = E + λ||W||1
(2.17)
Eregul = E + λ||W||2
2
(2.18)
λ is the regularization factor, that adjusts the strenght of the penalization. This
paradygm can be applied at any step of the network independently.
2.4
Deep learning applied to Natural Language
Let’s quickly get a glance on how text data is usually processed in Machine Learning
and Deep Learning applications.
==PAGE:31==
2.4 Deep learning applied to Natural Language
19
2.4.1
Usual processing of text data
Whatever the approach, the first step is to build a vocabulary, so that the text is only
a sequence of ids (the id of each word in the vocabulary). Then, the most simple way
to understand text is to count the words : text is hence encoded into a vector, of the
same dimension as the size of the vocabulary, and where the values are the occurence
value of each word of the vocabulary in the text. This approach is called bag-of-words
(BOW).
On top of that, the TF-IDF (Term-Frequency Inverse-Document-Frequency) ap-
proach encodes in the same way the text, but adds some weighting to the vector values.
The idea is that we also want to consider the capacity of each word to discriminate
the dataset: for a set of texts, if all the sequences contains the same word then this
word is not relevant for our machine learning challenge (0-variance for this column).
On the opposite, only one occurence of a word among all the dataset will be crucial.
Hence, we multiply the values of the BOW approach by the inverse-frequency of each
word among all the texts. The product between the two factors, combined with some
logarithmic operation, formulates the TF-IDF method.
These methods encodes perfectly the frequencies of the words and their impor-
tance into a text corpus. Yet, it doesn’t give any feeling on the word meaning: two
words that have the same value in the TF-IDF vector would not be especially close
in their meaning. On the other hand, two very close words (two colors for examples,
”blue” and ”red”) won’t be close or similar in the TF-IDF approach.
To tackle this issue, word-embeddings have been created to encode the meaning
of the words. All the words of the languages are associated with a high-dimensional
vector that encode the semantic, so that two close words in the embedding space (the
distance between the two word vectors) will be close in meaning. First formulations
of these continous space representations of words have been introduced by Mikolov
et al. in [Mik+13] “Efficient Estimation of Word Representations in Vector Space”.
These vectors are usually already computed in pre-trained matrices, and available in
several languages. Word2Vec, Glove and FastText are the main available pretrained
word-embeddings.
These word embeddings can be either static or dynamic: static embedding asso-
ciates a word with its vector, and considers it as the final extracted features from
this word.
On the other hand, dynamic embedding corresponds to a continuous
fine-tuning process of these vectors : the embedding weights are initialized with the
pre-trained embedding values, but are then considered as actual network weights.
Therefore, they contribute, as all the other weights, to the loss function calculation,
and to the network optimisation.
This way, global model languages implemented
in pre-trained embedding spaces can be adjusted to a specific language domain, cor-
responding to the training data. Subtle differences between words from the same
==PAGE:32==
20
2 Theoretical background
lexical field in French might not be well encoded by the pre-trained embedding, but
will appear on the go if these words are important in the training data.
2.4.2
How to feed textual data to neural networks
Text data is fed as sequences. Usually, those sequences correspond to word-by-word
sequences. Each word is projected into an word-embedding space (as described above),
so that the input of the network is a sequence of same sized vectors.
The text can also be considered as a sequence of characters (one RNN timestep
matches with one character). Each character is first encoded as an id, and then one-
hot encoded. The strength of this approach is the very limited possible characters
a text can contain: considering the language alphabet, the numerals and the special
characters will give a full definition of the input space. On the contrary, for word-
level sequences, the number of words in a language is tremendous, and tenfolds if we
consider spelling mistakes, wrong spacing, abbreviations, etc. This processing is used
for short text matching associations, character-level text generation, or spell checking.
That’s the processing we will implement for the spell checking network. Figure 2.18
explains the character-level encoding process for textual data.
Figure 2.18: Character-level encoding. The sentence Je reviens de voyage demain
(I’m coming back next tuesday) is encoded here.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
Related Work
In this chapter, we’ll introduce the related works on language correction research.
We’ll also relate the main research papers that moved the NLP state-of-the-art fur-
ther and on which this thesis relies.
3.1
Algorithmic spell checking method
First of all, the initial spell checking methods implemented years ago were completely
algorithmic and rule-based. One of the first reference works in the area was estab-
lished by Peter Norvig [Pet]. Let’s deep dive into this implementation.
In order to correct a misspelled word, various operations are applied to generate
eligible corrections. These operations consists in switching two letters in a row, insert-
ing a new letter, deleting one letter, or replacing one letter by another. By applying
these edits on a word, we define a set of words at distance 1 from the initial word
(1 edit only). If we apply on all those words all the possible edits, we define a set
of words at distance 2, etc. Of course, this computation is extremely expensive as it
grows quadratically with the length of the word N and the size of the alphabet M.
Moreover, the algorithm relies on the frequency of the words in a language to
choose the right correction for any misspelled word. These frequencies can be inferred
using a large text corpus, large enough to be considered as giving a good overview of
the words distribution in the language. We will for example be able to say that if the
word tomate has an apparition frequency of 0.0024 % in the text corpus, then it has
the same frequency over the whole language. Word probabilities can be then easily
compared. Algorithmic methods use these probabilities to evaluate whether a word
is correct or not.
Next, the process is very simple: for a misspelled word, all possible edits are
computed, and ranked by frequencies. The top candidate according to this ranking is
chosen as the word correction. Of course, the initial word is also kept in the candidates
as we don’t want to edit a word without any mistake. Listing 3.1 shows the initial
implementation (in Python).
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Related Work
1 import re
2 from collections import Counter
3
4 def words(text):
5
return re.findall(r'\w+', text.lower())
6
7 WORDS = Counter(words(open('corpus.txt').read()))
8
9 def P(word, N=sum(WORDS.values())):
10
"Probability of `word`."
11
return WORDS[word] / N
12
13 def correction(word):
14
"Most probable spelling correction for word."
15
return max(candidates(word), key=P)
16
17 def candidates(word):
18
"Generate possible spelling corrections for word."
19
return (known([word]) or known(edits1(word)) or known(edits2(
word)) or [word])
20
21 def known(words):
22
"The subset of `words` that appear in the dictionary of WORDS
."
23
return set(w for w in words if w in WORDS)
24
25 def edits1(word):
26
"All edits that are one edit away from `word`."
27
letters
= 'abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz'
28
splits
= [(word[:i], word[i:])
for i in range(len(word
) + 1)]
29
deletes
= [L + R[1:]
for L, R in splits if R
]
30
transposes = [L + R[1] + R[0] + R[2:] for L, R in splits if
len(R)>1]
31
replaces
= [L + c + R[1:]
for L, R in splits if R
for c in letters]
32
inserts
= [L + c + R
for L, R in splits for
c in letters]
33
return set(deletes + transposes + replaces + inserts)
34
35 def edits2(word):
36
"All edits that are two edits away from `word`."
37
return (e2 for e1 in edits1(word) for e2 in edits1(e1))
Listing 3.1: Spellchecker implementation from Peter Norvig.
The previous method works well on easy situations when the correction of a word
is obvious (“baguettte” -> ”baguette”), and without any possibility of confusion be-
tween several possibilities. Yet, it happens very often that the basic method is not
powerful enough in complex setups. For instance, the word “lote” (wrong word) can
be corrected in “note”, “pote”, “lotte”. Hence, we need some context to choose which
correction is the most probable. In the sentence “Je suis invité au mariage de mon
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Learning methods
23
lote” (English: I’m invited to my ”lote”’s wedding), the most likely correction is def-
initely “pote” (English: “mate”). Yet, in the sentence “Il joue une lote au piano”
(English: he’s playing a ”lote” on the piano), the best correction is of course note
(English: note).
To take into account this contextualization, words can be processed with a sliding
window of length n (2 is a good start). Correcting two words in a row at the same
time (digrams) and computing the frequency of the digram in the corpus allows the
corrector to take into account this context information. Frequencies have of course
to be normalized on a new scale (digrams are much more rare than single words in
the corpus).
All this challenges together gets the spell checking modeling very complex. Hence,
exploring learning methods can be fruitful and complementary with the rule-based
and basic statistical approaches.
3.2
Learning methods
Several reasons allow us to explore learning algorithms. First, the computation time
engaged on the previously described rule-based methods exponentially grows with the
problem complexity. Indeed, if the edit-distance 2, or even more, is used, the number
of combinations explodes. Moreover, understanding all the possible mistakes that a
human can do is extremely hard. Giving examples to a network that would “learn
to write correct French” allows us to focus on data collection and network modeling,
instead of dealing with tiny feature extraction details.
Let’s firstwalkthrough the related work regarding state-of-the-art deep learning
architectures. We’ll detail here the relevant ressources for the developement of our
model.
[Sal+18] “Recent Advances in Recurrent Neural Networks” from Salehinejad et
al. relates the main landmarks of RNN research, starting in 1990. The summed up
table is reported on Figure 3.1. First RNN descriptions are initialized by Elman in
1990. LSTM cells are explored by Sepp Hochreiter in Sepp Hochreiter ([Sep97] “Long
short-term memory”) to fight vanishing and exploding gradients.
This paradygm
introduces for the first time the gated units importance, and allows better under-
standing of the long-term dependencies between two items of a sequence, thanks to a
internal memory. A couple of years later, the Gated Recurrent Units ([CGC], “Empiri-
cal Evaluation of Gated Recurrent Neural Networks on Sequence Modeling”) are tried
out to get simpler training paradygms with the same memory capabilities. Based
on RNN architectures, sequence-to-sequence networks are introduced in “Sequence
to Sequence Learning with Neural Networks” by Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le in 2014,
and in “Learning Phrase Representations using RNN Encoder-Decoder for Statistical
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Related Work
Machine Translation” by Cho et al. Encoder-decoder networks are used when the
estimated output is also a sequence : neural machine translation, text generation,
etc. Attention mechanism highly improves the sequence-to-sequence architectures by
taking into account specific encoder timesteps at each decoding timestep. It has been
introduced, among others, by Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio ([BCB] “Neural Machine
Translation By Jointly Learning to Align and Translate”) and Chan et al. in [Cha+]
“Listen, Attend and Spell”. Soft attention multiplies encoder steps by probabilities
that are computed at each decoder step. Meanwhile, hard attention samples (from
the same distribution) only one encoder timestep to draw attention from.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Learning methods
25
Figure 3.1: Landmarks of RNN research, sample from [Sal+18] “Recent Advances
in Recurrent Neural Networks”.
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Related Work
Hence, we want to apply state-of-the-art deep learning methods for language cor-
rection to our problem. The principle is close from rule-based methods, but the rules
are used to generate mistakes in correct text. Indeed, we’ll apply the various types
of edits to a massive amount of French chunks of text (with a noise level that will be
defined later) to generate misspelled sentences based on the right ones. These noised
sentences will be the training data of our network, and the target will be the correct
sentence. Training a neural network on enough data might get us to a robust and
fast spell checker.
A couple of related deep learning initiatives have been published on language cor-
rection. The main relevant paper for our work is the [GK17] “Neural Networks for
Text Correction and Completion in Keyboard Decoding”, from Ghosh and Kristensson,
published in late 2017, develops a network for text correction and completion. Our
particular focus targets the correction part, realized by a combination of character-
level CNN and RNN. [Xie+] “Neural Language Correction with Character-Based At-
tention” from Xie et al. implements the same character-based paradygm, only with
recurrent architectures. The model consists in an attention-based encoder-decoder
(GRU based).
Inspired from the various papers that we walked through, we’ll be implement-
ing similar architectures.
As the training dataset is already completely custom
(no French language correction dataset), we’ll be implementing a simple version of
encoder-decoder network based on LSTM layers.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4
Data
As not any spell checking dataset for French language is available, we needed to gen-
erate our own. To do so, a French corpus will be processed and noised with artificial
mistakes. The strong constraint was to find a French text corpus that contains as
few mistakes as possible : that’s why all the social media or e-commerce reviews
datasets didn’t fit. Massive amounts of data were needed to represent any kind of
incoming sequence of characters. The perfect candidate that matches all the crite-
ria (correctly spelled, massive, and freely available) is the French Wikipedia dump.
Although it’s impossible to assert a 100% correctness, Wikipedia is close from being
perfectly written.
4.1
Raw data description
The input data is the full dump of all the French Wikipedia articles. That corresponds
to almost 35 billions rows of text. Figure 4.1 shows an extract of the dump.
==PAGE:40==
28
4 Data
Figure 4.1: Sample of the French Wikipedia dump.
Although the data is already of good quality, a strong cleaning process is still
needed to have a strong learning approach. As the spell checking pipeline highly de-
pends on the incoming characters, a normalization of the special characters is applied,
to make sure that any special character that doesn’t match the usual typology (all
types of parenthesis, brackets, quotes, etc...) will be mapped to the reference charac-
ter. The regular expressions compiled to operate this cleaning process are summed
up on (Figure 4.2).
Figure 4.2: Regular expression to normalize all kinds of special characters.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 From raw data to a learning dataset
29
4.2
From raw data to a learning dataset
Let’s understand how the raw Wikipedia articles are transformed into efficient fea-
tures and labels for our learning algorithm. We will chunk the raw text into short
sequences of characters. Lengths of these sequences will vary (as we don’t want to
split a word into two different sequences), but won’t go over a maximum number of
characters lmax. A minimum length lmin is also chosen, for we don’t want to correct
too short sequences of characters. Indeed, a random spelling mistake might not be
explainable on a few number of letters. The chunking process implementation is re-
ported on Listing 4.1
1 def chunk_lines(texts, L_MIN, L_MAX):
2
sentences = set()
3
for sentence in texts:
4
line = clean_text(sentence)
5
while len(line) > L_MIN:
6
if len(line) <= L_MAX:
7
chunk = line
8
line = ""
9
else:
10
space_location = line.rfind(" ", min_input_len ,
L_MAX - 1)
11
if space_location > -1:
12
chunk = line[:space_location]
13
line = line[len(chunk) + 1:]
14
else:
15
space_location = line.rfind(" ")
# no limits
this time
16
if space_location == -1:
17
break
# we are done with this line
18
else:
19
line = line[space_location + 1:]
20
continue
21
sentences.add(chunk)
22
return sentences
Listing 4.1: Chunking algorithm.
4.3
Noise generation process
Let’s deep dive in the creation of our training features. As the encoder-decoder model
needs misspelled text as input, correct sentences from Wikipedia will be artificially
noised to simulate spell checking mistakes.
To generate this noise in the text samples, the method related in the Chapter 3
is applied to alter the text: insertions, deletions, switches or replacement of letters in
the text sequence. A noise level value γ is defined to control the amount of mistakes
==PAGE:42==
30
4 Data
created in the clean sentence. Table 4.1 shows the mistake generations for a couple
of sentences, and for different values of γ. To take into account the noise level γ,
a random value α is drawn from a uniform distribution. The noising operation is
applied only if :
α < γ
l
lmax
(4.1)
with l the length of the text sample to treat, and lmax the maximum sample length
admitted. This random sampling tries to simulate the randomness of spelling mis-
takes, especially typos.
Noise level γ
Noisy sentence
0.1
la voiture est rouge et le bateau est grand
0.2
la voitur1 est rouge et le bateau est grand
0.3
la voiture est rouge et9le bateau est grand
0.4
la voiture est rouge et le bateau est grand
0.5
la voiture est rouge et le bate5uest grnad
0.6
la voiture est rougee t le bateau ect gand
0.7
la voiture est roge te le bateau est granû
0.8
la voiture est rouge et le-bateau est gard
0.9
la voiture est roue et le bateau est rgsnd
1
la voiture est rouge etl e7bateau et grand
Table 4.1: Noise level impact on the noising process of the correct french sentence
la voiture est rouge et le bateau est grand.
Of course, the whole precess highly relies on the list of characters we want to take
into account: any character that will be generated during the noising process will be
understood by the spell checker later on.
Here is the list of admitted characters: ., , ', -, a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h,
i, j, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, s, t, u, v, w, x, y, z, é, è, à, ù, ê, ë,
ï, î, ç, û, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Let’s note that the white blank is considered as a character itself, so that the spell
checker is able to correct wrong spacing mistakes. Let’s call nchars the size of the
alphabet we just defined: we will need it to define the objects shapes. The end-to-end
noise generation algorithm is presented on Listing 4.2.
1 def add_noise_to_string(text, noise_level):
2
# Replacement
3
if np.random.rand() < noise_level * len(text):
4
random_char_position = np.random.randint(len(text))
==PAGE:43==
4.4 Encoding
31
5
text = text[:random_char_position] + np.random.choice(
CHARS[:-1]) + text[random_char_position + 1:]
6
# Deletion
7
if np.random.rand() < noise_level * len(text):
8
random_char_position = np.random.randint(len(text))
9
text = text[:random_char_position] + text[
random_char_position + 1:]
10
11
# Insertion
12
if len(text) < MAX_LEN and np.random.rand() < noise_level *
len(text):
13
random_char_position = np.random.randint(len(text))
14
text = text[:random_char_position] + np.random.choice(
CHARS[:-1]) + text[random_char_position:]
15
16
# Switch
17
if np.random.rand() < noise_level * len(text):
18
random_char_position = np.random.randint(len(text) - 1)
19
text = (
20
text[:random_char_position] + text[
random_char_position + 1] + text[
random_char_position] +
21
text[random_char_position + 2:])
22
23
return text
Listing 4.2: Noise generation algorithm.
4.4
Encoding
The last step of the data processing pipeline is to encode the text data as understand-
able data for the neural network. The usual mapping is applied: all the letters of the
alphabet are encoded with a One-Hot-Representation. A sequence of characters is
hence represented as a matrix of shape lmax x nchars. Figure 2.18 shows an example
of this encoding process.
The complete pipeline is now built. Let’s now deep dive on the spell checker model
itself.
==PAGE:44==
32
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5
Model
The spell checking model is made of three modules : the encoder module, the de-
coder module, and the classification layer. The scheme we draw Figure 5.1 shows the
network architecture. The complete TensorFlow graph is shown on Figure 5.3. A
summary of each layer and the input-output tensor shapes is available on Figure 5.4.
We’ll detail each module in the following sections.
Figure 5.1: End-to-end network schema.
5.1
The encoder module
The encoder part is made of two LSTM layers in a row.
The input data, as we
described in the previous chapter, consists in a matrix lmax x nchars : each row i
is a one-hot-encoded version of the ith letter of the sequence. The first LSTM layer
proceeds this input with lmax LSTM loops, so that each timestep xt is processed by
one LSTM unit. We use a many-to-many approach (returning all the hidden states
==PAGE:46==
34
5 Model
of the layer instead of only the last one), so that a second LSTM layer can process
the output tensor. Hence, with hdim the hidden dimension of the LSTM units, the
first LSTM layer outputs a tensor of shape (lmax, hdim).
The same operations is then ran on the sequence of tensors outputed by the first
recurrent layer. The output of the second LSTM layer, with a many-to-one approach,
is the hidden state of the last unit, of shape hdim. Also, to help the network struggle
against overfitting, dropout and recurrent dropout are introduced in the LSTM layers.
That ends the encoder part.
5.2
The decoder module
The decoder part is the exact same network as the encoder. The crucial detail here
is to understand the way we feed the first LSTM layer with inputs.
Sequence-to-sequence networks usually feed the decoder with inputs correspond-
ing to the ground truth targets we want to estimate : at each timestep t, the tth unit
receives as input the (t −1)th element of the output sequence. For the first LSTM
unit of the sequence, the hidden state is initialized with the output of the last encoder
hidden state.
Here, the encoder output (the last hidden state) is simply repeated lmax times to
feed each LSTM cell (one for each timestep). A unit within this layer receives the
encoder output state as input, and the hidden state of the previous LSTM cell as
hidden vector.
The other specifity to the decoder compared to the encoder module is the output
of the second LSTM layer: the tensors are returned as a sequence, so that the output
of the decoder is still a sequence of lmax vectors of dimension hdim. Finally, as for
the encoder model, dropout and recurrent dropout are added in the LSMT layer.
5.3
The classification module
As a reminder, the output of the whole architecture is a sequence of characters, that
is supposed to be the corrected sentence. This sequence matches with the sequence
of outputs that the encoder-decoder produced. We now need to understand how are
those output tensors of dimension hdim are turned into a sequence of letter. Figure 5.2
shows the classification module organization.
==PAGE:47==
5.4 Loss function
35
Figure 5.2: Classification module description.
At each timestep, the tensor of dimension hdim is transformed into a probability
distribution over the possible characters thanks to a fully-connected layer: it links
the hdim dimensions of the tensor with the 46 dimensions of our alphabet. A softmax
activation function is applied so that we have a probability distribution. As we have
several timesteps, this paradygm is repeated as many times as the number of timesteps.
The weights are shared among all the dense networks, so that each timestep of the
output sequence is transformed into a probability distribution in the same way. This
weight-sharing process is implemented through the Keras TimeDistributed wrapper,
that takes as argument the Dense layer and repeats it along the timesteps.
5.4
Loss function
Let’s now deep dive into the loss function that drives the training of this architecture.
Each output timestep is a multi-class classification problem.
Hence, the classical
categorical cross-entropy loss function is used at each timestep. The loss function Ei,
for one input i, is the sum, over the timesteps t of the sequences, of each cross-entropy
loss E(i)
t :
==PAGE:48==
36
5 Model
E(i)
t
= −
C
∑
c=1
yclog( ˆyc)
(5.1)
Ei =
lmax
∑
t=0
E(i)
t
(5.2)
with c being the current category, considering that there are C possibles classes. Here,
C equals to the size of the alphabet nchars, yc is 0 or 1 if the true label is the class c,
and ˆyc the probability estimated for the class c.
The complete loss Eb for a batch of training inputs is then the average of the
losses over the Nb elements of the batch:
Eb = −1
Nb
Nb
∑
i=1
Ei
(5.3)
5.5
Initialization
The weights in both the LSTM layers and the last fully-connected classifier need to
be initialized. The usual initialization are either uniform (drawing samples from the
uniform distribution) or gaussian (normal distribution). The weights are here initial-
ized with a slightly different initialization algorithm, introduced by He et al. in [He+]
“Delving Deep into Rectifiers: Surpassing Human-Level Performance on ImageNet
Classification”: that corresponds to a truncated normal distribution centered on 0,
and of standard deviation :
σhe =
√
2
ni
(5.4)
where ni is the number of units of the following layer.
Let’s explain the reason why an advanced initialization process is needed. Let’s
consider an input x with M components, and a linear perceptron with weights w.
The output Y computed by the neuron is :
Y =
M
∑
i=1
wixi
(5.5)
The variance of wixi is :
Var(wixi) = E[xi]2Var(wi) + Var(wi)Var(xi) + E[wi]2Var(xi)
(5.6)
==PAGE:49==
5.6 Model summary
37
As inputs and weights have a 0-mean, the summed up formulation is :
Var(wixi) = Var(wi)Var(xi)
(5.7)
The goal of an efficient initialization here is too keep the same variance level
between the input and the hidden steps during the information flow. We want then:
Var(Y ) = MVar(wixi) = MVar(wi)Var(xi)
(5.8)
Hence, the optimal variance is :
Var(wi) = 1
M
(5.9)
The same logic is derived in [He+] to conclude on a value of 1
ni
for the variance
(and its square root for the standard deviation).
5.6
Model summary
Hereafter are summed up all the elements we mentioned earlier
1 model = Sequential()
2 for layer_number in range(INPUT_LAYERS):
3
model.add(recurrent.LSTM(HIDDEN_SIZE , input_shape=(None, len(chars)), init=
INITIALIZATION ,
4
return_sequences=layer_number + 1 < INPUT_LAYERS))
5 model.add(RepeatVector(output_len))
6 for _ in range(OUTPUT_LAYERS):
7
model.add(recurrent.LSTM(HIDDEN_SIZE , return_sequences=True, init=
INITIALIZATION))
8
9 model.add(TimeDistributed(Dense(len(chars), init=INITIALIZATION)))
10 model.add(Activation('softmax'))
11
12 model.compile(loss='categorical_crossentropy', optimizer='adam', metrics=['
accuracy'])
13 return model
Listing 5.1: Encoder Decoder implementation in Keras.
==PAGE:50==
38
5 Model
Figure 5.3: Tensorboard visualization of the model graph.
==PAGE:51==
5.6 Model summary
39
Figure 5.4: Model Summary of the Keras implementation.
==PAGE:52==
40
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 6
Experiments
6.1
Setup
The whole spell checking pipeline has been implemented in Python 3.6. About com-
puting power, I used my own machine (MacBook Pro 16Go RAM, Intel Core i7 2,5
Ghz) to implement, debug and test the training process on a small dataset. The mod-
els were trained with GPU computing on Amazon Web Services instances (p2.xlarge)
with the AWS Deep Learning AMI. The training framework we used is TensorFlow,
the main open-source software library for implementing and training deep learning
models. For simplification purposes, Keras, a Python wrapper for TensorFlow graphs,
has been used. Keras also implements the use of TensorBoard to visualize the training
process. The training on the full dataset runs in approximately 5 days.
6.2
Training
The Wikipedia dataset has been split into a train and test set (80% / 20%). The
Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 10−3 runs the gradient descent algorithm. All
the values of the training and model parameters have been summed up in Table 6.1.
Batch size
128
Epochs
100
Learning rate
10−3
Hidden layer dimension
700
Dropout rate
0.3
Recurrent dropout rate
0.3
Hidden layer dimension hdim
700
Maximum length of sequence lmax
700
Amount of noise γ
700
Table 6.1: Training hyperparameters.
==PAGE:54==
42
6 Experiments
6.3
Results
We encountered many difficulties in training this neural network as it’s heavy and
processes with a massive dataset. Hence, convergence troubles have often occurred,
and have sometimes come up pretty late in the training phase. Several runs were nec-
essary to adjust the model parameters and the noise generation settings. We finally
reached good convergence behavior, related just below. Figure 6.1 and Figure 6.2
show the training and validation loss and accuracies evolution throughout the epochs.
The network reaches a final validation accuracy of 92,43 %.
Figure 6.1: Training and validation accuracies.
==PAGE:55==
6.3 Results
43
Figure 6.2: Training and validation losses.
We can see that the training actually performs pretty well, and manages to fight
overfitting as the validation loss continuously decreases. Validation loss is even lower
than the training loss: this can be explained by the split between training and valida-
tion subsets. The split might have selected a more important share of easy excerpts
to correct.
Two main phases have been observed during training but are not reflected on
the curves. First, the network learns to correctly estimate the output when there is
not any mistake. Indeed, some dataset points doesn’t have misspelled words in their
input sequence, as the noise is randomly generated. It simply learns to imitate the
input sentence. Second, the network learns to match the target sequences when there
are mistakes in the input.
Also, the network has to optimize its weights without loosing all the previous
spell checking capabilities it learned on the previous batches. We can observe that a
sentence can be correctly predicted at some stages of the network convergence, and
then be wrongly estimated in the following epochs. This is one of the reasons we
implemented ensembling paradygm (Section 7.1).
==PAGE:56==
44
6 Experiments
6.4
Discussion
Let’s understand how the trained network performs on actual sentences. Table 6.2
shows a couple of correction results.
Training sentence
Corrected sentence
je ne veuxp as travailler
je ne veux pas travailler
ceci este une phrase de test
ceci est une phrase de test
lec amione st rouge
le camion est rouge
corrrige mnoi cette phrasee
corrige moi cette phrase
cest très beau
c’est très beau
jeveux savvoir où estt mn colis
jeveux savoir où est mon colis
Table 6.2: Spell checking results on random french sentences.
Let’s also try to understand when the network succeeds and fails. Simple mistakes
such as letter switches are very well taken into account. Doubled letters are also easily
corrected, as well as wrong spacing.
However, letter replacements and insertions are much harder to correct. One pos-
sible guess is that during the noise generation, the switch between two letters doesn’t
involve any other randomness than the location of the switch. Hence, the network
can learn a particular letter switch mistake from a lot of different examples. On the
other hand, letter insertions or replacements involve the choice of the location and
of the letter to insert or replace. This kind of mistakes are thus less frequent (for a
given letter of the alphabet) and much more diverse.
Moreover, the noise generation process creates wrong sentences with a given level
of errors: the misspelled text contains mistakes at an edit-distance of 1 from the orig-
inal word. Put in another way, the network should be able to apply operations at
only a distance 1. Hence, any sentence that has more complex mistakes might not be
corrected, for example a text with nested corrections such as a switch, followed by a
letter insertion.
6.5
Obstacles in training large neural networks
We faced various obstacles in training this massive network. First, as the training
phase is very long, it’s hard and time consuming to tune parameters, as every run
needs 4-5 days to be fruitful. In particular, the learning rate was a very difficult
parameter to tune: too low learning rates didn’t lead to good convergence (the net-
work seemed stuck in local minima), while too large learning rates didn’t give good
==PAGE:57==
6.6 Consistency with the initial usecase
45
generalization performances. We finally reached a optimum learning rate of 0.001.
Moreover, more technical issues came up when dealing with massive trainings.
We used the simpler AWS GPU machines (p2.xlarge), that often reached saturation
in RAM. We had to adjust our training script to avoid these memory errors. Also,
it was necessary to keep a robust track of our training, by dumping the weights-set
on a regular basis. Dumping these massive networks was memory consuming and
brought some difficulties in the training process. We kept track records with remote
TensorBoard monitoring, but it happened that our runs failed on the remote machine
without noticing. Yet, it was enriching to work on massive trainings in order to face
these pragmatic challenges.
In addition, generating our own dataset was another source of weakness as we
didn’t have any state-of-the-art references on the same data. It was sometimes diffi-
cult to precisely understand the problem (either from the data generation process or
from the model itself). Yet, we always kept the hypothesis that our data generation
was valid, in order to focus on the model tuning.
6.6
Consistency with the initial usecase
Let’s try to evaluate if the training is relevant to our task. As a reminder, we want
to plug the spell checker to a text classification pipeline, for a chatbot. We tried the
spell checker on actual sentences in the text classifier training dataset. Appendix A.3
shows a couple of promising results on an actual chatbot sentences.
Although the training metrics were very promising, as much as the learning be-
haviour of the network, the network performances on chatbot sentences are question-
able. Indeed, a lot of sentences are corrected in the right way. Also, most of the
sentences that didn’t contain any mistake were not changed, which is crucial. How-
ever, some of the misspelled sentences are not corrected, or even badly corrected.
Unfortunately, even if the network performs decently, it’s not robust enough to be
integrated in a chatbot pipeline: performances are not stable enough to be trusted
with real user’s requests in the chatbot.
Several reasons could explain this gap between performances on the training and
test data, and on the chatbot sentences. The best guess is that the training data
is not similar enough to what is to be predicted: we trained on Wikipedia articles
which are very formal texts, describing and explaining principles or ideas, while the
final data is conversational. For instance, there won’t be any sentence like ”I want
to check my delivery status” in Wikipedia. Moreover, another assumption to explain
the wrong performances on actual final data is the noise generation process. We gen-
erated mistakes on a completey random basis: the mistakes and their location were
==PAGE:58==
46
6 Experiments
random. Yet, we know very well what are the typical mistakes in a language, and
we could easily improve the noising process to simulate real-world mistakes such as
keyboard typos, or common grammatical errors.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 7
Implementation
As we said earlier, the final usecase of this thesis is to plug this language corrector into
a chatbot pipeline. We will here two main details of implementation that allowed the
integration of the spell checker. The full implementation is available in the appendice.
7.1
Ensembling models
As mentioned in the previous chapter, some mistakes are corrected in early stages
of the training, and then missed when the network weights move towards the loss
function minima direction. In order to improve the spell checker implementation in
the final usecase (chatbot classification), the trained model has been implemented
with an ensembling paradygm.
To optimize our chances to get a good spell checking on a given sentence at infer-
ence time, the implemented algorithm asks various dumped networks to spell check
the sentence. These networks are successive dumps at different epochs of the training.
These epochs have been chosen as the N best epochs according to the validation loss.
The correct sentence is hopefully returned by one of the requested networks.
The process is pretty similar to the classical ensembling methods. We couldn’t
train different networks on random subsets of the data, as the usual ensembling
paradygm would do. Yet, we simulate the voting part.
Furthermore, the main challenge is to choose, between all the answers, which one
is the most likely to be the correct version of the misspelled sentence. To do so, usual
words and digrams frequencies are used, as the algorithmic spell checking methods
do. The rule is to choose the most likely correction as the candidate that have the
highest minimum word frequency in its words. If this value is the same for more than
one sentence, we look at the digrams. To sum up, candidates corrections are sorted
according to their unigrams and diagrams frequencies in the corpus. The top ranked
one is chosen as the final correction. On top of that, a couple of adjustments are
made in order to consider at the same level different words up to a certain frequency
threshold (two existing words of the language should be considered as equally proba-
==PAGE:60==
48
7 Implementation
ble, even though they don’t have the same frequency).
Listing 7.1 sums up the operations we just mentioned.
1 def _get_metrics(self, sentence):
2
unigrams = sentence.split()
3
bigrams = [unigram_before + " " + unigram_after for
unigram_before , unigram_after in
4
zip([""] + unigrams, unigrams + [""])]
5
6
unigrams_frequence = [self._adjust_proba_unigram(self.
word_count[unigram]) for unigram in unigrams]
7
bigrams_frequence = [self.word_count[bigram] for bigram in
bigrams]
8
9
return {"correction": sentence,
10
"frequence_bigrams": bigrams_frequence ,
11
"frequence_unigrams": unigrams_frequence ,
12
"exists": self._is_real_sentence(sentence)}
13
14 def _adjust_proba_unigram(self, proba):
15
if proba < self.unigram_threshold_down:
16
proba = 0
17
return min(proba, self.unigram_threshold_up)
18
19 def _correct_sentence_with_single_model(self, sentence, model):
20
guess = sentence
21
for _iteration in range(self.max_iteration):
22
sentence, guess = guess, self.
_correct_from_model_with_one_iteration(guess, model)
23
if sentence == guess:
24
break
25
return guess.replace(".", "")
26
27 def _get_candidates(self, original_sentence):
28
"""
29
retrieve corrections computed by all the deep learning models
30
"""
31
corrections = [original_sentence]
32
for model in self.models:
33
correction = self._correct_sentence_with_single_model(
original_sentence , model)
34
if correction not in corrections:
35
corrections.append(correction)
36
37
return corrections
38
39 def _choose_best_candidate(self, candidates):
40
if not candidates:
41
raise IndexError("Found no candidates")
42
candidates_metrics = [self._get_metrics(candidate) for
candidate in candidates]
43
dataframe = pd.DataFrame(candidates_metrics)
==PAGE:61==
7.2 Correcting chunks of text
49
44
# Criterion on unigrams / bigrams
45
# WARNING - we use tuple instead of list because the type
list is not hashable -> problems with pandas multisort
46
dataframe[["sorted_bigrams"]] = dataframe[["frequence_bigrams
"]].applymap(lambda x: tuple(sorted(x)))
47
dataframe[["sorted_unigrams"]] = dataframe[["
frequence_unigrams"]].applymap(lambda x: tuple(sorted(x)
))
48
dataframe.sort_values(["sorted_unigrams", "sorted_bigrams"],
ascending=[False, False], inplace=True)
49
return dataframe.iloc[0]["correction"]
Listing 7.1: Ensembling networks to improve inference.
7.2
Correcting chunks of text
In order to fully integrate the language correction pipeline into the chatbot, two chal-
lenges have to be addressed.
First, the language correction algorithm was trained on fixed sized sequences (after
padding). In order to use the corrector on long texts (such as emails or long sentences
in chatbots), the network has to be called several times on chunked parts of the text.
The goal is to reduce as much as possible the length of the chunk to correct, so that
it’s shorter than the maximum size lmax the network has been trained with. To do so,
we first split on the strong punctuations : indeed, we assume that a spelling mistake
can’t be explained by tokens outside its own sentence. After the sentence split, if the
chunks are still longer than lmax, short chunks are generated with the same process as
in the dataset generation. Whitespaces are used as separators to select short enough
chunks. The initial text is now transformed into a list of available chunks for a feed-
forward in the trained network. Besides, the trained spell checker corrects each of
these chunks separately. Corrected chunks are then stuck back together, either with
a whitespace or a punctuation (if it came from a punctuation split). This process is
implemented by the functions _pop_chunk, _correct_chunk, and _correct_raw.
Second, we don’t want to correct every single word of the text: indeed, enti-
ties such as emails, ids, or emojis have to be removed and inserted back at the
right location. These particular entities (called exceptions in the code) are located
thanks to regular expressions, removed, and stored in a variable. When the spell
checker has walked through all the text (with the splitting complexity we men-
tioned in the previous paragraph), the exceptions are inserted back. The functions
_find_exceptions_to_correction and _insert_exceptions implement these op-
erations.
Listing A.2 shows the whole algorithm.
==PAGE:62==
50
7 Implementation
1 protected_regexes = [
2
r"(?:\s|^)(\d+)(?:\s|$)",
# numbers
3
r"([a-zA-Z0-9_.+-]+@[a-zA-Z0-9-]+\.[a-zA-Z0-9-.]+)",
#
email
4
emoji.get_emoji_regexp(),
# emojis,
5
r"(?:\s|^)((?:o|O|0|>|}|3|>|\|)?(?:(?::|;|=|x|X|8)(?:')
?(?:-|\^)?"
6
r"(?:D|P|p|B|b|\/|\\|d|3|\||\(|\)|\$|<|o|O|0|c|C|x|X
|\{|\}|\[|\]|>|@))|(?:\^\^))(?:\s|$)"
7
# smileys
8
]
9 sentence_separators = [".", "?", "!", ";", "\n"]
10
11 def _clean_sentence(self, sentence):
12
"""
13
Removes unwanted punctuation and multiple whitespaces
14
"""
15
sentence = self.re_punctuation.sub(" ", sentence)
16
return self.re_normalize_whitespace.sub(" ", sentence).lower
().strip()
17
18 def _correct_raw(self, sentence):
19
"""
20
correct a text (without exceptions). Deal with strings too
long by splitting them
21
"""
22
sentence = self._clean_sentence(sentence)
23
corrected_sentence = ""
24
while sentence:
25
chunk, sentence = self._pop_chunk(sentence)
26
corrected_sentence += self._correct_chunk(chunk)
27
if sentence:
28
corrected_sentence += " "
29
return corrected_sentence
30
31 def _correct_chunk(self, sentence):
32
"""
33
correct a string within the limit length of the corrector
34
"""
35
candidates = self._get_candidates(sentence)
36
text = self._choose_best_candidate(candidates)
37
return text
38
39 def _pop_chunk(self, sentence):
40
"""
41
split a string into two splits, with the first one shorter
than the limit self.sentence_max_length
42
"""
43
before, after = sentence[:self.sentence_max_length], sentence
[self.sentence_max_length:]
44
if not after:
45
return before, after
46
last_space_position = before.rfind(" ")
47
if last_space_position == -1:
==PAGE:63==
7.2 Correcting chunks of text
51
48
return before, after
49
return before[:last_space_position], before[
last_space_position + 1:] + after
50
51 def _find_exceptions_to_correction(self, sentence):
52
"""
53
extract exceptions (email / numbers / ids / etc...) to avoid
correcting them
54
"""
55
words = sentence.split()
56
57
exceptions_stack = []
58
remaining_words = []
59
chars_reviewed = Counter()
60
61
for word in words:
62
is_an_exception = False
63
for protected_regex in self.protected_regexes:
64
if re.match(protected_regex , word):
65
exceptions_stack.append({
66
"word": word,
67
"chars_before": copy(chars_reviewed)
68
})
69
is_an_exception = True
70
break
71
if not is_an_exception:
72
remaining_words.append(word)
73
chars_reviewed.update(word)
74
cleaned_sentence = " ".join(remaining_words)
75
return cleaned_sentence.strip(), exceptions_stack
76
77 @staticmethod
78 def dist_between_counters(counter1, counter2):
79
counter_diff = copy(counter1)
80
counter_diff.subtract(counter2)
81
return sum([abs(element) for element in counter_diff.values()
])
82
83 def _insert_exceptions(self, sentence, exceptions_stack):
84
"""
85
Insert exceptions in the corrected string after correction
86
:param sentence:
87
:param exceptions:
88
:return: sentence with exceptions
89
"""
90
for exception in exceptions_stack:
91
chars_reviewed = Counter()
92
best_position = -1
93
best_score = self.dist_between_counters(chars_reviewed ,
exception["chars_before"])
94
for position, char in enumerate(sentence + " "):
95
if char == " ":
96
new_score = self.dist_between_counters(
chars_reviewed , exception["chars_before"])
97
if new_score < best_score:
==PAGE:64==
52
7 Implementation
98
best_score = new_score
99
best_position = position
100
else:
101
chars_reviewed.update(char)
102
if best_position == -1:
103
sentence = exception["word"] + " " + sentence
104
else:
105
sentence = sentence[0:best_position] + " " +
exception["word"] + sentence[best_position:]
106
return sentence.strip()
107
108 def _split_on_punctuation(self, sentences):
109
"""
110
Split on sentence separators
111
"""
112
punctuation = [char for char in sentences if char in self.
sentence_separators]
113
pattern = f"[{''.join(self.sentence_separators)}]"
114
sentences = re.split(pattern, sentences)
115
116
return sentences, punctuation
117
118 def _join_on_punctuation(self, corrected_sentences , punctuations)
:
119
"""
120
Join corrected sentences with missing punctuation
121
"""
122
full_sentence = corrected_sentences[0]
123
for sentence, punctuation in zip(corrected_sentences[1:],
punctuations):
124
if punctuation != ".":
125
full_sentence += " "
126
full_sentence += punctuation + " " + sentence
127
return self.re_normalize_whitespace.sub(" ", full_sentence).
strip()
128
129 def correct(self, sentence):
130
sentence, exceptions_stack = self.
_find_exceptions_to_correction(sentence)
131
sentences, punctuations = self._split_on_punctuation(sentence
)
132
corrected_sentences = [self._correct_raw(sentence) for
sentence in sentences]
133
sentence = self._join_on_punctuation(corrected_sentences ,
punctuations)
134
return self._insert_exceptions(sentence, exceptions_stack)
Listing 7.2: Correcting chunks and dealing with entities.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusions
We managed to implement an end-to-end language correction algorithm that can be in-
tegrated in any chatbot pipeline. Although the training data doesn’t perfectly match
with the target data, training performances were good on the generated dataset. Yet,
serious improvements are necessary to get the current process more robust. These
improvements are either about the dataset generation, or about the learning model.
First, the source dataset can be changed to a more conversational French corpus.
Target chatbot sentences will be understood much better if training data contains
first person formulations, informal language or more oral syntax. Datasets like this
can be found in subtitles of French movies, theater plays, or maybe in news articles.
Furthermore, noise generation process can be further explored, in particular with the
integration of existing works on French spelling mistakes.
Moreover, deep improvements can be brought to the model itself. We implemented
an RNN-based encoder-decoder, but various architectures can be imagined. First of
all, tuning the RNN architecture with bi-directional propagation could enrich the cor-
rection with information from the following characters. Moreover, implementing an
attention mechanism in the decoding layers could be a serious work to explore. The
attention mechanism could hopefully focus either on the surrounding characters for
simple typos, or characters from surrounding words when the mistake is more struc-
tural. It would also be worth to try CNN implementation, as in “Neural Networks for
Text Correction and Completion in Keyboard Decoding” by Ghosh and Kristensson.
CNN layers could specifically compute language corrections based on the surrounding
characters. Relevant filters could be windows of 3, 4 or 5 characters. Combining these
filters with various network depths, and potentially with another RNN-based encoder
might lead to promising results. Using embedding techniques could also help finding
the closest words in the language space. Facebook FastText actually embed words
based on character n-grams, so that syllables are fully considered in the embedding
process. It’s hence pretty robust to simple spell checking mistakes, as it might not
affect the full word and keep some syllables correct.
Summing up, training an encoder-decoder network for language correction pro-
duced promising results, yet not robust enough to be integrated in a chatbot soft-
ware. Next step consists in training a more complex model and improving the data
==PAGE:66==
54
8 Conclusions
collection process.
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
A.1
Network training script
1
2 import datetime
3 import logging
4 import os
5 import re
6 import json
7 from itertools import islice, filterfalse
8 import keras
9 import numpy as np
10 import pickle
11 import pandas as pd
12 from keras.layers import Activation , TimeDistributed ,
RepeatVector , recurrent
13 from keras.layers import Dense, Dropout
14 from keras.models import Sequential
15 from keras.optimizers import Adam
16 from keras.callbacks import TensorBoard
17
18 from character_table import CharacterTable
19 from training_callback
import RecordBatchUpdates
20
21
22 class TrainCorrector():
23
logger = logging.getLogger(__name__)
24
25
def __init__(self):
26
27
self.batch_size = 100
28
self.epochs = 10
29
30
# Parameters for the model:
31
self.amount_of_dropout = 0.2
32
self.initialization = "he_normal"
# : Gaussian
initialization scaled by fan-in (He et al., 2014)
33
self.number_of_chars = 100
34
self.max_input_len = 40
35
self.encoder_layers = 2
36
self.decoder_layers = 2
37
self.hidden_size = 700
38
self.inverted = True
==PAGE:68==
56
A An Appendix
39
self.train_ratio = 0.7
40
self.validation_ratio = 0.2
41
self.test_ratio = 1 - self.train_ratio - self.
validation_ratio
42
self.save_path = './training' + datetime.datetime.now().
strftime('%Y%m%d%H%M%S')
43
self.model_checkpoint_filename = 'weights.{epoch:02d}-{
val_loss:.2f}.hdf5'
44
self.csv_log_name = 'log.csv'
45
46
os.makedirs(self.save_path)
47
48
# Parameters for the dataset
49
self.data_path = os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__file__),
"data/wikipedia-dump-fr")
50
self.min_input_len = 5
51
self.amount_of_noise = 0.5 / self.max_input_len
52
self.CHARS = list("
abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyzéèàîêïùôë1234567890 ")
53
self.padding = "_"
54
55
# Cleaning up REGEX
56
self.NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE_REGEX = re.compile(r'[^\S\n]+',
re.UNICODE)
# match all whitespace except newlines
57
self.RE_DASH_FILTER = re.compile(r'￿￿‐‑￿–—
￿￿−￿￿[\-\\\\\\\\\\\\]', re.UNICODE)
58
self.RE_APOSTROPHE_FILTER = re.compile(
59
r'￿￿￿‘’￿￿￿￿￿￿&#39;|[`￿￿´{}{}{}{}{}{}{}{}{}]'.format(chr
(768), chr(769), chr(832), chr(833), chr(2387),
chr(5151), chr(5152), chr(65344), chr(8242)),
60
re.UNICODE)
61
self.RE_LEFT_PARENTH_FILTER = re.compile(r'
￿￿￿￿￿￿[\(\[\{\\\\\\]', re.UNICODE)
62
self.RE_RIGHT_PARENTH_FILTER = re.compile(r'[\)
￿￿￿￿￿￿\]\}\\\\\\]', re.UNICODE)
63
self.ALLOWED_CURRENCIES = """￿€฿￿¥£$"""
64
self.ALLOWED_PUNCTUATION = """ -!?/;"'%&<>.()[]{}@#:,|=*
"""
65
self.RE_BASIC_CLEANER = re.compile(
66
r'[^\w\s{}{}]'.format(re.escape(self.
ALLOWED_CURRENCIES), re.escape(self.
ALLOWED_PUNCTUATION)), re.UNICODE)
67
68
self.ctable = CharacterTable(self.CHARS)
69
70
71
def clean_text(self, text):
72
73
"""Clean the text - remove unwanted chars, fold
punctuation etc."""
74
result = self.NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE_REGEX.sub(' ', text.
strip())
75
result = self.RE_DASH_FILTER.sub('-', result)
76
result = self.RE_APOSTROPHE_FILTER.sub("'", result)
77
result = self.RE_LEFT_PARENTH_FILTER.sub("(", result)
==PAGE:69==
A.1 Network training script
57
78
result = self.RE_RIGHT_PARENTH_FILTER.sub(")", result)
79
result = self.RE_BASIC_CLEANER.sub('', result)
80
return result
81
82
def add_noise_to_string(self, string, amount_of_noise ,
max_input_len):
83
"""Add some artificial spelling mistakes to the string"""
84
85
if np.random.rand() < amount_of_noise * len(string):
86
# Replace a character with a random character
87
random_char_position = np.random.randint(len(string))
88
string = string[:random_char_position] + np.random.
choice(self.CHARS[:-1]) + string[
random_char_position + 1:]
89
90
if np.random.rand() < amount_of_noise * len(string):
91
# Delete a character
92
random_char_position = np.random.randint(len(string))
93
string = string[:random_char_position] + string[
random_char_position + 1:]
94
95
if len(string) < max_input_len and np.random.rand() <
amount_of_noise * len(string):
96
# Add a random character
97
random_char_position = np.random.randint(len(string))
98
string = string[:random_char_position] + np.random.
choice(self.CHARS[:-1]) + string[
random_char_position:]
99
100
if np.random.rand() < amount_of_noise * len(string):
101
# Transpose 2 characters
102
random_char_position = np.random.randint(len(string)
- 1)
103
string = (
104
string[:random_char_position] + string[
random_char_position + 1] + string[
random_char_position] +
105
string[random_char_position + 2:])
106
107
return string
108
109
def create_model(self):
110
"""Generate the model"""
111
112
chars = self.CHARS
113
model = Sequential()
114
# "Encode" the input sequence using an RNN, producing an
output of hidden_size
115
# note: in a situation where your input sequences have a
variable length,
116
# use input_shape=(None, nb_feature).
117
118
# Encoder module
119
for layer_number in range(self.encoder_layers):
120
model.add(recurrent.LSTM(self.hidden_size ,
==PAGE:70==
58
A An Appendix
121
input_shape=(None, len(chars
)),
122
kernel_initializer=self.
initialization ,
123
return_sequences=
layer_number + 1 < self
.encoder_layers ,
124
recurrent_dropout=self.
amount_of_dropout))
125
model.add(Dropout(self.amount_of_dropout))
126
127
128
129
model.add(RepeatVector(self.max_input_len))
130
# Decoder module
131
for _ in range(self.decoder_layers):
132
model.add(
133
recurrent.LSTM(self.hidden_size ,
134
return_sequences=True,
135
kernel_initializer=self.
initialization ,
136
recurrent_dropout=self.
amount_of_dropout))
137
model.add(Dropout(self.amount_of_dropout))
138
139
# Classification module
140
model.add(TimeDistributed(Dense(len(chars),
kernel_initializer=self.initialization)))
141
model.add(Activation('softmax'))
142
143
adam = Adam(lr=.001)
144
model.compile(loss='categorical_crossentropy', optimizer=
adam, metrics=['accuracy'])
145
146
return model
147
148
def encode_sentence(self, sentence, max_len):
149
"""
150
Return numpy array encoding the sentence
151
"""
152
chars = list(sentence)
153
encoded = np.zeros((max_len, self.ctable.size))
154
for i, char in enumerate(chars):
155
try:
156
encoded[i, self.ctable.char_indices[char]] = 1
157
except KeyError:
158
pass
159
160
return encoded
161
162
def decode_sentence(self, sentence):
163
"""
164
Return numpy array encoding the sentence
165
"""
166
decoded = ''
==PAGE:71==
A.1 Network training script
59
167
168
for char in sentence:
169
decoded += self.ctable.indices_char[np.argmax(char)]
170
171
return decoded
172
173
def chunk_lines(self, texts, min_input_len , max_input_len):
174
sentences = set()
175
for sentence in texts:
176
line = self.clean_text(sentence)
177
while len(line) > min_input_len:
178
if len(line) <= max_input_len:
179
chunk = line
180
line = ""
181
else:
182
space_location = line.rfind(" ",
min_input_len , max_input_len - 1)
183
if space_location > -1:
184
chunk = line[:space_location]
185
line = line[len(chunk) + 1:]
186
else:
187
space_location = line.rfind(" ")
188
if space_location == -1:
189
break
190
else:
191
line = line[space_location + 1:]
192
continue
193
sentences.add(chunk)
194
195
return sentences
196
197
def create_dataset(self, datapath, amount_of_line_to_read ,
line_batch , noise_level , min_len, max_len):
198
file = open(datapath, 'r', errors='ignore', encoding='utf
-8')
199
dataset = pd.DataFrame(columns=['noise', 'correct'])
200
while len(dataset) < amount_of_line_to_read:
201
batch = list(filterfalse(lambda x: '<doc' in x or '</
doc' in x, islice(file, line_batch)))
202
chunk = self.chunk_lines(batch, min_len, max_len)
203
temp = pd.DataFrame(list(chunk), columns=['correct'])
204
temp[['noise']] = temp[['correct']].applymap(lambda x
: self.add_noise_to_string(x, noise_level ,
max_len))
205
dataset = pd.concat([dataset, temp])
206
207
return dataset.reset_index().drop('index', axis=1)
208
209
def generate_sets(self, dataset, train_ratio ,
validation_ratio , test_ratio):
210
211
if train_ratio + validation_ratio + test_ratio !=1:
212
self.logger.error('Split ratios doesn\'t sum up to 1.
')
213
==PAGE:72==
60
A An Appendix
214
n = len(dataset)
215
train = dataset.sample(int(train_ratio * n))
216
217
temp = dataset.drop(train.index)
218
219
valid = temp.sample(int(validation_ratio * n))
220
test = temp.drop(valid.index)
221
222
return train, valid, test
223
224
def generator(self, data, batch_size, valid=False):
225
226
temp = data
227
228
batch_features = np.zeros((batch_size , self.max_input_len
, self.ctable.size))
229
batch_labels = np.zeros((batch_size, self.max_input_len ,
self.ctable.size))
230
231
while 1:
232
try:
233
batch = temp.sample(batch_size)
234
except ValueError:
235
batch = temp
236
237
for i, line in enumerate(list(batch.index)):
238
batch_features[i, :, :] = self.encode_sentence(
data['noise'].loc[line], self.max_input_len)
239
batch_labels[i, :, :] = self.encode_sentence(data
['correct'].loc[line], self.max_input_len)
240
241
# temp = temp.drop(batch.index)
242
243
# if valid:
244
#
print('Validation batch generated')
245
yield batch_features , batch_labels
246
247
def train(self, datapath, amount_of_lines_to_read=10000):
248
249
line_batch = 3000
250
print('Starting to load dataset...')
251
dataset = self.create_dataset(datapath,
amount_of_lines_to_read , line_batch , self.
amount_of_noise , self.min_input_len , self.
max_input_len)
252
print('Dataset loaded')
253
254
model = self.create_model(self.max_input_len)
255
print('Model built')
256
train, validation, test = self.generate_sets(dataset,
self.train_ratio , self.validation_ratio , self.
test_ratio)
257
pickle.dump(train, open(self.save_path + '/trainset','wb'
))
==PAGE:73==
A.1 Network training script
61
258
pickle.dump(validation, open(self.save_path + '/
validationset','wb'))
259
pickle.dump(test, open(self.save_path + '/testset','wb'))
260
record_callback = RecordBatchUpdates(self.save_path)
261
262
# Custom training steps
263
training_steps = 100
264
validation_steps = 50
265
# Export config
266
config = {'epochs': corrector.epochs,
267
'batch_size': corrector.batch_size ,
268
'training_steps':training_steps ,
269
'validation_steps':validation_steps ,
270
'training_examples':len(train),
271
'start_time': str(datetime.datetime.now())}
272
273
json.dump(config, open(self.save_path+'/config.json', 'w'
))
274
275
checkpoint = ModelCheckpoint(self.savepath + '/' + self.
model_checkpoint_filename , period=1, save_best_only
=True)
276
tensorboard = TensorBoard()
277
csv_logger = CSVLogger(self.csv_log_name)
278
279
print('Starting training...')
280
model.fit_generator(
281
self.generator(train, self.batch_size),
282
validation_data=self.generator(validation , self.
batch_size, valid=True),
283
validation_steps=validation_steps ,
284
epochs=self.epochs,
285
steps_per_epoch=training_steps ,
286
callbacks=[checkpoint, tensorboard , csv_logger])
287
288
return model
289
290
def correct(self, sentence):
291
return self.decode_sentence(self.trained_corrector.
predict(np.array([self.encode_sentence(sentence,
self.max_input_len)]))[0])
292
293
294 if __name__ == '__main__':
295
corrector = TrainCorrector()
296
model = corrector.train(datapath='data/wikipedia-dump-fr',
amount_of_lines_to_read=model_config['amount_to_read'])
297
model.save(corrector.save_path+'/trained_model')
Listing A.1: Full deep corrector implementation.
==PAGE:74==
62
A An Appendix
A.2
Using the spell checker
The language corrector has been implemented as a Python object (DeepCorrector).
This class implements all the functions used to call predictions from the trained
network. In details, the DeepCorrector implements the following features:
• Loading the trained models
• Implementing a character table to encode and decode the network inputs and
outputs
• Loads the training corpus to evaluate word frequencies
• Implements ensembling paradygm
• Implements the splits and join operations on punctuation and exceptions
The endpoint function is correct, that unrolls the whole pipeline. The following
script details the full implementation of the DeepCorrector.
1
2 import logging
3 import os
4 import pickle
5 import re
6 from collections import Counter
7 from copy import copy
8
9 import emoji
10 import numpy as np
11 import pandas as pd
12
13 from ChatBotServer.vocab import VocabLoader
14 from .abstract_corrector import AbstractCorrector
15
16
17 class CharacterTable:
18
"""
19
Given a set of characters:
20
+ Encode them to a one hot integer representation
21
+ Decode the one hot integer representation to their
character output
22
+ Decode a vector of probabilities to their character output
23
"""
24
25
def __init__(self, chars):
26
self.chars = sorted(set(chars))
27
self.char_indices = dict((c, i) for i, c in enumerate(
self.chars))
28
self.indices_char = dict((i, c) for i, c in enumerate(
self.chars))
29
self.size = len(self.chars)
==PAGE:75==
A.2 Using the spell checker
63
30
31
def encode(self, characters, maxlen):
32
"""Encode as one-hot"""
33
X = np.zeros((maxlen, len(self.chars)), dtype=np.bool)
#
pylint: disable=invalid-name
34
for i, character in enumerate(characters):
35
X[i, self.char_indices.get(character, self.
char_indices["."])] = 1
36
return X
37
38
def decode(self, characters):
39
"""Decode from one-hot"""
40
return "".join(self.indices_char[character] for character
in characters.argmax(axis=-1))
41
42
43 class DeepCorrector(AbstractCorrector):
44
logger = logging.getLogger(__name__)
45
max_iteration = 5
46
unigram_threshold_up = 10000
47
unigram_threshold_down = 30
48
protected_regexes = [
49
r"(?:\s|^)(\d+)(?:\s|$)",
# numbers
50
r"([a-zA-Z0-9_.+-]+@[a-zA-Z0-9-]+\.[a-zA-Z0-9-.]+)",
#
email
51
emoji.get_emoji_regexp(),
# emojis,
52
r"(?:\s|^)((?:o|O|0|>|}|3|>|\|)?(?:(?::|;|=|x|X|8)(?:')
?(?:-|\^)?"
53
r"(?:D|P|p|B|b|\/|\\|d|3|\||\(|\)|\$|<|o|O|0|c|C|x|X
|\{|\}|\[|\]|>|@))|(?:\^\^))(?:\s|$)"
54
# smileys
55
]
56
sentence_separators = [".", "?", "!", ";", "\n"]
57
re_punctuation = re.compile(r"[-/\"%&<>()\[\]{}@#:,|=*￿€฿￿¥£$
]")
58
re_normalize_whitespace = re.compile(r"\s+", re.UNICODE)
#
match all whitespace
59
60
def __init__(self, vocab_path=None):
61
self.correction_models_path = os.path.join(os.path.
dirname(__file__), "data/deep_corrector/models/")
62
self.models = []
63
self.character_table = None
64
self.params = None
65
self.vocab = None
66
self.word_count = None
67
with open(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__file__), "data/
deep_corrector/dataset_params.pickle"),
68
"rb") as params_file:
69
self.params = pickle.load(params_file)
70
self.sentence_max_length = self.params["y_max_length"]
71
self.character_table = CharacterTable(self.params["chars"
])
72
self.vocab_path = vocab_path
73
self.default_graph = None
==PAGE:76==
64
A An Appendix
74
75
def load(self):
76
# VocabLoader is an external class that loads the
vocabulary from the text corpus.
77
self.vocab = VocabLoader.load()
78
self.word_count = VocabLoader.load_word_count(self.
vocab_path)
79
from keras.models import load_model
80
from tensorflow import get_default_graph
81
self.default_graph = get_default_graph()
82
model_names = [os.path.join(self.correction_models_path ,
i) for i in os.listdir(self.correction_models_path)
if
83
"weights" in i and "hdf5" in i]
84
self.logger.debug("Loading correction models in
DeepCorrector...")
85
with self.default_graph.as_default():
86
self.models = [load_model(model_name) for model_name
in model_names]
87
self.logger.debug("DeepCorrector loaded")
88
89
def _correct_from_model_with_one_iteration(self, sentence,
model):
90
sentence = sentence.ljust(self.sentence_max_length , ".")
91
input_data = sentence[::-1]
92
# Encoding input
93
X = np.zeros((1, self.sentence_max_length , self.
character_table.size), dtype=np.bool) # pylint:
disable=invalid-name
94
95
for j, char in enumerate(input_data):
96
X[0, j, self.character_table.char_indices.get(char,
0)] = 1
97
with self.default_graph.as_default():
98
predictions = model.predict(X, verbose=0)
99
return self.character_table.decode(predictions[0])
100
101
def _get_metrics(self, sentence):
102
unigrams = sentence.split()
103
bigrams = [unigram_before + " " + unigram_after for
unigram_before , unigram_after in
104
zip([""] + unigrams, unigrams + [""])]
105
106
unigrams_frequence = [self._adjust_proba_unigram(self.
word_count[unigram]) for unigram in unigrams]
107
bigrams_frequence = [self.word_count[bigram] for bigram
in bigrams]
108
109
return {"correction": sentence,
110
"frequence_bigrams": bigrams_frequence ,
111
"frequence_unigrams": unigrams_frequence}
112
113
def _adjust_proba_unigram(self, proba):
114
if proba < self.unigram_threshold_down:
115
proba = 0
==PAGE:77==
A.2 Using the spell checker
65
116
return min(proba, self.unigram_threshold_up)
117
118
def _correct_sentence_with_single_model(self, sentence, model
):
119
guess = sentence
120
for _iteration in range(self.max_iteration):
121
sentence, guess = guess, self.
_correct_from_model_with_one_iteration(guess,
model)
122
if sentence == guess:
123
break
124
return guess.replace(".", "")
125
126
def _get_candidates(self, original_sentence):
127
"""
128
retrieve corrections computed by all the deep learning
models
129
"""
130
corrections = [original_sentence]
131
for model in self.models:
132
correction = self._correct_sentence_with_single_model
(original_sentence , model)
133
if correction not in corrections:
134
corrections.append(correction)
135
136
return corrections
137
138
def _choose_best_candidate(self, candidates):
139
if not candidates:
140
raise IndexError("Found no candidates")
141
candidates_metrics = [self._get_metrics(candidate) for
candidate in candidates]
142
dataframe = pd.DataFrame(candidates_metrics)
143
# Criterion on unigrams / bigrams
144
# WARNING - we use tuple instead of list because the type
list is not hashable -> problems with pandas
multisort
145
dataframe[["sorted_bigrams"]] = dataframe[["
frequence_bigrams"]].applymap(lambda x: tuple(sorted
(x)))
146
dataframe[["sorted_unigrams"]] = dataframe[["
frequence_unigrams"]].applymap(lambda x: tuple(
sorted(x)))
147
dataframe.sort_values(["sorted_unigrams", "sorted_bigrams
"], ascending=[False, False], inplace=True)
148
return dataframe.iloc[0]["correction"]
149
150
def _clean_sentence(self, sentence):
151
"""
152
Removes unwanted punctuation and multiple whitespaces
153
"""
154
sentence = self.re_punctuation.sub(" ", sentence)
155
return self.re_normalize_whitespace.sub(" ", sentence).
lower().strip()
156
==PAGE:78==
66
A An Appendix
157
def _correct_raw(self, sentence):
158
"""
159
correct a text (without exceptions). Deal with strings
too long by splitting them
160
"""
161
sentence = self._clean_sentence(sentence)
162
corrected_sentence = ""
163
while sentence:
164
chunk, sentence = self._pop_chunk(sentence)
165
corrected_sentence += self._correct_chunk(chunk)
166
if sentence:
167
corrected_sentence += " "
168
return corrected_sentence
169
170
def _correct_chunk(self, sentence):
171
"""
172
correct a string within the limit length of the corrector
173
"""
174
candidates = self._get_candidates(sentence)
175
text = self._choose_best_candidate(candidates)
176
return text
177
178
def _pop_chunk(self, sentence):
179
"""
180
split a string into two splits, with the first one
shorter than the limit self.sentence_max_length
181
"""
182
before, after = sentence[:self.sentence_max_length],
sentence[self.sentence_max_length:]
183
if not after:
184
return before, after
185
last_space_position = before.rfind(" ")
186
if last_space_position == -1:
187
return before, after
188
return before[:last_space_position], before[
last_space_position + 1:] + after
189
190
191
192
def _find_exceptions_to_correction(self, sentence):
193
"""
194
extract exceptions (email / numbers / ids / etc...) to
avoid correcting them
195
"""
196
words = sentence.split()
197
198
exceptions_stack = []
199
remaining_words = []
200
chars_reviewed = Counter()
201
202
for word in words:
203
is_an_exception = False
204
for protected_regex in self.protected_regexes:
205
if re.match(protected_regex , word):
206
exceptions_stack.append({
==PAGE:79==
A.2 Using the spell checker
67
207
"word": word,
208
"chars_before": copy(chars_reviewed)
209
})
210
is_an_exception = True
211
break
212
if not is_an_exception:
213
remaining_words.append(word)
214
chars_reviewed.update(word)
215
cleaned_sentence = " ".join(remaining_words)
216
return cleaned_sentence.strip(), exceptions_stack
217
218
@staticmethod
219
def dist_between_counters(counter1, counter2):
220
counter_diff = copy(counter1)
221
counter_diff.subtract(counter2)
222
return sum([abs(element) for element in counter_diff.
values()])
223
224
def _insert_exceptions(self, sentence, exceptions_stack):
225
"""
226
Insert exceptions in the corrected string after
correction
227
:param sentence:
228
:param exceptions:
229
:return: sentence with exceptions
230
"""
231
for exception in exceptions_stack:
232
chars_reviewed = Counter()
233
best_position = -1
234
best_score = self.dist_between_counters(
chars_reviewed , exception["chars_before"])
235
for position, char in enumerate(sentence + " "):
236
if char == " ":
237
new_score = self.dist_between_counters(
chars_reviewed , exception["chars_before"
])
238
if new_score < best_score:
239
best_score = new_score
240
best_position = position
241
else:
242
chars_reviewed.update(char)
243
if best_position == -1:
244
sentence = exception["word"] + " " + sentence
245
else:
246
sentence = sentence[0:best_position] + " " +
exception["word"] + sentence[best_position:]
247
return sentence.strip()
248
249
def _split_on_punctuation(self, sentences):
250
"""
251
Split on sentence separators
252
"""
253
punctuation = [char for char in sentences if char in self
.sentence_separators]
254
pattern = f"[{''.join(self.sentence_separators)}]"
==PAGE:80==
68
A An Appendix
255
sentences = re.split(pattern, sentences)
256
257
return sentences, punctuation
258
259
def _join_on_punctuation(self, corrected_sentences ,
punctuations):
260
"""
261
Join corrected sentences with missing punctuation
262
"""
263
full_sentence = corrected_sentences[0]
264
for sentence, punctuation in zip(corrected_sentences[1:],
punctuations):
265
if punctuation != ".":
266
full_sentence += " "
267
full_sentence += punctuation + " " + sentence
268
return self.re_normalize_whitespace.sub(" ",
full_sentence).strip()
269
270
def correct(self, sentence):
271
sentence, exceptions_stack = self.
_find_exceptions_to_correction(sentence)
272
sentences, punctuations = self._split_on_punctuation(
sentence)
273
corrected_sentences = [self._correct_raw(sentence) for
sentence in sentences]
274
sentence = self._join_on_punctuation(corrected_sentences ,
punctuations)
275
return self._insert_exceptions(sentence, exceptions_stack
)
Listing A.2: Full deep corrector implementation.
A.3
Correction examples on chatbot sentences
The following associations show the raw sentence and their corresponding corrected
sentence, generated by the trained neural network.
bonjour je n’arive à ouvrir le pdf pour imprimer
bonjour je n’arrive à ouvrir le dcc pour imprimer
oùse procurer les planches d’impression
où se procurer les planches d’impression
n4arrive pas a acceder au paiement
n’arrive pas a acceder au paiement
je n’arrivepas à imprimer mes timbres
je n’arrive pas à imprimer des timbres
==PAGE:81==
A.3 Correction examples on chatbot sentences
69
est il possible d’avoir dezs visuels différents
est il possible d’avoir des visuels différents
merci cest fait
merci c’est fait
jveux me faire remboursser
jeux de faire rembourser
je n’arrive pas à imprmer mes timbres
je n’arrive pas à imprimer mes timbres
avec plusieur modele de timbres
avec plusieurs modeles de timbres
ou coller ses timbres sur l’envellope
ou coller ses timbres sur l’enveloppe
les fomat disponible
les formats disponible
pour l’impression des timvres à domicile en lettre
pour l’impression des times à domicile en lettre
==PAGE:82==
70
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[]
Deep Learning for Chatbots, Part 1 – Introduction – WildML. url: http:
//www.wildml.com/2016/04/deep-learning-for-chatbots-part-1-
introduction/.
[]
Recurrent Neural Networks Tutorial, Part 3 – Backpropagation Through
Time and Vanishing Gradients – WildML. url: http://www.wildml.
com / 2015 / 10 / recurrent - neural - networks - tutorial - part - 3 -
backpropagation-through-time-and-vanishing-gradients/.
[]
The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Recurrent Neural Networks. url: http:
//karpathy.github.io/2015/05/21/rnn-effectiveness/.
[BCB]
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. “Neural Ma-
chine Translation By Jointly Learning to Align and Translate”. In: ().
url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1409.0473.pdf.
[CGC]
Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, and Kyunghyun Cho. “Empirical Eval-
uation of Gated Recurrent Neural Networks on Sequence Modeling”. In:
(). url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1412.3555.pdf.
[Cha+]
William Chan et al. “Listen, Attend and Spell”. In: (). url: https://
arxiv.org/pdf/1508.01211.pdf.
[Cho+]
Kyunghyun Cho et al. “Learning Phrase Representations using RNN
Encoder-Decoder for Statistical Machine Translation”. In: (). url: https:
//arxiv.org/pdf/1406.1078.pdf.
[GK17]
Shaona Ghosh and Ola Kristensson. “Neural Networks for Text Correction
and Completion in Keyboard Decoding”. In: (2017). url: https://arxiv.
org/pdf/1709.06429.pdf.
[He+]
Kaiming He et al. “Delving Deep into Rectifiers: Surpassing Human-Level
Performance on ImageNet Classification”. In: (). url: https : / / www .
cv- foundation.org/openaccess/content_iccv_2015/papers/He_
Delving_Deep_into_ICCV_2015_paper.pdf.
[Mik+13]
Tomas Mikolov et al. “Efficient Estimation of Word Representations in
Vector Space”. In: (January 2013). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1301.
3781.
==PAGE:84==
72
Bibliography
[Pet]
Peter Norvig. How to Write a Spelling Corrector. url: http://norvig.
com/spell-correct.html.
[Sal+18]
Hojjat Salehinejad et al. “Recent Advances in Recurrent Neural Networks”.
In: (2018). url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1801.01078.pdf.
[Sep97]
Jurgen Schmidhuber Sepp Hochreiter. “Long short-term memory”. In:
(1997). url: http://www.bioinf.jku.at/publications/older/2604.
pdf.
[SVL14]
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. “Sequence to Sequence
Learning with Neural Networks”. In: (2014). url: https://arxiv.org/
pdf/1409.3215.pdf.
[Xie+]
Ziang Xie et al. “Neural Language Correction with Character-Based At-
tention”. In: (). url: http://commoncrawl.org.
[Yan]
Yannis Flet-Berliac. “Entity Neural Networks for Natural Language Un-
derstanding - DTU Findit”. PhD thesis. url: https://findit.dtu.dk/
en/catalog/2385161952.
