==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Active Index Allocation with the
Black-Litterman Model
Davide Vena (s161185)
Supervisors:
- Kourosh Marjani Rasmussen
- Majeed Simaan (External Adviser)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In this thesis we study the application of the Black-Litterman model to an active in-
dex portfolio management. We present a rigorous derivation of the model in a general
setting and then move on to apply it to active management. We collect the character-
istics of the ETF portfolio we wish to manage, comprising several asset classes such
as Equity, Commodities, Fixed-Income, Alternatives, Currencies and present results
derived from the application of the Black-Litterman model. Then we use unsuper-
vised learning, in particular Hierarchical clustering, to shrink the investment universe
and obtain few assets to include in the portfolio. Finally we introduce and use some
Machine Learning tools such as Recurrent Neural Networks with Long Short Term
memory cells with the aim of building the vector of the investors’ views used in the
Black-Litterman approach. Finally, we discuss some performance measures of the
optimized portfolio, comparing the results with the appropriate benchmarks.
Keywords— Portfolio allocation, Black-Litterman, Market Views, Bayesian Al-
location, Recurrent Neural Networks, Hierarchical Clustering.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring a Master degree in Mathematical Modelling and Computation.
Kongens Lyngby, August 5, 2018
Davide Vena (s161185)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
The writing of the thesis has been an extraordinary experience full of several brilliant
ideas, challenging tasks and stimulating suggestions. The project would not have been
the same without insightful consultations and constructive advice of my supervisors
Kourosh Marjani Rasmussen and Majeed Simaan whom I greatly thankful to. Their
help in keeping me on track, providing suggestions to my issues and being supportive
has proven to be crucial in the development of this project.
Lastly, I want to thank my parents, my sister and my friends for supporting me
throughout the process.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
List of Figures
ix
List of Tables
xi
Introduction
1
1
Theoretical Framework
1
1.1
Modern Portfolio Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Mean-Variance and limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Capital Asset Pricing Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
The Black-Litterman Model
9
2.1
Overview and Bayesian Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Factor Models: Fama-French 3 factors model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Investor Views
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
BL formula . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5
Time Series of Optimal Market Views
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Creating the Views: Artificial Neural Networks
23
3.1
Overview: Feed-Forward Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Recurrent Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3
RNN with LSTM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Results and Discussion
41
4.1
Portfolio Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
Investment Universe: ETFs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3
Screening of the Data and Analysis Preferences . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4.4
Hierarchical Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.5
Clustering Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.6
Estimation of Returns and Covariance Matrices with Fama-French . .
50
4.7
Prediction of the views with RNNs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.8
Rolling Windows approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.9
Benchmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.10 Performance Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.11 Wealth evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5
Conclusion
61
5.1
Conclusion and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A Appendix to Chapter 2
63
A.1 Compatibility of Independent Views
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.2 Universality of Absolute View Matrix
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
B Appendix to Chapter 4
65
B.1
Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
B.2
Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
Bibliography
91
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
1.1
Efficient Frontier with 3 risky assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1
Derivation process of the New Combined Return Vector . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1
Feed-Forward Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Activation Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
Recurrent Neural Network and the unfold version.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4
Several shapes of connections between layers in RNNs. . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.5
Architecture of a Long-Short Term Memory network . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.6
LSTM process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1
Three popular linkage functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2
Pie-Chart of the size of the clusters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.3
Geography of the selected ETFs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.4
Prices of the selected ETFs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.5
Asset classes of the selected ETFs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.6
Structure of the predictors tensor used in the RNN with LSTM . . . . . .
52
4.7
Wealth comparison of the strategies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.8
Drawdown of the strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.9
Boxplot of the Returns Distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.10 Value-at-Risk and Expected Shortfall estimates by confidence interval . .
60
B.1
Clustering Dendrogram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
B.2
Weights Mean-Variance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
B.3
Weights GMV
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
B.4
Weights GMV BL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
B.5
Weights BL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
B.6
Weights BL DIAG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
List of Tables
4.1
Characteristics of the Investment Universe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2
Characteristics of selected ETFs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3
Annualized statistics of the ETFs in the portfolio . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.4
Summary of the constructed RNN with LSTM units . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.5
Annualized performance of the strategies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
Introduction
In asset allocation decisions, investors generally agree with the objective of maximiz-
ing the expected return for a certain level of risk, then a quantitative model like
Markowitz’s mean-variance optimization would have had to play a dominant role in
investment processes. So instead it was not, as this model frequently leads to results
that can hardly represent investment solutions: in the absence of constraints, we risk
to obtain a portfolio that has several short positions and a portfolio concentrated in
few assets; placing a constraint on the positions on the other hand, there is the risk
of investing in a portfolio concentrated on market assets with low capitalization and
thus contradict the principle of diversification. These results mainly depend on two
reasons: first, when investors have forecasts only on few assets, expected returns are
difficult to be estimated; secondly, the weights of the optimal portfolio are extremely
sensitive to input data and in particular to assumptions on expected returns. The so-
lution to these problems, proposed by Black and Litterman, is a combination of two
modern portfolio theories, the mean-variance optimization proposed by Markowitz
and the CAPM of Sharpe and Lintner. The Black-Litterman model takes as a ref-
erence point the market portfolio and aims to obtain a constructed portfolio based
on investors’ preferences and views. The starting point is the vector of equilibrium
yields, from which we will move more or less strongly, based on the views expressed
by the investor, with an associated degree of uncertainty.
Asset allocation is, in a nutshell, the process of selecting a few assets from a given uni-
verse of assets and assigning weights to them. As an example, there are thousands of
Exchange Traded Funds traded on different exchanges worldwide, but an individual
investor needs in most cases only few assets to form a well-diversified portfolio.
The overall idea of this project was to model the Black-Litterman model in an invest-
ment universe composed by all the ETFs available in the market.
In the first chapter, we will provide a brief overview of the theoretical framework.
Starting from the basic concepts of portfolio theory we will present the Mean-Variance
approach proposed by Markowitz along with its limitations. Then we will introduce
another crucial model introduced by Sharpe and Lintner around 1960, namely the
Capital Asset Pricing Model.
In the second chapter, we will first provide a brief literature review regarding the
Black and Litterman model. Secondly, we will present the mathematical formulation
of the model and the modification needed to extend it to ETFs. In particular, since
the market capitalization is not precisely defined for all the ETFs, which include sev-
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
eral assets classes such as stocks, bonds currencies and many others, we needed to
find another way to define the market portfolio and the vector of the expected excess
return Π. Therefore we will introduce the Fama-French or three factors model, which
will be used to solve the above issue. Finally, we will explain how to construct the
time series of the optimal market views, which will be used in the training of the
Recurrent Neural Network model.
In the third chapter, a brief overview about Neural Network is provided. Then we
focus and provide more details about Recurrent Neural Networks, in particular the
Long Short Term Memory cell.
In the fourth chapter, we explain the portfolio construction step by step. Starting
from a presentation of the investment universe, we will then introduce the results
obtained from the application of a hierarchical clustering algorithm, used to shrink
the universe to a defined number of clusters, from which we will choose the best with
respect to a desired metric. In the project we decided to choose the best performing
with respect to the sharpe ratios. Secondly, we describe the model used to estimate
the returns and the covariance matrix of the selected assets. Then, we continue with
the description of the implementation of the RNN with LSTM for the prediction of
the market views in the Black-Litterman model. Finally, we explain the rolling win-
dows approach used for the estimation of the parameters and then we present all the
results of the different strategies along with a backtest.
In the conclusion, we will discuss the results obtained in the project and we include
some work and suggestions which are of interest to be investigated in the future.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Theoretical Framework
Asset allocation is one of the most important financial decisions made by investors.
Nevertheless, decisions taken by human beings are not fully rational, and usually are
characterized by mistakes due to overconfidence, irrational loss aversion and bad use
of information. Quantitative financial strategies have become quite outstanding and
popular since the last century.
Large investment companies started to create big
team of quantitative portfolio manager designated to deal with the implementation
of mathematical models to analyze financial data of the markets. The innovation in
computer science definitely empower to mine big volumes of data in a limited time.
Hence, companies started to develop more and more complex strategies exploiting
the power that modern computer have.
In this chapter we will describe the theoretical framework behind investment strategies
for portfolio construction.
1.1
Modern Portfolio Theory
The concept of diversification was extremely simplified before the Markowitz’ pioneer-
ing achievement. Investors realized that putting all their wealth in one asset lead to
mostly unacceptable results, while allocating their money among a lot of different
assets significantly reduce the possibility of having poor or bad returns at the same
time. The core of portfolio optimization theory is certainly diversification, the con-
cept that by combining different assets, with different characteristics, it is possible to
gather a lower risk than the one offered by any of the single assets. In fact, with an
increasing number of assets, the variance shows a decreasing asymptotic behaviour
towards zero. The main objective of the Asset Allocation process is finding the most
convenient group of assets while considering the individual features of each asset.
The optimal portfolio obviously varies with respect to the profile of each investor,
and there is not a unique portfolio that is recommended for every type of investor.
This is explained by the fact that each institution or individual has different prefer-
ences and therefore the concept of risk aversion in portfolio theory. It assumes that
investors are risk averse, meaning that if they are given a choice between two assets
with the same return, they will surely pick the one with a lower level of risk.
Modern investment literature is undoubtedly influenced by the approach proposed in
1952 by Harry Markowitz. The Markowitz model was the starting point for several
development in finance. Together with Sharpe and Miller he was awarded the Nobel
==PAGE:18==
2
1 Theoretical Framework
prize in Economics in 1990 [Mar52].
Modern Portfolio Theory, known as MPT or Mean-Variance Analysis is a mathemat-
ical framework for assembling a portfolio of a certain number of assets such that
the expected return of the portfolio is maximized for a given level of risk. At the
beginning, mean-variance has not had the same impact in practical applications as in
academia, but later on investors and portfolio managers started to adopt the method
proposed by Markowitz.
Nowadays, financial quantitative models based on those
foundations are continually being renovated to incorporate new findings. Whereas
there was no theoretical framework to support the approach of diversification pro-
posed, companies held a wide variety of assets in order to reduce the idiosyncratic
risk relative to a specific asset. Markowitz’ approach proposed a solution by devel-
oping ”a theory of investment that covered the effects of diversification when risks
are correlated, distinguished between efficient and inefficient portfolios, and analyzed
risk-return trade-offs on the portfolio as a whole” [Mar99]. Investment companies did
no longer had the obligation to hold a very diversified portfolio composed by lots of
assets in order to minimize risk, but an efficient portfolio could be built by using mean-
variance approach. Even though it took some time for Markowitz’ ideas to obtain
consensus, his findings were further developed both by academia as by investment
banks, such as Goldman Sachs where the Black-Litterman model was introduced.
The basic model proposed by Markowitz was built on two main measures, respectively
the expected rate of returns and an expected risk value. He claimed that the variance
of the rate of return was a valid measure to estimate the risk of the portfolio under
a number of assumptions.
The model relies on a set of assumptions regarding the investor:
- Investors identify each investment with a probability distribution of expected
returns over a certain period.
- Investors maximize a single period expected utility.
- Investors estimate the risk of a portfolio with the variability of the expected
returns.
- Investors’ decisions are based exclusively on two measures; their utility curves
are a function of expected returns and variance.
- Investors, for a given level of risk, prefer higher returns compared to lower and
vice versa.
In the following sections, we begin with an overview of mean-variance analysis, then
we introduce the classical mean-variance framework and its limitations. Lately we
will present the Capital Asset Pricing Model with its derivation and intuition.
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Mean-Variance and limitations
3
1.2
Mean-Variance and limitations
To provide the most convenient portfolio for an investor, it is necessary to understand
its preference among a number of possible investments. An approach to achieve this
is to map the utility function, defined as U, which explains investor’s gratification
at a certain level of wealth. For a given level of wealth W, the usefulness U(W) is
the happiness achieved with this wealth. In order to present the model proposed by
Markowitz, we need to introduce the concept of Utility functions. Assuming that
an investor with utility function U hold an investment portfolio and that pi is the
probability of this portfolio generating a wealth wi for a scenario i, then the the
expected utility function is defined as:
E[U(W)] =
n
∑
i=1
piU(wi).
(1.1)
In this way it is possible to characterize the risk aversion of the investor, as in [Che07].
In particular three kind of behaviours are summarized as follow:
- Risk averse =⇒U[E(W)] > E[U(W)];
- Risk neutral =⇒U[E(W)] = E[U(W)];
- Risk seeking =⇒U[E(W)] < E[U(W)].
Considering a portfolio with n assets, w the vector of the amount of capital in-
vested in each of the asset w = (w1, . . . , wn) and assuming that future returns are
random variables, the portfolio return can be estimated as:
E[Rp] =
n
∑
i=1
wiE[Ri].
(1.2)
Therefore, the expected rate of return of the portfolio is found by taking the weighted
sum of the single expected rates of return.
As said before, to evaluate the risk of the portfolio, the Markowitz model uses the
covariance of the return series between all pairs of assets that are included in the
portfolio. We denote the variance of the return of asset i by σ2
i , the covariance of
the return of asset i with asset j by σij and the total variance of the return of the
portfolio by σ2
P , where
σ2
P =
n
∑
i=1
n
∑
j=1
wiwjσij.
(1.3)
Using the mean-variance approach, the investor can create an efficient frontier. The
latter is defined as the set of portfolios in which a given risk level has the highest
possible return, or vice versa, a certain level of return has the lowest possible risk.
These are called efficient portfolios. The rest of possible portfolios are considered
==PAGE:20==
4
1 Theoretical Framework
Figure 1.1: Efficient Frontier with 3 risky assets
inefficient, because they have either lower return or higher risk.
We can now formulate a mathematical problem to find the optimal weights of the
efficient portfolios. This is defined as a set of weights w that solve the so called risk
minimization formulation:
min
n
∑
i=1
wiσ2
i +
n
∑
i=1
n
∑
j=1i̸=j
wiwjσij
s.t.
n
∑
i=1
wiµi ≥µ0
n
∑
i=1
wi = 1
wi ≥0
∀i.
(1.4)
==PAGE:21==
1.2 Mean-Variance and limitations
5
Analogously, it can be converted to the form in which we maximize the expected
return for a given level of risk or expected return maximization formulation:
max
n
∑
i=1
wiµi
s.t
n
∑
i=1
wiσ2
i +
n
∑
i=1
n
∑
j=1i̸=j
wiwjσij ≤σ0
n
∑
i=1
wi = 1
wi ≥0
∀i
(1.5)
where µ0 and σ0 are the minimum return and the maximum risk desired for the
investment portfolio.
In the same way one can also model directly the trade-off
between return and risk using a risk-aversion coefficient in the objective function. In
matrix notation the maximization problem will be:
max
(
w⊤µ −λ1
2w⊤Σw
)
s.t w⊤1 = 1
wi ≥0
∀i
(1.6)
where Σ is the covariance matrix and λ is the coefficient referred as Arrow-Pratt risk
aversion coefficient. Note that when the latter is large, more risky portfolio are penal-
ized. Alternatively, when λ is small the penalty from the risk in the objective is small
and then we will obtain more risky portfolios. To obtain the efficient frontier, one
can gradually increase the parameter from zero and solve each time the optimization
problem.
The straightforwardness and the intuitive approach proposed by Modern Portfolio
Theory in the field of portfolio construction have attracted noteworthy consideration
both in the academia world and in practical applications. However, it took several
years until portfolio managers stated to apply modern portfolio theory for investing
real money. Sadly, in industry’s applications there are numerous issues with it, and
the optimization method proposed is yet considered by numerous professionals to be
hard to apply. Black and Litterman featured that ”A good part of the problem is
that such models are difficult to use and tend to result in portfolios that are badly
behaved”. They supported the statement by explaining that the investor would get
extreme solutions from the model in the case of unconstrained weights. In particular,
the portfolio would be composed by large short positions in some of the assets. In
the case of no-shorting allowed, the model is most likely to produce corner solutions,
meaning that the weights would be concentrated in few assets in the portfolio. Ac-
cording to Black and Litterman (1992), the issues derive from two main causes. In
==PAGE:22==
6
1 Theoretical Framework
the first place, the Markowitz formulation requires portfolio managers to directly feed
in the model expected returns for all assets included in the portfolio in consideration.
This could be hard since investment managers tend to keep their attention only on
particular areas of the investment universe. Moreover, literature stress the fact that
expected returns are difficult to estimate, and the historical estimated returns that
are adopted in the model are inadequate for future returns. On the other hand, the
weights that the mean-variance portfolio model attributes to the assets are highly
unstable with a variation in the vector of expected returns fed in the model. Thus, it
is straightforward to see that these issues generate unstable portfolios.
In 1989 Michaud analyzed some of the problems. Firstly he claimed that the Markowitz
optimizers result in a maximization of the estimation errors. The reason for the ap-
praisal builds on the evidence that Markowitz optimization gives a large weights in
the portfolio to those assets that have big expected returns, negative covariance and
small variance in the period considered. He supported the idea saying that these
securities will have undoubtedly large estimation errors. Another fact to support his
thesis is that the use of the sample means from historical data as expected returns
is the main source of the estimation errors. He also stressed the fact that the model
is not considering the market capitalization of the assets, i.e. the value that the as-
set has, resulting in a possible overweight of small cap assets, which could lead to
unstable portfolios. Later in 1991, Best and Grauer showed that a little increase in
one individual asset’s expected return could completely change the weights in the
portfolio, suggesting the investor to sell lots of the assets.
Recently, M. Simaan Y. Simaan and Tang [SST18] provide a characterization of
the effects of estimation error in mean returns on the joint sampling distributions.
Moreover, they examine how such error affects the risk-return tradeoff of the Mean
Variance portfolios.
Nonetheless, this does not imply that the mean-variance theory is useless, but rather
that the intuition needs to be improved and modified with the aim of obtaining more
stable and meaningful results. For this reason, several scientists explored new method-
ologies for portfolio optimization and asset allocation. Regarding the mean-variance’s
sensitivity to changes on the inputs fed in the optimization, which implies that the
parameters need to be estimated accurately, the literature suggests numerous alterna-
tives to address the problem. Indeed, there are several intuitions to build portfolios
that are less sensitive to these variations. In the estimation part, researchers proposed
to produce more stable estimators of the inputs by using for example shrinkage or
Bayesian estimators. They result in a less sensitivity to sampling errors. Regarding
the modeling part, managers could use constraints in the portfolio weights in order
not to obtain a portfolio concentrated in few assets.
In this thesis, we will focus on the Black-Litterman approach, discussed in the fol-
lowing chapter. Starting from the assumption that the estimation of the parameters
of the Markowitz model leads to unstable results, we will explore the Black and Lit-
terman model to construct a portfolio based on the investors’ views. Furthermore,
we will focus on the constructions of the views in a quantitative way. Specifically,
we will model the problem with a Recurrent Neural Network with Long Short Term
==PAGE:23==
1.3 Capital Asset Pricing Model
7
Memory (LSTM).
1.3
Capital Asset Pricing Model
The Capital asset pricing model was developed by Sharpe and Lintner between 1960
and 1970. It builds on the mean-variance model proposed by Markowitz which was
discussed in the previous sections. The CAPM result is one of the most recognized
results in all history of finance and, despite it comes into being a simple one-period
model, it supplies an extensive contribution to the problem of asset-pricing.
In the case where every investor is a mean-variance optimizer, then we can say that
each of them will hold the same tangency optimal portfolio of risky securities in
conjunction with a position in the risk-free asset, if available to the investor. Since
the tangency portfolio is held by all investors and because markets must clear, we
can identify this portfolio as the market portfolio. The efficient frontier is then called
the capital market line.
Assuming that E[RM] and RM are respectively the expected return and the return
of the market portfolio, the major intuition of the CAPM is that in equilibrium, the
risk of a single asset is not measured by the variance of its returns, but rather by its
Beta. In particular, the Beta measures how the asset moves with the market.
The linear relationship is:
E[Ri] −rf = βi(E[RM] −rf)
(1.7)
where the coefficient Beta is:
β = Cov(Ri, RM)
Var(RM)
= σiM
σ2
M
.
(1.8)
The CAPM is simply a 1-factor model with the Market return being the only factor.
Several factor models have been developed and they can have more than one single
factor. For instance, the Fama-French model, which will be described in Chapter 2,
has three factors, the market return and two other factors. There is plenty of research
papers testing the CAPM. They usually implement regressions of the form:
Ri −rf = αi + βi(RM −rf) + ϵi
(1.9)
where the αi is the intercept of the regressed line and ϵi is the residual risk, which is
endemic to the particular asset and which is assumed to be independent of RM. It is
also known as idyosincratic risk. Furthermore, if the CAPM model holds, one should
be able to reject the hypothesis that the coefficient αi ̸= 0.
There are several opinions about CAPM, but it is still a popular model as a result of
its intuitiveness and applicability to several circumstances.
In the following chapter we will expand the model to the case of three factors, also
known as Fama-French model.
==PAGE:24==
8
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2
The Black-Litterman
Model
Though the absence of bias from emotion is one of the benefit in the context of quan-
titative investment strategies, in some cases it is valuable to include one’s own views
and intuitions about the market. Historical data and widely investment methods are
known as public information, in the sense that everyone has access to them. Contrar-
ily, information which is not available to the public, such as quantitative strategies,
analyst experience and trend analysis is usually denoted as private information. A
portfolio manager could achieve higher performance and results in the case he has
access to relevant private information, otherwise he totally relies on historical data
and its analysis. In the case he does hold private views he could combine the usual
investment approach with the views and some degree of uncertainty related to them.
The Black-Litterman model provides an elegant way to combine both the public and
the private information available to the portfolio manager.
The Black-Litterman model developed by Fisher Black and Robert Litterman in 1990
[BL90] at Goldman Sachs, is one of the most known mathematical model for portfolio
allocation. It was firstly published in an internal Goldman Sachs note, then it was
extended and published in the Financial Analyst Journal in 1992 [BL92]. The model
overcomes some of the shortcomings with the Markowitz Mean-Variance model. The
article was then published again by FAJ in the mid 1990’s and several copies are
broadly accessible online.
It gives the explanation of the methodology, and some
knowledge about the derivation. However, it does not provide all the details about
the formulas used in the model. Moreover, it contains a composite real example which
exploits the global equilibrium. More information can be found in a later article which
gives more tips for the soluition of the problem [Lit+04].
Bevan and Winkelmann (1998) [BW98] explain how investors can use Black-Litterman
model as in their Asset Allocation method at Goldman Sachs. They introduce some
assessment of the model which they execute which is crucial for any portfolio manager
who is intentioned to make use of the Black-Litterman model.
In their work, Satchell and Scowcroft (2000) [SS00] tried to disprove the Black-
Litterman model, proposing a non-Bayesian variation of the previous model. They
use point estimates in the context of the prior and the views, and they use the coef-
ficients Ωand τ to regulate the effect of shrinkage of the views over the prior. Since
==PAGE:26==
10
2 The Black-Litterman Model
their model is based on point estimates, conversely to the use of distribution func-
tions, the model does not give any insight on the accuracy of the estimate. For this
reason they claim to set the parameter τ = 1. Furthermore they extend their model
providing a version in which the paramter τ is stochastic, resulting in a stochastic
covariance matrix as well.
Drobetz in 2001 [Dro01], described in deep the Black-Litterman model concentrating
his work on a great examination on how to interpret the confidence in the estimates.
He also analyzed the reason why practitioners are not satisfied with the mean-variance
approach.
Fusai and Meucci in 2003 [FM03] proposed a non-Bayesian version of the model which
did not use the parameter τ in the approach. Later, in 2005, Meucci [Meu05] contin-
ued the work already began and invented the expression “Beyond Black-Litterman”.
He claimed that, since the model is considered as a normal shrinkage model, the pa-
rameter Ωitself gives the appropriate degrees of freedom to the shrinkage and then
the other parameter τ would be redundant. From this point scientists started to use
a combination of the canonical model and the version suggested by Meucci.
Firoozye and Blamont in 2003 [FB03], concentrated their work on the Reference
Model and made an effort to give an insight in the calibration of the τ parameter.
Koch in 2004 provides a description of the Black-Litterman model including a full
derivation of the main formula and exploits also the modification of the model in
the case the investor has 100% certainty in the views. He also gives an overview on
the sensitivity of the posterior estimate on the parameter τ, utilizing the alternative
formulation of the model.
Idzorek in 2005 [Idz05] worked on a modification that enables to specify the parame-
ter Ωin a way that the effect of the shrinkage is indicated with respect to the change
in percentage of the weights, spanning from 0% and the effect determined by 100%
confidence. The study relies on the alternative version of the model, but it can be
easily extended to the Canonical version because it includes the sensitivity to the
parameter τ explicitly set by the investor manager.
Krishnan and Mains in 2005 [KM05] study a modification of the Black-Litterman
model introducing an extra factor which has no correlation with the market. It is
known as the ”Two-Factor Black-Litterman model” and they further provide an ex-
ample of a variation of the Black-Litterman with a factor considering the recession.
They prove how it can obviously modify and alter the expected returns computed in
the model.
Mankert in 2006 [Man06] provides a detailed description of the Black-Litterman model
framework and then derives it mathematically using a sampling theoretical approach.
This brand new approach produces a new interpretation of the model and gives a more
interpretable and intuitive expression for the so discussed parameter τ. Furthermore,
the author focuses the attention in research results within the field of behavioral fi-
nance.
Meucci in 2006 builds a method to utilize non-normal distributed views in the Black-
Litterman approach.
Later, in 2008 [Meu08], he generalizes the above mentioned
method to any model parameter, and extends the model to a stage in which the user
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Overview and Bayesian Approach
11
can implement a scenario analysis.
Beach and Orlov in 2007 [BO07], illustrate a time series prediction method, GARCH
model, to generate the investors’ views. They exploit a model of international equity
over 20 countries. Moreover, they stress how the outcomes are sensitive to changes
in value of the parameter τ. However, they do not give insights on the uncertainty of
the views.
Braga and Natale in 2007 [BN07], propose a new method of adjusting the uncertainty
in the investors’ views using the measure known as Tracking Error Volatility (TEV),
which is a well known metric used from active portfolio managers. Moreover, sensitiv-
ities for the posterior estimates to the several views are derived to proved the investor
with more information to improve the portfolio management decision.
Martellini and Ziemann in 2007 [MZ07] introduce an approach to active management
in the context of hedge funds. They use Value at risk in their objective function for
the optimization and they present an extension of the CAPM model to higher order
moments of asset returns, including skewness and kurtosis for the design of their
benchmark portfolio. Moreover, they use a univariate conditional factor analysis to
produce a rank, then converting the scores to their confidence in the investors’ views.
Giacommeti, et al in 2007 [Gia+07] introduce a version of the model to derive the
neutral portfolio through stable paretian distributions, conversely to the use of the
normal distribution described in the traditional Black and Litterman. Furthermore,
they describe several risk measures for the portfolio selection, such as Value at Risk
and Conditional Value at Risk.
Cheung in 2009 [Che09] presents the notion of an augmented model. In this version
of the model he intcorporates a factor model and performs a joint estimation of the
factor returns.
Bertsimas, et al in 2013 [BGP12] present a way to estimate the adjustment of the
views with the estimate of the prior, examining and comparing the weights given by
the view portfolio to the eigenvalues of the covariance matrix from the prior.
Michaud, et al in 2013 [MEM12] criticize the Alternative Reference Black-Litterman
Model. He claims that the model is a combination of historical facts and feelings
(views), and that only a statistical approach will return a valid and meaningful prior
estimates.
He sustains that Black-Litterman is often uninvestable in applications
because of large leveraged or short allocations. Moreover, he compares constrained
Black-Litterman to Mean-Variance and Michaud (1998) optimization and sustains
that the former gives identical results as Markowitz.
2.1
Overview and Bayesian Approach
The starting assumption of the Black-Litterman model is that the expected return of
a security should be consistent with the market equilibrium in the case the investor
does not have personal views on the assets. To introduce the model it is relevant to
==PAGE:28==
12
2 The Black-Litterman Model
recap the CAPM model, which states:
E(Ri) −Rf = βi(E(RM) −Rf)
(2.1)
where E(Ri), E(RM), and Rf are respectively the expected return on security i, the
expected return on the market portfolio, and the risk-free rate. Moreover, the Beta
coefficient in the one-factor model can also be calculated as:
βi = cov(Ri, RM)
σ2
M
(2.2)
where the denominator is the variance of the market portfolio. Introducing the vector
of the market capitalization weights
wb = [wb1, . . . , wbN]⊤,
the return on the market portfolio RM can be written as:
RM =
N
∑
j=1
wbjRj.
(2.3)
Recalling the CAPM, the expected excess return on each asset i is:
Πi = E(Ri) −Rf =
= βi(E(RM) −Rf) = cov(Ri, RM)
σ2
M
(E(RM) −Rf) =
= E(RM) −Rf
σ2
M
N
∑
j=1
cov(Ri, Rj)wbj.
(2.4)
Defining the risk aversion coefficient
λ = E(RM) −Rf
σ2
M
,
(2.5)
which characterizes the expected risk-return trade-off or the rate at which an investor
will forsake expected return for less variance, the 2.4 can be written as:
Π = λΣw
(2.6)
Most of the practitioners use the above expression 2.6 to calculate the expected
return vector substituting the market capitalization weights w. This procedure is
called Reverse Optimization and was introduced by Sharpe and Fisher.
In a universe with N securities we have:
Π =


Π1
...
ΠN


==PAGE:29==
2.2 Factor Models: Fama-French 3 factors model
13
and the Var-Cov matrix of returns:
Σ =


Var(R1)
. . .
cov(R1, RN)
...
...
...
cov(RN, R1)
. . .
Var(RN)

.
Once we have estimated the three parameters:
- λ Risk Aversion coefficient
- Historical Var-Cov matrix Σ
- Market Capitalization Weights vector wMKT
and assuming that the excess return of the N securities over the risk-free rate are
normally distributed and represented by the vector µ, using a Bayesian framework the
Prior Equilibrium Distribution of excess returns is µ ∼N(Π, τΣ), where τ << 1 is a
scalar which expresses the confidence in the estimation of the equilibrium expected
returns.
Thus a small value for τ indicates a high confidence in the equilibrium
estimates. Finally, we can express the estimation of the true expected returns as:
Π = µ + ϵΠ,
(2.7)
where ϵΠ ∼N(0, τΣ).
2.2
Factor Models: Fama-French 3 factors model
It is maybe helpful to begin the section by introducing the idea of factors. People
utilize the term factor to identify something which has a strong connection with an
event.
Consider, for example, the amount of rain per year in a given region.
It
could be a factor affecting the yield of the farmers in the region. In this example,
the amount of rain per year is an exogenous factor which could affect and give an
estimate of the yield in the same year.
Nevertheless, one might argue that advertising is a factor of success, in the sense that
a good advertising is partly responsible for the success of some products. In the latter
example, the budget used for advertising is a characteristic relative to each firm or
company and it could vary a lot depending on the sector. There is also a notion
of hidden factors. A simple example could be the following sentence: “Her strength
and dedication were the crucial factors for the success she achieved in her life”. It
simply means that there was a mental disposition and a behavioral state that played
a crucial role even though we cannot directly observe these abstract concepts. Thus,
in everyday life, people already have many of the points that are developed in the
formal and mathematical notion of factors.
In the following thesis, however, we need to focus on two important aspects of the sci-
entific formal factors, not always used in every day life. Firstly, in science factors are
==PAGE:30==
14
2 The Black-Litterman Model
those variables that provide a common evidence and explanation of other variables.
When the relevant set of variables does not exhibit a systematic inter-dependence, a
factor model becomes a basic regression model. Secondly, factors which are some-
times observable variables could be used to predict additional observations. However,
often hidden or non observable factors are actually the crucial variables, and a data
set of observations is used only to estimate them. For instance, factor models were
introduced for the first time in psychometrics to discover a universal cause for many
different psychometric observations derived from empirical tests. Additionally, the
major causes that have been investigated are intelligence or personality traits, which
are crucial variables one wants to discover. On the other hand, observations such
as the answers and results of several tests are only used to determine hidden factors
related to the personality.
In the following section we provide a formal and mathematical treatment of static
linear factor models. A useful approach to reducing the statistical error of the plug-in
estimates in the Mean-Variance approach, is to impose a factor structure for the co-
variation among assets. This is done in order to reduce the number of free parameters
of the covariance matrix. Sharpe in 1963 was the first to propose an approach using
the covariance matrix implied by a single-factor market model in the mean–variance
problem as discussed in the previous chapter (CAPM).
However, one crucial point is that a single factor could not capture all of the co-
variation among assets, leading not only to a biased but also to a systematically
biased estimate of the return covariance matrix. The obvious and straightforward
way to overcome this issue is to increase the number of factors catching the covaria-
tion among assets. We start the section by providing a general formulation of factor
models. Finally we give an overview of the well known three factor model proposed
by Fama and French.
The genearal linear factor model has the following form:
xit = αi +
K
∑
j=1
βijfjt + ϵit
(2.8)
i = 1, . . . , N
j = 1, . . . , K
t = 1, . . . , T
where,
- xi is the variable to explain;
- αi is the average of the i-th variable;
- βij is the proportionality between i-th variable and j-th factor;
- fj is the j-th factor;
- ϵi is the residual.
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Factor Models: Fama-French 3 factors model
15
In the model we have N variables and K factors, with the assumptions that K << N.
In a matrix form the model can be written as:


x1
...
xN

=


α1
...
αN

+


β11
. . .
β1K
...
...
...
βN1
. . .
βNK




f1
...
fK

+


ϵ1
...
ϵN


where,
- x is the N × 1 vector of variables;
- α is the N × 1 vector of means of x;
- β is the N × K matrix of factor loadings;
- f is the K × 1 vector of factors;
- ϵ is the N × 1 vector of residuals.
The model defined in equation 2.8 can be reformulated in a matrix form including
the time dependence as:
X = F B⊤+ E
where each column of the matrices identifies a time series and each row an observation
at a certain time t with t = {1, . . . , T},
X =


x1,1
. . .
x1,N
...
...
...
xT,1
. . .
xT,N

, F =


1
f1,1
. . .
f1,K
...
...
...
...
1
fT,1
. . .
fT,K

, E =


ϵ1,1
. . .
ϵ1,N
...
...
...
ϵT,1
. . .
ϵT,N

.
Assuming that the variable X to explain is the asset return, we can now present the
model used in the analysis. As presented in Chapter 1, Sharpe in 1963 first proposed
using as estimation the covariance matrix implied by a single-factor model in the
mean–variance framework:
Ri,t = αi + βiRM,t + ϵi,t
(2.9)
where Ri,t is the return of asset i at time t, RM,t is the return of the market at
time t, and ϵi,t are the residuals which are assumed to be uncorrelated across assets.
Considering the vector of the N market betas β, we can write the covariance matrix
implied by the single factor model as:
Σ = σ2
Mββ⊤+ Σϵ
(2.10)
where:
Σϵ = diag(σ2
ϵ,1, . . . , σ2
ϵ,N)
==PAGE:32==
16
2 The Black-Litterman Model
is the diagonal residual covariance matrix. The major benefit of the above approach is
that the dimension of the parameters to be estimated is reduced to 3N + 1. However,
the disadvantage is that a single factor as in CAPM may not catch all the covariation
among the assets in the portfolio, which could result in a biased estimation of the
covariance matrix.
One way to deal with this problem is to increase the number of factors in the model,
which may capture more correlation of the assets. Thus the model become, assuming
we have K factors:
Ri,t = αi + β⊤
i ft + ϵi,t
(2.11)
where βi is the vector of factor loadings, ft is the vector of the factor realizations and
ϵi,t are the residuals which are assumed to be uncorrelated among the assets.
The covariance matrix implied by the factor model would be:
Σ = BΣfB⊤+ Σϵ
(2.12)
where
- B is the N × K matrix of factor loadings;
- Σf is the K × K covariance matrix of the factors;
- Σϵ is the diagonal cavariance matrix of the residuals.
The same model was used to estimate the expected returns of the assets in the port-
folio. Recalling equation 2.8, the expected return on asset i will be:
E[Ri] = αi +
F
∑
f=1
βi,fE[Rf]
(2.13)
Once performed the linear multiple regression and thus obtained the estimate of the
intercepts and the betas, the expected return will be:
ˆµi = ˆαi +
F
∑
f=1
ˆβi,f ˆµf
(2.14)
where
ˆµf = 1
T
T
∑
t=1
Rf,t
In particular, the Fama-French model (1992) introduce an extension of CAPM, namely
the three-factor model. The three-factor model sums two common risk factors to the
CAPM, size and book-to-market:
Ri −Rf = αi + (RM −Rf)βMi + SBMβSi + HMLβV i
(2.15)
where the coefficients:
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Investor Views
17
- βMi is the market beta for stock i;
- βSi is the size coefficient for stock i, which can be interpreted as the sensitivity
of the asset to movements of the price due to the size;
- βV i which is the book-to-market beta for asset i, which may be seen as the
sensitivity to price movements connected to the book-to-market characteristic.
The factor SMB, small size minus big, identifies the historical excess return on small
caps stocks over large caps. The factor HML, high book-to-market minus low, identi-
fies the historical excess return on value stocks over growth stocks, also known as the
value premium. Fama and French in their study [FF92] examine the cross-section of
expected stock returns in the United States. They made use of one major method
in the research, the regression approach proposed by Fama-MacBeth in 1973. This
method is used to estimate the beta parameters in the three-factor model. Moreover,
the study includes all NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ stocks in the period 1963-1990
that have a required characteristic.
2.3
Investor Views
The Black-Litterman model allows to express the investor views in an elegant fashion.
It defines a view as a statement that the expected return of a portfolio follows a
Normal distribution with mean equal to q and standard deviation ω respectively.
The above can also be called view portfolio.
The private information or views can be distinguished in two different types:
- Relative views which take the form of: ”The manager has ω1 confidence that
asset A will outperform asset B by a%”.
- Absolute views which take the form of: ”The manager has ω2 confidence that
asset C will outperform the market (or all the securities in the portfolio) by b%.
Formally, assuming the portfolio manager has K < N views on the securities, they
are expressed in the Black-Litterman model as a k-dimensional vector
Q = Pµ + ϵq
(2.16)
where ϵq ∼N(0, Ω), P is a K × N matrix, called Pick Matrix, which indicates the
securities mentioned in the views, Ωis a K × K matrix expressing the confidence in
the views and Q is a vector K × 1 of expected return for each view.
It is worth to mention that each row of the matrix P should either sum to 1 for
Absolute views or to 0 in the case of Relative views. Secondly, the matrix Ωcan
be interpreted as the covariance matrix between the manager’s views. However, the
==PAGE:34==
18
2 The Black-Litterman Model
model, without loss of generality, assumes that the views are independent of each
other such that the matrix of the confidence in the views takes the form:
Ω= diag(ω1, . . . , ωN)
(2.17)
As a matter of fact, this assumption will not affect the model as long as the views are
not self-contradictory, meaning that one of the K views contradicts another one. As
proved in [Xin+18] when the matrix Ωis not diagonal, spectral decomposition can
be used to express:
Ω= VΩΛV−1 =⇒PΛ = V−1P , QΛ = V−1Q
with QΛ diagonal.
In the paper they also proved that any set of independent views are not self-contradictory
or compatible (See appendix B). Following their approach, it can also be proved (See
appendix B) that any set of independent Relative and Absolute views can be ex-
pressed with a non-singular (determinant is non-zero) Absolute matrix, meaning that
the rows of the matrix are all of the form of the Absolute view summing up to 1.
Therefore the views on N securities can be expressed by:
- P a N × N absolute matrix, specifically the identity matrix;
- Q a N × 1 vector of expected return for each view;
- Ωa N × N non-negative diagonal matrix of the confidence in the views.
In the following section the Black-Litterman formula is derived combining all the
inputs determined.
2.4
BL formula
Once specified the Market Equilibrium and the Investor Views, all of the inputs
are entered into the Black-Litterman model to derive the New combined Return
Distribution or in a Bayesian framework the Posterior Distribution. Recalling the
equations we derived in the previous section:
Π = µ + ϵΠ,
and
Q = Pµ + ϵq,
an approach to derive the formula is to combine them, obtaining:
y = Xµ + ϵ
where ϵ ∼N(0, V)
(2.18)
and
y =
[Π
Q
]
X =
[ I
P
]
V =
[τΣ
Ω
]
.
==PAGE:35==
2.5 Time Series of Optimal Market Views
19
The equation (2.18) is simply a standard linear model for the expected returns µ.
The Generalized least squares estimator has the form:
¯
µBL = (X⊤V−1X)−1X⊤V−1y =
=
([
I
P⊤] [(τΣ)−1
Ω−1
] [ I
Π
])−1 [
I
P⊤] [(τΣ)−1
Ω−1
] [Π
Q
]
=
=
([
I
P⊤] [(τΣ)−1
Ω−1P
])−1 [
I
P⊤] [(τΣ)−1Π
Ω−1Q
]
=
=
[
(τΣ)−1 + P⊤Ω−1P
]−1 [
(τΣ)−1Π + P⊤Ω−1Q
]
.
The latter is the Expected Returns given by the Black-Litterman formula. Note that
in absence of investor views (Q = Σ = 0) the formula gives the expected returns
defined by the Equilibrium Returns Π. Furthermore, the formula can also be written
in the following way:
¯µBL = Π + τΣP ⊤(
Ω+ τP ΣP ⊤)−1 (Q −P Π)
(2.19)
where it is easy to see that the posterior expected returns is a tilt from the market ex-
pected returns Π, and the tilt is proportional to
(
Ω+ τP ΣP ⊤)−1 (Q −P Π). From
a macro perspective, the formula can be seen as a weighted average of the Market
Capitalization Equilibrium portfolio and the views portfolio.
The variance of the
combined estimator is:
Var(¯µBL) =
(
X⊤V −1X
)−1 =
[
(τΣ)−1 + P⊤Ω−1P
]−1 .
(2.20)
The Black-Litterman derivation process can be summarized as in the chart in figure
2.1.
2.5
Time Series of Optimal Market Views
The time series of the optimal market views is derived in a fashion way inverting
the Black-Litterman formula. First of all we need to define the confidence matrix of
the views Ω. The first original form of the Black-Litterman model does not provide
an intuitive way to quantify this matrix, it is up to the investor to compute the
variance of the views. However, in the example given in [HL99] and later in [Idz07]
the confidence matrix is derived from the equilibrium covariance matrix as:
Ω0 = diag(P (τΣ)P ⊤).
In the general case of the matrix P one can calculate the variance of each individual
view as pk(τΣ)p⊤
k where pk is a single 1 × N row vector from the general P matrix
==PAGE:36==
20
2 The Black-Litterman Model
Figure 2.1: Derivation process of the New Combined Return Vector
which corresponds to the kth view and where Σ is the equilibrium covariance matrix.
However having defined the matrix P as the identity, the product (P (τΣ)P ⊤) is
defined and the resulting matrix is the diagonal matrix of the scaled covariance matrix.
Thus the assumption is that the variance of an absolute view on asset i is proportional
to the volatility of the asset. Moreover, when the covariance matrix of the error term
is defined in this way, the value of the scalar τ is irrelevant as explained in [HL99].
Having specified the matrix Ω, the scalar τ, the Pick matrix P , the vector of implied
==PAGE:37==
2.5 Time Series of Optimal Market Views
21
excess returns Π and the historical covariance matrix Σ and considering the following
three equations:
wt = (λΣ(BL)
t
)−1µ(BL)
t
(2.21)
µ(BL)
t
=
[
(τΣt)−1 + P⊤Ω−1
t P
]−1 [
(τΣt)−1Πt + P⊤Ω−1
t Qt
]
(2.22)
Σ(BL)
t
= Σt +
[
(τΣt)−1 + P⊤Ω−1
t P
]−1
(2.23)
where wt is the solution to the mean variance maximization problem, we can isolate
Qt and find a formula to ”bootstrap” the time series of the optimal market views.
Thus the optimal expected returns for the market views for each time period t is:
Q∗
t = Ω0,t
{[
(τΣt)−1 + P ⊤Ω−1
0,tP
]
µ(BL)
t
−(τΣt)−1Πt
}
=
= λ
[
Ω0,t(τΣt)−1 + I
] [
Σt +
[
(τΣt)−1 + Ω−1
t
]−1]
wt −Ω0,t(τΣt)−1Πt. (2.24)
Using the above formula we can calculate all the expected returns for the views for
each of the time period, creating a time series which will be used in the training
process of the Neural Network model in the following chapter.
==PAGE:38==
22
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3
Creating the Views:
Artificial Neural
Networks
It is generally acknowledged that anticipating the future with 100 % precision is in-
conceivable. In any case, the celebrated French mathematician Henri Poincaré once
said ”It is much better to anticipate even without assurance than not to predict by
any stretch of the imagination”. The possibility that an investor could predict the
statistical properties of financial time series would reflect in higher profit in the invest-
ments. In this thesis we will attempt to improve the estimation of the matrix views
in the Black-Litterman model, by using machine learning with the aim to generate
higher returns in the constructed portfolio.
As previously discussed, Modern Portfolio Theory is a frequently used investment
model which uses the assumption that an investor is willing to maximize the ex-
pected returns given a desired level of risk, or vice versa. Thus, the model requires
both the estimation of future returns and risk, usually represented by the covariance
matrix between the assets returns. In 1990 Black and Litterman noticed that most
quantitative portfolio models generate very sensible positions to the change in the
expected returns.
According to the efficient-market hypothesis (EMH), a well-known theory in financial
economics, asset prices are a function of all currently available information and ra-
tional expectations. Hence, any price changes that are not based on newly revealed
information are inherently unpredictable. This implies that an investor can not beat
the overall market through expert stock selection or market timing. Those who fully
rely on this theory argue that the only way an investor can possibly obtain higher
returns is by chance or by purchasing riskier investments. The efficient market hy-
pothesis (EMH) was developed by Eugene Fama who claimed that stocks always trade
at their fair value. Later on, in 1973, the economist Burton Malkiel, argued that stock
prices can not be predict looking only at price history. However, the experience in
real life suggests that the theory is not widely accepted. Most of the large investment
companies are hiring many experts to predict asset prices using statistical models and
==PAGE:40==
24
3 Creating the Views: Artificial Neural Networks
recently machine learning as well as deep learning. Nowadays machine learning has
come to play a fundamental role in the field of financial forecasting. In particular,
Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) provide interesting properties which most of the
traditional models lack.
3.1
Overview: Feed-Forward Neural Network
Neural Networks, usually referred as NNs, are nowadays a broadly successful tool
used in regression, classification and unsupervised learning. The origin of the term
neural network is a result of several researchers’ trial to find a mathematical repre-
sentation of the mechanism that biological system use in processing information as
in [RM86]. Nevertheless, the biological motivation is mainly important and the uti-
lization of neural networks today is due mostly to the fact that Deep Architecture
allow to achieve outstanding results on several tasks and fields, often outperforming
other methods in terms of accuracy and also speed of execution. The most popu-
lar applications are audio processing, image processing, signal classification, sequence
recognition and several others. [Sch15] provide a historical survey which compactly
summarizes relevant and successful researches and findings.
As we will present in the following chapter, neural networks researchers applied these
architecture several times to the financial field. On the other hand, the literature
show that studies use mainly feed forward neural network with a single hidden layer,
which are quite basic and have been outperformed by several variations in recent
years. In particular, since the objective of this thesis is to find a model to predict the
optimal vector of views in the Black-Litterman context, we provide a depth descrip-
tion of Neural Netowrk, with a specific focus on RNNs. Moreover, we provide the
related advantages and disadvantages in the utilization of such models.
In the first part of the chapter we provide an overview of feedforward neural network,
which is the basic model to understand in order to use more complex and articulated
methods. Then we focus on a variation of Neural Network which has shown to be
particularly suitable for time series prediction, Recurrent Neural Networks. In the
last section of the chapter we analyze a variation of RNNs which show successful
results and findings in many time series related tasks.
3.1.1
Definition of the model
In this section we will describe the general definition of the model, providing also the
notation generally used in this analysis. To define the model, we need to introduce
the following terms:
- Input Vector: x ∈RP
- Output vector: y ∈RK
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Overview: Feed-Forward Neural Network
25
- Layer-wise output: ol ∈RMl where Ml is the dimension of each layer l =
{1, . . . , L}. Thus, oL = y is the output of the last layer and corresponds to the
output of the network. Analogously, o0 = x the output of layer 0 corresponds
to the input of the network.
- Weight Matrix: W l ∈RMl×Ml−1 defined for each layer l = {1, . . . , L}. Note
that the dimensions of the Weight matrices corresponding to the first and last
layers are respectively: M0 = P and ML = K.
- Vector of Bias: bl ∈RMl defined for each layer l = {1, . . . , L}.
- Parameters Set: θ which contains all the weight matrices and bias vectors
used in the network.
- Activation Function: σ(·) : R →R, which is a non-linear transformation
used to transform the output of a layer l to the input of the next layer l + 1.
We can now define a Feed-Forward Neural Network f(x, θ) with L layers as a recursive
function as follows:
f(x, θ) = oL
(3.1)
ol = σ(al) = σ(W lol−1 + bl)
for l = {1, . . . , L}
(3.2)
o0 = x.
(3.3)
A neural network is then a recurrent application of a linear product between a matrix
and a vector, transformed by a non-linear function or the activation function. The
network performs at each iteration a transformation of the input vector into a new
vector, executing a feed-forward propagation of the signal, starting from the input
layer until the last or output layer. The idea is that the term ol, which is the output
of the layer l, is fed to the layer l + 1 as the input vector.
Furthermore, the term al is a linear combination of the output of the previous layer,
combined with a bias term and passed through the activation function. The bias
vector is used as a constant shift, as in the case of the intercept of a linear regression.
The vectors ol for the internal layers, are usually called as hidden states of the neural
network.
3.1.2
Activation Functions
It is straightforward to see that the application of a non-linear function, the activation
function σ, plays a key role in the architecture of the model. Otherwise, the network
would results in a simple linear matrix-vector multiplication. The activation function
can be selected arbitrarily with the restriction that it is derivable. Some of the most
used activation functions in literature are the following.
Sigmoid Function:
σ(x) =
1
1 + e−x
(3.4)
==PAGE:42==
26
3 Creating the Views: Artificial Neural Networks
Figure 3.1: Feed-Forward Neural Network
with the corresponding derivative:
σ′(x) = σ(x)(1 −σ(x))
The function in equation 3.2a simulates the activation of a neuron in the biological
system. The neuron would be active in the case in which the input is enough high,
inactive otherwise.
A slightly different activation function, which maps the output in the range (−1, 1)
is the following.
Hyperbolic Tangent:
tanh(x) = ex −e−x
ex + e−x
(3.5)
with the corresponding derivative:
tanh′(x) = 1 −tanh2(x)
The rectifier is another activation function defined as the positive part of its argument
has the following form.
ReLU:
ReLU(X) =
{
x
for x > 0
0
for x ≤0
(3.6)
with the corresponding derivative:
ReLU′(X) =
{
1
for x > 0
0
for x ≤0
which is also known as Heaviside Function.
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Overview: Feed-Forward Neural Network
27
(a) Sigmoid Function
(b) Tanh Function
(c) ReLU Function
Figure 3.2: Activation Functions
3.1.3
Error Functions
In order to find the values of the coefficients it is necessary to introduce an error
function. Consider, for example, the problem of fitting a polynomial curve, i.e. a
line, and the task to find the values of the coefficients. They are tuned by fitting
the polynomial to the training data and by minimizing a specific measure, in this
case, the sum of distances squared between the function and the observed value for
all the data points in the training set. In the following we will describe some of error
functions mostly used in literature.
Mean Squared Errors (MSE): is a broadly used error function mainly in prediction
problems. It is defined as the sum of the squares of the errors between the target
values tn and the values predicted by the model y(xn, θ) for all the data points
n = {1, . . . , N}.
MSE(θ) =
1
2N
N
∑
n=1
∥f(xn, θ) −tn∥2
2
(3.7)
where the ∥· ∥2
2 is the l2 squared norm.
The Root Mean Squared Errors (RMSE) is a simple modification of the MSE
==PAGE:44==
28
3 Creating the Views: Artificial Neural Networks
including in the calculation the square root, thus:
RMSE(θ) =
√
MSE(θ) =
v
u
u
t 1
2N
N
∑
n=1
∥f(xn, θ) −tn∥2
2.
(3.8)
Moreover, these deviations are called residuals when the calculations are executed on
the data sample which was used for estimation or training and are called prediction
errors when executed out-of-sample or on the test sample. The RMSE is a smart
measure to aggregate the magnitudes of the errors in predictions for various times
into a unique value. Moreover, RMSE is a good measure of accuracy. It can be used
to compare forecasting errors of different models for a specific data-set.
3.1.4
Gradient Descent in the Training Process
One of the reason why neural network are a powerful tool nowadays is definitely the
availability of an easy but effective training process. The procedure allows to compute
the gradient of the error with respect to the set of parameters of the network. Thus
it can then be utilized to optimize the error with the algorithm of gradient descent.
In the following we show a derivation of the general algorithm.
Let us consider a training set of inputs {xn} and the corresponding target vectors
{tn}, with n = {1, . . . , N} and using the MSE error function presented in the previous
paragraph:
E(θ) =
1
2N
N
∑
n=1
∥f(xn, θ) −tn∥2
2
(3.9)
Note that the error function in equation 3.9 is non linear with respect to the parame-
ters. The function f(xn, θ) consists of many non linear functions in every layer of the
network. The most generally known optimization method in literature to minimize
the error function is gradient descent. The latter proceeds by recursively updating
the parameters following the direction of maximum descent obtained by the gradient,
until a local minimum of the error function is achieved:
θnew = θ −η∇θE(θ)
(3.10)
where η is usually a small parameter η > 0 which is tuned as a hyperparameter and
called learning rate.
The term ∇θ is the gradient calculated with respect to θ.
Furthermore, it is well known that gradient descent procedure makes use of a first
order Taylor expansion of the function, which is used as a local approximation around
the parameter configuration.
The choice of the learning rate is critical in the process of gradient descent. In the
first place its value should not be too large. It would results in the algorithm skipping
the global minimum. Secondly, the value should not be too small since the algorithm
would take a huge amount of time to converge to the optimal solution.
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Overview: Feed-Forward Neural Network
29
3.1.5
Error Backpropagation
The aim of this section is to find an efficient method to evaluate the gradient of the
error function E(θ) for a feed-forward neural network. We will show that this can
be accomplished adopting a local message passing design. Information is transmitted
alternately forwards and backwards over the network. This procedure is known as
error backpropagation.
Let us consider the first derivative of the error function E with respect to the weight
coefficient W l
ij, which is the weight connecting neuron i of layer l −1 to neuron j of
layer l:
∂E
∂W l
ij
= 1
N
N
∑
i=1
(f(xi, θ) −ti)
∂
∂W l
ij
f(xi, θ).
(3.11)
Using the chain rule of derivatives it can be written as:
∂
∂W l
ij
f(xi, θ) =
∂
∂W l
ij
oL =
∂
∂W l
ij
[σ(aL)]
= σ′(aL)
∂
∂W l
ij
aL = σ′(aL)
∂
∂W l
ij
(W LoL−1 + bL)
= σ′(aL)W L
∂
∂W l
ij
oL−1 = σ′(aL)W L
∂
∂W l
ij
σ(aL−1)
= σ′(aL)W Lσ′(aL−1)W L−1
∂
∂W l
ij
oL−2
= σ′(aL)W Lσ′(aL−1)W L−1 . . .
∂
∂W l
ij
oL
=
L
∏
k=l+1
(σ′(ak)W k)
∂
∂W l
ij
ol.
The last term can be rearranged as:
∂
∂W l
ij
ol =
∂
∂W l
ij
[σ(W lol−1 + bl)]
= σ′(al)
∂
∂W l
ij
(W lol−1 + bl)
= σ′(al)ol−1
j
then the gradient of the error function of equation 3.11 takes the shape:
∂E
∂W l
ij
= 2
N (f(xi, θ) −ti)
L
∏
k=l+1
(σ′(ak)W k)σ′(al)ol−1
j
(3.12)
==PAGE:46==
30
3 Creating the Views: Artificial Neural Networks
and denoting the quantity:
Dl
ij = 2
N (f(xi, θ) −ti)
L
∏
k=l+1
(σ′(ak)W k)
we obtain
∂E
∂W l
ij
= Dl
ijσ′(al)ol−1
j
(3.13)
and the backpropagation equations:
DL
ij = 2
N (f(xi, θ) −ti)
(3.14)
Dl
ij = σ′(al)W lDl+1
ij
(3.15)
∂E
∂W l
ij
= Dl
ijσ′(al)ol−1
j
.
(3.16)
The reason why the procedure is called backpropagation is that the computation of
the gradient at a specific layer necessitates only the term Dl−1
ij
of the previous layer
Since information is transmitted alternately forwards and backwards over the network
people saw a connection between artificial neural network and the way information
are exchanged between neurons in the human brain.
3.1.6
Deep Neural Network
It is important to specify the relevance of the depth in a neural network architecture.
Neural networks of more than 2 layers are usually called deep networks. They have
obtained particular importance since they have proven to be useful in several problems
and tasks. These architectures are becoming very popular in applied research among
several fields.
In deep learning models, each layer learns to mutate the input data into a more
abstruse representation. Consider, for example, the case of an image recognition. The
input is usually a matrix of pixels. The first layer of the network may extract borders
from the image and encode edges; the second layer combine several arrangements of
the latter; the following layer may identify ears and nose; and the last layer could
notice that the image is a human face.
The word deep in ”deep learning” is due to the number of layers through which the
data is transformed and processed. The term Deep Learning was introduced for the
first time by Rina Dechter in 1986 [Dec86]. Later, in 2000, Igor Aizenberg [AVA00]
introduced the concept in the framework of Boolean threshold neurons.
The major difficulty in training deep networks comes from the vanishing gradient
problem. The gradient descent procedure in neural networks has some issues and one
of them is vanishing gradient. The gradient at layers right after the input layer gets
heavily smaller with the number of layers in the network preventing the weight from
changing the value during the process. To overwhelm this problem, several methods
were suggested from researchers.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Recurrent Neural Networks
31
3.2
Recurrent Neural Networks
In the following section we focus on the presentation and implementation of Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNNs), which are the type of network used in the following study.
Recurrent neural networks have been an interesting and important part of neural
network research during the last three decades. They have already been applied to
a wide variety of problems involving time series of events and other data such as
characters in words or words in sentences. Nowadays, their usage range from motion
detection, machine translation, video analysis [SMS15] to financial forecasting. They
are a variation of the simple feed-forward neural network and they are specifically
suitable to model time series with long term dependencies as highlighted in [GMH13].
In this section we define the model behind RNNs. Then we extend the model to
capture time series behaviour and we present the training process.
Figure 3.3: Recurrent Neural Network and the unfold version.
3.2.1
Definition of the model
The major purpose and application of RNNs is to model sequential information and
data with a time dependence structure. Traditional neural networks use the assump-
tion that the inputs and outputs are independent. However, for many real problems
the assumption is not applicable to the data. Consider for example the prediction of
the next word in a sentence. Information about a certain number of previous words
would be crucial in the prediction. Recurrent neural networks execute the same cal-
culation for all the elements in a sequence, considering that there is a dependency
between the current state and the output of the previous.
Analogously, these networks can be seen as a structure with a memory that al-
lows to keep the information obtained in the previous calculations.
Let us con-
sider X = {x1, x2. . . . , xT } a sequence of of vectors, where xt ∈RD for each value
t ∈{1, . . . , T} and where T is the number of time steps in each sequence. The aim is
to model a recurrent neural network on the defined data. The naive form of a RNN
==PAGE:48==
32
3 Creating the Views: Artificial Neural Networks
is:
f({x1, . . . , xT }, θ) = yT
(3.17)
yt = σ(W outot + bout)
(3.18)
ot = σ(W h[xt, ot−1] + bh)
(3.19)
where the term ot−1 is the output at time t −1 and it comes from a delay unit.
The term [v, w] ∈Rn+m is simply the concatenation of the two vectors v ∈Rn
and w ∈Rm. Moreover, the hidden state ot plays the role of the state memory,
which implies that the next state is completely composed by the hidden and the pre-
vious state. Lastly, the network contains a transformation from hidden to output
σ(W outot +bout), where the matrices W and the vectors b are the weights and biases
explained in the simple feedforward neural network.
Note that the recurrent neural network with the cycle, figure 3.3 left side, is of infinite
length since the network keep feeding its output into itself, generating at each itera-
tion a new output. A recurrent neural network can be thought of as several copies of
the same network, each of them passing an information to the next.
It is then useful to eliminate the time delay unit which creates the loop. This can be
achieved by unrolling the network over time, defining a number of steps Ns. In this
way the RNN can be seen as a standard feed forward network , with a given initial
state oT −Ns. This intuition can be seen in figure 3.3 on the right side. Furthermore
the defined time steps correspond to layers in the context of feedforward neural net-
work. Thus the mathematics of the network would be the same with a given initial
state.
The computation is the same in the original and the unrolled formulation of the neu-
ral networks. Moreover, the second version of the network will follow the structure
presented in equations 3.17, 3.18 and 3.19, with a recursion that occurs a number
of times equal to the time steps in considerations. The initial state is sometimes set
to zero. It is also worth to mention that at each unrolled time step the parameters
of the network are the same since all the time steps in the sequence are the same
operation which is repeated through time. The latter consideration implies that the
parameters, in our case W and b are in common to all the layers of the corresponding
feed forward architecture.
3.2.2
Gradient Descent in the Training Process
In this section we will walk the reader through the Training process of a Recurrent
Neural Network, considering as the loss function the MSE presented in Section 3.1.1.1.
Considering the output of the RNN f(X, θ) with the input X = {xT −Ns, . . . , xT }
which is a sequence of length Ns. Moreover, let t be the vector of the target, then
the error function would take the form:
E(θ) = 1
2∥f({xT −Ns, . . . , xT }, θ) −t∥2
2.
(3.20)
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Recurrent Neural Networks
33
As we described in the section of feed forward networks, the properties can be gener-
alized to the case of Recurrent Networks. Therefore, the backpropagation approach
can be used directly to compute the gradient and to minimize then the error with
gradient descent algorithm. Nevertheless, note that the parameters W and b are the
same in all the layers of the Recurrent Network. Then, the computation of the gradi-
ent needs to be modified with respect to this key difference. Using the multivariate
extension, the modification results in the following equations:
ot = σ(W t[xt, ot−1] + bt)
(3.21)
W t = g(W) = W
(3.22)
bt = g(b) = b
(3.23)
where the gradient is computed using the rule of total derivatives and the function
g, in our case, corresponds to the identity function. Then, the weights at each time
step are expressed as a function of the weights in common to all layers. In this way,
the gradient would be:
∂f({xT −Ns, . . . , xT }, θ)
∂Wij
=
∑
t
∂f({xT −Ns, . . . , xT }, θ)
∂W t
ij
∂W t
ij
Wij
=
=
∑
t
∂f({xT −Ns, . . . , xT }, θ)
∂W t
ij
(3.24)
where the last expression ∂f({xT −Ns,...,xT },θ)
∂W t
ij
is not dependent on the Wij. Finally,
the gradient can be calculated as the sum over the time-steps, of each of the gradient,
as in equation 3.24. The procedure can be simply generalized for the vector of the
bias b.
3.2.3
Problems with a standard RNN
Unfortunately, implementing the above presented steps, results can be affected by
some problems. The reason is that the simplest RNN model has a main drawback, the
vanishing gradient problem, which could even stop the training process and generate
not really accurate results.
The vanishing gradients problem, which is one of the main problem in Deep Networks,
has a great impact and relevance in the context of RNNs as discussed in [PMB13].
The key is that using the process of unrolling, it corresponds to the creation of a
Neural Network with several layers. In this way, the gradient decays exponentially in
the layer depth, vanishing in really small values.
Furthermore, the resulting decay of the gradient results in a non capacity of the
network to learn long term dependencies. They are only suitable to train the layers
really close to the last time-step. For this reason, several researchers tried to modify
the structure of RNN in a way that the model could learn both long and short time
dependence.
==PAGE:50==
34
3 Creating the Views: Artificial Neural Networks
3.2.4
Generalization in Time Series Prediction
In this section we will explain the procedures discussed above in the case where data
is composed by Time Series and the task is to predict the next value in the sequence.
Let X = {x1, . . . , xNs} be the sequence of data and one wants to train a Recurrent
Neural Network to capture the behaviour of the series. The simplest goal would be
to predict the value xt given the values {x1, . . . , xt−1}.
Before training the network one needs to follow the procedure:
> Choose a number of Time-steps Ns and then create a set of inputs and outputs
as:
X1 = {x1, . . . , xNs}
with
t1 = xNs+1
X1 = {x2, . . . , xNs+1}
with
t2 = xNs+2
...
X1 = {xT −Ns, . . . , xT −1}
with
tT −Ns = xT
> Train the network with the backpropagation algorithm on the generated data-
set and the unrolled RNN in time for chosen number of time-steps. In this way
we obtain the two parameters Wh and bh used in the recursion.
> Evaluate the model; supposing that we want to make a prediction of the time
series after time t, we need to repeat eq. 3.19 for a number of times equals to t
with the sequence input {x1, . . . , xT } which produces the value for the hidden
state ot. In the end, we can predict the desired time-steps using eq. 3.18.
In picture 3.4 we can see the flexibility that RNNs offer to the user. The one-to-
one structure is also called Vanilla Neural Networks.
The one to many structure
is particularly suitable for image captioning. The many-to-one is usually utilized in
sentiment classification. Lastly, the many-to-many structure is successful for machine
translation, video classification and sequence to sequence learning [DBM15].
Figure 3.4: Several shapes of connections between layers in RNNs.
==PAGE:51==
3.3 RNN with LSTM
35
3.2.5
RNNs Architectures
As we previously discussed, the procedure of unrolling the RNN allows to utilize
all the procedures explained for the Vanilla feedforward neural networks, included
the algorithm of backpropagation and gradient descent. It could be proved that these
approaches can be extended to several different architectures 3.4, which are variations
of the basic structure of RNNs.
In the last decades, several researchers tried to build new formulations and variations
of the Vanilla Recurrent Neural Network, adapting the architecture to the task they
wanted to solve and validating through experiments. These powerful structures then
usually translate into models, although they are originated and come from the simple
vanilla feedforward network. The most used variations of such model are Long Short
Term Memories networks, which will be described in the next section.
3.3
RNN with LSTM
In the following section we will provide an introduction to a variant of RNN, namely
Long Short Term Memory networks. They are designated to be able to capture long
term dependencies. LSTMs were introduced for the first time in 1997 in the work
by Hochreiter & Schmidhuber in [HS97]. We will present the procedure we followed
to make use of these networks in the following chapter, in particular in the financial
framework.
In theory, RNNs should be absolutely able to handle long-term dependencies. How-
ever, in practice, RNNs do not seem to model these relations adequately. The major
issues were analyzed by Hochreiter in 1991 and Bengio, et al. in 1994, who found
several reasons why RNNs should not perform well for this task.
In some problems, only recent information is needed to perform the desired task. Let
us consider, for example, a language model whose goal is to anticipate the next word
given the previous ones in a sentence. Moreover, consider the task to predict the next
word in the sentence ”Paul receives the salary each ...”, it is straightforward in this
short term context that the next word would be ”month”. In other cases where the
time dependencies between cause and effect are quite short, RNNs can learn appro-
priately.
Nevertheless, there are situations where more data, in this case words, is needed. Let
us consider for instance the prediction of the last word in the sentence ”I was born
in Denmark in [...] I speak fluent ...”, where [...] denotes a long sequence of words or
even sentences. Although short term memory information suggest that the next word
in the sentence would be a language, the evidence that this language would be Danish
is transparent only based on a certain word, in this case Denmark, in a relatively big
distance.
Unluckily, as time distance between relationships increases, RNNs result inefficient
at modeling. The major issue to this lack is the gradient vanishing problem discussed
before.
==PAGE:52==
36
3 Creating the Views: Artificial Neural Networks
3.3.1
Definition of the model
These models are attracting lot of attention in recent years and they are giving im-
pressive performances on a broad collection of problems and tasks, and are currently
amply used both in research and in industry. An overview of applications of LSTMs
is given in [LBE15]. Fields where LSTMs have found particular accomplishment in-
clude language modeling ,machine translator and mobile phones [SVL14]. There are
several other areas where these models are applied such as: smart speakers (Google
Home), text classification, speech recognition, translation of videos to language, im-
age caption [Vin+15] and anomaly detection.
As in figure 3.4, the unrolled version of RNNs has a particular common shape. The
model has the shape of a chain which repeats several neural networks. In vanilla
RNNs the module that is repeated through time in the case of Time series, has an
easy structure. In most cases it is represented by a single layer with the sigmoid
function.
The major difference between RNNs and LSTMs is the composition of the repeating
scheme. LSTMs has a cell which is composed by four different connected layers. The
structure is presented in figure 3.5.
To explain the LSTM cell, we need to introduce some notation which will be used
in the representation. All the lines in the graph carry a signal from the output of
one specific node to the input od the following. The orange circles in the LSTM unit
represent respectively point wise multiplication × and addition +. The remaining
orange rectangulars are neural network layers, where σ denotes the sigmoid activa-
tion function and tanh the hyperbolic tangent. Lines that are combined represent the
concatenation of the vectors, whereas a line which fork means that the same vector
will be used in more than one calculation of the unit.
The structure of the LSTM is expressed by the recursion created by the following
equations, where we indicate with the element wise vector multiplication.
f t = σ(Wf[ot−1, xt], bf)
(3.25)
it = σ(Wi[ot−1, xt], bi)
(3.26)
˜ct = tanh(Wc[ot−1, xt], bc)
(3.27)
ct = f t ∗ct−1 + it ∗˜ct
(3.28)
ht = σ(Wh[ot−1, xt], bh)
(3.29)
ot = ht ∗tanh(ct)
(3.30)
yt = σ(W outot + bout)
(3.31)
The transformations in equations 3.25 to 3.31 correspond to the mathematical
formulation of the cell represented in figure 3.5. Firstly, notice that a LSTM in its
unrolled form maintains the standard form of a feedforward neural network, even
though the layer structures are more difficult. We have previously discussed that the
backpropagation method can be applied and extended to any RNN structure with
==PAGE:53==
3.3 RNN with LSTM
37
Figure 3.5: Architecture of a Long-Short Term Memory network
the condition that the connection graph of the unrolled version does not have any cy-
cles. The equations above and the figure confirm that LSTM follow these properties.
Thus, they can be trained with the method of gradient descent as one would do with
a standard feed forward network. One of the main characteristics of LSTMs is that
the state vector is split in two different parts: the cell state c and the hidden state
o. The cell state, which is the horizontal line that goes through the middle of the
diagram, runs straight through the unit cell and it receives only some minor linear
changes. All the information that flow through this line is mainly unchanged, unless
the linear interactions in the line are activated. The unit activates these different
units, called gates, for specific tasks, such as removing (forget) or adding (memory)
information to the cell state.
The gates are a tool that allows the unit to choose which data should continue through
the line and which should be forgotten. These units are simply composed by a sig-
moid neural network layer and a pointwise multiplication or addition operation. As
we discussed in the section regarding the activation functions, the sigmoid would out-
put a number in the interval 0 and 1, indicating how much of the data flowing in the
line should continue. Furthermore, the LSTM unit contains 3 different gates which
modify and adjust the amount of data running in the process. In the following sec-
tion, we explain in details the process happening in the unit, highlighting the action
of each of the layers.
3.3.2
LSTM cell description
The LSTM unit represented in picture 3.5 can be divided in four main actions. We
provide a description of all the steps, and a graphical depiction as can be seen in
==PAGE:54==
38
3 Creating the Views: Artificial Neural Networks
figure 3.6.
- (Figure 3.6a) The first step in the LSTM unit is to select which information
is needed to be removed from the cell state ct.
The selection is performed
by a sigmoid layer which is called forget gate layer. It outputs a number in
the range 0 and 1 for each element in the cell. In the case the output is a 1,
the transformation is suggesting to keep completely the information or element,
whereas a 0 would suggest to fully forget the information running in the cell.
Recalling the example we presented before, the cell state may include the gender
of the subject in the sentence, such that the correct pronouns will be used as
the following word. When a new subject comes to play in the sentence, the cell
state should be able to decide to forget the gender of the previous subject.
- (Figure 3.6b) The second step is to select which new information should be
added to the cell state.These procedure is divided in two parts. First, a sigmoid
layer called the input gate layer decides which values will be updated, still
producing outputs between 0 and 1. Secondly, a tanh layer with output between
−1 and 1, as discussed before, creates a vector of new candidate data ˜ct, which
could be added or deleted to the cell state. Considering the sentence example
proposed before, the gender of the new subject should be added to the cell state,
to replace the old one that the cell is supposed to forget.
- (Figure 3.6c) At this point, the old cell state ct−1 is effectively updated by
applying the forget and update steps we presented previously. The old state
cell state is multiplied by f t, deleting the vector elements for which the function
is close to 0 and thus forgetting them. Then the new candidate state it ∗˜ct is
added. In the language example, this is the point where the information about
the old subject would be actually dropped and the new information kept.
- (Figure 3.6d) Finally, in the last step, the network decides what should be passed
to ot, which is a modified version of the cell state through the transformations
presented in equations 3.29 and 3.30. In the language example in which we
have to predict the next word in a sentence, if the current word was a subject
the model might want to output information connected to a verb or a pronoun.
For example, the model could output whether the subject is a single person or
a group, such that we can predict how the next term should be conjugated into.
Furthermore, note that the network output yt is then computed based on this
information, through a final sigmoid layer.
The above description characterizes the standard LSTM. However, several form
of LSTMs have been proposed through the years, with some modifications in the
architecture of the model. Several papers try different adjustments of the model to
fit better the task in consideration.
Last year [Gre+17] presented the first large-
scale analysis of several LSTM variants. They focused mainly on three representative
fields: speech recognition, handwriting recognition, and polyphonic music modeling.
Their study show that none of the variants overcome the standard LSTM architecture
==PAGE:55==
3.3 RNN with LSTM
39
significantly, and they also demonstrate that the two major components in the LSTM
unit are the forget gate and the output activation function.
==PAGE:56==
40
3 Creating the Views: Artificial Neural Networks
(a) Step 1
(b) Step 2
(c) Step 3
(d) Step 4
Figure 3.6: LSTM process
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Portfolio Construction
In this chapter we provide an explanation of how the theory presented in the pre-
vious chapters is implemented in practice. In particular, we will provide the reader
with a step by step construction of the portfolio. Starting with the method used
to choose assets from the investment universe, we will then discuss the use of the
Black-Litterman and the forecasting of the market views. Finally, we will present the
time horizon for rebalancing and the benchmarks chose to test the portfolio.
Moreover, we will present the results of the thesis. First of all, the selected financial
model is benchmarked. Furthermore, note that the project is assumed to begin at
the very end of 2004. The analysis starts with a principal amount of wealth of 1000.
Only long positions are permitted. We assume no leverage. Tax and dividend yields
are not taken into account in the model. The investments are completely composed
by ETFs. The investment universe is clustered once, deleting all the ETFs without
enough historical data. The return and risk of the strategy, especially during black
swan events, are analyzed.
4.2
Investment Universe: ETFs
Nowadays there is a wide variety of assets classes available in the Investment Universe.
Particularly, in our investment universe there are approximately 1927 tradeable ETFs.
ETFs had their origin in 1989 with the Index Participation Shares, which traded on
two main Exchanges: the American Stock Exchange and the Philadelphia Stock Ex-
change. However, it was removed soon after and more stably ETFs have been around
since 1993, but they started being used significantly about a decade later. An ETF is
an investment fund, a pooled investment instrument tracking usually a stock or bond
index. They usually hold different assets classes such as bonds, currencies, commodi-
ties, and stocks. They allow to get a diversified exposure to a specific or several areas
of the market. Nowadays, the net assets held by ETFs are worth approximately 1.7
trillion USD in the United States. The market includes several types of ETF prod-
ucts. Some of them are: fixed-income ETFs, actively managed equity-based ETFs,
index ETFs, currencies ETFs, sector ETFs, leveraged and inverse ETFs. They are a
good alternative for a variety of investors types. Spanning from the small investor
==PAGE:58==
42
4 Results and Discussion
holding a small investment portfolio and capital to large investors or funds with huge
amount of capital under management, ETFs could be a good solution to meet their
goals and objectives. There are several advantages of ETFs over other types of invest-
ment products or vehicles such as Mutual Funds. ETFs are generally less expensive.
They exclude manager’s high remunerations and the investor need to pay brokerage
platforms fees only.
ETFs provide a way to achieve diversification. In fact, most ETFs do not concentrate
their exposure to one specific company or sector, but rather they ensure that investors
will not suffer from movements in either a specific asset or sector.
Another advantage is that ETFs do not require large principals, contrarily to mu-
tual funds. Investors can buy or sell as much share as they will directly from any
brokerage account exactly as one does with a single stock or bond. Moreover, ETFs
trading is allow in all the hours in which the market is open. Conversely to some
strict policies characterizing mutual funds, ETFs give investor much more freedom in
the investment strategies. For example, one can short sell or buy on margin. Those
are some of the reasons why ETFs constitute a valid alternative to investors, which
can exploit several sectors of the market in a transparent and flexible way. In this
thesis, we will deal with an investment universe of numerous ETFs, with different
Launch dates, underlying indexes and several other features.
4.3
Screening of the Data and Analysis Preferences
The Data contains historical data for more than 1900 ETFs with histories going back
up to 18 years. However, the presence of ETFs at that time was very modest, meaning
that investors had very few funds to select. The historical data provides all the ad-
justed close prices in the period in consideration. Moreover, we also used a database
containing all the information regarding each of the ETFs as in table 4.1.
Additionally, the project dataseries starts at the end of 2004 and goes until the be-
ginning of 2017. A related point to consider is that several relevant financial events
occurred in this time period, which could affect significantly the performance of the
different financial models.
As a measure of performance, it will be interesting to
analyze how the portfolios perform during these significant occurrences.
For example, the financial crisis of 2008 appears to be the worst financial crisis doc-
umented during the existence of markets. The main causes of the latter were the
explosion of the housing bubble and later the crisis related to the subprime mortgage
market in the United States. Successively, it rapidly turned into an international
banking crisis. Extreme risk-taking by investment banks such as Lehman Brothers
contributed to aggravate the financial impact worldwide. Obviously, the markets and
the real estate dropped globally. It is worth mentioning that, for example, the Dow
Jones Industrial Average index rose at a peak of approximately 14,000 points around
October 2007. Later, it started an extreme decline through 2008.
For this reason, since the market saw a global decline, it will be really hard to expect
==PAGE:59==
4.4 Hierarchical Clustering
43
good performances during the crisis. However, we will see how the portfolio react to
the event and how they recover in the successive time periods.
ETFs characteristics
Fund
Goegraphy
Launch Date
Category
Economic Development
Focus
Issuer
Niche
Segment
Inverse
Expense Ratio
Leveraged
Assets under management
Selection criteria
Leveraged factor
Weighting scheme
Average daily dollar volume
Underlying Index
Average daily share volume
Brand
Fund Closure Risk
Legal structure
Dividend Yield
Max Lt capital gains rate
Fixed Income credit quality
Max St capital gains rate
Asset class
Tax reporting
Region
Table 4.1: Characteristics of the Investment Universe
4.4
Hierarchical Clustering
Correlation between assets is used as a measurement of how they move in relation to
one another. Due to the purpose of reducing the overall risk in an investment portfo-
lio, it is highly recommended to invest in asset combinations that are not correlated.
This means that the assets do not tend to move in the same way at the same time.
One should bear in mind that the correlation may change over time. Though it is
nearly impossible to find true non-correlated assets, we can select the subset of assets
which have the lowest correlation to each other.
The first step in the portfolio construction is to find a way to pick the assets to invest
in. Several authors proposed different ways to shrink the investment universe to few
assets to include in the portfolio. It is well known that several different biases affect
the portfolio manager in the logic used to pick the assets. For instance, some stud-
ies showed that people tend to give more weight to unusual events in their decision
making process. This is the reason why many people invest money in games, such
as lotteries, even if the possibility of win is really small. Moreover, there are many
behavioral economic theory claiming that the choice of the investor is deviated, due
to the influence of some biases. One of them is the prospect theory which claim that
people make their decisions based on the prospective value of gains and losses, instead
of considering the final outcome. Status quo bias is another theory which states that
==PAGE:60==
44
4 Results and Discussion
investor show reluctance to change their portfolio despite evidence supporting that
change. Herding, instead, is the tendency of investors to buy when everyone else buys
or when share price is ricing.
As a result of the above mentioned biases and the many others which impact the
decision-making of investors, a quantitative and objective process to choose invest-
ments is crucial to lower biases in perception and reduce risk maximizing returns.
One way to diversify the risk of the portfolio is by choosing assets that differ from
each other with respect to a particular feature about them. The latter could be re-
lated to country, type of asset, industry, size or more. Take, for instance, the case
of two stocks belonging to the same industry. They may move together in the same
direction. Furthermore, two Asian stocks could move together whereas a European
stock could be moving in a different way. Nonetheless, several relationships and con-
nections among assets can be found, resulting in a concern for the investor in a crisis
or a black swan. It is impossible to identify a general and valid mechanism which
all investors could use to diversify their portfolios. In fact, the behavioural biases
represent still a decisive factor over investment process and decision. Therefore, an
automated procedure to find similarities among assets would be very advantageous
and could definitely lower the bias included in the investment decision-making. The
general idea is to classify stocks in several clusters such that the similarity within the
cluster is the greatest and conversely the similarity between clusters the lowest. In
this way the investor could easily use an objective and quantitative method to find
the right mix of assets to include in the portfolio.
Clustering analysis is a fruitful instrument to segment vast data sets into an arbitrary
number of groups in light of their characteristics. The approach is frequently used in
statistical data analysis, classification and pattern recognition. Clustering methods
could likewise be effective procedures for choosing optimal assets. Cluster analysis
is not identified with one exact algorithm, but rather with the general problem to
be solved. It can be accomplished by several methods that vary according to their
perception of what should be included in a cluster and in which accurate way they
should be created. Obviously, the relevant clustering method and the definition of
the parameters, such as the opportune distance function or the number of desired
clusters, depend on the shape of the data set and on the results that one wants to
achieve. Therefore, cluster analysis is considered an iterative mechanism, in which
most of the times it is indispensable to modify the pre-processing of the data and the
setting of the parameters in a way that the outcomes have specific properties.
As of late, cluster analysis has emerged as a standout amongst the most contemporary
strategies in portfolio theory, as an investigation strategy that re-organize data-sets
in smaller similar clusters.
Connectivity-based clustering, also called Hierarchical clustering, is an important
method in cluster analysis where the data is recursively divided into clusters of con-
secutively smaller dimension. Typically, this procedure is represented with a rooted
trees where the root identify the entire data set, the leaves contain single data points
and the nodes in between correspond to a cluster of its descendant leaves. This graph
is known as dendrogram and it represents several possible clustering of the data at
==PAGE:61==
4.4 Hierarchical Clustering
45
various levels of granularity, or at different numbers of desired clusters. Thus, each
pruning of the hierarchical tree corresponds to a feasible clustering. The most popular
and useful algorithms for hierarchical clustering follow the bottom-up agglomerative
approach. Some of them are: single linkage, average linkage and complete linkage.
From this point we will walk the reader in a mathematical formulation of the model.
Suppose we are dealing with a population of n stocks from a particular investment
universe. If we denote with Pi(t) the adjusted closing price for the i −th stock at
time period t, with t = 1, . . . , T. We express the daily returns of the i stock as:
Ri(t) = Pi(t) −Pi(t −1)
Pi(t −1)
=
Pi(t)
Pi(t −1) −1.
(4.1)
Note that the transformation in equation 4.1 is crucial to achieve the weak stationary
of the time series we are considering in the process.
The data will then be:
R1(1), . . . , R1(T)
...
Rn(1), . . . , Rn(T).
In order to give a quantity to the similarity between the evolution of the returns over
time of a pair of stocks i and j, it is necessary to define the measure of correlation:
ρij = cov(Ri, Rj)
σRiσRj
(4.2)
and the correlation matrix C = (ρij)i,j=1,2,...,n which is symmetric and with a unit
diagonal.
In 1999 Mantegna [Man99] claimed that the correlation matrix is suitable to discover
hierarchical organization for a portfolio of assets. Moreover, in order to construct a
similarity between assets, it is needed to define a distance metric that we will denote
by Dij. We will use the one proposed by Mantegna [Man99], which has become really
popular in economic network. The distance is defined as:
Di,j =
√
2(1 −ρij)
(4.3)
where ρij is the correlation defined in equation 4.2.
Once defined the distance measure, we have to choose the linkage criteria to merge
the cluster in the bottom-up approach. There are several possible methods to use in
the algorithm such as:
- Complete (Maximum) Linkage defined as D(I, J) = max{Di,j | Ri ∈I, Rj ∈J}
- Single (Minimum) Linkage defined as D(I, J) = min{Di,j | Ri ∈I, Rj ∈J}
==PAGE:62==
46
4 Results and Discussion
- Average Linkage defined as D(I, J) =
1
card(I)card(J)
∑
i∈I
∑
j∈J Di,j
where card(X) indicates the cardinality (number of elements) of cluster X.
In the following figure 4.1 a representation of the three linkage functions is provided.
Figure 4.1: Three popular linkage functions
In the project we decided to use the complete linkage since the method was pro-
viding a more balanced dendrogram with a clearer separation of the clusters.
4.5
Clustering Results
In this section the results of the clustering are presented. In this project 15 different
ETFs are selected from the universe to build the portfolio. The steps of the method
we explained in the previous section are described as follows:
1. Eliminate all the ETFs without enough historical data for the data period in
consideration;
2. Apply the Hierarchical clustering to the remaining assets;
3. Cut the dendrogram at the desired level N.
In this project we decided to
include N = 15 ETFs in the portfolio. Thus from the cut of the tree we obtain
N different clusters;
4. From each cluster pick the best with respect to a defined metric. In the project
we used the Sharpe Ratio as an indicator of good performance.
The same procedure can be generalized from ETFs to individual bonds, stocks, cur-
rencies and many others. In the project we only include ETFs.
In figure 4.2 we show with a pie-chart the size of all the clusters generated from the
model. Obviously, there are three main clusters which contain almost 75% of the to-
tal assets. This is due to the fact that generally assets are highly correlated and thus
they tend to move in the same direction. However, we still obtain a differentiation
between the other clusters. For this reason, the portfolio should be less sensitive to
change in the market movement, resulting in a highly diversified collection of assets.
In the second pie-chart 4.5, we show the proportion of the asset class included in the
portfolio. We can see that almost 70% of the assets are equity ETFs, approximately
==PAGE:63==
4.5 Clustering Results
47
25% are fixed income ETFs and a remaining 5% are currencies ETFs.
Figure 4.2: Pie-Chart of the size of the clusters
In the third pie-chart 4.3, we show the Geography of the ETFs selected by the
clustering algorithm. It is worth to note that a large part of the portfolio is U.S. ETFs
and the remaining 30% is distributed among Global, Malaysia and Switzerland.
In figure 4.4 the Asset Prices of the ETFs selected by the clustering are shown.
Note that there is a common upward trend and few of the assets with low prices are
almost constant through time. In figure B.1, we show how the hierarchical clustering
separate the data into clusters, with a bottom up approach. In the bottom line each
asset forms a cluster. Going up in the tree, clusters are merged following the linkage
measure explained before.
Finally, in table 4.2 we provide a list including the tickers, the asset class, the geog-
raphy and the focus of all the ETFs we chose.
==PAGE:64==
48
4 Results and Discussion
Figure 4.3: Geography of the selected ETFs
Figure 4.4: Prices of the selected ETFs
==PAGE:65==
4.5 Clustering Results
49
Symbol
Asset Class
Geography
Focus
1
AGG
Fixed Income
U.S.
Investment Grade
2
BBH
Equity
Global
Health Care
3
EWL
Equity
Switzerland
Total Market
4
EWM
Equity
Malaysia
Total Market
5
FVD
Equity
U.S.
High Dividend Yield
6
GLD
Commodities
Global
Gold
7
IEF
Fixed Income
U.S.
Treasury
8
LQD
Fixed Income
U.S.
Investment Grade
9
QQQ
Equity
U.S.
Large Cap
10
SHY
Fixed Income
U.S.
Treasury
11
TUSA
Equity
U.S.
Total Market
12
VAW
Equity
U.S.
Basic Materials
13
VDC
Equity
U.S.
Consumer Non-cyclicals
14
VNQ
Equity
U.S.
Real Estate
15
VPU
Equity
U.S.
Utilities
Table 4.2: Characteristics of selected ETFs
Ann. Retur
Ann. Std Dev
Ann. Sharpe (Rf=0%)
AGG
0.040
0.049
0.814
BBH
0.163
0.223
0.732
EWL
0.088
0.211
0.420
EWM
0.084
0.218
0.387
FVD
0.109
0.170
0.640
GLD
0.095
0.195
0.486
IEF
0.049
0.069
0.708
LQD
0.051
0.082
0.624
QQQ
0.118
0.205
0.579
SHY
0.021
0.0140
1.504
TUSA
0.057
0.196
0.292
VAW
0.105
0.254
0.415
VDC
0.105
0.1363
0.770
VNQ
0.132
0.334
0.395
VPU
0.100
0.177
0.563
Table 4.3: Annualized statistics of the ETFs in the portfolio
==PAGE:66==
50
4 Results and Discussion
Figure 4.5: Asset classes of the selected ETFs
4.6
Estimation of Returns and Covariance Matrices
with Fama-French
This sections focuses on the estimation of the expected return and covariance matrix
for the assets selected from the previous algorithm. Using the Fama-French method
presented in chapter 2 and performing a multiple linear regression we obtain the ex-
pected return, over the risk free rate, for all the assets included in the portfolio.
Note that, contrarily to the usual Reverse Optimization used in the Black-Litterman,
we could not make use of the market capitalization portfolio since the Market Cap-
italization is not defined for all the ETFs included in the universe. For this reason,
we decided to estimate the Prior Equilibrium Returns using the three factors model,
which should provide a better estimation compared to the the sample mean and co-
variance matrix estimators. Even though the ETFs have a different geography, we
discovered that the correlation coefficient between SPY and the median of the ETFs
is approximately 96%. Thus it is meaningful to use the Fama-French model since we
observed a high relationship between the returns of the ETFs and SPY which tracks
a market-cap-weighted index of US large and midcap stocks.
==PAGE:67==
4.7 Prediction of the views with RNNs
51
4.7
Prediction of the views with RNNs
The major task of the project was to find an estimate of the optimal market views.
Once calculated the time series of the views inverting the Black-Litterman formula,
we trained a Recurrent Neural Network with LSTM. To this purpose, we need to
explain how we processed the data in order to train the model.
First of all, we present the data setup. The shape of the tensor should be:
- The predictors (X) must be a 3D Array (tensor) with dimensions [samples,
timesteps, features], where the first dimension is the length of values, the second
is the number of time steps or lags, and the third is the number of predictors
(1 if univariate or n if multivariate) as in figure 4.6.
- The outcomes or targets (y) must be a 2D Array with dimensions [samples,
timesteps], where the first dimension is the length of values and the second is
the number of time steps or lags.
Moreover, we needed to define some paramters to use in the model. Respectively:
- Batch Size, which is the number of training examples in one forward/backward
pass of a RNN before a weight update. We used a batchsize = 1;
- Timestep, which is the number of lags included in the training/testing set. We
used timesteps = 10;
- Epochs, which are the total number of forward/backward pass iterations. We
used numberepochs = 5.
We then built an LSTM model using the keras_model_sequential() from the keras
R package, adding layers like stacking bricks. We used two LSTM layers. Each of
them with 50 units. The first LSTM layer is given the required input shape, which
is in the form [timesteps, number of features].Furthermore, we set the first layer to
return_sequences = TRUE and stateful = TRUE since we are providing one slide
of the tensor each time. The second layer is the same as the first with the exception of
return_sequences = FALSE which does not return the time stamp dimension and
thus a 2D tensor is returned instead of a 3D output from the previous LSTM. We used
a final layer layer_dense(units = 15), which is the standard final layer in a keras
sequential model and which corresponds to the desired output. Since we are dealing
with a regression problem, we used in the final layer a linear activation function.
Finally, we compile() using as loss = ”meansquarederrors” and the optimizer =
”rmsprop”.
The summary of the model is depicted in table 4.4, with the number of trainable
parameters in the model.
In the last step we used the predict() function to calculate the predictions based on
the above architecture.
Regarding the features space, we decided to use for each of the ETFs the time series
==PAGE:68==
52
4 Results and Discussion
of the returns and volumes over the period. Since the range of the values of the
two features are really different, we needed to standardize the data, by windows,
subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation. However, several more
features can be added to the model to improve the power of the predictions, such as
a moving average of the prices and a sentiment score. The latter is obtained by the
analysis through Natural Language Processing of chat between traders and tweets
by influential people. The only modification of the model would be to extend the
third dimension of the tensor, adding for each of the asset in the portfolio the other
features one wants to include to improve the predictions.
Figure 4.6: Structure of the predictors tensor used in the RNN with LSTM
Layer (type)
Output Shape
Param #
lstm_15 (LSTM)
(1, 10, 50)
16200
lstm_16 (LSTM)
(1, 50)
20200
dense_9 (Dense)
(1, 15)
765
Total params: 37,165
Trainable params: 37,165
Non-trainable params: 0
Table 4.4: Summary of the constructed RNN with LSTM units
==PAGE:69==
4.8 Rolling Windows approach
53
4.8
Rolling Windows approach
In this project we want to study the performance of each of the previous discussed
portfolios across various data sets. The analysis is based on a rolling sample approach.
The latter consists in the estimation of a series of out-of-sample portfolio returns by
using a rolling estimation window. More specifically, considering a N-days long data
set of asset returns, the estimation window length in our project is M = 754 days or
3 years, going from 2005 to 2008. To understand the method, one iteration of the
rolling sample approach is summarized as follows:
1. Beginning at time t = M, all the parameters needed for each of the portfolio
strategies over the estimation window of the M previous months are estimated.
Consider, for example, the GMV portfolio. In this step we obtain an estimation
of the variance-covariance matrix on excess returns and the expected returns
over the previous 754 days;
2. The second step includes the research of the solution to the constrained opti-
mization problem for each of the portfolio strategies used in this project;
3. The last step consists in the computation of the portfolio return in period t,
using the optimal set of asset weights obtained at the previous time t−1.
The above presented rolling window approach basically requires adding the return
for the next day in the data set and dropping the previous return, in order to keep
the estimation window length fixed, which in our case is 754 days. Considering, for
instance, the second iteration, the estimation window would consists of data going
from t = 2 to t = 755. The process is repeated until the last day available in the data.
The estimated covariance matrices ˆΣ and expected return ˆµ are used to construct
the portfolios following each portfolio’s optimization method making use of the data
until day t −1. On the other hand, the weights, calculated from the parameters
estimation, are used to calculate the return for each portfolio at time t. Finally, it
is worth mentioning also the portfolio rebalancing which is crucial since it allows
the investor to keep their targeted asset allocation through time. Furthermore, the
periodic rebalancing is a way to decrease portfolio drifts, and also to theoretically
minimize the exposure to risk relative to the target asset allocation. In this project,
we used monthly rebalancing in order to avoid this potential problem.
4.9
Benchmark
In the following section we present all the strategies used to benchmark our target
asset allocation, namely the Black-Litterman model with LSTM predictions.
==PAGE:70==
54
4 Results and Discussion
4.9.1
Naive Equal-Weighted Portfolio
The
1
N investment strategy, also called naive diversification, simply implies allocat-
ing the capital equally among all available investment assets in the portfolio. In our
project, the strategy is implemented by allocating the wealth, which is supposed to be
initially 1000, equally over the different ETFs selected with the clustering algorithm.
The naive strategy is a frequently used approach which has been broadly investigated
by academic research and sometimes it shows really good performance compared to
other more complex strategies. In fact, in opposition to several other sophisticated
and articulated modern portfolio strategies, which construct allocations based mainly
on an appropriate trade off between the investment return and risk, the
1
N strategy
is the most intuitive and straightforward strategy which does not need hard mathe-
matical computations and estimations.
Due to its outstanding simplicity and immediacy, the naive allocation strategy may
perform particularly well. As a matter of fact, in some cases the above strategy can
outperform several articulated models. This has its cause in the obstacle of retrieving
enough accurate data and also in the difficulty in estimating the parameters utilized
in the mathematical models.
4.9.2
Mean-Variance Maximum Sharpe portfolio
The following strategy is the traditional Markowitz optimal portfolio which optimizes
the Sharpe ratio, a measure which we will describe later in the chapter. We used as
inputs both the covariance matrix and the expected returns obtained from the Fama-
French three factors model.
As discussed before, they are estimated on a rolling
window of length 3 years or 754 days. Moreover, since the unconstrained problem
returns extreme weights for a large portion of the investment period, we decided to
use a constrained version in order not to obtain a portfolio concentrated in a single
asset. Following the approach by [LL14] this modification restricts the weights of the
individual ETFs in the range:
wi ≥0
and
wi ≤1
N + alpha_const
∀i,
(4.4)
where we set alpha_const to be 0.3. It means that the portfolio will tilt from the
naive diversification at most by 30%.
Even if the constrained version could prevent a theoretical optimal portfolio, the
diversification will persist and we will avoid obtaining a single asset portfolio which
would be highly volatile.
4.9.3
Global Minimum Variance portfolio
As a third benchmark we decided to use the Global Minimum Variance portfolio. The
latter is obtained by minimizing the overall risk of the portfolio. Along the minimum-
variance efficient frontier, the point which is on the left of the graph is a portfolio
==PAGE:71==
4.10 Performance Metrics
55
with minimum variance compared to all possible portfolios of risky assets. This is
also known as the global minimum-variance portfolio. Investors can not obtain a
portfolio of risky assets with a lower risk than the GMV. As in the maximum sharpe
ratio portfolio we keep the restrictions for the weights. It results in finding a solution
to the problem:
min
n
∑
i=1
wiσ2
i +
n
∑
i=1
n
∑
j=1i̸=j
wiwjσij
s.t.
n
∑
i=1
wi = 1
wi ≥0
wi ≤1
N + alpha_const
∀i.
(4.5)
The model will be later compared to the strategies presented so far, noting that it
will be most likely the one with the lowest variance.
Moreover, another portfolio, as discussed in [DeM+13], will be the Global Minimum
Variance, setting all the correlations equal to 0 such that the covariance matrix only
contains the estimates of the variances of the assets. To this manner note that the
estimated covariance matrix ˆΣ can be decomposed in:
ˆΣ = diag(ˆσ) ˆΩdiag(ˆσ)
(4.6)
where diag(ˆσ) is the diagonal matrix containing the volatilities of the assets and ˆΩ
is the correlation matrix.
4.10
Performance Metrics
Diversified metrics have been proposed throughout the years to evaluate the perfor-
mance of a certain portfolio. We report some of them in the following sections.
4.10.1
Sharpe-Ratio
The first performance metric, broadly used in the financial world, is the Sharpe Ratio.
It is derived from Modern Portfolio Theory and the CAPM discussed in chapter 1.
The measure was proposed by Sharpe in 1966 as the reward to variability ratio. It is
a statistic which measures the expected excess return of an investment over the risk
free asset in relation to its risk which is measured by its estimated standard deviation.
Formally, it is defined as:
SRP = RP −Rf
σP
.
(4.7)
Note that a higher Sharpe ratio implies superior performance and thus a superior
rank given a set of different investments.
==PAGE:72==
56
4 Results and Discussion
Nevertheless, it is important to observe that since returns and standard deviations
of returns are statistical measures that need to be estimated in same way, the sharpe
ratio is therefore subject of estimation errors. To this manner, to use the ratio as a
measure to compare strategies, these estimation errors should be considered. Several
researches stress that time series properties, such as the momentum of the returns,
could have a high influence on the Sharpe ratio and therefore they could be cause of
distortion.
4.10.2
Maximum Drawdown
In this section we introduce a valuable measure of the risk of the strategy constructed.
Given the time series of daily out-of-sample excess returns generated by each portfolio
strategy, the portfolio maximum drawdown (MDD) can be calculated. The MDD is
defined, in a formal way as follows.
Let X = (X(t), t ≥0) be a random process with X(0) = 0, the drawdown at time t
is:
D(T) = max
{
0, max
t∈(0,T ) X(t) −X(T)
}
.
(4.8)
The the Maximum Drawdown until time T is the maximum of the Drawdown over
the period of the stochastic variable, or:
MMD(T) = max
τ∈(0,T )
[
max
t∈(0,τ) X(t) −X(τ)
]
.
(4.9)
4.11
Wealth evolution
Assuming an initial investment of 1000$ we backtested the performances of the differ-
ent strategies in the period going from 2008 to 2017. The results are shown in figure
4.7. The BL model and the BL DIAG, which is model using as covariance matrix the
diagonal matrix of the estimated covariance matrix (this assuming the covariances
are zero) are the best performing among the six different strategies. On the other
hand, during the financial crisis they show the biggest drops. As expected, the GMV
portfolio shows a stable pattern through time, and a little drop during the financial
crisis. Moreover, the mean variance model also shows a quite stable performance and
a reasonable drop during 2008. This could be motivated by the fact that it allocates
more weight to assets with the least negative returns, which maybe corresponded
allocating more wealth to fixed income ETFs compared to equity ETFs.
Surprisingly, the naive diversification strategy overperform the MV. On the other
hand the price is a higher volatility through time compared to both the MV and the
GMV.
All the annualized statistics, comprising the return, the standard deviation and the
sharpe ratio have been calculated and are shown in table 4.5. The highest returns
are of the Equal Weights and Black-Litterman model. However, the highest sharpe
==PAGE:73==
4.11 Wealth evolution
57
ratio corresponds to the Black Litterman Global Minimum Variance portfolio. Even
though it has a lower return, the variance is very low and thus it results in a high
sharpe ratio. From this results, one could argue that the variance of the best perform-
ing model is too high for a risk averse investor. For this reason in the last chapter we
provide some suggestions to lower the risk related to this strategy. One could be the
one proposed as the GMV BL, which obviously has lower return since it corresponds
to the bottom point in the efficient frontier.
Figure 4.7: Wealth comparison of the strategies
In figure 4.8, the drawdowns related to the 6 different strategies are shown. Look-
ing at the figure, one could argue that the BL portfolio and the BL DIAG portfolio are
risky portfolios whereas the four remaining are more prudent portfolios. Especially
during the market crisis, such as the failure of Lehman Brothers during the financial
crisis in 2008, the two portfolios suffered extreme losses.
As expected, risk-based
portfolios lead to portfolios with significant higher diversification, and lower losses in
cases where the market suffered. BL and BL DIAG generally show a similar pattern
since the only difference in their construction is the assumption that the covariances
==PAGE:74==
58
4 Results and Discussion
Ann. Return
Ann. Std Dev
Ann. Sharpe (Rf=0%)
MV
0.04
0.06
0.66
BL_LSTM
0.08
0.28
0.29
EW
0.08
0.12
0.65
GMV
0.03
0.06
0.59
BL_GMV_LSTM
0.04
0.05
0.72
BL_DIAG_LSTM
0.09
0.27
0.32
Table 4.5: Annualized performance of the strategies
among assets are zero.
Figure 4.8: Drawdown of the strategies
In figure 4.9, the return distribution can be seen as a boxplot. It allows to see how
the returns are volatile around the mean value and where the mean value for each
strategy stands. Again we can see that the two most risk portfolios are the BL and
BL_DIAG which generally have several observations far from the mean value. The
BL_GMV shows the lowest variance among the models and at the same time also
==PAGE:75==
4.11 Wealth evolution
59
returns are really low. In the middle we can see that the equal weights allocation
shows a performance in between the other strategies with a reasonable percentage of
returns and associated risk. Nevertheless, the behaviour may be deviated from the
asset included in the portfolio and it could perform really bad using different ETFs
since it just provides a naive allocation.
Figure 4.9: Boxplot of the Returns Distribution
In figures 4.10 the Value-at-Risk and Expected Shortfall estimates by confidence
interval are shown in the subfigures. You can see that increasing the confidence level,
also the expected losses by the models increase. The VaR is defined as the maximum
possible loss during the time in consideration if we exclude worse outcomes whose
probability is less than a certain value p which is 1 −conﬁdencelevel. On the other
hand, the Expected Shortfall is the expected loss during a period, conditional that
the loss is greater than the Var percentile of the loss distribution.
==PAGE:76==
60
4 Results and Discussion
(a) Mean-Variance
(b) Equal Weights
(c) Bl with LSTM
(d) BL diagonal covariance matrix LSTM
(e) BL GMV
Figure 4.10: Value-at-Risk and Expected Shortfall estimates by confidence interval
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
5.1
Conclusion and Discussion
To sum up, this thesis contributes to the field mainly in two measures, working toward
two central objectives. First of all, we carried out a survey of the existing approaches
and modifications of the Black-Litterman model, starting from the original model
toward the most recent alternatives proposed. Additionally, we focused on a formu-
lation and modification of the model which expresses any set of independent relative
and absolute views as a non-singular absolute view matrix. This is crucial to allow
the investor to build a mathematical model which may predict the optimal views to
include in the prior.
To this manner, the project propose an overview of existing approaches for time se-
ries prediction using machine learning, focusing mainly on Neural Networks and their
several modifications.
In the second place, Recurrent Neural Networks with Long-Short Term Memory cells
were implemented empirically to predict the optimal market views to utilize in the
Black and Litterman formula. The performance was evaluated, comparing the ap-
proach with several well known asset allocation strategies.
Long-Short term Memory networks appear to have really good performance during
bullish market compared to the benchmark strategies, and underperform during bear-
ish market because the predicted views shift the portfolio towards some specific assets
which may have had really bad performances during the crisis. Moreover, through
the analysis we found that these model could reveal themselves really successful in
the field of time series prediction since they allow to take into account information
from both the recent and the past. In fact, the strategy with the highest sharpe ratio
is the portfolio constructed with the Black Litterman model and more specifically the
Global Minimum Variance Portfolio.
With portfolio theory moving forward during the last 50 years, new problems arose
and smart investment strategies could generate high profit for investors. Additionally,
the efficient estimation of a large number of inputs and the issue that little changes
in these inputs could lead to considerably different allocation, makes the implemen-
tation of mean-variance analysis not really convenient and beneficial.
The results of this thesis emphasize some important challenges in portfolio allocation.
In the first place, one needs to develop new and intelligent asset allocation schemes to
define its portfolio strategies. In the second place, it is crucial to find accurate mea-
==PAGE:78==
62
5 Conclusion
sures for these models to carefully assess the results. Since asset allocation develop
constantly, obviously also the markets are affected by the new strategies and invest-
ment policies. For this reason, it is still challenging to find a general optimal model
that can be used by investors. Therefore, financial asset allocation will constantly
attract the interest of both academia and practitioners.
5.2
Future Work
As a result of the limited time and availability of data, several points could be in-
vestigated more in detail in the future. First of all, the first step in the portfolio
construction, i.e.
the clustering algorithm could be exploited exploring the cross-
correlation between the time series of the assets returns.
It may help to capture
the displacement of one relative to the other in a way that the two assets will be
included in the same cluster. More importantly, the RNN with LSTM could be heav-
ily improved by adding more features in the predictors space. As an example, one
could consider to add in the asset prices series a term capturing the moving average.
Moreover, it would be valuable to consider several other scores as features such as a
sentiment score or financial ratios.
Finally, since the main challenge is to predict the optimal market views to include in
the Black-Litterman model, some others time series prediction method could be ap-
plied to the problem. For example, it would be intersting to develop ARIMA models
or a different machine learning technique such as elastic net.
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX A
Appendix to Chapter 2
A.1
Compatibility of Independent Views
It holds that any set of independent views are compatible. Indeed, by contradiction,
assume that there exists a pair of incompatible views {p; q} and {p; q′}, with q ̸= q′.
Both views can be derived from a set of k views, and so there exist two different linear
combinations, such that:
k
∑
i=1
aipi = p
k
∑
i=1
aiqi = q
k
∑
i=1
bipi = p
k
∑
i=1
biq′
i = q′
where (ai −bi) are not all zeroes.
Hence, we have
k
∑
i=1
(ai −bi)pi = 0,
which means that the k views are not independent and this contradicts the hypothe-
sis.
A.2
Universality of Absolute View Matrix
It holds that any set of independent relative and absolute views can be expressed
with a non-singular absolute view matrix.
We can assume a matrix P with r relative views and (k −r) absolute views:
Pk,n =


p1,1
p1,2
. . .
p1,n
...
...
...
...
pr,1
pr,2
. . .
pr,n
...
...
...
...
pk,1
pk,2
. . .
pk,n


.
==PAGE:80==
64
A Appendix to Chapter 2
The corresponding return vector is Q = (q1; q2; . . . ; qk), the capital weight vector for
assets is w = (w1; w2; . . . ; wk). Hence, we can write (r + 1) equations with regard to
r new variables q′
1, q′
2, . . . , q′
r where j = 1, . . . , r:
1 + q′
j =
r
∑
i̸=j
(1 + q′
i)
wi
∑
s̸=j ws
(1 + qj)
r
∑
i=1
q′
iwi +
k
∑
i=r+1
qiwi = Qw⊤.
If we consider {assetr+1 . . . assetk} to be one asset, return of this asset is decided
by Pr,n. Hence, r out of the (r + 1) equations above are independent. According to
Cramer’s rule, there exists a unique solution Q′ = (q′
1, ; q′
2; . . . ; q′
r; qr+1; . . . ; qk) to the
aforementioned (r + 1) equations, such that view matrices {P ′; Q′} is equivalent to
view matrices {P; Q} for all the assets considered, where
P ′
k,n =


1
0
. . .
0
...
...
...
...
0
pr,r = 1
. . .
0
...
...
...
...
pk,1
pk,2
. . .
pk,n


.
Now, P ′
k,n only consists of absolute views. By deleting dependent views, we can have
a non-singular matrix that only consists of absolute views and is compatible.
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX B
Appendix to Chapter 4
B.1
Images
B.2
Code
1 library(data.table)
2 library(keras)
3 #install_keras()
4 library(tidyr)
5 library(readr)
6 library(glue)
7 library(dplyr)
8 library(lubridate)
9 library(quantmod)
10 library(CVXR)
11 library(ggplot2)
12 library(MASS)
13 library(PerformanceAnalytics)
14 library(xtable)
15 library(plot3D)
16 library(reshape2)
17 library(plotly)
18 library(PortfolioAnalytics)
19 library(quantmod)
20 library(PerformanceAnalytics)
21 library(zoo)
22
23 options(scipen=999)
24 rm(list = ls())
25
26
27 ####
Functions
####
28 # Calculate Continous Returns
29 stand <- function(x){
30
for(i in 1:30){
31
x[,,i] = t(scale(t(x[,,i])))
32
33
}
34
return(x)
35 }
36 # Calculate Returns
==PAGE:82==
66
B Appendix to Chapter 4
37 returnsCalc <- function(x){
38
diff(x)/x[-length(x)]
39 }
40 # Calculate Geometric Average of returns
41 geomAveCalc <- function(x){
42
(prod((1+x)))^(1/length(x))-1
43 }
44 # Calculate Returns from 1 period to last
45 totReturnsCalc <- function(x){
46
(x[length(x)]-x[1]) / x[1]
47 }
48 # Calculate Sharpe-Ratio
49 sharpeRatioCalc <- function(x){
50
geomAveCalc(x) / sd(x)*sqrt(250)
51 }
52
53
54
55
56 #### Import the data ####
57 his = unzip("/Users/Davide/Desktop/kouroshHist.csv.zip")
58 ds <- fread(his[1])
59 ## Cleaning ##
60 ds <- subset(ds, !(ds$date == "2015-11-26") & !(ds$date == "2015-12-25") & !
(ds$date == "2015-07-03") & !(ds$date == "2015-09-07"))
61
62
63
64
65 # Import database characteristics #
66 meta <- unzip("/Users/Davide/Desktop/kouroshMeta.csv.zip")
67 meta_data <- fread(meta[1])
68
69 # Calculate Daily Returns
70 lag.f <- function(x,a) c(rep(NA,a),head(x,length(x) - a))
71
72 setkey(ds,"symbol")
73
74 ds.ret <- ds[,list(date,ret = adjusted_close/lag.f(adjusted_close ,1) - 1 ),
by = key(ds)]
75 ds.ret <- ds.ret[!ds.ret$ret == Inf,] # there are zeroes in the data
76 #ds.ret$date <- strptime(ds.ret$date, "%Y-%m-%d")
77
78 #### Cleaning of the outliers ####
79 badetf <- c('ADRU','ADRD','PEY','SLYV','ADRA','ICF','SPYV','SST','PSI','FTY'
,'BSCP', 'IPN','BFIT','UMK','ILB','USSD', 'TBZ','EZR','USWD','DOD','IMPL
', 'DIRT','PWC', 'SDP','IBDP','SMLL','ADRE','PEX','TLO', 'SMD','EMDV')
80 ds.ret <- ds.ret[!(ds.ret$symbol %in% badetf), ]
81 temp <- spread(ds.ret,key="symbol",value="ret")
82
83
84 new <- subset(temp,temp$date >= "2005-01-01" & temp$date < "2017-01-01")
85 test <- subset(temp,temp$date >= "2015-01-01" & temp$date < "2017-10-27")
86
87
==PAGE:83==
B.2 Code
67
88 # Exclude all ETF without enough history #
89 final <- subset(new, select=colMeans(is.na(new)) == 0)
90
91 #### Clustering ####
92 clustering <- list()
93 clustering$pearson <- cor(final[,-1], method = 'pearson')
94 clustering$spearman <- cor(final[,-1], method = 'spearman')
95
96
97 clustering$d1 <- as.dist(1-abs(clustering$spearman))^2
98 clustering$d2 <- as.dist(1-clustering$pearson)
99 clustering$d3 <- as.dist(abs(1-clustering$pearson))
100 clustering$d4 <- as.dist(sqrt(2*(1-clustering$pearson)))
101
102 met ='complete'
103 clustering$hc1 <- hclust(clustering$d4, method = met)
104 plot(clustering$hc1, labels = NULL, hang = 0.1, main = "Cluster dendrogram",
sub = NULL, xlab = NULL, ylab = "Height")
105
106 clustering$memb <- cutree(clustering$hc, k = 15)
107 finaldata <- final %>% gather(ETF, Ret, 2:ncol(final))
108
109
110
111
112
113 #### Clustering statistics ####
114
115
116 clustering$Gselect <- rep(0,15) # storage for sharpe ratio
117 clustering$Gselect2 <- rep(0,15) # storage for highest return
118 clustering$clustCount <- rep(0,15)
119
120 # Loop over the cluster and inside the clusters #
121
122 for(i in 1:15){
123
clustering$Gnames <- names(which(clustering$memb == i))
# the names of
the assets in clusters i
124
clustering$criteria <- rep(0,length(clustering$Gnames))# storage for the
selection criteria
125
clustering$criteria2 <- rep(0,length(clustering$Gnames))
126
clustering$clustCount[i] <- length(clustering$Gnames)
127
for(j in 1:length(clustering$Gnames)){
128
129
try <- subset(finaldata, finaldata$ETF == clustering$Gnames[j])
130
clustering$criteria[j] <- sharpeRatioCalc(try$Ret)
131
clustering$criteria2[j] <- geomAveCalc(try$Ret)
132
}
133
clustering$Gselect[i] <- clustering$Gnames[which(max(clustering$criteria)
== clustering$criteria)]
134
clustering$Gselect2[i] <- clustering$Gnames[which(max(clustering$criteria2
) == clustering$criteria2)]
135 }
136
137 chosenETFs <- clustering$Gselect
==PAGE:84==
68
B Appendix to Chapter 4
138 chosenETFs2 <- clustering$Gselect2
139
140 clustering$statsClust <- clustering$statsAll[which(clustering$statsAll$ETF %
in% clustering$Gselect),]
141
142
143
144 a <- finaldata[(finaldata$ETF %in% chosenETFs), ]
145 a <- spread(a,key="ETF",value="Ret",fill = NA)
146 back <- test %>% gather(ETF, Ret, 2:ncol(test))
147 backtest <- back[(back$ETF %in% chosenETFs), ]
148 backtest <- spread(backtest,key="ETF",value="Ret",fill = NA)
149
150 prova <- subset(a, a$date >= "2008-01-01" & a$date < "2015-01-01")
151 prova <- as.matrix(prova[,-1])
152 prova_test <- subset(a, a$date >= "2015-01-01" & a$date < "2017-01-01")
153 prova_test <- as.matrix(prova_test[,-1])
154 prova_tot <- rbind(prova,prova_test)
155
156
157 #### Plot of the Clustering Results ####
158 clustering$ClustSize <- data.frame(Cluster = sprintf("Clst%d", 1:15), Size =
clustering$clustCount)
159
160
161
162 bp <- ggplot(clustering$ClustSize, aes(x="", y=Size, fill=Cluster)) +
163
geom_bar(width = 1, stat = "identity") + coord_polar("y", start=0) + scale
_colour_gradientn(colours=rainbow(15)) +
164
theme_minimal() + ggtitle("Size of Clusters") +
165
theme(axis.text.x=element_blank(), axis.text.y=element_blank(), axis.title
.x=element_blank(),
166
axis.title.y=element_blank())
167 bp
168 pie(clustering$ClustSize$Size, labels=clustering$ClustSize$Cluster, col =
rainbow(15))
169
170
171
172
173 # Retrieve the characteristics for the chosen ETFs #
174 chara <- meta_data[(meta_data$symbol %in% chosenETFs), ]
175
176 assetClass <- as.data.frame(table(chara$assetClass))
177
178 bp1 <- ggplot(assetClass, aes(x="", y=Freq, fill=Var1)) +
179
geom_bar(width = 1, stat = "identity") + coord_polar("y", start=0) + scale
_colour_gradientn(colours=rainbow(15)) +
180
theme_minimal() + ggtitle("Asset Classes") +
181
theme(axis.text.x=element_blank(), axis.text.y=element_blank(), axis.title
.x=element_blank(),
182
axis.title.y=element_blank())
183 bp1
184
185 geography <- as.data.frame(table(chara$geography))
==PAGE:85==
B.2 Code
69
186
187 bp3 <- ggplot(geography, aes(x="", y=Freq, fill=Var1)) +
188
geom_bar(width = 1, stat = "identity") + coord_polar("y", start=0) + scale
_colour_gradientn(colours=rainbow(15)) +
189
theme_minimal() + ggtitle("Geography") +
190
theme(axis.text.x=element_blank(), axis.text.y=element_blank(), axis.title
.x=element_blank(),
191
axis.title.y=element_blank())
192
193 bp3
194
195
196 ####
FAMA-RENCH
####
197 ###
Calculate the expected returns using the Fama-French 3 factor
###
198 # Retrieve data for the 3 factors model #
199 # In this case is monthly data #
200 #temp <- tempfile()
201 #base <- "http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/ftp/"
202 #factor <- "Global_3_Factors"
203 #format<-"_CSV.zip"
204 #full_url <- glue(base,factor,format,sep ="")
205 #download.file(full_url,temp,quiet = TRUE)
206 #factors <- read_csv(unz(temp, "Global_3_Factors.csv"),
207 #
skip = 6) %>%
208 #
rename(date = X1) %>%
209 #
mutate_at(vars(-date), as.numeric) %>%
210 #
mutate(date =
211 #
ymd(parse_date_time(date, "%Y%m")))
212 #factors_new <- subset(factors,factors$date >= "2005-01-01" & factors$date <
"2009-01-01")
213
214 ## Daily data ##
215 fac <- read_csv("Downloads/F-F_Research_Data_Factors_daily.CSV", col_types =
cols(X1 = col_date(format = "%Y%m%d")), skip = 4)
216 fac_new <- subset(fac,fac$X1 >= "2005-01-01" & fac$X1 < "2017-01-01")
217
218 # Scale to decimal (shoul I scale or not?) #
219 fac_new <- fac_new[,2:5]/100
220
221
222 lookback <- sum(a$date >= "2005-01-01" & a$date < "2008-01-01")
223 tr <- sum(a$date >= "2008-01-01" & a$date < "2017-01-01")
224
225 weights_con <- matrix(0,nrow=15,ncol=nrow(a)-lookback)
226 Y <- matrix(0,nrow=15,ncol=nrow(a)-lookback)
227 pi = matrix(0,nrow=15,ncol=nrow(a)-lookback)
228 one_hot =matrix(0,nrow=15,ncol=tr)
229 values = c(rep(0,15))
230 B = matrix(0,nrow=15,ncol=3)
231 Omega_hist <- list()
232 Sigma_hist <- list()
233 return_con <- rep (0,nrow(a)-lookback)
234 risk_con <- rep(0,nrow(a)-lookback)
235 # Preparing the data #
==PAGE:86==
70
B Appendix to Chapter 4
236 # X should be a 3-d array with samples, time, and features # dim 1: Samples,
dim 2 Time, dim 3 Features * Number of ETFs#
237
238 prices <- ds[(ds$symbol %in% chosenETFs), ]
239 price <- prices[,list(date=prices$date,symbol=prices$symbol,adj=prices$
adjusted_close)]
240 price_tot <- subset(price, prices$date >= "2008-01-01" & prices$date < "
2017-01-01")
241 price_tot <- spread(price_tot,key="symbol",value=adj)
242 price_tot <- (as.matrix(price_tot[,-1]))
243 price_train <- subset(price, prices$date >= "2008-01-01" & prices$date < "
2015-01-01")
244 price_test <- subset(price, prices$date >= "2015-01-01" & prices$date < "
2017-01-01")
245 price_train <- spread(price_train,key="symbol",value=adj,fill = NA)
246 price_train <- (as.matrix(price_train[,-1]))
247 price_test <- spread(price_test,key="symbol",value=adj,fill = NA)
248 price_test <- (as.matrix(price_test[,-1]))
249 volume <- prices[,list(date=prices$date,symbol=prices$symbol,vol=prices$
volume)]
250 volume_tot <- subset(volume, volume$date >= "2008-01-01" & volume$date < "
2017-01-01")
251 volume_tot <- spread(volume_tot,key="symbol",value=vol)
252 volume_tot <- (as.matrix(volume_tot[,-1]))
253 volume_train <- subset(volume, volume$date >= "2008-01-01" & volume$date < "
2015-01-01")
254 volume_test <- subset(volume, volume$date >= "2015-01-01" & volume$date < "
2017-01-01")
255 volume_train <- spread(volume_train,key="symbol",value=vol,fill = NA)
256 volume_train <- (as.matrix(volume_train[,-1]))
257 volume_test <- spread(volume_test,key="symbol",value=vol,fill = NA)
258 volume_test <- (as.matrix(volume_test[,-1]))
259
260 ## Create one-hot vecotrs ##
261 for(s in 1:(nrow(price_tot))){
262
if (s != 2267){
263
max=0
264
for(l in 1:15){
265
values[l] = price_tot[s+1,l]/price_tot[s,l]
266
}
267
max = which.max(values)
268
one_hot[max,s]=1
269
}
270
if( s == 2267){
271
one_hot[,s]=one_hot[,s-1]
272
}
273 }
274
275
276 ## Here I need a loop. Starting with a one year data repeat all the process
to estimate the time series of the vector Q* (optimal expected returns
of market views) ##
277 n=15
278 for (i in 1:(nrow(a)-lookback)){
279
data_i <- a[(i):(lookback+i),]
==PAGE:87==
B.2 Code
71
280
fac_dat_i <- fac_new[(i):(lookback+i),]
281
val = list()
282
# Multiple regression with the 3 factors above #
283
for (k in 1:15){
284
val = lm(data_i[,1+k] - fac_dat_i$RF ~ fac_dat_i$`Mkt-RF`+fac_dat_i$SMB+
fac_dat_i$HML)
285
mu_1 = mean(fac_dat_i$`Mkt-RF`)
286
mu_2 = mean(fac_dat_i$SMB)
287
mu_3 = mean(fac_dat_i$HML)
288
pi[k,i] = val$coefficients[1] + val$coefficients[2]*mu_1 + val$
coefficients[3]*mu_2 + val$coefficients[4]*mu_3
289
B[k,] = val$coefficients[2:4]
290
}
291
Sigma_hist[[i]] = as.matrix(B%*%cov(as.matrix(fac_dat_i[,1:3]))%*%t(B))
292
Sigma_bl = as.matrix(Sigma_hist[[i]])
293
if(i == 1){
294
lambda=1000;
295
alpha_const = 0.35;
296
w <- Variable(n)
297
ret <- t(pi[,i] %*% w)
298
risk <- quad_form(w, Sigma_bl)
299
obj <- ret - lambda * risk
300
constr <- list(w >= 0, sum(w) == 1,w <= (1/n) + alpha_const)
301
prob <- Problem(Maximize(obj), constr)
302
result <- solve(prob)
303
risk_con[i] <- result$getValue(risk)
304
return_con[i] <- result$getValue(ret)
305
weights_con[,i] <- result$getValue(w)
306
}
307
308
309
if (i %% 25 == 0){
310
#### CONVEX OPTIMIZATION ####
311
# Number of clusters we chose #
312
#n = 15
313
lambda=1000;
314
alpha_const = 0.30;
315
w <- Variable(n)
316
ret <- t(pi[,i] %*% w)
317
risk <- quad_form(w, Sigma_bl)
318
obj <- ret - lambda * risk
319
constr <- list(w >= 0, sum(w) == 1,w <= (1/n) + alpha_const)
320
prob <- Problem(Maximize(obj), constr)
321
result <- solve(prob)
322
risk_con[i] <- result$getValue(risk)
323
return_con[i] <- result$getValue(ret)
324
weights_con[,i] <- result$getValue(w)
325
}
326
if(i !=1 & i %% 25 != 0){
327
weights_con[,i] <- weights_con[,i-1]
328
return_con[i] <- return_con[i-1]
329
risk_con[i] <- risk_con[i-1]
330
}
331
#### BLACK-LITTERMAN ####
332
==PAGE:88==
72
B Appendix to Chapter 4
333
tau =
0.05
334
335
336
337
# In the matrix P each row represents the weight of each asset in each of
the K views #
338
339
P = diag(n)
340
Sigma = tau * Sigma_bl
341
#Omega = tcrossprod(P %*% Sigma, P)
342
Omega_hist[[i]] = diag(n) %*% Sigma
343
# v is the vector of the expected returns of the K views
(in the paper it
is called Q) #
344
Omega <- as.matrix(Omega_hist[[i]])
345
Y[,i] <- lambda * (Omega %*% ginv(Sigma) + diag(n)) %*% (Sigma_bl + ginv((
ginv(Sigma) + ginv(Omega)))) %*% one_hot[,i] - Omega %*% ginv(Sigma) %
*% pi[,i]
346
347
print(i)
348 }
349
350
351 #### RNN LSTM ###
352 # Use RNN with LSTM to learn to approximate the vector #
353 stop=nrow(price_train)-9
354 X_train <- array(0,dim=c(nrow(price_train)-9,10,30))
355
356
357 k=1
358 t=2
359 for (i in 1:15){
360
for (j in 1:(stop)){
361
X_train[j,,k] <- prova[(0+j):(9+j),i]
362
#X_train[j,,k] <- price_train[(0+j):(9+j),i]
363
X_train[j,,t] <- volume_train[(0+j):(9+j),i]
364
}
365
k=k+2
366
t=t+2
367 }
368
369 stop_test=nrow(price_test)-9
370 X_test <- array(0,dim=c(nrow(price_test)-9,10,30))
371 k=1
372 t=2
373 for (i in 1:15){
374
for (j in 1:(stop_test)){
375
X_test[j,,k] <- prova_test[(0+j):(9+j),i]
376
#X_test[j,,k] <- price_test[(0+j):(9+j),i]
377
X_test[j,,t] <- volume_test[(0+j):(9+j),i]
378
}
379
k=k+2
380
t=t+2
381 }
382
383
==PAGE:89==
B.2 Code
73
384 stop_tot=nrow(price_tot)-9
385 X <- array(0,dim=c(nrow(price_tot)-9,10,30))
386 k=1
387 t=2
388 for (i in 1:15){
389
for (j in 1:(stop_tot)){
390
X[j,,k] <- prova_tot[(0+j):(9+j),i]
391
#X_test[j,,k] <- price_test[(0+j):(9+j),i]
392
X[j,,t] <- volume_tot[(0+j):(9+j),i]
393
}
394
k=k+2
395
t=t+2
396 }
397
398
399
400
401
402
403 ## Standardize the X inputs by windows ##
404 X_train <- stand(X_train)
405 X_test <- stand(X_test)
406 X <- stand(X)
407
408
409 # Define the output train and test #
410 Y <- t(Y)
411 Y <- t(scale(t(Y)))
412 count <- sum(a$date >= "2008-01-01" & a$date < "2015-01-01")
413 y_train <- Y[11:(count+1),]
414
415 y_test <- Y[(count+2):(tr),]
416
417 #y_train <- t(Y[2006,])
418
419
420 #y_train <-array(0,dim=c(2005,10,15))
421 # Same for output #
422 #for (i in 1:15){
423 #
for (j in 1:(stop-10)){
424 #
y_train[j,,i] <- Y[i,(10+j):(19+j)]
425 #
}
426 #}
427
428 #y_test <-array(0,dim=c(243,10,15))
429 # Same for output #
430 #for (i in 1:15){
431 #
for (j in 1:(stop_test-10)){
432 #
y_test[j,,i] <- Y[i,(2014+j):(2023+j)]
433 #
}
434 #}
435
436
437 #### LSTM ####
438 set.seed(1234)
==PAGE:90==
74
B Appendix to Chapter 4
439 # Build the model #
440 model <- keras_model_sequential() %>%
441
layer_lstm(units = 50, return_sequences = TRUE,input_shape= c(10,30),
dropout = 0.2,stateful = TRUE, batch_size = 1) %>%
442
layer_lstm(units = 50,return_sequences = FALSE, stateful = TRUE) %>%
443
#layer_dropout(0.3) %>%
444
#layer_dense(units = 50) %>%
445
layer_dense(units = 15, activation = "linear")
446
447 model %>% compile(
448
optimizer = "rmsprop",
449
loss = "mean_squared_error",
450
metrics = "mean_squared_error"
451
452 )
453 for(i in 1:20){
454 history <- model %>% fit(
455
X_train, y_train,
456
epochs = 1,
457
batch_size = 1,
458
#validation_data = list(X_test,y_test)
459
validation_split = 0.2,
460
shuffle= FALSE
461 )
462
463 model %>% reset_states()
464 cat("Epoch: ", i)
465 }
466 #### ####
467
468 #preds_train <- model %>% predict(X_train)
469
470 preds1 <-
model %>% predict(X_train,batch_size=1)
471 preds2 <- model %>% predict(X_test,batch_size=1)
472 preds_tot <- model %>% predict(X,batch_size=1)
473
474
475
476
477 lookfor <- sum(a$date >= "2015-01-01" & a$date < "2017-01-01")
478
479
480 random <- matrix(0, nrow=2258,ncol=15)
481 for(s in 1:nrow(random)){
482
random[s,] <- rnorm(15,mean=0,sd=1)
483 }
484
485 BLMu <- matrix(0,nrow=15,ncol=tr-10)
486 weights_bl <- matrix(0,nrow=15,ncol=tr-10)
487 return_bl <- rep(0, tr-10)
488 risk_black <- rep(0,tr-10)
489 BLSigma <- list()
490 f=1
491 seque <- seq(1,2257)
492 wealth <- 1000
==PAGE:91==
B.2 Code
75
493 alpha_const <- 0.35
494 re <- as.matrix(a[(765):3021 ,-1])
495 for (f in seque){
496
# In the formula the 'solve' find the inverse of the matrix #
497
# Mu_bl is the vector of Implied Returns PI, v is the vector of expected
returns on the views (Q) #
498
499
BLMu[,f]
= pi[,f+10] + Sigma_hist[[f+10]] %*% t( P ) %*% ( ginv( P %*%
Sigma_hist[[f+10]] %*% t( P ) + Omega_hist[[f+10]] )) %*% ( preds_tot
[(f),] - P %*% pi[,f+10] ) ;
500
BLSigma[[f]] =
Sigma_hist[[f+10]] -
Sigma_hist[[f+10]] %*% t( P ) %*% (
ginv( P %*% Sigma_hist[[f+10]] %*% t( P ) + Omega_hist[[f+10]] ) %*% (
P %*% Sigma_hist[[f+10]] ) );
501
502
503
if(f==1){
504
lambda=1000
505
506
w_bl <- Variable(n)
507
ret_bl <- t(BLMu[,f]) %*% w_bl
508
risk_bl <- quad_form(w_bl, BLSigma[[f]])
509
obj_bl <- ret_bl - lambda * risk_bl
510
constr_bl <- list(w_bl >= 0, sum(w_bl) == 1,w_bl <= (1/n) + alpha_const)
511
prob_bl <- Problem(Maximize(obj_bl), constr_bl)
512
result_bl <- solve(prob_bl)
513
risk_black[f] <- result_bl$getValue(risk_bl)
514
return_bl[f] <- result_bl$getValue(ret_bl)
515
weights_bl[,f] <-result_bl$getValue(w_bl)
516
}
517
518
519
if(f %% 25== 0){
520
w_bl <- Variable(n)
521
ret_bl <- t(BLMu[,f]) %*% w_bl
522
risk_bl <- quad_form(w_bl, BLSigma[[f]])
523
obj_bl <- ret_bl - lambda * risk_bl
524
constr_bl <- list(w_bl >= 0, sum(w_bl) == 1,w_bl <= (1/n) + alpha_const)
525
prob_bl <- Problem(Maximize(obj_bl), constr_bl)
526
result_bl <- solve(prob_bl)
527
risk_black[f] <- result_bl$getValue(risk_bl)
528
return_bl[f] <- result_bl$getValue(ret_bl)
529
weights_bl[,f] <-result_bl$getValue(w_bl)
530
}
531
if(f!=1 & f %% 25!=0){
532
weights_bl[,f] <- weights_bl[,f-1]
533
return_bl[f] <- return_bl[f-1]
534
risk_black[f] <- risk_black[f-1]
535
}
536
537
f= f+1
538
print(f)
539 }
540
541
542 ### GMV ###
==PAGE:92==
76
B Appendix to Chapter 4
543 f=1
544 weights_fgmv <- matrix(0,nrow=15,ncol=2257)
545 return_fgmv <- rep(0, 2257)
546 risk_fgmv <- rep(0,2257)
547
548 for(f in 1:2257){
549
if(f==1){
550
lambda=1000
551
552
w_gmv <- Variable(n)
553
ret_gmv <- t(re[f,]) %*% w_gmv
554
risk_gmv <- quad_form(w_gmv, Sigma_hist[[f]])
555
obj_gmv <- risk_gmv
556
constr_gmv <- list(w_gmv >= 0, sum(w_gmv) == 1,w_gmv <= (1/n) + alpha_
const)
557
prob_gmv <- Problem(Minimize(obj_gmv), constr_gmv)
558
result_gmv <- solve(prob_gmv)
559
risk_fgmv[f] <- result_gmv$getValue(risk_gmv)
560
return_fgmv[f] <- result_gmv$getValue(ret_gmv)
561
weights_fgmv[,f] <-result_gmv$getValue(w_gmv)
562
}
563
564
565
if(f %% 25== 0){
566
w_gmv <- Variable(n)
567
ret_gmv <- t(re[f,]) %*% w_gmv
568
risk_gmv <- quad_form(w_gmv, Sigma_hist[[f]])
569
obj_gmv <- risk_gmv
570
constr_gmv <- list(w_gmv >= 0, sum(w_gmv) == 1,w_gmv <= (1/n) + alpha_
const)
571
prob_gmv <- Problem(Minimize(obj_gmv), constr_gmv)
572
result_gmv <- solve(prob_gmv)
573
risk_fgmv[f] <- result_gmv$getValue(risk_gmv)
574
return_fgmv[f] <- result_gmv$getValue(ret_gmv)
575
weights_fgmv[,f] <-result_gmv$getValue(w_gmv)
576
}
577
if(f!=1 & f %% 25!=0){
578
weights_fgmv[,f] <- weights_fgmv[,f-1]
579
return_fgmv[f] <- return_fgmv[f-1]
580
risk_fgmv[f] <- risk_fgmv[f-1]
581
}
582
print(f)
583
f=f+1
584 }
585
586 ### GMV WITH DIAG(sigma) ###
587
588
589
590 f=1
591 weights_fgmv_diag <- matrix(0,nrow=15,ncol=2257)
592 return_fgmv_diag <- rep(0, 2257)
593 risk_fgmv_diag <- rep(0,2257)
594
595
==PAGE:93==
B.2 Code
77
596 for(f in 1:2257){
597
if(f==1){
598
w_gmv_diag <- Variable(n)
599
ret_gmv_diag <- t(re[f,]) %*% w_gmv_diag
600
risk_gmv_diag <- quad_form(w_gmv_diag, diag(diag(Sigma_hist[[f]])))
601
obj_gmv_diag <- risk_gmv_diag
602
constr_gmv_diag <- list( sum(w_gmv_diag) == 1)
603
#constr_gmv_diag <- list(w_gmv_diag >= 0, sum(w_gmv_diag) == 1,w_gmv_
diag <= (1/n) + alpha_const)
604
prob_gmv_diag <- Problem(Minimize(obj_gmv_diag), constr_gmv_diag)
605
result_gmv_diag <- solve(prob_gmv_diag)
606
risk_fgmv_diag[f] <- result_gmv$getValue(risk_gmv_diag)
607
return_fgmv_diag[f] <- result_gmv$getValue(ret_gmv_diag)
608
weights_fgmv_diag[,f] <-result_gmv$getValue(w_gmv_diag)
609
}
610
611
612
if(f %% 25== 0){
613
w_gmv_diag <- Variable(n)
614
ret_gmv_diag <- t(re[f,]) %*% w_gmv_diag
615
risk_gmv_diag <- quad_form(w_gmv_diag, diag(diag(Sigma_hist[[f]])))
616
obj_gmv_diag <- risk_gmv_diag
617
constr_gmv_diag <- list(w_gmv_diag >= 0, sum(w_gmv_diag) == 1,w_gmv_diag
<= (1/n) + alpha_const)
618
prob_gmv_diag <- Problem(Minimize(obj_gmv_diag), constr_gmv_diag)
619
result_gmv_diag <- solve(prob_gmv_diag)
620
risk_fgmv_diag[f] <- result_gmv$getValue(risk_gmv_diag)
621
return_fgmv_diag[f] <- result_gmv$getValue(ret_gmv_diag)
622
weights_fgmv_diag[,f] <-result_gmv$getValue(w_gmv_diag)
623
}
624
if(f!=1 & f %% 25!=0){
625
weights_fgmv_diag[,f] <- weights_fgmv_diag[,f-1]
626
return_fgmv_diag[f] <- return_fgmv_diag[f-1]
627
risk_fgmv_diag[f] <- risk_fgmv_diag[f-1]
628
}
629
print(f)
630
f=f+1
631 }
632
633 ### BL GMV SIGMA BASED
###
634 f=1
635 weights_fgmv_bl <- matrix(0,nrow=15,ncol=2257)
636 return_fgmv_bl <- rep(0, 2257)
637 risk_fgmv_bl <- rep(0,2257)
638
639 for(f in 1:2257){
640
if(f==1){
641
w_gmv_bl <- Variable(n)
642
ret_gmv_bl <- t(re[f,]) %*% w_gmv_bl
643
risk_gmv_bl <- quad_form(w_gmv_bl, BLSigma[[f]])
644
obj_gmv_bl <- risk_gmv_bl
645
constr_gmv_bl <- list(w_gmv_bl >= 0, sum(w_gmv_bl) == 1,w_gmv_bl <= (1/n
) + alpha_const)
646
prob_gmv_bl <- Problem(Minimize(obj_gmv_bl), constr_gmv_bl)
647
result_gmv_bl <- solve(prob_gmv_bl)
==PAGE:94==
78
B Appendix to Chapter 4
648
risk_fgmv_bl[f] <- result_gmv_bl$getValue(risk_gmv_bl)
649
return_fgmv_bl[f] <- result_gmv_bl$getValue(ret_gmv_bl)
650
weights_fgmv_bl[,f] <-result_gmv_bl$getValue(w_gmv_bl)
651
}
652
653
654
if(f %% 25== 0){
655
w_gmv_bl <- Variable(n)
656
ret_gmv_bl <- t(re[f,]) %*% w_gmv_bl
657
risk_gmv_bl <- quad_form(w_gmv_bl, BLSigma[[f]])
658
obj_gmv_bl <- risk_gmv_bl
659
constr_gmv_bl <- list(w_gmv_bl >= 0, sum(w_gmv_bl) == 1,w_gmv_bl <= (1/n
) + alpha_const)
660
prob_gmv_bl <- Problem(Minimize(obj_gmv_bl), constr_gmv_bl)
661
result_gmv_bl <- solve(prob_gmv_bl)
662
risk_fgmv_bl[f] <- result_gmv_bl$getValue(risk_gmv_bl)
663
return_fgmv_bl[f] <- result_gmv_bl$getValue(ret_gmv_bl)
664
weights_fgmv_bl[,f] <-result_gmv_bl$getValue(w_gmv_bl)
665
}
666
if(f!=1 & f %% 25!=0){
667
weights_fgmv_bl[,f] <- weights_fgmv_bl[,f-1]
668
return_fgmv_bl[f] <- return_fgmv_bl[f-1]
669
risk_fgmv_bl[f] <- risk_fgmv_bl[f-1]
670
}
671
print(f)
672
f=f+1
673 }
674
675 ### BL GMV SIGMA BASED
###
676 f=1
677 weights_fgmv_bl_diag <- matrix(0,nrow=15,ncol=2257)
678 return_fgmv_bl_diag <- rep(0, 2257)
679 risk_fgmv_bl_diag <- rep(0,2257)
680
681 for(f in 1:2257){
682
if(f==1){
683
w_gmv_bl_diag <- Variable(n)
684
ret_gmv_bl_diag <- t(re[f,]) %*% w_gmv_bl_diag
685
risk_gmv_bl_diag <- quad_form(w_gmv_bl_diag, diag(diag(BLSigma[[f]])))
686
obj_gmv_bl_diag <- risk_gmv_bl_diag
687
constr_gmv_bl_diag <- list(w_gmv_bl_diag >= 0, sum(w_gmv_bl_diag) == 1,w
_gmv_bl_diag <= (1/n) + alpha_const)
688
prob_gmv_bl_diag <- Problem(Minimize(obj_gmv_bl_diag), constr_gmv_bl_
diag)
689
result_gmv_bl_diag <- solve(prob_gmv_bl_diag)
690
risk_fgmv_bl_diag[f] <- result_gmv_bl_diag$getValue(risk_gmv_bl_diag)
691
return_fgmv_bl_diag[f] <- result_gmv_bl_diag$getValue(ret_gmv_bl_diag)
692
weights_fgmv_bl_diag[,f] <-result_gmv_bl_diag$getValue(w_gmv_bl_diag)
693
}
694
695
696
if(f %% 25== 0){
697
w_gmv_bl <- Variable(n)
698
ret_gmv_bl <- t(re[f,]) %*% w_gmv_bl
699
risk_gmv_bl <- quad_form(w_gmv_bl, BLSigma[[f]])
==PAGE:95==
B.2 Code
79
700
obj_gmv_bl <- risk_gmv_bl
701
constr_gmv_bl <- list(w_gmv_bl >= 0, sum(w_gmv_bl) == 1,w_gmv_bl <= (1/n
) + alpha_const)
702
prob_gmv_bl <- Problem(Minimize(obj_gmv_bl), constr_gmv_bl)
703
result_gmv_bl <- solve(prob_gmv_bl)
704
risk_fgmv_bl[f] <- result_gmv_bl$getValue(risk_gmv_bl)
705
return_fgmv_bl[f] <- result_gmv_bl$getValue(ret_gmv_bl)
706
weights_fgmv_bl[,f] <-result_gmv_bl$getValue(w_gmv_bl)
707
}
708
if(f!=1 & f %% 25!=0){
709
weights_fgmv_bl[,f] <- weights_fgmv_bl[,f-1]
710
return_fgmv_bl[f] <- return_fgmv_bl[f-1]
711
risk_fgmv_bl[f] <- risk_fgmv_bl[f-1]
712
}
713
print(f)
714
f=f+1
715 }
716
717 ### BL MV DIAG ###
718
719 f=1
720 weights_fbl_diag <- matrix(0,nrow=15,ncol=2257)
721 return_fbl_diag <- rep(0, 2257)
722 risk_fbl_diag <- rep(0,2257)
723
724 for(f in 1:2257){
725 if(f==1){
726
lambda=1000
727
728
w_bl_diag <- Variable(n)
729
ret_bl_diag <- t(BLMu[,f]) %*% w_bl_diag
730
risk_bl_diag <- quad_form(w_bl_diag, diag(diag(BLSigma[[f]])))
731
obj_bl_diag <- ret_bl_diag - lambda * risk_bl_diag
732
constr_bl_diag <- list(w_bl_diag >= 0, sum(w_bl_diag) == 1,w_bl_diag <= (1
/n) + alpha_const)
733
prob_bl_diag <- Problem(Maximize(obj_bl_diag), constr_bl_diag)
734
result_bl_diag <- solve(prob_bl_diag)
735
risk_fbl_diag[f] <- result_bl_diag$getValue(risk_bl_diag)
736
return_fbl_diag[f] <- result_bl_diag$getValue(ret_bl_diag)
737
weights_fbl_diag[,f] <-result_bl_diag$getValue(w_bl_diag)
738 }
739
740
741 if(f %% 25== 0){
742
w_bl_diag <- Variable(n)
743
ret_bl_diag <- t(BLMu[,f]) %*% w_bl_diag
744
risk_bl_diag <- quad_form(w_bl_diag, diag(diag(BLSigma[[f]])))
745
obj_bl_diag <- ret_bl_diag - lambda * risk_bl_diag
746
constr_bl_diag <- list(w_bl_diag >= 0, sum(w_bl_diag) == 1,w_bl_diag <= (1
/n) + alpha_const)
747
prob_bl_diag <- Problem(Maximize(obj_bl_diag), constr_bl_diag)
748
result_bl_diag <- solve(prob_bl_diag)
749
risk_fbl_diag[f] <- result_bl_diag$getValue(risk_bl_diag)
750
return_fbl_diag[f] <- result_bl_diag$getValue(ret_bl_diag)
751
weights_fbl_diag[,f] <-result_bl_diag$getValue(w_bl_diag)
==PAGE:96==
80
B Appendix to Chapter 4
752 }
753 if(f!=1 & f %% 25!=0){
754
weights_fbl_diag[,f] <- weights_fbl_diag[,f-1]
755
return_fbl_diag[f] <- return_fbl_diag[f-1]
756
risk_fbl_diag[f] <- risk_fbl_diag[f-1]
757 }
758
759 f= f+1
760 print(f)
761 }
762
763
764
765
766
767
768
769 wealth <- rep(0,2256)
770 wealth[1] <- 1000
771 wealth2 <- rep(0,2256)
772 wealth2[1] <- 1000
773 wealth3 <- rep(0,2256)
774 wealth3[1] <- 1000
775 wealth4 <- rep(0,2256)
776 wealth4[1] <- 1000
777 wealth5 <- rep(0,2256)
778 wealth5[1] <- 1000
779 wealth6 <- rep(0,2256)
780 wealth6[1] <- 1000
781 equal <- rep(1/15,15)
782 weights_con <- (weights_con[,11:2267])
783 retu_con <- return_con[11:2267]
784 ri_con <- risk_con[11:2267]
785 rea_eq <- rep(0,2256)
786 rea_con <- rep(0,2256)
787 rea_bl <- rep(0,2256)
788 rea_gmv <- rep(0,2256)
789 rea_gmv_bl <- rep(0,2256)
790 rea_bl_diag <- rep(0,2256)
791 var_bl <- rep(0,2256)
792 SR <- rep(0,2256)
793 for(f in 2:2256){
794
rea_bl[f] <- weights_bl[,f]%*%re[f+1,]
795
var_bl[f] <- t(weights_bl[,f])%*% (Sigma_hist[[f]]) %*% (weights_bl[,f])
796
SR[f] <- rea_bl[f]/var_bl[f]
797
wealth[f] <- wealth[f-1]+ weights_bl[,f+1]%*%re[f+1,]*100
798
rea_eq[f] <- equal%*%re[f+1,]
799
wealth2[f] <- wealth2[f-1] + equal%*%re[f+1,]*100
800
rea_con[f] <- weights_con[,f]%*%re[f,]
801
wealth3[f] <- wealth3[f-1] + weights_con[,f+1]%*%re[f+1,]*100
802
rea_gmv[f] <- weights_fgmv[,f]%*%re[f+1,]
803
wealth4[f] <- wealth4[f-1] + weights_fgmv[,f+1]%*%re[f,]*100
804
rea_gmv_bl[f] <- weights_fgmv_bl[,f]%*%re[f+1,]
805
wealth5[f] <- wealth5[f-1] + weights_fgmv_bl[,f+1]%*%re[f,]*100
806
rea_bl_diag[f] <- weights_fbl_diag[,f]%*%re[f+1,]
==PAGE:97==
B.2 Code
81
807
wealth6[f] <- wealth6[f-1] + weights_fbl_diag[,f+1]%*%re[f,]*100
808 }
809
810
811 ### PLOT WEALTH ###
812 dates<- subset(a$date,a$date >= "2008-01-15" & a$date < "2016-12-29")
813 time <- strptime(dates, "%Y-%m-%d")
814 data.zoo <- zoo(wealth, time)
815 data2.zoo <- zoo(wealth2, time)
816 data3.zoo <- zoo(wealth3, time)
817 data4.zoo <- zoo(wealth4,time)
818 data5.zoo <- zoo(wealth5,time)
819 data6.zoo <- zoo(wealth6,time)
820
821 plot(data.zoo,col="red", xlab="Time", ylab="Wealth ($)",type='l',lwd=1.5,
main="Backtest of the strategies")
822 lines(data2.zoo, col="blue",lwd=1.5)
823 lines(data3.zoo, col="green",lwd=1.5)
824 lines(data4.zoo, col="yellow",lwd=1.5)
825 lines(data5.zoo, col="purple",lwd=1.5)
826 lines(data6.zoo, col="orange",lwd=1.5)
827 legend(time[1], 1100, legend=c("BL_LSTM", "EW","MV","GMV","BL_GMV_LSTM","BL_
DIAG_LSTM"),col=c("red", "blue","green","yellow","purple","orange"),lty=
c(1,1,1,1,1,1), cex=0.8)
828
829
830
831 ### PLOT ASSET PRICES ###
832 time_a <- strptime(a$date, "%Y-%m-%d")
833 price_plot <- subset(price, prices$date >= "2005-01-01" & prices$date < "
2017-01-01")
834 price_plot <- spread(price_plot,key="symbol",value=adj)
835 price_plot <- (as.matrix(price_plot[,-1]))
836 plot(time_a, price_plot[,1], xlab="Time", ylab="Asset Prices",ylim = c
(0,200),type='l',lwd=1.5)
837 cl <- rainbow(14)
838 for(i in 2:15){
839
lines(time_a, price_plot[,i],col = cl[i], xlab="Time", ylab="Asset Prices"
,lwd=1.5)
840 }
841 legend("topleft", legend=chosenETFs,col=rainbow(15),lty=c(1,1,1), cex=0.8)
842
843 ### Characteristics ###
844 t_chara <- chara[,c("symbol", "assetClass", "geography", "focus")]
845 print(xtable(t_chara, type = "latex"), file = "t_chara.tex")
846
847
848 ### Pf analytics ###
849 ### These are the expected return and risk ###
850 merge <- data.frame(MV = rea_con, BL_LSTM = rea_bl, EW = rea_eq, GMV = rea_
gmv, BL_GMV_LSTM = rea_gmv_bl, BL_DIAG_LSTM = rea_bl_diag,row.names =
dates)
851 merge <- as.xts(merge)
852
853
==PAGE:98==
82
B Appendix to Chapter 4
854 ann_table <- table.AnnualizedReturns(merge)
855 draw_table <- table.Drawdowns(merge)
856 print(xtable(ann_table, type = "latex"), file = "table_ann.tex")
857 print(xtable(draw_table, type = "latex"), file = "table_draw.tex")
858
859
860 ### Weights ###
861 stack_bl <- matrix(0, nrow=15,ncol=91)
862 z=1
863 for (i in 1:2257){
864
if(i ==1){
865
stack_bl[,z] <- weights_bl[,i]
866
z=z+1
867
}
868
if(i %% 25== 0){
869
stack_bl[,z] <- weights_bl[,i]
870
z=z+1
871
}
872 }
873 stack_mv <- matrix(0, nrow=15,ncol=91)
874 z=1
875 for (i in 1:2257){
876
if(i ==1){
877
stack_mv[,z] <- weights_con[,i]
878
z=z+1
879
}
880
if(i %% 25== 0){
881
stack_mv[,z] <- weights_con[,i]
882
z=z+1
883
}
884 }
885 stack_gmv <- matrix(0, nrow=15,ncol=91)
886 z=1
887 for (i in 1:2257){
888
if(i ==1){
889
stack_gmv[,z] <- weights_fgmv[,i]
890
z=z+1
891
}
892
if(i %% 25== 0){
893
stack_gmv[,z] <- weights_fgmv[,i]
894
z=z+1
895
}
896 }
897
898 stack_gmv_bl <- matrix(0, nrow=15,ncol=91)
899 z=1
900 for (i in 1:2257){
901
if(i ==1){
902
stack_gmv_bl[,z] <- weights_fgmv_bl[,i]
903
z=z+1
904
}
905
if(i %% 25== 0){
906
stack_gmv_bl[,z] <- weights_fgmv_bl[,i]
907
z=z+1
908
}
==PAGE:99==
B.2 Code
83
909 }
910
911 stack_bl_diag <- matrix(0, nrow=15,ncol=91)
912 z=1
913 for (i in 1:2257){
914
if(i ==1){
915
stack_bl_diag[,z] <- weights_fbl_diag[,i]
916
z=z+1
917
}
918
if(i %% 25== 0){
919
stack_bl_diag[,z] <- weights_fbl_diag[,i]
920
z=z+1
921
}
922 }
923
924
925
926
927 bar_bl <- data.frame(WBL=t(stack_bl))
928 colnames(bar_bl) <- chosenETFs
929 bar_con <- data.frame(WBL=t(stack_mv))
930 colnames(bar_con) <- chosenETFs
931 bar_gmv <-
data.frame(WBL=t(stack_gmv))
932 colnames(bar_gmv) <- chosenETFs
933 bar_gmv_bl <-
data.frame(WBL=t(stack_gmv_bl))
934 colnames(bar_gmv_bl) <- chosenETFs
935 bar_bl_diag<-
data.frame(WBL=t(stack_bl_diag))
936 colnames(bar_bl_diag)<- chosenETFs
937 chart.StackedBar(bar_bl,xaxis = FALSE)
938 chart.StackedBar(bar_con,xaxis = FALSE)
939 chart.StackedBar(bar_gmv,xaxis = FALSE)
940 chart.StackedBar(bar_gmv_bl,xaxis = FALSE)
941 chart.StackedBar(bar_bl_diag,xaxis = FALSE)
==PAGE:100==
84
B Appendix to Chapter 4
Figure B.1: Clustering Dendrogram
==PAGE:101==
B.2 Code
85
Figure B.2: Weights Mean-Variance
==PAGE:102==
86
B Appendix to Chapter 4
Figure B.3: Weights GMV
==PAGE:103==
B.2 Code
87
Figure B.4: Weights GMV BL
==PAGE:104==
88
B Appendix to Chapter 4
Figure B.5: Weights BL
==PAGE:105==
B.2 Code
89
Figure B.6: Weights BL DIAG
==PAGE:106==
90
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
[AVA00]
Igor N Aizenberg, Joos Vandewalle, and Naum N Aizenberg. “Multi-
valued and universal binary neurons: theory, learning and applications”.
In: (2000).
[BGP12]
Dimitris Bertsimas, Vishal Gupta, and Ioannis Ch Paschalidis. “Inverse
optimization: A new perspective on the Black-Litterman model”. In: Op-
erations research 60.6 (2012), pages 1389–1403.
[BL90]
Fischer Black and Robert Litterman. Asset allocation: combining investor
views with market equilibrium. Technical report. Discussion paper, Gold-
man, Sachs & Co, 1990.
[BL92]
Fischer Black and Robert Litterman. “Global portfolio optimization”. In:
Financial analysts journal 48.5 (1992), pages 28–43.
[BN07]
Maria Debora Braga and Francesco Paolo Natale. “TEV sensitivity to
views in black-litterman model”. In: (2007).
[BO07]
Steven L Beach and Alexei G Orlov. “An application of the Black–
Litterman model with EGARCH-M-derived views for international port-
folio management”. In: Financial Markets and Portfolio Management
21.2 (2007), pages 147–166.
[BW98]
Andrew Bevan and Kurt Winkelmann. “Using the Black-Litterman global
asset allocation model: three years of practical experience”. In: Fixed In-
come Research (1998), pages 1–19.
[Che07]
Chia-Hui Chen. “Preference Toward Risk, Risk Premium, Indifference
Curves, and Reducing Risk”. In: Retrieved 11.14 (2007), page 2014.
[Che09]
Wing Cheung. “Generalised Factor View Blending: Augmented Black-
Litterman in Non-Normal Financial Markets with Non-Linear Instru-
ments”. In: (2009).
[DBM15]
Wim De Mulder, Steven Bethard, and Marie-Francine Moens. “A survey
on the application of recurrent neural networks to statistical language
modeling”. In: Computer Speech & Language 30.1 (2015), pages 61–98.
[Dec86]
Rina Dechter. Learning while searching in constraint-satisfaction prob-
lems. University of California, Computer Science Department, Cognitive
Systems Laboratory, 1986.
==PAGE:108==
92
Bibliography
[DeM+13]
Victor DeMiguel et al. “Improving portfolio selection using option-implied
volatility and skewness”. In: Journal of Financial and Quantitative Anal-
ysis 48.6 (2013), pages 1813–1845.
[Dro01]
Wolfgang Drobetz. “How to avoid the pitfalls in portfolio optimization?
Putting the Black-Litterman approach at work”. In: Financial Markets
and Portfolio Management 15.1 (2001), pages 59–75.
[FB03]
N Firoozye and D Blamont. “Asset Allocation Model”. In: Global Markets
Research, Deutsche Bank, July (2003).
[FF92]
Eugene F Fama and Kenneth R French. “The cross-section of expected
stock returns”. In: the Journal of Finance 47.2 (1992), pages 427–465.
[FM03]
Gianluca Fusai and Attilio Meucci. Assessing views. Università degli studi
del Piemonte orientale, Facoltà di economia, 2003.
[Gia+07]
Rosella Giacometti et al. “Stable distributions in the Black–Litterman ap-
proach to asset allocation”. In: Quantitative Finance 7.4 (2007), pages 423–
433.
[GMH13]
Alex Graves, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, and Geoffrey Hinton. “Speech
recognition with deep recurrent neural networks”. In: Acoustics, speech
and signal processing (icassp), 2013 ieee international conference on.
IEEE. 2013, pages 6645–6649.
[Gre+17]
Klaus Greff et al. “LSTM: A search space odyssey”. In: IEEE transactions
on neural networks and learning systems 28.10 (2017), pages 2222–2232.
[HL99]
Guangliang He and Robert Litterman. “The intuition behind Black-Litterman
model portfolios”. In: (1999).
[HS97]
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Long short-term memory”.
In: Neural computation 9.8 (1997), pages 1735–1780.
[Idz05]
Thomas M Idzorek. “A step-by-step guide through the Black-Litterman
model, incorporating user specified confidence levels”. In: Chicago: Ibbot-
son Associates (2005), pages 1–32.
[Idz07]
Thomas Idzorek. “A step-by-step guide to the Black-Litterman model:
Incorporating user-specified confidence levels”. In: Forecasting expected
returns in the financial markets. Elsevier, 2007, pages 17–38.
[KM05]
Hari Krishnan and Norman Mains. “The two-factor Black-Litterman
model”. In: RISK-LONDON-RISK MAGAZINE LIMITED- 18.7 (2005),
page 69.
[LBE15]
Zachary C Lipton, John Berkowitz, and Charles Elkan. “A critical review
of recurrent neural networks for sequence learning”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1506.00019 (2015).
[Lit+04]
Bob Litterman et al. Modern investment management: an equilibrium
approach. Volume 246. John Wiley & Sons, 2004.
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
93
[LL14]
Haim Levy and Moshe Levy. “The benefits of differential variance-based
constraints in portfolio optimization”. In: European Journal of Opera-
tional Research 234.2 (2014), pages 372–381.
[Man06]
Charlotta Mankert. “The Black-Litterman Model: mathematical and be-
havioral finance approaches towards its use in practice”. PhD thesis.
KTH, 2006.
[Man99]
Rosario N Mantegna. “Hierarchical structure in financial markets”. In:
The European Physical Journal B-Condensed Matter and Complex Sys-
tems 11.1 (1999), pages 193–197.
[Mar52]
Harry Markowitz. “Portfolio selection”. In: The journal of finance 7.1
(1952), pages 77–91.
[Mar99]
Harry M Markowitz. “The early history of portfolio theory: 1600–1960”.
In: Financial Analysts Journal 55.4 (1999), pages 5–16.
[MEM12]
Richard O Michaud, David Esch, and Robert Michaud. “Deconstructing
Black-Litterman: How to get the portfolio you already knew you wanted”.
In: (2012).
[Meu05]
Attilio Meucci. “Beyond Black-Litterman: Views on non-normal mar-
kets”. In: (2005).
[Meu08]
Attilio Meucci. “The black-litterman approach: Original model and ex-
tensions”. In: (2008).
[MZ07]
Lionel Martellini and Volker Ziemann. “Extending Black-Litterman anal-
ysis beyond the mean-variance framework”. In: Journal of Portfolio Man-
agement 33.4 (2007), page 33.
[PMB13]
Razvan Pascanu, Tomas Mikolov, and Yoshua Bengio. “On the difficulty
of training recurrent neural networks”. In: International Conference on
Machine Learning. 2013, pages 1310–1318.
[RM86]
David E Rumelhart and James L McClelland. “Parallel distributed pro-
cessing: explorations in the microstructure of cognition. volume 1. foun-
dations”. In: (1986).
[Sch15]
Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Deep learning in neural networks: An overview”.
In: Neural networks 61 (2015), pages 85–117.
[SMS15]
Nitish Srivastava, Elman Mansimov, and Ruslan Salakhudinov. “Unsu-
pervised learning of video representations using lstms”. In: International
conference on machine learning. 2015, pages 843–852.
[SS00]
Stephen Satchell and Alan Scowcroft. “A demystification of the Black–
Litterman model: Managing quantitative and traditional portfolio con-
struction”. In: Journal of Asset Management 1.2 (2000), pages 138–150.
[SST18]
Majeed Simaan, Yusif Simaan, and Yi Tang. “Estimation error in mean
returns and the mean-variance efficient frontier”. In: International Review
of Economics & Finance 56 (2018), pages 109–124.
==PAGE:110==
94
Bibliography
[SVL14]
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. “Sequence to sequence
learning with neural networks”. In: Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems. 2014, pages 3104–3112.
[Vin+15]
Oriol Vinyals et al. “Show and tell: A neural image caption generator”.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition. 2015, pages 3156–3164.
[Xin+18]
Frank Z Xing et al. “Discovering Bayesian Market Views for Intelligent
Asset Allocation”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.09911 (2018).
