==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis: Penetration testing the
Orb
In collaboration with Shade ApS
Master Thesis Supervisor: Christian Damsgaard Jensen
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Frederik Wrist-Jensen - s134537
01.02.2018 - 30.07.2018
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This report addresses cyber security in IoT devices. The focus is going to be
on the Orb from Shade ApS. The Orb is going to be analyzed both formally
and by running diﬀerent cyber-attacks against the Orb to determine if there are
any weakness. This report found several cyber security weaknesses in the Orb
many of them were dangerous. Security solutions to the weaknesses have also
been suggested. The report is also going to discuss the state of cyber security
in the industry
1
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgement
I would like to thank Christian Damsgaard Jensen my adviser and professor for
his help and inspiring discussions during my master thesis.
I would like to give my thanks to Thomas Vestergaard and Mads Nielsen
from Shade ApS for the collaboration and allowing me to use the Orb for my
master thesis.
2
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
5
2
Theory
9
2.1
Bluetooth 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.1
Bluetooth low energy Message format
. . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Security in Bluetooth
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Passwords and pin codes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Public Private Key Encryption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5
DOS and DDOS attack
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.6
Ransomware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.7
Cyber Kill Chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3
System Description
26
4
Technical description of the Orb, Eclipse and App
26
5
NIST Risk Management Model
31
5.1
NIST model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.1.1
Identify ”The Orb” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.1.2
Protection of ”The Orb” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.1.3
Detect ”The Orb”
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1.4
Respond ”The Orb” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1.5
Recover ”The Orb” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Risk Management of the product
36
7
Modeling of the current protocol
41
8
The hardware
43
8.1
Setup of nRF51 PCA10031 USB dongle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
8.2
Set up Plugable USB Bluetooth 4.0 Low Energy Micro Adapter
45
9
Attacks Against the Orb
47
9.1
Sniﬃng the communication between the Orb and the Eclipse
. .
48
9.2
Sniﬃng the communication between the Orb and the phone. . . .
50
9.3
Authentication attack
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
9.4
DOS attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
9.5
Taking full control over the Orb . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
9.6
Blocking access to the device
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
9.7
Certiﬁcation of the ﬁrmware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
10 Solutions to the security weakness
74
10.1 The solution on sniﬃng communication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
10.2 Authentication to the app . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
10.3 Solving the problem that involves that the attacker can gain access 80
3
==PAGE:5==
11 Discussion
88
11.1 Future work on the project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
12 Conclusion
92
13 References
97
14 Appendix
98
14.1 Appendix A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
14.2 Appendix B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
14.3 Appendix C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
4
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Today, all homes are connected to the internet with multiple devices like surveil-
lance cameras, speakers, smart locks or Amazone Alexa. All these devices makes
our life’s better and easier. These devices also collect a lot of data about the
user. This data is personal data and should be protected securely so that no
one can access it. Some of these devices also control things that may course
damage or hurt people if taken control of by individuals with malicious intents.
An example is that some of these devices can catch ﬁre or in other way create
dangerous situation for humans. Some cars entertainment systems have been
connected to the control system of a car, and through that individuals have
gotten access to steering system of the car[23]. So if the attacker can hack the
entertainment system which has a very low security he or she can control the
car and create very dangerous situations.
The problem is that the companies that develop these devices don’t think
about cyber security. One case where Internet Of Things(IoT) was used to
disrupted the world was the Dyn cyber attack on October 21 2016. The Dyn
cyber attack used the malware named Mirai and large parts of the U.S and
Europa was without available DNS(Domain Name System) servers for some
time.
As we all know most companies are not able to work without access
to the internet today so the world was paralyzed for a short time. The Dyn
cyber attack was done by infecting IoT devices and because of their poor se-
curity they were very easy to attack and take control of. All the IoT devices
was used to create the largest DDOS attack. The DDOS attack was directed on
critical infrastructure and was therefor able to block a large part of the internet.
The goal of this report is to look at a the Orb and test the products security
and if any weakness are found in the security, suggest how to ﬁx these security
weaknesses. This report is looking at a product form the manufacturer Shade
ApS. This report is going to look at how the product ”The Orb” is protected
against diﬀerent cyber attacks. The Orb is a new type of lamp that is going to
collect data about the users and is controlled though the phone or smart light
switches around the house. Some of the challenges is that security and func-
tionality should work together without destroying the other part. This report
is going to look at diﬀerent aspects of The Orb and try to ﬁnd security ﬂaws at
the Orb and suggest how these can be ﬁxed.
The types of attack should imitate some of the attacks that could happen in
the real world. The skill level of attackers that could be interested in attacking
the Orb could be cyber criminal gangs, corporate espionage and maybe hack-
tivisme. The cyber criminal gangs and corporate espionage all have money as
their only goal so if they lose money they will stop. The hacktivisme is diﬀerent
they are driven by ideals and ideology which means that money is non of their
concern but they normally don’t have the most skilled people. The model that
is going to be used is Lockheed Martin Cyber kill Chain. The Lockheed
5
==PAGE:7==
Martin Cyber kill Chain is a attack method that is used by many high end
hacker groups.
The ﬁrst type of attack that most attackers with the knowledge about wire-
less communication would start with would be a passive attack(A passive attack
is an attack where no trace is left behind). The passive attack is going to see
if the attacker can listen in on the communication. The attacker is not able to
listen in if the communication is protected by a good encryption. The attacker
would have to listen on both the Phone communicating with the Orb and the
Eclipse(light switch) communicating with the Orb. The next attack would be
to block communication to the Orb. Blocking communication can be done in
many diﬀerent ways, one way is ﬂood the device. This attack is very often seen
when someone wants to block access to a server. The next attack that could
be interesting could be to gain full control of the Orb.
Gaining full control
meaning that the attacker can change the light setting and powering oﬀthe
Orb remotely from a computer. If it is possible to gain full control of the Orb
it could be interesting to see how warm it could be. If the Orb gets too hot
it could catch ﬁre which would give some hackivisme groups a motivations to
attack the Orb. Getting the Orb to catch ﬁre would require a look at making
new ﬁrmware and uploading it to the Orb.
The former section looks at the most advanced attacks some less advanced
attacks that is going to be preformed, is checking if the authentication at the
current version of the app is good. Because if the current authentication method
is not really good the attacker can just gain access to the Orb by using the App
that is installed on the Phone. Checking the protocol for security weaknesses
is also very important but that is done by modeling the model to a format is
working with simulations tools. Because if the protocol is designed insecure in-
tercepting data might be possible even if it requires more work than just listing.
Below is a list of attacks that have be done against The Orb.
• Can the communication be intercepted between the phone and the Orb.
• Can the communication be intercepted between the Eclipse(light switch)
and the Orb.
• Is the protocol secure against attackers and can it be mathematical proven
that the protocol is insecure or secure.
• Is it possible to bypass authentication on the app.
• Sending messages from a laptop that looks like an authorized user.
• Creating fake ﬁrmware.
• How hot is it possible to make the Orb.
6
==PAGE:8==
The equipment that is being used is a nRF51 PCA10031 USB dongle, Plu-
gable USB Bluetooth 4.0 Low Energy Micro Adapter, a computer running win-
dows 10, a computer running Ubunutu 16 and a thermometer. The ﬁrst two
are special dongles that allows the attacker to communicate with devices that
is communicating on the bluetooth low energy.
The base station was not completed by Shade ApS when I was testing se-
curity features so it was never tested. Therefor is the report more focused on
diﬀerent way’s to get access to the Orb.
The goals for the report is to test if the system(Orb) complies with conﬁden-
tiality integrity and availability. Conﬁdentiality integrity and availability is
three pillars of security that most security turns around. To test conﬁdentiality
the attacker has to try to check if the communication is encrypted. To test
integrity the attacker has to send unauthorized messages to the Orb to see if it
can identify the unauthorized from the authorized messages. The report is also
going to look at how an attacker can break both conﬁdentiality and integrity
by taking full control oﬀthe Orb. The report is also going to spend some time
on model and assessing risk and determine how secure the protocol is based on
models. Below is a more detailed list with the diﬀerent subjects that the report
is going to look at.
• Test the conﬁdentiality of the communication between the Orb and Eclipse.
• Test the conﬁdentiality of the communication between the Orb and phone.
• Model the communications protocol and evaluated if the protocol is pro-
viding conﬁdentiality and integrity for the communication.
• Conduct a risk assessment of the system and determine which attacks are
dangerous to the system.
• Propose mitigation for the security weaknesses that have been identiﬁed.
• Examine if an attacker is able to take full control of the Orb and is there-
fore able of changing light settings.
• Examine if an attacker is able to block access to the Orb. Access to the
Orb can be blocked by a DDOS attack or something else.
• Theoretically describe how to build in malware into the ﬁrmware.
• Theoretically describe the problem with the signature on ﬁrmware and
how it can be falsiﬁed.
The report is going to have the structure oﬀlooking at theory and state of
the art technologies that is going to be relevant for the reader to know something
about. The next part of the report is going to look at how the Orb works and
7
==PAGE:9==
the systems that the Orb is going to be part of. Then comes a few sections about
risk models and OFCM models of the current protocol. This section is going
to explain how the security at the current moment is view from the perspective
of models. Then comes some sections about how the sniﬃng tool works and
is set up and why the sniﬃng tools where selected. Then comes the diﬀerent
attacks that is performed what information they obtain and after the attacks
comes the proposed solutions to the attacks. At the end there is a discussions
and conclusion.
8
==PAGE:10==
2
Theory
In this chapter the communication protocol, that the Orb uses, is described.
There will be special focus on the security features in the protocol. Also there
will be a walkthrough of relevant security topics. This will serve as reference for
the attacks that will be preformed later. Below is a list of the topics that will
be described in this chapter.
• Bluetooth.
• Bluetooth low energy.
• Security features that is available in Bluetooth.
• How to create strong passwords and pin.
• DOS and DDOS attack.
• Ransom ware.
• Cyber Kill Chain.
2.1
Bluetooth 4
This section is going to look at how Bluetooth 4 works. Bluetooth 4 is the
version where Bluetooth low energy is introduced. A very important part of
any communications protocol is to understand how protocol stack works. Most
of the protocols that have been developed during the las0t 25 years is based
around the idea of the OSI model(Open Systems Interconnection model ). This
section is going to look at how the protocol stack which is also developed with
concepts from OSI model works. The reason why the reader need to understand
how bluetooth communication works is because most of the attack performed
against the Orb is based around using bluetooth communication.
Bluetooth protocol stack consists of around 3 layers with some sub division
in some of the layers. The ﬁrst layers is the called the transport layer the second
layer is the middle ware and the top layer is the application layer. This remind
us of the layers involved in the internet. In this description of the layers we are
going to start from the bottom working our way up. In Figure 1 a illustration
of the bluetooth stack can be seen.
9
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1: This ﬁgure show the Bluetooth stack[29].
The lowest layer consists of 3 boxes. The boxes are Link manager protocol
(LMP), baseband and radio layers, Logical link control and adapta-
tion protocol layer (L2CAP). The lower layers can be seen in Figure 1. The
LMP is also called the Link manager layer(LML). The Link manager layer is
used for negotiating the frequency that the bluetooth devices is going to commu-
nicate on, this is also called frequency allocation. The LMP also handles devices
pairing and stores the key used for authentication. This level does also handle
the power that the bluetooth devices use for communication.The baseband and
radio layers are the layers that are responsible for searching for new devices.
The baseband is also responsible for handling master and slave relationships.
The master slave relationship is the way to know who is making decisions and
who follow orders in bluetooth communication. The baseband and radio layers
do also handle the frequency hopping that is done in Bluetooth.
Frequency
10
==PAGE:12==
hopping is not a security feature because it is hopping in a set number of chan-
nels. Frequency hopping is used to avoid collisions.The L2CAP is handling the
connection to the higher layers with the physical layers. This is also the layer
where larger packets are divvied into smaller packets and the other way around.
The L2CAP layer is the layer that divides the physical layer/ low level layer
from the high level layers[29].
The middle layer consists of parts: RFCOMM layer, Service Discovery
protocol layer (SDP), Object exchange protocol (OBEX), Networking
layers, Telephone control speciﬁcations layer (TCS) and audio. All of
the middle layer is located above the L2CAP which can be seen in ﬁgure 1. The
RFCOMM(Radio frequency communication) provides virtual port for keeping
track of diﬀerent connections. The SDP is used by the bluetooth devices to
learn about what other devices can do. This is a discovery mode when it has
connected to it’s master. The OBEX is a way to transfer objects between two
devices. The OBEX works like a server and client and is in most cases between
the master and slave. OBEX is used for browsing folder at the other devices and
you are then able to pull data out from the slave. The network layer uses peer to
peer communication between the devices. The dial up uses AT command(Hayes
standard AT command set) to communicate with. The TCS(Telephony Con-
trol Protocol) is used for telephone communication and can also be used for
exchanging the data. On the application layer is the main functionality of
the device. The application layer is above the stack. The application layer can
access the middle layer of the stack. Bluetooth 4 stack is the same as Bluetooth
Low Energy stack [29].
After describing the Bluetooth stack we are going to have a look at the basic
idea behind bluetooth 4 and bluetooth 5.
The improvement that was made
in bluetooth 4 was that the ranged of bluetooth was improved signiﬁcant
and the transmissions rate was also improved. The bluetooth 4 also get the
nickname Bluetooth Low Energy(BLE). The reason for that is this version of
the bluetooth is always trying to reduce the power consumption. Going from
bluetooth 4 to bluetooth 5 is it just more improvement in ranged transmissions
rate and power consummation. Below is a list with the capabilities of bluetooth
5[3].
• Message Capacity: 255 bytes[3].
• Theoretical Data Throughput: 2 Mbps, gives about 1.6 Mbps with over-
head[3].
• Reliability: Because bluetooth 5 can send 200 meter in Line Of Sight path
and it can send 50 meter in indoor environment[3].
11
==PAGE:13==
2.1.1
Bluetooth low energy Message format
This section is going to have a look at how Bluetooth low energy messages looks.
The reason why it is important to look at the bluetooth low energy messages
is because these are the messages that is going to be intercepted. When the
attack intercepted the messages the attack can create new messages and send
them to the Orb. The attacker is going to sniﬀpackets and to help the reader
understand what is inside a BLE packet this section is relevant.
The Bluetooth low energy package can be seen in ﬁgure 2. The ﬁrst part
of the Bluetooth low energy package is the Preamble. This is like an introduc-
tion that helps the receiver knowing what type of package it has received. This
could be an advertising packet which has the code 10101010. The second part
of the messages is the Access Address. This is used to contain address of the
sender and receiver. The PDU(protocol data unit) is used for the transport
commands for the device or data. The commands could change the light setting
or data that is music for a speak. The CRC(Cyclic redundancy check) is
the ﬁeld that is used for error correcting code. This code is going to allow the
receiver of the message to correct some errors or at least know that they are
there. In ﬁgure 2 can it be seen that ﬁrst is the Preamble after that comes the
access address and then the PDU. At the end of ﬁgure 2 is the CRC[37].
Figure 2: This ﬁgure show the Bluetooth stack[37].
The PDU can also contain a header and data packet. The PDU is always
going to contain a header which has the size of 2 bytes.
2.2
Security in Bluetooth
This section is going to describe the security features that are build into Blue-
tooth and Bluetooth low energy.
The reason why this section is interesting
to the reader is because it is going to show how the people behind Bluetooth
thought about security. This section is also going to show how Shade can pro-
tect the Orb or how Shade protects the Orb. The reader is going to understand
how Bluetooth can protect from passive eavesdropping, how secure pairing is
done, key generation and authentication.
The security standard for bluetooth low energy and bluetooth 4 has a few
goals for security. The goals for security are listed below. This section is going
12
==PAGE:14==
to look into how the goals are achieved by using diﬀerent defence mechanism
and to describe any known problems. This section is going to have focus on
encryption and authentication.
• Passive Eavesdropping Protection.
• Secure Pairing.
• Key generation.
• Authentication.
The way that the developers of the bluetooth want to prevent some mali-
cious party from Passive Eavesdropping is by using an encryption that don’t
allow anyone to read the communication. The dangerous part related to passive
eavesdropping is that it is almost impossible to detected so the protector need to
know about this danger. The way to avoid passive eavesdropping is to select a
strong and acknowledged encryption algorithm and to selected an acknowledged
key generation algorithm.
The encryption algorithm that is selected by the developer of bluetooth is
advanced encryption standard(AES). The AES is at the moment consider
the strongest symmetric encryption algorithm that is available for commercial
use. AES do not have any known side challenge attack(a side challenge attack
is an attack that use information form the implementation to break the encryp-
tion) which makes it a very strong encryption. The AES comes with three key
lengths 128 bit, 192 bit, 256 bit[26]. All three key lengths should provide the
needed level of security that is required for protecting the information that is
transmitted. The key’s that is used for encryption should be generated by a
random pseudo random key generator that is approved for encryption. The way
that the key’s in bluetooth is generated is by letting the master generate the
key. The reason for doing this is that the master have more CPU power and
also have more power so it makes sense to do that on the master. The Master
should use a pseudo random key generator that is approved for encryption.
There is pseudo random key generator in most coding language so it should not
be a problem.
AES encryption can also use diﬀerent modes to obfuscate the context be-
tween the data blocks. The most simple obfuscate is no obfuscate and it is
called ECB. If someone encrypts a picture and use ECB mode the human eye
is still able to view the picture and understand what it is even if the colors
are changed. A example of this is the Linux penguin that is encrypted with
AES and it can still be seen even when the encryption is done corrected. The
development team selected to use CCM mode. Before explaining CCM mode
we are going to explain some of the more classic modes. These modes are ECE,
CBC, PCBC, CFB, OFB and CTR. The ECE is know not to disguise the data
13
==PAGE:15==
if it is a picture or something like that. The CBC, CFB or OFB is normally
the most used modes. The reason for using one of these modes is because they
disguise the data so nothing can be learned from looking at the data as a com-
plete document. In Figure 3 can the reader see how TUX the logo for Linux
look. TUX is the penguin to the left. In the middle of Figure 3 can the reader
see the problem with using ECB mode when using AES encryption. If Figure 3
was a secret a human would still be able to know what the secret is. In Figure
3 to the left is a example of something like CBC mode or something else that
works better with encryption[38].
Figure 3: This ﬁgure shows the TUX. To the left is the unencrypted TUX.
In the middle of the ﬁgure is TUX encrypted with ECB. To the right is TUX
encrypted with something else then ECB[14].
The bluetooth use AES-CCM which is CBC-MAC but in the NIST stan-
dard document it is called Advanced Encryption Standard–Counter. The hash
value is used as authentication of the data. It prevents people for chancing the
data even thought they don’t know how the change is going to impacted the
data. The CBC-MAC mode is also know as the cipher block chaining message
authentication code[38].
CBC-MAC is an encryption algorithm that needs a key and a seed for the
ﬁrst message. The seed should be known by the receiver and so should the key
before CBC-MAC works. The messages is going to be split into blocks of 128
bits. The ﬁrst block is going to be XOR’ed with the seed and then is encrypted
with AES and the key.
The second messages is going to be XOR with the
previous message and then encrypted with key. In ﬁgure 4 is the encryption
algorithm show graphically represented[38].
14
==PAGE:16==
Figure 4: This ﬁgure illustrate how CBC encryption is working.
Hashing algorithms takes arbitrary sized input. The hashing algorithms
work by taking a arbitrary input and mapping it to some other value.
All
cryptography hashing algorithms has some special requirements that is called
collision resistance. Collision resistance means that there should not be two
inputs that gives the same output or the probability should be low. The reason
why hashing algorithms used for security needs to be collision resistant is to
avoid when a user is checking if two ﬁles are the same they should only give the
same output if they are exactly the same[12].
Secure pairing is done by using the technique that is called secure simple
pairing. The secure simple pairing was chosen by the developer of Bluetooth.
An example of the the simple pairing works could be two devices with a screen
show at number costing of 6 numbers from 0 to 9. If the number match on the
two devices the user press yes and the two devices exchange data and is then
paired together. This would also work the same way for two devices with out
screen but instead of showing something on a screen it could be a light ﬂashing.
The point of using secure simple pairing is to avoid that any one can do a
man in the middle attack on the system.
The ﬁrst step in secure pairing is that both parties need to set the SC
ﬂag. The SC ﬂag is part of AuthReq part. This is all a part of the packet that
is send to pair with another device. The next step is to generate the key. The
key generation follow standards for generating a secure key. After the key have
been generated the two parities have to authenticate each other. The reason for
authentication is to avoid having any man in the middle.
The authentication is done by each user creating a Elliptic Curve Diﬃe-
Hellman(ECDH) public-private key pair for authentication. The ﬁrst step in
authentication is that they share the public key with the other party. After
15
==PAGE:17==
the parties have exchanged public keys are they going to generate a random
number. The responding device is going to Cb which is a f4 with the input of
the two public keys and the random number that responding device have cal-
culated. After responding device have send Cb initial devices is going to send
the random number it generated and responding device is going to send the
number the it generated. Now initial device can check the Cb number and if it
is a match continue otherwise stop communication. In the upper part of Figure
5 can it be seen how Cb and random numbers are being exchanged. At this
point both initial device and responding device is going to use the function g2
with the input both public keys and both random numbers and send them to
each other if it is a match secure connection established[7]. In ﬁgure 5 can an
illustration of the entire protocol be seen.
16
==PAGE:18==
Figure 5: This ﬁgure illustrate secure paring in bluetooth low nergy 4.2 works[7].
2.3
Passwords and pin codes
This section is going to look at how create secure passwords and how pin codes
can also be secure. This section is going to look at back oﬀtimer use in pin code
systems and how passwords build wrong have a much lower security. This section
is going to help the reader understand how to build password for authentication.
Strong passwords or pin codes should be used to improve authentication in the
17
==PAGE:19==
Orb. This is going to be used in proposed solutions.
For authentication to a Bluetooth device a pin code or a password is needed.
A pin code is four number from 0 to 9 and a password is normally longer and
consists of both numbers, lower case letters, upper case letters and special signs.
Lets ﬁrst have a look at the problems with pin codes.
So the ﬁrst problem with a pin code is that there are on 104 combinations.
This is going to take less then 1 second to brute force with a computer. So this
problem can be solved in diﬀerent ways. The ﬁrst idea is to have a back oﬀ
timer like used on Iphones. A back oﬀtimer is when you have tried to log in
3 times you have to wait 1 minuet. If you then try and fail it is going to be
2 minuets(fourth attempt at logging in) and next time 4 minuets(ﬁfth attempt
at logging in). This is going to solve the problem with pin codes. The other
solution is to lock the device after a set amount of tries. Use the example
with the Iphone it is normally set to 10 attempt’s and then it is going to be
locked. Both of these solutions is going to protect a device from a brute force
attack.
So now looking at passwords they are signiﬁcantly more complex to describe.
It is well known that most people would only create password consisting of lower
case letters if they were allowed to do this. The reason for doing this is that
the password made like this is way easier to remember a few example could be
”iloveyou” or ”password”, ”letmein” or ”qwerty”. All of these passwords are
some of the most used passwords in the world over the last few years. The
problem is that only give a limited security. Below is a mathematical equation
which is called equation 1 of the strength of the password. The sign ”n” is the
length of the password[16].
combinationLowercaseletters = 26n
(1)
So if the user now start using numbers and lower case letters it is going to
increase the strength of the password. The mathematical equation is now going
to be 10 highers and it can be seen in equation 2. This password could how ever
be even strong so adding a upper case letter is going to increase the combina-
tions. This new type of passwords is going to have the strength of equation 3.
combinationLowercaselettersandnumbers = 36n = (26 + 10)n
(2)
combinationLowercaseletters,numbersanduppercaseletters = 62n = (2∗26+10)n (3)
The strongest way to create a password is to use some of the special sign
that is available on the keyboard. There is around 43 spacial sings on the key-
board and look at the ascii then there is 256 signs over all. So if the user is
18
==PAGE:20==
able to use all ascii sign then the strength of the password is going to be n256.
However most people can only use the 43 sign that is available on the keyboard
so therefor would it be most realistic that people could create password of the
same strength which is expressed in equation 4. It is clear from equations 5 to 6
that there is a huge diﬀerence. So using password that contains all the diﬀerent
signs is going to create much stronger passwords.
combinationLoweranduppercaseletters,numbers,specialsign = 105n = (2∗26+10+43)
(4)
14.774.554.437.890.625 = 1058
(5)
208827064576 = 268
(6)
Based on this is it clear that most devices should use strong passwords or
use a back oﬀtimer so they avoid running in to being brute forced.
2.4
Public Private Key Encryption
This section is going to look at how public key encryption works. This section
is going to focus on the public key encrypt called RSA encryption. The reason
why this is relevant for the reader is because he or she needs to understand
public private key encryption because it is used in the proposed solutions.
So public private key encryption is a used for signing messages and encrypt-
ing message that so only the intended receiver can read the messages. The most
well known asymmetric key algorithms are Diﬃe–Hellman key exchange and
RSA encryption. This section is going to look at the RSA encryption.
Public private key works by each user having both a public and private key.
The public key is know by everyone that want to communicate with the person
that have created the public and private key. The public is used for encrypting
message so that the intended receiver is the only person that can decrypted the
message. When a message is encrypted with a public key it can be decrypted
with the private key. The private key can be used for signing messages so that
the receiver knows that the message is from the owner of the private key. If the
messages is signed with a private key it can only be decrypt with the public key.
The ﬁrst step in using RSA is to generate the keys. This is an important
step because you have to do this correctly to have a secure encryption. So ﬁrst
step is to pick two prime numbers. The prime numbers are going to be called
q and p. The prime numbers should be chosen randomly. The prime numbers
q and p should also have similar magnitude but diﬀerent size. The second step
19
==PAGE:21==
is to calculate the value n. The value n is used for encryption and decryption.
The value n is calculated by multiplying q and p[15].
n = p × q
(7)
So after calculating the value n the next step is to calculate the lowest com-
mon multiple of the numbers (p-1) and (q-1). Next step is to pick a number
larger then 1 and smaller then the lowest common multiple of the numbers (p-
1) and (q,1). This is done by using Euler’s totient function. Euler’s totient
function is going to ﬁnd relative prime numbers to the value from the lowest
common multiple. The number that is picked from Euler’s totient function is
the value e[15].
computing lowest common multiple:
lcm((q −1), (p −1)) = lowestcommonmultiple
(8)
Finding e:
φ(lcm((q −1), (p −1))) = e
(9)
The next is to determine the value d. The value d is determined by calcu-
lating the modular multiplicative inverse of e[15].
d × e
modλ(n) = 1
(10)
So after doing all these calculations have we determine the public keys which
are e and n. This means that someone can encrypt a message with our public
key, The mathematical way to do this is shown bellow. The value c is the cipher
which is the encrypted messages and m is the message[15].
ce ≡m
(mod n)
(11)
When we receive the encrypted message witch is encrypted with our public
key we can then decrypt the message with our public key. The public key is the
d and we also need the n to decrypt. Below is the way to decrypt a message[15].
cd ≡(me)d ≡m
(mod n)
(12)
2.5
DOS and DDOS attack
This section is going to look at how DOS and DDOS works and how the attack
works. The reason why the reader should know something about the DOS and
DDOS attack is because these types of attack can be used against the Orb. The
Orb might also be used to DDOS attack other services.
20
==PAGE:22==
A DOS( Denial of Service) attack is a attack that is used to block access to
an server or some kind of resources. The denial of service attack is very hard to
protect against. At the moment are researchers around the world trying to come
up with solutions for defending against denial of service attacks and there have
been some suggestion but nothing that works in the real world. In the server
and client world does DDOS attack also exists. A DDOS attack is a Distributed
Denial of Service attack. Instead of only attacking with one computer or device
the attacker is going to attack with many computers or devices.
A DOS and a DDOS attack works by sending as many packets as possible
and thereby blocking the connection. All servers have a buﬀer where they can
store requests and if this buﬀer is ﬁlled up with fake requests the server have
to drop real requests. The server is not able to see what is a fake request and
what is a real request. Because the server is not able to determine if a request
is fake or real it need to deal with each requests as a real request. In ﬁgure 6
can illustration of DOS attack and a DDOS attack can be seen.
Figure 6: This ﬁgure shows how a DDOS attack would look like and how a DOS
attack would look like[39].
So why is DDOS attacks and DOS attack important for this report because
they are only used on servers and they are done by computers correct? No the
largest DDOS attack was done by IOT(Internet of things). The largest DDOS
attack is called Mirai[34] and was able to shut down the internet in a large part
of the Western world. DOS attack can also be used to block access to the users
IOT devices.
21
==PAGE:23==
2.6
Ransomware
This section is going to describe how ransomware works. This section is going
to take a case study and look at how other hackers have build ransomwares over
the last years. The reason why the the reader should understand ransomware
is because this could used to attack the Orb.
Today most of us have heard about ransomware it is regular on the news
that a large organization has been hit by ransomware. Ransomware is a type
of malware that encrypts almost all the ﬁles on a computer. The goal is that
some of the ﬁles that was encrypted has a special value for the owner of the
computer and the owner is therefore interested in paying for getting the com-
puter decrypted. The documents could be pictures of memories, it could be
research data, customer information or it could be something else. The attacker
will normal ask a person for around 300 to 600 U.S $. For companies and large
organization this price is much higher. In some case they ask for 100 million
U.S $. The type of ﬁles that the attacker encrypt are listed below[24].
.sql, .mp4, .7z, .rar, .m4a, .wma, .avi, .wmv, .csv, .d3dbsp, .zip, .sie, .sum,
.ibank, .t13, .t12, .qdf, .gdb, .tax, .pkpass, .bc6, .bc7, .bkp, .qic, .bkf, .sidn,
.sidd, .mddata, .itl, .itdb, .icxs, .hvpl, .hplg, .hkdb, .mdbackup, .syncdb, .gho,
.cas, .svg, .map, .wmo, .itm, .sb, .fos, .mov, .vdf, .ztmp, .sis, .sid, .ncf, .menu,
.layout, .dmp, .blob, .esm, .vcf, .vtf, .dazip, .fpk, .mlx, .kf, .iwd, .vpk, .tor, .psk,
.rim, .w3x, .fsh, .ntl, .arch00, .lvl, .snx, .cfr, .ﬀ, .vpp pc, .lrf, .m2, .mcmeta,
.vfs0, .mpqge, .kdb, .db0, .dba, .roﬂ, .hkx, .bar, .upk, .das, .iwi, .litemod, .asset,
.forge, .ltx, .bsa, .apk, .re4, .sav, .lbf, .slm, .bik, .epk, .rgss3a, .pak, .big, wallet,
.wotreplay, .xxx, .desc, .py, .m3u, .ﬂv, .js, .css, .rb, .png, .jpeg, .txt, .p7c, .p7b,
.p12, .pfx, .pem, .crt, .cer, .der, .x3f, .srw, .pef, .ptx, .r3d, .rw2, .rwl, .raw, .raf,
.orf, .nrw, .mrwref, .mef, .erf, .kdc, .dcr, .cr2, .crw, .bay, .sr2, .srf, .arw, .3fr,
.dng, .jpe, .jpg, .cdr, .indd, .ai, .eps, .pdf, .pdd, .psd, .dbf, .mdf, .wb2, .rtf, .wpd,
.dxg, .xf, .dwg, .pst, .accdb, .mdb, .pptm, .pptx, .ppt, .xlk, .xlsb, .xlsm, .xlsx,
.xls, .wps, .docm, .docx, .doc, .odb, .odc, .odm, .odp, .ods, .odt [19]
Ransomware works by encrypting ﬁles with a strong symmetric key encryp-
tion. The good choice is always to use AES encryption. AES(Advanced En-
cryption Standard) encryption is the most common and strongest symmetric
key encryption there is. The reason why the attackers would use a symmetric
key encryption instead of an asymmetric key encryption is because symmetric
encryption is a lot faster. Problem with symmetric key encryption is that the
key have to be stored on the victims computer. Symmetric key encryption use
the same key for encrypt as decryption. This problem does not exist for asym-
metric key encryption.
An example of a well know ransomware is the one called CryptoLocker.
All ransomware has it unique way of doing things. Therefor is an example a very
good way to describe ransomwares. CryptoLocker work by using both asym-
22
==PAGE:24==
metric key encryption and symmetric key encryption. CryptoLocker use asym-
metric key encryption for making a secure connection to the C&C(Command
and control server). The asymmetric key is also used for securing the symmetric
key. The symmetric key is used for encrypting all the ﬁles because it is faster.
CryptoLocker is using RSA for asymmetric key encryption and AES 256 for
symmetric key encryption[28].
The CryptoLocker only comes with a RSA public key and address for the
C&C server. The ﬁrst step is to establish a secure connection to the C&C server.
The C&C server is going to send a new RSA key unique for the victim. The
malware is then going to create a key for a AES 256. The AES 256 is going to be
encrypted with the unique RSA key. Then the malware encrypt all the ﬁles on
the computer and erase the AES 256 key from the memory. The encrypted key
and the encrypted ﬁels are now stored on the victimes computer. The victim
have to pay to get the private key so he can decrypte the AES 256 key and then
decrypt all the ﬁles on the computer[28].
In ﬁgure 7 can the chain of what Cryptolocker works be seen. The color
red is to signal when it starts doing something dangerous to the victims com-
puter. In the green step the victim just received the malware. In the yellow
start is it preparing by generating the key’s. In the ﬁrst red step it is encrypt-
ing all the ﬁles. In the last step it has completed encrypting the entire computer.
Figure 7: This ﬁgure shows the diﬀerent steps that the Cryptolock goes though.
2.7
Cyber Kill Chain
The Cyber Kill Chain is a model for how attackers attack organizations infras-
tructure and gain access. The Cyber Kill Chain model is partly going to be
23
==PAGE:25==
used in this report to perform the attacks. This is the reason why the reader
needs to have an understanding of the Cyber Killer Chain. This section is go-
ing to explain the seven step that Cyber kill chain goes though. It should be
noted that some organization think the Cyber Kill Chain needs more then seven
steps[20].
The Cyber Kill model was the ﬁrst developed by Lockheed Martin Corpora-
tion and that is the model that is going to be used. The model is based around
seven steps. The steps are listed below based in the order that the attacker
normally goes though them. Some times attacker breaks the order and skips
some steps[20].
• Reconnaissance.
• Weaponization.
• Delivery.
• Exploitation.
• Installation.
• Command and Control.
• Actions on Objective.
The ﬁrst step is the Reconnaissance. The attacker is going to select tar-
gets and researches everything the attacker can learn about the system. The
attacker will working to ﬁnd out which operating system the targets are using.
The attacker while also try to ﬁnd information about the network conﬁguration.
The attacker ﬁnd as much information about the target as possible.
The second step is the Weaponization. In the second step the attacker
is going to build the malware. The malware could be a virus or a worm or
some other type of malware. The attacker could in this step also prepare the
vulnerabilities that he or she found during reconnaissance. The vulnerability
could be something like a port that is open that should not be open. This step
is based on the ﬁrst step.
The third step is the Delivery. In the third step the attacker is going to
send the weapon to the target. The weapon can be send via e-mail attachments.
The malware weapon could also be delivered via a website or something else.
The target was selected in step one and the weapon was build in step two.
The fourth step is the Exploitation. In the fourth step the malware is
going to be activated on the targets machine or network.
24
==PAGE:26==
The ﬁfth step is the Installation. In step ﬁfth is the malware going to start
installing on the target devices. At this point the attacker gained access to the
system with rights equal to the user. The attackers goals is to stay hidden in
side the organization.
The sixth step is Command and Control. In step sixth the malware is
going to communicate out with the attacker. The malware will normally com-
municate with the attacker through many Command and Control(C&C) servers
that is spread out through out the world.The reason why the attacker would
do this is to avoid victim and law enforcement to know who the attacker really is.
The seventh step is Actions on Objective. The attacker have gain control
over the system and the attacker can now get access to the information that the
attacker wants. Once the attacker have found the information the attacker is
going to ex ﬁltrated.
25
==PAGE:27==
3
System Description
This section is going to give the reader an understanding on how the Orb should
work and what the ideas with the Orb is. The Orb is a smart lamp that have 3
adjustable parts. The Orb have a top part that can increase the brightness and
the bottom part of the Orb can do the same. The middle part of the Orb can
be set to any color in the rainbow.
The Orb is sold for 2995 DKK[4] at the moment and when a consumer buys
this box he gets diﬀerent element. It contains an Orb which is the lamp, the
Eclipse which is the light switch, wire and transformer. The Eclipse is not paired
with speciﬁc Orb which means that the user can buy Eclipses and use them for
Orb they already own. The Orb and the Eclipse should work just out of the
box. When the consumer puts batteries into the Eclipse and powers on the Orb
everything works. The Orb comes with 6 predeﬁned moods.
When a consumer wants to buy more then one Orb. Then the consumer
just power on the new Orbs and one Eclipse can control all the Orbs that are
powered on. There is no set up and they just work out of the box. The idea is
that when users buy more and more orbs they can all be connected with each
other and communicate with each other. The Orbs are using bluetooth low
energy to communicate with the phone and to communicate with the Eclipse.
The Orb’s are using bluetooth mesh to communicate between each other.
This entire system is build so that there is no conﬁguration and that it work
out of the box. It should be easy to get good lighting in the consumers home.
The Orb gives the chance to create the perfect light setting for any situation
no matter if it is family time, romantic time or work setting. A very important
part of the set up is it should be user friendly so that the Eclipse don’t need to
change battery often. Therefor the Eclipse only send update messages to the
Orb when it has connection. This is also how the phone does it. Having this
battery restriction is going to create many challenges for building security in to
the system.
4
Technical description of the Orb, Eclipse and
App
This section is going to describe how the Orb works and which features it has
build in.
This section is going describe the documentation that have been
handed out by Shade ApS. This section is very relevant for the reader because
it explain how the Orb and the app works. If the reader does not understand
how the App works he or she can not understand what is going on in some
of the attacks so therefor is it very important. The reader also needs to know
which light diode sends out which type of light. The documentation for the
26
==PAGE:28==
light diodes is hand out by Shade ApS during a meeting with them and so is
the naming convention.
The lamb is build with 8 diﬀerent light diodes. In ﬁgure 8 all the light diodes
can be seen and which type of color they are going to send out. At the top of
the the Orb we have the two types of light diodes. The ﬁrst type is warm light
and the second is cold light. At the bottom is the same pattern of light diodes
and the same types of light diodes. This means that the bottom half also have
warm light and cold light diodes. At the middle of the lamp there is four types
of diodes there are warm, red, green and blue diodes. These four types gives
the Orb it possibilities to change to all types of colors.
Looking at the Figure 8 the diﬀerent diodes have a number. The reason for
that is that this is the way that the data is send over the connection. Each
diode has 12 bits of information. The ﬁrst 12 bits is for top warm and the next
top cold. This all comes down to a messages that looks like this ”top warm,
top cold, bottom warm, bottom cold, mid warm, mid red, mid green, mid blue”.
Figure 8: This ﬁgure shows the orb and how the light diodes are placed in the
lamp.
The Orbs are using the Bluetooth 5 mesh network to communicate between
each other. Bluetooth have in older standards always been point to point con-
nection or many connected to one. Using the mesh network allows many devices
27
==PAGE:29==
to be connected to many devices. Bluetooth 5 mesh allows for encryption and
other other security features. When one Orb receives a messages form a phone
or an Eclipse it is going to send the messages 3 times to all it’s connection and
all the new connections is going to send 3 messages to all of it’s connections and
soon.
The Eclipse is a light switch which is used to control the Orb. The Eclipse
can be turned left and right to change the mood. The mood is predeﬁned light
setting or a customized light setting. The Eclipse allow the user to pick between
6 diﬀerent settings of light. In ﬁgure 9 can a picture of the Eclipse be seen. The
user can also press the Eclipse in the sender and the power will be turned oﬀor
on.
Figure 9: This ﬁgure shows Eclipse which is used to control the light setting.
The app for the Orb is called Better light and can be downloaded in the
app store on IPhone and Android. When the user starts the app he gets the
interface the can be seen in ﬁgure 10. This is under the assumption that the
user is close to an Orb if that is not the case the app is just going to say scanning.
At the top of the app 6 icons can be seen like in ﬁgure 10. These 6 icons is
6 setting of moods. Then the user press one of these mood he will change the
light setting. When turning the Eclipse the Orb changes between these 6 moods.
When the reader looks at ﬁgure 10 the reader can see a gray line in the middle
above and below is the same two bars. The bars on the top part and the bottom
part of the app are the light settings. The top bar is used to adjust the light
setting for the top part of the Orb. The bottom bar is used to adjust the light
setting for the bottom part of the Orb. The user can change power of the light
28
==PAGE:30==
and the some color variants. The gray bar in the middle can be click and the
user will get access to the diﬀerent setting for the dick in the middle of the lamp.
Figure 10: This ﬁgure shows the Orb and how the light diodes are placed in the
lamp.
The bar in the middle have a lot of diﬀerent settings. The GUI(Graphical
user interface) for the middle part of the orb can be seen in ﬁgure 11. At the
top of ﬁgure 11 can the power level of the middle part of the lamp be change.
In ﬁgure 11 is the power level low. In the center the color wheel can be seen.
The user can just turn the wheel and get any color that he or she wants. At the
bottom of ﬁgure 11 5 diﬀerent version of the color can been seen. In ﬁgure 11
is the color red so therefor the 5 diﬀerent version of the colors are red. To the
left is the strongest version of red and to the right is no color. New moods can
be saved and if the user wants to go back to default settings he can just press
the button called default.
29
==PAGE:31==
Figure 11: This ﬁgure shows the orb and how the light diodes are placed in the
lamp.
30
==PAGE:32==
5
NIST Risk Management Model
This section is going to use the NIST model to make a risk assessment of the Orb.
This section is going to apply the NIST model. The NIST model(Framework
for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cyber Security) is a very general model
but also very recognized model.
5.1
NIST model
This section is going to describe how the NIST model and the 5 diﬀerent steps
in the model works. The reason the reader should understand the NIST model
is because this is going to be framework that this report is going to use. The
NIST model is also going to be used to identify the missing security features.
The NIST model is also going to be used to suggest new ways to protect the Orb.
The NIST model is designed to be used on critical infrastructure components
the Orb can not be said to be critical infrastructure, but it is the only framework
available, and it is expected that valuable insights will be gained by applying
this process on the Orb. The ﬁrst step in the NIST model is to Identify the
assets in the system. The second step in the model is Protection. The second
step is to describe the safeguards that is implemented in the Orb at this point.
The third step in the model is Detect. The third step is where we diﬀer from
the model. In the third step the detection of breaches is going to be listed and
later in the report performed. The fourth step is Respond.In the fourth step is
ways to mitigate these breaches going to be listed. The ﬁfth step is Recover.
The ﬁfth step does not apply to this system so therefor is there just going be a
short description of how the system can recover.
31
==PAGE:33==
Figure 12: This ﬁgure is a illustration of the Framework for improving critical
infrastructure cyber security[21].
5.1.1
Identify ”The Orb”
The assets are the parts of the system that has value. I have identiﬁed three
assets. Due to new legislation in the EU do user data have a lot more value
than before. Therefor is the personal data going to be an assert. Controlling
the Orb is also going to be an assert. The second asset is controlling the Orb.
The third assert is integrity of the Orb. The meaning of the integrity of the
Orb means that no one can use the Orb for malicious purposes. The assets are:
• User data.
• Access to the Orb.
• The Safety of the users of the Orb.
5.1.2
Protection of ”The Orb”
This section is going to look at the safeguards that are in place. The Orb comes
with some safeguards and below they are listed. The safeguards should protect
the assets that are identiﬁed in section 5.1.1
32
==PAGE:34==
• Frequency hopping.
• Key to authenticate the message.
Frequency hopping is that the communication is going to change frequency
based on a set timer. This forces the attacker to be able to change frequency
when the device does. It should clearly be stated that frequency hopping is not
used for protecting the communication. The reason that communication use
frequency hopping is because it avoids collision between two packets send from
two devices. Some people think frequency hopping is part of the protection but
because the frequency hopping is done in known order the attacker and receiver
knows which frequency to listen on. Each messages contains a key that is used
for authenticating that the message is valid. the Key is static and do never
change and is the same for all the Orb that i have tested. Based on the current
security features that is identiﬁed in this section is it very clear that Orb is not
able to protect the assets that was identiﬁed in 5.1.1.
5.1.3
Detect ”The Orb”
This section is going to list the diﬀerent attacks that is going to be performed
in section 9
All the threats are listed below and all threats are going to be linked to
diﬀerent assets. The ﬁrst threat is sniﬃng, where someone is passive listen to
the communication. This type of attack is undetectable. If the client is sending
something sensitive an attacker can in some cases listen in and learn everything
without leaving any trace. Sniﬃng is also used in some attacks chain like the
Cyber Kill Chain. Where the attack want to learn as much about the type of
communication that is used.
The second threat is that an attacker could gain full access or partial ac-
cess to the orb. If the attacker is able to take control of the Orb he can change
the light and maybe update ﬁrmware and make fundamental changes to the
Orbs functions. The ﬁrst step is to gain access and control. The second step
is to replace the ﬁrmware with the normal ﬁrmware but it includes some extra
code. Uploading new ﬁrmware to the Orb can also be used for creating DDOS
attack against servers or other internet sites, or make the Orb heat up until it
starts to burn.
The third attack could be blocking all access to the Orb. If the attack is
able of blocking access and turn oﬀthe lights in rooms or building and therefor
could accidents happen inside building with out light on.
The fought attack
could be the attack steal personal data. With the
new legislation called GDPR(General Data Protection Regulation) companies
can be sued if they don’t protect personal data. The attack could gain access
33
==PAGE:35==
to personal data by gaining access to the Orb. The data that an attacker could
steal could be used to blackmail Shade ApS. The data Orb is collecting is con-
tain id’s and could therefor be used to track down who this person is. Because
the data can be used to identify identify an individual in context it is a Person-
ally identiﬁable information. Personally identiﬁable information is what of the
important things that GDPR looks at.
Below is a list with all the identiﬁed threats.
• Sniﬃng data.
• Attack gain partial access or full access to the Orb.
• Create fake ﬁrmware and upload it to the Orb.
• Attack have full access and as change the ﬁrmware the Orb could catch
ﬁre.
• Attack have full access and as change the ﬁrmware the Orb could be used
for DDOS attacks against servers on the Internet.
• Block access to the Orb.
• Steal information from ”The Orb” that is Personally identiﬁable informa-
tion.
Based on the list above containing all the threats to the system can a list
that describes how the threats are link to the assets. Below is a list of assets
and two them are diﬀerent threats linked
• The ﬁrst asset is user data. The user data alone can have value for the
attackers but if user data is stolen can it also mean problems for Shade
ApS because of the new GDRP legislation. The attacker can gain access
to user data by sniﬃng data, gain partial access or full access to the Orb.
• Having control over the Orb is the second asset.
Controlling the Orb
means changing light and power it oﬀ. The owner can lose control if an
attacker use a DOS attack against the Orb.
The Owner can also lose
control if attacker takes full control of the Orb.
• The integrity of the Orb is the third asset. The integrity of the Orb can
be destroyed if an attacker is able to upload new ﬁrmware that allows the
attack to set the Orb on ﬁre or DDOS a server.
34
==PAGE:36==
5.1.4
Respond ”The Orb”
This section is going to list diﬀerent new security features that can prevent the
security breaches that is described in the section above. All of the diﬀerent
security features are going to be explained in great detail in section 10.
• Encryption on communication.
• Fix the security problems that are with protocol.
• Add authentication into communication.
• Add authentication to the app.
• Block handles.
5.1.5
Recover ”The Orb”
The only way that IoT can recover is by being set back to factory standard or
by getting a ﬁrmware/software update from the producer.
35
==PAGE:37==
6
Risk Management of the product
This section is going to look at diﬀerent attacker and for each attack is this
report going to estimate the likelihood of the attack happening and the dam-
age. This section is also going to have a look at who is interest in hacking the
Orb and what type of skills and money the attack require. The reason why this
model is important is because the reader need to understand how this report
access the risk. The risk model that is presented is going to be used on many
diﬀerent types of attack that is going to be preformed.
The model that is used to evaluated the risk is going to look at probability
of an attack also know as frequency of an attack. The other parameter is going
to be damage. The damage is going to be determined based on if it is only dam-
aging one Orb or all Orb’s. An example of what the damage to an Orb could
be useless or broken. Useless could occur if attackers is able of blocking access
to the Orb. The probability is going to depend a lot on the skills required. If
something require high skills it is less likely to happen. If the required skill are
very low it is more likely that some attacker is going to try preform the attack.
Both parameters can be rated in the three steps low, medium and high.
The scale low, medium and high is also going to translate into the colors green,
yellow and red where green is low and red is high. A few examples of how the
system works. If the probability and the damage is both estimated to being low
or green the risk level is going to be green or low. If the probability is green
and the risk is yellow the risk level is going to be yellow. If the probability is
red and the risk is yellow the risk level is going to be red. This model is not
going to be the same if someone else do the estimates. The model would be
more accurate if there were data to support it.
The risk levels is also translated into number which goes from 1 to 3, where
3 is red level and 1 is green. To calculate the risk the number 2 green and the
numbers between 3 and 4 is yellow and 5 numbers between 5 and 6 is red. Below
is a table that is used to determine the risk level.
36
==PAGE:38==
Likelyhood/damage
1
2
3
1
2
3
4
2
3
4
5
3
4
5
6
Table 1: Table with likely hood and damage.
It should be very clear that this model have the weakness that it is per-
sonal assessment of the attack and this may change based on who is assessing
the attacks. This model can be more objective if there is data available for how
often the Orbs are being attack but in most situations it is a personal assessment.
So after describing the way to determine the risk we can look at what type
of attackers that could want to attack a system like ”The Orb”. Some of the
attackers could be governments, corporate spy, cyber criminal gangs,
terrorists/idealists and script kiddie.
The governments are most likely not interested in the type of light that
normal people like. The only reason why governments could be interested in
hacking these devices is if they are installed in a building where interesting
people work or if governments want to create larges DDOS attack. We believe
that if a government wants to hack the Orb they have the capability. The next
group of attackers is the corporate spy and the reason why they should be
interested in hacking the lamps was because they might be located at one of
their competitors. If the corporate spy would break into one of their competitors
turn oﬀthe light would make it much easy to not be spotted. Therefor could
it be interesting for corporate spy. Another reason why it could be interesting
for a corporate spy would be to sabotage a competitor’s reputation during a
presentation by turning on and oﬀthe light. Corporate spy would also have the
skill that is need to hack into the Orb.
The cyber criminal gangs could be interested in hacking these lamps if
they want to break into a house. The cyber criminal gangs do need help from
ordinary thief’s but they could sell this service to thief’s. Cyber criminal gangs
could also use the hack to break into especially safe buildings which store valu-
able things. There is a story about hackers and pirates working together. The
37
==PAGE:39==
hacker hacked into a shipping company to know which containers had valuable
cargo in them. They told the pirate to only empty out one container and get of
the ship fast after they did this. This is a case were hackers use ordinary thief’s
to do some of the work[6]. Cyber Criminal gangs could also infect the Orb to
use the Orbs that they control with malware for cyber crime. It is very likely
that cyber criminal gang could have an interested in hacking the Orb and they
most likely also would have success with it based on what type of attacks that
they want to preform.
Terrorists/Idealists hackers would not do it because this is most likely
not going to impact their goals for the world. The only reason why they would
do this is if they were able of setting the Orb on ﬁre. If all the Orb’s in a city
like New York could catch ﬁre this would create mass panic. If mass panic is
the goal it is only groups like ISIS or Al Qaeda that would have any interested
in hurting countries. We could see some script kiddie try to hack one Orb or
all the Orb in a house hold. The reason why script kiddie would try this is
so they can control the light. Script kiddies do normally not have a meaning-
ful reason for hacking stuﬀthey just want to see if they can and maybe break
it. They would most likely not have success with doing this unless they spend
a lot of time on it. Below is a list with the attacks that we are going to evaluate.
• Sniﬃng between Orb and Eclipse.
• Sniﬃng between Orb and phone.
• Authentication attack.
• DOS attack.
• Taking full control over the Orb.
• Blocking access to the device.
• Creating new ﬁrmware.
Sniﬃng between Orb and Eclipse and sniﬃng between Orb and
phone. These two attacks are being risk assessed together because they are
communicating on the same frequency. This can be done by some people be-
cause the attacker only need access the frequency 2.4 GHz. This attack has one
challenge when he or she is listening at the frequency 2.4 GHz. The challenge
is to ﬁnd the right connection because at 2.4 GHz is everything from internet,
bluetooth to other protocol communicating. The damage from sniﬃng data is
that the attack knows everything that is being send. The damage is a 2 because
it serious security breach but it is not going to shut down the system. The likely
hood of this attack is also a 2 because the attacker still need to know something
about wireless communication and how to set up the special system that is able
to listing at the right stuﬀ. This means that the risk level is going to be 4
38
==PAGE:40==
which is a yellow level.
Authentication attack is an attack where the user take control by cheat-
ing the authentication methods that is implemented in the system. This attack
is on some system very hard to do and on other system very easy. With out
having access the phone authentication methods it is going to be set to a 2. The
damage is going to be set to 3 because if a user that is not allowed to access the
Orb can gain access the damage is disastrous. This means that the risk level
is going to be 5 which is a red level.
DOS attack. The DOS attack is block access to the Orb. The skill required
for this is 3. The reason for that is that it requires that the attacker and ﬁgure
out to set up the listen function and send bluetooth low energy messages from
a computer. The damage is only 1 one because it just means that the own can’t
change the light setting. This means that the risk level is going to be 4
which is a yellow level.
Taking full control over the Orb. This attack has a high skill require-
ment because the attacker needs to be able to listen to messages. After the
attacker have sniﬀed the messages he or she needs to read them which can be a
challenge if the messages are encrypted. The attacker have to set up a system
that is able to communicate and then ﬁgure out how to communicate with the
Orb. The attack is going to make the communication look like packets are being
send form a diﬀerent sender. The attack have to break the authentication to be
able to fake who is sending the packet origin. Therefor is the skill required for
this is 3 and the damage is a 3 because the attack can now control everything
from a computer. This means that the risk level is going to be 6 which is
a red level.
Blocking access to the device. When the attacker want to block the
access to Orb he needs to go thought steps for the attack of taking full control
over the Orb. So just look at the risk from ”Taking full control over the Orb”
and then adding some more the risk level is going to be 6 which is a red
level.
Creating new ﬁrmware. Creating ﬁrmware means that the attacker has
the technical skill that is required for writing ﬁrmware. Writing ﬁrmware nor-
mally require a complete understanding of the hardware. It is very specialized
skills to write ﬁrmware and next his attack also need to gain full control so he
can send the ﬁrmware update to the Orb. Just look at the risk from ”Taking
full control over the Orb” and then adding the high skilled requirement from
writing ﬁrmware and the risk level is going to be 6 which is a red level.
39
==PAGE:41==
number of attack
Attack
Risk level
1
Sniﬃng between Orb and Eclipse
4
and sniﬃng between Orb and phone
2
Authentication attack
5
3
DOS attack
4
4
Taking full control over the Orb
6
5
Blocking access to the device
6
6
Creating new ﬁrmware
6
Table 2: This shows a table with the diﬀerent attacks and the risk for the
diﬀerent attacks. This is a summary of the diﬀerent attacks.
In table 2 the reader can get an overview of the diﬀerent attacks that an
attacker can perform on the Orb. The table show the risk level that is based
on likely hood and damage. These risk level is what the reader should take
away from this section because they are the attacks that the attacker is going to
preform. The reader should also be observant that if a diﬀerent cyber security
expert look at these attacks he or she might give them other risk levels.
40
==PAGE:42==
7
Modeling of the current protocol
This section is going to model the current protocol that Shade is using. The
reason for modeling the protocol is to determine if the protocol that Shade is
using is secure. The goals of the protocol is to make sure that data stay a secret
between the phone/Eclipse and the Orb. Some of the information regarding
encryption was obtain by sniﬃng the communication this is going to be explain
in section 9.1 and section 9.2.
The tool used to do formal proofs is OFMC. OFMC is a tooled that is used
by DTU(Denmark’s Technical University) to do formal proofs on protocols. The
goal when checking a protocol is to achieve at least 2 sessions passed.
So the current protocol just works by having the phone or eclipse send a
message with key/password. The message contains that update to the orb and
all of this is transmitted in clear text( clear text meaning that non encryption
algorithm is applied to the data send). The translated protocol have two goals
the ﬁrst goal is that the Orb(o) should authenticate the phone/eclipse(P) based
on the key(password). The second goal is that data that updating the lighting
setting( this is called data) should be secret between the phone/eclipse and the
Orb. Below is the current protocol translated into OFMC:
Listing 1: current protocol
Protocol : KeyEx
Types :
Agent P, o ;
Number data ;
Symmetric key password ;
#Function
;
Knowledge :
P:
data ,
password ;
o :
password
Actions :
P−>o :
password , data
Goals :
o authenticates P on password
data
s e c r e t
between P, o
41
==PAGE:43==
The result of running this thought OFMC is that OFMC ﬁnds attack before
this protocol passes one scenario.
The attack that is ﬁrst found is that the
phone/Ecplise(x20,1) sends data to the intruder(i). The intruder have access
to the data that should be secret. Below is the attack trace from running the
protocol thought OFMC.
Listing 2: attack trace on current protocol
( x20 , 1 ) −> i :
password , data
i −> ( i , 1 7 ) :
data
i −> ( i , 1 7 ) :
data
The current protocol failed on everything it could not achieve a single goal.
This means that the protocol is not secure in any way and should be ﬁxed. The
protocol is failing on conﬁdentiality and integrity. The OFMC model have build
some goals into the model and the goals is designed to secure conﬁdentiality and
integrity. The conﬁdentiality and integrity is broken because the attacker can
put himself into user positions. The integrity was broken because the Orb could
not authenticate the Phone/Eclipse. In section 10.1 a solution to this problem
is going to be proposed.
42
==PAGE:44==
8
The hardware
This section is going to review the considerations that I had when I picking
diﬀerent pieces of hardware for sniﬃng and sending bluetooth low energy com-
munication. This section is going to explain why the Nordic nRF sniﬀer and
Plugable USB Bluetooth was the two dongles that was the best picket. This
section is relevant for the reader because explain the beneﬁts two dongles. This
section is going to give the reader a look into the attacks thought process when
picking hardware. Below are the dongles was considered being used for sniﬃng
bluetooth low energy .
• TI BLE Sniﬀer (CC2540EMK-USB dongle)[1].
• Nordic nRF Sniﬀer (nRF51 PCA10031 USB dongle)[1].
• Ubertooth One[1].
I also looked at some other tools like Ellisys Bluetooth Explorer 400-
STD-LE and Teledyne LeCroy Sodera LE Wideband Bluetooth R⃝Protocol Analyzer
and Teledyne LeCroy (formerly Frontline) ComProbe BPA low en-
ergy. These tools are in a completely diﬀerent price class and they would have
been a lot of fun working with but because of their price were they discarded.
I have experience with the Ubertooth one. My Experience with the Uber-
tooth one is that it is almost impossible to set up and get working correctly. I
have not been able to ever get the packet captured with the Ubertooth One i
have only seen that some communication is going on. So therefore I decided to
not use the Ubertooth one. The Ubertooth one has not been supported the last
few years and therefor does it require a lot of legacy software and libraries.
I also looked at the TI BLE Sniﬀer (CC2540EMK-USB dongle) and
thought this could be a great idea. On paper do the TI BLE Sniﬀer (CC2540EMK-
USB dongle) and the Nordic nRF Sniﬀer (nRF51 PCA10031 USB don-
gle) look almost the same[1]. So the reason for picking the Nordic nRF Sniﬀer
dongle was that the Orb is build with Nordic Semiconductor bluetooth tech-
nology and it is therefor expected to be eaiser to setup as bieng from the same
company they setup bluetooth the same way. That is expected to eliminate
some issues. In ﬁgure 13 can the be seen Nordic nRF Sniﬀer (nRF51 PCA10031
USB dongle).
43
==PAGE:45==
Figure 13: This ﬁgure shows the Nordic nRF Sniﬀer (nRF51 PCA10031 USB
dongle)[31]
For sending messages to the Orb I’m using a diﬀerent dongle. I’m using Plu-
gable USB Bluetooth 4.0 Low Energy Micro Adapter (Windows 10, 8.1, 8, 7,
Raspberry Pi, Linux Compatible; Classic Bluetooth, and Stereo Headset Com-
patible). The reason for using this dongle is because it was recommended in one
of the guides that I looked at during the research phase[25].
8.1
Setup of nRF51 PCA10031 USB dongle
This section is going to describe how to set up the nRF51 PCA10031 USB don-
gle. The reason why the reader should be intrested in this section is when the
reader wants to conﬁrm that data that was collected in this report. When the
reader know how to set up for sniﬃng tool.
So for setting up the nRF51 we have to have some software installed on the
computer. I did this on a windows 10 computer.
• nRF Sniﬀer software 2v.x or later(https://www.nordicsemi.com/eng/
Products/Bluetooth-low-energy/nRF-Sniffer).
• Wireshark v2.4.2 or later.
• Segger J-link v6.16c.
• Python 2.7.x.
• Python 3.4 or later.
First step is to install all the software that is required. The segger J-link
v2.4.2 come in bundle that the user download when he downloads nRF Sniﬀer
44
==PAGE:46==
software.
Next step is to connected the hardward to the system.
The next
step is to setup the Wireshark. The user have to change the extcap path in
Wireshark need to be nrf sniffer
< version >
< hash >. Next step is
to check that Windows can access python 2.7 from any location with the call
”python”[30].
Next step is to set up J-link software.
It is called jlink.exe on windows.
Next step is to unplug all hardware and then connect the dongle. Then reason
why the hardware need to be unplug is because then the software know which
USB port the dongle is connected to. Then open the jlink.exe software and
erase by typing erase in the command window. It is going to ask the user for
the device which is nRF51422 XXAC. Target interface should be SWD the user
have to type ”s” and then selected speed 1000. Next set is that the user type[30]:
l o a d f i l e <path to
wireshark >\extcap \ n r f s n i f f f e r <verion>
<hash>\hex\ s n i f f e r <board name> <hash >.hex
At this point the user can just run the program called ”dongle sniﬀer”. This
program is going to give the user the possibility to track a connection with a
device. The user can then track the connection though Wireshark to see all the
packet remember to disable ”ble” in the top because you might miss some or
all the packages.
This tool have the beneﬁt that is very good at tracing the frequency hopping
of any bluetooth devices. Once the tool ﬁnd the diﬀerent devices it can keep
track of many devices until the user picks a special devices and focus on that
communication. The disadvantage of this software is that it is not able to send
packet to the device.
8.2
Set up Plugable USB Bluetooth 4.0 Low Energy Micro
Adapter
This section is about how to set up the pluable USB bluetooth dongle. This
section is interesting for the reader because this section explain how the dongle
is used for the attacks where the attacker take full control over the Orb. The
reader can use this section to set up the software so the reader can perform
some of the attack on the Orb.
To set up the plugable USB Bluetooth 4.0 low energy micro adapter a com-
puter running a Linux operating system is needed. I’m using a computer that
is running the newest version of Ubuntu. To run the attack that is using this
dongle we need to install the tools hcitool and gatttool. Below is the command
45
==PAGE:47==
that the user have to type into the terminal to set up the hcitool and the gat-
tool[25].
Below is the code for install hcitool:
sudo apt−get
i n s t a l l
bluetooth
bluez
bluez−t o o l s
r f k i l l
rfcomm
sudo apt−get
i n s t a l l
bluez−firmware firmware−atheros
sudo
systemctl
s t a r t
bluetooth . s e r v i c e
sudo
systemctl
enable
bluetooth . s e r v i c e
Below is the code for install gatttool:
wget https ://www. kernel . org /pub/ linux / bluetooth
/ bluez −5.18. tar . xz
dpkg −−get−s e l e c t i o n s
|
grep −v
d e i n s t a l l
|
grep
bluez
tar
xvf
bluez −5.18. tar . xz
sudo apt−get
i n s t a l l
l i b g l i b 2 .0−dev libdbus −1−dev libusb −dev
libudev−dev
l i b i c a l −dev systemd
l i b r e a d l i n e −dev
. configure −−enable−l i b r a r y
make −j8 && sudo make
i n s t a l l
sudo cp
a t t r i b / g a tt to o l
/ usr / l o c a l / bin /
This dongle is being set up on a Ubuntu computer which means that it can
use a lot of the diﬀerent tools build for Linux computers. The beneﬁt with
having a dongle running on a Linux computer is that a lot of the diﬀerent tools
build for sending packets works on Linux machines.
46
==PAGE:48==
9
Attacks Against the Orb
This section is going to look at the diﬀerent hacker attacks that can be done
and some theoretical attacks. Below is there a list of the diﬀerent attacks. After
the list of diﬀerent attack there is going to be a short explanation of each attack.
• Sniﬃng between Orb and Eclipse.
• Sniﬃng between Orb and phone.
• Authentication attack.
• DOS attack.
• Taking full control over the Orb.
• Blocking access to the device.
• Creating new ﬁrmware.
The ﬁrst two attacks are about sniﬃng data between the Orb and Eclipse
and the Orb and phone. These two attacks are about how much information
the attacker can gain just from passive listening. These attacks can never be
detected because the attacker is only listening. What both these sections are go-
ing to show is that the attack can learn almost everything from a passive attack.
The authentication attack is going to show how a none technical can take
control of one Orb very easily. This attack is going to show why authentication
is very important. The attacker can also make a DOS attack on a device to lock
all access permanent. The DOS attack is going to show how easy it is to block
all access to the device.
The attack called ”taking full control over the Orb” is the attack that shows
that an attacker can control the power of the Orb and change settings. This
attack requires technical skills and shows how the attacker can explore parts of
the Orb that is not in documentation. This attack is showing that the Orb is
lacking some security features. The next attack is to show how the attacker can
block the access to the device by changing some bytes. This attack is based on
the knowledge from the attack ”taking full control over the Orb”.
The last attack is a theoretical attack. It is based on changing the ﬁrmware
to set the Orb on ﬁre. Doing this attack would be very dangerous because it
would create small ﬁres and could escalate.
47
==PAGE:49==
9.1
Sniﬃng the communication between the Orb and the
Eclipse
This section is going to show the data was readable between the Orb and the
Eclipse(Eclipse is the light switch). The sniﬃng that is done in this section is
based on the setup from section 8.1. This is important for the reader because
this attack is the foundation with the next section for every other attack. The
data that is sniﬀed also have to be put into context. At ﬁrst, look do the data
that is sniﬀed just look like random stuﬀ. After the reader have read this section
he or she should understand what the diﬀerent bytes means. A example of what
the reader should know is what the key look like. The reason why the reader
should understand this is because it is used in more advanced attack by the
attacker. This attack was rated as a risk level 4 attack in the risk section from
table 2. All the data that have been sniﬀed can be seen in section 14.3(Appendix
C).
The hypothesis for this attack is that an attacker can sniﬀthe communica-
tion. Once the packet have been captured the attacker is able to read the data
because it is clear text. The attacker is cable of understand what the diﬀerent
packet does.
In this attack do the attacker gain access to the information that is send
between the Orb and the Eclipse. The Eclipse is the controller for the Orb.
The Eclipse is like a light switch for the Orb. In early section was it described
how the Orb was using a key to include in the messages. This key was used
to authorize the devices. This information about the key was obtain in this
section. The data was obtained by sniﬃng the communication between the Orb
and the Eclipse and the communication between the Orb and the phone.
I have been able to identify what the diﬀerent packets are doing. When
the Orb is not connected with the Eclipse or anything else it is going to send
messages of the size 50 bytes which it is going to keep broadcasting. The broad-
casting messages is build like it was explained in section 2.1.1. In listing 3 the
broadcasting message can been seen. The ﬁrst 8 bytes are used for header in-
formation. The ﬁrst byte is the preamble which is set to 0x03. 0x03 is the hexa
value that is set in message. The next 4 bytes are are the access address. After
the access address is next part of the packet header information.
To understand how the diﬀerent bytes inﬂuence the Orb, the attacker had
run diﬀerent test on the Orb. The way I obtained this knowledge about the
communication was by running diﬀerent scenarios and learn what happen. To
be able to determine what the diﬀerent message did I was creating very control
situations. A control situation mean that I only change one parameter in each
test. One example of a control situation is starting the Orb and connect with
the Eclipse but don’t change anything to it. I was able to determine what the
transmitted data was used for. Below is a list of diﬀerent scenarios that have
48
==PAGE:50==
been tested:
• Connected the Eclipse to the Orb with out changing the light settings.
• Connected the Eclipse to the Orb change the light setting from the initial
mood setting to the last mood setting and back to the initial mood setting.
There is 6 mood settings and the Orb is start on the ﬁrst mood setting
when it is power on.
• Connected the Eclipse to the Orb change the light settings don’t do any-
thing for a minute and then change light setting.
To the right of the listing 3 we can see the ASCII and to the left is the
hexadecimal code. The fourth byte from the right in the ﬁrst line is the access
addresses. The access address keep increment after each messages. I’m also able
to determine that the communication is from the Orb. The reason why I’m able
to determine this is because of the part of the messages that say Shade Orb. All
of the data between the header and the actual data is information that Nordic
Semiconductor bluetooth puts in. I have not been able to determine what the
Nordic Semiconductor data means.
Listing 3: Broadcasting messages with the size of 50 bytes and to the right is
the broadcasting messages in hexadecimal representation and to the right is it
in ASCII.
0000
03 06 2b 01 0e 4e 06 0a 01 27 48 00 00 89 02 00
. . + . .N. . . ’H . . . . .
0010
00 d6 be 89 8e 40 18 d9 4c a7 64 2 f
dc 03 19 00
. . . . . @. . L. d / . . . .
0020
00 02 01 06 0a 09 53 68 61 64 65 20 4 f
52 42 ab
. . . . . . Shade ORB.
0030
86 66
. f
In listing 4 is the message that is used for change light setting. The Eclipse
have 6 diﬀerent settings so it can only change between these 6 settings. So the
ﬁrst byte in the message is the preamble which is 0x03. The next 4 bytes are
the access address which are following the standard access address. After the
access address is the header which has the size of 2 bytes.
In the listing 4 we are also able to see the key that is used for authenticating.
The key are the bytes 0x5f 0x11 0x6e 0x6f. If the Orb and the Eclipse is powered
oﬀand then restarted they are still using the same key. The key can be seen in
the end of line 0010 in and start of line 0020 in listing 4. The two bytes after
the key is the receive also know as the sentinel value for ”all-and-relay-to-all”.
The receiver is the name” 0x01 and 0x16. After that it looks like bytes 0x00
can only be 0x00 or x01 which mean increase by one or decrease by one. The
last 3 bytes are error correcting code.
49
==PAGE:51==
Listing 4: The message for change the light setting. The message for change
light has the size of 43 bytes and to the right is the broadcasting messages in
hexadecimal representation and to the right is it in ASCII.
0000
03 06 24 01 52 4 f
06 0a 03 08 2d 12 00 e9 4c 00
. . $ .RO. . . . −. . . L.
0010
00 4c 3c 1c c9 02 11 0d 00 04 00 12 0d 00 5 f
11
. L < . . . . . . . . . . .
.
0020
6e 6 f
01 16 60 00 01 01 07 8c 63
no . . ‘ . . . . . c
We also collected a lot of data packets with the size of 26 bytes.
Listing 5: The message for paring the Eclipse and the Orb and not doing any-
thing. This message has the size of 26 bytes and to the right is the broadcasting
messages in hexadecimal representation and to the right is it in ASCII..
0000
03 06 13 01 f6 64 06 0a 09 0e 42 51 00 97 00 00
. . . . . d . . . . BQ . . . .
0010
00 4c 2e bc 89 05 00 30 bc be
.L . . . . . 0 . .
The hypothesis has been shown to be correct. The attacker is cable of
sniﬃng packets with the dongle build from Nordic Semiconductor. The attacker
is also able of read and understand the packets that he or she have captured.
The packets between the Orb and Eclipse wer not encrypted as expected in the
hypothesis.
9.2
Sniﬃng the communication between the Orb and the
phone.
This section is going to show that the data was readable in the communication
between the Orb and the phone. The sniﬃng that is done in this section is based
on the setup from section 8.1. Some of the sniﬃng that was done in the previous
sections is not done in this section because it is almost the same. The data that
is sniﬀed also have to be put into context. At ﬁrst look do the data that is
sniﬀed just look like random stuﬀ. After the reader have read this section he or
she should understand what the diﬀerent bytes means. An example of what the
reader should know is what the key looks like. The reason why the reader should
understand this is because it is used in more advanced attack by the attacker.
This attack was rated as a risk level 4 attack in the risk section from table 2.
All the data that have been sniﬀed can be seen in section 14.3(Appendix C).
The hypothesis for this attack is that an attacker can sniﬀthe communi-
cation. Once the packet have been captured the attacker is able to read the
data because it is clear text. The attacker is cable of understanding what the
diﬀerent packets does.
The sniﬃng is done while running diﬀerent types of commands to learn what
type of communication is send. Below is a list of the diﬀerent light setting that
data was sniﬀed on.
50
==PAGE:52==
• Test with red light on. I’m moving between the diﬀerent colors of red.
• Test with blue light on.
I’m moving the light setting in between the
diﬀerent colors of blue. This test started on red and moved to blue and
stay on blue light. The reason why it started on red was because when
powering on the Orb it starts on red light.
• Going though the diﬀerent colors. This test was done by starting on red
and moving clockwise. After one lap i redid it just to make sure that i got
the best measurements.
• Change the light settings while the light in the middle stay at the red
setting.
Changed the light lever of the bottom half.
First going from
middle to max light to minimum light back to max. Next was the top half
which also went max,min,max. The last part tested was the middle one
which also went max, min, max.
The broadcasted messages are the same as for the Eclipse. That was also
expected because it is the Orb that is broadcasting.
Listing 6: The broadcast message for the communication between the phone
and the Orb. The message for change light has the size of 50 bytes and to the
left below is the broadcasting messages in hexadecimal representation and to
the right is it in ASCII.
0000
03 06 2b 01 c9 2b 06 0a 01 27 42 00 00 89 02 00
. . + . . + . . . ’B . . . . .
0010
00 d6 be 89 8e 40 18 d9 4c a7 64 2 f
dc 03 19 00
. . . . . @. . L. d / . . . .
0020
00 02 01 06 0a 09 53 68 61 64 65 20 4 f
52 42 ab
. . . . . . Shade ORB.
0030
86 66
. f
In the listing 7 is the message used to change the mood of the the Orb. This
message is sent with the phone. The message have the ﬁrst 8 bytes that is the
same with preamble and access address and the header. The last byte of the
access address is increment with +1 each time a message is sent. The key that
is used to authenticate is the 4 bytes 0x5f 0x11 0x6e 0x6f. After that is the
0xc4 and 0xf3 which is the receiver of the message. The 0x11 on line 0030 in
listing 7 is a command for update of mood. The next 12 bytes are the mood
information for the lighting. The ﬁrst three bytes are 0xﬀ0xfa ox00. If you
change any of the 12 bytes the lighting is going to change. The 3 last bytes is
the error correcting.
Listing 7: The mood change message. It has the size of 53 bytes.
0000
03 06 2e 01 da 37 06 0a 03 03 2c 0a 00 b2 73 00
. . . . . 7 . . . . , . . . s .
0010
00 ee 73 65 50 0e 1b 17 00 04 00 12 0d 00 5 f
11
. . seP . . . . . . . . .
.
0020
6e 6 f
c4
f3 11
f f
fa 00 00 f9
f f
a0 09 60 c8 00
no . . . . . . . . . . . ‘ . .
0030
00 00 94 65 67
. . . eg
51
==PAGE:53==
Below is a message with size 26 bytes. This messages is used to keep the con-
nection alive and when this messages stop being send the connection is dropped.
The messages header is the same as on all the other messages.
Listing 8: The message with the size of 26 bytes.
0000
03 06 13 01 23 68 06 0a 09 0e 44 18 00 96 00 00
. . . . # h . . . . D . . . . .
0010
00 e0 7c 65 50 05 00 98 94 ac
. . | eP . . . . .
Below are ﬁve messages that have been captured multiple times. I was test-
ing what type of messages it would send if I was pressing the buttons that is
available on the color wheel. I was pressing the most red and the second most
red multiplier times over and over just to see if there was a pattern in the mes-
sages that I would get. The pattern that I found I shown below. The ﬁrst part
of each messages is the header. The messages that is strong red color is the
bytes 55 9d 21 and the code for less red color seems to be three ”f3 90 21”,
”20 96 21”, ”86 9b 21”. This messages pattern that is shown below is repeated
multiple times in the logs which can be seen in the ﬁle 14-04-2018 Two buttons.
Listing
9:
data
from
128.923932
to
128.985070
in
the
ﬁle
14-04-
2018 Two buttons. This shows how the lamp is change settings.
First
messages :
0000
03 06 13 01 e4 18 06 0a 09 0b 44 52 02 96 00 00
. . . . . . . . . . DR . . . .
0010
00 53 aa 9a af 09 00 55 9d 21
. S . . . . . U. !
Second messages :
0000
03 06 13 01 e5 18 06 0a 0b 1b 2c 53 02 fa 73 00
. . . . . . . . . . , S . . s .
0010
00 53 aa 9a af 01 00 f3 90 21
. S . . . . . . . !
Third messages :
0000
03 06 13 01 e6 18 06 0a 09 1b 42 53 02 96 00 00
. . . . . . . . . . BS . . . .
0010
00 53 aa 9a af 05 00 20 96 21
. S . . . . .
. !
Foruth messages :
0000
03 06 13 01 e7 18 06 0a 0b 06 3e 54 02 f9 73 00
. . . . . . . . . . > T . . s .
0010
00 53 aa 9a af 0d 00 86 9b 21
. S . . . . . . . !
f i t h
messages :
0000
03 06 13 01 e8 18 06 0a 09 06 3 f
54 02 97 00 00
. . . . . . . . . . ? T . . . .
0010
00 53 aa 9a af 09 00 55 9d 21
. S . . . . . U. !
52
==PAGE:54==
The hypothesis has been shown to be correct. The attacker is able
to sniﬀpacket with the dongle build from Nordic Semiconductor. The attacker
is also able to read and understand the packets that he or she have captured.
The packets between the Orb and phone was not encrypted as expected in the
hypothesis.
9.3
Authentication attack
This section is going to look at how the attacker can take control of the Orb
without using any special software. This attack is set to have a risk level at 5
in table 2. This mean that if this attack is successful there is problem with a
risk level red. This section is important because it explain how there is a lack
of minimum requirement of security in the system.
The hypothesis for this attack is that an attacker can take full control of
the Orb just by using the App. The hypothesis is that there is no authentication
and therefor can anyone control the Orb without having to authenticate.
This section is looking at how easy it is to access the Orb. Accessing the
Orb can be done by just downloading the app. The Orb have no authentication.
When a user have connected to the Orb no another user can connected to that
Orb. The connection is going to be dropped after no action in a minute. This
means that you can take full control of any Orb anywhere just by downloading
the app from app store or Google store. This is a security problem that there
is no authentication in section 10.2 a solution will be suggested for solving this
problem.
The hypothesis has been shown to be correct. The attacker could just
take full control with the app. This means that there is no authentication in
the current version of the app.
9.4
DOS attack
This section is going to describe two ways that DOS and DDOS attacks can be
used against the Orb and running on the Orb. This section is relevant for the
reader because the reader will get an understanding on how the attack can block
access to a single Orb. The attacker can based on blocking one Orb also start
blocking access to many Orbs. This section is also going to describe how the
attacker can use DDOS attack to block access to a server by using the Orb. The
DOS attack against the Orb is done by using the the dongle that is described
in section 8.2. This attack is set to have a risk level at 4 in table 2.
The hypothesis for this attack is that an attacker can block access to the
Orb by doing a DOS on the Orb from a computer. There is also a theoretic
53
==PAGE:55==
attack and that attacks have no hypothesis.
One of the attack that is very common today is DDOS attack and back in
early 2000 the DOS attacks were very popular. Having a look at what other
attackers have done through the last decade was the inspiration for this attack.
The idea is to block any type of access to the service. The service is in this case
having light on and change light settings.
First step is to look at how many connections can the Orb have open at one
time. The Orb is only able to be connected to one phone or Eclipse at any time.
This means that the attack only have to block this one connection to block any
access to the Orb. The attack can block any access to the Orb by using the
two tools Hcitool and Gatttool. These two tools is only working on Linux
computers. The tools are going to be explained in section 9.5.
After the attack has been preformed the next question is how diﬃcult is it
to scale this attack? This attack is not really scalable because it requires an
dongle for each Orb. Therefor is this type of attack not scalable to an entire city.
A very diﬀerent perspective that could be taken was that instead of
blocking the access to the Orb what if the Orb could block access to a server
like Facebook or Google. The attack could also be used to block access to some
of the DNS servers around the world. After looking at how the ﬁrmware could
be manipulated a new idea would be to create a bot that could run on the Orb.
A bot is also called a zombie by some people and is some code that is in-
stalled on the users computer. The bot is some code that wait for a command
that tells the bot what it should do. Below is a short list of some of the things
that bots can be used for.
• Steal ﬁnancial and personal information.
• Attack legitimate web services.
• Cyber criminals may also lease out their bot-nets.
The type of serveries that is use full in this case is attack legitimate web
services. This is a DDOS attack. The Orbs can be used for creating DDOS
attacks against legitimate web services like Facebook, Google and DNS servers.
This was the same way that Mirai [10] worked. If the Orb is located in many
homes around the world this would be a very power full attack. The plan with
the Orb is that all Orb’s in a house should be connected to a server like device.
This server should be collecting data from the Orbs but it is also connected
to the internet. Therefor is this type of attack not so unbelievable and it is a
concern to the safety of the system.
54
==PAGE:56==
The hypothesis has been shown to be correct. The attack was cable of
blocking the access by sending connection messages to the Orb. The Orb is not
able of droppeing the connection and therefor can the attacker keep the attack
going.
9.5
Taking full control over the Orb
This section is going to show how the attacker is able to take full control of the
Orb from a computer. This section will show how the attack slowly gain more
and more access into the Orb. The attack will start with having sniﬀed some
messages and understand what the diﬀerent bytes mean. The reason why this
is important is because this explain how an attacker slowly gain more and more
access and can change information. This section is going to show the reader how
the reader can take full control if he or she has the same set up. This attack
is done by the attacker that is using the dongle that is described in section 8.2.
This attack is set to be a risk level 6 which is max in table 2.
The hypothesis for this attack is that an attacker can gain full control over
the Orb. This means that an attacker can change data or the ﬁrmware and
change the light setting of the Orb.
This attack is going to send messages from a computer to the Orb. The at-
tack is going to be based on information I have gained from the previous attacks
on the Orb. In section 9.1 and section 9.2 is the information showed. The infor-
mation that is used most is showed in listing 7. The attack is going to use a Blue-
tooth 4.0+ dongle. The bluetooth 4.0+ dongle that is used in this attack can
be bought from (https://www.amazon.com/Plugable-Bluetooth-Adapter-
Raspberry-Compatible/dp/B009ZIILLI). This attack is also based on having
the software hcitool and gatttool. The attack method that I’m using is based on
some of the steps that is used by the Advanced persistent threat(APT). APT
groups are hacker groups that uses stealth and skills to attack organizations.
The APT groups are black hat(hacker groups with malicious purpose) with a
lot of resources to preform attacks. They are often seen as some of the best at
hacking. Below is the step that the attack is going thought.
• Target speciﬁc device.
• Reconnaissance.
• Establish Foothold.
• Escalate privileges.
• Complete mission.
55
==PAGE:57==
A lot of the reconnaissance is done in the two section that sniﬀed data be-
tween the Orb and the phone and between the Orb and the Eclipse. Sniﬃng
data and learning what it does is passive reconnaissance. During a reconnais-
sance it is very important to avoid activating the traps that tell the organization
that they are under attack.
First step in the attack is to scan for the devices that the attacker can access.
The hcitool is used to scan for devices and it is going to give the MAC addressed
that is assigned to the device. Below is the result of running the command sudo
hcitool lescan. At the bottom of the list is the a device called Shade ORB
with a MAC address DC:2F:64:A7:4C:D9. This attack is going to be on the
MAC address that we just found.
sudo
h c i t o o l
lescan
LE Scan
. . .
38:B3 : 6 4 : F7 :D6:96
(unknown)
78:BD:BC: C7 : 3 3 : E6 (unknown)
5 4 : 6 0 : 0 9 : 7D:53:95
(unknown)
5 4 : 6 0 : 0 9 : 7D:53:95
(unknown)
23:F7 :D4: 9 2 :DA:93
(unknown)
DC: 5 6 : E7 : 4 5 : 8 1 : 8 1
(unknown)
DC: 5 6 : E7 : 4 5 : 8 1 : 8 1
(unknown)
DC:2F: 6 4 : A7:4C:D9 Shade ORB
The hcitool can also in some cases collect information about the device. The
command for the hcitool is leinfo[13]. I was not able to use the command on
the Shade but for example I copied the data that is shown on the github for the
tool[8]. This command tells the attacker about what version of the The Link
Manager Protocol the device is running and how many handles (The attribute
handle is a unique 16-bit identiﬁer for each attribute on a particular GATT
server) are available. Other information that I also gained is who the manufac-
turer is. The good thing about knowing the manufacturer is that the attacker
can now look if any exploit exits for this product.
sudo
h c i t o o l
l e i n f o BC:6A: 2 9 :AE:D8:12
The r e s u l t
from the
l e i n f o
would look
l i k e
t h i s
i f
i t
i s
able
to
optain
the
information .
Requesting
information
. . .
Handle :
64 (0 x0040 )
LMP Version :
4.0
(0 x6 ) LMP Subversion :
0x140
Manufacturer :
Texas Instruments
Inc .
(13)
Features :
0x01 0x00 0x00 0x00 0x00 0x00 0x00 0x00
The two commands explained above are used for targeting a speciﬁc device
and reconnaissance. The hcitool is only used for the reconnaissance. After the
56
==PAGE:58==
reconnaissance phase is done the next step is to establish a foothold into the
device.
To establish a foothold we have to access the device.
The tool that I’m
using is gatttool. I have placed the gatttool with root access on my Ubuntu
computer. The reason for doing this is that the gatttool needs to be able to
access all of the hardware. The gatttool is used for connecting to the device the
information gained from the reconnaissance is used to connect to the device.
Below is the command that is used to connect to the device. Below this text
paragraph is shown how the attack connect to the device with the MAC address
”DC:2F:64:A7:4C:D9”. The device with the MAC address is one of the Orbs.
In the command below is also setting three ﬂags which are -t -b and -I. Then
the attacker set the -t ﬂag in the gatttool command it means that the device is
looking for a low energy bluetooth address type. The default for the t ﬂag is
public. The -b ﬂag is just the mac address ”DC:2F:64:A7:4C:D9”. The -I ﬂag
is just for interactive.
sudo gatttool -t random -b DC:2F:64:A7:4C:D9 -I
[DC:2F:64:A7:4C:D9][LE]>
After completing this state we have established a foothold into the sys-
tem. After establishing a foothold the next step is to escalate the privileges. At
this point we have block all access to the system but we still need to connect to
the device. Using the gatttool command connect is going to connect the com-
puter into the device. The reason why the connect command is the only thing
needed is because the gatttool knows the MAC address of the device. When the
MAC address is blue the computer and the Orb are connected. At this point I
have started the escalation of privileges. No other user can gain direct access to
this Orb. The reason why only one user can gain access is because then some
one connects all open connections are used.
[DC:2F:64:A7:4C:D9][LE]> connect
Attempting to connect to DC:2F:64:A7:4C:D9
Connection successful
[DC:2F:64:A7:4C:D9][LE]>
Once the laptop have connected to the device the help command tells the
attacker which commands are available. Looking at the output help command
there is the command char-read-hnd/char-read-uuid, char-write-req/char-write-
cmd, primary and char-desc. These are the commands that is going to be used
for the attack.
[DC:2F: 6 4 : A7:4C:D9 ] [ LE]>help
help
Show t h i s
help
57
==PAGE:59==
e x i t
Exit
i n t e r a c t i v e mode
quit
Exit
i n t e r a c t i v e mode
connect
[ address
[ address
type ] ]
Connect to a remote
device
disconnect
Disconnect from a remote
device
primary
[UUID]
Primary
Service
Discovery
included
[ s t a r t hnd [ end hnd ] ]
Find Included
Services
c h a r a c t e r i s t i c s
[ s t a r t hnd [ end hnd [UUID ] ] ]
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c s
Discovery
char−desc
[ s t a r t hnd ]
[ end hnd ]
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c s
Descriptor
Discovery
char−read−hnd
<handle>
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c s
Value/ Descriptor Read
by handle
char−read−uuid
<UUID> [ s t a r t hnd ]
[ end hnd ]
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c s
Value/ Descriptor Read
by UUID
char−write−req
<handle> <new value>
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
Value Write
( Write Request )
char−write−cmd
<handle> <new value>
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
Value Write
(No response )
sec−l e v e l
[ low
| medium |
high ]
Set
s e c u r i t y
l e v e l .
Default :
low
mtu
<value>
Exchange MTU fo r GATT/ATT
The ﬁrst command to be used is the primary. The command primary tells
us which handle are the main handles. From the output below we can see that
the handles from 0x0001 to 0x0009, 0x000a and from 0x000b to 0xﬀﬀare the
primary handles. This means that all the handles are primary. So either all the
handles are important or more likely the primary function is not working on the
shade.
[DC:2F:64:A7:4C:D9][LE]>primary
attr handle: 0x0001, end grp handle: 0x0009 uuid: 00001800-0000-1000-8000-
00805f9b34fb
attr handle: 0x000a, end grp handle: 0x000a uuid: 00001801-0000-1000-8000-
00805f9b34fb
attr handle: 0x000b, end grp handle: 0xﬀﬀuuid: 00001521-3d1c-019e-ab4a-
65fd86e87333
So instead of using the primary I can use the command char-desc. The com-
mand char-desc- gives all the handles and the uuid. The handles are location
in the Orb where the attacker can access data and change data. In the section
14.2( Appendix B) is list of the translation of the diﬀerent handles that is given
by Orb.
58
==PAGE:60==
[DC:2F: 6 4 : A7:4C:D9 ] [ LE]> char−desc
handle :
0x0001 ,
uuid :
2800
handle :
0x0002 ,
uuid :
2803
handle :
0x0003 ,
uuid :
2a00
handle :
0x0004 ,
uuid :
2803
handle :
0x0005 ,
uuid :
2a01
handle :
0x0006 ,
uuid :
2803
handle :
0x0007 ,
uuid :
2a04
handle :
0x0008 ,
uuid :
2803
handle :
0x0009 ,
uuid :
2aa6
handle :
0x000a ,
uuid :
2800
handle :
0x000b ,
uuid :
2800
handle :
0x000c ,
uuid :
2803
handle :
0x000d ,
uuid :
00001523−3d1c−019e−ab4a−65fd86e87333
handle :
0x000e ,
uuid :
2803
handle :
0x000f ,
uuid :
00001527−3d1c−019e−ab4a−65fd86e87333
handle :
0x0010 ,
uuid :
2803
handle :
0x0011 ,
uuid :
00001529−3d1c−019e−ab4a−65fd86e87333
handle :
0x0012 ,
uuid :
2803
handle :
0x0013 ,
uuid :
0000152a−3d1c−019e−ab4a−65fd86e87333
handle :
0x0014 ,
uuid :
2803
handle :
0x0015 ,
uuid :
0000152b−3d1c−019e−ab4a−65fd86e87333
handle :
0x0016 ,
uuid :
2803
handle :
0x0017 ,
uuid :
0000152c−3d1c−019e−ab4a−65fd86e87333
handle :
0x0018 ,
uuid :
2803
handle :
0x0019 ,
uuid :
0000152d−3d1c−019e−ab4a−65fd86e87333
handle :
0x001a ,
uuid :
2803
handle :
0x001b ,
uuid :
0000152e−3d1c−019e−ab4a−65fd86e87333
handle :
0x001c ,
uuid :
2803
handle :
0x001d ,
uuid :
00001528−3d1c−019e−ab4a−65fd86e87333
handle :
0x001e ,
uuid :
2803
handle :
0x001f ,
uuid :
0000152 f −3d1c−019e−ab4a−65fd86e87333
handle :
0x0020 ,
uuid :
2803
handle :
0x0021 ,
uuid :
1524
Discover
d e s c r i p t o r s
f i n i s h e d : No a t tr i b u te
found
within
the
given
range
Knowing all the diﬀerent handle I check what is stored at the diﬀerent handles.
below is a list of request for each handle and the respond that I got from the
handle. I have been able to explain some of the handles like 0x0009 which is
set Dim level increment. This Dim level is set to be a number between 0 and 8.
Documentation for some of the handles are showed in section 14.2( Appendix
B) but some of handles do not exits in the documentation from shade. This
number is in line with the documentation. It is disturbing that an attacker can
gain access to all these information that is stored within the Orb so easily. The
attacker actually only have to ask what is stored at each handle and it replies
59
==PAGE:61==
no conﬁrmation of who is asking is needed. The information that was obtained
is showed below it contains all the information that is stored in each handle.
char−read−hnd 0x0001
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
00 18
char−read−hnd 0x0002
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
0a 03 00 00 2a
char−read−hnd 0x0003
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
53 68 61 64 65 20 4 f
52 42
char−read−hnd 0x0004
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
02 05 00 01 2a
char−read−hnd 0x0005
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
00 00
char−read−hnd 0x0006
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
02 07 00 04 2a
char−read−hnd 0x0007
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
50 00 a0 00 00 00 90 01
char−read−hnd 0x0008
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
02 09 00 a6 2a
char−read−hnd 0x0009
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
01
char−read−hnd 0x000a
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
01 18
char−read−hnd 0x000b
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
33 73 e8 86 fd 65 4a ab 9e 01
1c 3d 21 15 00 00
char−read−hnd 0x000c
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
08 0d 00 33 73 e8 86 fd 65 4a
ab 9e 01 1c 3d 23 15 00 00
char−read−hnd 0x000e
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
02 0 f
00 33 73 e8 86 fd 65 4a
ab 9e 01 1c 3d 27 15 00 00
60
==PAGE:62==
char−read−hnd 0 x000f
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
4b
char−read−hnd 0x0010
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
02 11 00 33 73 e8 86 fd 65 4a
ab 9e 01 1c 3d 29 15 00 00
char−read−hnd 0x0011
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
01 9b
char−read−hnd 0x0012
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
02 13 00 33 73 e8 86 fd 65 4a
ab 9e 01 1c 3d 2a 15 00 00
char−read−hnd 0x0013
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
00 00 00 01
char−read−hnd 0x0014
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
02 15 00 33 73 e8 86 fd 65 4a
ab 9e 01 1c 3d 2b 15 00 00
char−read−hnd 0x0015
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
00 00 00 01
char−read−hnd 0x0016
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
02 17 00 33 73 e8 86 fd 65 4a
ab 9e 01 1c 3d 2c 15 00 00
char−read−hnd 0x0017
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
00 8c
char−read−hnd 0x0018
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
02 19 00 33 73 e8 86 fd 65 4a
ab 9e 01 1c 3d 2d 15 00 00
char−read−hnd 0x0019
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
82 00
char−read−hnd 0x001a
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
02 1b 00 33 73 e8 86 fd 65 4a
ab 9e 01 1c 3d 2e 15 00 00
char−read−hnd 0x001b
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
01
char−read−hnd 0x001c
61
==PAGE:63==
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
02 1d 00 33 73 e8 86 fd 65 4a
ab 9e 01 1c 3d 28 15 00 00
char−read−hnd 0x001d
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
00 00 00 00 00 00
char−read−hnd 0x001e
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
02 1 f
00 33 73 e8 86 fd 65 4a
ab 9e 01 1c 3d 2 f
15 00 00
char−read−hnd 0 x001f
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
00 00 00 00
char−read−hnd 0x0020
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
0a 21 00 24 15
char−read−hnd 0x0021
C h a r a c t e r i s t i c
value / d es cr ip to r :
e9 76 0d 9e 82 0e ca 96
fe
bf
3b 6c 12 30 16 e3
af
af
e8 ac
f f
06 2c 0 f
fe
e7 34 a9 af 98 05
c5 6b 60 5c 11 02 64 83 ae 99 96 f7 cb a4 6c 88 b3 91 f6 0e 01
00 0c 22 fb dc 99 2b 65 c6 18 98 50 a6 eb 9 f
46 b3 40 31 77 a9
bf
fe 4e e4 22 d0 cb a4 f5 99 a4 00 2a 8a 48 6c 1e 38 52 98 8a
a9 5d 64 14 6 f
c8 c0 d0 33 96
fe
94 27 05 0d 14 c0 66 8e 67 63
a8 03 8b 0a 71 36 7a ef
9a 73 d8 8c 4a
So the next step is to test witch of these handles that I can write to. I
found that I could write messages to two handles the ﬁrst one being 0x0003
and the second one being 0x000d. These two handles where the only one
that I was allowed to send messages to successfully. When I use the command
char-write-req I get a reply from the Orb. When I use the char-write-cmd I
don’t get a reply it just do it.
First step is to write to handle 0x0003 or 0x3 these name does not really
matter. I’m able to write anything on handle 0x0003. Below is the command
for writing to handle 0x0003 and as it can be seen the command is accepted. All
the diﬀerent input that have been tried have been successful. I can read what
have written to handle by using this command ”char-read-hnd”. After writing
it is possible to read the same results from the handle. It has been unclear what
this handle actually does. The reason why the handle is unclear is because it
is not in the documentation from Shade. According to Shade ApS, the handle
0x0003 does not exist
[DC:2F:64:A7:4C:D9][LE]>char-write-req 0x0003 5f116e6f011660010
Characteristic value was written successfully
The second step is to write to the handle 0x000d or 0xd. The 0x000d handle
62
==PAGE:64==
is used to update the light setting. The messages that I send to the Orb is
collected from the section about sniﬃng. Below is a list of diﬀerent messages
that I send.
• char-write-req 0xd 5f116e6fc4f311ﬀfa0000f9ﬀa00960c8
• char-write-req 0xd 5f116e6fc4f311ﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀ
• char-write-req 0xd 5f116e6fc4f31100000000000000000000
The ﬁrst messages above is just a sniﬀed messages and it is going to set
messages to a default setting. The ﬁrst part of the messages is the key and
sender address and the second part of the message is the setting of the Orb.
The second message is turning up all the light to max power. When all the
number is set to 0xﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀ. In ﬁgure 14 can be see how the Orb looks
when the setting is set to 0xﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀ. When the number is changed to
0x00000000000000000000 instead of 0xﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀthe Orb is going to have
no light on. The Orb with the power setting 0x00000000000000000000 can be
seen in ﬁgure 15. At this point have the attacker completed he or her mission
and have achieved full access which is the last of the attacker model that is
being used. Below the two ﬁgures is a messages send to Orb and it updates.
Below can it be seen how the Orb reply’s back successfully messages. At this
point have the attacker gained full control over the Orb.
Figure 14: This ﬁgure shows the Orb and how it is using maximum power.
63
==PAGE:65==
Figure 15: This ﬁgure shows the Orb and how it is using minimum power.
[DC:2F:64:A7:4C:D9][LE]>char-write-req 0xd 5f116e6fc4f311ﬀfaﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀ
Characteristic value was written successfully
After setting all the light diode to maximum power it is interesting to see
how warm the lamp turns out to become. In the center of the Orb the temper-
ature is around 60 degree Celsius or 333.1500 Kelvin. The temperature around
the metal area on the Orb has a signiﬁcant high temperature. The metal area
is around 75 degree Celsius that is the highest measured temperature. This is
not warm enough to set ﬁre to paper that burns around 220 degrees Celsius[18].
However the Orb is warm enough to make second degree burn marks on people.
For the Orb to be able to give a human second degree burns it requires that
the human is in contact with the hot area for 30 seconds to a 1 minute. To
achieve the temperature where anything is going to burn we need to double the
heat. I do have some doubt about how accurate the measurements is because
the temperature of my coﬀee was around 38 degree Celsius then I just removed
it from the coﬀee maker. The normal temperature for coﬀee is around 80 to 90
degrees. In Figure 16 a picture of one of the measurements can be seen. This
was picture was taken to show how it was done and how bright the Orb could be.
Now the question is how can an attack then achieve that the Orb is going to
catch ﬁre. The attacker could make a custom ﬁrmware that allows the attacker
to override the safety features that is installed. This attack has however showed
that it is very possible to get the right’s to change everything in the Orb and
take full control. This is a serious security breach and later in this report there
is going to be suggestion how on to solve these issues.
64
==PAGE:66==
Figure 16: This ﬁgure shows the Orb and how it is using minimum power.
The hypothesis has been shown to be correct. The attack was cable
of taking full control of the Orb and change the data stored in handle 0x0003
and 0x000d. This attack allows that to change colors of light settings.
9.6
Blocking access to the device
This section is a extension of the section above. It is based on that the attacker
has taken full control over the Orb. The attacker is then able to block all access
to the Orb form devices like phones and the Eclipse. This section is relevant
for the reader because it shows how the attacker can block access by changing
the data stored. This attack was done by the attacker using the the dongle that
was described in section 8.2. This is a series attack it has the risk level of 6
based on table 2.
The hypothesis for this attack is that an attacker can block access to the
Orb by changing the information that is stored in handle 0x0003.
65
==PAGE:67==
In the earlier section I showed how an attacker is able to block access to
Orb. The way that an attacker is able to block all access to the Orb from the
phone and Eclipse is by writing to one of the handles. I have blocked all access
by changing the data in handle 0x0003 to something completely diﬀerent. The
data that is stored at handle 0x0003 is normally 0x53 0x68 0x61 0x64 0x65 0x20
0x4f 0x52 0x42. At the moment I have not been able to access the Orb from
anything else but my computer. Normally after 24 hours to 48 hours the Orb
is accessible from the Eclipse or the phone.
When an attacker writes data to Handle 0x0003 the owner can’t access the
Orb from any of the normal methods like using the phone or Eclipse. When I
power oﬀthe Orb I still can’t access the Orb by the phone or Eclipse. I have
even tried to power oﬀthe device for 24 House and I still can’t gain control of
the device. At some point the Orb is going to ﬁx it self and therefor can I access
the Orb again.
When the access to the Orb has been blocked the phone is just going to show
the gray background and say scanning. The Eclipse is not able to tell the user
that it can’t connect to Orb. The attack is dangerous because this means that
the attacker can block all the Orb’s in one building and turn oﬀall lights. This
attack would have a lot of value for people that want to gain physical access to
the building. People can also be hurt if they can’t turn on the lights. Imag-
ine a staircase and people can’t see anything because they can’t turn on the Orb.
The hypothesis has been shown to be correct. The attack was cable of
block access to the Orb by changing the information stored at handle 0x0003.
This means that the attack is able of block access to many Orb with in a few
seconds.
9.7
Certiﬁcation of the ﬁrmware
This section is going to look at how certiﬁcation of the ﬁrmware works. This
section is looking at how an attacker can create false ﬁrmware code. This section
is also looking at what an attacker should do if he or she wanted to create some
ﬁrmware code that would have some malicious purpose. The section is going
to take some inspiration from the section about DDOS attacks. The reason
why the reader should read this section is to understand how important it is to
protect the code.
This attack is entirely theoretical. I have not looked at how the ﬁrmware is
build or how to create new ﬁrmware. The idea behind the attack is that chang-
ing the ﬁrmware will allow the attacker to increase the power consumption and
therefore increase the temperature on the Orb. If the temperature is very high
the Orb could ignite. This is the idea behind the attack that Orbs could be
used to start ﬁres on command in households.
66
==PAGE:68==
The way that the attack would work is that the attacker have to create a
ﬁrmware update.
The ﬁrmware have to contain some type of malware that
allows the attacker to increase the power consumption of the device.
If the
ﬁrmware is not signed the attacker can just create a new ﬁrmware that allows
the attacker to overheat the Orb.
The attacker can then send the ﬁrmware
update.
The attacker can then send a message that max the power con-
summation. The messages that the attack should send is ”char-write-req 0xd
5f116e6fc4f311ﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀﬀ”.
The ﬁrmware does have some protection methods from Nordic Semiconduc-
tor. The securety measurre that is going to protect the ﬁrmware is BLE Secure
DFU Bootloader. The BLE Secure DFU Bootloader is having these features:
• Type of the image.
• Hash of the image.
• Firmware version.
• Hardware version.
• Allowed versions of the SoftDevice.
• Size of the new SoftDevice, bootloader, or application.
• Signature type.
• Signature.
The Type of the image is the images. The images can be application images,
SoftDevice images, bootloader images or a combination of the three things.
”SoftDevice is a precompiled and linked binary software implementing a wire-
less protocol”[32]. The bootloader is code that runs before anything else. The
bootloader is used to boot the operating system. The Hash of the image is
a hash value of the image. This value contains two ﬁelds one that specify the
hashing algorithm. That could be SHA-1, SHA-256, SHA-3 or MD5. The other
ﬁeld is the hash value of the image.
The next part is describing how Nordic Semiconductor is signing ﬁrmware.
This is relevant to understand how a hacker can create a signature that is al-
lowed on the Orb. The Firmware version is just a number that tell which
version the bootloader image and application image. The Hardware version
is just the required hardware for the ﬁrmware. The Allowed versions of the
Soft Device is just information about which version of the SoftDevice ﬁrmware
that is used for an application image. The Allowed version of the soft Device
can max be four SoftDevice ﬁrmware. Size of the new SoftDevice, boot-
loader, or application this value is just the size of the SoftDevice, bootloader,
67
==PAGE:69==
or application in bytes or bits.
The Signature type are ECDSA P256 SHA256 and ED25519.
This is
Microsoft’s way of signing software ECDSA P256 SHA256 and ED25519 is a
signing algorithms that is based on the Schnorr signature based and Twisted
Edwards curves. The Signature is the hash value that is created when the
hashing algorithm is chosen.
The Types of the image, hash of image, ﬁrmware version, hardware version,
allowed versions of the softdevices, Size of the new SoftDevice, bootloader, or
application, Signature type and signature is ﬁelds that have to be ﬁlled out.
This header is security for the bootloader. Based on all looking at how the
bootloader is being protected this attack should be impossible.
That is not
really the case because one the signature type the Nordic semiconductor allow
is only secure if all the assumptions is working. ED25519 has been shown by
the industry to be insecure in a lot of cases. The reason why ED25519 has been
insecure is because the industry is breaking some of the assumptions. One of
the cases where it was used and broken was the PlayStation 3 hack. There is
also a case where 59 bit coins are stolen because they use the ED25519[27].
The next problem is that to authenticate the signature the device needs to
access a trusted server that knows the check sum. Normally when a computer
needs to validate the signature on some software it has to connect to a trusted
site get the check sum and then check. An example is a Windows update. The
computer would download the Windows update check calculate the hash value
and then go to Microsoft and ask for the hash value of this software. Microsoft
would sign the hash value and the computer would know the public key of Mi-
crosoft so it would trust that this hash value is from Microsoft. Next step would
be to check if the hash value is the same. If the hash value is the same it would
install the update. The Orb does not have access to the internet and is not
build it navigate the internet so how can it check that the ﬁrmware is from a
trusted party? So there is signature on the ﬁrmware but the Orb is not capable
of validating if this signature is correct or not. The smart phone that connect to
the Orb can download the ﬁrmware update and check if it is a validate ﬁrmware
but the Orb can not.
Nordic Semiconductor is also so nice that they give the attacker access to the
tool to create signed ﬁrmware package and unsigned ﬁrmware package. The Soft-
ware is availed at https://github.com/NordicSemiconductor/pc-nrfutil/.
This means that an attacker can go to Github download the software that signs
ﬁrmware and turns it into a package. The Orb does not have the capabilities
to check the ﬁrmware signature so it is going to take it. Below is a list with the
features that the software from github has.
• Device Firmware Update package generation.
68
==PAGE:70==
• Cryptographic key generation, management and storage.
• Bootloader DFU settings generation and display.
• Device Firmware Update procedure over Bluetooth Low Energy.
• Device Firmware Update procedure over Thread.
The Firmware can also be changed to contain diﬀerent types of code. One
example of code that could be upload onto the Orb could be ransomware. The
attacker could want to encrypt the entire software on the Orb and therefor
block access to the Orb. Ransomware attack’s are done to ask people or owners
for money to decrypt their devices. Ransomware is at moment a very popular
attack’s against companies and organizations. Therefor does it makes sense to
look at how ransomware could be used against the Orb. This could be a way
for cyber criminals to damage the reputation of Shade and the Orb.
Taking a look at how the ﬁrmware looks would give some insight into how
an attacker would create fake ﬁrmware. The newest version of ﬁrmware that I
got from Shade is called ”app dfu package orb v2”. It contains 3 ﬁles, ”mani-
fest.json”, ”orb.bin”, ”orb.dat”. The idea is how much can be learned just from
looking at these ﬁles. Let start with looking at manifest.json. a json ﬁle is a
open standard ﬁle format that is written in human readable text. The Json ﬁle
is used to transmit objects.
{
” manifest ”: {
” application ”: {
” b i n f i l e ”: ”orb . bin ” ,
” d a t f i l e ”: ”orb . dat”
}
}
}
Looking at the code it easily readable for everyone that have the code. The
code just run the two other ﬁles. This means that if an attacker were interested
in adding an extra ﬁle he or she could easily do that. Below is an example of
how the code would look with an attack ﬁle added. The attacker is going to call
the two ﬁles without maleware and one ﬁle that contains some malware. The
attack ﬁles are going to be called attack.bin and attack.dat.
A .bin ﬁle is a compressed binary ﬁle. a .bin ﬁle is an image that normally
contains many folders and ﬁles in it. When the bin ﬁle have been loaded will a
executable be created. A .dat ﬁle is a generic data ﬁle. A .dat ﬁle is used by
many diﬀerent programs and it just used to store data.
69
==PAGE:71==
{
” manifest ”: {
” application ”: {
” b i n f i l e ”: ”orb . bin ” ,
” d a t f i l e ”: ”orb . dat”
” b i n f i l e ”: ” attack . bin ” ,
” d a t f i l e ”: ” attack . dat”
}
}
}
Next step after looking at the manifest.json is to look at the .bin. This ﬁle
is written in binary so it was changed into ASCII to make it easy to read. Some
of the character was removed because they can’t be shown in this document,
the entire ﬁle is attached. The original ﬁle can be seen in section 14.1(Appendix
A). However looking at a small part of the orb.bin code can teach us a lot about
what the code actually does.
Just by looking at the code it pretty fast gets very clear that the code is
used for the mesh network that is running bluetooth 5. Some of the lines of
codes give away what the code is about. The ﬁrst line in the code below says
”C:/installed/mesh092/mesh/src/access/access.c” this tell us that it involves
the mesh network. Looking more into the code we ﬁnd that ”Advertiser ad-
dress: %.02x:%.02x:%.02x:%.02x:%.02x:%.02x” This is on the second last line
of the code. This is clearly an address used in Bluetooth 5. The length matches
a Bluetooth 5 address and is not used in Bluetooth low energy. Another mes-
sage that gives away that this involves is the error messages ”Error %u: Unable
to relay network packet. Continuing...”. The only time that message is relayed
thought the network is in the mesh network.
By looking at the .bin ﬁle that is a ﬁrmware update we also learn something
more about the security. The mesh network is using some type of encryption.
That information is shown in the lines that contains these statements ” Using
app key”,” Could not decrypt transport layer data.” and ”Got packet from old
SAR session”. The ﬁrst messages tell us that the system is using a key. That
messages alone don’t conﬁrms that the messages is encrypted. The second mes-
sages however conﬁrms that the data is encrypted because it can’t decrypt the
messages at the transport layer. The more interesting part is the last messages
that states ”Got packet from old SAR session”. The reason why this messages
is very interesting from a security perspective is that it tells us that it is creating
new key’s for each sessions. This means the mesh network is updating the key
that is used to encrypted the communication. This means that the attacker
have to break a key for regular for listening in which means that this is not the
way into the system.
C:/ i n s t a l l e d /mesh092/mesh/ src / access / access . c
TX:
[ aop :
0x%04x ]
70
==PAGE:72==
MESH ASSERT at 0x%.08 lx
./ mesh/ nrf mesh node config . c
C
Terminal
RTT SEGGER
<t : %10u>, %s , %4d ,
%u;%u;%s;%u ;
$
0123456789ABCDEF
C:/ i n s t a l l e d /mesh092/mesh/ src / core / nrf mesh . c
Sending
SARS packet !
length=%d unseg=%d
r e l i a b l e=%d
Cannot
a l l o c a t e memory fo r
advertising
packet !
[ er%d ]
Could not
process mesh packet . . .
[ er%d ]
Could not
process
beacon packet . . .
Error %u when processing SAR
id128 C:/ i n s t a l l e d /mesh092/mesh/ src / core / transport . c
Unable to push to
i n t e r n a l
event queue
[ er%d ]
Error %u :
Unable to
transmit segment .
Segments
l e f t : %u
Message decrypted
Dropped SAR s e s s i o n %u
Session
already
cancelled
%s : %s
SAR APP nonce :
Using
Virtual
Address
(∗)
Unable to
decrypt message
SAR assembling
complete
Packet
in
replay
protection
cache .
Error %u :
Unable to
relay
network packet .
Continuing . . .
Using app key
Could not decrypt
transport
layer
data .
Got packet from old SAR s e s s i o n
Got segment %u
Last segment
length : %u ,
t o t a l
length : %u
Segment payload
Re−scheduling
ack timer .
0x%04x
%0x != %0x , %0x != %0x
Unknown transport
packet
type .
All
segments acked !
Blocks
remaining 0x%0x
Segment %u already
acked !
No memory f or
sending SAR message or
bearer was busy
Unable to send SAR message %u
Rescheduling TX timer
Could not
a l l o c a t e
sequence number f or
packet !
Unable to
a l l o c a t e memory %u
Could not
a l l o c a t e
sequence number f or
transaction !
SAR App nonce
S u c c e s s f u l l y
created SAR packet
SAR packet :
-
C:/ i n s t a l l e d /mesh092/mesh/ src / core / flash manager . c
C:/ i n s t a l l e d /mesh092/mesh/ src / core /beacon . c Got
unrecognised
beacon ID :
0x%.02x .
Beacon raw data :
C:/ i n s t a l l e d /mesh092/mesh/ src / core / bearer . c smk2smk3id64
71
==PAGE:73==
smk4id6 C:/ i n s t a l l e d /mesh092/mesh/ src / core /network . c
Unable to
a l l o c a t e memory f or
relay
packet .
Unable to
transmit
packet %p [ er%u ]
Unencrypted data :
nkbk
Ey y y C:/ i n s t a l l e d /
mesh092/mesh/ src / core / bearer adv . c
scan order ( ) :
cannot
a l l o c a t e memory f or
incoming
packet
Advertiser
address :
%.02x:%.02x:%.02x:%.02x:%.02x:%.02x
Unknown option %d . . .
The orb.dat ﬁle do not really contain any information so therefor it’s not
that as interesting. So after looking at the code for orb.bin the code have showed
a lot about the diﬀerent security features that is involved with mesh network.
Understanding the security of the mesh network allow the attackers to design
the attack to attack the weakest point of the system. Looking at the ﬁrmware
it is possible to build a new version of Mirai but with the same properties or
reuse the Mira malware on the Orb. The Mirai malware have been used for
DDOS servers around the world. Mirai bot would only be working if the Orb
can connect to the internet.
As earlier described the Mirai malware took down most of the USA DNS
server back in 2016 with a cyber attack called the Dyn attack. The bot that
is going to be build for the Orb just need to DDOS a speciﬁc IP address. The
IP address could for example be Google or Facebook. Lets take Facebook for
example lets say the attacker want to block access to Facebook.dk. The attacker
need to ﬁnd all the diﬀerent IP address that is used by Facebook.dk. This is
the current IP address that Facebook.dk is on 157.240.18.15 and is easy to ﬁnd.
The next step is to code a piece of software that make connection to the IP
address that is 157.240.18.15. The software should only activate if the attacker
gives it a command. This could be done when the attacker set a special light
setting. The problem with using the light setting is that if a normal user happen
to take that setting the attack would start on all of the owners Orbs. Therefor
should there be a second requirement that could be the ﬂag in the messages.
The code for the attack is going to start with a if statement that check if the
light setting and sender mac address is what they should be. The next step is
going to be the attack.
The attack is a DDOS attack which requires that many bots can send re-
quests at the same time. The attacker needs to have a predeﬁned IP address
that it should attack. The attacker should also know which port and the size of
the messages that it is going to send. The next step is that it needs to create
as many connections as possible. This is done by having a while loop that just
open sockets up to this website. Below is a high level code written in python
that shows how the code could look in concept. The code should most likely
have been written in c or c++ instead of python but the reason for writing it
in python is that is easy readable. If the code was written in c it would most
72
==PAGE:74==
likely work. The idea with the concept is that it should show how an attacker
could be imagining to doing it.
code :
i f ( l i g h t
s e t t i n g ==”00000000000000000001” and
f l a g==0x02 ) :
TCP IP =
’157.240.18.15 ’
TCP PORT = 5005
BUFFER SIZE = 1024
MESSAGE = ” Hello ,
World !”
While ( True ) :
s = socket . socket ( socket . AF INET,
socket .SOCK STREAM)
s . connect ((TCP IP , TCP PORT))
s . send (MESSAGE)
This attack assumes that the Orb has access to the Base station. The reason
why this is assumed is because the information about the Base station have been
very few and last I talked with Shade it was yet not working. It is also assumed
that the Orb can communicate out though the Base station. This means that it
can send messages to the internet if it want which it should not be interested in
doing but based on the current state of the system it seems very unlikely that
this would be blocked.
73
==PAGE:75==
10
Solutions to the security weakness
This section is going to inform the reader about diﬀerent proposed solutions for
how to mitigate the attacks that was done in previous sections. Below is a list
of the attack that I had success with. These diﬀerent proposals are going to
be tested thought software like OFMC to argue that it is secure to a degree.
This section is going to look at how the system is breaking 3 very important
principles which are conﬁdentiality, integrity and availability (CIA). All
of the attacks that the attacker have been successful with have broken one or
more of these very important parts of the security.
• Sniﬃng between Orb and Eclipse.
• Sniﬃng between Orb and phone.
• Authentication attack.
• DOS attack.
• Taking full control over the Orb.
• Blocking access to the device.
• Creating new ﬁrmware.
10.1
The solution on sniﬃng communication
This section is going to propose a solution for protecting the communication
from being sniﬀed. The reason why the reader should be interested in that is
because in cyber security we always talk about conﬁdentiality, integrity and
availability (cia). Because the communication is not encrypted is violating con-
ﬁdentiality and integrity of the system which is a problem. So this section is
going to propose ways to improve the conﬁdentiality and integrity so that the
user know that people can’t listen in.
In section 7 did the reader learn how an attacker could break the goals of
conﬁdentiality and integrity on the current protocol. The Current protocol did
not pass one scenario because the protocol was build with out any security fea-
tures. In the new and secure protocol is the o going to be Orb and P is
going to be the phone. Every time the protocol run is it going to create two
random values N1 and N2. The protocol also contain data which is the
change in mood or colors generated by the phone or Eclipse. The password
in the protocol is constant password that never change to authenticate the user.
This section is going to look at how to prevent an attacker from sniﬃng
communication between the Orb and the phone or the Eclipse. The way to
solve this problem is by changing the protocol. The ﬁrst step in changing the
74
==PAGE:76==
protocol is to ﬁrst translate the current protocol to a mathematical expression
that OFMC(A tool developed for formal proving and developed by Sebastian
M¨odersheim from DTU) can work with. According to Sebastian M¨odersheim if
a protocol pass more then two scenarios it is secure to a high degree.
So after I had determined that the current protocol was not protecting the
communication by successfully sniﬃng the data and running OFMC on the pro-
tocol. I had to come up with a better solution. The ﬁrst step in developing a
secure protocol is to determine what are the goals. Before the goals are de-
scribed weakly authenticates have to be deﬁned. Weakly authenticates means
that it needs to authenticate but reply attacks is possible. The goals that I
deﬁned were that:
• o weakly authenticates P on {password, N2, data}hash. This goal mean
that the Orb is going to authenticate the phone/Eclipse on a hash value
with out taking into account if the reply attacks can happen.
• P weakly authenticates o on {o, P, N1, N2}hash. This goal mean that the
phone/Eclipse is going to authenticate the Orb on a hash value with out
taking into account if the reply attacks can happen.
• {o, P, N1, password}hash secret between P,o. This goal is that the hash
value should be kept secret between the Orb and the phone/Eclipse. The
hash is build of the 4 values that are in between the brackets.
• {o, P, N1, N2}hash secret between P, o. This goal is that the hash value
should be kept secret between the Orb and the phone/Eclipse. The hash
is build of the 4 values that are in between the brackets.
• {password, N2, data}hash secret between P, o. This goal is that the hash
value should be kept secret between the Orb and the phone/Eclipse. The
hash is build of the 4 values that are in between the brackets.
The goals was designed so that client(the phone or Eclipse) is going to au-
thenticate to the Orb but the Orb also have to authenticate to the client. The
reason for doing this is to avoid man in the middle attacks. The reason for
checking if the hash values are ever accessed by an attacker is to avoid that the
attacker gets access to password. If the attacker gets access to the password he
or she is able to create new messages as a legitimate user. The protocol is also
designed with goal to use very low energy.
The reason why the protocol that I designed has to focus on power consump-
tion is because the Eclipse(the Eclipse is the power outlet) is using a battery.
The Eclipse is using small battery and therefor is power consumption very im-
portant to avoid having to change batteries.
75
==PAGE:77==
The best way to achieve very low energy consumption is by sending few
packages. The protocol that I propose is only sending 3 packets. This means
that the power consummation for sending is 3 times as high compared to current
protocol. The protocol is also going to use encryption which also use power.
The power consummation by using RSA-1024 for sign is 304mJ = 3∗10−3J and
for verify is 11.9mJ = 11.9∗10−3J[36]. An AA battery build out of Lithium Ion
has around 11050J [2]. The client have to sign two messages and verify. The
client is going to use 304mJ ∗2 + 11.9mJ = 619.9mJ this means that on a AA
battery the client is able to sign and verify 17.825 messages before the client run
out of power. To reduce the energy consumption even more we are going to use
a symmetric key for one of the messages. Using Symmetric key encryption like
AES has a energy consumption of 2.46µJ/byte = 2.46 ∗10−6J/byte[36]. The
Symmetric key encryption that bluetooth low energy supports is described in
section 2.2. The cost of doing symmetric key encryption going to be 1.918mJ. So
the energy cost of both symmetric key and public key encryption is 621,8188mJ.
The most expensive operation of this solution is transmission.
The cost of sending an advertisement messages with bluetooth low energy
is 0.1mJ and sending a normal messages is 0.2mW. This means that a adver-
tisement message is going to cost 0.0001J and a normal messages is going to
cost 0.0002J[17]. The prices of a normal packet is assuming that it take a sec-
ond to send messages. The price for changing the mood with the Eclipse was
621,8188mJ and the Eclipse have to send two messages. This means that the
total price is going to be 621, 8188mJ +0.2mJ ∗2 = 622.0188mJ. Based on this
can the user send 17764 messages. Let’s say that a ordinary user turns on and
oﬀthe light 25 times a day. This example is assuming that there is only living
one person in the household. The battery life time with turning on and
oﬀ25 times a day using the new protocol that is suggested is going
to be 712 days with an AA battery. Below is the modeling of the protocol
presented.
76
==PAGE:78==
Listing 10: This is the updated protocol
Protocol : BLE
Types :
Agent P, o ;
Number data , N1,N2;
Symmetric key password , SKey ;
Function pk , hash ;
Knowledge :
P: P, o , data ,
password , pk(P) , inv (pk(P)) , pk( o ) , hash ;
o : P, o , password , pk( o ) , pk(P) , inv (pk( o )) , hash
Actions :
P−>o :
{{{o ,P,N1, password}hash ,N1, SKey} inv (pk(P))} pk( o )
o−>P:
{|{{ o ,P,N1,N2}hash ,N2} inv (pk( o ) ) | } SKey
P−>o :
{|{ data ,{ password ,N2, data}hash} inv (pk(P) ) | } SKey
Goals :
o weakly
authenticates P on {password ,N2, data}hash
P weakly
authenticates o on {o ,P,N1,N2}hash
{o ,P,N1, password}hash
s e c r e t
between P, o
{o ,P,N1,N2}hash
s e c r e t
between P,
o
{password ,N2, data}hash
s e c r e t
between P,
o
The new protocol have two agents. The agents are P(the client which is
either the phone or the Eclipse) and o(the Orb). The agents are going to know
each others public key. The public key’s is used for public private key encryp-
tion. The password is also know by both parts. They reason why the password
is shared is because then the client can authenticated before making any changes
to the Orb. The number data is just the data the user send to change something
in lamp or change the mood. The numbers N1 and N2 is nonce which is used to
keep the messages unique and to avoid reply attacks. This new protocol have
been tested with OFMC. A protocol is expected to be able to pass two sessions
to be secure with in a reasonable level. This protocol is able to pass 3 sessions
based on the goal that have speciﬁed. Below is a screen shot of the result from
the cmd( command prompt) it is shown in ﬁgure 17.
77
==PAGE:79==
Figure 17: This ﬁgure shows the sessions that the code in 10 completed before
it was stopped.
10.2
Authentication to the app
This section is going to look at the problem that there is no authentication. The
problem with having no authentication is that every user can take full control
of the Orb. The reason why the reader should read this section is because it
important to understand how Shade ApS can ﬁx the problem with having no
authentication.
The problem is that there is no authentication when a user uses the app.
There should be some type of authentication. The situation was described in
section 9.3.
One way that authentication could be done was by when you open the app
you could see all the Orb in the area. There would be a list with all the Orbs
and the user then have to pick an Orb or a group of Orbs. When the user then
pick an Orb he or she is asked to give a password. The password could be a pin
consisting of 4 numbers. The password could also be a normal password with
a the size of the 8 characters. This all comes down to the level of security that
user wants to have. There do also exist alternative ways to create authentica-
tion. The lamp would ask the user which color the middle ring is. The user
then have to reply some question that he can only answer correct if he can see
the lamp. This type of authentication does not work if the attacker is standing
outside the building and is able to see the lamp tough a window.
If password or pin is the preferred way to go then it is important to store
the password correct. The reason why the password need to be stored in a good
way is to avoid if an attacker gets access to the data he can’t read it. below is
a list of topic that should be done to protect the password correct.
• Do not limit the special characters and do not set a max length for cre-
dentials.
• How to store passwords with salt( a salt is a random number that is used
as extra information when using hash function. The normal information
+ salt is supply as input for the hash function ) in a secure way.
• Some of the best methods for storing password.
78
==PAGE:80==
Some login pages is going to set a max length for credentials. The credentials
is the user name and password. An example is that some websites don’t want
user names and password longer then 8 charterers so therefor do they remove
anything after the ﬁrst 8 characters. Credentials should have the possibility to
have any size. Some sites also restricts the special characters that can be used
in password. A example of special characters could be alt 0174 which is special
sign. So best practices is not to limit the size of the password and allow special
signs.
The second step is to make sure that the password is stored in secure way
that protect them if someone has a look at them. The password should never be
shown in clear text. Therefor is a hash function used to protect the password.
A good hash function is SHA-256 or newer version. Hashing the password is
going to avoid the attacker from know what the password is but if he has access
to a rainbow table he can ﬁnd it. A rainbow table is a table with hash values
and diﬀerent password that is computed in advance. A better way to protect
the password is to add a string of random characters this is called a salt. The
salt should be unique for the each password. The salt and password is concate-
nated and then hashed with SHA-256. This is going to create a securely stored
password. If the attacker want to use rainbow table he or she has to create a
rainbow table for each salt which is very time consuming. Three information
that is need to be stored is the user name the salt and the hash salt+password.
Based on these three information is it possible to authenticate the user. Below
is a example of how easy it is to break a SHA-1 with out a password. The reason
for using a SHA-1 instead of SHA-256 is because there are larger rainbow tables
available online.
The password is ”password” and the SHA-1 value of password is
5baa61e4c9b93f3f0682250b6cf8331b7ee68fd8.
The SHA-1 can be decrypt by using the online tool hashkiller(https://
hashkiller.co.uk/sha1-decrypter.aspx). Using this free tool it takes around
85 ms to ﬁnd out that SHA-1 value tranlate into password.
Lets try the same password but now adding a salt to the password. Here
is the random text string NoO4NyNdHjrpdTic with the size of 16 characters.
Adding the salt and password together we get ”NoO4NyNdHjrpdTicpassword”
and the corresponding SHA-1 value is 2237831e1d3d8fef1d696d9c26f850ﬀ8ca5fa05.
The SHA-1 value can not be decrypted by using the online tool hashkiller.
It stop after 315 ms and tells us that it is not able to decrypt this value. So just
by adding a hash value to the password create a lot more security.
Another element regarding authentication is that lamp can have diﬀerent
levels of access. There can be normal user and a guest user. The normal user
while have access to change the color setting and change anything but the guest
79
==PAGE:81==
user will only have access for 24 hours and they can only pick between the deﬁed
light settings. This would allow the owner of the Orb to give guest showing up
at their home access to control the light setting but not more access then owner.
10.3
Solving the problem that involves that the attacker
can gain access
This section is going to look at how Shade can avoid having attackers taking
full control of the Orb. It was explained in the section about attacks how an
attacker was able to gain full control of the Orb. This section is going to provide
some security features. The security features that is going to be presented is
going to preventing attacks where the attacker can take full control over the Orb.
Based on the security check it was clear that the handles are not protected.
A short summary of results is that based on the data that was sniﬀed it was
possible to create new messages that was from a phone. The Orb would re-
spond to the messages and change the light settings. Then the attack would
send messages to handle 0x3 the Orb would not be accessible from the phone or
Eclipse in over 24 hours. This is a serious problem that an attack can take full
control over the Orb and also block access to it. This section is going to look at
how this type of attacks can be prevented. The parts of the attack chain that
is important to look at is listed below to prevent this attack.
• Encryption of communication.
• Passwords.
• Block handles.
The previous section had looked at how encryption can be used to protect
against sniﬃng and how better make sure that attacks can’t read the communi-
cation. This alone is however not enough and this section is going to show why
Shade should improve many thing because one weakness makes other secure
things not work. First step is to look at how encryption is not enough but it
can still help making it a lot harder. Next comes password and last is a talk
about blocking handles.
So the encryption that is suggested in section 10.1 is a good way to prevent
anyone from listening in. The way that the solution in section 10.1 works is
that the Orb should authentic phone and the phone should authenticate the
Orb. Besides the authentication should the communication also be secret. This
solution is going to avoid that someone listening in and learn how the packets
looks like. Protecting the packet from being read is a very good start. Another
way could be secure paring that was presented in the theory section. The reason
for not suggesting secure paring as the only solutions is because Monday the
80
==PAGE:82==
24 July 2018 it was published that there were some ﬂaws in Diﬃe-Hellman key
exchange for bluetooth[9]. The result of this security is that an attacker can
sniﬀthe data and read it because the encryption is not secure. Secure paring
is using Diﬃe-Hellman key exchange and weaknesses have slipped into secure
paring to. Some of the companies that have this problem is Apple, Broadcom,
Intel, and Qualcomm[9].
At the moment all the packets do contain the same password which is a very
terrible idea. This means that an attacker just needs to buy one Orb and ﬁnd
the key then he or she knows all the key’s in the world. The key has a size of 4
bytes which means that the diﬀerent key’s is also way to small. So there is two
problems the ﬁrst problems is that key is very small and the second problem is
that the messages have a limit size so how to transmit larger key’s but still keep
the same amount of packets.
Lets ﬁrst have a look at how to create a much better key. There many dif-
ferent ways to build key. One way that is very secure is the Recommendation
for Cryptographic Key Generation(NIST Special Publication 800-133). This is
a 26 pages of how to create key that is secure to use for AES and RSA. This way
of creating a key is not really what is needed. The key just needs to be strong
enough to withstand a brute force attack. So a password like people know it
from bank and other places where they have to log should be good enough. If
the password follows the requirement from the theory section about passwords
it should be strong enough and have the length of 8 character. The requirement
is minimum one lowercase character, minimum one uppercase character, mini-
mum one spacial character and minimum one number. This give the possibility
of:
the new passwords strength:
1058 = 14774554437890625
the old password strength:
1054 = 121550625
Looking a these two number it is clear that the security have increased with
121550625 as many times. This is going to be a lot harder to guess. The second
problem is that sending more data is going to reduce the amount of other data.
There is two solutions one is to remove the entire Nordic Semiconductor header.
The nordic semiconductor header don’t seems to be needed. The other solution
is to just compress the password before sending it. Below is a list of diﬀerent
compression algorithm:
• LZ77.
• LZ78.
81
==PAGE:83==
• Lempel–Ziv–Welch(LZW).
• Huﬀman tree.
• RLE.
• Base 64 encoding and decoding.
• Base 32 encoding and decoding.
There are a lot of diﬀerent algorithms listed above the challenge was to ﬁnd
an algorithm that could have achieve the requirements. The requirement is that
the algorithm should be able to take a input of 8 bytes and turn it into 4 bytes
that could be authenticated at the Orb. This was a very hard requirement to
satisfy.
The ﬁrst idea was to look at LZ77, LZ78 and LZW all of these algorithms
were developed by the man behind the .zip format that most people use to com-
press ﬁles. These algorithm all preform very well when the they are compressing
largest data ﬁles. They preform much better then the input is big data ﬁles.
The problem is that the algorithms LZ77, LZ78 and LZW can’t achieve the
performers which are for 8 bytes to be compressed into 4 bytes. So researching
other very well know compression algorithms Huﬀman tree shows up.
The Huﬀman tree is a binary tree. The ﬁrst step is to have a set of num-
bers and their frequency. The set of numbers are the characters that can be
send and the frequency is how often they are present. The list should always
be sorted by frequency.
Creating three take the two values with the lowest
frequency. Add the frequency together that is the root and the two lowest fre-
quency with their values is the leafs. Add the root frequency to the three and
take the two lowest frequency and continue this way. This is the way the Huﬀ-
man tree work. When decoding or encoding start at the root and then decide
if you need to to left or right to reach the right value. If the user need to go
left add a 0 to the value and if the user need a 1 add the to the value[33]. In
ﬁgure 18 can a small example of the Huﬀman Tree be seen. The ﬁrst two nodes
add to the tree is 3:1 and 4:2 and the root for these two nodes are 7:*. The
problem with this way is that it is going to need more the 8 bit to describe one
byte. The reason for this is that the password have 255 diﬀerent characters in
the password is going to be constructed and there is also some overhead which
means that it is going to be around 512 diﬀerent nodes. The goals with the
compression that that one byte should only use 4 bits. So the Huﬀman tree
do not work when we have this many characters. The RLE(Run-length en-
coding works) by count the number of repetitions. A small example is easy
”wwwwwwwwwewwww” the compressed result would be ”9w1e4w”. This al-
gorithm do not work because a password is not going to have that many repeats.
82
==PAGE:84==
Figure 18: This ﬁgure shows a small example of how a Huﬀman Tree. To the
left is the frequency and the value.
Base 64 encoding is using 6 bites for each charterer which mean that 8 char-
terer is going to require 48 bits. 48 bits is the same as 6 bytes which is to much
so therefor to base 64 encoding not work. Base 32 is going to take up 1/6 less
then Base 64 encoding which in other words means that 8 characters is going
to take 5 bytes. This is however still one byte to large therefor we need to come
up with something diﬀerent.
So at this point I have not been able to ﬁnd a solution that ﬁnd what is
needed in this system so an idea occurred to solve this problem. The system
already know the password. In the initial set up of the Orb a password is picked
by the user and is stored in the Orb. This mean that password just needs to be
compressed an easy way to compress bit is using the same system that is the
strongest encryption know to mankind. XOR two bit stream can be reversed
just by knowing one of the bit streams. The password is going to have the size
of 8 bytes if the password into two byte streams of 4 bytes each then XOR them
together the password can be transported in the new system. This now 4 byte
string can be verify when the Orb receives it. Below is a more Exact description
of what should happen in steps.
83
==PAGE:85==
Initial setup:
• The user types in the password on he’s phone.
• The password is send to the Orb. The Orb stores the password.
• The Orb informs the phone that it was successful in sharing the password.
• The Orb also informs the Eclipse that this is the new password.
Every time the user wants to change the mood or update a speciﬁc mood
the password have to be send. The password in this example is going to be
”password” and it is done from a phone.
• The user have to type in the password on the phone and then does the
users phone split the password into two strings of equal size. Example
string 1 is ”pass”(0x70 0x61 0x73 0x73) string 2 is ”word”(0x77 0x6F
0x72 0x64).
• The phone is going to XOR string 1 and string 2 together. 0x70 ⊕0x77 =
0x07, 0x61⊕0x6F = 0x0E, 0x73⊕0x72 = 0x01 and 0x73⊕0x64 = 0x17.
The string that is going to be send is 0x07 0x0E 0x01 0x17.
• The Orb is going to receive 0x07 0x0E 0x01 0x17 and because the know
the password it can XOR the compressed password with string 1 or string
2 and conﬁrm that the password is correct.
This way also gives the system the possibility to change the way it split the
password. This means that there is 1680 diﬀerent ways the splits can be done.
This means that the protocol could split the password diﬀerent every time based
on time or something else. Let say it is done on time then the start time would
be January 1970. Then the calculation would be the time from January 1970 to
today(today being 09-07-2018 15:44) and there is 25518524 minutes. The phone
could then say 25518524mod(1680) = 1004. This means that it has to split the
password based on splitting method 1004.
The next security problem is that a hacker is able to communicate with
the handles. The handles are somewhat like ports on a computer and most
servers block port from outside access unless they can authenticate.
In this
case it doesn’t matter who connect. I faked the user to diﬀerent devices and
that did not impact anything. So this easy why of access need to be solve.
Another problem that I was made aware of was that some of the handles that
I found should according to Shade have been removed. Below is a list of the
topics that are very important to have a look at to ﬁx the problems with handles
• Block the handles correct.
84
==PAGE:86==
• Looking at the problem with not removing code correctly.
The ﬁrst part is blocking the handles so that an unauthorized user can’t
access them. This can be done in diﬀerent ways the suggested way would be to
only access devices with a known MAC address to the system. The ﬁrst user
is not going to be authorized based on he or her MAC address. The reason for
not doing that is that the Orb does not know the MAC address of the person
that buys the Orb. After that ﬁrst person have taken root access he or she
have to conﬁrm each other person MAC address to make them able to connect.
So using the MAC address to make it more diﬃcult to access the Orb is one
way of prevent any attackers from gaining access to the Orb to easy. Using
the compressed password idea would also help the system because that would
make it a lot hard to reply messages because there are many diﬀerent combi-
nations. This is two way that Shade could protect the Orb better from attackers.
The problem with using MAC address for authentication is that MAC ad-
dress can very easily be changed. Most people who have experiences would know
how to change a MAC address. Using the MAC address to authenticate do how-
ever mean that the attacker needs to know a white listed MAC address with the
correct access for what he or she wants to do. To show how easy it is to change
the MAC address is described below. This example below is done on a Machine
running Windows 10 with a up to date operating system. Change the Mac ad-
dress can also easily be done on a Linux machine if interested just Google how to
change MAC address on a machine running Linux. In ﬁgure 19 is there a print
screen of how it look when a user change MAC address on a Windows computer.
• Go to the search menu on the windows computer and search for system.
Go to the system tap on windows.
• To the left on the system tap devices click on this link.
• Clicking on devices is going to open up a list and ﬁnd the devices called
network adapter.
• Find the network adapter that need to change the mac address on.
• Click on the chosen network adapter and go into the tab called advanced.
• There is going to be a list with diﬀerent property go to the one called
network address.
• To the right is something called value change that and press ok. The MAC
address has now been changed.
85
==PAGE:87==
Figure 19: This ﬁgure shows how it looks when someone change their MAC
address[35].
The second problem is that some of the handles should have been removed
from the ﬁmrware. It is a common problem today that a lot of programmers
don’t want to remove old code in the event they are going to need it later.
The problem with this is that if they don’t disable correctly it might still be
running without them knowing or some of the code might be running and they
have no idea what the consequence is. In the attack phase the handle 0x03
was found by using Gatttool talking to developer of the Orb from Shade they
made it very clear that this handle should have been disabled and not work. A
very good way to avoid these problems that old cold is still active would be to
get someone to check their code that have not been involved in creating the code.
86
==PAGE:88==
If Shade was going to implement those security features into the Orb it
would be an lot harder for a attacker to gain full control of the Orb. The Orb
should use encryption Whenever the Orb is communication. The reason why all
communication should be encrypted is so that attackers can’t listen in on the
communication. The Orb should also use authentication so that attackers can’t
just use the Orb to take control. The Orb should use a much longer password
so that it was a lot harder to guess. Shade should also remove all handles that
are not used and double check that they have been removed.
87
==PAGE:89==
11
Discussion
This section is going to discuss the results and evaluate the attacks. The ﬁrst
topic to discuss ”what is the danger of hacking a lamp like the Orb”. Looking at
it very simply it is not very dangerous to hack a lamp and turning oﬀthe light.
Then looking at hacking a lamp from a simple perspective ordinary people can
come up with cyber attacks where there is a lot of assumptions before it can be
very dangerous. However this is not really the case when thinking about it.
Some of the attacks that have be presented would give an attacker the pos-
sibility to control the light setting in an entire building. If this is a residential
apartment building the attack can irritate the people living in the apartments.
A very simple attack like this is not going to hurt anyone but it is going to
damage the reputation of Shade ApS. A damaged reputation can mean millions
of Danish kroner in lost sales.
When organizations both criminals, companies, governments want to break
into to a speciﬁc building it is also preferable if the lights are oﬀbecause it
makes it more diﬃcult to detect the intruders in the building. If the Orb is
connected to the buildings infrastructure can it then become an entry point to
the rest of system. Another attack that seems very possible is setting paper on
ﬁre with the Orb. It is not very likely that a lamp gets in contact with paper
but paper is used to have measure for how warm it is. If the Orb gets warm
enough it can self ignite. The reason why this seem like a very possible attack is
because the Orb could reach around 75 degrees with out any ﬁrmware changes.
Changing ﬁrmware is always a serious attack no matter what. When an attacker
is able of change the ﬁrmware and updating it on the devices the attacker have
taken full control and it almost impossible to remove unless you have a special
background. Looking at all these attacks it is clear that securing a lamp like
the Orb is very important and should never be skipped to save money. This
report have showed how many weaknesses there emerges when a company does
not take the time to test for security weakness.
A very interesting topic to discuss is at what point the Orb is completely
penetrated. At the current point does the attacker have full access to the Orb
and can change light setting and block access in many diﬀerent ways. I was not
able to make a ﬁrmware update so having the ﬁrmware update could be argued
that would be the complete penetration. The reason for not making a ﬁrmware
update is because of time limitations. However I would argue that having full
control is enough to show complete penetration because the challenge with the
ﬁrmware update is to create the ﬁrmware code that is going to work on the
Orb. It was showed that faking a signature is doable so installing the Firmware
should be possible when the attacker have full access to the Orb.
Another topic to discuss is how many of the bullets did I complete in this
report and if some of them was not completed why. Below is a short list of all
88
==PAGE:90==
the bullets from the oﬃcial description, many of the bullet have been merged.
1. Test security of communication and examine the protocol.
2. Identify potential security weaknesses.
3. Examine if the system is vulnerable
4. Propose mitigation for weaknesses.
5. Conduct risk assessment.
6. Look into the security of the base station.
So looking thought the diﬀerent attacks that have been performed on the
Orb it is very clear that the communication have been tested a lot. I have tried
to sniﬀcommunication and was very successful with that. This report have
also suggested how Shade ApS can bolster their defense against attacks on the
communication and a new protocol have been suggested. So the ﬁrst bullet in
the list above have been completed.
The second bullet and the third bullet is about identifying potential security
weaknesses and examine if the system is vulnerable. During this report have
there been identiﬁed more 7 diﬀerent security weaknesses in the system. One
example of a weakness is that the communication between the phone and the
Orb is not encrypted. It is an understatement to call some of these weakness
it is a major cyber security issue. This report have identiﬁed a lot of potential
security gaps. The second and third bullet in the list above have been completed.
The fourth bullet is about propose mitigation for the weakness. There is
a section about the proposed solutions where the protocol is being analyzed
and a new protocol is suggested. This report also contains a section about how
authentication could be done in this rapport. The report is also about blocking
the handles and avoiding having anyone accessing the Orb. The fourth bullet
has been completed.
I have also conducted a risk assessment to evaluate what damage that the
diﬀerent attacks can do to. The diﬀerent attacks is showed in table 2 where the
risk level also can been seen. Many of the attacks can inﬂict signiﬁcant damage
to the Orb and the reputation of Shade ApS. The risk assessment is done based
on personal evaluation of the frequency and damage. The ﬁfth bullet has been
completed.
The last bullet was the looking at the base station. This was never done
because last time I talked with Shade the base station were not really in a state
where it was able to do penetration testing. We also discussed security features
but they were unclear about which security features they thought was relevant
89
==PAGE:91==
to protect the base station. Therefore do I not know how Shade wants to protect
the base station. Therefore did I assumed that during the attacks that the base
could be used as a router to communicate out of the network.
Researching the security of the Orb have giving me experiences of ﬁnding
weakness in IoT(internet of things). IoT is according to Mckinsey going to be
a industry worth around 3.9 trillion US dollars to 11.1 trillion US dollars in
2025[5]. If Mckineey is correct about their prediction is this going to mean that
there in the future is going to many IoT devices installed in homes and work-
places. If the security of IoT devices continue are most of these new devices very
easy to hack. The security in IoT in general has been very bad. The companies
that build IoT devices do not focus on protecting there devices. An example of
how bad the security is that some IoT devices come with default password but
the user is not forced to change the password when the user sets up the IoT
device.
To look at how serious a problem with IoT devices Mirai had infected 2.5
million IoT devices at the end of quarter 4 2016[22]. This is the same time as
2016 Dyn cyberattack which broke a largest part of the internet by the Mirai
malware. According to Forbes is there in 2025 going to be 75.44 billion IoT
devices around the world. This is a growth of 57.76 billion devices from 2016
to 2025[11]. Imagine a 2025 Cyn cyberattack of the Mirai malware just infect
devices with the same growth as the number of ioT devices then is the hackers
going to have 10.6 million IoT devices available to do hacker attacks. 10.6 Mil-
lion IoT devices is a lot of computing power. Lets instead say that Mirai grows
3 times as fast as the number of IoT devices then is hacker group behind Mirai
going to have access to more then 31.8 million IoT devices. If a hacker group
have access to this type of computing power this is going to change the threat
landscape because now the criminal groups are going to have computing power
like governments. This should be the god argument for every IoT manufacturer
to take a look at the security in IoT devices. It should also be said that it is
very good that Shade have taken contact to DTU to get someone to evaluate
the security this is a step in the right direction and the Orb is great product
with a lot of nice features. It clearly shows that Shade want to get security right.
11.1
Future work on the project
This section is going to look at how future work could be done on this project
to obtain more information. Below is a list of the diﬀerent direction that the
project could go.
• Coding a ﬁrmware update that is working.
• Build diﬀerent types of malware that could run on the Orb.
90
==PAGE:92==
• Testing if it is possible to achieve a temperature of 242 degrees Celsius.
• Security for the basestation.
So the ﬁrst step in future work would be to build some ﬁrmware code that
can run on the Orb. This report looked at how ﬁrmware code could be devel-
oped but it never build the code that would work on the Orb. The reason why
building new ﬁrmware code would be a great further improvement is because
the attackers would then be able move on to one of the next builds.
One of the ways that project could go after the attacker have ﬁgures out how
to get ﬁrmware to run on the Orb would be to create malware that can work
on the Orb. Some of the examples of the malware that could be running on the
Orb would be DDOS software that can target servers and stuﬀlike that. The
idea is to build a bot(malware that can be remotely control) into the ﬁrmware
update. Once the ﬁrmware update have be installed on one or more Orbs the
attacker can then take remotely control over the Orbs and then do a DDOS
attack against a website like Facebook or a DNS server. Another idea for some
malware that run on the Orb would be mining software. If the Orb is run-
ning cryptocurrency mining software that is slowly going to make the criminal
money. Below is a list of diﬀerent software’s that could be build run on the Orb.
• BOT that can run DDOS and DOS attacks.
• Orb is running cryptocurrency mining software.
• Ransomware to destroy the Orb.
The other way that the project could go is to achieve setting paper on ﬁre
with the Orb. The Orb need to reach the temperature of 242 degrees Celsius or
a little lower like 214 degrees Celsius to ignite a paper. Reaching these temper-
atures can only be done by change the ﬁrmware so that is the reason why the
ﬁrmware should be changed.
When the basestation is completed it would be a great topic to do penetra-
tion testing and see if it is possible to gain access to the basestation. It would
also be interesting to see if the attacker can gain access to the internet via the
base station. Because if the attacker can gain internet access this means that
DDOS attacks against servers would be possible.
91
==PAGE:93==
12
Conclusion
At this point the Orb have been tested and a lot of diﬀerent ideas for hacking
the Orb and take control over the Orb have been completed. This report have
looked at how the cyber security of the Orb from Shade is. The Orb is a smart
device and in the modern world today smart devices are often hacked and it can
have catastrophic consequences if the cyber security is not done. Unfortunately
is the Orb in its current version showing the same disregard for cyber security
as most of the industry of IoT.
During the the penetration testing of the Orb from Shade did I ﬁnd more 3
major cyber security weaknesses. The ﬁrst one is that the system is not using
any encryption to ensure that the communication is conﬁdential between the
two parties communicating. This report suggest a protocol that should allow
the system to communicate encrypted. Using encryption is going to cost more
in energy. Another major cyber security weaknesses is the missing authentica-
tion on app to the Orb. This security weakness means that an attacker can just
take control of someone else Orb. The problem is that the Orb does not know
which phones and eclipses(light switch) is allowed to communicate with it. The
solution is to use pin code or password to make sure that only authorized users
can access the Orb.
The last major cyber security weakness in the system is that an attacker
can take full control of the Orb and make changes like light settings or block
access. The reason why the attack is able to take full control is because of no
encryption, no real authentication and that some handles are present even if
they should not be. The handle that should not be there should be removed
from the ﬁrmware so that when an attacker tries to access that handle nothing
can happen. The Orb should also only allow authorized user to make changes
instead of everyone that just sends a messages and could be unauthorized user.
The solution is to use authentication and encryption so the messages cannot be
created by an attacker.
This report tested the Orb for diﬀerent cyber security weaknesses. The ﬁrst
attack tested conﬁdentiality of the communication between the orb and Eclipse
and the communication between the Orb and phone. I was successful in sniﬃng
the data and breaking the conﬁdentiality. This report did also conduct a risk
assessment of the Orb. The risk assessment did inform the reader about which
types of attacks that would create the most damage against the system. This
report did also show how an attacker can take full control of the Orb and how
it is a very power full attack.
The report did also model the communication protocol and proved that the
current protocol is not secure to use if the user wants conﬁdentiality and in-
tegrity. Therefor a new protocol was suggested that showed that it was secure
to a high degree. The protocol that was suggested also had power at focus and
92
==PAGE:94==
tried to avoid using to much power since that is relevant for the system. For each
of the diﬀerent security weaknesses that was found do this report also suggest
how Shade in the future can prevent these attacks by using diﬀerent security
measures. Diﬀerent theoretical attacks was also looked at how they would work
and could damage the system.
There is also a theoretical attack that shows how the attacker could create
a ﬁrmware update that could contain a malware. The malware could be used
for DDOS attacks or running cryptocurrency mining software. Both of these
attacks are going to require that the Orb can communicate out to the outside
world. Both attacks would be done by hacker groups.
So what can be concluded is that the attack which deals with sniﬃng data
was very successfully. It is possible to sniﬀall the communication both between
the Orb and the eclipse and between the Orb and the phone. I was also able to
take full control of the Orb and change the light setting remotely. The attacker
can also block all access to the Orb from phones and eclipse. Then there is
some theoretical attacks that can be done by the Orb. These are the ﬁrmware
attacks. It is explained how this could done but has not been tested.
The report have also look at general problem with security of IoT. IoT is
used in major cyber attacks around the world because the IoT can have bot
running on them. The general security of IoT is at the same level as the Orb
however Shade have clearly been trying to improve the security of the Orb by
talking with DTU. Hopefully more companies that build IoT are going to focus
more on security because IoT is a booming industry with a lot of money being
invested into. In 2025 each person on the earth going to have more then 11 IoT
devices per person. This means that these devices can be used to spy on their
owners, used to harm their owners or gain money from cyber attacks they need
to be secure. There are many ways that IoT can harm people an example is by
igniting. There is a lot of situation where IoT can harm people.
93
==PAGE:95==
References
[1]
Mohammad Afaneh. How to use a Bluetooth (BLE) sniﬀer without pulling
your hair out! Last access: 18/04/2018 at 14:44. 2016. url: http://www.
novelbits.io/bluetooth-low-energy-sniffer-tutorial/.
[2]
allaboutbatteries. Find the energy contained in standard battery sizes. Last
access: 04/04/2018 at 09:17. 2018. url: http://www.allaboutbatteries.
com/Energy-tables.html.
[3]
amarinfotech. Diﬀerences Between Bluetooth 5 vs 4.2. Last access: 30/07/2018
at 09:00. 2018. url: https://www.amarinfotech.com/differences-
comparisons-bluetooth-5-vs-4-2.html.
[4]
Shade APS. Dit liv, Dit lys. Last access: 30/07/2018 at 12:40. 2018. url:
https://shadelights.com/da/orb.
[5]
Harald Bauer, Ondrej Burkacky, and Christian Knochenhauer. Security
in the Internet of Things. Last access: 23/07/2018 at 13:10. 2018. url:
https : / / www . mckinsey . com / industries / semiconductors / our -
insights/security-in-the-internet-of-things.
[6]
Jay Bennett. Sea Pirates Hacked a Shipping Company To Figure Out
Which Vessels to Plunder. Last access: 06/07/2018 at 15:19. 2016. url:
https://www.popularmechanics.com/technology/infrastructure/
a19719/sea-pirates-hacked-a-shipping-firm/.
[7]
Bluetooth. Bluetooth Pairing Part 4: LE Secure Connections - Numeric
Comparison. Last access: 25/07/2018 at 14:59. 2018. url: http://blog.
bluetooth.com/bluetooth-pairing-part-4.
[8]
Peter Borenstein. hcitool and gatttool example. Last access: 30/07/2018 at
14:05. 2018. url: https://github.com/pcborenstein/bluezDoc/wiki/
hcitool-and-gatttool-example.
[9]
Richard Chirgwin. Big bad Bluetooth blunder bug battered – check for se-
curity ﬁxes. Last access: 29/07/2018 at 10:50. 2018. url: https://www.
theregister.co.uk/2018/07/24/bluetooth_cryptography_bug/.
[10]
Stephen Cobb. 10 things to know about the October 21 IoT DDoS attacks.
Last access: 26/07/2018 at 15:33. 2016. url: https://www.welivesecurity.
com/2016/10/24/10-things-know-october-21-iot-ddos-attacks/.
[11]
Louis Columbus. Roundup Of Internet Of Things Forecasts And Market
Estimates, 2016. Last access: 23/07/2018 at 13:52. 2016. url: https:
//www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2016/11/27/roundup-
of-internet-of-things-forecasts-and-market-estimates-2016/
#6f7d4f0c292d.
[12]
Tim Fisher. Cryptographic Hash Function. Last access: 28/07/2018 at
11:49. 2018. url: https://www.lifewire.com/cryptographic-hash-
function-2625832.
94
==PAGE:96==
[13]
Marcel Holtmann. hcitool.1. Last access: 28/07/2018 at 17:31. 2018. url:
https : / / github . com / pauloborges / bluez / blob / master / tools /
hcitool.1.
[14]
Ilmari Karonen. Why shouldn’t I use ECB encryption. Last access: 18/07/2018
at 16:54. 2014. url: https://crypto.stackexchange.com/questions/
20941/why-shouldnt-i-use-ecb-encryption.
[15]
Lars R. Knudsen. Cryptology, 01410, Spring 2014. DTU, 2014, pp. 53–60.
[16]
KIRSTEN KOROSEC. The 25 Most Common Passwords of 2017 In-
clude ‘Star Wars’. Last access: 28/07/2018 at 12:03. 2017. url: http://
fortune.com/2017/12/19/the-25-most-used-hackable-passwords-
2017-star-wars-freedom/.
[17]
J. K. Nurminen M. Siekkinen M. Hiienkari and J. Nieminen. “How Low
Energy is Bluetooth Low Energy?Comparative Measurements with Zig-
Bee”. In: WCNC 2012 Workshop (2012), 1 to 6.
[18]
Eeshan Malhotra. At what temperature does paper burn? Last access:
28/07/2018 at 18:04. 2018. url: https://www.quora.com/At-what-
temperature-does-paper-burn.
[19]
malwaretips. Remove “Your personal ﬁles are encrypted” ransomware (Re-
moval Guide). Last access: 04/07/2018 at 15:01. 2017. url: https://
malwaretips.com/blogs/remove-your-personal-files-are-encrypted-
virus/.
[20]
Lockheed Martin. “Seven Ways to Apply the Cyber Kill Chain with a
Threat Intelligence Platform”. In: White Paper (2015), 1 to 12.
[21]
massmep.org. Cybersecurity Framework Steps for Manufacturers Info Ses-
sion. Last access: 31/01/2018 at 10:14. 2017. url: https://massmep.
org/event/cybersecurity-framework-steps-manufacturers-info-
session/.
[22]
McAfee. McAfee Labs Threats Report April 2017. Last access: 23/07/2018
at 14:05. 2017. url: https://www.mcafee.com/enterprise/en-us/
assets/reports/rp-quarterly-threats-mar-2017.pdf.
[23]
Charlie Miller and Chris Valasek. THE JEEP HACKERS ARE BACK
TO PROVE CAR HACKING CAN GET MUCH WORSE. Last access:
28/07/2018 at 10:23. 2016. url: https://www.wired.com/2016/08/
jeep-hackers-return-high-speed-steering-acceleration-hacks/.
[24]
Steve Morgan. Global Ransomware Damage Costs Predicted To Hit $11.5
Billion By 2019’. Last access: 28/07/2018 at 12:26. 2017. url: https:
//cybersecurityventures.com/ransomware-damage-report-2017-
part-2/.
95
==PAGE:97==
[25]
nccgroup. Introducing BLESuite and BLE-Replay: Python Tools for Rapid
Assessment of Bluetooth Low Energy Peripherals Background. Last access:
28/07/2018 at 17:04. 2018. url: https://www.nccgroup.trust/us/
about-us/newsroom-and-events/blog/2016/september/introducing-
blesuite-and-ble-replay-python-tools-for-rapid-assessment-
of-bluetooth-low-energy-peripherals/.
[26]
NIST. “ADVANCED ENCRYPTION STANDARD (AES)”. In: Federal
Information Processing Standards Publication 197 (2001), 1 to 51.
[27]
Yolan Romailler. HOW TO DEFEAT ED25519 AND EDDSA USING
FAULTS. Last access: 03/07/2018 at 10:08. 2017. url: https://research.
kudelskisecurity.com/2017/10/04/defeating-eddsa-with-faults/.
[28]
SARAH. Spotlight on ransomware: Ransomware encryption methods. Last
access: 04/07/2018 at 15:01. 2017. url: https://research.kudelskisecurity.
com/2017/10/04/defeating-eddsa-with-faults/.
[29]
Sayali. Question: Explain Bluetooth Protocol Stack. Last access: 28/07/2018
at 10:55. 2016. url: http : / / www . ques10 . com / p / 2700 / explain -
bluetooth-protocol-stack/.
[30]
Nordic Semiconductor. “nRF Sniﬀer”. In: 2.1 (2018), 1 to 20.
[31]
nordic semiconductor. nRF51 Dongle. Last access: 07/07/2018 at 07:45.
2018. url: https : / / www . nordicsemi . com / eng / Products / nRF51 -
Dongle.
[32]
nordic semiconductor. SoftDevices. Last access: 03/07/2018 at 08:49. 2018.
url: http://infocenter.nordicsemi.com/index.jsp?topic=%2Fcom.
nordic.infocenter.softdevices51%2Fdita%2Fnrf51%2Fsoftdevices.
html.
[33]
siggraph. A quick tutorial on generating a huﬀman tree. Last access: 09/07/2018
at 13:44. 2018. url: https://www.siggraph.org/education/materials/
HyperGraph/video/mpeg/mpegfaq/huffman_tutorial.html.
[34]
Symantec. Mirai: what you need to know about the botnet behind recent
major DDoS attacks. Last access: 26/07/2018 at 15:44. 2016. url: https:
//www.symantec.com/connect/blogs/mirai-what-you-need-know-
about-botnet-behind-recent-major-ddos-attacks.
[35]
thewindowsclub. How to change MAC Address in Windows 10/8.1. Last
access: 10/07/2018 at 11:27. 2018. url: https://www.thewindowsclub.
com/change-mac-address-in-windows.
[36]
Hans Eberle Vinderpal S. Wander Nils Gura. “Energy Analysis of Public-
Key Cryptography for Wireless Sensor Networks”. In: Vipul Gupta, Sheuel-
ing Chang Shantz (2005), 1 to 5.
[37]
Wendy Warne. Bluetooth Low Energy - It starts with Advertising. Last
access: 28/07/2018 at 10:55. 2017. url: https://blog.bluetooth.com/
bluetooth-low-energy-it-starts-with-advertising.
96
==PAGE:98==
[38]
wikipedia. Block cipher mode of operation. Last access: 28/07/2018 at
11:35. 2018. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_cipher_
mode_of_operation.
[39]
Frederik Wrist-Jensen. “Fault-Tolerant Systems E17”. In: 02228 Fejltol-
erante systemer (2017), 1 to 24.
13
References
97
==PAGE:99==
14
Appendix
14.1
Appendix A
There are two ﬁles attached to the hand in. It is the ﬁrmware for Eclipse and
the Orb.
• app dfu package orb v2.
• app dfu package eclipse v2.
14.2
Appendix B
Protocol
The orb uses two primary means of communication. One method is using
Bluetooth Mesh to talk with other devices, in the ﬁrst version this is only orb
´o orb communication. Later additional devices will be added.
The other method is a GATT interface where other devices can communi-
cate with the Orb using Bluetooth Low Energy.
Bluetooth Mesh
Bluetooth mesh internal data structure
• SourceAddress uint16
• Bearer – enum BLE, MESH
• CommandArray[6] uint8
The source address has special requirements and must be less than 0xC000,
additionally space should be reserved when assigned addresses.
Bluetooth Low Energy
The primary usage of the Bluetooth LE GATT service is to act as a proxy to
the Bluetooth Mesh so the phone and Eclipse can interact with all the devices
on the Mesh.
Firmware release 1.0 has one service with UUID 00001521-3D1C-019E-AB4A-
65FD86E87333
Firmware release 2.0 has two services
• Key service with UUID 00001521-3D1C-019E-AB4A-65FD86E87333
• Auxiliary service with UUID 00001522-3D1C-019E-AC4A-65FD86E87333
98
==PAGE:100==
One write characteristic is used for all information passing from to the orb.
The other characteristics are used for exposing the state of the orb.
Write characteristic
UUID: 00001523-3D1C-019E-AB4A-65FD86E87333
Bluetooth low energy internal command data structure:
• SourceAddress uint16
• Bearer – enum BLE, MESH
• CommandArray[20] uint8
Package length is capped at 20 bytes. Following is a list of commands sup-
ported by ﬁrmware release 2.0.
TODO
Standard header
All commands have the same ﬁrst 7 bytes header. The only exception is
when provisioning.
From byte array index the header is speciﬁed as such
1. Auth key
2. Auth key
3. Auth key
4. Auth key
5. Address
6. Address
7. Command
The rest of the up to 13 bytes are parameters for the command, hereafter
referred to as command parameters.
The two address will be combined to be an unsigned 16-bit integer. The
value of the address has a meaning.
0x0000 is interpreted as itself
99
==PAGE:101==
0x0001 – 0xBF00 is the range of individual addressed for shade devices. The
app creates and assigns the address of the devices during the provisioning. The
app ensures that all the mesh devices have unique address.
0xC001 – 0xFF00 is the range of room addresses. Each Orb can be assigned
to be part of up to 32 rooms.
An orb will respond to 0x0000, its own address and any room address it has
been assigned to.
In the GATT scenario commands assigned to the 0x0000 address and its
own address will not cause messages to be relayed out over the mesh.
A fair number of commands has a mood index as part of the command pa-
rameters. An orb can have up to 8 moods, default is 6 moods. Here is a list of
mood indexes
• 0-7 – Mood settings.
Changing the index cause the new mood to be
applied to the working mood
• 255 – Working mood, what the orb actually displays.
• 254 – Sunrise mood setting, the mood setting used by the sunrise feature
• 253 – Nightfall mood setting, the mood setting used by the nightfall feature
Command 0x01 – Mood index set
Mood index = commandArray
Apply the mood referred to by the mood index to the working mood.
Command 0x02 – Mood index increment
Delta = (to signed integer) commandArray[7]
Increase the current mood index by delta. If outside of mood bounds restrict
to nearest border. (I.e. 0 or the current mood count)
Relays the mood index as a mood index set over mesh should the address
require mesh communication.
Command 0x04 – Mood count set
moodCount = commandArray[7]
Change maximum number of moods. Mood settings not actually changes,
just which can be reached with mood index changes
100
==PAGE:102==
Command 0x06 – Power set
New power setting = toBool(commandArray[7])
Orb is either set to pure 0 or working mood depending on the power setting
Command 0x07 – Power toggle
Looks at it own state and inverts the value.
Relays the new value as a power set over mesh should the address require
mesh communication.
Command 0x08 – Dim level set
dimLevel = commandArray[7]
Command 0x09 – Dim level increment
delta = (to signed integer) commandArray[7]
Increase the current dim level by delta.
Ensures the value is within the
[0;255] range.
Command 0x10 – Force mood update
Mood index = commandArray[7]
The rest 12 8-bit unsigned integers stores the mood setting. Those integers
contains 8 12-bit unsigned integers. Each are converted to 16-bit unsigned inte-
ger and leftshifted 4 bits. These extra 4 bits are used to give a smoother easing.
They come in the following order.
1. Top warm
2. Top cold
3. Bottom warm
4. Bottom cold
5. Middle warm
6. Middle red
7. Middle green
8. Middle blue
The working mood is updated according to the values of the 8 zones. All 8
zone settings are relayed over the mesh should the address require it.
101
==PAGE:103==
Command 0x11 – Mood update
Same as command 0x10 with the exception of which settings are relayed over
mesh should the address require it.
Each zone value is compared to the previous value. Only zones whose value
are changed will be relayed over mesh. This helps make the color wheel on the
app feel more responsive.
Command 0x12 – Save mood
Mood index = commandArray[7]
Applies the working mood to the mood referred to by the given index.
The new mood settings are saved to ﬂash.
Command 0x13 – Mood data reset
Mood data reset
Command 0x14 – Save all moods
Save all mood settings to ﬂash.
This command is useful when we need to setup a bunch of moods through
the app, for example after moving an orb to a new room we need setup up to
8 moods. Afterwards this command can be used, and we avoid having to show
all the moods. (I.e. we don’t have to change the working mood)
Caveat: Does currently not work over mesh.
Command 0x15 – Associate Eclipse
eclipseAddress = toUInt16(commandArray[7], commandArray[8])
associationType = commandArray[9]
Save the eclipse association to the list of eclipse associations.
No-op if 20 eclipse associations already exist.
Command 0x16 – Unassociate Eclipse
eclipseAddress = toUInt16(commandArray[7], commandArray[8])
Remove the eclipse association from the orb.
No-op if an eclipse association with the eclipse address does not already exist.
102
==PAGE:104==
Command 0x17 – Clear Eclipse associations
Clear all eclipse associations
Command 0x18 – Set listen to unassociated Eclipses
ignoreUnassociatedEclipse = toBool(commandArray[7])
Changes whether the Orb will listen to eclipses not in the list of associated
eclipses.
By default the Orb listens to unassociated Eclipses. This is to support the
out-of-box experience where the Eclipse works immediately. Firmware release
1.0 orbs has the ﬂash area set to 0, which is the reason for the negative/inverted
variable.
Command 0x20 – Feature enable set
featureId = commandArray[7]
enable = toBool(commandArray[8])
Command 0x21 – Feature setup
featureId = commandArray[7]
Rest of the commands are parameters on the feature and their meaning de-
pends on the individual features.
This part is currently in a WIP state
Command 0x30 – Provision begin
newDeviceAddress = toUInt16(commandArray[7], commandArray[8])
Start the provisioning procedure. For the new device address and provi-
sioned to be accepted the following commands are accepted.
Another other
commands in the ﬂow will break the procedure and the provisioning will not
happen.
Net key 20 bytes message
• 4 bytes auth key
• 16 bytes new mesh net key
Followed by App key 20 bytes message
• 4 bytes auth key
103
==PAGE:105==
• 16 bytes new mesh app key
Finally followed by command 0x32 – provision commit
Should all this go well the device will change its Mesh provision to have the
new net key and app key. The new auth key is the ﬁrst 4 bytes of the app key.
The orb will restart before starting up ready for communicating with the
new mesh keys.
This command will not be relayed over mesh
Command 0x33 – Provision cancel
Cancel the provisioning procedure.
Note: Any other command except the provision commit command will also
cancel the provisioning procedure, but it is nice to have an explicit cancel.
This command will not be relayed over mesh
Command 0x34 – Provision reset
Resets the mesh keys to the default ones. The Orb restarts as part of this pro-
cess.
This command will not be relayed over mesh
Command 0x35 – Flash reset
Reset the provisioning to the default settings, clear all other conﬁgurations saved
in ﬂash.
The orb will be restarted afterwards.
This command will not be relayed over mesh
Command 0x41 – Room add
roomAddress = toUInt16(commandArray[7], commandArray[8])
Add room address to list of rooms.
No-op if the roomAddress is already in the list of rooms, and if 32 other
rooms exists in the list of rooms.
Command 0x42 – Room remove
roomAddress = toUInt16(commandArray[7], commandArray[8])
104
==PAGE:106==
Remove room from list of rooms.
No-op if the room address is not in the list of rooms.
Command 0x43 – Clear rooms
Clear the list of rooms. The orb is now part of 0 rooms
Command 0x50 – Restart in DFU mode
Restart the orb in a special mode where Orb waits for an OTA DFU package.
This allows us to upgrade the ﬁrmware. In this special mode the Orb does not
function normally.
This command will not be relayed over mesh
Command 0x51 – Time set
time = toUInt16(commandArray[7], commandArray[8])
Set the time of the Orb. The time is number of minutes since midnight
Sunday
Command 0x52 – Time sunrise set
Command to set the sunrise time. We may use the feature setup command
instead.
WIP
Command 0x53 – Time nightfall set
Command to set the nightfall time. We may use the feature setup command
instead.
WIP
Special commands issued only by the Eclipse
Eclipses send their own address instead of target address. As such for Eclipse
commands we have
eclipseAddress = toUInt16(commandArray[4], commandArray[5])
Command 0x60 – Eclipse turn
direction = commandArray[7]
type = commandArray[8]
105
==PAGE:107==
amount = commandArray[9]
The Orb uses these 3 variables together with the eclipse association type
to determine what eﬀect the turn will actually have. The orb may send out
command 0x66 or 0x67 over the mesh depending on the eﬀect.
Command 0x61 – Eclipse push
type = commandArray[7]
Currently Eclipses send either a short push or a long push.
The Orb uses the push type together with the eclipse association type to
determine what eﬀect the turn will actually have. The orb may send out com-
mand 0x65, 0x66 or 0x67 over the mesh depending on the eﬀect.
Command 0x65 – Eclipse power set (Mesh command only)
Eclipse relayed power set
Command 0x66 – Eclipse mood set (Mesh command only)
Eclipse relayed mood set
Command 0x67 – Eclipse dim set (Mesh command only)
Eclipse relayed dim set
Query commands
You can check out the query commands. The result of the query can be read
from the characteristic with UUDI: 0000152F8-3D1C-019E-AB4A-65FD86E87333
Command 0xA0
Query time in minutes since last eclipse communication
Command 0xA1
Query current mood index
Command 0xA2
Query current room mood index
Command 0xA3
Query will this orb respond to this eclipse
Error characteristic
UUDI: 0000152F-3D1C-019E-AB4A-65FD86E87333
4 bytes containing the error code of the last command from the write service
106
==PAGE:108==
Currently this is only used for determining whether the auth key is correct.
Other details
Naming convention
• Shade Orb
• Shade Eclipse
• DfuTarg
• DfuTargEcli
The DFU targets are used when the Orb or Eclipse is put into a special DFU
mode where it awaits an OTA package from the phone.
14.3
Appendix C
All the sniﬀed data have been attached and can be open by using Wireshark(https:
//www.wireshark.org/). Below is a list with all the diﬀerent pcap ﬁles that is
the attachment called Data.zip.
• 04-03-2018 power on and oﬀ.pcapng.
• 04-03-2018-lighton chaning ecplise.pcapng.
• 04-03-2018-lighton only one type not chaning ecplise.pcapng.
• 04-03-2018-No Communication Only The Orb.pcapng.
• 05-03-2018-phone connected no change.pcapng.
• 13-03-2018 rødt-lyse phone.pcapng.
• 13-03-2018-bl˚a-lys phone.pcapng.
• 13-03-2018-light power level.pcapng.
• 13-03-2018-to runder p˚a hjulet start rød clockwise phone.pcapng.
• 14-04-2018 Two buttens.pcapng.
107
