==PAGE:1==
Chemistry of silicon-based windows for
electron microscopy
Master’s Thesis
JF Creemer et al. 2011. [4]
Written by
Hjalte Rørbech (s134236)
Supervised by
Stig Helveg, Fellow
HALDOR TOPSOE A/S
Sebastian Pirel Fredsgaard Jespersen, PhD student
DTU PHYSICS
Christian Danvad Damsgaard, Associate Professor
DTU CEN and DTU PHYSICS
Ib Chorkendorff, Professor
DTU PHYSICS
Technical University of Denmark
Juni 26th 2018
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
List of abbreviations
1
2
Abstract
2
3
Acknowledgements
3
4
Background and aim of the study
4
4.1
Aim of the study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
5
Theory
7
5.1
The Nanoreactor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5.2
Microscope parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5.3
EELS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5.4
The drift tube . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
6
Data processing
18
7
Experiments
26
7.1
Procedure 1 - setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7.2
Procedure 1 - results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7.3
Procedure 2 - setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.4
Procedure 2 - results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8
Discussion
50
9
Conclusion
55
10 Outlook
56
References
58
11 Appendix
61
11.1 Raw data from experiment with 1 mbar
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
11.2 Raw data from experiment with 1 bar
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
11.3 SiL/NK ratio for 1 bar measurements using procedure 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
11.4 Project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
==PAGE:3==
1
List of abbreviations
CCD -
Charge Coupled Device
C1 -
Condenser lens 1
C2 -
Condenser lens 2
C3 -
Condenser lens 3
DQE -
Detective Quantum Efﬁciency
EELS -
Electron Energy-Loss Spectroscopy
GIF -
Gatan Imaging Filter
NK -
Nitrogen K
OK -
Oxygen K
SiL -
Silicon L2,3
SNR -
Signal to Noise Ratio
TEM -
Transmission Electron Microscope
1
==PAGE:4==
2
Abstract
Miniaturized gas cells or liquid cells for in situ electron microscopy studies have facilitated
important discoveries within the areas of biology, materials science, and catalysis. Thin amor-
phous silicon nitride ﬁlms are widely used as electron transparent windows in such devices,
as they are thought to be chemically inert under conditions used in the operation of the gas or
liquid cells. This assumption of stability is problematic, as previous studies at Haldor Topsoe
(unpublished) have shown oxidation of electron transparent windows of a speciﬁc type of gas
cell during electron beam illumination in a transmission electron microscope (TEM).
Using gas/liquid cells, impressive spatial resolution in real space images or spectroscopy
can be obtained at high gas/liquid pressures. As a reﬂection of that, this study investigates
the beam-induced oxidation using varying oxygen pressures and parameters related to spatial
resolution. By examining the ratios of integrated core-loss signals, electron energy-loss spec-
troscopy (EELS) is used to track the oxidation in a TEM, as it evolves. The characterization
of the beam-induced oxidation is conducted while maintaining a similar signal to noise ratio
(SNR) on the charge-coupled-device (CCD) detector used to acquire EELS data. In this way,
the study reveals how the oxidation can be minimized without compromising the quality of the
data obtained. Oxidation is shown to be minimized at low areal dose rates of electrons and low
oxygen pressure. At an oxygen pressure of 1 mbar with an areal dose rate of 10
e
( ˚A2s), the
electron beam-induced oxidation proved to be unobservable.
The results underline the need for high quality CCD detectors, as low areal dose rates
decreases the SNR of the acquired signal for a constant illuminated area, if the exposure time
is restricted.
2
==PAGE:5==
3
Acknowledgements
The project was conducted at Haldor Topsoe A/S as a collaboration between DTU and Haldor
Topsoe A/S. It has been a very exciting and interesting experience, and I am thankful for having
been given this opportunity.
During my work with the project, I have received competent advice and tuition from Chris-
tian Danvad Damsgaard, Stig Helveg and Sebastian Pirel Fredsgaard Jespersen regarding the
the planning of the experiments, the interpretation of the data, and the general structure of my
work. I am grateful for the work that they have put into the supervision of me.
In addition to this, Sebastian, Sven Ullmann and Stig gave me indispensable support and
guided me throughout my usage of the electron microscope at Haldor Topsoe A/S.
Finally, I will like to thank my family and my partner, Sophie Ambjoerner, for their invalu-
able support and help. It is very much appreciated.
3
==PAGE:6==
4 BACKGROUND AND AIM OF THE STUDY
4
Background and aim of the study
In the search for solutions of technological and environmental problems, in situ studies of bi-
ological specimens and important chemical processes have become popular. Many different
experimental techniques of characterization are utilized, but the introduction of electron mi-
croscopes in such investigations has led to many important discoveries [1][2][3]. Impressive
spatial resolution in real space images can be obtained in parallel with elemental and chemical
information in electron microscopes, and this has made the ﬁeld of electron microscopy a re-
search area with great impact. As electron microscopes traditionally are operated in vacuum,
in situ investigations in electron microscopes have required invention of new sample holders or
alterations of the construction of traditional microscopes.
One such invention is the Nanoreactor [4](introduced in section 5.1), which is a state of
the art device that have been used to conduct many interesting in situ experiments in electron
microscopes. Recently, it has been observed[5] that the Nanoreactor oxidizes under electron
beam illumination, and this questions the stability of the Nanoreactor during measurements.
The phenomena of beam-induced oxidation can be generalized to many similar devices used
for in situ measurements in electron microscopes, and this might pose a critical problem for the
whole area of in situ electron microscopy. This thesis seeks to characterize the beam-induced
oxidation of electron transparent windows in the Nanoreactor.
Factors such as pressure, temperature, and in general the chemical environment have an enor-
mous effect on the dynamic behaviour of organic and inorganic molecules as well as their
interaction with a solid compound. As a consequence, it is highly important to study chemical
reactions in situ, meaning that the investigations of a sample have to be conducted under con-
ditions that mimic the environment, in which the behaviour of the sample is to be understood
or manipulated.
Differential pumping systems have been incorporated in electron microscopes [6][3] as a
way to enable in situ studies of specimens. A sketch of a microscope, in which such a solution
is implemented, can be seen on Figure 1. With this modiﬁcation of a traditional electron micro-
scope, pressures of several millibars have been achieved at the specimen plane, while spatial
resolution was preserved. In principle, the introduction of more and more pumps would make
it possible to keep higher pressures around the specimen, but with increasing amounts of gasses
or liquids fewer and fewer electrons that can be used to investigate the specimen will reach it
unscattered. This makes it difﬁcult to reach industrially relevant pressures, and at the same
time investigate specimens in electron microscopes, even after the introduction of differential
pumping systems.
Page 4 of 66
==PAGE:7==
4 BACKGROUND AND AIM OF THE STUDY
Figure 1: Sketch from ref. [6] of an elec-
tron microscope with a differential pump-
ing system :
Gas is fed into a small volume at
the specimen plane. Vacuum pumps, positioned
after gas transport limiting apertures, gradually re-
move gas molecules from the column, such that
electron source of the microscope is surrounded
by a sufﬁcient quality of vacuum.
In an attempt to reduce the travel distance
of the beam electrons through the gas or liq-
uid, in which the sample is to be investi-
gated, another approach have been suggested
and demonstrated with success. By encapsu-
lating the sample and the relevant gas/liquid
environment in a small cell, interactions be-
tween the electron beam and the gas or liq-
uid are minimized [1][2][4][7][8]. Using this
method, only the sample holder needs to be
altered, if the cells are completely leak-tight.
The cells are constructed in a way that allows
loading directly into electron microscopes, af-
ter they have been ﬁxed to an appropriate sam-
ple holder.
Several different types of cells have been
developed, and a description of the speciﬁc
type used in this project, the so-called Nanore-
actor [4], is presented in section 5.1. In the
Nanoreactor, dynamic reactions of the speci-
men can be observed through 15 nm thin elec-
tron transparent windows of silicon nitride,
whereas the rest of the reactor walls are thick
enough to withstand sample preparation procedures and high pressures. Using this device, a
solid sample can be examined in situ in a gaseous environment. In the Nanoreactor, it has been
observed that catalysts can change structure dynamically, while a catalytic process is taking
place[9]. This underlines the strength of in situ studies.
Common to many of the cells that facilitates in situ studies in electron microscopes is the use
of thin amorphous silicon nitride ﬁlms as electron transparent windows, through which the dy-
namical behaviour of the sample can be observed. Unfortunately, it has been observed that the
electron transparent windows in the Nanoreactor oxidize under electron beam illumination[5].
This is a crucial problem for the Nanoreactor technology and similar devices, as the stability
of the cell is necessary to ensure reproducibility of the data obtained. To this point, it has been
unknown, how the oxidation process progresses, and if oxidation of the transparent windows
can inﬂuence the chemical processes studied in the cells. In addition to the problem of instabil-
ity, the oxidized windows can mask oxygen signal from the sample. This is problematic, as the
oxygen signal is of high importance in many experiments conducted in electron microscopes.
Page 5 of 66
==PAGE:8==
4 BACKGROUND AND AIM OF THE STUDY
4.1 Aim of the study
Information about whether this oxidation can be circumvented lacks, and therefore research is
needed in order to develop a strategy for minimizing the beam-induced oxidation.
4.1
Aim of the study
In order to address the problems listed above, the aim of this study is to characterize the beam-
induced oxidation of the electron transparent windows of the Nanoreactor in a transmission
electron microscope (TEM), and through this investigation provide an operational procedure
for minimizing the oxidation during electron beam illumination. The physical mechanism re-
sponsible for the beam-induced oxidation is not examined, as this project has a more practical
perspective of identifying parameters inﬂuencing oxidation, which can be tuned such that oxi-
dation is minimized.
It is, as mentioned above, the facilitation of unparalleled spatial resolution during in situ
studies that is the strength of the gas or liquid cells. As a reﬂection of that, induced oxidation
is investigated under variation of illumination parameters, which determine achievable spatial
resolution in the TEM, and oxygen pressure inside the reactor.
The oxidation of the electron transparent windows of the Nanoreactor is investigated with
Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy (EELS) in a TEM. By measuring the change in the ratio
between the integrated signal of the nitrogen K (NK)-edge, oxygen K (OK)-edge, and the
silicon L2,3(SiL)-edge, the ongoing oxidation is tracked.
Both the areal dose rate and the width of the electron beam used to examine the windows
were changed in order to discover conditions, under which the oxidation is minimized. These
two illumination parameters are important for the spatial resolution in real space images[10]
and spectroscopy.
The acquired signal on the charge-coupled-device (CCD) detector used to collect EELS
data was kept nearly constant during experiments. Beam induced oxidation would be absent,
if the beam is turned off, but in the usage of gas or liquid cells for in situ investigations it is
preferable to know, how the induced oxidation can be minimized, while still getting reliable
information about the sample. Therefore it was investigated, how the oxidization could be
minimized while avoiding to deteriorate the quality of the collected data. The measurements
where performed at 500 °C, as this is an operating temperature often used in Nanoreactors.
The thesis contains three theory sections describing the Nanoreactor, the use of the elec-
tron microscope, and the physical origin of an EELS signal, respectively. The discussion of
these three subjects is followed by a section presenting the data analysis methods. Thereafter,
a section showing the results obtained in the investigation of the Nanoreactor and sketching
the acquisition procedures follows. As the data where collected using two different experi-
mental procedures, the results section is composed of two separated subsections dedicated to
Page 6 of 66
==PAGE:9==
5 THEORY
5.1 The Nanoreactor
the description of these two procedures, and the data acquired by using these procedures. In a
general discussion of the data and methods used to collect it, the validity and interpretation of
the results are evaluated. Finally, the conclusion and outlook are presented.
5
Theory
In the following sections, a short description of the Nanoreactor will be presented, and theory of
utilized methods will be introduced. In addition to a presentation of the modelling of the EELS
signal used in the interpretation of the obtained data, this theory section includes an overview
of the operation of the used electron microscope.
5.1
The Nanoreactor
A sketch of the hermetically sealed Nanoreactor is shown on Figure 2. The Nanoreactor is
fabricated [4] on a silicon chip and consists of a hollow silicon nitride slap, which is suspended
over an etched hole in the silicon chip. Through the inlet and outlet holes in the chip, gasses can
be transported from the sample holder into the channel inside the slap, where also nanoparticles
can be placed. The upper and lower silicon nitride membranes deﬁning the reaction chamber
(0.5 µm high) are stabilized by silicon nitride pillars. This is done in order to avoid bulging
of the reactor at high pressures and in general to improve the stiffness of the hollow slap.
Thereby, it is also avoided that the two silicon nitride membranes stitch together and block
the channel. The vanishing height of the channel ensures that the electrons of the electron
microscope beam only interact with the gases inside the channel over a small distance, and this
reduces the deteriorating effect such an interaction have on the detected signal of electrons.
The hollow space between the two membranes is made by etching away the material between
these two membranes through holes in the upper membrane. These holes is later blocked by
deposited silicon nitride. The plugs of the holes can be seen on Figure 2.
To ensure the mechanical strength of the relatively thin and hollow Nanoreactor structure,
the main part of the reactor is made of silicon nitride. As mentioned in the introduction, the
reaction to be studied in situ is observed through very thin regions in the Nanoreactor also made
of silicon nitride. These regions appear transparent to the electron beam and are often referred
to as ”electron transparent windows”. Silicon nitride is in general thought to be chemical inert at
temperatures below approximately 1000 °C except for an initial rapid oxidation when exposed
to ambient air [11]. Nonetheless, continued oxidation, besides this initially formed layer, has
been observed on the electron transparent windows [5].
On top of the reactor, a heater element connected to four electrically conductive pads is
deposited. By the ”Four-probe method”, the resistivity of the heater material can be measured.
Page 7 of 66
==PAGE:10==
5 THEORY
5.1 The Nanoreactor
Figure 2: A sketch of the Nanoreactor as presented in ref. [4].
The different regions are
colored according to their chemical composition. Blue regions are made of TEOS, silicon nitride is
depicted as green, regions of silicon are grey, and the heater material is coloured orange.
Figure 3: The Nanoreactor at different an-
gles. From J.F. Creemer et al. 2011.[4]
Figure 4: Zoom on the Nanoreactor. The gas
ﬂow direction is indicated with a white arrow, and
the electron transparent windows appear as a white
spiral structure. From S.B. Vendelbo et al. 2014.[9]
The silicon nitride slap can then be resistively heated, while the temperature is simultaneously
measured, as the resistivity of a material depends on temperature.
In the central part of the heater structure, an array of the electron transparent windows has
been formed. These windows are made by etching the slap down to a deposited amorphous
silicon nitride ﬁlm of only 15 nm. The electron beam of an electron microscope can without
a lot of scattering penetrate such a thin silicon nitride ﬁlm, and since the ﬁlm is amorphous
the ﬁlm will not introduce unwanted contrast in images formed by the transmitted beam. When
fabricating the gas cell containing nanoparticles and gasses on a single silicon chip, the electron
transparent windows can relatively easy be aligned. This allows the windows to be as small as
2 µm. These windows can due to their small size withstand pressures up to 14 bars, even though
they are very thin.
On Figure 3, a picture of the Nanoreactor is shown as seen in an optical microscope at two
Page 8 of 66
==PAGE:11==
5 THEORY
5.2 Microscope parameters
different angles. Here the four contact pads can be seen as the four squares at the bottom of the
silicon chip. The picture on Figure 4 is a zoom on the reactor region, which is the green region
with some similarity to a Maltese cross. In this zoomed image, the four electrical connections to
the heating element are situated at the top and bottom of the picture and are placed on the green
silicon nitride membrane suspended over the etched hole in silicon chip. The plugs mentioned
above are seen as a white array going from left to right showing the extent of the gas channel on
the chip. The middle white structure of the silicon nitride membrane is the electron transparent
holes.
As it is the oxidation of the electron transparent windows, which is investigated in this
thesis, the Nanoreactor is used without any sample loaded. Only the silicon nitride of the
windows and the oxygen gas inside channel affect the signal of the transmitted electron beam.
5.2
Microscope parameters
Control of the illumination parameters in an electron microscope requires adjustment of several
different lenses at the same time. As described in section 4.1, the width of the electron beam
illuminating the Nanoreactor windows and the areal dose rate of electron impinging on these
are varied in this study. In this section, it is described, how settings of the probe forming
lenses of an electron microscope was used to control the illumination area and the electron
current, which in combination determine the areal dose rate of electron on the sample. The
transmittance of signal to the bottom of the microscope, where the EELS signal is collected, is
brieﬂy sketched.
In the experiments a Titan™TEM made by FEI was used. An evaluation of the calibration
of the parameters introduced in this chapter is shown in section 7.1. Electron microscopes can
be constructed in various different ways, but the description of the electron beam forming lens
system in this section is based on a manual describing the speciﬁc microscope used[12].
The beam forming system of electron microscopes, also called the condenser system, is
situated above the sample to be investigated. This part of the electron microscope creates and
structures the electron beam that illuminates the sample. Figure 5 shows a sketch of the beam
forming system and the position of the electron lenses. The electron current going into the
beam forming part of the lens system is controlled by the extraction voltage of the electron
source, the gun lens strength, the condenser lens 1 (C1) aperture size (not shown on Figure 5),
and the C1 focus. In the present study, the C1 aperture was not changed during the experiments
and was kept at a width of 2000µm. The area of the beam on the specimen is controlled with
the condenser lens 2 (C2) focus and the C2 aperture .
A TEM can be operated in different illumination modes, but only parallel illumination-
mode was used for the experiments. The condition for upholding a parallel illumination is
Page 9 of 66
==PAGE:12==
5 THEORY
5.2 Microscope parameters
Figure 5: The condenser system.
The ﬁgure is a manipulated snapshot from ref. [12]. On the
right-hand side of the illustrated microscope column, the names and positions of the lenses are indicated.
The illumination parameters controlled by these devices are speciﬁed on the left-hand side. The sample
(in this case the Nanoreactor) is placed between the upper and lower objective lens.
to keep the ﬁnal image plane of the rest of the condenser system at the front focal plane of
the upper objective lens[13]. This is ensured by the condenser lens 3 (C3). The strength of
this lens is automatically varied such that the condition for parallel illumination is fulﬁlled.
Before reaching the upper objective lens, the condenser mini lens spreads the beam such that
the illuminated area is increased.
The image forming lens, also called the objective lens, is split into two lenses by the speci-
men, which is inserted in the middle of the objective lens. Below the lower part of the objective
lens is the projector system. This part of the column of the electron microscope selects and
magniﬁes the information present in the image of the specimen [13].
To establish an electron beam, an electron source is needed. A so-called Schottky electron
gun serves this purpose in the microscope used [13]. Here a sharpened tungsten cylinder is held
at a potential, which is lower than that of an anode situated below. The potential difference be-
tween these two components is the extraction voltage. The tungsten ﬁlament can be sharpened
to a degree that the force per area is high enough to make some electrons of the tungsten tunnel
out of the ﬁlament tip and enter the microscope column. This electrically induced tunneling is
thermally assisted by heating the tungsten ﬁlament to a ﬁxed temperature.
The ﬁrst anode, providing the extraction voltage, can be seen at the top of the microscope
column on Figure 5 as a thick gray line. After the extraction, the following anodes that make up
the gun lens accelerate the electrons to the desired ﬁnal energy (the high tension) and focuses
them. In the experiments an extraction voltage of 4500 V and a high tension of 300 kV were
Page 10 of 66
==PAGE:13==
5 THEORY
5.2 Microscope parameters
Figure 6: Effect of changing strength of C2 When the strength of C2 is increased, the cross over
of the lens moves up the optic axis. Thereby, the illuminated area on the sample is enlarged. The ﬁgure
is from ref. [12].
used. These parameters were not varied.
In order to quantify the focusing property of the anodes at the top of the column, the strength
of the gun lens is measured in discretely separated ”gun lens strength”s. By increasing the ”gun
lens strength”, the crossover of the gun lens moves up the optical axis. When the cross over of
the gun lens moves up the column, electrons reach greater and greater distances from the optical
axis at the position of the C1 aperture, and a greater amount of electrons is then excluded by
the aperture.
Besides the gun lens strength, there is another important parameter controlling the electron
current down the column. This is the focus of C1. This focus is described in terms of the
spot size, which is inversely related to the distance between the crossover of C1 and the lens
itself. The higher the spot size, the lower the number of electrons allowed to continue down the
column. The exclusion of electrons down the column happens in the same way, as it does when
changing the gun lens strength: A high spot size is associated with a crossover close to C1, and
thereby a magniﬁed image of the beam at C2. Due to the ﬁnite size of the C2, electrons will be
excluded.
The way the rest of the illumination system of the microscope is set up, determines the
effect of the C2 focus on the beam. As C3 and the mini lens focus the beam to the front focal
plane of the objective lens, the effect of moving the focal point of C2 up and down the optic
axis is to change the size of electron beam on the sample. This is illustrated on Figure 6.
After the beam has interacted with the specimen, it is focused by the lower objective lens.
The interactions between the beam and specimen relevant to this study will be described in
section 5.3.
The image formed by the lower objective lens is mapped to a ﬂuorescent screen at the bot-
tom of the microscope by the projector system. Most of the lenses of this part of the microscope
Page 11 of 66
==PAGE:14==
5 THEORY
5.3 EELS
just serve the purpose of magnifying, but the diffraction lens has a special role of determining
whether it is the back focal plane of the objective lens (diffraction-mode) or the image plane
(image-mode), which is magniﬁed. The setting of this lens, situated just below the lower ob-
jective lens, determines whether the microscope is in image- or diffraction mode. Both modes
were used in the experiments, as it will be described in section 7.1.
Besides the lenses described above, additional electromagnetic lenses are used to move or
correct the shape of the beam created by all the condenser lenses[13]. Stigmators are magnetic
lenses[14], where the magnetic ﬁeld focusing the electron beam can be changed independently
in two directions in the plane the lens. These stigmators are used to correct the shape of the
beam, and they are placed below some of the lenses. In addition to the stigmators, extra mag-
netic lenses are used to move the beam with respect to the optical axis[14]. Thereby both the
angle and distance to the optic axis can be changed. During the experimental work of this
project, the settings of these lenses varied throughout the experiments to keep the beam round
and centered on the optic axis.
The settings used to control the area and areal current of the electron beam illuminating the
specimen is listed in Table 3. The C2 focus is adjusted such that the dose rates are constant dur-
ing different experimental sessions, and this focus was calibrated at each experimental session,
as a varying emission current from the electron source made it necessary.
5.3
EELS
The following section presents the modelling of electron matter interaction, which the data
treatment and discussion are based on. As explained later, the EELS signal can be used to
investigate the elemental composition of the specimen. This is used in the experiments to
follow the oxidation of the electron transparent windows.
Scattering is traditionally separated into two categories that each gives different information
about a sample investigated in an electron microscope. These two categories are: elastic and
inelastic scattering[13]. The distinction between the signals stemming from these two types of
scattering and the interpretation of them are the subjects of this section.
In an elastic interaction between the specimen and the beam electron, there is no exchange
of energy. Only the momentum of the electron is changed in such an interaction[13]. Even
though such an interaction is an idealization [15], the term is used to categorize interactions
of very small or even undetectable energy exchanges. Elastic scattering can be a result of
Rutherford scattering. In this type of scattering, the trajectory of the electron is bend by the
potential of the atomic nucleus, and for a large scattering parameter (small deﬂection angles
and large distance to the nucleus) nearly no energy is exchanged [15].
In EELS, it is the total intensities of beam electrons with speciﬁc energies, which are de-
Page 12 of 66
==PAGE:15==
5 THEORY
5.3 EELS
tected. As this is not changed in elastic interactions, such interactions are not directly detected
in an EELS spectrum. That aside, the elastic signal is still important. The unscattered and
elastically scattered electrons form a zero-loss peak, which can be used to deﬁne the energy
resolution of the experiment as wells as to sharpen features in the rest of the spectrum. Further-
more, the ratio between the amount of electrons in this region and the rest of the spectrum is,
under certain assumptions, related to the thickness of the specimen[15].
It should be noted that besides in EELS, elastic scattered electrons are widely used in elec-
tron microscopes. These electrons can form high resolution images and amplitude contrast[13].
In general, low angle elastic scattering retains the coherency of the electron beam, and therefore
Bragg scattering and interference takes place for electrons that are scattered elastically[13].
Conversely, inelastic scattering is in general incoherent, but a lot of information about the
sample can be extracted from this type of signal anyway. The energy losses involved in inelastic
interactions can be signiﬁcant, and therefore easier to measure than those caused by elastic scat-
tering. Since these losses are characteristic of the scattering agent, they can give a ﬁngerprint
signal of the speciﬁc chemical elements present in the sample. In EELS, the beam electrons at
the end of the microscope are sorted depending on their energy by an energy ﬁlter[15], which
will be described below. This ﬁlter disperses the electrons according to their energy along an
axis on a detector, and the intensities are quantiﬁed. When the energy spectrum is analyzed,
elemental and chemical data about the sample can be extracted. An example of such a spectrum
can be seen in Figure 8.
The detected intensities of electrons of different energies are usually displayed in the same
way. The counts are arranged on an X-axis, which relates the energy of the collected electrons
to that of the unscattered electrons. By setting the origin of the X-axis at the zero-loss peak,
energies on the axis are equal to the energy loss suffered by the collected electrons compared
to the unscattered electrons. From this type of energy loss spectrum, much information about
the sample can be extracted, when the source of the signal is modelled. This will be explained
on the following pages.
An EELS spectrum is traditionally separated into two regions: The low loss region (see
Figure 20) and the core loss region (see Figure 8)[15]. The low loss region is characterized by
electrons scattered either elastically or inelastically by outer shell electrons of the specimen,
whereas the core loss region, which is situated at higher energy loss, consists of electrons scat-
tered by inner shell electrons. When the beam electrons interact with the outermost electrons
of the atoms of the specimen, they can lose energy in different ways. The beam electrons can
exchange energy with the electron cloud of the solid or speciﬁc electrons bound to a nucleus.
In these interactions, they either induce surface or bulk charge waves in the electron cloud that
spans the whole specimen (plasmons) or knock a more tightly bound electron from one energy
level to an empty high (energy wise) lying state[15]. In both types of interactions, the electron
Page 13 of 66
==PAGE:16==
5 THEORY
5.3 EELS
cloud will absorb an energy quantum of several tens of electron volts. Successive scattering of
this kind extents the low loss region up to around 100 eV of energy loss. Core electrons, on
the other hand, have a relatively higher binding energy. Therefore at least several hundreds of
electron volts must be absorbed by the core loss electrons from the electron beam, if they are to
be excited[15]. Due to the higher energy loss, the core loss spectrum is separated from the low
loss region. The core-loss signals are named according to the ﬁrst quantum number of excited
core-loss electrons, e.g. an EELS signal from the innermost shell of an oxygen atom is denoted
an oxygen K-edge signal. In the following sections, also the nitrogen K-edge and the silicon
L2,3-edge signals are discussed.
The total intensity of electrons with a speciﬁc energy loss relative to the zero loss beam
detected by using EELS procedures (J(E)) can be represented as below:
J(E) =
Z
I(E0)σ(E0, E)nadE0.
(1)
Here I(E0) is the electrons with lower energy losses, σ(X, Y ) is the probability of an event,
where an electron with energy X loses energy and end up with energy Y , times area (called the
scattering cross section), and na is the projected density of scattering centers.
σ does approximately not depend on the energy of the incoming electron, but only on the
energy loss[15]. As a result, the expression can be written as a convolution. The spectrum can
then be deconvoluted by using Fourier transformation to extract the product σ(E0−E)na. From
this product, a lot of information can be gained. The scattering cross section can be related to
the generalized oscillator strength (described below)[15], which then gives information about
the electronic states in the specimen. Using such an approach the chemical conﬁguration of
the specimen can be analyzed. In addition to this, the chemical composition can be determined
from na. The scattering cross sections of different chemical species, in general, only contribute
to the scattering in speciﬁc regions of energy-loss. In other regions, they only contribute to a
well behaved background. Therefore, the background subtracted intensity of a signal in one
region of energy loss is proportional to the amount of the scattering agents, which scatter the
beam electrons to that region of energy loss. Since the cross sections reasonably well can be
theoretically determined, na can be extracted from the data.
The equation above does not include the possibility of multiple scattering. It is though
mostly correct for thin specimens (like the silicon nitride windows), as in these only the low
loss electrons are scattered more than once. In that case, the low loss spectrum can just be
deﬁned to be included in I(E0). If this approximation isn’t valid, successive scattering can be
included in the modelling by using Poisson statistics (the scattering is independent) and succes-
sive convolution[15]. Such a model leads to a equation for the single scattered spectrum[15]:
Page 14 of 66
==PAGE:17==
5 THEORY
5.3 EELS
s(⌫) = I0 ln
✓j(⌫)
z(⌫)
◆
,
(2)
where ⌫is a frequency, s is the Fourier transformed single scattering spectrum, j is the acquired
Fourier transformed plural scattering spectrum, and z is the transformed zero-loss peak.
The silicon nitride thin ﬁlms used in the Nanoreactor as electron transparent windows are
amorphous, and therefore the scattering cross section can be investigated theoretically from
atomistic simulations with only small precautions. Utilizing that the scattering angles involved
in EELS are small, the following equation for the scattering cross section can be derived with
Bethe theory([15]):
δ2σ
δ⌦δE ⇡4γ2R
Ek2
0
1
✓2 + ✓2
E
δf
δE ,
✓E =
E
γm0v2,
(3)
where R is the Rydberg energy, γ = m
m0
, k0 is the wave vector before scattering of the incoming
electron, and f is the generalized oscillator strength. The generalized oscillator strength is
related to the overlap between the electronic orbitals of the initial and ﬁnal states of the electrons
of the specimen, which scatters the incoming beam. If the Fermi level is well below the energy
of the work function of the specimen, it is possible to excite the core electrons to empty states
below the vacuum level. Therefore the energy of chemical states present in the sample can
be determined from the EELS data, and these can be matched with simulations of the binding
energy of different states in different chemical conﬁgurations.
Since the generalized oscillator strength is bounded by Bethes sum rule[15], and the scat-
tering cross section is weighted by 1/E, the core loss spectrum can often be divided into en-
ergy regions, where mainly one chemical element contributes to the signal rising above the
background. The rest of the scattering agents with energy loss signal located outside the afore-
mentioned region contributes with a background that can be subtracted, as the signal from the
relevant chemical element is just added on this background. The background is experimentally
observed and theoretically determined to follow a decreasing power law dependence[16][17].
This dependence though differs from region to region, and as a consequence of that the speciﬁc
power is usually found by ﬁtting the data. In this thesis, this practice is followed.
For most energy losses, the scattering cross section has to be found from solutions to the
Schr¨odinger equation, but for plasmons it takes the analytical form[15]:
δ2σ
δ⌦δE ⇡
1
⇡2a0m0v2na
E∆EpE2
p
(E2 −E2
p)2 + (E∆Ep)2
1
✓2 + ✓2
E
.
(4)
[15]
Page 15 of 66
==PAGE:18==
5 THEORY
5.3 EELS
where the parameters are: the electronic rest mass m0, the velocity of the incoming electron v,
the bohr radius a0, the full-width-half-maximum of the lorentzian ∆Ep, a volume concentration
na, and the plasmon energy Ep. This cross section can be determined through the imaginary
part of the dielectric function for plasmons, as the dielectric function can be related to the
scattering cross section[15].
It can be seen in Equation 4 that the scattering cross section falls off like E−3 in accordance
with
the
previous
statement
about
the
energy
dependence
of
the
background.
Figure 7: Calculated generalized oscillator strength
from ref. [16].
The plot shows dependence both on en-
ergy loss, E, but also on scattering angle for carbon K-edge
scattering. Note that increasing Ka0 is related to increasing
scattering angle.
The plasmon peak will contribute
to the background of all signals at
higher energy losses with an inten-
sity that follows this dependence.
Core loss signals also follows a
power law far away from the thresh-
old. In fact, the scattering cross sec-
tion at large energy losses and col-
lection angles approximates to that
of Rutherford scattering on a scat-
tering agent with a charge of −1e
[16]. This gives a E−2 dependence.
In general, the dependence changes
with collection angle[16].
The scattering cross section of
the core loss signals in general does
not take a transparent analytic form
as that of the plasmons. Depending
on the type of inner shell electron
that the beam electrons scatters off,
the resulting EELS spectrum takes
different shapes. Most spectra rep-
resenting scattering on electrons of
the same quantum number though
have clear recognizable features in common. When beam electrons are scattered by K-shell
electrons(which is the type of scattering detected in most of the data presented this thesis), the
acquired EELS spectrum clearly resembles a spectrum with a generalized oscillator strength
like the one presented on Figure 7 [16].
The generalized oscillator strength is zero for all energy losses below that required to excite
the core electron in the K-shell to the ﬁrst unoccupied orbital, and then it decreases with energy.
Page 16 of 66
==PAGE:19==
5 THEORY
5.4 The drift tube
A broad so-called Bethe ridge appear[16] after the main peak and temporarily counteracts the
decreasing tendency. The generalized oscillator strength displayed on Figure 7 is based on
atomistic calculations, but it can still be used to produce a calculated spectrum that resembles
that of a solid. In a solid, the generalized oscillator strength for the K-shell will appear relatively
unaltered compared to that of single atoms, even though the band structure of the solid material
changes the states that the K-shell electron can be excited to. The resulting effect of the band
structure is found around the main peak as additional, fewer or moved peaks. This is due to
the fact that states before the vacuum level will be changed by the chemical interactions of the
solid.
When collecting EELS data, the energy resolution is often set by the energy width of the
electron beam illuminating the sample. This can be seen from Equation 1. Because of this
broadening effect, the ﬁne structure of the EELS spectra is not visible in the spectra presented in
this thesis, and therefore the structure introduced by the band structure of the amorphous silicon
nitride will create broad humps on the spectrum instead of sharp peaks. The only exception is
on Figure 9, which is a spectrum acquired by the company GATAN.
When the projected density of scattering centers of a chemical element is to be found,
only a ﬁnite integration energy width is used. The result is that the scattering cross section
also is integrated over a ﬁnite width, and this should be kept in mind, when determining the
projected density. That the scattering cross section depends on the solid angle is clear from
Equation 3 and Figure 7. Due to the ﬁnite size of the detector, the EELS signal collected is
an integral over angles of the scattering cross section up to a certain collection angle[15]. In
the data treatment in this thesis, only the change in the elemental composition of the electron
transparent windows were of interest. Therefore, it was deemed unnecessary to calculate the
scattering cross sections, as the integration width and collection angle were kept constant, this
choice will be described more thoroughly in section 6.
5.4
The drift tube
As mentioned before, electrons are dispersed on a detector according to their energy in EELS.
This energy separation of the electron beam is achieved by introducing a so-called drift tube
below the microscope. This device creates a magnetic ﬁeld that bends the electrons according
to their energy [15]. In the experiments, a Gatan Imaging Filter (GIF) was used[18].
When electrons enter a magnetic ﬁeld, they begin to follow spiral curves in the ﬁeld. This
follows from Lorentz’ law. The radius of curvature in the drift tube can be calculated to be[15]:
R =
⇣γm0
eB v
⌘
.
(5)
Page 17 of 66
==PAGE:20==
6 DATA PROCESSING
Here B is the magnetic ﬁeld in the drift tube, which is perpendicular to the travelling direction
of the beam electrons, and v is the velocity of the beam electrons. Since the velocity of the
incoming electrons depend on energy, the radius of curvature differs between electrons of dif-
ferent energies. Due to the difference in radius of curvature, but constant geometry of the drift
tube, the electrons are focused according to their energy along a speciﬁc direction in the plane
perpendicular to the travelling direction of the zero-loss electrons. The drift tube also has the
property of double focusing. This means that both in the x and y direction electrons travelling
with small angles to the optical axis will still be focused depending on their energy.
After bending the electrons around ⇡/2 radians, the resulting pattern is magniﬁed onto a
CCD detector. The magniﬁcation determines the dispersion of energy on the detector.
The aberrations of the microscope affects the counting efﬁciency associated with the EELS
measurements, as wells as the energy resolution that can be obtained. In general, the effect on
the collection efﬁciency of the aberrations is to broaden the beam, and thereby cause more beam
electrons to hit the entrance aperture of the drift tube[15]. Since this exclusion of electrons
depend on energy, an artiﬁcial difference in detected electron intensity at different positions
in the EELS spectrum could be introduced. This is a crucial problem, if the exact elemental
concentrations is to be determined. Since only the change in collected intensity is of interest,
the effect can be neglected, if the chromatic aberration is assumed to be constant. Therefore this
have not been taken into consideration in section 7. The spherical aberration alongside other
third order aberrations are corrected, as they bend the beam, and affects the angles allowed
by the entrance aperture to the drift tube. Furthermore, this reduces the combined effect of
spherical and chromatic aberration, which would introduce both angle and energy dependent
blurring.
6
Data processing
To be able to get an overview of and to quantify the beam induced oxidation, the raw data was
processed to extract elemental speciﬁc core-loss and plasmon signals. In the following section,
the assumptions and considerations that led to the ﬁnal display of data are presented.
To be able to identify changes in oxygen signal as changes in oxygen content of the electron
transparent windows, the total beam intensity illuminating the windows must be known, if only
the oxygen signal is studied. Knowledge of the total incoming intensity requires acquisition of
EELS data from zero energy loss and upwards to energy losses of negligible intensity. In the
experiments, the low-loss and core-loss signals were acquired in image- and diffraction-mode
respectively, and this prevents comparison of intensities. A ratio of two core-loss signals is
independent of the incoming intensity of electrons, and therefore core-loss signals were studied
through ratios in this thesis.
Page 18 of 66
==PAGE:21==
6 DATA PROCESSING
The integrated intensity, I, of a background subtracted EELS signal can be related to the
projected density, N, of a chemical element, if plural scattering is ignored, and only one atomic
species has a core-loss peak in the energy loss region considered. This is explained in section
5.3 and was exploited in the processing of the data. Dividing two signals obtained in this way,
the following elemental ratio can be found:
Na
Nb
= Iaσb
Ibσa
(6)
To quantify the relative amounts of the atomic species giving rise to the detected signal, the
scattering cross sections in the given integration energy interval and up to the used collection
angle must be known.
The precise amount of oxygen incorporated into the electron transparent windows was not
needed to investigate the progression of the beam-induced oxidation. Changes in oxygen signal
from the silicon nitride ﬁlms relative to the initial oxygen content gives enough information to
examine the minimization of beam-induced oxidation. As a consequence of that, the scattering
cross sections are unnecessary to determine, if they remain constant throughout the measure-
ments. Both the collection angle and the integration widths were kept constant during all mea-
surements of the silicon nitride windows. Therefore, only an alteration of the band structure is
likely to change the appearance of the scattering cross sections of the chemical species present
in the windows.
Local chemical conﬁgurations of the silicon nitride ﬁlms could have been examined, if the
energy resolution of the electron beam was better during the experiments. The energy spread
of the beam could have been reduced by using a monochromator[13], but since such a device
was not at hand, this has not been done. Furthermore, reducing the current of beam electrons
could reduce the energy spread due to a reduced interaction between the electrons of the beam
(the so called Boersch effect[13]), but this would be at the expense of the signal to noise ratio.
Since neither of these things have been done, oxidation is in the experiments only observed
though the elemental composition of the electron transparent windows. This examination of
the oxidation process can still reveal, whether there exists microscope settings that suppress the
beam induced oxidation to an unobservable level.
Ratios of integrated signals are treated in this study, as if the scattering cross sections were
constant. In an attempt to reduce the consequence of this probably incorrect assumption, the
integration region of the EELS signal is chosen to be relative broad in comparison to the scale
of the shifts in ﬁne structure of typical scattering cross sections. It is though a problem for the
study, if too large modiﬁcations of the scattering cross sections move signiﬁcant amounts of
scattering from inside the integration width to either side of this width. Such large modiﬁcations
have though not been observed.
Page 19 of 66
==PAGE:22==
6 DATA PROCESSING
Low-loss spectra can be used to evaluate the amount of plural scattering relative to single
scattering. Based on such data, the validity of the assumption that plural scattering can be
neglected is discussed in section 8.
The background subtraction of the core-loss spectra is illustrated graphically on Figure 8.
First the X-axis dispersion is corrected (the correction factor is discussed on the following
page). Hereafter, the position of the NK main peak deﬁnes the position of an energy loss
of 401.6 eV. Then backgrounds are ﬁtted to regions just in front of the core-loss edges. The
backgrounds are extrapolated beyond the core-loss edges and subtracted from the raw data. The
resulting spectrum for a speciﬁc example is depicted in red and shown in the upper right corner
of Figure 8. Repeating this data processing method for all acquired spectra with nitrogen,
silicon and oxygen signals, the oxidation of the silicon nitride windows can be tracked through
the ratio of the integrated intensities of the background subtracted signals.
Figure 8: Figure showing the background subtraction of a representative spectrum with
NK- and OK-edge present. The ﬁtting regions and backgrounds for an extrapolation of the back-
ground are indicated with orange. The raw data subtracted the background is displayed in red in the
corner of the ﬁgure. The background subtraction before the OK-edge is exaggerated.
It is preferable to have background ﬁtting regions of the same width for regions compared
in the analysis. The integrated intensities of the core-loss edge signals then have comparable
uncertainty.
The fact that the slope of the background changes can clearly be seen by comparing the
Page 20 of 66
==PAGE:23==
6 DATA PROCESSING
background subtraction in front of the NK- and OK-edge on Figure 8. At the OK-edge, the
background subtraction has been extended to a wider region than used elsewhere in the data
treatment. It is clearly seen how the background changes slope between the NK- and OK-
signal. This limits the possible widths background ﬁtting regions. The assumption of constant
slope in the background breaks down at a certain ﬁtting width. This point of ﬁtting width
depends on the the edge energy of interest. Therefore, it was only possible to fulﬁll the above
presented requirement for the spectra width for the OK- and NK-edge present in the data. The
ﬁttings region width for the SiL edge differs from those of the two K-edges.
In the experiments of this study, the dispersion of the GIF was set to 0.2 eV
pixel , but in the
data analysis, the dispersion of all core-loss data was corrected with a factor of 1.02 compared
to the raw data. The dispersion calibration was carried out by comparing EELS spectra of
two BN particles. An EELS spectra obtained from a BN particle was downloaded from a
website powered by GATAN inc.[19], and a BN test sample from GATAN was investigated
in the electron microscope used under the same illumination conditions as was used in the
experiments. By comparing the extracted threshold edge energies for the two spectra, the
dispersion of the acquired data was found to be a factor 1.02 off, if the edge threshold energies
should be equally distanced. The downloaded data from GATAN inc. can be seen on Figure
9. It is clear from inspection of Figure 9, that a better energy resolution would uncover band
structure induced ﬁne structure of the NK-main peak.
To use a common X-axis for all the measurements, the second step of the data processing
was to align a speciﬁc feature in the EELS spectrum with an energy loss. The zero loss peak
were aligned with zero. In other EELS spectra, the main peak of the NK-edge was ﬁtted with
a Gaussian, and the X-axis were moved to ensure that the maximum of the Gaussian lay at
an energy loss of 401.6 eV. Both zero-loss peak maximum and threshold edge energies were
found by using ﬁnite differences.
According to R. P. Burgner et. al. (1983)[20],the threshold energy, not the main peak
energy of the NK-edge, is 401.6 eV. However, to have a stable method for ﬁxing the X-axis
to a feature in the spectrum, the main peak was used as a reference point. From Figure 10,
it can be seen that the NK-edge ﬂuctuates. This can both be due to statistical ﬂuctuations or
band structure change, but with a full-maximum-half-width of 1.8 eV of the zero-loss peak
(which as written in section 5.3 broadens the spectrum) it is difﬁcult to tell the difference. Data
shown on Figure 10 is acquired at different windows, and all the measurements displayed are
used to deﬁne an average edge start. Thereby the averaging is both over ﬂuctuations in the
composition of the windows and local unobserved dynamic change in the electron transparent
windows. Assuming that ﬂuctuations are due to statistical noise in the spectrum, the mean
value is used to ﬁnd the NK-edge threshold. The data is from continuous measurements on
the same window to the left of the windows (as explained in section 7.3). As a result, the
Page 21 of 66
==PAGE:24==
6 DATA PROCESSING
Figure 9: Core-loss EELS spectrum from a BN specimen.
The data is downloaded from ref.
[19] to be used for calibration of the energy dispersion of the energy loss axis.
area is unchanged in measurements conducted at the same windows, so only oxidation should
induce change in the band structure of the amorphous silicon nitride and thereby the edge start.
Since no such oxidation could be tracked for this data (see section 7.4), the variations cannot
be explained by such a reaction. Instead of using data collected with oxygen present inside the
reactor to ﬁnd the NK-edge threshold, reference data obtained with the Nanoreactor evacuated
could have been used. It was though preferred that the averaging included data, which could
have variations in NK-edge threshold due to unobserved oxidation or other gas phenomena.
Thereby, the standard deviation also include uncertainty associated with such variations.
The search regions for the threshold energies differs from peak to peak. Manual inspection
of the spectra was used to ﬁnd the relevant regions. To minimize integration over OK-signal
from the gas molecules, the region for ﬁnding the solid OK-edge was found from raw data,
where no oxygen was present during acquisition. Furthermore, the background ﬁtting region
for the solid OK-edge was placed a few eVs before the gas peak rise above the background in
experiments with 1 bar of oxygen present in the gas chamber. To avoid signiﬁcant systematic
errors in the data processing from background extrapolation, if the positions of the used core-
loss edges were off, the integration of the NK-signal have to be much greater than the statistical
variance in the NK-edge start. This was ensured by using an integration energy width of 25 eV.
Investigations of the signal to noise ratio (deﬁned in terms of the signal of the background
Page 22 of 66
==PAGE:25==
6 DATA PROCESSING
Figure 10: NK-edge variation for constant illumination area at different windows from
spectra with the OK-edge present. Both the mean and standard deviation over all measurements
are displayed on the ﬁgure. The measurements were conducted with an aperture size of 150 µm, 1 mbar
oxygen, and an areal dose rate of 10
e
˚A2s. It is mentioned in the title that the measurements are acquired
on the left side of the windows, but as explained in section 7.4 no signiﬁcant radial difference was
observed in the oxidation.
subtracted signal, the background, and the statistical uncertainty associated with the back-
ground extrapolation) have shown that the optimal integration energy width of the CK-edge
is around 25 eV, and the optimal starting point is around the edge onset value [21]. Since the
OK- and NK- signal from the Nanoreactor windows are similar to that of CK with respect to
edge shape, the same integration width and start were used. Following the analysis of the SNR
in ref. [22] (the background ﬁtting width should be greater than integration width), the back-
ground ﬁtting region was chosen to be 30 eV, except at the SiL-edge. Here both the background
ﬁtting region and the integration width was 10 eV. A background ﬁtting width of 30 eV was
reasonable for the OK-signal, as can be seen on Figure 8. The ﬁtted background resembles the
background well on both sides of the ﬁtting region, but this is though not the case for energies
further away. In Table 1, the integration parameters are summarized. Here the search region
for the threshold is shortened to ”Search reg. for thres.”, the threshold is referred to as ”thres.”,
the background ﬁtting region is called ”Back. ﬁt reg.”, and the integration width used for the
speciﬁc edges is denoted as ”int. width”.
Page 23 of 66
==PAGE:26==
6 DATA PROCESSING
Table 1: Data processing parameters for oxidation data (eV)
K-edge
Search reg. for thres.
Thres.
Back. ﬁt reg.
int. width
O
529-532
530.7 ± 0.7
492-522
25
NO
396-401.6
397.1 ± 0.5
360-390
25
NSi
396-401.6
397.4 ± 0.7
360-390
25
Si
96-104
100.2 ± 0.7
85-95
10
The core-loss spectrum was acquired in two separate acquisitions with different exposure
times, and therefore the characteristics of the statistical noise can be different in the two acqui-
sitions. Therefore the NK-edge were found for both the spectra containing a Si peak and the
spectra containing an O peak (for acquisition procedure see section 7.1 and 7.3). The parame-
ters used in the data treatment are displayed in table 1 in electron volts.
On table 2 (the same abbreviations are used), the corresponding parameters for the disper-
sion calibration are shown. The downloaded BN EELS data was displayed with energy loss
separated in intervals with a width of 1 eV. On the other hand, the spectrum of BN test spec-
imen acquired in the experiments had data binned in intervals of 0.2 eV. To have comparable
spectra, bins in the acquired data were summed such that the energy loss axis was sampled with
the same resolution in both spectra.
Table 2: Data processing parameters for dispersion calibration (eV)
K-edge
Search reg. for thres.
Thres.
Back. ﬁt reg.
GATAN Data
B
186-192
189 ± 1
166-186
NB
396-402
397 ± 1
376-396
Own Data ( 10 e
˚A
2s
)
B
186-194
190 ± 1
166-186
NB
390-397
394 ± 1
370-390
The most signiﬁcant contribution to the core loss signal comes from electrons scattered
once (due to the small thickness of the electron transparent windows), but electrons that have
lost energy to plasmon creation can scatter again, on their continued travel trough the sam-
ple. Such plural scatterings will alter the slope of the core-loss signals at a energy distance
beyond the edge onset comparable to the energy loss due to plasmon losses. By Fourier log
deconvolution[15] (using Equation 2), the low loss spectrum with the zero-loss peak can be
turned into a single scattering spectrum for plasmons. Thereby the evolution of the plasmon
Page 24 of 66
==PAGE:27==
6 DATA PROCESSING
losses can be studied. Examining the total plasmon loss normalized with the integral of the
low-loss spectrum, the evolution of the propability of plasmon+core-loss scattering can be ex-
amined. The problem of plural scattering could be eliminated by performing a Fourier-log
deconvolution [15], but since the whole spectrum from zero to the core-loss edges was not col-
lected using the same illumination conditions, this precaution could not be taken. Even though
data was obtained from the low-loss region up to the core-loss regions of interest, the two re-
gions were examined in TEM- and diffraction-mode respectively. This means that the effect
of GIF and microscope aberrations differs from region to region. This makes a Fourier-log
deconvolution unreasonable.
Figure 11: Extraction of zero-loss peak.A low-loss spectrum taken in TEM-mode with the holder
retracted. The spectrum was Fourier-log deconvoluted with the ﬁtted zero-loss peak. The resultant
spectrum is displayed in red in the uppper right corner of the ﬁgure.
To extract the zero-loss peak for deconvolution of the low-loss region, the zero-loss peak
was extrapolated from the 20th channel from zero energy loss and onwards. This was accom-
plished with a Lorentz function, since the tail of the zero-loss peak is dominated by such a
function [23]. Thereby convolution with resolutions functions and the energy spread of the
electron source were neglected. A smooth transition between the data and the extrapolated
zero-loss peak was ensured, by choosing a Lorentz function with the same slope between the
20’th and 21’th channel as the acquired data. The quality of this extrapolation can be qualita-
tively evaluated by inspection of Figure 11. On this ﬁgure, a low-loss spectrum of the beam
Page 25 of 66
==PAGE:28==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.1 Procedure 1 - setup
with the specimen holder retracted is displayed in blue. Using the Lorentz extrapolation, the
red line is obtained. It can be seen on the ﬁgure that the extrapolation of the spectrum resembles
the acquired spectrum quite good. The Fourier-log deconvoluted spectrum should be zero in
this case, but due to the discrepancy between the acquired spectrum and the ﬁtted spectrum,
it rises some thousand counts above zero. This is much lower than the counts observed on
deconvoluted spectra with a plasmon signal (See Figure 20). A clear initial rise in the decon-
voluted spectrum is observed, when the extrapolation begins, and has no physical origin. The
additional peak besides the zero-loss peak is most likely an after glow of the zero-loss peak and
an artifact of the read out procedure of the 2k ⇥2k CCD (As concluded in a conversation with
Stig Helveg 04/06/2018.).
7
Experiments
Two procedures were used to acquire measurements on the electron transparent windows of
the Nanoreactor. In the ﬁrst investigation, the dependence on areal dose rate, accumulated dose
rate, beam width, and oxygen pressure were investigated. Questions based on these investi-
gations were addressed in measurements following a second procedure. The settings of the
condenser lens system for different areal doses used in the experiments are speciﬁed on Table
3.
Table 3: Microscope parameter settings
Areal dose rate
Gun lens strength
C1-aperture
spotsize
C2-aperture
1000
✓e
˚A2s
◆
4
2000 µm
3
150 µm, 100 µm, 50 µm
100
✓e
˚A2s
◆
4.2
2000 µm
6
150 µm, 100 µm, 50 µm
10
✓e
˚A2s
◆
5.2
2000 µm
8
150 µm
As mentioned in the previous section, the oxidation of the silicon nitride windows of the
Nanoreactor is observed by comparing the ratio of integrated element speciﬁc signals. The OK-
and NK-edge are compared and is often referred to as the ”OK/NK ratio”. The ”SiL/NK ratio”
is used instead of ”the ratio of the integrated signal from the SiL- and NK-edge”.
7.1
Procedure 1 - setup
As mentioned in section 4.1, studies have shown that the areal dose rate of beam electrons on
the sample is an important parameter, when the spatial resolution in real space images is to
Page 26 of 66
==PAGE:29==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.1 Procedure 1 - setup
be optimized[10]. By studying the beam-induced oxidation, while varying this parameter, it
is investigated, whether the beam-induced oxidation can be minimized without compromising
the quality of real space images obtained using the Nanoreactor.
Spatial resolution in spectroscopy in electron microscopes depends on the size of the illu-
minated area. Thus, by varying the beam width, it was investigated, if there was indications
of a dependence on the spatial sampling area used to investigate the sample. The thickness
of the electron transparent windows in combination with experiment time available required
the beam radius to be around 1 µm, if the signal acquired by the GIF CCD should have an
acceptable signal to noise ratio. As a result the illumination areas are quite wide.
In addition to the variation of illumination parameters, the pressure of the oxygen present
in the reactor was changed. The Nanoreactor was constructed to facilitate high pressure in
situ studies, and therefore speciﬁcally the inﬂuence of the oxygen pressure on the oxidation is
important.
In these ﬁrst experiments, oxidation was investigated at four different pressures of oxygen
in the reactor channel of the Nanoreactor: 1000 mbar, 500 mbar, 10 mbar and 1 mbar. To vary
the illuminated area at a constant areal dose rate, three different C2 apertures sizes were used:
150 µm, 100 µm, and 50 µm. Areal dose rates used were: 1000
e
( ˚A2s) and 100
e
( ˚A2s).
During every measurement following this procedure, both a low-loss spectrum and two core-
loss spectra were collected. A shift in energy losses acquired on the CCD detector of the GIF
between the two core-loss spectra was applied. Thereby, the SiL- and NK-edge were present
in one of the core-loss spectra, whereas the NK- and OK-edge could be observed in the last
spectrum. To avoid CCD saturation, the low loss spectrum was collected in image-mode. The
core-loss spectra were acquired in diffraction-mode to enhance the signal to noise ratio of the
signal.
To be able to distinguish between thermal and beam induced oxidation, one window was
used as a temperature reference in each experimental session. Such a reference window was left
untouched by the electron beam while O2 was present in the gas channel. Measurements on the
reference windows were only conducted with the gas channel evacuated. Reference windows
can be identiﬁed on Figure 12 by ”Ref”.
On Figure 12 it is shown how the experiments were carried out on the different windows.
Windows 12 to 14 were used for experiments with approximately 1 bar inside the reactor. To
investigate oxidation with pressures around 500 mbar, 10 mbar, and 1 mbar window 40 and 41
were used.
Different positions on the windows were used for measurements with different illumination
parameters. At each of the beam positions, initial measurements were carried out with the
Page 27 of 66
==PAGE:30==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.1 Procedure 1 - setup
Figure 12: Overview of the usage of the electron transparent windows of the Nanoreactor.
The ﬁgure shows a sketch of the electron transparent windows on Figure 4. Windows colored red were
used for measurements following procedure one. Yellow indicates that procedure two was used on the
window. The areal dose rate used on the windows during oxidation measurements is indicated with
”D.r.”.
gas channel evacuated. Then with O2 in the reactor, a series of measurements were conducted
at each beam position. The time line for measurements carried out on a speciﬁc position is
illustrated on Figure 13.
During oxidation measurements, the ﬁrst three EELS spectra were collected, and then the
beam was left illuminating the position for 0.3 min or 2 min, depending on whether the dose
rate was 1000
e
˚A2s or 100
e
˚A2s, before the next couple of spectra were collected at the same
position. This was done twice, and lastly a ﬁnal measurement was acquired. In this way the
gradual growth of a oxide could be detected. This procedure was repeated at different positions
for different aperture sizes, before O2 was pumped out. The illumination time was measured
with a stop watch. Lastly, a spectrum was acquired at each position under vacuum conditions.
Therefore no oxidation took place while the ﬁrst and ﬁnal reference measurements were taken.
This is though the case when measurements were taken with oxygen present.
Separate windows were used for the oxidation measurements with different areal dose rates.
The initial and ﬁnal measurements at the different beam positions with an evacuated gas channel
were conducted with an areal dose rate of 1000
e
˚A2s, as were the temperature references. This
reduced the acquisition time for such measurements.
Page 28 of 66
==PAGE:31==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.1 Procedure 1 - setup
Figure 13: Time line of measurements carried out at one position during procedure 1
experiments.
The measurements can be separated into reference measurements and oxidation mea-
surements conducted while oxidation took place. Only the oxidation measurements on a speciﬁc position
are carried out in row when following procedure 1.
To keep the accumulated dose constant, when changing areal dose rate, an illumination
time of 0.2 min should have been used for an areal dose rate of 1000
e
˚A2s. In some of the ﬁrst
measurements 0.3 min was used instead by mistake and to be consistent this illumination time
was kept.
Since the beam areas used were smaller than the window, a procedure for ﬁnding the same
positions on the windows was needed. Two drawn circles on a ﬂuorescent screen, situated at the
bottom of the microscope at the image plane of the projector system, were used to ﬁnd the same
positions. With the beam spread out to a size larger than the window to be examined, the outer
circle on the ﬂuorescent screen was placed such that its curvature matched that of the edge of
the window at either the left, top or right edge of a Nanoreactor window. Then the beam width
was reduced to the desired size and centered at the smallest circle on the ﬂuorescent screen.
By keeping the magniﬁcation of the projector system on 24 kx, the same positions were found
using this procedure.
The experiments tracking oxidation at 1000 mbar were structured as seen on Figure 14.
With a constant areal dose rate of electrons, the oxidation of the windows was measured at
three different positions on the windows. At each of the positions a different C2-aperture was
used. The apertures used had diameters of 50 µm, 100 µm, and 150 µm. Three windows were
used: One for an areal dose rate of 1000
e
˚A2s, one for 100
e
˚A2s, and one was used for reference
measurements.
At one point in time during every pair of oxidation measurements, the diffraction pattern
of the transmitted signal was aligned with the drift tube entrance aperture. This optimization
Page 29 of 66
==PAGE:32==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.1 Procedure 1 - setup
procedure, however, affected the data in an unpreferable way, which will be discussed in section
8.
The remaining pressures were investigated with variation of fewer parameters. In these
measurements, the data were collected in the same way, but neither the areal dose rate nor the
C2 aperture size were varied. These parameters were kept at 1000
e
˚A2s and 150 µm. In addition
to this, the same window was used for the temperature reference measurements. Furthermore,
since the repeated alignment of the beam with the drift tube introduced unwanted ﬂuctuations
in the measured oxidation, the signal of the diffracted beam was only optimized once before
experiments with 10 mbar and 1 mbar and once before the investigation with 500 mbar oxygen
inside the Nanoreactor.
Figure 14: Sketch of the beam positions on the win-
dows in the experiments with 1000 mbar of oxygen.
On the ﬁgure, the circles drawn on the ﬂuorescent screen,
which were used to navigate, are sketched.
In the three last measurements
with 500 mbar, 10 mbar, and 1 mbar
of oxygen, the reference measure-
ments were ﬁrst collected on win-
dow 40 and 41.
Hereafter, the
pressure inside the gas channel was
raised to 1 mbar with O2. Measure-
ments were carried out on window
41 and the reactor was evacuated.
Then the ﬁnal reference measure-
ments were made on window 41 and
40 for the 1 mbar experiment, be-
fore 10 mbar of O2 was led into the
reactor. Again, measurements were
completed on 41 before the channel
was evacuated again, and the ﬁnal
measurements were taken on win-
dow 40 and 41. An extra measure-
ment was carried out in the same
way with 500 mbar of oxygen. Ref-
erences were taken in vacuum before and after at the top of the windows, and window 41 was
used for the oxidation measurements.
The electron beam exposure of the windows was minimized, when no experiments took
place. In the case that illumination was unavoidable, the beam was spread to ensure low areal
dose rates. To keep the collected signal on the CCD detector used for EELS constant, and
hereby keep the amount of the signal acquired constant, the exposure times of the CCD scaled
inversely with the areal dose rates. In this way, the SNR of the signal acquired on the CCD in
Page 30 of 66
==PAGE:33==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.1 Procedure 1 - setup
question was similar during the experiments, and the ”quality” of the data was not compromised
during the investigations. Acquisition parameters are summarized in Table 4 and 5. On these
tables the following abbreviations are used: Exp. time (Exposure time), Num. of exp. (number
of exposures), Shift (Energy shift between each summed spectra), Num. of shifts (number of
shifts), and Mode (illumination mode). Image- and diffraction-mode are shortened to ”Im” and
”Diff.” respectively.
Each core-loss spectrum, presented in the subsequent section with results, is an average of
10 spectra taken at 10 different energy shifts of the transmitted electron beam. Energy shifts
were achieved by accelerating the beam electrons, before they entered the drift tube. In this
way, local gain differences between the channels on the CCD was averaged out using and
energy step and dispersion of 0.2 eV. Each of these shifted spectra is itself a sum of 10 −100
spectra of the same exposure time. Thereby random noise was averaged out.
Table 4: Acquisition parameters 100
e
˚A2s
Exp. time
Num. of exp.
Shift
Num. of shifts
Mode
Low-loss
0.01s
100
0
0
Im.
Core-loss (SiK/NK)
0.01s
100
0.2 eV
10
Diff.
Core-loss (NK/OK)
0.1s
10
0.2 eV
10
Diff.
Table 5: Acquisition parameters 1000
e
˚A2s
Exp. time
Num. of exp.
Shift
Num. of shifts
Mode
Low-loss
0.001s
100
0
0
Im.
Core-loss (SiK/NK)
0.001s
100
0.2 eV
10
Diff.
Core-loss (NK/OK)
0.01s
10
0.2 eV
10
Diff.
When choosing the microscope settings, it was important to ensure that the illuminated area did
not change, when the area dose rate changed. Therefore, before a new areal dose rate was intro-
duced, the geometrical width of the beam was measured on a CCD just below the ﬂuorescent
screen of the microscope. The areal dose rate was measured with a small ﬂuorescent screen in
the microscope, which is made such that the areal dose rate on that screen can be displayed on a
computer screen. Such calibrations were carried out at a magniﬁcation of 100 kx. Before each
experimental session, the dose rates were calibrated on the small ﬂuorescent screen, whereas
the microscope settings were kept constant with values as shown on Table 3. Thereby, the re-
lation between the electron current densities used were kept constant, but the absolute size of
Page 31 of 66
==PAGE:34==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.2 Procedure 1 - results
the illuminated areas could change. The intensity distribution of the beam inﬂuences this kind
of calibration. As the areal dose rate is measured in the middle of the beam, the average areal
dose rate was not determined following this procedure.
To analyze the precision of this procedure, a Haldor Topsoe A/S owned program was used
to ﬁnd the area and average areal dose rate with the settings used. Results obtained this way
from images of the beam from a speciﬁc experimental session are presented in Table 6. The
script identiﬁes the area of pixels with counts above a certain threshold and uses the counts
of these pixels to calculate an areal dose rate in DigitalMicrograph ™. Since the beam does
not have an abrupt edge, there was a need to deﬁne a threshold that characterized the edge.
The intensity distribution of the pixels was represented on a histogram of the occurrence of
pixels with intensities within different intensity regions. Assuming that the intensity of the
beam falls off most rapidly at the edge, the ﬁrst minimum in the direction of low intensity on
this histogram was chosen as deﬁning the threshold. The uncertainty associated with arranging
pixels in intervals of intensity was evaluated by also running the script with the intensity of
the bin following minimum. The values on Table 6 are averaged over these two runs. On
this table, the areal dose rate measured on the small ﬂuorescent screen is called ”Screen”, and
that calculated by the program is in the column denoted by ”Script”. ”A” is short for the area
calculated by the program. Also the the C2 aperture size is shown (C2-ap.). ”thres.” is short for
threshold.
It was though a problem for this method that interference fringes were observed for the
beams with areal dose rates below 1000 e
˚A
2s
. Each wave front of the beam interacts with the
apertures of the microscope and creates Airy patterns. Due to spatial and temporal incoherence,
the fringes in the beam arising from this phenomena is often averaged out [24]. This were
though not completely the case for all areal dose rates. The fringes caused the histograms
mentioned to display periodic spikes in occurrence. In such cases, it was ensured that the
minimum chosen was also smaller than the values in the following bins of the histogram.
When inspecting Table 6, it can be seen that areal dose rates scale as wanted. The abso-
lute value is though not precisely as expected, which suggests that the intensity of the beam
was not constant throughout the illuminated area. The change in areas upon exchange of C2
aperture follows a R2 dependence, with R being the radius of the aperture. In conclusion, the
table shows that when changing microscope parameters, the areal dose rate and area scales
approximately correct.
7.2
Procedure 1 - results
On Figure 15, it is seen how the background subtracted oxygen signal grows, as the nitrogen
signal decreases, while the electron beam illumination takes place with oxygen in the reactor
Page 32 of 66
==PAGE:35==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.2 Procedure 1 - results
Table 6: Calibration of dose rate and area
Screen ( e
˚A
2s
)
C2-ap. (µm)
thres. (counts)
A (nm2106)
Script ( e
˚A
2s
)
1000
150
1212.5 ± 17.5
2.55 ± 0.01
876.2 ± 0.7
1000
100
712.5 ± 11.5
1.06± 0.01
901.6 ± 0.8
1000
50
448.7 ± 3.8
0.27 ±0.01
928.4±1.5
100
150
102.3 ± 1.3
2.75 ± 0.01
80.8 ± 0.0
100
100
30 ± 0.7
1.1 ± 0.0
84.1±0.1
100
50
10.7 ± 0.5
0.28 ± 0.01
86.6 ±1.5
10
150
718±12
2.68 ±0.0
9.7 ±0.1
Figure 15: Display of several measurements on a window with 1 bar of oxygen in the
Nanoreactor using 1000
e
˚A2s and an aperture size of 150 µm The background have been sub-
tracted, and the data from the ﬁrst measurement are depicted as blue. The NK-edge and OK-edge are
indicated by vertical black lines, and the integration regions used in the quantiﬁcation are shown in
green and cyan. The background ﬁtting regions are colored orange. As explained previously, three mea-
surements were collected while oxidation took place. Between these measurements the beam was left
illuminating the window investigated.
channel. Note that oxidation also takes place while the measurements are collected. After evac-
uation of the Nanoreactor, nearly no oxidation takes place. Conversely, oxidation is evident,
Page 33 of 66
==PAGE:36==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.2 Procedure 1 - results
as soon as oxygen is led into the reactor, and beam illumination takes place. Oxidation of the
electron transparent windows is indeed a beam induced phenomena, as can be seen from this
and later presented results showing a much lower oxygen signal from reference windows. The
fact that the oxygen signal grows as the nitrogen signal decreases indicates that the oxygen is
incorporated in the windows at the expense of the amount of nitrogen atoms. Such exchange is
energetically favourable according to S.I. Raider et. al. (1976) [11].
Prior to the studies conducted in this project, the silicon nitride ﬁlm was oxidized, possibly
by ambient air, when it was stored outside the microscope. This can be seen as an oxygen signal
present in the ﬁrst reference measurement, and the non-zero OK/NK ratio on the following
ﬁgures. Such initial oxidation have been observed for silicon nitride ﬁlms in other studies[11].
A rapid increase in the oxygen signal, not accompanied by a corresponding decrease in
nitrogen, can be observed during the ﬁrst measurement with oxygen present in the Nanoreactor.
The difference between the scattering cross section for the solid and gaseous oxygen is small,
besides the modiﬁcations introduced on the scattering cross section by the band structure of
the solid. Due to this fact, it is expected that the gas molecules contribute to the OK-signal,
and thereby raises it. In front of the OK-edge it is seen that the gas OK-signal contributes to
the signal and presumably also to the integral of the OK-signal. The fact that the oxygen gas
signal extents into the region of the solid signal could explain some of the initial rise in the
oxygen signal. However, this most likely is not the entire explanation, since the initial increase
in oxygen signal is not fully matched by a corresponding decrease after the evacuation of the
reactor. The rapid increase of oxygen the signal therefore suggests that oxygen ﬁrst reacts with
the windows, without nitrogen is removed. It is clear from the two reference measurements
that a signiﬁcant oxidation took place, but it appears that the oxidation progresses in a dynamic
way.
As seen on Figure 15, the slope of the signal NK-signal is changed beyond the NK thresh-
old. This is likely due to a change in the plasmon signal. An increase in the plasmon peak,
would increase the plural scattering beyond the edge threshold. Such an increase is in fact
seen on Figure 21, which investigates the likelyhood of plasmon scattering. Supporting this
hypothesis is the fact that the change in slope ﬁrst becomes clear approximately after 20 eV
from the edge threshold. This is a typical plasmon peak value (see Figure 20). In conclusion,
it is clear that oxygen is incorporated in the electron transparent windows, and there are signs
of changed plasmon scattering. To examine whether the incorporation of oxygen only happens
due to exchange with nitrogen, it was important inspect spectra with the SiL-edge present. Be-
low, the oxidation is investigated through the ratio between the integrated OK- and NK-signals
(the OK/NK ratio). In order to explore the hypothesis that nitrogen leaves the silicon nitride
ﬁlms, integrated SiL- and NK-edge signals are investigated as well.
Interestingly, the oxidation does not depend linearly on the gas pressure, as can be seen on
Page 34 of 66
==PAGE:37==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.2 Procedure 1 - results
Figure 16: Overview of the dependence on oxygen pressure.
The ﬁgure shows the change
in the ratio between the integrated EELS signals of the NK- and OK-edge. All measurements were
collected with a C2 aperture size of 150 µm and a areal dose rate of 1000
e
( ˚A2s)
Figure 16. This conclusion is reached, if the increased oxidation between 1 mbar and 10 mbar
is compared to that between 10 mbar and 1000 mbar. The increased oxidation between the two
latter is more than 10 times the increase of the former.
The initial OK/NK signal ratio of the ﬁrst reference measurement seems to have some
spread depending on the window. If all the windows were alike and no oxidation took place
before the measurements, the windows should have equal OK/NK ratios. This variation will be
investigated in procedure 2 measurements.
When inspecting Figure 16, it is seen that there is a rapid initial increase in ratio for the mea-
surements with oxygen pressures above 10 mbar, and for all of the measurements a decrease in
the ratio is seen, when oxygen is pumped out of the reactor. It seems that this ﬁnal decrease is
nearly absent for the lowest investigated pressure. Finally, the increase in OK/NK signal ratio
appears linear, when oxygen is present in the Nanoreactor. Using procedure 2 the oxidation
was investigated with better resolution of accumulated dose. These experiments reveal whether
the linear dependence represents a real physical oxidation rate. The beam induced oxidation
very strongly depends on the oxygen pressure, and is unfortunately very much present at high
Page 35 of 66
==PAGE:38==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.2 Procedure 1 - results
pressures (see also Figure 15), at which the Nanoreactor is often operated.
In situ measurements are most interesting at high pressures, and because of that it is a
problem that the oxidation is so strong at high pressures. Therefore, the inﬂuence of the areal
dose rate on the oxidation, as seen on Figure 17, proved to be interesting. Reducing the areal
dose rate clearly reduces the oxidation. A small thermally induced oxidation is visible from
reference measurements on window 12.
Figure 17: Areal dose rate dependence at 1 bar of oxygen On this ﬁgure, OK/NK integral
signal ratios from measurements with different beam areas and areal dose rates are shown. The reference
measurements from window 12 are also displayed. Measurements connected with a red line are collected
with an areal dose rate of 1000
e
˚A2s. Blue indicates that an areal dose rate of 100
e
˚A2s was used during
oxidation. The reference measurements is connected with a black line. As indicated, a dotted line is
used for measurements conducted with an aperture size of 50 µm. A line composed of rectangles is used
for measurements using an C2 aperture size of 150 µm.
The linear growth of the OK/NK ratio is still observed, but more measurements are needed
to reveal, whether this is just a result of the lack of accumulated dose resolution. Such measure-
ments were made following procedure 2. Another tendency, which is also present on Figure
17, is the rapid initial rise and ﬁnal decrease in OK/NK ratio.
As explained in section 7.1, the diffraction pattern of the signal of the SiK/NK and NK/OK
measurements were optimized several times during experiments with 1 bar of oxygen. When
Page 36 of 66
==PAGE:39==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.2 Procedure 1 - results
Figure 18: The development in the SiK/NK ratio during the measurements also seen on
Figure 16.
During oxidation the SiL/NK ratio gradually grows, indicating that the nitrogen indeed
leaves the silicon nitride windows.
this optimization was carried out, the signal from the sample was shifted with respect to the
ﬂuorescent screen at the bottom of the microscope, which was used to ﬁnd the areas of interest
on the Nanoreactor windows. Due to an operational error, the beam was also moved with
respect to the electron transparent windows. Such a shift of beam was noted after the ﬁrst
illumination for the measurement with an areal dose rate of 1000
e
( ˚A2s) and an aperture size of
100 µm. In this case, it is likely that the beam crossed the edge of the Nanoreactor window,
causing the actual area that gave signal to decrease. This could be the explanation of the small
difference between the developing oxidation between the measurement with a C2 aperture size
of 100 µm and that with 50 µm.
The dependence on beam area is most signiﬁcant for high areal dose rates. Changing the
aperture size from 50 µm to 150 µm nearly doubles the OK/NK ratio at an areal dose rate
1000
e
( ˚A2s). Making the same change in area for with an areal dose rate of 100
e
( ˚A2s) does not
lead to the same signiﬁcant change in oxidation.
The exchange of oxygen atoms with nitrogen atoms can be examined by measuring the
SiK/NK ratio (it is assumed that silicon atoms do not leave the ﬁlm). If nitrogen atoms leave
Page 37 of 66
==PAGE:40==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.2 Procedure 1 - results
Figure 19: SiK/NK ratio for measurements at 1 bar of oxygen within the Nanoreactor.
Colors are again used to indicate use of different areal dose rates just as on Figure 17. The SiL/NK ratio
in general grows during oxidation measurements.
the Nanoreactor windows, this ratio will grow. On Figure 18, the evolution of this ratio, during
the measurements shown in Figure 16, can be followed. Besides the drop between the ﬁrst and
second measurement at 1 mbar the ratio seems to grow steadily. The initial slow increase of
the SiL/NK ratio for the experiment conducted at 1 bar indicates that only at this pressure, the
oxidation initially is faster than the exchange of nitrogen and oxygen atoms (See Figure 15).
For the experiment with 1 bar of oxygen, the increase stagnates during the last measure-
ment with oxygen, but for other measurements a growth is measured. Due to the extent of
the measurement in time, all SiL/NK ratios are averages over a changing SiL/NK ratio. This
could be the explanation of the ﬁnal increase. If the SiL/NK ratio continued to grow during
oxygen exposure, the reference measurements would be time averages over the highest and
lowest achieved SiL/NK ratio during the acquisition time. In general, increase in OK/NK ratio
on Figure 16 is accompanied by an increase in SiK/NK ratio during oxygen exposure. This
suggests that nitrogen is leaving the silicon nitride ﬁlm, as hypothesized above.
When inspecting Figure 19, it can be observed that for all aperture sizes and all areal dose
rates the SiK/NK ratio overall increase while oxygen is inside the Nanoreactor. For the mea-
Page 38 of 66
==PAGE:41==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.2 Procedure 1 - results
surements with 100
e
( ˚A2s) it is harder to compare reference measurements with the oxidation
measurements. A part of section 8 is dedicated to discuss the ﬂuctuations of the SiL/NK ratios.
Since no spectra were deconvoluted, an altered plasmon signal will cause changes in the
slope of the signal beyond the respective thresholds. The probability of scattering multiple
times could change. This could lead to both overestimation and underestimation of the OK/NK
ratio. Therefore it is of great importance to study the plasmon signal.
When Fourier deconvoluting a low-loss spectrum from the experiments, the resulting sin-
gle scattering spectrum looks like the one presented on Figure 20. Here the plasmon peak can
clearly be seen, and the silicon L-edge can be glimpsed as a small jump in signal around an
energy loss of 100 eV. When the single scattering plasmon spectrum is integrated, an estimate
of the total plasmon scatting can be made. Just as for the core-loss signal, the integrated in-
tensity is proportional to the scattering cross section, and thereby the probability of plasmon
scattering.
Figure 20: The low-loss spectrum, the zero-loss peak extraction, and the deconvoluted
spectrum in a smaller ﬁgure in the upper right corner.
This spectrum is acquired prior to
investigations of the windows with oxygen inside the Nanoreactor.
Integrals of the single scattering plasmon spectrum are shown on Figure 21. The integrals
are normalized by the integral of the low-loss spectrum, to calibrate for differences in total
amount of electrons illuminating the window investigated.
An increase in the plasmon signal is observed during the measurements with oxygen. All
Page 39 of 66
==PAGE:42==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.2 Procedure 1 - results
Figure 21: Integrated normalized single scattering plasmon spectra for oxidation at dif-
ferent oxygen pressures In the acquisition of these data, an aperture size of 150 µm, and an areal
dose rate of 1000
e
( ˚A2s) were used.
of the integrated areas decrease, when the reactor is evacuated. At low oxygen pressures the
integrated plasmon signal at ﬁrst decreases upon gas exposure of the windows. It can be seen
that the increase in plasmon signal is relative small for pressures below 1 bar making the ne-
glection of plural scattering the least problematic for such pressures. The general trends seen
on Figure 21 is discussed in section 8.
Many different phenomena simultaneously affect the data. The position for the reference
measurements and oxidation measurements were found at separate times, and as a result some
of the increase or decrease in ratios of integrals could be due to changed positions. This pos-
sibility has not been discussed yet, but it could play a role in the general trend of a ﬁnal de-
crease in the OK/NK ratio between the last oxidation measurement and the reference. Also
the mentioned alignment of the transmitted beam with the GIF entrance aperture could have
caused problems as hypothesized in this section. On top of this, the lack of similar measure-
ments makes it impossible to distinguish between random variations, and ﬂuctuations caused
by physical phenomena evolving in the electron transparent windows.
Further complicating the interpretation of the OK/NK ratio is the fact that oxidation took
place, while the measurements were carried out. As a result, the acquired spectra, which is a
sum of spectra taken over time, will display a smaller OK/NK ratio than the ratio that represents
Page 40 of 66
==PAGE:43==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.3 Procedure 2 - setup
the atomic concentration at the instant the illumination is stopped. This is suggested to be the
explanation of the the rise in the SiL/NK ratio for the graphs on Figure 18.
In short, the results acquired with procedure 1 clearly shows that the beam induced oxida-
tion depends strongly on oxygen pressure and areal dose rate. When lowering the areal dose
rate, the beam-induced oxidation is reduced. This is quite fortunate, as the spatial resolution in
real space images is improved by lowering the areal dose rate. On Figure 17, it is indicated that
the illuminated area affects the degree of induced oxidation the most at large areal dose rates.
SiL/NK ratios and raw data show that nitrogen continuously leaves the thin ﬁlm, as oxygen
is incorporated. It is also seen that at 1 bar oxygen is initially incorporated into the silicon
nitride at a greater rate than nitrogen leaves the electron transparent windows. Investigations
of the plasmon signal reveals that the plasmon signal increases, when oxygen is present in the
Nanoreactor. This trend is preserved after the oxygen is pumped out for measurements with
1 bar of oxygen.
7.3
Procedure 2 - setup
In order to address several questions emerging from the interpretation of the results obtained
following procedure 1, a new experimental procedure, procedure 2, was established.
The data obtained following procedure 1 revealed interesting dependencies on illumination
parameters of the microscope. Several problems though needed to be addressed in the subse-
quently conducted experiments. The following question needed to be answered: Did the dip
in NK/OK ratio between last measurement with oxygen and the reference mainly stem from
unsuccessful attempts to ﬁnd the same area or was it due to changes in oxygen signal?
Spread in initial OK/NK ratio was observed indicating that the initial state of the windows
differed. This phenomena raised the question of how large such a difference is, and if local
differences in the composition of the windows have an effect on the progression of the beam
induced oxidation.
Furthermore, since many of the measurements following procedure 1 were conducted on
the same windows, it was important to investigate the extent of the induced oxidation beyond
the width of the beam.
Statistical uncertainties in background ﬁtting, microscope instabilities, and operational is-
sues demanded several equivalent investigations of the beam induced oxidation to identify un-
certainties. The lack of equivalent measurements made it difﬁcult to interpret deviations in the
data from the general trend.
To address these issues, the subsequent experiments were structure differently than the ﬁrst.
At the windows used for oxidation measurements, the beam was not moved from a position
after the initial reference measurement was acquired, before the oxygen was pumped out, and
Page 41 of 66
==PAGE:44==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.3 Procedure 2 - setup
the ﬁnal reference measurement had been taken. In addition to this, the program that controlled
the energy shifts of the EELS spectra in the ﬁrst measurements was modiﬁed to keep the same
acceleration voltage but to wait a certain time period (40s) with the beam illuminating the
sample between measurements. Thereby, it was avoided to measure the time with a stop watch,
and the accumulated dose could be precisely determined. The number of measurements with
oxygen in the reactor was also increased to 10 for the NK/OK spectra. In these experiments
no SiK/NK or low-loss spectra were acquired during oxidation, because this could not be done
with the script used to control the exposure time. Therefore SiK/NK spectra were only acquired
during reference measurements. Illumination conditions used in procedure 2 are listed in Table
7. The parameters presented are: Exposure time (Exp. time), Number of exposures (Num.
of exp.), illumination time between measurements during oxidation (Ill. time), and number of
acquisitions during oxidation (Num. of acqui.).
The question about spatial difference in sensitivity to oxidation was addressed by carrying
measurements out both to the left and in the middle of the used windows. References were
also taken before and after oxygen exposure at the bottom of the windows, which were used
for beam induced oxidation measurements. Thereby reference measurements were collected at
different distances to the illumination area and the locality of the beam induced oxidation was
probed.
A possible variation over the different windows due to their local structure and position in
the Nanoreactor was examined by using two or three windows for the same measurements.
As the ultimate aim of the project is to discover illumination parameters that do not induce
oxidation, the areal dose rate was lowered to 10
e
( ˚A2s). All measurements were conducted with
an aperture size of 150 µm.
Table 7: Acquisition parameters 10
e
˚A2s
Exp. time
Num. of exp.
Ill. time
Num. of acqui.
Core-loss (SiK/NK)
0.1s
20
0
0
Core-loss (NK/OK)
1s
20
40s
10
As seen on Table 7, the accumulated dose per measurement on the CCD detector acquiring
the EELS data is changed in procedure 2 compared to measurements, which were carried out
with procedure 1. The increase in number of exposures that each OK/NK spectrum is a sum
of from 10 to 20 is an attempt to preserve the signal to noise ratio of the acquired signal, when
gain averaging is no longer performed. The acquisition parameters for the SiL- and NK-edge
containing spectra were set as listed, as they were not acquired during oxidation, and therefore
have lost some importance. In order to save time, the number of exposures was reduced.
Page 42 of 66
==PAGE:45==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.4 Procedure 2 - results
To ensure that most of the oxidation happens during the illumination between and not during
measurements the exposure time should be below 40s. During an illumination between mea-
surements of oxidation, an areal accumulated dose of electrons of approximately 12 000 e
˚A2 was
delivering to the windows for an areal dose rate of 100
e
˚A2s in the ﬁrst experiments, whereas
the corresponding value for procedure 2 measurements was 400
e
˚A2s. Thereby the resolution
with respect to the total dose is improved in the measurements following procedure 2.
In order to investigate the beam induced oxidation rate of windows, which had previously
been oxidized under beam illumination, the measurements at 1 bar of oxygen in the Nanoreac-
tor were collected at positions, which were earlier used for experiments with 1 mbar of oxygen.
No information was though obtained this way, as beam induced oxidation was unobservable at
1 mbar.
7.4
Procedure 2 - results
Figure 22 shows data from experiments carried out both at 1 mbar and at 1 bar of oxygen in the
Nanoreactor. The reduction of the areal does rate to 10
e
( ˚A2s) makes oxidation unobservable at
1 mbar.
Figure 22: Measurements of OK/NK ratio for 1 mbar(gray) taken at three different win-
dows shown alongside two measurements collected at 1 bar(black).
All the measurements
were taken with an areal dose rate of 10
e
( ˚A2s) and an aperture size of 150 µm.
Page 43 of 66
==PAGE:46==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.4 Procedure 2 - results
For window 25 a small decrease in OK/NK ratio is observed between the 3rd and 5th mea-
surement. On Figure 23, this decrease is explored by comparing the raw data from the two
measurements. The raw data from both measurements is nearly coinciding, and the same is
the case for the background subtracted nitrogen peak. There is though a small discrepancy be-
tween the background subtracted oxygen K-edges, which is most evident after the main peak.
A small difference in the slope of the ﬁtted background is also seen on the ﬁgure. It is therefore
concluded that the ﬂuctuations in OK/NK ratio on Figure 22 is due to statistical variations in
the slope of the ﬁtted background. This interpretation of the ﬂuctuations in the OK/NK ratio
is further supported by the fact that equivalent measurements collected at window 20 and 19
show non-correlated ﬂuctuations. Oxidation is not visible in the raw data from window 20 with
an oxygen pressure of 1 mbar (see appendix/section 11.1).
When the uncertainties of the results presented in this section were estimated, it was as-
sumed that they were of random origin. Many different parameters affected the data, but it
was concluded in the analysis of the data presented in Figure 22 that statistical uncertainties in
the background recording could cause the data to ﬂuctuate. Based on this investigation, it was
assumed that the dominating uncertainty stemmed from the acquisition and data processing.
Standard deviations describe the uncertainty in populations with a random spread. As this
description of the spread only applies for equivalent data, the standard deviations were cal-
culated only for equivalent measurements. On Figure 22, the result is that the uncertainty is
estimate for every acquisition number and separately computed for measurements collected at
different pressures. The differences in initial composition for windows having experienced the
same conditions are relatively small, as can be seen both on Figure 22, Figure 25, and Figure
26. When no oxidation is observed, the determined OK/NK ratios are very much alike, and the
spread is similar to that observed in previously presented data. But since oxidation is an atomic
process, the speciﬁc structure of an illuminated area could be very important. Therefore it is
not given that uncertainties estimated for oxidation measurements at 1 mbar of oxygen can be
used for experiments conducted at 1 bar. This is the reason for calculating the standard devia-
tion for the different experiments separately. In this way, the standard errors also estimate the
uncertainty associated by generalizing results obtained from one window.
Even though the number of equivalent measurements that were conducted is improved com-
pared to the experiments following procedure 1, the number of repeated measurements is low.
This is not preferable, but due to time limitations it could not be avoided.
Measurements of the OK/NK ratio at 1 bar on Figure 22 show a number of interesting
features. The initial rise in OK/NK ratio, when oxygen is led into the reactor is nearly compa-
rable in size to the decrease in the same ratio upon evacuation of the reactor. This underlines
that some of the rapid rise in OK/NK ratio also observed in earlier presented measurements is
caused by gas induced phenomena not correlated directly to the ﬁnal oxidation. On Figure 24,
Page 44 of 66
==PAGE:47==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.4 Procedure 2 - results
Figure 23: Raw and treated data from 3rd and 5th illumination at 1 mbar window 25 to
the left.
b. is used as an abbreviation for ”background”, and s.b. is used instead of ”background
subtracted”.
the decrease for window 20 upon evacuation of the Nanoreactor is investigated by comparison
of raw data. Inspection of the raw data reveals that the nitrogen peaks of the two measurements
are equal. The oxygen peaks also have the same shape, but it looks like the oxygen peak signal
is lifted beyond the main solid peak. This could be due to both plural scattering of the ﬁrst gas
peak signal, or the gas signal extending into the solid OK signal. It is though clear from Figure
24 and the initial increase and ﬁnal decrease in OK/NK ratio on Figure 22 that the decrease
in OK/NK ratio upon evacuation is not due to renitridation, but more likely caused by the gas
signal. This explains the previous observation that the ﬁnal drop in OK/NK ratio is pressure
dependent.
The initial incorporation of oxygen into the silicon nitride windows, observed in data pre-
sented in section 7.2, could also be due to changes in oxidation rate. Experiments conducted
with 1 bar of oxygen presented on Figure 22 display changes in slope. A linear ﬁt of the ﬁrst
three data points would greatly overestimate the subsequently measured change in OK/NK
ratio. This indicates that the oxidation rate is changing, suggesting that the incorporation of
oxygen into the electron transparent ﬁlms changes mechanism during the oxidation measure-
ments. Visually, such a trend is hard to identify, when inspecting the raw data from oxidation
at 1 bar on window 20 (see appendix/section 11.2). The increase in OK-signal during beam
Page 45 of 66
==PAGE:48==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.4 Procedure 2 - results
Figure 24: Raw data and background subtracted signal for 10th illumination (ill.) and
reference (ref.) Several abbreviations are used in this ﬁgure. ”Orig.” is used as short for ”original
data”, and the ﬁtted background is written as ”Back.”. The regions used for background ﬁtting is indi-
cated by ”Back. ﬁt. region”. In the upper right corner, the resulting background subtracted signal is
shown for both the data sets alongside with the integration regions used for quantiﬁcation.
induced oxidation progresses too slowly to be easily followed. The SiL/NK ratio displayed in
section 11.3 shows that during these experiments nitrogen also leaves the windows.
The development of the OK/NK ratio can be ﬁtted with a lot of different shapes, but since
no mathematical modelling of the oxidation have been established, it is not ﬁtted to a speciﬁc
shape.
Even though the accumulated dose for these experiments is smaller than that received by
the windows during the ﬁrst measurement in experiments following procedure 1, the maximum
OK/NK ratio is approximately 0.15, which is around the same ratio obtained with an areal dose
rate of 100
e
( ˚A2s) at 1 bar at the ﬁrst measurement (0.18). It is at ﬁrst counter-intuitive that this
is the case, but it can be observed on Figure 22, that the increase in OK/NK ratio per total dose
probably changes with the received accumulated dose. This suggests that the induced oxidation
rate is a function of both accumulated dose and areal dose rate.
With an oxygen pressure of 1 bar, oxidation in the middle of the windows is clearly ob-
served on Figure 25. The description of the measurements presented on Figure 22 could be
repeated here. Small differences in the gradual oxidation is difﬁcult to correlate to overall ten-
Page 46 of 66
==PAGE:49==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.4 Procedure 2 - results
dencies. The differences are of the same order as the ones observed for the OK/NK ratio at
1 mbar for the measurements carried out at the same window. When comparing the measure-
Figure 25: OK/NK integrated signal ratio for measurements on the middle of the win-
dows.
Measurements conducted at 1 mbar are colored gray, and black is used to identify measure-
ments, where 1 bar was used.
ments displayed on Figure 22 with that of Figure 25, the OK/NK in general appears to follow
the same development. As in Figure 22, the oxidation is unobservable at 1 mbar with an areal
dose rate of 10
e
( ˚A2s). Further more the maximum obtained OK/NK ratio during oxidation and
the ﬁnal reference OK/NK ratio is similar. It is therefore concluded that the induced oxidation
progresses in similar manner to the left and in the middle of the windows without signiﬁcant
differences.
The differences between the measurements carried out at window 20 and 19 windows are
though greater at 1 bar than at 1 mbar on both ﬁgures tracking the OK/NK ratio. This sug-
gests that the speciﬁc oxidation evolution depends on the local composition, but the average
composition is the same. The oxidation could depend on the position on the window exam-
ined, but the overall tendency in OK/NK ratio is the same both on Figure 22 and 25. It is
difﬁcult to distinguish between the oxidation development on the same window with only two
measurements, because small differences in OK/NK ratio is mixed with ﬂuctuations that have
no physical origin. However, the local difference in sensitivity to beam-induced oxidation is
clearly a lot smaller, than the difference in induced oxidation at different pressures or areal dose
Page 47 of 66
==PAGE:50==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.4 Procedure 2 - results
rates.
It is quite intriguing that for both the 1 bar measurements on Figure 25 and 22 that the
oxidation rate seems to decrease for the last three measurements. This will be discussed in
section 8.
Figure 26: References.
The reference measurements collected on the left side and in the middle
of the windows are plotted. As the reference measurements were collected before and after oxidation
measurements, the pressures used in the oxidation measurements are indicated in between reference
measurements.
Changes in reference measurements that can not be interpreted as caused by oxidation can
form a basis of the mixed effect of local differences in composition, changes in the noise of the
CCD and instability of illumination by the microscope. After each pair of oxidation measure-
ment on the left side and in the middle of either window 19, 20, or 25, reference measurements
were collected from the left and in the middle of all the reference windows. The results are
displayed on Figure 26. Decreases and increases in OK/NK ratio on one window are not in
general accompanied by similar behaviour of measurements acquired at other windows. Look-
ing at the y-axis, it can be seen that the overall change in OK/NK ratio independent of oxygen
pressure maximal is 0.013. This is a lot lower than the general change in OK/NK ratio of beam
induced oxidation observed in other measurements. Based on this it can be concluded that the
overall trends seen on previous ﬁgures are signiﬁcant.
Measurements collected after the last exposure to 1 mbar and the ﬁrst exposure to 1 bar
Page 48 of 66
==PAGE:51==
7 EXPERIMENTS
7.4 Procedure 2 - results
is remarkably lower than the rest of the measurements. The experiments following procedure
2 were spread out over three days, and the drops in OK/NK ratio coincides with the start of
the third days measurements. It is likely that initial instabilities of the microscope caused
the OK/NK ratio to drop. Especially the return of the ﬁnal measurements to OK/NK ratios
comparable to the initial measured OK/NK ratios suggests this.
The reference measurements show that variation in the OK/NK ratio below 0.013 does not
necessarily have physical origin in the evolution of the state of the sample.
Figure 27: Measurements at the bottom of a measurement before and after oxidation
measurements at different pressures. The measurements are connected pairwise, as they are col-
lected at different windows.
The geometrical extend of the beam-induced oxidation can be observed indirectly through
inspection of Figure 27. No signiﬁcant change in OK/NK ratio is observed at the bottom of the
windows used for beam induced oxidation measurements before and after exposure to 1 mbar
of oxygen. On the other hand increase in OK/NK ratio is observed after exposure to 1 bar of
oxygen. In the measurements considering such oxidation conditions, the increase in OK/NK
are approximately 0.01 and 0.014. That is about a third of the increased ratio measured in
area illuminated by the beam after evacuation of the Nanoreactor. Nevertheless, this increase
is of the same size as the maximal absolute difference in the reference measurements seen on
Figure 26. This makes it difﬁcult to distinguish the rise in the OK/NK ratio from that of random
ﬂuctuations.
Page 49 of 66
==PAGE:52==
8 DISCUSSION
If it is assumed that the beams illuminating the Nanoreactor windows are perfectly circular,
their diameters are of the order of 1.8 µm. This means that there is a small overlap between the
illuminated regions, when both the middle and bottom of a window are illuminated. The size
of this overlap is equivalent to the overlap between illuminated regions when measurements
to the left and the in the middle of the windows are carried out. Since there should be no
overlap between the illuminated areas at the left and bottom position, the increased signal on
Figure 27 due to overlapping illumination regions can only be due to one overlap. The beam-
induced oxidation measurements were ﬁrst conducted on the left side of the window, before
measurements from the middle of the window were collected. The difference between the ﬁrst
reference to the left and in the middle on the same windows can give an estimate, on how
much of the increased OK/NK signal for measurements at the bottom of the window is due to
beam induced oxidation stemming from another area. At window 20 the difference between
the initially measured OK/NK ratios is 0.004 and at window 19 the equivalent difference is also
0.004. This is much lower than the increased rise observed on Figure 27 suggesting that some
additional oxidation in fact happened.
It is unlikely that the increase is due to the instabilities of the microscope as seen on Figure
26, as the microscope seems to stabilize around the last measurement with 1 bar, and the rise
in OK/NK ratio is also seen for this position in time at Figure 27. Therefore it is concluded
that the oxidation extents beyond the geometrical size of the illuminating beam, but outside the
area illuminated by the beam, oxidation is small.
The data presented in this section highly suggest that the beam-induced oxidation was sup-
pressed to an unobservable level with an areal dose rate of 10
e
( ˚A2s) and oxygen pressure of
1 mbar. Furthermore, results displayed changes in oxidation rate that suggest that different
physical processes determine the oxidation rate at different total accumulated doses. Finally, it
was shown that it is likely that the beam-induced oxidation does extent beyond the illuminated
area deﬁned as in section 7.1.
8
Discussion
The results of the investigations were presented and preliminary discussed in section 7.2 and
7.4 section. In this section, the data will be discussed from a more general perspective.
In order to preserve the quality of the data acquired on the CCD detector used for EELS
measurements, the exposure time of the CCD was changed, when the areal dose rate was
changed. Transparent comparison between data acquired at different exposure times is made
complex by the fact that the exposure time of the CCD can differ from the acquisition time.
After a change of a microscope parameter, the software used to collect EELS spectra (Dig-
italMicrograph ™) will acquire a new dark current for calibration uses. This prolongs the
Page 50 of 66
==PAGE:53==
8 DISCUSSION
acquisition time. Furthermore, read out and display of the progression of the acquisition could
also cause a discrepancy between the total exposure time and total acquisition time of the CCD.
Adding to this is the shift in acquisition method when collecting low-loss and core-loss spectra.
A low-loss spectrum is as explained in section 7.2 a sum of 100 spectra acquired with an ex-
posure time of 0.001s. The spectra obtained in diffraction-mode was in procedure 1 also a sum
of several EELS spectra acquired using the same exposure time of the CCD, but in contrast to
the low-loss spectra also a gain averaging procedure was applied. In this procedure, 10 spectra
were acquired with different energies of the elastically scattered electrons and used to produce
an gain-averaged spectrum. A delay of 0.2s between these 10 different spectra ensured that the
electric ﬁeld accelerating the zero-loss beam an additional amount did not change while the
EELS spectra was collected. All these parameters add up to a total acquisition time in a way
that have not been characterized in this thesis. To get estimates of the total acquisition times,
a stop watch was used to measure the time used to collect EELS data with parameters as well
as acquisition procedures equivalent to those used in the experiments. Time spend to change
from one setting to another was not included, as the beam was blanked above the specimen
during such operations in the experiments. The resulting estimated acquisition times is shown
in Table 8. In this table, the time spend to acquire one measurement is a sum of the time used
to acquired all the spectra also collected in the experiments.
Table 8: Acquisition times for measurements
Areal dose rate
e
˚A2s
1000
100
10
Time (s)
86s
79s
26s
It is evident from the data presented in section 7.2 and 7.4, that the accumulated dose af-
fected the degree of induced oxidation for a speciﬁc type of acquisition. During the acquisition
of the EELS spectra, the beam was stopped by a GIF shutter situated above the entrance aper-
ture of the GIF, when the GIF CCD was to be read after an exposure [25]. As a result, the
silicon nitride windows were illuminated during the whole acquisition time. With a constant
area but changing the areal dose rate, the total dose rate changes. As a result, the accumulated
dose received by the electron transparent windows was not kept constant throughout the exper-
iments. Thus, the difference in the measured OK/NK ratios between measurements conducted
with different areal dose rates cannot directly be attributed to the change in areal dose rate. It
could also be due to a change in accumulated dose.
The experiments reveal how the illumination parameters effect the beam induced oxidation
for a nearly constant accumulated dose on the GIF CCD, but it is undetermined whether the
change in oxidation is due to changed areal dose rate or accumulated dose. This is though
Page 51 of 66
==PAGE:54==
8 DISCUSSION
important to determine, as such information makes it easier to optimize measurements in a
way, which minimizes the oxidation while preserving the quality of the acquired signal.
To test whether the beam-induced oxidation solely depends on accumulated dose, the OK/NK
ratio for different areal dose rates but constant acquisition time is determined at 1 bar of oxy-
gen. To ﬁnd the OK/NK ratio for an areal dose rate of 10
e
( ˚A2s) after a acquisition time of either
86s or 79, the OK/NK ratio measured on the left side of window 19 is linearly extrapolated be-
tween ﬁrst and second measurement with oxygen. This is done as the increase in OK/NK ratio
appears linear in that region of Figure 22. Using this method the OK/NK ratio is extrapo-
lated to approximately 0.13 for both an acquisition time of 86s and one of 79s. This should
then be compared to the OK/NK ratio of the ﬁrst measurement obtained with 100
e
( ˚A2s) or
1000
e
( ˚A2s). These ratios are respectively 0.18 and 0.44. It is clear that the increase in OK/NK
ratio at a constant acquisition time does not depend linearly on the increase on the areal dose
rate. This can be explained either by a non-linear dependence on the accumulated dose, or an
explicit dependence on the areal dose rate.
When comparing the slope of the OK/NK ratios for an aperture size of 150 µm seen on Fig-
ure 22 during oxidation measurements, it is seen that the OK/NK ratio increases more rapidly
from 0.44 to 0.58 and to 0.75 with an areal dose rate of 1000
e
( ˚A2s) compared to the 0.18, 0.24
and 0.29 measured with 100
e
( ˚A2s). In these regions, the oxidation rate seems to be linear,
which makes it unlikely that the difference is due to the discrepancy in acquisition times. It
could either be due to the difference in areal dose rate used for these experiments or an effect
of the previous accumulated dose, which change the oxidation rate. On Figure 22 and 25, the
oxidation rate dose though not seem to increase towards higher values, when the accumulated
dose rate nears that of the experiments presented on Figure 17.
Wrapping up this issue, either the oxidation rate depends on the areal dose rate or non-
linearly on the accumulated dose. Such a non-linear dependence is not seen for ﬁrst measure-
ments. In measurements following procedure 2, the accumulated dose dose not change the
oxidation rate, such that it could explain the observations listed above. This suggests that an
explicit areal dose rate dependence exits. To explored this in more detail, experiments should
be conducted alternating between keeping the areal dose rate or the accumulated dose constant.
Such investigations are important to conduct, as the areal dose rate effects the image resolu-
tion in high-resolution TEM images, whereas the accumulated dose for a constant areal dose
rate can be changed by changing the illumination area and thereby the spatial resolution of a
spectroscopy measurement.
In the experiments, the same Nanoreactor was used, and consequently, the conditions for
thermal oxidation changed from experimental session to experimental session. The thickness
of the oxide gradually builds up, and this could change the conditions for oxidation. Reference
Page 52 of 66
==PAGE:55==
8 DISCUSSION
measurements collected during the ﬁrst measurements can therefore not be directly compared
to that of the last measurements. Interestingly, the growth in of the reference measurements
presented on Figure 17 is larger, than the ﬂuctuations observed on Figure 26. The growth for
the different aperture sizes on Figure 17 is arranged with the greatest aperture size ﬁrst: 0.03,
0.02, and 0.03. The largest variance seen on Figure 26 is 0.01, and that have been associated
with a variance in microscope settings. This suggests that the thermal oxidation saturates.
If the thermally induced oxidation saturates, it could be that the beam induced oxidation also
would after a certain accumulated dose. In fact, the OK/NK ratio for three last measurements
at 1 bar on both Figure 22 and 25 is ﬁtted well with a straight line with a very low slope. This
could be by chance and additional experiments should reveal whether this tendency lasts. The
existence of a saturation point would provide a easy way to circumvent the continuous beam
induced oxidation during measurements. Before measurements, the Nanoreactor windows used
for investigations could be saturated, and thereby the problem of stability would be solved.
Silicon crystal cylinders have been reported to exhibit saturation of thermal oxidation [26][27].
The driving mechanism responsible for this phenomena is debated, but it have both been pro-
posed that the oxidation is diffusion limited [28] and that it is reaction limited[29][30]. In both
models the build up of stress, which cannot be released due to the high viscosity of the silicon
oxide, hinders the formation of new silicon oxide. These models predicts an oxide growth that
initially is linear before it gradually saturates, much like the OK/NK ratio growth observed in
section 7.4. Fused silica have a density of 2.2
g
cm3 [31], whereas silicon nitride have a density
between 2.37
g
cm3 and 3.25
g
cm3 [32]. As a consequence of that, energy is required to relax
the silicon nitride structure during oxidation. The amorphous structure of the Nanoreactor win-
dows and the relative low oxidation temperature of 500 °C could prevent the relaxation of the
stress created at the oxidation boundary due to the change in bonding distances under oxida-
tion. No additional oxidation at an oxygen pressure of 1 mbar was observed in procedure 2
measurements, even though both oxygen and an electron beam were present. Either the oxida-
tion is saturated under such conditions, or it progresses so slowly that it is not observed for the
accumulated doses used. Future experiments should explore this subject further.
If present, beam-induced oxidation beyond the extent of the beam can be caused by two
factors. Either the skirt of the electron beam induces oxidation, or the beam creates an oxi-
dizing effect that can move away from the illuminated area. The possible non-locality of the
oxidation would therefore reveal something about the physical mechanism behind the beam
induced oxidation. Further studies should go into this phenomena.
Only two ratios have been evaluated: The OK/NK and SiL/NK ratio. As a consequence
of this, it is impossible to detect, whether the beam drills through the silicon nitride during
illumination.
Furthermore, the deviance between the assumption that the scattering cross sections are
Page 53 of 66
==PAGE:56==
8 DISCUSSION
constant and the actual behaviour of the scattering cross sections will likely be greatest, when
two signals that stem from scattering on different core electrons are compared. Core-loss elec-
trons excited from the K-shell of oxygen or nitrogen atoms experience similar potentials, and
the shape of their EELS signal is similar. Actual increase in the scattering cross sections will
therefore only enhance the ratio of the integrated signal from the two chemical elements. When
comparing integrated signals from excitation of different types of inner shell electrons, the same
argument does not apply. The ratio between the silicon L2,3 edge signal and the K-edge sig-
nal of nitrogen should therefore be interpreted with great care. In future work, the assumption
about the constant scattering cross sections should be investigated.
Optimization of the diffraction pattern position on the entrance aperture affects the SiK-
peak and the OK- and NK-peaks differently. It can be seen in Equation 3 that the angular
dependence of the scattering cross section depends on the energy. This means that a small
misalignment of the diffraction signal has little effect on the NK- or OK-peaks, whereas the
effect can be severe for the Si-peak. This could cause greater ﬂuctuations in the SiK/NK ratios
than in the OK/NK ratios. It is because of this consideration, optimization during experiments
are avoided in procedure 2 and most of the measurements following procedure 1. In conclusion,
the SiL/NK ratio can ﬁrst fully be trusted, when the scattering cross section are known.
On Figure 19, the trend in the SiL/NK ratio of the reference measurements does not match
the oxidation at an areal dose rate of 100
e
( ˚A2s). Since the reference measurements are collected
with an areal dose of 1000
e
( ˚A2s), the optimization could have induced a change in the angular
distribution collected by the GIF. The question, of whether the mismatch between the references
and the oxidation measurements is caused by the change in areal dose rate, should be addressed
in future studies.
Increase in probability of plural scattering as observed on Figure 21 shows how the plural
scattering increases. As mentioned in section 6, this could over- or underestimate the OK/NK
ratios. The relative change in the plasmon scattering is small, and the integration width used
for quantiﬁcation is not much larger than the characteristic plasmon peak energy. With this in
mind, it is concluded that the changes in OK/NK ratio is affected by plural scattering, but that
such plural scattering probably does not change the conclusions of this study.
So far, the physical mechanism driving the beam-induced oxidation has not been discussed
much. The exchange of oxygen with nitrogen in silicon nitride have been calculated to be
energy favourable [11], and such an exchange is seen in the data presented in this thesis. Since,
nearly no oxidation is observed at the reference windows compared to that observed at the
windows illuminated during oxygen exposure, the beam induced phenomena must be transient.
Else the oxidation would also be observed at reference positions. In a simpliﬁed picture, an
ionized oxygen atom has higher energy than a neutral one, and thereby the energy barrier that
Page 54 of 66
==PAGE:57==
9 CONCLUSION
Figure 28: Sketch of potential. By ionizing an oxygen atom, its energy is increased. Thereby, in a
simpliﬁed picture, the oxidation of the silicon nitride ﬁlm could be more favourable energitically.
should be overcome in an exchange of nitrogen atoms and oxygen atoms in the ﬁlm (see a
sketch of the argument on Figure 8) is lower. Such ionized oxygen atoms are indeed present,
as oxygen is seen in the EELS signals at an energy loss corresponding to oxygen ionization.
In other studies, the oxidation of silver particles by beam ionized oxygen gas molecules have
been observed[33]. Based on this, it could be hypothesized that the oxidation is mainly caused
by the ionized oxygen atoms.
The actual chemical potential depends on local electric ﬁelds and the local temperature,
and these parameters remain unknown in these investigations. Without the scattering cross sec-
tion, the amount of oxygen incorporated in the electron transparent windows is undetermined.
Therefore it cannot be estimated, if the created amount of ionized gas molecules is comparable
to the degree of oxidation. As a consequence of the above listed lack of knowledge, it remains
a hypothesis that the beam-induced oxidation could be due to the creation of ionized oxygen
atoms.
Another possibility is that the beam heats the windows or in similar ways creates transient
conditions in the silicon nitride that decreases the energy barrier associated with oxidation
of the silicon nitride ﬁlm. Permanent structural changes like displacement of atoms or other
structural defects cannot, at least solely, explain the beam-induced phenomena observed. Fu-
ture investigations should address this problem of determining the cause of the beam induced
effect.
9
Conclusion
This study shows that a beam-induced oxidation of the silicon nitride windows of the Nanore-
actor takes place during exposure to oxygen at pressures between 1 mbar and 1 bar for an areal
Page 55 of 66
==PAGE:58==
10 OUTLOOK
dose rate of the beam electrons at 1000
e
( ˚A2s). The higher the pressure the greater the induced
oxidation. By changing the illumination parameters, it was demonstrated, how such oxidation
can be minimized for an approximately constant area and accumulated dose on the CCD used
for data collection, when the areal dose rate is reduced. Data supporting this statement at dif-
ferent pressures have been presented. At 1 mbar of oxygen present in the Nanoreactor, the
induced oxidation become unobservable, when an areal dose rate of 10
e
( ˚A2s) is used.
Furthermore, the results indicate that the beam-induced oxidation only depended weakly
on the illumination area for low areal dose rates.
10
Outlook
It was described how additional measurements were needed to fully cement the credibility
of the observed phenomena in section 7.2 and 7.4, since it could not be ruled out that small
variations in the OK/NK ratio was due to uncertainty in the acquisition or caused by physi-
cal phenomena happening in the silicon nitride ﬁlms. Besides these experiments that should
support interpretations of observed phenomena, other experiments have to be conducted to re-
veal both the nature of the oxidation, but also more of the parameter space that determine the
induced oxidation.
In situ studies of catalytic reactors requires high temperatures as well as high pressures.
Due to time limitations temperature measurements have not been examined in this study, but if
the hypothesis that the oxidation is limited is correct, a mapping of temperature dependencies
is just as important as the pressure dependency. Viscosity depends on temperature. Therefore,
if build up of mechanical stress is responsible for the indications of changed oxidation rate
of beam-induced oxidation observed, the temperature dependence is important to investigate
in future studies. If the changed oxidation rate is due to a diffusion limited oxidation, the
temperature would also be an important parameter, that could be used to reduce the beam-
induced oxidation.
The present study did not investigate the potential consequences of the beam-induced oxi-
dation for experiments carried out in the Nanoreactor. The acceptable beam induced oxidation
rate depends on the effect such an oxidation has on the studies carried out in the reactor. Many
catalysis experiments usually conducted in the Nanoreactor involve several gasses of which
many can act as oxidizing agents. Competitive oxidation processes could alter the progression
of the oxidation of the silicon nitride windows. It is possible that in some gas environments,
the windows of the Nanoreactor will renitridize. Before catalysis experiments with other gasses
than oxygen can be carried out, the beam induced oxidation with these gas compositions needs
to be evaluated. Mass-spectrometry could be used to determine how the nitrogen leave the sur-
face of the silicon nitride windows both before and after the introduction of more complex gas
Page 56 of 66
==PAGE:59==
10 OUTLOOK
compositions.
It is inherently difﬁcult to measure chemical reactions with atomic resolution. In order
to determine the chemical processes responsible for the beam induced oxidation, several ap-
proaches can though be chosen. The projected atomic potential is very similar for nitrogen
and oxygen making high-resolution TEM investigations of the oxidation difﬁcult. Especially
since the electron transparent windows are amorphous. Such investigation could though be
interesting to conduct. Fourier transformed high-resolution images could reveal whether the
structure the of the windows changed. Also, angle-resolved XPS measurements of the surface
of the Nanoreactor windows could be compared to ab initio calculations examining the change
of energy levels of the atomic species for different oxidation mechanisms.
The understanding of the physical process responsible for the oxidation is very important,
in order to identify parameters, having an effect on the beam-induced oxidation. Knowing
these parameters gives greater ﬂexibility when optimizing the beam-induced oxidation. In
section 8, two mechanisms were suggested as responsible for the beam-induced oxidation.
If the oxidation was caused by ionized oxygen atoms, the oxidation rate would depend on
the ﬂow rate of the gas. All the measurements presented in this thesis were conducted with a
constant pressure. In future experiments this could be altered, such that rather different constant
ﬂows would be used. Whether the beam illumination creates transient changes in the electron
transparent ﬁlms is more difﬁcult to determine experimentally. Theoretical studies the effect of
such an excitation could be estimated.
The discovery that continuous induced oxidation can be circumvented at an oxygen pressure
of 1 mbar by reducing the areal dose rate to 10
e
( ˚A2s) imposes restrictions on the detective
quantum efﬁciency (DQE) of the CCD used for acquisitions. Lower areal dose rates reduce
the signal that can be collected by a CCD for a constant illumination area, if the exposure time
also is restricted. For a too low signal intensity, features in the EELS spectrum can become
indistinguishable from a noisy background. Ultimately, it is therefore also the spatial resolution
of EELS measurements that suffer, as it is the total dose of the beam that determines the signal
on the CCD. The combination of the requirement of a low areal dose rate and a minimum
total dose rate on the CCD to get a signal that can be interpreted, sets a limit for the minimum
allowed beam area. CCD cameras with a high DQE is as a result of the above discussed a must,
if beam-induced oxidation should be avoided while keeping a high spatial resolution.
Page 57 of 66
==PAGE:60==
REFERENCES
References
[1] Fan Wu and Nan Yao. Advances in windowed gas cells for in-situ tem studies. Nano
Energy, 13:735 – 756, 2015.
[2] Niels de Jonge and Frances M. Ross. Electron microscopy of specimens in liquid. Nature
Nanotechnology, 6:695–704, 2011.
[3] Renu Sharma. An environmental transmission electron microscope for in situ synthesis
and characterization of nanomaterials. Journal of Materials Research, 20(7):1695–1707,
2005.
[4] J.F. Creemer, F. Santagata, B. Morana, L. Mele, T. Alan, E. Iervolino, G. Pandraud, and
P.M. Sarro. An all-in-one nanoreactor for high-resolution microscopy on nanomaterials
at high pressures, pages 1103–1106. IEEE Society, 2011.
[5] Sebastian Pirel Fredsgaard Jespersen. Oxidation of nanoreactor windows - vers1. Intern
Haldor Topsoe document, 2018.
[6] P.L. Hansen, S. Helveg, and A.K. Datye. Atomic-scale imaging of supported metal nan-
ocluster catalysts in the working state. 50:77 – 95, 2006.
[7] Lawrence F. Allard, Steven H. Overbury, Wilbur C. Bigelow, Michael B. Katz, David P.
Nackashi, and John Damiano. Novel mems-based gas-cell/heating specimen holder pro-
vides advanced imaging capabilities for in situ reaction studies. Microscopy and Micro-
analysis, 18(4):656–666, 2012.
[8] J.F. Creemer, S. Helveg, G.H. Hoveling, S. Ullmann, A.M. Molenbroek, P.M. Sarro,
and H.W. Zandbergen. Atomic-scale electron microscopy at ambient pressure. Ultra-
microscopy, 108(9):993 – 998, 2008.
[9] S.B. Vendelbo, Christian Fink Elkjær, H. Falsig, I. Puspitasari, P. Dona, L. Mele,
B. Morana, B. J. Nelissen, R. van Rijn, J. F. Creemer, P. J. Kooyman, and S. Helveg.
Visualization of oscillatory behaviour of pt nanoparticles catalysing co oxidation. Nature
Materials, 13(9):884–890, 2014.
[10] S. Helveg, C.F. Kisielowski, J.R. Jinschek, P. Specht, G. Yuan, and H. Frei. Observing
gas-catalyst dynamics at atomic resolution and single-atom sensitivity. Micron, 68:176 –
185, 2015.
[11] S.I. Raider, R. Flitsch, J.A. Aboaf, and W.A. Pliskin. Surface oxidation of silicon nitride
ﬁlms. 123:560–565, 1976.
Page 58 of 66
==PAGE:61==
REFERENCES
[12] Peter Tiemeijer. Titan condenser manual. FEI company, 2005.
[13] David B. Williams and C. Barry Carter. Transmission Electron Microscopy: A Textbook
for Materials Science. Springer, 2009.
[14] The
National
Centre
for
High
Resolution
Electron
Microscopy.
Titan
on-
line
help
manual–alignments
(accessed:
21.06.2018).
http://nchrem.nl/wp-
content/uploads/2010/04/Align.pdf.
[15] R.F. Egerton. Electron Energy-Loss Spectroscopy in the Electron Microscope. Springer,
2011.
[16] R.F. Egerton. K-shell ionization cross-sections for use in microanalysis. Ultramicroscopy,
4:169–179, 1979.
[17] D. M. Maher, D. C. Joy, R. F. Egerton, and P. Mochel.
The functional form of
energy-differential cross sections for carbon using transmission electron energy-loss spec-
troscopy. Journal of Applied Physics, 50(8):5105–5109, 1979.
[18] Gatan
Inc.
Gatan
imaging
ﬁlter
(gif)
(accessed:
30.05.2018).
http://www.eels.info/products/gatan-imaging-ﬁlter-gif.
[19] Gatan Corporate.
Bn particle suspended on holey c (accessed:
07.05.2018).
http://www.eels.info/atlas/nitrogen.
[20] R. P. Burgner M. M. Disko P. R. Swann C. C. Ahn, O. L. Krivanek. EELS Atlas. GATAN
inc., 1983.
[21] G. Kothleitner and F. Hofer. Optimization of the signal to noise ratio in eftem elemental
maps with regard to different ionization edge types. Micron, 29(5):349 – 357, 1998.
[22] R.F. Egerton.
A revised expression for signal/noise ratio in eels.
Ultramicroscopy,
9(4):387 – 390, 1982.
[23] Bangert U., Harvey A. J., Freundt D., and Keyse R.
Highly spatially resolved elec-
tron energy-loss spectroscopy in the bandgap regime of gan.
Journal of Microscopy,
188(3):237–242.
[24] Shigeyuki Morishita, Jun Yamasaki, and Nobuo Tanaka. Measurement of spatial coher-
ence of electron beams by using a small selected-area aperture. Ultramicroscopy, 129:10
– 17, 2013.
Page 59 of 66
==PAGE:62==
REFERENCES
[25] Alexander Gubbens, Melanie Barfels, Colin Trevor, Ray Twesten, Paul Mooney, Paul
Thomas, Nanda Menon, Bernd Kraus, Chengye Mao, and Brian McGinn. The gif quan-
tum, a next generation post-column imaging energy ﬁlter. Ultramicroscopy, 110(8):962 –
970, 2010.
[26] H. I. Liu, D. K. Biegelsen, N. M. Johnson, F. A. Ponce, and R. F. W. Pease. Self-limiting
oxidation of si nanowires. Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B: Microelectronics
and Nanometer Structures Processing, Measurement, and Phenomena, 11(6):2532–2537,
1993.
[27] C. C. B¨uttner and M. Zacharias. Retarded oxidation of si nanowires. Applied Physics
Letters, 89(26):263106, 2006.
[28] Takanobu Watanabe, Kosuke Tatsumura, and Iwao Ohdomari. New linear-parabolic rate
equation for thermal oxidation of silicon. Phys. Rev. Lett., 96:196102, May 2006.
[29] Dah-Bin Kao, J. P. McVittie, W. D. Nix, and K. C. Saraswat. Two-dimensional silicon
oxidation experiments and theory. In 1985 International Electron Devices Meeting, vol-
ume 31, pages 388–391, 1985.
[30] D. B. Kao, J. P. McVittie, W. D. Nix, and K. C. Saraswat. Two-dimensional thermal
oxidation of silicon. ii. modeling stress effects in wet oxides.
IEEE Transactions on
Electron Devices, 35(1):25–37, Jan 1988.
[31] AZoNetwork.
Silica
-
silicon
dioxide
(sio2)(accessed:
11.06.2018).
https://www.azom.com/article.aspx?ArticleID=1114.
[32] AZoNetwork. Silicon nitride (si3n4) properties and applications (accessed: 11.06.2018).
https://www.azom.com/properties.aspx?ArticleID=53.
[33] L. Sun, K.W. Noh, J.-G. Wen, and S.J. Dillon. In situ transmission electron microscopy
observation of silver oxidation in ionized/atomic gas. Langmuir, 27(23):14201–14206,
2011.
Page 60 of 66
==PAGE:63==
11 APPENDIX
11.1 Raw data from experiment with 1 mbar
11
Appendix
11.1
Raw data from experiment with 1 mbar
Figure 29: Raw data acquired using procedure 2 with an oxygen pressure of 1 mbar. All
10 oxidation measurements are superimposed.
Page 61 of 66
==PAGE:64==
11 APPENDIX
11.2 Raw data from experiment with 1 bar
11.2
Raw data from experiment with 1 bar
Figure 30: Raw data acquired using procedure 2 with an oxygen pressure of 1 bar.
Page 62 of 66
==PAGE:65==
11 APPENDIX
11.2 Raw data from experiment with 1 bar
Figure 31: Raw data acquired using procedure 2 with an oxygen pressure of 1 bar.
Page 63 of 66
==PAGE:66==
11 APPENDIX
11.4 Project plan
11.3
SiL/NK ratio for 1 bar measurements using procedure 2
Figure 32: SiL/NK ratio from the left side of window 19 and 20 during oxidation with
1 bar of oxygen.
11.4
Project plan
Page 64 of 66
==PAGE:67==
Project plan 
Aim of the study: To investigate the oxidation of electron transparent windows in Nano-
reactors under elevated temperatures, exposed to different mixtures of gasses and 
illuminated with an electron beam. 
 
Background: Catalytic reactions play a very important in role in many different industries, 
and the understanding of such reactions is of great interest, as knowledge obtained about the 
mechanisms driving the processes can be used to alter and optimize the performance of 
different catalysts.  With this in mind studies of reactions in situ are very important, as the 
industrially relevant environment for the catalysts is quite extreme compared to the 
conditions, under which catalysts are usually studied, and catalysts are know to change 
behavior at the elevated pressures and temperatures that they normally used in.  Therefore 
the Nano-reactors that make it possible to investigate catalysts in situ in Transmission 
Electron Microscopes while maintaining high resolution is of great interest. However the 
electron transparent windows in the Nano-reactors, through which the catalytic reactions are 
observed, have been observed to oxidize, when exposed to an oxygen containing 
environment. This poses a problem, as Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy (EELS)  
investigations of oxygen compounds cannot conducted as easily, and the windows change 
properties under the measurements. In addition to that the oxidation of the windows could 
induce chemistry not related to the original experiment. This project therefore seeks 
investigate the oxidation of the electron transparent windows and hopefully discover a way 
circumvent the problems of this oxidation.  
 
 Experimental methods: By using EELS  (Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy) the chemical 
configuration and thickness of the electron transparent windows will be investigated. 
Furthermore HRTEM pictures will be used to get an overview of the condition of the windows 
and Fourier transforms of such pictures will be used to determine the height of the reaction 
chambers of the Nano-reactors.  
 
 
 
Planning of the work: As I lack experience with TEM’s and EELS the first month is planned to 
be used for training and characterization of the Nano-reactor. Preceding that, the first 
investigations of the oxidation of the windows will be carried out. Additional complexity is 
introduced in April, by extenting the number of gasses besides oxygen in the Nano-reactor. 
The projekt work is structured with growing complexity of the experimental  procedures, 
such that I gradually get comftable with the equipment. May is reserved for final 
investigations and additional questions, as the physics drivin the oxidation is not entirely 
known, additional questions could come up, while the experiments are done. The last month 
is reserved for writing the thesis.  
==PAGE:68==
 
 
 
 
 
(Revised) Project plan 
 
 
 
 Progression of  the project:  The preliminary studies, which were combined with the initial 
training on the electron microscope used in the experiment, proved to be inconclusive 
regarding discovering the relevant parameters steering the oxidation of the Nanoreactor 
windows. This made it necessary to continuously introduce additional methods of 
characterization during the first three months of the project, while changing the scope of the 
project slightly. It was discovered that the oxidation depended strongly on the oxygen 
pressure inside the Nanoreactor, and therefore the parameter space to be examined changed. 
Furthermore, as the data required extensive analysis, the work of writing the thesis and 
analyzing the data was extended with a month.   
 
Auto-evaluation: During the project, the experimental work required self-evaluation of the 
operational procedures used to acquire data. Therefore, I strived to improve my experimental 
skills.    
