==PAGE:1==
Automatic Detection of Problematic
Feedback in Peer Review
Maximilian J. W. Zellinger
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The goal of this thesis is to automatically detect problematic feedback in peer
review, speciﬁcally for the peer assessment process of Peergrade.io. Problematic
feedback can then be automatically ﬂagged and brought to the attention of the
person responsible for the course.
For the intents and purposes of this thesis, problematic feedback is deﬁned as
feedback that is unfair or toxic. More speciﬁcally, this thesis consists of three
parts. In the ﬁrst part, a method to detect unfair feedback given by students
to the work of other students is developed. The second part deals with the
identiﬁcation of inappropriate or toxic language use in peer feedback. The last
section describes the prediction of the quality of given feedback and the removal
of the reciprocity bias inherent to the data.
Ultimately, the results of the models presented in this thesis should provide
some groundwork for future improvements for the experience of both students
and teachers on the Peergrade.io platform. Automatic detection and ﬂagging
could decrease the workload of the teachers as well as increase their eﬀectiveness
as course administrators. Students beneﬁt from more fairness in the grading
process and a better sense of community.
On the technical side, the methods and models were implemented in Python
using popular machine learning libraries and tools such as Scikit-Learn, Pandas,
Keras and Tensorﬂow.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the institute for Mathematics and Computer Sci-
ence, DTU Compute, at the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁlment of
the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc. in Mathematical Modeling and Compu-
tation.
The work was done in cooperation with Peergrade ApS, a startup company that
provides an online platform for teachers and students that uses peer assessment
methods to assist in grading the works of students.
Lyngby, 05-July-2018
Maximilian J. W. Zellinger
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
What is Peer Assessment? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
About Peergrade.io . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
Terminology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Thesis Overview and Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Representing Text for Machine Learning Algorithms
9
2.1
Localist Representation: The Bag-of-Words and TFIDF Model .
10
2.2
Dense Representation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
Word2Vec . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.2
GloVe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.3
FastText . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Detecting Unfair Feedback
17
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Disagreement Score . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Detecting Toxic Language
23
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
The Training Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.1
Data Representation with Keras
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Model Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
Application to the Peergrade Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5
Discussion of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
5
Detecting Unfair Feedback Reactions
37
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Data Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2.1
Implementation as Part of the Model Pipeline . . . . . . .
42
5.3
Model Selection and Parameter Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3.1
Hyperparameter Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3.2
Modelling and Subtracting the Reciprocity Bias . . . . . .
49
5.4
Discussion of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6
Conclusion
55
6.1
Detection of Unfair Feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
Detection of Toxic Language
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.3
Detection of Unfair Feedback Reactions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
Bibliography
59
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
What is Peer Assessment?
Peer assessment denotes a method of having students evaluate the work of their
peers, usually with the help of a rubric or some other form of benchmark pro-
vided by the teacher. The goal generally is either the ﬁnal evaluation of the
students’ work (summative feedback) or the improvement of the students’ end
product through inﬂuencing the learning process as the project progresses (for-
mative feedback).
The method of peer assessment can be advantageous for both students and
teachers. According to Sadler et al. [Sadler and Good, 2006] the key beneﬁts of
peer-evaluation on the student-side are:
• Logistical: The feedback and grading process is conducted in parallel and
on a ﬁxed schedule.
The grading process can be started directly after
hand-in and can be subject to a deadline, resulting in faster feedback.
Since individual students can expend more time on grading than a teacher
could, peer-assessment can produce more detailed feedback.
• Pedagogical: The evaluation of the work of other students exposes the
graders to diﬀerent solutions and problem approaches. This deepens the
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
students’ understanding of the subject matter and introduces the students
to diﬀerent perspectives.
• Meta-cognitive: Being involved in the grading process makes testing more
transparent. Additionally, it gives students a better idea where they stand
academically in comparison to their peers. Students are more reﬂective
about their own strengths and weaknesses as well as their progress. To suc-
ceed in peer-evaluation, they need to employ higher-order thinking skills
to judge the work of their peers. The exposure to what determines the
quality of an assignment motivates the evaluation of their own work.
• Aﬀective: The sense of shared ownership and being apart of a learning
community can make classrooms more productive, friendly and coopera-
tive. This creates a positive association with the grading process.
Perhaps the most practical advantage of the peer assessment process are the
beneﬁts relating to the opportunity costs of the teachers. With growing class
sizes, teachers of all levels are faced with an increasing workload just for grading
their students’ work in the form of assignments and tests. Arguably, the time of
teachers could be better distributed towards tasks with a higher marginal cost
to marginal beneﬁt ratio for both students and teachers. Oftentimes teaching
assistants are hired to alleviate the problem, which all but materializes the
theoretical opportunity cost into actual monetary cost.
With the advent of numerous online learning platforms oﬀering courses of all
levels to just about anyone with a computer and an internet connection, the
scalability of peer assessment might be its most crucial feature for application in
this context. Therefore, the implementation of peer assessment in the framework
of a digital platform is essential. Such platforms have been developed [Gehringer,
2014] [Hamer et al., 2005][Gehringer, 2001] in recent times. How to employ and
improve the peer assessment method and its outcomes, speciﬁcally for so-called
Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs), has been examined by several studies
[Piech et al., 2013][Ashton and Davies, 2015][Yousef et al., 2015][Díez et al.,
2013][Shah et al., 2013][Suen, 2014].
1.2
About Peergrade.io
Peergrade.io is a company that introduced the method of peer assessment as an
online service for individuals or institutions in the educational sector. Several
subscription options are available including a basic free tier. The prices depend
on the number of students and of course on the selected subscription package
and its included features and beneﬁts.
==PAGE:11==
1.2 About Peergrade.io
3
After sign-up, teachers can create courses for their classes on the website and
add the enrolled students, who will receive a conﬁrmation e-mail. Figure 1.1
from the website [pee, ] outlines the entire process from the teachers’ point of
view.
Figure 1.1: The process of peer assessment on Peergrade.io from a teacher’s
perspective.
For each class, the teacher creates the desired number of assignments along
with the meta-information and feedback criteria. This includes the submission
deadlines, peer-grading deadlines and, most importantly, the feedback rubric.
The rubric is divided into individual sections, each holding the feedback ques-
tions designed to guide the students through the peer-assessment process. The
questions can require a boolean answer, an answer on a numerical-scale or a
text answer. The collection of answers of one peer-grading student to the rubric
questions in the context of a submission is the peer-assessment of one student to
another. Each question can be assigned a weight by diﬃculty or relevance. Ad-
ditionally, the teacher has the choice of making questions optional or mandatory
to answer.
Other options the teacher can set include but are not limited to: the number
of peer-graders per student, the group size for the assignment, whether self-
evaluation is required, the ﬁle type of the submissions. The entire conﬁguration
of an assignment can be changed by the teacher at any given time. After this
initial set-up, students are automatically notiﬁed when an assignment opens for
handing in their submissions.
Once the students have submitted their work, the individual submissions are
assigned peer-graders who will provide feedback anonymously within the frame-
work of the feedback rubric. The algorithm ensures that each submission gets
feedback. When students access the Peergrade.io homepage with their login,
they are provided information on their outstanding tasks, such as handing in
work or grading their peers.
==PAGE:12==
4
Introduction
After the completion of the peer feedback process, the students can view the
received feedback. If a student wants to involve the course-responsible, he or she
has the option to ﬂag speciﬁc parts of the feedback to bring it to the attention of
the teacher. There could be many reasons for students to ﬂag a feedback answer
ranging from perceived (un-)fairness to toxic language use. It needs to be noted
that the entire peer assessment process is anonymous from the students’ point of
view. However, they teacher is of course able to see the identity of the students
of each feedback or hand-in.
Meanwhile, the teacher has access to a complete overview of the quality of
assignments and what feedback was given in the form of a dashboard.
The
collections of provided feedback is not only analyzed to determine a grade for
the individual submissions but also to rate each peer-grader.
1.2.1
Terminology
In the following, the necessary Peergrade speciﬁc terminology is deﬁned to fa-
cilitate understanding and to avoid ambiguity in the succeeding chapters and
sections. At the time of writing, Peergrade.io was using a MongoDB database
to store the data necessary to operate their services. The data was sorted into
collections by general categories such as courses, assignments, users and so on.
Each collection held the records speciﬁc to that category.
For example, the
assignment collection held all records of the individual assignments plus the
necessary metadata. In MongoDB, the meta data of each record is contained in
so-called ﬁelds. Since each record is assigned a unique object identiﬁer, refer-
ences to other records can be made by using the relevant identiﬁer.
By mapping out these references, the dependencies of the collection and their
records can be visualized. Figure 1.2 shows the relationship between the collec-
tions as well as the record ﬁelds relevant for our purposes. Irrelevant collections
(such as users, institutions, etc.) or record metadata is omitted for the sake of
clarity.
From the students’ perspective they interact with Peergrade.io in three ways:
1. they upload their submissions as handins
2. they provide feedback for a handin of another student
3. they react to the feedback they received from another student
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Thesis Overview and Motivation
5
Denotation
Description
handin, submission
The work subject to receiving feedback
(peer) feedback, peer review, report grade
The feedback given by one student for a single submission
question, rubric question
Questions of the pre-deﬁned feedback rubric
answer
The part of a feedback pertaining to a speciﬁc question
feedback reaction, feedback on feedback
The evaluation of the received feedback
peer grader, peer reviewer, feedback giver
The student giving feedback to a handin
feedback grade
The grade given to a submission from a feedback
feedback score
The quality of a feedback
Table 1.1: Summary of the terminology
This is why a record representing a single handin references the assignment iden-
tiﬁer. Usually, one handin receives multiple feedbacks from diﬀerent students.
Each peer feedback (also referred to as peer review) evaluates a handin by
answering the pre-deﬁne rubric questions. The individual answers are stored as
records in a separate collection. The peer feedback records reference both the
assignment and the handin identiﬁers, but make no reference to the answers.
Depending on the question type, the answer records contain either a numerical,
boolean or text answer. The numerical answers are answers from a multiple
choice question, where each option is assigned a number from a pre-deﬁned
interval; these numbers are then normalized to the interval (0, 1), to allow for
comparison between answers. A value of 1 is the highest attainable grade for a
question.
For each feedback students receive on their handins, they need to evaluate the
received feedback one by one in a process called feedback reaction. They give a
feedback grade, which is recorded in the peer feedback record along with wether
they ﬂagged or liked a speciﬁc answer of the feedback.
Table 1.1 summarizes the most important concepts and terminology.
1.3
Thesis Overview and Motivation
Automatic ﬂagging of peer feedback has several potential advantages. For one,
it increases the fairness of the peer assessment method as implemented on Peer-
grade.io by ﬂagging feedback that deviates from the consensus for review. Users
can and do already ﬂag feedback that they perceive as unfair or lacking in
some aspect. Here, an automatic ﬂagging feature can compensate for human
oversight or human error. Most importantly, however, feedback that attests an
==PAGE:14==
6
Introduction
Figure 1.2: An illustration of the relationship between the database collections
and its records. The white boxes represent the collections. The
descriptive texts describes the most important meta information
records of the collections typically store. Each record, no mat-
ter from which collection, also has a unique object identiﬁcation.
The arrows connecting the collections symbolize that the collec-
tion records reference one or more records from another collection
by their unique identiﬁcation.
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Thesis Overview and Motivation
7
undeservedly positive grade will most certainly not be ﬂagged, as that would go
against the feedback recipient’s self interest. In this case, the automatic ﬂagging
improves the fairness of the peer assessment.
Feedback rubrics can also require raw text input from peer graders. It is an
unfortunate reality that inappropriate or downright toxic language is sometimes
used in these text ﬁelds. By automatically detecting toxic language in the text
component of feedback this type of behavior can be dealt with. In the simplest
case, this could mean setting a ﬂag for review by the course administrator. Other
conceivable solutions could disabling the submit function until the detected toxic
language is removed, hiding toxic language behind a viewer discretion prompt
or removing the toxic feedback entirely.
These solutions certainly have the
potential to have aﬀective beneﬁts on students [Sadler and Good, 2006].
Feedback reactions are aﬀected by what we will term reciprocity bias. Receiv-
ing feedback that is more positive in comparison to the other available feedback
increases the chance that the feedback quality is rated with a higher feedback
score than it would otherwise deserve. Conversely, comparably negative feed-
back is generally evaluated with a lower feedback score. If this reciprocity bias
can be removed, the feedback reaction score can be corrected for fairness.
Chapter 3 describes how unfair feedback is detected by calculating a numerical
score and how well this approach works given the limitations of the data. The
detection of toxic language in text feedback is more complicated and employs
a neural network. Chapter 4 details why external training data was necessary
to train the neural network and how the model performed on the Peergrade
data. Chapter 5 shows evidence for the reciprocity bias and outlines a strategy
to remove it. It is described how a random forest regression model is trained to
predict the quality of text feedback and how the reciprocity bias is treated. The
necessary theory of the above mentioned techniques and methods are introduced
in chapter 2. Finally, the results are discussed in chapter 6 along with potential
extensions and future work.
==PAGE:16==
8
Introduction
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Representing Text for
Machine Learning Algorithms
Using natural language data in the context of machine learning naturally raises
the question of how to represent such data in a way that is compatible with the
underlying algorithms of the chosen machine learning models. To state it more
bluntly, machine learning algorithms require numbers instead of letters. Geoﬀ
Hinton [Hinton, 2011] makes a distinction between localist methods of represen-
tation and distributed methods of representation. The former generally yield a
sparse vector representation, while the latter yield a dense vector representation.
The representation of text as vectors allows the introduction of vector norms,
similarity measures and distance metrics.
Ideally, the vector representation should possess some important properties.
Identical texts should have the same representation and consequently, a dis-
tance of zero for maximum similarity. Additionally, a representation and its
similarity measure should allow for comparing the similarity of texts. For se-
mantic comparisons, the text length should not have an eﬀect.
A Note on Terminology
To avoid using the nebulous and rather long term
natural language data, we will use the following terms as explained: a corpus
is a large and structured set of documents, which contain an arbitrarily long
==PAGE:18==
10
Representing Text for Machine Learning Algorithms
arrangement of alphanumeric and special characters1 referred to as text(s). For
example, a collection of a certain number of news articles would form a corpus.
The individual articles would be the documents.
2.1
Localist Representation: The Bag-of-Words
and TFIDF Model
Arguably, the simplest method of representing text data is the so-called bag-
of-words model. The bag-of-words model represents text as the collection of
words as well as their frequency of occurrence. This is easily illustrated with an
example corpus of two text documents:
(Document 1) The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
(Document 2) Never jump over the lazy dog quickly.
First, a dictionary of all the words in the corpus is created, in which each word
is assigned an arbitrary index. Actually, in this case, the words were sorted
alphabetically and then assigned a number in ascending order. The point is
that—in principle—the index assignment scheme does not matter.
{
'brown': 0,
'dog': 1,
'fox': 2,
'jump': 3,
'jumps': 4,
'lazy': 5,
'never': 6,
'over': 7,
'quick': 8,
'quickly': 9,
'the': 10,
}
For each of the two documents, a vector recording the counts of each dictionary
word can be constructed. The index associated with every word in the dictionary
1This includes, most notably, punctuation, apostrophes, quotation marks, smileys and
similar.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Localist Representation: The Bag-of-Words and TFIDF Model
11
is the vector index holding the occurrence count information. The vectors for
the ﬁrst and second sample document respectively are now in a bag-of-words
representation:
[1,1,1,0,1,1,0,1,1,0,2]
[0,1,0,1,0,1,1,1,0,1,1]
The ﬁrst vector element with index 0 corresponds to the word ‘brown’, which is
found once in the ﬁrst document but is not in the second document at all. The
word ‘dog’ is found in both documents and consequently, the second element in
both representation vectors is 1. The occurrence of each word can now be used
as a feature for training a machine learning model.
There are obvious drawbacks to the bag-of-words approach of representing text.
For one, grammar along with word order is completely disregarded. Also, bag-
of-words does not possess a notion of word relationships; ‘laptop battery’ is
completely unrelated to ‘notebook battery’. Additionally, the occurrence count,
or term frequency, might not be a good feature for machine learning models
as words like ‘the’, ‘a’ and ‘of’ are almost always part of the most common
words in documents and therefore carry little meaningful information about the
document content. In other words, the term frequency might not capture words
relevant for representing the document in contrast to other documents, say, for
classiﬁcation purposes.
By multiplying the term frequencies of the words with their inverse document
frequencies this issue can be counteracted. This procedure is known as tf-idf,
short for term frequency-inverse document frequency. With the variables t for
term and d for document, the mathematical formulation2 is:
tf-idf(t, d) = tf(t, d) × idf(t)
(2.1)
where
idf(t) = log
(
1 + nd
1 + df(d, t)
)
+ 1
(2.2)
describes how the inverse term frequencies are computed given nd as the to-
tal number of documents and df(t) as the number of documents that contain
t. Finally, the resulting tf-idf vectors are normalized, most commonly by the
Euclidian norm:
vnorm =
v
||v||2
=
v
√
v2
1 + v2
2 + · · · + v2n
(2.3)
2There are diﬀerent ways to calculate the idf. The given method is taken from the Python
Sci-Kit Learn tf-idf vectorizer.
==PAGE:20==
12
Representing Text for Machine Learning Algorithms
For the sake of simplicity the bag-of-words model was explained using ‘words’,
but in practice, more general tokens are used; for example they could be phonemes,
syllables, letters, words or base pairs. The process of splitting texts into ‘words’
is called tokenization and the individual tokens need not be human-interpretable
per se. As long as the rule for splitting texts into a number elements is con-
sistently applied, any sequence of characters can be a token. A more advanced
concept often applied in the process of tokenization is lemmatization. Basically,
each word token is sought to be replaced by its dictionary form.
This way,
the word tokens ‘walking’, ‘walked’ and ‘walks’ would be grouped together and
represented by ‘walk’ instead.
It is possible to systematically combine n tokens during the process of tokeniza-
tion to obtain n-grams. For n = 2, this is called bigrams and for n = 3 trigrams.
An example illustrates the concept better than any explanation could. The text
The fox jumps over the dog.
would yield the following bigrams: ‘The fox’, ‘fox jumps’, ‘jumps over’, ‘over
the’, ‘the dog’.
2.2
Dense Representation
For representing text as dense vectors there are many popular (pre-trained)
embeddings available, such as Word2Vec [Liu, 2017], GloVe [Pennington et al.,
2014] and FastText [Joulin et al., 2016]. In the following the general working
principle of these embeddings are summarized. For the mathematical descrip-
tion please refer to their cited papers.
2.2.1
Word2Vec
Word2Vec was one of the ﬁrst neural embedding models to gain popularity
in 2013 and is still widely used today. It is based on the notion of distributed
similarity, which is a concept perhaps best described by the popular NLP slogan
“You shall know a word by the company it keeps.” [Firth, 1957]
Essentially, this means that the meaning of a word is best represented by its
neighboring words. As a consequence, if one can reliably predict the context a
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Dense Representation
13
word is appearing in means one understands the meaning of the word. Mathe-
matically, this concept can be drafted as
p(context|wt)
(2.4)
where wt is the target word and the context is usually deﬁned using a window
size around the target word. Target and context words are deﬁned as word
vectors. The previous equation comes with a loss function
J = 1 −p(w−t|wt)
(2.5)
where w−t represents all other words in the context window except the target
word. After randomly initializing the word vectors of the corpus words, going
through diﬀerent word positions t in a text corpus the word vector represen-
tations are changed to minimize the loss function. Essentially, this procedure
captures the co-occurrence of words one at a time.
Word2Vec provides two diﬀerent model architectures: The skip-grams (SG)
approach predicts context words given a target word (or center word), whereas
the Continuous Bag of Words (CBOW) approach predicts the target words from
the bag-of-words context. There are two training algorithms: negative sampling
and hierarchical softmax, which is better for infrequent words. The loss function
for the skip-grams architecture with negative sampling training was derived in
[Liu, 2017] to be:
J(θ) = 1
T
T
∑
t=1
Jt(θ)
(2.6)
Jt(θ) = log σ(uT
o vc)
|
{z
}
(1)
+
k
∑
i=1
Ej∼P (w)[log σ(−uT
j vc)]
|
{z
}
(2)
(2.7)
where t represents each individual window when going through the corpus. Term
(1) represents the maximizing of the log probability of the center words vc and
the outside words vo co-occuring. Outside words are words appearing outside
the context window. Term (2) describes the sub-sampling words from the corpus
and minimizing the expected log-probability of context words uj co-occurring
with the uc center word. Essentially, this means that words that co-occur within
context windows cluster together, while words that do not co-occur are pushed
away.
The involved matrix computations can be represented as a neural network, which
is why Word2Vec is called a neural embedding. During the training process,
words—or rather their word vectors—with similar meanings start clustering
==PAGE:22==
14
Representing Text for Machine Learning Algorithms
in the vector space. Distance measures between the words can even express
semantic relationships.
For example, the distance between the words ‘king’
and ‘queen’ will be similar to the distance between ‘male’ and ‘female’ or other
analogies of that nature.
2.2.2
GloVe
Now, instead of capturing the co-occurrence count indirectly and step by step
one window at a time, as the Word2Vec algorithm does, the co-occurrence counts
can be captured directly by creating a co-occurrence matrix. The co-occurrence
matrix can be created from the context windows around each word, which cap-
tures both syntactic and semantic information, or from the individual docu-
ments, which will capture topics. The latter approach is also known as Latent
Semantic Analysis (LSA).
Then, since co-occurrence matrices are high-dimensional and sparse, the singu-
lar value decomposition (SVD) is applied to the ‘raw’ co-occurrence matrix to
obtain ﬁxed lower-dimensional dense vectors.
There are many ways to improve this method. Ignoring corpus speciﬁc stop
words or capping the word count at a threshold value can counteract the dis-
proportionate importance given to words with large counts. The window can be
weighted so that words closer to the target word have higher weights. The main
issues with applying SVD to the co-occurrcence matrix are the computation
time of O(nm2) for a n × m matrix when n < m and the fact that it is hard to
incorporate new documents or words.
Global Vectors for Word Representation (GloVe) combines the best of both the
direct co-occurrence count based methods (like LSA) and the window-based
prediction methods (like Word2Vec). From Word2Vec, GloVe retains the scal-
ability in regard to corpus size, the ability to capture complex patterns beyond
word similarity and the ability to perform tasks such as entity recognition or
part of speech tagging and combines it with the more eﬃcient usage of the co-
occurrence statistics as well as faster training time of the co-occurrence matrix
approaches.
GloVe uses the information of a co-occurrence matrix Pij for its loss function
J(θ) = 1
2
W
∑
i,j=1
f(Pij)(uT
i vj −log Pij)2
(2.8)
where ui and vj are the dense word vector representations that are improved
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Dense Representation
15
during the learning process, which essentially minimizes their dot product. The
weighting function f weighs the co-occurrence counts, for example, to introduce
a threshold value to cap the importance of the very frequent words. For each
word W two vector representations (u and v) are learned during the training
after which they are combined, usually by simply adding them.
2.2.3
FastText
FastText expands the skip-gram Word2Vec model by representing words as bags
of character n-grams to add subword information. Each character n-gram is
associated with a vector representation. Words can then be represented as the
sum of the vectors associated with their n-grams. This gives the FastText model
some distinct advantages apart from fast training. Because it takes into account
word morphology, languages with large vocabularies and rare words are better
represented. Words not contained in the training corpus can still be assigned a
vector if they are morphologically similar to words in the corpus.
==PAGE:24==
16
Representing Text for Machine Learning Algorithms
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Detecting Unfair Feedback
3.1
Introduction
The grading of the work of students always brings with it the question of fairness,
especially in the context of peer assessment. Unfair feedback, as perceived by
the recipient, can be ﬂagged for review. Unfair feedback can mean feedback
that is either too negative or too positive in terms of the numerical value that
represents the answer type. As it is, students readily ﬂag feedback that is too
negative. However, on the other hand, there are no incentives for students to
ﬂag feedback that is too positive, because it would be against their own interest
to do so. The goal of this part of the thesis is to detect these feedbacks so that
they can be automatically ﬂagged.
In the following, the available database information is described and relevant
concepts from section 1.2.1 are reiterated and elaborated on for the sake of
clarity.
On Peergrade.io, the students receive grades for their submissions based on the
feedback given by the assigned peer graders. Each peer feedback is a collection of
answers to the teacher-deﬁned feedback rubric. A feedback grade is calculated
for each peer feedback by calculating the weighted average of the individual
==PAGE:26==
18
Detecting Unfair Feedback
numerical answers1. The weights represent the importance of the rubric question
and are usually set by the course administrator. Subsequently, the feedback
grade of each peer grade pertaining to the individual submissions are averaged
again to obtain a ﬁnal submission grade.
For future reference, ‘an answer’ will synonymously refer to the numerical an-
swers in this chapter, because text answers are inconsequential to the presented
analysis. As already mentioned, the numerical value is normalized to be within
the interval of (0, 1).
In order to detect unfair feedback, the peer feedbacks are analyzed on the lowest
level – the answers to individual rubric questions. Each submission generally has
a varying number of peer graders and hence a varying number of peer feedback
answers to each rubric question. The goal is to introduce a disagreement score
to ﬁnd unfair answers. The idea is that, if one peer grader disagrees greatly
with the others on a rubric question, the answer of that peer grader is most
likely unfair and should be ﬂagged.
The next section describes the desired properties of a disagreement score and
how the disagreement score was calculated.
Afterwards, in section 3.3, the
results are discussed using test cases designed to examine whether the disagree-
ment score behaves as desired.
3.2
Disagreement Score
Due to the nature of the data, the answers to diﬀerent questions are indepen-
dent from each other for our intents and purposes. The collection of answers
compromising a peer feedback are also independent from each other if they are
relating to diﬀerent submissions, because each submission is naturally unique.
As a consequence, the detection of unfair feedback on an answer level is limited
to only a few data points, which are the numerical answers of a varying number
of peer graders to individual questions.
To illustrate the nature of the data, a sample question2 is selected from an
assignment3 and listed below along with the corresponding answer choices.
How good was the solution to Exercise 3.3? One of the most rated
1At the time of writing, text answers are not used to calculate a feedback grade.
2with a question identiﬁer 57dec2324b6770001202e566
3with an assignment identiﬁer 57c29ec1865114001048e703
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Disagreement Score
19
movies should be American Beauty and one of the movies with high-
est standard deviation should be Blair Witch Project.
-----------------------------------------------------------------
[0] The exercise was not solved
[1] The solution was wrong or it was impossible to verify that
it was correct
[2] The solution was correct but the documentation was lacking
[3] The solution was correct and the arguments and documentation
was great
For this question, peer graders choose one of the answer options [0, 1, 2, 3]. The
corresponding normalized numerical answers are, in this case, [0.0, 0.˙3, 0.˙6, 1.0].
For a given yet arbitrary submission of this assignment a total of 4 peer graders
were assigned. As a consequence, four numerical answers exist, one for each peer
grader. The answer choices were [3], [1], [0], [0], the corresponding normalized
answers are [1.0], [0.˙3], [0.0], [0.0]. In this case, it is easy to identify the answer
[3] as a likely outlier, because it disagrees signiﬁcantly with the answers of the
other peer graders.
Since the number of peer graders as well as the possible answers are variable, a
disagreement score should ideally possess the following properties:
• If only two or less peer graders were assigned, the disagreement score is
undeﬁned. This means that no automatic ﬂagging will take place.
• If all answers are the same, each answer should have a disagreement score
of 0.0 to represent perfect agreement.
• If all but one answers are the same, the disagreement score should clearly
indicate the disagreeing answer proportional to the numerical diﬀerence
between it and the other answers; all other answers should have a very
low disagreement score.
• For cases where one answers diﬀers from n identical answers (as in the
previous point) the disagreement score for the disagreeing answer should
scale with n. Increasing n should increase the disagreement score pro-
portionally and vice versa. Intuitively speaking, the more peer graders
gave same answers the higher the disagreement should be—this is rele-
vant since the number of peer graders varies by submission. For example,
in the case of the answers being [0, 1, 1, 1], a higher disagreement score
should be associated with [0] compared to the case of [0, 1, 1].
==PAGE:28==
20
Detecting Unfair Feedback
The number of normalized answers for a question of a single submission is very
small (< 5) in most cases. Unfortunately, with only a very limited amount of
observations sampled from the unknown underlying distribution(s), it is almost
impossible to infer the distribution. Usually, it would be both safe and intuitive
to assume normality, but due to the discrete nature of the numerical answers,
this consideration of normality can be discarded. Additionally, no matter the
theoretical underlying distribution, with very little data an accurate or reliable
estimation of, for example, mean and standard deviation would have been hard
if not impossible anyway.
Based on the considerations presented above, it was opted for using the in-
terquartile range to ﬁnd outliers. Observations x that fulﬁl the following crite-
rion are identiﬁed as outliers:
Q3 + IQR < x < Q1 −IQR
(3.1)
Bupper < x < Blower
(3.2)
where Q1 and Q3 are the ﬁrst quartile and the third quartile respectively and
IQR is the interquartile range.
Combining them gives the lower and upper
bound Blower and Bupper. This method makes no assumption for the underlying
distribution. After the outliers have been identiﬁed, they need to be assigned a
disagreement score with:
disagreement score = 1
2(Bupper + Blower) −x
(3.3)
This disagreement score is naturally conﬁned to the interval (−1.0, 1.0), where
negative scores mean that the outlier has a higher numerical value compared to
the rest of the answers and vice versa.
Other methods for outlier detection and score models were considered but failed
to replicate the desired properties, especially the score scaling for increasing
numbers of peer graders.
3.3
Results and Discussion
To assess the performance of the outlier detection method, especially in regards
to the desired properties outlined in the previous section, a number of test cases
are deﬁned and the outputs observed. The test cases and the results are listed
in table 3.1.
The ﬁrst test case shows that answers that are identical to all others will yield
a disagreement score of zero, as desired. The second test case shows a high
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Results and Discussion
21
disagreement score for clear outlier in a case where every answer but one agrees.
Increasing the number of agreeing answers from 3 to 4, while keeping one dis-
agreeing answer, should increase the disagreement as well. This is tested suc-
cessfully in case 3, where the disagreement score changed from 0.75 to 0.88. The
next text case, test 4 has a higher score (−1.0) than the previous test case. Test
case 5 and 6 show that the disagreement score scales with reducing the absolute
diﬀerence between the disagreeing outlier and the agreeing answers. Evidently,
the scaling works as desired. The seventh case consists of answers that are in
total disagreement, which should not yield any outliers—which mathematically
speaking are not present or identiﬁable based on the available information. This
might not necessarily be a desired in the context of Peergrade and the highest
numerical answer could be ﬂagged with the trade-oﬀof increasing the signal-to-
noise ratio for teachers resolving the ﬂags for their courses. For now, however,
this case is not treated in our approach as it was deemed that this kind of fringe
case would be ﬂagged by the student anyway. The ﬁnal three test cases 8, 9 and
10 test less clear-cut cases with good success.
Overall, the results of the outlier detection seem good.
After applying the
method to the Peergrade database a visual inspection conﬁrmed that the outlier
detection yields decent results. For future implementation of automatic ﬂagging
a cut-oﬀvalue for the outlier scores could be introduces as well as a threshold
for the total number of outliers.
==PAGE:30==
22
Detecting Unfair Feedback
Test No.
Test Cases
Outlier Scores
1
[0, 0, 0]
[0, 0, 0]
2
[0, 0, 1]
[0, 0, −0.75]
3
[0, 0, 0, 1]
[0, 0, 0, −0.88]
4
[0, 0, 0, 0, 1]
[0, 0, 0, 0, −1.0]
5
[0, 0, 0, 0.6]
[0, 0, 0, −0.52]
6
[0, 0, 0, 0.3]
[0, 0, 0, −0.26]
7
[0, 0.˙3, 0.˙6, 1]
[0, 0, 0, 0]
8
[0, 0.5, 0.5, 0.5]
[0.43, 0, 0, 0]
9
[0.25, 0.5, 0.5, 0.5]
[0.22, 0, 0, 0]
10
[1, 0.˙6, 0.˙6, 0.˙3, 0.˙3]
[−0.55, 0, 0, 0, 0]
Table 3.1: Test cases and the results of the outlier detection. The test case
represents the numerical answers of the peergraders assigned to a
submission to a question. During the testing many more test cases
were examined. The test cases in this table are only meant as a
representative subset to illustrate the criteria based on which the
performance was examined.
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4
Detecting Toxic Language
4.1
Introduction
Abuse and harassment online is harmful to the conversational culture and might
discourage people from expressing themselves or their opinions. Speciﬁcally in
the context of peer assessment, negative online behavior in the form of toxic
comments has a potential to disrupt the core dynamic of giving and receiving
feedback to and from a community of peer learners. Identifying these comments
is an essential ﬁrst step to address the problem and assess its magnitude.
Ultimately, the trained model should identify toxic language in the text com-
ponent of the peer feedback on Peergrade. Once detected, toxic language in
peer-feedback can be auto-ﬂagged for review by the persons responsible for
the course. Furthermore, several other measures are conceivable: preventing
the submission of toxic feedback to begin with, prompting a viewer-discretion
warning or preventing the feedback recipient to see the relevant comments.
Section 4.2 describes the characteristics of the data and why it was necessary
to use external data for training the neural network.
Why neural networks
were selected is explained in section 4.3 along with how the neural network
parameters were tuned for the problem at hand. Finally, the results are discussed
in section 4.5.
==PAGE:32==
24
Detecting Toxic Language
Severe Toxic
Obscene
Threat
Insult
Identity Hate
Toxic
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
144 277
0
143 754
523
144 248
29
143 744
533
144 174
103
1
13 699
1595
7368
7926
14 845
449
7950
7344
13 992
1302
Table 4.1: The contingency table showing the occurrences of the toxic label in
relationship to the other labels.
4.2
The Training Data
Instead of using Peergrade data, speciﬁcally the text answers from feedbacks,
the training and test data was taken from the Kaggle Toxic Comments Clas-
siﬁcation Challenge [kag, ].
This was necessary because the Peergrade data
did not contain any labels that could have been used for toxicity classiﬁcation.
Therefore, both training and testing of the model was conducted on the exter-
nal Kaggle dataset. The ﬁnal model was retrained as a binary classiﬁer and
validated on the Peergrade text answers by a thorough visual inspection.
The Kaggle dataset was created from comments of Wikipedia’s Talkpage by
Jigsaw [con, ]. The comments were labelled by human raters for six diﬀerent
types of toxicity: toxic, severe toxic, obscene, threat, insult, identity hate. In
total, the 68.8 MB ﬁle contained 159 571 comments. The two plots in ﬁg. 4.1
show the class label distribution and the occurrences of multi-tags. Roughly
90 % of the data were not assigned any labels and consequently considered free
from toxicity or ‘clean’. Of the remaining 10 % the majority was labelled toxic,
followed by obscene and insult.
Severe toxic, threat and identity hate were
extremely under-represented. Neither of these categories represent more than
0.01 % of the data.
Usually, this extreme class imbalance could be a cause
for concern, but in our ﬁnal use case only binary classiﬁcation is performed.
Additionally, almost all observations of the minority classes are multi-labelled.
The exact frequency of multi-label co-occurrences can be read oﬀthe contin-
gency table given by table 4.1. It shows that all comments labelled as severe
toxic are also labelled as toxic. Notably, most other toxicity classes appear to
be a mostly subset of toxic as well with a comparably low rate of exceptions.
To give an idea about what kind of comments we are dealing with, some exam-
ples from each toxicity class are listed below. A sample comment classiﬁed as
toxic is:
I'm Sorry
==PAGE:33==
4.2 The Training Data
25
(a) Class label distribution
(b) Multi-class labels
Figure 4.1: The distribution of class labels and multi-class instances for a total
of around 160 000 comments.
==PAGE:34==
26
Detecting Toxic Language
I'm sorry I screwed around with someones talk page.
It was very bad
to do.
I know how having the templates on their talk page helps you
assert your dominance over them.
I know I should bow down to the
almighty administrators.
But then again, I'm going to go play
outside....with your mom.
76.122.79.82
Comments classiﬁed as severe toxic are generally more toxic as the next example
shows:
How dare you filthy stinking whores disrupt my constructive editing
of the Nazi Hellhole euphemistically called ""Johnson County.""
Here
I am working my ass off to provide decent, balanced and accurate
information on this piss-hole joint and you mamby-pamby suck titties
are constantly reverting what I say based upon the vague sobriquet
""vandalism""
Well, suck titties, I have known some vandals in my
day (none of them every coming from fascist Johnson County) and they
are twice the men you Bible thumping wee wees will ever be.
I proudly
wear the title ""vandal"".
Now about Johnson County.
It SUCKS BALLS.
It's a haven for Nazi war criminals.
Its inhabitants are Nazi ferries
(how's that for a mental image?).
Johnson County scored a perfect
10 on the National ""It blows"" list for 2010, beating out Kabul
Afghanistan as places God is most likely to insert the enema tube if
he ever gives the Earth and enema.
Hopefully you piss-ass reverters will let the truth stand.
BTW Jonhson
County is a real shithole in case you were wondering.
Next, an obscene example:
Ram it up ur ass very hard till ur eyes water
The following is an example of a comment classiﬁed as threat:
Our warning to you ,Weare
not afraid of you blocking our edits here
,and if you keep going with this Nationalist propaganda Chauvinism
and Hate speech,we might start looking for you and face you in
person,so watch out !
And ﬁnally, the category identity hate:
Mate, sound like you are jewish
==PAGE:35==
4.2 The Training Data
27
Gayness is in the air
On a more general note, the crowd-sourced class labels are far from 100 % con-
sistent or accurate. Apart from inconsistent or ﬂat-out wrong labels, some other
aspects were less than ideal. A portion of the comments was in languages other
than English. Or the fact that ASCII art might not have been properly rendered
on the annotation platform, resulting in wrong labels. One of the competition
hosts, Lucas Dixon [dat, ], acknowledged this by stating:
Indeed. And occasionally, we ﬁnd we don’t agree with the annotator
judgement distribution too. :) We got multiple labels per comment
to try and get a high quality dataset, and if you are curious you can
read more about the methodology for crowdsourcing in this earlier
paper: https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.08914
Of course, this is fairly normal for annotated natural language data of this kind
and certainly does not automatically mean a problem.
4.2.1
Data Representation with Keras
The text comments were converted into embeddings in a series of steps. First,
the corpus of text comments was vectorized by turning each text comment into a
sequence of integers. This is accomplished by tokenizing the corpus and indexing
the resulting tokens, creating a dictionary in the process. With this dictionary,
the individual text comments can be converted into an ordered list of tokens
(the words). Replacing them with their associated index yields a sequence of
integers.
In practice, these steps were implemented using the preprocessing module of
the Keras library [Chollet et al., 2015]. By default, the Keras tokenizer performs
common text processing prior to the actual tokenization.
This includes the
ﬁltering of special characters, lower case conversion and splitting on the space
character.
In order to guarantee the correct input dimensions for the machine learning
model, a maximum length for the vectorized text comments needed to be set.
The input integer sequences shorter than this deﬁned length were padded with
zeros, while longer sequences were simply cut-oﬀat the end to satisfy the dimen-
sion requirement. Choosing an optimal value for the maximum length comes
with a trade-oﬀ: small numbers will generally mean lower computational cost,
==PAGE:36==
28
Detecting Toxic Language
Figure 4.2: Histogram of the comment length. The length of a text comment
is measured as the number of tokens in the comment.
but implicitly bring a loss of information. By looking at the distribution of the
comment lengths, we can make an informed choice. Figure 4.2 shows the com-
ment length distribution as histogram. A maximum length of 150 was chosen as
a good trade-oﬀbetween computational cost and information loss. The chosen
length was also suﬃcient for the Peergrade data.
Additionally, similar a restriction needs to be set for token dictionary. Limiting
the the number of entries in the word dictionary is equivalent to setting the
number of unique words used for representing the text comments. The maximum
number of words, being the number of features, is chosen to be 20 000, which
should guarantee enough unique tokens for detecting toxicity.
As a last step, the word vector embeddings are learned in a dedicated Keras
embedding layer. It requires integer sequences as inputs along with three pa-
rameters: the number of features, the embedding dense vector length, and the
length of the input. Regarding the technical implementation, the embeddings
are a part of the model as opposed to being a step in the representation prepro-
cessing, because the embeddings are trainable weights.
In addition of learning the vector embeddings from scratch, popular pre-trained
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Model Selection
29
weights for the embedding layer are utilized and their eﬀect on model perfor-
mance compared. Naturally, the dimensions of the embedding layer is adjusted
to the vocabulary size and vector dimensionality of the pre-trained embeddings.
4.3
Model Selection
The problem of multi-class detection of toxic language is complicated in the
way that it requires a concept of context. Without context, models basically
just ‘memorize’ a certain set of words, such as swear words. Ultimately, context
allows a model to classify
You fucking suck.
as toxic, while recognizing that
You are a fucking genius.
is not. Swear words alone are relatively easy for the model to just memorize. A
comment using words associated with violence instead of swear words already
requires a notion of context. For example
I will kill you!
is clearly a threat and therefore should be classiﬁed as toxic, but
He killed the king.
should not.
Still, a context-less model could still memorize a list of words
associated with violence and be somewhat accurate. After all, words like ‘kill’
might be used disproportionally in toxic contexts. And then there are really
tough situations like
I will end you.
where none of the words are semantically negative yet the overall sentence con-
stitutes a threat. s The consideration of context was the deciding factor for
employing neural networks for the classiﬁcation task. The architecture of the
ﬁnal model is listed in table 4.2. Over 90 % of the model’s complexity comes
==PAGE:38==
30
Detecting Toxic Language
Layer
Keras Implementation
Output Shape
No. Parameters
Input Layer
Input
(None, 150)
0
Embedding
Embedding
(None, 150, 300)
63166200
Bidirectional GRU
Bidirectional(GRU(...))
(None, 150, 100)
105300
Pooling
GlobalMaxPool1D
(None, 100)
0
1st Dropout
Dropout
(None, 100)
0
1st Dense (ReLu)
Dense
(None, 50)
5050
2st Dropout
Dropout
(None, 50)
0
2st Dense (Sigmoid)
Dense
(None, classes)
306
Total params:
63276856
Trainable params:
63276856
Non-trainable params:
0
Table 4.2: The Keras model.summary() describes the layer composition of the
model and provides the layer dimensions and trainable parameters.
The second dense layer has an output shape of (None, classes)
to allow multi-class as well as binary classiﬁcation. For the Kaggle
dataset, this means classes = 6, whereas the Peergrade data only
requires classes = 1. The activation function for the ﬁrst dense
layer was the ReLu function and the sigmoid function for the second
dense layer.
from the embedding layer, which means that the post-embedding architecture
will have only very limited impact on model performance.
Yin et al.
[Yin
et al., 2017] suggests that a recurrent neural network architecture would be
more suitable for sentiment analysis tasks, which is why the architecture fea-
tures a bidirectional GRU layer. Theoretically, the GRU layer should allow the
model to consider the context as it has information from both the past and the
future of the sequence. ReLu was selected as the activation function for the ﬁrst
dense layer and the sigmoid function for the last dense layer, which served as
the output layer.
20 % of the training set data was split oﬀinto a validation set, on which the
diﬀerent experiments were evaluated. All the conducted experiments, includ-
ing other architectures such as fully-connected or convolutional layers, brought
accuracy values well above 95 % on the validation set. Modifying the hyperpa-
rameters of the layers did not yield signiﬁcant improvements as well — which
was to be expected, given that, as previously mentioned, the vast majority of
the model’s complexity lied in its embedding layer. Since the end goal is the
application of the model on Peergrade data, these improvements are absolutely
inconsequential and therefore omitted. The training was conducted using the
ADAM optimizer [Kingma and Ba, 2014] to minimize the binary cross-entropy.
For all experiments overﬁtting issues were observed very early on, usually after
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Model Selection
31
Figure 4.3: The learning rate of the diﬀerent embeddings.
The left graph
shows the recorded accuracy values on the validation set, the right
the recorded values on the training set.
as early as the third epoch. Given that the ﬁrst epochs of the experiments all
showed accuracies of over 95 % already, running into overﬁtting issues early on
in the training process is not entirely surprising.
Given the reasons outlined above, the hyperparameter search was ﬁrst and fore-
most focused on ﬁnding the right embeddings.
In addition to training the
embeddings layer completely from scratch, the most popular pre-trained em-
beddings were loaded as well1. These include Standford’s GloVe [Pennington
et al., 2014], Facebook’s FastText [Joulin et al., 2016] and Google’s Word2Vec
[Liu, 2017]. More information about the embeddings and their performances
are listed in table 4.3.
The learning curves, depicted in ﬁg. 4.3, clearly show that the models start
overﬁtting after two to three epochs. The FastText and Word2Vec embeddings
yielded the highest validation accuracy—however, the diﬀerences between the
models are within fractions of a percentage point. It was decided to proceed
with the FastText embeddings instead of Word2Vec, because FastText possibly
generalizes better to data with words not contained in the embeddings vocabu-
lary2.
To combat the overﬁtting as much as possible, the dropout parameters of the
selected model were tuned. This included the two dropout layers as well as the
regular dropout and recurrent dropout parameters in the GRU layer. Results
are listed in table 4.4. Unfortunately, increasing the dropout probability did
not really aﬀect the overﬁtting much, but did decrease the validation accuracy.
Therefore, the optimal dropout parameter of the model was selected as 0.1.
1The embedding layer was not frozen during the training process.
2This is because FastText is based on n-gram tokens instead of word tokens.
==PAGE:40==
32
Detecting Toxic Language
Embedding
Training Data
No. Tokens
Training Data
Val. Acc. [%]
Trained from scratch
Peergrade.io data
128
20 000
0.9829
GloVe
Common Crawl
300
840 Billion
0.9829
FastText
Common Crawl
300
2 Million
0.9834
Word2Vec
Negative News 300
300
3 Million
0.9836
Table 4.3: Information on the diﬀerent embeddings and their maximum accu-
racy on the validation set.
Dropout Param.
Val. Acc.
Overﬁtting Starts
0.1
0.9834
4th epoch
0.2
0.9831
4th epoch
0.3
0.9828
4th epoch
0.4
0.9825
4th epoch
0.5
0.9823
5th epoch
Table 4.4: The dropout parameter tuning results. The point of when over-
ﬁtting started was deﬁned as the epoch where training accuracy
increased but validation accuracy decreased in comparison to the
previous epoch.
Figure 4.4: The learning curves showing the accuracy of the ﬁnal model with
FastText embeddings on the training set and the validation set.
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Application to the Peergrade Data
33
With the optimal dropout parameters set, the model is now suﬃciently tuned
and ready for application to the test set.
The learning curve is depicted in
ﬁg. 4.4. The evaluation of the test set happened through the Kaggle API. The
accuracy on the test set was returned as 94.19 %. Theoretically, the test set
accuracy should be an approximation of the generalization error. How well the
model generalizes and performs on actual unseen data—the Peergrade data—
will be examined in the next section.
4.4
Application to the Peergrade Data
The Peergrade data was obtained by querying the MongoDB database for all
text answers, dumping them into a comma-separated ﬁle along with the answer
ID and loading it into a Pandas dataframe. Although most comments were in
English, other languages were present in the data. Most notably, Danish was
the second most common language.
The application of the model on the Peergrade data cannot be evaluated by a
performance metric such as accuracy, because the Peergrade dataset does not
contain any labels or annotations. Therefore, it was necessary to resort to visual
inspection as well as approximation heuristics to give us an idea of how useful
the classiﬁcations are.
Additionally, the types of toxicity are not of interest
in the application to Peergrade data, so the model architecture of table 4.2
needed to be adapted to only support binary classiﬁcation, i.e. toxic or not.
Simply setting dimensions of the last dense output layer to (None, classes=1)
accommodated our goals.
These necessary change to the model required a retraining the model on a mod-
iﬁed binary dataset. In practice, this was achieved by merging the classes into
the toxic class. The retraining learning curves of the adjusted binary classiﬁ-
cation network is shown in ﬁg. 4.5. The highest validation accuracy of 96.33 %
was achieved after the second epoch. The baseline for comparison is given by
naïvely guessing the most common class (non-toxic) which yields an accuracy
of 90.42 %. Overall, given the strong imbalance of the problem, our accuracy of
96.33 % is a relatively good value in comparison.
4.5
Discussion of Results
The prediction on the Peergrade dataset with its roughly 3.5 million text answers
was a relatively time-consuming task with an execution time of little over an
==PAGE:42==
34
Detecting Toxic Language
Figure 4.5: The learning curves resulted by retraining the binary classiﬁcation
neural network.
hour on an Intel Core i7-7820HQ 2.90 GHz. A cursory visual inspection was
conducted by looking at all text answers which the model determined to be
toxic with a probability of over 80 %. A lot of Danish comments as well as other
non-English comments were classiﬁed as toxic, so that all non-English comments
were excluded by applying detect of the langdetect library [lan, ]. Accurate
language identiﬁcation is a relatively hard problem for short texts. This means
that a number of English text comments were probably wrongly excluded—
however, it is likely only a very small number, but deﬁnitely skews the statistics
to some degree.
Overall, a total of 1210 English comments were classiﬁed as toxic. Making the
very generous assumption that half of the text answers in the database were En-
glish comments, this means 0.69 ‰ text answers were classiﬁed as toxic. Given
that Peergrade.io is an academic and non-anonymous platform, this relatively
low rate of toxicity is not unrealistic.
It was noted that the model picked up on swear words that were used in a non-
toxic context, for example “You are a fucking genius” or “Shit, you are good at
this!”. This might have been due to the obscenity class of the original training
data. Depending on the cultural context, using swear words even in a positive
context might be inappropriate or at the very least unprofessional. Therefore,
the model behaviour in regard to this issue was deemed satisfactory.
While it is impossible to estimate the overall accuracy of the model on the
==PAGE:43==
4.5 Discussion of Results
35
Peergrade dataset, some educated guesses can be made on the true positives
and false positives and consequently the precision. This was done by randomly
sampling 20 answers that were classiﬁed as toxic3 and manually assessing the
correctness of the classiﬁcation. Table 4.5 shows the sampled answers as well
as their manual assessment. Evidently, there were 15 true positives (TP) and 5
false positives (FP). Then, the estimated precision is:
precision =
TP
TP + FP = 15
20 = 75 %
(4.1)
In conclusion, despite the challenges inherent to the problem, the selected model
yields reasonable results. However, without any information about the true and
false negatives it is very hard to make an accurate assessment of the model. In
general, there are two issues with the applicability of the model to the Peergrade
dataset.
First, the model consistently fails to understand context when swear words are in
the text and thus acts more similarly to what a list-based ﬁlter does. Replacing
the neural network approach with a more traditional approach such as tﬁdf
with support vector machine could be worth considering when going for a more
ﬁlter-based approach.
Secondly, apart from the general issues with data and annotation quality inher-
ent to crowd-sourced labelling, the training data still might not be a ﬁt culturally
speaking. Using swear words like ‘fuck’ or ‘shit’ can be oﬀensive to people no
matter in what context they appear. And this is an issue for the Kaggle dataset.
During the visual inspection of the results, we found it very hard to judge the
correctness of the classiﬁcation manually and that oﬀensiveness is generally very
subjective even if the context of the text answers was available.
3Theoretically, the random sample could have included a certain number of non-toxic
comments as well to calculate true and false negatives and recall. This proved infeasible due
to the rarity of actual toxic comments and the tendency of the classiﬁer to predict the majority
class (non-toxic).
==PAGE:44==
36
Detecting Toxic Language
Answer Text
TP
FP
fuk oﬀm8
1
0
No there are a lot of diﬀerent structure issues, which all in all,
gives the text a bad look and a certain smell of shit.
1
0
ya shit was pretty gucci
1
0
it’s a sin to kill a cripple sitting standing or escaping.
0
1
it all sucked
1
0
It’s true. Bitch. :)
1
0
Beyond the stuﬀI wrote you fucked up I actually really liked
part 3B. The ﬁgsizes were a bit weird, though.
1
0
Your quotes were good, and each of the required elements for
this essay f f f f f f f f
1
0
The setup was sick.
0
1
idiots got shot
1
0
the author is a faggot
1
0
Stop being a lazy loser and do your work.
1
0
"I believe that guns dont kill people, people kill people." 0
1
shut the f**k up, Im best
1
0
your diction doesn’t suck but it could be improved
1
0
THIS IS HORRIBLE WTH
1
0
water polluted can get us sick
0
1
that other people think personal ﬁnance classes are stupid.
0
1
"Hitler couldve dominated the whole world with his Nazi group"
0
1
you did research and stated your research well. I liked how you
went and got outside sources to prove the conservatives were
idiots.
1
0
totals:
15
5
Table 4.5: A random sample of Peergrade text answers that were classiﬁed as
toxic and the manual assessment of the comments as either a true
positive (TP) or false positive (TR).
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5
Detecting Unfair Feedback
Reactions
5.1
Introduction
Receiving criticism or feedback is just as much of a skill than it is to give feed-
back.
As previously mentioned in section 1.2, the peer feedback process on
Peergrade.io includes a ﬁnal assessment step where the feedback recipient eval-
uates the received feedback. This so-called ‘feedback reaction’ is given based on
a pre-deﬁned rubric whose purpose is to determine the quality of the feedback
as well as what aspect of the feedback was lacking. In practice, the feedback re-
action rubric consists of multiple polar questions inquiring about certain aspects
of the feedback such as constructiveness, relevance, etc. and most importantly,
a ﬁve-level Likert item seeking to measure the overall feedback quality1. The
Likert item and its levels are listed in table 5.1.
Ideally, good feedback will be evaluated by the recipient to be exactly that, while
bad feedback should receive a feedback reaction indicating the shortcomings of
the feedback. Practically, we know that the giving and subsequent evaluation
of feedback is not always perfectly rational and sometimes show reciprocity not
1It should be noted that, for our purposes, the Likert items are implicitly treated as interval
values as opposed to ordinal categoricals.
==PAGE:46==
38
Detecting Unfair Feedback Reactions
Score
How useful was the feedback?
1
Not at all useful
2
Not very useful
3
Somewhat useful, although it could have been more elaborate
4
Very useful, although minor things could have been better
5
Extremely useful, constructive and justiﬁed
Table 5.1: A question from the feedback reaction rubric which measures the
usefulness of the feedback with a ﬁve-level Likert item. Each level
is converted to a numerical ‘feedback score’ ranging from 1 to 5.
based on constructiveness but rather on niceness or the lack thereof. For exam-
ple, objectively constructive feedback is more likely to receive a bad feedback
reaction if the feedback is critical or harshly worded. Also, positive or nicer
feedback without substance or constructiveness tends to receive better feedback
reactions.
Before investigating if this reciprocity pattern assumption is even supported
by the data, the term ‘numerical harshness’ needs to be deﬁned. Assuming n
peer-graders for a given submission, the numerical harshness Hj of a feedback
j is deﬁned as and calculated by comparing the numerical grade gi associated
with the feedback j to the average grade of the feedback provided by the other
peer-graders for the same submission:
Hj = gj −
1
n −1
n
∑
i=1,i̸=j
gi
(5.1)
Since the feedback grades g are normalized so that g ∈[0, 1], the harshness is
conﬁned to: H ∈[−1, 1], where negative values mean a given feedback gj was
harsher by comparison and vice versa.
At this point, it is crucial to emphasize the distinction between a feedback grade
and a feedback score.
The former is the numerical grade calculated from a
feedback for a submission and captures the quality of the submission.
The
latter is a value obtained in the context of a feedback reaction intended to rate
the usefulness of a single feedback provided for a given submission.
The relationship between the feedback scores and the numerical harshness is
illustrated in ﬁg. 5.1. Evidently, the mean values of the distributions by feedback
score are generally relatively close to zero, yet show high standard deviation.
A normality test reveals that neither distribution is actually normal with high
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Introduction
39
Feedback Score
Mean
Std.
p-Value
1
−0.108
0.290
0.000
2
−0.055
0.233
0.000
3
−0.018
0.209
0.000
4
0.008
0.199
0.000
5
0.029
0.189
0.000
Table 5.2: Summary statistics for the numerical harshness distributions by
feedback score and the p-value of the normality test from the SciPy
library.
conﬁdence. Table 5.2 contains the relevant summary statistics and p-values.
It could be that the mean values are actually relatively similar, because the
underlying distributions all have the same mean value. To test this hypothesis,
we employ the Kruskal Willis test [Kruskal and Wallis, 1952], for which we do
not need to assume normality or equal variances across the populations. The
resulting p-value of 8.5 × 10−34 forces us to reject the hypothesis.
Going from the lowest attainable feedback score to the highest attainable feed-
back score, we can see that the mean values increase and the standard deviations
decrease. This is evidence for the hypothesized reciprocity pattern.
In order to detect unfair feedback reactions, a machine learning model is trained
to predict the quality of the feedback, that is to say the feedback score of feed-
backs. This approach is inherently biased due to the reciprocity eﬀect present
in the training data. The chosen strategy to combat is outlined as follows:
1. Train a machine learning model that takes engineered features representing
individual peer reviews as input and predicts the feedback score, i.e. the
quality of the feedback. The features should relate to the text component
of the feedback, since feedback can only be constructive if the peer-reviewer
provides text along with his numerical evaluation.
Ideally, for a bag-of-words representation, the model should pick up which
words are correlated with good feedback scores.
This means, it picks
up words that are an indicator for actual constructiveness as well as the
reciprocity pattern. For example, words with negative connotations such
as ‘poor’ or ‘bad’ could mean that the review is critical. Consequently, the
feedback receiver might respond by given a low feedback score as revenge.
2. Now, we introduce the numerical harshness as deﬁned by eq. (5.1) and
predict the feedback score based on only the harshness as a single feature.
==PAGE:48==
40
Detecting Unfair Feedback Reactions
(a) Histograms of the numerical harshness by feedback scores
(b) Boxplots of the numerical harshness by feedback scores
Figure 5.1: The distributions of the numerical harshness in dependence of the
feedback scores. The mean value of the distributions are relatively
close to zero with high standard deviations (the values are listed
in table 5.2). There exists, in fact, evidence for the reciprocity
pattern.
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Data Representation
41
Since this model will only have numerical knowledge (no text features), it
should model the reciprocity pattern.
3. Finally, the problem is transformed by subtracting the predicted bias out-
puts of the previous step from the the ground-truth feedback scores. The-
oretically, this should remove the revenge pattern from the problem so
that we can retrain the model on the transformed problem.
5.2
Data Representation
It was chosen to represent the text comments using a standard bag-of-words
tf-idf model. The main reasoning behind this choice was that n-grams might
provide better interpretability and insight in comparison to, for example, word
embedding approaches. Additionally, n-grams might possibly be better suitable
to identify feedback quality.
The data was obtained from the Peergrade MongoDB database. The text an-
swers were extracted for each peer review that was rated with a feedback score.
Peer reviews that did not contain a single text answer were ignored. When a
peer review contained more than one text answer, the text answers were simply
concatenated into one entry.
The database also contained artiﬁcial or demo
data, which was either ignored during the extraction process or removed post-
hoc as best as possible.
Due to the fact that Peergrade operates internationally, the extracted text data
was to a signiﬁcant portion in languages other than English.
However, the
removal of all non-English text turned out to be tricky, since the MongoDB
database did not feature a language attribute that could have been used for
ﬁltering.
Instead, the Python library langdetect was used to identify the
language of each concatenated block of text answers. Long text answers were
classiﬁed with relatively high accuracy, but short texts with few words were often
wrongly classiﬁed. As result, the separation of English and non-English language
data was not entirely successful. The ﬁnal dataframe was certainly contaminated
with non-English data, as a comprehensive visual inspection brought to light.
Overall, the entire English dataset consisted of 2680 assignments with 25 066
submissions containing 61 899 peer reviews and their associated text answers.
The dataset was divided into training and test set, using a 20 % shuﬄed hold-
out. Table 5.3 lists a sample excerpt of the ﬁrst few rows of the data. Some
rudimentary summary statistics of the features are given in table 5.4.
The
data exhibits a strong class imbalance with lower feedback scores being severely
under-represented, as shown in ﬁg. 5.2.
==PAGE:50==
42
Detecting Unfair Feedback Reactions
Figure 5.2: The class imbalance: low feedback scores are under-represented in
comparison to high feedback scores.
Feedback
Score
Harshness
Concatenated Text Answers
id
5
−0.044
Not much to say. Fine solution and c
. . .
id
2
−0.044
Pretty well documented and explained
. . .
id
5
0.005
You did it as speciﬁed and document
. . .
id
4
0.021
Does exactly what the assignment req
. . .
id
5
−0.028
You could have beneﬁted by using a
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Table 5.3: A sample excerpt from the dataset, which was stored in a Pandas
dataframe. The columns for the index, assignment ID, the feedback
grade and submission ID are omitted. ‘id’ is used as a placeholder
for feedback/peer review ID.
It was tried to alleviate the class imbalance issue by naively oversampling the
underrepresented classes using RandomOverSampler, SMOTE and ADASYN from
the Imbalanced-Learn library [Lemaître et al., 2017], but these eﬀorts ultimately
failed to yield any tangible improvements or results.
5.2.1
Implementation as Part of the Model Pipeline
The entire data transformation, model training and parameter tuning was imple-
mented in Python using the very popular Scikit-Learn library [Pedregosa et al.,
2011]. The tf-idf representation was obtained by using the tfidfvectorizer
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Data Representation
43
Score
Grade
Harshness
count
— 61899 —
mean
3.832
0.744
0.000
std
1.089
0.245
0.207
min
1.000
0.000
−1.000
25 %
3.000
0.604
−0.085
50 %
4.000
0.800
0.000
75 %
5.000
0.961
0.094
max
5.000
1.000
1.000
Table 5.4: Summary statistics of the data as given by dataframe.describe().
function in combination with a custom analyzer for tokenization using lemmata.
In total, three diﬀerent vectorizers were ﬁtted to obtain unigrams, bigrams and
trigrams. The merging of the three vectorizers and the subsequent integration
into the model pipeline was achieved by using FeatureUnion from Scikit-Learn.
For the unigram, bigram and trigram vectorizer the maximum amount of fea-
tures was set to 2000, 500 and 500 respectively. Additionally, n-grams with a
document frequency of over 70 % and words occurring in less than 10 documents
were excluded.
The custom analyzer deﬁnes how the input text is tokenized. Code snippet in
listing 1 shows the implemented analyzer class spacy_lemmatizer. The ini-
tialization creates an English lemmatizer object using the Spacy natural lan-
guage processing library [Honnibal and Montani, 2017]. The class features a
pre-processing and cleaning method and a tokenizer method. The former uses
regular expressions to clean the text data by
• replacing punctuation with spaces
• removing digits
• removing words with less than three characters as they usually do not
contain much semantic information
• removing excessive and trailing white space
• ensures lowercase for all letters and unicode format
On call, spacy_lemmatizer runs the pre-processing on the input and creates
tokens using the lemmatizer, but only returns the lemmata that are in the
English vocabulary as output.
==PAGE:52==
44
Detecting Unfair Feedback Reactions
english_stops = set(stopwords.words('english'))
danish_stops = set(stopwords.words('danish'))
custom_stops = set([u'god', u'kan', u'kun', u'bare', u'ting',
u'husk', u'del'])
stop_words = english_stops | danish_stops | custom_stops
class spacy_lemmatizer(object):
def __init__(self):
self.nlp = spacy.load('en')
self.lemmatizer_ = spacy.lang.en.English()
def preprocess(self, doc):
doc = re.sub(r'[^\w\s]', ' ', doc)
doc = re.sub('\\d+', ' ', doc)
doc = re.sub(r'(\b\w{1,2}\b)', '', doc)
doc = re.sub('\\s+', ' ', doc).strip()
doc = doc.lower().decode("utf-8")
return doc
def tokenize(self, doc):
return self.lemmatizer_(doc)
def __call__(self, doc):
processed_doc = self.preprocess(doc)
tokens = self.tokenize(processed_doc)
return([token.lemma_ for token in tokens
if token.lemma_ in self.nlp.vocab])
Listing 1: The
analyzer
class
used
to
create
lemmmata
tokens
with
tfidfvectorizer() including the deﬁned stop words.
In addition to the custom analyzer function, the vectorizer is provided with a list
of English and Danish stopwords from the Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK)
[Loper and Bird, 2002]. The following Danish words slipped through the cracks
and were added manually to the stop word lists: ‘god’, ‘kan’, ‘kun’, ‘bare’, ‘ting’,
‘husk’ and ‘del’.
Applying the constructed vectorizer on the training partition of the dataset
yields a total of 3000 n-gram features. The most common n-grams along with
their frequency are listed in table 5.5 below.
The high-dimensional feature space was compressed to two dimensions using
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Model Selection and Parameter Tuning
45
Unigrams
Bigrams
Trigrams
Words
tﬁdf
Words
tﬁdf
Words
tﬁdf
good
3198.5
good job
1420.6
little bite much
247.1
much
1916.2
really good
784.3
good job good
218.4
use
1383.9
much detail
610.0
would like see
206.1
mere
1359.2
good write
604.7
yes yes yes
193.8
make
1272.5
good good
590.7
good good good
181.5
like
1183.6
mere mere
556.4
add much detail
174.9
think
1174.4
bite much
539.7
keep good work
163.0
yes
1159.5
add much
535.6
doe make sense
141.3
would
1018.6
great job
525.7
make much clear
135.4
job
1000.6
make sure
486.4
mere mere mere
132.1
Table 5.5: The most common n-grams in the training partition of the dataset
and their tﬁdf score.
LSA to visualize the text representation.
The LSA visualization is given in
ﬁg. 5.3 and shows the feature space and its labels, meaning the feedback scores.
Ideally, clearly separable clusters should have emerged, which could have been
easily classiﬁed. Instead, the visualization does not give way to any (human-
interpretable) structures except for the trivial observation that the data are
smeared along two almost perpendicular and narrow axes. Tweaking the param-
eters of the vectorization procedure had little to no eﬀect on this distribution.
5.3
Model Selection and Parameter Tuning
In the previous section, the tf-idf representation of the available text data was
visualized using LSA. Previous works [Jensen, 2017] suggest to treat the clas-
siﬁcation problem as a regression problem instead. Given that the LSA visual-
izations (as shown in ﬁg. 5.3) of the tf-idf representation produces no visually
distinct clusters or patterns, it was chosen to follow this suggestion.
After some rudimentary experiments, random forest regression was chosen mainly
for two reasons. First, random forests are very transparent about how their de-
cisions are made in comparison to other traditional machine learning techniques.
Knowing which n-grams factor into the decision making progress is crucial to
==PAGE:54==
46
Detecting Unfair Feedback Reactions
Figure 5.3: The dataset visualized in two dimensions using Latent Semantic
Analysis (LSA).
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Model Selection and Parameter Tuning
47
investigate whether our end goal—the removal of the reciprocity bias—was
achieved. Secondly, the nature of the data without any distinct visual patterns
or groupings could easily lead to overﬁtting. Random forests, due to the random
feature selection and subsequent bagging, are robust towards overﬁtting.
First and foremost, the random forest regression was trained with the goal
of predicting the feedback scores of text feedbacks without accounting for the
reciprocity bias (this corresponds to step 1 of the previously outlined strategy).
The technical implementation used Scikit-Learn’s pipeline to combine the tf-
idf feature transformation with the actual random forest regression model into
one object.
The optimal parameter conﬁguration of the model pipeline was
found using K-fold cross-validation for a pre-deﬁned parameter values. For this,
Scikit-Learn provides the GridsearchCV method, which conveniently accepts the
pipeline object. Then, in the course of steps 2 and 3 of the outlined strategy,
the original random forest model was retrained on new feedback score labels,
which had their reciprocity bias removed.
Section 5.3.1 goes into training the base model to predict the feedback scores.
The modelling of the reciprocity bias and the subsequent transformation of the
data is described in section 5.3.2. Finally, the re-training of the original model
on the debiased dataset is dealt with in section 5.3.2 as well.
5.3.1
Hyperparameter Tuning
The hyperparameter tuning implementation of a random forest regression with
GridsearchCV is a particularly memory expensive process, depending on the
number of parameter combinations to be trained. Additionally, speciﬁc param-
eters such as the number of estimators within random forest or the maximum
depth can consume an increasing amount of memory. This easily makes an im-
pact on training time, especially when insuﬃcient RAM forces the system to
partly use the hard disk for caching.
Due to the computational constraints the parameter grid needed to be selected
with some compromise; selecting every single parameter on a wide range was
not feasible.
Instead, the hyperparameter tuning was focused on the num-
ber of estimators, for which a very broad but sparse range of values (10, 20,
30, 40, 50, 100, 200 and 300) were investigated for no limitations of the tree
depth.
The scoring function was chosen as mean absolute error using the
neg_mean_absolute_error scoring implementation of Scikit-Learn. This con-
ﬁguration was computationally very expensive and took more than 30 hours on
the high-performance computing cluster of DTU.
==PAGE:56==
48
Detecting Unfair Feedback Reactions
Figure 5.4: The test score of the grid search over the number of estimators.
The results are shown in ﬁg. 5.4.
Due to the way GridsearchCV works the
more negative the test score the worse the model is. For an increasing number
of estimators the performance increases yet with quickly diminishing returns.
Additionally, the numerical performance diﬀerences are so marginal that it was
simply chosen to proceed with 10 estimators.
The model with 10 estimators was trained on the training set, but this time with
the scoring criterion set to ‘mse’’, the mean square error, as opposed to ‘mae’,
the mean absolute error. This was necessary due to a bug in the implementation
where the training would either take an extremely long time or would not ﬁnish
at all [mae, ]. The resulting mean absolute error on the test set was 0.97 ± 0.71.
The most important features in the models are listed in the next section in
table 5.6. The model learned to use unigrams to make its decisions and disre-
garded other n-grams. The words selected by the model are neutral verbs and
positive adjectives. Notably not a single negative adjective is present.
The distribution of the test set predictions in comparison to the true values is
shown in ﬁg. 5.5. Note that the predictions have been rounded to the closest
discrete feedback score to enable the comparison with the true (discrete) values.
The model skews heavily towards predicting scores of 3.0 and 4.0 and the lowest
feedback score only has a few predictions. Given the distribution of the training
labels, this is not entirely surprising.
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Model Selection and Parameter Tuning
49
Figure 5.5: The distribution of the rounded test set predictions vs. the true
values.
5.3.2
Modelling and Subtracting the Reciprocity Bias
To model the reciprocity bias, the feedback score is modelled solely in depen-
dency of the harshness. This means that the model will only have numerical
knowledge and no knowledge about the text features.
Looking at the distribution of the feedback scores over harshness, as plotted
in ﬁg. 5.1b, no immediately apparent relationship is recognizable other than
possibly a linear one. Of course, the true relationship might be non-linear as it
is certainly an intuitive assumption that a very high or very low harshness results
in a disproportionate feedback score. Nonetheless, a simple linear regression was
chosen to not risk overﬁtting given the lack of a discernible higher-order pattern.
Subtracting the predictions of the linear regression from the feedback scores gives
the adjusted scores, which should not include the reciprocity bias any longer.
The adjusted scores are shown in ﬁg. 5.6 along with the old feedback scores
and the values predicted by the linear regression. Evidently, the transformation
preserves the general scale and distribution of the original feedback score and
only ‘smears out’ the feedback scores.
Training the random forest regressor model on the dataset with the adjusted
feedback scores yields a absolute mean error of 0.88 ± 0.65. This is a better
result than before but certainly within the range of ﬂuctuation when looking at
==PAGE:58==
50
Detecting Unfair Feedback Reactions
Figure 5.6: The feedback scores, the feedback scores predicted solely by a
linear regression on the numerical harshness and the resulting ad-
justed scores. In the plot the adjusted scores are labelled as “feed-
back score minus predicted feedback score”.
the standard deviations. The most important features of the new random forest
model are listed alongside the previous values in table 5.6. The model adjusted
for reciprocity bias bases its decisions on roughly half of the same variables with
slightly reduced importance. The distribution of the predicted classiﬁcations
compared to the true adjusted values, ﬁg. 5.7, shows that the model predictions
are still centered around feedback scores around 4.0.
The model has gotten
worse at predicting lower feedback scores. Overall, the adjusted model has a
lower mean error compared to previous one, but its predictions are somewhat
unsatisfactory as they do not predict lower feedback scores well.
5.4
Discussion of Results
The goal of the this chapter was to predict the feedback scores and to remove
the reciprocity bias in the process. The ﬁrst part, the prediction of feedback
scores yielded imperfect but reasonable predictions. The main problem of the
model is that its predictions are heavily centered around feedback scores of 3.0
and 4.0 due to the class imbalance. Especially in comparison to [Jensen, 2017],
which treated the feedback score multi-class problem as a binary problem, it
seems that lemmatization was the key factor for better results.
==PAGE:59==
5.4 Discussion of Results
51
Feature
Importance
Feature
Importance
good
0.03
good
0.02
much
0.02
would
0.02
would
0.01
add
0.01
also
0.01
also
0.01
clear
0.01
correct
0.01
doe
0.01
doe
0.01
easy
0.01
easy
0.01
explain
0.01
ﬁn
0.01
give
0.01
great
0.01
great
0.01
like
0.01
like
0.01
make
0.01
make
0.01
mere
0.01
mere
0.01
need
0.01
nothing
0.01
one
0.01
one
0.01
say
0.01
theory
0.01
think
0.01
think
0.01
use
0.01
use
0.01
well
0.01
work
0.01
write
0.01
yes
0.01
yes
0.01
Table 5.6: The feature importances as determined by the random forest re-
gression model. The results on the left are from the original model
without bias correction.
On the right, the results are from the
model trained on the modiﬁed dataset where the bias has been
compensated.
==PAGE:60==
52
Detecting Unfair Feedback Reactions
Figure 5.7: Distribution of the predicted classiﬁcations compared to the true
adjusted values.
In order to improve the model, it might actually be worthwhile to consider
not using the text feedback per se, but rather engineer features based on the
text data instead. This change is motivated by the LSA plot in ﬁg. 5.3 as it
suggests that textual data might not be a good predictor of feedback scores. The
relative length of the text feedback compared to other feedbacks, the frequency
of positive or negative adjectives in the text, or assignment speciﬁc words to
measure speciﬁcity of the feedback might be good candidates for predicting
the feedback score. Maybe with these features, the problem can be eﬀectively
treated as a classiﬁcation problem instead of a regression problem.
In regard to the reciprocity bias, we found that there is strong evidence to
believe it is there, but unfortunately, the signal to noise ratio is very high. The
variability of the harshness for each single feedback score renders modelling
seemingly ineﬀective or at least not overly expressive. The model trained on
the reciprocity corrected data performs a little bit better with higher accuracy,
but bases its decision on fewer word features with slightly lower importances.
None of the word features have a negative semantic meaning, which is also an
indicator that the model does not work as well as it should. Whether or not
the removal of the reciprocity bias was successful is impossible to tell but it is
doubtful.
Another potential issue might be the data quality to begin with. In [Jensen,
2017] it is mentioned that a manual classiﬁcation of a 100 samples only yielded
40 % accuracy, which is worse than random choice strategy. This could mean
==PAGE:61==
5.4 Discussion of Results
53
that the prediction of feedback quality is actually an impossible problem due to
the subjective nature. Additionally, the way students interact with the feedback-
on-feedback implementation might also have some unintended side-eﬀects like
students rating feedbacks disproportionately based on the numerical grade in-
stead of the text feedback.
To sum up, the model improved on previous work but its performance is still
far from ideal.
Additionally, it suggests that the textual data is not in fact
not a good predictor of the feedback score and alternative features should be
considered.
==PAGE:62==
54
Detecting Unfair Feedback Reactions
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
6.1
Detection of Unfair Feedback
The ﬁrst part of this thesis introduced a numerical method for the detection
of unfair feedback grades. The method identiﬁes outliers and rates them with
a disagreement score without making assumptions about the underlying dis-
tribution based on very few data points. The method was evaluated by using
pre-deﬁned test cases, which yielded good results and indicated that the method
was indeed feasible for application to the Peergrade database.
Future work could improve on the disagreement score by adding incorporating
the information about the peer graders, such as their average disagreement score
and their grading biases. Additionally, it might be possible to use the presented
numerical method to ﬂag with very high sensitivity aiming for as few false
negatives as possible. When teachers resolve the ﬂags this can be used to create
annotations to train a more complex machine learning model that automatically
ﬂags unfair feedback based on features collected in the database.
Once the
model yields suﬃcient performance for actual implementation it is possible to
implement a feedback loop by using the teachers’ decision to continuously train
and reﬁne the model.
==PAGE:64==
56
Conclusion
6.2
Detection of Toxic Language
To detect toxic or inappropriate language in peer feedback a neural network with
FastText embeddings was trained on a proxy dataset. The subsequent applica-
tion on the Peergrade data yielded decent results with an estimated precision of
75 %. No recall statistics is available due to the missing labels. The theoretical
generalization error was estimated at 96.33 %, although this estimate is likely
very unreliable.
A visual inspection of the feedback texts classiﬁed as toxic revealed that the
intended goal of considering context for the classiﬁcations was not entirely suc-
cessful. However, without a recall score this is hard to judge. Overall though,
the model performed with solid results.
Future work on improving the toxic language detection should focus on data
quality. One way to accomplish this would be to manually label a fraction of
the Peergrade data with the help of the model to ﬁnd the rare toxic comments.
Special attention has to be paid to the cultural aspect of what constitutes toxic
language. Diﬀerent courses in diﬀerent countries most likely have completely dif-
ferent standards for appropriate language use. Therefore, the manual labelling
should follow a pre-deﬁned guideline to obtain consistent labels. As suggested
in the previous section, once the model is implemented in production, it is pos-
sible to utilize a feedback loop to continuously improve the model performance
by learning from the teachers’ decision. It might be worth to consider training
multiple models for diﬀerent countries or and of course languages.
6.3
Detection of Unfair Feedback Reactions
To detect unfair feedback reactions, a model was built to predict the feedback
scores which measure the quality of the feedback. The implemented random
forest regression model yielded mixed results. On the one hand, the resulting
mean absolute error was reasonable but on the other hand, the balance of the
predictions was skewed towards feedback score values of 3.0 and 4.0.
We managed to provide evidence for the existence of the reciprocity bias and
attempted to remove it before retraining the model on the new de-biased data.
While the mean absolute error improved slightly, the issue of the prediction
imbalance was exacerbated. In both cases, the most important features for the
decisions of the random forests were positive adjectives and neutral verbs which
makes it hard to trust the model and its predictions.
==PAGE:65==
6.3 Detection of Unfair Feedback Reactions
57
There are two issues that future work should focus on. For one, our ﬁndings
suggest that the pure textual data or rather its words are not accurate predictors
of the feedback score. Therefore, we suggest trying to engineer features based on
the text data such as, for example, relative feedback lengths, relative frequency
of positive and negative words or a speciﬁcity score that counts assignment
speciﬁc words. If an assignment was about MongoDB the speciﬁcity score would
be high when the text feedback includes MongoDB related words and phrases.
The second issue is that the problem of predicting the quality of feedback is
impossible in its current form. Feedback quality might be too subjective and
providing accurate or at least consistent labels is impossible. Evidence for this
hypothesis is provided by [Jensen, 2017], which found that a manual classiﬁ-
cation of feedback by two people yielded results worse than random guessing.
Secondly, it might be that the feedback scores have too many distinct values
and that a binary classiﬁcation would work better1. Or, maybe a Likert scale is
generally the wrong instrument for rating feedback quality. Then an alternative
solution could be a pairwise comparison scheme, where —instead of assigning a
feedback score— the feedback recipient ranks the received feedback by compar-
ing two feedbacks at a time.
1Netﬂix also changed their 5-star rating system to a binary thumbs-up/thumbs-down sys-
tem.
==PAGE:66==
58
Conclusion
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[con, ] Conversation-ai project website.
https://conversationai.github.
io/. Accessed: 2017-09-11.
[dat, ] Is the training dataset classiﬁed correctly?
https://www.kaggle.
com/c/jigsaw-toxic-comment-classification-challenge/discussion/
46131. Accessed: 2017-09-12.
[lan, ] langdetect python library for language identiﬁcation.
https://pypi.
org/project/langdetect/. Accessed: 2018-07-01.
[pee, ] Peergrade.io. https://www.peergrade.io/. Accessed: 2017-09-11.
[kag, ] Toxic comments classiﬁcation challenge. https://www.kaggle.com/c/
jigsaw-toxic-comment-classification-challenge.
Accessed: 2017-09-
11.
[mae, ] Trees with mae criterion are slow to train.
https://github.com/
scikit-learn/scikit-learn/issues/9626. Accessed: 2018-07-01.
[Ashton and Davies, 2015] Ashton, S. and Davies, R. S. (2015).
Using scaf-
folded rubrics to improve peer assessment in a mooc writing course. Distance
Education, 36(3):312–334.
[Chollet et al., 2015] Chollet, F. et al. (2015). Keras. https://keras.io.
[Díez et al., 2013] Díez, J., Luaces, O., Alonso-Betanzos, A., Troncoso, A., and
Bahamonde, A. (2013). Peer assessment in moocs using preference learning
via matrix factorization.
==PAGE:68==
60
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Firth, 1957] Firth, J. R. (1957).
A synopsis of linguistic theory 1930-1955.
Special Volume of the Philological Society, (1).
[Gehringer, 2001] Gehringer, E. F. (2001).
Electronic peer review and peer
grading in computer-science courses. SIGCSE Bull., 33(1):139–143.
[Gehringer, 2014] Gehringer, E. F. (2014).
Best practices in classroom peer
review. Conference on Higher Education Pedagogy, pages 197–198.
[Hamer et al., 2005] Hamer, J., T. K. Ma, K., and H. F. Kwong, H. (2005). A
method of automatic grade calibration in peer assessment. pages 67–72.
[Hinton, 2011] Hinton, G. (2011). Csc321 introduction to neural networks and
machine learning lecture slides.
[Honnibal and Montani, 2017] Honnibal, M. and Montani, I. (2017). spacy 2:
Natural language understanding with bloom embeddings, convolutional neu-
ral networks and incremental parsing. To appear.
[Jensen, 2017] Jensen, R. A. F. (2017). Eﬃcient feedback analysis using recur-
rent neural networks.
[Joulin et al., 2016] Joulin, A., Grave, E., Bojanowski, P., and Mikolov, T.
(2016).
Bag of tricks for eﬃcient text classiﬁcation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.01759.
[Kingma and Ba, 2014] Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. (2014). Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization. CoRR, abs/1412.6980.
[Kruskal and Wallis, 1952] Kruskal, W. H. and Wallis, W. A. (1952). Use of
ranks in one-criterion variance analysis. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 47(260):583–621.
[Lemaître et al., 2017] Lemaître, G., Nogueira, F., and Aridas, C. K. (2017).
Imbalanced-learn:
A python toolbox to tackle the curse of imbalanced
datasets in machine learning.
Journal of Machine Learning Research,
18(17):1–5.
[Liu, 2017] Liu, H. (2017).
Sentiment analysis of citations using word2vec.
CoRR, abs/1704.00177.
[Loper and Bird, 2002] Loper, E. and Bird, S. (2002). Nltk: The natural lan-
guage toolkit. In Proceedings of the ACL-02 Workshop on Eﬀective Tools and
Methodologies for Teaching Natural Language Processing and Computational
Linguistics - Volume 1, ETMTNLP ’02, pages 63–70, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
==PAGE:69==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
61
[Pedregosa et al., 2011] Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel,
V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O., Blondel, M., Prettenhofer, P., Weiss, R., Dubourg,
V., Vanderplas, J., Passos, A., Cournapeau, D., Brucher, M., Perrot, M., and
Duchesnay, E. (2011). Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830.
[Pennington et al., 2014] Pennington, J., Socher, R., and Manning, C. D.
(2014). Glove: Global vectors for word representation. In Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1532–1543.
[Piech et al., 2013] Piech, C., Huang, J., Chen, Z., Do, C. B., Ng, A. Y., and
Koller, D. (2013).
Tuned models of peer assessment in moocs.
CoRR,
abs/1307.2579.
[Sadler and Good, 2006] Sadler, P. M. and Good, E. (2006). The impact of self-
and peer-grading on student learning. Educational Assessment, 11.
[Shah et al., 2013] Shah, N. B., Bradley, J. K., Parekh, A., Wainwright, M. J.,
and Ramchandran, K. (2013). A case for ordinal peer-evaluation in moocs.
[Suen, 2014] Suen, H. (2014). Peer assessment for massive open online courses
(moocs).
The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed
Learning, 15(3).
[Yin et al., 2017] Yin, W., Kann, K., Yu, M., and Schütze, H. (2017). Com-
parative study of CNN and RNN for natural language processing. CoRR,
abs/1702.01923.
[Yousef et al., 2015] Yousef, A. M. F., Wahid, U., Amine Chatti, M., Schroeder,
U., and Wosnitza, M. (2015). The eﬀect of peer assessment rubrics on learners’
satisfaction and performance within a blended mooc environment.
