==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
MSc in Transport and Logistics
Cyclists’ route choices in the
Copenhagen Region
Author:
Andrés Fernández Palao (s161312)
July 2018
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Travel behaviour in the Copenhagen Region
6
3
Data
10
3.1
Bicycle Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.1
Land use data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.2
Elevation data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
GPS data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.1
Data gathering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.2
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Map-matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.1
Modiﬁcation of the bicycle network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.2
Comparison of map-matching performance between both bicy-
cle networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.3
Individual proﬁles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Model development and methodology
23
4.1
Choice set generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.1
Deﬁnition of cost function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Model formulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Results
28
5.1
Generated route choice set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2
Route choice model estimation and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2.1
Network attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2.2
Land use attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Conclusion
37
7
Further considerations
38
8
Acknowledgments
39
Appendix
46
A Appendix
46
==PAGE:3==
List of Tables
1
% of bicycle network kilometers of each land use category . . . . . . .
14
2
Bicycle network kilometers of each steepness category . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Comparison of matched and unmatched trips . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Comparison of ways of matching trips among both bicycle networks .
20
5
Comparison of excluded trips among both bicycle networks . . . . . .
21
6
Predeﬁned cost parameters and scale parameters . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
7
Means and standard deviations of the attributes of the chosen and
alternative routes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
8
Model estimates of the ﬁnal Multinomial Logit (MNL) model . . . . .
33
A.1 Model estimates of the Path-Size logit model . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
List of Figures
1
Cycling in European cities, 2015 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Trip production in the Greater Copenhagen area . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Distribution of trips on bicycle across trip distance in the Greater
Copenhagen area, 2016-2017. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
Distribution of trips on bicycle across age group in the Greater Copen-
hagen area, 2016-2017. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
5
Average daily travel on a bicycle (km/person/day) divided into age
groups in the Greater Copenhagen Area, 2016-2017. . . . . . . . . . .
9
6
Share of total bicycle trips by trip purpose in the Greater Copenhagen
Area, 2016-2017.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
7
OTM Bicycle network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
8
Final Land Use Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
9
OTM bicycle network with and without 20m buﬀers . . . . . . . . . .
13
10
Starting, intersecting and ending link points . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
11
Example of issue with ratio between map-matching and GPS distances
21
12
Age distribution of the 286 remaining cyclists. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
==PAGE:4==
Cyclists’ route choices in the Copenhagen Region
Andrés Fernández Palao
July 23, 2018
Abstract
Given the increased interest in urban cycling during the recent years, but
also given the lack of interest for bicycles in transport planning models, this
study presents a cycling route choice model based on revealed preference data,
and carried out in the Copenhagen Region. In addition, the study includes the
improvements in regard to land-use and elevation data, and the extension of
size, of the oﬃcial OTM bicycle network, which is the bicycle network used for
the route choice model presented. A doubly stochastic generation method with
a multi-attribute cost function was applied for the choice set generation, while
the model used for estimation was a Multinomial Logit model. The estimation
of the route attributes deﬁned by length was made in value-of distance-space,
while the rest of attributes were estimated in preference space.
The main
ﬁndings show that cyclists are sensitive to distance, number and congestion
time of right and left turns, cycling in the wrong direction, and steepness.
Furthermore, it was found that roads with segregated bicycle lanes are the
favourite kind of bicycle infrastructure, making the route to be perceived as
32.7% shorter than when cycling in roads with no bicycle facilities. Regarding
the eﬀect of land-use attributes, only the ones in the right side of the routes were
shown to be relevant, and cyclists show a preference for cycling next to parks
or water over the rest of land-use categories. Finally, for some route attributes
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent results depending on the gender and the average speed
of the cyclists were found.
==PAGE:5==
1 Introduction
1
1
Introduction
It is well known that urban cycling is lately becoming more and more popular in
several cities around the world. The bicycle as a way of transport, thanks to its
characteristics, seems to be a solution aligned with some of the main issues that we,
as humanity, are currently facing. For instance, according to Zhang and Mi (2018),
in the city of Shanghai, in 2016, bike sharing caused a reduction of 25,240 tonnes of
CO2 emissions, 64 tonnes of NOX emissions, as well as savings of 8,358 tonnes of
petrol. In terms of health care, according to the results of a cost and beneﬁt analysis
presented in Götschi (2011), bicycling investments from $143 to $218 million, will
mean health care savings in the range of $388 to $594 million by 2040.
In line with these facts, interest in urban cycling is growing very fast in both private
and public sectors. According to CBInsights (2018), private investments into bike-
sharing startups increased in a 819,24 % from 2016 to 2017. In the same way, cycling
is being highly promoted by several public policies and investments in cities. For
instance in London, the goal by 2026 is to increase cycling in a 400 % in comparison
to the 2001 baseline, as seen in London (2010), while in Paris, by 2020, the number
of kilometers of bicycle lanes is expected to be duplicated, going from 700 to 1400
kilometers, according to Paris (2015). At the same time, there are other cities such
as Amsterdam or Copenhagen, where although cycling is already a reality and part
of their citizens’ daily basis, the plan is to continue investing in cycling. For instance,
Copenhagen is going to invest from 1.1 to 1.8 bio.DKK in bicycle infrastructure by
2025, according to Københavns (2017).
Aligned with this trend in urban cycling, bicycles are starting to be taken into account
in transport modelling, but still at a basic level. Usually, large scale models do not
represent cycling in detail, and bicycles are mainly included in mode choice models,
focusing the study just on bicycle demand, and although it is true that bicycles have
been also included in bicycle route choice models, this is still to a much lesser extent.
This lack in cycling route choice modelling leads to a huge misunderstanding of cy-
clists’ behaviours and preferences, making it very complicated for the decision makers
to evaluate the eﬀectiveness and the return in society of the policies and investments
in bicycle infrastructures and services. Therefore, cycling route choice models, are
a necessary tool to understand what is needed and preferred by the cyclists, and to
invest and plan accordingly.
==PAGE:6==
1 Introduction
2
Most bicycle route choice models have been based on stated preference (SP) data,
as the cases of Bovy and Bradley (1985), Axhausen and Smith (1986), Hopkinson
and Wardman (1996), Stinson and Bhat (2003), Krizek (2006), Hunt and Abraham
(2007), Tilahun, Levinson, and Krizek (2007) Sener, Eluru, and Bhat (2009), and
Pereira Segadilha and Sanches (2014), while few have been based on revealed prefer-
ence (RP) data, as the cases of Menghini, Carrasco, Schüssler, and Axhausen (2010),
Hood, Sall, and Charlton (2011), and Broach, Dill, and Gliebe (2012). Although
SP studies have relevant advantages, such as the requirement of very few resources,
having the possibility of taking into account alternatives which are not available yet,
or controlling the experimental environment, they have the main limitation of not
recording observed behaviour. That limitation is partly contradicted in Wardman
(1988), where it is stated that SP studies are considered a reliable way to capture in-
dividuals’ actual preferences, but it cannot be guaranteed that the stated behaviour
completely correspond to the actual one. Therefore, on one side, RP studies are
generally preferred since they are able to overcome the limitation of not recording
observed behaviour, but on the other side, it is always more diﬃcult to carry out
them due to the technical problems, especially when observing the routes, and when
generating logical alternative routes. The ﬁrst issue has been overcome by the use
of GPS-devices carried by the cyclists. Furthermore, according to Pritchard (2018),
smartphone GPS and crowdsourcing have a specially big growth potential in im-
proving the observation of the routes. Mainly thanks to these developments in GPS
technology, the number of bicycle route choice studies based on RP data has lately
been increasing, counting with a relevant number of studies in recent years, like the
cases of Casello and Usyukov (2014), Segadilha and da Penha Sanches (2014), Khatri,
Cherry, Nambisan, and Han (2016), Zimmermann, Mai, and Frejinger (2017), Prato,
Halldórsdóttir, and Nielsen (2018), or Ghanayim and Bekhor (2018). Regarding the
second technical diﬃculty mentioned before, the one related with the generation of
logical alternative routes, most of the diﬀerent path generation algorithms have been
designed for cars or public transport, while for bicycles, for which a more detailed
network is needed, very few methods have been designed or tested so far.
In regards to the results of the studies of cyclists’ route choices based on RP data
that can be found in the literature, all of them agree on the fact that regarding
route choices, trip distance is the factor which aﬀects them the most. Apart from
that, there are other factors which, depending on the study, signiﬁcantly aﬀect route
choices, but always to a lesser extent than the distance of the trip. For example,
either the maximum gradient of the route according to Menghini et al. (2010), or the
==PAGE:7==
1 Introduction
3
average gradient of the route according to Hood et al. (2011), Broach et al. (2012),
Casello and Usyukov (2014), and Zimmermann et al. (2017), have a signiﬁcant neg-
ative inﬂuence on route choices. Number of turns has a negative inﬂuence as well as
shown by Hood et al. (2011), Broach et al. (2012), Zimmermann et al. (2017), Khatri
et al. (2016), and Ghanayim and Bekhor (2018) , and in some cases, left turns present
a higher disutility than right turns. In addition, cycling in the wrong way would only
be done when considerably saving eﬀorts, as seen in Hood et al. (2011).
Regarding the inﬂuence of the diﬀerent kinds of infrastructures, in general all the
studies agree on the fact that the presence of bicycle facilities is always a positive fac-
tor. For instance, Menghini et al. (2010) and Casello and Usyukov (2014), conclude
that for cyclists, the higher the percentage of bicycle facilities of any kind the better.
However, when the preferences for the diﬀerent kinds of infrastructures are studied
more in detail, the conclusions vary from one study to another. In order to make it
easier for the reader to understand the ﬁndings of the diﬀerent previous studies, a
summary of the most common terms used to name the diﬀerent kinds of bicycle facil-
ities is presented: 1) Oﬀ-street bicycle paths: bicycle paths in own trace, not next to
road, only used by bicycles, and in some few cases by pedestrians; 2) Bicycle boule-
vards: low speed streets which are somehow adapted to bicycles; 3) Bicycle lanes:
roads with a bicycle lane, usually indicated by a painting in the asphalt; 4) Segre-
gated bicycle paths: roads with a segregated from the motorized traﬃc bicycle path
of around 2 meters wide; 5) Bridge facilities: Bridges which are only used by bicycles.
That being said, Hood et al. (2011) showed a cyclists’ preference for roads with segre-
gated bicycle paths, over oﬀ-street bicycle paths, roads with bicycle lanes and bicycle
boulevards. In contrast, Broach et al. (2012) showed that cyclists prefer oﬀ-street
bicycle paths, bicycle boulevards and bridge facilities. In addition, and contradicting
what was presented in Hood et al. (2011), Broach et al. (2012) stated that the at-
tractiveness of bicycle lanes was strongly related to motorized traﬃc levels, showing
a decreased preference for bicycle lanes when high traﬃc levels, and showing that
a bicycle lane in a road, was equally attractive as a normal low traﬃc street. The
results of Zimmermann et al. (2017) showed a high preference for oﬀ-street bicycle
paths, followed ﬁrst by bicycle lanes, but again with a strong relation to traﬃc levels,
and second by bicycle boulevards. Finally, the ﬁndings of Khatri et al. (2016) and
Ghanayim and Bekhor (2018) in this sense, are aligned with the previous ones, gener-
alizing that cyclists prefer to ride in bike paths, which includes roads with segregated
bicycle paths, oﬀ-street bicycle paths, and walking paths that also allow cycling. In
==PAGE:8==
1 Introduction
4
addition, the presence of signal controlled junctions has a negative inﬂuence accord-
ing to Menghini et al. (2010) and Broach et al. (2012), while by Khatri et al. (2016),
it was seen as a positive factor tough. A higher quality surface has a relevant positive
inﬂuence according to Segadilha and da Penha Sanches (2014).
With the intention of continuing studying in this direction, a bicycle route choice
model based on RP data in Copenhagen was carried as part of a PhD study in the
Technical University of Denmark, which can be seen in Halldórsdóttir, Nielsen, and
Prato (2015). It has to be noted that all the aforementioned bicycle route choice stud-
ies based on RP data were carried out in diﬀerent kinds of places regarding urban
mobility, from places with a strong car oriented culture such as San Francisco with
Hood et al. (2011), Portland with Broach et al. (2012), Waterloo with Casello and
Usyukov (2014), São Carlos with Segadilha and da Penha Sanches (2014), Eugene
with Zimmermann et al. (2017), or Tel Aviv with Ghanayim and Bekhor (2018), to
others places with a more bicycle-friendly culture like Zurich with Menghini et al.
(2010), or Phoenix with Khatri et al. (2016). Nevertheless, it is a fact that compared
to Copenhagen, none of those places counts with such a complete bicycle infrastruc-
ture, nor reaches bicycle shares of even approximately 37%, as stated by Pucher
and Buehler (2012), which make Copenhagen a perfect place to perform a study of
this kind. The ﬁndings of this study were aligned with the ones of previous studies,
showing that trip length is the most signiﬁcant factor, as well as that cyclists dislike
cycling the wrong way, hilliness, and turn frequency, especially left turns. Regarding
infrastructure, cyclists show a preference for roads with segregated bicycle paths or
with bicycle lanes, bicycle bridges, and paved surfaces. Roundabouts are the only
signiﬁcant kind of intersection which are seen as a positive factor for cyclists. In addi-
tion, this study included the novelty of taking into account the interaction of land-use
attributes in bicycle route choices, ﬁnding that cyclists are willing to ride extra dis-
tances in recreational areas or parks but only when they are on both sides of the path,
similar to the ﬁndings of Ghanayim and Bekhor (2018), where cyclist showed a ten-
dency to ride near to pleasant environments such as parks or the sea. Halldórsdóttir
et al. (2015) also found that cyclists dislike cycling near to industrial and high resi-
dential areas, again similar to Ghanayim and Bekhor (2018), which showed a cyclists’
preference for calmed residential areas. Heterogeneity among cyclists depending on
the gender and on how fast they are, was also captured by Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015).
In addition, depending on the time of the day, if it is weekend or weekday, and the
temperature of the air, diﬀerent behaviours were observed as well.
==PAGE:9==
1 Introduction
5
Using the same data as in Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015), another bicycle route choice
model in the Greater Copenhagen area was developed by Prato et al. (2018). In this
case, based on the common conclusion that distance is the most relevant factor for
cycling route choices, the study was made in value of distance (VoD) space. In value
of distance space means that all the results are in relation to the distance, in order
to know if cyclists perceive trips as larger, or shorter, depending on the character-
istics of the same ones. The ﬁndings are aligned with the ones previously obtained
by Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015), showing that cyclists dislike left and right turns, and
uphill slopes, and that roundabouts are the only type of intersection with a positive
eﬀect. In addition, it is shown that when cyclists are riding in dedicated cycling
bridges, as well as when cycling in roads with segregated bicycle paths or roads with
bicycle lanes, they perceive routes as shorter, specially during peak hours when the
perception of decreased distance is around 25%. In addition, narrower roads, which
usually have a lower traﬃc level, are perceived as shorter, which is aligned with what
was found by Ghanayim and Bekhor (2018), showing that cyclists are willing to take
a route 57% longer than the shortest one in order to avoid routes with a high level
of stress. Regarding the eﬀect of land use attributes, cyclist showed a preference for
riding in low residential areas, sport areas, and scenic areas.
That being said, the aim of this master thesis is improving the bicycle route choice
models in the Copenhagen Region presented by Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015) and Prato
et al. (2018) in order to continue contributing to the understanding of cyclists’ be-
haviours and preferences. While the same GPS data is used as in both previous
studies, the present study uses a new version of the bicycle network. In addition,
that new version of the bicycle network has been extended and improved along the
way, requiring long data adjustment processes which are presented as part of the
thesis as well. As a result, the content of the study presented in this document is
structured as follows. Section 2 gives a general overview about travel behaviour in
the Copenhagen Region. Section 3 presents the diﬀerent data used to perform the
study, including the description of the data itself, gathering and processing, and the
modiﬁcations carried out on it. Section 4 presents the methodology used for the
two main steps of route choice modelling. Section 5 presents and discusses the re-
sults obtained. Section 6 and 7 present the conclusion and potential avenues for new
research.
==PAGE:10==
2 Travel behaviour in the Copenhagen Region
6
2
Travel behaviour in the Copenhagen Region
As it was brieﬂy mentioned in the introduction, Copenhagen is considered worldwide
as one of the most bike-friendly cities. For instance, Figure 1 shows a graph from EU
(2016), where the percentages of people who use cycling as a mode of transport in
some European cities can be observed. Copenhagen, marked by a black rectangle, is
located in the top right corner, with a percentage close to 60%, much higher than in
most other European cities.
Figure 1: Cycling in European cities, 2015
Source: Quality of Life Survey, Eurobarometer 419. EU (2016)
Cycling is the most used way of transport in the Copenhagen capital, but when
considering the Greater Copenhagen area, the results are slightly diﬀerent. This dif-
ference can be seen in Figure 2, where the shares for the diﬀerent modes of transport
in the Greater Copenhagen area are presented. Cycling still counts with very high
shares, but the ones for private cars are slightly higher in this case.
==PAGE:11==
2 Travel behaviour in the Copenhagen Region
7
Figure 2: Trip production in the Greater Copenhagen area
Source: Danish National Survey (TU).
Regarding cyclists behaviour when referring to trip lengths, as it was expected, there
seem to be a higher preference for short distance trips. Figure 3 shows the percentage
of trips classiﬁed by distance intervals, and it can be seen that the 84% of the bicycle
trips are shorter than 5km, while trips from 5 to 10km long represent only the 12%
of the total. Finally, trips longer than 10km only represent 4% of the trips.
Figure 3: Distribution of trips on bicycle across trip distance in the Greater
Copenhagen area, 2016-2017.
Source: Danish National Survey (TU).
==PAGE:12==
2 Travel behaviour in the Copenhagen Region
8
When referring to the age of the cyclists, Figure 4 presents the percentage of trips
classiﬁed by distance intervals, and it can be seen that the 78% of the trips correspond
to cyclists younger than 50 years old, and that from this age, the percentage of trips
is more drastically reduced compared to at younger ages. It has to be noted as well
the high percentage of trips which are taken by cyclists younger than 18 years old,
showing the high level of mobility independence that the bicycle provides.
Figure 4: Distribution of trips on bicycle across age group in the Greater
Copenhagen area, 2016-2017.
Source: Danish National Survey (TU).
In order to complete the information regarding the age of the cyclists, Figure 5
presents the average amount of kilometers cycled per person, classiﬁed by age group.
A similar pattern than the one presented in Figure 4 is followed, in the sense that
from 50 years old, the average daily kilometers decreases in a more accused way than
before. In addition, it is remarkable the fact that cyclists from 40 to 49 years old,
are the ones who cycle the most among all the diﬀerent age groups, cycling more
kilometers than the cyclists who make up the three diﬀerent age groups between 18
to 39 years old.
==PAGE:13==
2 Travel behaviour in the Copenhagen Region
9
Figure 5: Average daily travel on a bicycle (km/person/day) divided into age
groups in the Greater Copenhagen Area, 2016-2017.
Source: Danish National Survey (TU).
Regarding the purpose of the trips, Figure 6 presents the percentage of trips depend-
ing on that. The most common purpose is commuting, representing 40% of the trips,
with a 27% dedicated to workplaces, and a 13% to educational institutions. Leisure
purposes represent a big percentage as well, with a 31% of the total amount of trips.
Figure 6: Share of total bicycle trips by trip purpose in the Greater Copenhagen
Area, 2016-2017.
Source: Danish National Survey (TU).
==PAGE:14==
3 Data
10
3
Data
The data used to carry out the study presented in this master thesis is composed
by a bicycle network and a set of GPS data collected in the Greater Copenhagen
area. While the GPS data is the same as the one used in Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015)
and Prato et al. (2018), the bicycle network is a new version which was updated in
connection with Tønning and Vuk (2017), and which has been further improved in
the present study. In this section, ﬁrstly it is presented the original version of the
bicycle network, as well as the variations introduced in both land use and elevation
data, secondly the gathering and post-processing of the GPS data, and thirdly the
required map-matching process to adapt the GPS data to the new bicycle network,
which includes both the extension carried out in the original version of the bicycle
network, and a comparison of the map-matching performance between the original,
and the updated version of the bicycle network. Finally, an overview of personal
information of the participants is presented.
3.1
Bicycle Network
The bicycle network used for this study is the oﬃcial OTM bicycle network, which
can be seen below in Figure 7. It is comprised by 74,726 directional bicycle links and
57,852 nodes, and it covers the Greater Copenhagen area and part of Zealand. The
bicycle network contains, for each link, information regarding length, direction, link
type, motorized traﬃc lanes, land use, and steepness. The details of the diﬀerent link
attributes are presented below:
• Length: Link length in meters.
• Direction: Single or double directional link, and the direction of the link.
• Link type: Four diﬀerent link types: Road, Road with bicycle lane, Road with
bicycle path, and Bicycle path.
• Motorized traﬃc lanes: From zero to three motorized traﬃc lanes.
• Land use: Six diﬀerent categories deﬁned by a dummy variable.
• Steepness: Flat or not ﬂat link deﬁned by a dummy variable.
Due to the available information regarding the last two aspects presented above,
land use and steepness, being very limited for a study of this kind, it was decided to
modify this data. Therefore, the diﬀerent actions carried out in order to do so are
==PAGE:15==
3 Data
11
explained in the following two subsections. First, the process to modify the land use
data is presented, and afterwards, the same is done but for the case of the elevation
or steepness data. All the diﬀerent actions were carried out by using ArcGIS Desktop
of ESRI (2018)
Figure 7: OTM Bicycle network
3.1.1
Land use data
This data is based on the topographic network Kort-10 from FOT-Kort10 (2010),
where most of the Copenhagen Region is classiﬁed in relation to the land use. The
intention of including land use data is to know whether what there is on both sides of
a path or road makes a diﬀerence to cyclists when making a route choice. This infor-
mation was already included in Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015) and Prato et al. (2018),
where for every link where land use information was available, it could be known the
==PAGE:16==
3 Data
12
kind of land use surrounding. However, this information is very limited since it is
deﬁned just by a dummy variable, being not possible to appreciate any diﬀerence in
distances when a link crosses more than one kind of land use category. Therefore,
the intention is to overtake this limitation by calculating the exact number of meters
of each land use category on both sides of each path or road.
Initially, the data was composed by ﬁfteen diﬀerent land-use categories, which were
summarized into just eight diﬀerent ones.
In addition, given that in some areas
diﬀerent land use layers were intersecting each other, it was necessary to deﬁne a
priority order for the eight deﬁned categories. Finally, all the observations of the
eight diﬀerent layers were appended into a common one, deﬁned as ﬁnal land-use
map. Therefore, Figure 8 presents a small part of the ﬁnal land-use map, and in the
legend of the same one, the diﬀerent eight land use categories, sorted according to the
established priority order, can be observed. To clarify, green restricted areas include
cemeteries and sport areas, Urban/ High buildings are high residential areas, Urban/
Low Buildings are low residential areas, while the others include what is roughly
understood by their names.
Figure 8: Final Land Use Map
==PAGE:17==
3 Data
13
Once the ﬁnal land use map was completed, it was combined with bicycle network
and, as it can be seen below in Figure 9a, it usually happened that links are in between
more than one land use type, and just by intersecting the links and the land use map
it is not possible to know the type of land use on both sides of a link. Therefore, it
was decided to make two 20-metre-wide buﬀers, one for each side of the link, for all
the diﬀerent links of the bicycle network. In Figure 9, the same few links with, and
without the 20-metre-wide buﬀers can be seen.
Figure 9: OTM bicycle network with and without 20m buﬀers
(a) Bicycle links without 20m buﬀers
(b) Bicycle links with 20m buﬀers
The intersections between the buﬀers and the ﬁnal land use map were calculated,
and as a result, the area of each link buﬀer which was intersecting each category of
the land use map was obtained, and afterwards, this area was divided by the width
of the buﬀer to obtain the ﬁnal intersecting distance. Due to limitations in the Ar-
cGIS software, for few links it was not possible to create a 20-meter-wide buﬀer, and
in those cases the width of the buﬀer was progressively reduced until being feasible
to create it. In addition, for some links the area of the buﬀer was not exactly the
distance of the link times the deﬁned width, leading to errors in the ﬁnal intersected
areas. This limitation was solved by calculating the intersecting distance using the
proportion between the theoretic area of the buﬀer (link length times buﬀer width),
==PAGE:18==
3 Data
14
and the area of the buﬀer created by ArcGIS.
At the end, land use information of the right side of the links was obtained for the
72.72% of the bicycle network kilometers, and of the left side for the 72.85 %, while
for the rest of kilometers there was not available information regarding land use. In
addition, Table 1 presents for both sides, the percentage of bicycle network kilometers
of each land use category.
Table 1: % of bicycle network kilometers of each land use category
Hydro
GRA
Parks
Forests
Industry
High B.
Center
Low B.
Right
(%)
0.839
1.89
10.07
1.501
9.335
11.963
3.841
60.56
Left
(%)
0.898
1.87
10.063
1.509
9.367
12.066
3.937
60.291
According to the results, Urban/Low Building (Low B.) is the land use category
which covers the highest number of kilometers by far. Urban/ High Buildings, Green
Areas/Parks (Parks), and Industrial and Technical Areas (Industry) cover each of
them close to the 10% , while the rest of categories represent a very low percentage
of the total number of kilometers.
3.1.2
Elevation data
As it was mentioned when introducing the bicycle network, this network includes very
limited information regarding the steepness of its links, which, according to several
studies, is a relevant factor for cycling route choices. That is why it was decided
to extend the information provided in this regard. The information available at the
beginning consisted on a a dummy variable for each link, which was equal to 0 if that
link was considered ﬂat, or to 1 if there was a relevant enough up or downhill incline.
In contrast, the information in this regard included in Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015)
and Prato et al. (2018) was quite detailed. In these two studies, the exact number
of vertical metres of each level of steepness deﬁned was included in each link. Those
steepness levels were 0 to 10, 10 to 35, 35 to 50, and above 50, all in vertical meters
per kilometer, and for each category there was both a down and an uphill category.
Therefore, the intention is to calculate steepness data, as similar as possible to the
one available in Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015) and Prato et al. (2018).
==PAGE:19==
3 Data
15
In the same way as for the land use data, the topographic network Kort-10 from
FOT-Kort10 (2010) was used, but in this case, the contour map which is included
on it was used. In order to know the diﬀerent heights along a link, this contour
map was combined with the bicycle network. First, the intersection between all the
diﬀerent bicycle links and the contour lines was done. Thanks to that, it was possible
to know the height of those intersecting points. Second, for the case of the starting
and ending points of the links, the approximate height was calculated by using the
height of the nearest contour line, the height of the nearest intersecting point, and
the distances from the starting or ending points, depending on the case, again to the
nearest contour line, and the nearest intersecting point. An example of the diﬀerent
points can be seen below in Figure 10:
Figure 10: Starting, intersecting and ending link points
In the case shown in Figure 10, the height of the green point is calculated using
==PAGE:20==
3 Data
16
the height of the contour line located on its left, the distance to the same contour
line, the height of the closest intersecting point which is located above of it, and the
distance to that intersecting point. More precisely, the formula used to calculate the
approximate height of the starting and ending link points is presented below:
HeightStarting/Ending =
DistContour
DistInt + DistContour
(HeightInt−HeightContour)+HeightContour
(1)
Where DistInt is the distance from the starting or ending point to the closest in-
tersecting point, DistContour is the distance from the starting or ending point to the
closest contour line, HeightInt is the height of the closest intersecting point, and
HeightContour is the height of the closest contour line. It is assumed that there is an
error on the height of those points, but it was the most accurate way to calculate it
available.
Having the height of all the starting, ending, and intersecting points, all the links
were split at these points in order to know the distances between the points in a row,
but in the direction of the links. That being done, it was possible to calculate the
steepness of every section of the link, which were classiﬁed according to the same
categories as the ones used in Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015) and Prato et al. (2018),
which were named before. Finally, for each link, the vertical meters of diﬀerence
on each link section were summed up for each steepness category. In Table 2, the
total amount of kilometers of each steepness category can be observed, as well as the
percentage of the total amount of bicycle network kilometers represented by them.
Table 2: Bicycle network kilometers of each steepness category
0-10 m/km
10-35 m/km
35-50 m/km
Above 50 m/km
Total
Km
5,932.657
2,388.589
430.828
336.481
9,088.555
%
65.276
26.281
4.740
3.702
100.000
As expected, the Copenhagen area is mostly ﬂat, with 65.276 % of the kilometers
that make up the bicycle network having a steepness within the range of 0 to 10
vertical meters per kilometer, and just 34.723 % of kilometers left have a steepness
higher than 10 vertical meters per kilometer.
==PAGE:21==
3 Data
17
3.2
GPS data
3.2.1
Data gathering
The GPS data is exactly the same as the one used in Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015) and
Prato et al. (2018). The data was gathered in the Greater Copenhagen area, and it
was done by giving GPS trackers to a total of 318 cyclists for an average period of
eight days. The cyclists were selected from Christiansen and Jensen (2009), from the
Danish National Survey, under the criteria of having been interviewed within the last
6 to 12 months, having used the bicycle in the travel diary, living in the study area,
and being 16 years old or older. The data gathering process was carried out in three
diﬀerent rounds with the aim of appreciating the possible diﬀerences depending on
the season of the year. In addition to carry the GPS trackers, participants were asked
to ﬁll a questionnaire to provide trip information about one of the days they were
carrying the GPS trackers, as well as information related with their socio-economic
characteristics. For further information regarding the data gathering process, see
Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015).
3.2.2
Data processing
In Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015) and Prato et al. (2018), an extensive data processing
was carried out in order to obtain data that could be used for bicycle route choice
modelling. This process was necessary mainly because the GPS data was available as
raw GPS-traces, and not only bicycle trips were recorded. The processing was made
by following the four-step procedure explained in Schuessler and Axhausen (2009):
(i) cleaning of GPS data by removing systematic and random errors; (ii) trips and
activity identiﬁcation where the GPS device had been stationary and/or the spatial
density of observations had been high for a period of time;(iii) trip segmentation into
single-mode trip legs; and (iv) mode identiﬁcation where, as described in Rasmussen,
Ingvardson, Halldórsdóttir, and Nielsen (2015), fuzzy logic rules were modiﬁed in
order to ﬁt travel behaviour of Danish population. Finally, the results of the post
processing method were validated by comparing the trips and modes obtained, with
the travel diaries. Thanks to the data processing, trips which were undertaken by
bicycle were identiﬁed, resulting on a total of 2,496,328 GPS points and 4,630 trips,
made by a total of 301 diﬀerent individuals.
==PAGE:22==
3 Data
18
3.3
Map-matching
The bicycle trips extracted from the data processing were used in the present study,
but due to the fact that a diﬀerent bicycle network was used with respect to the
one used in Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015) and Prato et al. (2018), it was necessary
to map the trips to that new network, and that process was made by following the
algorithm described in Nielsen and Jørgensen (2004). The trips were map-matched
either because the sequence of GPS points was clear enough following a sequence
of bicycle links, or by following the shortest path algorithm when there was a big
gap between points.
The ﬁrst way is the desired one, while the second is a way
to solve limitations in the data.
By looking at the results of the map matching,
and after trying with diﬀerent values for the parameters, it was realized that the
bicycle network was missing many relevant links, making properly map-matching of
many observed routes unfeasible. As a result, it was decided to manually modify the
existing bicycle network, whose process is explained in the following subsection.
3.3.1
Modiﬁcation of the bicycle network
As it was brieﬂy mentioned before, the existing bicycle network was missing relevant
links, and a extension of the same one was completely necessary. Due to time limi-
tations, the modiﬁcation of the bicycle network was based only on a certain amount
of trips, which were considered as potentially problematic according to the results
of the map-matching. Those trips were the ones where, the percentage of the trip
length matched by using the shortest path algorithm was higher than 10, based on
idea that a lack of relevant links would lead to higher values of that percentage. As
a result, 715 trips were found as problematic, and from those trips both the output
of the map-matching and the GPS points were observed in GIS in order to ﬁnd the
missed links.
Most of the new links needed were present in the bicycle network used in Halldórs-
dóttir et al. (2015) and Prato et al. (2018), thus they were copied directly from their.
In addition, few new links were created, and some of the existing ones were split in
order to ﬁt with the new added ones. In particular, 1048 links were added from the
bicycle network used in Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015) and Prato et al. (2018), 52 links
were created, and a total of 226 existing links were split because of the modiﬁcations
carried out in the network. In conclusion, the number of bicycle links of the bicycle
network was increased from 74,726, to a total of 76,070. At the same time, when
analyzing the selected trips, it was decided to delete 71 of them because the GPS
==PAGE:23==
3 Data
19
points were very problematic, being unfeasible to map-match them in a realistic way.
Regarding the values of the diﬀerent attributes of the new links, apart from the length,
which was automatically calculated by GIS, the situation of the other attributes was
diﬀerent depending on the case and, accordingly, diﬀerent actions were carried out,
and diﬀerent errors derived from that actions were assumed. For the links added from
the network previously used in Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015) and Prato et al. (2018),
information regarding link type, motorized traﬃc lanes, surface, and elevation was
available, while the information related to land use was not, being that deﬁned as
equal to 0 for all the diﬀerent land use categories. In the case of the existing links
which were split, the only variation was made in the elevation and land use attributes,
because are the ones which vary with the distance. Accordingly, it was decided to
recalculate them proportionally to the distances of the split parts of the link. Finally,
for the links which were completely created, the attributes of link type, motorized
traﬃc lanes, and surface, were deﬁned one by one, and according to the values of the
similar links which were close by, while the elevation and land use attributes were
deﬁned as equal to 0.
3.3.2
Comparison of map-matching performance between both bicycle
networks
With the intention of checking the improvement in the results, the map matching
was run twice. The ﬁrst time was done using the original version of the OTM bicycle
network, and the second one using the modiﬁed one. As part of the comparison, in
Table 3 the number of matched and unmatched trips can be seen for both bicycle
networks, showing that 55 more trips were matched in the modiﬁed bicycle network,
compared to the original one.
Table 3: Comparison of matched and unmatched trips
Observed trips
Matched trips
Unmatched trips
Updated bicycle network
4,630
4,109
521
OTM bicycle network
4,630
4,064
566
Another way to evaluate the map-matching performance, is by comparing the amount
of perfectly matched trips, and the amount of trips where a part of them was matched
by using the shortest path algorithm. Table 4 presents the percentage of matched
trips where the shortest path algorithm was used, as well as the average percentage
==PAGE:24==
3 Data
20
of the trip length matched by the shortest path algorithm for the same ones.
Table 4: Comparison of ways of matching trips among both bicycle networks
Partly matched by
shortest path trips (%)
Trip length matched
by shortest path (%)
Updated bicycle network
20,419
85,613
OTM bicycle network
27,854
81,475
Once again the results conﬁrm the improvement in the map-matching performance
when using the modiﬁed version of the bicycle network, decreasing in more than
seven points the percentage of trips where the shortest path algorithm was required.
Furthermore, for those cases, the average percentage trip length matched in this way
decreased in more than four points.
Having the map-matched trips, it was necessary to ﬁlter them in order to continue
working only with the realistic ones. To do so, it was decided to ﬁlter them accord-
ing to two factors: the ratio between the map-matching length and the GPS points
length of the trips , and the percentage of the map-matching trip length which was
matched by using the shortest path algorithm.
In the case of the ﬁrst ﬁltering factor, the main problem appeared when calculating
the GPS distances. While the map-matching distances were very simply calculated
by summing up the lengths of the links covered by the map-matching traces, the
calculation of the GPS distances, due to the uneven patterns of the GPS points, was
much more problematic. The GPS distances were initially calculated by summing up
the distances between every consecutive point, but in most cases, the calculated dis-
tances were not precise, being much higher than they should be. This issue leaded to
considerably higher values for GPS distances compared to map-matching distances in
most of the trips, even for cases where it could be seen in the map that both distances,
the one from the GPS points and the one from the map-matching, were clearly very
similar. For example, Figure 11 shows the case of a trip where the ratio between the
map-matching distance, and the GPS distance, was equal to 0.66, which is in fact
the average value for that ratio, but as it can be seen in the picture, the trip was
perfectly matched, and both the map-matching distance, represented by the green
line, and the GPS distance, represented by the brown points, are almost equally long.
==PAGE:25==
3 Data
21
In order to overcome that limitation, the GPS distances were calculated by summing
up the distances from one point, to the one ﬁve positions ahead. As a result, the
average ration between the map-matching distances and the GPS ones increased from
0.51 to 0.66, being still very low, however.
Figure 11: Example of issue with ratio between map-matching and GPS distances
Therefore, and assuming that the GPS distances were on average relevantly higher
than the map-matching ones, the GPS distances were multiplied by the average ratio
mentioned before (0.66), and trips where the diﬀerence between the map-matching
distance and the new normalized GPS distance was lower than 0.75, were excluded.
Regarding the ﬁltering based on the percentage of the map-matching length matched
by using the shortest path algorithm, 30% was deﬁned as the highest allowed per-
centage of the trip length matched by the shortest path. Table 5 compares, for both
bicycle networks and according to the thresholds deﬁned, the total number of trips
excluded, and the percentage they represent among the initial number of trips.
Table 5: Comparison of excluded trips among both bicycle networks
Updated bicycle network
OTM bicycle network
Excluded trips (%)
1,071 (23.492)
1,358 (29.787)
==PAGE:26==
3 Data
22
According to the results, the percentage of trips deleted was reduced in more than six
points thanks to the modiﬁcations in the network. As a result of this modiﬁcation,
the ﬁnal number of trips remaining for the route choice modelling was equal 3,488,
and those trips were made by 286 diﬀerent individuals.
3.3.3
Individual proﬁles
The remaining 3,488 trips correspond to 286 diﬀerent individuals, of which 55.09%
were females, and 44.91% males.
Regarding their ages, it can be seen in Figure
12 that the distribution was considerably widespread. The highest percentage was
represented by cyclists aged from 30 to 39 years old, making up almost 25% of the
total, but ﬁve others age groups represented more than the 10% of the sample. It has
to noted as well that this distribution of ages is quite similar to the one regarding
all the bicycle trips in the Greater Copenhagen area, which was presented before in
Figure 4, meaning that this sample could be considered as a good representation of
the Danish population.
Figure 12: Age distribution of the 286 remaining cyclists.
In addition, cyclists were also classiﬁed depending on their average speed, diﬀerenti-
ating between slow (<10 km/h), medium (10-14 km/h), and fast (>14 km/h) cyclists.
Among the 281 cyclist who make up this sample, 5.99% of them were considered as
slow cyclists, 67.25% as medium, and the 26.76% remaining as fast ones.
==PAGE:27==
4 Model development and methodology
23
4
Model development and methodology
In order to know which attributes aﬀect cyclists’ route choice and to which extent,
it is necessary to build a route choice model. As mentioned by Bekhor, Ben-Akiva,
and Ramming (2006), the required process for building a model of this kind can be
deﬁned as a two-stage process, where the ﬁrst stage is generating the alternatives
which form the choice set, and the second stage is calculating the probability that
a given alternative from the generated choice set is chosen. Therefore, this section
presents, for the current study, the methodology of the two stages of the designed
route choice model.
4.1
Choice set generation
As mentioned for example by Bliemer and Bovy (2008), or Rasmusseni, Anderson,
Nielsen, and Prato (2016), route choice models are very sensitive to the size and
composition of the choice set, and a wrong choice set generation may lead to wrong
parameters and estimations. Furthermore, Bliemer and Bovy (2008) stated as well
that: (i) diﬀerent choice probabilities may be obtained when using diﬀerent choice
sets, even though all the relevant alternatives are included in all of them; (ii) including
irrelevant alternatives may aﬀect the attractive ones. What is more, the inclusion of
irrelevant alternatives does not add any beneﬁts, and demands more computational
eﬀorts as seen in Bekhor et al. (2006). However, and according to Rasmusseni et al.
(2016), there is not a objective deﬁnition for what is considered a relevant alternative.
As it was mentioned in the introduction, very few path generation algorithms have
been designed or tested for bicycles, and the literature is very scarce. For example,
Menghini et al. (2010) used the breath ﬁrst search on link elimination method (BSF-
LE), which was presented by Rieser-Schuessler, Balmer, and Axhausen (2013). In
the case of Broach, Gliebe, and Dill (2010), it was demonstrated that the calibrated
route labelling method designed by them performs better than: a K-shortest paths
link penalty, based on Cascetta, Nuzzolo, Russo, and Vitetta (1996), De La Barra,
Perez, and Anez (1993), and Ramming (2002); an adapted version of the simulated
shortest paths, explained by Bekhor et al. (2006) and Ramming (2002); and a la-
belled route method, based on Bekhor et al. (2006), Ben-Akiva, Bergman, Daly, and
Ramaswamy (1984), and Ramming (2002). In addition, Hood et al. (2011) compared
a doubly stochastic generation method (DSGF), as seen in Nielsen (2000) and Bovy
and Fiorenzo-Catalano (2007), with a BFS-LE method, showing that the ﬁrst one
outperforms the second one. It has to be noted that while the cost function of all the
==PAGE:28==
4 Model development and methodology
24
others mentioned studies included travel time only, distance only, or both of them,
in the case of Hood et al. (2011), the DSFG was implemented with the novelty of a
multi-attribute cost function, showing better results, but not being able to reproduce
a high percentage of the observed routes though.
Aligned with that, and with the intention of analyzing the diﬀerence in perfor-
mance when creating relevant and heterogeneous alternatives, Halldorsdottir, Rieser-
Schussler, Axhausen, Nielsen, and Prato (2014) tested the three most eﬀective meth-
ods for generating choice sets for cars, i.e., the breath ﬁrst search on link elimi-
nation method (BSF-LE), the doubly stochastic generation method (DSGF), and
the branch & bound algorithm (B&B), further explained by Hoogendoorn-Lanser
and Bovy (2006) and Prato and Bekhor (2006). The study tested diﬀerent multi-
attribute functions which took into account, apart from route length and travel time,
other bicycle-speciﬁc attributes that could be relevant for a cyclist such as road types,
land-use attributes or bicycle infrastructure.
According to the results, including diﬀerent attributes in the cost functions resulted
in an increase in the performance of the choice generation methods. When looking
at the results of the comparison of the three diﬀerent choice set generation methods
tested, the results for both the BSF-LE and the DSFG were very satisfactory. In
terms of replicating the observed routes, the results of these two methods were very
similar, but in generating heterogeneous alternatives, the DSFG method performed
better.
Therefore, and based on the results brieﬂy explained above, in the present study it
was decided to use the DSFG method for generating the choice set. Apart from the
good performance of this method, by drawing random costs and parameters from
probability distributions, it takes into account variations in travellers’ link cost and
diﬀerences in travellers’ attribute preferences.
4.1.1
Deﬁnition of cost function
Since including not only length and time in the cost function but also factors consid-
ered relevant for cyclists leads to an increment in the performance, as demonstrated
by Halldorsdottir et al. (2014), in the present study it was decided to do so. There-
fore, apart from considering route length and travel time, the cost function includes
information regarding: link type (i.e., road, road with bicycle lane, road with bicycle
path,bicycle path, footpath, steps), motorized traﬃc lanes (i.e., zero, one, two, three,
==PAGE:29==
4 Model development and methodology
25
and four motorized traﬃc lanes), surface types (i.e., paved or unpaved), land-use
information (i.e., nature or not nature), and cycling in the wrong direction or not.
As a result, the link cost function in this study was deﬁned as follows:
Ca = βTTTa + βDDa +
K
X
k=1
(βPkPakDa) +
H
X
h=1
(βShSahDa) +
L
X
l=1
(βRlRalDa)
+ βUUaDa + βWWaDa + εa
(2)
where Ca is the cost of link a, TTa is the travel time of link a, Da is the length of link
a, Pak is equal to 1 when link a is link type k (k = 1, ..., K), and 0 otherwise, Sah is
equal to 1 when link a is surface type h (h = 1, ..., H), and 0 otherwise, Ral is equal
to 1 when link a counts with l motorized traﬃc lanes (l = 0, ..., L), and 0 otherwise,
Ua is equal to 1 when there is some kind of natural element (i.e., water, parks, forests,
sand) at the right or left side of link a, and zero otherwise. As the DSFG method
is used, the diﬀerent betas (i.e., βT, βD, βPk, which is diﬀerent for each link type k,
βSh, which is diﬀerent for each surface type h, βRt, which is diﬀerent for each number
of motorized traﬃc lanes t, βU, and βW) are drawn from random distributions, with
the intention of showing heterogeneity among cyclists’ perceptions, in regards to the
bicycle network attributes included in the cost function. Finally the εa is drawn from
a random distribution, but in this case its intention was to express diﬀerences in
cyclists’ perceptions of the overall cost.
4.2
Model formulation
Once the generation of alternatives is done, the next step of modelling route choice
behaviour is calculating the probability that a given alternative from the generated
choice set is chosen. To do so, it is necessary to deﬁne the utility function, and the
model which is going to be applied. The two most common models used for discrete
choice modelling are the Multinomial Logit (MNL) and the Nested Logit (NL) model,
but both of them have important limitations when modelling route choice behaviour.
In the case of MNL models, they do not take into account similarities among alter-
natives, being it very likely to happen that alternative routes overlap in route choice
models. With respect to NL models, their main limitation is that by deﬁnition, each
alternative only belongs to one unique nest, while in real-size networks, like the one
used in the present study, links are shared by many diﬀerent routes. That being said,
for the case of the present study it was decided to use a Path-Size logit (PSL) model,
presented by Ben-akiva and Bierlaire (2009), which enable us to overcome the limi-
==PAGE:30==
4 Model development and methodology
26
tation related with the similarity across routes. Additionally, due to the fact that, as
it was mentioned in the introduction, most of the previous similar studies conclude
that length is the factor which aﬀects the most cycling route choices, the modelling
was made in value of distance space (VoD), obtaining the inﬂuence of most factors
with respect to the distance of the route.
In Path-Size logit (PSL) models, the probability Pnjt that cyclist n is going to choose
route j is deﬁned as follows:
Pnj =
exp(Vnj + βPS ln PSnj)
P
l∈C exp(Vnl + βPS ln PSnl)
(3)
where Vj is the utility function of route j, and Vl is the utility function of route l. The
the terms ln PSj and ln PSl are the path size factors of routes j and l, respectively,
while the βPS is the parameter related with them that has to be calculated. The path
size term indicates the fraction of the route which is unique, and which constitutes a
“full” alternative.
The path size term is the way that PSL models have to account for similarity among
alternatives, and it was calculated as follows:
psj =
X
a∈Γj
La
Lj
1
P
l∈C δal
(4)
being La and Lj the lengths of link a and route j, respectively, while Γj is composed
by all the links that form route j, and δal is a dummy variable equal to one when link
a is part of route i, or equal to zero otherwise.
Regarding the utility function, in the present study it was deﬁned with the intention
of taking advantage of the rich variety of available information. Therefore, it takes
into account from common variables such as length, hilliness, or turn frequency, to
others related with bicycle facilities, or the kind of area surrounding the route. As a
result, the simplest version of the utility function was deﬁned as follows:
Unj = βxnj + εnj
(5)
where n is the cyclist, and j is the alternative route among the route choice J.
Therefore, xnj is a vector of the, perceived by a certain cyclist n, features of a certain
alternative route j, β is a vector of ﬁxed parameters associated with the observed in-
ﬂuences on characteristics xnj, and εnj is the error term, which is Gumbel distributed.
==PAGE:31==
4 Model development and methodology
27
With the intention of modelling in VoD space, the route feature which regards to the
length of the route dnj, was separated from the rest of the utility:
Unj = βddnj + βxnj + εnj
(6)
being βd the route length parameter to be estimated. In addition, as it was intended
to model in VoD only the route features deﬁned by length, the route features xnj,
were divided into deﬁned and non deﬁned by length features:
Unj = βddnj + βyynj + βzznj + εnjt
(7)
being ynjt and znjt, vectors of the, perceived by a certain cyclist n, deﬁned and non
deﬁned by length features, respectively, of a certain alternative route j, while βy and
βz, are the parameters to be calculated of the route attributes ynjt and znjt, respec-
tively.
Therefore, the parameter for route length βd was ﬁxed as equal to 1, and a param-
eter γ was included. Accordingly, it was possible to estimate the marginal rates of
substitution between the parameters of the route features deﬁned by length, and the
route length parameter. Finally, the utility function was expressed as follows:
Unj = γ(dnj + βyynj) + βzznj + εnj
(8)
As a result, and according to equation 3 presented above, the probability Pnj that
cyclist n is going to choose route j was deﬁned as follows:
Pnj =
exp (γ(dnj + βyynj) + βzznj + εnj + βPS ln PSj)
P
l∈C exp (γ(dnl + βyynl) + βzznl + εnl + βPS ln PSl)
(9)
where the parameters of the route features non deﬁned by length βnd, and the path
size parameter βPS, do not belong to the value of distance space.
==PAGE:32==
5 Results
28
5
Results
5.1
Generated route choice set
As explained by Bekhor et al. (2006), the most common way to evaluate the eﬀec-
tiveness of a choice set generation technique is by looking at the percentage of a
observed route matched by a generated route. Ideally, this matching is complete,
being the generated route able to replicate the whole survey route, but when that is
not the case, the percentage which is shared by both the observed and the generated
route is called overlap. Therefore, a common way of measuring the eﬀectiveness of a
choice set generation algorithm, or set of algorithms, is called coverage and deﬁned as
the percentage of observed routes replicated by the generated ones, under a deﬁned
overlap threshold.
In the case of the present study, the parameters betas and the error term were deﬁned
with the same values as the ones used in Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015) and Prato et al.
(2018), where the intention was to maximize the coverage of the choice set generation.
The β′s were log-normally distributed, while the error term was gamma distributed,
in order to account for the error terms in the links within a route, as seen in Prato
(2009). In Table 6, for all the diﬀerent parameters, the distribution used, the mean,
and the variance, are presented.
Table 6: Predeﬁned cost parameters and scale parameters
ID
Parameter
Distribution
Mean
Variance
βLength
Length
No distribution
1
0
ε
Error term
Gamma
0
2
βLT1
Road
Log-normal
1.25
1.5625
βLT2
Road with bicycle lane
Log-normal
0.75
0.5625
βLT3
Road with segregated bicycle path
Log-normal
0.5
0.25
βLT4
Bicycle path in own trace
Log-normal
0.5
0.25
βLT5
Footpath
Log-normal
1.5
2.25
βLT6
Steps
Log-normal
1.5
2.25
βST1
Paved surface
Log-normal
0.75
0.5625
βST2
Unpaved surface
Log-normal
1.25
1.5625
βLU1
Scenic land-uses
Log-normal
0.5
0.25
βLU2
All other land-uses
Log-normal
1.5
2.25
βWW
Cycling the wrong way
Log-normal
1.5
2.25
==PAGE:33==
5 Results
29
For a coverage threshold of 80%, the choice set, generated by following the DSFG
method, was able to replicate the 60.91% of the observed routes, while for a coverage
threshold of 75%, the percentage of replicated observed routes increased to 66.13%.
It has to be mentioned that these values are considerably lower in comparison to
the ones obtained in Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015) and Prato et al. (2018), where the
percentage of replicated trips with a coverage threshold of 80% was equal to 80%,
but due to time constrains, it was not possible to improve the choice set generation
performance. The maximum number of generated alternatives per observed route
was deﬁned as 100, with 83.59 alternatives per observed route being generated on
average, and with a standard deviation of 37.03.
Table 7 presented below, shows the means and standard deviations of all the route
attributes for both chosen and alternatives routes. Chosen routes, in comparison to
alternative routes, are on average shorter, have less kilometers cycled in the wrong
direction, have less number of right and left turns, and have lower cumulative elevation
gain. The land-use attributes are presented for the right, and the left side of the
routes, having very similar results on average.
Table 7: Means and standard deviations of the attributes of the chosen and
alternative routes
Chosen
routes
Alternatives
routes
Variable
Unit
mean
st. dev.
mean
st. dev.
ln(Path-size)
-2.387
0.692
-1.874
0.372
Length
[km]
2.984
3.296
3.993
4.143
Wrong way
[km]
0.183
0.371
0.324
0.364
Turns
Left turns
3.233
4.767
5.324
5.835
Right turns
3.405
4.974
5.54
6.049
Congestion
Congestion time in turns
[min]
1.344
1.926
2.179
2.402
Link type
Road with no bicycle facilities
[km]
1.001
1.203
1.78
1.621
Road with bicycle lane
[km]
0.114
0.255
0.149
0.201
Road with bicycle path
[km]
1.546
1.991
1.529
1.616
Bicycle path
[km]
0.302
0.622
0.467
0.682
Footpath
[km]
0.018
0.099
0.024
0.047
==PAGE:34==
5 Results
30
Steps
[km]
0.001
0.012
0.002
0.007
Cumulative elevation gain
0-10 vertical meters/km
[km]
0.002
0.002
0.003
0.002
10-35 vertical meters/km
[km]
0.006
0.009
0.008
0.01
35-50 vertical meters/km
[km]
0.001
0.002
0.001
0.002
Above 50 meters/km
[km]
0.003
0.005
0.003
0.005
Surface
Paved
[km]
2.942
3.248
3.909
3.737
Unpaved
[km]
0.042
0.207
0.042
0.108
Motorised traﬃc lanes
0 lanes
[km]
0.310
0.622
0.496
0.745
1 lane
[km]
0.008
0.047
0.006
0.021
2 lanes
[km]
2.357
2.541
3.132
2.909
3 lanes
[km]
0.308
0.696
0.317
0.461
4 lanes
[km]
0.001
0.008
0.001
0.005
Land-use attributes
Hydro right side
[km]
0.067
0.188
0.069
0.131
Hydro left side
[km]
0.065
0.195
0.069
0.129
Green restricted areas right side
[km]
0.032
0.093
0.042
0.066
Green restricted areas left side
[km]
0.032
0.09
0.041
0.066
Green areas/ Forests right side
[km]
0.053
0.182
0.061
0.149
Green areas/ Forests left side
[km]
0.049
0.166
0.058
0.145
Green areas/ Parks right side
[km]
0.165
0.369
0.183
0.269
Green areas/ Parks left side
[km]
0.172
0.363
0.192
0.277
Industrial and technical areas right side
[km]
0.231
0.448
0.263
0.391
Industrial and technical areas left side
[km]
0.22
0.441
0.263
0.386
Urban/ High residential areas right side
[km]
0.756
1.102
1.018
1.189
Urban/ High residential areas left side
[km]
0.746
1.1
1.013
1.186
Urban/ Low residential areas right side
[km]
0.691
1.218
0.985
1.511
Urban/ Low residential areas left side
[km]
0.678
1.186
0.981
1.502
Urban/ Center areas right side
[km]
0.802
1.203
1.102
1.339
Urban/ Center areas left side
[km]
0.803
1.202
1.099
1.336
==PAGE:35==
5 Results
31
5.2
Route choice model estimation and discussion
Using the observed routes and the generated alternative routes, several models with
diﬀerent combinations of attributes were carried out in order to ﬁnd the best possible
model. The p-value was used to evaluate wether the parameters included were sig-
niﬁcant or not in both a 95% and a 90% level of signiﬁcance. In addition, correlation
between variables was checked in order to avoid multicollinearity issues. Initially,
models including the path size term were tested, in order to check that the utility
for similar routes was reduced. However, a negative estimate value for the path size
term was obtained, which contradicted the theoretically expected positive value men-
tioned by Ben-akiva and Bierlaire (2009). As a result, it was decided to not include
the path size term in the ﬁnal model speciﬁcation. In any case, the same model as
the one presented in this section, but also including the path size term, is presented
in Appendix A. Due to the decision of not including the path size term, the type
of model used was not the Path-Size logit (PSL) model anymore, and instead, the
denominated Multinomial Logit (MNL) model was the one applied.
In some cases, it was decided to combine attributes when they did not show to be
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. More precisely, it was done in the cases of: 3 and 4 motorised
traﬃc lanes; hydro, parks and green restricted areas; and high residential and center
areas. As it was explained in subsection 4.2, the route attributes deﬁned by length
were modelled in VoD space, and the rest were modelled in preference space. The
case of the attribute regarding congestion time in turns was a peculiar one, since as
it can be seen in Table 7, its value was given in time units, but it was modelled in
VoD space. To do so, it was used the average speed of the individuals to calculate
the distance that would be covered by the cyclists in that amount of time due to
congestion in turns, converting that attribute in a deﬁned by length one. Equation
10 presents the utility speciﬁcation Unj for cyclist n, and route j, of the ﬁnal model.
Note that all the route attributes which are multiplied by the parameter γ, are the
ones modelled in VoD space, while the rest are modelled in preference space.
Unj = γ(dnj + βwwwwnj + βww/malewwnjmalen + βCongTurncongturnnj + βLT2LT2nj
+ βLT3LT3nj + βLT4LT4nj + βLT4/fastLT4njfastn + βLT4/medLT4njmedn + βLT5LT5nj
+ βLT6LT6nj + βML0ML0nj + βML1ML1nj + βML3−4(ML3nj + ML4nj) + βLU4LU4nj
+ βLU4/maleLU4njmalen + βLU5LU5nj + βLU6LU6nj + βLU7−8(LU7njLU8nj) + βLU9LU9nj)
+ βRTRTnj + βLTLTnj + βelev10−35elev10 −35nj + βelev35−50elev35 −50nj
+ βelev<50elev < 50njεnj
(10)
==PAGE:36==
5 Results
32
where dnj is the distance cycled in route j by individual n, wwnj is the distance cycled
in route j, by individual n, in the wrong direction, congturnnj is the distance which
would have been cycled in route j, by individual n, during the time spent in turns,
LT2nj, LT3nj, LT4nj, LT5nj, and LT6nj, are the distances cycled in route j, by in-
dividual n, in a road with bicycle lane, a road with segregated bicycle path, a bicycle
path in own trace, a footpath, and steps, respectively, ML0nj, ML1nj, ML3nj, and
ML4nj, are the distances cycled in route j, by individual n, in a road with 0, 1, 3,
and 4 motor traﬃc lanes, respectively, LU4nj, LT5nj, LU6nj, LU7nj, LU8nj, and
LU9nj, are the distances cycled in route j, by individual n, having at the right side
of the route forests, industrial or technical areas, high residential areas, center areas,
and low residential areas, respectively, elev10 −35nj, elev35 −50nj, and elev < 50nj,
are the gained, in route j, by individual n, vertical meters within a steepness level
of 10 to 35, 35 to 50, and above 50 vertical meters per kilometer, respectively, malen
is a dummy variable which is equal to 1 if individual n is a male, and 0 otherwise,
and fastn and medn are dummy variables as well, which are equal to 1 if individual
n is a fast or a medium cyclist, respectively, or 0 otherwise. Finally, the diﬀerent
betas βs, are the parameters to be estimated of the diﬀerent route attributes recently
mentioned.
Table 8 presents the estimates for the best model speciﬁcation. As it can be see, most
of the parameters are signiﬁcant at a 95% level, and only three are not signiﬁcant
at a 90% level.
It has to be noted that the way the attribute parameters have
to be interpreted diﬀers depending on if they have been modelled in VoD space
or in preference space.
On one hand, for the case of the attributes modelled in
VoD space, the estimate of the distance was ﬁxed as equal to 1, so the value of
the estimate presented is the value of the rate of substitution, which means that a
positive (negative) sign makes the route to be perceived as larger (shorter) because of
the eﬀect of that attribute. For instance, the estimate value of cycling in the wrong
way for females is equal to 1.25, meaning that for females the route is perceived as
125% longer when cycling in the wrong direction. Conversely, roads with segregated
bicycle path presents an estimate equal to -0.327, meaning that the route is perceived
as 32.7% shorter when cycling in a road of this type. On the other hand, when the
estimates are obtained by modelling in preference space, a positive (negative) sign
means that this attribute aﬀects route choices in a positive (negative) way.
==PAGE:37==
5 Results
33
Table 8: Model estimates of the ﬁnal Multinomial Logit (MNL) model
Parameter
Estimate
St.err.
t-test
p
Non modeled in VoD space
Turns
Right turns
-0.081
0.018
-4.47
0.00
Left turns
-0.081
0.018
-4.38
0.00
Cumulative elevation gain
0-10 vertical meters/km
-
-
-
-
10-35 vertical meters/km
-0.025
0.01
-2.48
0.01
35-50 vertical meters/km
-0.036
0.019
-1.88
0.06*
Above 50 vertical meters/km
-0.011
0.01
-1.07
0.28**
Modeled in VoD space
Length
1.000
-
-
-
Wrong way
1.25
0.088
14.23
0.00
Wrong way - males
-0.284
0.086
-3.31
0.00
Congestion
Congestion time in turns
0.276
0.154
1.79
0.07 *
Link type
Road without bicycle facilities
-
-
-
-
Road with bicycle lanes
-0.084
0.059
-1.42
0.16**
Road with segregated bicycle path
-0.327
0.022
-14.67
0.00
Bicycle path in own trace
1.83
0.452
4.04
0.00
Bicycle path in own trace - fast cyclists
-2.03
0.451
-4.51
0.00
Bicycle path in own trace - medium cyclists
-1.92
0.450
-4.26
0.00
Footpath
0.378
0.151
2.51
0.01
Steps
0.521
0.791
0.66
0.51**
Number of motorised traﬃc lanes
0 lanes
0.351
0.054
6.50
0.00
1 lane
-1.07
0.272
-3.94
0.00
2 lanes
-
-
-
-
3-4 lanes
0.089
0.036
2.47
0.01
Land - use attributes - right side
Hydro
-
-
-
-
Green restricted areas
-
-
-
-
Green areas / Parks
-
-
-
-
Green areas / Forests
0.834
0.156
5.34
0.00
==PAGE:38==
5 Results
34
Green areas / Forests - males
-0.419
0.179
-2.34
0.02
Industrial and technical areas
0.107
0.056
1.91
0.06*
Urban / High residential and center areas
0.145
0.046
3.58
0.00
Urban / Low residential areas
0.213
0.046
4.59
0.00
Model parameters
Gamma
-0.002
9.77e-05
-22.63
0.00
Number of estimated parameters
24
Number of observations
3487
Null log-likelihood
-15,149.219
Final log-likelihood
-11,359.950
Adjusted rho-square
0.249
Note: * non signiﬁcant at the 95% level; ** non signiﬁcant at the 90% level.
5.2.1
Network attributes
According to the results shown in Table 8, turn frequency has a negative inﬂuence
in route choices, as it was concluded as well by Hood et al. (2011), Broach et al.
(2012), Zimmermann et al. (2017), Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015), Khatri et al. (2016),
Ghanayim and Bekhor (2018), and Prato et al. (2018). However, both right and left
turns present almost the same estimate value (the estimate for right turns is slightly
higher than for left turns when the number are not rounded oﬀ), which contradicts
for instance Prato et al. (2018), where it was found that left turns were more incon-
venient than right ones. Furthermore, the results suggest that having to spend time
in turns because of congestion is a relevant factor for cyclists route choices, making
the route to be perceived as 27.6% larger than when there is free congestion.
Cumulative elevation gain is seen as a negative factor, being more inconvenient when
increasing the level of steepness, but with the exception of the cumulative elevation
range of above 50 vertical meters per kilometer, which does not show to be signif-
icant. It may happen due to the presence of very few observations with that level
of steepens. Besides, and aligned with Prato et al. (2018), no relevant diﬀerence
between males and females in this regard were found.
The model speciﬁcation presented suggests as well that cyclists clearly dislike cycling
in the wrong direction, which is consistent with the ﬁndings of Hood et al. (2011),
Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015) and, Prato et al. (2018). Furthermore, it was found that
while for females cycling in the wrong direction makes the route to be perceived as
==PAGE:39==
5 Results
35
125% larger, for males this perception is reduced to 96.6%.
With regard to the diﬀerent types of bicycle infrastructures, the result show a clear
preference for the most common bicycle infrastructure existing in Copenhagen. Cy-
clists perceive routes as 32.7% shorter when cycling in a road with a segregated bicycle
path, in comparison to when cycling in a road without bicycle facilities. A similar
conclusion was stated by Hood et al. (2011), where road with segregated bicycle paths
were shown to be preferred over bicycle paths in own trace and routes shared with
vehicles. It also has to be noted that roads with bicycle lanes were not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from roads without bicycle facilities even at a 90% level of signiﬁcance, which
contradicts the ﬁndings of Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015) and Prato et al. (2018), where
the parameters for roads with segregated bicycle paths and roads with bicycle lanes
were joined together since they did not show to be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between
each other. In addition, it was found that for slow cyclists (average cycling speed
lower than 10km/h) bicycle paths in own trace are very unattractive compared to
roads with no bicycle facilities, while for medium and fast cyclists that perception
is relevantly diﬀerent, being these bicycle facilities even slightly attractive for them.
Finally, the results show that cycling in a footpath makes the route to be perceived
as 37.8% larger compared to roads without bicycle facilities, while steps did not show
to be signiﬁcant, maybe because the number of bicycle links of this type available in
the network is extremely small.
In line with the conclusion that roads with segregated bicycle paths are the preferred
bicycle infrastructure, it was found that roads with 2 motor traﬃc lanes are preferred
over paths without motor traﬃc lanes, where the route is perceived as 35.1% larger,
showing a clear cyclist’ preference for bicycle facilities next to roads. Besides, roads
with two motor traﬃc lanes are considered less attractive than roads with one motor
traﬃc lane, but more attractive than roads with three or four motor traﬃc lanes,
which leads to the conclusion that cyclists are aﬀected by motor traﬃc levels, as it
was concluded as well by Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015) and Prato et al. (2018).
5.2.2
Land use attributes
Regarding the results of the eﬀect of the land-use attributes in cyclists’ route choices,
ﬁrst it has to be noted that none of the left side land-use attributes showed a signiﬁ-
cant eﬀect. Therefore, only the land-use attributes of the right side of the links were
considered. As it can be seen in the results, routes with water, green restricted areas,
and parks on its right, are the preferred ones among all the others, which is aligned
==PAGE:40==
5 Results
36
with the ﬁndings of Ghanayim and Bekhor (2018), where it was seen a cyclists’ ten-
dency for cycling near to the sea and near to parks. In addition, compared to routes
with water, green restricted areas, or parks on its right, routes with low residential
areas, and routes with high residential and center areas are perceived as larger, but
the latter in a lesser extent (perceived as 21.3% and 14.5% larger respectively). These
results contradict the ones obtained by Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015) and Prato et al.
(2018), where a higher preference for low over high residential areas was shown. The
reason could be that bicycle facilities in high residential and center areas are usually
better taken care of, as well as that people usually prefer to cross the city instead of
going through more remote areas.
Another land-use attribute which is found as signiﬁcantly less attractive than water,
parks, or green restricted areas is forests, which can be related with the fact that
very often the paths located in this kind of places are not in the best condition for
cycling, regarding aspects such as lighting or surface, and being usually more used
for sport or recreative purposes than for practical ones. Furthermore, it was found
that while for males, cycling in a route with a forest on its right makes the route to
be perceived as 41.5% in comparison with routes with water, green restricted areas,
or parks on its right, for females this perception increases 83.4%, which reinforces
the guess suggested before, since in general, males use more the bicycle for sport or
recreative purposes.
==PAGE:41==
6 Conclusion
37
6
Conclusion
With the intention of contributing in fulﬁlling the existing gap in large scale transport
models regarding non-motorized transport modes, and more in particular cycling, this
study provides some conclusions extracted from a cycling route choice model based
on revealed preference data, which can be used for decision makers as a tool for eval-
uating, according to the observed cyclists’ preferences, the eﬀectiveness of cycling
related investments and policies.
The same initial observed routes as the ones used in the previous studies of Halldórs-
dóttir et al. (2015), and Prato et al. (2018), were studied, but in contrast, a diﬀerent
bicycle network was used, which besides, was improved in regard with two diﬀerent
aspects. First, the initial land-use information available in the network, which con-
sisted on dummy variables to show if a certain land use category was present or not
on each link, was improved in a way that gives us the opportunity to know the exact
number of kilometers of each land use category present on each link. Second, from the
initial elevation data available, which was composed by dummy variables which just
indicated if a link was ﬂat or not, it was obtained a much more detailed information
which enables us to know the total amount of vertical meters per kilometer gained
in each link, and classiﬁed according to four diﬀerent steepness level.
Given that a new bicycle network was applied to the study, it was required to map-
match the GPS points of the observed trips to that new network. Along the map-
matching process, it was realized that many relevant links used by the cyclists in the
observed routes were missing in the bicycle network, being necessary to manually
modify the network. As a result, and after adding links from the bicycle network
used in Halldórsdóttir et al. (2015), and Prato et al. (2018), creating new links, and
splitting existing ones, the size of the network was increased from the 74,726 initial
bicycle links, to a total of 76,070. That being done, the map-matching performance
of both the original and the modiﬁed version of the bicycle network were compared
to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of modiﬁcation carried out. According to the results,
the modiﬁed bicycle network performed better, showing that: 1) 55 more trips were
matched by using the modiﬁed bicycle network; 2) the number of trips where the
shortest path algorithm was required for the map-matching, was decreased in more
than seven percentage points, and when shortest path algorithm was required, the
average length of the trip matched in this way was reduced as well. 3) The number
of excluded trips because of not fulﬁlling the required criteria was reduced in more
==PAGE:42==
7 Further considerations
38
than seven percentage points.
Once having the data ready, it was possible to start with the route choice modelling.
The choice set generation was done by following the DSFG method, and by deﬁning
a multi-attribute cost function which took into account diﬀerent route attributes
apart from length. Regarding the model, initially a Path-Size logit (PSL) model was
tested, but given that the path size term did not perform correctly, a Multinomial
Logit (MNL) model was ﬁnally applied instead. In addition, it was decided to model
in value of distance space the route attributes which were deﬁned by length, while the
rest were modelled in preference for space. From the results of the model presented in
this study, it was extracted that cyclists prefer shorter routes, with low turn frequency,
and that the time spent in congested turns makes the route to be perceived as 27.6%.
Furthermore, it was found also that cumulative elevation gain is seen as a negative
factor, and that cycling in the wrong direction is also very unattractive, specially
for females. Concerning bicycle infrastructures, cyclists show a strong preference for
roads with segregated bicycle paths over the rest of link types. For slow cyclists,
bicycle paths in own trace are very unattractive, while for medium and fast cyclists,
those bicycle paths were even slightly attractive, always compared to roads with no
bicycle facilities. With regard to land-use attributes, only the ones in the right side
of the routes are relevant, and cyclists show a preference for cycling next to parks,
water, or green restricted areas. In addition, high urbanized and center areas are
shown to be more attractive than low urbanized areas, maybe because these areas
are usually better taken care of, or maybe just for the pleasure of cycling in the city
center. Finally, females dislike cylcing next to forests in a higher extent than males,
which can be on account of the surface, or the lighting of the available paths in those
kind of places.
7
Further considerations
Due to time constrains and unexpected troubles that arose along the project, there
are diﬀerent things that could have been done, and others that could have been done
in a diﬀerent way.
For instance, with regard to the data improvements added to the network, it would
be very convenient to calculate the elevation data in a more precise way in order
to avoid the errors that were assumed in the present study. In addition, and given
that the decision of extending the bicycle network was taken when the modiﬁcations
==PAGE:43==
8 Acknowledgments
39
in land-use and elevation data were already ﬁnished, it was not possible to count
with that information for some of the new links added to the network. Furthermore,
it would be highly recommended to study the possibility of further extending the
bicycle network, since the manual extension carried out in the present study was
based on the assumption that the problematic trips were the ones where the length
map-matched by the shortest path algorithm was higher than 10% of the trip length,
and those were the only trips on which the extension was based. Therefore, a more
detailed analysis of the bicycle network should be done in order to ﬁnd more missed
links.
Concerning the cyclist route choice modelling, it would be interesting to apply more
advanced models than the one used in the present study. For example, and due to the
fact that there are several observations per individual, applying a Mixed Logit (ML)
model would be a good idea since this kind of model accounts for the heterogeneity
in the individual preference for speciﬁc alternatives. Additionally, apart from the
congestion time in turns which is already included in the route choice model presented
in this study, it could be relevant to include information regarding the level of cycling
congestion in the diﬀerent roads and paths of Copenhagen. In the present study
this information was slightly tested, but nothing relevant was found. However, a
more detailed analysis should be done in order to properly check whether this factor
actually has a relevant inﬂuence in cyclists’ route choices or not.
8
Acknowledgments
First of all, I would like to aknowledge to my two supervisors Otto Anker Nielsen and
Anders Fjendbo Jensen. The ideas and solution that Otto gave me were always very
useful, and Anders was always willing to help me as much as possible, even not being
in Copenhagen and having to talk at really inconvenient times for him. In addition,
I would like thank Thomas Ross Pedersen and Thomas Kjær Rasmussen, who not
being my supervisors, helped me out so many times, and were very important for
this project to be done.
Of course, I aknowledge my mother, my father, and my brother, who always have to
listen to all my complains, but they are always there to do so, and my friends who
always make me forget the problems for a while. Finally, I aknowledge to all the
people who made it possible that hopefully, I am about to ﬁnish a MSc in Transport
and Logistics in one of the best universities of Europe.
==PAGE:44==
REFERENCES
40
References
Axhausen, K. W. and Smith, R. L. J.
“BICYCLIST LINK EVALUATION: A
STATED-PREFERENCE APPROACH”. Transportation Research Record, (1085):
7–15, 1986. ISSN 21694052, 03611981.
Bekhor, S., Ben-Akiva, M. E., and Ramming, M. S. “Evaluation of choice set gener-
ation algorithms for route choice models”. Annals of Operations Research, 144(1):
235–247, 2006. ISSN 15729338, 02545330. doi: 10.1007/s10479-006-0009-8.
Ben-akiva, M. and Bierlaire, M. “Discrete Choice Methods And Their Applications
To Short Term Travel Decisions”. 2009. doi: 10.1.1.37.2711.
Ben-Akiva, M., Bergman, M., Daly, A. J., and Ramaswamy, R. “Modeling inter-
urban route choice behaviour”. In Proceedings of the 9th international symposium
on transportation and traﬃc theory, pages 299–330. VNU Science Press Utrecht,
The Netherlands, 1984.
Bliemer, M. C. J. and Bovy, P. H. L. “Impact of Route Choice Set on Route Choice
Probabilities”.
Transportation Research Record, 2076(2076):10–19, 2008.
ISSN
21694052, 03611981. doi: 10.3141/2076-02.
Bovy, P. H. L. and Bradley, M. A. “ROUTE CHOICE ANALYZED WITH STATED-
PREFERENCE APPROACHES”. Transportation Research Record, (1037):1–11,
1985. ISSN 21694052, 03611981.
Bovy, P. H. L. and Fiorenzo-Catalano, S. “Stochastic route choice set generation:
Behavioral and probabilistic foundations”. Transportmetrica, 3(3):173–189, 2007.
ISSN 19440987, 18128602.
Broach, J., Gliebe, J., and Dill, J.
“Calibrated Labeling Method for Generating
Bicyclist Route Choice Sets Incorporating Unbiased Attribute Variation”. Trans-
portation Research Record, 2197(2197):89–97, 2010. ISSN 21694052, 03611981. doi:
10.3141/2197-11.
Broach, J., Dill, J., and Gliebe, J.
“Where do cyclists ride? A route choice
model developed with revealed preference GPS data”.
Transportation Research
Part A: Policy and Practice, 46(10):1730 – 1740, 2012.
ISSN 0965-8564.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2012.07.005.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0965856412001164.
==PAGE:45==
REFERENCES
41
Cascetta, E., Nuzzolo, A., Russo, F., and Vitetta, A. “A modiﬁed logit route choice
model overcoming path overlapping problems. Speciﬁcation and some calibration
results for interurban networks”. Transportation and Traﬃc Theory, pages 697–711,
1996.
Casello, J. and Usyukov, V. “Modeling Cyclists’ Route Choice Based on GPS Data”.
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board,
2430:155–161, 2014. doi: 10.3141/2430-16. URL https://doi.org/10.3141/2430-16.
CBInsights. The global bike-share boom: Dockless models look to solve urban com-
mutes
transit access. Available at: https://www.cbinsights.com/research/bike-
sharing-boom/, 2018. Accessed 15 May 2018.
Christiansen, H. and Jensen, C.
“Modernisering af Transportvaneundersøgelsen”.
Artikler Fra Traﬁkdage På Aalborg Universitet, 2009.
De La Barra, T., Perez, B., and Anez, J. “Multidimensional path search and assign-
ment”. In PTRC Summer Annual Meeting, 21st, 1993, University of Manchester,
United Kingdom, 1993.
ESRI.
ArcGIS Desktop: Release 10.4. Enviromental Systems Research Institute,
2018.
EU. “The State of European Cities Report, 2016 - Cities leading the way to a better
future”. Technical report, European Commission, 2016.
FOT-Kort10.
Information om det nye kort10 og fot-kort10.
Available at:
https://download.kortforsyningen.dk/, 2010. Accessed 16 March 2018.
Ghanayim, M. and Bekhor, S. “Modelling bicycle route choice using data from a
GPS-assisted household survey.” European Journal of Transport & Infrastructure
Research, 18(2), 2018.
Götschi, T. “Costs and Beneﬁts of Bicycling Investments in Portland, Oregon”. 8:
S49–S58, 01 2011.
Halldorsdottir, K., Rieser-Schussler, N., Axhausen, K. W., Nielsen, O. A., and Prato,
C. G.
“Eﬃciency of choice set generation methods for bicycle routes”.
Euro-
pean Journal of Transport and Infrastructure Research, 14(4):332–348, 2014. ISSN
15677141, 15677133.
Halldórsdóttir, K., Nielsen, O., and Prato, C. Behavioural models for cycling - Case
studies of the Copenhagen Region. PhD thesis, 2015.
==PAGE:46==
REFERENCES
42
Hood, J., Sall, E., and Charlton, B. “A GPS-based bicycle route choice model for
San Francisco, California”. Transportation Letters, 3(1):63–75, 2011. doi: 10.3328/
TL.2011.03.01.63-75. URL https://doi.org/10.3328/TL.2011.03.01.63-75.
Hoogendoorn-Lanser, v. N. R., S. and Bovy, P. “A rule-based approach to route choice
set generation. Presented at the 11th International Conference on Travel Behaviour
Research, Kyoto, Japan, . Hopkinson, P. and Wardman, M. (1996). Evaluating the
demand for new cycle facilities”. Transport Policy, 3(4):241–249, 2006.
Hopkinson, P. and Wardman, M. “Evaluating the demand for new cycle facilities”.
Transport Policy, 3(4):241–249, 1996. ISSN 1879310x, 0967070x. doi: 10.1016/
S0967-070X(96)00020-0.
Hunt, J. D. and Abraham, J. E. “Inﬂuences on bicycle use”. Transportation, 34
(4):453–470, Jul 2007. ISSN 1572-9435. doi: 10.1007/s11116-006-9109-1. URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11116-006-9109-1.
Khatri, R., Cherry, C. R., Nambisan, S. S., and Han, L. D. “Modeling Route Choice
of Utilitarian Bikeshare Users with GPS Data”. Transportation Research Record,
2587(2587):141–149, 2016. ISSN 21694052, 03611981. doi: 10.3141/2587-17.
Krizek, K. J. “Two approaches to valuing some of bicycle facilities’ presumed beneﬁts:
Propose a session for the 2007 national planning conference in the city of brotherly
love”. Journal of the American Planning Association, 72(3):309–320, 2006.
Københavns. “Cykelstiprioriteringsplan 2017-2025”. Technical report, Københavns
Kommune, 2017.
London. “Cycling Revolution London”. Technical report, Transport for London, 2010.
Menghini, G., Carrasco, N., Schüssler, N., and Axhausen, K. “Route choice of cyclists
in Zurich”. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 44(9):754 – 765,
2010. ISSN 0965-8564. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2010.07.008. URL http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0965856410001187.
Nielsen, O. “A stochastic transit assignment model considering diﬀerences in pas-
sengers utility functions”. Transportation Research Part B-methodological, 34(5):
377–402, 2000. ISSN 18792367, 01912615. doi: 10.1016/S0191-2615(99)00029-6.
Nielsen, O. A. and Jørgensen, R. M.
“Map-matching algorithms for GPS-data -
methodology and test on data from the AKTA road pricing experiment in Copen-
hagen”. World Conference on Transport Research Society (wctrs), 2004.
==PAGE:47==
REFERENCES
43
Paris. “Paris Capitale du vélo 2020”. Technical report, Mairie de Paris, 2015.
Pereira Segadilha, A. B. and Sanches, S. d. P. “Identiﬁcation of factors that inﬂuence
cyclists’ route choice”. Procedia: Social and Behavioral Sciences, 160:372–380, 2014.
ISSN 18770428. doi: 10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.12.149.
Prato, C. G. “Route choice modeling: Past, present and future research directions”.
Journal of Choice Modelling, 2(1):65–100, 2009. ISSN 17555345. doi: 10.1016/
S1755-5345(13)70005-8.
Prato, C. G. and Bekhor, S. “Applying Branch-and-Bound Technique to Route Choice
Set Generation”. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation
Research Board, 1985(1):19–28, 2006. ISSN 21694052, 03611981. doi: 10.1177/
0361198106198500103.
Prato, C. G., Halldórsdóttir, K., and Nielsen, O. A. “Evaluation of land-use and
transport network eﬀects on cyclists’ route choices in the Copenhagen Region in
value-of-distance space”. International Journal of Sustainable Transportation, 0(0):
1–12, 2018. doi: 10.1080/15568318.2018.1437236. URL https://doi.org/10.1080/
15568318.2018.1437236.
Pritchard, R. “Revealed Preference Methods for Studying Bicycle Route Choice—A
Systematic Review”. In International journal of environmental research and public
health, 2018.
Pucher, J. and Buehler, R. City Cycling. MIT Press„ 2012. ISBN 9780262517812.
Ramming, M. S. “Network knowledge and route choice”. 2002.
Rasmussen, T. K., Ingvardson, J. B., Halldórsdóttir, K., and Nielsen, O. A. “Im-
proved methods to deduct trip legs and mode from travel surveys using wearable
GPS devices: A case study from the Greater Copenhagen area”. Computers, En-
vironment and Urban Systems, 54:301–313, 2015. ISSN 18737587, 01989715. doi:
10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2015.04.001.
Rasmusseni, T. K., Anderson, M. K., Nielsen, O. A., and Prato, C. G. “Timetable-
based simulation method for choice set generation in large-scale public transport
networks”. European Journal of Transport and Infrastructure Research, 16(3):467–
489, 2016. ISSN 15677141, 15677133.
Rieser-Schuessler, N., Balmer, M., and Axhausen, K. W. “Route choice sets for very
high-resolution data”. Transportmetrica A-transport Science, 9(9):825–845, 2013.
ISSN 23249943, 23249935. doi: 10.1080/18128602.2012.671383.
==PAGE:48==
REFERENCES
44
Schuessler,
N. and Axhausen,
K.
“Processing raw data from global po-
sitioning
systems
without
additional
information”.
Transportation
Re-
search
Record,
(2105):28–36,
2009.
doi:
10.3141/2105-04.
URL
https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-76649096302&doi=10.
3141%2f2105-04&partnerID=40&md5=63af58fb289e421be46684ade7dbf1f6. cited
By 115.
Segadilha, A. B. P. and da Penha Sanches, S.
“Analysis of Bicycle Commuter
Routes Using GPSs and GIS”.
Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 162:
198 – 207, 2014. ISSN 1877-0428. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.12.
200. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877042814063010.
XVIII Congreso Panamericano de Ingeniería de Tránsito, Transporte y Logística
(PANAM 2014).
Sener, I. N., Eluru, N., and Bhat, C. R.
“An analysis of bicycle route choice
preferences in Texas, US”. Transportation, 36(5):511–539, 2009. ISSN 15729435,
00494488. doi: 10.1007/s11116-009-9201-4.
Stinson, M. and Bhat, C. “Commuter Bicyclist Route Choice: Analysis Using a Stated
Preference Survey”. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation
Research Board, 1828:107–115, 2003. ISSN 21694052, 03611981. doi: 10.3141/
1828-13.
Tilahun, N. Y., Levinson, D. M., and Krizek, K. J. “Trails, lanes, or traﬃc: Valu-
ing bicycle facilities with an adaptive stated preference survey”. Transportation
Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 41(4):287 – 301, 2007. ISSN 0965-8564.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2006.09.007.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S096585640600108X.
Tønning, A. and Vuk, G. “Modelling of bicycle transport in OTM”. Traﬁkdage på
Aalborg Universitet, 2017. ISSN 1603-9696.
Wardman, M. “A Comparison of Revealed Preference and Stated Preference Models
of Travel Behaviour”. Journal of Transport Economics and Policy, 22(1):71–91,
1988. ISSN 17545951, 00225258.
Zhang, Y. and Mi, Z. “Environmental beneﬁts of bike sharing: A big data-based
analysis”. Applied Energy, 220:296 – 301, 2018. ISSN 0306-2619. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.03.101. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0306261918304392.
==PAGE:49==
REFERENCES
45
Zimmermann, M., Mai, T., and Frejinger, E.
“Bike route choice modeling using
GPS data without choice sets of paths”. Transportation Research Part C: Emerg-
ing Technologies, 75:183 – 196, 2017.
ISSN 0968-090X.
doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.trc.2016.12.009. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0968090X16302637.
==PAGE:50==
Appendix
46
A
Appendix
Table A.1: Model estimates of the Path-Size logit model
Parameter
Estimate
St.err.
t-test
p
Non modeled in VoD space
ln (Path −size)
-0.706
0.058
-12.25
0.00
Right turns
-0.082
0.018
-4.57
0.00
Left turns
-0.082
0.018
-4.47
0.00
Cumulative elevation gain
0-10 vertical meters/km
-
-
-
-
10-35 vertical meters/km
-0.026
0.01
-2.58
0.01
35-50 vertical meters/km
-0.032
0.019
-1.70
0.09*
Above 50 vertical meters/km
-0.009
0.01
-0.87
0.38**
Modeled in VoD space
Length
1.000
-
-
-
Wrong way
1.66
0.140
11.84
0.00
Wrong way - males
-0.374
0.115
-3.26
0.00
Congestion
Congestion time in turns
0.233
0.201
1.16
0.25 **
Link type
Road without bicycle facilities
-
-
-
-
Road with bicycle lanes
-0.082
0.078
-1.05
0.30**
Road with segregated bicycle path
-0.404
0.032
-12.60
0.00
Bicycle path in own trace
2.58
0.635
4.07
0.00
Bicycle path in own trace - fast cyclists
-2.84
0.634
-4.48
0.00
Bicycle path in own trace - medium cyclists
-2.70
0.631
-4.28
0.00
Footpath
0.464
0.197
2.36
0.02
Steps
0.86
1.06
0.81
0.42**
Number of motorised traﬃc lanes
0 lanes
0.493
0.076
6.51
0.00
1 lane
-1.36
0.362
-3.76
0.00
2 lanes
-
-
-
-
3-4 lanes
0.110
0.0474
2.33
0.02
Land - use attributes - right side
Hydro
-
-
-
-
==PAGE:51==
A Appendix
47
Green restricted areas
-
-
-
-
Green areas / Parks
-
-
-
-
Green areas / Forests
1.04
0.211
4.91
0.00
Green areas / Forests - males
-0.566
0.237
-2.38
0.02
Industrial and technical areas
0.122
0.0747
1.63
0.10*
Urban / High residential and center areas
0.236
0.058
4.09
0.00
Urban / Low residential areas
0.295
0.065
4.55
0.00
Model parameters
Gamma
-0.002
5.24e-05
-15.94
0.00
Number of estimated parameters
25
Number of observations
3487
Null log-likelihood
-15,149.219
Final log-likelihood
-11,280.247
Adjusted rho-square
0.254
Note: * non signiﬁcant at the 95% level; ** non signiﬁcant at the 90% level.
