==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Electric Vehicle Battery Patterns Based On
Frequency Regulation Services
Ívar Hrafn Ágústsson
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3800
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
www.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Renewable energy sources (RES), such as wind and solar are increasing their mar-
ket share in power systems and they are replacing conventional power plants. The
conventional power plants offer ancillary services that maintains the system balance.
Since RES are unable to produce power on demand, there is a need for new type
of energy sources that can help to maintain the power balance between consumption
and generation in the future power systems. Electric vehicles (EVs) have a steadily in-
creasing market share in the automotive industry. EVs come equipped with a battery
of a considerable size that might become a valuable energy storage unit if utilized for
ancillary services. Vehicle-to-Grid (V2G) is a technology that enables EVs to partici-
pate in ancillary services via bi-directional chargers. Frequency regulation is among
grid service that has potential through V2G.
In this project the battery patterns of EVs participating in frequency regulation are
analyzed. Four different strategies are used for the analysis tasked with regulating the
input and output powers of a bi-directional charger depending on the grid frequency.
A program is constructed that simulates the battery behavior of an EV participating
through the four strategies. The purpose of the simulation is to compute the energy
transmission between an EV and the grid as well as the cycles the battery undergoes
during the service provision. Real frequency data from Regional Group - Continental
Europe (RG-CE) and Regional Group - Nordic (RG-N) are used in the simulations to
investigate the differences between the regions. The simulation also considers different
battery capacities to determine how it may influence the results of the simulation.
Functionality of preferred operating point (POP) mechanism, which is a smart
charging algorithm designed to maintain the battery charge within a set boundary
during frequency regulation provision is presented and discussed in this thesis, and the
battery patterns are investigated both with and without POP. The results indicate
great differences between service provision in RG-N and RG-CE. An EV providing
service in DK2, which is in RG-N, can expect to transmit much more energy than
an identical EV providing service in DK1, which is in RG-CE. In addition, the cycle
periods the battery undergoes in DK2 are more severe and frequent than for an
identical battery in DK1.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Electrical Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a
M.Sc. degree in Electrical Engineering. This thesis was conducted from the 29th
of January to the 29th of June 2018 and it corresponds to 30 ECTS points. It has
been carried out under the supervision of Senior Researcher Peter Bach Andersen
and Postdoc Seyedmostafa Hashemi Toghroljerdi.
Kongens Lyngby, June 29, 2018
Ívar Hrafn Ágústsson
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
This project gave me an insight into very exciting technologies and future possibili-
ties. Learning about electric vehicles, batteries and their potential in regards to grid
support for the future power systems is an interesting topic to explore. I appreciate
the opportunity it provided to develop my programming skills and learn Python.
My sincere thanks go to my supervisors Peter and Seyedmostafa for their guidance
throughout the project period. The work being done by The Parker Project is exciting
and I am glad to have contributed a small part to it. Being able to work on a project
one finds interesting is motivating and that was surely the case.
I extend my gratitude to my parents for their never ending support, encouragement
and motivation.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theoretical Analysis
5
2.1
Power System Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Frequency Control Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Electricity Markets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Electric Vehicle Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
Battery Technology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.2.1
Battery Terminology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.3
Battery Degradation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.3.1
Calendar Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.3.2
Cycle Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.3.3
Degradation under V2G . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
Vehicle-to-Grid in Practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.1
The Parker Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Simulation Methods
19
3.1
Input Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Phase 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Phase 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
Phase 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5
Program Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5.1
FCR_function Explained . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5.2
Power Output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.5.3
SOC Output
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
3.6
Real V2G Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.6.1
The Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.7
Curve Fitting and Error Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Results
39
4.1
Frequency Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Phase 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2.1
The Four Strategies under the same Frequency Data . . . . . .
41
4.2.2
RG-CE and RG-N Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
Phase 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3.1
Energy Transfer - 12 kWh Battery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3.2
Battery Patterns - 12 kWh Battery
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3.3
Energy Transfer - 24 kWh Battery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.3.4
Battery Patterns - 24 kWh Battery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.3.5
Energy Transfer - 60 kWh Battery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.3.6
Battery Patterns - 60 kWh Battery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.4
Phase 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.4.1
Energy Transfer with POP - 12 kWh Battery . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.4.2
Battery Patterns with POP - 12 kWh Battery . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.4.3
Energy Transfer with POP - 24 kWh Battery . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.4.4
Battery Patterns with POP - 24 kWh Battery . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.4.5
Energy Transfer with POP - 60 kWh Battery . . . . . . . . . .
65
4.4.6
Battery Patterns with POP - 60 kWh Battery . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.5
Analysis of 2-step POP function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.6
Real V2G Data Analysis and Model Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5
Discussion
77
5.1
Battery Patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
5.2
Cycle Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
5.3
POP algorithm and Model Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6
Conclusion
81
6.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
A An Appendix
85
A.1 Python Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
A.2 Frequency Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
A.3 Phase 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
A.4 RG-CE and RG-N Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
A.4.1
12 kWh Battery - Normal and 1-step POP Operation
. . . . .
87
A.4.2
24 kWh Battery - Normal and 1-step POP Operation
. . . . .
90
A.4.3
60 kWh Battery - Normal and 1-step POP Operation
. . . . .
92
Bibliography
95
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The 4th industrial revolution is underway and with it come immense changes to
everyday life.
The first industrial revolution started in England during the 18th
century with the birth of the steam and water engines freeing human and animal
labor. The second revolution came about during the 19th century, bringing electric
power, assembly lines and mass production. The third revolution started in the 1960s
with the rise of computers and automation.
The 4th industrial revolution is bringing in a new age by expanding on the digital
technologies brought about by the 3rd revolution. Embedded Systems, Internet of
Things and Artificial Intelligence are technologies that will make their mark on every
industry, the power systems included.
The first AC power generators, a product of the 3rd industrial revolution, were
produced in the late 19th century and that technology has henceforth been the worlds
main source of electric power. The conventional power system consists of a large power
generator which dispatches power over high-voltage transmission lines, to a substation
that steps down the voltage and then directs the power to a distribution grid where
the power reaches the consumers. This system is referred to as a centralized power
system. It is controlled by a centralized grid that transmits the power to its end users.
The Transmission System Operator (TSO) is tasked with the power distribution and
maintaining the system stability. The power systems in Europe operate at 50 Hz
when power production and demand is at a balance. This is due to the power grid
being a synchronous system and therefore the same frequency is measured everywhere
in the grid. Figure 1.1 demonstrates a voltage wave and the power balance sensitivity.
(a) 50Hz and 60Hz Waves.
(b) Frequency Balance [1].
Figure 1.1: Visualization of a 50Hz voltage wave and the power balance sensitivity.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
Power system operation is going through a transformation. It is moving away
from the centralized system which is in place today to a decentralized system. A
decentralized system will have multiple levels of integration by applying software
capable of exchanging information and allowing bi-directional flow of power. This
will free energy consumers to transition to prosumerism, where users can produce
energy by employing distributed energy systems such as solar panels and participate
in the electricity market by selling any surplus electricity they produce. This type
of power system is referred to as Smart Grid. Advancing battery technology enables
users to also set up battery stations in their homes and as such become more self-
dependant. With this type of interconnection, households are also able to participate
in demand response. Demand response refers to grid assistance from the demand side.
One such possible grid service is frequency regulation. Not all devices are suitable to
use in demand response, as many wont tolerate the frequent turn on and off that is
required without loss of comfort for the user. Battery powered devices, however, have
a special potential for this kind of operation. Devices such as laptops can have their
power supply turned off for a short duration without causing problems for the user.
Improving battery technology allows more and more devices to be battery powered.
This includes various types of transportation systems.
Electric Vehicles (EVs) started to make a presence in the automobile industry in
the 1990s after a century-long hiatus although they have only recently properly be-
come a viable option for customers. This resurgence had the power utilities concerned
as to how these vehicles would affect the power system and were mainly viewed as
new excessive load [2]. It was however first described by Kempton and Letendre in
[2] that the EV could serve a greater role than solely as load, as plugged in EVs
could have a bi-directional connection with the power grid. As such, they are able
to provide grid services by both charging and discharging from and to the grid. This
technology is referred to as Vehicle-to-Grid or simply V2G. The V2G technology is
being researched and developed at DTU through the Parker Project. It aims to cer-
tify that commercial electric vehicles are a viable option for grid assistance. The
possible services an EV can provide by means of V2G includes frequency regulation
and reactive power support for voltage control. Electric Vehicles have a battery of
considerable size and are therefore able to transmit much more energy on demand
than most other household devices. The lifetime of batteries is limited and more use
causes faster aging effects on the batteries, as will be demonstrated in Chapter 2. For
that reason, it is important to analyze how EV batteries are affected when providing
V2G services.
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Project Overview
3
1.1
Project Overview
The purpose of this project is to analyze energy transmission and battery patterns that
occur when an EV is providing frequency regulation services through a bi-directional
connection with the transmission grid.
This is done by analyzing real frequency
data from the synchronous frequency areas in continental Europe and the Nordic
region, referred to as DK1 and DK2 respectively. Four different frequency regulation
strategies are analyzed under DK1 and DK2 frequency. It is also important to examine
different battery capacities as battery patterns are expected to differ between different
capacities.
A program is designed with the purpose of reading in the frequency
data and simulate the corresponding change in battery charge, as described by each
strategy’s droop control.
The project is split into three main parts. First the energy transmitted between
the grid and vehicle is analyzed without taking battery capacity into consideration.
In the second part, battery capacity is considered but no limits are set as to
how much the battery can be charged or discharged. In the third part, a preferred
operating point (POP) is implemented. POP is a smart charging algorithm that is
tasked with maintaining the battery charge within a set boundary and thus preventing
the charge in the battery from reaching critical limits. The procedure to achieve the
results and what questions they will answer is summarized as follows:
• Study the theory behind frequency regulation, V2G and the factors that affect
battery degradation the most.
• Create and analyze simulated data based on the four frequency regulation strate-
gies and real frequency data.
- To what extent do the DK1 and DK2 frequencies differ?
- What patterns does the battery display under the different strategies?
- What are the differences in battery patterns between different battery ca-
pacities?
- How do these results change when a POP algorithm is applied?
• Analyze real frequency regulation data from the Parker Project.
- Compare with the result of the simulation for model validation.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Theoretical Analysis
2.1
Power System Operation
The alternating current (AC) power system consists of power generators, transmission
system, sub-transmission system and a distribution system. This system is in place in
order to supply its end users with electricity. The centralized power generators feed
into the transmission system, known as the grid, which is operated at high voltage.
The power is directed to a distribution network where it passes through a substation
which steps down the voltage by means of transformers. The distribution network is
then tasked with supplying power to the users and is operated by the Distribution
System Operator (DSO).
The grid has no internal storage for electricity and, as such, it is essential that
the production always meets the demand. This is a constant concern for the TSO as
the demand fluctuates throughout the day. The electric power transported in an AC
system is apparent power, as shown in Eq. 2.1.
S = V · I∗= P + jQ
(2.1)
Power is a product of voltage and current. The apparent power is complex and
consist of active (P) and reactive (Q) power. The active power is the power that
produces work while reactive power does not. Reactive power is formed when the
voltage and current waves are out of phase. Although reactive power does not produce
work, it is a necessary component in maintaining system stability. Whenever the load
demand changes, the voltage levels change. Losses in the system are also inevitable
which results in a decreased voltage level at the end of a transmission line. Reactive
power demand increases as a result of voltage deviation. If this demand is not met,
the voltage level drops further and starts to negatively affect voltage levels at buses
surrounding it [3].
The power systems in Europe operate at 50 Hz when active power production
and demand are at a balance. This is due to the power grid being a synchronous
system and therefore the same frequency is measured everywhere in the grid. Since
the power is mainly produced by large electrical machines with rotating mass with
high inertia, the generators are unable to adjust their production instantly. However,
minor unbalances will however not cause a blackout due to the kinetic energy of the
rotating mass. Instead, the frequency deviates in case of energy deficit or surplus.
The motion of synchronous machines is represented in Eq. 2.2 [4].
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Theoretical Analysis
J · dw
dt = Tm −Te
(2.2)
Here J represents the inertia of the generator, Tm is the mechanical torque pro-
duced by the generator and Te is the electrical torque which is produced by the
demand. w is the rotor speed of the generator, also expressed as w = 2πf where f is
the grid frequency. t represents the time in seconds. The relationship between power
and torque is expressed in Eq. 2.3.
P = w · T
(2.3)
As such it is possible to extend Eq. 2.2, as demonstrated in Eq. 2.4 where Pm is
the mechanical power and Pe is the electrical power.
J · w · dw
dt = Pm −Pe
(2.4)
Eq. 2.4 shows how the grid frequency deviates as long as the demand and produc-
tion are not equal. The derivative dw
dt is the rate of change of frequency (ROCOF)
[5].
2.1.1
Frequency Control Systems
Europe is split into different regional groups, each with their own synchronous inter-
connected systems. Denmark is split between two different regions, as can be seen
in Figure 2.1. Jutland is part of the Regional Group Continental Europe (RG-CE)
while Zealand is part of Regional Group Nordic (RG-N). The area of Denmark that
belongs to RG-CE is denoted as DK1 and the area belonging to RG-N is denoted as
DK2.
There are two main automatic control systems in place designed to keep the system
in balance, primary control and secondary control. As mentioned in the Introduction,
four different primary control strategies are analyzed in this project, two of which are
from RG-N and two, the primary strategies in DK1 and Germany, from RG-CE.
The frequency at RG-N is actively kept within a range of 49.9Hz and 50.1Hz.
Primary control is tasked with maintaining the balance between the demand and
generation.
The frequency in the system is the indicator of that balance, and as
such, it is continuously regulated to ensure it remains within the boundary. This
main type of control is the Frequency Containment Reserve - Normal (FCR-N). The
second type of primary frequency control is the Frequency Containment Reserve -
Disturbance (FCR-D), which is activated when the frequency drops below 49.9Hz.
Although RG-N extends over four countries, it is the responsibility of each local TSO
to maintain the system balance within their country.
At RG-CE, it is not the duty of the primary control to control the frequency while
the system in normal operation. Therefore a deadband around the nominal frequency
of 50 Hz is allowed [5]. In DK1, a deadband of ±20mHz is allowed while a ±10mHz
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Power System Operation
7
Figure 2.1: Regional groups within Europe [6].
deadband is allowed in Germany. The primary control instead operates as a stability
reserve. The RG-CE strategies are referred to as Primary Frequency Reserve - DK
(PFR-DK) and Primary Frequency Reserve - DE (PFR-DE). The primary control
strategies apply a droop control to achieve a linear characteristic of the control. Eq.
2.5 shows the frequency control droop function.
f −f0 = −kp · (P −P0)
(2.5)
Here f0 is the nominal frequency, P0 represents the set point for active power, P
is the active power and kp is the droop slope. The droop control allows for genera-
tors to respond to deviations in frequency simultaneously. The four primary control
strategies analyzed for this project are shown in Figure 2.2.
If the demand increases above the production the ROCOF from Eq. 2.4 becomes
negative and the grid frequency decreases. The generators compensate by increasing
the power output. Such operation is referred to as up-regulation. The generators
participate in down-regulation if the frequency increases, whereupon they respond by
decreasing their production.
As mentioned in the Introduction, demand response
is the participation of load applications in grid assistance such as FCR. Battery
powered applications can both consume and dispatch power; as such, Figure 2.2
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Theoretical Analysis
Figure 2.2: The four primary control strategies applied within RG-N and RG-CE.
shows the power as a function of the frequency, where frequencies above 50Hz may
result in negative power. Negative power means the battery charges from the grid
and discharges if the power is positive.
2.1.2
Electricity Markets
While frequency control is tasked with keeping the system in balance, it is the elec-
tricity market that determines which power producers are allowed to produce at one
time and which will be called upon to maintain system balance. There are four mar-
ket types tasked with a specific role in order to reach a power balance. The future
market arranges long term financial contracts between TSO and power producers and
used for risk management. The day-ahead market is where the power producer bids a
specific amount of energy at a certain price that they intend to deliver the following
day. A merit order curve determines which generators will eventually produce, as
each offer is ranked from cheapest to most expensive. The demand is ranked from
most expensive to cheapest: the point at which these curves intersect is where the
balance between demand and production is reached. The balance point determines
which producers are set to produce the following day as well as the electricity price
[7]. The Nordic day-ahead market is controlled by Nord Pool while each individual
country in the RG-CE operates its own day-ahead market within the rules set by
ENTSO-E. The interaction between the different market actors and an example of a
merit order curve are shown in Figure 2.3.
Since the day-ahead market is cleared 12 - 36 hours before actual operation, it is
essential to have a secondary market that operates closer to real time to make up for
any shortcomings in the production or load changes. Therefore, the intra-day market
covers that by operates few hours before real time operation and handles any unex-
pected production failure. The TSO has a bilateral contract with the power suppliers
in the intra-day market. The fourth type of electricity market is the balancing mar-
ket. It is close to real-time operation, tasked with maintaining system balance, and
is controlled by the TSO [8]. Ancillary services such as frequency control is linked to
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Power System Operation
9
(a) The market actors in the Nordic power sys-
tem.
(b) Merit order curve for Day-Ahead market.
Figure 2.3: The interaction between the different market actors and the price setting
merit order curve [6].
the operation of the balancing market. Players that intend to bid in the balancing
market in Denmark must fulfill certain conditions set by the TSO. The bid must
be at least 0.3 MW and the player must be able to provide the regulation until the
automatic and manual reserve takes over or for a minimum of 15 minutes [9].
The electricity market is facing a great change in how electricity is produced and
distributed. Renewable energy sources have been steadily increasing in Europe over
the last two decades and are expected to reach a 50% production share by 2030 [10].
With an awakening among people towards sustainability and the causes of global
warming, countries are more aware of the need for sustainable energy production.
Wind and solar power are, however, very volatile as they are unable to produce energy
on demand which makes their participation in the day-ahead market often uncertain.
Due to the sensitive balance requirements between demand and production, this may
cause problems. Wind and solar power are in principle free energy. A wind farm that
participates in the electricity market is a price taker instead of a price maker. The
wind farm will always sell its energy, however much it produces, at the market price.
When a lot of wind energy is produced, it pushes more conventional power producers
out of the market. When little wind energy is produced, the conventional power plants
are needed to meet the demand. Hence, since wind power is such an unstable source of
energy, the conventional power producers are needed to ensure stability in the system
and serve as backup generators in case wind power is low. However, as wind power
pushes down the market price and cuts more conventional power producers out of the
market more often, they make less profit and may eventually become unprofitable.
The increase in uncertainty in power production and reduction in conventional
producers will require rigorous control strategies and new providers for FCR. Demand
response has great potential to help with maintaining system stability and will be
an important player in future electricity markets [11], furthermore, battery powered
applications have the possibility of both charging and discharging from the grid on
demand which makes them highly valuable in regard to frequency control.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Theoretical Analysis
2.2
Electric Vehicle Technology
An electric vehicle (EV) uses electric power, often from a battery source to power an
electric motor to gain propulsion. Sales of electric cars have steadily increased over
the past eight years and will increase further in the future [12]. Plug-in electric cars
can either be battery electric vehicles (BEV), which are all-electric, or plug-in hybrid
electric vehicles (PHEV). A PHEV has an internal combustion engine (ICE) as well
as an internal battery to power an electric motor. This battery is charged via a plug
but the battery is usually of smaller capacity than that of BEV. PHEV may have a
battery capacity between 4 to 16 kWh while BEVs have a battery size ranging from
20 kWh up to the 100 kWh battery of Tesla Model X [13], [14]. The terminology
for BEVs and PHEV will be expressed as EV as they are analogues in behavior in
regards to this project.
Several factors contribute to making an EV a viable option for customers. The EV
requires a lot less maintenance. The EV requires a lot less maintenance since it has
considerable less moving parts than the ICE car. The EV is also more environmentally
friendly [15]. The number of car manufacturers that produce EVs is rising, resulting
in a greater variety of electric cars on the market and correspondingly creates more
competition among manufacturers. Higher production numbers likewise push down
the production cost for manufacturers because of economy of scale.
The greatest
bane in the existence of electric cars has always been the battery. The limited travel
range and slow charging has made the EV an unattractive choice. The battery is also
the most expensive part of the car. However, this is changing as battery technology
continues to improve giving the car a longer travel distance and better infrastructure
ensures more availability of fast charging stations, moreover, the manufacturing cost
of EV batteries are expected to drop by 60% by 2020 compared to 2009 [16].
As mentioned in the Introduction, the way this increase of EVs would affect the
power system had the power utilities worried. Normally power demand fluctuates
throughout the day and reaches a peak during the evening. This is the time when
most people are home, with the lights on and something cooking in the oven [17].
The EV is a movable load, which implies uncertain as to when and where it will be
connected to the grid for charging. It was suggested by Tang and Wang in [18] that
a smart charging method is needed to counter the adverse effects of EV charging at
weak or heavily loaded nodes in the grid.
An EV connected to the grid through a bi-directional charger may offer sophis-
ticated approaches to grid support, such technology is referred to Vehicle-to-Grid
(V2G). There are many types of support an EV could offer, such as reactive power
support for voltage control as the EV charger can be used for reactive power operation
[19]. Other areas of support include power factor regulation, peak load shaving and
load leveling services. A V2G service that is promising for an EV is the frequency
control [20].
For example, the Lithium-Ion (Li-Ion) battery used by the EVs has
excellent characteristics for frequency control [21].
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Electric Vehicle Technology
11
2.2.1
Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment
Every EV relies on a unidirectional Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE). Its
purpose is to safely transfer electric energy to the vehicle from a power source. EVs
have an on-board charger which is supplied with AC power. The charger contains a
rectifier for AC/DC conversion, a DC/DC converter that regulates the battery current
and a harmonic filter.
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) sets the standardization of charg-
ing methods. In Europe the method of charging is split into three categories depend-
ing on the power output; these are shown in Table 2.1 as set by IEC 61851. Normal
power is a basic 1-phase AC connection gained from a household outlet. Medium
power is attained with a dedicated EVSE. It may have a 3-phase connection and can
be implemented at both public and private places. The third category is a high-power
charging method, which is any charging method that allows for 22 kW rated power
or greater. It is considered analogous to a filling station where an EV owner can
expect to recharge the car in under an hour [22], [23]. The high-power method can
either be an AC or DC connection. An EVSE with a built-in charger can output DC
power directly to the car. An on-board charger comes with a few limitations: it is
constrained in weight, size and cost. This limits the input power it can handle. How
much power an on-board charger can handle ultimately depends on the vehicle as it
varies between vehicle brands. An off-board charger is not constrained in such a way
and thus makes fast charging more achievable. Many EVs come equipped with the
possibility of both AC and DC charging [22]. The different charging methods for an
EV are shown in Figure 2.4.
Table 2.1: Charger types and power levels in Europe [23].
Charging Method
Connection
Power [kW]
Max current [A]
Location
Normal Power
1-Phase AC connection
3.7
10-16
Domestic
Medium Power
1- or 3- Phase AC connection
3,7 -22
16-32
Semi-public
High Power
3-Phase AC connection
>22
>32
Public
High Power
DC connection
>22
>3.225
Public
The IEC categorizes the charging methods into four modes, depending on voltage
levels and safety equipment, and four types, according to which socket is used. [23],
[24]. The four modes are the following:
• Mode 1: 1-phase household socket connection
• Mode 2: Mode 1 connection including an in-cable protection device
• Mode 3: Dedicated EVSE which includes protection function and control
• Mode 4: Off-board charger outputting high-power DC
DC charging is usually a public charging station meant to serve many types of EVs.
Standardization of the charger type across multiple EV brands is therefore optimal
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Theoretical Analysis
Figure 2.4: Schematic of an EV for the different charging types [22].
to ensure that DC charging can serve a greater number of EVs. CHAdeMO is a high-
power DC charger that has gained international recognition and is categorized as type
4 by IEC 62196-1 [24]. It is used by original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) such
as Nissan, KIA and Mitsubishi. Tesla vehicles are also compatible with CHAdeMO
through an adapter. The CHAdeMO is integrated into 22% of the worlds EV fleet
with around 18.000 chargers around the world [25]. Another type of DC charger is the
SAE Combo. It is mainly used by German and US OEMs, but it has not acquired as
large-scale infrastructure as CHAdeMO. Both of these standards are capable of over
60 kW charging. The most capable fast-charging charger on the market today is the
Tesla supercharger as it can produce 120 kW [26].
For an EV to be more valuable in regards to grid support it requires a bi-directional
charger. The bi-directional charger can either be on-board or off-board but the on-
board charger in commercial EVs today do not support bi-directional power flow
[27]. An off-board bi-directional charger requires less incentive from the OEM as it
can be developed by private companies. A bi-directional charger is a more sophisti-
cated piece of equipment as it needs a bi-directional AC/DC converter and DC/DC
converter.
This makes the topology of the power electronics more complex.
The
frequent conversion of the power flow direction will potentially result in additional
energy losses. It also requires a complex controller and rigorous safety equipment.
This makes the bi-directional charger expensive and it will have a high investment
cost for large-scale implementation [28], [29]. A bi-directional charger that utilizes
the CHAdeMO standard will be able to monitor the battery charge [27]. This is vital
when providing frequency regulation to ensure the battery is neither overcharged or
discharged.
2.2.2
Battery Technology
Lithium-Ion (Li-Ion) is a type of rechargeable battery which dominates the battery
market, both in regard to EVs and other consumer applications. The Li-Ion battery
has a higher energy density than other types of batteries such as lead-acid or nickel-
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Electric Vehicle Technology
13
metal. This allows the Li-Ion batteries to be built smaller without costing energy
capacity. There are many different types of Li-Ion batteries and they vary greatly in
their chemistry composition where some varieties have certain strengths over others.
A rechargeable Li-Ion battery consists of cells made up of a positive electrode
(cathode) and a negative electrode (anode) which are connected by electrolyte as a
conductor. When the battery is charged, ions flow through the electrolyte from the
anode to the cathode, and vice versa during discharging. Although the chemical com-
position of Li-Ion batteries differs, their cathode is always comprised of the element
Lithium. Lithium has the trait of being the lightest of the metals and has the largest
specific energy per weight, which gives it its high energy density [30]. Lithium also
has the best electrochemical potential of around 4.08V. The greater the electrochem-
ical potential of the battery, the higher its energy release when an atom is ionized
[31].
There are five different Li-Ion battery types that are most applicable for EVs.
They are lithium nickel cobalt aluminum (NCA), lithium nickel manganese cobalt
oxide (NMC), lithium manganese spinel (LMO), lithium titanate (LTO) and lithium
iron phosphate (LFP) [16]. The relative strength and weakness of each battery type
is shown in Table 2.2.
Specific energy is the battery’s capacity for storing energy per kilogram of weight
[Wh/kg], similar to energy density which refers to storing energy per liter [Wh/l] [33].
Specific power refers to how much power the battery can dissipate per kilogram of mass
[16]. Performance determines how well the battery can operate in different climates
and Life Span specifies how long the battery can operate until it reaches its End-of-
Life (EOL). Life span is highly influenced by several factors that contribute to the
battery degradation and are explained further in Section 2.2.3. The characteristics
Safety and Cost are of specific interest to EV OEMs.
The safety factor needs a
certain priority when developing battery for an EV as vehicle crashes are bound to
happen and the impact might also damage the battery. If a battery is deformed it
may internally short circuit which leads to a chain reaction causing thermal runaway.
Such circumstances could cause the temperature to increase substantially, resulting
Table 2.2: Difference in characteristics in Li-Ion batteries [16], [32].
NCA
NMC
LMO
LTO
LFP
Specific Energy
++
++
+
+−
+−
Specific Power
++
+
+
+
+
Safety
+−
+
+
++
+
Performance
+
+
+−
++
+
Life Span
++
+
+−
++
++
Cost
+−
+
+
−
+
++: Very good performance, +: Good performance, +−: Average performance, −: Poor
performance
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Theoretical Analysis
in a fire and dissipation dangerous chemicals such as lead into the atmosphere [16],
[34]. The cost of the different Li-Ion batteries varies and good battery qualities often
come down on its cost.
The battery type which is frequently used today is NMC, which is the battery of
choice for BMW i3, Nissan Leaf and Chevy Volt [35]. As seen from Table 2.2, it has
overall good qualities. The Nissan Leaf model 2017 has a listed driving range of 400
km, up from 200 km of the original Leaf which uses a LMO battery [36].
2.2.2.1
Battery Terminology
Battery technology uses specific terminology in regards to its use. One such term
is the battery cycle. The definition of a battery cycle is loosely defined as a single
discharge period followed by a subsequent charging period. An EV under normal driv-
ing operation will often have a long discharge period and a relatively short charging
period.
State of Charge (SOC) is the term used to describe how much charge is in the
battery at any given moment. The SOC is the charge in the battery divided by its
nominal capacity, as shown in Eq. 2.6. The battery capacity in this report is given
as the unit kilowatt hour (kWh).
SOC = Q
Q0
(2.6)
During a cycle, the discharge period lowers the SOC of the battery. This discharge
is referred to as the Depth of Discharge (DOD) and is described in Eq. 2.7.
DOD = ∆SOC = 1
Q0
·
∫
I(t)dt
(2.7)
I is the discharge current over the discharge period. The charge and discharge
current may also be expressed in terms of C. The C-rate is the inverse of a battery
charging time, as shown in Eq. 2.8. A charging rate of 1 C refers to fully charging a
battery in 1 hour.
I = Q0 · C
(2.8)
2.2.3
Battery Degradation
The nominal capacity of a battery fades, both with time and from use. As the battery
is built on electrochemical processes, it inevitably loses its lithium inventory with time.
The interaction between the active materials and the electrolyte is mainly responsible.
The End-of-Life (EOL) of a battery is considered the moment the nominal capacity
fades to a certain threshold. This threshold is often considered 80% of the original
nominal capacity. There are several factors that contribute to battery degradation.
The main factors are the following:
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Electric Vehicle Technology
15
• SOC
• DOD
• C-rate
• Temperature
2.2.3.1
Calendar Life
Calendar life is the lifetime the battery has left in calendar years. The SOC and
temperature are the factors that have the most effect on calendar aging. The internal
resistance in the battery is affected by both the SOC and temperature [20]. Low
temperature results in higher internal resistance. Low and high SOC also results in
a higher internal resistance, although the effect from high SOC is not as significant.
Maintaining a SOC around 50% is therefore optimal. The power dissipated within
the battery is the product of I2R where R is the internal resistance and I is the cur-
rent flowing through the battery [20]. Although high temperature may decrease the
internal resistance, high temperature should result in a faster degradation as given
by the Arrhenious relationship [37]. This is a model which explains reaction rate re-
garding temperature dependence. Manufacturers’ data also shows clear temperature
dependence as the discharge capacity fades when operated at temperatures above
45◦C, as well as sub-zero temperatures [38].
2.2.3.2
Cycle Life
The cycle life of a battery describes how many cycles it can withstand until the battery
reaches its end of life. The DOD and C-rate are the main factors that contribute to
the cycle life along with temperature. The correlation between DOD and degradation
is represented in Figure 2.5. The deeper the discharge the more severe is the effect
on the cycle life. However, this is a simplified model that makes several assumptions.
It is difficult to produce a battery-life model which takes all the different factors into
account [32], [39].
Degradation caused by cycles along with other factors is expressed in Eq. 2.9 [40].
Qcycle
loss = B1 · eB2·Irate·Ah
B1 = a · T 2 + b · T + c
B2 = d · T + e
(2.9)
Here the factors B1 and B2 are functions of temperature.
Ah is the throughput
expressed as Ah
=
(Cycle number) · DOD · (full cell capacity).
Irate is the
current given as C-rate [40]. The factors a, b, c, d and e are constants representative
of the battery type which was used for the degradation model. This is a simplified
model, but it goes to show how the cycle life is dependent on temperature, C-rate and
DOD. These factors are constantly changing and thus representing them as constants
decrease the accuracy of the model.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Theoretical Analysis
Figure 2.5: Number of cycles that can occur at a certain DOD until the battery
reaches its EOL [32].
For the C-rate to induce degradation, it needs to be of considerable size. Most
battery types made for EVs can withstand up to 1 C charge and discharge rate
before starting to have a negative effect [35]. However, a C-rate that is less than 4 C
is considered to cause insignificant damage [41].
2.2.3.3
Degradation under V2G
An EV that participates in V2G via a bi-directional charger will naturally experience
faster degradation [42]. The lifetime of an EV battery under normal conditions can
be expected to last 7-11 years, depending on driving style and the charging power
level [43]. Battery lifetime of 11 years can be achieved through a modest driving style
and by avoiding fast chargers. An aggressive driving style can reduce the lifetime of
the battery by up to 3 years. The battery life shortens by 3.2-4.4 years if full battery
capacity is supplied on a daily basis through V2G [43], which is not much higher than
the degradation caused by aggressive driving.
As temperature is a factor in the degradation, applying liquid cooling system can
mitigate the degradation due to V2G, likewise, a battery providing V2G grid service
with a 6.6 kW charger reduces the battery lifetime by 1.5 years [44].
Unlike a conventional driving cycle where the EV will have a relatively short charg-
ing period followed by a longer discharge period, an EV participating in frequency
regulation will have a considerable fluctuation in energy throughput. The charge and
discharge periods will show a more similar pattern during frequency regulation as they
depend on the grid frequency. This makes the conventional definition of cycles more
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Vehicle-to-Grid in Practice
17
unclear. Eq. 2.10 might be useful to track the cycles under such irregular operation
[45].
cyclesequiv =
∑(∆DOD
2
)
(2.10)
Here ∆DOD refers to both the conventional depth of discharge and the charging
period. The equivalent cycle is therefore half of the discharging period plus half of
the charging period. The irregular cycle patterns may often result in micro-cycles.
These are cycles that are very close to 0% ∆DOD.
2.3
Vehicle-to-Grid in Practice
There is an enormous potential for grid service by demand response. V2G technology
is there at the forefront because of the considerable size of an EV battery.
The
greater number of EVs in operation increases their potential in regards to V2G. An
EV fleet with 10% market penetration in the USA would be able to reduce the need
for installed generation capacity by 25% by discharging during peak demand hours
[46].
It is not possible for an individual EV to participate in the balancing market be-
cause of the requirement of a minimum bid of 0.3 MW. This will require an aggregator
that pools many cars together and bids on their behalf as an individual player. It
will allow EVs and other small demand side consumers to participate in frequency
regulation [11]. The more vehicles that are available to the aggregator, the greater the
flexibility. As the aggregator tries to fulfill its bidding commitment in the balancing
market it must also be aware of the primary function of the EV which is to drive and
thus it must be able to optimize the charging profile of each vehicle [27].
By applying smart charging algorithms it is possible to ensure that the vehicle
is available for service during the whole service period and to avoid overcharging or
discharging the battery. This type of algorithm is called the preferred operating point
(POP). POP uses set points which are triggered when the SOC crosses a set threshold.
The charging rate of the vehicle is regulated up or down in accordance with the set
point.
An EV providing service via a bi-directional charger will charge and discharge
the battery alternately.
The POP algorithm will keep the battery SOC within a
certain boundary. This ensures that the battery will not be fully depleted when the
car should be driven. The battery is also affected more negatively by degradation at
critically high or low SOC.
2.3.1
The Parker Project
The Parker Project is an EV integration project which researches the V2G technol-
ogy. The project is funded by ForskEL with the purpose of investigating whether
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Theoretical Analysis
serial produced electric cars are a viable option for providing services for the Danish
electricity grid by means of V2G [47]. The Parker Project is a joint project between
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet (DTU), Frederiksberg Forsyning (FF), Nissan, Mit-
subishi, PSA, Enel, Nuvve, and Insero. FF is a utility company and is the hub of the
project. Ten EVs are used for FCR at FF via 10 kW bi-directional chargers provided
by Enel. The 10 EVs at FF are of the brand Nissan e-NV200, which has a 24 kWh
battery and a 3.7 kW on-board charger. During work hours, the 10 EVs at FF are
used for company errands and utilized for FCR at other times. Nuuve is a San Diego
based company. Its mission is to make V2G participation possible through the Grid
Integrated Vehicle Platform (GIVe). The GIVe is an aggregator system that controls
the V2G participation of the cars at FF.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Simulation Methods
In this project, the participation of EVs in frequency regulation will be analyzed
through simulation. The purpose is to understand what differences can be expected
for vehicles that participate in RG-CE and RG-N through four different frequency
regulation strategies. The differences will be investigated by looking at real frequency
data from February 2017. Three battery capacities will be applied which are 12 kWh,
24 kWh and 60 kWh. The 24 kWh battery matches Nissan e-NV200 and is therefore
useful for the analysis. The 12 kWh is the battery capacity of Nissan Outlander, a
PHEV that is also used by the Parker Project. A 60 kWh battery is analyzed as it
gives a view into future scenarios where a larger number of EVs will have a battery
capacity of that size. The bi-directional charger in the simulation will be 10 kW, the
same as the ones provided by Enel. The simulation assumes a single vehicle that
is directly participating in frequency regulation. In reality, an aggregator bids on
behalf of many vehicles and thus how each vehicle within the same aggregated pool
is affected may vary.
The project can be split into three major parts which will be specified as Phase
1, Phase 2 and Phase 3. Phase 1 analyzes the energy that would be transmitted
to and from the grid via the four control strategies without considering an EV. The
energy flow is therefore unconstrained in terms of battery size. At Phase 2 the energy
transfer and EV battery patterns are analyzed for the three battery sizes. Phase 3
has the same task, but here a POP algorithm will be implemented to maintain the
SOC within certain limits. The exact operation of the POP algorithm used by Nuuve
for the frequency regulation is unknown, but an estimation of the operation will be
made. Finally, real V2G data from the Parker Project is analyzed and compared with
the results of the simulation.
The simulation is made using Python 3.6 and by utilizing the following external
libraries:
• NumPy. NumPy is a fundamental package with scientific capabilities.
• Pandas. Pandas is an essential tool for high-performance data analysis.
• Matplotlib. Matplotlib utilizes the object-oriented interface to offer flexible ways
for data visualization.
• Seaborn. Based on the Matplotlib library but provides a high-level interface for
visualization.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Simulation Methods
• scikit-learn. Scikit-learn is a data analysis package that enables effective ways
for error calculations.
3.1
Input Variables
There are three main parameters that make up the simulation; real frequency data,
the four FCR strategies, and EV properties.
The frequency data consists of two
data sets from February 2017 for both DK1 and DK2. The four frequency regulation
strategies will be implemented both with and without a POP. The simulation takes
in four parameters concerning the EV. They are the initial SOC (SOCinit) at the
start of the simulation, the maximum charging power of the charger (chargermax),
the nominal battery capacity (batterycap) and the minimum and maximum allowed
SOC (SOCmax) of the car. All these parameters are listed below:
• Grid Frequency
- DK1 - February 2017
- DK2 - February 2017
• Frequency Regulation Strategies - With or without POP
- RG-CE - PFR-DE
- RG-CE - PFR-DK
- RG-N - FCR-N
- RG-N - FCR-D
• EV Properties
- Initial SOC
- Max. Charging Power
- Battery Capacity
- Battery max. and min. SOC threshold
The four strategies are presented in Figure 3.1. The behavior of the droop control
strategies is also expressed as conditional equations in Eq. 3.1 - 3.4 where f represents
the frequency input.
FCR −N : P(f) =





1
if f ≤49.9
500 −10 · f
if 49.9 < f < 50.1
−1
if f ≥49.9
(3.1)
FCR −D : P(f) =





1
if f ≤49.5
124.75 −2.5 · f
if 49.5 < f < 49.9
0
if f ≥49.9
(3.2)
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Phase 1
21
PFR −DE : P(f) =















1
if f ≤49.8
263.105 −5.263 · f
if 49.8 < f < 49.99
0
if 49.99 ≤f ≤50.01
263.211 −5.263 · f
if 50.01 < f < 50.2
−1
if f ≥50.2
(3.3)
PFR −DK : P(f) =















1
if f ≤49.8
277.667 −5.555 · f
if 49.8 < f < 49.98
0
if 49.98 ≤f ≤50.02
277.889 −5.555 · f
if 50.02 < f < 50.2
−1
if f ≥50.2
(3.4)
Figure 3.1: The four primary control strategies applied within RG-N and RG-CE.
3.2
Phase 1
The first step in the analysis is to get an understanding of how much energy will flow
from and to the grid, based only on the frequency data and the four FCR strategies in
Figure 3.1. Phase 1 avoids any assumptions which are made when simulating battery
behavior such as battery tapering around high SOC. This is a saturation effect where
the battery is unable to charge at the same rate [26]. The energy transfer will be
unconstrained in terms of battery size and will provide a reference to the energy
transmission computed during Phase 2 and Phase 3.
Figure 3.2 summarizes the
input variables considered in Phase 1.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Simulation Methods
Figure 3.2: Phase 1 of the analysis. The white boxes show what input parameters are
considered while the grey boxes are left out. Since the battery capacity is not taken
into account, the only output for Phase 1 is the energy transfer.
3.3
Phase 2
The variables that are considered in Phase 2 are shown in Figure 3.3, which analyzes
the energy transfer and battery patterns in relation to the three battery capacities,
frequency data and FCR strategies. The battery is allowed to charge and discharge
fully. The initial SOC in the scenarios is set at 50%. The results of Phase 2 will
be compared to Phase 1 to determine how the battery capacities limit the energy
transmission. It also offers reference to the effects of the POP algorithm applied in
Phase 3.
3.4
Phase 3
In Phase 3 of the analysis all the input parameters are considered as shown in Figure
3.4. The energy transfer and battery patterns are analyzed in the same way as in
Phase 2. As before, the initial SOC will be 50% and the charger 10 kW. However, the
usable battery capacity is reduced to 90% as it is more aligned with real applications
[48]. The frequency regulation strategies now include a POP algorithm and are shown
in Figure 3.5.
The purpose of the POP algorithm is to ensure that the charge in the battery
stays within a specific interval. When the battery reaches a set threshold the charging
power will shift by 50%. The POP thresholds are set at 80% and 20% SOC for the
analysis. When the SOC of the battery is within 20-80% the FCR function behaves as
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Phase 3
23
Figure 3.3: Phase 2 of the analysis. The white boxes show what input parameters
are considered while the grey boxes are left out.
Figure 3.4: Phase 3 of the analysis. All input parameters are taken into consideration.
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Simulation Methods
(a) FCR-N POP droop functions.
(b) FCR-D POP droop functions.
(c) PFR-DE POP droop functions.
(d) PFR-DK POP droop functions.
Figure 3.5: The four strategies using a 1-step POP algorithm.
normal and is at a state called POP0. When the battery charges over 80% SOC the
power output is shifted upwards by 50% and that state is called POP1. Being shifted
upwards means that the battery will discharge at a half rate when the frequency is at
50 Hz. If the battery discharges under 20 % the charger enters POP2 and the power
function shifts downwards by 50%.
The preferred operating point (POP) therefore shifts the charging rate to increase
the availability of the vehicle under V2G services.
By shifting the charging and
discharging rate, it is possible to ensure that the car continues to offer regulation
services even though it is to a lesser extent when it has reached the set SOC limits.
It also pushes the SOC of the battery into the ideal POP0 function where it will
continue to provide regular service.
A 2-step POP algorithm is also applied for FCR-N. It operates in the same way
as the one in Figure 3.5(a) but it has an additional step. A third set-point is placed
above the POP1 set-point and a fourth set-point placed below the POP2 set-point.
If the battery SOC crosses the third or fourth set-points the charger enters POP3
or POP4. The POP3 function is shifted 25% above POP1 and POP4 is shifted 25%
below POP2. The threshold for POP3 is set at 85% SOC and POP4 is triggered at
==PAGE:35==
3.5 Program Structure
25
15% SOC during the analysis.
The POP set-points when going from a higher to a lower state of POP differs
by 1% from that which occurs when going from a lower to a higher state of POP; a
necessary component to avoid transient behavior that would otherwise occur around
the thresholds. That means when the battery goes from POP1 to POP0 it will need
to have a SOC of 79%, or 21% when crossing from POP2 to POP0.
Figure 3.6: FCR-N with a 2-step POP algorithm.
3.5
Program Structure
Two primary results from the simulation are analyzed: the energy transfer and EV
battery patterns. The energy transfer is calculated from the power flow while the
simulation of change in SOC over a time interval is used to compute the battery
patterns. The core of the simulation is tasked with calculating the power flow and
the subsequent charge in the battery, which is then converted to the SOC. Figure 3.7
demonstrates the program structure. The process starts by loading in the frequency
dataset where the time axis and frequency vector are extracted and the four EV pa-
rameters are initiated. The four EV parameters and frequency vector are inserted into
the function FCR_function, which is unique to each strategy as the droop function is
described within it. FCR_function has two forms: one where POP is implemented,
called FCR_POP, and one without which is called FCR_normal. Both functions
serve the same purpose of outputting the Power and SOC. The power vector is in-
serted into the function Energy_per_h which outputs the energy transfer as energy
per hour (kWh/h). The SOC vector is inserted into functions tasked with analyzing
the charging and discharging periods of a cycle. The final step of the program is to
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Simulation Methods
visualize the results acquired. The Python code is accessible in Section A.1 in the
Appendix.
Figure 3.7: Flow diagram representing the structure of the program.
3.5.1
FCR_function Explained
Figure 3.8 represents a flow diagram of the algorithm which is used to calculate the
power and SOC for Phase 1 and Phase 2. It presents the function FCR_normal
which takes in the five described parameters. The algorithm starts by calculating
the initial charge in the battery, called charge_old, based on the initial SOC and the
battery capacity. It also calculates the maximum and minimum capacity the battery
can reach. It then loops through the frequency vector and subsequently calculates
the power output based on the rules set in Eq. 3.1 - 3.4 at each iteration. The change
in the battery charge is calculated and run through if statements which check if the
charge has exceeded the limits of the battery capacity. If that is the case, then the
charge is made equal to the minimum or maximum capacity. The value of the power
is recalculated as presented in Eq. 3.5.
Power = charge[index_counter] −charge[index_counter −1]
−1 · charger_max
(3.5)
==PAGE:37==
3.5 Program Structure
27
The power is the present charge minus the charge from the previous iteration,
divided by the charger’s max. charging power multiplied by -1. The droop functions
as presented in Figure 3.1 shows the power output from the perspective of the grid.
Positive power flow means the grid is taking in energy and as such discharges the bat-
tery. By recalculating the value of the power, it ensures that the power input/output
operates within the limits of the battery and is therefore reliable as a tool to calculate
the energy flow provided by the battery. When the function has looped through the
whole frequency vector it outputs the power and SOC as vectors ready for further
analysis.
The function FCR_POP outputs the power and SOC for Phase 3. It operates
under the same principles as the one described in Figure 3.8, but it has an added
layer which is the POP technique. A flow diagram for the algorithm for a 1-step POP
is presented in Figure 3.9. The thresholds for the POP are set within the function.
Before looping through the frequency vector, the POP is initialized by comparing the
initial SOC with the POP thresholds, called POP_min and POP_max. The power
is then calculated as a function of the frequency and the POP. The charge within the
battery is calculated the same way but the SOC of the battery is measured during
each iteration to check if it has crossed the threshold to another state of POP. If it
reaches POP1 or POP2 the algorithm will check if the limit of the battery capacity
has been reached. If that is the case, the charge is set to the maximum or minimum
allowed limit and the power value is recalculated as described in Eq. 3.5.
The 2-step POP function shown in Figure 3.6 operates under the same principle
as described in Figure 3.9 but it has the additional POP3 and POP4 conditions that
the algorithm loops over when checking at which POP state the battery should be
at.
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Simulation Methods
Figure 3.8: The function that outputs the Power and SOC that is analyzed for Phase
1 and Phase 2.
==PAGE:39==
3.5 Program Structure
29
Figure 3.9: The function that outputs the Power and SOC that is analyzed for Phase
3.
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Simulation Methods
3.5.2
Power Output
The frequency data includes frequency measurements for each second of February
2017. The power that is outputted by the FCR functions is inserted into another
function which converts it into kWh/h. Energy is power over time, as shown in Eq.
3.6. Since the power calculated is a discrete variable, the energy is the sum of the
power measurements as shown in Eq. 3.7.
E =
∫
Pdt
(3.6)
E =
∑
P
(3.7)
The power vector is converted into a matrix of size [n x 3600] where n is the number
of hours in the dataset, each with 3600 values representing one hour of data. The
positive and negative power values in each column are summed together which gives
the energy per hour that flows to and from the grid. The algorithm used to calculate
the energy is shown as Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 E_output(power)
Require: power is an array of length n
1: hour = 3600
2: if len(power) / hour ̸= Integer then
3:
for i = 0 to n do
4:
power[: -n]
# Removes the last value from array
5:
if len(power) / hour == Integer then
6:
P_hour = power[: -n]
7:
total_hours =len(P_hour) / hour
8:
end if
9:
end for
10: end if
11:
12: # Matrix created of size [total_hours x 3600]
13: power_matrix = P_hour[total_hours, hour]
14:
15: # Matrix columns summed
16: sum_positives =sum(power_matrix > 0, axis = 1)
17: sum_negatives =sum(power_matrix < 0, axis = 1)
18:
19: return sum_positives , sum_negatives
==PAGE:41==
3.5 Program Structure
31
3.5.3
SOC Output
The change in SOC of the simulated battery is used to further compute the cycles the
battery is subject to. As mentioned in Section 2.2.2.1, a cycle is loosely defined as a
discharge period followed by a charge period. As the charging and discharging periods
of a cycle under frequency regulation are arbitrary, they are computed separately.
This separation is made to give a better representation of how often the battery can
be expected to experience severe cycle depths.
Algorithm 2 DOD_output(SOC)
Require: SOC is an array of length n
1: DOD = [ ]
2: DOD_thres = [ ]
3: calc = [ ]
4: set_point = 0
5: for i = 1 to n do
6:
if SOC[i] ≤SOC[i-1] then
# Finding a downwards or even slope
7:
calc = SOC[i]
8:
if len(calc) == 1 then
9:
set_point = i
# Starting location of slope saved
10:
end if
11:
# Check whether SOC increases next iteration
12:
if SOC[i+1] > SOC[i] then
13:
DOD = SOC[set_point] - SOC[i]
# Cycle over and DOD saved
14:
calc = [ ]
15:
# Micro cycles under 1 % ∆SOC ignored
16:
if SOC[set_point] - SOC[i] > 0.01 then
17:
DOD_thres = SOC[set_point] - SOC[i]
18:
end if
19:
end if
20:
end if
21: end for
22:
23: return DOD, DOD_thres
Two methods of computing the charging and discharging periods are developed.
It is suggested in [45] that the charging and discharging periods that make up a cycle
are monotonic. As such the first type of a charging and discharging cycle period is
defined as a downwards or a flat slope and as soon as the SOC changes slope the cycle
period ends. Algorithm 2 demonstrates how a DOD cycle is calculated. The function
DOD_output takes in the array SOC from FCR_function and calculates the depth of
each downwards cycle. It has two outputs which are the arrays DOD and DOD_thres.
DOD_thres is the same as the output DOD but it has the condition that the actual
depth value has to be above a certain limit. Algorithm 2 has this limit set to 1%
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Simulation Methods
∆SOC to exclude all micro-cycles under this limit. Due to the high sensitivity of the
simulation to change in frequency, it can be expected that the majority of discharge
cycles will be very close to 0% ∆SOC.
Although Algorithm 2 has an output which disregards any DODs that are under a
set threshold, it may still be an inaccurate way of representing the cycle periods. As
the simulation is very sensitive to changes in frequency, the subsequent value of power
might cause the cycle period to end prematurely, and as such may not be an accurate
representation of the battery behavior. Therefore, another function is designed with
the task of measuring a discharge or charge periods of a cycle as done in Algorithm 2
but must also measure the ∆SOC when the slope changes to the opposite direction.
As such, two conditions must be fulfilled for a cycle period to be registered: the
discharge or charge, depending on the desired outcome, must be of a certain size
and the ∆SOC of the subsequent reversal in the slope must be greater than a set
threshold. By applying this method, it is ensured that a cycle period is not broken
due to a micro-cycle period in the opposite direction. This method for calculating the
DOD is shown as Algorithm 3. The same methods are used for calculating ∆SOC
caused by charging periods by reversing the functionality of the algorithms.
==PAGE:43==
3.5 Program Structure
33
Algorithm 3 DOD_no_micro_output(SOC)
Require: SOC is an array of length n
1: DOD = [ ]
2: calc = [ ]
3: calc_up = [ ]
4: set_point1 = 0
5: set_point2 = 0
6: for i = 1 to n do
7:
if SOC[i] ≤SOC[i-1] then
# Finding a downwards or even slope
8:
calc = SOC[i]
9:
if len(calc) == 1 then
10:
set_point1 = i
# Starting location of slope saved
11:
end if
12:
# Check whether SOC increases next iteration
13:
if SOC[i+1] > SOC[i] then
14:
for j = i to n do
# New loop started, begins at i
15:
if SOC[j] ≤SOC[j+1] then
# Checking for upwards slope
16:
calc_up = SOC[j]
17:
if len(calc_up) == 1 then
18:
set_point2 = i
# Local minima point saved
19:
end if
20:
else:
21:
# If upwards slope is greater than 1 % ∆SOC break cycle
22:
if SOC[j] −SOC[set_point2] > 0.01 then
23:
# Micro cycles under 1 % ∆SOC ignored
24:
if SOC[set_point1] −SOC[set_point2] > 0.01 then
25:
DOD = SOC[set_point1] −SOC[set_point2]
26:
end if
27:
calc = [ ]
# Reset cycle variables
28:
calc_up = [ ]
29:
set_point1 = 0
30:
set_point2 = 0
31:
Break inner loop
32:
else:
# Cycle not broken
33:
calc_up = [ ]
# Reset local minima variables
34:
set_point2 = 0
35:
Break inner loop
36:
end if
37:
end if
38:
end for
39:
end if
40:
end if
41: end for
42:
43: return DOD
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Simulation Methods
3.6
Real V2G Data Analysis
The final step in the analysis is to look at real data from the Parker Project. As men-
tioned in Section 2.3.1 there are 10 Nissan e-NV200 vehicles actively participating in
frequency regulation at Fredriksberg Forsyning (FF). These EVs have a battery ca-
pacity of 24 kWh and are connected to a 10 kW bi-directional charger when providing
V2G services. The project has been ongoing for more than a year and thus data from
these vehicles is available from February 2017; this will be used to compare with the
results of the simulation as an estimator of its accuracy. As FF is located in DK2,
which is a part of RG-N, the EVs are participating in frequency regulation through
FCR-N.
3.6.1
The Data
The data analyzed contains the 10 EVs at FF over February 2017. The dataset has
16 attributes listed in Table 3.1 with descriptions. The attributes that are of specific
interest concerning this project are listed in Table 3.2.
Table 3.1: The attributes of the dataset.
Attribute
Description
Time
Date and Time of measurement
CarName
The specific EVs identity
PowerCapacityUp
Max. Power capacity up [W]
PowerCapacityDown
Max. Power capacity down [W]
PowerRequested
Requested Power [W]
PowerProvided
Provided Power [W]
EnergyCapacity
Nominal Energy capacity [Wh]
EnergyStored
Stored Energy [Wh]
POP
Preferred Operating Point
PowerFlow
Power Flow [W]
Volts
Voltage [V]
Amps
Ampers [A]
Available
Proving services or not
EVSEId
Electric Vehicle Supply Equippment ID
ev_state
Grid integrated or other
evse_state
EVSE state
The attribute EnergyCapacity is the energy capacity of vehicles and is listed as 21
kWh. This means the cars have a useful capacity of 87,5% compared to their listed
capacity of 24 kWh. The attribute EnergyStored refers to the energy stored in the
battery at a given moment. The SOC of the battery is the Energy Stored divided by
the energy capacity. The attributes Available, EVSEId and ev_state record whether
==PAGE:45==
3.6 Real V2G Data Analysis
35
Table 3.2: The attributes and corresponding parameters relevant to the analysis.
Attribute
Extracted Parameters
Time
Date and Time of measurement
CarName
EV id
EnergyCapacity
Q_0 = 21000 Wh
EnergyStored
Q = energy stored [Wh]
Available
True
EVSEId
Grid Integrated (GI)
ev_state
V2G
the vehicle is currently providing grid service. By extracting the data when Available
= ”True”, EVSEId = ”GI” and ev_state = ”V2G”, it is possible to analyze it as a
continuous V2G service. This data is denoted V2G data.
The 10 FF vehicles have a specific identity listed in Table 3.3. Each vehicle is
also denoted Car 1 - 10 for simplicity. By extracting an individual car from the V2G
service data it is possible to compare it to the SOC outputted by the FCR_POP
function.
Table 3.3: The 10 cars at FF and their IDs
CarName
Denoted Name
MCV2G03160002
Car 1
MCV2G03160012
Car 2
MCV2G04160002
Car 3
MCV2G03160003
Car 4
MCV2G03160004
Car 5
MCV2G03160006
Car 6
MCV2G03160007
Car 7
MCV2G03160008
Car 8
MCV2G04160001
Car 9
MCV2G03160009
Car 10
Since the cars at FF are operated as normal vehicles and only provide service
when parked at FF, their availability for V2G is limited. In order to compare the
V2G data to the simulation it is, therefore, necessary to match the Time attribute of
the V2G data to the frequency data used for the simulation.
The Time in the V2G data is given as [day-month-year time] while in the frequency
data it is arranged as [month-day-year time]. The Time attribute is rearranged to
match the frequency data. Then the two string columns are compared and all strings
that match are kept in the frequency data.
Thus the frequency data is of equal
length to the V2G data with the same Time column. This is crucial to ensure that
the simulation is run at the same frequency signal as the V2G data.
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Simulation Methods
3.7
Curve Fitting and Error Measurements
The computed cycle periods are presented as the number of measurements as a func-
tion of ∆DOD. A polynomial function is fitted from the measurements and the good-
ness of fit is estimated through the Coefficient of Determination, also denoted by R2,
as done by Stroe, Świerczyński, Stan, Teodorescu, and Andreasen in research paper
[32].
The simulation model is validated by comparing the SOC output to actual V2G
data. The correlation between the SOC of a specific FF EV and the corresponding
simulated SOC is measured through Pearson Correlation Coefficient (r). To estimate
the regression fit of the simulation the error measurements Root Means Square Error
(RMSE) and R2 are used.
The Pearson r measures the linear correlation between the two curves on the inter-
val [-1,1] where a perfect linear relationship gives a correlation of 1 and no correlation
results in r = 0. A positive correlation means that as variable x increases so does
variable y. The Pearson r is presented in Eq. 3.8 [49]. n refers to the sample size, x
and y are the averages of the observed sample y and the simulated sample x.
rxy =
∑n
i=1(xi −¯x) · (yi −¯y)
√∑n
i=1(xi −¯x)2 · (yi −¯y)2
(3.8)
While the Pearson r coefficient measures the correlation between the two curves
it does not indicate the exact fit of the model. Therefore, Linear Regression error
measurement tools are needed to further evaluate the accuracy.
R2 is a measure for how much of the variance in y is explained by a regression
model, meaning how well the regression line fits the observation.
It measures to
goodness of fit in the interval [0,1]. A R2 of 0 would mean the model accounts for
none of the variability in the observed data while a value of 1 means it accounts for
all the variability.
The mathematical formulation of R2 is shown in Eq. 3.9 [50]. The factor ∑n
i=1(yi−
¯y)2 is the total sum of squares. This valuates how far a particular observed variable
is from the mean. ∑n
i=1(yi −xi)2 stands for how far a predicted value xi is from
the actual value and is denoted as the sum of squared residuals. Large differences
between the observed and predicted value are given a more significant meaning to
the error estimators by squaring the differences. It also ensures positive numbers.
R2 = 1 −
∑n
i=1(yi −xi)2
∑n
i=1(yi −¯y)2
(3.9)
The purpose of the model influences how large the R2 should be in order for it
to be considered adequate. In this project, R2 is used to estimate the how well a
polynomial function fits certain measurements. When a curve is fitted it is important
to avoid overfitting the measurements. As such, a R2 value very close to 1 might not
be desired.
==PAGE:47==
3.7 Curve Fitting and Error Measurements
37
The R2 is also used as an estimator for the accuracy of the simulation model.
The closer the output of the simulation is to the observed data, the better the model.
Therefore it is desirable for the model to account for high variability in the observed
data.
The error estimator RMSE is also applied for the model validation. The mathe-
matical formulation of the RMSE is shown in Eq. 3.10 [50].
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(yi −xi)2
(3.10)
yi represents the observation, xi represents the simulated value and n is the num-
ber of measurements. The RMSE presents the square root of the average squared
differences between the simulated output to the observed data. In other words, it
gives the absolute fit of the model while the R2 is used to assess the relative fit of the
model.
==PAGE:48==
38
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4
Results
4.1
Frequency Analysis
The two frequency datasets that are used for the simulation consist of frequency
measurements from February 2017 for both DK1 and DK2. The data is displayed
in Figure 4.1. The orange line represents a perfect fit of a normal distribution given
the averages and standard deviations of the data. The DK2 frequency data has clear
correlation with the normal distribution except for the a peak probability density
around 50 Hz, see Figure 4.1(b). The DK1 data is more skewed, see Figure 4.1(a).
Applying a test for normality on the data gives very low p-values. As a result, the
null-hypothesis that these curves are normally distributed can be rejected.
(a) Frequency data for DK1
(b) Frequency data for DK2
Figure 4.1: The frequency data from February 2017 for DK1 and DK2 represented
as probability density. The orange curve represents a fitted normal distribution with
the µ and σ of the data.
The standard deviation of the DK2 data is almost exactly double that of the DK1
data. To check whether it can be said with 95% confidence that the average value
differs significantly between the two data sets, the Student’s t-test is applied.
The null-hypothesis states that the averages are the same in the two samples. The
result of the two-tailed test gives a p-value of 0.0279 which means the null-hypothesis
can be rejected.
The test yielded a t-score of 2.457.
The t-score states that the
difference between the two distributions is 2.457 times that of the difference within
them. Since the null-hypothesis of the Student’s t-test can be rejected, it can be
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Results
assumed that the outcomes from the simulation will differ between the two frequency
datasets.
The probability distribution for 1 year of frequency data from DK2 is presented as
Figure A.1 in the Appendix. The distribution of the 1 month DK2 data is compared
with the 1 year DK2 data with a Student’s t-test.
The test returns a p-value of
0.0273 and t-score of 2.466. With a significance level of 0.05 the null-hypothesis can
be rejected, it can be concluded that with 95% confidence that the averages are not
the same. This indicates that the results may vary between selected months for the
analysis.
However, visual inspection of the distributions indicate similarity.
Due
to the large size of the data sets, small differences may become exaggerated to the
test solver resulting in a Type I error where the null-hypothesis is falsely rejected.
The standard deviations give a clearer representation of the differences between the
distributions and are presented in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: The mean and standard deviation of the 1 month DK1 and DK2 data, as
well as 1 year DK2 data.
µ
σ
DK1 - February
50.000607
0.0213
DK2 - February
50.000533
0.0420
DK2 - 1 year
50.000461
0.0436
The size of the DK1 - February dataset has 2419200 indices or a measurement
for every second in February 2017. The DK2 - February dataset has 2408104 indices.
It is therefore missing 11096 measurements. Due to the large size of data sets, this
difference is insignificant.
The differences in energy transmission under DK1 and
DK2 frequency is estimated by computing energy per hour. Algorithm 1 outputs
672 measurements under DK1 frequency and 668 hours under DK2 frequency. The
four hours missing can be assumed to have minimal effect on the average energy
transmitted per hour.
4.2
Phase 1
The purpose of Phase 1 of the analysis is to understand how much energy is transmit-
ted between an EV and the grid via the four different frequency regulations shown
in Figure 3.1. The simulation uses the function FCR_normal described in Section
3.5.1. As the power should not be constrained in terms of battery capacity, the bat-
tery capacity input is set sufficiently high. The only inputs that have an effect are
the frequency and chargermax. The input chargermax is given a value of 10 kW to
maintain consistency with the rest of the analysis.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Phase 1
41
4.2.1
The Four Strategies under the same Frequency Data
The energy transmitted by the four strategies under DK1 and DK2 frequencies is
presented in Figure 4.2 as box plots. These display both the energy that is transmitted
to and from the grid, represented as input or output power flow. Input power flow
refers to the power that flows into the grid.
As the DK1 frequency used for the
simulation is somewhat skewed and has the highest probability density around 50.01
Hz, the simulation results have the output energy slightly higher while the difference
is less under DK2 frequencies.
(a) DK1 Frequency.
(b) DK2 Frequency.
Figure 4.2: The energy transmitted by each strategy in DK1 and DK2.
The total energy transmitted by the four strategies under DK1 and DK2 fre-
quency is shown in Table 4.2. The average and standard deviation of the total energy
transmission is represented in Table 4.3.
Table 4.2: The total energy transmitted by the strategies under DK1 and DK2 fre-
quencies and the ratio between them.
DK1
DK2
Ratio
FCR - N
1125.055 kWh
2235.900 kWh
0.503
FCR - D
0.025 kWh
2.094 kWh
0.0116
PFR - DK
141.741 kWh
646.027 kWh
0.219
PFR - DE
301.718 kWh
867.128 kWh
0.347
The correlation between the input and output of transmitted energy for both
frequencies, along with their distributions are displayed in Figure 4.3. This reveals
the stark difference in the behavior of the two frequencies. Each dot on the plot
represents the total input and output energy transmitted in a certain hour. Under
DK1 frequency, the energy input/output displays clustered behavior, while under
DK2 frequency the input and output have a negative correlation between 50% and
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Results
Table 4.3: The total average (µ) and standard deviation (σ) of energy transmission
per hour.
DK1
DK2
µ [kWh/h]
σ [kWh/h]
µ [kWh/h]
σ [kWh/h]
FCR - N
1.674
0.507
3.347
1.150
FCR - D
0.0000366
0.000550
0.00314
0.0124
PFR - DK
0.211
0.181
0.967
0.561
PFR - DE
0.449
0.239
1.298
0.595
70%, represented as the Pearson numbers in the figures. The negative correlation
means that as the input increases, the output decreases and vice versa. It goes to
show that the DK2 frequency will deviate from its nominal value of 50 Hz for longer
periods while the DK1 frequency is more stable around the nominal frequency. The
energy transmitted per hour is also presented as a histogram in Figure A.2 in the
Appendix.
4.2.2
RG-CE and RG-N Comparison
(a) Energy per hour.
(b) Total input and output energy.
Figure 4.4: Comparison between the RG-CE strategies under DK1 frequency and the
RG-N strategies under DK2 frequency.
The difference in energy transmission gained from frequency regulation under DK1
frequency and RG-CE strategies versus DK2 frequency and RG-N strategies is visu-
alized in Figure 4.4. Figure 4.4(a) represents the energy per hour while Figure 4.4(b)
shows the total energy transmitted by the four strategies on a logarithmic scale. The
transmission grid in DK1 will transmit 0.211 kWh/h on average through a 10 kW
charger through PFR-DK, while the grid in DK2 transmits 3.347 kWh/h on average
through FCR-N, or approximately 16 times more energy.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Phase 1
43
(a) PFR-DE under DK1 frequency.
(b) PFR-DE under DK2 frequency.
(c) PFR-DK under DK1 frequency.
(d) PFR-DK under DK2 frequency.
(e) FCR-N under DK1 frequency.
(f) FCR-N under DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.3: The correlation between input and output of energy per hour as well as
their distributions for the strategies PFR-DE, PFR-DK and FCR-N under DK1 and
DK2 frequency.
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Results
4.3
Phase 2
Phase 2 of the analysis takes an EV battery into consideration. It makes limited
assumptions and, as such, there is no POP mechanism involved, the battery can be
charged and discharged between 0-100% and the charger is 10 kW. Three different
battery capacities are considered, 12 kWh, 24 kWh and 60 kWh. The energy transfer
is analyzed as in Phase 1 and the battery cycle periods are computed. Comparison
between service provision in RG-CE and RG-N is further visualized in Section A.4 in
the Appendix.
4.3.1
Energy Transfer - 12 kWh Battery
The input/output energy transmitted per hour by a 12 kWh battery is shown in Fig-
ure 4.5. The total consumed and discharged energy by the battery is presented in
Table 4.4. The table also displays the energy ratio in reference to the unconstrained
value shown in Table 4.2. The averages and standard deviations of the total energy
transmission is presented in Table 4.5. The FCR-N strategy causes the most fluc-
tuation in the battery SOC as will be demonstrated in Section 4.3.2. This results
in the most constrained flow of power under FCR-N: the battery is able to transmit
89.3% in DK1 and 82.1% in DK2, while the power flow under PFR-DK and PFR-DE
strategies is close to being unconstrained.
(a) 12 kWh battery under DK1 frequency.
(b) 12 kWh battery under DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.5: Comparison of energy transmission by a 12 kWh battery via the four
strategies in DK1 and DK2. Input power flow represents energy transmitted to the
grid and thus discharges the battery.
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Phase 2
45
Table 4.4: The total energy transmitted by the 12 kWh battery, along with its ratio.
DK1
DK2
Total Energy [kWh]
Ratio*
Total Energy [kWh]
Ratio
FCR - N
1004.923
0.893
1836.887
0.821
FCR - D
0.025
1
2.095
1
PFR - DK
141.066
0.995
625.141
0.967
PFR - DE
290.788
0.963
819.318
0.944
*: The ratio between the total energy compared to its respective value in Table 4.2.
Table 4.5: The total average (µ) and standard deviation (σ) of energy transmission
per hour for a 12 kWh battery.
DK1
DK2
µ [kWh/h]
σ [kWh/h]
µ [kWh/h]
σ [kWh/h]
FCR - N
1.495
0.564
2.750
1.345
FCR - D
0.0000366
0.000550
0.00314
0.0124
PFR - DK
0.210
0.181
0.936
0.562
PFR - DE
0.433
0.236
1.227
0.613
4.3.2
Battery Patterns - 12 kWh Battery
The simulated SOC of a 12 kWh battery over the month of February 2017 under DK1
and DK2 frequency are displayed in Figure 4.6. The number of occurrences where
the battery is either fully charged or discharged and unable to provide service is
presented in Table 4.6, given as percentage of the total simulation period of 1 month.
The availability is not directly correlated with the energy ratio shown in Table 4.4
as the the power input/output constantly varies. For example, the 12 kWh battery
providing services through FCR-N at DK2 is unable to provide service for 13.48% of
the total time due to being fully charged or discharged. The simulation period for
DK2 is 668 hours and thus the car was unavailable for over 90 hours in total.
Table 4.6: The time the 12 kWh EV battery is unable to provide service due to being
fully charged or discharged, presented as a percentage of the total simulation period.
DK1
DK2
Max. SOC
Span
Min. SOC
Span
Total
Max. SOC
Span
Min. SOC
Span
Total
FCR - N
5.08%
2.85%
7.93%
7.13%
6.35%
13.48%
FCR - D
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0%
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0%
PFR - DK
0.13%
0.0 %
0.13%
1.29%
0.44%
1.73%
PFR - DE
2.25 %
0.22%
1.78%
2.25%
1.33%
3.57%
As explained in Section 3.5.3, the SOC is used to calculate the cycle periods the
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Results
(a) 12 kWh battery under DK1 frequency.
(b) 12 kWh battery under DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.6: The SOC of a 12 kWh battery simulated over the month of February 2017
under DK1 and DK2 frequency.
battery undergoes. Figure 4.7 presents the DOD computed with Algorithm 2 where
micro discharges under 1% ∆SOC are discarded. Each dot in the figure represents
the number of DOD cycles that occurred within a 2% interval. A polynomial function
is fitted to the data to represent continuous change in occurrences with higher DOD.
Since the cycle is ended as soon as the SOC slope changes directions, the depth of the
cycles may be inaccurate due to micro-cycles in the opposite slope. In Figure 4.7(b),
the largest DOD is caused by PFR-DE. An even slope will not break the discharging
cycle and thus the deadband around the nominal frequency allows it to grow larger
than the DOD caused by FCR-N. The DOD cycles the battery experiences if Algo-
rithm 3 is applied to further eliminate micro-cycles and to ensure that a discharge
period is not ended prematurely are shown in Figure 4.8. This has the effect that a
cycle may last for a longer period and thus more cycle periods have a higher DOD
and the number of micro-cycles is reduced.
As can be seen in Figure 4.7(a) and 4.8(a), the R2 value of the polynomial fit is
low for FCR-N and PFR-DE. With few data points, each point that deviates far from
the fitted curve will have a greater negative effect on the score of the fit. Higher order
polynomials would fit the curves better, but at an increased risk of overfitting.
Since these cycles occur under frequency regulation, the charging periods of the
cycles are of the same nature as the discharging periods.
Both the charging and
discharging periods are presented together and fitted with a polynomial function.
Figure 4.9 shows the number of cycle periods that occurred during the simulation of
the 12 kWh battery.
The number of measurements varies greatly, both between the frequencies and
the strategies. As could be expected from the simulated SOC presented in Figure 4.6
the cycle periods the battery experiences in DK2 are a lot more intensive than those
caused in DK1. The battery had nine cycle periods close to 100% charge/discharge
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Phase 2
47
(a) DOD of a 12 kWh battery under DK1 frequency.
(b) DOD of a 12 kWh battery under DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.7: The DODs the 12 kWh battery experiences under DK1 and DK2 frequency
when applying Algorithm 2. Cycles under 1% DOD are excluded.
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Results
(a) DOD of a 12 kWh battery under DK1 frequency.
(b) DOD of a 12 kWh battery under DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.8: The DODs the 12 kWh battery experiences under DK1 and DK2 frequency
when applying Algorithm 3. The charging cycle needs to be higher than 1% ∆SOC
in order to break a discharge cycle.
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Phase 2
49
(a) The cycles a 12 kWh battery experiences under DK1 frequency.
(b) The cycles a 12 kWh battery experiences under DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.9: The DOD and charging cycles the 12 kWh battery experiences under DK1
and DK2 frequency when applying Algorithm 3.
in DK2 while the deepest cycle period in DK1 reached 46%.
The deepest cycle
period in DK1 is also a clear outlier. Since the DK1 frequency is more stable around
the nominal frequency, as demonstrated in Figure 4.3, the battery experiences more
micro-cycles under DK1 frequency.
Alternative ways of visualizing the cycle periods that the battery is subjected
to are presented in Figure 4.10 as box plots. The y-axis shows how much energy is
charged/discharged during the periods. Since the total number of cycles varies greatly
between the strategies, the actual measurements are plotted on top of the box plots
to visualize the differences in a number of measurements.
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Results
(a) The cycles a 12 kWh battery experiences un-
der DK1 frequency.
(b) The cycles a 12 kWh battery experiences un-
der DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.10: The energy transmitted by the 12 kWh battery through its charge and
discharge cycles.
4.3.3
Energy Transfer - 24 kWh Battery
The input/output energy transmitted per hour by a 24 kWh battery is shown in Figure
4.11. The total transmitted energy by the battery is presented in Table 4.7. The
average and standard deviation of the total energy transmitted per hour is presented
in Table 4.8. As the battery has twice the capacity of the 12 kWh battery, the power
flow is less constrained and as a result, it is able to transmit over 93% of the energy
the frequency regulation requires in all scenarios.
(a) 24 kWh battery under DK1 frequency.
(b) 24 kWh battery under DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.11: Comparison of energy transmission by a 24 kWh battery via the 4
strategies in DK1 and DK2. Input power flow represents energy transmitted to the
grid and thus discharges the battery.
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Phase 2
51
Table 4.7: The total energy transmitted by the 24 kWh battery along with its ratio.
DK1
DK2
Total Energy [kWh]
Ratio*
Total Energy [kWh]
Ratio
FCR - N
1046.923
0.931
2083.121
0.932
FCR - D
0.025
1
2.095
1
PFR - DK
141.741
1
640.720
0.992
PFR - DE
299.563
0.993
858.176
0.990
*: The ratio between the total energy compared to its respective value in Table 4.2.
Table 4.8: The total average (µ) and standard deviation (σ) of energy transmission
per hour for the 24 kWh battery.
DK1
DK2
µ [kWh/h]
σ [kWh/h]
µ [kWh/h]
σ [kWh/h]
FCR - N
1.558
0.530
3.118
1.277
FCR - D
0.0000366
0.000550
0.00314
0.0124
PFR - DK
0.211
0.181
0.959
0.561
PFR - DE
0.446
0.241
1.285
0.598
4.3.4
Battery Patterns - 24 kWh Battery
The simulated SOC of a 24 kWh battery over February 2017 under DK1 and DK2
frequency is displayed in Figure 4.12. Table 4.9 presents the number of occurrences
where the battery is either fully charged or discharged and unable to provide service.
The total time where the battery is unavailable through FCR-N at DK2 is approxi-
mately 35 hours, about 2.5 times less than the unavailability of the 12 kWh battery.
An EV providing service in DK1 through PFR-DE is unavailable for only 3 hours in
total.
Table 4.9: The time the 24 kWh EV battery is unable to provide service due to being
fully charged or discharged, presented in percentages.
DK1
DK2
Max. SOC
Span
Min. SOC
Span
Total
Max. SOC
Span
Min. SOC
Span
Total
FCR - N
3.48%
1.45 %
4.93%
3.05%
2.16%
5.21%
FCR - D
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0%
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0%
PFR - DK
0.0%
0.0 %
0.0%
0.40%
0.0%
0.40%
PFR - DE
0.47 %
0.0%
0.47%
0.60%
0.0%
0.60%
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Results
(a) 24 kWh battery under DK1 frequency.
(b) 24 kWh battery under DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.12: The SOC of a 24 kWh battery simulated over the month of February
2017 under DK1 and DK2 frequency.
(a) The cycles a 24 kWh battery experiences un-
der DK1 frequency.
(b) The cycles a 24 kWh battery experiences un-
der DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.13: The energy transmitted by the 24 kWh battery through its charge and
discharge cycles.
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Phase 2
53
The cycle periods the battery experiences are shown in Figure 4.14. Under DK1
frequency, the battery displays similar cycle behavior to the 12 kWh battery. The
cycles under DK2 frequency with a 24 kWh battery are less erratic compared to the
12 kWh battery, especially those caused by FCR-N as it shows a more clear reduction
in cycle periods as they increase in depth. The PFR-DE measurements in Figure
4.14(b) are fitted with a 2nd order polynomial. Due to the alignment of the highest
cycle measurements, a higher order fit would likely overfit the measurements and
thus not represent the cycle behavior correctly. The energy transmitted by the cycle
periods is presented as box plots in Figure 4.13 with the actual measurements plotted
on top. It is clear from Figure 4.13(a) that there are fewer cycle measurements under
PFR-DK than PFR-DE. This results in the box plot representing PFR-DK covering
a greater range of measurements with fewer outliers.
(a) The cycles a 24 kWh battery experiences under DK1 frequency.
(b) The cycles a 24 kWh battery experiences under DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.14: The DOD and charging cycles the 24 kWh battery experiences under
DK1 and DK2 frequency when applying Algorithm 3.
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Results
4.3.5
Energy Transfer - 60 kWh Battery
The input/output energy transmitted per hour by a 60 kWh battery is shown in Figure
4.15. The total transmitted energy by the battery along with its ratio is presented in
Table 4.10. It is evident that an EV with a 60 kWh battery will be able to provide
more service than EVs with 12 and 24 kWh batteries. Only through FCR-N does the
battery get fully charged or discharged, but it still transmits over 98% of the energy
requested. The average and standard deviation of the total energy transmitted per
hour is presented in Table 4.11.
(a) 60 kWh battery under DK1 frequency.
(b) 60 kWh battery under DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.15: Comparison of energy transmission by a 60 kWh battery via the 4
strategies in DK1 and DK2.
Table 4.10: The total energy transmitted by the 24 kWh battery along with its ratio.
DK1
DK2
Total Energy [kWh]
Ratio*
Total Energy [kWh]
Ratio
FCR - N
1106.729
0.983
2217.011
0.992
FCR - D
0.025
1
2.095
1
PFR - DK
141.741
1
646.027
1
PFR - DE
301.718
1
867.128
1
*: The ratio between the total energy compared to its respective value in Table 4.2.
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Phase 2
55
Table 4.11: The total average (µ) and standard deviation (σ) of energy transmission
per hour for the 60 kWh battery.
DK1
DK2
µ [kWh/h]
σ [kWh/h]
µ [kWh/h]
σ [kWh/h]
FCR - N
1.647
0.523
3.319
1.169
FCR - D
0.0000366
0.000550
0.00314
0.0124
PFR - DK
0.211
0.181
0.967
0.561
PFR - DE
0.449
0.239
1.298
0.595
4.3.6
Battery Patterns - 60 kWh Battery
The simulated SOC of a 60 kWh battery over the month of February 2017 under
DK1 and DK2 frequency is displayed in Figure 4.16. Table 4.12 presents the number
of occurrences where the battery is either fully charged or discharged and unable
to provide service. The battery became fully charged only through FCR-N and for
a longer period in DK1 than DK2. The cycles the battery experiences is shown in
Figure 4.17. It is apparent from Figure 4.16(a) that the cycles caused by PFR-DE
and PFR-DK under DK1 frequency are very small and that translates into Figure
4.17(a). Due to these small number of cycle measurements, the curves are given a
perfect fit. The energy transmitted by the cycles is presented as box plots in Figure
4.18 with the actual measurements plotted on top.
(a) 60 kWh battery under DK1 frequency.
(b) 60 kWh battery under DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.16: The SOC of a 60 kWh battery simulated over the month of February
2017 under DK1 and DK2 frequency.
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Results
Table 4.12: The time the 60 kWh EV battery is unable to provide service due to
being fully charged or discharged, presented as percentages.
DK1
DK2
Max.
SOC Span
Min. SOC
Span
Total
Max.
SOC Span
Min. SOC
Span
Total
FCR - N
1.35%
0.0 %
1.35%
0.57%
0.0%
0.57%
FCR - D
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0%
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0%
PFR - DK
0.0%
0.0 %
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
PFR - DE
0.0 %
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
(a) The cycles a 60 kWh battery experiences under DK1 frequency.
(b) The cycles a 60 kWh battery experiences under DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.17: The DOD and charging cycles the 60 kWh battery experiences under
DK1 and DK2 frequency when applying Algorithm 3.
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Phase 3
57
(a) The cycles a 60 kWh battery experiences un-
der DK1 frequency.
(b) The cycles a 60 kWh battery experiences un-
der DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.18: The energy transmitted by the 60 kWh battery through its charge and
discharge cycles.
4.4
Phase 3
Phase 3 of the analysis considers the three battery capacities of 12 kWh, 24 kWh
and 60 kWh with an application of the 1-step POP algorithm, that was explained
in Section 3.5.1. The four strategies are simulated with the 1-step POP algorithm
shown in Figure 3.5 under the DK1 and DK2 frequencies. The charger is 10 kW as
in Phase 1 and Phase 2, but the useful capacity of the battery is reduced to 90% and
thus it can be charged to a maximum 95% SOC and discharged to a minimum 5%
SOC.
The initial SOC of the battery is set at 50% and as such the droop function of the
strategies starts at POP0. The function enters POP1 if the battery charges over 80%
SOC and POP2 if it discharges under 20% SOC. The SOC needs to reach 79% and
21% for the droop function to shift back to POP0 from POP1 and POP2, respectively.
This eliminates transient behavior at the thresholds.
• 1-Step POP thresholds
- POP0: 0.2 < SOC < 0.8
- POP1: SOC ≥0.8
- POP2: SOC ≤0.2
4.4.1
Energy Transfer with POP - 12 kWh Battery
The input/output energy transmitted per hour by a 12 kWh battery with a 1-step
POP algorithm applied is shown in Figure 4.19. The total transmitted energy by
the battery, along with the ratio, compared to its respective value in Table 4.2, is
==PAGE:68==
58
4 Results
presented in Table 4.13. As the POP algorithm shifts the droop function either up or
down by 50%, the power input/output may become higher than that of the normal
POP0 function. This results in some scenarios transmitting slightly more total energy
than they would otherwise if the power flow was unconstrained in terms of battery
size and without the POP mechanism.
The average and standard deviation of the total energy transmitted per hour is
presented in Table 4.14.
(a) 12 kWh battery under DK1 frequency.
(b) 12 kWh battery under DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.19: Comparison of energy transmission by a 12 kWh battery via the four
strategies in DK1 and DK2 with a 1-step POP applied.
Table 4.13: The total energy transmitted by the 12 kWh battery and its normalized
value.
DK1
DK2
Total Energy [kWh]
Ratio*
Total Energy [kWh]
Ratio
FCR - N
1117.303
0.993
1930.359
0.863
FCR - D
0.024
1
2.095
1
PFR - DK
143.806
1.014
657.631
1.018
PFR - DE
314.235
1.041
877.854
1.012
*: The ratio between the total energy compared to its respective value in Table 4.2.
==PAGE:69==
4.4 Phase 3
59
Table 4.14: The total average (µ) and standard deviation (σ) of energy transmission
per hour for the 12 kWh battery.
DK1
DK2
µ [kWh/h]
σ [kWh/h]
µ [kWh/h]
σ [kWh/h]
FCR - N
1.663
0.449
2.890
0.958
FCR - D
0.0000366
0.000550
0.00314
0.0124
PFR - DK
0.214
0.184
0.984
0.560
PFR - DE
0.468
0.255
1.314
0.581
4.4.2
Battery Patterns with POP - 12 kWh Battery
The simulated SOC of a 12 kWh battery over February 2017 under DK1 and DK2
frequencies with a 1-step POP algorithm is displayed in Figure 4.20.
Table 4.15
presents how much time the battery spends under POP0, POP1 and POP2 as a
percentage of the total time. It also shows the highest and lowest SOC the battery
reached during the simulated service participation. The scenario where the battery
reaches its capacity limits is through FCR-N under DK2 frequency. The EV was
only unable to provide service for 0.11% of the total time, which roughly equals 44
minutes. However, it is providing service at a half rate for approximately 20% of
the total time. When EV provides frequency regulation service through PFR-DE or
PFR-DK at DK1, the battery capacity barely reaches beyond the thresholds of the
POP functions.
The cycle periods the battery is exposed to are presented in Figure 4.22. Under
DK1 frequency the cycles present a clear pattern, as the fitted curve demonstrates.
Under DK2 frequency the cycles have more erratic behavior.
The 1% threshold
difference when entering and leaving a POP function results in more micro-cycles
being formed. Without the POP algorithm, the battery has a lot fewer micro-cycles
at DK2 compared to DK1, which is not the case in this scenario. However, the POP
reduces the severity of the cycle periods. Through FCR-N at DK2 the largest cycle
period is 83.3% ∆SOC, while the 12kWh battery experiences several cycle periods
close to 100% ∆SOC without POP.
==PAGE:70==
60
4 Results
(a) 12 kWh battery under DK1 frequency.
(b) 12 kWh battery under DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.20: The SOC of a 12 kWh battery simulated over the month of February
2017 under DK1 and DK2 frequency with a 1-step POP applied.
(a) The cycles a 12 kWh battery experiences un-
der DK1 frequency.
(b) The cycles a 12 kWh battery experiences un-
der DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.21: The energy transmitted by the 12 kWh battery through its charge and
discharge cycles.
==PAGE:71==
4.4 Phase 3
61
Table 4.15: The time the 12 kWh battery spends under a specific POP function given
as a percentage of the total time. The maximum and minimum SOC the battery
charged or discharged to is presented as Highest SOC and Lowest SOC in percentages.
POP0 Span*
POP1 Span
POP2 Span
Highest SOC
Lowest SOC
DK1
FCR - N
95.66%
2.79%
1.55%
82.22%
18.68%
FCR - D
100%
0%
0%
50.00%
49.96%
PFR - DE
99.22%
0.55%
0.23%
80.01%
19.99%
PFR - DK
99.88%
0.11%
0.01%
80.01%
20.00%
DK2
FCR - N
79.67%
10.70%
9.63%
95.00%
5.00%
FCR - D
100%
0%
0%
50.00%
49.96%
PFR - DE
96.77%
1.81%
1.42%
80.37%
19.70%
PFR - DK
98.09%
1.10%
0.81%
80.33%
19.96%
*: The duration a certain POP state is active given as percentage of the total time.
(a) The cycles a 12 kWh battery experiences under DK1 frequency.
(b) The cycles a 12 kWh battery experiences under DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.22: The DOD and charging cycles the 12 kWh battery experiences under
DK1 and DK2 frequency when applying Algorithm 3 and a 1-step POP algorithm.
==PAGE:72==
62
4 Results
4.4.3
Energy Transfer with POP - 24 kWh Battery
The input/output energy transmitted per hour by a 24 kWh battery with a 1-step
POP algorithm applied is shown in Figure 4.23. The total transmitted energy by
the battery is presented in Table 4.16. This also shows the ratio between the total
energy compared with its respective value in Table 4.2. As in the case with the 12
kWh battery with the 1-step POP algorithm, the ratio exceeds a value of 1 in some
cases. The average and standard deviation of the total energy transmitted per hour
is presented in Table 4.17.
(a) 24 kWh battery under DK1 frequency.
(b) 24 kWh battery under DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.23: Comparison of energy transmission by a 24 kWh battery via the four
strategies in DK1 and DK2 with a 1-step POP applied.
Table 4.16: The total energy transmitted by the 24 kWh battery and its normalized
value.
DK1
DK2
Total Energy [kWh]
Ratio*
Total Energy [kWh]
Ratio
FCR - N
1128.305
1.003
2101.789
0.940
FCR - D
0.025
1
2.095
1
PFR - DK
141.742
1.000
648.605
1.004
PFR - DE
306.055
1.014
869.661
1.003
*: The ratio between the total energy compared to its respective value in Table 4.2.
==PAGE:73==
4.4 Phase 3
63
Table 4.17: The total average (µ) and standard deviation (σ) of energy transmission
per hour for the 24 kWh battery.
DK1
DK2
µ [kWh/h]
σ [kWh/h]
µ [kWh/h]
σ [kWh/h]
FCR - N
1.679
0.471
3.146
1.097
FCR - D
0.0000366
0.000550
0.00314
0.0124
PFR - DK
0.211
0.181
0.971
0.562
PFR - DE
0.455
0.244
1.302
0.593
4.4.4
Battery Patterns with POP - 24 kWh Battery
The simulated SOC of a 24 kWh battery over February 2017 under DK1 and DK2
frequency with a 1-step POP algorithm is displayed in Figure 4.24. Table 4.18 presents
the total time the battery spends under POP0, POP1 and POP2 as well as the highest
and lowest SOC the battery reached during the simulation. It is evident that in none
of the scenarios did the battery reach its maximum capacity and it was able to provide
service through the whole period. EV participating through FCR-N in DK2 spent
9.65% of the time under POP1 and POP2, while the 24 kWh battery is sufficiently
large to not pass into POP1 and POP2 through PFR-DK in DK2. The cycles are
visualized as box plots in Figure 4.26, with the actual measurements plotted on top.
(a) 24 kWh battery under DK1 frequency.
(b) 24 kWh battery under DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.24: The SOC of a 24 kWh battery simulated over February 2017 under DK1
and DK2 frequency with a 1-step POP applied.
==PAGE:74==
64
4 Results
Table 4.18: The time the 24 kWh battery spends under a specific POP function
given as percentage of the total time. The maximum and minimum SOC the battery
charged or discharged to is given as highest and lowest SOC in percentage.
POP0 Span*
POP1 Span
POP2 Span
Highest SOC
Lowest SOC
DK1
FCR - N
96.63%
2.31%
1.07%
81.16%
19.51%
FCR - D
100%
0%
0%
50.00%
49.96%
PFR - DE
99.77%
0.22%
0.01%
80.00%
20.00%
PFR - DK
100.00%
0.00%
0.00%
77.82%
33.83%
DK2
FCR - N
90.35%
5.32%
4.33%
92.51%
13.01%
FCR - D
100%
0%
0%
50.00%
49.96%
PFR - DE
99.09%
0.66%
0.25%
80.00%
19.98%
PFR - DK
99.66%
0.32%
0.02%
80.00%
20.00%
*: The duration a certain POP state is active, presented as percentages of the total time.
(a) The cycles a 24 kWh battery experiences under DK1 frequency.
(b) The cycles a 24 kWh battery experiences under DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.25: The DOD and charging cycles the 24 kWh battery experiences under
DK1 and DK2 frequency with a 1-step POP function and Algorithm 3.
==PAGE:75==
4.4 Phase 3
65
(a) The cycles a 24 kWh battery experiences un-
der DK1 frequency.
(b) The cycles a 24 kWh battery experiences un-
der DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.26: The energy transmitted by the 24 kWh battery through its charge and
discharge cycles.
4.4.5
Energy Transfer with POP - 60 kWh Battery
The input/output energy transmitted per hour by a 60 kWh battery with a 1-step
POP algorithm applied is shown in Figure 4.27. The total transmitted energy by
the battery along with its ratio is presented in Table 4.19.
The 60 kWh battery
can transmit all requested energy through PFR-DE, PFR-DK and FCR-D while the
energy transmission through FCR-N deviates by only 1% in both DK1 and DK2. The
average and standard deviation of the total energy transmitted per hour is presented
in Table 4.20.
(a) 60 kWh battery under DK1 frequency.
(b) 60 kWh battery under DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.27: Comparison of energy transmission by a 60 kWh battery via the 4
strategies in DK1 and DK2 with a 1-step POP applied.
==PAGE:76==
66
4 Results
Table 4.19: The total energy transmitted by the 60 kWh battery and its ratio.
DK1
DK2
Total Energy [kWh]
Ratio*
Total Energy [kWh]
Ratio
FCR - N
1135.042
1.009
2212.452
0.990
FCR - D
0.025
1
2.095
1
PFR - DK
141.741
1
646.027
1
PFR - DE
301.718
1
867.507
1
*: The ratio between the total energy compared to its respective value in Table 4.2.
Table 4.20: The total average (µ) and standard deviation (σ) of energy transmission
per hour for the 60 kWh battery.
DK1
DK2
µ [kWh/h]
σ [kWh/h]
µ [kWh/h]
σ [kWh/h]
FCR - N
1.689
0.510
3.312
1.145
FCR - D
0.0000366
0.000550
0.00314
0.0124
PFR - DK
0.211
0.181
0.967
0.561
PFR - DE
0.449
0.239
1.299
0.595
4.4.6
Battery Patterns with POP - 60 kWh Battery
The simulated SOC of a 60 kWh battery over February 2017 under DK1 and DK2
frequency with a 1-step POP algorithm is displayed in Figure 4.28. Table 4.18 presents
the total time span the battery spends under POP0, POP1 and POP2, as well as the
highest and lowest SOC the battery reached during the simulation.
Under DK1
frequency the 60 kWh battery remained within the POP0 boundary the whole period
through PFR-DE, PFR-DK and FCR-D, while FCR-N would cross into POP1 and
POP2 for only 1.28% of the entire period. Under DK2 frequency the battery also
remains mostly within the POP0 boundary. Through FCR-N it crosses into POP1
and POP2 for about 2% of the total time. PFR-DE passes into POP1 for about 39
minutes during the whole simulated month.
The cycle periods the 60 kWh battery undergoes with a 1-step POP algorithm are
shown in Figure 4.30. Since the differences between the battery behavior with the
POP algorithm and without are either none or very small for PFR-DK and PFR-DE,
the cycles form the same pattern. PFR-DE and PFR-DK in DK1 are given perfect
fit due to their low number of measurements. The cycles are visualized as box plots
in Figure 4.29 with the actual measurements plotted on top.
==PAGE:77==
4.4 Phase 3
67
(a) 60 kWh battery under DK1 frequency.
(b) 60 kWh battery under DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.28: The SOC of a 60 kWh battery simulated over February 2017 under DK1
and DK2 frequency with a 1-step POP applied.
(a) The cycles a 60 kWh battery experiences un-
der DK1 frequency.
(b) The cycles a 60 kWh battery experiences un-
der DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.29: The energy transmitted by the 60 kWh battery through its charge and
discharge cycles.
==PAGE:78==
68
4 Results
Table 4.21: The time the 60 kWh battery spends under a specific POP function,
presented as percentages of the total time. The maximum and minimum SOC the
battery reached is given as highest and lowest SOC.
POP0 Span*
POP1 Span
POP2 Span
Highest SOC
Lowest SOC
DK1
FCR - N
98.72%
1.10%
0.18%
80.36%
20.00%
FCR - D
100%
0.00%
0.00%
50.00%
49.96%
PFR - DE
100%
0.00%
0.00%
73.59%
37.69%
PFR - DK
100%
0.00%
0.00%
61.13%
43.53%
DK2
FCR - N
98.01%
1.46%
0.53%
81.89%
18.90%
FCR - D
100%
0.00%
0.00%
50.00%
49.96%
PFR - DE
99.90%
0.10%
0.00%
80.00%
32.81%
PFR - DK
100%
0.00%
0.00%
78.84%
36.87%
*: The duration a certain POP state is active, presented as percentages of the total time.
(a) The cycles a 60 kWh battery experiences under DK1 frequency.
(b) The cycles a 60 kWh battery experiences under DK2 frequency.
Figure 4.30: The DOD and charging cycles the 60 kWh battery experiences under
DK1 and DK2 frequency with a 1-step POP function and Algorithm 3.
==PAGE:79==
4.5 Analysis of 2-step POP function
69
4.5
Analysis of 2-step POP function
As can be observed from Tables 4.15, 4.18 and 4.21 the SOC rarely deviates far above
80% SOC or below 20% with the 1-step POP function. The only case where the
battery reached its limit is with the 12 kWh battery under DK2 frequency through
FCR-N. In that specific case, the EV was unable to provide service for 0.11% of the
total service time of one month.
A 2-step POP algorithm was designed for FCR-N, shown in Figure 3.6.
The
algorithm shifts the droop function by 50% when a SOC threshold is crossed and
again by a further 25% if a second SOC threshold is crossed. This makes the 2-step
POP more aggressive at keeping the SOC within a set limit.
A scenario is created where the 1-step and 2-step POP functions are compared.
The thresholds for the POP are shown below for the 1-step and 2-step algorithms
respectively, but the threshold when going from a higher state of POP to a lower
state is 1% higher.
• 1-Step POP
- POP0: 0.2 < SOC < 0.8
- POP1: SOC ≥0.8
- POP2: SOC ≤0.2
• 2-Step POP
- POP0: 0.2 < SOC < 0.8
- POP1: 0.8 ≤SOC ≤0.85
- POP2: 0.15 ≤SOC ≤0.2
- POP3: SOC > 0.85
- POP4: SOC < 0.15
12 kWh and 24 kWh batteries are simulated for the month of February 2017 under
DK2 frequency through FCR-N. The SOC of the 12 kWh battery over the period is
shown in Figure 4.31. As seen in Figure 4.31(a), there is a peak on February 6th
where the SOC reaches 95% under the 1-step function, which is the set capacity limit
of the battery. This date is visualized in Figure 4.31(b). The highest SOC recorded
on the 6th of February with the 2-step POP is 88.17%. The 24 kWh battery reaches
92.5% SOC with the 1-step POP and 85.6% with the 2-step POP on February 6th.
The time span when the batteries are under certain POP functions are presented in
Tables 4.22 and 4.23. In both cases when the 2-step POP is applied, the battery stays
within the POP0 boundary for a longer period.
To further demonstrate the differences between the 1-step and 2-step methods,
an efficiency (η) equation is applied, see Eq. 4.1. When the battery enters POP1
or POP2 it produces a frequency regulation service at 50% efficiency. The efficiency
==PAGE:80==
70
4 Results
(a) SOC over February 2017.
(b) SOC over February 6th.
Figure 4.31: The SOC of a 12 kWh battery with a 1-step and 2-step POP algorithms.
drops down to 25% during POP3 and POP4. The total efficiency is therefore calcu-
lated as the seconds the battery spends under certain POP function multiplied by its
respective efficiency ratio.
Table 4.22: The time a 12 kWh battery spends under a specific POP function, pre-
sented as percentages of the total time.
POP0 Span
POP1 Span
POP2 Span
POP3 Span
POP4 Span
FCR-N 1-step POP
79.67%
10.70%
9.63%
-
-
FCR-N 2-step POP
80.20%
9.73%
8.76%
0.10%
1.21%
Table 4.23: The time a 24 kWh battery spends under a specific POP function, pre-
sented as percentages of the total time.
POP0 Span
POP1 Span
POP2 Span
POP3 Span
POP4 Span
FCR-N 1-step POP
89.94%
5.29%
4.31%
-
-
FCR-N 2-step POP
90.41%
5.13%
4.28%
0.01%
0.16%
η = 1 · (POP0) + 0.5 · (POP1 + POP2) + 0.25 · (POP3 + POP4)
(4.1)
The efficiency (η) of the 2-step algorithm is slightly higher in both cases as pre-
sented in Table 4.24. The 12 kWh battery reaches its capacity limit for 0.11% of the
duration with the 1-step POP, and that period is taken into consideration for the
efficiency calculation.
==PAGE:81==
4.5 Analysis of 2-step POP function
71
Table 4.24: The calculated efficiency (η) of the 1-step and 2-step algorithms for 12
kWh and 24 kWh batteries through FCR-N under DK2 frequency.
12 kWh
24 kWh
1-step POP
2-step POP
1-step POP
2-step POP
η
0.892
0.897
0.947
0.952
The differences in cycle behavior are shown in Figure 4.32. The 12 kWh battery
displays a very similar pattern between 1-step and 2-step POP until reaching 60%
∆SOC. The 2-step POP algorithm is able to prevent the cycles from reaching over
70% ∆SOC for a 12 kWh battery, but has little affect on a 24 kWh battery.
(a) 12 kWh battery with a 1-step and 2-step POP.
(b) 24 kWh battery with a 1-step and 2-step POP.
Figure 4.32: The cycle periods that 12 kWh and 24 kWh batteries are subjected to
under DK2 frequency when a 1-step and 2-step POP function is applied through
FCR-N.
==PAGE:82==
72
4 Results
4.6
Real V2G Data Analysis and Model Validation
In order to estimate the accuracy of the simulation, real data from the Parker Project
is analyzed and compared with the results of the simulation. As mentioned in Section
3.6, the V2G data consists of 10 EVs with a 24 kWh battery connected to a 10 kW
bi-directional charger when providing frequency regulation services. By extracting
the data of a single vehicle when it is providing the service during February 2017, it
is possible to simulate an EV over the same period. The SOC of Car 1, as denoted
in Table 3.3, is shown in Figure 4.33. Figure 4.33(a) shows the SOC over the period
when it was providing V2G services over February 2017. The maximum capacity of
the vehicles in the V2G data is set at 21 kWh but the SOC scale of the figures are
given in reference to a 24 kWh battery. The maximum charge is therefore 87.5% SOC.
It is evident that when the battery is declared fully charged, it is not actually due to
service provision as can be observed from the instantaneous change to full SOC and
subsequent horizontal slope. All measurements in the data presenting the battery as
either fully charged or discharged are removed and the cleared SOC is presented in
Figure 4.33(b).
(a) SOC over February 2017.
(b) SOC after clearing.
Figure 4.33: The SOC of Car 1 over February 2017, shown as continuous V2G service.
As mentioned previously, it is not exactly known how the POP algorithm that
is used for the EVs at FF operates. The 2-step POP algorithm described in Section
3.5.1 is used for the comparison. From Figure 4.33(b) it is estimated that POP1 is
triggered at 80% SOC and POP2 at 35% SOC. POP3 and POP4 are triggered at 85%
and 30% SOC, respectively. The simulated SOC compared to the real SOC of Car 1
is shown in Figure 4.34. The Pearson correlation between the full simulation and the
actual data is 62.2%.
Simulating the battery behavior over the period the actual FF car was providing
service comes with certain limitations. The EVs at FF are used for ordinary driving
between periods of V2G service. This results in fluctuations in the SOC over the
==PAGE:83==
4.6 Real V2G Data Analysis and Model Validation
73
Figure 4.34: The simulated SOC compared to the SOC of Car 1.
Figure 4.35: The simulated SOC compared to Car 1 over 8th-10th of February.
==PAGE:84==
74
4 Results
month that the simulation cannot take into account as it simulates the battery be-
havior continuously. This is demonstrated in Figure 4.35. Here Car 1 is disconnected
from the V2G charger in the morning with SOC around 30%. It returns for service
later that day with over 80% SOC. It is apparent that the POP triggers at 30% SOC
for Car 1 during this period while the simulation has the threshold set at 35 % SOC.
The SOC of Car 1 over the period 16th-21st of February has some minor changes
due to driving and dump charging, which is charging avoid of grid incentive. This
period is visualized further in Figure 4.36. It gives a clearer representation of the cor-
relation between the simulation and the actual EV data. Having the POP2 threshold
set at 35% over this period gives better correlation than a threshold at 30%. It is also
apparent that setting the POP1 threshold at 80% SOC is accurate. The Pearson corre-
lation coefficient over this period is computed as 0.896, where a correlation of 1 would
represent total positive linear correlation and 0 no linear correlation. The error is also
calculated through the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE), where RMSE = 0.0815.
In order to put the error value into perspective, the RMSE is also calculated between
the SOC over the period in Figure 4.36 of Car 1 and its average value which gives a
result of RMSE = 0.128. This indicates that the simulation is better at predicting
the actual SOC of the car than always guessing the average value.
Figure 4.36: The simulated SOC compared to Car 1 over the 16th-21st of February.
To better assess the models accuracy, a period is found where the driving and
dumb charging periods are even fewer. Car 7 has over two days of almost continuous
V2G service, a total of 202600 data indices. The SOC of Car 7 over the 17th-19th
February and the simulated battery behavior over the same period are shown in
Figure 4.37. The x-axis represents the time for every 10800 indices, which equals 3
hours. Therefore, it can be assessed that the car stayed connected to the V2G charger
==PAGE:85==
4.6 Real V2G Data Analysis and Model Validation
75
almost continuously over the period.
Figure 4.37: The simulated SOC compared to Car 7 over the 17th-19th of February.
The Pearson correlation over this period is 0.951 and the RMSE is 0.0596. The
RMSE between the SOC of Car 7 compared to its average SOC over the period is
0.152.
There are several factors that contribute to the error value of the simulation. One
obvious reason is the POP algorithm as it is not of the same design as the one used
for the FF cars and will therefore create differences between the two curves. The
bi-directional charger is also a component of uncertainty. Section 2.2.1 describes how
such a charger may have greater losses than normal chargers. The same period is
simulated with 8 kW and 9 kW chargers. The results are presented in Table 4.25.
Decreasing the possible power output of the charger does not increase the accuracy
of the model.
Table 4.25: The Pearson correlation, RMSE value and R2 in relation to the chargers
maximum power output for the period presented in Figure 4.37.
Charger:
Pearson corr.
RMSE
R2
10 kW
0.951
0.0546
0.871
9 kW
0.945
0.0596
0.846
8 kW
0.939
0.0623
0.832
==PAGE:86==
76
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
5.1
Battery Patterns
The analysis of the frequency data reveals considerable differences between the fre-
quency at DK1 and DK2.
These differences translate into how an EV battery is
affected when providing V2G through frequency regulation under DK1 and DK2
frequencies. The frequency at DK2 tends to deviate both further and for a longer
period from the nominal frequency than DK1 frequency. More energy is transmitted
between the battery and the grid per hour in DK2 due to this greater imbalance.
It also causes the batteries to undergo larger cycles which have a more detrimental
effect on the battery State-of-Health. Since the DK1 frequency tends to remain more
stable around the nominal frequency, the battery experiences micro-cycles more often
under DK1 frequency.
The battery capacity has a great effect on the cycles it is subject to. A larger
battery is able to transmit more energy per hour on average as the flow of power
is less constrained within the limits of the battery. An important advantage for the
larger batteries is also the fact that they experience smaller cycles relative to a smaller
battery. The largest cycle the 60 kWh battery experienced during the simulation was
45% ∆SOC, when the battery was providing service through FCR-N at DK2. Without
the POP the 12 kWh will experience multiple full charge/discharge cycles through
FCR-N at DK2.
In real application of V2G an EV located in DK1 and Germany will provide service
through PFR-DK and PFR-DE. The results indicate that the cycles experienced by
an EV in RG-CE are minor. Over the whole month of February, the largest computed
cycle period for a 12 kWh battery was 24.5% ∆SOC. The 60 kWh battery in DK1
only experienced four cycle periods that fulfill the conditions of Algorithm 3 through
PFR-DK. In Germany there are six measurements. For FCR-N at DK1 there are
176 cycle periods measured.
The deadband around the nominal frequency has a
significant effect on the number on cycle measurements.
5.2
Cycle Measurements
Figure 4.7 shows how if a charging or discharging cycle is only allowed to be monotonic
in behavior it might give a false representation of the actual cycle behavior. The
cycles formed through PFR-DE and PFR-DK are able to be larger than cycles formed
==PAGE:88==
78
5 Discussion
through FCR-N, due to the deadband around the nominal frequency which gives them
an extra margin to grow. FCR-N is contrarily very sensitive to frequency changes
around the nominal frequency. Small deviations in the SOC slope will not mitigate
the effects of an otherwise deep cycle. Therefore forcing a deep cycle period with a
small slope deviation to count as two cycle periods of average depth is inaccurate.
A function was designed that would only break a charging or discharging cycle
if the change in slope was higher than 1% ∆SOC. This counteracts the simulation
sensitivity to small changes in frequency and allows the cycles to reach a higher
∆DOD. The function also reduces the number of measured micro-cycles. Due to the
big differences in battery patterns between DK1 and DK2 it might be argued that a
lower threshold would be appropriate for DK1. In order to maintain consistency in
the comparison between DK1 and DK2 it was decided to apply the same 1% ∆SOC
threshold for all the scenarios.
5.3
POP algorithm and Model Validation
The POP algorithm is designed to maintain the battery SOC within a certain limit.
A set limit helps with avoiding over- and undercharging the battery. If the battery be-
comes fully charged or discharged, it cannot provide down-regulation or up-regulation,
respectively. The POP should also ensure that there is some minimal charge in the
battery at any given moment for when the car should be used for driving.
The POP algorithms designed for this project are either 1-step, meaning the droop
function of the FCR strategy is shifted once, either up or down 50% from the normal
function or 2-step, where the droop function is shifted 50% and then by an additional
25% if the battery SOC gets critically high or low. The 1-step POP is able to reduce
the size of the cycles the 12 kWh battery experiences, where the largest cycle was
83% ∆SOC. However, the battery will reach 95% and 5% SOC over the simulation
for some time. The 2-step POP algorithm is able to prevent that, and also manages
to further decrease the depth of the largest cycles. With a larger battery capacity,
the threshold to a higher state of POP is crossed fewer times and the battery is less
prone to reaching a critically high or low SOC. It was demonstrated that the 2-step
POP would have minimal effect on the cycles a 24 kWh battery will experience under
DK2 frequency. However, it offers higher efficiency as it forces the SOC to return to
the POP0 boundary faster. The 60 kWh battery is large enough for the 2-step POP
to have no effect, as the thresholds of the second POP steps are never crossed.
Data of EVs participating in frequency regulation through FCR-N at DK2 was
used to determine the accuracy of the simulation. The simulation has a 95% corre-
lation with an EV participating in a near continuous FCR for over two days. The
regression fit is measured through RMSE and R2, where RMSE = 0.0546 and R2 =
0.871. The RMSE states the square root of the average of the squared errors between
the simulation and the actual data. The value of R2 indicates to what extent the
simulation model is able to explain the variance in the vehicle data, which in this
case is 87.1%.
==PAGE:89==
5.3 POP algorithm and Model Validation
79
Several factors contribute to the error of the simulation. As described in Section
4.6, the POP algorithm used for the simulation does not operate in the same way as
the one designed for real application. Analysis of the real V2G data indicates that
the 1% difference in the POP set-point that depend on increasing or decreasing SOC
is too low. It can be observed in Figure 4.36 over the period 01:47 - 07:47 that the
POP forces the SOC of the FF car to discharge further than the simulated SOC. The
POP algorithm used to control the SOC of the FF cars includes 80 unique states
of POP. This allows for a gradual increase in the charge and discharge ratio of the
charger when the SOC exceeds the POP set points.
Decreasing the charger’s maximum power output did not increase the accuracy
of the model. The model is simulating behavior of vehicle charging which in real
application includes many other components. In reality, charging is controlled with
Pulse Width Modulation (PWM) which steps the charging/discharging current up
and down. The simulation does not consider PWM, which might contribute to the
disparity between the observed and simulated data. There is also a latency between
the measured frequency signal and subsequent power output of the charger.
The
latency may exceed one second which is the operating period of each power mea-
surement for the simulation. The latency will result in a small delay in the battery
charging/discharging.
The results gained from the real V2G data analysis indicate that the model has
decent accuracy for FCR-N. This accuracy can be extended to the models of the other
3 strategies as they are all designed with the same process.
==PAGE:90==
80
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
The increasing market penetration of EVs is presenting new possibilities in energy
management. By applying EVs for demand response services, it is possible to take
advantage of the considerable battery capacity and utilize the energy stored within
them when the cars are parked. The technology of applying bi-directional flow of
power to enable EV participation in grid support is referred to as Vehicle-to-Grid
(V2G). Frequency regulation is a utility service that has potential through V2G.
In this thesis, an EV participation in frequency regulation is simulated. Two real
frequency data sets are used for the analysis. The data includes frequency measure-
ments for every second of February 2017 from Regional Group - Continental Europe
(RG-CE) and Regional Group - Nordic (RG-N). Four frequency regulation strategies
are analyzed under the frequency data. PFR-DE and PFR-DK are strategies used in
RG-CE while FCR-N and FCR-D are strategies used in RG-N.
The purpose of the project is to investigate what differences can be expected be-
tween frequency regulation service participation in RG-CE and RG-N. The frequency
regulation via V2G is simulated with three different battery capacities of 12 kWh,
24 kWh and 60 kWh.
The frequency regulation strategies are implemented both
as normal droop control and with a preferred operating point (POP). The POP is
tasked with maintaining the SOC within a certain boundary. The simulation has two
outputs that are analyzed, the energy transmission per hour and the charging/dis-
charging periods of the cycles the battery is subject to.
Table 6.1: The total average energy transmitted per hour by the four strategies in their
respective synchronous regions. It presents a comparison between normal operation
and 1-step POP algorithm.
RG-CE
RG-N
PFR-DK
[kWh/h]
PFR-DE
[kWh/h]
FCR-N
[kWh/h]
FCR-D
[kWh/h]
Normal
12 kWh
0.210
0.433
2.750
0.00314
24 kWh
0.211
0.446
3.118
0.00314
60 kWh
0.211
0.449
3.312
0.00314
POP
12 kWh
0.214
0.468
2.890
0.00314
24 kWh
0.211
0.455
3.146
0.00314
60 kWh
0.211
0.449
3.312
0.00314
==PAGE:92==
82
6 Conclusion
The results of the simulated energy transmission are summarized in Table 6.1. It
presents the total average energy per hour transmitted through each strategy in their
respective synchronous region. As can be observed, there is a considerable difference
in the energy transmission between the strategies. The RG-CE frequency is more
stable around the nominal frequency than RG-N frequency. The RG-CE strategies
also have a deadband around the nominal frequency which allows the battery to be
less responsive to changes in frequency occurring around 50 Hz. The PFR-DK and
PFR-DE droop controls regulate the power input/output in the range [-200,200] mHz
around 50 Hz, with a specific deadband of ±20 mHz and ±10 mHz, respectively, while
the FCR-N droop control regulates the power input/output in the range [-100,100]
mHz around 50 Hz and without a deadband. These results conclude that an EV
with a 24 kWh battery located in DK2, providing service through FCR-N, transmits
approximately 15 times more energy per hour on average than an identical EV located
in DK1 participating through PFR-DK.
The results in Table 6.1 indicate the battery capacity has little effect on the energy
transmission in RG-CE. The same applies to the difference between normal and POP
implementation. The 12 kWh battery will reach its capacity limits for 13.48% of
the simulation period when providing service through FCR-N without POP. This
negatively affects how much energy it can transmit over the period. By applying
the 1-step POP algorithm, the 12 kWh and 24 kWh batteries can transmit more
energy, but since the droop control function is shifted up or down depending on the
battery SOC, it may transmit more energy than the normal FCR-N strategy would
request. FCR-D is a disturbance reserve with a unidirectional operation. Since it
becomes active when the frequency drops below 49.9 Hz, the energy transmitted
through FCR-D is minuscule.
Table 6.2: The total ∆SOC of the battery capacity that is used during the simulation
period. Comparison is presented between normal and 1-step POP implementation.
RG-CE
RG-N
PFR-DK
(∆SOCtotal)
PFR-DE
(∆SOCtotal)
FCR-N
(∆SOCtotal)
FCR-D
(∆SOCtotal)
Normal
12 kWh
82.30%
100%
100%
17.47%
24 kWh
43.99%
80.78%
100%
8.73%
60 kWh
17.60%
35.90%
93.88%
3.40%
POP
12 kWh
60.01%
60.02%
90.00%
17.47%
24 kWh
43.99%
60.00%
79.50%
8.73%
60 kWh
17.60%
35.90%
62.99%
3.40%
To further demonstrate the differences between service provision in RG-CE and
RG-N, the ∆SOC of the battery capacity that is used during the simulation period
of February 2017 is presented in Table 6.2. As can be observed, the ∆SOC decreases
with larger battery capacity, except for 12 kWh and 24 kWh through FCR-N. For the
scenarios where the 1-step POP algorithm is activated in RG-CE, it is highly effective
==PAGE:93==
6.1 Future Work
83
at keeping the SOC within the set boundary. The 1-step POP is less effective through
FCR-N under DK2 frequency, especially if the battery capacity is small.
It was
demonstrated in Section 4.5 that a 2-step POP algorithm will provide more benefits
for a small battery providing service through FCR-N.
The largest cycle period, along with the total number of cycle periods measured
during the simulation for the scenarios in RG-CE and RG-N when Algorithm 3 is
applied is presented in Table 6.3. The battery capacity has a substantial effect on the
number of cycle periods registered. As the POP causes a cycle period to break sooner
than when under normal operation, more measurements are registered under POP.
There is also a 1% ∆SOC difference in the set-point for POP activation depending on
increasing or decreasing SOC. This impacts the number of measured cycle periods. In
RG-N, the 12 kWh and 24 kWh batteries experienced almost full charges/discharges
over the simulation period without a POP. The 1-step POP algorithm can mitigate
the depth of the cycle periods. Since the depth of the cycle periods is low under
normal operation in RG-CE, the POP algorithm has limited effects on cycle depth
reduction at RG-CE.
Table 6.3: The largest cycle period and total number of measurements computed
when applying Algorithm 3. Comparison is presented between normal and 1-step
POP implementation.
RG-CE
RG-N
PFR-DK
PFR-DE
FCR-N
∆DODmax.*
n∆
∆DODmax.
n
∆DODmax.
n
Normal
12 kWh
21.48%
188
24.54%
387
99.83%
522
24 kWh
17.99%
57
18.23%
153
98.73%
373
60 kWh
6.48%
4
15.97%
6
44.62%
233
POP
12 kWh
21.48%
206
21.79%
519
82.87%
927
24 kWh
17.99%
57
18.23%
172
64.44%
429
60 kWh
6.48%
4
15.97%
6
44.62%
237
*: The largest cycle period. ∆: Number of cycle periods measured.
6.1
Future Work
This project has demonstrated the different effects of frequency regulation on EV
batteries between four strategies and two synchronous frequency areas. Future work
may include further improving the accuracy of the model. By analyzing the function-
ality of the POP algorithm used in real application it may be possible to increase the
regression fit of the model. The analysis only takes a 10 kW bi-directional charger
into consideration. It is possible to extend the analysis to include different power
capabilities of the charger. Global sensitivity analysis (GSA) may also be utilized
==PAGE:94==
84
6 Conclusion
for further analysis. GSA can determine how differences in the model inputs affect
the variance in the output. The GSA creates a sample of input variables within a
set boundary and puts them into the model in a Monte Carlo method. However,
the computational cost of thorough GSA is high. The frequency sample needs to
be sufficiently large to induce change in the SOC, and with a large number of input
parameters it may require high performance computing.
Degradation models predicting reduction in battery life caused by V2G services
as described in previous studies [43] and [44] do not consider real V2G application
but instead estimate the cycles the battery is subject to and the extent of used
battery capacity.
It is evident that the battery capacity, location of V2G service
and the frequency regulation strategy have profoundly different effects on the battery
patterns. Future degradation models investigating effects of frequency regulation on
battery State-of-Health should accordingly consider these factors.
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
A.1
Python Code
The Python code used to produce the results acquired is accessible through the fol-
lowing link:
https://github.com/ivarhrafn/Thesis_code.git
A.2
Frequency Analysis
One year of frequency data from DK2 is presented as a histogram in Figure A.1.
Figure A.1: Probability density of 1 year of frequency data from DK2.
A.3
Phase 1
The input/output energy transmitted through the strategies PFR-DE,PFR-DK and
FCR-N each hour is shown in Figure A.2.
==PAGE:96==
86
A An Appendix
(a) PFR-DE under DK1 frequency.
(b) PFR-DE under DK2 frequency.
(c) PFR-DK under DK1 frequency.
(d) PFR-DK under DK2 frequency.
(e) FCR-N under DK1 frequency.
(f) FCR-N under DK2 frequency.
Figure A.2: The energy input/output provided by PFR-DE, PFR-DK and FCR-N
under DK1 and DK2 frequency during each hour.
==PAGE:97==
A.4 RG-CE and RG-N Comparison
87
A.4
RG-CE and RG-N Comparison
This section presents comparison between frequency regulation in RG-CE and RG-
N. A battery is simulated providing service through FCR-N and FCR-D under DK2
frequency and PFR-DE and PFR-DK under DK1 frequency.
A.4.1
12 kWh Battery - Normal and 1-step POP Operation
The energy transmitted per hour to and from the grid by a 12 kWh battery is presented
in Figure A.3. The power input/output and the battery SOC over February 2017 is
presented in Figure A.4 and A.5. The cycle periods are presented in Figure A.6.
(a) Energy transmission - Normal operation.
(b) Energy transmission - 1-step POP.
Figure A.3: Energy transmission per hour provided by a 12 kWh battery. Comparison
presented between normal and 1-step POP operation in RG-CE and RG-N.
==PAGE:98==
88
A An Appendix
(a) The input/output power - Normal operation.
(b) The input/output power - 1-step POP.
Figure A.4: The input/output power when providing service in RG-CE and RG-N
with a 12 kWh battery.
(a) The change in SOC - Normal operation.
(b) The change in SOC - 1-step POP.
Figure A.5: The change in SOC when providing service in RG-CE and RG-N with a
12 kWh battery.
==PAGE:99==
A.4 RG-CE and RG-N Comparison
89
(a) The cycle periods - Normal operation.
(b) The cycle periods - 1-step POP.
Figure A.6: The cycle periods a 12 kWh battery undergoes in RG-CE and RG-N under
normal and 1-step POP operation. Algorithm 3 is applied for the cycle measurements.
==PAGE:100==
90
A An Appendix
A.4.2
24 kWh Battery - Normal and 1-step POP Operation
The energy transmitted per hour to and from the grid by a 24 kWh battery is presented
in Figure A.7. The SOC over February 2017 is presented in Figure A.8. The cycle
periods are presented in Figure A.9.
(a) Energy transmission - Normal operation.
(b) Energy transmission - 1-step POP.
Figure A.7: Energy transmission per hour provided by a 24 kWh battery. Comparison
presented between normal and 1-step POP operation in RG-CE and RG-N.
(a) The change in SOC - Normal operation.
(b) The change in SOC - 1-step POP.
Figure A.8: The change in SOC when providing service in RG-CE and RG-N with a
24 kWh battery.
==PAGE:101==
A.4 RG-CE and RG-N Comparison
91
(a) The cycle periods - Normal operation.
(b) The cycle periods - 1-step POP.
Figure A.9: The cycle periods a 24 kWh battery undergoes in RG-CE and RG-N under
normal and 1-step POP operation. Algorithm 3 is applied for the cycle measurements.
==PAGE:102==
92
A An Appendix
A.4.3
60 kWh Battery - Normal and 1-step POP Operation
The energy transmitted per hour to and from the grid by a 60 kWh battery is presented
in Figure A.10. The SOC over February 2017 is presented in Figure A.11. The cycle
periods are presented in Figure A.12.
(a) Energy transmission - Normal operation.
(b) Energy transmission - 1-step POP.
Figure A.10: Energy transmission per hour provided by a 60 kWh battery. Compar-
ison presented between normal and 1-step POP operation in RG-CE and RG-N.
(a) The change in SOC - Normal operation.
(b) The change in SOC - 1-step POP.
Figure A.11: The change in SOC when providing service in RG-CE and RG-N with
a 60 kWh battery.
==PAGE:103==
A.4 RG-CE and RG-N Comparison
93
(a) The cycle periods - Normal operation.
(b) The cycle periods - 1-step POP.
Figure A.12: The cycle periods a 60 kWh battery undergoes in RG-CE and RG-
N under normal and 1-step POP operation.
Algorithm 3 is applied for the cycle
measurements.
==PAGE:104==
94
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
[1]
Y. Zong, 31070 Hands-on microcontroller programming. Lecture 1 - Introduction,
DTU Electrical Engineering - Centre for Electric Power and Energy, January
2018.
[2]
W. Kempton and S. E. Letendre, ”Electric vehicles as a new power source for
electric utilities”, Transp Res. D, Vol. 2 No. 3 pp. 157-175, 1997.
[3]
J. Parmar, How reactive power is helpful to maintain a system healthy, Electri-
cal Enginering Portal, August 2011. [Online]. Available: http://electrical-
engineering-portal.com/how-reactive-power-is-helpful-to-maintain-
a-system-healthy.
[4]
P. Kundur, Power system stability and control. McGraw-Hill, 1994.
[5]
Task Force Overfrequency Control Schemes-Recommendations for the Synchronous
Area of Continental Europe, ENTSO-E, Sep. 2017. [Online]. Available: https://
docstore.entsoe.eu/Documents/SOC%5C%20documents/Regional_Groups_
Continental_Europe/2017/170926_RG_CE_TOP_08.1_D.2_SPD_Codes_TF_
v6_Overfrequency_Control_Schemes.pdf.
[6]
C. Bang, F. Fock, M. Togeby, The existing Nordic regulating power market, Ea
Energy Analyses, May 2012. [Online]. Available: https://http://www.ea-
energianalyse . dk / reports / 1027 _ the _ existing _ nordic _ regulating _
power_market.pdf.
[7]
P. Pinson, Day-ahead electricity markets, DTU Electrical Engineering - Centre
for Electric Power and Energy, January 2018.
[8]
——, Intra-day and balancing markets, DTU Electrical Engineering - Centre
for Electric Power and Energy, February 2018.
[9]
HEP/HEP, ”Ancillary services to be delivered in Denmark. Tender conditions.”
Energinet, December 2017.
[10]
D. Jones, Dr. A. Sakhel, M. Buck and Dr. P. Graichen, ”The European Power
Sector in 2017. State of Affairs and Review of Current Developments.” Agora
Energiewende and Sandbag, January 2018. [Online]. Available: https://sandbag.
org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/EU-power-sector-report-2017.
pdf.
==PAGE:106==
96
Bibliography
[11]
J. P. C.-Á. E. Koliou C. Eid and R. A. Hakvoort, “Demand response in lib-
eralized electricity markets: Analysis of aggregated load participation in the
german balancing mechanism,” Energy, volume 71, pages 245–254, 2014, issn:
0360-5442. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2014.04.067.
[12]
M. B. Al-Alawi and T. H. Bradley, “Review of hybrid, plug-in hybrid, and
electric vehicle market modeling studies,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, volume 21, pages 190–203, 2013, issn: 1364-0321. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.rser.2012.12.048.
[13]
BU-1003: Electric Vehicle (EV), Battery University, February 2018. [Online].
Available: http : / / batteryuniversity . com / learn / article / electric _
vehicle_ev.
[14]
Model X Specifications, Tesla, Inc., 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.
tesla.com/support/model-x-specification.
[15]
Benefits of electric vehicles, Ergon Energy, 2018. [Online]. Available: https:
/ / www . ergon . com . au / network / smarter - energy / electric - vehicles /
benefits-of-electric-vehicles.
[16]
Batteries for Electric Cars, Challenges, opportunities, and the outlook to 2020,
The Boston Consulting Group, 2010.
[17]
J. Palmer, N. Terry, T. Kane, S. Firth, M. Hughes, P. Pope, J. Young, D. Knight
and D. Godoy-Shimizu, Electrical appliances at home: tuning in to energy saving,
Loughborough University, Element Energy, Cambridge Architectural Research
Limited, November 2013. [Online]. Available: https://assets.publishing.
service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/275484/electricity_survey_2_tuning_in_to_energy_saving.pdf.
[18]
D. Tang and P. Wang, “Stochastic modeling of electric vehicle movable loads:
Nodal impact from transportation,” in 2014 International Conference on Prob-
abilistic Methods Applied to Power Systems (PMAPS), Jul. 2014, pages 1–6.
doi: 10.1109/PMAPS.2014.6960647.
[19]
M. C. Kisacikoglu and B. Ozpineci and L. M. Tolbert, “Ev/phev bidirectional
charger assessment for v2g reactive power operation,” IEEE Transactions on
Power Electronics, volume 28, number 12, pages 5717–5727, December 2013,
issn: 0885-8993. doi: 10.1109/TPEL.2013.2251007.
[20]
S. Han, S. Han and K. Sezaki, “Economic assessment on v2g frequency regula-
tion regarding the battery degradation,” in 2012 IEEE PES Innovative Smart
Grid Technologies (ISGT), January 2012, pages 1–6. doi: 10.1109/ISGT.2012.
6175717.
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
97
[21]
M. Świerczyński, D. I. Stroe, A. I. Stan, R. Teodorescu and D. U. Sauer, “Se-
lection and performance-degradation modeling of limo2/li4ti5o12 and lifepo4/c
battery cells as suitable energy storage systems for grid integration with wind
power plants: An example for the primary frequency regulation service,” IEEE
Transactions on Sustainable Energy, volume 5, number 1, pages 90–101, Jan-
uary 2014, issn: 1949-3029. doi: 10.1109/TSTE.2013.2273989.
[22]
M. Yilmaz and P. T. Krein, “Review of battery charger topologies, charging
power levels, and infrastructure for plug-in electric and hybrid vehicles,” IEEE
Transactions on Power Electronics, volume 28, number 5, pages 2151–2169, May
2013, issn: 0885-8993. doi: 10.1109/TPEL.2012.2212917.
[23]
M. C. Falvo and D. Sbordone and I. S. Bayram and M. Devetsikiotis, “Ev
charging stations and modes: International standards,” in 2014 International
Symposium on Power Electronics, Electrical Drives, Automation and Motion,
Jun. 2014, pages 1134–1139. doi: 10.1109/SPEEDAM.2014.6872107.
[24]
Types of connectors, Circutor, 2015. [Online]. Available: http://circutor.
com/en/training/electric-vehicle/types-of-connectors.
[25]
CHAdeMO fast charging for EVs, CHAdeMO Association, 2017. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.chademo.com/.
[26]
Zachary Sahan, Electric car charging 101 — types of charging, charging net-
works, apps,
more, EV Obsession, Sep. 2015. [Online]. Available: https://
evobsession.com/electric-car-charging-101-types-of-charging-apps-
more/.
[27]
K. Knezovic, C. Træholt, M. Marinelli and P. B. Andersen, ”Active integration
of electric vehicles in the distribution network - theory, modelling and practice”,
Technical University of Denmark, Department of Electrical Engineering., 2017.
[28]
D. C. Erb, O. C. Onar and A. Khaligh, “Bi-directional charging topologies
for plug-in hybrid electric vehicles,” in 2010 Twenty-Fifth Annual IEEE Ap-
plied Power Electronics Conference and Exposition (APEC), February 2010,
pages 2066–2072. doi: 10.1109/APEC.2010.5433520.
[29]
K. M. Tan, V. K. Ramachandaramurthy, and J. Y. Yong, “Integration of electric
vehicles in smart grid: A review on vehicle to grid technologies and optimization
techniques,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, volume 53, pages 720–
732, 2016, issn: 1364-0321. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.09.
012.
[30]
BU-204: How do Lithium Batteries Work? Battery University, Jul. 2017. [On-
line]. Available: http://batteryuniversity.com/learn/article/lithium_
based_batteries.
[31]
C. Liu, Z. G. Neale and G. Cao, ”Understanding electrochemical potentials of
cathode materials in rechargeable batteries”, Elsevier, Materials Today, vol. 19,
no. 2, March 2016.
==PAGE:108==
98
Bibliography
[32]
D. I. Stroe and M. Świerczyński and A. I. Stan and R. Teodorescu and S. J.
Andreasen, “Accelerated lifetime testing methodology for lifetime estimation of
lithium-ion batteries used in augmented wind power plants,” IEEE Transactions
on Industry Applications, volume 50, number 6, pages 4006–4017, November
2014, issn: 0093-9994. doi: 10.1109/TIA.2014.2321028.
[33]
BU-105: Battery Definitions and what they mean, Battery University, November
2017. [Online]. Available: http://batteryuniversity.com/learn/article/
battery_definitions.
[34]
Safety of lithium-ion batteries, Recharge: The European Association for Ad-
vanced Rechargeable Batteries, Jun. 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.
rechargebatteries.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Li-ion-safety-
July-9-2013-Recharge-.pdf.
[35]
BU-205: Types of Lithium-ion, Battery University, November 2017. [Online].
Available: http : / / batteryuniversity . com / learn / article / types _ of _
lithium_ion.
[36]
Electric Vehicle Lithium-ion Battery, Nissan Motor Corporation, 2017. [Online].
Available: https://www.nissan-global.com/EN/TECHNOLOGY/OVERVIEW/li_
ion_ev.html.
[37]
A. Millner, “Modeling lithium ion battery degradation in electric vehicles,” in
2010 IEEE Conference on Innovative Technologies for an Efficient and Reliable
Electricity Supply, Sep. 2010, pages 349–356. doi: 10 . 1109 / CITRES . 2010 .
5619782.
[38]
High Power Lithium Ion ANR26650M1A, A123 System, Inc., 2010. [Online].
Available: https://www.rcgroups.com/forums/showatt.php?attachmentid=
4155818.
[39]
D. U. Sauer and H. Wenzl, “Comparison of different approaches for lifetime
prediction of electrochemical systems—using lead-acid batteries as example,”
Journal of Power Sources, volume 176, number 2, pages 534–546, 2008, Selected
Papers presented at the10th ULM ElectroChemical Days, issn: 0378-7753. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2007.08.057.
[40]
D. Wang, J. Coignard, T. Zeng, C. Zhang and S. Saxena, ”Quantifying electric
vehicle battery degradation from driving vs. vehicle-to-grid services”, Journal of
Power Sources vol. 332 pp. 193-203, Sep. 2016.
[41]
V. Marano, S. Onori, Y. Guezennec, G. Rizzoni and N. Madella, “Lithium-
ion batteries life estimation for plug-in hybrid electric vehicles,” in 2009 IEEE
Vehicle Power and Propulsion Conference, Sep. 2009, pages 536–543. doi: 10.
1109/VPPC.2009.5289803.
[42]
M. A. Fasugba and P. T. Krein, “Gaining vehicle-to-grid benefits with unidi-
rectional electric and plug-in hybrid vehicle chargers,” in 2011 IEEE Vehicle
Power and Propulsion Conference, Sep. 2011, pages 1–6. doi: 10.1109/VPPC.
2011.6043207.
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
99
[43]
H. Ribberink, K. Darcovich and F. Pincet, ”Battery Life Impact of Vehicle-
to-Grid Application of Electric Vehicles”, EVS28 International Electric Vehicle
Symposium and Exhibition, May 2015.
[44]
K. Darcovich, S. Recoskie, Y. Hazaz and H. Ribberink, “Cooling regimes for
electric vehicle battery packs in vehicle-to-grid scenarios,” in 2017 International
Conference on Sustainable Energy Engineering and Application (ICSEEA), Oc-
tober 2017, pages 118–127. doi: 10.1109/ICSEEA.2017.8267696.
[45]
K. Darcovich, B. Kenney, D. MacNeil, and M. Armstrong, “Control strategies
and cycling demands for li-ion storage batteries in residential micro-cogeneration
systems,” Applied Energy, volume 141, pages 32–41, 2015, issn: 0306-2619. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2014.11.079.
[46]
S. D. Jenkins, J. R. Rossmaier and M. Ferdowsi, “Utilization and effect of plug-
in hybrid electric vehicles in the united states power grid,” in 2008 IEEE Vehicle
Power and Propulsion Conference, Sep. 2008, pages 1–5. doi: 10.1109/VPPC.
2008.4677501.
[47]
Parker, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://energiforskning.dk/da/project/
parker.
[48]
T. Williams, Real World Test: 2013 Nissan LEAF Range vs 2012 Nissan LEAF
Range (w/Video), Inside EVs, February 2013. [Online]. Available: https://
insideevs.com/real- world- test- 2013- nissan- leaf- range- vs- 2012-
nissan-leaf-range/.
[49]
Pearson Correlation, TIBCO Software Inc., 2018. [Online]. Available: http://
www.statsoft.com/Textbook/Statistics-Glossary/P/button/p#Pearson%
5C%20Correlation.
[50]
Model evaluation: quantifying the quality of predictions, scikit-learn develop-
ers, 2017. [Online]. Available: http://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/
model_evaluation.html#mean-squared-error.
==PAGE:110==
