==PAGE:1==
Adhesive and fastener-free furniture for multiple assembly/disassembly
MSc Design & Innovation
Supervisor:
Christopher Alan McMahon
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Author:
Simon Wolff
S161302
MSc Design & Innovation
August 2018
30 ECTs
==PAGE:2==
Abstract 
This report presents the process and solution developed designing metal-fastener and adhesive free 
furniture for multiple assembly and disassembly. Hazardous furniture waste is an increasing issue. New 
furniture is acquired on a more frequent basis, also leading to earlier disposal of used ones. This 
development was, additional, strengthen based to the broad availability of low budget furniture. 
Utilizing mostly timber board material, they create environmental issues due to the hazardous 
chemicals used during manufacturing. Not only after disposal, but already during its lifetime. 
Formaldehydes, needed for board production, emit volatile organic compounds (VOCs) supporting the 
development of respiratory illnesses like Asthma. 
Millennials have become the most market influencing consumer group. While on the one hand they 
own huge market power many of them face huge financial difficulties. These or on one side based on 
their living decision of realizing a higher education like a master’s degree, but on the other side a result 
of the recession in 2008. Millennials often use the consuming of goods to impress their personality, 
but they are limited to budget products. Linking this with the environmental and health impact of 
common furniture products, this thesis explores the possibility of designing a sustainable furniture 
solution that is affordable for the target group. 
The development was accompanied with 4 workshops, as a main methodology for this process was co-
creation. Participants being millennials themselves helped to review research conducted and created 
valuable new perspectives and ideas, improving developed personas, or a trend analysis. The ideation 
and evaluation of the product further have been supported by an individual workshop. 
The final design is quadrant furniture securing its stacking mechanism using a rubber strap. It requires 
no tools for assembling as the rubber part can be mounted using only the hands. The final dimensions 
of the design are adjusted to transportability using a common Backpack. This would allow easy pick up 
from the retailer. Using only environmentally friendly plywood utilizing natural adhesives the VOCs 
released are minimized guaranteeing a healthy living environment.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
Learning Objectives  
• Collect and evaluate data in connection with need and market analyses  
• Analyse and explore existing solutions regarding adhesive and fastener furniture assembly  
• Identify needs, constraints and contexts based on research literature and data collection  
• Analyse and define the most relevant context for fastener and adhesive free furniture  
• Create ideas and concept suggestions  
• Develop innovative concepts using creative, systematic - and visual thinking  
• Evaluate the potential and realizability of solution concepts  
• Decide on a concept based on potential, realizability and other relevant criteria  
• Develop the product based on the projects estimation of the scope, complexity, and desired 
results  
• Finalize and build a functional and useable product  
• Reflect on each stages process identifying potential short comings, decision making and 
improvement  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgement 
This project was not possible without the contribution, support and advice of following people. Thank 
you very much: 
Christopher Alan McMahon 
For the supervision and patience. 
Paul and Carsten 
For providing guidance and inspiration during the weekly meetings. 
Workshop Participants  
Thank you very much for your time and the valuable work. 
DTU Skylab 
Prototyping would not be the same without you. 
Jana 
This Thesis would not have been possible without your support. Thank you very much for dealing with 
me. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
Content 
1 INTRODUCTION 
1 
1.1 
Motivation 
1 
1.2 
Project goal formulation 
3 
2 
BACKGROUND 
3 
2.1 
Double diamond as basic methodology 
3 
2.2 
Neuro creativity 
4 
2.3 
Iterative Process 
5 
2.4 
The Five Feed Chain 
6 
2.5 
Co-creation Focus 
7 
3 
EXPLORATION STAGE 
11 
3.1 
Introduction 
11 
3.2 
Environmental Impact of Furniture 
12 
3.2.1 
GPP 
12 
3.2.2 
Case study analysing the impact of different material 
15 
3.3 
Furniture and its Waste 
16 
3.3.1 
Landfill and Incineration 
16 
3.3.2 
Recycling 
18 
3.3.3 
Refurbishment 
19 
3.3.4 
Adhesives and the resulting VOCs 
19 
3.4 
Millennials as focused Consumer 
22 
3.4.1 
Generation of financial issues 
22 
3.4.2 
Living condition 
23 
3.4.3 
Consumer behaviour 
25 
3.4.4 
Changing the market 
25 
3.4.5 
DEPEST Trend analysis 
27 
3.4.6 
Green furniture 
30 
3.4.7 
Personas 
32 
4 
TECHNOLOGY 
35 
4.1 
Wood 
35 
4.1.1 
Timber as a material 
35 
4.1.2 
Wooden board material 
36 
4.1.3 
Fastener and adhesive free furniture 
37 
4.1.4 
Joining Wood 
38 
4.2 
Manufacturing technologies 
43 
==PAGE:6==
4.2.1 
Laser Cutting 
43 
4.2.2 
Interference fitting 
45 
4.3 
Natural Rubber 
46 
4.4 
Five feed Chain 
48 
4.4.1 
Problem Formulation 
48 
4.4.2 
Need Interpretation 
49 
4.4.3 
Technology and Idea Elements 
49 
4.4.4 
Perception of ideals 
50 
4.4.5 
Task perception and formulation 
50 
4.5 
Design Brief 
51 
5 
IDEATION 
55 
5.1 
List of Requirements 
55 
5.1.1 
General 
55 
5.1.2 
Maintenance and Reuse/Recycle 
56 
5.1.3 
Product Cost 
56 
5.1.4 
Ergonomics 
57 
5.1.5 
Production Facilities 
57 
5.1.6 
Materials 
58 
5.1.7 
Recycling/Disposing 
59 
5.1.8 
Wishes 
59 
5.2 
Analogies 
60 
5.3 
Brainstorming & Sketching 
61 
5.4 
Group Ideation 
61 
5.4.1 
C-BOX 
62 
5.4.2 
SWOT 
68 
5.5 
SCAMPER 
72 
5.6 
Concepts 
74 
5.6.1 
Concept 1 - Vertical Rubber Straps 
74 
5.6.2 
Concept 2 - Horizontal Rubber Straps 
74 
5.6.3 
Concept 3 - Horizontal Rubber Straps and Pin 
74 
5.6.4 
Concept 4 - Vertical Pin Connection 
75 
6 
CONCEPT EVALUATION 
80 
6.1 
Weighted Objective Method 
81 
6.2 
Concept Visualisation 
83 
6.3 
Wishes 
84 
6.3.1 
Modularity 
84 
6.3.2 
Customization 
87 
6.3.3 
Transporting using public transport 
88 
6.4 
Business Model Canvas 
88 
==PAGE:7==
7 
FINAL SOLUTION 
91 
7.1 
Final concept discussion 
92 
8 
REFLECTION 
95 
8.1 
Project Plan 
95 
8.2 
Learning Objectives 
96 
9 
CONCLUSION 
99 
10 
LITERATURE 
101 
11 
INTERNET REFERENCES 
111 
12 
LIST OF FIGURES 
117 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
1 
 
1 Introduction  
1.1 Motivation 
The explored target group in the main report, the millennials, are in such a focus as I am one myself, 
recalling many identically or similar situations discovered during my research.  
Referring to David Goodhart’s anywhere vs somewhere statement [66] [67], I belong to the anywhere 
category. I have been able to choose the places where I wanted to study as I could afford needed 
expanses. I studied in 3 different cities away from my hometown, Erlangen, Frankfurt, and 
Copenhagen. Moving 5 times in the last 8 eight years, I know the issues occurring during this process, 
especially regarding furniture disposal / purchase connected to it. Before, I was not thinking about the 
furniture waste. If the next student moving in would not buy it, I would have thrown it away. 
The furniture always been bought at IKEA, being an affordable and stylish solution. Assembling these 
products made me worry about the durability after diss- and reassembling after moving because of 
the quality. Additionally, demounting IKEA furniture requires a lot of effort and precision as the used 
particleboard easily can be damaged. As well as I do not own a car the renting prices increases with 
car size, thus a smaller rental car was preferred so moving with less goods safes money. 
My thoughts never circled to much about furniture waste or sustainability regarding my consumer 
behaviour. This changed during my studies at the DTU where sustainability is a huge focus. Studying 
here, gaining more knowledge about environmental issues let me understand the concept of eco-
friendliness and sustainability better, making it to a focus area for my thesis and, hopefully, future 
professional career. 
Finishing my Master-degree at DTU this summer I will move back to Germany starting my professional 
career. As I lived in Flat-shares so far, I do not own much furniture, just the most basic ones: A bed, a 
desk and some shelfs for organization cloths, books, and other stuff. I will move in with my girlfriend 
in Flensburg. I decided to not move my stuff back to Germany, as being already re-assembled due to 
an apartment move in Copenhagen, the durability already got reduced, making it questionable if 
transporting them back would make sense. This can be also because of damaging parts during one of 
the processes and thus it might be self-imposed.  The car rental prices further limits possibilities.  
Additionally, as my girlfriend wanted to create our ‘own’ special atmosphere in our new apartment we 
decided to get new furniture with our wanted aesthetics appearance.  
We had to manage and think about how to furniture a whole apartment with our limited budget. We 
do not own a car and would have to rent one for visiting a furniture store and for transportation, thus 
we decided to order Flat-pack furniture online.  
==PAGE:9==
2 
 
Experiencing this Flat-pack furniture, with the amount of small metal and plastic parts, and even 
adhesives further strengthened my motivation to develop a piece of furniture with a smaller ecological 
footprint. Additionally, not only the amount of parts, but the work needed to assembly (and thus also 
disassembling) further increased my perception of the need of change in this consuming department. 
It somehow felt that making it inconvenient to disassembling and reassembling was a strategy by the 
manufactures to motivate new purchases. 
Reflecting on my old behaviour this is how I used to reason the purchase of IKEA furniture: 
Purchased low budget furniture (flat-pack-furniture) 
• 
as I planned / had to move after a couple of years 
• 
limited budget 
• 
flexibility (thought of doing an exchange semester) 
• 
possibilities -> friends might own a small car where flat-pack-furniture fit in 
 
Did not want to move flat pack furniture 
• 
Disassemble is stressful 
• 
Moved with one and experienced heavy durability loss 
• 
Worried that not stable any more 
• 
Students who moved into my old room also only purchased “flat pack furniture” 
Still I had to rent a car and move other stuff. Questioning myself it would be interesting if I would have 
behaved differently if my furniture was easily disassembled and transported only taking up a small 
volume. This would have been a cheaper and more sustainable solution. Reflecting on my attitude 
development I would have chosen this option over buying new goods.  
This lead to the question if it is possible to develop furniture that fulfil needed criteria: 
➔ Affordable furniture: that can easily be taken with when moving to a new location  
➔ Furniture that can be assembled and disassembled easily up to 10 times minimum  
➔ Eco friendly furniture: Environmental impact beginning with the manufacturing process, using 
just raw materials, to the disposal aspect is considered 
 
Based on my education at DTU the next chapter describes the theory behind the process of the 
development 
==PAGE:10==
3 
 
1.2 Project goal formulation 
Designing an affordable furniture application for multiple assembly and disassembly, that is (metal) 
fastener and adhesives free that follows sustainable directives reducing the amount of hazardous 
furniture waste produced. 
 
2 Background 
This paragraph does not aim on describing and explaining tools used but wants to give an insight of 
the cognitive model followed and reason the iterative project process with a huge focus on co-creation 
and understanding the user’s needs and problems. 
Many tools and methods used and explained can be found in the Delft Design Guide [119], a 
compendium of design approaches, tools, and exercises aiming to improve the design process. For 
further references and explanation please refer to the Delft Design Guide.  
 
2.1 Double diamond as basic methodology 
The double diamond is a design methodology / process taught and utilized at the Technical University 
of Denmark. It consists out of four stages: Discover, Define, Develop and the Deliver.  
 
Figure 1- Double Diamond Methodology [www4] 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
4 
 
The four stages focus on [www4]: 
Discover – The discover stage follows a divergent exploring methodology. An increased research area 
aims to create a holistic understanding of the problem 
Define –The Designer connects all the gathered possibilities and converges on the most promising Idea. 
Questioning the feasibility and what matters the most leading to a design brief explaining the design 
problem tackled.  
Develop – Setting a starting point and an aim, concepts and prototypes are developed, tested, and 
evaluated.  Iteration in the process will further improve and refined the solution. 
Delivery – The final solution is presented and explained. 
2.2 Neuro creativity 
“Neuro creativity is a cognitive model of how the human mind works during a, creative, process. How 
it processes information, how it limits itself and how it interacts in between different domains. The 
theory and knowledge where gained during two different courses, Applied Neuro Creativity and 42081 
Staging Co-Creation. Applied neuro creativity was taken during an exchange semester at -DTU 5 years 
ago and this course is, unfortunately, not offered anymore. Thus, the corresponding course number 
cannot be found nor remembered. The course responsible have been Balder Onarheim, who have 
been also in charge of Staging co-creation.  One main concept utilized in this project are the five-key 
concept of creativity. They will be explained in more detail using a paragraph, written for project during 
the course 42575 Technology and Innovation Management, by the author of this thesis. This text is 
based on a project analysing and increasing the innovativeness of the company SpaceCamper, located 
in Darmstadt, Germany. SpaceCamper is transforming, customized, Volkswagen Buses into a camping 
solution, with, e.g., an inbuild bed. 
Creativity is an integral part of design and innovation processes. Therefore, innovation needs creativity 
to promote product ideation and further adds value other design process stages. (Valgeirsdottir et al. 
2017) Neuro-creative research states that there are phenomena occurring limiting the creative output. 
The research internalizes five key concepts which are based on basic brain processes occurring during 
(creative) praxis. Priming, close and remote associations, (cognitive) inhibition, fixation, and 
incubation. (Onarheim et al. 2013) 
==PAGE:12==
5 
 
Priming: Priming means that a stimulus has an influence on the reaction of another stimulus. 
Mentioned danger before introducing a context like the individually disassembling SC’s bench will 
influence the focus on maybe safety [130]. 
Close and remote associations: Keywords or thoughts will instantly create associations in our mind. 
An example is the color red. When hearing red of course the color and associations like fire, firetruck 
will occur. But as people have different backgrounds individual remote associations will appear, like 
experiencing issues with a fire extinguisher. This network of associations defines the area of ideas that 
can be explored, thus influencing creativity. 
Cognitive Inhibition: Cognitive Inhibition can be described as a system the brain uses to focus only on 
what it starts to consider as the relevant space for the scope, limiting down creative output. 
Fixation: Fixation means that while working on a topic the area of potential ideas gets limited down as 
thoughts start circle around a specific domain as it got manifested in the mindset. This is making it hard 
to consider other perspectives or solutions after a certain point. 
Incubation: Incubation means that the brain unconscious further explores and work on the issue. Over 
time further associations can be reached and thus more original solutions are developed. This process 
is done while not ‘thinking’ and working on the topic.” 
Based on these characteristics the process aims to tackle rising problems, like fixation. Working 
together with other, during a workshop or the weekly meetings, fixation should be lowered as new 
input, insights, thoughts, or perspectives, were gained.  
Incubation and cognitive inhibition were tackled by iterative development cycles. Moving away from 
an area, working on a different problem. Utilizing these phenomenon new ideas should be developed 
in a domain not actually working on as well as loosing up cognitive inhibition. This also includes the 
close and remotes associations. Connecting different topics lead to a greater network of ‘ideas’.  
Priming was especially utilized during groupwork / workshops. Everyone has different perception of 
the named problem and these stimuli will be triggering new thoughts. 
 
2.3 Iterative Process 
Considering the cognitive traits occurring during creative process, this project was executed in iterative 
cycles.  Moving forwards and backwards from problem – solution space and gaining new exploration 
areas due to further idea development in combination with the cognitive key concepts aimed to 
expand the tasks understanding and resulting solution. Ideation in form of drawing have already been 
==PAGE:13==
6 
 
conducted from mid exploration stage. To get a better feeling and understand for the problem and 
broaden the perspectives of the problem / solution space. 
The iterative process methodology can further be experienced in tools / methods used during this 
process.  
 
2.4 The Five Feed Chain 
When applying the Five Feed Chain every category can be used as a starting point. Moving from area 
to area, multiple times, will create a more detailed and developed exploration stage as knowledge is 
increasingly building up layer by layer until a certain level of detail is achieved. It might can be 
compared to the forwards movements in-between the problem and solution space, also being referred 
to as a “research loop” [118] 
 
Figure 2 Five-Feed-Chain 
Need interpretation 
This category defines the needs backing up the project. It is defined by the designer’s personal 
interpretation or triggered by other factors, like a task given, potential market possibilities or issues 
experienced in existing design solutions. As it is an interpretation it is connected to the designer’s own 
values and perspectives and identity. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
7 
 
Task perception and formulation 
Defining the details, direction, and range of the design challenge. It can evolve an idea or contrary 
about business opportunities 
 
Technology and idea elements 
Feasibility is an important attribute of the concept considered. Which and how technology is used 
points the direction the concept can develop towards. It can also be approached other way around. 
Exploring if a new technology could lead to new solutions regarding a problem / need. 
 
Perception of ideals 
Different Stakeholders need to contribute to a successful design. Each stakeholder might have a 
different focus for the outcome. Here the goals all the (included/wanted) stakeholders can agree on 
are declared. 
Tools like the Five Feed Chain need iterative circles to function best. Considering one part independent 
might lead to wrong conclusions, e.g. a solution cannot be manufactured due to limits of available 
technologies. Further, the level of detail in each category increases with every iteration as they 
influenced and enrich each other. 
 
2.5 Co-creation Focus 
Co-creation has great value as it tries to include all stakeholders into the development. Here it is a 
mainly a user focused co-creation. A successful product must understand the user’s needs, desires and 
wishes to increase success in the competitive market sections [www--68].  
 
Workshops 
One co-creation methods used for this project are workshops. Theory and tools/exercises needed for 
facilitating workshops where aquired during ‘42081 – Staging co-creation and Creativity’ taught at 
DTU. 
Many exercises used here are referred to the Delft Design Guide Book. As this book is a collection of 
techniques and tools used for product development it is not single minded developed by a group of 
people but providing many tools developed in and by different departments.  
==PAGE:15==
8 
 
A total of four workshops have been facilitated. Most of the time the participants have been the same 
with some changes due to limited availability. The participants have been students of the Technical 
University of Denmark as well, ranging from Media Design to Design and Innovation. All of them have 
been doing the course 42081 – Staging co-creation and creativity and thus have already gained 
experience participating as well as facilitating workshops. It was a personal decision to process through 
several workshops with similar teams, as owning the neuro-creativity benefit (incubation) from 
repetitive participation. Participants who only attended one or two workshops helped creating a 
broader view as new insights will help to avoid fixation. In the main report the key findings of the 
workshop will be displayed.  
 
Workshop 1 
The first aimed on gaining an insight of the users’ needs and thus tried to develop potential personas 
important for the projects direction. It aimed to create a comfort and connections between the 
participants and thus had a huge focus on fun activities that would let them enjoy the time being. 
 
Personas [119] 
The creation of personas tries to collect insights and characteristics (their needs, wishes, values, …) 
about a typical user from the target group. Behaviour and social context provide further insights 
regarding the solutions design. 
 
Workshop 2  
The output of second workshop was a finalized and uniform description of personas. Further, a trend 
analysis was conducted. This aimed to back up and create new perspectives and insights regarding the 
trends stated and discovered by literature and research or finding some trends which have been out 
of the focus before. The furniture trends perceived by the participants were ranked after the DEPEST 
method (D = Demographic; E = Ecological; P = Political; E = Economics; S = Social; T = Technological) 
[y2] so the impact and future trends can be evaluated in each category and to select focus areas. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:16==
9 
 
Trend Analysis DEPEST [119] 
A trend analysis aims to identify customer needs resulting in possible business opportunities. 
Generating many ideas and then combine, categorize (DEPEST) and lastly analysing the most potent 
trends targetable by the project. DEPEST means the grouping after demographic, ecological, political, 
economic, societal and technology categories. 
 
Workshop 3  
The third workshop aimed on concept creation regarding fastener and adhesive free furniture 
assembling and disassembling. Available fastener / adhesive free furniture concepts were analysed 
based on two C-Box analyses. One focusing on manufacturing feasibility for the producer and one for 
‘easiness’ in assembling focusing the consumer. Based on these three concepts where picked for 
further analyzation using SWOT. Both exercises aimed to intensify the focus for the coming brainstorm 
session on usability and feasibility. The Brainstorm was also conducted using neuro creativity concepts. 
Idea were exchanged to new ideas could developed based on other participants work. But as fixation 
should be avoided no one explained its ideas before ending the whole session. 
 
C-Box Analysis [119] 
The C-Box analysis aims to categorize ideas into four groups. The matrix features to axis, x-axis for 
innovativeness and the y-axis for feasibility. Using this exercise, the most potential ideas based on 
named attributes can be found. 
 
SWOT Analysis [119] 
Analysing Strengths and Weaknesses, created by the designer, and Opportunities and Threats 
regarding the use scenario and the interaction with the environment. 
 
Workshop 4  
Workshop 4 focused on the evaluation of 4 concepts. A Weighted Objectives Method (WOM) was used 
to score each concept after its value. Categories and ranking were created by the participants in a prior 
discussion. Following was the interaction with the concepts. The user could assemble and disassemble 
==PAGE:17==
10 
 
each solution to get a better understanding. Last two individual WOM reviewed each concepts 
potential, strength and weaknesses. 
 
Weighted Objectives Method [119] 
The Weighted Objectives Method is a tool for comparing several concepts guiding the decision making 
towards choosing the most potent solution. It allows a numerical evaluation of the designs value. 
Starting by creating categories to score, like price, usability, aesthetics, or durability with individual 
weight. For furniture designed by a prestigious designer the price might be from less importance 
compared to aesthetics.  
 
Scamper [119] 
Scamper is a method reassessing and further improve solutions by applying seven heuristics: 
Substitute, Combine, Adapt, Modify, put to another use, Eliminate and Reverse. It allows ideation 
without focusing on feasibility and relevance at first. Brainstorming is a good way to utilize this tool. 
An example for the Substitution approach is given in the Delft Design Guide. “What can be substituted 
(S) in the idea/ concept to improve it”. Like replacing a furniture joint with a rope connection.  The 
other ideation tasks are: Combine ideas (C), What aspect of the design can be adapted? (A), How can 
the design be modified? (M), How can the idea be put to another use? (P), What can be eliminated? € 
and which idea can be reversed (R).  
The Concepts developed are based on Brainstorming and evaluation output created during Workshop 
3. To further develop the created designs the SCAMPER tool was applied. 
The last workshop evaluates, and test final concepts developed. Usability will be analysed and ranked 
to choose the concept best applicable for the context. The output is described using the ‘Weighted 
Objectives Method’ (WOM) rating each concept regarding several categories with different primness, 
like utility is more important than the look of a design.  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
11 
 
3 Exploration Stage 
Developing a new product requires the synergy from at least three different Dimension: Business, 
People and Technology [119], and is described by the Authors of Conceptual Design as following [118]: 
“Exploration is the upfront design activity that leads to the initiation and argumentation for a project. 
It is also the continuous process that supplies data, information, and knowledge.” 
 
 The Methodology followed here is the Five-Feed-Chain, which got introduced earlier, exploring 
different segments to create an understanding a broad and holistic understand of the root problem 
defining a basis for a successful development. The exploration stage combines literature review, 
traditional research with user created content, based on Workshops. Understanding the people’s core 
need and desires is important for create a successful solution by directing the view on important 
domains during the process. Additionally, technologies available have been explored and reviewed, 
next to mechanical behaviour materials in general. 
A Trend analysis was done by the workshop participants and connected with trends predicted by 
available literature. The outcome of the exploration stage, next to a broad understanding of the 
context, are Personas (defining potential customers and their behaviour / desires) and finalizing a 
Design Brief setting the frame for the Ideation stage.  
 
3.1 Introduction 
The United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) reported that in 2009 about 10 million 
tons of furniture have been discarded in the US alone [www15]. A similar amount of furniture waste 
is generated, yearly, by the EU-28 states [2]. This is even more tragic as around 80-90% of this material 
is used for incinerated or sent to landfill [2]. This is backed up by the European research statement that 
only 0.4 % of furniture industry focus, during the manufacturing and development processes, on reuse 
or remanufacturing of furniture and materials [3]. Both, the little activities of the industry and the 
numbers of disposed furniture annually emphasize that more effort towards a sustainable 
development is needed. In the report of EUROPEAN FACTORIES OF THE FUTURE they state that 
“Increasing the capability of manufacturing to process advance or environment-neutral materials that 
ease materials recycling, reuse and re-manufacturing are critical factors for sustainable 
competitiveness” [15]. This is not merely a European focus but a global strategy the united Nations 
developed in their Agenda 2030 Report[9].  
The need for a sustainable change in the furniture sector is obvious and the demand is demanded by 
politics and society, still only little effort is realized by the industry. This starts the question if it’s not 
==PAGE:19==
12 
 
possible to develop a sustainable, thus also economical successful, furniture that can be acquired by 
the big mass of consumers or just not in the focused of profit orientated organizations. The resulting 
environmental impacts and its main perpetrator of the actual furniture industry and consumer 
behaviour is described in the next Chapter. 
 
3.2 Environmental Impact of Furniture 
 
3.2.1 GPP 
The Green Public Procurement (GPP) is an attempt by the European Union to motivate the consumer 
towards a more sustainable behaviour. As it cannot be dictated it tries to voluntary increase the effort 
by the industry, based on the demand by the user, towards a change for a more resource-efficient 
economy. The promotion of eco-innovation [www43] is one direction the EU is taking. This is also the 
domain this project focus on, making it an actual need for protecting the environment. 
GWP stands for Global Warming Potential and is a tool to compare different emissions on their overall 
climate impacts in the next 100 years [71]. This emphasises how important the selection of raw 
materials realising a sustainable solution. 
The European Commission published the “Furniture Background Product Report” analysing the 
environmental impacts in the life of furniture. From production to use and recycling. The created a 
table showing the impact categories and strategies manufacturers should focus on to minimize the 
environmental damage connected with their furniture product [57]: 
==PAGE:20==
13 
 
 
Figure 3 Key Environmental Impact of Furniture [57] 
Four of the major impact categories focus on the use of metal, and plastic, parts based on the use of 
chemicals. Mining activities have huge impact on the local environment based on acid mine drainage, 
meaning the segregation of metal and waste material create during the mining process, polluting soil 
and ground and waterways [105], additionally the production of metal is the most energy consuming 
compared to other material used for furniture production [70] [106]. Metal and chemicals used for 
furniture continues to perish the environment during use, the segregation of VOC and after disposal 
Tees with metal contaminated leaves are only of created outcomes [107].  
The High amount of packaging is also from great importance. The huge amount of metal and plastic 
parts need for assembly is usually warped in plastic foil. To, properly, make the mounting experiences 
more enjoyable these parts are often put in several packages to create a better overview generating 
even more waste. Some insights and examples can be found in the Workbook about the author’s 
experience of the assembling several pieces of flat-pack furniture. 
Another problem created by the today common acquired type of furniture is the low durability which 
leads to early disposal. The use of, low-cost, particleboard and MDF (Medium Dense Fibreboard) is 
common amongst all furniture companies that offer products in the budget department. The attributes 
and the resulting problems will be explained in the Technology Chapter 
Early disposal is also often due to the good not fitting the customers need and its purpose. The life 
situation and characterises the consumer is facing will be further explored in the Chapters 3.3 
Millennials as the focus group. Here the life style and the resulting conditions of the target group will 
==PAGE:21==
14 
 
be analysed. These chapters aim to explain why, especially, the successful flat pack furniture attributes 
conflict with the millennials way of living. 
The use of illegal logged wood recourses is not acceptable after obvious reasons. But still regarding the 
acquisition environmental guidelines, like local wood and sustainable logging should be focused. This 
is a  
The GPP approach in Figure is used as the problem space. The design criteria described in the solution 
space are the developed initial scope of the thesis.  
 
Figure 4 Problem Solution Space 
 
The demands developed through the GPP approach are solved based on design criteria aimed in this 
Thesis. Feasibility is not considered yet as this is seen as a starting point and prove of the need of the 
projects scope/goal. 
 
==PAGE:22==
15 
 
An example of the importance of correct materials choice is shown in the following case study. This is 
for the GPP goal of “Use materials made partly or totally from recycled materials and/or renewable 
materials (such as wood)” a relevant example. 
 
3.2.2 Case study analysing the impact of different material 
Other case studies that focused on the environmental impact of certain material frequently used for 
furniture and as building material. An interesting example is the LCA regarding the Beovision Avant 
produced by Band &Olufsen. A TV/video system might be not the best example to refer to the furniture 
industry, but as the focus here is on the chassis only, this analysis can be used exemplary.  Bang & 
Olufsen cocase mpared plastic (polystyrene), wood (MDF) and a structure of aluminium covered with 
wood (AI/MDF) regarding environmental impact [130]. Figure 5 shows the environmental impact from 
each potential chassis material.  
 
Figure 5 Environmental Impact of Materials [130] 
 
This graph shows that Wood is by far the most environmental solution for a bang & Olufsen chasis. It 
only has a bigger negative influence in the categories “Volume Waste” and “Slag and ashes” compared 
to plastic. Aluminium has the biggest impact overall. This is further backed by a study regarding office 
chairs with different percentage of aluminium used in the final product. The analysis revealed that 60% 
of all the GPW 100 contributes are based on the raw materials extraction and refinements processes 
of needed resources [70].  
==PAGE:23==
16 
 
3.3 Furniture and its Waste 
This Chapter explores the handling of  furniture waste generated by the EU and the US. Most waste 
used to be dumped in Landfills, making problems stated before, like the contamination of the 
environment, oblivious. During the last decades change could be experienced towards a more, as 
probably first perceived, environmental processing of the waste increasing e.g. recycling rates. This 
Chapter aims to screen and explores the actions taken more holistic, than just accept recycling as a 
good solution. 
EuroStaat is the statistical department of the European Union established in Luxembourg developing 
statics and conducting research to validate, analyse and compare countries and regions all over Europe 
[www44]. 
 
3.3.1 Landfill and Incineration 
Most furniture waste is either send to landfill or incinerated [2]. A EuroStaat statistics states that the 
amount of municipal waste being recycled, incinerated, or composted is steadily increasing while the 
landfill process is declining [www25]. The overall amount of waste created by the average EU citizen 
did not change a lot over the last 20 years. Only half of the waste is sent to landfills today, compared 
to 1995. At the same time the recycling rate doubled. Around 150 kg of municipal waste per citizen is 
recycled, that is around 25% of the overall waste. The Incineration rate also increased to around 130 
kg per capita. Composting also is applied on a bigger scale today. This development towards a more 
sustainable waste management is based on the Landfill Directive resolved by the European Union in 
1993 aiming to reduce the amount of waste sending to landfill [82]. The EU leads projects to improve 
sustainable waste management infrastructure, like improving home composting [81] but an EU-wide 
regulation is missing. The rate of home composting is depended of country and sometimes even 
region. In the Netherlands only 5-10% of the households use home composting. In Germany it is 
depending to the local administration if an area is composting or not [83]. The categories others 
describe the amount of trash which cannot be connected to a process. Some areas in Europe do not 
have a responsible MSW collector, thus more waste is generated / reported than treated [www25]. 
 
==PAGE:24==
17 
 
 
Figure 6 Municial waste treatment in EU-28 states [www25] 
This project focuses on furniture waste alone. Regarding furniture the increasing recycling rates and 
incineration might be a positive development. Wood is claimed to be perfect for incineration as the 
elements wood is composed of return to the environment when it is burned [25]. This might be one of 
the reasons why in Sweden wood is used as a fuel for heating with an increased utilization rate [26].  
This seems to be a positive development regarding woods mentioned burning behaviour. In contrast, 
an analysis of wood waste, from Germany, Netherlands, and Sweden, revealed that most wood 
material used for incineration are contaminated. Particles of copper, zinc, chromium, and arsenic have 
been found [27]. These are commonly used for surface treatments like paints or wood preservatives 
which can be identified as the main reasons of this contamination [28]. Even after combustion the 
heavy metals will still be contained in the ashes further disposed in landfills and following will pollute 
the environment [29]. Next to the metal contamination in wood due to chemicals, waste considered 
as sorted still contains approximately 1% of non-wood compounds like plastic or even composite 
materials [27]. So even used sorting processes like using a magnet for ferrous metals or eddy current 
separator systems for e.g. aluminium [30] which are applied cannot sort all the particles out [31].  
This shows why wooden furniture and the resulting waste must be viewed as critical. Incineration and 
landfill dumping lead to environmental contamination that has been shown to be harmful to 
humankind, even fatal [34] as already a trace amounts of heavy metals and some metalloids can have 
toxic and carcinogenic impact on the human health [32]. 
 
==PAGE:25==
18 
 
3.3.2 Recycling 
Recycling is an important tool for reducing the ecological footprint of a society and each individual by 
collecting and sorting reusable materials. As the waste is returned to the production chain new goods 
can be produced reducing the need of new raw material. 
In the US single stream recycling is implemented with an increasing rate [10]. Single stream recycling 
means that a household only feature one container where all the different material is gathered. The 
sorting is supposed to happen in materials recovery facilities (MRF) [11]. One reason for the rise of 
single stream recycling systems is that because of its simplicity. It increases the overall participation 
[www15] leading to considerable greenhouse gas emissions benefits over dual-stream-recycling [12]. 
Dual-stream-recycling means that two containers are available. One for paper and one for metal and 
plastics, while at single-stream-recycling all the material is gathered in one container [www29] and 
must be sorted by the waste processing organisation. 
This can be claimed as a positive development, but it should be mentioned that single-stream-recycling 
still decrease the material yield gained compared to double- or multi-stream recycling [13]. 
The increase of recycling, all over the world, needs a bigger focus and is not allowed to be neglected. 
This could be increased by developing more easy-to-recycle furniture.  
Two surveys, one done in the UK [www16] one in the US [www17], each featuring around 2500 
participants, revealed that 80-90 % of the participants believe that recycling is important. Contrary to 
those surveys a report published by United Sates Environmental Protection Agency states that only 
35% of municipal solid waste (MSW) have been recycled in 2014 [16]. As the statistic focused on the 
US it can also be compared to the American survey. Furniture Waste is considered a part of MSW and 
more than 4% of MSW furniture based [2]. Combining this with the actual recycling rate the amount 
to furniture material and resources lost unable of being reused is immense. 
 
This paragraph is meant to give a short overview of the motivation of developing a piece of furniture 
making fastener and adhesives redundant. One aim is the increase of material yield when furniture is 
recycled. 
Considering the motivation paragraph in this report it is obvious that flat-pack furniture needs a lot of 
work to be proper recycled. It is questionable if furniture that can be easily separated into the 
individual recycling category would increase the recycling rate, as recycling would be not connected 
with much effort. The furniture focused on in this project aims to be completely recycled without the 
need of dividing different materials as it only consists out of timber. 
==PAGE:26==
19 
 
3.3.3 Refurbishment 
Another important possibility for a more environmental friendly handling of furniture after the use is 
Refurbishment and reuse of parts. Developing and establishing a circular economy, in the furniture 
department, is a designated goal by the European Union. The main reasons that hold back the 
development towards a circular economy, based on a Report of the European Environmental Bureau, 
are [2]: 
• 
Low quality materials used and poor design 
As solid wood is often replaced with lower quality board material like particleboard or MDF 
[55] the potential of a long lasting good or the option of reuse are limited. Additionally, only 
little attempts, regarding designing for disassembly and reassembly, are made by the industry 
• 
High costs of recycling due to the hazardous chemicals used 
A detailed declaration of used (hazardous) substances is often missing, making it difficult to 
prober recycling. 
• 
Missing availability of spare parts 
As furniture manufactures often do not provide, easy to access, spare parts making it 
inconvenient to repair it by the customer himself. 
• 
High cost of repair and refurbishment 
As repairing, flat-pack-furniture, would relate to high costs due to the design and principle of 
it, especially in countries with high labour costs, repairing or refurbishment is often too 
expensive compared to acquiring a new piece. 
The problem regarding the hazardous chemicals used in common furniture will be explained in more 
detail in the following chapter. The used substances not only create issues regarding the disposal / 
reuse but already during the use. 
 
3.3.4 Adhesives and the resulting VOCs 
Adhesives and other chemicals used in furniture production can be connected to health issues [37]. 
Not only after in the manufacturing process but also during use continuing after disposal. Especially 
wooden board/composite material has an increased impact compared to regular timber [33]. 
Volatile organic compounds are organic chemicals that will evaporate at room temperature [www45]. 
Wood composite material is on the rise. Dick Sandberg states in “Additives in Wood Products – Today 
and Future Development, that “about 80% of all wood and wood-based products involve some form 
of bonding and 70% of the total volume of adhesives produced is consumed in the woodworking 
industry” [77]. 
==PAGE:27==
20 
 
Those two types of processed wood are not only cheap to produce but often even have advantages 
regarding regular timber. Not only the price, but also its mechanical behaviour explains the widely use 
of wooden board materials. A detailed explanation of wooden board materials mechanical properties 
and used adhesives will be further explained in the technology focused Chapter 3.51 Wood. 
Manufactured board material used for room decoration, like furniture or floor, has been identified as 
the main source of volatile organic compounds (VOC) pollution in-door [33]. This is worrying as a 
negative indoor environment has a negative impact on the humans’ health and performance and 
influence e.g. rates of communicable respiratory illness, allergy, and asthma symptoms [37]. Over the 
last 20 years the number of children being affected by asthma has doubled and can be connected to 
the pollution through VOCs [64] as the exposure of high levels of VOCs increases the chance to develop 
an asthma sickness [65]. 
The main reason for the high concentration of VOCs in these materials is due the use of formaldehyde-
based resins, acetaldehyde, or phenol needed in the manufacturing process for particleboard and/or 
MDF board material [62] [64]. As 70% of all particleboard produced is used for furniture production 
[66] the amounts of VOC based on furniture is immense. Considering a fully furniture apartment with 
products from e.g. Ikea mostly made from particleboard can be health threatening, as experts do not 
recommend using more than 1 m² of material for 1 m³ room volume [63]. 
A study conducted by the School of Environmental Science in Perth Australia analysed different 
construction material regarding their VOCs emission. The outcome can be seen in figure 7 [69]: 
 
Figure 7 Formaldehydes emitted by Material [69] 
It is shown that softwood plywood has the lowest emissions of formaldehydes. MDF has the highest 
emissions. Particleboards and hardwood plywood have a huge range of potential emissions depending 
on the chemicals used. Exchanging hazardous chemicals with eco-friendlier would be a logical 
approach, but not taken by the industry yet.  A soy-based adhesive [72] or a tannin-phenol 
formaldehyde resin [73] for wood composites manufacturing is already available. But contrary to the 
ecological problems Urea-formaldehyde (UF) is used mostly. In Europe where annually around 6 
million ton of liquid formaldehyde resins are applied, 80% are UF resins [74]. UF is commonly used 
==PAGE:28==
21 
 
based in its high reactivity, its liquid state, its compatibility with other adhesives and its low price [75] 
[76]. 
An example of a soy-based plywood manufacture is the company Hanson Plywood limited 
(www.hanson-plywood.co.uk). Their “Pure glue Eco Plywood” is formaldehyde-free as it is using a soy-
based adhesive called Soyad™ technology [www46]. Together with the lowest VOCs emission rate of 
softwood plywood, this board material seems to be one of the most promising material for achieving 
the goal of an environmentally friendly furniture. 
 
The actual status of furniture designs, the resulting waste, and its consequences is not satisfying on 
regarding the material choices made by the industry. Important environmental protection mechanism, 
like recycling and reuse of recourses or refurbishment of furniture, cannot work efficiently . The focus 
on the environmental impact of furniture must be broaden. Furniture not only create environmental 
issues when it is disposed, but already the choice of materials used has influence on the nature and 
even on the human health, piking in metal and plastic parts used and chemicals (adhesives, 
preservatives) processed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:29==
22 
 
3.4 Millennials as focused Consumer 
Millennials as an age groups define everyone who was born between the early 1980s till mid 1990s 
and sometimes even until 2000s [www47] [www48]. In the US states they have become the biggest 
generation, number wise) and are already considered as the consumer group influencing and defining 
the market the most [www49]. This is also due to the special living conditions the millennials are facing 
and they are creating themselves. As the author of this Thesis can identify with the problems/traits 
analysed during the exploration stage further explains the focus on this group. The following chapter 
creates an overview of what obstacles they are dealing with and what are the consequences for the 
market. 
3.4.1 Generation of financial issues 
In 2015 a Census Study in the United States revealed that a full time working young American adult 
roughly earns 2000 $ less compared to the earning in the 1980s [20]. This might be one of the reasons 
why this generation is often referred as ‘the Unluckiest Generation’ [www9] as they will be the ‘first’ 
generation to be worse off than their parent as the recession had a heavy negative impact on the 
millennial income growth [www24]. This development can be seen in most high-income countries [84]. 
An analysis based on the Luxembourg Income Study, initiated by the Guardian, found that the income 
of the population aged 25-29 have stagnated since the seventieth and eighties. Older employee’s 
income has risen to adept to the national financial situation [6]. 
One other reason that contributes to the bad financial situation is the increase trend of a higher 
education like a bachelor’s degree. More than 31% now have a bachelor’s degree or higher in the US. 
In the UK around 40% off all citizen between 25-39 owned a degree level int 2015 [85]. 
This already has a negative impact on the overall financial situation, as the education prices have risen 
faster than inflation in-between 1970 and the late 2000s [21] from around 15.000$ to 34.000$ for 
example a 4-year education. Today around every fourth household owned by adults who are younger 
than 40 currently have some student debts [22]. This financial negative development can not only be 
seen in countries were studying requires a fee like the United Kingdom [85]. Same problem can be 
seen in Germany, e.g. Hamburg. Around 30% of all the students there have depts ranging between 
9000-17000€ [www30]. It is important to mention that Germany do not have any student fees, still 
many of the young generation needs to make debts to go through higher education. 
 
The high amount of debts after finishing education might relate to the fact that millennials have less 
possibility in buying an own home, even though a survey states that most millennials have a high 
priority and value for homeownership [23]. This is because the real estate prices have increased twice 
==PAGE:30==
23 
 
as fast as the average income growth [www50]. This further puts financial pressure on the millennials 
and leading to delays homeownership and making it hard to find affordable, rented, home. A by the 
Goldmann Sachs Global Investment Research Department states that the peak age for home buying 
moved from 25 to 45 years [www1]. In general, around 40 % of all European lives in rented homes 
[www52]. 
The decision of many millennials doing a higher education, like a bachelor- or master-degree, limits 
the financial possibilities for this generation, as in some countries this is combined with study fees. 
Even in countries without one, students often finish their degree indebted, possible because of the 
increased housing costs. This might be one reason for the market success of affordable furniture 
companies like IKEA. 
 
3.4.2 Living condition 
Many millennials decide to undergo ‘better’ education to be prepared for the business lives challenges. 
This further change their decision making, also regarding their consumer behaviour. 
Living on their own 
The number of single-person households is steadily increasing. In Europe around every third household 
is categorized as single-person households, peaking in the Scandinavian countries where more than 
50% are single-person type [www10]. This is not only a phenomenon in western countries but can be 
also seen in east-Asian countries like Thailand.  A transition from big family to a small family, or single, 
apartments transforms the real estate industry likewise [18]. 
Denmark, or the Scandinavian countries in general, are a good example for the increase of single 
apartments. A housing report presented by the Centre for Housing and Welfare in the context of the 
51 IFHP World Congress revealed that around 60% of the 18-24 Danes already moved away from their 
parent’s home [4]. This number is contrary to the trend of leaving the parents place later, but Lars 
Dencik, a professor of social psychology at Roskilde University explains this exception [www13]: 
 
“With the welfare state, we have built up a system and a welfare system that allows young people to 
live by themselves, which is a luxury not seen in many other nations, where they can’t afford to do so,” 
 
This further underline the somewhere vs anywhere discussion, started by David Goodhart, introduced 
before in this project. Millennials from countries like Denmark, a strong welfare system empowers 
society giving them more choices compared to people with less wealth. If Danish millennials are 
==PAGE:31==
24 
 
considered representatives for e.g. European millennials, they back up the stated desire of them, to 
live on their own. They have the possibilities and decide on doing it likewise.  
More single person households also influence the market in many sectors. It contributes directly to an 
increase in consumption of consumer goods, as each household needs to own certain products, from 
plates, furniture up to a television. In Germany around 98% of all households own a tv [www51], an 
increased number of households means an increased amount of television and the other products 
consumed/purchased. The number of households carries a bigger influence on the overall resource 
consumption than the total population itself [7] and following contribute to a more waste. 
 
Moving a lot or not at all (anywhere vs somewhere) 
The lifestyle ‘decision’ of the millennials directly influence the housing market and its further 
development regarding planning. It is interesting to say that contrary to the trend of living alone more 
millennials tend to, or better must, leave their parents’ home later. A Data analysis done by Goldman 
Sachs shows that in-between 2005-2010 the amount of 18-34-year-old living with parents has 
increased by 5% to around 30% in total [www11].  It can be assumed that the financial situation is 
contributing to this development. Increased real estate prices detain many from moving their ‘own’ 
apartment.  
Regarding those Millennials who leave their parents nest early, the intend or mentality behind moving 
is different to older generations. Based on a survey by the Mayflower Group 41% of the millennials 
qualify as vacation movers at some point in their life. This means they moved to a new place without 
planning on settling down there permanently [www12]. Considering the change of education focus 
further creates a ‘need’ of moving. Changing universities, after finishing the bachelor’s degree, to 
undergo further studies (master) has become very common, as well as moving to another city due to 
a job.  Additionally, there have been a change framing of many working positions offered. Today many 
jobs are only temporary [108] increasing the change of moving again after the period is over. 
 
This explains why millennials have a short-term mentality when purchasing furniture and prioritize 
only initial ‘transportation ease’ and assembly of the good [35]. Additionally, with the next move in 
mind, spending of furniture that might not be reusable, based on different reasons, in the new home. 
The financial limits of millennials increase the preference of acquiring affordable/low-budget furniture, 
as in general the most important criteria for a purchase decision is the price [50]. Moving soon, either 
due to changing education and thus changing cities, or due to temporary jobs, often appears 
unavoidable, strengthening the focus on a low price of consumer goods.  
==PAGE:32==
25 
 
But not only the financial issues and changing life conditions have reasoning of the success of low-
budget furniture, but also the consumer methodology the millennials connect. 
 
3.4.3 Consumer behaviour 
The traits and interests the millennials have changes the overall market, being the upcoming top 
consuming group. Reasons for the focus on the price have been given in the chapter before, but also 
other attributes, as identifying and showing their identity through made purchases. Additionally, 
globalization and the internet made their overview and access of goods broader. Increasing their 
demand for the ‘perfect’ or most fitting product.  Their traits and influence on the market are described 
in this chapter 
 
3.4.4 Changing the market 
A study from 2010 revealed that the customer behaviour regarding furniture still has a huge focus on 
the price, but the most important attribute of furniture nowadays is that it is “tailored to individual 
needs as a result of ego trends derived from modern values” [17]. The study furthermore states that 
for around 75% of the participants it is very important to renew their home décor more often as buying 
furniture is perceived as a very pleasuring activity by around 74% of the participants [17].  
The named characteristics have a huge influence of the market. They directed towards a new type of 
furniture. Furniture that is affordable, smaller, and multifunctional is needed to fit this new dynamic 
and more urban lifestyle [W1] or one that can be easily replaced, price wise.  
Due to the financial situation is the most dominating attribute for furniture selection the price. This 
explains for example, Ikea UK’s grew by 5,8% in 2017, which have been their sixth consecutive year of 
growth [www2]. This can be viewed in a negative development regarding the perception of the 
manufacturing process. Manufacturers and craftsman traditionally took pride in their handiwork and 
what they produced, but modern consumer capitalism has caused a shift from crafts that lasted a 
lifetime to easy disposability of mass-produced goods [1]. This has a negative effect on the 
environment. Studies showed that by increasing the last/use time of a desk from 8 to 10 years the 
relative impact would be reduced by 20% [8].  
As mentioned before the millennial target group have a high chance of being limited in their buying 
power due to the great Recession of the 21st century [38]. Considering furniture this generations looks 
for affordable but stylish goods that reflect their personality and additionally Millennials tend to 
prolong the purchase of high-quality furniture, due to their career and life situation [39]. 
==PAGE:33==
26 
 
This further explains the success of furniture companies like Ikea, who focus on low prices and consider 
the pricing as one of the corner stones of Ikeas identity [www26] and thus became the world’s top 
furniture retailer in 2002 [40] and remain being one of the biggest furniture companies, e.g. in the us, 
till today [www27].  
The trend towards low-cost and following low quality furniture has a huge negative impact of the 
environment, as, stated before, increasing the life time of a desk from 8 to 10 years already decreases 
the ecological footprint by 20% [8]. Contrary to this, the, low budged, furniture producers are ignoring 
their environmental responsibility and follow a different methodology. They promote the life-style of 
changing furniture on a regular basis and promote a different perception of furniture. This is 
underlined by a statement of the Head of Ikea herself [www28]:  
“It’s O.K. to replace them, to get rid of them. We don’t think we’re going to live one way always. Our 
feelings is: It’s just furniture. Change it.” 
The consumer behaviour changed toward are faster furniture replacing rate. Is it mainly because of 
lifestyle reason or because of low material quality broadly used now [2] that leads to a need of early 
furniture disposition.  
This is further backed up by a report stating that companies like Ikea and Wayfair are so successful 
because the customer (millennials especially) is looking for low prices and continuously new 
merchandise in great variation [35]. They want to replace or add new furniture to adept to their actual 
life situation as, stated in a survey, 73% of all the respondents express themselves using their furniture. 
This is demonstrated again when the respondents named their favourite furniture brand as they 
identify with a certain style. Ikea and Ashely were mentioned, most reasoned by their good prices [41] 
which is the most important attribute for the consumer [50]. This led to low profitability and lack of 
demand in traditional furniture production regions like Germany and northern Europe for the wooden 
furniture industry as many low-cost competitors are entering the market [51]. 
This chapter analysed the consumer behaviour and the markets reaction of the target group. Next to 
the reasons for the price focus, explained in the previous chapter, here it is revealed that millennials 
prefer affordable goods/furniture as they aim to change or acquire new on a frequent basis. This 
increases the influence and market size of companies responding to this demand. It is interesting to 
state that at the same time, as millennials have such a big price and consumerism focus, young adult’s 
states that sustainable behaviour and the prefer purchasing of ‘green’ products as a study shows[109]. 
The industry reacting, offering environmental friendly furniture, will be viewed in the next chapter, 
especially focused on the successful low-budget companies. 
  
==PAGE:34==
27 
 
3.4.5 DEPEST Trend analysis 
The second workshop facilitated not only generated inspiration for personas but also was used to 
understand the perception of market trends regarding furniture solutions by the participants. 
Combining the workshop output with background research lead to the following analysis. The 
participants brainstormed on market trends, the use of internet research was allowed, and created a 
big collection of possible trends. Following a discussion (grouping/combining of trends) where the 
finalized trends should be categorized using the DEPEST.  The outcome can be seen in Figure 8: 
 
Figure 8 DEPEST Trend Analysis 
 
Demographic 
No trends where categorized in the Demographic sector. The participants did not develop or explore 
this domain enough to analyse trend. Potential trends in this domain where not in the focus of the 
workshop participants. 
Ecological 
Trends found here are the use of natural material, like wood, power saving applications, like lightning 
utilizing solar panels for powering and the possibility to repurpose the material or the product itself. 
For this project two trends are relevant: natural materials and the designing repurposable furniture 
solutions. Using only timber material also focusing on the chemicals used for manufacturing aims to 
fulfil these trends. The use of little hazardous chemicals as possible increases the chance of 
refurbishment and reuse of the material. 
 
==PAGE:35==
28 
 
Political 
The participants defined sustainability as a political trend. The GPP Approach, regarding furniture, 
introduced earlier, confirms this perception. The goals of this thesis align with the political demand for 
sustainable solutions/goods. 
Economical 
Many organizations and whole industry sectors established their manufacture facilities industries to 
countries with low labour cost.  In 2016 around 40% of all the furniture consumed worldwide was 
produced in China [111]. This is connected to the market’s demand of affordable goods that can be 
consumed in masses, resulting in the success of low-budget furniture. To realize this compromise 
regarding the quality of used material must be taken, leading to non-durable furniture. Planned 
obsolescence is often assumed to be a part of the strategy of many furniture manufactures [www54] 
[www55] [www56]. As stated before the early ‘fail’ of a furniture good has a great impact on the 
environmental footprint, as increasing the use time from 8 to 10 years would reduce the impact by 
20%. 
These trends are very interesting, as they create negative feelings by the workshop participants. More 
people develop a sustainable mindset, but still acquire and dispose furniture on a frequent basis, were 
often lack of quality is the reason. 
The too developing furniture design solutions aims to be affordable solution but at the same time 
opposing the trends of moving the production to low labour costs and non-durable goods. 
Sustainability does not only focus the environment but is an holistic approach of changing the world, 
not only on a global basis but also locally, e.g. creating jobs and thus wealth for the society [www57]. 
Local production is a goal/desire for this projects outcome. But delivering an affordable solution is 
mandatory and might create issues for realizing this wish. Finding a manufacture technology that 
enables local production while staying competitive is important. This will further be explored in the 
Chapter 3.5 Technology. 
Social 
Millennials often have a fully connected lifestyle using several internet devices, like a smartphone. 
They are used and interested in new technologically advances thus utilization of the internet medium 
is experienced very natural. Especially ecommerce has a high status amongst them, based on it is easy 
and comfortable for them neglecting the need of moving to a store for purchasing goods [ x20]. The 
option to acquire the product online is mandatory today. But this also empowers the producer 
regarding customization using digital manufacturing. Digital manufacturing means that the production 
==PAGE:36==
29 
 
is based on computer-based systems [www58]. Online shopping behaviour and decisions can directly 
be used as input for digital manufacturing enabling a high degree of customization [113]. Modular 
design is experienced an increased interest also in the furniture department [www59] [www60] as it 
increases flexibility in usage [91]. Modular design solutions will be considered for this product 
development.  
Fast fashion is the social last trend analysed during the workshop. Fast fashion refers to quick changing 
designs and styles the consumer should adept to. In the furniture industry it refers to affordable 
clothing that mimic high fashion trends [115]. In the furniture industry fast fashion could be explained 
by showing examples like the collaboration of the Danish design house HAY [www70] or Tom Dixon 
[www71] with IKEA. As fast fashion means to acquire goods in short distances this is not a focus for 
this project. A long lasting solution is targeted. 
Technology 
Two of the technologies trends find by the participator are not connectable to this project. Remote 
control or utilizing the furniture for easy smart device charging can not be agreed with the sustainable 
focus. Needed material for creating the electric devices create huge environmental impacts. To 
produce a 2-gamm microchip around 630 times the amount material is used up during production 
[112]. This intense need of raw material for manufacturing cannot be aligned with the project’s 
sustainable goals.  
The use of light material, e.g. plastics, is not focused any further as the choice of material has already 
been made, wood or timber will be the designated resource. 
The trend/interest in multi-functional purpose of furniture is from great interests. This would give the 
product more flexibility for being utilized in the fast-changing life of millennials. Options and 
possibilities to create multiple functionality into the sustainable design will be viewed at a later stage 
of this report.  
The in this paragraph discussed trends proves the interests in the targeted solution. Natural material 
and durable furniture are desired. Trends like low budget and quality furniture are viewed in a negative 
perspective. Trend changes with named attributes would be preferable. The trends here presented 
appear very subjective, but they were traditional research was conducted as well. Additionally, with 
the market size of companies like IKEA visualise that many consumers are following trends like fast 
fashion. But the mindset shown by the workshop participants show that also different approach and 
consumer behaviour is spreading among millennials. This sustainable perspective demonstrated might 
be influenced due to the education at DTU which follows a very environmental focused approach in 
==PAGE:37==
30 
 
their teachings. The next chapter describes green consumerism, the problems and obstacles 
connected, and the value of the market. 
 
3.4.6 Green furniture 
The demand for green products and solutions is steadily increasing. The environmental impact of a 
product has become a huge impact on the consumers decision making [44] [46], increasing the success 
of green products. In the UK alone, the amount spent on eco-friendly goods increased by around 18% 
from 2008 till 2010, adding up to nearly 50 billion € sales [45]. Especially the millennial group is said to 
have a huge focus on sustainability [47] and as well on the producer’s (green) identity and actions [6].  
 
Connecting this to IKEA success, a study analysed the consumers perception of IKEA’s environmental 
actions and status. 87% of the respondents accept IKEA’s actions to protect the environment [48].  
A paper analysing 53 consumer life stories, regarding green consumerism revealed that the finish 
participants own a strong intend on consuming environmental friendly goods. But with the financial 
situations, described before, consuming sustainable products is often perceived as too expensive [52].  
The main reasons for the millennials not to purchase green products is the high price. Further, they 
have problems in understanding ‘real’ green values and thus cannot elaborate efficiently on their 
consuming behaviour [49]. It is arguable if the behaviour of buying low quality clothes to, then be able 
to, afford ecological food [52] can be considered as a sustainable solution, but only a beginning. Are 
higher level of environmental consciousness needs to be spread among people [48].  
But not only the consumer must evolve further, but also the industries creates problems enhancing 
this issue. 
Hard to distinguish green values 
Organizations like IKEA aim to act environmentally friendly and created personal environmental 
strategies of how to achieve this goal [42]. Provisions like “minimizing the usage of formaldehyde” or 
“using 100% post-consumer plastic waste for furniture production” are mentioned in IKEA: The 
Furniture Guru – an Exploratory Study [43], to name some examples. These actions are from high value 
for environmental protection, but IKEA’s furniture goods still carry a huge environmental impact, 
referring to the chapter Furniture wood waste, for example the high amount of metal parts needed, 
and as well the choice the timber material, usually particleboard. It was stated before that consumers 
often do not have a holistic perspective and knowledge regarding sustainable behaviour and 
guidelines. This ‘knowledge’ is further influenced or fortified by several different ecological label and 
==PAGE:38==
31 
 
certifications through the whole European union [69]. Some labels do not cover important criteria, e.g. 
the use of hazardous substances, VOC emissions by coating or heavy metals used for metal and plastics 
part production [57]. Even labels from countries like Germany, who are often referred to represent a 
green leader [58], exclude important sources like the named ones. Considering Germany’s standing 
and reputation regarding green measurements it is deceptive to then missing important criteria’s from 
eco labels. This is worrying as eco-labelled products correlated positively on the consumer’s purchase 
decision making [59], and thus, it is hard to distinguish between a 100% green product compared to, 
in case of furniture, still use hazardous substances for coating or other applications. As eco labels have 
a big influence of the consumer decision making they need to be well educated about the 
environmental impact and the individuals eco labels categories [60]. 
Regarding IKEA’s environmental position, e.g. reducing the formaldehyde usage, this can be viewed 
critically as most of the low-priced furniture consist out of MDF or particleboard.  
Around 70% of all particleboard produced is used for furniture production [66]. Those material need 
adhesives based on formaldehyde for manufacturing. Reducing the amount of aldehyde used but 
mostly using material which needs formaldehyde can be considered inconsequent. Next to the 
chemicals which will be lead into the environment when disposing furniture consists out of those 
materials, another big problem created by MDF and, especially by, particleboard, is the emission of 
VOCs [62]. The main reason for the high concentration of VOCs in these building materials is the use 
of formaldehyde-based resins, acetaldehyde, or phenol in the manufacturing process [64]. A more 
detailed explanation regarding VOCs can be found in the Chapter 3.2.2. Furniture and its Waste. 
There have been many developments to reduce the environmental impact of furniture goods, like 
using more environmentally friendly adhesives, and most wooden board materials would benefit from 
these improvements.  
But next to the chemicals and materials used for coating, adhesive or other application needed in the 
manufacturing process, low-budget furniture faces more issues regarding their negative 
environmental impact, e.g. because of the amount of metal and plastic parts.  
One of the reasons for IKEA’s success was their ‘invention’ of ready to assemble furniture (RTA). RTA 
or often referred as flat-pack or knock-down furniture is bought and delivered packed and needs to be 
build up by the consumer. They have been adapted as a low-price option to an already assembled 
product [80]. The overall success of RTA furniture can be seen at the American furniture market. In 
2014 most of the biggest us furniture retailers had a huge focus on flat-pack furniture. For example, 
Ashely Furniture, ranked 1 with a shipment volume of around 3.875 million $, Klaussner Furniture 
Industries, ranked 3 with 524 million $ or Sauder Woodworking, ranked 4 with 517 million $ [61]. 
==PAGE:39==
32 
 
That means metal fastener, like cam locking, screw-in, and hooks [67] and adhesives are required to 
assemble the product. With metal and plastic material having the greatest impact on the environment 
as explained in Chapter 3.2. Environmental impact of furniture. 
One of the most efficient action reducing the environmental impact would be reducing the overall 
amount of metal and metal parts used replacing it with wood-based parts [57], as metal manufacturing 
needs high amount of energy for the processes [68]. These measurements are one of the GPP approach 
explained earlier. 
3.4.7 Personas 
The personas presented here are developed by the workshop participants combined with knowledge 
created during the exploration process. The four millennial personas aim to get a better understanding 
of the user’s potential need and preferences as well inspire throughout the ideation and product 
development. The four personas are presented on figure 9. 
==PAGE:40==
33 
 
 
 
==PAGE:41==
34 
 
 
 
Figure 9 Personas created 
 
This chapter focused on the market development, trends, and consumer demands regarding 
environmental furniture. As the overall goal of this project is to develop furniture with a minimized 
ecological footprint the actual status was displayed here. The use of wooden board materials, 
especially particleboard or MDF, create issues for the environment, reducing the sustainable value of 
declared green furniture. The price is one of the reasons for the high utilization rate of board material, 
==PAGE:42==
35 
 
not analysing the material properties so far. The next chapter will explore the technology and 
mechanical behaviour of timber materials. 
 
4 Technology 
The technology chapter does not only explore manufacturing technologies considered for this project 
but also focus on the mechanical properties of wood and timber material, like the dimensional size 
change based on moisture content or fitting tolerances needed for joining parts during assembling. 
 
4.1 Wood 
Wood or timber, as processed wood used for construction is referred too, has been used for centuries 
and experienced great interest due to its environmental attributes. One cubic meter of wood binds up 
to 1 ton of CO² [87] and it regrows naturally being a plant. Still, as the demand of timber has 
dramatically increased, the natural growths processes is might be too slow for natural regrowth [88] 
and thus raw material sources need to be used sustainable. The European Union created a declaration 
aiming to protect forests and to guarantee a sustained handling with this important resource and now 
having consecutive meetings [89]. The use of licensed timber material in this project is obvious. 
 
4.1.1 Timber as a material 
Timber is an organic material and thus faces changes over time due to environmental impacts, like 
heat or moisture level. Wood is an anisotropic material, knots or twists occur naturally during growth 
processes [78] [79]. This has an influence of the quality of the wood. Most mechanical properties are 
reduced around a knot [78] [90], and often influence the quality of certain parts of the material. To 
guarantee high quality wood around 35% of hardwood and 45% of softwood logs are further processed 
into timber, like particleboard. The woodchips and sawdust can further process into board material or 
used for energy generation [63], they are not wasted.  
 Natural wood further experiences dimensional changes during use. Moisture and temperature 
changing due to seasons can let the timber shrink and warping [Y8]. Wood is a hygroscopic material, 
meaning that it will absorb or lose water dependent on the temperature and the humidity level [101]. 
The amount of water absorbed by timber has a huge impact on the mechanical properties of the 
material, as it will swell or shrink as a reaction. 
==PAGE:43==
36 
 
In the worst case this can lead to failure of the product, or an individual part of it. This is especially 
troublesome at joints where metal fastener are used as they only allow little movement. Additionally, 
adhesive carry the potential to fail due to dimensional change of the timber. The most common issues 
for timber joints to experience damaged are [91]: 
• 
Different shrinkage coefficients - Different heartwood, sapwood, or grain type will react 
differently on change. 
• 
Only one shrinkage coefficient - Only one-part experience seasonal changing (join wood with 
e.g. metal) 
• 
Adhesives experiences moisture – weakens the bonding as waster can re-emulsify and ooze 
the adhesive used [92] 
Timber Joints made from one type of timber and only using wood for stabilization won’t suffer from 
dimensional changes too much as they all change with the similar parameters [www34]. 
 
4.1.2 Wooden board material 
There are several reasons but the low price for the success of timber materials like plywood, MDF or 
particleboard. As a material used for construction or furniture application, timber carries specific 
attributes which can create issues for the utilization.  J.M. Dinwoodie lists following deficiencies of 
timber as a material [55]: 
• 
It possesses a high degree of variability 
• 
It is strongly anisotropic in both strength and moisture movement 
• 
It is dimensionally unstable in the presence of changing humidity 
• 
It is available in only limited widths 
Processed board material like MDF or particleboard create a more homogenous material [54] with a 
greater stability against dimensional change [55], as inconsistencies, like knots, are not existent. This 
guarantees and homogenous quality.  
To produce MDF wood-fibres are glue laminated with usually synthetic adhesives and pressed into 
shape [54]. Particleboard is manufactured similar, small wood chips are glued and pressed together to 
form an artificial ‘wood’ board [56]. There have been many developments to reduce the environmental 
impact of furniture goods, created by used substances, e.g. using more environmental friendly 
adhesives. All board materials would benefit from these improvements.  
Plywood is made by gluing and pressing an uneven number of sheets of veneer together.  To create an 
increased stability each layer is rotated. The reason for the uneven number of sheets is to balance the 
==PAGE:44==
37 
 
system around the central layer. It is usually made from temperate hardwoods like the birch [55]. As 
the project aims to consider a holistic sustainable solution, logistic are also important to look at. 
Transportation leaves a big environmental impact, especially if foreign wood is purchased being 
shipped using sea transportation [110]. Finland and Germany are named as exporter of birchwood [55] 
and would allow relative short distances from the resource origin. 
Developing furniture made from 100% wooden material needs to considered wood joint technologies 
as metal fastener or adhesives are not used. This leads to exploration of traditional woodworking 
craftsman methods and techniques as well as new applications that fulfil the named criteria. The 
findings will be presented in the following chapter. 
 
4.1.3 Fastener and adhesive free furniture 
Modern manufacturing methods enables low costs mass production and now even a high degree of 
customization is possible while keeping the price low [86]. But due to changing perspectives on life, 
people develop an environmental consciousness [45]. This might be the reason the consumer is 
searching more for craftmanship these days [wwwY1, wwwY2]. In the furniture industry these trends 
can be viewed in the development of new solutions for furniture assembling, even at big players like 
IKEA, who have their focus on mass producing goods. 
The Figure 10 show the new assembling system by IKEA, using a removable ‘Wedge Dowel’ system 
[www33]. 
  
 
Figure 10 Wedge Dowel System IKEA 
 
 
 
These system enables easy and multiple assembling and disassembling but requires precise and special 
tools for manufacturing. 
==PAGE:45==
38 
 
But many other developments and products for metal fastener and adhesive free furniture production 
can be seen by the German company Werkhaus on figure 11 [www54]. 
 
Figure 11 Werkhaus Product Examples 
 
 
 
Werkhaus uses rubber straps to fix their furniture. This allows easy and multiple assembling and 
disassembling. If the rubber is worn out they can be easily replaced guaranteeing a long lifetime of the 
overall furniture. This design can be considered as a possible solution regarding several goals set. It is 
an environmentally friendly solution as Werkhaus follows sustainable procedure and even funded by 
the European Union for green outdoor furniture [www54]. The rubber strap material should also be 
environment friendly. Werkhaus’s solution is fastener and adhesive free and can be multiple dis- and 
reassembled. But for example, the chair might not be able to easily transport using public 
transportation what would interfere with a desired wish. Still this designed will be used for ideation 
tools and methods. 
 
4.1.4 Joining Wood 
Wood is one of the oldest building materials known to humankind. Hundreds and thousands of 
methods and technologies are known for processing and applying and in this case, joining wood. This 
chapter features the mechanical properties a joint must fulfil as well as examples of traditional 
methods linking  
Requirements for wood joints 
Joints need to transfer tensile, compressive, and transverse forces. The principles for tensile and 
compressive force transmission are contact, shear transfer with compressive force, single-overlap, or 
double-overlap as it is viewed on figure 12 [132].  
==PAGE:46==
39 
 
 
Figure 12 Principles of Force Transmission [132] 
Furniture Joints need to provide three-dimensional stability, not considering moving joints, to fulfil 
functionality. A joint need to resist forces it is exposed during use in all direction up to a certain level. 
Considering a Chair, the joints need to endure the weight of 1-2 person (~200 kg), but also in case of 
moving it, the stability to can be lifted upwards without falling apart. This must be guaranteed for many 
years of use. 
Examples 
Common Wood Joints, used in traditional furniture industry, often lack a complete dimensional 
stability. Adhesives or even fastener are needed to create three-dimensional stability. Figure 13 
visualise principles often used in woodworking [www48]. 
==PAGE:47==
40 
 
 
Figure 13 Traditional Wood Joint Connections [www48] 
 
All joints require adhesives. This is obvious for e.g. the ‘Butt Joint’ or the ‘Mitre Joint’ but also more 
advanced joints, like the Dovetail. Often even metal fasteners are required to strengthen the joints 
and thus ensure functionality in the use scenario, as the force resistant of adhesives might not be 
enough. Using metal fastener and adhesives are the most common and easiest way. But there are also 
ways of utilizing wooden fasteners. 
 
The Wedge/Pin 
But not only metal fastener or adhesives can be used for increasing and ensure stability but also, e.g.  
timber fastener that fulfil needed criteria. One example is the wedge. The Wedge can be installed so 
it will “tighten” even further being exposed to the forces generated in the use scenario. On Figure 14 
a Wedge is combined with the ‘Mortise and Tenon’ Joint. The Mortise and Tenon joint lacks stability 
against one direction. This is usually countered with adhesives. Utilizing the wedge, the same can be 
achieved without using chemicals or metal parts.  
==PAGE:48==
41 
 
 
Figure 14  Mortise and Tenon Joint combined with Wedge 
The regular Mortise and Tenon Joints lacks static positivity in one direction here drawn blue. Usually 
this will be solved using adhesives. Adding a Wedge to the Joint, and accordingly adjusting the design, 
can define the joint in all directions. This link also strengthen under pressure as the wedge is getting 
pressed against the connecting part. 
Using wedges is an old and simple way to achieve a stable bonding. Advanced and especially beautiful 
joints can be found in the Japanese woodworking tradition. Japanese Joints often utilize wedges, but 
they are made so complex and aesthetic that the wedge often is hidden in the joinery as it can be 
viewed on Figure 15 [www63]: 
 
Figure 15 Japanese Wood Joint [www63] 
 
Here, the top part is first moved down and then slide into the openings. A wedge in the middle is 
securing everything. This Joint is a very beautiful as the wedge is nearly invisible and strong as there 
are many overlapping areas provide good force transmission. But this joint need high precision in the 
==PAGE:49==
42 
 
manufacturing process, as the number of fittings influences the potential of tolerance errors and thus 
can quickly lead to failure of the joint.  
The high degree of complexity and following precision needed for manufacturing joints like this (might) 
not fit the overall goals of this thesis as high precision usually involves increased manufacturing costs. 
 
Sliding Dovetail Joint 
Joints can also be designed to guarantee and fulfil static fixation during the use scenario. Chairs for 
example will experience certain forces while sitting on them. These can be used to create the 
counterpart for the usual missing force transmission. An example is the ‘Sliding Dovetail’ Joint. Two 
version are shown on figure 16: 
 
Figure 16 Sliding Dovetail Joint 
The regular one who needs a bottom base for stabilisation in one horizontal direction and the tapered 
one who defines the force transmission through its shape. These Joints still are statically unconfirmed 
on the horizontal axis. This can be made redundant for use scenarios when a counter directed acting 
force is guaranteeing stability. In the example of a shelf. The weight of placed objects will keep the 
shelf together. For a chair this joint solution is not applicable. It might be enough to stabilize the chair 
while sitting on it, but as chairs are e.g. often moved around, other actions will lead to failure of the 
product. 
It is aimed to create a product / joints with 0 degree of freedom. As mentioned for shelf 1 degree of 
freedom might be acceptable due to the rare use. But for furniture which excessive and daily use 
scenarios, like bedframes, chairs, tables secured stability is needed. It would be possible to create 0 
degree of freedoms with the tapered sliding dovetail joint. But this would rely on compression forces 
and might be still not strong enough during several use scenarios, like moving a chair around. 
 
==PAGE:50==
43 
 
The connection of a Mortise and Tenon joint with a wedge or pin seems a very interesting solution. It 
is easy to produce as no complex shapes are required. The sliding Dovetail for example is harder to 
manufacture due to its tapered edges and higher precision needed. The requirements the manufacture 
technology can or must accomplish is important as high tools or processes costs, limits the possibility 
of cheap and local production. 
 
4.2 Manufacturing technologies 
Traditional woodworking used pure timber joints for centuries. But as they require craftmanship and 
thus time and skill, it fits not the modern manufacturing methodology where low budget and fast mass 
production are the most important attributes. Making the use of creative and detailed wooden joints 
scarce. Today, common technologies used, for furniture production, are specialized in producing 
simple parts. They need be connected using adhesives or fastener to assemble, considering flat-pack 
manufactures.  
The amount of metal and plastic parts used for ready to assemble furniture (Workbook – Self-study) is 
worrying, especially thinking about the environmental aspect. IKEA being one of the first of the 
industry selling furniture that does not need metal fastener or adhesives and just work by sliding the 
parts together (Figure YY). IKEA is working towards closing the ‘Gap in Furniture Manufacturing’ 
between possibilities and actual actions in the furniture production [94]. The ‘Gap in Furniture 
Manufacturing’ means that companies need to be innovative and/or sustainable to stay competitive 
[100]. 
The Solution IKEA developed is very advanced but also need special tools that are connected to big 
investments. Something not suitable for the aim of local and cheap manufacturing. 
Considering all the new manufacturing technologies the question arises if now mass production of 
fastener and adhesive free furniture is not possible also on a smaller scale. IKEA can utilize most 
advanced and expensive technologies as they can afford it due to their manufacturing volume. But 
local and small / medium scale production have hard time realize expensive technologies. 
 
4.2.1 Laser Cutting 
Laser cutting is a very promising technology. It can cut faster and more accurate than many other, 
mechanical, processes, like disc sander or jigsaw, common techniques being applied [95] [99]. Not only 
the speed and quality of this process is from value but being able to work with only a small kerf (0.08 
mm to 0.45 mm) [96] saving material in the production [95]. Kerf is the thickness of material removed 
during the laser cutting process [97]. This lead to new possibilities minimizing the waste at furniture 
==PAGE:51==
44 
 
manufacturing using the laser cutting technology [98]. Regarding the thickness of board material laser 
cutter can handle, for example, the company ‘Trotec’ sell machines able to cut through 30 mm material 
thickness [www35]. 
A laser cutter cut has following quality characteristics important for timber processing [95] [102]: 
• 
very minor kerf -> reduces material savings compared to mechanical processes  
• 
round edges possible 
• 
smooth and clean-cut edge, no edge burr -> does not require additional cleaning or treatment 
• 
Heat affected zones can are negligible small on dross-free cuts 
• 
Very accurate (0.1 mm) 
 
Laser cutting system manufacturer offers a position accuracy ranging from 0.01 to 0.1 mm [www37] 
[www38] [www39] [www40]. This project will consider a 0.1 mm positioning accuracy, as one of the 
project’s goal is to design a simple solution which is easy to manufacture. 
With more axis laser cutter, like 8 or 5-axisis the complexity of parts manufacturable using laser cutting 
is huge. But considering SME, more basic 3-axis, cutter might be represented the most, especially in 
the furniture / woodworking industry, as 85% of all EU furniture manufactures are categorized as a 
micro enterprise (<10 employees) [99], their investments are limited. 
 
3-Axis Laser Cutter 
Based on the percentage of SME being working in the furniture manufacturing branch the 3-axis laser 
cutter and its option will be analysed.  As the number of axis limits the manufacturing possibilities, only 
vertical cuts and ‘engravements’ are considered in the development for the furniture.  The x- and y-
axis define the ‘shape’ of board material cut, the z-axis will define if it’s a cut through or an 
engravement. Only 90° angled edges are considered possible while the outer shape of the cut can be 
any organic form. Of course, edges with more/less than 90° can be manufactured but not in a parallel 
pattern. An example can be seen in figure 17. 
==PAGE:52==
45 
 
 
Figure 17 3-Axis Laser Cutter Movements 
 
 
4.2.2 Interference fitting 
To make a wedge or a pin work in a given context an interference fit is needed. Interference fit are 
common in the metal industry and have been standardized using ISO [103]. In general fittings range 
from clearance and transition to interference. Regarding furniture an interference fit is needed to 
statically fit the wooden joints. Using all wood joints and pins face issues regarding shrinkage and 
swelling based on changing moisture content and thus the strength of the connection is affected, 
possible leading to failure of the joint [104]. This effect can be reduced by using plywood as the pin 
and joint material. The reasons for this can be found in Chapter 4.1. Timber as a material. Circular 
wooden dowels are common in furniture manufacturing, but often made from low quality material, as 
experienced/described in the assembling of furniture section presented in the Workbook. Based on 
the manufacturing technology focused on for this project (described in the following chapter) round 
pins and wedges are out of the focus due to limitations in the process, even though wedges are very 
common and made for multiple use, thus it fulfils the needed characteristics for multiple assembling. 
Regarding durability square shaped pins are superior to round ones [www41]. This also fits the 
possibilities of the chosen manufacturing method. According to mechanical and metal trade handbook 
and based on the possibility to process wood board up to a thickness of 3 cm the interference fitting 
H7/N6 or H7/M6 will be chosen initially. It is important to mention that these ISO fitting are usable on 
circular and square shapes. As well the tolerances given are referring to metal connections. Having a 
natural material like timber greater tolerances might be possible. The correct fit will be evaluated 
during the prototyping stage, described later in the report. 
Using wooden pins also can be very useful for reinforcing interference after disassembling and 
reassembling. As mentioned before, moisture will result in swelling of wood. This can be used to 
==PAGE:53==
46 
 
increase the pins size to guarantee. Usually moisture-based swelling is considered as a negative 
attribute of wood. But regarding joints/connection it might be useful to reassure interference. The 
following figure shows how different wooden board material react to contact with water over time 
[www42]: 
 
Figure 18 Swelling behaviour of Plywood 
  
Figure XX shows the thickness swelling of Plywood being exposed to water in a 20° Celsius environment 
for 3,5 hours. It will swell around 3,5% of its size. Considering the pin to be 20mm thick this would 
result in 0,7 mm swelling. This of course is just consideration and needs validation through testing. 
 
4.3 Natural Rubber 
The exploration of rubber straps is a good example for the iterative process of the project. The focus 
on this material established during early group ideation. Workshop participants acknowledged a wood 
joint using a rubber strap for fastening as very valuable and practical, considering the projects target.  
Natural Rubber (NR) is mostly made from ‘Hevea brasiliensis’ tree, indigenous in the Amazon region. 
As it as a re-growing material coming from plant it inherits a positive carbon balance [127] and owns 
high performance properties, e.g. resilience, elasticity or abrasion resistance, that are hard to mimic 
using synthetic materials [128]. This a reason for the wide application of natural rubber, leading to 
higher demands than producible. In 2010 the expected consumption of NR outstripped the production 
capabilities [127]. This is problem regarding the sustainable growth and production of rubber, as trees 
require time to grow naturally.  The project scope is to develop a sustainable product, thus only 
environmentally friendly produced natural rubber will be utilized.  
==PAGE:54==
47 
 
Natural rubber is most commonly used for car tires, but also other application of rubber products, like 
bridge bearings, show that it can resist strong forces for a long time. Analysis have shown that after 
10-20 years of usage natural rubber only shows, negligible, surface degradation [129].  
 
This chapter revised mechanical and technical attributes of material, chosen manufacturing 
technology, and requirements for joining wood. Connections without metal fastener or adhesives 
requires an extra part for guaranteeing a fixed state for the product. Based on conduced exploration 
initial a pin/wedge solution was aspired but based on new insights during the ideation stage also 
utilizing natural rubber for tightening wooden joints moved into the focus of the product development 
process. 
The following Chapter shows primary and secondary research findings using the Five Feed Chain 
methodology. Reviewing Problem Formulation, Need Interpretation, Technology and Idea Elements, 
Perception of Ideals and resulting Task Perception and Formulation section, to create a holistic 
overview of the different exploration domains. The Five Feed Chain is a summary of key findings during 
the research stage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:55==
48 
 
4.4 Five feed Chain  
The Five-Feed chain is an explorative method for iterative research circles. It collects and displays all 
the important findings occurring during context exploration. 
 
4.4.1 Problem Formulation 
Amount of furniture waste in increasing 
➔ More people tend to live on their own until a later stage  
➔ Usually no spare parts / option for repair offered 
Furniture Wood waste contaminated (adhesives, preservatives, …) 
➔ Particleboard, MDF and Plywood needs adhesives for manufacturing      
Financial issues of Millennials 
➔ Need to purchase low cost furniture 
Consuming is a lifestyle 
➔ Consuming is a leisure time activity and important 
➔ Change interior equipment to impress their personality 
Moving a lot 
➔ Millennials tend to move on a frequent basis 
Millennial generation contributes to the amount of furniture waste in several points. They often live 
by themselves for a longer time, increasing the overall consumption, additionally for many, consuming 
is a way to express their personality. Further, millennials move places more often compared to other 
generations. Their choice to achieve higher education as well as the development on the job market 
now often only be employed temporarily are some of the reasons. Combined with the financial 
situation millennials are facing is leading to the success of low-budget, flat-pack furniture. As it is 
affordable it can be acquired and exchanged easily. Additionally, when moving it is more convenient 
to dispose the furniture and acquire new ones after moving, as the disassembling of flat-pack furniture 
needs effort. This is worrying as furniture waste is often contaminated leading to heavy environmental 
and health issues during and after use. Named behaviour leads to move contaminated waste.  
In general, flat pack furniture often lacks the possibility of being repairable. Either because spare parts 
are hard to acquire, or the low-quality material is not durable enough. 
 
==PAGE:56==
49 
 
4.4.2 Need Interpretation 
Sustainable but affordable furniture 
➔ Fastener and adhesive free 
➔ Environmentally friendly material 
➔ Easy and cheap production 
Furniture that fulfils millennials desires and needs 
➔ Furniture that can be easily moved (assembled / disassembled) 
➔ Stylish furniture 
➔ Modular 
➔ Transportable using public transportation 
To reduce future environmental contamination due to furniture and its waste, sustainable solutions 
fitting the customers’ demands are needed. Removing metal and plastic parts, like fastener, and 
adhesives from the design would already increase the eco friendliness dramatically. The wood material 
must be considered after green guideline as well.  A material, like the soy-based plywood application 
sold by Hanson Plywood limited, will be chosen.  
To fit the target groups needs the price should be kept low due to their financial situation. It further 
needs to adapt to the life-style, not only meaning aesthetics and functionality, like modularity, but also 
the fact that this target group tends to move on a frequent basis. Including easy and multiple 
assembling and disassembling into the design is very important.  
 
4.4.3 Technology and Idea Elements 
Manufacturing using a 3-Axis laser cutter 
➔ 90° edges or only one side tapered 
➔ Minimal kerf, meaning minimal waste material 
➔ Affordable machine 
➔ Maybe open source based on available laser cutting workshops  
Simple wooden Joints based on wedges / pins 
➔ Combining traditional wood joints with a point with a removable wedge or pin  
Digital manufacturing 
➔ Customization due to online shopping 
==PAGE:57==
50 
 
 
Choosing 3-Axis laser cutting as the manufacturing technology defines characteristics of the design.  It 
is possible to produce with only little waste material as the position accuracy is high and the resulting 
kerf very small. The design will be simple to not violate limits given by laser cutting. This allows the 
manufacturing of simplistic but strong pure wooden joints by adding a removable pin to traditional 
wood jointing technology like the Mortise and Tenon. Another interesting aspect is based on the high 
acceptance of online shopping among millennials. Laser cutting is based on digital manufacturing. The 
online shopping decisions made by the customer allows easy customization for example the size of the 
furniture. 
 
4.4.4 Perception of ideals 
Only Sustainable, local, and eco-friendly timber/board material (minimizing VOC) 
Local manufacturing 
Can be assembled / disassembled easily up to 10 times 
Lifetime of up to 20 years 
The lifetime of furniture directly correlates with its environmental impact. The longer a good is used 
the smaller the overall impact will be. The solution developed here should be assembled and 
disassembled a minimum of 10 times without experiences durability loss. This is based on story told in 
the motivation chapter, as the author roughly moved every second year. This leads to the lifetime of 
up to 20 years. All recourses should be acquired and processed locally. Considering Denmark, acquiring 
wood from Germany, Sweden or Finland would be acceptable. 
 
4.4.5 Task perception and formulation 
The perception and formulation of the task will be presented in the form of a design brief in the 
following chapter. The design brief is considered as the conclusion of the research process moving 
towards to the second diamond of the double diamond design methodology. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:58==
51 
 
4.5 Design Brief  
 
Concept 
Furniture that is fastener and adhesive free, thus fully consisting out of environmentally friendly 
timber-based material. The product must be easily assembled and disassembled multiple times 
without losing durability. Furthermore, the good must consists out of ‘small’ units so it can be easily 
transported using public transportation or even on a bike. As it consists out of individual parts, broken 
pieces can be exchanged easily, while replacement parts must be easy to acquire. 
 
Context 
The furniture market is steadily increasing since years. Especially one ‘kind’ of furniture goods have 
been very successful: the flat-pack / ready-to-assemble (RTA) category. 
This is due to several reasons. Obviously flat-pack furniture has some advantages against regular 
furniture. It is easy to transport (and cheap to get it delivered) and purchased, as many furniture 
companies now also feature and online store and offer low delivery fees. It must be mounted by the 
consumer themselves. Due to low transportation cost and low assembly costs for the manufacturer 
RTA furniture can be offered to a low price. Especially today the price has the biggest impact on 
decision making regarding purchases.  Many people face a low income and high depts, beginning in at 
a younger age, due to higher education and real estate costs. This might be obvious for students in 
countries having a high fee for university education like the United States. But also, for example in 
Germany, where education is free, many students finish their studies with debts. The development in 
the mortgage and real estate industry puts additionally pressure on the wealth of many people since 
the recession in 2008. This delays to acquisition of an own home for the majority by many years as 
real-estate prices have increased tremendously over the last years. 
There is a special focus on the millennial generation as their hardship regarding acquiring an own home 
and early debts are the one of the greatest compared to other generations. 
More and more young people prefer a university education over a craftmanship. Following the chance 
of those to move many times, already due to their education, increases. But this can further be seen 
in the overall attitude among many of the millennials. As they have only little possibility to settle down 
the often prefer the freedom to move to other cities or even just neighbourhoods. As well as 
companies nowadays only offer temporary positions. Many millennials want to but many also must 
move on a frequent basis. 
==PAGE:59==
52 
 
This further strengthen the success of low price furniture. As time is limited, in a location, it seems to 
make less sense to acquire long lasting high-quality furniture. It is possible to disassemble RTA furniture 
and move with it. But the amount of small parts and thus the amount of work needed combined with 
the low price emphasize to just dispose it. As well as the durability of a flat-pack furniture is reduced 
when assembling it several times. 
There is an increasing sustainable consciousness in societies. At the same time, it is hard for many, to 
distinguish between real environmental friendly and ‘regular’ goods. One of the discrepancies, 
especially regarding the millennials, is that consuming is considered something important in their live. 
New outfits, gadgets and even furniture is used to impress themselves and getting acceptance and a 
specific status. Excessive consumerism is in direct contradiction with sustainable behavior. This 
explains also the huge focus on the price. They want to consume a lot following must the price be low 
due to their financial situation.  
 
Need 
As more and more people have/want to move on a frequent basis furniture also must fulfill new 
characteristic: Furniture must be moved / assembled more often.  
Assembling and disassembling RTA furniture requires tools and many small metal and plastic parts and 
sometimes also adhesives which makes a disassembly nearly impossible. In general assembling flat-
pack furniture usually takes a lot of time, nerves and usually requires / recommend a second person 
to help setting it up. 
➔ Furniture that can be assembled/disassembled easily -> no adhesives 
➔ Furniture that does not require parts from metal or plastic parts 
Today where sustainable goals gaining increased support from society, many companies don’t offer 
holistic environmental solutions or even greenwash. The governmental and companies own 
regulations and eco labels are hard to vet and often neglect important impact categories, like for 
furniture chemicals used for protective coating or even packaging. It is important to offer a product 
that is sustainable on more levels. 
➔ Considering more aspects of eco friendliness regarding furniture (e.g. packaging, 
manufacturing processes / location) 
 
==PAGE:60==
53 
 
What often is neglected for furniture is the disposal. Recycling and dissembling is important, especially 
as real environmentally friendly furniture is only ‘green’ when the disposal stage is done correctly, 
meaning disassembling every small piece and recycling / sorting it. But even if this process is done 
correctly, chemicals used on wood, e.g. preservatives, will contribute to contamination. 
➔ Using timber material can be disposed with ease 
Living conditions also changed regarding the environment people choose. Based on labor market 
development many people move into an urban or suburban environment. Not only the costs of living 
their but also the infrastructure hinders / demotivates the use of cars. As well as online shopping is 
booming it seems people are to convenient to not order online and get the good delivered to their 
home. It is often not possible to not transport even small units, like chairs, using public transportation. 
Enabling them to acquire furniture without the need of online delivery or a car just by transporting it 
using busses, trains or even bikes would be an interesting aspect. 
➔ Furniture that can be (disassembled) transported using public transportation or even a 
backpack 
To realize the low price of flat pack furniture used material is often not of high quality. Additionally, 
the design of RTA furniture usually not allows damaged parts to be replaced, often leading to early 
disposal. If replacement parts would be available, it would be lot of work to replace them. Especially 
with low budget goods they often compare time needed vs acquiring price, where often the price is 
wins and thus new products are bought. 
➔ Design a furniture where parts can be easily replaced making them keep and preserve it 
 
The price has today often the biggest impact on decision making. Considering their living conditions 
and financial situation, low budget furniture has advantages compared to common furniture. But with 
the sustainable consciousness there is a chance to convince people, especially millennials to spent 
more and purchase a sustainable product that will last longer. This could be based on lifestyle reasons 
or for example design 
➔ Find a market section where people prefer buying a quality sustainable product over low-
budget furniture 
 
 
 
==PAGE:61==
54 
 
Criteria 
Design a piece of furniture (series) that fulfils following requirements: 
- 
Metal/plastic fastener and adhesive free (wooden pin fastener utilized) 
- 
Multiple and easy assembly and disassembly (10 times minimum) 
- 
Made from an environmentally friendly material (timber, ecological plywood) 
- 
Single (defect) parts can be exchanged as spare parts are easy to get 
- 
A fitting Quality – Price ratio as sustainability  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:62==
55 
 
5 IDEATION 
The ideation stage is all about creating original solution based on key findings derived during the 
explorative process [120]. A load of ideas should be generated to then, align or analyze them based on 
the context. The design brief created as the final output of the exploration stage is used to create a list 
of Requirements defining needed attributes (demands) and interesting aspects (wishes) for the 
solution. Early ideation (focus on exploration stage) was used to create some sketches and mock-ups 
to start creative thinking. Visual impressions/expression influences the cognitive process occurring 
during the design process. Sketches are used as/for [121]: 
• 
External memory that can be easily reviewed at a later stage of the project 
• 
Visualizes functionality issues 
• 
Creates further ideas / thoughts by moving ideas to the physical domain 
Some sketches and ideas have been neglected as they could not be combined with the findings and 
decisions made during exploration. 
New design usually aims to be considered as a novel solution. Still, analysing existing products and 
processes positively influences overall design thinking [120]. Analogies and existing solutions 
(workshop) have been reviewed and ranked using C-Box and SWOT tools. The outcome created new 
ideas utilizing the SCAMPER [119] methodology. 
It is important to mention that the kind of furniture has yet not finally decided. But a shelf application 
utilizing the development and technique of this process is chosen to use as an example. Sketches might 
feature table or chairs as well, but the final design will be concentrating on shelf usage. 
 
5.1 List of Requirements 
A list of Requirements is created based on conducted research and exploration [119]. The output of 
applied methods, like personas or a trend analysis, is a good basis for developing a list. The List is used 
here for an initial definition of the development context. During ideation the criteria might evolve due 
to need discovered conditions 
Performance/use (function, capability, durability, usability) 
5.1.1 General 
• 
No metal fastener or adhesives used 
• 
assembly and disassembly up to ten times 
• 
natural / environmentally friendly material (minimizing VOCs, no metal) 
==PAGE:63==
56 
 
• 
possible to be assembled by one person in 15 minutes 
• 
needs to resist stronger forces then the use scenario creates (Shelf board min 20 kg) 
 
5.1.2 Maintenance and Reuse/Recycle 
• 
Broken parts (Pins, Bars, Boards, …) can be exchanged, after disassembling, individually.  
• 
All parts can be separated as not permanent joints are established, enabling easy recycling.  
• 
The connections designed are standardized, meaning that parts can be reused for a new 
product. 
 
5.1.3 Product Cost 
Based on market research the aimed retail price is between 100-120 € (750-900 DKK). It still should be 
attractive to the customer usually acquiring low costs furniture, but the environmental qualities aim 
to guarantee interests for even a, slightly, higher price. 
 
Figure 19 Shelf Examples 
On figure 19  thee different shelves are displaced ranging from 45 to 80 €. Different material is applied 
from plastic (45€), to particleboard (60€) and bamboo (80€). Being considered as competition the price 
aims to only be slightly higher than these examples. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:64==
57 
 
5.1.4 Ergonomics 
Average strength of the customer must be considered, e.g. the handgrip strength of the average 
male/female.
 
Figure 20 Average Grip strength in pounds [124] 
Figure 20 shows the average hand grip strength of 4 ages groups ranging from 20 to 40 years. As the 
displayed average 
 strength of woman is roughly 40% lower this must be considered towards the design. The optimal 
solution would be that it can easily handle/assembled by everyone (requires 30 pounds grip strength 
for assembling). If this is not the case tools must be provided 
. 
5.1.5 Production Facilities 
Manufactured using 3-Axis laser cutting technology: 
• 
cutting depth up to 3 cm 
 
5.1.5.1 
Size and Weight 
• 
Focusing on single person households (limited space: around 30-40 m²) 
• 
Size of the parts and thus weight will influence the possibility of transportation regarding using 
bus, metro. 
Sizes of regular backpacks or bags must be considered to validate if this task is feasible.  Shown on 
Figure 21 are a regular backpack from the company Ortlieb, a transformable backpack, found on 
Kickstarter, as well as a traditional transportation bag from IKEA. The size of the regular sized 
backpack has following dimensions:  50x35x20cm while the IKEA bag owns 50x35x30 (cm³). 
Comparing with the big version of the Backpack, 65 x 35 x 20cm, especially the limitation in two 
dimensions becomes clear. Designing a e.g. shelf with public transportation viability results in the 
dimensioning of 50x35x20 (cm³) enabling the use of regular backpacks or a bag. 
 
==PAGE:65==
58 
 
 
Figure 21 Backpack and IKEA bag 
 
5.1.5.2 
Aesthetic and appearance 
• 
Clean, simple design (Scandinavian design) 
• 
Appearance: Wood, natural, quality, sturdy/durable 
 
Figure 22 Inspirational Moodboard 
Figure 22 shows an example of Scandinavian design inspired furniture. This style is very popular right 
now and will be the basis for aesthetic choices. A clean and simple design is featured in all applications. 
5.1.6 Materials 
• 
Plywood using environmentally friendly adhesives in the production 
Produced base on the SOYAD™ adhesive technology [www64] [123]: 
==PAGE:66==
59 
 
o Water based systems using natural soy flour and proprietary crosslinking resin 
o Comparable to urea-formaldehyde-based adhesives 
o Competitive with regular adhesives applied 
o Eliminates formaldehydes-related health issues in the manufacturing and during the 
use. 
 
 
Figure 23 Sizes and Prices of Pure Glue Plywood 
Figure 23 shows available dimensions of plywood using the pure glue, application name of SOYAD™ 
adhesive, with prices offered by Hanson Plywood. Considering the aiming sell price of the good of 
around 100-120 €, this must be further analysed regarding the material used for one shelf. 
• 
If other materials are used, they will be chosen after environmental perspective 
• 
Close wood origin (Europe) 
 
5.1.7 Recycling/Disposing 
• 
All parts and material used must be 100% recyclable 
 
5.1.8 Wishes 
• 
Small size to make transportation using public transport viable (maximum weight 20 kg) 
• 
Customization 
• 
Modularity 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:67==
60 
 
5.2 Analogies 
Analogies aim to support the creation of original design by approaching the projects problem space 
from a different angle. Using perspectives and ideas from other domains, connect existing solution 
with, new, problem spaces can lead to the development of original concepts [119] [126], and in general 
an overall enhancement of the creative output [116]. Interesting and inspiring analogies can be found 
on figure 24 showing a collage of ideas covering different solution spaces. These are used for visual aid 
and inspiration for the brainstorm sessions and ideation. 
 
Figure 24 Analogies 
 
==PAGE:68==
61 
 
Aiming of training the tactile skills and logical thinking construction must be mounted using wooden 
interlocking systems. Assembling requires specific designed motion sequence while applying force. 
These are examples of a very simple interlocking mechanism, meaning they are easy to understand. 
Further the application of pins in the truck toy is based on a Mortise and Tenon joint, an already 
considered connection system (Chapter 2.5 Technology). Exploring analogies helps connecting new 
remote associations leading to a more creative and open process as it helps viewing new ideas [117]. 
 
5.3 Brainstorming & Sketching 
Sketching based on individual brainstorming were created from the beginning. The solutions 
developed during the exploration stage broadens the understanding of needs and problems. It further 
helped visualizing ideas allowing early assessment of feasibility. These activities were intensified during 
the Ideation stage. Root problems, the user’s needs and resulting tasks have been analysed due to 
prior exploration. They are defined using a design brief and a list of requirements. As sketching and 
ideation was done parallel to the exploration stage, some solutions featured might not be applicable 
regarding chosen requirements, like using the laser cutting technology. An initial overview of sketches 
and ideas can be seen on Figure QQ1 
 
5.4 Group Ideation 
During intensive and individual work periods the five key concepts of creativity must be applied for not 
end up with e.g. To avoid influences like this, a group session evaluating furniture solutions and a 
following brainstorm session were featured in Workshop 3. To get a better feeling for the user’s 
understanding and perception of design solutions, two C-BOX analysis have been developed ranking 
eleven furniture examples. Using methods like C-BOX allows to evaluate und assess ideas helping to 
analyse the most promising one.  Discovered solutions most suitable for further development and 
conceptualization 
A following SWOT analysis focusing on the participants three most promising designs explored 
weaknesses but also strength of theses application.  This helps to understand positive and negative 
design solutions, directing the ideation process towards including analysed positive traits while 
removing weaknesses and design threats. 
The final exercise was a brainstorm session. As they have been inspired and evaluate potential 
solutions the understand for the problem should be sharpened. It was a combination of Brainwriting 
and Brain Drawing. The Delft Design guide recommends exchange of worksheets several times as ideas 
can build up on each other creating a more original output. Continuing with other people’s ideas will 
==PAGE:69==
62 
 
create a bigger network of remote associations, an important trait for creativity as it broadens the 
solution / problem space. 
 
5.4.1 C-BOX 
Initial only the classical C-BOX analysis was planned to focus on the innovativeness of a design. The 
participants themselves initiated to do a C-BOX analysis focusing on usability aspects. This is a very 
good example of the enrichment through co-creation as this exercise was not on the facilitators mind. 
Figure BB categorizes the furniture after innovativeness Figure NN after usability and functionality. 
This ranking is done by the personal perception of the participants. But as preferences and initial 
impressions of a product influence our, e.g., shopping behaviour, the output of the exercise is still 
considered valuable, as it is important to understand the customer’s thoughts and feelings. A total of 
11 design solutions are evaluated, including 2 Ideas created during the initial ideation stage. Furniture 
Number 2 uses the same principle one of the other ideas created during the prior ideation process, 
leading to and review of the three ideated concepts. Evaluated furniture are displayed on Figure 25. 
Sketches are added if some clarification regarding the connection system is required. 
==PAGE:70==
63 
 
 
 
Figure 25 Products and Sketches reviewed Part 1 
==PAGE:71==
64 
 
 
Figure 26 Products and Sketches reviewed Part 2 
 
C-BOX ranked after innovativeness on Figure 27 
 
Figure 27 C-BOX focused on innovativeness 
==PAGE:72==
65 
 
 
1: Innovative and not difficult to manufacture but has some higher tolerances as two fittings must be 
aligned parallel. As it is only using two sliding mechanism for assembling of a table it is considered 
innovative. 
2: This solution ranks slightly higher on the innovativeness axis. The application of the wedges for 
fixation also makes it easy to produce, as the tolerance are not very exact. 
3: Solution number is considered easy for the realize but at the same time not considered very 
innovative, as it utilizes traditional carpenter methods and technologies for assembly.   
4: IKEA new dowel solution is perceived as innovative but not as innovative for example furniture 
number 2. This might be due to the joining mechanism. The new dowel is considered very innovative, 
but the need of the special tool reduces the overall impression. The tools are made from metal so still 
metal ‘fastener’ are required. The system in total needs high precision and special tools for production. 
5: Ranked second highest on the easiness and the innovative axis. Utilizing rubber bands for easy and 
multiple assembly is perceived as a very valuable solution, especially as the parts are easy to 
manufacture.  
6: Utilizing a traditional Japanese wood puzzle technique is viewed as a creative solution. But as it is 
based on a puzzle it requires high tolerances and thus complicated manufacturing process. 
7: The most innovative and easy ranked furniture. A modular cubic based furniture system working 
with interlocking, fixed by a final ‘key’ part. It is perceived as easy to manufacture, but compared with 
solutions like number 2, it should be harder to realize this design. 
8: This design is ranked as very easy, but not very innovative. Using a stick and stack system for 
assembling is easy to realize using e.g. laser cutting. 
9: Its easiness factor is considered as average with a slight tough of innovation. It consists out of easy 
parts, but the tapered edges are ‘difficult’ to produce. 
10: Dovetail joints require high tolerances and thus are hard to produce. This utilization of traditional 
woodworking techniques is not perceived as very innovative, probably due to its complexity. 
11: This simple furniture concept is perceived as easy to produce, regardless of its tapered edges. The 
participants referred to wooden ladders when discussing the level of innovation and thus ranked it in 
the lower area. 
 
==PAGE:73==
66 
 
 
C-BOX ranked after functionality and assembling, figure 28 
 
Figure 28 C-Box focusing on functionality 
 
1: The assembling of furniture 1 is considered as very easy, as it only involves sliding three boards 
together. The functionality is ranked as slightly unfunctional. The assembly as one person might be 
complicated (single apartment millennials as a part of the target group) as well as it lacks stability. The 
horizontal board is not fixed in 1 direction. An incident could dismount this table. The two other boards 
appearing on the top of the desk are also unhandy, as is reduce the overall area that can be used. 
2: Number 2 has ranked as very innovative. Regarding its utilization it is positioned in the beginning of 
the functional axis. The reason is that it is very functional about the possibility of assembling / 
disassembling several times but unfunctional as many parts need to be connected. 
3: This table is in the easy assembling and very functional quadrant.  It only consists out of seven parts 
and can be disassembled into smaller units, that makes a transport, even with a small car or Christiania 
bike, easy. But at the same time as the size of the table is coherent with the transportability it is still in 
the beginning of the axis. 
4: IKEA’s solution has scored the lowest. Their personal experience of assembling IKEA furniture might 
has an influence on the outcome of the assessment as the participants initial reactions of the 
==PAGE:74==
67 
 
assembling drawing was very negative. It also still requires a metal fastener for fixation and thus is not 
very functional in this projects context.  
5: WERKHAUS’s product is positioned in the functional – difficult to assembly quadrant. The system is 
available in many applications and allows easy assembling/disassembling it is very functional, as well 
as the rubber straps can easily be replaced guaranteeing a long lifetime of this design. The assembling 
is only viewed in a difficult light as the high number of straps needed relates to a lot effort in this 
process. 
6: The Kumiki system is ranked like number 5 but it slightly higher regarding its utility. This design is 
based on a traditional puzzle technique meaning it requires some skills for assembling. The bars must 
be twisted into each other to achieve a fixed state.  
7: Number 7 scored the most points on the functionality axis. Making it modular is appealing to the 
participants as well as the ‘LEGO’ principle applied, using blocks to build and create. It placed in the 
beginning of the easy-axis, as the sliding and locking mechanism are easy to handle but the imagined 
assembling needs some time. 
8: Utilizing a cross featured stick-and-stack principle the mounting is fast and easy. But stability is 
considered an issue here. It is not fixed completely and thus the design can easily fail. 
9: Also featuring a stacking system it is considered as very functional. It is interesting to mention that 
this solution was not viewed as critical regarding its missing stability. Properly shelf have less 
requirements compared to a chair (considered by the participants) and thus this is not considered as 
a big issue. Regarding easiness it perceived neutral, not being hard nor easy to assemble / handle.  
10: This design has the second lowest ranking right after IKEA’s. As it consists out of many small parts 
that need be connected it is not seen functional, as well as it has the same design issues regarding 
stability as the two solutions before. Further the dovetail joint requires some forces for assembling. 
This explains the scoring regarding easiness. 
11: Design number 11 has the highest position on the easiness axis, as it only involves sliding 4 bars 
through holes on a board. It is only considered as that functional as the design limits its use.  
 
This C-BOX analysis was conducted during Workshop3. It is based on personal experience and 
perception and thus might not be technical correct. But as personal preferences and associations will 
define our behaviour it is important to get an impression of how certain features are perceived.  It was 
==PAGE:75==
68 
 
further used to set the stage for three SWOT analyses based on concepts used for the C-BOX exercise. 
By discussing concepts and ideas aimed to direct them choosing, their, most interested design. 
 
5.4.2 SWOT 
A SWOT analysis method is applied at the early stage of an ideation/innovation process. The Strength 
and Weaknesses focus here on the solution and not on the company’s internal attributes. Creating an 
overview of the products Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats, allows decision making 
for the product development direction. 
SWOT 1 
 
 
 
Figure 29 SWOT analysis Product 1 
==PAGE:76==
69 
 
The assembly of this table utilizes simple mechanism, a sliding dovetail and a wedge.  It is considered 
as a strength that parts are designed in a simple way and no special tools are required (but a hammer 
for tightening the Wedge). 
A weakness of the design is its dimensioning. The table size roughly fits 2 people, thus applying it in a 
family meeting context might be not possible. The sliding dovetail requires tight tolerances as the 
whole board needs to fit on the horizontal bar. A high manufacturing accuracy is needed. 
As the design and assembly/disassembly is simple, easy transporting to, e.g. public places like a park, 
might be an option. But the transportation method might be limited to a car. 
A Threat of this solution is losing a Wedge, as it is a mandatory part of the joint. When utilizing screws, 
a missing one often does not result in the failure of the design, but in this application a missing Wedge 
it critical. 
The material chosen for this table is natural wood, thus the environmental influences, like moisture 
level, are greater compared to timber board material. Considering the long edge of the dove tail joint 
this can be problematic because of the tolerances required.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
70 
 
SWOT 2 
 
 
 
Figure 30 SWOT Analysis Product 2 
 
Being made from board only this design is very sturdy. Again, requiring no tools is considered as a 
positive trait as it makes the assembly more pleasant. The sliding parts reminded the workshop 
participants of the LEGO principle stacking cuboids on each other.  
Even though it reminiscent of LEGO the participants expected the assembly time to be very time 
consuming because of the amount of connections. Another weakness mentioned, was the need of 
being completed to create a fixed system. Meaning that the locking top part is always required. This 
might influence the customization possibility.  
Overall the design potential for customization is creates many opportunities. As the sliding mechanism 
can be easily applied at different sizes, offering personal dimensioning can be realized. 
==PAGE:78==
71 
 
A threat was this solution are possible tolerance changes. Especially in larger assembly, as shown on 
the Figure HH, All the tolerances add up to a long chain. Interferences are transferred to every other 
connection. This made it vulnerable against environmental impacts. 
 
SWOT 3 
 
Figure 31 SWOT Analysis Product 3 
 
The assembly of this systems only requires 4 bars and boards. The boards will be mounted on the 
boards by sliding the tapered bar through. The size of the openings and the angle of the bar will define 
each boards position.  No tools are required. 
A weakness of the design is that there is no fixation against upwards directed forces. Furniture must 
be fixed to guarantee usability. The bars required for this solution and the boards appear very bulky, 
==PAGE:79==
72 
 
making transportation problematic. It further, will take a lot of space in an apartment, being an issue 
for small student rooms. 
The design of this shelf reminded the participants of a room separator and thus an opportunity for its 
application. Additionally, as the boards hole size defines the vertical position customization is viable. 
Putting a lot of weight on a board leads to tightening of the sliding connection. This can make 
dissembling hard and is considered as a threat. Dimensional changes due to the environment is also a 
potential failure mechanism. The boards might not be aligned even and thus the shelf will be tilted. 
 
Output 
By analysing exemplary solutions of fastener and adhesive free furniture, as well as initial ideas 
developed through the project, helped understand the perception of the user. Identifying innovative 
and user-friendly solutions and principles directs further ideation in desired design applications.  
Evaluating three examples using a SWOT analysis helped to further understand positive design feature 
that the final design should include. The knowledge created using the C-BOX and SWOT methods will 
be used for further ideation using the SCAMPER method. The workshop revealed design solution 
valued by the participants. These are be new perspectives which might not been in the focus before, 
broadening the scope for the following, individual, SCAMPER process. More inspiration was gained due 
a short brainstorm sketching exercise.  
 
5.5 SCAMPER 
 
The SCAMPER methodology applies seven heuristics to create more creative output during ideation. 
Techniques like combining ideas lead to a total of 10 solutions as shown on Figure SS. Thanks to the 
prior workshop the solution space was broaden. This allowed the development of new concepts. 
Substituting the already considered pin with a rubber strap directed the ideation into a new domain. 
This method has proven very valuable as concepts created during a SCAMPER exercise can be already 
further developed applying another heuristic. The Strap connection developed in the Substation 
domain could be improved in the next exercise Adaption, leading to implementing grooves, increasing 
the strength of the connection, while making position easy. The combination heuristic lead to 
utilization of a pin with a rubber strap. This is useful where only one direction must have a very tight 
connection. Considering the design through all 7 perspectives is very important. In this project some 
==PAGE:80==
73 
 
categories like substitution or combination have lead to very interesting concepts, while e.g., the 
elimination heuristic contributed no new ideas. 
 
Figure 32 SCAMPER exercise 
 
Four concepts, considered the most valuable of all regarding the projects scope, have been developed 
using SCAMPER. To get a better understanding and feeling for the solutions, building mock ups was 
the next step. 
 
==PAGE:81==
74 
 
5.6 Concepts 
The concept development started from simple drawings of the connection system to further evolved 
sketches of small shelf applications.  Using three-dimensional modelling techniques should help 
understand drawn mechanism better and materialise concepts into prototypes. Building models is a 
vital process in a product development project. It creates better understanding of the concepts 
functionality and ergonomic and allows user testing [119].  Starting from simple cardboard mock ups, 
the ideas were finalized by developing functional wooden prototypes. The prototypes were produced 
using a 3-axis laser cutting system, thus the manufacturability was proven. The prototypes were used 
for the last Workshop aiming to analyse the best concept. The participants assembled and disassemble 
each concept and where allowed to play around to create understanding of the concept. The 
Workshops output are two Weighted Objectives Methods ranking all the four concepts after different 
valued categories. The categories and weight were before discussed by the workshop participants. The 
discussion was done before the user testing to not influence the ranking by the concepts 
They had to do the WOM individually. This should create more diverse perspectives as two different 
score allows comparison. The four designed and evaluated concepts are presented in this section. Fist 
a small introduction is given to each concept, following an overview of the developed solution.  
 
5.6.1 Concept 1 - Vertical Rubber Straps 
The first concept presented utilizes two vertical positioned rubber straps for stabilising and fixing the 
board vertically.  The slide through bar grants stability in the horizontal plane. 8 straps per board are 
required on the bar. The cut-outs enable easy positioning and strengthen the overall connection as it 
improves the friction force. As the straps are slide/rolled on the bar no tools are required for assembly 
or disassembly. The prototype worked surprisingly well, tightening the board very well. This also allows 
greater manufacturing tolerances as the rubber strap can change its form.  
5.6.2 Concept 2 - Horizontal Rubber Straps 
Again, rubber straps are used for fixation. This time on the horizontal plane. The mortise and tenon 
joint grants stability on the vertical axis. The positioned rubber joint keeps the board from sliding 
through the bar. This design only needs 4 straps per board. By building the prototype the connection 
tightness could be validated, proving the concept feasibility. 
5.6.3 Concept 3 - Horizontal Rubber Straps and Pin 
This solution replaces one rubber strap with a pin connection. As the shelf faces greater forces towards 
the floor a stronger joint might be needed on the downwards vertical axis. Utilizing a rubber strap 
should great enough resistance. To mount the pin a hammer is required to secure a fixed connection. 
Meaning the assembly/disassembly requires more effort to execute. Designing a working prototype 
==PAGE:82==
75 
 
was possible but the pin utilisation results in tighter tolerances. This lead to the test of various size 
combinations. Developing this prototype required more work compared to the two only utilizing 
rubber straps. The process, additionally, faced crucial limitations as only 6mm thick board material was 
available. This made proper evaluation of the pin connection difficult. Tight fittings are hard to realize 
using thin material. 
5.6.4 Concept 4 - Vertical Pin Connection 
Concept number four reminiscent number two but replaces the rubber strap with wooden pins. As 
prototype number three developing a working version required more work as it faced same limitations. 
Comparing solution 4 and 2, assembling concept 4 requires more effort and a hammer, but a stronger 
joint is created.  
Figure 33,34,35 and 36 each feature one concept. A conceptual sketch, a cardboard mock up and a 
wooden protype is displayed. 
==PAGE:83==
76 
 
 
Figure 33 Concept 1 
==PAGE:84==
77 
 
 
Figure 34 Concept 2 
==PAGE:85==
78 
 
 
Figure 35 Concept 3 
==PAGE:86==
79 
 
 
 
Figure 36 Concept 4 
==PAGE:87==
80 
 
6 Concept Evaluation 
A Product Concept Evaluation was processed using the final workshop. A Product Concept Evaluations 
helps to understand impression the concept creates by the user. The developed prototypes and 
concept sketches were used to generate interaction and better understand of each solution. The 
evaluation started with a discussion targeting to create the categories and ranking to conduct the 
Weighted Objectives Method. Not predefining content of the WOM gives more insight in the user’s 
personal value perception. Before executing the exercise, the participants could ‘play’ with the 
concept’s prototypes. Assembling and disassembling helped the user to understand mechanism and 
features of the design. This also resulted in a more realistic feeling of the required work to assembly a 
real sized version of each concept. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
81 
 
6.1 Weighted Objective Method 
 The WOM was done individually. Analysing two rankings should great a more validated view. The 
outcome of the method is shown on figure 37. 
 
Figure 37 WOM 
==PAGE:89==
82 
 
The result of the Weighted Objectives Method reveals the most valuaed concept. Concept number 4 
is considered as the least desirable solution. It is important to mention that it scores very low in the 
aesthetic ranking. It is possible that the score got influenced by the prototypes impression. Instead of 
aligning pins it used a wedge due to manufacturing limitations. This reveals the strong impact the 
appearance of a three-dimensional model has, as the sketch visualizes a pin application.  
Concept number 2 scores achieves the highest score. Both participants rank this design very high in 
the ‘Easiness Assembly / Disassembly’ category. This might relate to the good score in usability, as this 
feature creates new opportunities for the use scenario. The durability is considered similar good 
compared to place 2 and 3. All these concepts utilize rubber straps for connection. This has proven the 
application for this type of joint for prototype dimensions and materials. The assembly speed is 
considered as well-developed as well. The straps can be mounted easily and then slide into defined 
position. The aesthetic of the design is perceived as average, scoring a 4 and 6. Improving the aesthetics 
could be a new focus of the development, but as it one of the least ranked categories, the focus will 
be on improving more crucial features. The next development processes will target states wishes, like 
can be easily transported using public transportation or modularity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:90==
83 
 
6.2 Concept Visualisation 
Figure 38 shows sketches and renderings of concept 2. 
 
Figure 38 Selected Concept 
==PAGE:91==
84 
 
 
6.3 Wishes 
Next to mandatory requirements there is often a desire for the design to inherit special features, that 
are considered valuable, but are not crucial to the success of the solution. In this project these are 
called ‘Wishes’. Three wishes have been stated for this development. Enabling modularity and 
customization while applying dimensions that makes comfortable transportation via busses, trains and 
metros available. But is also leads to limit the solution towards other features.  Limiting the size might 
not be compatible with customization as this includes variation of dimension. The following section 
focus on the integration of wishes stated. 
 
6.3.1 Modularity 
Modularity allows the connection of several elements to a basic body, generating a completed or even 
uncompleted systems. The use of repetitive dimension is required to ensure correct fitting [91].  An 
approach of including modularity into the final concept is shown on figure 39. 
 
Figure 39 Modularisation 
 
The ideated pin connection yet must be validated. It must be proven that chosen and available 
dimensions create a joint that is strong enough. This was done by creating a test piece using similar 
sizes as the actual connection designed.  This was done by gluing 6 mm thick board sheets together, 
forming 12 mm layers. The overall bar is 36 mm wide, the cut-out 12mm.  As a material thickness of 
==PAGE:92==
85 
 
up to 30mm, for the final product, is considered, the dimension increase created better test conditions, 
as the glued board material is from lower quality then the plywood. The connection makes a very 
strong impression, but the actual strength must be further evaluated. 
As mentioned before, more validation for a pin joint, proving the interference connection functionality, 
must be conducted. This was done creating a template comparing several possible tolerances. The test 
revealed the manufacturing derivation created by this certain laser cutter.  The 9.8 signed pin was 
aimed to be 10 mm wide, explaining the hole variation from 9.5 to 10.5. But measuring revealed that 
the pin’s actual size was 9.8 mm. The holes size aberration was as well 0.2 mm but in the reverse 
direction leading to 0.2 wider openings. Still the test template could reveal a fitting connection. The 
joining a 9.8 mm wide pin fits well into the 9.7 wide hole creating a tight interference fit. Limitations 
for the assessment again was the manufacturing thickness. Gluing sheets together was considered an 
option, but as the glues parts must fit tight tolerances hard to realise. Figure 40 shows the two concept 
validations explained as well as renderings. Figure III visualise the modular version of the concept using 
renderings. 
 
Figure 40 Proof of Concept Pin Connection 
==PAGE:93==
86 
 
 
Figure 41 Renderings Modularized Concept 
 
Figure 42 Table application 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
87 
 
6.3.2 Customization 
Laser cutting utilities digital data as a production template. Meaning design adjustment can be done 
using CAD software. For example, dimensional changes can be easily integrated into the production 
line. Example customized version of the design is shown on figure 43.  
 
Figure 43 Customized Bar sizes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
88 
 
6.3.3 Transporting using public transport 
The dimension of the base model has been adjusted to fit a common backpack. Figure 44 shows a 
simple proof of concept if the finalized sizing can be applied in this context. An example for sizes that 
fit a backpack are shown in figure 43, showing sizes adjusted to Backpack examples given in the list of 
requirements 
 
Figure 44 Dimensioning of transportable concept 
 
 
6.4 Business Model Canvas 
 
The development of this furniture has been in the frame of a Master Thesis. No commercial interests 
are predominant. The exploration of the target group revealed that the financial situation is the most 
influencing considering buying furniture.  As the design developed aims to tackle the needs of the user, 
affordability is very important. The idea of the following business idea arouses during conducted 
research of the targets group living situation and the workshop sessions.  
Many of the millennials chose to undergo higher education aiming for a master’s degree. Especially 
this group has a close contact to Universities. The Business Idea involves Universities becoming the 
manufacture stakeholder. The business plan will be explained using a Business Model Canvas (BMC) 
and a Value Proposition Canvas (VPC). It is important to mention that the revenue stream for the 
Universities are not financial but e.g. creating value and motivation choosing this university. 
 
Business Model Canvas 
The BMC is a design thinking tool that explores business development using several different angels 
[125]. Utilizing 2 different templates, the VPC as well as the BMC. The Value Proposition Canvas is split 
==PAGE:96==
89 
 
into two blocks, the Value Proposition (VP) and the Customer Segment (CS). The CS segment describes 
the customer’s pains, what they will gain using the solution and their activities needed to make the 
idea work. The VP lists the ‘Products and Services’, ‘Pain Relievers’ (how the product aims to solve the 
user’s need and pains) and ‘Gain Creators’ the solution offers. The ‘Gain Creators’ states how the 
product adds value to the customer and how it addresses the user’s gains. The BMC analyses needed 
Key Partners, Activities and Resources as well as Customer Relationships, Customer Segments and 
channels needed to reach the customer. Cost Revenue Streams showing the financial sector of the 
template [125]. The Value Proposition Canvas is the last category of the BMC, showing, being a 
template itself, the focus on the customer.  
 
University provides production facilities 
The idea positions the University, or a relating facility, as the manufacture stakeholder. Providing the 
technology as well as selling the materials needed for production. The student can book a certain time 
frame for using the facilities and paying only raw material needed. The revenue stream for the 
supplier/university is here not financial but value based. Improving their student’s life and education 
by promoting interdisciplinarity. 3D printing and laser cutting are common prototyping techniques 
utilized by especially the mechanical engineering department at DTU. Facilities like Skylab already 
grant students easy access to technologies improving study related projects. Their facilities right now 
cannot handle cutting depths up to 3 cm thus the acquisition of a new machine would be necessary. 
But not only students would benefit from this business model but also the Skylab and the University. 
More reasoning and usage of machines could be created. It further would allow the creation of 
prototypes of higher quality further improving the student’s education. The University of Denmark has 
a strong orientation towards an interdisciplinary education. Many courses try to get participants from 
different study lines, as differently developed skills and perceptions lead to a more holistic process and 
outcome. Still many students only rarely interact with manufacturing techniques, even thought, it’s a 
parts of their degrees content. Offering customized and self-produced furniture acquisition through 
DTU facilities could increase the interest’s students have towards technology. Dealing with 
manufacturing processes will create new knowledge and better understanding by applying these. 
Additionally, students from diverse study lines might be tempted to use as this as an affordable way 
to get furniture. This would lead to a more divers environment and result in a bigger network for e.g. 
Skylab. A Value Proposition Canvas explaining the intended value creation by this business is shown on 
Figure 44.  The resulting Business Model Canvas is displayed on Figure 45. The canvas’s will not be 
explained in more detail as it is considered as self-certified. 
==PAGE:97==
90 
 
 
Figure 45 Value Proposition Canvas 
 
Figure 46 Business Model Canvas 
==PAGE:98==
91 
 
7 Final Solution 
The final solution is a modularized version of chosen design presented in section 6. Figure 47 shows 
the basic cuboid and an assembled shelf application. 
 
Figure 47 Single modular cuboid and shelf example 
Modularization using specific design dimensions allow transportation using common backpacks, a 
design wish of the project. While a cubic shelf is assembled and tightened using rubber straps, the 
vertical stacking and connection of individual shelfs utilize a wooden pin. A higher force resistance of 
the joint is required, resulting in the choice for this connection principle. Also, modularisation is easy 
to realize. Laser cutting uses digital templates as a basis, enabling easy customization by the designer, 
or even the user himself. This allows the production of individual design in wanted sizes, and creation 
of aspired aesthetics, like utilizing longer bars and thus remove the pin connection systems required 
for modular assembly of several cuboid shelfs. This allows better results targeting the individual user’s 
need and preferences, like space availability in their room. 
The developed connection system is easy applicable in other furniture designs, like tables. Board 
applications like shown on figure 42 are also possible integrating the basis or modular version. The 
inspiration for the aesthetics of the design was inspired by the Scandinavian appearance. Clean design 
with natural materials, leading to clean and straight edges of the design.  
All used materials an environmentally friendly, like the use of plywood made with soya-based 
adhesives or sustainable rubber straps. 
 
==PAGE:99==
92 
 
7.1 Final concept discussion 
Even the most thought out designs and related process do not guarantee a solutions success. 
Conceptual vulnerability methodology explains an ideas failure using two approaches. Either the 
concept is weak due to the lack of requirements or design specifications fulfilled, or the strengths and 
characteristics of the solution is not understood or the they are not easy to be identify [118]. This 
should be avoided applying useful systematic and creative development tools as well as conducting 
thoughtful research, but Improvements, reiteration or changing of the solution, to achieve a better 
solution, is still always possible. 
The presented solution will be evaluated using the list of requirements formulated in section 5.1 
General 
The main targets for this project was to develop furniture that does not need metal fastener nor 
adhesives for assembling while guaranteeing multiple assembling and disassembling. Utilizing a rubber 
strap can realize this goal. Regarding possible assembling up to ten times, the durability of rubber 
straps must be evaluated more thoroughly.  
Applying a natural material that fulfils needed criteria or easy access to replacement rubber straps. 
This is vital for the products success. The chosen material is environmentally friendly plywood with a 
reduced environmental impact compared to common timber board products. Rubber being available 
in a natural composition, being produced from plants, also accomplishes this criterion. 
Utilizing an easy joinery system applying rubber straps allows individual assembly in a short amount of 
times, as, for a modular shelf version, it only requires 8 straps to mount. The assembling process is due 
to the simplicity of parts obvious. This guarantees an easy assembling in up to 15 minutes. 
Furniture needs to resist certain forces during its lifetime. For the here focused shelf application aimed 
to resists up to 20 kg per board. The thickness and connection sizes of the design origin from common 
furniture application using similar material or material from lower quality. By applying chosen 
dimensions guarantees a durable solution 
 
Maintenance and Reuse/Recycle 
Each part can be easily exchanged when damaged. Bars or boards must be reproduced but considering 
the mention business idea this is possible while having access to the facilities. For consumer leaving 
institutions imbedding named service it is possible to resort to companies offering and selling laser 
cutting capacities. The connection design is represented in every application the reuse of parts is 
==PAGE:100==
93 
 
possible. If e.g. the consumer decided to acquire a bigger shelf system, boards can be reused as they 
fit the design specifications. 
 
Product costs 
The modular version of the cuboid shelf needs roughly 100x37 cm of the board material. The 250x120 
cm dimensioned board material sold by Hanson Plywood Limited costs around 85€ allows the 
production of 7 shelf systems using one board. The material costs for one shelf can be estimated to 
about 20€, including purchased rubber straps. The products target price is thus connected to the 
manufacture stakeholder. 
 
Ergonomics 
The reviewed ergonomics mostly focus on the grip strength needed to apply rubber straps. As they 
must fix the connection in a tight matter, strong straps are required. The forces needed to apply the 
rubber connection needs more evaluation to guarantee a products success. 
 
Production Facilities 
Utilizing only straight edges the design is kept simple, allowing manufacturing using a 3-Axis laser 
cutting technology. The designs board comes with a thickness of 2 cm. These dimensions are feasible 
for producing using laser cutting. 
 
Size and Weight 
Millennials being in the focus here, single person households are considered the most relevant. The 
solution should fit into smaller rooms and apartments. Creating a modular design with potential for 
customization tackles the needs originated living on a small areal. 
A designs wish was to allow easy moving using public transportation. The sizes of 45x30x2cm enables 
the use of common backpack for transportation, as regular backpacks often feature 50x35x20cm. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:101==
94 
 
Aesthetic and appearance  
Aesthetic and appearance have a huge influence on the customers perception. The desired design 
strived towards the Scandinavian look, using clean and simple style. Scandinavian design is considered 
very valuable due to its use of natural materials and quality applications. Plywood might be not the 
best choice to create this impression, but the advantages compared to natural wood was convincing. 
Further, the application of rubber straps might not be most fitting for desired aesthetic impression, 
but the easiness in the use lead to this decision. But Rubber straps could useful to allow more 
customization, when being available in several colours.  
 Material 
The kind of timber material utilized here is already predefined in the List of Requirements (Chapter). 
More research and definition has to be made regarding the rubber straps origin and properties. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:102==
95 
 
8 Reflection 
 
8.1 Project Plan 
The initial step before starting with the research was the creation of a project plan guiding the 
development process. It defines activities and sets a time frame for fulfilling the task. It is very crucial 
setting goals and direction for the project, but it is at the same time very difficult to anticipate the 
actual time needed. Difficulties or re-orientation, based on researched knowledge, occur during all the 
stages and must be dealt with, leading to timetable changes. While new objectives and resulting work 
are discovered, some tasks and research areas get removed or adapted, making permanent adaptation 
of the project plan mandatory. 
Four main phases were anticipated: Exploration, Conceptualization, Concept Validation and Finalizing 
Product stage, which a 7-8 weeks period for each category. 
The project plan was made in a linear process methodology. This is not applicable to the chosen 
process in this Report. The process follows an iterative development methodology, meaning that 
moving forward and backward through the stages is possible. As research creates ideas, and ideas 
often require further exploration jumping between stages can be mandatory. But these iterative 
exploring circles create conflict with the allocated time planed, as even during concept evaluation new 
data might be required. An iterative process also influences the topics explored. The project time is 
limited, thus decision had to be made if a new development domain replaces a planned one. This 
projected faced a lot of changes regarding the projects direction. It is considered very difficult to 
anticipate each step required in this project process beforehand as the design process is experienced 
as a natural process with changes occurring. Especially the insights created through the Workshops 
often lead to re-scoping. 
This is the reason for the re-orientation of the projects plan tasks. This might be due to little 
preparation in the orientation stage defining and analysing potential research domains beforehand. 
But it is considered as very difficult to estimate every step. Some methods and focus areas might be 
not promising as estimated while other reveal unknown value for the development. This lead to the 
changing structure of the project plan with path taken. 
The Exploration stage consumed more time than expected, influencing the other’s stages. New 
researching theory and executing workshops focusing on exploration create new domains interesting 
to explore. This stage needs to be very structured. Decision on where to put the focus on must be set 
and followed. Additionally, some areas seem very promising but might be not applicable to the projects 
goals. A stronger framing and more controlled process is required. This will be improved in the next 
project. 
==PAGE:103==
96 
 
Ideation began parallel with the exploration, as both domains positively influence each other creating 
more and more input. The visualisation of ideas and concept have been be more time consuming as 
expected. Creating mock-ups, prototypes, and especially sketches took more time than planned. 
The overall project planning would have needed more thoughts. Each stage individual assigned time 
frame has been enough, but the tasks have change based on exploration and ideation. Using a more 
flexible plan would be interesting approach, but at the same time more preparation and tracking of 
the original goals is an important task set for future projects, creating a more controlled ‘environment’.  
 
8.2 Learning Objectives  
 
The here presented learning objectives have been defined at the very beginning of the project. They 
represent the scientific approach and goals set for this project.  
 
• 
Collect and evaluate data in connection with need and market analyses 
This was done using secondary research of the market situation using business report and primary with 
the creation of a trend analysis and personas based on workshops. The target group was further 
reviewed exploring papers based in social science to broaden the understanding. More primary 
research could have been conducted using interviews or surveys. This would further have increased 
the scope and enrichen the overall process.  
• 
Analyse and explore existing solutions regarding adhesive and fastener furniture assembly  
Examples of furniture with states traits have been analysed, reviewed and scored using a C-BOX 
analysis, during a Workshop. Utilizing methods, like SWOT, revealed positive and negative traits of 
found solutions. This was further reviewed for the exploration of furniture application and helped 
developed new concepts using the SCAMPER methodology. 
• 
Identify needs, constraints and contexts based on research literature and data collection  
The primary and secondary research conducted lead to the development of the five-feed chain which 
displays gathered findings. Developing a Design Brief and a list of requirements aims to give a good 
overview of identified needs and constrains 
Analyse and define the most relevant context for fastener and adhesive free furniture  
==PAGE:104==
97 
 
This learning objectives could have been fulfilled more thoroughly. The report features a small business 
model based on a Value Proposition Canvas and Business Model Canvas, but it needs more work and 
refinement to fully show the value of the business idea and its potential feasibility. 
• 
Create ideas and concept suggestions  
The concept creation/ideation began parallel to the exploration stage, resulting in sketches and mock-
ups.  
• 
Develop innovative concepts using creative, systematic - and visual thinking  
The concepts created are based on conducted research, the workshops and visual inspiration like 
analogies or furniture examples. Using methods and tools like SCAMPER allowed systematic 
improvement of the concepts, due to combination or replacement of ideas and technologies. 
 
• 
Evaluate the potential and realizability of solution concepts  
• 
Decide on a concept based on potential, realizability and other relevant criteria  
 
The final four concepts have been evaluated using a Weighted Objectives Method. The WOM combines 
the analysis of workshops participants with the personal perception of the designer.  Building 
prototypes for each concept helped to create a more detailed evaluation of the concepts. 
 
• 
Develop the product based on the projects estimation of the scope, complexity, and desired 
results  
The final decision making allowed further development of the idea, integrating modularity, 
customization and other ‘wishes’ for the design solutions functionality. A concise Business Model is 
explaining an idea of how to make the target group get access to the final solution. 
 
• 
Finalize and build a functional and useable product  
The final solution with different application possibilities is presented using prototypes and CAD 
renderings. Due to the lack of access to special facilities only smaller sized prototypes could be 
developed. Testing and further evaluation based on a real size model would have been very useful. 
 
==PAGE:105==
98 
 
• 
Reflect on each stages process identifying potential short comings, decision making and 
improvement  
 
Overall the learning objectives have been reached in a satisfying way. But some categories could have 
been targeted more, as every stated task is important for a holistic and thus successful product 
development. No interviews have been conducted as the workshop approach was considered as 
enough of the primary research section. But especially understanding the user’s needs a problem 
requires thoughtful and plenty data to create a realistic overview.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:106==
99 
 
9 Conclusion 
Millennials have become the most interesting and potent group for many markets. Consumerism is, 
for many, an important way to impress themselves and a part of daily life. At the same time research 
revealed that this target group faces difficulties based on the financial situation but also their personal 
living decisions. Reaching higher education, like a master’s degree, is perceived more important, 
leading to an immense increase of student enrolment. It might be obvious for countries like the UK or 
the US that studying often results in debts due to the studying fee, but research show that, also in 
countries like Germany, where no fees for higher education are applied, students often leave university 
indebted.  
Another interesting trait of millennials is the trend of moving more frequent. This is a result of more 
millennials strive for higher education, moving in-between universities, as well as personal preferences 
of a changing environment, but also due to the rise of the temporary job model. Both, the financial 
situation, and the frequent change of places support the success of affordable, flat-pack, furniture. The 
price has been identified as the most influencing attribute on the buying behaviour. The broad 
availability of this low-price furniture enhances the purchase motivation and directly results in more 
furniture waste created, as furniture is disposed after a shorter life-time. 
The most common used material for this type of furniture is processed board material, like 
particleboard or MDF. These are cheap to produce and carry some mechanical properties superior to 
natural wood. They are less influenced by environmental impacts, like moisture content, leading to a 
greater dimensional stability during use. As wood is a natural material it can absorb or release water 
leading to swelling or shrinkage. These are some reasons for the success of board material. But the 
usage of board material has a big environmental impact compared to natural timber. The chemicals 
used during manufacturing are often hazardous. Adhesives are needed to merge and form small 
wooden parts into a consistent board. Urea-formaldehyde is the most common one applied, due to its 
properties and price. These formaldehydes are not only problematic at disposal stage, but already 
create health issues for the human, contributing to the spread of respiratory sicknesses like Asthma, 
during usage. Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are permanently released from the material 
contaminating the environment the furniture is located at. Another environmental issue is created by 
the material commonly used for furniture goods.  
Considering flat-pack furniture, the assembly requires many metal fastener, plastic parts and 
sometimes even adhesives. Metal has the biggest impact due to the energy used and waste created 
during processing the raw material. Reducing the amount of metal used in furniture would be the 
easiest procurement for realizing a sustainable production. Another problem with furniture, utilizing 
==PAGE:107==
100 
 
many metal parts, is, that the consumer is often not willing to spend much effort in disassembly and 
correct disposal/recycling of the product, leading to further contamination of the environment.  
Based on these insights defined the development of a fastener and adhesive free furniture that can be 
easily assembled and disassembled multiple times. The exploration and workshops facilitated lead to 
the definition of requirements for the solution. Based on these traits the ideation of desired solution 
was initiated. Creative and systematic thinking methodologies, utilized in the design process, lead to 
the development of four concepts tackling these needs. Evaluation based on the Weighted Objective 
Method lead to the final concept. A modular cuboid shelf system. The shelf consisting out of four 
boards and four bars are connected utilizing a Mortise and Tenon joint that is fixed with a rubber strap. 
The shelf design has been chosen as the most representative for developed concept, but it can be 
easily utilized for other furniture applications, like a table, which have been additionally visualized. The 
dimensions have been chosen to fit a regular backpack used by many students. This allows the 
transportation using public transportation or even using a bicycle. 
The rubber straps allow easy assembling and disassembling removing the need for tools. This was 
perceived as very valuable by the workshop participants. The chosen timber material is sustainable 
plywood using soya-based adhesives for manufacturing. This reduced the amount of VOCs emitted. 
Combining this with the removable of metal fastener results in a sustainable product. Regarding rubber 
as a natural material, only green applications are considered. 
The research discovered that a big percentage of the target group consists out of students. This, plus 
the personal experience with the Technical University of Denmark, lead to the development of a, 
“social”-orientated, business plan involving universities as the producer stakeholder. Universities 
providing needed laser cut facilities and guidance allow the production of customized furniture for the 
student. The student only must pay the material costs, as the designs used are user driven utilizing a 
cloud platform or a similar technology. This create better understanding in usage of technologies, in 
relevant degrees, but more important can lead to more interdisciplinarity university environment. 
Students from different departments, e.g. biology, can experience and use a technology uncommon 
to their area of expertise. The value created for the university is a greater interdisciplinarity and 
technology understanding among the students and a bigger network. At the same time, they can 
reason the purchase and increase usage of new technologies while creating value joining this 
University. 
 
 
==PAGE:108==
101 
 
10 Literature 
[1] Nes, N. V., & Cramer, J. (2006). Product lifetime optimization: A challenging strategy towards more 
sustainable consumption patterns. Journal of Cleaner Production,14(15-16),  
 [2] Forrest, A., Hilton, M., Ballinger, A., Whittaker, D. (2017). Circular Economy Opportunities In The 
Furniture Sector, European Environmental Bureau, European Union 
[3] Parker, D., Riley, K., Robinson, S., Symington, H., Tweson, J., Jansson, K., Ramakumar, S., Peck, D. 
(2015). Remanufacturing Market Study, European Remanufacturing Network, For Horizon 2020, grant 
agreemtnet No 645984 
 [4] Anonymous, (2015). Housing in Denmark, Centre of Housing and Welfare – Realdania Research, 
Vilhelm Jensen & Partners 
[5] Ingham, S. (2011), Furniture Longevity: How Mass-Produced Heirloom Furniture Supports 
Sustainable Consumption, Master Thesis, Arizona State University 
[6] Duffy, B., Shrimpton, H., Clemence, M. (2017). Millennial - Myth and Realities, Ipsos MORI 
[7] Palmer, G. (2006). Single Person Households – Issues that JRF should be thinking about, Joseph 
Rowntree Foundation 
[8] JRC Scientific and Policy reports – EU Commission – Wooden Furniture 
[9] Loewe, M. (2015). Translating an ambitious vision into global transformation the 2030 agenda for 
sustainable development. Bonn: Dt. Inst. für Entwicklungspolitik. 
[10] Lakhan, C. (2015). A Comparison of Single and Multi-Stream Recycling Systems in Ontario, Canada. 
Resources. 4.  
[11] Wang, J. (2006). All in One: Do Single-Stream Curbside Recycling Programs Increase Recycling 
Rates? Single-Stream Recycling. 
[11] Lakhan, C. (2015). A Comparison of Single and Multi-Stream Recycling Systems in Ontario, 
Canada. Resources,4(2),  
 [12] Fitzgerald, G. C., Krones, J. S., & Themelis, N. J. (2012). Greenhouse gas impact of dual stream and 
single stream collection and separation of recyclables. Resources, Conservation and Recycling,69 
[13] Morawksi, C. (2009). Understanding economic and environmental impacts of single-stream 
collection systems, Container Recycling Institute,  
[15] Pintér, L., Almassy, D., Offerdahl, K., Czunyl, S. (2015). Global Goals and the Environment: Progress 
and prospects, IISD 
==PAGE:109==
102 
 
[15] Anonymous (2013). Factories of the future – Multi-Annual Roadmap For The contractual PPP 
Under Horizon 2020, European Factories Of The Future Research Association, European Union 
[16] Anonymous (2016).  Advancing sustainable materials management: 2016 Recycling Economic 
Information (REI) Report, United States Environmental Protection Agency 
[17] Bednárik, E., Pakaine Krováts, J. (2010). Consumer Behaviour Model on the Furniture Market, Acta 
Silv. Lign. Hung., Vol. 6 (2010), Department of Entrepreneurship and Marketing, Faculaty of Wood 
Sciences, University of West Hungary  
[18] Sakpichaisakul, T. (2012). Consumer Behaviour Model on the Furniture Market, Major in Business 
Adminisration, Graduate School of Commerce WASESDA University 
[19] Anonymous (n.d.). Case Good consumer buying trends, e-CRAFTCIL Issues 18, 2015 
[20] McDermott, K (n.d.). Future trends in consumer behaviour – Technology in a connected world 
2017-2020, acapture 
[21] Levenson, A. R. (2010). Millennials and the World of Work: An Economist’s Perspective. Journal of 
Business and Psychology,25(2), 257-264.  
[22] Fry, R., Parker, K., Rohal, M. (2014). Young Adults, Student Debt and Economic Well-being, Pew 
Research Center 
[23] Dickerson, M. (2016). Millennials, Affordable Housing, and the Future of Homeownership, 24 J. 
Affordable Hous.& Cmty. Dev. L. 435 
[24] Dodoo, A., Gustavsson, L., & Sathre, R. (2014). Recycling of Lumber. Handbook of Recycling,151-
163.  
[25] Krook, J., Mårtensson, A., Eklund, M., & Libiseller, C. (2008). Swedish recovered wood waste: 
Linking regulation and contamination. Waste Management,28(3), 638-648.  
[26] Hillring, B. (1997). Price trends in the Swedish wood-fuel market. Biomass and Bioenergy,12(1), 
41-51. doi:10.1016/s0961-9534(96)00066-9 
[27] Jermer, Jöran & Ekvall, Annika & Tullin, Claes. (2018). Analysis of contaminants in waste wood. 
[28] Krook, J., Mårtensson, A., & Eklund, M. (2006). Sources of heavy metal contamination in Swedish 
wood waste used for combustion. Waste Management,26(2), 158-166.  
 [29] Krook, J., Mårtensson, A., & Eklund, M. (2004). Metal contamination in recovered waste wood 
used as energy source in Sweden. Resources, Conservation and Recycling,41(1), 1-14.  
==PAGE:110==
103 
 
[30] Chmielewski, A.G. & Urbański, T.S. & Migdal, Wojciech. (1997). Separation technologies for metals 
recovery from industrial wastes. Hydrometallurgy. Volume 45. 333-344.  
[31] Anonymous (n.d.). Guidance on separating wood for recycling at source – Step by step guide to 
understanding wood for recycling, Wrap 
[32] Lin, S., Zhou, X., Ge, L., Ng, S. H., Zhou, X., & Chang, V. W. (2016). Development of an accelerated 
leaching method for incineration bottom ash correlated to toxicity characteristic leaching 
protocol. Electrophoresis,37(19), 2458-2461.  
[33] Miao, Y., Guan, H., & Chen, Y. (2015). Characteristics Analysis for Volatile Organic Compounds 
Emission 
of 
Wood 
Furniture. The 
Open 
Materials 
Science 
Journal,9(1), 
189-193. 
doi:10.2174/1874088x01509010189 
[34] Maheshwari, R., Gupta, S., Das K. (2015). Impact of Landfill Waste on Health:  An Overview. IOSR 
Journal of Environmental Science, Toxicology and Food Technology (IOSR-JESTFT) Journal,4(1), 17-23 
[35] Anonymous (2017). Deep dive: Millennials and the furniture in the US and the UK – Ten 
characteristics that Define the Market, Gung global Retail & Technology 
[36] Wongwichai, T., Tanaka, T. (2016). Basic consideration of the interlocking design for examining 
the assembling mistake for wooden furniture, Bulleting of JSSD 2016, 114-115 
[37] Fisk, W. J., & Rosenfeld, A. H. (1997). Estimates of Improved Productivity and Health from Better 
Indoor Environments. Indoor Air,7(3), 158-172. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0668.1997.t01-1-00002.x  
[38] Hawkins, D. I., Mothersbaugh, D. L., & Mookerjee, A. (2010). Consumer behavior: Building 
marketing strategy (11th ed.). New Delhi: Tata McGraw Hill  
[39] International Journal of Sales, Retailing & Marketing, vol. 5 No. 2 2016 
[40] Moon, Youngme E. "IKEA Invades America." Harvard Business School Case 504-094, April 2004  
[41] Ponder, N. Consumer Attitude and buying Behavior for Home Furniture, Franklin Furniture 
Institute – Furniture Outreach Program, 2013 
[42] The IKEA Group approach to sustainability – How we manage sustainability in our business, IKEA 
Group, 2011 
[43] Vinay, A., Srivastava, I., Vij, S., Rawatt S. R. (2017). IKEA: The Furniture Guru – an Exploratory Study. 
Proceedings of International Conference on Strategies in Volatile and Uncertain Environment for 
Emerging Markets, Jul 14-15, 2017, 18-27 
==PAGE:111==
104 
 
[44] Diamantopoulos, A., Schlegelmilch, B. B., Sinkovics, R. R., & Bohlen, G. M. (2003). Can socio-
demographics still play a role in profiling green consumers? A review of the evidence and an empirical 
investigation. Journal of Business Research,56(6), 465-480.  
[45] Grimmer, M., & Bingham, T. (2013). Company environmental performance and consumer 
purchase intentions. Journal of Business Research,66(10), 1945-1953.  
[46] Heo, J., & Muralidharan, S. (2017). What triggers young Millennials to purchase eco-friendly 
products?: The interrelationships among knowledge, perceived consumer effectiveness, and 
environmental concern. Journal of Marketing Communications,1-17.  
[47] Millennials and furniture US and UK 
[48] Passaro, P., Perchinunno, P., & Schirone, D. A. (2015). Green Marketing and Sustainable 
Development: A Statistical Survey on Ikea Customers’ Perception. Computational Science and Its 
Applications -- ICCSA 2015 Lecture Notes in Computer Science,130-145.  
[49] Lu, L., Bock, D., & Joseph, M. (2013). Green marketing: What the Millennials buy. Journal of 
Business Strategy,34(6), 3-10.  
[50] Lihra, T., Buehlmann, U., & Graf, R. (2012). Customer preferences for customized household 
furniture. Journal of Forest Economics,18(2), 94-112.  
[51] Hakala, I., Autio, M., & Toppinen, A. (2015). Young Finnish and German consumers’ furniture 
acquisition - wooden, inherited or just low price? International Journal of Consumer Studies,39(5), 
445-451.  
[52] Huttunen, K., & Autio, M. (2010). Consumer ethoses in Finnish consumer life stories - agrarianism, 
economism and green consumerism. International Journal of Consumer Studies,34(2), 146-152.  
[53] Notarnicola, B., Tassielli, G., Renzulli, P. A., Castellani, V., & Sala, S. (2017). Environmental impacts 
of food consumption in Europe. Journal of Cleaner Production,140, 753-765.  
[54] Johansson, L. N. (1983). MDF—Mitteldichte Faserplatten. Holz Als Roh- Und Werkstoff,41(7), 255-
260.  
[55] Dinwoodie, J. M. (2002). Timber: Its nature and behaviour. London: E & FN Spon.  
[56] Akers, L. (1966). Methods of Manufacture. Particle Board and Hardboard,12-39.  
[57] Caldas, M. G., Donatello, S., Wolf, O. (2017). Revision of the EU Green Public Procurement (GPP) 
criteria for Furniture. JRC Science for policy report. European Union 
[58] Buehler, R., Jungiohann, A., Keeley, M., Mehling, M. (2011). How German Became Europe’s Green 
Leader: A Look af Four Decades of Sustainable Policymaking, Solutions Journal 5(2) 
==PAGE:112==
105 
 
[59] Daugbjerg, C., Smed, S., Andersen, L. M., & Schvartzman, Y. (2014). Improving Eco-labelling as an 
Environmental Policy Instrument: Knowledge, Trust and Organic Consumption. Journal of 
Environmental Policy & Planning,16(4), 559-575.  
[60] Taufique, K. M., Vocino, A., & Polonsky, M. J. (2016). The influence of eco-label knowledge and 
trust on pro-environmental consumer behaviour in an emerging market. Journal of Strategic 
Marketing,25(7), 511-529.  
[61] Weinswig, D., (2016). A Deep dive into the US Furniture Market, Fung Businesss Intelligence 
Centre, Global Retail & Technology 
[62] Brown, S. K. (1999). Chamber Assessment of Formaldehyde and VOC Emissions from Wood-Based 
Panels. Indoor Air,9(3), 209-215.  
[63] Anonymous. Timber as a sustainable building material (n.d.). Timber in Ecologically Sustainable 
Development, Chapter 3 
[64] Annonymous (n.d.). Creating Healthier Furniture and Building Materials by Minimizing Chemical 
Emissions. UL LCC 
[65] Rumchev, K. (2004). Association of domestic exposure to volatile organic compounds with asthma 
in young children. Thorax,59(9), 746-751.  
[66] Beyer, G. (2006). Tackle climate change: Use wood. Brussels: European Parliament.  
[67] Šimek, M., Haviarová, E., & Eckelman, C. (2008). The end distance effect of knock-down furniture 
fasteners on bending moment resistance of corner joints. Acta Universitatis Agriculturae Et 
Silviculturae Mendelianae Brunensis,56(2), 203-210.  
[68] Hill, C. A., & Dibdiakova, J. (2016). The environmental impact of wood compared to other building 
materials. International Wood Products Journal,7(4), 215-219. 
[69] Parikka-Alhola, K. (2008). Promoting environmentally sound furniture by green public 
procurement. Ecological Economics,68(1-2), 472-485.  
[70] Gamage, G. B., Boyle, C., Mclaren, S. J., & Mclaren, J. (2008). Life cycle assessment of commercial 
furniture: A case study of Formway LIFE chair. The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment,13(5), 
401-411.  
[71] Shine, K. P. (2009). The global warming potential—the need for an interdisciplinary retrial. Climatic 
Change,96(4), 467-472.  
==PAGE:113==
106 
 
[72] Prasittisopin, L., & Li, K. (2010). A new method of making particleboard with a formaldehyde-free 
soy-based adhesive. Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing,41(10), 1447-1453.  
[73] Jahanshaei, S., Tabarsa, T., & Asghari, J. (2012). Eco‐friendly tannin‐phenol formaldehyde resin for 
producing wood composites. Pigment & Resin Technology,41(5), 296-301.  
[74] Athanassiadou, E., Nakkos, P. (n.d.), Formaldehyde-free composite wood products for improved 
indoor air quality, CHIMAR HELLAS S.A 
[75] Dunky, M. (2003). Adhesives in the Wood Industry. 70. 10.1201/9780203912225.ch47. 
[76] Salthammer, T., Mentese, S., & Marutzky, R. (2010). Formaldehyde in the Indoor 
Environment. Chemical Reviews, 110(4), 2536–2572.  
[77] 
Sandberg, 
D. 
(2016). 
Additives 
in 
Wood 
Products—Today 
and 
Future 
Development. Environmental Footprints and Eco-design of Products and Processes Environmental 
Impacts of Traditional and Innovative Forest-based Bioproducts,105-172.  
[80] Bramorski, T., Madan, M., Motwani, J., & Sundarraj, R. (2000). Improving competitiveness of 
ready‐to‐assemble 
manufacturers 
through 
information 
technology. Logistics 
Information 
Management,13(4), 201-209.  
[78] Ramage, M. H., Burridge, H., Busse-Wicher, M., Fereday G., Reynolds, T. Shah, D. U., Wu, G., 
Fleming, P. Densley-Tingley, D., Allwood, J. Dupree, P., Linden, P. F., Scherman, O. (2016). The wood 
from the trees: The use of timber in construction, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 1(68), 
2017, 333-359, ISSN 1364-0321,  
[79] Akers, L. (1966). Methods of Manufacture. Particle Board and Hardboard,12-39.  
[80] Slater, R., & Frederickson, J. (2001). Composting municipal waste in the UK: Some lessons from 
Europe. Resources, Conservation and Recycling,32(3-4), 359-374.  
[81] European Commission (2000), Success stories on composting and separate collection, Directorate- 
General for the Environment, Compost brochure 
[82] European Union (1999), Council Directive 1999/31/EC of 26 April 1999 on Landfill of waste, Official 
Journal of the European Communities  
[83] European bioplastics e.V. (2015), Home Composting – Fact Sheet 2015 
[84] Rahman, F., Tomlinson D. (2018). Cross countries: international comparisons of intergenerational 
trends, LIS Working papers 732, LIS Cross-National Data Center in Luxembourg. 
Cross countries International comparison of intergenerational trends 
==PAGE:114==
107 
 
[85] Brown, J., Apostolova, V., Barton,C., Bolton, P., Dempsey, N., Harari, D,. Hawkins, O., McGuinness, 
F., Powell, A. (2017). Millennials, creators. (2017) House of Commons Library: Briefing paper: Number 
7946, 11 April 2017: Millennials, UK Parliament House of Commons 
[86] Cornier, D., Harrysson, O., (n.d.), Mass Customization Via Rapid manufacturing, Department of 
Indsturail Engineering, North Caraolina State University 
[87]Blumer Lehmann AG, (n.d.), Building with wood, Timber Construction 
[88] Grimsel, M. (1999). Mechanisches Verhalten von Holz: Struktur- und Parameteridentifikation 
eines anisotropen Werkstoffes. Dresden: W.e.b. Universitätsverlag. 
[89] Köhl, M., & Rametsteiner, E. (2009). The State of Europe’s Forests: 2007 – Report of the Fifth 
Ministerial Conference on the Protection of Forests in Europe for Sustainable Forest Management in 
Europe. Sustainable Forest Management in a Changing World: A European Perspective Managing 
Forest Ecosystems,53-60.  
 
[90] Kretschmer, D. E. (2010),  Wood as an engineering material – Chapter 5, Mechanical Properties of 
Wood, U.S. Department of Agriculture  
[91] Smardzewksi, J. (2016). FURNITURE DESIGN. Place of publication not identified: SPRINGER 
INTERNATIONAL PU. 
[92] Frihart, C. R., Hunt, C. G. (2010), Wood as an engineering material – Chapter 10, Adhesives with 
wood materials : bond formation and performance Properties of Wood, U.S. Department of Agriculture 
[93] J. J. Haines & Co. Inc, Common adhesives problems - Guideslines 
[94] Annonymous, (n.d.), Furniture Industry Sector– Final Report, Academy of Sciences malaysia, Mega 
Science 3.0 
[95] Taeusch, D. R., & Ruselowski, J. M. (1987). Laser material processing. Dearborn, MI: Society of 
Manufacturing Engineers.  
[96] Touretzky, D., 99-353 SolidWorks and Laser Cuttinger – Kerf and Joinery (Fall 2016), Computer 
Science, Carnegie Mellon University  
[97] Martínez-Conde, A., Krenke, T., Frybort, S., & Müller, U. (2017). Review: Comparative analysis of 
CO2 laser and conventional sawing for cutting of lumber and wood-based materials. Wood Science 
and Technology,51(4), 943-966.  
[98] Koo, B., Hergel, J., Lefebvre, S., & Mitra, N. J. (2017). Towards Zero-Waste Furniture Design. IEEE 
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,23(12), 2627-2640.  
==PAGE:115==
108 
 
[99] Centre for European Studies (CEPS), Demetra, Centre for Industrial Studies (CSIL),  (2015), The EU 
Furniture market situation and possible furniture products imitative – final report, Directorate- 
General for Enterprise and Industry (European Commission) 
[100] Donatello, S., Moons, H., Cordella, M., Kowalksa, M. A., Kaps, R. B., Wolf, O., Hidalgo, C., Fuentes, 
N. (2014), Revision of EU Ecolabel and EU Green Public Procurement criteria for furniture products, 
JRC Science for Policy Reports, Publications office of the European Union,  
[101] Freitas, V. D., Delgado, J. M., & Machado, N. (2015). Wood Dimensional Changes due to 
Hygrothermal Behaviour. Defect and Diffusion Forum,365, 172-177.  
[102] Crowson, R. (2006). The handbook of manufacturing engineering. planning and instructional 
methods. Boca Raton, FL: CRC/Taylor & Francis. 
[103] Gomeringer, R., Heinzler, M., Kilgus, R., Menges, V., Oesterle, S., Rapp, T., Wieneke, F. 
(2018). Mechanical and Metal Trades Handbook. Haan: Europa-Lehrmittel. 
[104] Wang, Y., & Lee, S. (2014). Design and Analysis on Interference Fit in the Hardwood Dowel-glued 
Joint by Finite Element Method. Procedia Engineering,79, 166-172.  
[105] Environmental impact of metals derived from mining activities: Processes, predictions, 
prevention. (1996). International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences & Geomechanics 
Abstracts,33(1).  
[106] Bosch, P., Kuenen, J. (2009). Greenhouse gas efficiency of industrial activities in EU and Non-EU, 
European Commission  
[107] Patel, K. S., Sharma, R., Dahariya, N. S., Yadav, A., Blazhev, B., Matini, L., & Hoinkis, J. (2015). 
Heavy Metal Contamination of Tree Leaves. American Journal of Analytical Chemistry,06(08), 687-693.  
 
[108] Bronstein, A.S.. (1991). Temporary Work in Western Europe: Threat or Complement to 
Permanent Employment?. International Labour Review. 130. 291-310. 
 
[109] Smith, K. T., & Brower, T. R. (2012). Longitudinal study of green marketing strategies that 
influence Millennials. Journal of Strategic Marketing,20(6), 535-551.  
 
[110] Endresen, Ø. (2003). Emission from international sea transportation and environmental 
impact. Journal of Geophysical Research,108(D17).  
 
[111] Anonymous (2017), World furniture Outlook 2017/2018 New 100 Countries Edition, CSIL Milano. 
 
[112] Shadman, F., & Mcmanus, T. J. (2004). Comment on “The 1.7 Kilogram Microchip:  Energy and 
Material Use in the Production of Semiconductor Devices”. Environmental Science & 
Technology,38(6), 
1915-1915.  
 
==PAGE:116==
109 
 
[113] Tuck, C. J., Hague, R. J., Ruffo, M., Ransley, M., & Adams, P. (2008). Rapid manufacturing 
facilitated customization. International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing,21(3), 245-258.  
 
 
[115] Joy, A., Sherry, J. F., Venkatesh, A., Wang, J., & Chan, R. (2012). Fast Fashion, Sustainability, and 
the Ethical Appeal of Luxury Brands. Fashion Theory,16(3), 273-295.  
 
[116] Hey, J., Linsey, J., Agogino, A., Wood, K. (2008). Analogies and Metaphors in Creative Design. 
International Journal of Engineering Education. 24. 
 
[117] Bonnardel, N. (2000). Towards understanding and supporting creativity in design: Analogies in a 
constrained cognitive environment. Knowledge-Based Systems,13(7-8), 505-513. 
 
[118] Andreasen, M. M., Hansen, C.T., Cash, P. (2016). CONCEPTUAL DESIGN. Place of publication not 
identified: SPRINGER INTERNATIONAL PU. 
 
[119] Boeijen, A. V., Daalhuizen, J., Zijlstra, J., Schoor-Rombouts, R. V., Zijlstra, Y., & Kuntonen, J. 
(2016). Delft design guide: Design methods, Delft university of technoloy, faculty of industrial design 
engineering. Amsterdam: BIS. 
[120] Harmsen, J. (2013). Ideation and Research Stages. Industrial Process Scale-up,15-44.  
 
[121] Suwa, M., Gero, J. S., Purcell, T. A. (2006). The Roles of Sketches in Early conceptual Design 
Processes, Department of Architectural and Design Sciences, Universtiy of Sydnee, NSW 
 
[122] ULMA (n.d.). Beams and Wood boards for Formwork, Product catalogue 
[123] Solenis (2015). SOYAD™ Adhesive Technology – The natural choice for engineered wood flooring, 
Technology catalogue, SOYAD. Solenis 
[124] Mathiowetz, V.,  Kashman, N., Volland, G., Weber, K., Dowe, M., Rogers, S. (1985). Grip and Pinch 
Strenght: Normative Data for Adults, Occupational therapy program, University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee 
[125] Stenn, T. L. (2016). Focus on the Business Model Canvas. Social Entrepreneurship as Sustainable 
Development,55-89.  
 
[126] Ponsi, A., & Shugaar, A. (2015). Analogy and design. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press. 
 
[127] Vaysse, L., Bonfils, F., Sainte-Beuve, J., & Cartault, M. (2012). Natural Rubber. Polymer Science: 
A Comprehensive Reference,281-293.  
 
[128] Mooibroek, H., & Cornish, K. (2000). Alternative sources of natural rubber. Applied Microbiology 
and Biotechnology,53(4),  
 
[129] Lewis, P. (1980). Laboratory testing of rubber durability. Polymer Testing,1(3), 167-189.  
 
[130] Wolff, S. (2017). Final Report - 42575 Technology and Innovation Management 
==PAGE:117==
110 
 
[131] Wenzel, H., Hauschild, M., & Alting, L. (1997). Environmental assessment of products: Volume 1 
Methodology, tools and case studies in product development. Boston: Kluwer Academic. 
[132] Herzog, T., Natterer, J., Schweitzer, R., Volz, M., & Winter, W. (2013). Holzbau Atlas. Basel: 
Birkhäuser Verlag. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:118==
111 
 
11 Internet References 
[www1] 
Millennials 
Infographic. 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
April 
20, 
2018, 
from 
http://www.goldmansachs.com/our-thinking/pages/millennials/  
[www2] Henderson, J. M. (2017, May 01). Millennials Are Moving For A Good Time, Not A Long Time. 
Retrieved 
June 
16, 
2018, 
from 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/jmaureenhenderson/2017/04/30/millennials-are-moving-for-a-good-
time-not-a-long-time/#55edd25f9bbc 
[www3] Millennials 
Favor "Vacation Moves". 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
May 12, 2018, 
from 
https://www.mayflower.com/contact-mayflower/news/vacation-moves-insights 
[www4] The Design Process: What is the Double Diamond? (n.d.). Retrieved from 
https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/news-opinion/design-process-what-double-diamond 
[www5] A. (2015, November 11). Millennials Drive One-Bedroom Apartment Trend, But That Might 
Change. 
Retrieved 
June 
24, 
2018, 
from 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/axiometrics/2015/11/11/millennials-drive-one-bedroom-apartment-
trend-but-that-might-change/#7ce1564739a9  
[www6] The Rise of One-Person Households. (n.d.). Retrieved June 24, 2018, from 
http://www.ipsnews.net/2017/02/the-rise-of-one-person-households/  
[www7] People in the EU - statistics on household and family structures. (n.d.). Retrieved July 31, 2018, 
from 
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=People_in_the_EU_-
_statistics_on_household_and_family_structures  
[www8] M. (2015, January 29). How Many Times Does The Average Person Move? Retrieved April 13, 
2018, from https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/how-many-times-the-average-person-moves/ 
[www9] Thompson, D. (2014, April 24). The Unluckiest Generation: What Will Become of Millennials? 
Retrieved May 14, 2018, from https://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2013/04/the-
unluckiest-generation-what-will-become-of-millennials/275336/  
[www10] People in the EU - statistics on household and family structures. (n.d.). Retrieved May 15, 
2018, from http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=People_in_the_EU_-
_statistics_on_household_and_family_structures#Single-person_households 
[www11] 
Millennials 
Infographic. 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
May 
20, 
2018, 
from 
http://www.goldmansachs.com/our-thinking/pages/millennials/  
==PAGE:119==
112 
 
[www12] Henderson, J. M. (2017, May 01). Millennials Are Moving For A Good Time, Not A Long Time. 
Retrieved 
April 
16, 
2018, 
from 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/jmaureenhenderson/2017/04/30/millennials-are-moving-for-a-good-
time-not-a-long-time/#4db0d3e69bbc 
[www13] The Copenhagen Post - Danish News in English. (n.d.). Retrieved April 17, 2018, from 
http://cphpost.dk/news/danish-youth-are-euro-champs-at-escaping-from-their-parents.html  
[www14] Flammia, L. (2017, April 14). A Furniture Retailer's Guide to Winning the Millennial Consumer. 
Retrieved April 16, 2018, from https://www.blueport.com/blog/furniture-retailers-guide-to-the-
millennial-consumer/ 
[www15] United Nations sustainable development agenda. (n.d.). Retrieved May 24, 2018, from 
https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/development-agenda/ 
[www16] Reporters, T. (2017, September 25). Eight out ten people believe recycling 'makes a 
difference',but 
have 
no 
idea 
how. 
Retrieved 
May 
24, 
2018, 
from 
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2017/09/25/eight-ten-people-believe-recycling-makes-
difference-have-no/ 
[www17] Consumers Overwhelmingly Believe Recycling is Important. (2016, April 06). Retrieved May 
24, 
2018, 
from 
https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20160406005465/en/Consumers-
Overwhelmingly-Recycling-Important 
[www18] Municipal waste generated by country in selected years. (n.d.). Retrieved May 25, 2018 from 
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/images/3/33/Municipal_waste_generated_by_country_in_selected_years_%28kg_per_ca
pita%29%2C_1995_-_2016.png 
[www19] WB Update Says 10 Countries Move Up in Income Bracket. (n.d.). Retrieved April 20, 2018, 
from 
http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2015/07/01/new-world-bank-update-
shows-bangladesh-kenya-myanmar-and-tajikistan-as-middle-income-while-south-sudan-falls-back-
to-low-income  
[www20] 
Inclusion 
Insights. 
(2018, 
July 
20). 
Retrieved 
June 
19, 
2018, 
from 
https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/pages/about-deloitte/articles/millennial-majority-transforming-
culture.html 
[www21] Millennials And Their Societal Impact. (2017, September 14). Retrieved June 18, 2018, from 
https://www.theodysseyonline.com/millennials-and-their-societal-impact  
==PAGE:120==
113 
 
[www22] Stahl, A. (2016, May 06). A Millennial Manifesto: Why Gen Y Will Change The World. 
Retrieved June 18, 2018, from https://www.forbes.com/sites/ashleystahl/2016/04/28/a-millennial-
manifesto/#3d41a1e02616  
[www23] Weinswig, D. (2016, February 18). Seismic Shift To Millennials Driving Dramatic Changes In 
U.S. 
Furniture 
Market. 
Retrieved 
May 
20, 
2018, 
from 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/deborahweinswig/2016/02/15/seismic-shift-to-millennials-driving-
dramatic-changes-in-us-furniture-market/#279313941cab  
[www24] An economic trend that ensured British prosperity for the last 136 years just went into 
reverse. (n.d.). Retrieved May 18, 2018, from http://nordic.businessinsider.com/millennials-uk-first-
generation-1800s-do-worse-than-parents-resolution-foundation-2017-2?r=UK&IR=T  
[www25] 
Municipal 
waste 
statistics. 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
April 
7, 
2018, 
from 
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Municipal_waste_statistics  
[www26] 
Our 
low 
prices 
- 
IKEA. 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
May 
6, 
2018, 
from 
https://www.ikea.com/ms/en_SG/about_ikea/the_ikea_way/our_business_idea/our_low_prices.ht
ml  
[www27] 
Top 
25 
U.S. 
furniture 
retailers. 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
June 
8, 
2018, 
from 
http://www.furnituretoday.com/article/481737-top-25-us-furniture-retailers/ 
[www28] Leland, J. (2002, December 01). How the Disposable Sofa Conquered America. Retrieved May 
12, 
2018, 
from 
https://www.nytimes.com/2002/12/01/magazine/how-the-disposable-sofa-
conquered-america.html  
[www29] Understanding Single vs. Dual Stream Recycling. (2017, July 14). Retrieved June 6, 2018, from 
https://www.vangelinc.com/single-vs-dual-stream-recycling/ 
[www30] Hasse, E. S. (2017, August 29). Ein Drittel der Studenten ist verschuldet - WELT. Retrieved 
June 12, 2018, from https://www.welt.de/print/die_welt/hamburg/article124570384/Ein-Drittel-der-
Studenten-ist-verschuldet.html 
[www31] J. (n.d.). 2017 and the return of craftsmanship. Retrieved July 12, 2018, from 
https://www.insitegraphics.co.uk/2017/04/04/2017-and-the-return-of-craftsmanship/ 
[www32] 4. Keeping it real sub-trend Craftsmanship. (n.d.). Retrieved July 12, 2018, from 
http://www.bordbiaconsumerlifestyletrends.ie/4-keeping-it-real-sub-trend-craftsmanship/  
==PAGE:121==
114 
 
[www33] Fairs, M. (2017, March 10). IKEA to introduce furniture that snaps together in minutes 
without requiring tools. Retrieved April 20, 2018, from https://www.dezeen.com/2017/03/06/ikea-
introduce-furniture-snaps-together-minutes-without-requiring-tools/  
[ywww34] Instructables. (2017, November 08). Woodworking: Making Wood Projects Without Using 
Nails, Screws, or Glue. Retrieved July 19, 2018, from http://www.instructables.com/id/Woodworking-
Making-wood-projects-without-using-na/ 
[www35] Trotec Laser Cutting & Laser Engraving Machines. (2018, July 24). Retrieved July 25, 2018, 
from https://www.troteclaser.com/en-au/laser-machines/laser-cutters-sp-series/  
[www37] Focus Laser Group Pty Ltd. (n.d.). The Power of Light. Retrieved July 25, 2018, from 
http://www.focuslaser.com.au/accuracy  
[www38] Laser Cutting Machine - Co2 Laser Cutting Machine Manufacturer from Mumbai. (n.d.). 
Retrieved July 25, 2018, from http://www.quicksoftpro.in/laser-cutting-machine.html 
[www39] Laser Cutting Melbourne | Lighting Laser Cutting. (n.d.). Retrieved July 25, 2018, from 
https://www.lightninglaser.com.au/ 
[www40] 
Laser 
cutting. 
(2018, 
July 
27). 
Retrieved 
July 
25, 
2018, 
from 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laser_cutting  
[www41] 
Wooden 
pins 
and 
drawboring. 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
May 
26, 
2018, 
from 
http://www.craftsmanspace.com/knowledge/wooden-pins-and-drawboring.html 
[www42] 
The 
bad 
effects 
of 
water. 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
June 
28, 
2018, 
from 
http://www.wbpionline.com/features/the-bad-effects-of-water//image/the-bad-effects-of-water-
72224.html  
[www43] 
Green 
Public 
Procurement. 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
June 
20, 
2018, 
from 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/gpp/index_en.htm  
[www44] 
Your 
key 
to 
European 
statistics. 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
April 
18, 
2018, 
from 
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/about/overview 
[www45] Volatile organic compound. (2018, July 27). Retrieved June 16, 2018, from 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Volatile_organic_compound 
[www46] Pure Glue Eco Poplar Throughout Plywood. (n.d.). Retrieved June 24, 2018, from 
https://hanson-plywood.co.uk/products/pure-glue-eco-poplar-throughout-plywood/ 
==PAGE:122==
115 
 
[www47] 
Millennials. 
(2018, 
July 
20). 
Retrieved 
April 
27, 
2018, 
from 
http://www.pewresearch.org/topics/millennials/ 
[www48] 
Millennials. 
(2018, 
July 
30). 
Retrieved 
June 
30, 
2018, 
from 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Millennials 
[www49] Gapper, J. (2018, June 06). How millennials became the world's most powerful consumers. 
Retrieved June 15, 2018, from https://www.ft.com/content/194cd1c8-6583-11e8-a39d-4df188287fff 
[www50] Belvedere, M. J. (2018, March 13). Real estate economist: Home prices are increasing twice 
as 
fast 
as 
income 
growth. 
Retrieved 
May 
16, 
2018, 
from 
https://www.cnbc.com/2018/03/13/economist-home-prices-are-increasing-twice-as-fast-as-income-
growth.html  
[www51] 
P. 
(n.d.). 
Navigation 
und 
Service. 
Retrieved 
May 
28, 
2018, 
from 
https://www.destatis.de/DE/ZahlenFakten/GesellschaftStaat/EinkommenKonsumLebensbedingunge
n/AusstattungGebrauchsguetern/Tabellen/Unterhaltungselektronik_D.html  
[www52] 
Housing 
statistics. 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
June 
14, 
2018, 
from 
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=Housing_statistics 
[www53] Home. (n.d.). Retrieved July 28, 2018, from https://www.werkhaus.de/ 
[www54] IKEA-great design or planned obsolescence? (n.d.). Retrieved July 13, 2018, from 
http://www.ethicsingraphicdesign.org/ikea—great-design-or-planned-obsolescence/  
[www55] Quality Solid Furniture vs. Planned Obsolescence. (2016, August 03). Retrieved July 13, 2018, 
from http://www.dapwood.com/quality-solid-furniture/ 
[www56] Modern design: Longevity versus obsolescence. (2014, October 17). Retrieved July 13, 2018, 
from 
http://midcenturymagazine.com/furniture-objects/modern-design-longevity-versus-
obsolescence/  
[www57] Sustainable Development Goals.:. Sustainable Development Knowledge Platform. (n.d.). 
Retrieved May 24, 2018, from https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/?menu=1300 [www58] 
https://www.plm.automation.siemens.com/global/en/our-story/glossary/digital-
manufacturing/13157 
[www59] Designs, P. (2018, March 22). Modular Home Office Furniture - The Upcoming Trend – 
Pinkapple 
Designs 
– 
Medium. 
Retrieved 
July 
3, 
2018, 
from 
https://medium.com/@pinkappleoriginaldesigns/modular-home-office-furniture-the-upcoming-
trend-7c9258d763a3  
==PAGE:123==
116 
 
[www60] Chan, K. (2017, December 08). Design trends for 2017 include modular furniture and bright 
hues. 
Retrieved 
May 
12, 
2018, 
from 
https://www.scmp.com/magazines/style/tech-
design/article/2096472/design-trends-2017-include-modular-furniture-and-bright  
[www61] Select your location. (n.d.). Retrieved July 12, 2018, from https://hay.dk/ 
[www62] Home PAge. (n.d.). Retrieved July 12, 2018, from https://www.tomdixon.net/ 
[www63] These Mesmerizing GIFs Illustrate the Art of Traditional Japanese Wood Joinery. (2016, 
October 07). Retrieved July 10, 2018, from https://www.archdaily.com/796918/these-mesmerizing-
gifs-illustrate-the-art-of-traditional-japanese-wood-joinery 
[www64] 
Soyad™ 
Adhesive 
Technology. 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
July 
12, 
2018, 
from 
https://solenis.com/en/industries/specialties-wood-adhesives/innovations/soyad-adhesive-
technology 
[www65] Suppliers of a complete range of panel products and a service tailored to individual customer 
requirements. (n.d.). Retrieved May 24, 2018, from https://hanson-plywood.co.uk/ 
[www66] Anywheres vs Somewheres: The split that made Brexit inevitable. (n.d.). Retrieved from 
https://www.newstatesman.com/politics/uk/2017/03/anywheres-vs-somewheres-split-made-brexit-
inevitable 
[www67] Freedland, J. (2017, March 22). The Road to Somewhere by David Goodhart – a liberal's 
rightwing 
turn 
on 
immigration. 
Retrieved 
July 
31, 
2018, 
from 
https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/mar/22/the-road-to-somewhere-david-goodhart-
populist-revolt-future-politics  
[www68] Woodwork - Butt Joint information and Pictures. (n.d.). Retrieved April 1, 2018, from 
http://www.woodworkbasics.com/butt-joint.html 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:124==
117 
 
12 List of Figures 
Figure 1- Double Diamond Methodology [www4] .................................................................................. 3 
Figure 2 Five Feed Chain [118] ........................................................... Fehler! Textmarke nicht definiert. 
Figure 3 Key Environmental Impact of Furniture [57] ........................................................................... 13 
Figure 4 Problem Solution Space .......................................................................................................... 14 
Figure 5 Environmental Impact of Materials [130] ............................................................................... 15 
Figure 6 Municial waste treatment in EU-28 states [www25] .............................................................. 17 
Figure 7 Formaldehydes emitted by Material [69] ............................................................................... 20 
Figure 8 DEPEST Trend Analysis ............................................................................................................ 27 
Figure 9 Personas created ..................................................................................................................... 34 
Figure 10 Wedge Dowel System IKEA ................................................................................................... 37 
Figure 11 Werkhaus Product Examples ................................................................................................. 38 
Figure 12 Principles of Force Transmission [132] .................................................................................. 39 
Figure 13 Traditional Wood Joint Connections [www48] ..................................................................... 40 
Figure 14  Mortise and Tenon Joint combined with Wedge ................................................................. 41 
Figure 15 Japanese Wood Joint [www63] ............................................................................................. 41 
Figure 16 Sliding Dovetail Joint ............................................................................................................. 42 
Figure 17 3 Axis Laser Cutter Movements............................................................................................. 45 
Figure 18 Swellign Behaviour of Plywood ............................................................................................. 46 
Figure 19 Shelf Examples ....................................................................................................................... 56 
Figure 20 Average Grip strength in pounds [124] ................................................................................. 57 
Figure 21 Backpack and IKEA bag .......................................................................................................... 58 
Figure 22 Inspirational Moodboard ...................................................................................................... 58 
Figure 23 Sizes and Prices of Pure Glue Plywood .................................................................................. 59 
Figure 24 Analogies ............................................................................................................................... 60 
Figure 25 Products and Sketches reviewed Part 1 ................................................................................ 63 
Figure 26 Products and Sketches reviewed Part 2 ................................................................................ 64 
Figure 27 C-BOX focused on innovativeness ......................................................................................... 64 
Figure 28 C-Box focusing on functionality ............................................................................................. 66 
Figure 29 SWOT analysis Product 1 ....................................................................................................... 68 
Figure 30 SWOT Analysis Product 2 ...................................................................................................... 70 
Figure 31 SWOT Analysis Product 3 ...................................................................................................... 71 
Figure 32 SCAMPER  exercise ................................................................................................................ 73 
Figure 33 Concept 1 ............................................................................................................................... 76 
Figure 34 Concept 2 ............................................................................................................................... 77 
Figure 35 Concept 3 ............................................................................................................................... 78 
Figure 36 Concept 4 ............................................................................................................................... 79 
Figure 37 WOM ..................................................................................................................................... 81 
Figure 38 Selected Concept ................................................................................................................... 83 
Figure 39 Modularisation ...................................................................................................................... 84 
Figure 40 Proof of Concept Pin Connection .......................................................................................... 85 
Figure 41 Renderings Modularized Concept ......................................................................................... 86 
Figure 42 Table application ................................................................................................................... 86 
Figure 43 Customized Bar sizes ............................................................................................................. 87 
Figure 44 Dimensioning of transportable concept ................................................................................ 88 
Figure 45 Value Proposition Canvas ...................................................................................................... 90 
Figure 46 Business Model Canvas ......................................................................................................... 90 
==PAGE:125==
118 
 
Figure 47 Single modular cuboid and shelf example ............................................................................ 91 
 
