==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Learning Heuristics for Planning using Neural
Networks
Federico Bergamin (s162924)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone ￿45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
An important component towards the creation of intelligent agents is to make them
effectively reason about what actions to take in order to reach a specific goal in a
wide range of domains. This is the aim of Automated Planning (AP). Most planners
nowadays are based on a logical representation of the domain, i.e. action/transition
model, which allows them to automatically derive a heuristic to guide the search.
When this kind of description is not given or it is difficult to be defined the only
alternative is to manually derive a domain-specific heuristic. This is also the case
when the derived heuristic is not so efficient. However, ideally it could be desirable
to learn it, instead of hand-crafting it.
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) have been used to automatically extract
features from data, reaching state-of-the-art performances in a lot of tasks and do-
mains. In addition to that, they are important components of recently successful
systems used in reinforcement learning.
In this thesis, we proposed three CNN architectures that learn effectively a heuris-
tic function for the Sokoban domain. We analyzed different scenarios that vary in
terms of complexity and level size and we compared the learned heuristic with three
different hand-crafted domain-dependent heuristics.
Experimental results show that the learned heuristic can improve the performance
of a planner in solving Sokoban level instances in terms of number of expanded and
generated nodes.
The quality of the created dataset and the depth of the CNN
structure play an important role in the accuracy of the learned heuristic.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a MSc degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, July 30, 2018
Federico Bergamin (s162924)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors, Professor Thomas Bolander and Ph.D. student
Andrea Dittadi, for the interesting discussions and helpful comments, and especially
for their guidance during this project. I would also thank the DTU Compute Embed-
ded System Engineering section, in the person of Jan Madsen, for allowing me to use
a desk in their space during the development of this project.
Being a student abroad is not always easy, thus I would like to thank everyone
that makes me feel like home during this experience. I met a lot of people during this
two years both here in Denmark and in Canada that helped me a lot to go through
this experience and that were a big source of inspiration for me, each one in a different
and personal way. I would also like to thank you all my friends in my hometown, that
are always waiting for me even if I spend most of the year far from them.
Last but not least, I am greatly indebted to my family. Their unconditional love
and support mean everything to me.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Automated Planning
3
2.1
Planning domains and planning problems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Graph search algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Neural Networks
15
3.1
Linear models and their limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Regression error function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Network training and parameter optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5
Regularization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Convolutional Neural Networks
33
4.1
Architecture overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
The convolution operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Inside a convolutional neural network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
An outsider’s tour of learning heuristic functions 1
43
6
Learning a heuristic for the Sokoban domain
47
6.1
Datasets creation process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.2
Input representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.3
Skip connections in NN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
1All the rights for the title go to Benjamin Recht, http://www.argmin.net/2018/06/25/
outsider-rl/
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6.4
Network architectures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7
Results and discussion
61
7.1
Model selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.2
Baselines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.3
Accuracy of the learned heuristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.4
Performances of the learned heuristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.5
Important factors for learning a heuristic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
7.6
Things that did not work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
8
Conclusion
79
A Additional plots
81
A.1 Error distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
A.2 Expanded nodes missing plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.3 Generated nodes plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.4 Solution length plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
B Additional experiments
87
B.1
How does the ResNet really perform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
B.2
Using non-optimal solution lengths to learn a heuristic . . . . . . . . .
88
C Proofs
91
C.1 Consistency implies admissibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
Bibliography
93
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Among the goals of Artificial Intelligence (AI) there are the understanding of in-
telligence and the creation of intelligent agents. Planning, which is the deliberation
process that chooses actions foreseeing their outcomes to reach a goal, is an important
component of a rational behavior. There are a lot of real-world situations in which an
agent needs to plan in order to perform a task, such as robot manipulation and path-
planning robots. Unfortunately, planning has been shown to be a PSPACE-complete
problem when the domain is defined using the STRIPS representation.
Most state-of-the-art planners used nowadays are based on the idea of forward
state-space heuristic search [SK13] and on a lifted representation of the planning do-
main, which allows to define the domain in an exponentially more compact way. The
heuristic function, which plays an important role on the performance of a planner,
should ideally be both easy to compute and accurate. An easy-to-compute and inac-
curate heuristic sometimes is preferable to a precise heuristic function that requires
a lot of time to be computed.
The good performance of these state-of-the art planners is also due to their ability
to automatically derive a domain-independent heuristic in a wide range of domains, for
example by considering a relaxation or an abstraction of the problem domain. From
the domain definition, expressed in a lifted representation, one creates a relaxed state
space that is easier to search. The exact solution in the relaxed domain can be used
as an admissible heuristic in the original domain. However, this type of approach
is not always flawless, and there exist domains in which the evaluation returned by
the relaxed problem results in a poor guidance for the search algorithm, leading to a
planning failure. Examples of such domains are those in which there is a strong sub-
goals interaction [Jim+12]. Another drawback is that sometimes solving a problem
in the relaxed domain requires to solve a NP-hard problem, which is intractable in
terms of time complexity making it preferable to solve it in a greedy way. However,
by doing this, we lose the guarantee of admissibility of the automatically derived
heuristic.
Alternative approaches we could use, when we are dealing with a domain in which
the automatically derived heuristic does not perform well, or when we have no lifted
domain representation, are to manually hardcode a domain-dependent heuristic or to
define the problem in such a way that reinforcement learning techniques are applicable.
Ideally, in this scenario, we would like to learn a heuristic function instead of manually
creating it, since in some domains it is difficult to write a useful heuristic. In addition
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
to that, learning it will result in a more straightforward method.
The remarkable success of deep learning techniques, such as deep neural networks
and convolutional neural networks (CNN), across various disciplines encourages us
to investigate with this thesis to what extent these can be used to learn a heuristic
function. We chose the Sokoban domain to test the capability of CNNs to provide
an effective heuristic in terms of planning performance, since it was proved to be a
challenging domain for both the domain-dependent heuristic [JS97] [JS01] and the
domain-independent one, as can be seen from the poor results obtained in the IPC
2008 by the best planners, which were unable to solve all problems.
The thesis continues as follows: Chapter 2 provides a background in automated
planning, Chapter 3 introduces the main concepts of supervised learning and the
basic theory behind neural networks for regression.
Chapter 4 presents the main
notions of convolutional neural networks, and Chapter 5 provides a literature review
of learning heuristic functions. In Chapter 6 we present the setting of the project,
we describe how we generated the dataset used to train our CNN, and discuss the
different architectures considered as well as the two different input representations
used to encode the input. In Chapter 7, we evaluate the accuracy of our learned
heuristic in comparison with three domain-specific heuristics used as baselines, and
its effectiveness when embedded in a planner. Factors that affect the performance
of our heuristic are mentioned, as well as approaches that did not work. Finally, in
Chapter 8 we summarize the results, and analyze pros and cons of our approach.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Automated Planning
Planning is the reasoning side of acting, that is, devising a plan of action to achieve
one’s goal [RN16][GNT04]. In artificial intelligence, automated planning refers to the
deliberation process of an agent that aims to generate a sequence of actions (a plan)
by anticipating their expected outcomes to achieve a specific goal state. Given an
initial state, all the states reachable by executing any sequence of actions from it
form the state space of the problem. Large state spaces represent the main limita-
tion of classic search-based problem-solving agents, when they use blind lookahead
algorithms for action selection, becoming intractable and requiring efficient domain-
specific heuristics to make planning feasible even in small domains. A* and greedy
best-first search are search algorithms that use a heuristic function to guide the search
through the state space of the problem. To overcome the drawback of manually gen-
erating heuristics for every new domain, planning researchers introduced a factored
representation of the planning problems, in which states are represented by a col-
lection of variables. These planning languages, such as PDDL (Planning Domain
Definition Language)[McD+98], are based on the STRIPS language1[FN71] and they
allow one to automatically derive domain-independent heuristic functions. In this
chapter, as well as in the rest of the thesis, we are considering environments that are
fully observable (i.e. the agent can access the complete state of the environment at
each point in time, there is nothing it does not know), deterministic (i.e. the agent
knows exactly the effects of an action in the environment, there is no stochasticity),
static (i.e. the state does not change while the agent is deliberating, it is the only
actor in the environment) and in which there is only one agent. Most of the notions
we are going to present are taken from the artificial intelligence textbook by Russel
and Norvig [RN16].
Grid world domain
Before explaining the main concepts more in depth, we intro-
duce a simple toy problem that is going to be used as a running example, especially
when we explain the PDDL language. We consider an agent in a grid world, where
there are only walls, free cells, and a goal cell, that has to be reached by the agent.
The domain could be expressed in a more structured way using logic, defining a set
of predicates and constants. We denote with the constant Ci,j the cell in row i and
column j, using the unary predicates Free(x) and Wall(x) to represent that x is a
1First introduced as the planning component in the software of the Shakey Robot project at SRI
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Automated Planning
free cell or a wall. The unary predicate AgentAt(x) is used to state if the agent is
in cell x and similarly GoalAt(x) for the goal. We use the constants N (North), S
(South), E (East), W (West) to indicate the directions, and the ternary predicate
Neighbour(x, y, d) to state that cell x is a neighbor of cell y along the direction d.
The agent has only the action Move available, that makes it move one step in the
chosen direction.
2.1
Planning domains and planning problems
In this section, we are going to introduce a formal definition for a planning problem.
We will focus on the PDDL representation of a planning problem since most of the
state-of-the-art planners are based on it. This is later going to be used to briefly
explain how these planners can automatically derive heuristic functions in a wide
range of domains.
In general, a planning problem can be formally defined as a tuple (S, A, T , C, G, s0)
where S is a finite set of states, A is a finite set of actions, T : S × A →S is a tran-
sition function, C : S × A →(0, ∞) is a cost function, G ⊆S is a set of goal states
and s0 is the initial state. In this work, we consider T to be deterministic, where
T (s, a) is the state2 reached from s taking action a, and C to be simply 1 for each
action applied in a state. In this way, the cost of reaching the goal from the initial
state would be simply the length of the action sequence.
In case we use a STRIPS-based representation, like PDDL for example, we first
define the planning domain as a tuple (F, A, C), where F is a set of predicates, A a
set of action schemas3, and C a cost function as above. This describes the dynamics
of the environment and how an agent can act in it. A specific problem inside this
domain is defined as a tuple (s0, sg, O) with s0 being the initial state, defined using
atoms, sg describing the goal as a conjunction of literals (negative or positive atoms),
and O being a set of objects/constants. Therefore, the set of states that satisfy the
goal can be written as G = {s ∈S : s |= sg}, that is the set that contains every state
s in which sg holds.
In our simple grid world, the set F contains the predicates AgentAt(x), GoalAt(x),
Free(x), Wall(x), Neighbour(x, y, d) while A contains only one action schema,
the one referred to the action Move. Given an instance of this domain, we have
that the set O contains the cells (C1,1, C1,2, ...) and the directions (N, S, E, W),
while s0 is a conjunction of positive, function-less atoms, that are the predicates
in F, grounded using the objects o ∈O.
2We can define T (s, a) for each pair (s, a), with T (s, a) = s if the action a is not applicable in s,
or we can define a partial mapping, which means considering the T (s, a) for only the actions a that
could be executed in s.
3We use the same notation for both the set of actions, as defined before, and the set of action
schemas, when the domain is expressed by a STRIPS-based representation. The context makes the
reader understand to which of these we are referring to.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Planning domains and planning problems
5
In the following, we are going to explain more in detail how we could represent a state
s of the domain, the action schemas structure, and the effects of doing an action a in
a state s. A state is defined as a conjunction of non-negative, function-less, ground
atoms. For an atom to be ground, it must not contain any variables, which must
be substituted by constants o ∈O of the domain. The closed-world assumption is
used: all ground atoms that are not stated to be true by the state description s are
assumed to be false. We also work under the unique names assumption, meaning
that two different objects must have different names. A state s could be represented
also as a set of atoms, rather than a conjunction of atoms, which can be modified
using set operations. This becomes useful when we have to update a state s, given
the effect of an action a.
Consider an initial state s0 of our toy domain as a 4 × 4 grid with walls only
along the square sides (we have a 2 × 2 free-space area in the middle) with the
agent and the goal occupying two cells of those available. It could be described
as {Wall(C1,1)∧Wall(C1,2)∧...∧Wall(C4,4)∧AgentAt(C2,2)∧GoalAt(C3,3)∧
Free(C2,3) ∧Free(C3,2) ∧Free(C3,3)}. We cannot have atoms like AgentAt(x)
because it contains a variable or ¬Free(C2,2) because it is negated. The goal
sg is given, in our case, by AgentAt(x) ∧GoalAt(x). A representation of the
running example is shown in Fig. 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Visual representation of our running example. The agent is represented
as a blue circle, and it has to reach the goal cell, colored in yellow. Walls
are in dark gray.
Actions in PDDL are represented by a set of action schemas. Each action schema
consists of an action name, that specifies also the variables used in the schema, the
action preconditions and its effect. Both the precondition, and the effect are expressed
as a conjunction of literals. The former describes when the action is applicable in a
state s, while the latter specifies what changes in s after its execution. The action
model is a lifted representation, since it lifts the reasoning level from propositional
logic to a small subset of first-order logic. In other words, the action schema could
be seen as an abstraction of ground actions. Indeed, it expresses both preconditions
and effects using variables, allowing us to ground, or instantiate, different actions,
substituting each occurrence of a variable in the model with the same constant from
the problem’s object set.
If an action schema uses v different variables and the
problem has n constants, |O| = n, there are O(nv) possible instantiations. This also
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Automated Planning
represents the complexity of finding all the possible ground actions given an action
schema.
We say that a ground action a ∈A is applicable, i.e. can be executed, in state s if
and only if the state s entails its (ground) preconditions. We denote all the applicable
actions in a state s with the set A(s) ⊆A. Formally we could write:
a ∈A(s) ⇐⇒s |= Precond(a)
(2.1)
Calling q the literals of Precond(a) and using set semantics, applicability could be
assumed if every positive literal of q is in s, while every negated literal is not.
In our simple domain, the action schema for our action Move could be:
Action(Move(x, y, d)),
Precond: AgentAt(x) ∧Free(y) ∧Neighbour(x, y, d)
Effect: ¬AgentAt(x) ∧¬Free(y) ∧AgentAt(y) ∧Free(x)
We could get a ground action initializing the variables with objects o ∈O of
the domain. For example, in the 4 × 4 grid described above, we have only two
possible applicable actions: Move(C2,2, C2,3, E) and Move(C2,2, C3,2, S). Other
instantiations of the action schema do not have all the preconditions satisfied
in the initial state s0.
We can use the set semantics also to explain the result of executing an applicable
action a ∈A(s) in state s. The effects of an action a are defined, as its preconditions,
as a conjunction of literals. We can divide them into an add list Add(a) and a delete
list Del(a). The former contains all atoms that appear as positive literals in the
Effect(a), whereas the latter contains all atoms that are negated. Add(a) can be
seen as the atoms that come to hold after executing a, whereas Del(a) represents
the atoms that no longer hold after the execution. We denote with s′ = Succ(s, a)
the result state we reach executing a in s. This is similar to the transition function T
defined at the beginning of this section for a more general description of a planning
problem, but in this case the state s′ is not define for an action a that is not applicable
in a state s. This is a partial mapping. s′ is represented by the ground atoms that
we obtain starting with the atoms of s and then removing the atoms of Del(a) and
adding the atoms that are in Add(a).
s′ = Succ(s, a) = (s −Del(a)) ∪Add(a)4
(2.2)
Consider again our running example.
Suppose that the agent decides to do
Move(C2,2, C2,3, E), which we have already shown to be applicable. The Add
and Del are given by:
4This notation is to be referred to the case in which we are using a forward state-space search.
PDDL description allows us to do a backward state-space search, i.e. starting from the goal, the aim
is to find a sequence of action to reach the initial state. In that case, the update of the new state s′
is given by s′ = (s −Add(a)) ∪Precond(a)
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Graph search algorithm
7
Add(a) = {AgentAt(C2,3), Free(C2,2)}
Del(a) = {AgentAt(C2,2), Free(C2,3)}
Thus, the new state s′ = (s0 −Del(a)) ∪Add(a) can be described as the set
{Wall(C1,1), Wall(C1,2), ..., AgentAt(C3,2), GoalAt(C3,3), Free(C2,2), Free(C3,2)}
In PDDL description, the goal is defined, just like the precondition, as a conjunction
of literals that could contain variables. The literals can be positive or negative and
they declare which atoms should hold in the goal state. Variables have to be treated
as existentially quantified. We reach the goal state if and only if we reach a state
s′ in which the goal holds, or in case of the presence of variables, there is a state in
which, an instantiation of the variables using the constants of the planning problem,
i.e. the ground atoms of the goal, holds. We can formalize a goal test function as a
function g : S →{true, false}.
In the grid domain, we saw that the goal is expressed by the literals AgentAt(x)∧
GoalAt(x) and contains the variable x. In our case we have only one instantia-
tion of x that could be found in a state s ∈S. In case we have k goal cells, we
have k possible goals that could be reached.
The aim of automated planning is to find a plan that could lead from an initial
state to a goal state. We have just presented how an agent could see the environment
in logical form and execute actions in it. The solution to a planning problem, therefore,
is a sequence of ground actions that, from the initial state, lead the agent to the goal
state.
In our running example, one possible solution to the simple path-finding prob-
lem, is given by the following sequence of ground actions: {Move(C2,2, C2,3, E),
Move(C2,3, C3,3, S)}. Obviously this is only one of the possible solutions, an-
other one being {Move(C2,2, C3,2, S), Move(C3,2, C3,3, E)}.
We did not say anything about how an agent, in every state, decides which action
to take. Search plays a big role in automated planning. This is also called progression
planning or forward state-space search: starting from the initial state s0, an agent
searches the state space S in order to reach the goal. Therefore, a planning problem
can be seen in terms of a search problem.
2.2
Graph search algorithm
Given a planning problem, we saw that it is possible to formulate it as a search
problem, where we start from an initial state s0 ∈S and search for a goal through
the state space S.
In each state s, the action schemas allow an agent to derive
A(s), the set of applicable actions in that specific state, and generate the successor
state given the executed action, Succ(s, a). These two are necessary for an agent to
simulate the environment, anticipating the effects of its actions. Starting from s0 an
agent can generate all the states it can reach from there, and then for each new state
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Automated Planning
it could generate the successors and go on. Formally, given a state s ∈S an agent
can generate:
Succ(s) = {Succ(s, a) : a ∈A(s)}
(2.3)
which are all the successors of a state s. Repeating this step for all s′ ∈Succ(s),
we can notice that the possible action sequences, which we are generating, form a
search tree structure, where the nodes correspond to the states of the state space of
the problem and the edges are the applicable actions. The root of this tree is given by
the initial state s0. The procedure of finding the applicable actions and creating the
successors of a state is called expansion. During this step, we add branches from the
parent node, i.e. the current state, to each new child node, i.e one for each state in the
Succ(s) set. All the leaf nodes of the tree, which are all states that we have created
during the expansion of the parent node but we have not yet expanded, form the
frontier. This is the core of the tree search algorithms. A drawback of this approach
is that it has no memory, indeed, we are not keeping track of states that we have
already visited. Thus, it could happen that we expand more than once the same node,
and explore its related sub-tree again. To avoid such redundant paths, we augment
the tree-search algorithm with a new data structure that remembers the expanded
nodes. This is called explored set. The new algorithm is called Graph-Search and
we are going to report its pseudocode formulation in algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Graph-Search
function Graph-Search(s0, Succ, G)
frontier ←{s0}
explored ←∅
while true do
if the frontier is empty then return failure
Choose a leaf node sL from frontier
frontier ←frontier \ {sL}
if sL contains goal state then return solution(sL)
explored ←explored ∪{sL}
children ←Succ(sL)
for sC in children do
if sC not in frontier ∪explored then
frontier ←frontier ∪{sC}
When a node is selected from the frontier, the algorithm checks if its representation
entails the goal literals. If a goal state sg ∈G is reached, a plan is returned, consisting
of a sequence of ground actions a1, a2, ..., an from A, such that a1 is applicable in the
initial state s0 and for i = 1, 2, .., n, ai is applicable in the result of executing the
actions a1, ..., ai−1 in s0. In other words, we could say that a plan is such a sequence
of actions, that executing them from the initial state, we obtain the goal state:
sgoal = Succ(...Succ(Succ(s0, a1), a2), ..., an)
(2.4)
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Graph search algorithm
9
2.2.1
Search algorithms
In the previous section, we explained how the Graph-Search algorithms works. The
last question we have still to answer is which node from the frontier should be chosen
for expansion. In this section we present algorithms that come from two different
search strategies: uninformed search, known also as blind search, and informed or
heuristic search. The algorithms from the first approach have no additional informa-
tion about the states beyond the definition of the problem. They can only generate
the successors and check if they are in a goal state. In the second approach, instead,
the agent has a way to estimate a value of the state, and therefore it knows which
node is more promising to be expanded.
2.2.2
Uninformed search
Breadth-first search (BFS) and Depth-first search (DFS) are the simplest examples of
uninformed search algorithms. In BFS the root node is expanded first, then all its
successors, then their successors, and so on. This way, all the nodes at a given depth
are expanded before the nodes that are in the next levels. Following this description,
the frontier of the Alg. (1) is a FIFO (First in, First out) queue. BFS is complete,
i.e. if there is a solution to the planning problem it will find it. It is also optimal,
that is the found solution is the one with the minimum cost. Assuming unit costs,
this solution will be also the shortest, and this is due to the fact that it expands all
the nodes in order of depth, so there cannot exist a shorter solution than the one
the algorithm finds. Drawbacks of this approach are the time and space complexity,
which for both is O(bd), where b is the branching factor of the tree, i.e. the maximum
number of successors of any state, and d the depth of the goal state, which is also the
number of actions in the shortest solution.
DFS always chooses to expand one of the deepest nodes in the frontier of Alg.
(1), which is the most recently generated. Thus, the frontier could be implemented
as a LIFO (Last In, First Out) queue. Starting from the root, the search reaches the
deepest level of the search tree, until it finds a leaf that has no successors. After that,
the algorithm backtracks to the deepest node in the frontier that is not expanded.
Since we are using Alg. (1) and we are avoiding redundant paths, we have that DFS
is complete in finite state space. Indeed, it could eventually expand every node. In
contrast to BFS, DFS is not optimal. Searching for the goal state preferring depth
instead of breadth can make it find a goal state in a deeper level than the optimal goal
node. Calling m the maximum depth of any node, with m ≥d, we have that the time
complexity is O(bm), which is worse than BFS, because in the worst case it searches
through the whole state space. The space complexity is also O(bm), which is due
to the size of the explored-set, that we used to avoid redundant paths and therefore
loops. But since DFS explores a single path a time, we need to keep in memory only
the nodes related to that path. This allows us to reduce the space complexity to
O(bm). If there are many solution paths, DFS can be much faster than BFS.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Automated Planning
2.2.3
Heuristic search
It is clear that the exponential time and space complexity of those algorithms are
major problems, making even simple domains infeasible to be solved. The use of
problem-specific knowledge can help in finding a solution more efficiently. In this
section, we will focus on the best-first search approach. Instead of selecting the nodes
in a blind way, best-first search algorithms select the next node to be expanded based
on an evaluation function f(n), which can be seen as a cost estimate. f(n) becomes
the value of the key of the node n in the frontier of Alg.
(1), implemented as a
priority queue. Thus, the node with the lowest f(n) is chosen for expansion. The
heuristic function h(n) tries to estimate the cost of the cheapest (or shortest, in our
case) path from the node n to the goal state. That is, if h(n1) < h(n2), this means
that we estimate that reaching the goal from n1 is cheaper than from n2. Since the
cost cannot be negative, we assume that h(n) is a non-negative function that assigns
a value of 0 to a goal state, which reflects the definition of heuristic, since being in
a goal state requires no actions to reach a state in which the goal is satisfied. Most
best-first search algorithms consider it as an important component in computing the
evaluation function f(n) of a node. Two examples of best-first search approaches are
Greedy best-first search and A* search.
Greedy best-first search uses the heuristic value h(n) directly as evaluation value,
formally f(n) = h(n). That means that the algorithm always selects for expansion
the node that is estimated to be closest to the goal. Thus, at each iteration of Alg. (1),
it tries to get as close as possible to the goal state, that is why it is called greedy. Due
to its greediness, it is a non-optimal algorithm. Indeed, ignoring the cost of getting
to the node n from the initial states and expanding always the most promising node
in the frontier, taking into account only the heuristic value, could make it miss some
paths that come from a more expensive decision at the beginning. It is complete only
in finite state spaces, since it won’t get stuck into a loop.
A* search on the other hand, takes into account the cost of getting to the node as
well the heuristic value of it, which is the estimated cost of getting to the goal from
there. Formally the evaluation function f(n) is given by f(n) = h(n) + g(n), where
h(n) is the heuristic value as explained above and g(n) is the path cost to get to the
node from the root taking into account the taken path. Indeed, a cost is associated
to each edge of the graph, which represents the cost of executing a in a certain state s
as defined by C. Therefore g(n) is the sum of all the state-action pair costs that lead
to the node n from the root. In case of unit costs, g(n) is equivalent to the number
of actions taken to reach the node n from the root, considering the taken path. Thus,
f(n) is an approximation of the total cost of the cheapest solution that goes from
the root n0 to a node with the goal state ng passing through n. A* always expand
the node with the lowest f(n), which is the node that seems to return the cheapest
solution considering it in the solution path. This approach results to be both optimal
and complete, when used in combination with the Graph-Search algorithm, if the
heuristic we choose is consistent. To understand when a heuristic h(n) is consistent5,
5This condition is required only when Graph-Search is used. If the memory-less Tree-Search
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Graph search algorithm
11
we have to consider each node n in the state space, and its successors n′, as we defined
them in Eq. (2.3). Denoting with c(n, a, n′), the cost of reaching n′ from n using
action a, to be consistent the heuristic has to satisfy:
h(n) ≤c(n, a, n′) + h(n′)
(2.5)
that is, the estimated cost of reaching the goal state from n (h(n)), has to be lower
than the cost of going to any of its successors (c(n, a, n′))6 plus the estimated cost
of reaching the goal from the new node (h(n′)). It could be proved by induction
that admissibility follows from consistency (see Appendix C.1), which means that a
consistent heuristic never overestimate the cost to reach the goal.
2.2.3.1
Domain-independent heuristics
The factored representation of a planning problem and the use of action schemas
introduced by STRIPS-based languages, described in Section 2.1, allows to automat-
ically create and use domain-independent heuristics for planning problems. That is
preferable instead of manually hand-crafting heuristics for each new domain we have
to solve. Admissibility and consistency are necessary to find an optimal solution us-
ing A* search. Most admissible heuristics can be derived considering a relaxation of
the planning problem. Thinking in terms of graph search, a problem becomes easier
adding more edges or grouping nodes together. The cost of solving the simplified
problems becomes the heuristic value of the original one.
One technique from the first approach is the ignore preconditions heuristic, which
drops all preconditions from the action schemas.
As effect, every action becomes
applicable in every state and any goal literals could be satisfied in one step. This
means that the exact cost of solving the relaxed problems is almost the number of
unsatisfied goals. Indeed, we could have situations in which one action can satisfy two
goal literals or, on the opposite, one action could undo an already satisfied goal while
satisfying another. Therefore, a similar approach consists in ignore the precondition
and also the effects in the action schemas that are not literals in the goal. In this case,
the solution to the relaxed problem would be the number of actions that, considering
the union of their effect, satisfies the goal. This is a set cover problem instance, which
is NP-hard. We could use a greedy approach to solve this, but, by doing it, we lose
admissibility in favor of tractability.
Recalling our toy example and its only action schema for Move, if we apply the
ignore preconditions heuristic technique, we get the heuristic value by solving a
relaxed problem in which we have the following action:
Action(Move(x, y, d)),
Precond: -
is used, only admissibility is required to obtain an optimal solution.
6There might be more than one action that leads from n to n′, and in that case the inequality
must hold for all of them.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Automated Planning
Effect: ¬AgentAt(x) ∧¬Free(y) ∧AgentAt(y) ∧Free(x)
Instead, if we consider the second approach, taking into account that the literals
contained in our goal are AgentAt(x) and GoalAt(x), the action schema of Move
becomes:
Action(Move(x, y, d)),
Precond: -
Effect: AgentAt(y)
In both cases, in the relaxed state-space, out agent can reach the goal in one
step, since it is not longer required that two cells are close to each other along
one of the directions. While using the first approach, in the resulting state s′
the starting cell of the agent is made free again, in the second case we have that
the agent is in two different positions.
Another technique is the ignore-delete-lists heuristic, in which we remove all the
negated literals from the effect of the actions. This is equivalent to set all Del(a) to ∅,
which is the reason for the name. We could solve the relaxed problem and the solution
cost of solving it will be used as h(n) in our original problem. The heuristic calculated
using this approach is admissible if and only if goals and action preconditions contain
only positive literals. If those contain negative literals, it is possible to represent the
problem using only positive literals, transforming the negative one into a positive one
that represents the negative meaning of the original. The drawback is that also this
approach, as the two presented before, is NP-hard.
In our grid domain, we can see that both our goal and action precondition
contain only positive literals.
Therefore, the action schema for the relaxed
problem would be:
Action(Move(x, y, d)),
Precond: AgentAt(x) ∧Free(y) ∧Neighbour(x, y, d)
Effect: AgentAt(y) ∧Free(x)
In this case, the preconditions have to hold for the action to be applicable, but
in the effect we are not considering the delete list, therefore the agent is in two
different positions and the position reached by the agent is still seen as free.
Although relaxing the actions gives us a simpler problem, computing the heuristic
value is still expensive, since for both presented approaches we have to solve an NP-
hard problem only to get the value for one state. Since planning problems can have a
very large state space, these techniques do not help us with the time complexity. The
approaches we present now, try to relax the problem by reducing the number of states
in the state space, in order to make it easier to find a goal state. The first intuition
is to ignore some atoms, consider only part of the problem and get a cost for that
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Graph search algorithm
13
part. This would obviously be an admissible heuristic for the original formulation,
since solving only a subpart of the problem cannot be more expensive than solving
it entirely. This leads us to the idea of decomposing the problem into different parts,
solving them independently and then combining them again.
A major constraint
is introduced by the subgoal independence assumption – the cost of achieving the
conjunction of subgoals g1 ∧g2 ∧... ∧gn is approximated by ∑n
i=1 cost(gi). It could
be both optimistic, and thus admissible, and pessimistic.
If all the sub-goals are
independent, or there are negative interactions between them (for example solving
a sub-goal undo another one) the heuristic will be admissible. In case of redundant
actions, which are actions that are taken into account in two sub-plans but that can
replace by only one action in the merged plan for example, the value returned as
heuristic will overestimate the optimal solution. Therefore, using this assumption
makes our heuristic not admissible. A simple trick to make the heuristic admissible is
to consider only the max cost between the sub-goals, but in practice the lower bound
would be too low for an heuristic to be efficient [RN16].
A system that uses a domain-independent heuristic is the FastForward planner
[HN01], also simply called FF. This is a forward state-space planner that uses the
ignore-delete-lists heuristic, estimated using a particular data structure known as
planning graph. To find a solution plan, it uses hill-climbing search with the computed
heuristic, using iterative deepening search when it reaches a local-maximum during
the search. Some of these concepts are not mentioned in this chapter because they
are beyond the scope of this thesis.
==PAGE:24==
14
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Neural Networks
In this chapter we guide the reader through some important machine learning notions,
which will be useful to understand the core of the work presented in this thesis. We
will start by introducing the concepts of supervised learning and regression, and then
we will explain briefly the reasons why neural networks are so widely used nowadays
and give some mathematical formulation of what happens inside a neural network.
Although neural networks and similar approaches are used for different tasks, such as
classification and unsupervised learning, we will focus on the regression task, since it
will be the only approach used in this work. References used for writing this chapter
are [Bis06], [GBC16], [Gro18], [Sch17].
3.1
Linear models and their limitations
The aim of a supervised learning algorithm is to take features of objects and corre-
sponding labels as input and find a model that can predict the label for new objects.
If the label is categorical, we speak of a classification problem, whereas when the label
is real-valued, we have a regression problem. More formally, in the simplest setting,
we define the d × 1 vector xi ≡(xi1, ..., xid)T to be the features or explanatory vari-
ables of the example/object i in the training set. The training set, therefore, is a n×d
matrix X, where each row xiT represents a training example of the problem. The cor-
responding labels, or response variables, are given by the n×1 vector y ≡(y1, ..., yn)T ,
i.e. yi is the label of the example xi. Using this mathematical notation, in supervised
learning, we want to find a model that, given a new unlabeled example x, which is not
contained in the training set, predicts a label ˆy. In general, in regression, we assume
that there is some relationship between the explanatory variables and the labels that
can be written in a very general form by:
y = f(x) + ϵ
(3.1)
where f is some fixed but unknown function of the features and ϵ is a random error
with mean zero. To be able to estimate the unknown function f, which corresponds
to finding a function ˆf such that y ≈ˆf(x) for any observation (xi, yi) in the training
set, we should make assumptions about its form. From now on, we will indicate the
approximate function learned by the model as ˆy = ˆf(x, w), where w is the vector
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Neural Networks
of parameters of the model. Further in this chapter we will use the function f to
define the objective function of a model, which is given by the loss function plus a
regularization term. This second term will be introduced in Section 3.5. To avoid
misunderstanding, we will use ˆy to refer to the output of a model, which depends
both from the input data x and the parameters w.
A very simple assumption is to consider f linear in x and w, that is:
f(x) = w0 + w1x1 + ... + wdxd
(3.2)
This is a linear model, and if the labels are real-valued, what we are trying to solve
is a linear regression problem. The parameters w are the regression coefficients, or
weights of the model, and w0 is called bias, also known as intercept. A simple trick
to add the bias is to consider an extra feature xi0 that is equal to 1, and include w0
in the vector w. The goal is to use the training set observations xi and the relative
labels yi to estimate the value of the parameter w, such that
yi ≈w0 + w1xi1 + ... + wdxid = wTxi
for i = 1, ..., n
(3.3)
Given the parameters w, then the output of the model, ˆy, is given by:
ˆyi = w0 + w1xi1 + ... + wdxid = wTxi
for i = 1, ..., n
(3.4)
For the whole dataset, we can write:
ˆy = Xw
(3.5)
The most common approach to fitting the model, i.e.
estimating the parameters
vector w, is (ordinary) least squares – we find the parameters that minimize the sum
of squares of the residual of each training example. In general, with residual we mean
the difference between the true label and the one predicted by the model. We will
present this approach more in depth further in this section.
Being a linear function of the input variables xi1, ..., xid is a strong limitation for
the power of the model. Indeed, this approach allows us to fit only linear functions.
Therefore, if the true relationship between inputs and targets is not linear, with the
model just presented, the fitting we obtain is not satisfactory. We can extend the
class of models to learn nonlinear dependences using a feature mapping, also called a
change of basis, which is a transformation of the features of our observations using
non-linear functions. This way, the output of the model is given by a combination of
non-linear transformations of the input variables, that could be written as:
ˆyi = w0 +
M−1
∑
j=1
wjϕj(xi)
(3.6)
where ϕ(·) are the basis functions that we apply to x and M is the total number of
parameters of the model. To make the mathematical formulation more compact, we
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Linear models and their limitations
17
could define a dummy ’basis function’ ϕ0(x) = 1, so the equation above becomes:
ˆy =
M−1
∑
j=0
wjϕj(x) = wT ϕ(x)
(3.7)
where w = (w0, w1, ..., wM−1)T and ϕ = (ϕ0, ϕ1, ..., ϕM−1)T . We can see that this
model is still a linear model, since it is linear in w. Therefore we can use ordinary least
square to find a solution to this problem. We treat all the ϕi(x) for i = 0, ..., M −1
as different features or explanatory variables.
To give a simple example of the basis function, we assume to deal with a problem
where the observations have only one feature, xi = {xi1}, thus our training set
X is a n × 1 vector. In this scenario, the model of (3.4) allows us to consider
only ˆyi = w0+w1xi1 for each example. But if the relationship between data and
labels is not linear, for example cubic, we want to approximate it with a cubic
polynomial. To do that we define the basis, or feature mapping, as follows:
ϕ(x) =



1
x
x2
x3



In this particular example, ϕj(x) = xj. This way, we can transform our data
using ϕ(x), therefore each observation becomes xi = {1, xi1, x2
i1, x3
i1}. Thanks
to this transformation we have defined a class of models of the form ˆyi = w0 +
w1xi1 + w2x2
i1 + w3x3
i1, which can be simply written as wTϕ(x).
This approach allows us to use linear models even if the real relationship in our data
is not linear, i.e. our model output ˆy can be a non-linear function of the features.
However, this approach works when the true relationship that links our observations
to their labels is known and therefore it requires domain knowledge. More than that,
finding the right basis by hand is hard to do and also time consuming.
We saw that there are functions that cannot be represented by linear models
and a practical workaround is to define a feature mappings, that is, to transform the
original features using non-linear functions. This approach solves part of the problem.
Indeed, the features have to be specified in advance, i.e. we use them to train the
model, therefore we have to know them, and this requires both a lot of engineering
work and domain knowledge, see Fig. 3.1. More than that, it could happen that the
number of features required to represent a specific data-label relationship is very large.
More specifically, the number needs to grow exponentially with the dimensionality d
of the input space.
In the following example, we want to show that finding the right basis is a
difficult task, if it is done by hand. At the same time, it proves the unsatisfactory
result of fitting a linear model when data is not linear.
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Neural Networks
(a) Linear Model
(b) Linear Basis Function Model
Figure 3.1: In (a) we highlight the limitation of linear models. Indeed, we find a straight
line that does not fit the data well. In (b), we use a change of basis and
we notice that the fitting is better, since we capture the oscillations. The
basis used is: w0 + w1x + w2x2 + w3x3 + w4x4 + w5 sin(5x). This shows that
sometimes it is really difficult to do it by hand.
Another possible, but unsupervised, approach is outside the scope of this thesis,
allows us to find a different basis to represent the data. Principal component analysis
(PCA), which is part of the family of methods known as latent factor models, learns
a linear, orthogonal transformation of the data. Then we could use the new represen-
tation of the data to do linear regression as described before. The problem with this
approach is that a good representation of the data can be a bad representation for
predicting the labels.
Neural networks, the main topic of this chapter, can jointly learn both the new
representation, or basis, and the regression weights based on the original data and
their labels. From the next section, we explain the structure and the mathematical
formulation behind neural networks, also called multilayer perceptrons.
3.2
Neural Networks
Here we introduce the basic neural network model, that is made up of three layers: an
input layer, a hidden layer, and an output layer, as it can be seen in Fig. 3.21. Each
layer contains in general a different number of units or neurons. In the classification
scenario, the output layer contains one unit per class, whereas in the regression con-
figuration it is a single neuron. The mathematical notation we introduce is related
to the regression task. Since each unit of one layer is connected to every unit in the
1Nowadays, most neural networks are made up of several hidden layers. Because of this, these
are called deep neural networks. We present the basic architecture for the clarity of the notation.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Neural Networks
19
next layer, the network is also called fully connected. The number of layers is known
as depth2 and the number of neurons in each layer is called width.
xi1
xi2
xid
ai1
ai2
ai3
aik
zi1
zi2
zi3
zik
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
hidden layer
input layer
yi
output layer
xi0
zi0
W
v
h( )
h( )
h( )
h( )
Figure 3.2: Graph representation of the basic neural network. The matrix W con-
tains the weights of the connections between each input unit and all
units of the hidden layer (all the weights connected to ai1 are in the
first row). The vector v is the vector of the regression parameter, called
w in Eq. 3.4. In this case we call it v to avoid misunderstanding with
the rows of the matrix W. Green nodes are the biases and the arrows
represent the information flow during forward propagation.
The basic neural network can be described as a series of functional transformations.
Starting from the input layer, we have to compute the value of all the hidden units aij,
also known as activation, as a linear combination of the input variables xi1, ..., xid.
If we consider an example xi, we get3:
aij =
d
∑
p=1
wjpxip + wj0
for j = 1, ..., k
(3.8)
where k is the number of hidden units in the layer. In case we have more than one
hidden layer, we would use a superscript (i), where i is the layer number, above the
2The terminology for depth is very inconsistent. The network we are presenting in this section
is sometimes called one-layer network or three-layer network, depending if you count the input and
output layer or only the hidden layers.
3In the following, we could avoid to deal with the bias wj0 in the notation if we consider it as
an additional unit with activation function fixed at +1.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Neural Networks
weights wji, that is w(i)
ji . This way, we could differentiate the matrix W relative to a
specific layer. Each activation aij is then transformed using a differentiable, nonlinear
function into the output of the hidden layer zij:
zij = h(aij)
for j = 1, ..., k
(3.9)
where h(·) is called activation function. Also in this case, we might distinguish with
a subscript the activation function h(·)(i), since each hidden layer can have different
activation functions. We discuss typical choices for the activation function at the end
of this section. At this point we could compute the value of our simple network in
Fig. 3.2 as a linear combination of the outputs of the hidden layer, using the weights
v:
ˆyi =
k
∑
j=1
vjzij + v0
(3.10)
Substituting zij as defined above, we could write the overall network function for our
basic neural network for regression as:
ˆyi =
k
∑
j=1
vjh
( d
∑
p=1
wjpxip + wj0
)
+ v0 = vT h(Wxi + Iw0
T ) + v0
(3.11)
which is a nonlinear function of the inputs that can be controlled and adjusted by a
set of parameters and I is the identity matrix. The procedure of starting from the
input and computing the value of the model output is called forward pass. This is
related to the propagation of the information through the network and explains the
reason why these networks are also called feed-forward neural networks. Looking at
Eq. (3.11), we can understand why we need the non-linearity transformation of our
activations. Indeed, if we do not write the activation function h(·), or in other words,
we consider h(x) = x, we obtain the following overall network function:
ˆyi =
k
∑
j=1
vj
( d
∑
p=1
wjpxip + wj0
)
+ v0
(3.12)
which is still a linear model (actually we could re-write the overall weights as W′ =
vW) and therefore it has all the limitations we described in the previous section.
The choice of the activation function is made among sigmoidal functions, such as
the logistic sigmoid σ(x) =
1
1+e−x or the hyperbolic tangent tanh(x). Another typical
choice in deep learning, which was used also in our project, is the rectified linear unit
(ReLU) or the leaky rectified variant [MHN13], which are respectively given by:
h(x) = max(0, x)
h(x) = max(ax, x),
with 0 < a < 1
(3.13)
For the latter of the approaches, in the original paper the a was fixed at 0.01, but
new approaches make a a learnable parameter [He+15].
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Regression error function
21
All the proposed activation functions have similar properties. All of them map
the unit activations into a bounded interval (sometimes only lower bounded). While
σ(x) and tanh(x), which are strictly increasing functions, squash the activation into
the interval (0, 1) and (−1, 1) respectively, ReLU keeps only the activation if it is
positive, resulting in neurons with sparse activations since some will be exactly 0.
3.3
Regression error function
To be able to train a neural network, we have to first define a function that measures
how the output of the model ˆy differs from our target, or true value, y for each
example in the training set. This is a measure of the performance of our model, i.e.
how close the predictions are to the real value. This is called loss function4. A simple
approach is to consider the sum-of-squares error function. Considering our n × d
training set matrix X and the respective n × 1 target vector y, we want to minimize
the following function:
f = L(ˆy, y) = 1
2
n
∑
i=1
( ˆyi −yi)2 = 1
2||ˆy −y||2
(3.14)
where the factor of 1/2 makes the calculations convenient.
In the case of linear
regression, which we have explained at the beginning of this chapter, the model
output is given by ˆyi = wT xi, thus, the loss function becomes:
f(w) = 1
2
n
∑
i=1
(wTxi −yi)2 = 1
2||Xw −y||2
(3.15)
which is convex5.
In the neural network case, if we consider our three-layer neural network presented
in Fig. 3.2, we have that the loss function is given by
f(v, W) = 1
2
n
∑
i=1
((vTh(Wxi + Iw0
T ) + v0) −yi)2
(3.16)
4We defined the loss function and then the cost function, which is the loss function plus the
regularization as f(w).
Sometimes the previous addition is also called objective function.
Some
books denote the loss function as E(w).
We mostly denote it using f since we call it objective
function.
5To prove that the objective function is convex, we could start defining g(r) = ||r||2, which is
convex because it is a squared norm, and both norms and squared norms are convex by definition.
Then we consider f(w) = g(Xw −y), which is convex because it is a convex function (g(·)) com-
posed with a linear function, and therefore convex, h(w) = Xw −y. By definition we have that a
composition of a convex function and a linear function is convex.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Neural Networks
We can look at Eq. (3.14) from another perspective, a probabilistic one. This
approach states that we could find the value of the parameters w of the model using
maximum likelihood estimation (MLE). We said at the beginning that in regression
we are assuming that there is a relationship between the data and the target values
described by Eq. (3.1), where we could substitute ˆy = ˆf(x), since, after assuming a
particular shape of the unknown function f(x), we could predict the outcomes of the
model for each example. Therefore:
y = ˆy + ϵ,
with ϵ ∼N(0, σ2)
(3.17)
Since we are assuming that the error ϵ follows the Gaussian distribution, we have
that its probability is
p(ϵi) =
1
√
2πσ2 exp
(
−ϵ2
i
2σ2
)
(3.18)
and moreover, given that the error ϵi for one example can be written as ϵi = yi −ˆyi,
we have also that (yi −ˆyi) ∼N(0, σ2). Thus, this leads to the likelihood of a single
example, that is the probability of that observation given the model, which is a
function of the parameters, as
p(yi|xi, w) =
1
√
2πσ2 exp
(
−(yi −ˆyi)2
2σ2
)
(3.19)
Our dataset, is made up of n examples, but if we assume that all the examples are
independent and identically distributed (IID), we could write the probability of the
dataset, as
p(y|X, w) =
n
∏
i=1
p(yi|xi, w)
(3.20)
which we want to maximize, since we are considering the MLE approach. Equivalently,
we could maximize the log-likelihood6:
log(
n
∏
i=1
p(yi|xi, w)) =
n
∑
i=1
log(p(yi|xi, w))
(3.21)
In deep learning, optimization problems are usually expressed in terms of minimiz-
ing an objective function, therefore, to maximize the log-likelihood is equivalent to
minimize the negative log-likelihood.
If we rewrite the negative log-likelihood, we
6Since the logarithm function is monotonic, we have that if α ≥β, then log(α) ≥log(β).
Therefore, we get the same result using the logarithm.
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Network training and parameter optimization
23
obtain7:
f(w) = −
n
∑
i=1
log(p(yi|xi, w))
= −
n
∑
i=1
log
(
1
√
2πσ2 exp
(
−(yi −ˆyi)2
2σ2
))
= −
n
∑
i=1
[
log(
1
√
2πσ2 ) + log
(
exp
(
−(yi −ˆyi)2
2σ2
))]
= −
n
∑
i=1
[
(constant) −
1
2σ2 (yi −ˆyi)2
]
= (constant) +
1
2σ2
n
∑
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(3.22)
where with constant, we denote something that does not depend on w. Therefore,
finding the value of w using maximum likelihood estimation, which is translated into
finding the minimum of the negative log-likelihood, is equivalent to minimizing the
least squares function (3.14), since the σ2 in front of the sum, being a scalar that
does not depend on the parameters, can be seen as a constant.
3.4
Network training and parameter optimization
We have computed the loss function of our basic neural network in Eq.(3.16) and we
have shown that, to find the value of the parameters W and v of our networks, we
have to minimize the objective function found. A simple idea is to use analytical tools
from multivariate calculus to find the minimum. This means, we could compute the
gradient of our objective function, set it to zero, that is ∇f(w) = 0, and solve for the
parameters. This method is known as direct solution. This really works only for a
handful of models. Linear regression is one of them. If we computed the gradient of
Eq. (3.15) and set it to zero, we would see that the linear system has a closed form
solution.
In contrast to linear regression, the neural network error function is highly non-
convex, and therefore it has many local minima, making its minimization a hard
task. But in practice, if the network is deep and wide enough, all local minima are
considered good, so it is sufficient to find a “good enough” local minimum. However,
we cannot find a stationary point by simply calculating the gradient and setting it to
0 as before. In this scenario, local minima of f(w) are computed using an iterative
approach, such as gradient descent, which we present in the next subsection.
7In the next equation f is the objective function, not the general function of Eq. (3.1)
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Neural Networks
3.4.1
Stochastic Gradient Descent
Gradient descent is an iterative algorithm that uses information given by the gradient
to locate a minimum of the objective function. It is based on a simple observation
related to the meaning of the gradient of a function, which is the slope of the tangent of
the function graph. Indeed, given the parameters w, if the slope ∇f(w) is negative we
can decrease f(w) by making w more positive, whereas if the slope ∇f(w) is positive
we can move the value of w in the negative direction. Formally, gradient descent
uses the value of the gradient to update the weights w in the direction opposite the
gradient, and we could express this concept using the following update rule:
w(τ+1) ←w(τ) −α∇f(w(τ))
(3.23)
or in terms of coordinates of the weights vector:
w(τ+1)
j
←w(τ)
j
−α ∂f
∂wj
(3.24)
where the parameter α > 0 is known as learning rate and τ indicates the iteration
step. We start with some initial guess (usually randomly initialized) for the weights
w(0), then we generate a new guess using Eq. (3.23) and repeat again. More precisely,
after the described update, the gradient is re-computed using the new weights and
the process is repeated until it converges. In Eq. (3.23) we are computing the update
considering the whole training set X at each iteration, and this turns out to be not
so efficient in practice. Indeed, the cost of computing the gradient is linear in n, the
size of the dataset, i.e. O(n). So the bigger the dataset, the more expensive it is
to compute the gradient. Moreover, for large datasets there could be memory issues.
This is known as batch training, since we are treating the whole training set as a
batch.
In practice an on-line version of the gradient descent, called stochastic gradient
descent or sequential gradient descent, is more efficient for training neural networks
on large training sets [LeC+89b][Bot10]. Instead of using the entire dataset, at each
iteration we update the vector w using the gradient computed using only one training
example. This could be picked at random or in sequence. Thus, Eq. (3.23) becomes:
w(τ+1) ←w(τ) −α∇fi(w(τ))
(3.25)
where i indicates the example. This makes the cost of computing the gradient cheaper,
and to make it converge, we should go through the entire dataset multiple times. The
main problem of this approach is that sometimes the gradient of a single example
could point in the wrong direction, but on average, it will point in the right direction.
Indeed, in machine learning, generally our cost function is given by the average of the
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Network training and parameter optimization
25
cost of each example, that is:
f = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
fi
= 1
n
n
∑
i=1
L( ˆyi, yi)
(3.26)
By linearity of derivatives, the gradient computed using the whole training set, is the
average of the gradient computed for single observations:
∇wf = ∇w
1
n
n
∑
i=1
fi
= 1
n
n
∑
i=1
∇wfi
(3.27)
Therefore, even though the gradient of a single training example points in the wrong
direction, when we consider the average of different examples, this is similar to the
full gradient and for this reason, on average, SGD goes in the right direction.
We just presented two completely opposite approaches, but nowadays, in practice,
the minibatch training approach [Ben12][LeC+12], in which we consider a subset of
training examples (usually hundreds) to compute the update, is used.
In summary, each of the cited approaches present pros and cons. We saw that
using the whole dataset gives us the exact value of the gradient, but at the same time,
it could have memory issues and the computational cost grows linearly with the size of
the dataset. Stochastic gradient descent, using only one example per iteration, gives a
poor estimate of the gradient, making it hard to converge and creating fluctuations in
the objective function. Thus, the minibatch approach seems to be a good compromise
between the two, since it allows us to use a better gradient estimate and it is not as
expensive as using the entire dataset.
Both the learning rate and the minibatch size are hyperparameters. These are not
parameters that can be learned by the training process as the normal parameters W
and v, but instead they have to be fixed before the training procedure begins. Other
hyperparameters are the number of units for each hidden layer.
3.4.2
Momentum and adaptive learning rates algorithms
We have presented stochastic gradient descent as an optimization approach to train
a neural network. Anyway, sometimes can be very slow, that is, it takes a lot of time
and a lot of iterations for the algorithm to converge to a local minimum. An approach
to speed up the operations and to decrease the fluctuation in case we have issues like
small but consistent gradients or noisy gradients is momentum [Pol64]. Momentum
proposes a tweak in computing the gradient descent update, giving a short-memory
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Neural Networks
to it. In other words, it accumulates an exponentially decreasing moving average of
previously computed gradients to continue to move in the same direction during the
optimization process8. The update rule is done in two different steps:
z(τ+1) ←βz(τ) −α∇f(w(τ))
w(τ+1) ←w(τ) + z(τ+1)
(3.28)
where if we use β = 0 we get the gradient descent update. The vector z keeps track
of the running average of the gradient. This method is called Stochastic Gradient
Descent (SGD) with momentum. This method helps to reduce the fluctuations of the
optimization process, given the fact that we are using only an estimate of the full
gradient. On the other hand, it adds a new hyperparameter β to tune.
A different approach is to choose an algorithm that uses a separate learning rate
for each parameter and during learning automatically adapts those learning rates.
Algorithms of this type are AdaGrad [DHS11], RMSProp [Hin12] and Adam [KB14].
In the thesis we use Adam, but we have to briefly present the other two approaches
because Adam derives from those. Before going into the explanations of these ap-
proaches, it is useful to recall that the gradient has the following shape:
∇wf = ∂f
∂w =







∂f
∂w1
∂f
∂w2
.
.
∂f
∂wd







(3.29)
AdaGrad keeps track, for each parameter, of the sum of the previous squared
gradients. This means that for each parameters, it computes the sum of all previous
partial derivatives squared. In the update step, for each element of w we are going
to divide the gradient by the square root of its history. Formally, this is:
r(τ+1) ←r(τ) + ∇f(w(τ)) ⊙∇f(w(τ))
w(τ+1) ←w(τ) −
α
δ +
√
r(τ+1) ⊙∇f(w(τ))
(3.30)
where in the second equation the division and the square root are applied element-
wise and δ is a small constant used for numerical stability.
From this, it follows
that parameters associated with large partial derivatives have a big decrease in the
learning rate, whereas weights with small partial derivatives get a smaller decrease in
the learning rate. The drawback is that the learning rate keeps decreasing, since we
are accumulating squared gradient history at each iteration, and because of this the
method works well only with convex functions, having problem with saddle points in
a non-convex scenario.
8To have a more in-depth explanation of the momentum and the reasons why it works, since it
is behind the scope of this thesis, we suggest [Goh17]
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Network training and parameter optimization
27
A slight variation is given by RMSProp, which want to overcome the limitation
of AdaGrad. It still computes the squared gradient at each iteration, but instead of
always summing it to previous values, it lets it decay. This means that we compute:
r(τ+1) ←ρr(τ) + (1 −ρ)∇f(w(τ)) ⊙∇f(w(τ))
(3.31)
where ρ is the decay rate. Intuitively, this is like momentum update applied to the
accumulated squared gradient instead of the actual gradient. This solves the problem
of always decreasing the learning rate and slowing down the optimization problem.
The update step is:
w(τ+1) ←w(τ) −
α
√
δ + r(τ+1) ⊙∇f(w(τ))
(3.32)
Adam incorporates the nice properties of both AdaGrad/RMSProp and momen-
tum to compute the update of the value of each parameter. It computes the z(τ+1)
as in Eq. (3.28), but then in the update step, it divides those by the square root of
the accumulated gradient computed as in Eq. (3.31).
3.4.3
Backpropagation
In this subsection we present error backpropagation [RHW86] as a technique to com-
pute the gradient of the neural network objective function with respect to the param-
eters, which is then used in the update rule of gradient descent (3.23). We consider
the error function of only one observation, i.e. fi(w), and not the entire dataset, since
in Eq.(3.26) we saw that the entire cost function is the average over the cost function
of each term.
In a neural network each unit of a hidden layer is a weighted sum of the inputs.
When we presented the forward pass, we indicate with aij the value of the activation
j using the example i as input. In this section, to keep the mathematical notation
clearer we will refer to it only as aj. This forces us to use fn(w), instead of fi(w)
for the loss function for one example, to avoid confusion with other i. This way, the
activation of a unit is given by
aj =
∑
i
wjizi
(3.33)
for j = 1, ..., k and then each of these units is transformed by an activation function
h(·). From Eq. (3.33), we can derive the following relation:
∂aj
∂wji
= zi
(3.34)
For each unit aj we can introduce its error, which is a measure of how much the
activation of that unit affects the overall error function. This is given by
δj = ∂fn
∂aj
(3.35)
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Neural Networks
Moreover, we can notice that fn depends on the weights wji only through the activa-
tion aj of unit j, so using the chain rule and the formula above, we could write
∂fn
∂wji
= ∂fn
∂aj
∂aj
∂wji
= δjzi
(3.36)
This last equation tells us that, in order to calculate the derivatives, we need to
compute the value δj for each unit, both in the hidden and the output layer, and the
values of zi, their transformation using h(·). Computing the zi is fairly easy, since we
have to apply equations (3.8) and (3.9). We could start by computing the error δ for
the output units, where we know that ak = ˆyk.
δk = ∂fn
∂ak
=
∂
∂ak
1
2
∑
k′
(ak′ −yk′)2 =
∂
∂ak
1
2(ak −yk)2 = ak −yk = ˆyk −yk
(3.37)
In the hidden units, the objective function fn depends on aj only through the output
unit ak, therefore to evaluate the δ’s in this layers, we use the chain rule again:
δj = ∂fn
∂aj
=
∑
k
∂fn
∂ak
∂ak
∂aj
=
∑
k
δk
∂ak
∂aj
(3.38)
We still need to evaluate
∂ak
∂aj .
We know that the output unit, is computed as a
weighted sum of the transformed activations of the previous layer, that is
ˆyk =
∑
j
wkjzj =
∑
j
wkjh(aj)
(3.39)
It follows that
∂ak
∂aj
= wkjh
′(aj)
(3.40)
Thus, substituting the value above in (3.38), we get
δj =
∑
k
δkwkjh
′(aj) = h
′(aj)
∑
k
δkwkj
(3.41)
where the sum is of all the units k connected to unit j. Those could be both units of
a hidden layer and units of the output layer. Eq. (3.41) indicates that the error for a
particular hidden unit depends on the error δ of units that are deeper in the network.
So we are propagating the error from the output layer to all the other units in the
network, in a backwards way. Since we are able to compute the δ’s for the output
units, we can recursively apply (3.41) to compute the value of the δ of the hidden
units.
In summary, to compute the gradient ∇f(w) of the objective function to adjust
the weight values using SGD or one of the other adaptive methods described, we have
to:
==PAGE:39==
3.5 Regularization
29
1. Compute the forward pass using a training example xi = (x1, ..., xd) using (3.8)
and (3.9), so we can compute the value of all hidden and output units.
2. Compute the value of the error δ for the output units using (3.37).
3. Compute the value of the δ for all the hidden units backpropagating the δ of
the output units using (3.41).
4. Calculate the derivatives using (3.36).
3.5
Regularization
At this point, given a training set X of n examples, we have understood how to train
the neural network model using this data, that is, solving the optimization problem
defined by the objective (or loss) function using stochastic gradient descent. But,
when we train a machine learning model, we don’t want it to learn to model and
predict the training data. Our hope is that it will predict the right value also to
unseen data – examples that were not used for training the model. This ability is
known as generalization. To measure the generalization performance of an algorithm,
a separate dataset is used, which is called test set, and we compute the mean square
prediction error (MSPE) on it using Eq. (3.14). If a model works well on the data
used for training it but fails in predicting new examples, we say that it is overfitting
on the training data. On the other hand, we could be in a scenario in which the model
is not able to perform well not even in the training set, this is called underfitting.
The characteristic of a model that controls whether it overfits or not is its capacity
or complexity. This is related to the number of parameters of the model. Indeed, the
more parameters a model has, the wider the variety of functions that it could fit is.
Looking at the two extreme cases, models with high capacity could overfit because
they can memorize properties of the training data that are not necessary to predict
unseen examples, whereas models with very low capacity can have issues even in
fitting the training data9.
In models such as linear regression models, their capacity is given by the number
of parameters, that is the size of the vector w of weights. In this case, it is easy to
play with the model complexity.
For example, if we consider a training set made up of scalar observations (xi, yi),
where yi is the respective target, we could recall our polynomial regression model,
9There are a few ways to see overfitting and underfitting. From machine learning perspective
we could write Etest = (Etest −Etrain) + Etrain = Eapprox + Etrain. Considering this, the error
on the test set could be seen as made up of two parts: an approximation error, that is how well the
training error is an approximation of the test error, and a training error, that is the error on the
training set. Very simple models fit the training set not so well, so they have a small approximation
error but a high training error. Very complex models, instead, can fit the training set very well, so
Etrain is small, but this is not a good approximation of the test error. A similar way, but more
statistical, is the Bias-Variance trade off, but we leave a reference for the reader [Jam+13].
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Neural Networks
given by the application of a particular basis function ϕ(x). That is:
ˆy = w0 + w1xi + w2x2
i + ... + wMxM
i
=
M
∑
j=0
wjxj
i
(3.42)
For different values of M we have completely different models.
Figure 3.3: Polynomial regression models with different capacity.
We can see how the complexity of the model changes considering different values
for M. For M = 0 our model is simply a horizontal line, since we have that the
output does not depend on the input, but it is always equal to the bias w0. In
other words, with M = 0, we could represent only the family of horizontal lines.
A polynomial of degree 1 (M = 1) gives us the possibility to fit both horizontal
and oblique lines, whereas M = 2 increases the family of functions considering
also the quadratic functions, and so on. The more we increase the complexity,
the more our model is able to fit the data. In the figure 3.3, we report only the
model for M = 0, 1, 4, 9.
A naive idea for finding a model that has the right balance between overfitting and
underfitting is to create models with different complexities and choose the one that
works best in terms of performance on a test set. Even though this method works
when we have a dataset that does not change in the future and we are using simple
statistical approaches, it is usually not used in practice.
The complexity of a neural network, instead, is given by the number of all the
weights and all the biases. In addition to that, the random initialization of both of
them could lead the model to converge to different local minima if we repeat the
training more than once. Therefore, in contrast to simple linear models, it is not
reasonable to think about tuning the complexity of a neural network to find a model
that works well on unseen data10.
10This could be done adding a boottleneck layer, which is one layer that contains fewer units
==PAGE:41==
3.5 Regularization
31
In practice, for both simple statistical methods and neural networks, we choose a
relatively complex model and instead of minimizing only the loss function during the
training, we minimize the loss function plus another term, called regularization term
or regularizer. This term penalizes weights with a large value to obtain a model that
would be more stable if the distribution of the data changes. Our objective function
becomes:
f(w) = floss(w) + λfreg(w)
(3.43)
which is also called cost function, and the λ term, sometimes called weight cost, is a
hyperparameter that controls the strength of regularization. This reduces overfitting.
For example, if we consider a set of two weights, learned with the same training
procedure, that links an input of two variables to a single output, as shown in
Fig. 3.4, we can see that for the same training input, (x1 = 1, x2 = 1) they make
the same prediction, which is equal to 2. Since both the training set and the
test set are sampled from the same distribution, we would expect that test set
examples that are close to training set examples have similar outputs. But, in
the example, if we observe a slightly different input in the test set, for example
(x1 = 1, x2 = 0), we get a very different prediction (the first networks predicts
1 and the second -9). The former network seems more stable, while the second
seems to be overfitting the training set (it is like the M=9 linear models in Fig.
3.3), not being able to generalize well in new examples. Therefore we want a
regularization strategy that makes the first pair of weights preferable. Another
example is presented in Section 7.5 of [Mur12].
Figure 3.4: Example of two sets of weights that make the same prediction assuming
x1 = x2. Figure taken from [Gro18].
A standard regularization strategy is the L2-norm regularization, also called weight
decay in the deep learning scenario.
This has the effect of shrinking the weights
towards zero, but never exactly to zero.
freg(w) = 1
2||w||2
2 = 1
2wT w = 1
2
∑
i
w2
i
(3.44)
than the layer after and before it. Indeed, if we have two layers of 100 units each, we have 10000
connections/weights between them. Adding a layer with 10 units between them, we obtain 2000
parameters only.
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Neural Networks
If we consider again the two models represented by Fig. 3.4, we can see the
effect of weight decay when added in the objective function. L2-regularization
tends to favor models where the norm of the weights is smaller. If we consider
λ = 1, the first model gets a penalty of
1
2(12 + 12) = 1, while the second
of
1
2((−9)2 + 112) = 101. Since the objective function contains both the loss
function and the regularization term, the training process will find a compromise
between the quality of the training data fitting and the norms of the weights.
In the case of our basic neural network, we have that the overall objective function
becomes
f(W, v) = 1
2
n
∑
i=1
(vT h(Wxi) −yi)2 + λ1
2
∑
w∈W
w2 + λ2
2
k
∑
i=1
v2
i
(3.45)
where the last two terms are the regularization parameters for our weights W and v
and we are not considering the biases.
A similar approach is to use the L1-norm, also called lasso [Tib96]. In contrast to
the L2-norm, the effect of the L1-norm is to shrink weights exactly to zero. Therefore
we would have a lot of null parameters. This introduces sparsity in the model. The
use of a combination of L1 and L2-norm regularization is called elastic net [ZH05] in
statistics.
Other approaches used to prevent overfitting in the neural network context, are
early stopping [CLG01] and dropout [Sri+14]. The first approach consists in mon-
itoring the validation error11 as we run SGD and stopping the training when the
validation error starts to increase. Even if it sounds simple, this approach is a bit
problematic. Indeed, during the training both the training and validation error fluctu-
ate because of the stochasticity in the gradient. As a consequence of that, we cannot
be sure if the validation error is increasing because of the fluctuation or because we
are overfitting. The second approach, instead, consists in setting to zero input and
hidden units independently at each iteration, according to a decided probability. This
encourages a distributed representation of the relationship between the examples and
their targets.
11We cannot tune the hyperparameters of our model using the test set, otherwise we would be
overfitting on it. Therefore, a new dataset is used, called validation set. We choose the model that
works better on the validation set, hoping that it will perform the same on the test set. If we apply
some transformations to the training set, like the change of basis described before, we should apply
the same transformation also to the validation and test set.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
Convolutional Neural
Networks
In the previous chapter, we presented neural networks as a method that, at the same
time, learns the best linear basis ϕ(x) to transform our input observations and the
weights v to perform regression. They consist of a series of fully connected layers
where each layer is made up of a certain number of units that are connected to all
the ones in the previous layer. While these kinds of layers are useful, sometimes they
have limitations, given by the number of connections and by the fact they require a
vector as input. In case we have to process an image, which usually is stored as a
multi-dimensional array, we have to transform it into a vector and then connect each
unit of the input to all the units in the first hidden layer. While this could still be
manageable for small images, even if the full connectivity would lead to overfitting
due to the huge number of parameters1, regular neural networks do not scale to large
images.
For example, if we used the MNIST dataset [LeC+98] that contains 28 × 28
grayscale images of digits, or the CIFAR-10 [KH09] dataset that has 32 × 32
colored images from 10 different classes, we are still able to use a regular neural
network. For the former, we will have an input of 28×28×1 = 784 units (the ×1
is given because grayscale images consist of only one channel, so an image can
be represented as a 2D matrix) whereas for the latter we have 32×32×3 = 3072
input neurons (RGB images are represented as a 3D matrices, where each 32×32
matrix represent a different channel). While these are still reasonable, if we have
to process a 256 × 256 images with 3 channels, the input layer will have approx.
200000 input units. If the first layer has 10000 neurons, then we have about 2
billions parameters, which could be difficult to store.
In addition to that, if we are processing data, such as images or audio waveforms,
which have a certain intrinsic structure in them, we would like to use it. Flattening
them into a vector makes them lose their structure and the information it carries.
For example, if we think of an RGB image, the pixels at the same location along
the depth represent the view of the object through the red, green and blue channel.
1Since each parameter has a separate weight, we would need a huge number of training examples
to avoid overfitting [Gro18].
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Convolutional Neural Networks
Their order is meaningful, but spreading them into a vector when we flatten the im-
age, makes this information vanish. The same happens if we have two images where
the second is a slight transformation of the first one, for example by shifting a few
pixels. These represent the same data, but in a regular neural network, these appear
as completely different inputs. In this chapter we are going to introduce the reader to
the main concepts regarding convolutional neural networks (CNN) that are necessary
for the remainder of this thesis. Indeed, as shown in the next chapters, we used these
architectures (or different versions of a basic CNN) to learn the heuristic function in
the Sokoban domain.
References used for writing this chapter are [LKJ16], [GBC16], [DV16], and [Gro18].
4.1
Architecture overview
Convolutional neural networks (CNN), introduced in the early nineties [LeC+89b]
[LeC+89a], are a particular type of neural networks for processing data that has an
intrinsic grid-like structure. As regular neural networks, these architectures express a
single differentiable cost function: from the raw representation of the input to the re-
gression value or the classification class, but they overcome some limitations described
above. Their current widespread applications are due to the increase in the compu-
tational power and to the work of [KSH12], in which a CNN beat the state-of-the-art
in the ImageNet image classification challenge. Convolutional networks are simply
neural networks that use convolution instead of general matrix multiplication2 in at
least one of their layers [GBC16]. Before going into the mathematical formulation of
the convolution operations, we want to explain what makes them different from the
networks we presented in the previous chapter, and how they work.
Unlike regular neural networks, the layers of these networks have neurons arranged
in three dimensions: width, height, and depth, usually called activation volume. It
could be easier to think of the activation volume as different 2D activation maps, also
called depth slice or feature map, depending on the reference used, stacked along the
depth. Each neuron of these activation maps is connected only to a spatially localized
region of the input. This local connectivity solves two problem: the non-manageable
number of parameters we would have, if we were to flatten the images and use a
classic neural network, and the complexity of computing the activation of each unit,
since we reduce the number of multiplications required.
Furthermore, each unit in the same activation map shares the same learnable-
weights matrix, called filter or kernel. Therefore, to compute all the units in the
same 2D feature map we multiply element-wise each input region of the same size
of the filters, with the same weight matrix. To do that, we slide the filters above
the input. This CNN property of sharing parameters helps to reduce even more the
2The convolution operation could also be represented by a matrix multiplication, where the
weights matrix is really sparse.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 The convolution operation
35
number of parameters of the model. In the case of an input image with more than
a single channel, like a 3-RGB-channels image, the filter has to have three channel,
where each slice is the weight matrix applied to each different channel of the input.
Some of the notions we introduce in this paragraph are, in reality, hyperparameters
of the model. We should define each filter size, the depth of each activation volume,
and the stride, which is the number of pixels (or more generally positions) we slide
our filter along the width and the height of the input. Some of them play a role in
the dimension of the output volume, that is how many neurons there are and how
they are arranged. We will see more in depth in the convolutional layer section.
Figure 4.1: Parameter sharing between units of the same activation map in a 1D
convolution example. Suppose y0, y1, y2 are units in the same feature
map and x0, x1, x2, x3, x4 are the input units.
In this case y0, y1, y2
share the same weights parameters w1, w2, w3, which is our 1D filter.
We slide the filter with stride 1 in this example.
Figure taken from
[Gro18].
Each feature map of the activation volume can be computed using the discrete
convolution operation between the input and its weight matrix. In the next section
we describe mathematically this operation.
4.2
The convolution operation
The convolution is a mathematical operation on two real-valued functions that comes
from signal processing. If we consider two continuous signals x(t) and w(t), we define
the convolution signal s(t), indicated as (x ⋆w)(t), as:
s(t) = (x ∗w)(t) =
∫
x(τ)w(t −τ)dτ
(4.1)
which is the integral of the product of the signal x and the signal w, after the latter
is reversed and translated. In the discrete case, in which the signals are arrays with
elements denoted as x[t] the convolution becomes the sum instead of the integral:
s(t) = (x ∗w)(t) =
∑
τ
x(τ)w(t −τ)
(4.2)
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Convolutional Neural Networks
Since convolution is commutative, we can rewrite both as:
s(t) = (x ∗w)(t) =
∫
x(t −τ)w(τ)dτ
for the continuous case
s(t) = (x ∗w)(t) =
∑
τ
x(t −τ)w(τ)
for the discrete case
(4.3)
Depending on the formula we choose, there are two possible ways of interpreting
the convolution operation. For Eq. 4.1 and Eq. 4.2, as we already said, we could
think of them as flip-and-filter, which means we generate the signal x ∗w by flipping
w, translating it, and taking the product.
For Eq.
4.3, instead, the approach is
translate-and-scale: we take various copies of the signal x, we translate and scale
them according to w.
In machine learning applications, we use multidimensional discrete data. As we
have seen before, images are stored as 2D or 3D arrays.
Instead of using a one-
dimensional kernel, we use a two dimensional kernel.
In this scenario, instead of
using x and w as signals, we use I as 2D input image and K as 2D kernel. Using this
notation, the formula becomes:
(I ∗K)(i, j) =
∑
m
∑
n
I(m, n)K(i −m, j −n)
(4.4)
or, equivalently, due to the commutative property:
(K ∗I)(i, j) =
∑
m
∑
n
I(i −m, j −n)K(m, n)
(4.5)
It is possible to see that the convolution is commutative because in Eq. 4.4 we are
flipping the kernel relative to the input. This means that when we increase the value
of m, the index of the input increases, but the index of the kernel decreases. This
property is not important for a convolutional network implementation, and because
of this a lot of libraries implement the convolution operation without flipping the
kernel, that is:
(I ∗K)(i, j) =
∑
m
∑
n
I(i + m, j + n)K(m, n)
(4.6)
This is usually known as cross-correlation. The only difference between those two ap-
proaches in a machine learning perspective is that the network will learn two different
kernels, where one can be obtained by flipping the other.
Equation 4.6 is equivalent to the dot product between the sub-input-matrix that
has the size of the filter and the weight matrix itself.
A simple 2D-convolution3
representation is in Fig. 4.2.
3For an animated visualization of the convolution see: https://github.com/vdumoulin/conv_
arithmetic#convolution-animations. For an example of a 3D convolution, instead, see [LKJ16].
==PAGE:47==
4.2 The convolution operation
37
Kernel K
(weight matrix)
Input image I
(two-dimensional array)
Activation 
volume
Figure 4.2: 2D convolution example. This example summarizes what we have ex-
plained so far.
We have our 5 × 5 input image I in light blue, the
learnable weight matrix K in gray, and the output volume in a greenish
matrix. Our activation volume has only 1 channel, therefore it is repre-
sented as a single activation map, with 9 units. Every unit shares the
same weight values, given by K, and they are all connected to a spa-
tially localized region of the input – the darker blue. To compute their
value we do the dot-product between the kernel K and the connected
region. As we are going to see next, if the input images was a RGB,
which means it has 3 channels, also our kernel K would be of depth 3.
If instead, we want our output to have more channels, we have to add
more filters, one for each depth slice of the output. Image taken from
[DV16]. .
We can use Fig. 4.2 to explain how the the green matrix is computed using the
cross-correlation (Eq. 4.6). We show the calculation for the first cell of activation
volume, which is (I ∗K)(0, 0). The kernel is 3 × 3 size, so both m and n can get the
values 0, 1, 2.
(I ∗K)(0, 0) =
I(0, 0)K(0, 0) + I(0, 1)K(0, 1) + I(0, 2)K(0, 2)+
+
I(1, 0)K(1, 0) + I(1, 1)K(1, 1) + I(1, 2)K(1, 2)+
+
I(2, 0)K(2, 0) + I(2, 1)K(2, 1) + I(2, 2)K(2, 2) =
=
3 × 0 + 3 × 1 + 2 × 2 + 0 × 2 + 0 × 2 + 1 × 0 + 3 × 0 + 1 × 1 + 2 × 2
=
12
Then for each (i, j), we should repeat the same process. This is done inside a
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Convolutional Neural Networks
convolutional layer, that we are going to present in more detail in the next Section.
4.3
Inside a convolutional neural network
At this point, we have explained the advantages of using a CNN instead of a regular
neural network for processing images or other inputs that have a 2D or 3D implicit
structure. We could have 3D activation volumes, where their units are connected to
only a small region of the input. This helps us reduce the number of parameters and
make the training faster. We also showed how discrete convolution can be used for
computing the activation value of every unit. We are missing the connection between
the shape of the input, the shape of the kernel/filter, and the size of the output
volume. In addition to that, we have to describe another type of layer that is used in
a CNN, the pooling layer.
Convolutional layers
A convolutional layer in a CNN applies the operation we
described in Eq. 4.6 and explained in Fig. 4.2. It takes a 2D or 3D matrix as input,
and after the convolution it returns another 2D or 3D matrix. Similarly to the fully
connected layers, after the convolution, we apply a non-linear transformation h(·)
element-wise to every unit. We explained how it is characterized by local connections
and parameter sharing, but we have not discussed the size of the output volume
– how many neurons there are in it. This is controlled by three hyperparameters
that have to be set by the user: the volume depth, stride, and zero-padding. As we
have already mentioned before, the depth of an activation volume corresponds to the
number of filters, different weight matrices, we want to use. Looking at Fig. 4.2, if
we add more filters, K1, K2, ..., Km, each one of these creates a 2D activation map.
Stacking them along the depth, we get our final output volume of depth m. The
second hyperparameter is the stride. Common values for the stride are 1 or 2, which
means we move our filter 1 or 2 pixels at a time. The last hyperparameter that is
relevant for the output volume size is the zero-padding size. Indeed, looking again
at Fig. 4.2, we see that, in that example, the output volume is smaller in size than
the input volume. That’s due to the fact that we slide the filter K one pixel at the
time, but only in the positions that contain it as a whole. We cannot compute the
convolution when the filter exceeds the input board. To solve this limitation and keep
the output volume with the same height and width of the input volume we usually
zero-pad the input.
In other words, we make the input wider adding some zeros
around the matrix.
In summary, a convolutional layer accepts an input value of shape w1 × h1 × d1
(where w stays for width, h for height and d for depth) and requires the following
hyperparameters: the number of filters m, their spatial extent f, the stride value s,
and the zero-padding amount p. The convolution between the filters and the input
produces an output volume of size w2 × h2 × d2, where:
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Inside a convolutional neural network
39
w2 = w1 −f + 2p
s + 1
width of the output volume
h2 = h1 −f + 2p
s + 1
height of the output volume
d2 = m
depth of the output volume
Each filter has shape f × f × d1, therefore we introduce in total m × (f × f × d1)
weights and m biases in the model. In the output volume, each activation map at
depth d2i of size w2 ×h2 is the result of a valid convolution between the filter d2i and
the input with stride s.
Pooling layers
In a convolutional network architecture, a common practice is to
insert pooling layers in-between convolutional layers.
These layers summarize the
previous layer’s output volume, after the non-linear transformation, by computing a
simple function over small 2D-regions of it. We could think about it as the example
in Fig. 4.2. We have a filter that slides above the input, and instead of computing the
convolution, it computes another function. The aim of this layer is to reduce the shape
of the output volume to decrease the number of parameters and the computations
to compute the activation units. We saw before, that also the convolution without
padding reduces the width and height of the output of the layer, but usually, people
prefer to keep the same size between input and output of a convolutional layer and
use a pooling layer to reduce it.
Typical functions of pooling layers consist in taking the maximum or the average
of the elements in every region considered. The most common choice is to use a 2 × 2
region and a stride of 2. This has the effect of reducing both the width and the
height to half the original size. In addition to that, pooling increases the receptive
fields (i.e the size of the input region from which it gets information) of each unit of
the activation volume that comes after the pooling layer. For example, if we consider
all filters to be of size 5 × 5 and the pooling layer to use a stride of 2, after the
first convolution, the receptive field of each unit has size 5 × 5. The pooling layer
summarizes the information carried by each 5 × 5 region of the output volume into a
unique unit, contained in a volume that has half the size. Each unit that results from
the second convolution, which uses a 5 × 5 filter in this reduced volume, will have
a receptive field of size approximately 10 × 10. That is because it gets information
from a 5 × 5 convolution over a representation that was reduced by a factor of 2 by
the pooling operation.
For some researchers, the pooling layer is a drawback of convolutional neural
networks. When we take the average or the maximum of a small area, if the pools
do not overlap, there is an important loss of valuable information about where things
are. Hinton et al. [SFH17] started working on a new approach, but this is still in the
early stages and not yet completely working on large datasets.
In general, the pooling layers accept an input volume of size w1 × h1 × d1, where
the w, h, d are defined as above, and requires two hyperparameters: the size of the
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Convolutional Neural Networks
region we consider f, and the stride s. The result of the pooling operation, both
using the average and the maximum, is a volume of shape w2 × h2 × d2 where:
w2 = w1 −f
s + 1
width of the output volume
h2 = h1 −f
s + 1
height of the output volume
d2 = d1
depth of the output volume
Input image I
(two-dimensional array)
Activation 
volume after 
pooling operation
Figure 4.3: Max-pooling example 3 × 3 max pooling over a 5 × 5 input, using stride
1. Image taken from [DV16].
4.4
Summary
In this chapter we briefly presented how CNNs work. Most of the concepts we pre-
sented in the previous chapter for regular NNs, such as backpropagation, SGD, and
regularization, can be extended to CNNs without any problem. In this thesis, as we
have mentioned in the introduction, we are going to use machine learning models to
learn a heuristic function for the Sokoban domain. Since each level can be visualized
as a grid, we have that a single cell is more meaningful if considered together with
its neighbors than if it is considered as a single, unrelated cell. We want a method
that automatically extracts features from the Sokoban levels, exploiting their intrin-
sic structures. Because of this, CNNs might be preferable for the purpose of learning
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Summary
41
a heuristic function than regular NNs. Fig. 4.4 shows how a Sokoban level will be
treat as input by a CNN and a regular NN. While a CNN tries to learn important
features for the regression task considering different spatially localized regions of the
level grid, a NN treats the level as a single vector, and to compute an activation of
a hidden layer unit, it considers all the cells of the level, without taking into account
how they are related to each other spatially. In the CNN, the information that comes
from different regions of the level representation is used to compute the value of a
deeper activation volume (in the figure we show only a slice of the first activation
volume). More than that, we can see that the number of parameters is higher in the
NN, while the CNN allows us to use the same filter weights to compute each neuron
activation of the same volume. This way, each filter will learn a specific feature, and
when the activation is computed, if a neuron has a higher activation value, it means
that it contains that learned feature.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Convolutional Neural Network
input
Regular Neural Network input
. . . . . . . . . 
hidden layer
Single slice of the
 activation volume
Figure 4.4: Representation of how a Sokoban level is used as input by a CNN and a NN.
While the CNN exploit the level structure, the NN flattens the levels into a
vector, loosing every information of the neighbors of a single cell. Looking at
the CNN (we consider 3 × 3 filter size, no padding and stride of 2), we can
see the parameter sharing and the local connectivity properties. Indeed, each
neuron of the activation volume is computed with the same weights matrix
(filter) and each of them is also connected to a spatially localized region. We
only report the line that link the blue neuron to the region used to compute
it, to preserve readability of the figure.
==PAGE:52==
42
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 5
An outsider’s tour of
learning heuristic
functions 1
At this point the reader should have enough notions about automated planners, sim-
ple linear regression, and artificial neural networks to be able to understand previous
approaches in the literature about learning heuristics.
Most of the state-of-the-art planners are based on the idea of forward state-space
heuristic search that we have presented in Chapter 2 [BG01]. These use automatically-
derived domain-independent heuristics to guide the search across a wide range of
different planning domains. The heuristic value for a specific state is usually com-
puted using a relaxed version of the original problem but, as we already mentioned
at the end of Chapter 2, this approach still has some limitations. First of all, the
computation could still be expensive since sometimes we have to solve an NP-hard
problem, but also, in some domains [YFG06], the relaxed-plan length could be a
severe underestimation of the real length, resulting in a poor guidance during the
search. Given that it is common to use planning systems to solve a lot of problems
from the same domain, researchers started to use knowledge from past experiences,
previous solution plans for example, in order to tune or learn the heuristic in a spe-
cific domain. The International Planning Competition (IPC) also started a learning
track [FKT11], in which planners that can learn from a set of examples, compete
in different planning domains. Knowledge from previously solved instances can be
leveraged to improve the performance of planners in different ways: improving the
search considering learned patterns in different solutions, such as combinations of
actions that are usually executed in sequence, learning completely from scratch a new
heuristic function or, in some other cases, learning a policy, that is a map state-action
to be executed. We will mostly focus on the learning heuristic functions case, since
it is the one more related to this thesis.
1All the rights for the title go to Benjamin Recht, http://www.argmin.net/2018/06/25/
outsider-rl/
==PAGE:54==
44
5 An outsider’s tour of learning heuristic functions 5
Works before the Deep Learning breakthrough
Grouping together actions
that usually occur together is a useful tool to reduce the search tree depth. [Bot+05]
and [CS07] propose methods that gather this kind of knowledge from previous experi-
ence, such as previous plan traces and previous solution plans. Both of them extend
the Fast-Forward (FF) planner [HN01] with additional macro-actions, learned both
from the problem formulation, using domain analysis, and solution plans of training
problems. These are filtered and then added to the PDDL domain. The drawback
of this kind of knowledge is that the branching factor of the search tree (or graph)
increases linearly with the number of actions in the domain.
Early works focusing on learning a heuristic function, or, more in general, an
evaluation function, are from the middle nineties. In [ZD95], they used one of the first
neural networks to predict the value function over different states to learn the optimal
policy for a job-scheduling problem. Nowadays, in deep reinforcement learning, this is
done by a CNN, as we will see further in this section. In [BM00], instead, polynomial
regression is used to learn an approximation function that predicts the value of a local-
search algorithm for an optimization problem. Both these approaches use human-
constructed features from the problem definition for each domain they consider.
In the automated planning literature, [YFG06] improved the automatically de-
rived heuristic of the FF planner with a heuristic learned using linear regression.
They trained a weighted linear function to predict the difference between the heuris-
tic value given by the FF on the relaxed problem and the real cost to reach the goal
from that state. To do that, they created databases of features, which include infor-
mation about the state, the goal and the actions used, for every relaxed plan of the
planning problems in the training set. Those features are expressed using taxonomic
syntax. The same authors, in [XFY07], proposed a modification of the learning as
search optimization framework (LaSO) [DM05] to learn a domain-specific heuristic to
improve the breadth-first beam search2, to speed up the search when a smaller beam
size b is used.
[DCB08] and [XFY10] tried to improve the heuristic search by learning control
knowledge from previous examples to reduce the number of node evaluations in heuris-
tic search. The former builds domain-specific relational decision trees for classification
that are able to identify preferred actions in different scenarios of a planning prob-
lem. Those trees can be used directly as an action policy or used to order the node
evaluation in other approaches, such as Enforced Hill Climbing algorithm. The latter,
instead, proposed an iterative learning algorithm to learn weighted action-selection
rules. These rules are then used to assign a value to possible state transitions in the
greedy best first search algorithm.
A natural way of learning an approximation of the heuristic function is to apply
machine learning techniques to a set of states, or more in general, features of those
states, whose distance or cost to the goal is known. This is similar to the approach
2Breadth-first beam search is similar to the BFS we described in Chapter 2, but at each level, it
generates all the successors and then it uses a heuristic value to order them. The value of the size b
of the beam is used to prune the search. Indeed, after ordering the nodes, only b of them are kept.
==PAGE:55==
5 An outsider’s tour of learning heuristic functions 6
45
used in [ZD95] and [BM00], but for automated planning domains.
Works in this
direction are [EG04], [SFS08], [AZH11], [VBA13], and [SK13].
Both [EG04] and
[SFS08] trained a neural network for predicting the heuristic value for the 15-puzzle
problem (4 × 4 grid with 15 sliding tiles)3. Their input features are different. [EG04]
used the position of the tiles to predict the distance to the goal, they biased the
learning procedure towards admissibility, considering a particular novel cost function
for the NN, but this approach was limited in success, resulting in the optimal solution,
when used with A*, only in 50% of the cases. However, the proposed heuristic reduced
the time for find a solution by a factor of 500 with respect to the time required using
the Manhattan heuristic. On the other hand, [SFS08] improved the performances
using values from k different heuristics as input for the neural network.
This is
based on the fact that, in a single agent scenario, all heuristics are trying to measure
the same thing: the distance to the goal from a specific state. It has been shown
that combining different heuristic can improve planning performance [RH09]. Also
[VBA13] considered the values of different heuristics as inputs of the machine learning
algorithm. Unlike [SFS08], they used a simple linear regression model for creating
the new heuristic, that was used in different domains of the IPC. [SK13] uses neural
networks and support vector machines (SVM) to learn a heuristic function. For each
planning domain considered, such as Blocks World, Sokoban, and GoldMiner, they
defined a set of atoms and used a binary representation for the states with respect
to that set. They compare their performance, in terms of the estimation accuracy,
with FF and the approach proposed by [YFG06]. The learned heuristic has superior
accuracy compared to both the FF and the solution proposed by [YFG06], and at the
same time it is also faster to be computed than the one of [YFG06]. The maximum size
of the Sokoban levels considered is 8 × 8 with 2 boxes. A slightly different approach
is the one presented by [AZH11], which uses a neural network to learn a heuristic
function, but it uses an iterative approach with bootstrap to improve its performance.
They start with an initial weak and simple heuristic h0 and a set of problems from a
specific planning domain. In addition to that, they have to set two hyperparameters
for the time constraint and the minimum number of solved levels that is acceptable.
Using a random walk algorithm, they create (bootstrap) new level instances from the
initial set. This new set is used to train the heuristic in two steps: in the first step
they run a heuristic search using h0, if the number of solved levels is less than the
one wanted, they increase the time constraint, otherwise the solved levels, together
with the states in the solution path, are added4 to the training set and used to train
the neural network and create a new heuristic h1. Then the process is repeated using
h1 instead of h0, and so on. This ends when the set contains less example than the
quantity set as parameters at the beginning. Instead of using an iterative algorithm
with boosting, [Hau+09] used genetic programming to improve an initial population
of heuristic functions.
3[SFS08] tried also the 24-puzzle problem, but the complexity plays an obstacle in creating a
sufficiently large dataset with optimal solution length.
4They are not adding the levels as a grid, but some user-defined features that differ from domain
to domain.
==PAGE:56==
46
5 An outsider’s tour of learning heuristic functions 8
Works after the Deep Learning success
Deep neural network architectures and,
more specifically, convolutional neural networks have proven to be useful when applied
to reinforcement learning (RL) in high dimensional domains.
Deep reinforcement
learning has been successfully applied to games, like Go [Sil+16] [Sil+17], video-
games, such as Atari games [Mni+13], robotic manipulation [Gu+17] [Lev+16], and
imitation learning [Giu+16].
These results showed that it is possible to use the
raw representation of a particular level as input of a learning algorithm instead of
manually-defining domain-specific features as before.
The most relevant work for this thesis is [Gro+17]. They proposed an imitation
learning approach to learn the policy in the Sokoban domain. Imitation learning, in
the form of behavioural cloning [Pom89], could be seen as regular supervised learning
as defined in Chapter 3, where the state represents the input x and the action taken is
our target y. It is called imitation learning because the data are produced by human
demonstration, or in the case of Sokoban, by an optimal planner, and therefore the
agent learns using examples of the optimal behavior. Alongside the best action to be
executed, their network predicts also the solution length from the state to the goal
(their network has two outputs, one for the action and one for the solution length),
since they showed that this improves the accuracy of the policy prediction.
The
concatenation along the height of the current state and the goal state is passed through
a 12-convolutional layer CNN. The solution length learned by their network could be
used as heuristic in a search algorithm. Comparison between the performance of a
planner that uses the learned heuristic with one that uses a simple Manhattan distance
heuristic is made, showing that the learned NN heuristic significantly outperforms the
baseline in terms of expanded nodes, both in greedy BFS and A* search. In addition
to that, the NN heuristic with A* explored fewer nodes than the FF planner.
If we look at the aim of training a CNN to predict the heuristic value of states
in a more general way, that is, training a learning algorithm to predict one value
(regardless of the meaning that this value represents) given a state representation,
we could notice that there are a lot of architectures which do that as part of a
deep reinforcement learning algorithm.
The first AlphaGo architecture proposed,
also called AlphaGo Fan [Sil+16], used two deep neural networks: the policy network
that predicts move probabilities, and a value network, which outputs an evaluation
of the board state. We can see that learning to predict a heuristic value given a
state or learning to predict a value that represents the likelihood of winning the game
given that board configuration, are very similar. [Sil+16] used a 13-convolutional
layers CNN plus one fully connected to solve this regression task. Another example is
in [Mni+15], where they used a convolution neural network with three convolutional
layers followed by one fully connected layer to predict the Q−value, usually computed
using the Q-learning algorithm7, of each action in a specific domain.
7Q-learning is an algorithm used to learn a policy in a specific domain. It considers an agent
that interacts with an environment through actions and each time it gets a reward. The goal is to
use these information to select each time the action that maximizes cumulative future discounted
rewards. This is usually done iteratively until the algorithm converges – the value associated to the
action given the state, converges. For further RL notions, see [S+98].
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6
Learning a heuristic for
the Sokoban domain
This chapter describes the methods used and the steps taken to learn a heuristic
function for guiding the graph search in the Sokoban domain [DZ99]. This domain
is similar to the running example used in Chapter 2, where an agent can move in
four possible directions inside a grid-like environment.
Instead of being a simple
path-planning problem, in Sokoban we have boxes that have to be pushed into some
goal positions. There are eight possible actions, four Move and four Push, one for
each direction1. Sokoban has been proven to be a challenging domain for planning
algorithms, even when significant human domain knowledge is provided to a hand-
crafted heuristic [JS97] [JS01]. This is because the state space of the problem, in
the single-agent case, depends on the number of free cells and the number of boxes2.
Indeed, given n reachable cells and b boxes, the size of the state space is bounded by
(n
b
)
(n −b)3. In addition to that, some actions could be irreversible and could lead
to an unresolvable configuration of the level. These situations are called deadlocks.
In [JS01], a handcrafted deadlock detection is used in the search tree to avoid the
expansion of useless nodes. Pushing a box into a tunnel that is closed on the other
side, or pushing a box in a corner, are only two simple examples of deadlock situations.
Long-term planning is required for solving a level with more than one box, and this
makes the Sokoban domain challenging also for Reinforcement Learning approaches.
Recently, [Gro+17] tried to use imitation learning in the form of behavioral cloning
to learn a policy that works in the Sokoban domain, whereas [Web+17] proposed an
end-to-end trainable agent architecture that learns the environment and at the same
time simulates, starting from the current state, future configurations using actions
from a rollout policy that has to be learned. This way, they address the long-term
1We could also consider only four actions Move. When the agent executes Move it moves into
the specified direction, if the neighboring cell is free. In case the destination is occupied by a box, it
moves the box in the same direction into the next cell, if it is free.
2In the multi-agent case, it depends also on the number agents in the environment.
3Considering n reachable cells, i.e. non-wall cells, b boxes and a single agent, we firstly have to
decide b cells where to put the boxes. This is can be done in (n
b
)
different way. In the remaining
cells, we have to decide the position of the agent, therefore we have (n −b) possible choices. In total,
we can have (n
b
)
(n −b) different possible configuration of a level.
==PAGE:58==
48
6 Learning a heuristic for the Sokoban domain
planning problem and try to avoid irreversible actions.
In this work we focus our attention on understanding to what extent convolutional
neural networks can be used to predict the distance to the goal and to be embedded in
a planner as heuristic function to order the nodes in the frontier of Algorithm 1. The
heuristic function h will be set to a function f that has to be learned. We model this
problem as a regression task. Even if the target values we want to predict are discrete,
since in our domain they are equivalent to the number of actions needed to reach the
goal and they could be seen as a sort of label or class, the problem of the classification
task is its loss function. For example, if the true target is 10, the classification loss
function penalizes in the same way both the case in which our network predicts
11 and the one in which it predicts 50. That is because, considering the targets as
labels makes us treat them as unrelated measures, whereas they represent the solution
lengths and, obviously, they are related to each other due to the natural number order.
Therefore, we would prefer a network that predicts 11 and we would like to penalize
the second prediction more.
6.1
Datasets creation process
As we have seen in Chapter 3, in supervised learning we need both the training
examples x and their associated target values y to train a model. In this setting,
given a planning domain, we need to create data in the form {si, di}n
i=1, where si
is a state from the domain and di is the cost of the optimal solution from si (we
could train a machine learning model using non-optimal solution lengths, but then
the accuracy of the learned heuristic is a lot worse than the one trained in the optimal
lengths, see Appendix B.2). In our case, si will be states from different instances Πj
of the Sokoban domain and di the number of actions in the optimal solution, since we
consider a unitary cost for the actions. We consider six different combinations of level
sizes and number of boxes: 8 × 8, 11 × 11, and 15 × 15, with one box and two boxes
for each size. This choice allows us to see how a fixed model could perform both in
terms of level size and level complexity. For the learning process to be effective, the
dataset needs to be balanced, i.e. the number of examples for each target needs to be
similar, therefore we decide to limit the range of solution lengths considered in each
dataset as shown in Table 6.1.
6.1.1
Sokoban level generator
A level generator similar to the one described in [Web+17] was created. Each level is
created in three steps: room topology generation, position configuration, and reverse-
playing. It starts with a level in which there is a wall in every cell of the grid, and
a simple random-walk algorithm is used to create the empty spaces. Since the walls
along the level border will not be removed, for a h × w level, only (h −2) × (w −2)
==PAGE:59==
6.1 Datasets creation process
49
cells can be corridors. Firstly a random starting position and a random direction
are chosen. The corresponding cell is emptied together with some surrounding walls
depending on the randomly selected pattern (see [Web+17] for the patterns). At
each step of the random-walk the grid-cell is updated and a new random direction is
chosen with some probability p, a parameter that we have to decide. The value of p
influences the configuration of the level, since a small p helps the creation of longer
corridors in the level. The only constraint in this step is that enough space is needed
for the boxes and the agent. After the creation of the level topology, the generator
randomly chooses a position for each goal, putting a box on them, and one for the
agent. At this point, the Sokoban game is reverse-played. This means that the agent
can move in the free cells and instead of pushing the boxes, it pulls them in the four
directions. This is done by using a simple DFS, as described in Chapter 2. Doing so,
the resulting levels are in a solvable configuration4. At each step of the DFS, the new
configuration is evaluated with a score, and at the end of the algorithm we return the
best five5 levels we found during this search. The reason why we add more levels with
the same layout (i.e. same walls topology and same goal positions) is because the
network has to learn that states which have the same wall-layout and goal positions
could have different associated values. This is extremely important, since it has to
be embedded in a planner, and during the graph-search it has to evaluate levels that
have the same topology. Previous approaches, like [Gro+17] and [SK13] added for
each instance all the states in the solution path into the training set. We prefer to
construct our training set with unrelated states of the same instance, obtained as
we described above, because we want our network to generalize well to all kinds of
possible situations it could find during a graph search. The drawback of this approach
is that more computation is needed to create a dataset with enough examples, since
we are not getting training data for free from the solution paths, but, at the same
time, we will consider a larger number of layouts in the dataset.
Four different scores were used to evaluate the states during the generation of
each dataset. All of them are based on the Manhattan distance of the boxes to the
goals as a naive measure of the complexity of the level, in terms of possible solution
length associated to it. This is a very simple approach, but since we have to evaluate
each level generated during the DFS (this is similar to evaluate a state to assign an
heuristic value), we need a score that is fast to be computed, since we have to create
millions of levels6. The first score considers only the Manhattan distance of the boxes
from the closest goal, where we assign each box to the goal in a greedy way. The
second, instead, adds also the distance of the agent to the closest box. The third is
the negation of the second score, whereas the fourth uses penalties for moving boxes
from their goal in the reverse-play stage of the generator. As a result, we can create
level examples that represent almost all the possible configurations that could happen
4Indeed, if we randomly choose a position for each goal and a position for each box, we will
create a lot of levels that are not solvable using only the actions available in the Sokoban domain.
5In some cases, it could happen that it returns less than five levels, especially using the third
score, which will be described further in the paragraph.
6Using more precise scores makes the generation process really slow.
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Learning a heuristic for the Sokoban domain
in a Sokoban domain. This means: agent on the goal, one goal satisfied and one not,
the goal state, agent far from the boxes, agent close to the box, box near the goal,
etc. If we use a single score that considers only the distance of the boxes from the
goals and returns the levels that maximize it, a lot of situations will not be in our
training set, leading to a poor performance of the learned heuristic. For the 8 × 8
size levels, both with one box and two boxes we created 50k level instances per score,
while for 11×11 and 15×15 size we limit ourself to 40k per score, due to the increased
computation time7.
6.1.2
Training, validation, and test set
At the end of the level generation process, we unify all the subsets from the different
scores into a unique dataset that contains all the levels in groups of five. After deleting
duplicated levels, i.e. states with the same wall configuration and goal, boxes and
agent in the same position, we randomly divide the dataset into a training, validation,
and test set using the following proportions: 96% of the data goes in the training,
while the remaining 4% is equally divided into the validation and the test set. We
start by focusing on the training set.
The target value for each level has to be
created.
While BFS, which we have seen to be optimal in Chapter 2, is not too
computationally intensive for the 8 × 8 size (both with one and two boxes) and for
the 11 × 11 with one box, for solving larger levels we need to use A* search with an
admissible heuristic. Since we are using A* in combination with the Graph Search
algorithm, the heuristic is required to be also consistent. We use a minimum-cost,
perfect bipartite matching algorithm [Kuh55], which is shown to be admissible in
[JS01] and proved to be consistent in Section 7.2. This heuristic solves the box-to-
a-goal assignment problem using the real distance, i.e. the distance that takes into
account the walls, unlike the Manhattan distance, returning the assignment with the
minimum cost. An example is shown in Fig. 6.1.
We increase the effective size of the training set, adding, for each level, all its
possible rotations and reflections as shown in Fig. 6.28. This approach, called data
augmentation [KSH12], increases the size of our training set almost “for free”, since
we do not need to solve all these new levels, since their y is the same as the y of
the original one. In addition to that, this would make our network invariant to this
kind of transformations and make it more likely that any test example has a closely
related training example [Gro18].
The distribution of the training set that we have obtained for all the different size-
box combinations considered, despite the use of four different scores to evaluate the
levels during the generation process, were still skewed towards middle-length solution
levels. For each dataset we decided the maximum solution length and a minimum
7We have to remember that, for every instance, we return maximum 5 level configuration. Thus
at this point we have ≈250k levels for each score for the 8 × 8 size, and ≈200k in the other cases.
8The graphical representation was generated by an emulator provided in the course 02285 Arti-
ficial Intelligence and Multi-Agent Systems at DTU.
==PAGE:61==
6.1 Datasets creation process
51
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1  2  3   4  5  6   7  8
Boxes
Goals
(3,6)
(5,5)
(3,2)
(7,7)
6
7
4
5
usually it is computed using a distances matrix:
   
(3,6)
(5,5)
(3,2)
(7,7)
6
4
7
5
Considered 
example
Figure 6.1: Minimum-cost, perfect bipartite matching algorithm. In this simple ex-
ample we show how the minimum-cost matching is computed. When
we have two boxes and two goals, this is really simple, but it becomes
difficult to compute when the number of boxes and goals increases. We
have to choose for each box a goal such that the sum of the distances
is minimized. In the considered case, we can see that assigning the box
in cell (3, 6) to the goal (3, 2) and the box in (5, 5) to the goal in (7, 7)
results in a “cheaper” cost (10 vs 12). We are using the distance that
takes the walls into account.
number of examples for all the solution lengths in that range.
Then we used a
rejection sampling procedure to increase the number of examples. For each solution
length yl that needed more examples, we randomly selected nsamples examples from
the dataset, and if their y is lower than yl or the layout of sampled level is already
contained in the set of level with solution length yl, we reject the sample. Otherwise,
we add to the dataset the state, taken from the selected example solution path, that
has solution length yl, together with its augmentations. For each sampled solution
length yl we are adding ≤8 × nsamples new examples, where the 8 comes from the
augmentation step. After the sample phase, we balance our training set by keeping
the same number of examples for each solution length in the considered range. As a
result, we get our final balanced training set.
Before applying the same operations to the validation and test set, we have to
remove duplicates of levels in the final training set that are contained in the validation
or test set. At this point, we have two possible choices: we could delete only perfect
==PAGE:62==
52
6 Learning a heuristic for the Sokoban domain
Figure 6.2: Augmentation example. All the transformations we consider for each
original level in our dataset. As we can see in the augmented boards
column, all the newly created levels are obtained by rotation and re-
flection of the original one. Their optimal solution length would be the
same as the original board.
duplicates, which means that the wall layout (or topology), the position of goals,
agent and boxes are the same, or we could remove from the validation and test set all
the levels that have a topology already contained in the final balanced dataset. We
apply the second method, which we hope will give us a better understanding of the
performance of our CNN in completely unseen levels.
The final datasets are summarized in Table 6.1.
6.2
Input representation
The next decision we needed to make was how to encode the Sokoban grid as input
for the CNN. In the early stages of this work, we used to transform our Sokoban
level into a simple 2D matrix, using this convention: −1 for the walls, 0 for the free
cells, 1 for the box position, 2 for the goal position, 3 to represent the box on goal, 4
for the agent position, and 5 when the agent is on the goal position. We abandoned
this representation because we were implicitly inserting an order and, furthermore,
an importance to each object in the board, assigning them a sort of weight.
We decide to use two different representations. The first is a classical approach,
used also by [Sil+17] and [Gro+17], and it is to encode the level into a 3D matrix,
where each slice along the depth represents to one type of object of the domain, and
contains 1 in the positions where that object appears on the original grid and zero in
==PAGE:63==
6.2 Input representation
53
Table 6.1: Summary statistics about the dataset created (and used) in this thesis.
Level
Solutions range
Size
8 × 8, 1 box
0-18
training set
2596008 levels
(136632 per sol. length)
validation set
137104 levels
(7216 per sol. length)
test set
134824 levels
(7096 per sol. length)
8 × 8, 2 boxes
0-26
training set
2460672 levels
(91136 per sol. length)
validation set
133920 levels
(4960 per sol. length)
test set
126144 levels
(4672 per sol. length)
11 × 11, 1 box
0-27
training set
2292192 levels
(81864 per sol. length)
validation set
254016 levels
(9072 per sol. length)
test set
277312 levels
(9904 per sol. length)
11 × 11, 2 boxes
0-35
training set
2995200 levels
(83200 per sol. length)
validation set
349632 levels
(9712 per sol. length)
test set
362016 levels
(10056 per sol. length)
15 × 15, 1 box
0-31
training set
2689536 levels
(84048 per sol. length)
validation set
310784 levels
(9712 per sol. length)
test set
323840 levels
(10120 per sol. length)
15 × 15, 2 boxes
0-40
training set
3331168 levels
(81248 per sol. length)
validation set
396880 levels
(9680 per sol. length)
test set
403768 levels
(9848 per sol. length)
==PAGE:64==
54
6 Learning a heuristic for the Sokoban domain
the remaining cells. In the Sokoban domain we have four different objects – agent,
boxes, walls, goals – and therefore the 3D-input matrix has depth 4. An example can
be seen in Fig. 6.3. We will refer to this as entity-based representation.
The second approach is inspired by natural language processing and, more specifi-
cally, by an efficient vector representation of words proposed by Mikolov et al. called
word2vec [Mik+13b] [Mik+13a] [GL14]. In these works, instead of using a one-hot
encoding9 the authors propose a map from words to vectors of learnable weights,
called embedding, that are tuned during training.
These represent in an abstract
way the meaning of each word and allow one to compare, using various similarity
measures, two vectors representing two different words. After the training process,
which is done using large corpus, i.e. large amount of texts, they find that the learned
representation is able to capture meaningful syntactic and semantic regularities, for
example gender and singular-plural relations. A famous example that they present
is the “King-Man+Woman” example, in which they take the learned vector for the
word King, subtract the vector of Man and add the vector of Woman and they find
that the result is very similar/close to the learned vector for the word Queen. These
results inspire us to use a similar approach for representing a Sokoban level. Indeed,
instead of forcing a fixed representation for the various possible situations that can
be found in the Sokoban domain, such as box, goal, box on goal, agent, agent on goal,
etc. we can make the model learn its own representation for each of these cases. In
addition to that, we are curious if the learned representation is able to capture the
fact that, for example, the agent on a goal cell is the combination of two different
entities of the domain: the agent and the goal. This means that the learned vector
associated to an agent on a goal can be seen as the sum of the learned vector repre-
senting the agent and the one representing the goal. The same reasoning can be done
for the box on goal case.
In our Sokoban domain, we map the initial representation, the one that uses real
values from -1 to 5, into a set of embeddings, which starts with random weights
and then are tuned with backpropagation. Since we are mapping each value into an
array of weights, the 2D level representation becomes 3D. The first slice of the newly
formed 3D matrix contains the first value of those arrays, whose object appears in the
original grid, the second slice contains the second values of those arrays, and so on.
In other words, we substitute each value with the array stacked along the depth. Fig.
6.4 shows an example that helps understanding how the final input is represented.
6.3
Skip connections in NN
Before going in depth into the CNN structures, we should introduce the concept of
skip connections in a neural network, that can be extended to CNN. This allows us to
9This means that each word is represented by an array of the size of the dictionary considered,
where only one value is one and the remaining are zeros, that allows one only the equality check.
==PAGE:65==
6.3 Skip connections in NN
55
Figure 6.3: First representation example. We transform the level grid into a 3D
matrix where each slide represents an object of the domain and it con-
tains 1 in the cells in which that object appears in the example. The
remaining cells contain 0.
briefly introduce and describe the residual network, also known as ResNet [He+16],
which is also one of the models used in this thesis.
A skip connection, also known in literature as skip-layer connection or identity-
shortcut connection, is a direct connection between two non-consecutive layers. It
takes the input of the neural network or the output of a layer after the application
of the non-linearity, and feeds it to another layer that is deeper in the network. This
allows the information to pass unmodified, through many layers. In a CNN, these
connections feed the input volume of a convolutional layer into another deeper convo-
lutional layer, but for the sake of clarity we are going to explain what happens when
a regular neural network is used.
As seen in Chapter 3, we compute the activation of the units in the fully connected
layer at depth (l + 1) using the output of the previous layer (l):
a(l+1) = W(l+1)z(l) + I(w0
(l+1))T
(6.1)
and then we apply the non-linearity h(·) to obtain the output z(l+1) = h(a(l+1)). If
there is a shortcut connection between the (l + 1)-layer and the (l + t)-layer, with
t > 1, we first have to compute its activation:
a(l+t) = W(l+t)z(l+t−1) + I(w0
(l+t))T
(6.2)
==PAGE:66==
56
6 Learning a heuristic for the Sokoban domain
Figure 6.4: Second representation example.
Considering the same level example
as Fig.
6.3, we present how the input is encoded using the second
representation. We start with a 2D matrix the has values from -1 to 5,
as we described in the paragraph. To each value, a vector of learnable
weights, i.e. an embedding, is associated. We substitute each value in
the 2D grid with the respective embedding along the depth. In this
example we use embeddings of size 3, so the resulting 3D matrix has
depth 3. In our work, we consider embeddings of size 8.
and then, before computing the non-linearity, we have to add the forwarded output
of the (l + 1)-layer:
z(l+t) = h(a(l+t) + z(l+1))
(6.3)
Two different approaches are used in literature to add the output of a layer to an
activation of a deeper layer in the network.
The first approach is to simply add
element-wise the two arrays, whereas the second consists in concatenating them. In
the first scenario, if they have different sizes we have to use a transformation to
reshape the forwarded output, for example by feeding it into a fully connected layer
of the same size as the (l + t)-layer. In a CNN, this is equivalent to feeding the first
into a convolutional layer that returns an output volume of the same shape as the
second. In case of concatenation, in a regular neural network there are no constraints,
whereas in a CNN this is done along the depth, therefore the two need to have the
==PAGE:67==
6.4 Network architectures
57
same height and width.
If the skip connection is made between a layer at depth (l) and the layer at depth
(l + 2), with l > 0, we call the resulting structure a residual block10. This is the
building-block of the ResNet model. In [He+16] they showed that a structure made
up by a sequence of several residual blocks, allows one to train deeper neural networks
avoiding exploding and vanishing gradient type of problems. In practice, due to the
concerns about the training time, they modified the residual block as a bottleneck
design. This is a stack of three convolutional layers instead of two, which apply, in
order, 1 × 1, 3 × 3, 1 × 1 convolutions. The first 1 × 1 convolution is used to reduce
the dimension of the input, while the last 1 × 1 restores the original size. This way,
the 3 × 3 convolution in the middle has less parameters, given the smaller input and
output.
Figure 6.5: Residual block and bottleneck design example. The figure on the left
represents a residual block, where the input volume of depth 64 is fed
into the convolutional layer and at the same time is forwarded deeper
in the network. The figure on the right, instead, shows the bottleneck
design, where the first convolutional layer reduces the depth from 256
to 64 and the last one restores it. The central layer is used to compute
the convolution using less parameters. Image taken from [He+16].
6.4
Network architectures
In this section we introduce the different architectures we considered to learn a heuris-
tic function for the Sokoban domain. We compared six different models that use the
input representations described before, and the following CNN structures: classical
CNN, CNN with shortcuts from the input to each hidden layer, and ResNet with
10This is because each layer adds something (a residual) to the previous value instead of producing
an entirely new value as would happen in the regular convolutional layer. Indeed, indicating with
H(x) the output of a regular convolutional layer, in case we use the identity shortcut, we are forcing
part of the output to be x, therefore the output of a layer where there is a shortcut should be of the
form H(x) := F(x) + x
==PAGE:68==
58
6 Learning a heuristic for the Sokoban domain
bottleneck design. The aim was to find the one that seemed to approximate in the
best way the real number of steps needed to reach the goal. We tried to tune the
hyperparameters for each network we are going to present and find the one that works
the best in each of these model families11.
Classical CNNs
The first network considered is a classic CNN that takes as input
the level grid transformed using the first representation (Fig. 6.3). It is made up of
12 convolutional layers, where the first has 128 filters, the next six have 64, then we
find four with depth 32 and the last one has size 16. Apart from the first layer, which
uses filters of size 7 × 7, and the next two, which use 5 × 5 filters, all the remaining
have 3 × 3 windows-size filters. The convolutional layers are followed by two fully
connected layers with 256 and 128 units respectively.
The second network is very similar to the previous one. The only differences are
that it embeds the input level into the second representation (see Fig. 6.4) and it has
one less convolutional layer. The structure is as follows: the first convolutional layer
has 128 7 × 7-size filters and it is followed by five layers that compute convolutions
with 64 filters (the first three have kernel-size of 5 × 5 and the last two of 3 × 3). The
remaining ones consist of four layers with 32 3×3 filters and one layer that computes
a convolution with 16 filters of size 3 × 3. Also in this case, the two fully connected
layers have 256 and 128 units respectively.
CNNs with skip-layer connections
The third and fourth networks considered
are characterized by the use of skip connections from the encoded input to all hidden
layers deeper in the network. This way, we forward the information contained in the
input to each layer along the network. The former uses the first input representation
and is made up of 12 convolutional layers. The first seven of them apply a convolution
of 64 filters, with kernel size 7 × 7 for the first, which is followed by two 5 × 5 and
four 3 × 3. The remaining layers have output volumes of size 32 (four of them) and
16 (the last). Their filters have size 3 × 3. The same fully connected layers as before
are used.
The latter network structure, instead, uses embeddings to represent the input
level. It has eleven convolutional layers, the first five have an activation volume of
depth 64, of which the first has 7 × 7 filters, the next two 5 × 5 and the last two 3 × 3,
respectively. These are followed by four convolutions of 32 filters of kernel-size 3 × 3
and two convolutions of 16 3 × 3 kernel-size filters. The same fully connected layers
as in the other case lead to the output.
ResNets with bottleneck design
The last two networks we considered are both
ResNet, one using the first representation for the input and one using the second
11The hyperparameters tuning could have been done in a more exhaustive way, but we had time
and resources limitations. In addition to that, performing a grid-search over the hyperparameters
for six networks can be time-consuming, so we do that in a greedy way and stop when we have found
a combination of parameters that has an acceptable performances.
==PAGE:69==
6.4 Network architectures
59
encoding. We use the bottleneck design to implement the residual block. The first
ResNet uses the entity-oriented representation for the input. It consists of an initial
convolution with 128 filters of size 5 × 5 followed by six bottleneck block, where the
central convolutional layer has output volume of depth 64 and the filters have size
3 × 3 as in the original paper. After these six blocks an intermediate convolution
layer reduces the depth of the activation volume to 64, using 3 × 3 filters, and it
is followed by seven bottleneck blocks. In this case, the central layer in each block
applies a convolution with 32 filters of kernel-size 3 × 3. A last convolutional layer
reduces again the depth of the volume to 16 (3 × 3 size filters are applied). Two fully
connected layers (256 and 128 units respectively) lead to the output.
The second ResNet uses the learnable embeddings to represent the Sokoban grid.
It has a first convolution layer of 128 filters 5 × 5 and then the first group of five
bottleneck blocks, where the layer in the middle has 64 filters 5 × 5. Then a single
convolution with 64 filters 3 × 3 is used to reduce the depth of the volume, and its
output is fed to the second group of four bottleneck blocks (central layer has 32 3 × 3
filters). Also in this case, a convolutional layer is used to reduce the depth of the
volume to 16, before feeding it into two fully connected layers of the same size as
before.
All the convolutions use stride of 1 and the input is padded to always maintain
the same dimension/shape.
==PAGE:70==
60
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 7
Results and discussion
In Chapter 6, we have presented six different CNN architectures that can be used as
a heuristic function approximation for our Sokoban domain, which use two different
input representations.
Our first goal is to choose the network that performs the
best in terms of accuracy among the six. Once we have selected the best model, its
effectiveness is measured both in terms of accuracy, i.e. how close are its predictions to
the real targets and in terms of performance when it is embedded in a planner, which is
measured by the number of generated and explored nodes. Three domain-dependent
heuristics are used as comparison both for the accuracy and the performance in a
planner. Then we tried to understand which factors are required to learn a good
heuristic function: we try to understand how the number of training examples for each
label affects the accuracy and we investigate if it is possible to learn a precise heuristic
function using targets generated by a greedy best-first search planner, instead of an
optimal one. In the end we will present some approaches that we have tried, which use
the information from the goal decomposition and the learned heuristic in the levels
with one box, to improve the heuristic in the datasets with two boxes, but those were
not so successful.
All the models, the environments such as the planner and the heuristics were
implemented in Python, using the Tensorflow [Aba+16] and Sonnet libraries for the
machine learning parts.
7.1
Model selection
We trained all the models presented in the previous chapter using the dataset con-
taining the levels of size 11×11 with 2 boxes. The choice was not random. We expect
these levels to be a good compromise between the six datasets we created: it is more
complex than the 8 × 8 (both with 1 and 2 boxes) datasets, because the levels are
larger and than the 11 × 11 with one box dataset since having two boxes increases
the complexity of the solutions of the levels. At the same time, for the same reasons,
this would be a bit easier than the 15 × 15 datasets. This way, choosing the network
that has the best performance on this dataset allows us to study the generalization
power of the architecture in smaller and bigger levels, as well as in simpler and more
difficult ones. Indeed, our goal is to find a fixed network structure that can be trained
as a black-box on different datasets, and maybe different domains, without re-doing
==PAGE:72==
62
7 Results and discussion
the hyperparameter tuning, otherwise this would not be so different from manually
designing a different domain-specific heuristic for each new domain considered.
Every network was trained in minibatches of b = 64, using Adam to minimize
the mean squared prediction error (MSPE) function (Eq. 3.14) plus a weight decay
(regularization) term:
f(w) = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(hCNN(xi, w) −yi)2 + λfreg(w)
(7.1)
The learning rate for the Adam update was chosen to be α = 0.0003 for all the
networks analyzed. We evaluated the networks using the validation set during the
hyperparameters tuning process, and only when the final model for each “family”
considered was selected we evaluated its accuracy on the test set. A typical approach
to decide when stopping the training procedure of a CNN is the “early-stopping”
approach, which means that, during the training, we plot the MSPE on the validation
error to check whether it starts to overfit, this way it was possible to decide at which
iteration number to stop the process. This approach is informative when the available
resources allow one to train the model for a longer time.
This way, the iterative
optimization algorithms will perform huge number of steps, and this can be seen
when the validation error seems to converge. Since we trained those initial models on
a normal CPU on the LSF10 DTU cluster, we had both time and resource limitations1,
therefore we were forced to based our model selection on the results obtained during a
limited training phase of three days2, instead of using the “early-stopping” approach
described above.
Fig. 7.1 displays how the validation error changes during the training process,
for every network we considered. It can be seen that the training of the network
architectures that use embeddings (Fig. 6.4) is slower than those that use the entity-
based representation.
Furthermore, also the ResNets required more time for the
training. Indeed, this type of architecture allows one to train a deeper model, but
since the number of parameters is related to the depth, the number of computations
needed for the forward and backward pass increases.
Even though some of the models considered still have to converge in Fig. 7.1,
and therefore we do not know how well they could perform with a larger available
training time, for the scope of this thesis, we decide to use the CNN with the skip-
layer connections (the green line in the figure) because it seems to be the one that it
is easier to train and, at the same time, it seems to converge to better results than the
others, given the resources we have. Only the two ResNets seem to have the potential
to reach the same performance or maybe perform better.
Anyway, the difference
would be so small that it should not largely affect the performance as heuristic value.
1We were able to solve the problem with the GPU only two weeks before the deadline. However,
all the work that is done after the model selection was trained using one Tesla V100.
2The maximum number of iterations that we were able to do in three days were reached in less
than 4 hour using the Tesla V100.
==PAGE:73==
7.2 Baselines
63
0
500000
1000000
1500000
2000000
2500000
Iterations
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
MSPE validation set
Model selection using 11x11 2 boxes dataset
classic cnn w/ 4 channels
classic cnn w/ embeddings
cnn short w/ 4 channels
cnn short w/ embeddings
resnet w/ 4 channels
resnet w/ embeddings
Figure 7.1: MSPE on validation set during the training process.
7.2
Baselines
To really understand how precise our learned heuristics are, we have to compare their
predictions and accuracy with other more or less precise heuristics used in the same
domain. We propose three different handcrafted domain-dependent heuristics with
diverse properties, as comparison.
The first heuristic we consider is a very simple one. It considers the sum of the
Manhattan distances from each box to the closest free goal, allowing the assignment
of multiple boxes to the same goal. In addition to that, we add also the distance from
the agent to the closest box that is not in a goal position, because the gap between
the heuristic value returned considering only the sum of the Manhattan distances and
the optimal solution length will be to large, as mentioned in [JS01]. The Manhattan
distance is always a lower bound of the distance that consider the obstacles, therefore
considering the sum of the Manhattan distances of each box to the closest goal never
overestimate the optimal solution length. Adding the distance from the agent to the
closest “unsatisfied” box keeps the heuristic admissible3, but on the other hand, makes
it non-consistent, and therefore A* is not guaranteed to find an optimal solution. One
of the possible situations in which the consistency condition (Eq. 2.5) is violated is
shown in Fig. 7.2.
The second heuristic is the one we used to solve the levels in an optimal way. It
computes the minimum cost matching between goals and boxes, using the distances
that take walls into account. This is both admissible, since it is a lower bound on
the optimal solution length, and consistent, and therefore A* is guaranteed to find an
3We could have done this heuristic a bit more accurate if we had considered the agent-to-closest-
box distance minus 1.
==PAGE:74==
64
7 Results and discussion
h(n) = 4+3 = 7
h(n’) = 1+1+3 = 5 
Push(W)
Figure 7.2: Example of violation of the consistency condition. We can see that from
the initial state we can reach a state, where h(n) ≤c(n, a, n′) + h(n′) is
not satisfied. In our domain c is 1 for every action.
optimal solution [JS01]. A simple proof of its consistency is as follows: in a level with
k boxes and k goals, we could create a k×k matrix, where the boxes are the rows and
the goals are the columns, that contains the box-goal pair distances. A minimum-cost
matching consists in selecting one cell for each row, such that two chosen cells are
not in the same column, such that the sum of those is minimal. There are k! possible
assignments. If we indicate with N the minimum cost, we have that all the other
assignments have to be ≥N. In our domain, the agent can move only one box at
each step, therefore if with the next action we move a box, the values of only one
row will change. Since the box is moved in a neighboring cell, each value of this
row can change by ±1. There are two cases: if the minimum assignment remains
the same, we have that its value differs by ±1, so the consistency condition holds
(h(n) ≤c(n, a, n′) + h(n′) can be seen as h(n′) ≥h(n) −1 in our domain), indeed we
have that N ± 1 ≥N −1. If the assignment changes, we are selecting an assignment
that in the previous step had a value ≥N (it it was smaller we would have selected
it) and the only thing that changes now is that one of its elements changes by ±1.
Therefore that assignment will have value at least N-1, thus the consistency condition
holds.
The last heuristic considered is a non admissible one (as shown in Fig. 7.34), but
at the same time it is the one that uses the domain information in a more intelligent
way. We call it path heuristic. It starts by calculating the distance matrix between
all non-wall cells and uses it to find the distance from the agent to the closest box,
then it adds the distance from that box to the closest goal and after that it continues
adding the distance from that goal to the closest not-yet-considered box, and so on.
It tries to guide the agent through a decided path.
4This example works because we were not so accurate when we implemented this heuristic. If we
subtract 1 from the right distances, the path heuristic would not overestimate this example. In this
case it happens because we are measuring the distance from the agent to the closest box without
subtracting 1 and the distance from the goal to the next closest box without subtracting 2, since the
agent will not enter the goal position and then it has to end up close to the box and not in the box
cell.
==PAGE:75==
7.3 Accuracy of the learned heuristics
65
Figure 7.3: Simple example that shows that the path heuristic, as implemented in
this thesis, sometimes overestimates the optimal length.
In the pre-
sented case, the optimal solution length is 3, whereas our heuristic re-
turn 6. However, even making the path heuristic more accurate and
therefore not overestimating this example, it can still happen that it
overestimates the optimal solution length due to a non optimal box-
goal pairing.
7.3
Accuracy of the learned heuristics
We evaluate the accuracy of all the heuristics using the MSPE on the test set, shown
in Eq. 3.14. We want to highlight the fact that the error, in general, depends on the
type of levels we use to evaluate the accuracy of our heuristic. Therefore, all results
we described in this chapter depend on the common patterns used by the generator
and on the scores we used to decide which levels to select. It will not be strange if,
changing the test set, we obtain different results in terms of MSPE, but the general
trend should remain the same.
In Fig. 7.4, we can see that, overall, the learned heuristic has a lower MSPE
than the other domain-dependent heuristics. Furthermore, while it is not so clear
from Fig. 7.4, the heuristic values given by the CNN are more precise in predicting
shorter solution lengths, whereas the mean squared error increases when the solution
lengths to predict are bigger. This trend can be noticed easily in the Fig. 7.5, where
we consider only the MSPEs of the hCNN in the different datasets. This behavior is
shared with the other baseline heuristic functions, which are less precise when asked
to predict longer solution length values. This is natural also for humans: given a
Sokoban level, we are able to understand easily how many actions are required to
solve it when the solution is short and there are not so many interactions with boxes,
while when we have more boxes or the solution is longer, our prediction would be
uncertain.
In case of levels with only one box, the path heuristic and the Manhattan heuris-
tic are very similar and their error follows the same curve.
This is because they
are measuring the same distances (agent-to-box plus box-to-goal distance) but using
different metrics. The path heuristic results in a more precise approximation of the
real solution length than the Manhattan because it uses the real distance, i.e. the
one that does not consider the walls. When we consider the datasets with two boxes,
==PAGE:76==
66
7 Results and discussion
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Solution Length
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
MSPE test set
MSPE on 8x8 1 box dataset
MSPE CNN h
MSPE Manhattan h
MSPE Minimum Cost Matching h
MSPE Path h
(a) 8 × 8 size with 1 box dataset
0
5
10
15
20
25
Solution Length
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
MSPE test set
MSPE on 8x8 2 boxes dataset
MSPE CNN h
MSPE Manhattan h
MSPE Minimum Cost Matching h
MSPE Path h
(b) 8 × 8 size with 2 boxes dataset
0
5
10
15
20
25
Solution Length
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
MSPE test set
MSPE on 11x11 1 box dataset
MSPE CNN h
MSPE Manhattan h
MSPE Minimum Cost Matching h
MSPE Path h
(c) 11 × 11 size with 1 box dataset
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Solution Length
0
100
200
300
400
500
MSPE test set
MSPE on 11x11 2 boxes dataset
MSPE CNN h
MSPE Manhattan h
MSPE Minimum Cost Matching h
MSPE Path h
(d) 11 × 11 size with 2 boxes dataset
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Solution Length
0
100
200
300
400
MSPE test set
MSPE on 15x15 1 box dataset
MSPE CNN h
MSPE Manhattan h
MSPE Minimum Cost Matching h
MSPE Path h
(e) 15 × 15 size with 1 box dataset
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Solution Length
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
MSPE test set
MSPE on 15x15 2 boxes dataset
MSPE CNN h
MSPE Manhattan h
MSPE Minimum Cost Matching h
MSPE Path h
(f) 15 × 15 size with 2 boxes dataset
Figure 7.4: Comparison between the MSPE of each label for every dataset we con-
sidered. In each plot the error of the three domain-dependent heuristics
and the learned heuristic are showed. Fluctuation in the error depends
on the types of levels created by the generator.
==PAGE:77==
7.3 Accuracy of the learned heuristics
67
the error of the Manhattan heuristic increases and it is in between the error of the
minimum-cost box-to-goal matching heuristic and the one of the path heuristic. This
is because the Manhattan heuristic measures the distance of the boxes to the closest
goal, without considering a box-to-goal assignment, and therefore it might consider
the distance from the two boxes to the same goal, resulting in a lower approximation
of the real solution length. The MSPE, as result, is highly affected by these situations.
On the other hand, the heuristic value based on the minimum-cost box-to-goal
matching, representing a tighter lower bound, will be smaller, and sometimes much
smaller, than the real solution length, resulting in an higher MSPE. The main problem
is that we are not taking into account the number of actions that the agent has to
perform to reach the boxes from its initial position. Even if the level is quite small,
8 × 8 with 1 box for example, in a long solution plan, like size 15 or higher, the
agent can be far from the box, therefore we would have a lot of actions that are not
considered in the heuristic value given by the minimum-cost matching, resulting in
a high squared difference between the prediction and the real target. And since we
are considering the mean of all these squared differences, we have that the average,
unlike the median, is affected by the highest value.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Solution Length
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
MSPE test set
Learned heuristic MSPEs on all the dataset
MSPE CNN on 8x8 1 box
MSPE CNN on 8x8 2 boxes
MSPE CNN on 11x11 1 box
MSPE CNN on 11x11 2 boxes
MSPE CNN on 15x15 1 box
MSPE CNN on 15x15 2 box
Figure 7.5: MSPE of all the learned heuristic on the respective test sets.
Since
we consider different range of solution lengths for each dataset, all the
lines has different length. While all the heuristic are quite precise when
the solution length to predict is small, when this starts to increase the
CNNs have more uncertainty.
In summary, the overall MSPE on the test set of our trained CNN, which is given
by the mean of the MSPE for each label, is shown in Table 7.1
==PAGE:78==
68
7 Results and discussion
Table 7.1: Overall MSPE of the learned heuristics on the different test sets.
Level size
Solution Range
MSPE
8 × 8
1 box
0-18
0.10
2 boxes
0-26
2.08
11 × 11
1 box
0-27
0.47
2 boxes
0-35
3.62
15 × 15
1 box
0-31
1.48
2 boxes
0-40
5.19
7.3.1
Error distribution
The MSPE, as represented in Eq. 3.14, is useful when it is used as loss function
to train a machine learning model, because it penalizes more the higher differences
between the prediction and the real target, and it will focus on getting those smaller,
since these are the one that influences the overall MSPE the most. Furthermore, it is
useful as accuracy measure to compare how different models work, as we did in Fig.
7.4. However, since we are predicting distances, we want to have a more informative
representation of the errors of our predictions than the one given by the MSPE. For
example, we would like to understand better what it means that our CNN has a
MSPE of 11.14 in assigning the heuristic value to 15 × 15-size levels with two boxes
that has a solution length of 39.
To have an overview from another perspective, we plot the error distribution,
given by ˆyi −yi for all the examples i in our test set, considering different solution
ranges. In this paragraph, we only show the plots for the 15×15 datasets, since these
are the ones in which the CNN has the highest overall MSPE for both the one box
and two boxes scenario. All the other plots are in Appendix A.1.
In both figures in 7.6, we can see that the learned heuristic is more precise in
predicting small and medium solution lengths. In 7.6(a), the predictions for a level
that has an optimal solution in the range of 0 −10 has an error that usually goes
from −0.5 to +0.5, which means that our CNN can predict the real target plus an
error that is in the mentioned range. If we plot the error distribution of the solution
in the range 0 −5, we will see an higher histogram around zero, since the CNN has a
lower error in predicting those solutions. The error increases when we consider bigger
optimal solution length, indeed the height of curve that fits the orange and green
histograms is lower than the one of the blue histogram. However, most examples in
these ranges have an error that goes from −2 to 2. There could be situations in which
the error is higher than ±2, but those seem to happen rarely.
The 15×15 with 2 boxes is the dataset in which the learned heuristic is less precise,
as we noticed looking at the MSPE line in Fig. 7.5 and in Table 7.1. This is reflected
also in the error distribution showed in Fig. 7.6(b). Indeed, the curves described by
the histograms are lower than the one in Fig. 7.6(a) and, at the same time, are more
spread along the x-axis. While the CNN could still predict in an acceptable way the
optimal solutions between 0 and 10, where the error is contained in the range ±2 (also
==PAGE:79==
7.4 Performances of the learned heuristics
69
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
Error = Prediction - Real target
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Number of examples 
Error distribution in 15x15 1 box (hist width = 0.25)
Solution 21-31
Solution 11-20
Solution 0-10
(a) Error distribution on 15 × 15 with 1 box
dataset
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Error = Prediction - Real target
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Number of examples 
Error distribution in 15x15 2 boxes (hist width = 0.25)
Solution 32-40
Solution 21-31
Solution 11-20
Solution 0-10
(b) Error distribution on 15 × 15 with 2 boxes
dataset
Figure 7.6: Error distributions in two considered datasets. As shown in Table 7.1,
they have the higher MSPE between the dataset considered, but at the
same time these contains the bigger size levels considered. The x-axis
represents the result of the difference ˆyi −yi, while the y-axis represent
the number of example of our test set, which difference with the real
target ends up in that bin. Each bin has width of 0.25 .
in this case we expect the solution lengths in this range that get higher error are the
one that are in the subrange 6 −10), we can see that all the other ranges considered
have long tails both on the right and on the left. One last interesting thing that
could be noticed from this plot, since we are computing ˆyi −yi (prediction minus real
target), is that the heuristic given by the CNN seems to overestimate more the level
which optimal solution is in 21 −31, whereas it underestimate more the solutions in
32 −40.
A similar analysis can be done with the error distribution in the other considered
datasets. In case of 8 × 8 and 11 × 11 with one box, the learned heuristic is really
precise, thus all the solution-range distributions have an high peak around zero and
only few errors have an error higher than ±0.5. In the two boxes scenario, we obtain
a similar plots to Fig. 7.6(b), but less spread on the x-axis, i.e. smaller errors.
7.4
Performances of the learned heuristics
In the previous section we compared our learned heuristics in terms of accuracy with
three different baselines heuristics, using the MSPE as metric. As mentioned before,
outliers, i.e. data that have values that is “unusually different” from all the others,
have a big effect on the value of the mean. Because of this, in our domain, when we
compute the MSPE for all the different heuristics, these can be affected by possible
unusual behavior caused by a particular topology of some levels. Therefore, from 7.4
==PAGE:80==
70
7 Results and discussion
we cannot conclude that the learned heuristic will perform the best when embedded
in a planner because it gets a lower MSPE than the domain-dependent heuristic in
all the considered dataset.
To measure the heuristic’s performance in a more fair way, we solved every level of
the test set, without considering all its augmentations5, and we computed the number
of explored and generated nodes during the graph search. We did this both using the
A* and Greedy best first search. In this section, we will focus on the analysis of the
number of explored nodes, which are also related to the number of nodes generated
during the search, since to generate more nodes and add them into the frontier we
have to expand a node first.
Plots for the generated nodes can be found in the
Appendix A.3. We start by analyzing the performances in the 1 box scenario, and
then we will focus on the 2 boxes.
7.4.1
Performances on 1-box-datasets
By combining all the plots in Fig. 7.7 we can draw some conclusions regarding the
performance of our CNN as a heuristic function approximation. We can notice that
in most plots the learned heuristic is the one that has the lowest median among
all the considered heuristics. In combination with the A* search, the CNN heuristic
explored much fewer nodes compared to using the baseline heuristics. In each dataset,
the typical number of nodes explored by using our CNN as heuristic function increases
when levels with longer optimal solution length are considered. This can be noticed
by looking at the shaded area (the quartiles) related to the blue line, which is larger
when the solution lengths are longer. This is because, as shown in Fig. 7.6, the error
distribution of longer solutions is broader than the one of smaller optimal length, and
this can cause the expansion of useless nodes during the search.
In case we use Greedy Best First Search, the performance of the learned heuristic
becomes more similar to the Path and Manhattan heuristic.
That is because, as
shown in Chapter 2, the evaluation function of a node f(n) considers only the heuristic
value h(n). For short solutions, we can see that the Greedy BFS with hCNN expands
exactly the number of nodes in the solution path (we have no quartiles in both 8 × 8
and 11 × 11 until solution of length 12), which means that we are perfectly guiding
the search. For longer solutions, instead, the heuristic values predicted by the CNN
suffer from lower accuracy. In addition to that, it could happens that during the
search, the agent reaches some states configuration that have an optimal solution
length from that that is outside the range on which the network was trained, so the
value predicted will be random but, presumably, high.
Looking at the baseline heuristics, it is reasonable that in a 1-box situation both
the Manhattan heuristic and the Path heuristic expand similar number of nodes,
with the latter that expands slightly less nodes due to its higher accuracy.
The
minimum-cost box-to-goal matching heuristic, instead, results to be the one that
typically expands more nodes due to the lack of guidance in the search every time
5On average we solved ≈800 levels per label, for each dataset
==PAGE:81==
7.4 Performances of the learned heuristics
71
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Solution Length
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
Median of expanded nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(a) Median of explored nodes in 8 × 8 with 1
box solved using A*
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Solution Length
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Median of expanded nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(b) Median of explored nodes in 8 × 8 with 1
box solved using GreedyBFS
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
Solution Length
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Median of expanded nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(c) Median of explored nodes in 11 × 11 with
1 box solved using A*
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
Solution Length
0
20
40
60
80
100
Median of expanded nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(d) Median of explored nodes in 11 × 11 with
1 box solved using GreedyBFS
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
Solution Length
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Median of expanded nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(e) Median of explored nodes in 15 × 15 with
1 box solved using A*
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
Solution Length
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Median of expanded nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(f) Median of explored nodes in 15 × 15 with 1
box solved using GreedyBFS
Figure 7.7: Comparison between the median of the explored nodes number during
the graph search for solving a level with a particular solution length.
Median and quartiles of ≈800 solved levels per label are shown.
==PAGE:82==
72
7 Results and discussion
that the agent is not close to a box. This results in the expansion (and generation)
of many useless node during the search. Indeed, in case we are using A*, as long as
the agent does not reach a box, the search will be equivalent to the one performed
by a BFS. Instead, if we are using Greedy BFS, we have that each node will have the
same heuristic value until the agent moves a box.
7.4.2
Performances on 2-boxes-datasets
As shown in Table 7.1, the learned heuristic has a better accuracy in the datasets that
contains only one box, resulting in a error that is a lot higher in the 2-box datasets.
This lower accuracy is reflected also in the performances when it is embedded into a
planner. Indeed, looking at 7.8, we can see that the difference on the median number
of explored nodes between the hCNN and the path heuristic is less pronounced than
the 1-box scenario. hCNN still works better when used in combination with A*,
whereas using Greedy BFS the two have similar performance. Both expand less nodes
than the Manhattan heuristic and the one based on the minimum-cost matching.
On the other hand, it could be noticed that with two boxes, the number of nodes
explored by the Manhattan distance heuristic, when it used in combination with A*,
is similar to the one of the minimum-cost matching heuristic. This is because, as
shown in Fig. 7.4, in the two-boxes scenario, the MSPE is quite similar, and in all
case higher than the error of the Path and CNN heuristics.
While the Manhattan heuristic expands lots of useless nodes also in combination
with the GreedyBFS, it is unexpected that the minimum-cost box-to-goal matching
heuristic has a big decrease in the number of explored nodes switching from A* to
GreedyBFS 6. One possible explanation (more precisely a guess) for the drop in the
explored nodes using the minimum-cost matching heuristic, could be that there are a
lot of situations in which the two boxes are close to one goal, and therefore once the
agent reaches that area, it gets different heuristic values for guiding its search, since
it is moving the boxes.
7.4.3
Time performances
An important property of a heuristic function is the time spent to calculate it. Indeed,
sometimes a fast but inaccurate heuristic is preferred to one that is more precise but
slower. The learned heuristic seems to be a valid alternative in terms of explored
nodes both using A* and GreedyBFS, but if it requires too much time to evaluate a
single state, this makes us prefer a domain-dependent approach.
Two out of three baseline heuristics, base their calculation on a distance matrix
that is computed when the root is created, thus only once in the whole search. Al-
though this operation is expensive, its cost is amortized during the search, since it
allows one to get a distance between two points in constant time. Therefore, compar-
ing the time needed to evaluate single states from the test set would be unfair, since
6I will re-do the solving part before the defense, to check if there was an error in my code.
==PAGE:83==
7.4 Performances of the learned heuristics
73
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
Solution Length
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Median of expanded nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(a) Median of explored nodes in 8 × 8 with 2
box solved using A*
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
Solution Length
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Median of expanded nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(b) Median of explored nodes in 8 × 8 with 2
box solved using GreedyBFS
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36
Solution Length
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Median of expanded nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(c) Median of explored nodes in 11 × 11 with
2 box solved using A*
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36
Solution Length
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Median of expanded nodes
CNN heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(d) Median of explored nodes in 11 × 11 with
2 box solved using GreedyBFS
0
2
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40
Solution Length
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Median of expanded nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(e) Median of explored nodes in 15 × 15 with
2 box solved using A*
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40
Solution Length
0
50
100
150
200
250
Median of expanded nodes
CNN heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(f) Median of explored nodes in 15 × 15 with 2
box solved using GreedyBFS
Figure 7.8: Comparison between the median of the explored nodes number during
the graph search for solving a level with a particular solution length. In
the 11 × 11 and 15 × 15 solved using GreedyBFS plots we are not re-
porting the Manhattan heuristic line, because of its weak performances
that makes the entire plot not so readable, squashing all the other lines
all together. Median and quartiles of ≈800 solved levels per label are
shown.
==PAGE:84==
74
7 Results and discussion
most of the time for the domain-dependent heuristics will typically be given by the
calculation of the matrix. Computing the average time spent solving all the levels in
the test set, using all the four heuristic considered, would give us a single quantity
with an high variance that does not allow us to make lots of considerations. Thus, we
decide to choose randomly five levels with a long optimal solution from the 15 × 15
with two boxes level, which are the most complex level considered in this thesis. We
solved each of them using the hCNN and the baseline heuristics in combination with
A*, computing for each of them the time required to solve it and the number of eval-
uated nodes. Since an operation that requires some time is the load of the weight of
the trained CNN, we are not counting it, in the overall time used to solved a level
using hCNN. Note that wights have to be loaded only once, and they do not have to
be loaded again for different levels.
Looking at Fig.
7.9, we can notice that evaluating a state using the CNN is
slower than using one of the baseline heuristics. This is because we have to encode
each state using the entity-based representation and then do a forward pass on the
network. However, the number of evaluated nodes per second is stable across different
levels, as is the case for the Manhattan heuristic. Moreover, we can see that the
Manhattan heuristic, which is very simple to evaluate, is the one that has the best
ratio between evaluated nodes and time spent solving the level. Despite the very
high number of evaluated nodes, the Manhattan heuristic is still competitive in these
levels, but in larger or more complicated levels, the number of evaluated nodes will
explode, making it infeasible to use this heuristic.
The remaining two heuristics
have to compute the initial matrix, which is an expensive operation.
After that,
the evaluation of a state using the path heuristic is fast, so this heuristic is able to
amortize the time spent for computing the matrix. In contrast, the minimum-cost
matching heuristic has to compute a minimum matching for each evaluated state,
which makes it slower even after the creation of the matrix7. This can be seen by
observing the performance in the first level, where in all cases A* evaluates many more
nodes than in the other levels. Here, as mentioned above, the ratio of evaluated nodes
per second is similar to the other levels for the CNN and Manhattan heuristics. The
minimum-cost matching heuristic can amortize the initial matrix creation, to some
extent, yielding a higher number of evaluated nodes per second. The path heuristic,
however, shows a remarkable speed-up compared to the other levels, because after
computing the costly distance matrix, state evaluations are fast. It can be noticed,
also, that even though we are using the network trained on the 15×15 with two boxes
dataset, which is the one with the highest MSPE error, the search using this network
is the one that evaluates less nodes.
7In this cases we are computing a minimum cost matching with only 2 boxes and 2 goals, which
is relatively easy to compute. But when the number of boxes and goals increases also the time for
computing the minimum cost matching increase, since it is O(B3) where B is the number of boxes
[JS01] [Kuh55].
==PAGE:85==
7.4 Performances of the learned heuristics
75
Heuristic
Evaluated
Time
Evaluated/s
CNN
2874
7.09 s
405
Path
9541
2.18 s
4376
Manhattan
84024
5.04 s
11671
Min-cost
108096
17.53 s
6169
Heuristic
Evaluated
Time
Evaluated/s
CNN
401
0.88 s
455
Path
885
1.00 s
885
Manhattan
3154
0.20 s
15770
Min-cost
4720
1.62 s
2913
Heuristic
Evaluated
Time
Evaluated/s
CNN
604
1.32 s
457
Path
879
1.44 s
610
Manhattan
6902
0.40 s
17255
Min-cost
11963
2.79 s
4287
Heuristic
Evaluated
Time
Evaluated/s
CNN
476
1.04 s
449
Path
1998
1.76 s
1135
Manhattan
14214
0.90 s
15793
Min-cost
19123
4.89 s
3910
Heuristic
Evaluated
Time
Evaluated/s
CNN
414
0.90 s
460
Path
2319
2.55 s
909
Manhattan
51238
3.15 s
16266
Min-cost
38398
8.95 s
4290
Figure 7.9: Five levels considered as example for comparing the time required for
evaluating a level using the heuristic given by the CNN. Number of eval-
uated nodes, time required to solve the level and the ratio of evaluated
nodes per second are reported.
==PAGE:86==
76
7 Results and discussion
7.5
Important factors for learning a heuristic
In this section we are going to summarize some results that help us understand which
are some of the factors needed to learn a good heuristic function using CNNs. Firstly,
the CNN has to be deep enough. When we started this thesis using the 8 × 8 with
one box dataset, we used a simple CNN made up of seven convolutional layers plus
two fully connected layers. When we used it on the larger levels of size 11 × 11 we
saw that is was not enough to generalize well. We found that 12 convolutional layers
worked better both in the 11 × 11 and in the 8 × 8 dataset. From Table 7.1, we can
observe that the error of this network increases when trained on larger levels (15×15
size), and maybe a deeper network is required to have better results in those datasets.
The second factor that affects the accuracy of the deep CNN is the amount of
examples per solution length used to train the CNN. We spent a lot of time creating
a dataset that contains a huge number of examples for each level-size considered,
aiming for a high diversity. We also spent a lot of time sampling it to make all the
solution lengths have the same number of examples. As shown in Table 6.1, our final
training set contains millions of level instances. To see how the number of examples
affects the performance we train a CNN that uses only half examples for each labels
on the 11 × 11, both with one and two boxes, dataset. In the 11 × 11 with one box
case, we trained the CNN using 40988 examples per label, whereas in the 11×11 with
two boxes, the example for each label were 40912. In both case the new training set
contains more than one million examples.
From Fig. 7.10 it is clear that using more data the accuracy of the learned heuristic
improves.
0
5
10
15
20
25
Solution Length
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
MSPE test set
MSPE on the 11x11 1 box test set
MSPE CNN trained using the original training set
MSPE CNN trained in the half size training set
(a) MSPE on 11 × 11 with 1 box test set
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Solution Length
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
MSPE test set
MSPE on the 11x11 2 boxes test set
MSPE CNN trained using the original training set
MSPE CNN trained in the half size training set
(b) MSPE on 11 × 11 with 2 boxes set
Figure 7.10: Comparison between the error of a CNN trained using the original
training set and the one trained in one that contains only half examples
for each label. In both cases, the one trained using more training data
perform better.
==PAGE:87==
7.6 Things that did not work
77
7.6
Things that did not work
In the last section of this chapter we present some approaches we tried in order to
increase the accuracy of the learned heuristic in the two boxes scenario. Unfortunately,
these did not work as we expected, maybe more work is needed to find out a possible
configuration that makes these approaches work.
The learned heuristic has a better performance when we consider levels that have
only 1 box.
We tried to use a goal decomposition approach to extract important
information that could be used when learning a heuristic for levels in the 2-boxes
scenario. For each level in the 2-boxes dataset, we created all the four 1-box states,
each of which represent a specific box-to-goal assignment. Then we used the heuristic
learned for the datasets with 1 box, to their heuristic values. At the end of this step
we have four values for each 2-boxes level, where the first two and the second two are
related to a specific box-to-goal assignment in the original level. The process is shown
in Fig. 7.11. These can be used already to create simple heuristics. One of these, for
examples, consists in computing the sum of the two pairs and return the minimum,
which is an approximation of the length of the solution given a specific assignment.
This is obviously non-admissible, since considering the two goal as separate goal, and
there could be situations, like when boxes and goals are in the same area, in which
we counting twice the cost for the agent to reach the boxes.
CNN
CNN
CNN
CNN
a
b
c
d
Figure 7.11: Simple example that shows what happens in the goal decomposition
phase. It can be noticed that the first two new states refers to a specific
boxes-to-goal assignment in the original level, while the second two to
the other possible assignment. This procedure assign to each two-boxes
level four values a, b, c, d.
Our first “naive” approach, was to train a regular NN that only takes the four
==PAGE:88==
78
7 Results and discussion
values as input and tries to predict the overall solution length. This simple approach
did not work, as we expected. A different and more interesting approach is to consider
the information from the goal decomposition as additional information to be fed
into the usual CNN model. We tried both giving all four values and only the two
values of the pair whose sum is the smallest. We transformed each of these (2 or
4) values into a 2D matrix, where each cell contains exactly that value and then we
stacked those matrices along the depth of the input, represented using the entity-
based representation. As base model we used a CNN with the same structure as
the one chosen in Section 7.1, but the performance in the 2-boxes scenario were not
improved.
Another approach was to use a CNN as a state feature extractor and then, before
the fully connected layers, concatenate the four or two values with the flattened output
of the CNN (we also tried to feed it to a fully connected layer first, and then perform
the concatenation). Also skip connections from the four or two values to every fully
connected layers were considered, but none of these approaches (and combinations of
them) resulted in a better accuracy in the 2-boxes scenario.
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
In this thesis, we study and analyze to what degree a CNN can be used to learn a
heuristic function for planning domains, more specifically for the Sokoban domain.
The problem was modeled as a supervised learning regression task, where labeled
data are used to train a machine learning model in order to predict the target for
new, unseen data. Since there is no publicly available Sokoban dataset that is large
enough for our purpose, the starting point of this thesis was the creation of six
different datasets, considering variations both on level size and number of boxes in
the level. We hope could be useful also for other researchers that want to test their
ideas on the Sokoban domain. Varying both the number of boxes and the size of the
level allowed us to get an idea of how the performance depends on these factors. A
property of the created datasets is that the validation and test set do not contain any
level topology that is already in the training set. This means not only duplicate levels,
but also levels that share the same wall structure. Ideally, this makes the learning
task more challenging, and it give us a more meaningful result on the accuracy of
CNN in learning the optimal solution length given a state. Indeed, in if we were to
allow levels with the same topology to be in both the training and the test set, many
test examples would have a closely related example in the training set. Therefore
the trained network would have a better accuracy on the test set, in terms of MSPE,
given by the fact that it can easily predict the target for levels whose layout is in
the training set, but, at the same time, it could be that it is not generalizing well in
unseen layouts.
We proposed three different CNN architectures and two possible input represen-
tations, and showed that in all cases the network can successfully learn a good heuris-
tic function approximation. The limited computational resources and the time con-
straints given by the DTU LSF 10 cluster did not allow us to train all the proposed
models until full convergence, therefore the model selection was not optimal since it
was made based on the MSPE on the validation set after three days of training.
Comparison of the trained model with three different domain-dependent heuristics
showed that the learned heuristic has a better accuracy in terms of MSPE, which
means that, in general, we would expect it to be able to predict a more precise value
of the optimal solution length than all the heuristic considered. This should make
the trained CNN more effective as heuristic when used for planning. Indeed, it is
the one that typically explores fewer nodes in comparison with the other baselines,
both when it is used in combination with A* and Greedy BFS in the 1-box cases.
==PAGE:90==
80
8 Conclusion
In the 2-boxes scenario, it is still the best performing heuristic when used with the
A* algorithm, however, when used in combination with Greedy BFS, it has similar
performance as the path heuristic, which is the more accurate of the three baselines.
In terms of time spent on evaluating a single state, it seems to be a bit slower than
all the considered heuristics, but it is also the most stable in terms of the number of
generated nodes per second.
Even though the trained CNN performs well in the considered datasets, this ap-
proach still has limitations. The main bottleneck is represented by the huge amount
of labeled data required to train a CNN that results in a low MSPE on unseen data.
Both creating data and generating their target value is time consuming and this op-
eration has to be repeated for each combination of level size and number of boxes we
want to consider. A possible alternative approach would be to use a trained network
on smaller levels to solve larger levels that contain the same number of boxes. In this
case, our approach, which limits the range of solution lengths considered, will not
work so well, since in larger levels we will get longer optimal solutions. However, the
need for a lot of labeled data persists. This is a problem, especially when considering
levels with more boxes (it is already infeasible when the number of boxes is 4).
Furthermore, the way we implemented our CNN requires that the input level size
is fixed. A way to overcome this limitation is to train a CNN on levels with different
size, padding the smaller ones with walls to obtain a uniform input size. More than
that, to reproduce the results presented in this thesis, also the number of boxes in the
training and test set has to be the same. It is possible to learn a heuristic using levels
with a non-fixed number of boxes, but to obtain a satisfying result it requires a huge
dataset, we suppose, and we would face the problem described above, of generating
the targets for levels with more than 3 boxes.
The solution to all these limitations would be to find a way to make the process
of learning a heuristic function independent from the labeled data, but, to the best
of our knowledge, there is no easy way to do this.
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX A
Additional plots
A.1
Error distribution
We present the additional plots, related to the 8×8 and 11×11 datasets, not presented
in Section 7.3.1.
4
2
0
2
4
Error = Prediction - Real target
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Number of examples 
Error distribution in 8x8 1 box (hist width = 0.25)
Solution 13-18
Solution 6-12
Solution 0-5
(a) Error distribution on 8 × 8 with 1 box
dataset
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
Error = Prediction - Real target
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Number of examples 
Error distribution in 8x8 2 boxes (hist width = 0.25)
Solution 19-26
Solution 10-18
Solution 0-9
(b) Error distribution on 8 × 8 with 2 boxes
dataset
4
2
0
2
4
Error = Prediction - Real target
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Number of examples 
Error distribution in 11x11 1 box (hist width = 0.25)
Solution 19-27
Solution 10-18
Solution 0-9
(c) Error distribution on 11 × 11 with 1 box
dataset
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
Error = Prediction - Real target
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Number of examples 
Error distribution in 11x11 2 boxes (hist width = 0.25)
Solution 18-36
Solution 19-27
Solution 10-18
Solution 0-9
(d) Error distribution on 11 × 11 with 2 boxes
dataset
Figure A.1: Error distributions in the 8 × 8 and 11 × 11 datasets. Each bin has
width of 0.25 .
==PAGE:92==
82
A Additional plots
A.2
Expanded nodes missing plots
In this section we present the two plots that presents how the Manhattan distance
works.
We did not present them in Section 7.4.2, because the plots were not so
readable.
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36
Solution Length
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Median of expanded nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(a) Median of explored nodes in 11 × 11 with
2 box solved using GreedyBFS
0
2
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40
Solution Length
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
Median of expanded nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(b) Median of explored nodes in 15 × 15 with
2 box solved using GreedyBFS
Figure A.2: Comparison between the median of the explored nodes number during
the graph search for solving a level with a particular solution length.
The presented results are related to the 11 × 11 and 15 × 15 with 2
boxes datasets solved using Greedy BFS .
A.3
Generated nodes plots
In this Section, we include the plots related to the generated nodes in solving the test
set levels for every heuristic considered. As we did before, we report both the ones
obtained using A* and those obtained in combination with Greedy BFS. We firstly
report the plots related to the datasets with 1 box, and then we will focus more on
those with 2 boxes.
In the first case, it can be noticed that the learned heuristic has better performance
than the other heuristic both using A* and Greedy BFS, except for the 15 × 15 with
1 box (see Fig. A.3), solved using Greedy BFS, where it has similar performance
of the path heuristic. Also in the 2-boxes case (see Fig. A.4), the learned heuristic
performs better than the baselines, except for 15 × 15 with 2 boxes in combination
with Greedy BFS, where for levels with long solution length, the path heuristic seems
to generate typically fewer nodes.
Since for the 2-boxes datasets, we are not always reporting the performance of the
Manhattan heuristic, since it makes the plots not so readable, we present it in Fig.
A.5.
==PAGE:93==
A.3 Generated nodes plots
83
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Solution Length
0
50
100
150
200
250
Median of generated nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(a) Median of generated nodes in 8 × 8 with 1
box solved using A*
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Solution Length
0
20
40
60
80
Median of generated nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(b) Median of generated nodes in 8 × 8 with 1
box solved using GreedyBFS
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
Solution Length
0
100
200
300
400
Median of generated nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(c) Median of generated nodes in 11 × 11 with
1 box solved using A*
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
Solution Length
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Median of generated nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(d) Median of generated nodes in 11 × 11 with
1 box solved using GreedyBFS
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
Solution Length
0
100
200
300
400
500
Median of generated nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(e) Median of generated nodes in 15 × 15 with
1 box solved using A*
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
Solution Length
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Median of generated nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(f) Median of generated nodes in 15 × 15 with
1 box solved using GreedyBFS
Figure A.3: Comparison between the median of the generated nodes number during
the graph search for solving a level with a particular solution length.
Datasets with only 1 box are considered. Median and quartiles of ≈800
solved levels per label are shown.
==PAGE:94==
84
A Additional plots
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
Solution Length
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Median of generated nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(a) Median of generated nodes in 8 × 8 with 2
box solved using A*
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
Solution Length
0
200
400
600
800
Median of generated nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(b) Median of generated nodes in 8 × 8 with 2
box solved using GreedyBFS
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36
Solution Length
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Median of generated nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(c) Median of generated nodes in 11 × 11 with
2 box solved using A*
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36
Solution Length
0
100
200
300
400
500
Median of generated nodes
CNN heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(d) Median of generated nodes in 11 × 11 with
2 box solved using GreedyBFS
0
2
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40
Solution Length
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
15000
17500
20000
Median of generated nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(e) Median of generated nodes in 15 × 15 with
2 box solved using A*
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40
Solution Length
0
100
200
300
400
Median of generated nodes
CNN heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(f) Median of generated nodes in 15 × 15 with
2 box solved using GreedyBFS
Figure A.4: Comparison between the median of the generated nodes number during
the graph search for solving a level with a particular solution length.
Datasets with only 2 box are considered. Also in this case in the 11×11
and 15 × 15 solved using Greedy, we are not reporting the Manhattan
performance for preserving readability. Median and quartiles of ≈800
solved levels per label are shown.
==PAGE:95==
A.4 Solution length plots
85
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36
Solution Length
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Median of generated nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(a) Median of generated nodes in 11 × 11 with
2 box solved using GreedyBFS
0
2
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40
Solution Length
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
Median of generated nodes
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(b) Median of generated nodes in 15 × 15 with
2 box solved using GreedyBFS
Figure A.5: Manhattan heuristic performance on 11 × 11 and 15 × 15 with 2 boxes,
solved using Greedy BFS. Median and quartiles of ≈800 solved levels
per label are shown.
A.4
Solution length plots
We consider the median of the difference of the solution length returned by solving the
test set with the considered heuristics and the optimal solution length. In particular,
from Fig.A.6, it can be seen that for longer solution length, using A* with our learned
heuristic, we get non-optimal solutions sometimes.
This means that the learned
heuristic is not admissible.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
Solution Length
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Median (solution found - optimal solution)
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(a) Median of solution found by the different
heuristics in 11×11 with 2 box solved using A*
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40
Solution Length
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Median (solution found - optimal solution)
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(b) Median of solution found by the different
heuristics in 15×15 with 2 box solved using A*
Figure A.6: Comparison in 11 × 11 and 15 × 15 with 2 box, solved using A* .
==PAGE:96==
86
A Additional plots
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
Solution Length
0
2
4
6
8
10
Median (solution found - optimal solution)
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(a) Median of solution found by the different
heuristics in 8 × 8 with 2 box solved using
GreedyBFS
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
Solution Length
0
5
10
15
20
Median (solution found - optimal solution)
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(b) Median of solution found by the different
heuristics in 11 × 11 with 2 box solved using
GreedyBFS
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40
Solution Length
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Median (solution found - optimal solution)
CNN heuristic
Manhattan heuristic
Minimum Cost Matching heuristic
Path heuristic
(c) Median of solution found by the different
heuristics in 15 × 15 with 2 box solved using
GreedyBFS
Figure A.7: Comparison in the median of the difference between the solution lengths
found by the considered heuristic using Greedy BFS and the optimal
solution length. Median and quartiles of ≈800 solved levels per label
are shown.
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX B
Additional experiments
B.1
How does the ResNet really perform
Being able to use the GPU only during the last days limited a bit the model selection
procedure. After the deadline, we tried to understand if the ResNet can really perform
better than the CNN with shortcuts that we have chosen in Section 7.1. Using a Tesla
V100, we trained both two networks for 24hr, which is the time limit for accessing
the GPU. The MSPE on the validation set, is showed in Fig. B.1. We were able to
train the usual CNN with the shortcuts from the input to each convolutional layers
for 11mln of iteration of the Adam algorithm, whereas the ResNet only for 7mln.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Iterations
1e7
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
MSPE validation set
Comparison ResNet and CNN with shortcuts trained on GPU
CNN shortcuts w/ 4 channels
RESNET w/ 4 channels
Figure B.1: Comparison between the MSPE in the validation set during the training
between the CNN with shortcuts and the ResNet.
It is clear that the ResNet can achieve better performance, while the CNN con-
verges after 3mln iterations. But how this small improvements affect the results we
showed in this thesis using the CNN with the shortcuts connections (trained for 6mln
of iterations)? To understand a bit better the real performance of this ResNet, we
start comparing the MSPE on the test set between three different architectures: the
ResNet, which seems to be the one that performs the best, the CNN with shortcuts
==PAGE:98==
88
B Additional experiments
both trained for 6mln iterations (the one used for the thesis) and the one trained for
11mln iterations.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Solution Length
0
2
4
6
8
10
MSPE test set
MSPE on the 11x11 2 boxes test set
MSPE CNN with shortcuts trained for 11mln iterations
MSPE RESNET trained for 7mln iterations
MSPE CNN used in the thesis
Figure B.2: Comparison between the MSPE in the test set of the 11 × 11 with 2
boxes dataset between the CNN with shortcuts (both the one used in
the thesis and the one trained for 11mln iterations) and the ResNet.
It can be noticed that, while the ResNet gains more accuracy on most of the opti-
mal solution lengths, when we consider the longest solutions in the dataset (33, 34, 35),
the ResNet has a similar precision of the CNN with shortcuts. In addition to that,
the one we used for the whole thesis, which was trained for 6mln Adam iterations,
has a slightly better accuracy than the one trained for 11mln iterations.
But how does this small improvement in the overall accuracy affect the effective-
ness once embedded in a planner? We solved again the 11 × 11 with 2 boxes dataset,
both in combination with A* and Greedy BFS and plot the median of explored and
generated nodes with respect to the learned heuristic by the CNN used in the main
corpus of the thesis.
From Fig. B.3 and Fig. B.4, can be seen that using the heuristic learned by the
ResNet, gives us fewer expanded (and consequently generated) nodes only when it is
used in combination with A* algorithm. Anyway, the difference is not significant.
B.2
Using non-optimal solution lengths to learn a heuristic
Since the accuracy of the learned heuristic decrease when we consider more than one
box, we planned to measure the performance of a learned heuristic also on levels that
contains 4 boxes. We created train, validation and test set of 11×11 levels that has 4
boxes but to solve them in an optimal way requires to much computation time, thus
==PAGE:99==
B.2 Using non-optimal solution lengths to learn a heuristic
89
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36
Solution Length
0
50
100
150
200
250
Median expanded nodes
CNN heuristic
ResNet heuristic
(a) Median of expanded nodes in 11 × 11 with
2 box solved using A*
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36
Solution Length
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Median expanded nodes
CNN heuristic
ResNet heuristic
(b) Median of expanded nodes in 11 × 11 with
2 box solved using GreedyBFS
Figure B.3: Median expanded nodes for solving the 11 × 11 with 2 boxes test set.
Median and quartiles of ≈800 solved levels per label are shown.
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36
Solution Length
0
100
200
300
400
Median generated nodes
CNN heuristic
ResNet heuristic
(a) Median of generated nodes in 11 × 11 with
2 box solved using A*
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36
Solution Length
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Median generated nodes
CNN heuristic
ResNet heuristic
(b) Median of generated nodes in 11 × 11 with
2 box solved using Greedy BFS
Figure B.4: Median generated nodes for solving the 11 × 11 with 2 boxes test set.
Median and quartiles of ≈800 solved levels per label are shown.
==PAGE:100==
90
B Additional experiments
we have to abandon this idea. Solving these dataset using Greedy BFS allow us to
speed up the process of computing the targets at the cost of loosing the guarantee of
the solution optimality.
We try to study how the performance changes, only in terms of accuracy, when
the CNN is trained on non-optimal solutions. We considered the 11 × 11 with two
boxes training set and we solved it again using Greedy BFS algorithm. In this way,
most targets y, associated to each training example, are non-optimal. As expected,
for this dataset we obtain solution ranges outside the range considered (see Table 6.1),
but we allow them to be in the training set and be used to train the network. We
measured the accuracy of the model both in predicting the optimal solution length
and the non-optimal one, obtained solving also the test set using Greedy BFS. In Fig.
B.5, those are compared with the performance of the CNN trained in the optimal
solution lengths.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Solution Length
0
10
20
30
40
50
MSPE test set
MSPE on the 11x11 2 boxes test set
MSPE CNN trained using the optimal lengths training set
MSPE CNN trained in the Greedy solved training set, 
 tested in the optimal targets
MSPE CNN trained in the Greedy solved training set,
 tested in the greedy targets
Figure B.5: Comparison between the MSPE in the test set of the 11 × 11 with 2
boxes dataset between the network trained on non-optimal labels and
test both in the test set with optimal label and in the one with non-
optimal label.
Also the result of the network used in this thesis is
reported.
It is clear that since we are training a network to predict longer solution lengths
than the optimal ones, when this is tested on the optimal solution lengths, it gets
an high MSPE (see orange line in Fig. B.5). Also the accuracy on the greedy labels
is not so high, meaning that the confusion introduced by the non-optimal solution
lengths, does not allow the CNN to extract meaningful feature to predict with high
precision unseen data.
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX C
Proofs
C.1
Consistency implies admissibility
We are going to show that a consistent heuristic h(n) must also be admissible. Re-
calling the definition of consistency, we have that a heuristic h(n) is consistent if, for
every node n and every successor n′ of n generated by any action a, the estimated
cost (the heuristic) of getting to the goal from n is not greater than the cost of the
action for reaching n′ plus the estimated cost of reaching the goal from n′. Formally,
this can be written as:
h(n) ≤c(n, a, n′) + h(n′)
(C.1)
In this thesis, we are considering all unit costs, therefore, the above equation becomes:
h(n) ≤1 + h(n′)
(C.2)
We will prove the fact a consistent heuristic h(n) must be also admissible for the unit
costs case.
Proof:
This is done by induction. Let h∗(n) be the length of the shortest path from
the node n to the goal.
• Base Case: If there are 0 steps from n to the goal, we have that n is the goal
state. At the same time, for the definition of heuristic function h(n) = 0 and
also h∗(n) = 0, since it is the optimal length. Thus, h(n) = 0 ≤h∗(n).
• Inductive Step: If n now is k steps away from the goal, there must be among
its successor a node n′ that is k −1 steps away from the goal and it is on the
optimal path of length k from n to the goal. Considering it, we have:
h(n) ≤1 + h(n′)
since the heuristic is consistent. But from the induction hypothesis we have
that h(n′) ≤h∗(n′), therefore:
h(n) ≤1 + h∗(n′) = h∗(n)
given the fact that n′ is in the optimal path from n to the goal and we are
considering unit costs for every action.
==PAGE:102==
92
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
[Aba+16]
Martı́n Abadi et al. “Tensorflow: a system for large-scale machine learn-
ing.” In: OSDI. Volume 16. 2016, pages 265–283.
[AZH11]
Shahab Jabbari Arfaee, Sandra Zilles, and Robert C Holte. “Learning
heuristic functions for large state spaces.” In: Artif. Intell. 175.16-17
(2011), pages 2075–2098.
[Ben12]
Yoshua Bengio. “Practical recommendations for gradient-based training
of deep architectures”. In: Neural networks: Tricks of the trade. Springer,
2012, pages 437–478.
[BG01]
Blai Bonet and Héctor Geffner. “Planning as heuristic search”. In: Arti-
ficial Intelligence 129.1-2 (2001), pages 5–33.
[Bis06]
Christopher Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer,
January 2006. url: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/
publication/pattern-recognition-machine-learning/.
[BM00]
Justin Boyan and Andrew W Moore. “Learning evaluation functions to
improve optimization by local search”. In: Journal of Machine Learning
Research 1.Nov (2000), pages 77–112.
[Bot+05]
Adi Botea et al. “Macro-FF: Improving AI planning with automatically
learned macro-operators”. In: Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research
24 (2005), pages 581–621.
[Bot10]
Léon Bottou. “Large-scale machine learning with stochastic gradient de-
scent”. In: Proceedings of COMPSTAT’2010. Springer, 2010, pages 177–
186.
[CLG01]
Rich Caruana, Steve Lawrence, and C Lee Giles. “Overfitting in neu-
ral nets: Backpropagation, conjugate gradient, and early stopping”. In:
Advances in neural information processing systems. 2001, pages 402–408.
[CS07]
Andrew I Coles and Amanda J Smith. “Marvin: A heuristic search plan-
ner with online macro-action learning”. In: Journal of Artificial Intelli-
gence Research 28 (2007), pages 119–156.
[DCB08]
Tomás De La Rosa, Sergio Jiménez Celorrio, and Daniel Borrajo. “Learn-
ing Relational Decision Trees for Guiding Heuristic Planning.” In: ICAPS.
2008, pages 60–67.
==PAGE:104==
94
Bibliography
[DHS11]
John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. “Adaptive subgradient
methods for online learning and stochastic optimization”. In: Journal
of Machine Learning Research 12.Jul (2011), pages 2121–2159.
[DM05]
Hal Daumé III and Daniel Marcu. “Learning as search optimization:
Approximate large margin methods for structured prediction”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 22nd international conference on Machine learning. ACM.
2005, pages 169–176.
[DV16]
Vincent Dumoulin and Francesco Visin. “A guide to convolution arith-
metic for deep learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.07285 (2016).
[DZ99]
Dorit Dor and Uri Zwick. “SOKOBAN and other motion planning prob-
lems”. In: Computational Geometry 13.4 (1999), pages 215–228.
[EG04]
Marco Ernandes and Marco Gori. “Likely-admissible and sub-symbolic
heuristics”. In: Proceedings of the 16th European Conference on Artificial
Intelligence. Citeseer. 2004, pages 613–617.
[FKT11]
Alan Fern, Roni Khardon, and Prasad Tadepalli. “The first learning
track of the international planning competition”. In: Machine Learning
84.1-2 (2011), pages 81–107.
[FN71]
Richard E Fikes and Nils J Nilsson. “STRIPS: A new approach to the
application of theorem proving to problem solving”. In: Artificial intelli-
gence 2.3-4 (1971), pages 189–208.
[GBC16]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning.
http://www.deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016.
[Giu+16]
Alessandro Giusti et al. “A Machine Learning Approach to Visual Per-
ception of Forest Trails for Mobile Robots.” In: IEEE Robotics and Au-
tomation Letters 1.2 (2016), pages 661–667.
[GL14]
Yoav Goldberg and Omer Levy. “word2vec Explained: deriving Mikolov
et al.’s negative-sampling word-embedding method”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1402.3722 (2014).
[GNT04]
Malik Ghallab, Dana Nau, and Paolo Traverso. Automated Planning:
theory and practice. Elsevier, 2004.
[Goh17]
Gabriel Goh. “Why Momentum Really Works”. In: Distill (2017). doi:
10.23915/distill.00006. url: http://distill.pub/2017/momentum.
[Gro+17]
Edward Groshev et al. “Learning generalized reactive policies using deep
neural networks”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07280 (2017).
[Gro18]
Roger Grosse. Lecture notes in Machine Learning. http://www.cs.
toronto.edu/~rgrosse/courses/csc321_2018/. January 2018.
[Gu+17]
Shixiang Gu et al. “Deep reinforcement learning for robotic manipula-
tion with asynchronous off-policy updates”. In: Robotics and Automa-
tion (ICRA), 2017 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE. 2017,
pages 3389–3396.
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
95
[Hau+09]
Ami Hauptman et al. “GP-Rush: using genetic programming to evolve
solvers for the Rush Hour puzzle”. In: Proceedings of the 11th Annual con-
ference on Genetic and evolutionary computation. ACM. 2009, pages 955–
962.
[He+15]
Kaiming He et al. “Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing human-level
performance on imagenet classification”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on computer vision. 2015, pages 1026–1034.
[He+16]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep residual learning for image recognition”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition. 2016, pages 770–778.
[Hin12]
Geoffrey Hinton. RMSProp: Divide the gradient by a running average of
its recent magnitude. Coursera, video lecture. 2012.
[HN01]
Jörg Hoffmann and Bernhard Nebel. “The FF planning system: Fast plan
generation through heuristic search”. In: Journal of Artificial Intelligence
Research 14 (2001), pages 253–302.
[Jam+13]
Gareth James et al. An introduction to statistical learning. Volume 112.
Springer, 2013.
[Jim+12]
Sergio Jiménez et al. “A review of machine learning for automated plan-
ning”. In: The Knowledge Engineering Review 27.4 (2012), pages 433–
467.
[JS01]
Andreas Junghanns and Jonathan Schaeffer. “Sokoban: Enhancing gen-
eral single-agent search methods using domain knowledge”. In: Artificial
Intelligence 129.1-2 (2001), pages 219–251.
[JS97]
Andreas Junghanns and Jonathan Schaeffer. “Sokoban: A challenging
single-agent search problem”. In: In IJCAI Workshop on Using Games
as an Experimental Testbed for AI Reasearch. Citeseer. 1997.
[KB14]
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014).
[KH09]
Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of fea-
tures from tiny images. Technical report. Citeseer, 2009.
[KSH12]
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. “Imagenet clas-
sification with deep convolutional neural networks”. In: Advances in neu-
ral information processing systems. 2012, pages 1097–1105.
[Kuh55]
Harold W Kuhn. “The Hungarian method for the assignment problem”.
In: Naval research logistics quarterly 2.1-2 (1955), pages 83–97.
[LeC+12]
Yann A LeCun et al. “Efficient backprop”. In: Neural networks: Tricks
of the trade. Springer, 2012, pages 9–48.
[LeC+89a]
Yann LeCun et al. “Generalization and network design strategies”. In:
Connectionism in perspective (1989), pages 143–155.
==PAGE:106==
96
Bibliography
[LeC+89b]
Yann LeCun et al. “Backpropagation applied to handwritten zip code
recognition”. In: Neural computation 1.4 (1989), pages 541–551.
[LeC+98]
Yann LeCun et al. “Gradient-based learning applied to document recog-
nition”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 86.11 (1998), pages 2278–2324.
[Lev+16]
Sergey Levine et al. “End-to-end training of deep visuomotor policies”.
In: The Journal of Machine Learning Research 17.1 (2016), pages 1334–
1373.
[LKJ16]
Fei-Fei Li, Andrej Karpathy, and Justin Johnson. CS231n: Convolutional
neural networks for visual recognition. http : / / cs231n . github . io.
2016.
[McD+98]
Drew McDermott et al. “PDDL-the planning domain definition lan-
guage”. In: (1998).
[MHN13]
Andrew L Maas, Awni Y Hannun, and Andrew Y Ng. “Rectifier non-
linearities improve neural network acoustic models”. In: Proc. icml. Vol-
ume 30. 1. 2013, page 3.
[Mik+13a]
Tomas Mikolov et al. “Distributed representations of words and phrases
and their compositionality”. In: Advances in neural information process-
ing systems. 2013, pages 3111–3119.
[Mik+13b]
Tomas Mikolov et al. “Efficient estimation of word representations in
vector space”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 (2013).
[Mni+13]
Volodymyr Mnih et al. “Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602 (2013).
[Mni+15]
Volodymyr Mnih et al. “Human-level control through deep reinforcement
learning”. In: Nature 518.7540 (2015), page 529.
[Mur12]
Kevin P. Murphy. Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective. The
MIT Press, 2012. isbn: 0262018020, 9780262018029.
[Pol64]
Boris T Polyak. “Some methods of speeding up the convergence of itera-
tion methods”. In: USSR Computational Mathematics and Mathematical
Physics 4.5 (1964), pages 1–17.
[Pom89]
Dean A Pomerleau. “Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural
network”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems. 1989,
pages 305–313.
[RH09]
Gabriele Röger and Malte Helmert. “Combining heuristic estimators
for satisficing planning”. In: ICAPS 2009 Workshop on Heuristics for
Domain-Independent Planning. 2009, pages 43–48.
[RHW86]
David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. “Learn-
ing representations by back-propagating errors”. In: nature 323.6088
(1986), page 533.
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
97
[RN16]
Stuart J Russell and Peter Norvig. Artificial intelligence: a modern ap-
proach. Malaysia; Pearson Education Limited, 2016.
[S+98]
Richard S Sutton, Andrew G Barto, et al. Reinforcement learning: An
introduction. MIT press, 1998.
[Sch17]
Mark Schmidt. Lecture notes in Machine Learning, CPSC 340. https:
//www.cs.ubc.ca/~schmidtm/Courses/340-F17/. December 2017.
[SFH17]
Sara Sabour, Nicholas Frosst, and Geoffrey E Hinton. “Dynamic rout-
ing between capsules”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems. 2017, pages 3856–3866.
[SFS08]
Mehdi Samadi, Ariel Felner, and Jonathan Schaeffer. “Learning from
Multiple Heuristics.” In: AAAI. 2008, pages 357–362.
[Sil+16]
David Silver et al. “Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks
and tree search”. In: nature 529.7587 (2016), page 484.
[Sil+17]
David Silver et al. “Mastering the game of Go without human knowl-
edge”. In: Nature 550.7676 (2017), page 354.
[SK13]
Benjamin Satzger and Oliver Kramer. “Goal distance estimation for au-
tomated planning using neural networks and support vector machines”.
In: Natural Computing 12.1 (2013), pages 87–100.
[Sri+14]
Nitish Srivastava et al. “Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural net-
works from overfitting”. In: The Journal of Machine Learning Research
15.1 (2014), pages 1929–1958.
[Tib96]
Robert Tibshirani. “Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso”.
In: Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological)
(1996), pages 267–288.
[VBA13]
Jesús Virseda, Daniel Borrajo, and Vidal Alcázar. “Learning heuristic
functions for cost-based planning”. In: Planning and Learning (2013),
page 6.
[Web+17]
Théophane Weber et al. “Imagination-augmented agents for deep rein-
forcement learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06203 (2017).
[XFY07]
Yuehua Xu, Alan Fern, and Sung Wook Yoon. “Discriminative Learning
of Beam-Search Heuristics for Planning.” In: IJCAI. 2007, pages 2041–
2046.
[XFY10]
Yuehua Xu, Alan Fern, and Sung Wook Yoon. “Iterative Learning of
Weighted Rule Sets for Greedy Search.” In: ICAPS. 2010, pages 201–
208.
[YFG06]
Sung Wook Yoon, Alan Fern, and Robert Givan. “Learning Heuristic
Functions from Relaxed Plans.” In: ICAPS. Volume 2. 2006, page 3.
[ZD95]
Wei Zhang and Thomas G Dietterich. “A reinforcement learning ap-
proach to job-shop scheduling”. In: IJCAI. Volume 95. Citeseer. 1995,
pages 1114–1120.
==PAGE:108==
98
Bibliography
[ZH05]
Hui Zou and Trevor Hastie. “Regularization and variable selection via
the elastic net”. In: Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
(Statistical Methodology) 67.2 (2005), pages 301–320.
