==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Design and Implementation of an Extensi-
ble Framework for Securely Collecting and
Sharing Health-related Data from Wearable
Devices
Nikolaj King Lykkegaard
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Today scientist spend too much time setting up data managemenet systems for their
research projects because there is no real solution that supports them during all phases
of research. This shortens the time researchers have to perform the actual work and
could potentially weaken the quality of their work. Furthermore scientist often have
to collect data manually and setup up repositories to be able to store and share data
with co-workers with concerns of exposing sensitive data and losing valuable data.
This project proposes a solution that can help developers save time in the process of
setting up a project and managing all aspects of a project from collecting to publishing
the relevant research results. The system can create projects that are able to store
the meta data for the project and customize the project to the users needs. It also
functions as a data collection and management system that can automate the process
of connecting sensor, colleting data and storing data and its meta data in a secure way.
All access to resources is protected and only authorized personal have access to the
system. The technologies chosen for the project are build on good design principles
and can be easily expanded to support new features.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a Master degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, July 6, 2018
Nikolaj King Lykkegaard
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I wish to thank my supervisor Ekkart Kindler for guiding me through this project.
I also wish to thank my good friends Mr. Stoll and Mrs. Haavaldsen for always
keeping me motivated.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Data management in scientific research projects . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Outline of content
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Scientific data collection
7
2.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
User interface overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Domain model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Requirements for scientific data collection
21
3.1
Use cases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Functional Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
MoSCoW Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Non-functional requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Technologies for data collection
29
4.1
Fitbit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Empatica
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Design decisions
35
5.1
Component diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Implementation details of the data management system
43
6.1
Front-end implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
Rest implementation using Spring
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6.3
Endpoints for the back-end
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.4
MQTT implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.5
Persistence implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.6
Database Schema . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7
Test
57
7.1
Testing outcome
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.2
User management testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.3
Acceptance test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
8
Evaluation
63
9
Related work
65
9.1
ERDA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
9.2
Openlab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
9.3
Dash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
9.4
Figshare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
9.5
Re3data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
10 Conclusion
67
10.1 Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A Appendix A
69
Bibliography
85
==PAGE:11==
Contents
1
==PAGE:12==
2
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In today’s society, the access to new types of data has changed how we live, and the
introduction of internet of things has revolutionized data collection. In short, it now
enables our devices and machines - such as cars, fridges and other house appliances
– to connect to the internet. This, in turn, is a unique opportunity to make them
even more useful by analyzing and using the information they provide to make our
lives easier. The revolution that internet of things can be called has been pushed
forward by the many new ways of connecting our appliances.
Even low-powered
mobile cellular networks enabling us to connect to simple devices have open up new
opportunities. Most importantly, what the internet of things, but also smart phones,
and the internet have provided is not only automation of the data collection process,
but the sheer amount of it that is collected. In turn, the information gained from this
gigantic new data can help us develop and understand new aspects of our daily lives
that can push our society forward.
More specifically, the internet of things made its way to different subfields of
science, where it has the potential to accelerate and push development forward in
many research projects. Data collection is an important component in all scientific
research projects and is the foundation for its good quality. This puts high pressure
on the future systems used for these studies.
1.1
Data management in scientific research projects
Figure 1.1 shows the life-cycle of a research project. All research projects are built up
starting with the research planning phase where the project proposal and the project
is being planned and is then started. In this phase, a data management plan is set,
funding are planned, and other preparations are made. The ”active” state of the
research is when the collecting, analyzing, and sharing of the data takes place. The
last phase covers the sharing of the results with the community and ensuring that
the data used is saved for long-time preservation.
The data management plan is essential in a scientific research project to produce
a high quality outcome. It is a plan that covers:
• A layout of the data that needs to be collected and the methods needed to do
so
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: Researh project lifecycle. Picture taken from [Datb].
• Storage options for the different types of data.
• Documentation of the data to be able to understand the data collected
• Defining the sharing possibilities for the data set
• Long term preservation of the data after the research project has ended
All these phases of the project need to be considered when creating a Data man-
agement system that can support the researchers in their work.
1.2
Problem statement
Researchers starting a new project often loose considerable time and energy setting
up an infrastructure for the project, for there is no general data management system
to work on. Instead, a new data management system to conclude their research has
to be built every time a project is started. This takes valuable time away from the
actual research and lowers the quality of the end result.
1.3
Goal
The goal of this study is to develop a data management system that researchers
can use to set up and manage the life-cycle of their projects. The system shall be
able to support the researchers in starting and managing the project throughout all
phases described in 1.1. The system will also be able to connect and collect data from
different types of sensors. The system will store the raw data with the included meta
data from the sensors. Researchers with access rights will then gain view rights to a
copy of the data.
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Outline of content
5
1.4
Outline of content
This section describe a brief outline of the content in the chapters of this paper
Chapter 2: Scientific Data collection
This chapter presents an overview over the background information needed to un-
derstand the thoughts behind the project, it also shows the user interfaces from the
front-end and the domain model with an explanation of the concepts of the model.
Chapter 3: Requirements for scientific data collection
This chapter presents a use case diagram, functional requirements and a prioritiza-
tion of the functional requirements. Finishes with an overview of the non-functional
requirements of the system.
Chapter 4: Technologies for data collection
this chapter presents a explanation and discussing of the proposed technologies and
protocols used to collect data with.
Chapter 5: Design decisions
This chapter presents the important design decisions for the system.
Showing a
component diagram an explaining components and sub-components. then database
choices are discussed and finally sequence diagrams of the connections with the dif-
ferent devices are shown.
Chapter 6 Implementation details of the data management
system
This chapter presents some of the implementation details regarding the front end
implementation. Rest implementation using spring annotation is explained and end-
points are shown. The MQTT implementation details on both clients are also showed.
Finally persistent implementations are shown.
Chapter 7 Test
This chapter uses curl to test some of the use cases and to show how to access the
system using rest request. It also features a user acceptance test
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
Chapter 8 : Evaluation of the data management system
This chapter presents an evaulation of the project and results created.
Chapter 9 : Related works
This chapter presents some of the related done and that could compete with the
system proposed in this project
Chapter 10 : Conclusion
This chapter close this thesis with a conclusion an a list of things that could be
considered for future work.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Scientific data
collection
This chapter gives a detailed description of the background information needed to
understand the domain in which the system is going to operate and the main features
of the system. The first part of the chapter showcase two scenarios that explains
in which settings this system is used. The two scenarios are followed by a look at
the front end to give a view of the system from the users perspective. The chapter
finishes with a view of the domain model amd the concepts of the domain are pointed
out and explained in detail.
2.1
Overview
This section will go over two scenarios where a data collection and management
system can be effective. There are two main scenarios. The first scenario is called
the Project scenario and reflects a scenario based in a university environment where
research projects are carried out by researchers. The second scenario is called the
Hospital scenario. It covers a scenario where doctors use the system in for example a
rehabilitation program or for monitoring of single patients.
• Project Scenario
– In the project scenario a researcher who wants to start a new project can
use the system to set it up. The researcher can create a project with a
project name, type of project, time.frame startdate, enddate, deacription.
After creation of the project phases can be created to split up the project
and roles, other researches, devices and data subjects can be added to the
project.
Default phases are defined for example project proposal, data
collection, data analysis and publishing. Members of the projects are able
to add new devices for collecting data and set up collection of the data from
the data subjects. The system saves all incoming data as raw data format.
The raw data can be viewed, but never altered. Projects that want to view
and analyze data belonging to the project can create a copy that can be
viewed and analyzed. In later phases where a copy of the data needs to be
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Scientific data collection
published, the system can anonymize it by removing information that can
disclose the data subjects and other sensitive information. Results and the
analyzed data collected can after finishing the project be saved for long
term storage. The Project Leader can manage the project via the project
settings.
• Hospital Scenario In the hospital scenario the medical staff working at a clinic
or a hospital can use the system for either monitoring a single data subject or
a group of data subjects.
– Group based
∗A group based hospital scenario example could be the monitoring of
a group of data subject in a rehabilitation or weight loss program.
Medical staff can set up a project where data subjects and devices can
be connected to. Medical staff can view progress of all data subjects
based on their data.
– Case based
∗A Case based hospital scenario example could cover a situation where
the medical staff at a hospital wants to monitor a patient’s behaviour
over a longer period of time. Connecting a sensor to a patient that
can be send home instead of monitoring them at the hospital saves the
hospital a lot of money.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 User interface overview
9
2.2
User interface overview
In this section we will show and describe the user interface made available for the
data subjects and the project members. First we go to detail in how to create a
new account and log in.
Then the project scenario where creating a new project
with phases and roles are possible and in the end the user user interface for the data
subjects personal user interface is explained.
Create new user
Figure 2.1 shows how a new user of the system can create a profile. The new user
of the system needs to write their First name, Last name, Email, pick a user type,
Username and passsword. The user type is either: a Data subject, A project member
or Medical staff.
Figure 2.1: Create a new User Screen.
Log in screen
The login screen is the front page screen when a user access the Home page of the
front-end. The user needs to use his User-name and password to log in to the system.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Scientific data collection
Figure 2.2: Log in screen.
Personal projects
On a successful log in the user is directed to their personal project page, if they have
user type project member or Medical staff. If they are of user type data subjects they
will go to their personal. The personal projects page shows a view of all the active
projects that the user is involved in. If the user click a project in the project table
the project home page for the chosen project will be shown. In the side menu the
user can access the ”creating a new project page”
Create new Project
Figure 2.4 shows the page where the project member can create a new project. It
consist of a form where it is possible for the user to type in the details of the project.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 User interface overview
11
Figure 2.3: A view of a users projects.
The user starts by choosing a name for the project, then select what type of time
frame the project should have. This can either be a set time frame or a running time
frame. If the time frame is set the project member can add the start and end date
to the project. A description of the project can be writing and the owners id will be
attached.
Project Home page
The project home page in Figure 2.5 shows the main page for a project. It has the
project details for the project. Beneath the project details there is a list of project
members and we can add new project members to the project. When clicking the
”add project member” button a list of project members will appear and a role can be
added to the project member. On success the project member will be added to the
project. The project will also appear on the project members personal project page
when logging in. In the left sidebar the user can navigate to go to the role , phase
and settings screen of the project.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Scientific data collection
Figure 2.4: Create a new project screen.
Create new Role
On the last screen in Figure 2.5 we could navigate to a projects role page. The role
page is showed in Figure 2.6 where a new role can be added to the project. The new
role can be added to a project member as described in section 2.2.
Create new phase
In the introduction an example of how a scientific project could look like in was shown
in Figure 1.1 . It shows how a project is split into different phases during it’s life
cycle. To enable that in the project, phases can be added to the project. Figure 2.7
shows the user interface for the ”create a new phase”. It consist of a form that takes
in the name of the phase, start/end date and a description of the phase.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 User interface overview
13
Figure 2.5: A projects home page.
Data subject personal page
Figure 2.8 shows the personal page for a data subject. It consist of a table with
personal information about the user and a table displaying the data subjects devices
and when they were last synchronized with the back-end. In the sidebar the data
subject can create a new device and view data from their devices
Create new device
In Figure 2.9 the user interface for connecting a data subjects device is shown. The
system supports two categories of sensors. Fitbit[Fit] and Empatica[Emp]. Clicking
on the Fitbit Connect Fitbit button takes us to the screen shown in 2.10 where the
data subject, when clicking on button, will be redirected to the fitbit log in page to
authorize our third party application.
Figure 2.10 shows how a device was found and the use can now choose the name
for the device and save it to the database. The device now shows in a list on the data
subjects personal page shown in Figure 2.8
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Scientific data collection
Figure 2.6: User interface for adding roles.
2.3
Domain model
This section will show the domain model.
Based on the domain model the most
important concepts of the domain are defined and their connections with each other
are explained. Figure 2.11 shows the domain model
Data Subject A data subject is a person(basic user of the system) which has
data stored in the system. Their are two types of data subjects. Active and latent.
Active users have their own devices and use the system to upload the data. Latent
users don’t actively use the system but their data is in the system because they are
connected to a clinic/hospital or a research project that collects their data.
Project
A project describes a project setup. It can be a research project or a group based
project in the hospital scenario. These projects has a name,time-frame, description,
type, goal, problem.(FILL OUT) The project leader can create roles and delegate
responsibilities and permissions to these roles. Project members can have and adopt
one or more roles in a project. Different Phases can be added to the project de-
pending on the type of project. The project leader delegate what roles have access to
which phases and what type of privileges they have.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Domain model
15
Figure 2.7: User interface for adding phases.
Device
A device can be any type of sensor that is used to collect data in a project. It has a
unique id, name and description, each device has a device-type which tells us what
type of sensor we are dealing with. Each device-type can have one or more different
data-types depending on the data that we want it to send.
Data-type Data Type is a description of the raw data points send by a certain device-
type. Formally it is a way to understand what the data points are representing and
how they should be stored in order for us to understand them at a later point. Since
the data points are unstructured data the construction of the raw data points can
vary a lot. Each data type is connected to a device type and a device type can have
multiple data types because a watch my send different types of data.
Data points Data points are the raw data collected from the different sensors con-
nected to the system. The data points are saved as time series data in a unstructured
database. If the data points are collected in a project setting the data is saved with
a reference to the project so that it can be found.
Phases Phases defines project phases. In figure 1.1 is a example of some phases. IN
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Scientific data collection
Figure 2.8: Personal user interface for data subject.
the start of the project there is the project proposal and the project start-up phases.
In the active state of researching there are collecting of data, analyzing data and shar-
ing data. In the end of the project publishing results and end of project phases which
cover publishing and long term preservation. These are examples of some default
types of phases in a project.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Domain model
17
Figure 2.9: Create new device.
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Scientific data collection
Figure 2.10: user interface showing a new device.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Domain model
19
Figure 2.11: The domain diagram .
==PAGE:30==
20
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Requirements for
scientific data
collection
This Chapter gives an overview over the development of the requirements starting
with a use case diagram, followed by functional requirements.
The requirements
are analyzed and prioritized in order to define the scope of the project. The non
functional requirements for the system is discussed in the last part. For an overview
over detailed requirements head to appendix.
3.1
Use cases
The use case diagram figure:3.1 displays all the use cases that have been found to be
a part of the project. They are divided into five different areas each covering a part of
the system. The first one is user management which are all use case relating to access
control of the system. The second one is the project scenario which covers all things
related to setting up a project both in a hospital and in a research project scenario.
The third is the hospital related use cases. Fourth is the data subjects access to the
system. Fifth covers a scenario where a developer can introduce a new type of sensor
to the system.
3.2
Functional Requirements
This section describes a high level view of the functional requirements for the system
derived from the use cases. They are displayed in different tables based on the area
found in the use cases.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Requirements for scientific data collection
User administration
No
Use case
MoSCoW
1
Sign Up
Should have
2
Sign In
Should have
3
Sign Out
Should have
Table 3.1: User administration use cases.
Table 3.1 displays requirement 1-3 and focuses on the user administration area.
Use case number 1 is Sign up and allows the user to sign up to the system. When the
user signs up they need to provide essential information such as firstname, lastname,
email, username and password. On creation email is checked if it already exist, if
not, user is created and is now logged in to the system. The use case sign in, ensures
that the user is authorized before entering into their personal profile. On successful
authorization a personal user token is given by the server to the front end. The users
can access the resources on the back-end by providing the token on request. On sign
out the token is deleted from the front end and need to be obtained again for access.
Project
No
Use case
MoSCoW
4
Create new project
Must have
5
Add Project members to a project
Must have
6
Add roles to project
Must have
7
Add project phases
Should have
8
Manage project phases
Should have
9
Create role permissions
Could have
10
Add data subjects to project
Could have
11
Connect data subjects devices to project
Could have
12
Pull data from data subject’s device(s)
Could have
13
View project data
Could have
14
Edit project settings
Could have
15
Anonymize data for export
Won’t have
16
Create project permissions
Won’t have
Table 3.2: Project use cases.
Table 3.2 refers to all requirements related to creating and managing a project.
Having the framework from figure 1.1 in mind. Our project management part needs
to be able to create a project that have different phases. Multiple team members
can work on the project with restricted access defined by the type of role they have
in the project. Sensors and data subjects can be added to collect data as a part
of the project. Data stored as raw data cannot be changed in any way. Only view
permission are given. If analyzing or processing of data is needed as a part of the
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Functional Requirements
23
project a copy is made.
Time synchronization can sometimes be necessary when data is coming into the server,
so there needs to be a module that can time synchronize the data.
Viewing a data set and a proper graph module and other views should be available so
that users can make dynamic views of the data sets. Exporting data sets anonymously
is very important when researchers want to share data with non authorized users or
publish the data sets with the results. Therefore a module should be made that can
anonymize data sets for export.
Hospital
No
Use case
MoSCoW
17
Request access to data subject data
Won’t have
18
View data from data subject
Won’t have
19
Connect a device to a data subject
Could have
Table 3.3: Hospital use cases.
Table 3.3 refers to use cases that are specific for the case based hospital scenario
where medical staff monitor data subjects without creating a project. The doctor
needs to be able to access and view the data from the data subject. The last use case
enable them to connect a device to a data subject so that they can monitor the data
subject.
Home
No
Use case
MoSCoW
20
Connect device
Must have
21
pull personal data from device
Must have
22
View personal data
Must have
23
Edit personal data
Won’t have
24
Add own data manually
Won’t have
25
Create permissions
Won’t have
Table 3.4: Home use cases.
Table ?? covers use cases where the data subject can access the system. The data
subjects are able to connect their devices to the system and pull data from them to
their own account. They can view their personal data and also add data personal
data manually. Default access rights to the data can also be defined by the data
subject.
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Requirements for scientific data collection
Developer
No
Use case
MoSCoW
23
Add a new type of device
Table 3.5: Developer use cases.
Table 3.5 covers only one use case. The system should be able to handle new
types of devices with minimal programming from the developer.
All these use cases defines different aspects of the system but when put together
they cover the fundamentals for a data management system.
3.3
MoSCoW Analysis
This section will describe how the requirements for the system have been prioriotized
and the technique used in the process. In table 3.1, 3.2,3.3,3.4 and 3.5 the out most
right column shows the prioritization of the use cases and is defined by the MoSCoW
analysis.
MoSCcoW analysis is a prioritization technique often used in the software engineering
discipline. It can be used to prioritize use cases, requirements, tests of a product. In
this case we will use it to evaluate all the functional requirements found in section3.2.
Figuring out the importance of each requirements will help choose the right features
to implement in our system. The MoSCoW prioritization analysis use four terms to
categorize a requirement. First rank is Must Have which defines the minimal viable
product in order for the system to make sense. Second rank is Should Have are
important requirements that important for the system but can be left out if necessary.
Third rank is Could Have are desired but less important requirements. fourth and
last rank are Won’t Have are requirement that will not be delivered but are still on
the prioritized list to define the overall scope of a project. By using this technique
the must have and should have are aimed to be implemented and the could have are
only looked at if more time is available for implementation.
The must have requirements are the core of the system that is necessary to be able to
build upon. First we need to be able to create a project and add new project mem-
bers. Then we need to be able to create roles so that we can define access control
based on the roles later. To be able to add data into the system we need to be able
to connect data subjects with their devices and then enable them to pull data from
the devices and save them into our database. It should also be possible for the users
to view their data in their personal profile.
Should have requirements are meant to support the core(must have) of the system in
order to create a more complete system. With the should have’s requirement phases
are added to the project. Adding phases makes it possible to divide the project up into
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Non-functional requirements
25
different sections. Also to add security into the system the user management require-
ments helps manage access control so that the users can sign up, sign in, and sign out.
Could have are all the requirements that are to be implemented depending on how
much time there is left of the implementation period.
It is all requirements that
compliment the features implemented in ?? and 5.1 and that will make the system
complete. These are features that will be implemented depending on what makes
most sense, depending on the time it takes to implement and what makes sense in
regards to the requirements already implemented.
The won’t have section are desired features that will not be implemented in this
project.
They could be implemented in later iterations or suggestions for further
work.
3.4
Non-functional requirements
This section describe the non-functional requirements of the system. They are derived
from the background information described in chapter 2 and from the functional
requirements of the system. Non functional requirements can be used to define the
qualities of a system. They ensure that a system is tailored to the specific environment
that it is suppose to be used in.
Also talks with client often derives important
information related to the non-functional requirements.
The most important non
functional requirements for the data management system are:
• Extensibility
• Data integrity
• Security
• Availability
• Scalability
• Interoperability
Some of the requirements will be explained in the following sections.
Extensibility
Extensibility is the first and most important non-functional requirement of the system.
The ability to add new sensors and new ways of accessing data is vital for the system
to be useful for the end-user. Therefore the focus on the architecture must be to create
a system where modules can easily be added or extended to support new functionality.
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Requirements for scientific data collection
Data integrity
As the system is a data management system it is vital the system can assure that
the data is kept in a way where the integrity of the data is safe from the collection
to the long term preservation state. Making sure that the data is secure and safe in
the system.
Security
The data collected from both devices and users of the system is seen as sensitive data.
This means that security requirements needs to of a high standard. The security most
data security, network security and ensure that only authorized users can access the
resources in the system.
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Non-functional requirements
27
Figure 3.1: Use case Diagram.
==PAGE:38==
28
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4
Technologies for data
collection
In the previous section, the requirements and prioritization of the core system were
presented using the Moscow prioritization strategy. This chapter now builds on that
and starts by making an analysis of some of the core features of the system. Looking
at the essential requirements from Table ?? two main topics can be derived: Project
management and data management. The former - data management - will be the
focus of the analysis since the complexity of its solution is bigger than the one of the
project management.
This includes describing the core competences such as data collection methods, storage
of the raw data, meta data and technologies used. The chapter will be organized by
first analyzing the chosen devices needed for data collection and their connection
methods and technologies.
4.1
Fitbit
The first type of device chosen for this project is a Fitbit Surge 24.1. Fitbit - its
producing company - is one of largest companies on the commercial activity tracking
market. Their devices connect to the Fitbit application on the users smart-phone or
computer and synchronize data from the watches and bracelets. The data collected
is in turn stored in a cloud. As a user, it is then possible to have multiple devices
connected to the Fitbit cloud, all tracking you at the same time. The data collected
from the cloud is further synchronized to ensure a coherent timeline of activities in
case of multiple devices. Activity measurements from Fitbit is data that can take very
various natures. In the present implementation, two types of activity measurements
have been chosen to give a good sample of the variety of measurements that Fitbit can
offer. The first one is a measurement of daily steps, enabling the data subject to track
the number of steps walked in a single day. The second one, is an overview of the data
of a subjects’ daily activities during a defined period of time. It measures, among
others, the active duration, the activity’s level, the average heart rate, the distance
and its unit, heart rate zones, calories, description of activity, distance, duration,
activity names, steps, source (what device the data comes from), or finally the start
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Technologies for data collection
time. In sum, these measurements enable the construction of an advanced picture of
the data subjects daily activity level.
Figure 4.1: Fitbit Surge. photo from: http://help.fitbit.com/?p=surge.
4.1.1
Fitbit web Api
Fitbit Web API[fitb] provides a way to access data from Fitbit’s cloud service to any
third party applications compiling with Fitbit rules. Before gaining access, a new
Fitbit project must be created at the location of the redirecting address and links
to the website, the rules, and other important elements regarding the third party
app are stored. Fitbit uses the oauth 2.0[Bil] protocol to authorize the user and to
ensure that the third party application is allowed to obtain the data on the data
subjects’ behave. This is done by using the authorization code grant flow [fita]. The
Authorization flow has four steps as shown in figure 4.2. First, the third party app
redirects the user to the Fitbit authorization page. Second, upon user consent, Fitbit
redirects the user to the callback url, provided when the Fitbit project was created,
with a authorization code. Third, the application can exchange the authorization
code with an access token and a refresh token. Fourth and finally, the access token
is used whenever a resource is needed on the server and when expiring, the refresh
token is used to gain a new access token.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Empatica
31
Figure 4.2: Fitbit Surge. photo from: [fita].
4.1.2
Communication technologies
Using the web API was a straightforward choice because it is the simplest method to
get data from Fitbit. Other options could have been to make a third party application
and then synchronize that app with back-end. But by picking the web API as a
starting point, the choice of technology was already given since Fitbit has defined
that data can only be obtained via secure HTTP [w3] requests. Figure 4.3 shows how
the data moves from the data subjects wearing the Fitbit surge to the third party
application. The surge synchronizes with the phone via Bluetooth. When opening
the Fitbit app, the phone checks for available devices and synchronizes the data (if
available). In this example, the phone could also be a laptop with a Fitbit client
installed on it. The Fitbit application is connected to the Fitbit cloud with https and
sends the data whenever some data is available or on specifically set synchronization
times set by the data subject. Our third party service - called Thesis back-end - then
requests access as described in the former section 4.1.1 and on successful authorization
the Fitbit cloud sends the data via https to the Thesis Back-end.
Figure 4.3: Fitbit flow diagram.
4.2
Empatica
The second type of data collection device is provided by the company Empatica and
is called E4. Empatica is one of the most accurate activity trackers on the comercial
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Technologies for data collection
market[MPR16], and this is obviously one of the reasons for its choice. Its product -
E4 - is an advanced wearable research device that can measure galvanic skin response,
blood volume pulse, acceleration, heart rate and temperature. It sends the same data
as a holter monitor[ass] commonly used in hospitals and represents a broad spectrum
of sensors. Empatica’s device however, is able to stream data to a server in real time,
which is helpful for many researchers doing either experiments on data subjects or
simply for real time data subjects monitoring.
4.2.1
Synchronization issues
Data synchronization can be very important when doing research projects. Indeed,
data coming from different devices often needs to be synchronized to be able to make
use of the data, and ensure a maximal accuracy. An example could be how stress level
is measured using the Empatica E4 while playing a computer game with a pair of eye
tracking glasses. This requires multiple sets of real time data to be synchronized in
order to understand what elements are influencing the stress level of the data subject.
Even though it is a out of the scope of this project, this discussion should be included
when deciding what type of technologies to use for data transfer to the server.
4.2.2
Empatica API
The Empatica API is available for Android, IOS, and Windows. The choice of tech-
nology for the API is based both on the most widespread uptake and availability of
the technology. Additionally, the time constraint of the present study meant that the
preferred programming language is to be taken into consideration. The choice thus
fell on an android app, which is the most available technology and it is free of cost to
develop apps for it. Empatica offers an API that can connect an android smart-phone
to the Empatica E4 via Bluetooth. When connected and set on the data subjects’s
wrist, it is able to stream data to the android phone which can collect the data and
send it to the server.
4.2.3
Android Application
The application can run on any android device running android SDK version 21+.
It functions as a component in the data collection process and also ensures that
only authorized users can stream data to the server. The code for connecting and
streaming the data to the phone is implemented by Empatica. The authentication
process with the thesis back-end server, the implementation, and the connection to
the eclipse paho MQTT protocol are done by the author.
The app features:
• HTTP connection to the server so data subjects can be authorized
• HTTP connection to connect the data subjects with the empatica servers
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Empatica
33
• Implementation of Eclipse Paho Mqtt protocol that can publish data.
• Live streaming the Empatica data via the MQTT protocol.
The primary tool for data transfer on the application is Message Queuing Teleme-
try transport – or MQTT – it is a lightweight messaging protocol used for machine-
to-machine connectivity. It is a broker-based publish/subscribe messaging protocol,
built to be easy to be implemented. The publisher connects to a broker and delivers a
short broadcast on a specific topic. The Subscriber can then connect to the topic and
receive the broadcast. The specific implementation of the MQTT protocol on both
the server and android side is Eclipse Paho project[Eclb] java library. The android
app can set the topic to be published, and then the data subject can set a subscribing
topic that the server listens to.
Figure 4.4: Overview over the data transfer from empatica device to Thesis back-
end.
Figure 4.4 shows how the data subjects Empatica e4 device is connected to the
smart-phone app via Bluetooth. It streams data to the application and the application
publishes the streaming data to a broker. A broker is a third party server. For this
project, it is the Eclipse Mosquitto [Ecla] open-source broker that is used. The server
is set up by Eclipse and can be used by everyone. Both encrypted and un-encrypted
access is available. This implementation is un-encrypted, and a further avenue for
this project would be to make it more secure. The Thesis back-end can subscribe
with the topics set by the data subjects and the broker publishes the messages to the
Thesis Back-end.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Technologies for data collection
This chapter showed the sensors used to implement the system and the data
transfer technologies proposed for the system. Further more important topics such
as synchronization and security was discussed.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5
Design decisions
The design chapter gives an insight into the design decisions made in the creation of
the system. First, an overview of the system architecture - defined by a component
diagram - is provided. The component diagram 5.1 shows the interfaces that defines
their interaction with each other. Secondly, a detailed class diagram is drawn to show
more design decisions. Finally, some sequence diagrams are displayed in order to
show the interaction between the back-end and external systems.
5.1
Component diagram
The component diagram figure 5.1 gives an overview of the system architecture, which
in turn can be split up in to three bigger parts: back-end, front-end and Android app
5.1.1
Back-end
The back-end component is the biggest component of the system and has many sub-
components that will be explained in more details below. The sub-components will be
explained from the Authentication sub-component which is the main access way into
the system and to the persistence layer sub-component that stores the data coming in
to the server. The back-end is build in java using the spring boot 2.0 framework and
is powered by a built-in tomcat server. Spring boot 2 allows for an easy setup version
of the spring framework that provides support for a rest API, ORM framework in the
form of spring JPA/hibernate, easy adaptable security components and support for
MQTT in the form of spring integration[springintegration] and eclipse Paho[Eclb].
5.1.1.1
Authentication component
The authentication component is the main security element of the server and covers
all user management requirements from 3.1. The component is responsible for au-
thenticating new users and to authorize existing users on log in. The authentication
method used for this project is token based, implying that on successful authoriza-
tions, the server issues a token to the client that needs to be sent along with every
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Design decisions
Figure 5.1: Component diagram.
request as a parameter. The Spring security module is an external module for spring
that adds security to an application in many ways. The configuration can be set up to
check all incoming requests and uses filters to check them. For this application there
is a filter for authentication and one for authorization. Besides the filters CORS con-
figuration can be set up easily and granular control can be made using antmatchers
that checks if a certain user have the role that can gain access to a certain resource.
This will be helpful when implementing the permission for user types and roles. The
authenticate component is connected to every component in the system and ensures
that no unauthorized request can access the server.
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Component diagram
37
5.1.1.2
Rest Controllers
On successful authorization, requests are delegated to one of the Rest-controllers. Ta-
ble 5.1.1.2 shows all the different controllers used in the system, with their respective
responsibility, delegating the work needed from the request. Each controller has an
annotation stating its path so that the request goes to the right controller and im-
plements resources from the persistent layer to manipulate the data in the databases.
More elements of resources are explained in 5.1.1.3. Each method sends a response
back in a desired format such as JSON/XML, which can be done by setting the
Accept headers on the incoming requests.
• DataController
• DataTypeController
• DeviceController
• DeviceTypeController
• DPUserController
• MqttController
• PhaseController
• ProjectController
• RoleController
• FitbitController
• UserTpeController
5.1.1.3
Persistence
The persistence Component consists of two database connectors: Spring JPA and
influx-DB. Each one has a connection to a database.
Besides the connectors the
Spring data JPA repository [Spr] interfaces define the way the data is accessed in
the database.
They implement crud repositories and it is possible to define new
queries based on the Java Object associated with the repository. The Influx-DB-java
connector is a library that uses a HTTP connection to communicate with the influx
Database. It can manipulate and send both single data items or chunks to improve
the performance.
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Design decisions
5.1.2
Database
Handling both unstructured data points and relational data is a challenge for most
databases today. On the one hand, relational databases are well structured and have
many advantages for the simplicity of saving and searching for elements using SQL
language to query the structure. It also works very well if the data-type saved is
known. On the other hand, unstructured data and changing data types is a big chal-
lenge for normal relational databases. With Internet of things and a new world of
smart-phones, databases like noSQL had a reformation with because they can store
this unstructured types of data. But problems can also arise when re-finding the data
and actually using it is required. The ”unstructuredness” of the noSQL asks for more
processing power and storage space.
The first choice for a database system was to create a traditional relational post-
gresSQL database. In turn, the unstructured data would be supported by utilizing
JSON by PostgresSQL, which could have worked with new formats such as JSON
binary[Pos] format being available. The unstructured data that we want to put into
the data is time series data. Time series data is data ordered by time, as for example
most of sensor data is. The most relevant problem encountered was the scaling of the
relational database. In this closed prototype, where not more than a couple of devices
are delivering, data to the database psotgresSQL would have been a fine match. But
when thousands of sensors are loading data onto the server at the same time, a lot of
horizontal scaling and database management will be required. Hence the choice of a
two-parts solution.
Introducing InfluxDB into the function, all the unstructered time-series data can be
stored in a time-series database. InfluxDB are very good at ingesting a lot of data
which is the main selling point in this case. It is further scalable on a horizontal level,
and requires less management compared to postgresSQL. In table ?? is a view of the
two databases and access methods. The relational part of the database is accessed
with hibernate and spring JPA methods. Influxdb is accessed with a java library
called influxdb java[inf]. It communicates with influxDB with the help from low level
REST calls.
Databases
databases
PostgresSQL
InfluxDB
type
Relational
Time-series
Access
Spring JPA
Influx-DB java
Table 5.1: Caption.
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Component diagram
39
5.1.3
Front-end
The front-end is the main user interface for our users of the system. It is build in
JavaScript using React and Redux. The front-end consists of both a project and a
Data subject part. The former, is meant to be a user interface where the researchers
can create and manage their projects and a personal page where data subjects have
there own profile, can manage their devices, and view their own data. The front-
end communicates with the server using a http client called super agent which is a
lightweight Ajax API that sends http request to the server. To be able to access the
system users must authenticate and authorize themselves in exchange for an access
token that the authentication component gives on a successful authorization. The
access token is saved in a session-storage on the client and is used whenever the front-
end requires the use of resources from the back-end. For a more visual picture of the
front-end see section2.2
5.1.4
ThesisAndroidApp
The ThesisAndroidApp runs on any android phone with android version 21 or over.
The application is made as a streaming app than can connect directly to the back-
end using MQTT. The Android app consists of three screens displayed in 6.4, each
of them have a specific function.
The first screen - the left one in figure 6.4 - has Log in screen letting the data
subjects connect to the back-end with their user-name and password, in exchange for
a jwt token. On successful authorization of the user, the data subject is taken to
the second screen - the start screen (middle screen in 6.4). The latter has two fields:
the api code from the data subjects empatica account that will help the user connect
to their device, and the a second field to set the topic that the MQTT protocol
will broadcast is message to the broker on. On successful connection with the users
Empatica account the user is taken to the third and last screen; the Main activity
screen (right screen in 6.4). The user can turn on the watch and if in range the watch
and the app will connect if they are in range of each other. With the app connected
it will start streaming data.
The ThesisAndroidApp have three types of connections. First of all, to connect
with the Empatica E4 it uses a Bluetooth low energy connection. Second, to connect
to the authentication component provided by the server it uses the http client OkHttp.
Third and finally, for sending MQTT messages to the server it uses Eclipse Paho[Eclb]
MQTT framework.
In figure 5.3 is a sequence diagram of the connection between the Empatica device,
ThesisAndroidApp and the back-end. The sequence diagram shows the message ex-
change between the different components. The message broker is a fourth component
that was just explained.
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Design decisions
Figure 5.2: Login, Start and MainActivity.
5.1.5
Fitbit sequence diagram
Figure 5.4 shows the sequence diagram for the authentication between our third
party application and Fitbit. This sequence diagram is not only used to describe the
connection to the Fitbit cloud, but also as a more general sequence diagram of the
Oauth 2.0 [Bil] authorization grant flow. This means that it can be used for several
other services such as Google fit [Goo] and Misfits[Mis]; two other big players on the
commercial activity-tracker market.
In figure 5.4 the front-end requests the server to deliver an authorization url.
Then, the front-end redirects the user to the Fitbit login page. In turn, on successful
authorization, an authorization code is sent back to the front-end. The front-end
asks the back-end to make an exchange of the authorization code with a new access
token and a refresh token. The back-end sends a request to the Fitbit authentication
service and if the authorization code is valid, it sends the access and the refresh token
to the server. The tokens are saved in a map on the server-side with a reference to
the data subject id. When the data subject wants to get a protected resource from
the Fitbit cloud. The front-end sends a request to the back-end including the id of
the data subject. The back-end finds the data subjects access token and uses it to
fetch the protected resources in the Fitbit Cloud. If the access token is valid, the
server will send the resource to the back-end where it will be stored and send to the
front-end.
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Component diagram
41
Figure 5.3: Sequence diagram of the Empatica connection.
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Design decisions
Figure 5.4: Sequence diagram of the fitbit connection.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 6
Implementation
details of the data
management system
The previous chapter showed some of the design decisions made for the system. This
chapter will now present some of the implementation details that might not be under-
stood from the design perspective. First, an explanation of the front-end component
is presented, via its implementation using the redux and react.
Second, the end-
points of the server are explained, as well as how to reach the necessary resources in
the database. This will demonstrate that many of the things in spring are controlled
with annotations. The most common annotations will be explained. Third and finally,
a deeper view of how the persistence layer is managed will be put forward.
6.1
Front-end implementation
As mentioned in 5.1.3, the front-end is build on a combination of the react and redux
library. This section will explain how a combination of both libraries is used to create
the front-end developed in this project.
sectionReact React is a JavaScript library for building user interfaces. It is build
up in components that can have their own state. To form a complex user interface,
react combines these components. One of the benefits of react is its use of a virtual
Dom - standing for document object model (when updating a view of a web-page, it
is the Dom that is interacted with). However, it can often be slow and inefficient,
and this is why react is used to update a virtual Dom instead. This means that
it will only render or re-render the part of that user interface which state changed.
This increased efficiency is mostly characterized by an absence of need to re-render
all elements on the page.
==PAGE:54==
44
6 Implementation details of the data management system
6.1.1
Redux
Building complex solutions seems easy when it can be split into components. Manag-
ing the state of all components in a bigger context, nevertheless appear tricky. This
is where redux comes in. Redux is a JavaScript state container that in short terms
takes the state out of the components and places them in a central store that can be
accessed from react. To get a view of how react and redux work together figure 6.1
shows some of the core concepts and how the two function together. On the right
side is the pure react components now stateless. The connection between the react
and redux part of the program are the containers, which in short, are the middle
man between the store and the pure react components. To explain the concepts on
the Redux part of the program let us say that when a button is clicked in react the
container commands the action creator to start a new action. For example, the action
could be to get some data from a back-end. This action, in turn, calls a background
service that collects the data. On return, the action creator sends the result of the
action to the reducer that handles to update the correct state that the action wants to
update, and the reducer updates the store. Finally, to update the react components,
the selector is used and react updates the user interface based on the new state.
Figure 6.1: Overview
Of
react/redux.
Photo
taken
from:
https://articles.coltpini.com/react-redux-architecture-overview-
7b3e52004b6e.
==PAGE:55==
6.2 Rest implementation using Spring
45
6.2
Rest implementation using Spring
This section presents the REST service API and how it is implemented in spring.
Access to the system is done through exposed Rest endpoints To add this func-
tionality to Spring, spring boot offers starter dependencies. The starter dependencies
encapsulate a lot of children dependencies that might be necessary for a certain part
of a project. For all the functionality needed the only dependency we need is the
Spring-boot-starter-web [Boo] dependency. It offers everything needed to create rest-
ful applications in spring.
To expose the methods in the controllers with the rest API annotations are used.
Figure6.2 shows a part of the project controller class where annotations are used on
the class and on all methods. The @restcontroller annotation on the project Con-
troller class is a two part annotation. The first one defines that the class is a controller
and a component. In turn, the second one is the rest part that specifies that methods
exposed as end-points using the @Requestmapping annotation automatically have
the notation @Responsebody which attach their return value as responsebody. The
Requestmapping annotation can both be seen on the controller class and on each
method. It is used to define the route to the method with help from the name value
in the annotation defining the route to the goal. endpoint. The method value defines
what type of HTTP requests are allowed. Finally, the Requestmapping annotation
also lets you define what type of response you want but default in this case is JSON.
6.3
Endpoints for the back-end
This section contains the main endpoints used to reach the resources on the back-end
and a display of the response data.
Table 6.1 shows the endpoints for the user management use cases: sign up, log
in and log out. The sign up creates a new user in the system and at the same time
attaches a user type to the user. A user type is one of three identified user types: data
subject, project member or medical staff. The log in endpoint takes the user-name
and password of the dpUser and checks if they are valid. On successful authorization
a response header is attached with a JWT token created and managed by the back-
end. In the log out use case the JWT token is made non-valid and the user will have
to obtain a new one.
Project endpoints shown in Table 6.2 enable us to create a new project and edit
the project with the update and existing project endpoint. We can get a project from
the front-end by getting all projects or specify the search by adding parameters such
as the id or the name of the project.
These next endpoints in Table 6.3 add more of the functionality needed to start
a project. They add the opportunity to create roles, phases, and connecting project
members and data subjects to a project. When adding a project member, a role can
be attached to it.
==PAGE:56==
46
6 Implementation details of the data management system
Figure 6.2: code from server.
User management endpoints
Endpoint
Method
Description
/dpuser/signup
POST
user registers in the system
/loginusername, password
POST
user log in with username and
password
/logout
POST
user log out
Table 6.1: User management endpoints.
The next endpoints in table 6.4 connect to the Fitbit Cloud we need endpoints
that can find the authorization URL and send it to the server, on to exchange the
authorization token with the Fitbit access token and refresh token. The resources
we are collecting from the fitbit cloud are fitbit devices, daily activities and steps.
Table 6.4 shows that the three last endpoints - used to get protected resources in the
Fitbit cloud - need the user ID in order to look up the appropriate tokens for the
data subject.
The last set of endpoints in Table 6.5 adds the new device, the devicetype, and the
datatype to the system. For some Fitbit, the devicetype is derived from the Fitbit
Cloud information.
The settopic endpoint enables the user to set a topic for the
back-end to subscribe to in order to get data from a device publishing to the same
==PAGE:57==
6.4 MQTT implementation
47
Project endpoints
Endpoint
Method
Description
/project/addProject
POST
Add new project
/project/updateProject
PUT
Update existing project
/project/deleteid
DELETE
Delete project
/project/getprojects
GET
Get all projects
/project/getoneid
GET
Get project by id
/project/getbynameprojectname
GET
Get project by name
Table 6.2: project endpoints.
Adding more functionality to projects
Endpoint
Method
Description
/roles/addRole
POST
Add new role to a project
/phases/addPhase
POST
Add a new phase to a project
/phases/updateid
PUT
Update a phase
/project/addprojectmember POST
Add a project member to a
project
/project/adddatasubject
POST
Add a data subject to a project
Table 6.3: endpoints for adding things to a project.
Adding more functionality to projects
Endpoint
Method
Description
/token
GET
Get authorization url from back-
end
/accesstokenauthorizationcodeGET
Get the Access and refresh token
/fitbitdevicesid
GET
Get all new devices on Fitbit
Cloud
/activities id
POST
Get the last month daily activi-
ties
/stepsid
POST
Get step count for today
Table 6.4: Fitbit.
topic. Finally, getdata finds data points based on type and on the data subjects’ user
names.
6.4
MQTT implementation
In this section the MQTT implementation on both the client and the back-end side
is shown and explained. Both implementations are done by using the Eclipse Paho
==PAGE:58==
48
6 Implementation details of the data management system
Adding more functionality to projects
Endpoint
Method
Description
/devices/addDevice
POST
Add new device
/devicetype/addDeviceType POST
Add new device type
/datatype/addDataType
POST
Add new Data type
/mqtt/settopic String
POST
Add topic for the back-end to
subscribe to
/data/getdata/type,usernameget
get specific data type for data
subject
Table 6.5: Fitbit.
Framework[Eclb].
6.4.1
MQTT Back-end
Spring integration is a framework that provides out of the box implementations of
common integration patterns.
That helps integrate our system with other external components like the the-
sisAndroidApp using one of the supported message protocols. Spring integration has
support for MQTT with an implementation of the Eclipse Paho framework[Eclb].
Spring integration [springintegration] is based on receiving messages through a
message channel using defined endpoints. In Figure 6.3 the implementation of the
incoming MQTT solution is shown. The mqttadapter is an adapter that functions as
an endpoint. It has a clientid, a broker url, and a list of topics to subscribe to. When
a message is received from one of the subscribed topics it is handled by the messaging
channel. In this example, the messaging channel simply passes the information on to
the handler method. Thus, the incoming messages have a header and a body that can
be used by spring integration to seperate messages to several handlers. Upon using
that information, the system could support many types of sensors, and also separate
the incoming messages based on header information. The handler method in Figure
6.3 takes the payload from the message and splits it into fields. The data subjects
user name is sent with the message and all the data is stored in a table using the
user name. This means that when searching for data in the influxDb, the main key
needed to find data is the user name and the specific type of data wanted from the
subjects’ data. although rather simple, this solution could be a priority and a fast
way to make the back-end more extensible in future iterations.
6.4.2
MQTT ThesisAndroidApp
The ThesisAndroidApp uses an android version of the Eclipse Paho framework to
setup the MQTT service. The implementation consist of two different classes
==PAGE:59==
6.4 MQTT implementation
49
Figure 6.3: .
MwttClient is the setup class where all the options for the mqtt service is defined
and the method used to publish data is created. The options can be split into two
categories: connection options and disconnected buffer-options. In the former - con-
nection options - it can be declared whether an automatic re-connection on a lost
connection is wanted. In the former one - disconnected buffer-options - it can be
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Implementation details of the data management system
chosen if the app should store the messages when offline and how big the buffer size
should be.
Figure 6.4: .
MqqtService An android service is used when a program is doing long-term
operations in the background. This could be playing music or stream data using the
mqtt protocol. The Mqttservice is started when the mainActivity is created, and it
can run in the background even when the app is shut down and enables use over
longer period of testing with a data subject. In Figure 6.4 we can see that on the
creating of the service the MqttAndroidClient is created using the options defined in
the Mqttclient. In Figure 6.5 we use the PublishMessage method from the mqttclient
to send the received data from the Empatica e4 device.
Figure 6.5: .
==PAGE:61==
6.5 Persistence implementation
51
6.5
Persistence implementation
In this section the persistence layer implementation details are described. First a
quick overview over the spring data JPA an how it is used is provided, and second,
the InfluxDB configuration is explained.
6.5.1
Spring data jpa
Spring data jpa is a module that extends the java persistence API(jpa) to connect with
spring. It is a framework for persisting managing and accessing data from relational
databases such as in this example a PostgresSQL. It uses Object-relation-mapping
also called ORM. The spring data jpa uses hibernate as the default implementation for
this, which is an implementation of the ORM and by far the most popular solution
on the market, managing entities with annotations. In figure6.6 we see how some
annotations related to hibernate. The Entity notation defines that this class needs
to be managed by hibernate, and the id notation states that it is the primary key
of the entity. In turn, the GeneratedValue notation states that the database will
manage the generation of the id on creation. In 6.6, the attributes have a Not null
value so that we know that these value can not be null. The annotation also defines
the different relationship between classes. we can define relations by adding notation
such as one-to-one, one-to-many and many-to-many. The responsible for creation is
also defined, so as where the system can look up a relation.
Figure 6.6: Hibernate example.
To manipulate with the Pojo and access the database the spring JPA uses spring
data repositories. In Figure6.7 we can see that a DeviceRepository is an interface
that extends a crudrepository that have a device and the type of the IH, in this case
a long. Spring data uses abstraction in order to avoid boilerplate code when writing
a Data access layer.
==PAGE:62==
52
6 Implementation details of the data management system
Figure 6.7: Device repository.
Instead of writing boiler plate code, the interface can be injected into a class and
implement the methods provided by the interface. The crudRepository add standard
methods shown in 6.8. This allows the system to save an entity, get an element by
the id, get all elements, count the number of elements in the database, or delete
elements among other examples. Extending the capabilities of the repository with
custom functionality can be done as shown in 6.7 where more methods are defined.
For example, if we want to find all Devices belonging to a certain data subject we
create the method findAllByDataSubjectdevice(DPUser id);”.
Figure 6.8: CrudRepository methods. [taken from: https://docs.spring.io/spring-
data/jpa/docs/2.0.8.RELEASE/reference/html/].
In Figure 6.9 we can see how we add the device repository as a dependency to
==PAGE:63==
6.6 Database Schema
53
the controller. In the method ”getDevicesByDataubjectdId we use one of the custom
method that we defined in the repository to get all the devices belonging to a data
subject.
Figure 6.9: Device Controller using the Device Repository.
This shows how we can use spring data jpa and dependency injection in order to
loose a lot of the usual boilerplate code written in the database management layer.
6.5.2
InfluxDB java
Managing the influx database requires the use of InfluxDB java which is a java library
to connect to InfluxDB. It uses low level http calls to communicate with the database,
but the database can also be configured in pure java code. It requires the URL, port
of the database, user-name and password to do so. The data-points itself takes data
points and compares them to element in a database. It is up to the developer to
define how the data-points should look. Finally, to minimize potential overheads of
the network connection, batches of data-points can be created.
6.6
Database Schema
In this section we will describe the layout of the relational PostgresSQL database.
The layout is represented using a database scheme showing how the data is stored in
==PAGE:64==
54
6 Implementation details of the data management system
the tables and how the relations between the latters are defined. Each table and its
relations to other tables will be described in detail to give a better understanding of
what type of relations the database contains. Figure 6.10 shows the Database scheme.
The tables used to store a many to many connection will not be described but only
mentioned in the ”parent” tables as relations.
Project table
The primary key of the project table is the id, but besides this it also contains the
name, the type, the timeframe of the project, its startdate and enddate, a description,
and a foreign key called owner referring to the project. The project is a central figure
in the system and requires several relations. Project table have two M:N with dpuser.
One for the user type project member and one for the user type data subject. The
middle tables are called (project member project) and (data subject project). They
both have the (project id) and the (dpuser id). The project table have a 1:M relation
with role table. The last relation to the project page is a 1:M relation with the phase
table.
Dpuser table
The primary key of the dpuser table is the id. The data stored on the dpuser containes
usernames, passwords, first names, last names, emails, roles and a foreign key from
the user type table to define the type of dpuser. Dpuser has a 1:1 relation with the
usertype table, and tt has a 1:M relation with device meaning that a dpuser can have
many different devices attached to it. The M:M relations with the project are already
described in the project table. The last relation is a M:M relation with the role table,
mapped in the table below (role dpuser).
Phase table
Phase table has a id as primary key and besides the primary key the table contains
name, description, startdate, enddate and project id as a foreign key. It has a M:1
relation with project.
Role table
Primary key of the role table is an id. I have columns, name, description and a foreign
key referencing the project id that it belongs to.
Devicetype table
Devicetype table have columns id, producer, model and type where the primary key
is the id. It has a 1:1 relationship with the device table. the devicetype table have a
==PAGE:65==
6.6 Database Schema
55
M:M with the datatype table which is mapped to the tabel (devicetype datatype).
Usertype table
the usertype table have two colums the usertype id column which is also the primary
key and the type column. It has a 1:M relation with dpuser as described in the dpuser
table.
Databasechangelog and databasechangeloglock tables
Both tables are automatically generated by liquibase which is a database managing
and version control tool. The two tables save the database changelog and ensure
integrity of the database.
==PAGE:66==
56
6 Implementation details of the data management system
Figure 6.10: Database schema.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 7
Test
The Test chapter will display some low level testing of the functionality of the system
using cURL[cUR] to show the results of some of the functionality that the system
offers. Curl is a command line tool that can be used to transfer with urls. After
some acceptance tests will be made to show how much functionality the system have
obtained in the finished state.
7.1
Testing outcome
This section will use curl to test some of the main functionality of the system. The
tests will show how different use cases such as creating a user, log in, create resources
and get resources work in the back-end. It is to demonstrate how the system function
and what type of data we can get and save into the back-end.
7.2
User management testing
In Figure 7.1 the curl command for the signing in a new user to the system. The user
we are trying to sign in to the system is called ”testuser” and has the user type of a
project member.
Sign up
Figure 7.1: curl command for the signing a new user into the system.
Figure 7.2 shows the database columns for the dpuser of the system where the
testuser is now added to the system. The password is encrypted for extra security
using a one-way hash function.
==PAGE:68==
58
7 Test
Figure 7.2: A view of the dpuser table where the testuser is now added.
Log in
Our testuser now want to log in to the system, This is done by sending a curl command
with username and password. The command is shown in Figure 7.3.
Figure 7.3: Curl command for log in.
The result of the login request is shown in Figure 7.4.
The server accept the
request and validate the user by attachin an authorization header to the response
with an access token that the testuser should use for accessing resources.
Figure 7.4: Response for log in curl command.
Creating a project
With the access token send by the server the testuser can now create projects. Figure
7.5 shows the curl command for creating a new project with the testuser as the owner
of the project. The authorization header is passed with the Bearer access token to
authorize the request.
The result is shown in Figure7.6 where a successful project was made and saved
to the project table in the database.
==PAGE:69==
7.2 User management testing
59
Figure 7.5: Curl command to create a project.
Figure 7.6: View of the project table in the database.
Viewing data
If we want to view our own personal data we can use the fetch all data command
to see all the data-points that we have gathered. A picture of the curl command is
shown in Figure 7.7. The authorization header with the token is still present and then
the URL takes a username parameter that is used to get all the data on a specific
user.
Figure 7.7: View of the project table in the database.
Figure 7.8 shows a snippet of all the data points retrieved as a response to the
curl command.
Figure 7.8: Data points taken from the database.
All these command shows us the type of commands that the user can use to access
the system and the results and response from the back-end.
==PAGE:70==
60
7 Test
7.3
Acceptance test
In the section a user acceptance test will be made. It will be done by taking each use
case that have been implemented and explain if its ready or potential use by a user.
Use case: Create new project
Looking at the extended use case for create new project in Appendix A. The goal of
the use case is for the user to be able to create a project through the user interface.
This is possible showed in figure 2.4.
Test passed: Yes
Use case: Add project members to project
Adding project members to a project with a role is not yet fully implemented. It is
possible to add the relation through commands, but for the user there is still some
work to be done until it can be made.
Test passed: No
Use case: Add Roles
Adding a role to a project can be done through the user interface. In Figure 2.6 a
view of the interface is shown where a role can be added to a project 2.4.
Test passed: Yes
Use case: Add Phases
Adding a phase to a project can be done through the user interface. In Figure 2.7 a
view of the interface is shown where a phase can be added to a project .
Test passed: Yes
Use case: Connect devices
It is possible to connect device both from empatica and fitbit. The empatica device
is connect through the user interface on the android application and the Fitbit is
connect through the main user interface..
Test passed: Yes
Use case: Pull data from device
It is possible to pull data directly from the Empatica device through the user inter-
face, but for the Fitbit The implementation of a button to fetch the data still needs
to be implemented. It would be only a matter of adding a button to the interface.
Test passed: Yes/no
==PAGE:71==
7.3 Acceptance test
61
Use case: View personal data
The data subjects does not have the opportunity to view their own data in the main
interface. Just creating the advanced views of the data needed could be a thesis in it
self. It is possible to query the data but a visual view of it is not implemented
Test passed: no
Use case: Sign up
Sign up is a fully implemented use case. It is only possible through the front-end user
interface.
Test passed: yes
Use case: Sign in
Sign in is also a fully implemented use case that be used from both the android app
and the front-end user interface
Test passed: yes
Use case: Sign out
Sign out is a fully implemented use that can also be done from both the android app
and the front-end user interface
Test passed: yes
There are still room for improvement as the user acceptance test show. Not all
details have been implemented because of limited time constraints on the implemen-
tation process. Implementing the use cases that was passed would not take long since
it is only visual part that is not ready. This sums up the test done by the system to
give an overview over the functionality implemented.
==PAGE:72==
62
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 8
Evaluation
This chapter will evaluate how well the system copes with the challenges that was
layed out in the problem statement and consider the non-functional requirements for
the system in the argument.
The purpose of the system was to create a data management platform where users
could create and manage a project throughout its entire lifecycle. Also the system
should be a able to connect to a variety of sensors and collect data from them to be
stored for use in projects. The system should be extensible in a way that new sensors
should be able to be added without much hazzle for a future user or programmer.
The system in its finished state of implementation can create the metadata around
the project and add phases, roles, project members and data subjects to be a part of
a project. Project members can have a role which in future work could be connected
with a permission setting.
The implementation can connect to two different types of sensors using two dif-
ferent types of sensors. The first one Fitbit was chosen because it resembles a lot of
other commercial fitness trackers and the way we connect to them using HTTP and
the Oauth protocol. This means that the way we collect data from the fitbit cloud
is also the way that it would be possible to collect data from other companies such
as [Goo] and [Mis]. This implies that it would be possible to extend the system to
collect data from many of the big companies without much tweaking of code.
The second sensor chosen was an Empatica e4 connected to an android app and
it represents a different kind of sensor that streams data straight to the server. The
implementation of the mqtt server shows how all incoming data runs through the same
handler method. But spring integration allows for the incoming data to be sorted by
information attached to the incoming messages, this implies that the system could be
expanded to support multiple types of sensors with minimum work for a developer.
The data is store in two separate databases one for incoming streaming data and
one for relational data. Data security is important and all password are encrypted
with one-way hash functions so that no passwords can be stolen. At the same time
resources are protected using the build in security options in the chosen implementa-
tion.
For the system to be really useful to a potential user it would still need some work.
The front-end lacks some functionality, because time constraint of the development
phase made it impossible to finish. The android app can be used perfectly by the user
==PAGE:74==
64
8 Evaluation
without any changes and will stream data to any MQTT server. The back-end also
lacks some functionality in handling some of the meta data coming from the sensors
in regards to data types.
Some important security details still needs to be added, such as encryption on
both the MQTT and http. But was left out of the implementation.
The system compared to other system combines functionality of many different
types of system. Looking at related systems most of them only offer one or two parts
needed in a project, for example, repositories for storing data after finishing project,
publishing data on long term, cloud service for storing and managing data.
But
none of the solutions offer a generic solution combining all of the above. Therefore
the proposed solution could be a good alternative to using 3-4 systems for a project.
Even though the implementation in it’s finished state is not a full system it would
still shave a considerable amount of time of the process of setting up a new data
management system. The system can easily be extended using standard components
from spring to cope with more sensors, security details or functionality.
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 9
Related work
This chapter goes through some of the related works in the area of data management
systems with focus on the scientific research.
9.1
ERDA
Electronic Research System[cop] or ERDA for short is a data management system
developed at the Faculty of science at the university of Copenhagen.
The main
purpose of the system is to provide a place for the scientist to store and archive
the data and at the same time access the data and share it with partners. ERDA
is located at the University of copenhagen and has a storage space of around 4000
Terabyte[man]. It can be compared to other file sharing services like dropbox, box
and Google drive.
9.2
Openlab
Openlab software suite [Agi] from the company Agilent is a data management sys-
tem that consist of many small sub component.
Openlab is based around a lab
environment where a lot of data from sensors and images taken by instruments can
be captured by the various instruments in the lab and stored in safe manner. The
software suite offers analyzing tools and sharing data among researchers.
9.3
Dash
Dash[Das] is an open-source data publishingresource that lets research manage, de-
scribe and publish their data sets with the purpose of creating easier access and reuse
of the data. It is administrated by UC berkeley.
9.4
Figshare
Figshare [Fig] is a cloud based repository that lets users upload their research outputs
avaiable. Researcher can upload any type of data including figures, datasets media,
==PAGE:76==
66
9 Related work
papers etc. Figshare can make all the data shareable and public so that it can be
discovered by others. It can also be cited by other researchers. It users Amazon web
services as a platform.
9.5
Re3data
Re3data[Data] is a registry for research repositories. It can be used to save data for
permanent storage so others in the research community can access data sets. It has
over 2000 repositories and is founded by the german Research foundation.
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 10
Conclusion
The scope of the thesis was to design and implement a scientific data management
system that could aid researcher with managing a project, also the system should be
able to automate the process of collecting and managing the data used in the project.
The system should be generic, secure and extensible so that new module could be
added to the system. With focus on those requirements a system was designed and
a prototype of the system was made. The prototype in its finished state can connect
to multiple types of devices using common technologies such as rest calls and MQTT.
Project can be made with different phases and roles can be defined and added to
project members working on a common project. The system also consist of a user
interface and an Android application. The user interface can be used to access the
implemented features in the system. The Android app is used as a data collecting
and sharing device connecting the Empatica e4 device and the back-end. The finished
implementation is not a complete system, but it sets some ground stones for future
work.
10.1
Future work
Future work might include
• Security improvements including encryption protecting of incoming data, adding
more granular control, projects permission and data permissions.
• Extension of Spring integration to make a more generic way to add new devices
and receive data.
• User interface improvements to add more possibilities for the users to interact
with the system the way they want to.
==PAGE:78==
68
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX A
Appendix A
This appendix shows all the detailed use case created for the project
Use Case Name
Sign In
Description
User signs in to the system
Actors
Data owner, Medical staff, Researcher
Pre conditions
None
Main Scenarios
1. The user opens system
2. The user inserts his username/email and password
3. The system validates user information
4. User goes to default role interface
Alternative Scenar-
ios
3a. user information is incorrect.
• System notify user
• user can choose recovery of password or user(figure out
method)
4a. Choose default interface or choose to choose at each log in
• If no default is chosen and user has more than one role
show pop up with opportunities
• ask to choose default
Post conditions
The user is logged in
Notes
choose method of recovery and choose what to do with the default
role interface
==PAGE:80==
70
A Appendix A
Use Case Name
Sign Up
Description
User signs up for the system
Actors
Data owner, Medical staff, Researcher
Pre conditions
None
Main Scenarios
1. The user opens system
2. The user press sign up button
3. The user is taken to the sign up formula and types inputs:
• First Name
• Last Name
• User name
• Password
4. System checks input
5. The user has been registered
Alternative Scenar-
ios
4a. Username is taken.
• System notify user to choose another user name
Post conditions
The user has been registered
Notes
Is email necessary
==PAGE:81==
A Appendix A
71
Requirement
num-
ber:
18
Use Case Name
Add device
Description
Data subjects add a new device to his acount
Actors
Data subject
Pre conditions
Logged in as a data subject
Main Scenarios
1. Data subjects press the create new device tab in the left
menu.
2. Choose what type of device to connect
3. A registration form is displayed with
• name
• type
• producer
4. Connect account to producer if necessary
5. After device is created it is displayed on the data subjects
homepage.
Alternative Scenar-
ios
Post conditions
A new device has been added to the data subjects account
Notes
==PAGE:82==
72
A Appendix A
Use Case Name
Pull Data from device
Description
User pulls data from device
Actors
Data Owner
Pre conditions
Logged in as data owner & device is connected
Main Scenarios
1. The user press Device on the screen
2. The user selects the button Pull data from this device
3. The user press the create project button
Alternative Scenar-
ios
2a. Connection is lost
• System notify user that connection was lost
Post conditions
The user has created a new project
Notes
On what conditions should a reseracher be able to edit data and
how is data stored
==PAGE:83==
A Appendix A
73
Requirement
num-
ber:
19
Use Case Name
View own data
Description
User can view their own data
Actors
Data owner
Pre conditions
Logged in as a Data owner
Main Scenarios
1. The user is automatically shown a view of their data on log
in
2. The user can press search to define criteria for view of data
3. The user is presented with a pop up showing search criteria
4. The user chooses search criteria
5. The user is presented with the chosen data in the default
view
6. The user can change the views to view the data in by clicking
the view settings tab and choose another layout
Alternative Scenar-
ios
4a. No data matches the search criteria
• System notify user to choose different search criteria
Post conditions
Notes
==PAGE:84==
74
A Appendix A
Use Case Name
Create New Project
Description
User creates a new reserach project
Actors
Researcher
Pre conditions
Logged in as researcher
Main Scenarios
1. The user press the new project button
2. System creates a make new project pop up
3. The User inputs
• Project name
• Add researcher(s)
• add data owner(s)
• description
• duration
• permissions
4. The user press the create project button
Alternative Scenar-
ios
4a. Input is wrong or false
• System notify user what input is wrong and what the
problem is
• The user changes the input
Post conditions
The user has created a new project
Notes
==PAGE:85==
A Appendix A
75
Requirement
num-
ber:
5
Use Case Name
Add project members to project
Description
Project owner adds colaborators to their project
Actors
Project member
Pre conditions
Logged in as a project member and a project created
Main Scenarios
1. Project owner goes to a projects homepage
2. Project owner goes to add project member tab in the left
sidebar
3. All available members are displayed and can be added by
pressing the button besides their name.
Alternative Scenar-
ios
Post conditions
New project members have been added to the project
Notes
==PAGE:86==
76
A Appendix A
Use Case Name
Add data manually
Description
User Adds data manually from a external resource
Actors
Data owner
Pre conditions
Logged in and Data owner role chosen
Main Scenarios
1. The user goes to the drop down menu Data
2. The user Press on the tab Add data manually
3. The system opens a search window
4. The user selects a file to import from
5. System checks input
6. The user has been registered
Alternative Scenar-
ios
4a. Username is taken.
• System notify user to choose another user name
Post conditions
The user has been registered
Notes
fil formats and who needs to be able to add data and where is the
data added
==PAGE:87==
A Appendix A
77
Requirement
num-
ber:
7
Use Case Name
Add roles to a project
Description
Project owner adds roles for their project members involved in
their project
Actors
Project member
Pre conditions
Logged in as a project member and a project created
Main Scenarios
1. Project owner goes to a projects homepage
2. Project owner goes to settings in the left sidebar.
3. Project owner goes to the role settings and press the button
add a new role
4. define the role by adding:
• role name
• description
• permissions
5. After creation of role members can be added to the role.
Alternative Scenar-
ios
Post conditions
New roles have been added to the project
Notes
==PAGE:88==
78
A Appendix A
Use Case Name
Collect data from data owners
Description
User Collects data from a specified Data owner
Actors
medical staff
Pre conditions
Logged in as a medical staff
Main Scenarios
1. The user goes to the search field in write corner and search
for the data owner
2. The user chooses a person from the list provided by the
system
3. The user request access to the data owners data
4. The user views the data from the data owner
Alternative Scenar-
ios
3a. The user is not authorized to view the data
• System notify user that it doesn’t have authorization
to view the data
• The user can ask the data owner to create permission
for him to use their data
Post conditions
Notes
==PAGE:89==
A Appendix A
79
Use Case Name
Create permissions
Description
User create permissions for the use of their own data
Actors
Data owner
Pre conditions
Logged in as a Data owner
Main Scenarios
1. The user is prompted on first log in to set the permissions
for the use of his data
2. The user is taken to the permission settings page
3. The user sets permission and click save
4. The user views their permissions
Alternative Scenar-
ios
1a. The user clicks the setting tab
• The user opens the tab and click the permission tab
1b. The user is prompt by a new request
• The user clicks on the prompt and is taking to the
settings page
• The user is asked to respond to request
Post conditions
Notes
==PAGE:90==
80
A Appendix A
Use Case Name
Edit Data
Description
User edits it’s on data
Actors
Data Owner
Pre conditions
Logged in as data owner
Main Scenarios
1. The user
2. System creates a make new project pop up
3. The User inputs
• Project name
• Add researcher(s)
• add data owner(s)
• description
• duration
• permissions
4. The user press the create project button
Alternative Scenar-
ios
4a. Input is wrong or false
• System notify user what input is wrong and what the
problem is
• The user changes the input
Post conditions
The user has created a new project
Notes
On what conditions should a reseracher be able to edit data and
how is data stored
==PAGE:91==
A Appendix A
81
Use Case Name
Edit Data
Description
User edits it’s on data
Actors
Data Owner
Pre conditions
Logged in as data owner
Main Scenarios
1. The user
2. System creates a make new project pop up
3. The User inputs
• Project name
• Add researcher(s)
• add data owner(s)
• description
• duration
• permissions
4. The user press the create project button
Alternative Scenar-
ios
4a. Input is wrong or false
• System notify user what input is wrong and what the
problem is
• The user changes the input
Post conditions
The user has created a new project
Notes
On what conditions should a reseracher be able to edit data and
how is data stored
==PAGE:92==
82
A Appendix A
Use Case Name
Edit project settings
Description
User edits the project settings
Actors
Researcher
Pre conditions
Logged in as researcher & Chosen a project
Main Scenarios
1. The user Clicks the settings button
2. The user is taken to the settings page
3. The user can choose what settings to edit:
• name
• Edit researcher(s)
• Edit researcher(s) permission
• description
• duration
• permissions
•
4. The user press the save button to save the changes
Alternative Scenar-
ios
Post conditions
Notes
==PAGE:93==
A Appendix A
83
Use Case Name
Register device
Description
User Register a device
Actors
Data Owner
Pre conditions
Logged in as data owner
Main Scenarios
1. The user Clicks the button new device
2. The systems shows a pop up with devices
3. The user chooses his device
4. The user connects device with system
5. The user names device and chooses pull data interval
Alternative Scenar-
ios
4a. Connects external account with system
• User is prompt for external account information
• The user inputs the information
4b. Cant find device
• Prompt is showing to the user with error message
Post conditions
The user has registered a new device
Notes
==PAGE:94==
84
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[Agi]
Agilent. Transform Analytical Data into Meaningful Results with OpenLab
Software. url: https://www.agilent.com/en/products/software-
informatics/openlab-software-suite.
[ass]
American heart association. Holter Monitor. url: http://www.heart.
org/HEARTORG/Conditions/HeartAttack/DiagnosingaHeartAttack/
Holter-Monitor_UCM_446437_Article.jsp.
[Bil]
Alex Bilbie. A Guide To OAuth 2.0 Grants. url: https://alexbilbie.
com/guide-to-oauth-2-grants/ (visited on May 8, 2017).
[Boo]
Spring Boot. Spring boot starters. url: hhttps://docs.spring.io/
spring-boot/docs/2.0.3.RELEASE/reference/htmlsingle/#using-
boot-starter.
[cop]
University of copenhagen. UCPH ERDA. url: http://www.erda.dk/.
[cUR]
cURL. Command line tool and library. url: https://curl.haxx.se/.
[Das]
Dash. An easy-to-use data publication service. url: https://dash.berkeley.
edu/stash.
[Data]
DataCite. Registry of Research Data repositories. url: https : / / www .
re3data.org/.
[Datb]
DTU Datamanagement. Data Management plan. url: http://www.dtu.
dk/-/media/DTUdk/Forskning/Om_DTUs_forskning/DTU_Data_Management_
Plan-folder.ashx (visited on April 9, 2018).
[Ecla]
Eclipse. Musquitto Broker. url: http://mosquitto.org/.
[Eclb]
Eclipse. Paho. url: https://www.eclipse.org/paho/.
[Emp]
Empatica. Empatica e4 wristband. url: https://www.empatica.com/.
[Fig]
Figshare. simplifying your research workflow. url: https://figshare.
com/.
[Fit]
Fitbit. Fitbit. url: https://www.fitbit.com/dk/home.
[fita]
fitbit. Accessing the Fitbit API. url: https://dev.fitbit.com/build/
reference/web-api/oauth2/#authorization-code-grant-flow.
[fitb]
fitbit. Web API Reference. url: https : / / dev . fitbit . com / build /
reference/web-api/.
==PAGE:96==
86
Bibliography
[Goo]
Google. Google Fit. url: https://www.google.com/fit/.
[inf]
influxdata. influxdb-java. url: https://github.com/influxdata/influxdb-
java.
[man]
SCIENCE leads the way in data management. Faculty of science. url:
https://www.science.ku.dk/english/press/news/2018/science-
leads-the-way-in-data-management/.
[Mis]
Misfit. Misfit cloud API. url: https : / / build . misfit . com / docs /
cloudapi/overview.
[MPR16]
Cameron McCarthy, Nikhilesh Pradhan, and Calum Redpath. Validation
of the Empatica E4 wristband. Student Conference (ISC), IEEE EMBS
International., 2016.
[Pos]
PostgresSQL. Json types. url: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.
4/static/datatype-json.html.
[Spr]
Spring. 29.3.2 Spring Data JPA Repositories. url: https://docs.spring.
io/spring-boot/docs/2.0.3.RELEASE/reference/htmlsingle/#boot-
features-jpa-and-spring-data.
[w3]
w3. HTTP. url: https://www.w3.org/Protocols/.
