==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Nacelle cover configurator
Aleksandra Staśkiewicz (s152471)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management Engineering
Department of Management Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet
Building 426
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 4800
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Engineering Management at
the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring
a yyy degree in Wind Energy.
Kongens Lyngby, July 19, 2018
Aleksandra Staśkiewicz (s152471)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
[Hva06] [lars1] [HH98] [NH12] [CIM] [BH12] [SHB14] [MKH17] [Sha+17] [GL10]
[TJW] [Age] [Pin93b] [Pin93a]
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Wind Power Industry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Jupiter Bach A/S . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Scope of the project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Approach to the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.6
Delimitation of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.7
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Theoretical background
11
2.1
Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Mass customization methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
Configuration systems in the Bally Engineered Structures . . . . . . .
17
3
Mass Customization and product configuration system in Jupiter
Bach
19
3.1
The current market conditions and customer requirements . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Mass Customization and specification processes at Jupiter Bach . . . .
22
4
Development of specification processes
29
4.1
Step 1: Identification and characterization of the most important spec-
ification processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Step 2: Analysis of requirements for the specification processes . . . .
35
4.3
Step 3: Designing the future specification process. Definition of con-
figuration system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4
Step 4: Evaluation of the scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.5
Step 5: Plan of action and organization of further work
. . . . . . . .
57
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5
Analysis of the Product Range
59
5.1
Procedure of the product analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.2
Fundamental of nacelle cover design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.3
Product Variant Master . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A Product Variant Master
81
B Class Diagram
83
C CRC Cards
85
Bibliography
87
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In today’s business world, the environment and technology are evolving rapidly, so
are the customer. These continuous changes are affecting customers’ demands and
expectations. In response, many companies compete in creating the powerful cus-
tomer experience that can lead a company towards growth and financial success.
To personalize and shape customer experiences, increasing number of companies are
adopting the concepts of mass customization and product configurators and begin to
customize their products and services. In the recent past, especially companies spe-
cializing in production of highly complex product have made customization a priority.
The project is made in cooperation with the Jupiter Bach A/S company, which
has recently applied the principles of mass customization and is interested in further
development by implementing a configuration system in its organization. The objec-
tive of this thesis is to analyze the procedure of developing the configuration system at
the Jupiter Bach A/S company, and examine the benefits and limitations associated
with the application of the mass customization principles and configuration system.
The chapter contains a description of the current Wind Power Industry, introduc-
tion to Jupiter Bach A/S business and the scope of the project in which the case
study was explained in more detail. On this basis, research questions are formulated,
and then the approach to the study is discussed. Finally, the delimitation of the
project and the thesis outline are presented.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
1.1
Wind Power Industry
Since the early 1970s, environmentalists have been promoting the development of
renewable energy as an escape from dependence on oil, a substitute for the eventual
depletion of oil and a key element in the reduction of global carbon dioxide emis-
sion. As a result, the first wind turbines generating electricity appeared, and since
then Wind Energy Industry making their way up in energy agenda. Currently, the
benefits of renewable energy sources go beyond low carbon transition, which includes
increasing price competitiveness, long-term certainty, and energy security compared
to oil and gas sources.
Denmark has become a pioneer in the wind industry, where it has experienced
tremendous advancement in the entire value chain, from wind turbine manufacturers,
developers of offshore and onshore wind farms, transport, maintenance and operation,
and the production of turbine components, etc. Constant investments and innova-
tions in wind technologies, involving political, technical and economic aspects, ensure
the competitiveness of the Danish market. To ensure expansion through renewable
energy technologies, the Danish government has provided special support for new
technologies on the market i.e. tax incentives, public support to research, develop-
ment of RE-technologies, a suitable legislative and planning framework, and so on.
The current policy trend, however, consists in forcing renewable energy investors
to reduce costs and ultimately stop their dependence on subsidies. The price pressure
involves entire value chain, as market for electricity is extremely focused on Levelized
Cost of Energy (LCoE). This is related to all electricity production technologies based
on nuclear, fossil or renewable energy.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Jupiter Bach A/S
3
1.2
Jupiter Bach A/S
The Jupiter Bach is a niche Danish company focused on the wind industry. Their
basic activity is the design, production, and supply of fiber-reinforced plastic nacelle
and spinner covers. From the beginning, as two small independent production compa-
nies, Jupiter Bach grew out of the merger of the Jupiter group and BACH Composite
Industry in 2017, which were similar to the size measured by revenues and number
of employees, and their size basically doubled. It affected the economies of scale and
resulted in a number of benefits, such as stronger technical support, a widely devel-
oped production platform, and better barging power in acquiring. The company, in
2017, had a revenue of 850 million DKK with and EBIT in the range of 9%.
The Wind Energy Industry has been dynamically developing over the last two
decades together with the demands for products and services from Jupiter Bach. In
recent years, they have gradually expanded their global operations, and currently
have eight production sites in six countries, 90 000m2 of manufacturing and assembly
capacity, and over 1200 employees. Thanks to many years of experience with demand-
ing quality standards set by OEMs, combined with expertise in product development,
Jupiter Bach has become a partner of leading global wind energy companies, with a
track record of more than 40 000 wind turbines.
The market share of Jupiter Bach was gradually developed over time, but obvi-
ously had a tremendous boost with the merger of Jupiter Group and Bach Composite
Industry. The company has reached a worldwide market share of 55%, where the
main drivers are the markets in Europe and USA. China is also a contributor, but
the market is more difficult due to competition, regulations and common business
manners. The customers of Jupiter Bach are the key players in wind energy indus-
try e.g. GE, Vestas, Siemens Gamesa, Nordex Acciona, Senvion, Shanghai Electric,
MVOW, Goldwind, Suzlon etc. The vast majority of the revenues are generated from
products manufactured at the request of two key clients, i.e. GE and Vestas.
The main competitors of Jupiter Bach are Shuangyi in China, Fassmer in Ger-
many/Poland and MFG in the USA. However, companies like BFG in Bahrain and
Grossmann in Germany should not be underestimated. To maintain its position as a
market leader, Jupiter Bach’s objective is to ensure on-time deliveries of flawless qual-
ity at competitive prices measured as total cost. Moreover, services as engineering
support, consultancy and responsiveness must exceed their customers.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
1.3
Scope of the project
The main goal of all companies dealing in wind technologies, as mentioned earlier, is
to increase cost competitiveness in relation to gas and oil companies. The current
strategy of Jupiter Bach is to maintain and even improve their position as a market
leader by maintaining existing activities, absorbing added scope to existing products,
and winning new projects, especially within the off-shore market. The company is
committed to continuous improvement in the design and delivery of products with
maximum customer benefits at a minimum cost by expanding the range of existing
products to maintain revenue and competitiveness.
The current products are intended for an individual customer, causing a number
of problems, i.e. long production time, high production costs and many defects in the
final product. Jupiter Bach intends to implement an innovative solution to meet the
challenge and overcome obstacles. According to Dr. David Thomas, vice-president
of Capgemini: “There are very few niches left in the business. Mass-customizing the
tours is one of the few places left to build a competitive advantage.” The concept
of mass customization offers companies many benefits that can provide solutions to
Jupiter Bach’s problems. The company decided to apply the techniques of mass cus-
tomization in the near future by providing a product design that is intended for each
customer rather than for an individual customer. This can significantly shorten the
lead time, reduce technical problems associated with production, and thus reduce the
total cost, bringing tremendous benefits to both the company and the customer.
As the nacelle and spinner covers are not the key to the performance of wind
turbines, it would be reasonable to set product standards by OEMs to reduce prices.
Due to the complexity of the nacelle cover design, this has never been done before.
To meet customer requirements, Jupiter Bach has developed its own modular design
of the nacelle cover, with an emphasis on low production costs and short delivery
time, which practically every wind turbine manufacturer could use. The overall prod-
uct concept has been developed on the basis of how the product model can be built
up from modules, significantly facilitate production, and meet general needs of each
customer. Based on the product knowledge, gained through years of expertise, the
engineers created modular nacelle cover design that is continually customizable across
seven dimensions: width, height, length, shaft diameter, tower diameter, origin point
width and height distance. This will allow the company to be ahead of the competi-
tion in providing comprehensive solutions for individual customers.
The main purpose of this project is to develop a nacelle cover configuration sys-
tem, built from predefined components that have the best functionality with respect
to customer criteria, and create and customize specifications supporting production.
The future primary goal of implementing the configurator system is to enable sales
representatives to make a custom design without involving other parties in the pro-
cess. Currently, Jupiter Bach provides product solutions through CAD modeling, as
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Scope of the project
5
well as complicated calculators that require specialized technical knowledge. This
markedly increases work load, with the often resulting delays and uncertainty for the
entire project. The nacelle cover configurator should be a simplified version of the
current calculator for the use of sales representatives in order to provide standard
solutions and a quick response to the customer. Therefore, it is important for the
project to analyze the impact of implementing the configurator system on customer-
oriented business processes that result in the elimination of subsequent approvals and
the simplification of the communication channel.
To summarize, the primary goal of this project is to develop the configurator sys-
tem that will be the basis for future development for other product families, while
focusing on making the customer an integral part of an organization.Moreover, Jupiter
Bach intends to present the nacelle cover configuator at the Global Wind Summit
Conference 2018 in Hamburg to convince customers that this is the only way to pro-
vide low-cost products.
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
1.4
Problem formulation
The previous discussion provides a brief overview of how Jupiter Bach intends to
implement the mass customization techniques based on a modular product design.
The main objective of this project is to develop the configuration system for the
modular nacelle cover design that can support their business. The task is therefore to
investigate how the product configurator system can support organizational processes
and what are the potential benefits and limitations associated with it. On this basis,
the principle research question and its sub-questions are formalized:
How to enable the sales department in the product design process leading to
the generation of specifications facilitating production?
1. What should the scope of the configurator system be and what are the
expected cost benefits for the company?
2. How to structure the nacelle cover product model that is to be implemented
in the configuration system
3. How to implement the nacelle cover product model into a standard config-
uration system?
The first research sub-question is answered in Chapter 4, where the business re-
quirements for the configuration system are formulated, the future specification pro-
cess was developed and the future benefits for the company were estimated.
The second research sub-question is answered in Chapter 5 and Chapter ??, where
the knowledge of the product for incorporation into a standard configuration system
is described.
The final research sub-question is answered in Chapter ?? and Chapter ??, where
the configuration system is created using SOLIDWOKRS, Tacton Configuration Stu-
dio, and Tacton Automatization Studio, and the recommendations for operating the
configuration system are formulated.
The main research question is answered in Chapter ??, where the answers for
sub-questions are summarized and the general conclusion is given.
==PAGE:17==
1.5 Approach to the study
7
1.5
Approach to the study
Based on the literature studies a decision was made to apply the 7-phase framework
procedure for creating, implementing and operating configuration systems that where
developed at the Center for Product Modelling (CPM) at the Technical University
of Denmark. This procedure has already been included in many companies and has
been successfully completed, which is why it was decided to apply this procedure in
the master’s thesis. (Hvam & Jensen, 2005)
The procedure for developing and implementing configuration systems proceeds
according to the following steps:
1. Phase 1: Development of specification processes
2. Phase 2: Analysis of Product Range
3. Phase 3: Object-oriented modelling
4. Phase 4: Object-oriented design
5. Phase 5: Programming
6. Phase 6: Implementation
7. Phase 7: Maintenance and further development
1.6
Delimitation of the project
Due to the fact that the objective of this thesis is to develop a configurator system,
and not to implement it in a company, there are several aspects that have been
excluded from the project. Moreover, due to the time constraints, it was necessary to
narrow the scope of the project and to examine only those aspects which are relevant.
The project’s delimitations are listed below.
1.6.1
Price-to-weight optimization
Optimizing the design in the configuration system can significantly reduce expenses,
so it is obvious that it is always worth considering them. However, the main emphasis
is put on showing the company that it is possible to develop a configurator that
supports sales and design processes for the production of nacelle covers instead of
optimized projects based on various factors. Nevertheless, attempts have been made
to optimize the nacelle cover design, taking into account the price and weight, but
without success. Possible aspects that could have impact will be discussed further in
section.
==PAGE:18==
8
1 Introduction
1.6.2
Production setup
The primary modular nacelle cover has been designed for the Global Wind Summit
Conference in Hamburg, and the design will be changed for improvements. So far,
the company has produced one modular nacelle cover for the needs of the exhibition,
and future production settings have not yet been defined due to possible changes. In
addition, the project aims to develop a configurator, and therefore no effort has been
made to present changes in the production setup processes.
1.6.3
Implementation and Maintainace
It was decided late in the process to exclude two phases of the CPM procedure,
because the main goal of this project is to show the company that it is possible to
develop a nacelle cover configurator system and benefits associated with it, rather
than focusing on implementing and maintaining the configuration system.
==PAGE:19==
1.7 Thesis outline
9
1.7
Thesis outline
The thesis outline will follow the overall procedure for creating, implementing and
operating configuration system and will follow the phases of the 7-phase framework
procedure, and is as follows:
• Chapter 2: Theoretical background The theoretical background for the the-
sis will be set. Important terminology will be explained and directly linked to
the relevant context.
• Chapter 3: Mass Customisation at Jupiter Bach This chapter elaborated
on the mass customization principles and configurator system of the standard
nacelle cover currently being developed by Jupiter Bach.
• Chapter: 4: Phase 1: Development of specification processes The current
specification process is analysed and modelled, several alternatives are proposed
and the most suitable is selected.
• Chapter 5:Phase 2: Analysis of Product Range Analysis of current product
range, give an overview of offerings to the customer and describe the product
knowledge which will be incorporated in the configuration system.
• Chapter ??: Phase 3: Object-oriented modelling The models from the
second phase, e.g. the product variant master (PVM) the class responsibility
collaboration (CRC) cards and the product constraints, will be further devel-
oped and described.
• Chapter ??: Phase 4: Object-oriented design The selection of the software
is described, software requirements and user interface are specified.
• Chapter ??: Phase 5: Programming The programming of the object-oriented
model using Tacton Configuration Studio, Tacton Automatization Studio and
SolidWorks.
• Chapter ??: Discussion This chapter includes general discussion and evalua-
tions of the whole project.
• Chapter ?? Conclusion In this chapter the main findings from the analyses
are discussed along with the results from the research questions
==PAGE:20==
10
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2
Theoretical
background
This chapter will introduce the theoretical background for the thesis.
Important
terminology for conducting analyses will be explained in order to answer the research
questions. The main core for the analyses will be the 7-phase framework procedure
developed in CPM. The mass customization methods defined by Joseph Pier will be
used to support the analyses.
2.1
Framework
The framework provides structure for the task of developing, implementing and using
configuration system.
The procedure includes theoretical basis for analyzing the
product range, as will as the documentation of the configuration system and the
product model [book] However, the last two phases are not covered by the scope of
the project, and below is a more detailed description of only five of the seven phases
of the framework.
2.1.1
Phase 1: Development of Specification Processes
In the first phase of the framework the most important specification processes are
identified and analyzed. It is important to identify the commercial advantages de-
sired from implementing the program and future requirements for the specification
processes. On this basis, definition of the future specification processes to be sup-
ported by configuration system id conducted. In this phase the five steps can be
distinguished which will be presented in the following sections. [book]
2.1.1.1
Step 1: Identification and characterization of the most important
specification processes
In the first step the most important specification processes within the company are
identified. Specification processes, or in another words business process, aim to ana-
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Theoretical background
lyze how the future product along with life cycle properties can meet customer needs.
Furthermore, a specification process can be describe by its inputs, outputs and sub-
activities that are performed during the process. Figure presents how input, which
in this case will be customer’s wishes in relation to the product, is transformed via a
series of activities into output
2.1.1.2
Step 2: Formulation of aims and requirements for the individual
specification processes
• Which targets should be met?
• Where does the greatest potential of improvements lie?
• What is the nature of the specification work to be included in the configuration
system?
• Are the methods to be used in the specification processes rapidly changing?
• What degree of freedom and flexibility must be included in the specification
processes and the configuration system?
• How detailed should it be?
• What product knowledge should be incorporated in the configuration system?
• How is the customers’ input secured?
• How will the product and its specification processes be further developed with
the use of configuration system?
2.1.1.3
Step 4: Evaluation and selection of scenarios
2.1.1.4
Step 5: Plan of action and organization of further work
2.1.2
Phase 2: Analysis of Product Range
According to Hvam et al., (2008) there are some central questions which need to be
considered when analyzing the product range, i.e.:
• What degree of modularization exists in the product range?
• What are the limitation of each part of the product range that shall be incor-
porated into the configuration system?
• How to get an overview of the knowledge to be dealt with?
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Framework
13
Figure 2.1: Framework for modelling product families [book].
• How to structure both the product model and the configuration system so that
maintenance will easy as well as optimizing the division of work between the
configuration system and users?
• How to ensure that the quality of knowledge which is to be incorporated into
the system is good enough?
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Theoretical background
Figure 2.2: Framework for modelling product families [book].
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Framework
15
Figure 2.3: Framework for modelling product families [book].
2.1.2.1
Product Variant Master
2.1.3
Phase 3: Object-Oriented Modelling
2.1.3.1
Basic concept in OOM
2.1.3.2
Object-Oriented Analysis
2.1.4
Class diagram
2.1.4.1
CRC cards
2.1.5
Object-Oriented Design
2.1.5.1
Selection of Configuration Software
2.1.5.2
Choosing a software
2.1.6
Choosing a software supplier
2.1.6.1
Adaptation of the OOM to the chosen software
2.1.7
Phase 5: Programming
2.1.8
Phase 6: Implementation
2.1.9
Phase 7: Maintenance and further development
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Theoretical background
2.2
Mass customization methods
The paradigm of mass customization uses the advantages of mass production. It’s
power and benefits have been expanded over the past 20 years by consultants, aca-
demics and practitioners. The objective of mass customization is to deliver affordable,
individually designed products and services to every customer through process agility,
flexibility and integration.[TJW]
According to Pier, to ensure the progress in which company immersed in mass
production can move to mass customization, there are five fundamental principles of
mass customization. In practice none of them are mutually exclusive and often many
companies use their combination. Success with implementing the appropriate tech-
niques can bring entire organization the enormous potential inherent in customization,
facilitating the progress in manufacturing products. However, it should be taken into
account that the implementation of any technique involves a radical change of each
key link in organizational value chain. It is extremely important to implement mass
customization principles, from the easiest place to start through more common and
fundamental, which does not require drastic changes in a company’s value chain and
starts to change people’s thinking about the concept of customization. [Pin93b]
Based on the preliminary analysis, only relevant methods are discussed for the
purposes of the thesis.
2.2.1
Create customizable products and services
The main objective of this method is to develop a customized product that easily
adapts to the individual needs of the customer and can be mass produced. Success
using this method can be only achieved by finding the most individual characteristics
of the product. It is characterized by changes in development and marketing, while
production and delivery have less disruption. This method includes only two links
of an organization’s value chain and is therefore considered as the easy method at
the beginning. However, it should be mentioned that original customizability does
not ensure a sustainable competitive advantage, but with further development of the
product and the use of other mass customization methods.[Pin93b]
2.2.2
Provide quick response throughout the value chain
This method is known as time-based competition, as the main strategy is to reduce
time throughout entire value chain to meet customers’ needs by means of saving time
method. The main objective of this method is a shorten set-up time in production and
to speed up product development to facilitate these reductions to ultimately shorten
the overall order delivery cycle. This often results in lower variant product specific
cost, as well as complexity costs by reducing final good inventory. [Pin93b]
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Configuration systems in the Bally Engineered Structures
17
In general, this method reduces cycles times of each key link in the value chain,
which is the result of a chain reaction initiated by the fast delivery function. However,
it is important to not introduce mistakes and lower quality while reducing the overall
delivery times. It becomes apparent that it is necessary to redesign the specification
processes in the organization to minimize the non-value added as activities as much
as possible. It can be achieved by eliminating the succession of approval and con-
stant communication up and down the layers of management that slows down the
organization. [Pin93b]
2.2.3
Modularize components to customize end products and
services
According to Pier, this is the best method for achieving customization. The main
objective is to modularize components that can be configured to a wide number of
product variants, while minimizing the costs and maximizing individual customiza-
tion, involving the entire organization in meeting customer needs. Economies of scale
are achieved through the components, while economies of scope and customization
are gained by reusing the components to create a large stream of product variants.
This method is characterized by the development and use of modules, which will be
discussed further in Section [Pin93b]
2.3
Configuration systems in the Bally Engineered
Structures
The Jupiter Bach nacelle cover modular product is strikingly similar in function and
design to the products offered by Bally Engineered Structures.
Therefore, it was
considered important to investigate how the principles of mass customization and
product configuration were applied in this company, because it could be an example
to follow in the future.
The company has been successful in providing various types of products, i.e. walk-
in coolers, freezers, insulated outdoor structures, refrigerated warehouses, environ-
mentally controlled rooms, cold storage buildings, and blast chillers, simply having
one building block - modular panels that can be connected together in an unlimited
number of products.[Pin93a]
The first step to move from mass production to mass customization in the com-
pany was the change of inefficient administrative processes that covered the produc-
tion process. Mainly because it was possible to produce customized structures in
just four work days, but administrative processes often stretched these four days by
five to seven weeks. In response, Bally used its computer system to completely re-
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Theoretical background
engineer the administrative processes. The idea was to develop a customer-focused
strategy and then shorten the cycle time and ensure more customization for key cus-
tomers.[Pin93a]
In 1983, the company moved from standardized to customized products using the
MAPICS software that began tracking the parts. Owning this information has en-
abled a tenfold increase in the variety of their products. Due to the fact that the
Bally product has a complex structure, each modification requires a constant re-check
of the entire structure and relations between the modules. The desire of the company
was to eliminate unnecessary processes associated with the rechecking the design, and
Bally started to redesign its sales and ordering processes using artificial intelligence
software - the Application System/400T M (AS/400), that was supported at the same
time by configuration CAD systems that automatically generated drawings. Based on
these drawings, a sales representative could easily generate bill of materials through
MAPICS to facilitate production. These improvements have shortened the communi-
cation channel from 86 to 56 steps, which is further supported by the AS/400 system,
which maintains the employee database and can be reached at any time, if necessary.
Having information under control allows Bally to continue eliminating the unneces-
sary manual steps in production. Bally has provided immediate access to AS/400 to
its sales representatives who have now become responsible for planning and super-
vising their own work. In addition, employees can easily exchange information via
the system not only internally, but also with suppliers in one network that shares
information along the entire value chain. [Pin93a]
In summary, by adopting the principles of mass customization, many companies
have to change their business model. Fundamentals in such business model are a
modular based product range and use of configuration system in customer-oriented
business processes. The business processes include sale, product design and devel-
opment of the manufacturing specification, which are the business processes from
customer to production.[HMR08]
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Mass Customization
and product
configuration system
in Jupiter Bach
In this chapter, the external environment is first examined by researching market
conditions. Then, current problems will be discussed in detail, based on which the
company’s strategy will be determined. Next, based on literature research, possible
techniques of mass customization were investigated. Finally, based on the principles
of mass customization the new business model and the functional requirements for the
future specification process at Jupiter Bach are determined. All the aspects discussed
here are the basis for future analysis, which will be carried out in the chapter 4.
The discussion in the section 1.3 presents a preliminary review of the company’s,
steps taken to overcome obstacles and a vision of the future direction of the company.
However, to deal with these aspects holistically, it is necessary to identify and explore
possible techniques and tools that will give a profound understanding of the possible
impact on the company. It should be remembered that, that he main goal of Jupiter
Bach is to enable the sales department in the product design process, which will gen-
erate specifications to facilitate production.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Mass Customization and product configuration system in Jupiter Bach
3.1
The current market conditions and customer
requirements
The Jupiter Bach is experiencing the growing demands of customers. Currently, the
company’s is characterized by the development of next-generation wind technologies
- offshore turbines that are developing even faster than onshore turbines over the last
decade. From the perspective of Jupiter Bach, the demand is high. Perhaps not now,
but the demand is expected to increase in a few months. Therefore, it is very im-
portant for the company to efficiently handle daily operations, i.e. order-processing
activities, warehouse activities, fulfillment activities and most importantly the activ-
ities attached to inventory operations. To quickly produce, Jupiter Bach will have
no choice but to build up a stock. This can have a negative impact on company’s
cash flow because high working capital will be associated with building up stocks to
overcome the problem and maintain revenue. (Hansen, 2018)
With regard to the section 1.1 and the discussion above, Jupiter Bach’s key cus-
tomer requirements put emphasis on low costs and short delivery times. However, to
stand out from the competition Jupiter Bach must respond to several other require-
ments, such as:
• Quality
This is of great importance for Jupiter Bach to ensure the flawless quality of
their products. To quantify the quality of the products, they are tested by using
monitoring methods and control systems like: batch recording, visual control
for transport damage , tensile testing, visual control, dimensional control, CNC
software, color check or check for casting errors.
It is also ensured that all
material certificates are in line with technical specification requirements for the
materials. (Hansen, 2018)
• Compliance
It is essential for customer to obtain desired product adapted to all technical
requirements. To meet this requirement, services as engineering support and
consultancy are provided. (Hansen, 2018)
• On-time deliveries and Fast reaction time
Due to the high demands on the market, it is essential to ensure quick response
and on-time delivery. The overall delivery time of the company’s products can
be significantly reduced only through the fast production. The use of a cus-
tomized nacelle cover will definitely contribute to this. What is more, Jupiter
Bach expects tremendous improvements with the use of a product that can
shorten the processing time of specifications relevant to high-speed production.
(Hansen, 2018)
==PAGE:31==
3.1 The current market conditions and customer requirements
21
3.1.1
Main problems with current situation
Jupiter Bach is a typical manufacturing company that supplies complex products,
where significant amount of work goes into the product design and related specifica-
tions for an individual customer. The primary goal for Jupiter Bach is to develop
product that will increase the general value for the customer, reduce costs and deliv-
ery times, minimize complexity and provide efficiency of business processes.
The engineering department must develop a product design using CAD modelling,
most often from scratch, individually for each customer, which basically means that
it is a repetitive and therefore ineffective process. This complicated design process
involves entire organization. Sharing knowledge between departments means more
back and forward communication, which extends the time of specification creation.
Specifications are passed between departments and the processes are completely de-
pendent on the outcome from the previous ones. It directly affects the time needed to
create a specification, because it requires more resource consumption and can trigger
the human errors. This causes a number of problems, such as long production time,
high production costs and errors in the final product.
In response, the engineering team has developed a customized product based on
modules and intends to implement a configuration system to handle the customer-
oriented specification. It becomes apparent that this will require the restructuring of
organizational activities that relate to the product specifications at different stages
of the product life cycle. [CIM]
In conclusion, the current sales, design and engineering processes are complicated
and require a significant amount of work and continuous information exchange, which
is associated with lower quality, increased delivery time and higher costs for capital
resources. This section is an introduction to the analysis that must be performed in
the section 4.1.
3.1.2
Strategy of Jupiter Bach
After identifying current problems it is relevant to set future goals. The primary
goal of Jupiter Bach is to streamline the specification with an emphasis on low cost,
short delivery times and enhanced quality of both products and organizational activ-
ities. It is by means certain that the greatest potential for improvement lies in the
production process. Therefore, the company strives to apply techniques of mass cus-
tomization through the production of a modular nacelle cover design, which will bring
tremendous improvement in production efficiency. This is mainly due to the fact that
mass customization clarifies the organizational structure of many manufacturing op-
erations and enables the use of tools and machinery, usually automated, related to
the production of a customized product. Therefore, it is relevant to identify future
manufacturing tasks that must be overcome and link key production targets to them.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Mass Customization and product configuration system in Jupiter Bach
It will directly affect the sales and design processes. Therefore, it becomes apparent
that the greater potential exists within sales and design processes because even small
improvements can bring substantial benefits and streamline specification processes,
as well as contribute to the optimization of costs related to OPEX, IPC, and manage-
ment. (Hansen 2018). In addition, the company intends to use a configurator system
that can enable the sales department in the product design process and that gener-
ates specifications that facilitate production. It requires radical changes throughout
the entire value chain. The goals will be determined on the basis of key performance
parameters for which the company has a chance of a radical improvement. It will be
discussed further in the section 4.2.
3.2
Mass Customization and specification processes
at Jupiter Bach
The implementation of the principles of mass customization in the organization is a
way to overcome existing problems and maintain a lasting advantage over the compe-
tition. Some of these methods have found application in the Jupiter Bach’s business,
which strives to develop customized products based on a set of modules to be sup-
ported by the configuration system.
Considering the company’s current strategy,
three Pier’s mass customization methods have been recognized as significant, and
their key elements and impact on the company value chain are analyzed in the sub-
sequent section.
3.2.1
Create customizable products and services
Implementing the principles of creating products and services that can be customized
is the easiest place to start. Above all, the key to this method is to identify the most
individual product characteristics, and the general needs of Jupiter Bach customers,
including the desired product characteristics of the product, have been discovered by
the sales department to a large extent. Therefore, much less effort will be devoted
to the development of products. What is more, for Jupiter Bach it is important not
to introduce drastic changes in the value chain, which is why this method might be
suitable at the beginning of the journey towards mass customization.[Pin93b]
Figure 3.1 shows the expected changes in the value chain of Jupiter Bach.
It
is worth to remembering that the initial customizability alone can rarely provide a
long-lasting, sustainable and competitive advantage. This can only be achieved by
continuous improvement and development of new features, and above all by combining
it with other methods of mass customization.[Pin93b]
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Mass Customization and specification processes at Jupiter Bach
23
DESIGN
PRODUCTION
SALES
DELIVERY
Sale customizable products 
or services
Produce standarized (but 
customizable) products or 
services
Develop customizable 
products or services
Deliver standarized 
(but customizable) 
products or services
Figure 3.1: Changes in Value Chain to Create Customizable Products and services
at Jupiter Bach..
3.2.2
Provide quick response throughout the value chain
The main objective of this method is quick response to customer requirements, what
often results in shorter cycle times in the entire value chain. This can start to move
the Jupiter Bach away from the mass production mode towards mass customization
even more. The mere production of the Jupiter Bach modular product will markedly
reduce production time. It is expected that it can contribute to the significant reduc-
tion in the overall manufacturing lead time, including sales, design and production
processes. It was estimated that the delivery time can be reduced from 20-45 weeks
to 2 weeks, and the future goal is even to achieve a two-day delivery time by using a
configuration system to support sale and design activities. (Raimund, 2018)
As a result, the customer will become an integral part of an organization, which will
create customer-integrated value chain. Figure shows 3.2 the impact of this method
on all key links in the organization.
It is important in this method, to carefully redesign the business processes in the
organization, so as not to introduce mistakes and lower quality while reducing a time.
In an ideal Jupiter Bach’s scenario, the standard components are to be stored in
the stock as inventory items so that they are ready for subsequent post-processing
and assembly. As mentioned in the section 3.1, Jupiter Bach is forced by the current
market situation to consider an appropriate inventory replenishment process, because
it can have a bad effect on the company’s cash flow. This method is an excellent
solution to possible future problems, as shortening the time in entire value chain
shortens the replenishment cycle, and thus reducing inventory and complexity costs.
[Pin93b]
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Mass Customization and product configuration system in Jupiter Bach
DESIGN
PRODUCTION
SALES
DELIVERY
reduce sales cycle time
reduce production cycle 
time
reduce development cycle 
time
reduce delivery 
cycle times
Figure 3.2: Changes in Value Chain or Provide Quick Response at Jupiter Bach.
3.2.3
Modularize components and customize end products and
services
This method can move the organization even further to mass customization.
As
discussed in section 2.3, the Jupiter Bach modular product is strikingly similar in
function and design to the products offered by Bally Engineered Structures. There-
fore, the methods used by this company can be an example to follow, as they provide
an almost limitless variety of their products, i.e. refrigeration structures–walk-in cool-
ers, refrigerated warehouses etc., by a single process that creates a panel of urethane
between two metal skins. [Pin93b]
Similarly, the new designed nacelle cover is a customized product consisted of a set
of modules, i.e., panels, edge profiles and connectors, tailored to any combination the
customer needs. Therefore, Jupiter Bach can achieve economies of scale by increas-
ing a volume of the modular composite panel. While the variety of manufactured
goods - the economies of scope - can be achieved by simply casting the panel in 6
different types (sides, roof, bottom, front, rear) with customized heights, widths and
lengths. [Pin93b] Figure 3.3 shows how this method involves entire value chain in the
organization.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Mass Customization and specification processes at Jupiter Bach
25
DESIGN
PRODUCTION
SALES
DELIVERY
Sale customized products 
and services
Produce modularized 
product and services
Design modularized product 
and services
Deliver customized 
product and services
Figure 3.3: Changes in Value Chain to Modularize Components to Customize End
Products and Services at Jupiter Bach.
3.2.4
Jupiter Bach’s mass customization business model
Implementation the principles of mass customization means that a module-based
product range is to be built up, and that configuration systems are to be used to sup-
port the task of working out specifications in the customer-oriented business process
[HMR08].
SALES BASED ON 
CONFIGURATOR
DESIGN BASED ON 
CONFIGURATOR 
POST-PROCESSING 
OF STANDARD 
COMPONENTS 
FROM INVENTORY
DELIVERY
Figure 3.4: Mass customization business process at Jupiter Bach.
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Mass Customization and product configuration system in Jupiter Bach
With regard to the identified mass customization techniques that will be imple-
mented, and the desire to use the product configurator system, requires the develop-
ment of a coherent business model for Jupiter Bach. Figure 3.4 shows the changes
resulting from the implementation of the above mentioned techniques of mass cus-
tomization.
It illustrates the flow between key processes in Jupiter Bach’s mass
customization business model, i.e. sales based on configurator, design based on config-
urator, post-processing of standard components from inventory, and delivery. These
processes are based on a modular product model that has been designed with an
emphasis on low costs and short delivery times. It enables mass production of stan-
dard panels in the main production site and fast post-processing, which customizes
components in case the customer places an order. The final product is developed by
the configuration system in the sales process, and based on the specifications from
the configurator product is assembled to order using already customized modules.
3.2.5
The organizational changes at Jupiter Bach
Table 3.5 shows the future organizational changes at Jupiter Bach, resulting from
the implementation of mass customization principles discussed above and the use of
product configuration system. This required basically restructuring all specification
processes, including sales, design, engineering, production and procurement.
Figure 3.5: The future changes in specification processes at Jupiter Bach.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Mass Customization and specification processes at Jupiter Bach
27
The current approach of Jupiter Bach is to design, engineer and finish the prod-
uct after the order has been received, what is defined as Engineer-to-order (ETO)
specification process. They are complicated by nature and cause many problems. As
Jupiter Bach will produce customized product supported by IT system, there will
be a need to develop sales and engineering processes, in which specifications can be
automatically generated using a configuration system. It can be carried out on the
meanings of Customize-to-Order (CTO) processes. Building on this, it will affect
every aspect in sales and design processes. This is due to the fact that the Customer
Order Specification Decoupling Point will move from the specification worked out on
an order-initiated basis to the specifications worked out independently of the individ-
ual orders. This results in higher degree of completed specifications, that can better
facilitate production and procurement processes. Currently, the entire production
process starts only after a customer’s order is received, which is characterized by the
production of Make-to-Order type. The future changes in production, in which stan-
dard modules for inventory are mass produced, and then customized and assembled
to order, is typical for Assemble-to-Order type of production.
==PAGE:38==
28
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4
Development of
specification
processes
In this phase, the existing specification process is analyzed and future processes sup-
ported by the configurator system are proposed. The analysis follows a 5-step pro-
cedure that begins by identifying and characterizing the most critical specification
processes for the company’s performance. Then, based on the company’s strategy,
requirements for specification processes are defined and future scenarios are designed.
Finally, the costs and risks associated with future specification processes were esti-
mated.
The procedure ends with a decision regarding the selection of the appro-
priate scenario, and the plan of action and organization are carried out for further
work. Analysis in this phase was carried out in order to answer the first research
sub-question.
4.1
Step 1: Identification and characterization of the
most important specification processes
Analysis of business processes is an indispensable step in the implementation of con-
figuration systems. The initial analysis can provide an overview of the organization’s
business activities regarding specification processes where improvements can be easily
made. The current specification process, in accordance with both the Built-to-Print
and Built-to-Specification processes, was performed by following Business Process
Model and Notation (BPMN) convention, and can be found in Appendix [ref]
The production processes will not be analyzed because they are not covered by the
scope of the project. The main focus is on sales and design processes. The main prob-
lems related to the current situation of Jupiter Bach have already been identified in
the section 3.1.1 and therefore will not be discussed in this chapter.
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Development of specification processes
4.1.1
Current situation of Jupiter Bach
The basis of Jupiter Bach’s activity is to provide each customer with an individually
designed product. Depending on whether the customer has the exact specifications for
the item they need fabricated, there are two different ways that Jupiter Bach can pro-
pose the appropriate solution. Most projects are carried out based on the customer’s
design and documentation package, in accordance with the so-called Built-to-Print
process. Another type of project is when customer requests support for product de-
sign. In this case, the importance of the Built-to-Spec process can be applied. In
both cases, a significant amount of work goes into the design and specification of
each individual product and often includes knowledge and engineering solutions from
previous projects. In both cases, the entire engineering design process involves the
Engineer-to-order (ETO) specification process.
The current situation will be examined in terms of Built-to-Print specification
process. The decision was made on the basis of a discussion with sales person, who
explained that the Built-to-Spec designs cover only about 15% of all projects, so it
is more appropriate for them to focus on Built-to-Print.
Moreover, the efficiency
of business processes in this case depends largely on the product design, which often
requires design from scratch, what makes communication and organizational activities
more complicated, which is why it is difficult to define them. After analyzing the Built-
to-Print business processes the several interesting points about the current work flow
quickly becomes apparent:
• Five different actors, excluding the customer, are involved in the business pro-
cesses i.e. sales department, project management, engineering department, pro-
duction and procurement team. The sales department, project management
and engineering department are located in the main headquarter in Denmark,
and each production site has its own production department, which includes:
quality manager, production manager, supply chain manager and TPO. The
procurement team is part of the Global Supply Chain, which is responsible for
acquiring materials for each production site. Figure 4.1 presents global oper-
ations of Jupiter Bach, where complexity of communication channels becomes
apparent.
• There are 4 main types of business processes i.e. sales, design, production and
delivery process.
Most processes are completely dependent on the outcome
from the previous ones, only allowing for a few places where actors can work
independently on the case. As the project progresses and the information about
the project becomes more available in the organization, the number of actors
involved in the process decreases.
• Sales and design processes are characterized by complex communication and
involves almost all actors in each phase. Sharing knowledge in an organization
implies a significant number of iterations and communication loops.
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Step 1: Identification and characterization of the most important specification processes
31
MAIN 
HEADQUATER 
IN DENMARK
PRODUCTION 
IN 
LITHUANIA
PRODUCTION 
IN 
LITHUANIA
PRODUCTION 
IN POLAND
PRODUCTION 
IN USA
PRODUCTION 
IN SPAIN
PRODUCTION 
IN DENMARK
PRODUCTION 
IN CHINA
PRODUCTION 
IN CHINA
GLOBAL SUPPLY CHAIN 
PROCUREMENT TEAM
SALES, PROJECT 
MANAGEMENT & 
ENGINEERING GROUP
PRODUCTION GROUP
•
QUALITY MANAGER
•
PRODUCTION MANAGER
•
SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGER
•
TPO
Figure 4.1: Actors and departments at Jupiter Bach.
• Due to the complexity in sales and design processes, there has been a need to
distinguish the phases within them. The sales process includes 4 consecutive
phases, i.e. initial analysis, request review, request execution and close the deal
before the project is released. Whereas the design process includes 5 following
phases, i.e. initiation, analysis & planning, execution, documentation, imple-
mentation and qualification and evaluation before the release of the product.
Each phase represents communication loop.
• Specifications are often transferred between different actors through the pro-
cess, in which one party must further develop and define information found in
documents.
• The distance between the first contact with the customer and the point at which
the customer receives the final product is within 20-45 weeks. The sales process
takes 1 week, design process is up to 10 weeks, production process is in the
range of 8-10 weeks and delivery time is 1-12 weeks.
• There are different types of key sales, engineering or production specifications in-
corporated in the Jupiter Bach business, i.e.: 3D model design, 2D drawings, Bill
of Materials (BOM), Quotation (commercial and technical proposal), Purchase
Order (PO), Parts List, Design Failure Mode Effects Analysis (DFMEA), FEM
analysis, Work Instructions (WI), Production Part Approval Process (PPAP),
Manufacturing Process Plan (MPP), and Manufacturing Quality Plan (MQP).
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Development of specification processes
4.1.2
Sales process flow
Figure 4.2 presents a sales process that consists of four phases as follows: initial anal-
ysis, request review, request execution and close the deal. The primary responsibility
for execution of the specification tasks rests on the side of the sales person that is
approached by the potential customer. However, several other actors are involved in
the process, because creating specification documents requires sharing project infor-
mation and reviews at every stage. The customer has a decisive voice and can either
accept, reject or request modifications, which imply iterations over the process.
Phase 2:
REQUEST 
REVIEW
Phase 3:
REQUEST 
EXICUTION
Phase 1:
INITIAL 
ANALYSIS
Phase 4:
CLOSE THE 
DEAL
Figure 4.2: The phases in sales process.
The initial analysis phase starts with commercial meetings between the customer
and the sales person. Once the design requirements have been discussed, the sales
person must do the initial analysis of the customer request, including NDA, specifi-
cation and design requirements.
Later, the sales person shares the project information with all parties in the orga-
nization and initiates reviewing the customer’s request, to find out if the project is
feasible for production.
In execution phase, sales representative starts the process of preparing offers, in-
volving all parties, including the customer. Once product requirements are agreed,
the engineering team designs 3D model prototype and prepare initial BOM, which
is used to estimate material consumption, production team assess the feasibility of
the project, while procurement team determine supplier list and supplier of tooling.
The customer is involved in the process and is asked to give a continuous feedback on
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Step 1: Identification and characterization of the most important specification processes
33
the ideas for product design. Then the project manager is responsible for collecting
all information and preparing a technical proposal. Sales person executes technical
proposal and starts preparing a commercial proposal for the customer.
Once the order is placed, the sales person starts preparing the supply agreement
together with engineering and production department. At the same time, the sales
person negotiates all legal and commercial issues for the contract and asks for Pur-
chase Order (PO). Finally, based on the PO, the sales person, project manager and
production evaluate prices and delivery time together before project is released and
close the deal.
4.1.3
Design process flow
Figure 4.3 presents design process, where it is possible to distinguish five consecutive
phases that overlap simultaneously with operational activities of Global Supply Chain
(GSB) i.e. project procurement and project purchasing. The responsibilities are han-
dover by the sales person to the project manager (PM) with the project kick-off. The
number of actors decreases with the process, because the knowledge about the project
becomes more accessible and therefore there is no need for further clarifications. In
this case, customer can either accept or reject the process.
Phase 1:
INITIATION, 
ANALYSIS &
PLANNING
Phase 2:
EXECUTION
Phase 3:
DOCUMENTATION
Phase 4:
IMPLEMENTATION
Phase 5:
QUALIFICATION &
EVALUATION
Figure 4.3: The phases in design process.
The first step is general project planning is to determine clear framework about
the roles and responsibilities between the project manager and the GSC, along with
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Development of specification processes
the project schedule. The project manager then checks the project package with the
engineering team and ask for specifications, i.e. product specification, parts list and
DFMEA, which are analyzed before approval.
In the execution phase, the project manager distributes project data to all parties
in the organization and requests the product design specification. The engineering
team either reviews customer design (Built-to-Print) or designs the product based on
customer requirements (Built-to-Spec). The production department first evaluates
feasibility, product quality and plans production, and then initiates PPAP. The Pro-
duction Part Approval Process is executed independently in production sites because
it demands physical preparation of manufacturing processes for serial production.
The procurement team prepares the production supply based on the initial BOM and
prepare a list of validated suppliers and framework agreements. The execution phase
ends with the Design Freeze, meaning that customer binds the decision based on the
3D product design.
In the documentation phase, the project manager initiates the preparation of the
master documentation package based on the approved 3D product model. The en-
gineering team prepares 2D drawings and does FEM analysis of the product, while
production finalize BOM, and Work Instruction (WI). The project manager executes
the specifications up to the approval of Master Data. Based on the Master Documen-
tation Package, the procurement team finalizes the supplier list and begins to deliver
production materials.
The implementation phase is associated with tooling and product inspection.
Therefore, most specifications are carried out by production. Based on the Master
Documentation Package, production finalizes PPAP and prepares MPP and MPQ.
Once MPP and MPQ are finalized by the project manager, production will build a
prototype, which must later be approved by the customer during a meeting in the
factory. After the meeting, the production performs the first piece of qualification,
the so-called First Article Inspection (FAI), for the future small pilot production of
3-5 products, to validate production feasibility.
In the final phase, the project manager finalizes all the specifications needed for
serial production. First, the project manager updates the documentation package and
later transfers the project to the GSC. Then, the sales person prepares a financial
report and framework agreements that are evaluated by the project manager before
the product is released.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Step 2: Analysis of requirements for the specification processes
35
4.2
Step 2: Analysis of requirements for the
specification processes
The most critical specification processes have been identified and characterized. In
this step, requirements for future specification processes are defined.
First of all,
future goals will be identified based on the company’s strategy discussed in chapter 3.
Later, a gap analysis will be performed that shows the difference between the current
situation and future goals.
4.2.1
Targets for Jupiter Bach
The profound discussion in chapter 3 depicts key performance parameters in which
the company has a chance of radical improvement. In addition, the interested party
interviewed the sales department to find out which critical areas of business processes
the company would like to investigate. On this basis, future targets will be listed
directly in the gap analysis.
4.2.2
Gap analysis
The gap analysis is used to compare the current state of the company with future
desired results, giving an overview of where the potential for improvement lies. Table
4.4 table shows the gap analysis that was performed.
Figure 4.4: Gap Analysis.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Development of specification processes
It was decided to differentiate the objectives in terms of specification processes
with which these goals are related, i.e. sales and design processes or the production
process. Before carrying out the analysis, issues regarding the input data in the table
4.2.2 should be clarified.
Input data regarding the current situation was provided by the sales department,
which considered the Built-to-Print process, because it accounts for 85% of all projects.
The time for generating the specifications is given in working days, as requested by
the interested party, in order to conduct a cost analysis. The quality of the specifica-
tion is very uncertain, because all mistakes are corrected constantly during reviews,
which is closely related to the large number of communication loops. The cost of pro-
duction is 90% of the total cost of the final product, where the labour cost represents
50-55% and material cost is up to 35-40% (Hansen, 2018). Therefore, the company
is looking for improvements in this area. At the request of the interested party, the
cost of production was provided for a single nacelle cover, in which all taxes, sales
margin, and accessories were excluded. However, it can vary considerably because
the nacelle covers are individually designed for each project. Moreover, the cost of
the raw material varies greatly depending on the place of production site, because
the source materials come from the local area. The cost for single nacelle cover can
range from 125 000 DKK to 175 000 DKK. The total error rate reaches 6%, and most
of them are production errors (4-5%). The biggest source of claims are molds and
casting errors, and errors related to the finishing of products, such as cutting and
drilling errors. (Hansen, 2018)
Goals for future specification processes were introduced based on suggestions from
a conversation with the sales department, which was based mainly on assumptions
regarding the design of the modular nacelle cover without the use of a configurator.
It was decided to exclude the use of the configuration system in the gap analysis,
because it is important to have a clear picture of how much the company can benefit
from having the configurator. (Raimund, 2018) However, the goals set out seem to
be reasonable and will now be clarified. Regarding production processes, the assump-
tion are based on a calculator provided by engineering department (Per, 2017). It
has been calculated that the production cost of the modular nacelle cover is from 24
396 to 95 558 DKK, which gives an average of 60 000 DKK. However, the provided
calculator has not updated prices, and the actual price may be different. However, it
was agreed with the engineering team that the differences will be insignificant. It has
been calculated that production time can be reduced from 10 weeks to 2 man-days.
This is a radical improvement, however, due to the fact that the company has not
defined the plan to adapt the specification processes to these changes, it was decided
to set a goal for two weeks. Similarly, this will reduce the error rate from 5% to less
than 1%, and will be explained later. The proposed goals for quotation and design
lead time and generating specifications are based on the assumption proposed by the
sales department. IPC and quality of specifications are also expected to improve.
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Step 2: Analysis of requirements for the specification processes
37
Based on the analysis, it becomes clear that there will be a significant improve-
ment in all identified targets. First, improvements in the production process will be
discussed, followed by improved sales and design processes.
Due to the fact that Jupiter Bach will start producing the modular product,
all production-related problems will be minimized. It is expected that the greatest
progress will be in production lead time, up to 80%. This will directly affect the cost
of production, as the main source of production cost is the time needed to produce
sets of mold sets for non-standard elements and finishing products. It is expected
that production costs will fall to 60%, which is beneficial for both the company and
the customer. This is because molds are bought by customers, and Jupiter Bach’s
task is to direct customers, how many sets of molds are required, and then to provide
the required floor space and adequate labor capacity for production. It is directly
linked to the production error rate, because recently the company’s production sites
have experienced an increasing number of projects, therefore there is no idling capac-
ity, and the manpower becomes a key factor in terms of production. (Hansen, 2018)
As a reminder, the idea of facilitating production consists in the mass production of
standardized components and then customizing them to the order initiated by the
customer. This significant drop in error rate is mainly due to the fact that mass
production clarifies the organizational structure of many manufacturing operations
and enables the use of tools and machinery, usually automated ones. The expected
decrease in the error rate is 4%, which may bring additional cost savings as the aver-
age cost of error correction is high and amounts to 10% of the sales price. (Hansen,
2018)
These improvements in production processes are directly related to improvements
in sales and design processes.
Major improvements are expected in generation of
specifications, up to 50%. This is mainly because that the modular nacelle cover
design would enable to creation of predefined specifications, and therefore manual
administrative work for preparation will be reduced and performed in more repetitive
manner. This will directly affect the quality of specifications that will be based on
previously calculated values or pre-designed product models that will need to be up-
dated. This is closely correlated with the drop in quotation and design lead time, as it
is expected that the decrease will be 20% and 50%, respectively. The quotation lead
time is a long negotiation and discussion process lasting up to one week. This is due
to complicated sales and design processes, as well as the need to obtain continuous
feedback from stakeholders. Improving the quality of specifications will allow both
engineers and sales representatives to work more independently, which will reduce
the number of iterations. It is expected that the number of communication loops will
fall by almost half.
This analysis will be the basis for creating a future scenario of mass customization
without using the configuration system in the section .
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Development of specification processes
4.3
Step 3: Designing the future specification process.
Definition of configuration system
In this step the future specification processes are designed based on the framework for
modelling product families, and configuration system to be used is defined. The spec-
ification task is additionally supported by defining the most significant requirements
for the future specification, based on defined critical goals in production.
4.3.1
Product knowledge about nacelle covers family
When developing a configuration system, it is critical to understand the product
being engineered in order to address the specification process. The knowledge to be
incorporated in configurator was defined using the framework for modelling product
families, based on which the future scenarios can be developed. This method requires
identifying the relevant product features that are critical to the engineering design
process. Figure 4.5 shows the framework used for modelling knowledge about the
nacelle cover. Knowledge about the product to be implemented in the configuration
system has been imposed based on the knowledge of sales representatives. Emphasis
is placed on the aspects marked by the red line. The main focus is on the property,
product structure models, and the life cycle systems that are associated with the
activities in production.
Figure 4.5: The framework for modelling knowledge about nacelle covers family.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Step 3: Designing the future specification process. Definition of configuration system
39
4.3.2
Definition of configuration system
The configuration system has been developed to support the product specification
processes associated with the nacelle cover product design. At the request of Jupiter
Bach, a configuration system was developed for the use of the sales representatives.
Based on the functional requirements in Table 3.5 around 80% of the projects are to
be supported by configuration system, while remaining 20% is intended in case the
customer wants to have an individual project.
The general idea was that the configuration system will be an internal tool in
which employees without any technical background could create a product design.
Emphasis is placed on CAD modeling, structural properties, technical requirements,
material costs and time calculation, because it can provide the sales representatives
enough information to create an offer for the customer, without unnecessarily en-
gaging other parties, especially the engineering department.
To achieve this, the
configuration was designed to generate 2D drawings with attached material specifica-
tions in which information on the weight, volume, unit price and total cost for can
be found. In addition, sales processes are to be supported by built-in functions in the
configuration system, where the number of products, profit margin and VAT can be
adjusted to get the final sale price for the project.
Taking into account current situation of Jupiter Bach, the primary pricing strat-
egy is not to disclose the product’s production price in order to remain competitive.
Another thing is that it is necessary to provide sales representatives with flexibility in
adjusting the sales prices, because the price of the raw material varies depending on
the supplier and production site, and it is essential to include cost related to OPEX,
IPC and management. Therefore, it becomes clear that the price information should
be hidden and obtained only after contacting the sales person. The overall benefit
of having a configuration system that supports sales activities is that it will provide
a quick response to the customer.
In addition, the output from configurator will
support the generation of other specifications, e.g. Parts List, WI, PPAP, MPQ and
MPP, and will allow to perform specification tasks in a more repeatable manner while
stimulating entire design process. This will save costs from capital resources that can
be used to improve operational activities.
The inputs are limited to the main seven dimensions, i.e. width, height and the
length of the nacelle cover, shaft and tower diameter, and their width and height
distance from wind turbine origin point. The design of the nacelle cover consists of
the three main types of modular components, i.e panels, edge profiles and connectors,
which can be customized in a variety of lengths, widths and heights, which means
that the product can be configured in an infinite number of structures.
When entering input data into the configurator, the Design Automatization Studio
automatically adjust the dimensions and appropriate configuration of each single com-
ponent, giving the nacelle cover assembly. Having all the information about dimension
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Development of specification processes
properties, the configuration system calculates the total weight, volume, labor and
material cost, as well as the delivery time. These calculations are based on fixed val-
ues estimated for each type of component and is explained further in the section 5.2.
Finally, the 2D drawings and BOM are generated where all the structural properties
and technical properties are included. The output document is mainly intended to
be a communication document between all parties within the organization.
Coming back to the Figure 4.5, all the desired knowledge about the product to be
engineered has been incorporated in the configuration system.
4.3.3
Future scenarios
The previous section provide a general concept for future scenarios. Based on the
Jupiter Bach’s mass customization business model in the section 3.2.4, it was critical
to re-design the current specification processes in the scenario when Jupiter Bach
will start mass customization of modular nacelle cover design. This scenario was de-
veloped to separately distinguish the benefits of mass customization and use of the
product configurator. The scenarios supported by configuration system are based on
the knowledge included in section 4.3.2.
On this basis, future scenarios are developed in which the configuration system is
implemented. The process flow in every scenario is described only in terms of changes
resulting from redesigning the processes. The scenarios are listed below:
• Scenario 1
Mass customization of nacelle cover product design without the support of the
product configuration system
• Scenario 2
Extension of Scenario 1, but with support for the configuration system used
internally by the sales person
• Scenario 3
Extension of Scenario 1, but with support for the configuration system used
externally by the customer
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Step 3: Designing the future specification process. Definition of configuration system
41
4.3.4
Scenario 1 - Mass customization of nacelle cover product
design
The first scenario is based on the Jupiter Bach’s business model of mass customization
described in section 3.2.4 and concerns a situation in which the configuration system
has not yet been implemented.
The overall description of the future changes in
case of this scenario have been analyzed in detail in section 4.2.2. At the request
of the interested party, an interview with a sales representative was carried out to
find out where the key changes in the process could occur. As the reminder, the
significant improvements in production lead time, which dropped from 10 to 2 weeks,
accelerates sales and design processes.
However, this scenario in general terms is
based on preserving the current work procedures, and therefore was not accompanied
by changes in the sales and design processes. Due to the fact that these processes
have not been re-engineered, only key changes in the process flow will be indicated,
i.e .:
• The execution phase in development processes has been removed because there
is no need to design a new product anymore.
• Similarly, there is no need to involve the engineering team in all design processes.
Their role and number of duties is limited to updating the parts list, product
specifications and 2D drawings.
• TThe analysis of the product’s performance on wind load has already been car-
ried out and therefore there is no need to perform specifications (FEM analysis,
DFMEA) related to structural properties such as strength, stiffness or failure
mode. According to other specifications (BOM, Part list, Product specifications
etc.) only updates will be required.
• The production processes have been redesigned in accordance with the conven-
tion of the new business model of Jupiter Bach and more detailed description
can be found in section 4.3.4.1
In this scenario the changes sales and design processes should be based on im-
proving the order requisition and other documents.
At the same time, the sales
representatives and engineering team should be trained in how to use the modular
product assortment and how the newly developed specifications should be filled in.
Moreover, a formalized work procedure should be worked out for the ETO and CTO.
4.3.4.1
Production processes
According to the new business model, see section 3.2.4, the idea of facilitating produc-
tion consists of the mass production of standardized components and then customizing
them to the order initiated by the customer.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Development of specification processes
Based on the calculator provided by the engineering team (Pier, 2017), future
production processes can be divided into pre-processing and post-processing. The
pre-processing is linked to mass production of standardized components, which will
then be stored in the productions sites. Figure 4.6 shows the pre-processing phases.
Direct 
Labor 
Glass
Direct 
Labor 
Casting 
Direct 
Labor Foam 
and Rib 
(Preparation)
Direct 
Labor 
Demolding 
Direct 
Labor 
PRE-
Finishing, 
Cutting & 
Drilling 
Stocking, 
Labelling, 
Inspection 
Figure 4.6: The phases in pre-processing.
The post-processing is related with customization of these standardized compo-
nents from the inventory. Figure 4.7 shows the post-processing phases.
Longside
cut/drill/stee
l inserts 
End 
cut/drill/stee
l inserts
Pick from 
stock
Apply primer 
and tape
Labelling, 
Inspection, 
cleaning, 
packing
Figure 4.7: The phases in post-processing.
This is the knowledge to be included in the future configuration system, because
it provides a good estimate of the time needed to produce and assemble the product,
as well as labor costs.
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Step 3: Designing the future specification process. Definition of configuration system
43
4.3.4.2
Scenario 2 – Internal tool used by sales person
In this scenario, the idea was to develop a configuration system that can dimension
the nacelle cover and print 2D drawings and material specifications from the moment
the data is entered from the sales representatives In addition, the system provides
enough information that can be the basis for calculating production time and produc-
tion costs and to provide a part list. This scenario can be found in the Appendix and
the description of sales process is below.
The order is implemented through dialog between the customer and the sales per-
son who uses the configuration system. The sales person asks about the customer’s
requirements and proposes a standard project that the customer can accept or request
for a special case following as-is procedure. If the customer wants to have a standard
design, the sales person implements the customer’s requirements to the configurator,
by means of which the 3D model design, 2D drawings, bill of materials are created
automatically and the initial costs and delivery times are calculated. On this basis,
the preparation of the offer begins, and the sales person asks the production for the
plugs and molds cost estimation, and the procurement team updates the list of suppli-
ers. Then the project manager collects information and makes a technical proposal,
which later forms the basis for the offer. When the customer accepts the offer, the
project is released.
4.3.4.3
Scenario 3 – External tool used by the customer
The third scenario is in many ways reminiscent of scenario 2, but the configuration
system is used by the customer through online portal. The customer can here inde-
pendently build a product model, where all the specifications including 2D drawing,
BOM and a quote for the customer. Moreover, the configurator can be used for and
internal use to generate list of parts, list of operations and product specifications.
This scenario can be found in the Appendix and the description of processes is below.
The process begins with an online portal, where customer can view the company’s
products and decide if the standard product can meet desired requirements. If not,
the customer contacts a sales representative who carries out special case following
procedure for individual project. Coming back, the customer specifies the design of
the 3D product model using configurator a, which generates 2D drawings and BOM
and a quote. The customer may reject, accept the quote or request a modification.
The customer is then asked to provide PO and NDA via the online ordering sys-
tem. A sales representative collects all information and provides customer support,
explaining all inaccuracies when needed. When everything is agreed, the sales person
prepares the supply agreement and checks the PO, on the basis of which he decides
whether the project should be released. If an explanation is necessary, the sales per-
son contacts the customer.
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Development of specification processes
The number of parties involved in the design process has been reduced only to the
project manager, because the parts list and product specifications prepared by en-
gineering team and list of operations prepared by production can be generated now
automatically by the configuration system. Another thing is that the configurator,
i.e. PPAP, MPP, MQP, can be updated by employees using predefined values from
the configurator. It greatly simplifies the entire design process. It also contributes to
significant drop in communication loop and increase in quality of specification.
4.4
Step 4: Evaluation of the scenarios
In this step the evaluation of the future scenarios in terms of effects in relation to
objectives, cost and risk will be conducted. On this basis, the most suitable scenario
will be selected.
4.4.1
Effects in relation to objectives
Table 4.8 shows the contribution of the scenarios to the identified targets in section
4.2.2.
This comparison can help to quantity the overall benefits and the relation
between scenario 1, associated with mass customization of modullar product design
without support of the configuration system, and scenarios 2 and 3, where the config-
urator system is implemented.
Figure 4.8: Expected effects in terms of targets.
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Step 4: Evaluation of the scenarios
45
The targets for potential improvements were introduced based on the suggestion
of the sales department. As a reminder, these assumptions were made as in the case
of scenario 1, and detailed explanations of the input data and benefits are discussed
in detail in section 4.2.2. Assumptions for scenarios 2 and 3 were made based on the
analysis of the designed scenarios in an objective manner.
As can be seen in the table, scenario 1 achieves all of the listed targets, with
the exception of reducing the number of communication loops. This indicates that
mass customization of a modular product requires more attention to inefficient ad-
ministrative processes that surround sales and design processes. It is obvious that
the scenarios supported by the configuration system will exceed expectations in all
respects, and the contribution from scenario 3 will be larger than in scenario 2. Nev-
ertheless, there is not much difference between these scenarios in terms of benefits
for Jupiter Bach. This is due to the fact that the quality of specifications generated
by the configurator contributes achievement of targets in terms of flawless quality
and elimination of communication loops. In relevance to the organizational changes
discussed in section 3.2.5, sales and design processes will undergo transformations
from ETO to CTO processes, resulting in higher degree of completed specifications.
It basically that the resource consumption will significantly decrease, and therefore
improve the sales and design lead times. The slight difference between the scenario
2 and 3 is due to the fact that the configuration system in scenario 3 was designed
in such a way as to support not only the sales department, but also production and
engineering department. Another thing is that in scenario 3 it is possible to auto-
matically generate quotes, parts lists, product specifications and WI, which in the
previous scenario had to be updated by employees.
4.4.2
Cost analysis
The cost analysis will cover the costs related to the development of the modular
nacelle cover design, the expected annual savings in production, the analysis of the
annual resource consumption for the projects, the cost of developing, implementing
and maintaining the configuration system.
The possible impact on the supply of
services and sales growth will also be discussed. To conduct the analysis in an orderly
manner, each aspect will be considered separately and summarized at the end of the
section.
4.4.2.1
The cost of developing a modular nacelle cover design
As explained in the section 1.1 all companies in the wind energy industry experi-
ence extreme price pressure. It affects the entire value chain in the electricity mar-
ket, which is why companies dealing with wind technologies focus on lowering LCoE.
Jupiter Bach was requested by Vestas - key customer - the reduce the product price
by 30% within 3 years.
In response, the CEO of the company initiated the new
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Development of specification processes
project. The engineering team was requested to design the cheapest design possible
quickly became clear that the only way to do this was to develop modular nacelle
cover design. The development of the new design lasted almost a year with breaks,
and the design was constantly modified. (Raimund, 2018).
In order to estimate the cost of developing a modular nacelle cover design, the
interested party held meetings with a group of engineers and asked how many actors
were involved in the process and how much time was devoted to development. Based
on these findings, the stakeholder has calculated the resource consumption for this
project and is included in the Table 4.9.
Figure 4.9: Resource consumption for developing modular nacelle cover design.
The design of the nacelle cover design took 11 months. The actors directly involved
in the nacelle cover design are 3 engineers and 1 FEM analyst. It is estimated that
engineers spent 1.5 days a week in this process. The FEM analyst is an external con-
sultant who helps to see if the project can withstand the wind load. He was asked to
check the project 4 times during the process, due to modifications and it took him 20
man-days each time. Sales representatives and CEO accompanied this project during
the brainstorming session, during which the actors shared ideas and knowledge about
the product. It was estimated that they spend 2 man-days per month. (Hansen, 2018)
Having calculated the resource consumption spent on this project it is possible to
calculate the total cost. According to the data provided by sales person the internal
rate for employee is around 2000 DKK/day, that included the salary and office cost,
while to cost of having a FEM analyst is 350 DKK/hour. (Hansen, 2018) To perform
the calculation it was assumed 8 working hours per day, therefore the total project
cost of developing modular nacelle cover amount to 752 000 DKK.
4.4.2.2
Savings in annual production
A preliminary analysis of cost savings in production was carried out in the section
4.2.2. However, this was only a brief review, and now this will be explained in detail.
==PAGE:57==
4.4 Step 4: Evaluation of the scenarios
47
Figure 4.10: Annual production cost.
In order to allow the most reliable estimation, the cost of the nacelle design was
cleaned at the request of the interested party from the sales profit, VAT and the cost
of the accessories. As explained in the section 4.2.2, for various reasons it is difficult
to give an exact number. As discussed before, the cost of a modular nacelle cover
comes from a calculator provided by a group of engineers. The number includes the
cost of raw material, consumables and labor cost, both in the area of pre-processing
and post-processing. The cost has been estimated for the minimum and maximum
size of the product design, and ranges from 3272.39eto 12817.96e1. However, the
actual cost can be different, for the same reasons as explained in section 4.2.2. The
actual number of nacelle cover produced is 4500 pieces per year. Numbers marked
in red indicate the average of saved costs and amount to 405 million DKK per year.
In addition to saving in production costs, it is worth remembering that the error
rate will also drop significantly. The average error repair cost is high and amounts
to 10% of the sales price. The sale price ranges from 150 000 to 225 000 DKK per
piece. Assuming that a 4% decrease in the number of production errors means in
principle a 4% decrease in the number of nacelle covers that need repair, which gives
180 pieces a year. (Hansen, 2018). Therefore, the cost reduction due to the decrease
in the production error rate is 3.38 million DKK per year. Therefore the company
can annually save up to 408.5 million DKK annually, assuming that the error rate
will drop 4%.
11e= 7,455 DKK (16-07-2018)
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Development of specification processes
The cost of production is 90% of the total cost of the final product, where the
labour cost represents 50-55% and material cost is up to 35-40%.
(Hansen,2018)
Therefore, if the new project saves 62% of the production costs, it means basically
56% savings on the total cost of the final product. This is a significant improvement
and can definitely help Jupiter Bach meet the requirements of Vestas.
4.4.3
Analysis of the resource consumption
In this section the scenarios will be evaluated in terms of cost. The cost estimation is
divided to project costs and running costs for operating the specification processes for
each scenario. Running costs include resource consumption, expenditure for software
licences and costs for maintenance and further development of configuration system,
and are calculated on a yearly basis. However, the developments costs are calculated
based on the resource consumption for internal and external actors. The cost of de-
veloping a configuration system prototype is not assigned to these costs, because it
is the responsibility of the master’s thesis student. However, if necessary, additional
time is allocated to an external consultant who can program the prototype in the
final configuration system.
First, to calculate reliably, the cost of internal and external entities involved in
the process was determined. These numbers have already been indicated in section
4.4.2.1, however as a reminder the internal rate is around 2000 DKK/day, while
the FEM analyst has been rated at 350 DKK/hour.
(Hansen, 2018) The cost of
having external consultant who specialize in configuration systems varies between 80-
160 EUR/hour (Lukasz, 2018). To perform the calculation it was assumed that the
external consultant is rated at the 900 DKK/hour. When it comes to licences, there
can be different scenarios for the prices for software. The prices given below were
provided by the sales representatives from Tacton and PLM Group. According to the
discussion with both companies, Jupiter Bach has two possible ways to proceed. It
was explained that if the company is considering long-term use of the software, then
the company should go on eternal purchase of the software, in case the company would
like to use the software in a short time, then the company should rent the software
for a specified period. Regarding scenarios 2 and 3, it is assumed that it is intended
for long-term use, so the interested party has asked for a quote to obtain reliable
licensing prices, that are listed in Table 4.11 (Dabrowski, 2018). The prices obtained
are the purchase of a license with an annual fee for support and maintenance. The
purchase of a license is treated as a project cost, while the support and maintenance
fee is treated as the annual running cost in each scenario.
==PAGE:59==
4.4 Step 4: Evaluation of the scenarios
49
Figure 4.11: Software costs for scenario 2 and scenario 3.
First, an analysis of the costs of the current scenario will be carried out in order
to compare it with future scenarios. The resource consumption for the current situ-
ation was directly provided by the sales representative, in which the minimum and
maximum values were given. This is due to the fact that the project’s performance
is different in individual cases. Resource consumption for future scenarios has been
estimated by carefully examining the flow of processes as some of the phases were
eliminated and the actors have ceased to be involved in some business processes. The
approach consisted in analyzing the current consumption of resources, first determin-
ing the average consumption of resources per actor, and then calculating the related
margin in percent for each actor. Then, based and expected effects in terms of fu-
ture scenario targets in the table 4.8, the average resource consumption was scaled
for each scenario, and the calculated margins were added to define the minimum and
maximum values. Finally, the flow process in each scenario has been carefully studied
to take into account the changes associated with the declining number of communica-
tion loops. This allows the administration of reliable numbers in the future resource
consumption, which have been agreed with a sales representative.
4.4.3.1
Current scenario
Table 4.12 shows the resource consumption for making a project in current situation,
where the final range for internal actors is 292-894 man-days, while for FEM analysist
it is exactly 20 man-days. As agreed in the section 3.2.5 around 80% of the projects
are to be supported by the CTO process, while the remaining 20% is intended in case
the customer wants to have an individual project, that is ETO process. Currently,
Jupiter Bach runs 8 projects a year. Therefore, it can be estimated that around 6
projects a year can be manned by configuration system.
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Development of specification processes
Figure 4.12: Annual resource consumption for current situation.
With all assumptions, the current annual cost of projects can be estimated using
the equation:
On this basis, the cost estimated for the current situation have been calculate and
is given in the table 4.13.
Figure 4.13: Annual cost estimates for current situation.
==PAGE:61==
4.4 Step 4: Evaluation of the scenarios
51
4.4.3.2
Scenario 1
This scenario is related to mass customization of nacelle cover design without the
support of product configuration system. Table 4.14 shows the resource consumption
for making a project in scenario, where the final range for actors is 197-319 man-days.
The FEM analyst is not needed anymore as the modular nacelle cover design has
been already developed and certificated. A radical improvement in the consumption
of resources is expected, as the annual savings reach up to 340 man-days, which is
mainly due to time savings in engineering tasks (Hansen, 2018). These expected time
savings have been agreed with sales representative.
Figure 4.14: Annual resource consumption for scenario 1.
The table 4.15 presents the estimated costs for scenario 1. With regard to the
project cost of developing the modular nacelle cover design, calculated in the section
4.4.2.1, the total cost is 752 000 DKK. However, it should be remembered that these
costs will contribute equally to each scenario, because the project has already been
developed, and therefore has not been included in the cost estimates in any scenario.
Figure 4.15: Annual cost estimates for scenario 1.
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Development of specification processes
4.4.3.3
Scenario 2
In this section the project cost and running cost will be estimated for scenario 2.
The project cost includes the consumption of resources related to the use of the
configuration system as an internal tool, and software costs. At the beginning, one
should assume the time needed to collect all information that must be implemented
in the configuration system.
The set of information should include the costs and
material properties as well as the time of operational activities, mainly in production
sites.
Based on the discussion with the sales representative, domain experts will
initially have to spend 15 days to collect information from GSC and all production
facilities. It was also suggested that for the next 9 weeks one man-day per week is
needed to do clarification about the data (Hansen, 2018). Therefore, domain experts
will have to devote 24 man-days to the preparation of data. Based on the consultant
in this case 15 man-days are required to prepare the configurator for internal use (Lis,
2018). The license cost is given in the table 4.11.
Figure 4.16: Annual resource consumption for scenario 2.
The running cost includes the consumption of resources related to making the
projects, and the costs of maintenance and costs of service and subscription to the
software. Table 4.16 shows the resource consumption for making projects in scenario
2, which is in the range of 54-85 man-days. The average saving in resource consump-
tion per project compared to the current situation is 524 man-days. The results have
been agreed with a sales representative (Hansen, 2018). In addition, it is necessary
to take into account the costs of an external consultant who will be responsible for
maintaining the system. According to the discussion with the sales representative, it
would be relevant to only update the prices for the material. Due to the fact that GSC
updates the list of suppliers every quarter, and therefore the consultant should also
update information on a quarterly basis in the configuration system. (Hansen, 2018)
To add a little safety margin, three additional days were included for some modifica-
tions. Therefore, the external consultant will need 7 man-days on a yearly basis to
maintain configuration system. Finally, the annual fee for support and maintenance
of the software is given in relevance with the table 4.11. The table 4.17 presents the
final cost estimate for scenario 2.
==PAGE:63==
4.4 Step 4: Evaluation of the scenarios
53
Figure 4.17: Annual cost estimates for scenario 2.
4.4.3.4
Scenario 3
In this section the project cost and running cost will be estimated for scenario 3.
The project cost includes the internal and external consumption of resources related
to the implementation of configuration system and software costs.
It is assumed
that gathering all information that will be implemented in the configuration system
by Jupiter Bach employees will take 36 man-days.
This is due to the fact that
scenario 3 is more extensive compared to scenario 2. Next, there will be a need for a
consultant who will implement and adjust the information. Based on the discussion
with configuration consultant it is should take 30 man-days to modify and finalize
the program (Lis, 2018) . The license cost is given in the table 4.11.
Figure 4.18: Annual resource consumption for scenario 3.
The running cost includes the same aspects as in scenario 2. Table 4.18 shows
the resource consumption for making projects in scenario 3, which is in the range of
25-40 man-days. The average saving in resource consumption per project compared
to the current situation is 560 man-days. The results have been agreed with a sales
representative (Hansen, 2018). In addition, it is necessary to take into account the
costs of an external consultant who will be responsible for the further development and
updating of the system. According to the discussion with the configuration consultant,
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Development of specification processes
it is accurate to set up one day a month with an additional 3 days for modifications
(Lis, 2018). Therefore, the external consultant will need 15 man-days on a yearly
basis. Finally, the annual fee for support and maintenance of the software is given
in relevance with the table 4.11. The table 4.19 presents the final cost estimate for
scenario 3.
Figure 4.19: Annual cost estimates for scenario 3.
4.4.4
influence on on-time delivery
4.4.5
increase in sales
4.4.6
Risk analysis
The most important risks are evaluated for all three scenarios. The evaluation of risks
includes the both the evaluation of risks associated with the execution of the devel-
opment project for the specification process and the possible development of a con-
figuration system, and risks associated to the subsequent implementation, operation
and maintenance of the future specification processes and the related configuration
system. [HMR08]
4.4.6.1
Risks in scenario 1
The the first scenario, uncertainty exists about the rationalization of sales and design
processes. This is mainly due to the fact that future changes in the specification
processes will be significant and no efforts have been made to determine the scope
of responsibility of each employee in the new scenario. Moreover, the estimated time
consumption is associated with high uncertainty and there is a real risk that parts of
the project may simply not be technically implemented. This creates a significant risk
that employees will return to their old routine activities, and therefore the progress
in improving the performance of the specification processes can be impeded.
==PAGE:65==
4.4 Step 4: Evaluation of the scenarios
55
4.4.6.2
Risks in scenario 2
The greatest risk in the second scenario is the assessment of the possible scope of the
configurator that will allow to dimension the modular structure of the nacelle cover
using object-oriented programming and implementing design automation. Correct
mapping of the geometry in the model is very important to control 3D design and
obtain the desired product. If it becomes too automated, the system may be rigid and
may limit the ability to create new solutions. What is more high degree of automation
leads to complex system with an unclear structure. [CE16] Therefore it was decided to
develop a prototype of the nacelle cover configurator at an early stage, and gradually
check the critical parts of the configuration system during the construction of the
configurator. According to the implementation and operation in scenario 2, the risk
is related to the possible rejection of the system by employees of Jupiter Bach. This is
because the configuration system may not be able to provide the necessary handling
of the specification tasks, or employees may have doubts about using the configurator
or their job situation. To overcome this obstacle, employees should be involved at an
early stage of the process and trained in the use of the configuration system.
4.4.6.3
Risks in scenario 3
In the third scenario, the technical risks are much higher as it must be for external
use with usable interface and functions for the customer. Moreover, the generated
specifications must be of flawless quality. Another thing is that the knowledge to be
included in this configurator system must be more detailed and constantly updated,
which increases the complexity of the software. The critical factor is the cost of pre-
processing and post-processing, which includes the cost of materials and operating
times and costs. Jupiter Bach may have difficulty with implementing this information
in configuration system because the company operates globally, and the cost of raw
material and manpower varies between production locations. In addition, to facilitate
production, it may be prudent to develop new functions in the configurator that would
enable generating the specifications such as WI or product specifications. According
to operation and maintenance of the system the same risks exists as in the scenario 2.
Nevertheless, the another risk is associated with the restructuring of processes. There
is great uncertainty that a company can technically go from its current state directly
to this scenario.
4.4.7
Selection of scenario
Based on the objectives, the cost and risk analyzes carried out, the most appropriate
scenario can be chosen. The main goal of this project is to show how a company can
take advantage of implementing a configuration system that will facilitate production.
Therefore, only scenario 2 and scenario 3 will be evaluated in this section because they
are directly related to the use of the configuration system. Scenario 1 was carried out
to analyze the cost benefits of the modular nacelle cover project. Moreover, it should
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Development of specification processes
be mentioned that the company is interested in scenario 2 and does not take into
account scenario 3. In order to select the suitable scenario, the cost savings based on
the analysis in section 4.4.2 have been calculated and can be found in the table 4.20.
Figure 4.20: Final summary of costs.
The general benefits using object-oriented programming and design automation
in the product development process has a huge potential of cutting lead-time in the
longer run. Once a 3D CAD configuration software developed in this project will be
implemented and established in the organization, the efficiency of the design process
might be much enhanced. With regard to the contribution to the targets of scenario 3,
it offers more potential than scenario 2. However, both scenarios meet expectations,
and therefore these factors should not be treated as leverage. When it comes to cost
analysis, the scenario 3 is more expensive however the difference is not significant. It
is important to mention that, once a 3D CAD configuration software developed in this
project will be implemented and established in the organization, the efficiency of the
design process might be much enhanced. It has huge potential of cutting lead-time,
thus reduce running costs in a longer perspective. Nevertheless, even if the scenario
3 has more potential for the above-mentioned aspects, at the same time it involves
more risk associated with execution of the project. In this scenario, the risk is greater
in terms of implementing part of the configuration system as compared to scenario 2.
Scenario 2 was therefore chosen as a suitable solution
==PAGE:67==
4.5 Step 5: Plan of action and organization of further work
57
4.5
Step 5: Plan of action and organization of further
work
In connection with the realization of scenario 2, an action plan for the task of devel-
oping a configuration system has been made. The plan includes the main activities
to be carried out and the person responsible for the task, as well as the people to be
involved in the activity. Then the expected time consumption is listed along with
the start and end dates. However, the values given in the plan of action have been
roughly estimated,
==PAGE:68==
58
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5
Analysis of the Product
Range
This phase presents overall content and structure of product, consisting of the product
knowledge and product modelling to be included in the configuration system. The
analysis of the product starts with the description of the procedure of obtaining
knowledge about the product, which is later narrowed down to ensure the quality
of product knowledge. Then the product modeling is carried out by analyzing the
existing degree of modularization of the nacelle cover, which forms the basis for the
structure imposed in the PVM and will be explained in final stage. The analysis
carried out in this phase is partly a response to the second research sub-question.
In order to model and visualize the product knowledge the operational tool - a so
called product variant master is performed.
5.1
Procedure of the product analysis
To begin with the analysis of the product structure of the modular nacelle cover
design has been performed in order to get better understancing. Moroover there was
provided by engineering team of Jupiter Bach the calculators, which has defined rules
for calculating the product cost,delivery time, weight volume etx.
The intereviews were conducted where the relevant information about the design
have been explained in detail, as well as the decisions which have been done when de-
veloping the rules for calculating the most relevant aspects fo ancelle cover design. In
order to get basic understanding about Jupiter Bach prodcuts, the one of production
site in Poland has been visited in order to understand how the production processes
are followed to produce composite structures. [katrin]
Once the information have been collected, the first drafts of the PVM have been
created based on which first simple configurator system has been developed. The
content of the knowledge together with design for the configurator system have been
discussed in the following meetings over the next eight weeks, and configurator system
has been gradually builted up.
==PAGE:70==
60
5 Analysis of the Product Range
Once the agreement has been reached on what kind of technical knowledge should
be incorporated, the effort was conducted to finally structure the the product knowl-
edge and incorporate it in the PVM. Afterwards, based on provided 3D model the
work was commisioned to start configuring the 3D model of the nacelle cover using
Amortization Design Studio. Due to the software limitions, which will be further ex-
plained, it was necessary to redraw every single component of the nacelle cover, and
built-up automized nacelle cover design, what tooks more or less 8 weeks. The output
from the configurator system eas agreed to be 2D drawings with included BOM. The
CEO approved the fundamental concept of the configurator and through discussion
it was decided to make some extra functions, which lead to final approval from the
CEO who attended the workshop.[katrin]
Before the first meeting with the domain experts (including sales, CEO, engineer-
ing team, the master student has individually has worked out a small part of product
variant master, 3D model and configuration system drafts. During subsequent meet-
ings, work on the product variant master continues so that the individual parts are
discussed; when agreement was reached, the result is incorporated into the product
variant master or associated CRC cards. [LARS]
After the meeting the electronic version of the product variant master and the crc
cards are updated. If any information about those parts of the product range which
have been discussed at any meeting was not available, it is necessary to assign the
individual participants the tasks of collecting supplementary information in order to
make final decisions about the product range
5.2
Fundamental of nacelle cover design
The modular design of the nacelle cover incorporates the solution principles related to
functional properties of the product, which allow the entire structure to withstand the
wind load. With regard to the design of the company’s nacelle cover, it is important
to clarify the structure of the chassis, which consists of different types of components,
as well as the material structure of these components. The structure of the nacelle
cover consists of three main types of standardized components: panels, edge pro-
files and connectors, which are generally fiber-reinforced (FRP) composite products.
Connected to each other by different types of joint materials form a nacelle cover.
Figure shows the modular nacelle cover design which is going to be implemented in
the configurator system. The detailed structure will be explained in Section...
==PAGE:71==
5.2 Fundamental of nacelle cover design
61
Figure 5.1: The modular nacelle cover design.
In order to better understand the company’s product, one should give the gen-
eral concept of a composite structure. First of all, it is important to understand the
difference between a laminate, also known as a single skin material, and a laminate
sandwich structure. A typical fiber-reinforced composite material consists of multiple
layers known as lamiane or plies that together form a building block of a composite
structure. These fibre layers assembled on top of each other and bonded together to
form a laminate.
To create a laminate, the stack of laminae must be cured together to ensure that
the layers are connected to form a thin, structurally rigid sheet of material. The
structure of a sandwich laminate consists of outer skins in the form of thin and stiff
laminates and a light but thick core. In both cases, the material layers are cured dur-
ing the vacuum infusion manufacturing process, where resin is introduced between
the layers to create a composite. Figure 5.2 shows the example of a company’s sand-
wich laminate structure. It should be mentioned that in order to provide protection
against environmental factors, the surface of the external laminate is treated with a
gel coat and a top coat.
==PAGE:72==
62
5 Analysis of the Product Range
1a. Topcoat
1b. Gelcoat
3. 2nd ply of fiber glass
5. lamina of fiber glass
2. 1st ply of fiber glass
4. Foam Core
EXTERNAL LAMINATE
1. Foam Core
INTERNAL LAMINATE
4. 3rd ply of fiber glass
3. 2nd ply of fiber glass
2. 1st ply of fiber glass
SINGLE SKIN
2. 1st ply of fiber glass
3. 2nd ply of fiber glass
4. 3rd ply of fiber glass
5. 4thply of fiber glass
1a. Topcoat
1b. Gelcoat
Figure 5.2: The example of composite structures.
This knowledge was taken into account when designing each standard component.
The design differs depending on the structural properties required for a particular
component.
If the element has to withstand the load, it has been designed as a
sandwich laminated structure, i.e. panels and edge profiles. Whereas connectors have
simply a laminated structure. After defining the material layup for each component,
it was possible to calculate the prices, weights and time needed to create individual
components within the defined knowledge-based scheme. First of all, the calculations
were carried out separately for pre-processing and post-processing. This was done
in this way because, as indicated earlier, it is necessary to separate the calculations
associated with the pre-processing of the production of standardized panels, which
will later be adapted based on customer criteria, giving a customized component. The
main idea is to calculate the price and weight for each material layer in accordance
with the design of the component, and then add up these values. However, to make
calculations that will be adapted to changes in the nacelle cover design, the price
and weight calculations have been made for a 1 meter length, in case of panels and
edge profiles, or 1 unit in case of connector. At the same time, labor costs have been
roughly estimated by the engineering team, based on their knowledge of production
operations. Figure 4.6 shows the production operation included in the pre-processing
calculations. The total cost of pre-processing is the sum of the labor cost and the
raw material cost, which gives the unit price for producing standard components. In
terms of post-processing calculations, these include labor costs and time associated
with the production activities,as shown in Figure 4.7, needed to adapt standardized
==PAGE:73==
5.2 Fundamental of nacelle cover design
63
components to customer criteria. The solution of defining unit prices, unit weight
and unit time for each component makes it possible to easily calculate total costs,
total pre-processing time and post-processing time, as well as the total weight for the
entire nacelle cover design.
==PAGE:74==
64
5 Analysis of the Product Range
5.3
Product Variant Master
In order to develop the configuration software for the nacelle cover design review, it is
necessary to define the input of core knowledge to the design of the configuration sys-
tem structure. For a review of the product range, the product Variant Master (PVM)
was used, which can be found in the appendix. It was decided to describe the knowl-
edge of the product from three perspectives, i.e. Customer view, engineering view
and part view, mainly because these three aspects best define the requirements of the
main stakeholders related to the configuration system. They are closely correlated
to each other. The relation between the customer and engineering view is such that,
the customer perspective should be translated into functional units through the engi-
neering perspective, while the relation between the engineering view and production
view is how these functional units are realized as parts and assemblies.
5.3.1
Customer View
The customer view is an overview of the factors that increase the value for the cus-
tomer.
It contains the main input parameters for the configuration system that
creates the final customized nacelle cover design. Identified aspects that are of inter-
est to the customer are geometric properties, cost, delivery time, delivery conditions,
material and structural properties, as well as health and safety requirements and will
be explained below. Figure 5.4 shows a screen shot of the customer view.
5.3.1.1
Geometric properties
HEIGHT
SØ
TØ
LS
Figure 5.3: The critical nacelle cover dimensions.
==PAGE:75==
5.3 Product Variant Master
65
The geometric properties of the nacelle cover are important for the customer in terms
of the performance of the wind turbine. Figure 5.3 shows the critical dimensions of
the nacelle cover from the customer’s point of view. It includes the width, height,
length of the nacelle cover, tower(TØ) and shaft diameter(SØ), the distance to the
center of the tower(LT) and center of the shaft (LS)
5.3.1.2
Cost
The cost is critical factor in production, and is of great interest to the customer. This
part is concerned with the material and project costs.
5.3.1.3
Delivery time
The on-time delivery is of key importance to the client because any delay increases
uncertainty for the entire project, as well as the risk of additional costs if the project
does not meet the deadline.
5.3.1.4
Delivery conditions
It is important for the customer receives the product without any defects. However,
the product may be damaged during transport, and the company is not obliged to
take responsibility for it. Therefore, the delivery terms are important for the customer
because it would give more flexibility in the choice of the product transport method
to ensure flawless product quality. This part is not within the scope of the project,
however it is worth considering in the future.
5.3.1.5
Material and structural properties
The material and structural properties of the product are the most important factor
for the customer.
The composite structure has to withstand the wind load and
therefore requires certified quality. The design of the modular nacelle cover must
be characterized by low weight, temperature resistance, non-corrosion and rigidity in
order to withstand the wind load. Another factor for the customer might be a use of
the green materials. This is because the lifetime of the wind turbine is 20 years, it is
relevant that the used composite material will be produced from recyclable materials.
5.3.1.6
Health and Safety environment
For the customer, it is important that the company provides a healthy and safe
working environment for employees. Even if it is not directly correlated with the
project, it is worth mentioning that for composites manufacturers it is essential to
meet the requirements of ISO 14001 and OHSAS 18001 certificates to ensure health
and safety management and environmental management.
==PAGE:76==
66
5 Analysis of the Product Range
Figure 5.4: The customer view of the PVM.
==PAGE:77==
5.3 Product Variant Master
67
5.3.2
Engineering View
The main focus of the engineering view is to define the solution principles in CAD
modeling for the nacelle cover in order to meet the customer’s criteria. The calcula-
tions supporting the engineering view are included under the part view. In an engi-
neering view, the aspects in the ”part-of” structure includes the solution principles,
while its ”kind-of” structure includes a part model for describing product components.
This allowed to identify components that need to be configured and for which dimen-
sional constraints must be set to ensure that the final geometrical properties of the
structure meet the customer’s criteria. Identified aspects that are relevant from the
engineering view are adjusted dimensions of the product model, panel variants, and
price-to-weight ratio, and will be explained further. Figure 5.4 shows a screen shot
of the engineering view.
Figure 5.5: The engineering view of the PVM.
5.3.2.1
Adjusted dimensions
This part deals with the geometrical requirements for the product design requested
by the customer. To ensure that the final product will be able to withstand the wind
load, the components must be adapted in such a way as to ensure sufficient quality,
with an emphasis on low price and short deliveries. The design concept is based on
==PAGE:78==
68
5 Analysis of the Product Range
the production of standard panels with a fixed width and extruded length that can
be cut for assembly based on customer requirements.
Figure 5.6: The cross-section of standard panel.
Figure 5.6 shows cross-section with fixed width of the standard panel. From en-
gineering perspective the best way to meet the quality criteria is to cut the panels
in the middle between the ribs. This also contributes to the fact that this solution
does not require additional work related to the casting of shortened panels, as the
continuity of the material is preserved. This led to the development of panel variants
that will be explained in the following section.
Once the solution principle was defined, it is essential to identify the components
that should be adopted to match geometric properties of the structure. However, it
is worth mentioning that in order to assemble the nacelle cover, already shortened
panels are placed next to each other in a row. Therefore, the most convenient way to
control the total width and length of the nacelle cover is to tailor the last panels of
each wall. Figure 5.7 shows the selected panels to be tailored.
Roof Rear Panel
Bottom Rear Panel
Side Left Rear Panel
Side Right Rear Panel
Rear Left-hand 
Side Panel
Rear Right-hand 
Side Panel
Front Left-hand Side Panel
Front Right-hand Side Panel
Bottom Wall
Side Left Wall
Rear Wall
Roof Wall
Front Wall
Side Right
Wall
Figure 5.7: Identified components that should be tailored in order to adjust width
and length of the nacelle cover.
==PAGE:79==
5.3 Product Variant Master
69
5.3.2.2
Panel variants
This section deals with customizing components for a product model that was initially
discussed in the previous section. However, it requires more detail explanation. The
panels for each wall are cut differently to fit the elements together and assemble the
nacelle cover. As an example, Figure 5.8 presents the two different types of the panels
with distinction in terms of the wall for the same design of the nacelle cover.
ROOF STANDARD PANEL
BOTTOM STANDARD PANEL
Figure 5.8: The different types of the panel with distinction to roof and bottom
wall for the 4x4x12 [m] nacelle cover.
The main difference lies in the length of the ribs and the core panel that are
specific to a particular wall, and form the basis for the ”part-of” structure.
The
”kind-of” structure includes the variants related to cutting the standard panels ends
for overlap. Figure 5.9 shows 3 main variant of the rear panel. In case the adjusted
length or adjusted width of the nacelle cover causes the length of the rear panel to
be close to zero, there is a need to create a physically non-existent 4th sub-variant,
called ”0 RIB”.
==PAGE:80==
70
5 Analysis of the Product Range
2 meter
1.33 meter
0.67 meter
3 RIB
2 RIB
1 RIB
Figure 5.9: The different variants of the rear panel.
However, there are even more variants of the panel. Due to the fact that the last
panels must match the edge profile, there are different types of the overlaps. First
type is related to the overlaps that allow to fit panels together, and the second type
of the overlap is in case, as mentioned before, when the panel and edge profile have
to fit together. Figure 5.10 shows these two types of the overlaps.
Figure 5.10: The different types of the overlaps.
In the case when the sub-variant of the rear panel is ”0 RIB”, the function of the
rear panel is transferred to the last standard panel in the wall row. Figure 5.11 shows
the identified panels that must be configured to the new function.
==PAGE:81==
5.3 Product Variant Master
71
Figure 5.11: The standard panels that must be configured.
These panels, however have only two sub-variants, either ”Full panel” which is
basically the standard panel and has the panel-to-panel overlaps, or ”0 RIB” panel
which has the panel-to-edge profile overlaps.
5.3.2.3
Price-to-weight optimization
This part deals with the quantification of the price-to-weight ratio of the product, to
ensure the low-cost ans short delivery time. Although, this is not within the scope
of the project, efforts have been made to find a way to find the optimal solution and
this will be discussed in the section. Nevertheless, it is worth mentioning that the
most optimal solution will be in case when the last panel will be either ”3 RIB” or ”0
RIB” type, because it does not require additional work when cutting the panels, and
therefore save costs.
5.3.3
Part view
The part view completes overview of the nacelle cover design, and in order to incorpo-
rate the knowledge in structured manner, it was decided to divide it into 3 sub-parts.
Due to the complex structure and the size of the part view, it was decided to show
the general overview of each sub-part and later on discuss the calculation part. The
entire part view of the PVM, can be found in Appendix.
==PAGE:82==
72
5 Analysis of the Product Range
5.3.3.1
Structure of the part View
The 1st sub-part was carried out by specifying and classifying all components of the
nacelle cover, i.e. panels, edge profiles as well as connectors, and all associated calcula-
tions. This includes the internal and external properties, that describes consequences
of meeting product between the production and assembly model. Figure 5.12 shows
the screen shot of the 1st sub-part of part view.
Figure 5.12: 1st sub-part of part view in the PVM.
==PAGE:83==
5.3 Product Variant Master
73
The structure of the panel part was imposed with regard to modeling from the
engineering view. There are different types of panels with a distinction between walls
(roof, bottom, left side, right side, front and rear walls) and the corresponding panel
variants, i.e. front panel, standard panel and rear panel, which as mentioned earlier,
is configurable. This was intended to be done in this way, because it allows future
development of new panel variants, for example with different material layup. As for
the edge profiles, three different variants have been distinguished depending on their
function in the nacelle cover frame. The same applies to connectors that connect
components to construct a solid nacelle cover.
Corner cap
Base frame 
conector
Rib-to-Edge
conector
Rib-to-Rib
conector
Tower collar
Edge Profile
Long Side
Edge Profile
Short Horizontal
Edge Profile
Short Vertical
Figure 5.13: The edge profiles and connectors in the nacelle cover design.
The 2nd sub-part is associated with the CAD modeling of the nacelle cover struc-
ture, where the components have been mapped to the corresponding part. The se-
quence in the structure is consistent with the construction of the assembly of com-
ponents in CAD modeling. Therefore, it becomes obvious that the assembly begins
with the structure of the front wall, to which the edge profiles are then attached, and
then the rest of the walls to the end of the structure, and ends with the addition of
connectors. Figure 5.14 shows the screen shot of the 2nd sub-part of part view.
==PAGE:84==
74
5 Analysis of the Product Range
Figure 5.14: 2nd sub-part of part view in the PVM.
The 3rd sub-part concerns creation the output documents, and its sequence begins
with the most important drawings, showing assembly of the nacelle cover and material
specification, and ends with technical drawings for production for each component.
Figure 5.15 shows the screen shot of the 3rd sub-part of part view.
==PAGE:85==
5.3 Product Variant Master
75
Figure 5.15: 3rd sub-part of part view in the PVM.
5.3.3.2
Calculations in the part view
When it comes to calculations, it should be clarified that the degree of detail in 1st
sub-part is lower than in 2nd and 3rd sub-parts, because the dimensions of physi-
cal components have been simplified to perform calculations. Therefore, to properly
control the configuration in CAD modeling and associated output documents, the
necessary numbers have been assigned from 1st sub-part to 2nd and 3rd sub-parts,
where basically no calculation were made. it was decided to incorporate the knowl-
edge contained in them into CRC cards, and therefore they will not be explained in
detail.
To present knowledge in an orderly manner, it was decided to group attributes
and a list of constraints, depending on the type of calculations to which they are
assigned. Figure 5.16 shows the example of the imposed structure.
==PAGE:86==
76
5 Analysis of the Product Range
Figure 5.16: The panel part and their corresponding calculations.
As for the list of constraints, the number in rows means each group of calculations
related to their purpose. The first column refers to the calculated attributes, the sec-
ond to the parts included in these calculations, and the last one shows the equation.
The third column refers to the attributes assigned to other parts. It gives a clear
picture of how the calculations were made.
The nacelle cover part contains all product calculations and is the core of the entire
structure in the part view. Only relevant calculations that define functional units in
the engineering view will be described in details. The sub-parts of the nacelle cover
part have common attributes and associated features that are listed in the Table 5.17.
The rule of thumb is that these attributes are added into the associated super-part
and the final results are summed up in the nacelle cover part. To clarify which groups
of calculations for nacelle cover require further explanation, a Table 5.18 was made
with a brief description of what this calculation concerns.
==PAGE:87==
5.3 Product Variant Master
77
Figure 5.17: The common attributes and associated features for nacelle cover sub-
parts.
==PAGE:88==
78
5 Analysis of the Product Range
In order to make Table 5.17 more readable it was decided to list the production
activities and enumerate them, as given below:
1. Pre-processing activity: Direct Labor Foam and Rib (Preparation)
2. Pre-processing activity: Direct Labor Glass
3. Pre-processing activity: Direct Labor Casting
4. Pre-processing activity: Direct Labor Demolding
5. Pre-processing activity: Direct Labor PRE- Finishing, Cutting & Drilling
6. Pre-processing activity: Stocking, Labelling, Inspection
7. Post-processing activity: Pick from stock
8. Post-processing activity: Longside cut/drill/steel inserts
9. Post-processing activity: End cut/drill/steel inserts
10. Post-processing activity: Apply primer and tape
11. Post-processing activity: Labelling, Inspection, cleaning, packing
Figure 5.18: The groups of calculation nacelle cover part.
As mentioned earlier, these calculations are of great importance for explaining
how the function units in the engineering view have been defined, see sections 5.3.2.1
and 5.3.2.2, which in turn define the product features in the customer view. As a
reminder, the width and length of the nacelle cover are the input data provided by
the customer. Calculation of the width of the nacelle cover is based on the estimation
of the width of the left-hand side and right-hand side panels. In case of the length of
the nacelle cover, first, the number of standard panels required to build the associated
==PAGE:89==
5.3 Product Variant Master
79
walls is calculated and then based on that the width of the rear panels is estimated.
To better understand, the Figure 5.19 shows the calculations carried out.
WIDTH
LENGTH
2 m
0.27 m
0.27 m
0.27 m
0.28 m
0.27 m
x
x
2*y
z
y=: floor(LENGTH-2*0.27-0.28)/2
z=: LENGTH-2*0.27-0.28-y*2
x=: (WIDTH-2*0.27-2)/2
x – width of left/right-side panels
y – number of standard panels
z – width of rear panels
Figure 5.19: Calculation of the adjusted width and length of the nacelle cover.
After estimating the width of the last panels, it is relevant to find a solution that
will adjust the dimensions of the nacelle cover in the most optimal manner, while
at the same time including the panel variant function units. Figure 5.20 shows the
proposed solution. The point is that if the calculated widths of the last panels are in
the range of 0-0.33 [m], then the panel variant ”0 RIB” will be selected, if within the
range of 0.33-0.99 [m], then the panel variant ” 1 RIB ”is selected, or if in the range
0.99-1.66 [m] the panel variant” 2 RIB ”has been chosen and finally, if the calculated
widths are in the range 1.66-2 [m], then the variant of the panel is ”3RIB”.
Figure 5.20: The solution for adjusting the nacelle cover dimensions.
==PAGE:90==
80
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX A
Product Variant
Master
==PAGE:92==
82
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIX B
Class Diagram
==PAGE:94==
84
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX C
CRC Cards
Class responsibility Collaboration Card
==PAGE:96==
86
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
[Age]
Danish Energy Agency. Levelized Cost of Energy (LCoE) Calculator. url:
https://ens.dk/en/our-responsibilities/global-cooperation/
levelized-cost-energy-calculator. (1998) (cited on page v).
[BH12]
Martin Bonev and Lars Hvam. “Analyzing the accuracy of calculations
when scoping product configuration projects”. In: (2012) (cited on page v).
[CE16]
Gustav. Carlberg and Soderby Erik. “Context-based 3D CAD configura-
tion using object-oriented programming”. In: Master thesis at Linköping
University, Department of Management and Engineering (2016), pages 47–
48 (cited on page 55).
[CIM]
CIMdata. Product Data Management: The Definition; An Introduction to
Concepts, Benefits, and Terminology. url: http://www.cimdata.com/
en/. (1998) (cited on pages v, 21).
[GL10]
Patrik. Gustafsson and Jonas Lindholm. “Sales and product configurator
- a comperative study”. In: Programme for Computer Engineering 180
credits (2010) (cited on page v).
[HH98]
Lars Hvam and Ulrik Have. “Reengineering the Specification Process”. In:
Business Process Management Journal , vol 4,no.1 (1998), pages 25–43
(cited on page v).
[HMR08]
Lars Hvam, Niels Henrik Mortensen, and Jesper Riis. Product customiza-
tion. Berlin Heidelberg. Springer, 2008 (cited on pages 18, 25, 54).
[Hva06]
Lars Hvam. “Mass customization in the electronics industry - based on
modular products and product configuration”. In: International Journal
of Mass Customization ,vol 1,no.4 (2006), pages 410–426. issn: 1742-4208
(cited on page v).
[MKH17]
Anna Myrodia, Katrin Kristjansdottir, and Lars Hvam. “Impact of prod-
uct configuration systems on product profitability and costing accuracy”.
In: Computers in Industry (2017) (cited on page v).
[NH12]
Jeppe Bjerrum Nielsen and Lars Hvam. “Developing engineering processes
through integrated modelling of product and process”. In: The European
Conference on Operations Management (2012) (cited on page v).
==PAGE:98==
88
Bibliography
[Pin93a]
B.Joseph Pine II. “Line managers describe mass customization operations:
Standard modules allow mass customization at Bally Engineered Struc-
tures”. In: Planning Review , Vol 21,no.4 (1993), pages 20–22 (cited on
pages v, 17, 18).
[Pin93b]
B.Joseph Pine II. “Mass Customizing products and services”. In: Planning
Review , Vol 21,no.4 (1993), pages 171–212 (cited on pages v, 16, 17, 22–
24).
[Sha+17]
Sara Shafiee et al. “The documentation of product configuration systems:
A framework and an IT solution.” In: Advanced Engineering Informatics
(2017) (cited on page v).
[SHB14]
Sara Shafiee, Lars Hvam, and Martin Bonev. “Scoping a product config-
uration project for Engineer-To-Order companies”. In: (2014) (cited on
page v).
[TJW]
Mitchell M. Tseng, S. Jack Hu, and Jue Wang. “Mass Customization”.
In: The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong ()
(cited on pages v, 16).
