==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
FleetScanner
An IoT-based infrastructure for compound manage-
ment
Atila Sarvari (s152185)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring a Master of Science degree in Digital Media Engineering.
The project was carried out in cooperation with Autorola Solutions. The work
was carried out from January 2nd 2018 to July 2nd 2018, with an assigned workload
of 35 ECTS points.
Report written by: Atila Sarvari (s152185).
Main supervisor: Associate Professor, Ph.D., Jakob Eg Larsen, Department of
Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark.
Company supervisor: Senior Business Process Consultant, Kennet Frahm Larsen,
Autorola Solutions.
Kongens Lyngby, June 30, 2018
Atila Sarvari (s152185)
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
The process of working on a Master’s thesis is long and demanding, and I would
therefore like to express my gratitude towards the people who have been helping and
supporting me.
First of all, I would like to thank my main supervisor Jakob Eg Larsen for help-
ing me realize this project and for always providing valuable and insightful feedback
on our regular meetings. Next I would like to thank my company supervisor Ken-
net Frahm Larsen for giving me the opportunity of working on this project and for
accompanying and helping me on the many trips to the test sight in Ballerup.
Finally, I would like to thank all the employees at compound Bilsalg for giving
me access to a test sight and for participating in all the experiments throughout this
project.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
Managing a large vehicle compound is a complex process. Vehicle compounds can
contain a running fleet of 500 to more than 5000 vehicles. Having a good overview
of the fleet and the compound area is crucial for the compound workers and for
the business. However, creating and maintaining an overview of the vehicles in the
compound area and their corresponding locations is a huge challenge. The current
solution used in Autorola’s compounds consist of an internal database for check-in
and check-out of vehicles and manual updates of the fleet using pen and paper. The
current process is complex, time consuming, resource demanding and error-prone.
This calls for a better solution capable of automatically generating an overview of
the vehicles in the compound and their corresponding locations. It should provide a
more accurate and up-to-date overview of the vehicles in the compound compared to
the existing solution and as an effect also remove some of the costly manual processes
to reduce time and costs.
This study presents an IoT-based infrastructure using BLE beacons and a smart-
phone for generating an overview of the vehicles in the compound and their corre-
sponding locations.
Several different technologies and methods were analyzed for
identification of vehicles, localization of vehicles, and for visualization of vehicle loca-
tions to find the best possible solution.
Several experiments were carried out to validate the prototype system. It was
found that the best way of generating a full overview of vehicles in the compound
and their corresponding locations could be achieved by combining passive and active
fleet updates. Using the prototype system, a full fleet update could be completed in 56
minutes which is much faster than the existing solution that takes two working days
to complete. Furthermore, it was found that the location data of vehicles calculated
in the prototype was accurate to within few meters compared to the existing solution
that only contains an often outdate area/row number. This was considered a success
as a proof of concept solution.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Resumé
Håndtering af et stort billager er en kompleks proces.
Et billager kan indeholde
en løbende flåde på 500 til mere end 5000 køretøjer. Både for lagermedarbejderne
samt for forretningen, er det yderst vigtigt at have en god oversigt over flåden på
lageret.
At skabe og vedligeholde en oversigt over bilerne og deres lokationer på
pladsen er en stor udfordring.
Den nuværende løsning, brugt i firmaet Autorola,
består af en intern database til check-ind og check-ud af køretøjer samt manuelle
lageroptællinger ved brug af pen og papir.
Den nuværende løsning er kompleks,
tidskrævende, ressourcekrævende og fejlbehæftet. Derfor er der behov for en bedre
løsning, som automatisk kan lokalisere bilerne og generere en oversigt over bilerne på
lagerpladsen. Løsningen skal levere en mere præcis og opdateret oversigt over bilerne
på pladsen og samtidig fjerne nogle af de dyre manuelle processer for at reducere tid
og omkostninger.
Denne afhandling præsenterer en IoT-baseret infrastruktur bestående af BLE bea-
cons og en smartphone til generering af en oversigt over bilerne på lagerpladsen, samt
deres tilhørende lokationer. Forskellige teknologier og metoder er blevet undersøgt
og analyseret for at finde frem til de bedst mulige løsninger til identifikation af biler,
lokalisering af biler og til visualisering af billokationer.
I løbet af projektet blev der udført flere forskellige eksperimenter, som havde
til formål at validere prototypen.
Det blev vist, at den bedst mulige metode til
generering af en oversigt over bilerne og deres lokationer på lagerpladsen var ved
at kombinere passive og aktive lageroptællinger. Ved hjælp af prototypen kunne en
komplet lageroptælling færdiggøres på 56 minutter, hvilket er en del hurtigere end
den nuværende løsning, som tager to arbejdsdage at udføre.
Derudover blev det
vist, at prototypen udregnede lokationsdata med en nøjagtighed på få meter, mens
den eksisterende løsning kun fortæller hvilket område/hvilken række bilen holder på.
Løsningen viste sig at være en succes som proof of concept.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Abstract
v
Resumé
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Project goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Contribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
Structure of thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related work
5
2.1
iButton
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
RFID
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
BLE beacon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Proximity-based localization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
GPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Compound management
13
3.1
Processes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Touchpoints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Analysis
17
4.1
Vehicle identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Vehicle localization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Visualization of vehicle locations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Design
25
5.1
Vehicle identification and ranging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
5.2
Android application for localization of vehicles
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
Location visualization for finding a vehicle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4
Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6
Experiment 3: A final usability experiment
43
6.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
Apparatus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.3
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.4
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.5
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7
Discussion
49
7.1
Scanning the vehicle signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.2
Location accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.3
Ranging beacons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.4
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8
Conclusion
53
A Map of Bilsalg compound
55
B Map on paper for guiding external users to find a vehicle
57
C Experiment 2 transcriptions
59
C.1 Participant 1 (Mechanic) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
C.2 Participant 2 (Student helper) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
C.3 Participant 3 (Office assistant)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
D Experiment 2 mock-up
63
E Final prototype system screenshots
65
Bibliography
67
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
A vehicle compound is practically an outdoor warehouse for vehicles. As any other
warehouse, it is primarily a trans-shipment point where all assets received are dis-
patched as quickly, effectively and efficiently as possible. According to a survey made
by Motorola, 35% of the respondent companies planned to increase the number of
warehouses operated whilst 36% looked to increase the size of their existing facilities
[Ric17]. As the number of warehouses grow and existing facilities increase in size, the
management and tracking of assets within these facilities get even more challenging
and complex. Handling this through manual processes is very labor intensive and
error prone.
Autorola is a company that delivers IT solutions for online remarketing and fleet
management within the automotive industry. An important part of the business is
to deliver compound services to the vehicle fleet owners. Compounds can contain
a running fleet of 500 to more than 5000 vehicles. Autorola offers compound stor-
age services alongside a range of other services such as vehicle collection, delivery,
inspection and refurbishment which complicates the processes even more [aut16].
Having a good overview of the fleet and the compound area is crucial for the com-
pound workers and for the business. However, creating and maintaining an overview
of the vehicles in the compound area and their corresponding locations is a huge chal-
lenge. The solution today consists of an internal database for check-in and check-out
of vehicles. Furthermore, a manual update of the fleet is carried out once every six
months. A compound worker is walking through the whole compound area registering
vehicles and their corresponding locations using pen and paper.
During this thesis Autorolas’ vehicle compound in Ballerup Copenhagen is used
for experimenting and testing purposes. This facility has a capacity of approximately
1.500 vehicles and is the largest Autorola compound in Denmark.
1.2
Problem
Incorrect or imprecise vehicle location information leads to difficulties in finding the
vehicles in the compound area. This issue is currently handled by implementing a set
of strict processes to minimize relocation of vehicles. The setup makes the processing
of the vehicle fleet very inflexible and vulnerable to human errors.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
To catch up on some of these errors a manual update of the fleet is carried out once
every six months. During the manual updates of the fleet an average of 1-2 vehicles
per row are found to be parked somewhere else than what is saved in the database. In
the Ballerup compound that is somewhere between 45-90 vehicles with wrong location
information. Looking for a specific vehicle amongst 1.500 other deregistered vehicles
is a frustrating task for both the compound workers and for the people coming to
collect a vehicle at the facility.
The problem that will be addressed in this thesis is this process, which currently
is complex, time consuming, resource demanding and error-prone.
1.3
Project goals
The goal of this thesis is to develop a digital wireless IoT-based infrastructure for
monitoring and managing the vehicle fleet at the compound. We will explore digi-
talized the monitoring and management processes using Bluetooth low energy (BLE)
beacons. The aim is to build a prototype system that can serve as a proof of concept
that can be validated.
Through scanning of beacon signals from the vehicles we hypothesize that an
overview of the vehicles in the compound and their corresponding locations can be
generated automatically. The digital solution should provide a more accurate and up-
to-date overview of the vehicles in the compound compared to the existing solution.
As an effect also remove some of the costly manual processes to reduce time and costs
compared to the existing solution.
1.4
Contribution
Internet of Things, or IoT is a network of physical devices that are connected to the
internet, collecting and sharing data. The use cases of IoT are endless as pretty much
any physical object can be transformed into an IoT device. Devices embedded with
sensors, electronics and software can enable any object to connect and share data
through the internet.
Although the idea of IoT was discussed already throughout the 1980s-1990s this
field just started getting increasing popularity and attention the recent years. [Ran18]
According to Gartner, Inc. an estimate of 20.4 billion connected devices will be in
use by 2020 with a total spending on IoT endpoints and services reaching almost $3
trillion [inc17]. The increased popularity is mainly due to developments in technology
such as cheaper sensors and more powerful devices.
The field of using IoT in warehouse management is relatively new. No validated
state of the art studies was found which performed tracking of asset locations using
IoT devices and smartphone GPS. Therefore, the proposed method is, to the best
of the knowledge of the author, a novel and will bring new information to the field
of warehouse management.
The proposed prototype system gave positive results,
==PAGE:15==
1.5 Structure of thesis
3
with a great potential for improvements, while also shinning light on some important
challenges related to tracking of asset locations using IoT and a smartphone GPS.
1.5
Structure of thesis
This thesis consists of eight chapters that combined documents the work done during
the master’s thesis. After this introduction, chapter 2 will present an overview of state
of the art related work literature within the fields of intelligent warehouse management
and location-based systems. Chapter 3 will provide the reader with the necessary
vehicle compound background knowledge in order to understand the methods and
approaches used in this thesis.
Chapter 4 is an analysis of different technologies
and methods for solving the issues of developing a digital solution for compound
management. Chapter 5 presents the proposed solution design and the experiments
it was based on. Chapter 6 contains the final usability experiment that was conducted
in this master’s thesis. Chapter 7 discusses the results acquired, stating strengths,
weaknesses, and possible improvements of the system. Finally, chapter 8 evaluates
the previously mentioned project goals.
==PAGE:16==
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Related work
The scope of this section is to get familiar with the current possibilities and develop-
ments in the fields of intelligent warehouse management and location-based systems.
The insights from the literature study will be used as guidelines for choosing the ap-
proach for a solution. This will also ensure that it will contribute with new knowledge
to the field of warehouse management. All the technologies and approaches in the
coming sections are related to this project through either enabling identification or
localization of assets.
2.1
iButton
The iButton device is a small computer chip enclosed in a stainless steel can that works
as an electronic communication interface. The chip provides a unique ID, read-write
memory and the possibility to communicate the data through the 1-Wire interface
circuitry. With information stored in its memory it practically works as an electronic
ID tag that can be mounted to any object. Because of the durable container the
device can withstand harsh environments.
In the paper, An Intelligent Warehouse Stock Management and Tracking System
based on Silicon Identification Technology and 1-Wire Network Communication by
Tee et al. the iButton technology was used for stock control. An electronic system was
developed for stock control and container tracking in a storage warehouse environment
using advanced electronic identification tags and 1-Wire communication tools.
Each storage cell/shelf position in the warehouse was equipped with an individual
position identification tag iButton.
All the storage cells were linked through the
1-Wire communication network to the central computer. Every container was also
attached with its own iButton identifying the container, its content, etc. When a
container was placed on one of the empty cells, it created a closed loop and thus seen
by the computer. The cells that were not occupied were disconnected and thus not
seen by the computer.
The tracking process begins when a container is being pushed into the storage
location where the container tag iButton and the storage location tag iButton phys-
ically is in contact with the drive wire (a conducting metal strip) (see Figure 2.1).
The host computer is then able to gather information on the physical location of the
container based on the recognition of the iButton unique ID.
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Related work
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the implemented method by Tee et al. [TCD11].
The study proved that stock control and container tracking could be done in a
storage warehouse using iButton identification tags. However, it was concluded that
this method was not suitable for stock management and goods tracking, where the
chain of the connected devices needs to be broken many times whenever a stock is
retrieved or placed in a cell as it would lead to many hardware complications [TCD11].
2.2
RFID
Radio-frequency identification (RFID) is a technology that uses electromagnetic fields
to identify and track objects that are tagged from a distance. The tags, also called
transponders, are small microchips that can be attached to different objects.
By
strategically deploying the tags and readers the system can locate, identify and trans-
mit data on the objects carrying the tags.
Passive tags do not have a power supply and therefore use power derived from the
RFID readers electromagnetic field to transmit data back to the reader. Active tags
also use batteries to power the microchip which allows them to have a longer range
than the passive tags.
RFID readers are either fixed or mobile data capture devices that generate an
electromagnetic field to detect the tags [Lot+13]. One version of this system is often
seen used as anti-theft systems in shopping malls where products are embedded with
chips and fixed readers at the entrance.
In the paper, Automated Tracking System Using RFID for Sustainable Manage-
ment of Material Handling in an Automobile Parts Manufacturer by Jamaludin et al.
RFID technology is used for identifying and tracking trolleys for an automotive parts
manufacturer.
==PAGE:19==
2.3 BLE beacon
7
A number of trolleys were tagged with RFID tags while reader antennas were
placed along the entrance of the receiving dock at the factory. The reading interval
of the RFID reader was set to 60ms and 20ms to study the capability of the system
in tracking fast moving trolleys. All data were saved in a central database on a host
computer (see Figure 2.2).
Figure 2.2: Illustration of the implemented method by Jamaludin et al. [Jam+18].
The system was tested for 15 days for determining the system accuracy. This was
done by comparing the actual number of detected trolleys by the number of tagged
trolleys.
This study proved that the RFID system could to some extend be used to detect
trolleys at the receiving dock of the automotive manufacturing plant and increase
efficiency. Metal in vicinity caused poor RFID system performance as it was able
to reflect electromagnetic wave of the reader antenna and reduce its power.
The
weakened signal meant that the antenna was not able to fully power the tag circuitry
to send tag response back to the RFID reader. The proposed RFID system design
managed to detect 50% of the trolleys [Jam+18].
2.3
BLE beacon
Bluetooth low energy (BLE) technology is a new standard designed to enable short-
range wireless devices to operate for months or years on a single coin cell battery. A
BLE beacon can enable smartphones and other devices to perform actions when in
close proximity to a beacon or even be used for estimating the position of the user
relative to certain predefined monitoring spots. BLE beacons are one of the latest
technologies to provide the means to offer different location-based services to a user
[Che+16].
In the paper, Improving Indoor Localization Using Bluetooth Low Energy Beacons
by Kriz et al. BLE beacons are used to improve radio-based indoor localization. The
test site for this study was a campus building with an existing WiFi infrastructure. 17
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Related work
new BLE beacons made by Estimote were evenly deployed in corridors and classrooms
about 10 meters apart from each other. (see Figure 2.3)
Figure 2.3: Floor plan with WiFi access-points and BLE beacons by Kriz et al.
[KMK16].
For acquiring learning data, volunteers used their smartphones having a developed
application for the purpose with a digitized map of the building. The smartphone did
scan signals of all available WiFi networks and beacons around and the user thereby
created a fingerprint of the given location. By recording strengths of individual signals
in a given location for 10 seconds a unique fingerprint of that given location could
be stored in the database. After mapping the whole floor this way, the learning data
was done. A user could now be localized on the floor by comparing incoming signal
strengths of Wifi access-points and BLE beacons to the fingerprint database.
The study proved that radio-based indoor location was improved by adding BLE
beacons to the setup. The data did show that the median accuracy improved by 23%
while reducing the variance. However, as BLE signal is weaker than WiFi a higher
density of deployed beacons is required for good performance [KMK16].
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Proximity-based localization
9
2.4
Proximity-based localization
A very common method for collecting spatio-temporal data is by strategically deploy-
ing readers at fixed known locations. By constantly scanning for nearby devices, the
reader can determine if a certain device has been seen on that location and at what
time it was seen. This is a very general method that can be achieved using many
different technologies.
In the paper Automated Tracking System Using RFID for Sustainable Manage-
ment of Material Handling in an Automobile Parts Manufacturer by Jamaludin et al.
RFID readers are used to detect nearby tagged trolleys at the receiving dock of an
automotive manufacturing plant for tracking purposes [Jam+18].
In the paper Crowds, Bluetooth and Rock’n’Roll: Understanding Music Festival
Participant Behavior by Larsen et al. Bluetooth scanners at strategical locations are
used to collect spatio-temporal data of festival participants.
The approach was to place 33 Bluetooth scanners in strategic positions around
the test site (see Figure 2.4). Approximately 2 scans were done per minute searching
for Bluetooth-enabled devices that were operating in discoverable mode and within
the range of about 10 meters. The data collected included time, scanner ID and a
Bluetooth MAC address of the discovered device, all saved in a local database.
Figure 2.4: Picture of a smartphone used as Bluetooth scanner and the deployed
locations by Larsen et al. [Lar+13].
The study proved that proximity-based Bluetooth sensing can be used for ob-
taining large scale spatio-temporal data for analysis.
The feasibility of capturing
Bluetooth data from a large crowd was also demonstrated [Lar+13].
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Related work
2.5
GPS
One of the most common technologies used in location-based systems is the Global
Positioning System (GPS). GPS is a satellite-based navigation system that allows any
GPS receiver on earth to receive its geolocation based on distance measurements to
four or more satellites [Tsu05].
In the paper, Tracking and locating components in a precast storage yard utilizing
radio frequency identification technology and GPS by Ergan et al. GPS trackers are
utilized to track and locate concrete components in a storage yard of a manufacturing
plant.
A gantry crane used for moving the concrete components in the yard had im-
plemented a RFID antenna and a GPS receiver while having a RFID reader and a
computer in the operator’s cabin. The concrete components were all tagged with
active RFID tags (see Figure 2.5).
Figure 2.5: Illustration of hardware setup in the prototype by Ergen et al. [EAS07].
The RFID technology enabled the system to uniquely identify the concrete com-
ponent while the GPS attached the gantry crane could give the location of the com-
ponent.
The proposed prototype system successfully identified all the components that
were relocated.
However, analysis of the GPS location information showed that
==PAGE:23==
2.5 GPS
11
approximately 60% of the location information was within the acceptable limit of
approximately 5 meters [EAS07].
==PAGE:24==
12
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Compound
management
The typical customers of vehicle compounds are large fleet owners such as leasing
companies, rental companies, original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) or banks.
Vehicle compounds are therefore designed to support the overall vehicle fleet work-
flows of these customers. In the following sections some background information is
given regarding the overall workflow at a compound and the touchpoints a compound
management prototype system may have.
3.1
Processes
The overall workflow of a vehicle fleet involves everything from acquisition of vehicles
to disposal of vehicles. The processes of a vehicle compound naturally reflect some of
the sub-processes in between, such as vehicle return, vehicle pick-up or various kinds
of vehicle services.
The compound workflow is just a sub-process of the overall vehicle fleet workflow
(see Figure 3.1). The typical steps in the compound workflow is as follows.
==PAGE:26==
14
3 Compound management
Figure 3.1: Overall illustration of vehicle compound workflow.
1. The driver returns the vehicle at the compound.
2. The vehicle gets inspected, refurbished, washed, etc. and put on an online sales
channel.
3. The vehicle is stored somewhere in the compound area.
4. The vehicle is sold.
5. The buyer or a transport company comes to pick up the bought vehicle.
3.2
Touchpoints
There will be three important touchpoints during the mentioned workflow for a pro-
totype system that can deliver an overview of vehicles in the compound and their
corresponding locations. During the inspection process, while vehicle is stored in the
compound, and when buyer comes to pick up the vehicle (see figure 3.2).
When a vehicle has been returned to the compound it has to be inspected. The
license plates are removed during the inspection process as the vehicle is deregistered.
The inspector therefore needs to setup a new identification for the vehicle.
While the vehicles are stored in the compound area, they must be localized, and
fleet updates must be made to have an updated location of vehicles in the compound
area.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Touchpoints
15
Figure 3.2: Illustration of prototype system touchpoints during compound work-
flow.
When a vehicle is being collected at the compound area by one of the compound
workers, a buyer or a hauler, they need to know where to find it. Hence, a visualization
of the vehicle data is needed. Different solutions to these three touchpoints are going
to be analyzed in the coming section.
==PAGE:28==
16
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4
Analysis
This chapter analyzes different possible solutions to the three touchpoints found in
the previous chapter, vehicle identification, vehicle localization, and visualization of
vehicle locations.
4.1
Vehicle identification
Today when the vehicle license plates are removed during the inspection process they
are being replaced by a piece of paper containing the former registration number
along with some basic vehicle data (see Figure 4.1). This piece of paper is placed
behind the windshield for identifying the vehicle.
Figure 4.1: Picture of vehicle identification paper behind the windshield.
Replacing the license plates with just a piece of paper behind the windshield
introduces some practical challenges. During the winter period the windshields are
covered in snow and ice, which makes the vehicle impossible to identify. In sunny
weather this is a challenge as well, as the reflections on the windshield can make it
difficult to read the information. Therefore, it is necessary to find a better solution
for uniquely identifying vehicles.
==PAGE:30==
18
4 Analysis
Looking at related work and technologies there are several methods for identifying
assets. Some of the most used technologies are described and analyzed in the following
subsections.
4.1.1
Barcode for identification of vehicles
One of the most used systems for asset identification is the old barcode/matrix system
that uses patterns of dark lines or squares and light spaces to store data. Every asset
that is equipped with a barcode or QR code can be scanned and identified by either
a handheld or fixed position reader [Lot+13].
Some of the advantages of this technology are that it is very cheap and that
it requires no power supply to work.
The disadvantage is however that scanning
requires clear visual contact which leads to the same practical challenges as the current
solution.
4.1.2
RFID for identification of vehicles
RFID technology has many advantages for identifying assets. The passive tags are
relatively cheap, and no visual contact is needed for reading the signals. However,
there may be some performance issues and limitations for identification of vehicles.
Passive tags perform poorly with metal in vicinity as the readers can have trouble
powering the tags from distance [Jam+18]. This problem can be solved using active
tags, but these are very expensive for this purpose. Furthermore, read/write from a
distance is only possible with a special RFID reader which limits the solution.
4.1.3
iButton for identification of vehicles
All iButtons have a laser-programmed ROM containing a 64-bit unique device ID.
The iButton can communicate data through the 1-Wire protocol to a PC. Like the
RFID and BLE beacon technology iButtons can be used as tags to identify assets.
This technology is useful in certain cases such as for carrying information on objects in
harsh environments, as the iButtons are very durable. iButton tags can only be read
through the 1-Wire network which also requires physical contact to the tag [TCD11].
In an outdoor compound area where vehicles can be parked anywhere this is not a
feasible solution.
4.1.4
BLE Beacon for identification of vehicles
BLE beacons have a Bluetooth chipset that broadcasts BLE radio signals that can
be read and interpreted by any device that supports Bluetooth 4.0 or higher.
A
very basic BLE beacon simply transmits Bluetooth packets with identification data
in regular intervals [KMK16]. Many beacons like the Estimote proximity beacon can
even broadcast integrated sensor data such as temperature, motion, light, etc [esta].
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Vehicle localization
19
The BLE beacon technology has many similarities with the RFID technologies as
a BLE beacon can be used as a tag on an asset for identification purposes in the same
way as RFID tags are being used. One of the biggest advantages of the BLE beacon
is that it sends an active Bluetooth signal that can be read by almost any Bluetooth
enabled device, such as smartphones, from distance. This opens for many possibilities.
Furthermore, it is a low-cost and energy efficient solution that can actively broadcast
a unique identifier for the whole period a vehicle can be on stock. A disadvantage of
using Bluetooth technology is that scanning takes 3-4 seconds on most smartphones
whereas technologies as barcode or RFID can be read in 1-2 seconds (see Table 4.1).
4.1.5
Comparison
Table 4.1 compares the different technologies used for identification of objects on
parameters price, power supply, readability, reading speed, writability and range.
Attributes
Barcode
RFID (passive)
RFID (active)
iButton
BLE beacon
Price
0.01$
Tag: 1$-2$
Reader: 239$-3187$
Tag: 63$
Reader: 637$-796$
iButton tag: 2$-95$
Beacon: 1$-13$
Power supply
Not needed
Powered through reader
2-3 years
Up to 7 years or powered
through reader
2 years
Readability
Barcode readers
and smartphones
With RFID reader
With RFID reader
With reader connected
to 1-Wire network
With any newer Bluetooth
enabled device
Reading speed
1-2 sec.
1-2 sec.
1-2 sec.
1 sec.
3-4 sec. on most smartphones
Writability
Only readable
With RFID reader
With RFID reader
With reader connected to 1-Wire network
With any newer Bluetooth
enabled device
Range
Up to 30cm.
10cm - 10m. depending on reader
and environment
20m-40m. depending on reader
and envionment
Needs physical contact
70m. depending on
environment
Table 4.1: Comparison of different technologies that can be used for identification
of objects [ida] [Lot+13] [estb] [maxb] [maxa] [estc] [ali].
4.2
Vehicle localization
When a vehicle has arrived at the compound and has got an inspection it is parked
somewhere in the parking area of the compound. The vehicle parking location is then
manually saved into an internal database. Maintaining an up to date overview of the
vehicles in the compound area and their corresponding locations is a huge challenge
in the period where the vehicles are on stock. As vehicles are occasionally moved,
it is necessary to update the old location information in the database every single
time. This is a subject to many errors. To catch some of these errors a manual fleet
update is carried out twice a year taking two whole working days to finish every time.
==PAGE:32==
20
4 Analysis
Obviously, a better solution is required for receiving and maintaining an overview of
vehicles in the compound area and their corresponding locations.
Looking at related work and technologies there are several methods for receiving
asset locations. In the following subsections some of the most common methods are
described and analyzed.
4.2.1
GPS trackers
GPS trackers for asset tracking can generally be divided into two categories, wired
and wireless trackers.
The wireless trackers are battery powered while the wired
trackers need to be connected to a power source. Some of the advantages of these
systems are that they can provide location information anywhere on earth and in real
time.
Wired trackers are cheaper than wireless trackers but requires installation into
the electrical circuit of the vehicle which can take up to 30 minutes [DM09]. Using
wired GPS trackers in every vehicle in the fleet would be very time consuming and
expensive to install and to remove again. Also, there would be some legal issues as
the vehicles are not owned by the compound themselves but by the different fleet
owners.
Wireless trackers do not need installation into the power circuit of the vehicle but
are in return very expensive and must be recharged frequently [easb]. Covering a fleet
of 1.500 vehicles with GPS trackers would not be a feasible solution.
4.2.2
WiFi positioning
The principle behind WiFi positioning is to use WiFi access points to determine loca-
tion. The number of access points has increased rapidly over the past several years in
homes, businesses, public buildings, etc. All these WiFi access points are broadcast-
ing a signal announcing their existence to the surrounding area. By collecting WiFi
signals within the range of a WiFi enabled mobile device, it is possible to calculate
the location of the device. The advantage of this method is that it can use an already
existing WiFi infrastructure within a building to determine location where technolo-
gies such as GPS fails. This only works for places with a good WiFi infrastructure,
which often is not the case for outdoor areas. Another important disadvantage of this
method is that it usually has a relatively poor accuracy depending on the density of
access points and the methods used [Zan09].
4.2.3
Proximity based localization
By deploying readers at fixed known locations, it is possible to collect spatio-temporal
data of nearby devices. This can be achieved using many different technologies.
The advantage of this method for tracking and localization of assets is that once
the readers has been setup they can track any nearby devices automatically. The level
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Vehicle localization
21
of detail in the location information is limited to the number of readers deployed. This
method works best if readers are deployed on strategical locations such as entry/exit
points. In a compound area such as the Bilsalg compound, readers could be deployed
at the entry/exit gates to the parking area to tell when a vehicle entered or left
the parking area. However, this method is not viable for determining the accurate
locations of 1500 vehicles in a completely open outdoor area.
4.2.4
BLE beacons for positioning
BLE beacons can be used in many ways to provide a variety of services. One use
case is to use BLE beacons for positioning. Most often this is utilized for indoor
environments where GPS technologies are limited. Several BLE beacons are installed
on fixed locations broadcasting a signal announcing their existence to the surrounding
area. Any device that supports Bluetooth 4.0 or higher can collect the signals and
determine its location based on the received signal strength. This method is very
similar to WiFi positioning. Because BLE operates in low power, the overall received
signal strength is low compared to the WiFi and therefore has lower accuracy. Studies
show that there is a clear correlation between number of installed beacons and the
positioning accuracy [Ji+15]. As BLE beacons are much cheaper and easier to install
than WiFi access points, this method can give better results than with WiFi in terms
of positioning accuracy.
The fact that BLE beacons are powered by battery makes them easier to apply
for outdoor usage. However, implementing this method in a large outdoor compound
area would require hundreds or even thousands of beacons to be installed with few
meters in between throughout the whole area. The setup and maintenance of so many
devices would be a huge task and not feasible.
4.2.5
Comparison
Table 4.2 compares the technologies and methods that can be used for localization of
objects on parameters Price, power supply, setup and accuracy.
==PAGE:34==
22
4 Analysis
Attributes
GPS tracker (wired)
GPS tracker (wireless)
WiFi positioning
Proximity-based localization
BLE beacons for positioning
Price
100$-300$ per tracker
220$-350$ per tracker
Depends on existing WiFi
infrastructure
Depends on technology and
number of readers deployed
Depends on number of beacons deployed.
A single beacon costs 1$-13$
Power supply
Until the vehicle battery is
out of power
3-6 months
Wired
Depending on technology.
Often wired
2 years
Setup
Requires installation into
the electrical circuit
First time setup
Can use existing WiFi
infrastructure
First time setup
First time setup
Accuracy
2m-20m depending on tracker
and environment
2m-20m depending on tracker
and environment
1m-40m depending on environment
and number of AP’s
Location described as a
reference to a known location
1m-10m depending on environment
and number of beacons deployed
Table 4.2: Comparison of different technologies and methods used for localization of
objects [DM09] [easa] [easb] [estb] [Lar+13] [Jam+18] [Men+11] [EAS07]
[Che+05].
4.3
Visualization of vehicle locations
The parking area of the vehicle compound is divided into five sections, identified
by a letter, each having somewhere between 1 to 14 rows of vehicles. A complete
map of the area can be found in Appendix A. Currently when a vehicle gets parked
somewhere in the parking area, the section and row number, e.g. A12, of the vehicle
parking location is manually saved into an internal database and written on a label
hanging in the keychain. Anybody that needs to find a vehicle on the compound uses
this location information to find it. The compound workers know the parking area
very well and can easily find the vehicles if they have the updated section and row
number of the vehicle parking location. The buyers and haulers that come to collect
a vehicle, on the other hand, have often difficulties finding the vehicles.
Currently when buyers or haulers come to the compound to collect a vehicle they
are handed the keys to the vehicle having the location information on the label (see
Figure 4.2). Furthermore, they are handed the static map of the area on paper found
in Appendix A. Especially for those who are not familiar with the compound area it
is often not sufficient to find the vehicle they are looking for.
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Visualization of vehicle locations
23
Figure 4.2: Picture of vehicle keys with information on label.
Geospatial data consists of the components location, attributes, and time which
answers the elementary questions Where?, What?, And When?. In this case it is,
where is the vehicle?, what vehicle is it?, And when was it seen on this particular
location?. The most standard way of visualizing geospatial data is by using maps
as an interface. Maps help the users to better understand geospatial relationships.
Information on distances, directions and area sizes can be retrieved, patterns revealed,
and relations understood and quantified from maps [R+00]. In following subsections
two different tools for visualization of geospatial data is analyzed.
4.3.1
Google Maps API
Google Maps API uses a set of classes that let users customize and embed Google
Maps in their own applications. It is a widely used tool for visualization of geospatial
data [DGM14]. The API can be used to add markers, polygons, paths, and overlays
to a basic map to change the user’s view of a particular area in the map [Goo]. These
objects can provide additional information to the location that can help answer the
questions of what? And when? too.
The advantages of Google Maps are many. It allows for a high degree of customiza-
tion and most people are familiar with the UI. Furthermore, it is highly accessible
through a SDK for Android and an API in several business intelligence tools such
as the TIBCO Jaspersoft [Jas] which is currently used for data visualization in the
different software tools used by the Bilsalg compound.
4.3.2
Geoplotlib: A Python Toolbox for Visualizing Geographical
Data
Another tool for visualization of geospatial data is Geoplotlib which is an open-source
python toolbox. This toolbox supports the development and implementation of sev-
==PAGE:36==
24
4 Analysis
eral types of visualizations for geospatial data including dot maps, kernel density
estimation, spatial graphs, shapes and many more. Geoplotlib is a powerful tool that
can be used in data analysis for exploring, mining and visualizing large-scale spatial
data [CLL16].
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 5
Design
This section presents the proposed digital solution for creating and maintaining an
overview of vehicles in a compound area and their corresponding locations.
The
solution was developed in three parts, every time adding and testing a new aspect.
The technologies and approaches used in developing the prototype system is based
on the knowledge gained from the related work articles reviewed in chapter 2 and the
analysis in the previous chapter.
Figure 5.1: Overall illustration of implemented prototype system.
The figure (Figure 5.1) illustrates the overall architecture of the final proposed
system prototype. A vehicle has a configured BLE beacon behind the windshield
broadcasting the vehicle identifier to the surroundings. An android application lis-
tening to these signals requests a GPS location whenever it is within few meters from
the beacon and saves the collected data to a remote database through an API. The
data collected is eventually used for visualizations that allow different actors to locate
and find vehicles in the compound area. The following sections are divided into the
mentioned three parts where the design of each aspect of the solution is described in
further details.
==PAGE:38==
26
5 Design
5.1
Vehicle identification and ranging
BLE beacons were chosen for identification of the vehicles in the fleet. The BLE
beacons are relatively cheap which makes them viable to deploy to large vehicle fleets.
The low consumption of power means that they can actively send a signal containing
the vehicle identification data to the surroundings for up to two years, which is enough
to cover the period a vehicle can be on stock on a compound. Most importantly,
the BLE technology is compatible with any technology supporting Bluetooth 4.0
or higher which allows for designing a low-cost smartphone-based solution. The only
disadvantage of choosing BLE beacons for identification of vehicles compared to other
technologies is that the Bluetooth scans normally takes few seconds depending on the
platform.
5.1.1
Beacon setup
To have vehicles broadcast their identifier when parked in the compound parking area
a BLE beacon must be configured and placed behind the windshield first. The first
time anybody has physically access to the vehicle after it has arrived at the compound
is during the inspection process. Therefore, optimally this step is carried out by the
inspector. All the inspector has to do is to pick up the NFC enabled beacon, trigger
the configuration page by the gesture of touching it with the smartphone/tablet,
enter the vehicle registration number, click save and place the beacon behind the
windshield. (see Figure 5.2) Besides having access to the vehicle, the inspector already
is inspecting the vehicle on a tablet that can be used to configure the beacon if having
FleetScanner installed.
Figure 5.2: Picture of a beacon being configured.
When the newly arrived vehicle has a configured beacon behind the windshield
==PAGE:39==
5.1 Vehicle identification and ranging
27
broadcasting its identifier, it is ready to be parked somewhere in the parking area of
the compound.
5.1.2
Ranging beacons
To read the vehicle identifiers again, the smartphone scans for beacons using rang-
ing. Ranging is a method where the smartphone is actively scanning for any nearby
beacons delivering results every second.
Each configured beacon associated with a vehicle is broadcasting its Bluetooth
signal with a certain strength. The strength of this signal diminishes as it travels
through the air, which enables the receiver device to make a rough estimation of how
far the beacon is. A strong signal from a beacon means it is close while a weak signal
means it is further away.
For Estimote beacons, used in this thesis, the distance between the beacon and
the receiving device is categorized into four proximity zones:
• Immediate, which means the signal strength is strong and the beacon is within
few centimeters.
• Near, which means the signal strength is medium and the beacon is within a
few meters.
• Far, which means the signal strength is weak and the beacon is more than few
meters away.
• Unknown, which means the signal strength is very, very weak and no estimations
can be done.
The relationship between signal strength and distance is an inverse-square rela-
tionship. This means that if the distance to a beacon increases two times, the signal
strength decreases four times. This relationship makes the accuracy of the proximity
estimations decrease drastically when the distance increases. As an example, the sig-
nal strength at 20 meters will be roughly 100 times weaker than at 2 meters. This
correlation makes it nearly impossible to estimate the distance of weak signals [Est].
FleetScanner only uses the beacons for remote identification and ranging of ve-
hicles in the compound. It is currently set to only save data for vehicles within the
near proximity zone. The reasons are to make sure that a person actually is within
the presence of a vehicle before requesting a GPS location on the smartphone and to
avoid signal disturbance from vehicles in adjacent rows.
A smaller unformal test was carried out to test the identification and ranging
of vehicles in the compound parking area. The goal was to determine the optimal
proximity zone where a vehicle could be identified remotely using the FleetScanner
application while not getting disturbed by the signals from vehicles in adjacent rows.
==PAGE:40==
28
5 Design
15 Estimote proximity beacons were numbered and placed on the windshields of
vehicles in two adjacent rows. All the even numbers in one row and the odd numbers
in the adjacent row.
Different proximity zones were tested while walking and scanning along the first
row. The results showed that by ranging within the near proximity zone, the vehicle
could be identified from 1m to 1,5m distance and at the same time avoid catching
the signals of vehicles in the adjacent row.
5.2
Android application for localization of vehicles
For determining the location of the vehicles in the compound area a smartphone-based
solution was chosen. Instead of installing expensive GPS trackers in every single ve-
hicle in the fleet, the GPS in a single android smartphone is utilized. By having
the FleetScanner application installed, the smartphone can be used to determine the
vehicle locations. The GPS receiver in the android application works under optimal
conditions in a vehicle compound. For obvious reasons most often these vehicle com-
pound parking areas are outdoor and is basically an open field. Furthermore, they
are often located in rural or semi-urban areas without tall buildings or trees reflecting
or blocking the GPS signal. A solution using GPS is therefore very optimal in this
case compared to other the approaches analyzed [Zan09].
By clicking on “Scan”, the FleetScanner android application can start scanning
for nearby BLE signals (see Figure 5.3). Whenever the smartphone device is near
a vehicle with a BLE beacon, it requests a GPS location in terms of a latitude,
longitude and a horizontal accuracy and saves it with a timestamp in a local SQLite
database. The BLE beacon itself does nothing else than identifying the vehicle and
telling how close the user is to the vehicle.
The location is practically the GPS
location of the smartphone device. Therefore, the closer the user is to a vehicle, the
more representative is the location data as being the location of the vehicle. During
such a scan the android application can save several location data per vehicle that
can later be used to estimate a more accurate location.
Even though the environment is very optimal for using GPS location there are
occasionally outliers in the data. Some data points can sometimes be several me-
ters off the true vehicle location. A method has therefore been implemented in the
prototype application that takes a set of the best location data available, looking
at timestamp and accuracy, as input and returns the current best location estimate.
This method takes the set of data points for the vehicle and calculates the median
latitude, longitude and standard deviation which is later used to visualize the best
location estimate and the deviation in data points.
The solution for improving the location accuracy and filtering outliers was based
on a smaller test described in the following subsection. To find a feasible and efficient
method for collecting the data of the whole fleet a larger experiment was carried out.
This experiment was divided into two parts and is described in the last section within
this chapter.
==PAGE:41==
5.2 Android application for localization of vehicles
29
Figure 5.3: Prototype system scanning page.
5.2.1
Method for improving location accuracy
Different methods were tested for finding an appropriate method for improvement of
location accuracy and filtering of outliers in the historical location data.
In the article Study of the Accuracy of Averaged Non-Differential GPS Measure-
ments by Charrois [Cha99] a method of averaging the GPS data over time was tested.
A lot of measurements were gathered over time and eventually the latitudes and lon-
gitudes of the data points were averaged. The conclusion was that the accuracy of
the averaged data points improved as the amount of data points increased [Cha99].
This test was replicated and done in a smaller scale using a beacon placed on
a fixed location with a known latitude and longitude.
The smartphone with the
FleetScanner application was kept close to the beacon while scanning and saving
location data for 2 minutes. This test however showed that the accuracy decreased
as a single outlier in the location data could skew the rest of the data points.
In another study RADAR: An In-Building RF-based User Location and Tracking
System by Bahl and Padmanabhan [BP00] the algorithm k-nearest neighbor is used
to filter outliers in the data before averaging the data points. Every time the device
receives a new location estimation its distance to all other earlier location estimations
are measured and a k number of the nearest neighboring points are returned. This
set of points are then averaged to yield a location estimate that is closer to the true
==PAGE:42==
30
5 Design
location than any individual point [BP00]. In other words, this study is very similar to
the previous one, but outliers here are filtered using the k-nearest neighbor algorithm
first.
This method was also replicated and tested using FleetScanner as previously. The
results of this test were better with an increase in accuracy. However, this method
would not be scalable to a whole fleet of vehicles with hundreds of data points for
each vehicle, as calculating distances to all other points every time would be very
costly.
The final method that was chosen was to first pick a set of the best available data
points for a vehicle and calculate the median latitude and median longitude to find
the best location estimate.
The set of best available data points for a vehicle consists of a maximum of 5
location points that are chosen mainly by ordering the data by the newest data
points first. If several data points exist within the same day, they are ordered by
their accuracy value. Along with all location data follows an accuracy value that is
an estimated horizontal accuracy in meters. The reason why the accuracy value is
not weighted so much is because it is mainly a theoretical value defined as a 68%
probability that the true location is within a radius equal to the accuracy value. Also,
it is assumed that the location errors are random with a normal distribution which
in practice is far from always true [dev].
The outcome of this method is very much like using the k-nearest neighbor method
but with a much better performance. The test results showed that the accuracy of the
estimated location could increase from few centimeters to several meters depending
on the location data gathered. As it can be seen in Figure 5.4 few outliers do not affect
the location estimation that is closer to the true location than any of the individual
points.
==PAGE:43==
5.3 Location visualization for finding a vehicle
31
Figure 5.4: Median values of a set of locations (L1,L2,L3,L4,L5) can lead to guess
(G) that is closer to the true location (T) than any of the individual
locations.
5.3
Location visualization for finding a vehicle
For visualization of the geospatial data collected, Google Maps is used. Google Maps
is available through the SDK for android and therefore easy to implement in the
FleetScanner android application and it is already embedded into the business intel-
ligence tool, Jaspersoft, used in the compound. Furthermore, it allows for a high
degree of customization which is very useful in this case.
During the scan, data is saved in the locale SQLite database.
Whenever the
scanning of the fleet is done, all the data that is saved in the SQLite database is
synchronized to a remote MySQL database through a REST API. This is much more
efficient as the application then only has to send data to the remote database once.
This design was made for gathering all the data at one place accessible from anywhere.
All the data that is gathered in the remote MySQL database is eventually used for
the visualizations that can help users find the vehicles at the compound.
The users that need to find a vehicle in the compound can be divided into two
groups. Internals (compound workers), and externals (haulers, buyers, etc.). Two
different visualizations were developed in the final prototype for these two types of
users. Both were designed for finding a vehicle in the compound parking area but did
mainly differ on how the maps were accessed.
==PAGE:44==
32
5 Design
An experiment on different ways of visualizing vehicle location data, described
later in the experiments section, showed that internal users need an easy access to
vehicle locations from anywhere in the compound. Also, it was shown that it helped
to use the existing references to parking area/row to better understand the location.
This was solved by developing a search functionality and visualization in the
FleetScanner application itself. When searching for a vehicle the compound worker
already has the keys with a label showing the registration number. The compound
worker can enter that vehicle registration number in the search field of the application,
which then will zoom and show the best estimated location of the vehicle presented
with a marker (see Figure 5.5). The red circle around the marker shows that the
vehicle is most likely within that circle. The radius of this circle is calculated by
looking at the deviation in the location data collected. Lastly, the marker has a title
showing the registration number of the vehicle, in this case “Test1”, and the date it
was last seen on that location.
Figure 5.5: Map on smartphone for guiding internal users to find a vehicle.
Early interviews, with haulers and buyers coming to collect vehicles at the com-
pound, revealed that only some of them was in possession of a smartphone. All of
them however expressed that they were not interested in installing an application just
for finding a single vehicle.
To solve this issue a map was designed using the business intelligence tool, Jasper-
soft. Whenever a hauler or a buyer come to collect a vehicle at the compound, they
==PAGE:45==
5.4 Experiments
33
first need to get the keys from the compound reception. A map can automatically
be generated here based on the vehicle registration number and handed in a printed
version. This map guides the user from the office entrance to the vehicle location by
showing a path on the map (see Figure 5.6). For users in possession of smartphone the
QR code can be scanned and a digital interactive map will open on the smartphone
that can guide the user to the vehicle. A larger version of the map can be found in
Appendix B.
Figure 5.6: Map on paper for guiding external users to find a vehicle.
5.4
Experiments
This section describes all the experiments that were carried out to determine the best
possible solution. Many of the design decisions presented in the previous section were
based on these experiments.
==PAGE:46==
34
5 Design
5.4.1
Experiment 1: A feasibility experiment including different
ways of scanning vehicle signals
Experiment 1 was a feasibility experiment including different ways of scanning the
vehicle signals. The purpose of the experiment was to quantitively find the most
feasible method for scanning the vehicle signals measured on task completion time
and number of errors. In this case the task completion time is the amount of time it
takes a person to scan the whole compound area. Number of errors is a measure to
describe the number of vehicle signals that are not collected during the scan. This
experiment consisted of two parts.
5.4.1.1
Part 1 – Active scanning
This part of the experiment was to almost replicate the current method of doing fleet
updates by having a person walking along the rows of vehicles. Instead of reading the
paper signs behind the windshields and taking notes using pen and paper, the person
would have to bring a smartphone with FleetScanner to actively scan the vehicle
signals.
Participants
The first part of the experiment required no participants and were therefore carried
out by myself.
Apparatus
This part of the experiment required the following apparatus:
• 15 x Estimote proximity beacons.
• Smartphone with FleetScanner installed.
• PC for saving data sheets.
Procedure
The goal for the first part of the experiment was to get insights on the scanning per-
formance of FleetScanner during an active fleet update. This was done by adjusting
the walking speed and measuring the success on task completion time and number of
errors. The procedure of the first part of the feasibility experiment was as follows:
Before starting the experiment, beacons were placed on the windshield of 15 vehi-
cles in a row (see Figure 5.7). Hereafter, I walked along the row of vehicles adjusting
my walking speed every third time.
1. Positioned at the start of the row with the smartphone, click “Start scan” in
FleetScanner.
==PAGE:47==
5.4 Experiments
35
2. Start walking along the row of vehicles with a normal walking speed of approx-
imately 5 km/h.
3. At the end of the row stop the scan.
4. Save all collected data in a spreadsheet.
5. Repeat x3
6. Adjust walking speed to slow walking (approximately 2,5 km/h).
7. Repeat x3
8. Adjust walking speed to slow walking and stop in front of each vehicle for 1
second.
9. Repeat x3
Figure 5.7: Experimental setup, part 1 - active scanning.
Design
This experiment was a 3 × 2 within subjects design. The independent variable was
the walking speed manipulated across three levels, normal walking speed, slow walk-
ing speed, slow walking speed with short stops. The dependent variables were the
task completion time and number of errors.
The total number of trails administered in this part of the experiment
was 1 participant x 3 levels of speed x 3 repetitions = 9 trails
==PAGE:48==
36
5 Design
Results
As mentioned earlier the goal of experiment 1 was to quantitatively find the most
feasible method for scanning the vehicle signals measured on task completion time
and number of errors. This part of the experiment covered the active scanning method
where FleetScanner is used to do a full fleet update. The results of the experiment
are presented below (see Table 5.1).
Walking speed
Task completion time
Number of errors
Normal walking speed ￿5 km/h
Approximately 28 minutes
58 seconds per row * 29 rows
60% coverage
Slow walking speed ￿2.5 km/h
Approximately 56 minutes
95,6% coverage
Slow walking speed with 1 second
stop in front of each vehicle
Approximately 89 minutes
100% coverage
Table 5.1: Results of experiment 1, part 1.
The data gathered in the first part of the experiment show the task completion
time and the corresponding number of errors in a complete walkthrough of the whole
parking area. The number of errors is described as a percentage meaning the percent-
age of the vehicles that were localized
By walking with a normal walking speed of approximately 5 km/h the task can
be completed in approximately 28 minutes with a coverage of 60% meaning that 60%
of the vehicles passed by have been localized while the rest 40% has not. By walking
half the speed, 2.5 km/h, the task could be completed in approximately 56 minutes
with a coverage of 95.6%.
5.4.1.2
Part 2 – Passive scanning
Today, some of the compound workers are already moving around the compound area
to park or find vehicles. The second part of the experiment was to examine whether
it is feasible to have these compound workers scan the vehicle signals passively by
having FleetScanner running in the background on their smartphones during the
working hours. Since I did not have 1.500 beacons to cover all the vehicles in the
compound area, another approach was used to carry out this experiment. One of
the compound workers’ movements were tracked for some time to see how many
of the vehicles in the compound area he passed by during the period. This would
give an indication of how many vehicles that could potentially be scanned, if having
FleetScanner running passively on the smartphones of the compound workers.
==PAGE:49==
5.4 Experiments
37
Participants
The second part of the experiment required participation of one of the compound
workers. The participant chosen for this part of the experiment was one of the com-
pound workers whose daily tasks required him to park and pick up vehicles from
the parking area. He would therefore naturally be present and move around in the
compound area as part of his daily tasks. This participant is representative of any
compound worker that has daily tasks on the compound area itself.
Apparatus
The second part of the experiment required the following apparatus:
• Smartphone with application My Tracks [Qin] installed. Time interval for mea-
surements set to 1 sec. and distance interval set to 1 meter.
• PC for saving data sheets.
Procedure
The goal for this part of the experiment was to investigate whether it was possible
to do a full fleet update covering all vehicle in the compound area without having a
person dedicated to the task but instead having compound workers passively scanning
vehicle signals during the day. The procedure of the second part of the feasibility
experiment was as follows:
Before starting the experiment, a test smartphone with the application My Tracks
were handed out to the participant. Instructions were given on how to use the appli-
cation.
1. Every morning when arriving at work start My Tracks tracker.
2. Before going home after work stop tracker and save data.
3. Repeat every day for two weeks.
Design
As I only had 15 beacons available for experiments, the only way to get an indication
of the success rate was to track the movements of a compound worker for a period
and estimate how many vehicles he may pass and potentially scan during that period.
The experiment was designed to run for almost two weeks to see how much of the
compound area that would be covered during that period. It was in total 9 working
days where the movements of the participant were tracked during the working hours
from approximately 8 am to 4 pm.
Results
All the KML data gathered throughout this experiment can be seen plotted into a
satellite map of the compound area (see Figure 5.8). The colored boxes are the parking
areas while the colored lines are each one day of tracking data. As the satellite map
==PAGE:50==
38
5 Design
is not completely up to date, the relatively newly constructed parking area, marked
in blue, cannot be seen on this map.
Figure 5.8: Results of experiment 1, part 2, tracking data.
First of all, the illustration proves that a single person on the compound can cover
a large part of the compound parking area during daily tasks of parking and picking
up vehicles. By having FleetScanner running on his smartphone the compound worker
could potentially scan and update many of the vehicles that he passes by. This data
==PAGE:51==
5.4 Experiments
39
represents only the movements of one of the compound workers. Multiplying this to
several persons working and moving around in the area a large part of the vehicle
fleet could potentially get updated locations every day.
This illustration also shows that some parts of the parking area are more frequently
visited than others. Some of the parking area corners are not visited a single time
during the period of 14 days by the compound worker.
This experiment shows that most of the fleet can be scanned passively by having
the FleetScanner application running on the smartphones of the compound workers
during the working hours. To cover the whole parking area including some of the
unvisited corners, a compound worker can walk along the rows of vehicles and actively
scan the whole fleet occasionally. This would ensure that the whole fleet is located
and up to date.
5.4.2
Experiment 2: An experiment on different ways of visualizing
the vehicle location data
This experiment was about exploring different ways of visualizing data. The purpose
was to qualitatively find the most appropriate way to visualize the data of vehicles
and their corresponding locations in the compound by gathering user feedback.
5.4.2.1
Participants
A series of think-aloud tests were conducted on different representative participants
to gather feedback and to get useful insights.
Participant 1 (Mechanic): Responsible of running mechanical tests on the vehicles.
Uses vehicle location data when picking up or returning vehicles to the parking area.
Participant 2 (Student helper): Primarily doing ad-hoc task at the compound.
Uses vehicle location data when picking up vehicles from the parking area.
Participant 3 (Office assistant): Responsible of keeping the fleet updated. Uses
vehicle location data when doing fleet updates or helping haulers finding their vehicles.
5.4.2.2
Apparatus
For this experiment the following apparatus were used:
• PC with the clickable mock-ups.
• A recorder for recording sound.
5.4.2.3
Procedure
The procedure for this experiment was the same for all the participating compound
workers. They were interviewed one at a time.
==PAGE:52==
40
5 Design
1. Introduction.
2. Start recording.
3. Interview.
4. Handing out mock-up.
5. Think-aloud test
6. Follow-up questions.
Before beginning the experiment, the participant was carefully introduced to the
experiment, its purpose and the fact that the whole session would be recorded. The
first part of the experiment was a short interview consisting of 3 preliminary questions
for warming up. After the interview, a PC was handed out to the participant with
the clickable mock-up open. The participant was now asked to perform a certain task
using the mock-up while thinking out loud.
5.4.2.4
Design
The think aloud tests were designed according to the standard think aloud proto-
col described in THE THINK ALOUD METHOD: A practical guide to modelling
cognitive processes by Someren et al. [VBS94].
Before starting the experiment, it was important to make sure that the setting
was such that the participant could feel at ease. The room was quiet, and the subject
was settled comfortably.
In the introductory part of the experiment every single participant was carefully
introduced to the project and to the experiment and its purpose.
It was empha-
sized that it was the mock-ups that were being tested and not the participant. Any
unnecessary anxiety could hamper the whole experimental procedure. To create an
atmosphere of confidence and easiness was therefore of the utmost importance.
Before starting the interview and the think-aloud test, the participant was asked
to give his/her consent to being recorded during the experiment. It was explained
that the data were to be handled strictly confidentially.
The participant was asked the following preliminary questions during the interview
for warming up and for giving an opportunity to start talking:
• What is your role in the compound?
• When do you need to get an overview of the vehicles and their corresponding
locations in the compound?
• How often do you need to get an overview of the vehicles and their corresponding
locations in the compound?
• Do you feel that the current solution supports your needs why/why not?
==PAGE:53==
5.4 Experiments
41
For the think-aloud test the participant was presented to a clickable mock-up on
a PC screen. A clear set of instructions were given:
‘I will give you a task. Please keep talking out loud while solving the task.’
‘You have to pick-up a certain Peugeot 206 with identification number
test1. How do you find this vehicle using the mock-up?’
While performing the task the responses of the participant were recorded and
observed. During the whole session the situation was focused on the task. The role
of the experimenter was a restrained one. Interference was as little as possible with
the thought process to avoid influencing its course.
Before ending the session, a set of follow-up questions were asked:
•
‘Does this way of visualizing the location data support you on your
task, why/why not?’
•
‘Do you have any suggestions for improvements?’
The transcriptions can be found in Appendix C.
5.4.2.5
Results
In this section some of the key results and findings will be presented from the data
collected through interview questions and observations of think-aloud tests.
The main findings are all listed below using visuals from the mock-up:
All participants had difficulties understanding the location information given on
the list of vehicles (see Figure 5.9).
Figure 5.9: Mock-up vehicle location information on list.
The participants, that are all familiar with the compound area, preferred to see
in which area/row the vehicle was parked in, instead of just a marker on a satellite
map (see Figure 5.10)
==PAGE:54==
42
5 Design
Figure 5.10: Mock-up vehicle location on map.
Some of the participants expressed that being forced to find the vehicle location
on a desktop could be a hassle as there is not always a pc nearby at the compound.
The mock-up designed for this experiment can be found in Appendix D.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 6
Experiment 3: A final
usability experiment
The final experiment in this thesis was a usability experiment with the purpose of
qualitatively validating the usability of the prototype system compared to the old
manual solution. A set of usability tests were carried out with the compound workers
to gather their feedback.
The tasks were different for every participant to cover all aspects of the prototype
system. The beacon setup part was tested with one of the inspectors at the compound.
The fleet update part was tested with the compound worker currently responsible of
doing fleet updates. Lastly, the find vehicle part was tested with one of the compound
workers that has daily tasks of finding vehicles in the parking area.
6.1
Participants
Participant 1 (Vehicle inspector): Responsible of doing the vehicle inspections. He
is the first person to have physical access to a vehicle after it has arrived at the
compound.
He makes sure that every vehicle is equipped with a piece of paper
behind the windshield that identifies the vehicle.
Participant 2 (Office assistant): Responsible of keeping the fleet updated. Does
manual updates of the fleet once every six months by walking through the whole
compound area registering vehicles and their corresponding locations using pen and
paper.
Participant 3 (Student helper): Primarily doing ad-hoc task at the compound.
Uses vehicle location data when picking up vehicles from the parking area. Currently
he is provided with a row number telling where the vehicle was parked at check-in.
6.2
Apparatus
For the usability experiment the following set of apparatus was used:
• 15 x Estimote BLE proximity beacons.
==PAGE:56==
44
6 Experiment 3: A final usability experiment
• Smartphone with FleetScanner application.
• PC for taking notes.
• Keys to a vehicle parked in the compound parking area.
6.3
Procedure
The overall procedure of the three tests was almost the same. However, every par-
ticipant got different tasks in the think-aloud test related to the participants function.
Beacon setup:
1. Place a box of BLE beacons in the inspection hall.
2. Introduction.
3. Hand out smartphone with FleetScanner application.
4. Think-aloud test.
5. Follow-up question.
Fleet update:
1. Place a BLE beacon on the windshield of 15 vehicles in a row before starting
the test.
2. Introduction.
3. Hand out smartphone with FleetScanner application.
4. Think-aloud test.
5. Follow-up question.
Find vehicle:
1. Place a BLE beacon on the windshield of 15 random vehicles in the compound
area including a vehicle for which you have the keys to.
2. Introduction.
3. Hand out smartphone with FleetScanner application and keys to one of the
vehicles.
4. Think-aloud test.
5. Follow-up question.
==PAGE:57==
6.4 Design
45
6.4
Design
The think-aloud tests performed in this usability experiment were all designed accord-
ing to the protocol used previously in experiment 2 [VBS94]. The three participants
each got a unique task that was designed to validate a certain aspect of the prototype
system.
In the introductory part of the experiment every single participant was carefully
introduced to the project and to the experiment and its purpose. It was emphasized
that it was the prototype system that was being tested and not the participant. Any
unnecessary anxiety could hamper the whole experimental procedure. To create an
atmosphere of confidence and easiness was therefore of the utmost importance. All
tests had different settings as it was important to ensure that the different aspects of
the prototype system were tested in the right environments.
The first part of the experiment was about testing the beacon setup process to-
gether with the participating inspector. This test was carried out in the inspections
hall where vehicle inspections are done. After the introductory part the think-aloud
test were carried out twice. First time without giving any information on how to start
the beacon configuration and second time by showing how to start the configuration.
‘You want to inspect a vehicle that has just arrived at the compound. I
will give you a task. Please keep talking out loud while solving the task’
‘Configure a beacon with the vehicle registration number using the prototype
system and place it behind the windshield’
After finishing the test, the participant was asked to rate his experience on a scale
from 1-5 on how easy he found the setup process (see Figure 6.1).
Figure 6.1: Beacon setup questionnaire.
The second part of the experiment was about testing the fleet update process
together with the participant that is usually responsible for doing fleet updates at
the compound. This test was carried out on the parking area of the vehicle compound.
Before introducing the participant to the experiment, a row of vehicles was equipped
with configured BLE beacons. The scenario and task of this think-aloud test was
formulated as follows.
‘You want to do a fleet update of the vehicles in the compound. I will give
you a task. Please keep talking out loud while solving the task’
==PAGE:58==
46
6 Experiment 3: A final usability experiment
‘Perform a fleet update for vehicles in this particular row using the proto-
type system. Follow the instructions on screen’
After finishing the test, this participant got a follow-up question asking her to
rate her experience with the prototype system (see Figure 6.2).
Figure 6.2: Fleet update questionnaire.
The last part of the experiment was about using the collected vehicle location
data to find a specific vehicle. This test was also carried out on the parking area
of the vehicle compound. After the general introduction, the think-aloud test began.
Starting at the entrance of the parking area the participant was handed the keys to
one of the vehicles and a smartphone with FleetScanner application.
‘Somebody is coming to collect a vehicle at the compound and you need
to prepare it. I will give you a task. Please keep talking out loud while
solving the task’
‘Find vehicle with registration number ”test1” using the prototype system’
Like the previous tests in this experiment, this participant also got a follow-up
question asking him to rate his experience with the prototype system (see Figure 6.3).
Figure 6.3: Find vehicle questionnaire.
6.5
Results
In this section all the test results and findings will be presented from the data collected
through observations and follow-up questions. This experiment was divided into three
different tests. The first test with the beacon setup process was carried out twice. A
summary of the data collected is presented in the following table (Table 6.1).
==PAGE:59==
6.5 Results
47
Tests
Feedback from observation
Rating (1-5)
Beacon setup
(without information)
Confused, frustrated, trying to ask for
help
1
Beacon setup
(with information)
Makes sense now, configures the beacon
very quickly
5
Fleet update process
Excited, started fine following the guide
on screen, unsure about how fast to
walk at start but figures out after a
while
5
Find vehicle process
Quickly searches up the vehicle and
starts walking towards the specified lo-
cation on screen, seems to know what
he is doing, is able to find and point out
the right vehicle without even using the
keys
5
Table 6.1: Usability experiment results.
As seen in the presented data (Table 6.1), most of the findings were positive.
Only the first part of the beacon setup test scored very low. To trigger and open the
configuration page in the application, the user had to use the BLE beacon’s built-in
NFC by the gesture of simply touching a beacon with the smartphone (see Figure
6.4).
Figure 6.4: Start beacon configuration gesture.
==PAGE:60==
48
6 Experiment 3: A final usability experiment
The configuration page can be triggered from any page and even without having
the application running on the smartphone beforehand. The test showed that this
process caused a lot of confusion as there were no help or guide to find within the
application itself. It was later shown in the second part of the beacon setup test that
this task got much easier as soon as the participant knew the gesture to open the
configuration page (see Table 6.1).
In the fleet update process on the other hand, a simple on-screen animation guide
helped the participant perform the fleet update task (see Figure 6.5).
The main findings of this experiment were that the beacon setup process did
not support inexperienced users and that on-screen animations helped to guide users
perform a task. It was therefore recommended that a dedicated beacon setup guide
page was designed within the application to help users start the configuration page.
Screenshots of the final prototype system design can be seen in Appendix E.
Figure 6.5: Fleet update guide on screen.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
7.1
Scanning the vehicle signals
This section discusses the overall procedure of scanning the vehicle signals during
the fleet update. It will contain general aspects from the experiments, as well as
comments about the results.
7.1.1
Limitations in the experimental setup
Experiment 1, the feasibility experiment including different ways of scanning vehicle
signals was limited by the 15 Estimote proximity beacons that were available for this
thesis.
This experiment was divided into two parts. One part was about exploring how
fast a fleet update could be done by having a person walking along the rows of
vehicles scanning the signals. In this part of the experiment, the 15 beacons were all
deployed in 15 vehicles in a row. This was only enough to cover a half row of vehicles.
After measuring the task completion time for scanning the half row of vehicles this
number was basically multiplied by two and subsequently by the number of rows at
the compound. The task completion time for doing a full fleet update was therefore
an estimate based on the time it took for scanning the 15 beacons available.
The second part of the experiment was about exploring whether it was possible
to have compound workers scan the vehicle signals passively by having FleetScanner
running in the background on their smartphones during the working hours. This
part of the experiment was also limited by the number of beacons available. As the
compound area has a capacity of approximately 1.500 vehicles the best results could
of course be gained by having the same number of beacons available to deploy and
test.
However, this was partly solved by tracking the movements of a compound
worker over a period to see how much of the area he would cover and potentially
scan. This method could not tell how many of the vehicles in the compound that
were scanned passively during this period, but instead gave a hint of how much of
the area that could potentially be covered and updated.
Despite some limitations in the experimental setup, some estimates were acquired
for validating the solution even though an optimal setup with 1.500 beacons available
for a full-scale test might give more precise results.
==PAGE:62==
50
7 Discussion
7.1.2
Experiment results
One finding of this experiment was that by walking with the speed of, 2.5 km/h, a
full fleet update could be completed in approximately 56 minutes with a coverage
of 95.6% of the vehicles updated. Another finding was that most of the fleet could
potentially be scanned passively by having the FleetScanner application running on
the smartphones of the compound workers during working hours.
The passive scans can give a good result on the frequently visited areas of the com-
pound. However, to get a full coverage it might be necessary to have a compound
worker walk around in the compound area actively scanning the signals occasionally.
To be sure to get 100% coverage during the active scanning of the fleet, it can take
almost 90 minutes to finish the task. This is a lot of time but still a huge improve-
ment compared to the solution today that takes two days to complete under optimal
conditions.
One of the ideas for fully automatizing this process was to use an autonomous
drone for the scanning of the fleet. A drone capable of carrying a smartphone and
flying a preprogrammed route. By talking to Ulrik Pagh Schultz, Associate Professor
at the University of Southern Denmark Dronecenter, a specific drone model was
recommended for the purpose. Phantom 3 or 4 from the company DJI [dji]. However,
this solution was found to be limited by Danish legislation that prohibits autonomous
flying of drones without supervision of a certified drone pilot ready with the remote
control.
7.2
Location accuracy
The method developed for improving the location accuracy of the GPS locations
proved that accuracy could improve from few centimeters to meters depending on the
data gathered. Furthermore, the vehicle location data would become more reliable as
outliers in the data would not affect the overall accuracy. However, there are other
methods that could improve the quality of the GPS location information even more.
Differential Global Positioning System (DGPS) is an enhancement of the existing
GPS system that can improve the overall accuracy. DGPS uses a network of ground-
based fixed receivers as references for correcting the location received by measuring
distances to satellites [BRA02]. The location accuracy can improve using this method
but would require a setup of receivers and cause increase in costs. In the last usability
experiment it was shown that the accuracy of the current system was enough for
finding a vehicle in the compound parking area.
7.3
Ranging beacons
The prototype system is currently only saving location data for vehicles within the
near proximity zone. The location information is found by requesting the GPS loca-
==PAGE:63==
7.4 Future work
51
tion of the smartphone device. Therefore, the closer the smartphone is to the actual
vehicle the more representative is the location data received. This is done for making
sure the location data has a high level of accuracy. An alternative to this solution
would be to collect data for any vehicle no matter the proximity zone. The signal
strength/distance to the beacon could then be saved in the database as another pa-
rameter and considered when weighting the data points. With this method a larger
percentage of the vehicle fleet would be scanned every time. Even though many of
the data points would contain inaccurate locations they would be weighted less in the
calculation.
7.4
Future work
This Thesis was mainly focused on finding a better solution for creating and maintain-
ing an overview of the vehicles in a compound area and their corresponding locations,
which worked great, but with room for improvements. One improvement that would
likely contribute to the quality of location data would be to use the beacon proximity
zones or received signal strength as another parameter for weighting of data points.
The quality of the experiments could also be improved by covering the whole fleet
to carry out full-scale tests instead. Furthermore, by integrating this solution into
existing compound tools a more complete solution could be made that would allow
for completely new interactions.
Many BLE beacons today has all sorts of integrated sensors available such as
temperature sensor, motion sensor, ambient light sensor, etc [estb]. With this solution
every vehicle is already mounted with a BLE beacon. The sensor data could as well
be collected and maybe utilized in the solution for creating new types of insights.
==PAGE:64==
52
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
The goal of this thesis was to develop a digital wireless infrastructure for monitoring
and managing the vehicle fleet at a compound. The aim was to build a prototype
system that could serve as a proof of concept that could be validated. In accordance
with the project goals and by studying other related work within the fields of location-
based services and warehouse management an IoT-based infrastructure was designed.
The prototype system was developed using BLE beacons and a smartphone. A set
of experiments were designed and carried out at a large vehicle compound area to
validate every aspect of the proposed prototype system.
The hypothesis was that through scanning of beacon signals it should be possible
to automatically generate an overview of the vehicles in the compound and their
corresponding locations. This digital solution should provide a more accurate and up-
to-date overview of the vehicles in the compound compared to the existing solution
and as an effect remove some of the costly manual processes and reduce time and
costs.
The experiments did show that the best way of generating a full overview
of vehicles in the compound and their corresponding locations could be achieved by
combining passive and active fleet updates. By having the FleetScanner application
running passively on the smartphones of the compound workers a large part of the
compound area could be covered. Followed up by periodic active fleet updates, the
whole fleet could be kept up-to-date. By walking slowly along the rows of vehicles it
was found that a full fleet update could be completed in approximately 56 minutes
covering 95,6% of the fleet which was much faster than the existing manual solution
that takes two days to complete. Furthermore, it was found that the location data
of vehicles calculated in FleetScanner was accurate to within few meters compared
to the existing solution that only contains an often outdate area/row number. One
of the things that the final usability experiment proved was that compound workers
could easily find vehicles in the compound area using the prototype system.
This project has shown promising results, performed well compared to the existing
solution, and succeeded in reaching the project goals. However, some minor changes
are discussed in the prototype system and in the experimental setup. Generally, the
project was considered a success as a proof of concept solution, providing knowledge
to the field of warehouse management.
==PAGE:66==
54
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX A
Map of Bilsalg
compound
==PAGE:68==
56
A Map of Bilsalg compound
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX B
Map on paper for
guiding external users
to find a vehicle
==PAGE:70==
58
B Map on paper for guiding external users to find a vehicle
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX C
Experiment 2
transcriptions
C.1
Participant 1 (Mechanic)
Facilitator: What is your role in the compound?
Participant: I’m a mechanic.
My primary task is to run mechanical tests on ve-
hicles to check if everything is working.
Facilitator: When do you need to get an overview of the vehicles and their corre-
sponding locations in the compound?
Participant: We use that very often for collecting vehicles from the compound park-
ing area.
Facilitator: How often do you need to get an overview of the vehicles and their
corresponding locations in the compound?
Participant: Daily. We use it very often.
Facilitator: Do you feel that the current solution supports your needs why/why not?
Participant: Quite often we experience that vehicles are not parked on the spot
indicated on the key label. Usually because the location information is not updated
after a vehicle has been moved. This can sometimes cause some confusion.
Facilitator: I will give you a task. Please keep talking out loud while solving the
task.
Facilitator: You have to pick-up a certain Peugeot 206 with identification number
test1. How do you find this vehicle using the mock-up?
==PAGE:72==
60
C Experiment 2 transcriptions
Participant: I can see how far away the car is.
I don’t know how to find it.
Is
it possible to click here? Okay, that was smart. Seems like it’s parked in A11 as one
of the first cars in the row.
Facilitator: Does this way of visualizing the location data support you on your task,
why/why not?
Participant: I like this. It’s genius. I have a picture of the car and i know which row
it’s parked in so that’s enough for me. It’s a smart solution if it works properly.
Facilitator: Do you have any suggestions for improvements?
Participant: It’s easier to just look at the key label but if the location is wrong
we are forced to look it up like this.
C.2
Participant 2 (Student helper)
Facilitator: What is your role in the compound?
Participant: I am a student helper. I’m usually doing different ad-hoc tasks such
as collecting vehicles, parking vehicles, helping haulers, washing vehicles, and moving
vehicles. So basically bit of everything.
Facilitator: When do you need to get an overview of the vehicles and their corre-
sponding locations in the compound?
Participant: I use it for finding vehicles. It’s usually very easy if everything is up-
dated. I just look at the key label to see where the vehicle is parked.
Facilitator: How often do you need to get an overview of the vehicles and their
corresponding locations in the compound?
Participant: Not that often. It’s about 10-15 percent of what i do here. For some
customers it’s my responsibility to collect the vehicles and make them ready for pick-
up.
Facilitator: I will give you a task. Please keep talking out loud while solving the
task.
Facilitator: You have to pick-up a certain Peugeot 206 with identification number
test1. How do you find this vehicle using the mock-up?
==PAGE:73==
C.3 Participant 3 (Office assistant)
61
Participant: The list looks like what we have today. I assume you can search up
a vehicle and see it on the list. For finding vehicle test1 i will look for it in the list.
I’m not sure how to understand that location is 3.2 meters. Maybe that’s the distance
to the car. It seems like the date is telling how long the car has been parked there. I
will click on the location icon. Seems like it’s possible to see where it is parked very
precisely. I’m familiar with this area, but if i was a hauler i wouldn’t be able to find
it just by looking here.
Facilitator: Does this way of visualizing the location data support you on your task,
why/why not?
Participant: For me it is fine, but it may be difficult for someone who isn’t famil-
iar with this compound.
Facilitator: Do you have any suggestions for improvements?
Participant: Maybe add something to help people who aren’t familiar with the com-
pound to find a car.
C.3
Participant 3 (Office assistant)
Facilitator: What is your role in the compound?
Participant: To keep status of the stock. IF they are sold, delivered or parked here
somewhere.
Facilitator: When do you need to get an overview of the vehicles and their corre-
sponding locations in the compound?
Participant: I need it when i do fleet updates to see where vehicles are parked.
Facilitator: How often do you need to get an overview of the vehicles and their
corresponding locations in the compound?
Participant: I use it twice a year for fleet updates. Sometimes haulers have diffi-
culties finding them. Then it is also very useful to be able to look it up. The location
information on the key label is wrong sometimes and we can end up walking through
the whole area to find a vehicle.
Facilitator: Do you feel that the current solution supports your needs why/why not?
==PAGE:74==
62
C Experiment 2 transcriptions
Participant: More updated location data would be fine but it takes too long. Two
whole days.
Facilitator: I will give you a task. Please keep talking out loud while solving the
task.
Facilitator: You have to pick-up a certain Peugeot 206 with identification number
test1. How do you find this vehicle using the mock-up?
Participant: It makes sense. I can see here when the vehicle has been parked. I
can see that this car is parked in A11. That’s smart. If I can find all vehicles this
way it would be easier for me to do fleet updates. I only need to see which cars that
are parked on this row.
Facilitator: Does this way of visualizing the location data support you on your task,
why/why not?
Participant: Not so much.
I still need to check if the car is on it’s spot or not.
But it could help the mechanics finding the cars. If this helps to keep the fleet up-
dated it would be very smart since we often have issues with keeping the stock up to
date.
Facilitator: Do you have any suggestions for improvements?
Participant: I would rather want to see an overview of which vehicles that are parked
on a certain row. But this is fine too.
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX D
Experiment 2 mock-up
==PAGE:76==
64
D Experiment 2 mock-up
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX E
Final prototype system
screenshots
==PAGE:78==
66
E Final prototype system screenshots
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
[ali]
alibaba.com. bluetooth 4.0 low energy device product details. [Online;
accessed 19-June-2018]. url: https : / / www . alibaba . com / product -
detail/16- bluetooth- 4- 0- low- energy_60378235467.html?spm=
a2700.galleryofferlist.normalList.113.6cfa1f5dfN6gC1.
[aut16]
autorolagroup.com. Compound services. [Online; accessed 02-June-2018].
2016. url: http://www.autorolagroup.com/products-and-services/
compound-services/.
[BP00]
Paramvir Bahl and Venkata N Padmanabhan. “RADAR: An in-building
RF-based user location and tracking system”. In: INFOCOM 2000. Nine-
teenth Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communi-
cations Societies. Proceedings. IEEE. Volume 2. Ieee. 2000, pages 775–
784.
[BRA02]
Rashmi Bajaj, Samantha Lalinda Ranaweera, and Dharma P Agrawal.
“GPS: location-tracking technology”. In: Computer 35.4 (2002), pages 92–
94.
[Cha99]
Dan Charrois. “Study of the accuracy of averaged nondifferential GPS
measurements”. In: Web page http://www. syz. com/gps/gpsaveraging.
html (1999).
[Che+05]
Yu-Chung Cheng et al. “Accuracy characterization for metropolitan-scale
Wi-Fi localization”. In: Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on
Mobile systems, applications, and services. ACM. 2005, pages 233–245.
[Che+16]
Rung-Shiang Cheng et al. “Seamless guidance system combining GPS,
BLE beacon, and NFC technologies”. In: Mobile Information Systems
2016 (2016).
[CLL16]
Andrea Cuttone, Sune Lehmann, and Jakob Eg Larsen. “geoplotlib: a
Python Toolbox for Visualizing Geographical Data”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1608.01933 (2016).
[dev]
developer.android.com. Developer Docs Part 3: Ranging beacons. [On-
line; accessed 23-June-2018]. url: https://developer.android.com/
reference/android/location/Location#getAccuracy().
==PAGE:80==
68
Bibliography
[DGM14]
Jheel Doshi, AI Goradia, and Dharmeshkumar Mistry. “A Review of
Google Data Visualization Tools”. In: International Journal of Current
Engineering and Technology 4.5 (2014), pages 3134–3138.
[dji]
dji.com. PHANTOM 3. [Online; accessed 27-June-2018]. url: https://
www.dji.com/phantom-3-standard.
[DM09]
Ger Devlin and Kevin McDonnell. “Assessing real time GPS asset track-
ing for timber haulage”. In: (2009).
[easa]
easytracgps.com. All GPS tracking devices. [Online; accessed 19-June-
2018]. url: https://www.easytracgps.com/all-devices/.
[easb]
easytracgps.com. Geo-Trax micro+: Multi-Functional MICRO+ GPS Track-
ing Device. [Online; accessed 17-June-2018]. url: https://www.easytracgps.
com/pdf/specsheet/Geo-TraxMICRO+_SpecSheet.pdf.
[EAS07]
Esin Ergen, Burcu Akinci, and Rafael Sacks. “Tracking and locating
components in a precast storage yard utilizing radio frequency identifi-
cation technology and GPS”. In: Automation in construction 16.3 (2007),
pages 354–367.
[Est]
Estimote.com. Developer Docs Part 3: Ranging beacons. [Online; accessed
21-June-2018]. url: https : / / developer . estimote . com / android /
tutorial/part-3-ranging-beacons/.
[esta]
estimote.com. Beacons, how do they work? [Online; accessed 08-June-
2018]. url: https://developer.estimote.com/how-beacons-work/.
[estb]
estimote.com. Compare beacons. [Online; accessed 18-June-2018]. url:
https://estimote.com/products/.
[estc]
estimote.com. What are Broadcasting Power, RSSI and other character-
istics of a beacon’s signal? [Online; accessed 19-June-2018]. url: https:
//community.estimote.com/hc/en-us/articles/201636913-What-
are-Broadcasting-Power-RSSI-and-other-characteristics-of-a-
beacon-s-signal-.
[Goo]
Google. Maps SDK for Android. [Online; accessed 19-June-2018]. url:
https://developers.google.com/maps/documentation/android-
sdk/intro.
[ida]
idadvice.dk. RFID priser – hardware budgetpriser. [Online; accessed 18-
June-2018]. url: https://idadvice.dk/rfid-priser/.
[inc17]
Gartner inc. Gartner Says 8.4 Billion Connected ”Things” Will Be in
Use in 2017, Up 31 Percent From 2016. [Online; accessed 02-June-2018].
2017. url: https://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/3598917.
[Jam+18]
Z Jamaludin et al. “Automated Tracking System Using RFID for Sus-
tainable Management of Material Handling in an Automobile Parts Man-
ufacturer”. In: Journal of Telecommunication, Electronic and Computer
Engineering (JTEC) 10.1-7 (2018), pages 35–40.
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
69
[Jas]
Jaspersoft.com. EMBEDDED BI: REPORTING AND ANALYTICS IN-
SIDE YOUR APPLICATION. [Online; accessed 19-June-2018]. url: https:
//www.jaspersoft.com/embedded-bi#_.
[Ji+15]
Myungin Ji et al. “Analysis of positioning accuracy corresponding to the
number of BLE beacons in indoor positioning system”. In: Advanced Com-
munication Technology (ICACT), 2015 17th International Conference on.
IEEE. 2015, pages 92–95.
[KMK16]
Pavel Kriz, Filip Maly, and Tomas Kozel. “Improving indoor localization
using bluetooth low energy beacons”. In: Mobile Information Systems
2016 (2016).
[Lar+13]
Jakob Eg Larsen et al. “Crowds, bluetooth, and rock’n’roll: understand-
ing music festival participant behavior”. In: Proceedings of the 1st ACM
international workshop on Personal data meets distributed multimedia.
ACM. 2013, pages 11–18.
[Lot+13]
Trupti Lotlikar et al. “Comparative study of Barcode, QR-code and RFID
System”. In: International Journal of Computer Technology and Applica-
tions 4.5 (2013), page 817.
[maxa]
maximintegrated.com. Reading and Writing 1-Wire Devices Through Se-
rial Interfaces. [Online; accessed 19-June-2018]. url: https : / / www .
maximintegrated.com/en/app-notes/index.mvp/id/74.
[maxb]
maximintegrated.com. WHAT IS AN IBUTTON DEVICE? [Online; ac-
cessed 19-June-2018]. url: https://www.maximintegrated.com/en/
products/ibutton/ibuttons/index.cfm.
[Men+11]
Timothy Menard et al. “Comparing the GPS capabilities of the Samsung
Galaxy S, Motorola Droid X, and the Apple iPhone for vehicle tracking
using FreeSim_Mobile”. In: Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC),
2011 14th International IEEE Conference on. IEEE. 2011, pages 985–
990.
[Qin]
Daniel Qin. My Tracks. [Online; accessed 25-June-2018]. url: https :
//play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.zihua.android.
mytracks&hl=da.
[R+00]
A Rolf, RA de By, et al. “Principles of geographic information systems”.
In: The International Institute for Aerospace Survey and Earth Sciences
(ITC), Hengelosestraat 99 (2000).
[Ran18]
Steve Ranger. What is the IoT? Everything you need to know about the
Internet of Things right now. [Online; accessed 02-June-2018]. 2018. url:
https : / / www . zdnet . com / article / what - is - the - internet - of -
things- everything- you- need- to- know- about- the- iot- right-
now/.
==PAGE:82==
70
Bibliography
[Ric17]
Gwynne Richards. Warehouse management: a complete guide to improv-
ing efficiency and minimizing costs in the modern warehouse. Kogan Page
Publishers, 2017, page 29.
[TCD11]
Kai-Xin Tee, Moi-Tin Chew, and Serge N. Demidenko. “An Intelligent
Warehouse Stock Management and Tracking System Based on Silicon
Identification Technology and 1-Wire Network Communication”. In: 2011
Sixth IEEE International Symposium on Electronic Design, Test and Ap-
plication (2011), pages 110–115.
[Tsu05]
James Bao-Yen Tsui. Fundamentals of global positioning system receivers:
a software approach. Volume 173. John Wiley & Sons, 2005, pages 8–9.
[VBS94]
MW Van Someren, YF Barnard, and JAC Sandberg. “The think aloud
method: a practical approach to modelling cognitive”. In: (1994).
[Zan09]
Paul A Zandbergen. “Accuracy of iPhone locations: A comparison of as-
sisted GPS, WiFi and cellular positioning”. In: Transactions in GIS 13.s1
(2009), pages 5–25.
