==PAGE:1==
M.Sc.Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Biomedeical Engineering
Ecient sampling schemes for
magnetic resonance spectroscopic
imaging
Jakob Sørensen (s101490)
Supervisor: Lars G. Hanson
Technical University of Denmark
7th July 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Center for Magnetic Resonance
Department of Elcetrical Engineering
Ørsteds Plads Building 349,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
http://www.cmr.elektro.dtu.dk/
And
Danish Research Center for Magnetic Resonance
Hvidovre Hospital
Kettegaard Allé 30
2650 Hvidovre
www.drcmr.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Background: Technical challenges and long scan times still limit the use of
magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging (MRSI). Further technical challenges
are introduced by the introduction of higher magnetic eld strengths. The pur-
pose of this project was to investigate whether a SNR gain can be found by
matching the sampling density to the lter along both the spatial and temporal
dimensions of k-t-space.
Methods: Variable density concentric ring trajectories (VD CRT) has previ-
ously been shown to give a 24.4 % higher SNR compared to the golden standard
chemical shift imaging (CSI), when the sampling density was matched to that
of a Hamming window. Here two possible trajectory modications to VD CRT
was presented, termed AVD CRT and TVD CRT, to additionally match the
sampling density to the natural exponential decay of signal along the tempo-
ral dimension of k-t-space, by narrowing the spatial coverage of k-t-space with
time. The two trajectories were implemented in the MRI simulation tool JEM-
RIS, where simulations were performed to compare them to VD CRT.
Results: The point spread function (PSF) for VD CRT and TVD CRT showed
an almost complete removal of side lobes in the spatial PSF, while small side
lobes were visible in the spatial PSF for AVD CRT due to discontinuities in-
troduced by the sampling density. In terms of SNR, both AVD CRT and TVD
CRT showed a higher SNR of 102.8 % and 105.8 % respectively relative to that
of VD CRT.
Conclusion: By matching the MRSI acquisition to both spatial and spectral
lters, additional SNR can be obtained relative to both golden standard CSI
and VD CRT matched only to a spatial lter. This has no additional scan time
compared to VD CRT and TVD CRT therefore provides an attractive MRSI
sequence for a wide range of magnetic eld strengths with optimal SNR.
==PAGE:4==
Resume
Baggrund: Tekniske udfordringer og tilhørende lange scanninger udgør sta-
dig hæmninger for brugen af billeddannende magnetisk resonans spektroskopi
(MRSI). Flere tekniske udfordringer bliver introduceret efterhånden som den
magnetiske feltstyrke bliver højere. Målet med dette projekt var, at undersøge
om der kunne skabes forbedringer i signal-støj forholdet (SNR) ved at matche
sampling densiteten til optimale ltre langs både spatielle og temporale retnin-
ger af k-t-rummet.
Metoder: Variabel densitet koncentrisk ring trajektorier (VD CRT) er tidli-
gere blevet demonstreret til at kunne opnå en 24.4 % forbedring af SNR i fht
den gyldne standard i form af chemical shift imaging (CSI). Her er der blevet
foreslået to modikationer af VD CRT, kaldet AVD CRT og TVD CRT, som
yderligere gør trajektorierne i stand til at matche sampling densiteten til det
eksponentielt aftagende signal langs den temporale dimension af k-t-rummet,
ved at indsnævre den spatielle dækning af k-t-rummet over tid. Sekvenser blev
designet og implementeret i MR simuleringsprogrammet JEMRIS, hvor simule-
ringer blev udført for at sammenligne de designede sekvenser med VD CRT.
Resultater: Punktspredningsfunktionen (PSF) for VD CRT og TVD CRT vi-
ste at sidesløjfer i den spatielle PSF stort set forsvandt, mens sidesløjfer var
synlige for AVD CRT pga diskontinuiteter introduceret i sampling densiteten. I
forhold til SNR, gav både AVD CRT og TVD CRT et højere SNR på 102.8 %
og 105.8 % for AVD CRT henholdsvis TVD CRT relativt til VD CRT.
Konklusion: Ved at matche sampling densiteten til både spatielle og spektra-
le ltre, kan der opnås SNR forbedringer både i fht den gyldne standard CSI,
men også i fht VD CRT som kun matcher sampling densiteten til et spatielt l-
ter. SNR forbedringerne opstår uden brug af ekstra tid til scanningen i fht VD
CRT og TVD CRT udgør dermed en attraktiv sekvens for MRSI for et bredt
spektrum af magnetiske felt styrker og opnår samtidig optimal SNR.
==PAGE:5==
Preface and
Acknowledgements
This thesis is written equivalent to the work of 32.5 ECTS points and to full
requirements to become a Master of Science at DTU with a specialization in
Biomedical Engineering. The report is written such that a basic knowledge of
magnetic resonance (spectroscopic) imaging is a good starting point.
I would like to extent my thanks to my supervisor Lars G. Hanson for suggesting
the topic and guiding me through problems occurring through the process. I
would also like to thank my girlfriend, Kristine, for supporting me and listening
when toolboxes and simulation programs annoyed me the most.
Lyngby, 7th July 2018
Jakob Sørensen
s101490
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resume
ii
Preface and Acknowledgements
iii
Nomenclature
vi
1
Introduction
1
2
Spectroscopic Imaging
3
2.1
Chemical shift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Limitations of MRSI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Advantages and challenges of high eld MRSI . . . . . . .
6
2.2
k-t-space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Point spread function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.1
Spatial point spread function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.2
Spectral PSF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Weighting of k-space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.1
Accumulation weighting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.2
Density weighting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.3
Acquisition Weighting through variable TR . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
MRSI Acquisition Schemes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5.1
Conventional MRSI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5.2
Echo Planar Spectroscopic Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.3
Other Spatial-Spectral encoding schemes . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5.4
Comparison of Acceleration Methods . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5.5
Choice of trajectory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6
Gridding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
v
2.7
Signal-to-Noise-Ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.7.1
Optimal acquisition parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.7.2
SNR calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Methods
25
3.1
Implementation of VD CRT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Implementation of TVD CRT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3
Implementation of AVD CRT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4
Sequence Diagram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.5
Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Results
40
4.1
Sampling Density and Point Spread Functions . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1.1
Spatial and spatial-temporal sampling density for VD CRT 42
4.1.2
VD CRT PSF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.1.3
Spatial and spatial-temporal sampling density for TVD
CRT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.1.4
TVD CRT PSF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.1.5
Spatial and spatial-temporal sampling density for AVD CRT 47
4.1.6
AVD CRT PSF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.2
Noise simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3
Example of spectrum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.4
Example of non-symmetric object . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.5
SNR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5
Discussion
57
5.1
Sampling Densities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Point Spread Functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.3
Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.4
SNR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.4.1
Eciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.5
Trajectory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6
Conclusion
62
Bibliography
64
Appendix
67
.1
Matlab Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
.1.1
Radii distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
.1.2
Postcorrection for VD CRT and AVD CRT . . . . . . . .
68
.1.3
Postcorrection for TVD CRT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
AVD CRT
Attenuated Variable Density Concentric Ring Trajectory
AW
Accumulation weighting
CRT
Concentric Ring Trajectory
CSI
Chemical Shift Imaging - An acquisition scheme for MRSI envolv-
ing only phase encoding
EPSI
Echo Planar Spectroscopic Imaging
FID
Free Induction Decay
FOV
Field Of View
MRI
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MRSI
Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopic Imaging
NUFFT
Non-Uniform Fast Fourier Transform
ppm
parts per million
PSF
Point Spread Function - may apply to spatial, spectral or spatial-
spectral
RF
Radio Frequency
SAR
Specic Absorption Rate
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
vii
SNR
Signal-to-Noise-Ratio
SVS
Single Voxel Spectroscopy
TVD CRT
Temporal Variable Density Concentric Ring Trajectory
VD
Variable Density - k-space acquired with varying sampling density
Symbols
γ
The gyromagnetic ratio [MHz/T]
σ
The shielding factor generated by the surrounding molecular struc-
ture
B0
The static magnetic eld strength [tesla]
Beﬀ
The eective magnetic eld experienced by a nucleus
f
Precession frequency of nuclei in MR - the so called Larmor fre-
quency
fR
Reference frequency used when generating a ppm scale for display
of a spectra
fs
The eective precession of the nucleus in the rotating frame of
reference
feﬀ
The eective precession frequency of a nucleus eected by chem-
ical shift
N0
The number of voxels along each dimension of the image
NS
Number of samples per ring in a CRT trajectory
Ncirc
The number of circumnavigations around the circle for each radius
in the CRT trajectories
NRing
Number of rings in a CRT trajectory
T2
Time constant of the exponential decay of transversal magnetiza-
tion
T ∗
2
Eective time constant of the exponential decay of transversal
magnetization
TC
Time constant of the exponential attenuation function for TVD
CRT.
TE
Echo time
TR
Repetition time. The time between subsequent excitations in an
MRI or MRSI sequence.
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging (MRSI) is a technique that enables
non-invasive quantication of metabolite levels in both normal and diseased cen-
tral nervous systems. Depending on the knowledge of a disease and its location,
dierent techniques may be used, e.g. single-voxel spectroscopy (SVS) may be
used if a disease is focal or global and MRSI can be used if the location is ei-
ther unknown or diuse [1]. Situations does however exist where the choice of
technique is the opposite.
Several technical challenges have limited the use of MRSI compared to SVS,
among which are inhomogeneities of the main and Radio Frequency (RF) mag-
netic elds, insucient water suppression and gradient errors induced by eddy
currents [1]. Further, the relatively low concentrations of metabolites compared
to water, leads to an intrinsically low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in MRSI as
well as in SVS, which in combination with both spatial and spectral encoding
has lead to quite long acquisition times for MRSI.
In order to acquire enough signal relative to noise, larger voxel volumes are used
in MRSI compared to Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). The accompanying
lower spatial resolution of MRSI makes the consideration of the spatial point
spread function (PSF) even more important. Conventional MRSI acquired on
a Cartesian grid with uniform weighting suer from signicant side lobe arti-
facts, especially along the principal axes of the PSF. The side lobes causes voxel
==PAGE:11==
2
bleeding to surrounding voxels, but may also result in contamination by un-
wanted signals, such as from residual water or subcutaneous fat, far away from
its actual location [2]. The solution to the problem of unwanted signal has been
to suppress the unwanted signal by methods such as outer volume suppression
or inversion recovery [3], as well as applying aggresive lters to the acquired
k-space retrospectively to shape the PSF.
Instead of retrospectively shaping the PSF by post acquisition ltering, it has
also been demonstrated that the MRSI data can be acquired in such a way
that the shape of the PSF is optimized. This can be done by matching the
k-t-space sampling to the desired lter, which greatly reduces the side lobes of
the PSF without the need for post acqiusition ltering [4]. Ideally the sampling
of k-t-space can be shaped to any desired lter and thereby any desirable PSF
should be obtainable.This is termed a matched lter acquisition and has been
demonstrated to come with the positive side-eect of obtaining a higher SNR as
compared to a uniformly weighted k-t-space acquisition followed by retrospec-
tive ltering of k-t-space data [5]. This acquisition weighting of k-t-space has
previously been done by using a variable density (VD) pattern for several dif-
ferent trajectories, such as for example spiral [4] or concentric ring trajectories
(CRT) [3, 6, 7, 8].
In other words, it has been shown that employing ecient sampling schemes
by matching the sampling of k-t-space to the desired target lter, SNR can
be gained as well as an improved PSF. So far, an ecient sampling scheme
along the temporal direction of k-t-space in MRSI has not been implemented.
By doing so, the SNR and time eciency could potentially be improved even
further.
In the temporal direction, the sampling density should be matched
to an exponential lter, due to the signal's natural exponential decay. In the
spatial dimensions, an exact match to the desired lter can be achieved, this
can however not be expected in the temporal direction since the time pass by
at a constant rate.
This work seeks to implement ecient sampling schemes of k-t-space, thus
matching the acquisition to a desired target lter in both the spatial and tempo-
ral directions and thereby seek an optimal spatial-spectral PSF. Dierent MRSI
trajectories will be investigated in order to nd a trajectory design capable of
matching to both spatial and temporal lters. The derived k-t-space trajecto-
ries will be implemented and simulated in the MRI simulator JEMRIS [9]. The
aim of the simulations is to establish whether the designed trajectories gives an
additional SNR gain by matching the MRSI acquisition to desired lters in both
the temporal and spatial dimensions.
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2
Spectroscopic Imaging
MRSI has through the last decade become widely available on clinical MR scan-
ners, both as a research tool, but also increasingly for routine clinical use. MRSI
is a technique which enables spatial mapping of many metabolites within the
body, which makes it a potentially very powerful for both research and routine
clinical use. In contrast to normal MRI, where only an intensity is assigned
each voxel, MRSI has an entire spectrum allocated each voxel. These spectra
can, if properly processed give quantitative information on the concentration of
a variety of molecules within a specic voxel. Although MRSI can be performed
on dierent nuclei, such as 31P, protons (1H)is by far the most commonly used
nuclei in MRSI. This chapter will introduce the basic concept of MRSI as well
as some crucial aspects.
2.1
Chemical shift
Nuclei with an odd number of protons posses what is known as spin angular
momentum, which eectively makes the nuclei magnetic dipoles. If the body
is exposed to a strong magnetic eld, two eects will occur. Firstly, the nuclei
tend to align along the magnetic eld, which will give rise to a net magnetization
M pointing in the direction of the magnetic eld.
Secondly, if the nuclei is
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Chemical shift
4
subjected to another force, making them point in a dierent direction than the
strong static magnetic eld, then the net magnetization will begin to precess
around the static magnetic eld. This precession frequency, f, is commonly
referred to as the Larmor frequency, given by the Larmor equation
f = γ · B0
(2.1)
where γ, given in MHz/T, is the gyromagnetic ratio of the nucleus and B0 is
the strength of the externally applied static magnetic eld given in tesla. The
gyromagnetic ratio for protons is equal to 42.58 MHz/T.
If all protons within the body precessed at the exact same frequency, MRSI
would be trivial, resulting in only a single peak in the spectrum.
Thereby
rendering the usefulness of MRSI to nothing. The magnetic eld experienced
by the dierent nuclei in the body does, however, vary slightly depending on
the covalent electron structure surrounding the specic nucleus, which to some
extent "shields" the nucleus from the magnetic eld. This eectively shifts the
resonant frequency slightly depending on the chemical neighbourhood in which
the nucleus is sited. This eect is called chemical shift and depends on both the
overall molecular structure of the molecule as well as the exact position of the
nuclei within the molecule. The eective eld experienced by the nucleus in the
molecule is given by
Beﬀ= B0 −B0σ = B0 · (1 −σ)
(2.2)
where σ is a shielding constant, which depends on several factors of the chemical
environment, such as electron density and the electron negativity of neighbour-
ing groups in the molecule. When combining Equation 2.2 with the Larmor
relationship, the eective resonant frequency of the nucleus becomes
feﬀ= γ · B0 · (1 −σ)
(2.3)
It should be noted that the change in frequency is proportional to the static
magnetic eld B0. The signal in the MRSI spectra is proportional to the num-
ber of nuclei precessing at each frequency. The signal is therefore also usually
displayed in the frequency domain. The signal is however not displayed directly
on a frequency axis, due to mainly two reasons. Firstly the shift in frequency
depends on the strength of B0, which would make comparison between dier-
ent eld strengths dicult. The second reason for using a scale dierent than
frequency is that there is no natural material which could represent the zero fre-
quency, though the unsuppressed water peak is usually used as a reference in in
vivo scans. Due to these reasons, the axis is usually displayed as the dierence
from a reference on a parts per million scale (ppm), which is reversed to go from
high to low frequencies to due to historical reasons. Hence the chemical shift
is usually dened with respect to some reference frequency, which here will be
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Chemical shift
5
denoted fR . The resonant frequency of the sample will be denoted feﬀ. The
chemical shift is then displayed on a ppm scale given by
δ = feff −fR
fR
· 106
(2.4)
In nuclear magnetic resonance, some chemical substance, such as tetramethyl-
silane, is used as reference. These compounds are however toxic to the human
body and cannot be used in in vivo MRSI. Therefore a slightly dierent scale is
used in in vivo MRSI given by
δcs =
fs
ftransmit · 10−6 + oﬀset
(2.5)
where fs is the frequency of the nucleus in the rotating frame of reference and
ftransmit is the frequency of the transmitter in the laboratory frame of reference.
The oset is a constant which references the signal to an in vivo standard,
typically being that of the unsuppressed water peak at 4.7 ppm.
The spatial resolution in MRSI depends mainly on acquisition parameters, which
will be covered when the specic acquisition schemes are discussed. Spectral
resolution also depends on acquisition parameters. Specically it depends on
the time between samples in the temporal dimension, often referred to as the
dwell time, and the number of samples acquired in the temporal dimension.
However the spectral resolution also depends on parameters which cannot be
fully controlled. The peak width depends inversely on the transversal relaxation
time T2. The separation of peaks scale linearly with the strength of the B0 eld.
Also the homogeneity of the B0 eld across the eld of view (FOV) is important
to obtain common localization of the peaks, and secondly local magnetic eld
inhomogeneities distort and widen the line shapes.
2.1.1
Limitations of MRSI
The main limitation of MRSI is unfortunately one which cannot be avoided.
The metabolites of interest usually have a low concentration, which leads to a
poor SNR. Historically this has lead to long scan times, both due to limitations
in choice of acquisition schemes, but also due to the necessity of acquiring a
number of averages to acquire enough signal over noise. In recent years the de-
velopment within MRSI and MRI in general has led to reduction in scan times,
while still improving spatial resolution. For eld strengths of B0 ≤3T a consid-
erable acceleration of the scan time has been achieved by using spatial-spectral
encoding in trajectories such as echo planar spectroscopic imaging (EPSI) and
spiral.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 k-t-space
6
2.1.2
Advantages and challenges of high eld MRSI
At eld strengths of B0 > 3T the use of trajectories such as EPSI or spiral
becomes limited due to hardware and specic absorbtion rate (SAR) limitations.
These limitations becomes an issue at higher eld strengths due to the increased
spectral bandwidth necessary because the chemical shift is proportional to the
B0 eld. Both EPSI and spiral can be used at B0 ≥7T, but the increased
demand for spectral bandwidth limits the achievable spatial resolution.
Instead the acceleration of MRSI scan time at B0 ≥7T has been dominated
by either a simple reduction in TR or by parallel imaging. Parallel imaging
eciency increases with B0, however signal contamination from lipids are also
increased. In addition, achievable accelerations for parallel imaging is less than
what would be achievable for spatial-spectral encoding techniques.
MRSI in itself should also benet from increased static eld strength, since both
spectral resolution and SNR increase with eld strength. The spectral resolution
increase due to a larger dispersion of metabolites since chemical shift is propor-
tional to B0, and additionally higher order coupling eects has been shown to
be reduced at higher eld [2]. The increase in SNR and spectral resolution due
to higher eld can be used directly to improve metabolite quantication perfor-
mance, or it may be used in trade o's between increased SNR and increased
spatial resolutions or reduced acquisition times.
Clinical applications at high eld has however been limited due to a number
technical challenges associated with inhomogeneities of both B0 and B1, limita-
tions of SAR and water/lipid suppression issues [2]. Recently a few preliminary
clinical applications has been demonstrated using MRSI at 7 T[10].
2.2
k-t-space
In MRI, k-space is a widely used formalism to describe the spatial frequency
domain, in which the raw data is sampled. The k-space formalism will be shortly
described here, and then extended to k-t-space. The description of k-space is
only considered in general, and may apply to any number of dimensions, e.g.
1, 2 or 3 dimensions. Each position in k-space uniquely characterizes a phase
roll, as described by its wave length and the direction of the phase roll. A phase
roll can in general be described as exp(−i2πk · r), or in words, a phase roll that
varies linearly along the direction of k. The phase roll has a wavelength of
1
|k|.
==PAGE:16==
2.3 Point spread function
7
Phase rolls are created and removed through the active use of gradient coils.
A MRI scanner is equipped with three gradient coils, which can vary the eld
linearly in directions orthogonal to each other. Just after an excitation, k is zero,
since gradients are yet to be applied. As gradients are applied the position in
k-space shifts depending on the amplitude and duration of the gradients applied.
A signal is then measured by the receive coils either after or during the use of
the applied gradients, and at dierent positions in k-space. The measured signal
at a single position in k-space reects how much alike the object is to the phase
roll created by the gradient coils. As a pre-dened region of k-space is lled out,
the image is then obtained straight forward through a Fourier transformation
of k-space as long as k-space is sampled in a Cartesian fashion. In that sense, a
MR image is created as a summation of a series of phase rolls each weighted by
the corresponding measured weight in k-space.
MRSI is a measurement providing a full spectrum over a certain spectral band-
width at each position in e.g. a spatial slice. This requires the extension of
k-space into k-t-space, since for each position in k-space the signal needs to
be measured repeatedly at dierent time-points along an entire free induction
decay (FID). Thus in a 2D MRSI measurement, k-t-space is consisting of 3 di-
mensions; kx, ky and t. The latter is also often referred to as kf. Along the time
dimension of k-t-space, the chemical shift has the same eect as the gradient
coils has in the two spatial dimensions. The chemical shift creates a phase roll
in time, which can be sampled at a series of time points to enable the creation
of an image of spatially resolved spectra, through a 3D Fourier transform of
k-t-space samples as long as all dimensions are sampled critically according to
the Nyquist theorem and the samples are positioned on a Cartesian grid.
2.3
Point spread function
Formally the PSF is dened as the response of an imaging system to a point
source. Knowing the PSF of an MR measurement will allow prediction of how
an object will be imaged, since rstly the Fourier transform is a linear operator
and secondly any object can be considered a collection of point sources. The
PSF of an MR scan is given as the Fourier transform of the weighting function
of k-space.
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Point spread function
8
2.3.1
Spatial point spread function
In order to ideally reconstruct an image, k-space should be sampled to an innite
extent. This is of course not feasible, and due to the nite k-space coverage the
PSF should be considered in both MRI and MRSI- especially in MRSI due to
the larger voxel volumes often used compared to MRI. Generally the extent of k-
space coverage determines the spatial resolution in the image, and the spacing
between acquired points along a given direction, determines the FOV along
that given direction. For a uniform k-space sampling over a rectangular area
the PSF becomes a sinc function, as seen in blue to the right in Figure 2.1. A
sinc function has considerable side lobes extending throughout the FOV. This
means that unwanted signals from peripherally located voxels at the edge of the
FOV may contribute to the signal even in centrally located voxels. An example
of such a contaminating signal is from the peripheral fat layer surrounding the
scalp, which can lead to severe distortions in far away voxels.
Figure 2.1: In blue a uniform k-space weighting of 16 equidistant samples.
In red the
uniform weighting function multiplied with a Hamming window.Left: Two
weighting functions. In blue a uniform k-space weighting of 16 equidistant
samples. In red the uniform weighting function multiplied with a Hamming
window.
Right: The PSF's corresponding to the two weighting functions
given to the left.
The PSF is often improved upon through a post-processing step involving l-
==PAGE:18==
2.3 Point spread function
9
tering of k-space. An often used lter is a Hamming window, which reduces
the weight of high-frequency content in k-space, but retains the low frequency
content. This eectively reduces the side lobes of the PSF, at the expense of
increasing the width of the main lobe, thereby increasing the spread of signals
onto adjacent voxels. This eect is often termed voxel bleeding. The eect of
ltering k-space can be seen in Figure 2.1.
2.3.2
Spectral PSF
In the spectral dimension, k-t-space is also mostly sampled uniformly. However,
the transversal magnetization decay provides a natural weighting of the temporal
dimension. This decay is given by e−t/T2, where T2 is a time constant of the
exponential decay and t is the time. Where T2 may be considered the true time
constant for transversal decay of a given tissue, the transversal decay is usually
occurring faster in an in vivo MRSI acquisition. This faster decay has a time
constant denoted T ∗
2 and is given as
1
T ∗
2
= 1
T2
+ 1
T2i
(2.6)
where
1
T2i = γ∆B0 is the relaxation rate which is due to local inhomogeneities
of the magnetic eld. These inhomogeneities of the magnetic result is due to
susceptibility induced distortions due to any object or patient placed in the
scanner as well as any hardware induced eld inhomogeneities. This extra addi-
tion to the relaxation rate has the eect of making the exponential decay even
faster and it is thus given as e−t/T ∗
2 . This eectively means that the spectral
PSF is not only given as the the Fourier transform of the uniform weighting,
but also with an additional convolution with the Fourier transform of an ex-
ponential decay, which has a Lorentzian shape. The Fourier transform of an
exponential decay can be seen in Figure 2.2. The width of the Lorentzian is
inversely proportional to the time constant of the exponential decay T2 or T ∗
2 .
Post processing in MRSI also often involves ltering in the temporal direction
with an exponential lter. This lter can be used to reduce the noise in the last
part of the FID, where the amplitude of the noise can be large relative to that
of the signal depending on acquisition parameters.
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Point spread function
10
Figure 2.2: Left: An exponentially decaying FID. Right: The Fourier transform of an
exponential decay
==PAGE:20==
2.4 Weighting of k-space
11
2.4
Weighting of k-space
Already in the early days of MRI, k-space ltering was an often used approach to
improve the spatial PSF. This technique was also especially essential in MRSI,
and still is, due to the lower spatial resolution compared to normal MRI. Water
or lipid suppression might be insucient in some regions of the FOV, due to
inhomogeneities of either the B0 or the B1 eld. The residual lipid or water sig-
nals, consists of rather strong signals compared to the metabolite signals. The
residual water or lipid signals, and due to the side lobes of PSF, may severely
contaminate the signal even far away from the signal source. Another unde-
sirable eect of the ringing in the PSF is a poor localization of the metabolite
signals, since a given portion of the metabolite signal will be spread across the
FOV to other voxel locations [4].
2.4.1
Accumulation weighting
Already in the 1980's it was shown that optimal SNR in an MR image as well as
in MRSI, when using ltering to improve the spatial PSF, was obtained when
the weight of the acquired phase encoding position matched that of the desired
lter at the given position [11, 12]. More precisely, ltering the k-space data
increases the noise variance in the image. By acquiring the k-space data, such
that it matches the weight of the desired lter, it is possible to obtain the desired
PSF without the increase in noise variance. At the time, the given weighting of
a k-space position was obtained through averaging of a number of samples. To
obtain enough averages to obtain weights similar to that of a low pass lter such
as a Hamming window would require quite a high number of averages. This type
of acquisition weighting was later termed accumulation weighting (AW) [13].
Generally the higher the number of averages used for the central part of k-space,
the better the approximation of the lter function. In general AW will however
result in a coarse approximation to a desired continuous weighting function,
which may result in artifacts in the spatial domain. In MRSI, which in the 1980's
was performed using CSI (see Section 2.5.1), this would correspondingly increase
the number of excitations and thereby the acquisition time. For a 1D acquisition
this might be feasible in terms of acquisition time, but for a 2D acquisition, which
is already at the limit of feasible acquisition time when uniformly sampling k-
t-space, this way of weighting k-t-space would be infeasible. Hence, while this
approach oers an attractive approach to improve the spatial PSF, without a
sacrice in SNR, the long acquisition times makes it infeasible in practice.
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Weighting of k-space
12
2.4.2
Density weighting
The improvement in computation power of the computers over the next decade
made a new approach to acquisition weighting possible. The new take on acqui-
sition weighting suggested a variational sampling density through k-t-space by
using time varying read-out gradients [4, 14]. Adalsteinsson et al used a variable
density spiral trajectory to generate a sampling density that closely resembled
that of a Hanning window[4]. The result was a reduction in side lobes of the
spatial PSF, with similar SNR as compared to non VD spiral trajectories. This
new type of acquisition weighting was termed density-weighting or VD. Even
though density-weighting is probably the mostly used term, in short DW, this
report will use the term VD, to avoid confusion with diusion weighting, which
is also often used in short as DW.
The VD approach to acquisition weighting have the same advantage of improved
spatial PSF as AW, but with a scan time increase which is less severe compared
to AW. Still the acquisition were possible to make in an optimal way in terms
of SNR by acquiring the k-space data such that the weighting function across
k-space resembled that of the desired lter. The VD k-space sampling instead
had drawbacks associated with a more complicated trajectory design and re-
construction. The advent of VD k-space sampling made a new processing step
necessary, namely that of gridding the non-cartesian sampled k-space onto a
cartesian grid. 15 years ago this was a time-consuming process, today this is
however not a problem for single slice MRSI, especially since many gridding
algorithms have been optimized and implemented on GPU's.
2.4.3
Acquisition Weighting through variable TR
Another approach to acquisition weighting was presented by Kühn et al [15],
where a variable repetition time was used to achieve a continuous weighting
function of the spatial k-t-space dimensions. The longest TR is then used for the
center of k-space, with decreasing TR towards the edges of k-space. Compared
to AW which often results in a coarse stair-like approximation to the target
lter, variable TR results in a more smooth approximation to the target lter.
This approach to acquisition weighting, in contrast to the other presented meth-
ods, results in a reduction in acquisition time compared to a uniformly weighted
k-space acquisition [15]. This is because it does not necessitate additional excita-
tions and it reduces TR compared to uniform weighting in all excitations except
one [15]. This of course also makes it a faster acquisition scheme compared to
the other acquisition weighting schemes, which both increase the needed number
==PAGE:22==
2.4 Weighting of k-space
13
of excitations compared to a uniform weighted acquisition.
By varying TR across k-space, a variable T1-weighting is also introduced across
k-space, which results in diculties in accurate metabolite quantication [6].
The problem can be reduced by varying the ip angle of the excitation along with
varying TR [15]. In 1996 this gave a severe reduction in SNR of 20% compared
to a standard CSI sequence. Whether this is actually the result of the variable
TR or a result of limited reconstruction techniques at this point in time is not
necessarily clear since CRT was used for sampling k-t-space. A few years later,
in a variable density spiral trajectory, SNR comparable to that of a uniform
weighting with retrospective ltering was achieved [4]. Recently the theoretical
achievable SNR gain through acquiring k-space in a weighting matched to a
desired target lter as compared to uniform weighting with retrospective ltering
has been achieved experimentally [3, 6]. This progress in the achievable SNR of
non-cartesian sampling schemes makes it likely that the SNR reduction found
by Kühn et al [15] was due to poor possibilities within reconstruction.
==PAGE:23==
2.5 MRSI Acquisition Schemes
14
2.5
MRSI Acquisition Schemes
2.5.1
Conventional MRSI
The traditional approach to MRSI involves an acquisition scheme which is often
referred to as chemical shift imaging (CSI) and will also through the rest of this
thesis be referred to as CSI. A modular pulse sequence design is used, as in
all other MRI methods. The CSI pulse sequence involves phase encoding only,
since using frequency encoding to encode spatial location mixes up spatial and
spectral information. An example pulse sequence diagram for a 2D CSI sequence
is shown in Figure 2.3. A number of phase encoding steps is used along both
the kx and ky directions, and only one FID can be measured per excitation.
This makes the number of repetitions needed to cover the entire k-t-space quite
large, and thereby the acquisition time rather lengthy, even for a single slice.
For acquiring a 2D raw data matrix of 32 x 32 and a repetition time (TR) of 2
seconds, this gives an acquisition time of more than 34 minutes, which is already
a long scan time for the subject. So even though data reconstruction is easy and
spatial and spectral localization is good using CSI, the long acquisition times
makes it inconvenient for in vivo applications.
Figure 2.3: Left:
A 2D CSI spectroscopic imaging pulse sequence diagram, involving
phase encoding in both spatial dimensions.
==PAGE:24==
2.5 MRSI Acquisition Schemes
15
2.5.2
Echo Planar Spectroscopic Imaging
The probably most used technique in MRSI using spatial-spectral encoding is
called EPSI. Compared to CSI, EPSI employs frequency encoding to encode one
spatial dimension in k-t-space, thereby speeding up the acquisition by a factor
of the number of phase encoding steps for one dimension compared to CSI. For
the 32x32 raw data matrix with a TR of 2 seconds, which for a CSI sequence
took 34 minutes to acquire, this means a reduction in scan time by a factor
of 32 to approximately 1 minute. The data is acquired in the presence of an
oscillating readout gradient, to implement a zig-zag coverage of k-t-space. A
number of phase encoding steps must still be used to sample the second spatial
dimension of k-t-space.
The k-t-space trajectory can be seen in Figure 2.4.
The acquired signal is typically divided into 2 matrices, one comprising the odd
echoes (Positive readout gradient amplitude) and one comprising even echoes
(Negative readout gradient amplitude). The separate reconstruction of odd and
even echoes makes it easy since samples are collected equidistantly along straight
lines. The samples are corrected to lie on straight lines parallel to that of t=0
using the Fourier shift theorem[16].
Figure 2.4: The trajectory in k-t-space in EPSI implemented using an oscillating readout
gradient.
==PAGE:25==
2.5 MRSI Acquisition Schemes
16
Though the EPSI approach oers much faster MRSI acquisition compared to
CSI, it is not without its drawbacks. The maximum possible spectral bandwidth
in CSI is determined by the maximum sampling rate of the analogue-to-digital
converter. In EPSI, the maximum spectral bandwidth is limited by other hard-
ware limitations. Specically it is limited by how fast the gradient switching
can be performed between the gradient at tops and how high the amplitude
of the gradient at tops can be. This means that the limitations on gradient
slew rate and maximum gradient amplitude are the limiting factors for spectral
bandwidth in EPSI. The fast switching of the readout gradient is quite demand-
ing already at 3T, and becomes increasingly demanding with increasing B0 eld
strength, since a larger spectral bandwidth needs to be covered. In practice this
makes fully sampled and non-interleaved EPSI infeasible at high eld strengths
and for high resolutions at 7T, hardware limitations makes the use of EPSI
impossible [6]. The harsh conditions for the gradient coils also makes EPSI sen-
sitive to frequency drifts and line broadening due to gradient heating. Ghosting
can also be induced through small hardware imperfections. The ghosting can
be prevented using a yback EPSI scheme. However, this is at the expense of
reduced spectral bandwidth.
2.5.3
Other Spatial-Spectral encoding schemes
Many dierent trajectories have been proposed for MRSI, in order to make
the acquisition as time ecient as possible, while still maintaining good local-
ization and robustness against artifacts. Both spiral [4, 17], rosette [18] and
concentric ring trajectories [3, 6, 8] have been proposed as more time-ecient
trajectories compared to CSI. The next few sections will compare the dierent
spatial-spectral encoding schemes in order to determine which trajectory will
be most suitable for the task at hand here. The trajectories will be compared
in a few important parameters being: the possibilities in varying the sampling
density, acquisition speed and susceptibility to artifacts.
2.5.4
Comparison of Acceleration Methods
2.5.4.1
Sampling Density Comparison
Since the task here is to vary the sampling density in order to match it to a
given target lter, this is an important parameter for the choice of trajectory.
CSI usually has a uniform weighting of k-space, however it can be almost ex-
==PAGE:26==
2.5 MRSI Acquisition Schemes
17
actly matched to a given target lter through AW. This requires an enormous
amount of repetitions and in practice makes the scan time far too long for in-vivo
acquisitions.
EPSI has a uniform weighting of k-space, which can eectively only be varied in
the phase-encoding direction, where the size of the phase-encoding step can be
varied through k-space. It is however not possible to vary the sampling density
eectively in the frequency-encoding direction and hence it cannot be exactly
matched to a circular invariant target lter such as a Hamming window.
Spiral trajectories has previously been shown to be suitable for adaptation to a
low pass lter such as Hamming implemented by pure VD and no AW [4]. It does
prolong the spiral trajectory and therefore requires more temporal interleaves
in order to maintain the spectral bandwidth. The number of required temporal
interleaves is increased for higher eld strengths and this requires the spiral
trajectory to almost become a radial k-space readout. This means that spirals
are well suited for eld strengths of B0 ≤3T [6]. Since the development in MRI
and MRSI goes towards higher eld strengths, this is not deemed to be very
suitable.
Rosette trajectories can achieve some varying k-space weighting through vary-
ing certain parameters. Exactly matching to a Hamming lter with a rosette
trajectory is not possible due to inherent high-pass lter components [18].
CRT with equidistantly spaced radii already incorporates a rotationally invari-
ant low-pass lter on k-space if the number of acquired samples is the same
for all acquired rings in k-space[8]. The natural
1
|k| weighting can be eectively
adapted to any rotationally invariant lter by varying the distance between the
circles. This means that a target lter and thereby optimal SNR can be achieved
at least for the spatial dimensions [6].
2.5.4.2
Acquisition Speed
The dierent spatial-spectral encoding techniques also varies in terms of their
maximum possible acceleration compared to CSI. While EPSI can achieve an ac-
celeration factor equal to that of the reduction of phase encoding steps, equidis-
tant CRT can achieve a factor of two acceleration compared to EPSI [8]. Spiral
is probably the fastest trajectory, but the number of temporal interleaves re-
quired at high eld strengths reduces the possible acceleration [6]. Any type of
acquisition weighting, with it being VD or AW will however prolong acquisition
time and reduce the possible acceleration factor.
==PAGE:27==
2.5 MRSI Acquisition Schemes
18
2.5.4.3
Artifact Susceptibility
Spiral trajectories are less prone to motion artifacts due to its fast acquisition,
but is however more prone to artifacts related to system hardware imperfections
[7]. Spiral trajectories are also less demanding in terms of gradients at least
compared to EPSI [7].
EPSI is relatively robust in terms of artifacts, at least for B0 ≤3T. For higher
eld strengths the increased gradient stress, makes it prone to frequency drifts
and gradient inaccuracies.[NEEDS CITATION]
CRT is less demanding for the gradients and is thereby not as aected by fre-
quency drifts due to heating. CRT is also less sensitive to eddy currents and
inaccurate trajectories [7]. Additionally, VD CRT has no need for strong spatial
lters to reduce Gibbs ringing due to an in-optimal spatial PSF [6].
2.5.5
Choice of trajectory
With the CRT trajectory being capable of matching to a desired target lter,
as well as reduced scan time compared to EPSI and its reduced susceptibility
to artifacts it seems a good choice for MRSI acquisitions. Additionally it can
be eciently implemented for high eld strengths in contrast to EPSI or spiral
trajectories. Therefore a VD CRT sequence will be implemented which matches
to a lter in the spatial dimensions, which can be used as comparison to imple-
mented trajectories which matches to lters in both the temporal and spatial
directions.
For the matching to a lter along the temporal dimension, the VD CRT trajec-
tory will be the starting point. Here two dierent attempts will be implemented,
which will shortly be mentioned here and discussed in more detail later.
The rst approach will be denoted Temporal Variable Density CRT (TVD CRT).
This approach will narrow the extent of spatial k-t-space coverage as time pro-
gresses by narrowing the radii of the ring trajectories as time progresses. The
spatial center of k-t-space will thereby be sampled denser and denser as time
progresses.
The second approach will be denoted Attenuated Variable Density CRT (AVD
CRT). This approach will instead stop the outer rings in k-t-space before the
full extent of the temporal direction has been sampled. This way the sampling
density of the spatially central parts of k-t-space will remain the same, while
==PAGE:28==
2.5 MRSI Acquisition Schemes
19
less and less of the high frequency content will be sampled as time progresses.
==PAGE:29==
2.6 Gridding
20
2.6
Gridding
Fourier analysis plays an important role in MRI, and especially the fast Fourier
transform, in order to reconstruct the image from samples on a Cartesian grid.
However, there is an increasing number of acquisition methods in MRI and MRSI
where the data is not sampled on a Cartesian grid. Acquisition methods which
acquire samples on a non-Cartesian grid requires reconstruction methods which
are more sophisticated than the fast Fourier transform. The problem being that
an image needs to be reconstructed on a uniformly sampled grid from samples
in the spatial frequency domain which are non-uniformly distributed. This is a
problem which is solved by a method often referred to as gridding, which is a
special case of the non-uniform fast Fourier transform (NUFFT).
Gridding is a solution where the non-uniform samples in the spatial frequency
domain is interpolated on to a Cartesian grid and then subsequently recon-
structed using the fast Fourier transform. This is a solution which has received
a lot of attention in MRI and MRSI due to many acquisition methods acquiring
the data on a non-uniform grid. The basic approach of the gridding algorithm
is to convolve the acquired data with some convolution kernel, to eectively
distribute the signal from one sample on to a broader area and then re-sample
the data on to a Cartesian grid afterwards. Many gridding kernels has been sug-
gested in literature, but generally the optimized Kaiser-Bessel kernel has seen
widespread use since its suggestion [19], since it represents a good compromise
between accuracy and simplicity[9].
Historically gridding had issues with apodization in the reconstructed image do-
main, as well as aliasing from the replicated samples[19]. There are two parts in
the solution for the problem. Firstly, an oversampling is used in the frequency
domain on the Cartesian grid to avoid aliasing of the replicated samples, which
reduces the eect of apodization across FOV. Secondly, the last step in the grid-
ding process should be to divide the gridded samples with the Fourier transform
of the gridding kernel in order to correct for the apodization. The NUFFT tool-
box by Jerey Fessler has been widely used in literature. The toolbox consist of
an optimized Kaiser-Bessel function and is usually used with two-fold oversam-
pling in applications where it does not become too computationally expensive[9].
The Fessler toolbox is however limited in its reconstruction to two dimensions.
This eectively introduces another pre-processing step for MRSI reconstruction.
This additional reconstruction step should re-sample the circles so that they
have identical timestamps. This is similar as to what is done in e.g. EPSI [16]
and has been done by several authors using CRT and VD CRT [6, 20]. When
using e.g. circular trajectories, then the samples for one revolution around the
circle are not sampled at identical times. For a 2D NUFFT reconstruction this
==PAGE:30==
2.6 Gridding
21
is a prerequisite, since otherwise this will cause spatial blurring as described by
Mayer et al [20].
This is however not a problem if a 3D NUFFT algorithm is used. A 3D NUFFT
can take into account the varying time points along each revolution and grid it
eectively onto a Cartesian grid without the problems of spatial blurring. An
extension of Fessler's toolbox to 3D has been implemented by Florian Knoll
which is part of the ISMRM MR-hub [21].
==PAGE:31==
2.7 Signal-to-Noise-Ratio
22
2.7
Signal-to-Noise-Ratio
The amount of signal and noise which are sampled into a given k-space region
depends on the amount of time spent sampling that specic region. Since the
purpose here is to vary the time spent for local acquisition, the accrual of signal
and noise in k-space becomes dependent on k-space position k = (kx, ky, kz).
Hence the sampling density will be denoted daw(k). If k-space is sampled accord-
ing to the Nyquist sampling interval, and the acquired k-space data is convolved
with the gridding convolution kernel, then daw becomes eectively smooth and
represents the local k-space trajectory density.
Signal accrues linearly with time and thus scales linearly with sampling density
daw(k).
Thermal noise is the dominating form of noise in MRI and MRSI.
Thermal noise is independently normally distributed in the frequency domain,
and therefore noise accrues incoherently with sampling density.
Instead the
variance of the thermal noise increases linearly with local sampling density:
σ2
acq(k) ∝daw(k)
(2.7)
The goal of k-space ltering in post-processing is to obtain a desired PSF. Fourier
transforming the desired PSF yields the desired target density of k-space dtarget.
The target density is obtained as
dtarget(k) = dacq(k) · dfilter(k)
(2.8)
where dacq is the sampling density of the acquired k-space data and dfilter(k) is
the lter multiplied onto k-space. The acquired k-space data consists of a mix
of signal and noise, where the applied lter then acts to re-weight these data.
Signal scales linearly with the lter density. The noise in the image is also scaled
with the density of the lter and thus a quadratic term is induced. The noise
in the nal post-processed in image is then given as [6]
|σfinal|2(k) = d2
target(k)
dacq(k)
(2.9)
This illustrates that the acquisition density is a degree of freedom which is
not often used. A given target PSF can almost always be achieved through
retrospective ltering, but an implication of the acquisition density as an extra
degree of freedom is then to nd the acquisition density that optimizes SNR
in the acquisition. If Nyquist sampling is ensured, then the signal amplitude
is dependent only on the target PSF and independent of the sampling density.
Therefore, to maximize SNR becomes a matter of minimizing the noise in the
image [5].
==PAGE:32==
2.7 Signal-to-Noise-Ratio
23
If the image is reconstructed through a Fourier transformation, then the noise
will be uniform across the image according to the Wiener-Khinchin theorem.
In other words the voxel noise variance is identical in all image voxels. This in
turn means that minimizing the power of noise variance per voxel is equivalent
to minimizing the total power of the noise in the image. According to Parseval's
theorem this becomes a question of minimizing the noise power of the covered
k-space volume[5]. The noise variance in the acquired volume is given as [5]:
|σacq|2 =
Z
Vk
d · d2
target(k)
dacq(k)
(2.10)
Where d is an integration constant. As shown by L. Kasper et al, the minimal
noise power, and thereby maximum SNR is achieved if the acquisition density
matches that of the target density given by the Fourier transform of the desired
PSF.
The SNR ratio of a matched lter acquisition relative to that of a uniform
k-space density acquisition is given as
SNRacq
SNRUni
=
s
|σUni|2
|σacq|2
(2.11)
Specically for VD CRT with a target lter given as a Hamming window the
calculation of the SNR gain relative to that of a uniform sampling density is
125.2% [6].
2.7.1
Optimal acquisition parameters
In MRSI a large number of repetitions is utilized. If thermal equilibrium needs to
be reached before each excitation, then very long TR needs to be used. This will
unfortunately result in very long acquisition times. Therefore shorter repetition
times are often used, and then the system will approach a steady state after a
number of excitations. When steady state is reached the free induction decay
after each excitation will have the same amplitude.
When a TR is used for
which the system does not reach thermal equilibrium before the next excitation,
it is important to optimize the ip angle in order to get the maximum signal
amplitude at steady state.
The ip angle which gives the maximum signal
amplitude at steady state for a given TR can be found as
αernst = cos−1(e−TR/T1)
(2.12)
==PAGE:33==
2.7 Signal-to-Noise-Ratio
24
Pohmann, Von Kienlin and Haase investigated the optimal acquisition parame-
ters for maximum SNR for both pulse-acquire and spin-echo CSI [22]. With the
optimal ip angle given as the Ernst angle in Equation 2.12, then the optimal
TR for a simple pulse-acquire CSI sequence was found to be
TRopt = 1.26 · T ∗
2
(2.13)
For long T2, spin echo sequences will achieve the highest SNR eciency, while
for shorter T2 simple pulse acquire sequences will achieve the highest SNR e-
ciency [22]. There is a general trend in MRSI towards stronger B0 elds, and
these stronger magnetic elds gives shorter T ∗
2 due to an increased eect of mi-
croscopic susceptibility dierences [2]. Therefore it will be desirable to design
MRSI sequences that can take into account short T ∗
2 , but this will on the other
hand also introduce problems related to specic absorption rate (SAR) due to
the short repetition times needed according to Equation 2.13.
2.7.2
SNR calculations
The SNR calculations in this thesis will be based on a simple approach. The
simulations in JEMRIS will simulate a ood eld phantom, which should yield
an image with a large area of uniform signal. The SNR can then be calculated
as the mean signal of the uniform area of ood eld phantom, divided by the
standard deviation of the signal in that same region [23].
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 3
Methods
The three CRT trajectories were implemented in the MRI simulation tool JEM-
RIS [24]. The three implemented sequences (VD CRT, TVD CRT and AVD
CRT) will be described in this chapter, before being analysed in the results and
discussion chapters.
3.1
Implementation of VD CRT
An example of a CRT is shown in Figure 3.1, where it can be seen that the initial
step is a pre-phasing step going from a →b. Acquiring signal begins at location
b in k-space and is continued as k-space is traversed around the circle shown in
red. In MRSI this circle is traversed a number of times, until the entire FID
is covered. Thereby no gradient rewinding is needed during sampling, which
makes the trajectory very ecient. Additionally all four quadrants of k-space is
sampled after each excitation, which eectively halves the number of excitations
needed to cover k-space (when circles are equidistantly spaced) as compared to
EPSI, when the full k-space is a circle inscribed in a rectlinear square [8].
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Implementation of VD CRT
26
Figure 3.1: Example of a concentric ring trajectory in k-space, here with a radius of 1
[1/mm].
The k-space trajectory during readout is given by the following equations
kx(t) = −r · sin
2 · π
T
(t −TE)

(3.1)
ky(t) = r · cos
2 · π
T
(t −TE)

(3.2)
Where r is the radius of the circle traversed in k-t-space, T is the duration
it takes to traverse the circle and TE is the echo time.
The exact gradient
==PAGE:36==
3.1 Implementation of VD CRT
27
waveforms can be obtained through the relationship
G(t) = 2 · π
γ
dk(t)
dt
(3.3)
which yields
Gx(t) = −4π2r
γT cos
2 · π
T
(t −TE)

(3.4)
Gy(t) = −4π2r
γT sin
2 · π
T
(t −TE)

(3.5)
For time t−TE ≤T this yields the rst trace around the circle, and for t−TE >
T subsequent retracings of the same circle follows.
This gives the basis for
spectroscopic imaging, as the same spatial information can be sampled as a
function of time with time T between the samples. An example of the k-t-space
trajectory can be seen in Figure 3.2. The period T is equal to the dwell time.
The SBW of the acquisition scheme is thus given by
SBW = 1
T
(3.6)
The nominal spectral resolution is given by the SBW divided by the number
of samples along the temporal dimension of k-t-space.
The number of sam-
ples along the temporal dimension is given by the number of circumnavigations
around the circles, Ncirc.
Figure 3.2: Left: Example of a concentric ring trajectory in k-t-space, with several re-
tracings of a circle with a given radius. Right: Sampling in ky-t-space for a
sequence consisting of 16 equidistantly spaced circles.
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Implementation of VD CRT
28
In order for the Nyquist sampling criterion to be satised the distance between
two rings should be given by
∆k ≤
1
FOV
(3.7)
Where ∆k is the the distance between two subsequent circles and FOV is the
eld of view. If the extent of k-space coverage is given as
kmax =
1
2 · FOV
N0
= 1
2 ·
N0
FOV
(3.8)
Where FOV
N0
is the nominal spatial resolution in the image and N0 is the number
of voxels along one dimension in the image. Then the necessary number of rings
to cover k-space is given as
Nmin = kmax
∆k
= 1
2 · N0
(3.9)
Thus for e.g. a 32x32 raw data matrix resulting in 32 excitations for an EPSI
sequence, an equidistantly spaced CRT requires eectively a factor of 2 less
excitations compared to EPSI. The radius of each ring can then be given as
r = (n + 1
2)∆k
(3.10)
Where n = 0, 1, 2...Nmin −1 and ∆k =
1
FOV .
In order to avoid azimuthal
aliasing, the number of samples per ring NS should be
NS ≥0.5 · π · NRing
(3.11)
Where NRing is the number of rings and NS is the number of samples per ring.
The sampling scheme for equidistant CRT as described above eectively imposes
a weighting on k-space from the sampling density.
For equidistantly spaced
CRT, the sampling density eectively imposes a low-pass lter on k-space when
the number of samples per ring is kept the same on all circles. An example of
the weighting function imposed on k-space through the sampling density when
using CRT equidistantly spaced can be seen in Figure 3.3.
==PAGE:38==
3.1 Implementation of VD CRT
29
Figure 3.3: The weighting function imposed on k-space when using equidistantly spaced
CRT.
Low-pass lters such as Hamming or Hanning has been shown to be very de-
sirable for improving the spatial PSF. Using CRT, lters such as Hamming
or Hanning could ideally be exactly matched.
CRT is a radially symmetric
sampling scheme, with an accompanying circular symmetric sampling density
already for equidistantly spaced circles (see Figure 3.3). Therefore to match the
weight of a Hamming window with the sampling density essentially becomes a
task of varying the spacing between the circles in order to get an exact match
[6].
The calculation of the radii distribution is not straight forward and an exact
match to a Hamming window sampling density cannot be found analytically, but
can instead be approximated through an inverse series expansion of a dierential
equation. The solution is described in detail in [6] and is implemented in a
Matlab function which can be found in Appendix .1.1. An example of a VD
CRT sampling of the spatial dimensions of k-t-space is given in Figure 3.4.
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Implementation of VD CRT
30
Data matrix size
Nmin eCRT
Nmin VD CRT
32x32
16
44
64x64
32
177
128x128
64
714
Table 3.1: Table displaying the minimum number of circles required to cover k-space to
satisfy the Nyquist sampling theorem for both equidistantly spaced CRT and
VD CRT.
Figure 3.4: An example of VD CRT sampling in the two spatial dimensions showing the
varying distance between the circular trajectories.
Varying the distance between the circles makes the distance between two sub-
sequent circles vary through k-space, but the maximum distance between two
subsequent circles should still be small enough to satisfy the Nyquist sampling
criteria. In order to satisfy the Nyquist criteria for VD CRT, the number of
circles needed to cover k-space needs to be increased compared to equidistant
CRT. The additional number of circles needed to satisfy the Nyquist sampling
criteria depends on the desired number of voxels and the desired spatial reso-
lution. For a nominal spatial resolution of 1x1 mm2 the minimum number of
circles for dierent matrix sizes are given in Table 3.1.
==PAGE:40==
3.2 Implementation of TVD CRT
31
3.2
Implementation of TVD CRT
In any MRI or MRSI acquisition the signal decays away with time, and the
noise remains constant, which implies that the SNR will decrease over time. A
matched exponential lter can be applied in the temporal direction to attenuate
the amplitude of the noise in the end of the FID, especially if the sampling
time is long. This matched lter will increase the SNR, but will lead to an
undesirable two-fold line broadening, since the signal is already decaying away
exponentially on a time scale of T ∗
2 , which is the reason for the Lorentzian shape
of the peaks in the spectrum [25].
As with the sampling density matched to the Hamming window in the spatial
dimensions in VD CRT, the sampling density along the temporal dimension will
also be sought matched to the natural exponential decay of the signal. In the
spatial dimension the sampling density can be controlled through the use of
gradients. In the temporal direction this is not directly possible, since the time
passes by on a constant rate that cannot be controlled.
The sampling density is sought to be approximated to the exponentially de-
caying signal, such that the sampling density matches the contour lines of an
exponentially decaying function. This eectively means reducing the extent of
spatial k-space coverage with time. This approach is chosen due to giving the
highest SNR of two dierent attempts implemented in an earlier master thesis
[26]. The contour of the exponentially decaying function can be modelled as
1 = k(t)2
12
+ t
Tc
(3.12)
Where k(t) is the spatial k-space position at time t, t is the time and Tc is a
time constant of the exponential decay. The position in k-space is then given as
katt(t) = k(t) ·
r
(1 −t
Tc
)
(3.13)
Where katt(t) is the attenuated position in k-t-space. k(t) is then given according
to Equations 3.1 and 3.2. The k-space trajectory during readout for TVD CRT
is then given as
kx(t) = −r ·
r
(1 −t
Tc
) · sin
2 · π
T
(t −TE)

(3.14)
ky(t) = r ·
r
(1 −t
Tc
) · cos
2 · π
T
(t −TE)

(3.15)
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Implementation of AVD CRT
32
The corresponding gradient waveforms then become
Gx(t) = −4π2r
γT
·
r
(1 −t
Tc
) · cos
2 · π
T
(t −TE)

(3.16)
Gy(t) = −4π2r
γT
·
r
(1 −t
Tc
) · sin
2 · π
T
(t −TE)

(3.17)
The time constant Tc can be adjusted to vary how much the k-space coverage
will be narrowed with time. An example of an attenuated CRT is given in Figure
3.5. If Tc is set equal to the duration of the readout time, then the k-t-space
trajectories will be attenuated to hit exactly zero by the end of the readout.
Figure 3.5: An example of a CRT with a radius attenuated over time as given by Equa-
tions 3.14 and 3.15. For this example the time constant Tc was set to 720
ms.
3.3
Implementation of AVD CRT
The implementation of AVD CRT is governed by the same equation as TVD
CRT (Equation 3.13), but the way it is used is dierent. For TVD CRT it was
used to progressively narrow the radius of the concentric circles with time, while
for AVD CRT it will be used to decide the number of circumnavigations for each
==PAGE:42==
3.3 Implementation of AVD CRT
33
radius. This means that some of the circles with largest radius will be stopped
before covering the entire temporal dimension.
The extent of temporal sampling for each radius will be governed by the contour
of spatial coverage, as given by Equation 3.13. The approach is illustrated in
Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: The blue lines are given by Equation 3.13 with TC=480 ms.
These lines
illustrates the extent of spatial k-space coverage as it is narrowed with time.
The samples for various radii are shown in dots, which can be seen to stop
when the contour given by the blue lines are reached or when full coverage of
the temporal dimension has been achieved.
This approach will not vary the repetition time and will thus sacrice SNR
eciency in order to attempt to gain SNR. The approach will however not
prolong the scan time compared to VD CRT or AVD CRT.
==PAGE:43==
3.4 Sequence Diagram
34
3.4
Sequence Diagram
The MRSI sequences described above are both implemented in JEMRIS based
on a single-slice FID sequence which is displayed in Figure 3.7. A sinc excitation
RF pulse with three zero-crossing and a ip angle of 90 degrees is used for each
excitation. After excitation follows a short acquisition delay before gradient pre-
winders are applied in both Gx and Gy in order to reach the specied radius in k-
t-space as well as the intended transverse velocity. The gradient pre-winders are
based on a simple solution to avoid any discontinuities in the gradient waveforms
and faster solutions does denitely exist.
Readout starts immediately after the pre-winders, where the gradient waveforms
are given by Equations 3.4 and 3.5 for VD CRT and AVD CRT, or Equations
3.16 and 3.17 for TVD CRT. This means that a number of circumnavigations
for the same circle is performed for VD CRT, while for TVD CRT each following
circumnavigation of the circle has a slightly smaller radius than the former. For
AVD CRT the number of circumnavigations diers with the radius of the circle.
When the entire FID has been acquired, gradients are ramped down so as not
violate gradient slew rate restrictions. One circle is acquired per excitation and
thus the pulse sequence is repeated as many times as the necessary number of
rings needed to cover k-space. A long TR has been used, and thus no crusher or
spoiler gradients are used.
==PAGE:44==
3.5 Simulations
35
Figure 3.7: The pulse sequence digram of a single repetition. Initially a sinc-shaped RF
pulse is accompanied by a slice selection gradient in the Gz row. An acqui-
sition delay follows the RF pulse. Gradient pre-winders is played out before
the readout gradients. ADC readout is denoted with the read color in the RF
row. Gradient ramp-down is not displayed here.
3.5
Simulations
All simulations were performed with the acquisitions parameters as given in
Table 3.2
==PAGE:45==
3.5 Simulations
36
Acquisition parameters
TR
5000 ms
T1
500 ms
T ∗
2
60 ms
T2
60 ms
Acq. delay
6.6 ms
FOV
32 mm
N0
64
Ncirc
799
Dwell time
0.4 ms
SBW
2500 Hz
Table 3.2: Acquisition parameters for all simulated acquisitions. Ncirc was the only pa-
rameter that varied slightly for some radii for AVD CRT depending on the
choice of TC.
The simulations were performed on a simple circular phantom as displayed in
Figure 3.8. For all simulations in this report the radius of the circular phantom
was kept at 6 mm.
==PAGE:46==
3.5 Simulations
37
Figure 3.8: The simple circular phantom used for the simulations in JEMRIS.
For the acquisition parameters given in Table 3.2, 177 concentric rings were
needed to cover k-space to ensure that Nyquist sampling was satised. This
means that 279 samples were necessary per ring to ensure adequate azimuthal
sampling. The radii distribution for the specied sampling scheme could then
be calculated with the Matlab function given in Appendix .1.1. That gave a
sampling of the spatial dimensions of k-t-space as displayed in Figure 3.9. For
TVD CRT and AVD CRT an additional parameter, TC, was needed to specify
the narrowing of k-space acquisition with time. Simulations were performed
with varying values of TC and the value are specied where needed.
==PAGE:47==
3.5 Simulations
38
Figure 3.9: Sampling of the spatial dimensions in k-space for the simulated sequences.
Note that this changes with time for TVD CRT.
Along with the acquisition parameters given in Table 3.2, a number of param-
eters specic to the simulation tool JEMRIS and the reconstruction algorithm
were also necessary to be specied. The JEMRIS specic parameters are given
in Table 3.3.
JEMRIS parameters
M0
1
{dx, dy}
0.3
Table 3.3: Parameters specic to the simulation tool JEMRIS. M0 species the equilib-
rium magnetization of the sample in an arbitrary unit. The parameter {dx, dy}
is the distance between two neighbouring spins.
JEMRIS does not simulate noise in the trajectories, and therefore noise was
added to the samples in k-space after the simulation of the trajectories. The
sampling frequency was the same for all simulations performed and therefore the
noise added to the k-space samples could be drawn from the same noise distri-
bution. Thermal noise is the dominating noise in MRI and MRSI experiments,
and therefore the noise could be drawn from a standard normal distribution.
Each sample from the simulations was subjected to two noise samples drawn
from the normal distribution. One aected the real part and one aected the
==PAGE:48==
3.5 Simulations
39
imaginary part of the signal.
One additional parameter was specied for the simulations in JEMRIS, which
was the parameter denoted CS, which could be used to simulate chemical shift.
It was specied in radians per second.
The reconstruction of the simulated trajectories was performed with the Fessler
NUFFT toolbox [9], with the 3D-extension by Florian Knoll [21]. Gridding was
performed with a Kaiser-Bessel kernel with a width of 6, with an oversampling
factor of 2. The reconstruction algorithm needed an accurate k-t-space position
for each sample. The size of the reconstructed images were then N0xN0xNcirc.
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4
Results
4.1
Sampling Density and Point Spread Func-
tions
The weighting of k-t-space due to any k-t-space sampling scheme can be esti-
mated by reconstructing an image with all samples equal to ones [6]. This has
been done for the three sampling schemes described in Section 3 and for the
acquisition parameters described in Section 3.5.
The sampling density was initially investigated for VD CRT, and the result
can be seen in Figure 4.1, where the uncorrected sampling density (in blue)
after gridding k-t-space can be seen to the left plotted against the analytical
solution. The large weight in center of k-t-space needs to be corrected for, since
it corresponds to a DC oset in the reconstructed image. This large weight is the
same for all temporal points located at (kx, ky) = (0, 0) This type of behaviour
has been reported before and is due to an imperfection in the gridding algorithm
[6]. The eect of correcting the weight of the k-space center can be seen in Figure
4.2. The images and image proles shown in Figure 4.2 are the only simulations
performed with a dierent radius of the circular phantom compared to what is
described in the Method section, since here the radius of the phantom was 4
mm.
==PAGE:50==
4.1 Sampling Density and Point Spread Functions
41
Figure 4.1: Left: Uncorrected sampling density weighting acquired by gridding ones at all
sample positions in k-space. The gridded weighting function is plotted against
the analytical solution. Right: Sampling density weighting acquired by grid-
ding ones at all sample positions in k-space, with the weight in the center
of k-space corrected for.The gridded weighting function is plotted against the
analytical solution.
With the weight of the center of k-space corrected, the gridded sampling density
is plotted against the analytical solution in the middle in Figure 4.1. Here small
deviations still exist near the center of k-space, which can be corrected for
without any signicant loss in SNR as long as the correction factors are close
to one [27]. Even though these are small deviations they need to be corrected
for. Since they are near the center of k-space, it might have an implication on
metabolite quantication and they are therefore corrected for in post-processing.
The eect of correcting the small deviations can be seen to the right in Figure
4.2.
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Sampling Density and Point Spread Functions
42
Figure 4.2: Top left: Image of a circular phantom with no corrections performed on the
k-space weighting. Bottom left: Image prole from the reconstructed im-
age without any post-processing correction of the sampling density weighting
of k-space. Top Middle: Image of a circular phantom with the weight of
the center of k-space corrected for.Bottom middle: Image prole from the
reconstructed image with the weight of the center of k-space corrected.Top
right: Image of a circular phantom with the weight of the center of k-space
as well as the small deviations surrounding it corrected for. Bottom right:
Image prole from the reconstructed image with the weight of the center of k-
space corrected as well as the small deviations surrounding the k-space center
corrected.
4.1.1
Spatial and spatial-temporal sampling density for
VD CRT
After post correction, a closer look is given to the sampling densities. For VD
CRT a 2D view of the sampling density along the spatial dimensions is given in
Figure 4.3 and for a 2D slice the spatial-temporal sampling density is given in
Figure 4.4. For VD CRT the sampling density is seen not to change along the
temporal dimension as seen to the left in Figure 4.4. To the right in Figure 4.4
an exponential lter has been multiplied onto the sampling density to emulate
how the signal intensity would be in k-t-space.
==PAGE:52==
4.1 Sampling Density and Point Spread Functions
43
Figure 4.3: Spatial sampling density of the spatial dimensions of k-t-space for VD CRT
after post correction.
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Sampling Density and Point Spread Functions
44
Figure 4.4: Left: Spatial-temporal sampling density for VD CRT after post correction for
ky = 0. Right: Spatial-temporal sampling density for VD CRT multiplied
with an exponential signal decay with T ∗
2 of 60 ms.
4.1.2
VD CRT PSF
The PSF of the sampling schemes is found through a Fourier transform of the
sampling density. Before Fourier transformation the sampling densities are mul-
tiplied with an exponentially decaying lter in order to get a spectral extent
of the PSF as well. The sampling densities are multiplied with a lter along
the temporal direction given by e−t/T 2 with T2 equal to 60 ms. The resulting
spatial-spectral PSF for VD CRT is displayed in Figure 4.5.
==PAGE:54==
4.1 Sampling Density and Point Spread Functions
45
Figure 4.5: Left: A 2D-slice through the spatial-spectral PSF of VD CRT. Middle: A
line through the 2D slice of the spatial-spectral PSF at 0 mm on one spatial
axis, thus illustrating the spectral PSF for VD CRT. Right: A line through
the 2D slice of the spatial-spectral PSF at 0 Hz on the frequency axis, thus
illustrating the spatial PSF for the two acquisition schemes.
4.1.3
Spatial and spatial-temporal sampling density for
TVD CRT
Sampling densities for TVD CRT are found in the same way as for VD CRT. For
TVD CRT the sampling density changes along the temporal direction, which
can be seen in both Figure 4.6 and 4.7. In Figure 4.6, the sampling density along
the spatial dimensions are given for two dierent time-points. This illustrates
the fact that spatial k-t-space coverage becomes more and more narrow with
time. How the spatial k-t-space coverage is narrowed with time is illustrated in
Figure 4.7.
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Sampling Density and Point Spread Functions
46
Figure 4.6: Spatial sampling density of the spatial dimensions of k-t-space for TVD CRT
after post correction and with TC = 480 ms. Notice that the colorbar has a
dierent scale on the two gures. Left: 19.6 ms from beginning of readout.
Right: 299.6 ms from beginning of readout.
Figure 4.7: Notice that the colorbar has a dierent scale on the two gures. The sampling
densities shown are for TVD CRT with a TC = 480 ms.
Left: Spatial-
temporal sampling density for TVD CRT after post correction at ky = 0.
Right: Spatial-temporal sampling density for TVD CRT multiplied with an
exponential signal decay with T ∗
2 of 60 ms.
==PAGE:56==
4.1 Sampling Density and Point Spread Functions
47
4.1.4
TVD CRT PSF
For TVD CRT the spatial-spectral PSF is given for two dierent values of TC
in Figure 4.8. For TC of 480, the spatial main lobe becomes slightly wider than
for a TC of 2100.
Figure 4.8: Upper left: 2D-slice through the spatial-spectral PSF for TVD CRT with a
TC of 2100 ms. Upper right: 2D-slice through the spatial-spectral PSF for
TVD CRT with a TC of 480 ms. Lower left: A line through the 2D slices
of the spatial-spectral PSF's at 0 mm on the spatial axis, thus illustrating the
spectral PSF's for the two acquisition schemes. Lower right: A line through
the 2D slices of the spatial-spectral PSF's at 0 Hz on the frequency axis, thus
illustrating the spatial PSF's for the two acquisition schemes.
4.1.5
Spatial and spatial-temporal sampling density for
AVD CRT
Sampling densities for AVD CRT are found in the same way as for VD CRT
and TVD CRT. For AVD CRT the sampling density changes along the temporal
direction, which can be seen in both Figure 4.9 and 4.10. In Figure 4.9, the
sampling density along the spatial dimensions are given for two dierent time-
points. This illustrates the fact that spatial k-t-space coverage becomes more
and more narrow with time. How the spatial k-t-space coverage is narrowed
with time is illustrated in Figure 4.10. In contrast to TVD CRT, discontinuities
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Sampling Density and Point Spread Functions
48
are created in the sampling densities of AVD CRT which becomes more and
more pronounced with decreasing values of TC.
Figure 4.9: Spatial sampling density of the spatial dimensions of k-t-space for AVD CRT
after post correction for TC = 480 ms.
Left: 19.6 ms from beginning of
readout. Right: 299.6 ms from beginning of readout.
Figure 4.10: Left: Spatial-temporal sampling density for AVD CRT after post correction
with a TC = 480 ms. Right: Spatial-temporal sampling density for AVD
CRT multiplied with an exponential signal decay with T ∗
2 of 60 ms.
==PAGE:58==
4.2 Noise simulations
49
4.1.6
AVD CRT PSF
The PSF for AVD CRT was investigated for two dierent values of TC being 480
ms and 2100 ms. The PSF's was given as the Fourier transform of the sampling
density, multiplied with an exponentially decaying lter along the temporal
dimension of k-t-space. The resulting spatial-spectral PSF's are displayed in
Figure 4.11. For TC equal to 480 ms side lobes are appearing in the spatial
dimension, and the main lobe is found to be wider in the spatial dimension
compared to a TC equal to 2100 ms.
Figure 4.11: Upper left: 2D-slice through the spatial-spectral PSF for AVD CRT with a
TC of 2100 ms. Upper right: 2D-slice through the spatial-spectral PSF for
AVD CRT with a TC of 480 ms. Lower left: A line through the 2D slices
of the spatial-spectral PSF's at 0 mm on the spatial axis, thus illustrating
the spectral PSF's for the two acquisition schemes. Lower right: A line
through the 2D slices of the spatial-spectral PSF's at 0 Hz on the frequency
axis, thus illustrating the spatial PSF's for the two acquisition schemes.
4.2
Noise simulations
In order to investigate how the designed trajectories deals with noise, recon-
structions of all trajectories performed with all samples in k-t-space consisting
of noise only were performed. The resulting standard deviation of values in the
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Example of spectrum
50
reconstructed images are given in Table 4.1.
Tc
TVD CRT
AVD CRT
VD CRT
VD CRT
-
-
0.0567
6000
0.0567
0.0565
-
3800
0.0567
0.0563
-
2100
0.0567
0.0561
-
1440
0.0567
0.0558
-
960
0.0567
0.0554
-
720
0.0567
0.0548
-
480
0.0567
0.053
-
Table 4.1: Standard deviation of image values when pure noise and no signal is recon-
structed with the various trajectories used.
4.3
Example of spectrum
A simulation was performed with three dierent values of the value CS in JEM-
RIS, being CS=-5655 rad
s , CS=0 rad
s
and CS=5655 rad
s . All acquisition parame-
ters as specied in the Methods section, the sequence used was VD CRT. Figure
4.12 shows an example of spectra from within and outside the circular phantom.
==PAGE:60==
4.4 Example of non-symmetric object
51
Figure 4.12: An example of the spectra found in the acquisition of the circular phantom
with three dierent chemical shifts. In blue, a spectrum located within the
circular phantom. In red, a spectrum located outside the circular phantom.
4.4
Example of non-symmetric object
To test one of the designed trajectories, a non-symmetric object was specied
in JEMRIS as seen in Figure 4.13 to the left with a chemical shift for the
object specied to be 600
rad
s .
The object was simulated using TVD CRT
with TC = 2100 ms. Acquisition parameters was kept as in Table 3.2. The
reconstructed image is shown to the right in Figure 4.13.
==PAGE:61==
4.5 SNR
52
Figure 4.13: Left:
A non-symmetric object was specied and simulated in JEMRIS.
Right: The reconstructed image from JEMRIS simulation with TVD CRT
with TC = 2100 ms.
4.5
SNR
For both TVD CRT and AVD CRT, the SNR was computed for various values
of TC ranging from 480 ms to 6000 ms, corresponding to a narrowing of spatial
k-t-space coverage in between 57.7% and 97.3%. Equation 3.13 has been plotted
for all used values of TC used in the simulations in Figure 4.14.
==PAGE:62==
4.5 SNR
53
Figure 4.14: Equation 3.13 plotted for the dierent values of TC used in the simulations.
For each value of TC and each trajectory type (e.g. AVD CRT and TVD CRT),
a simulation was performed in JEMRIS. For each simulated trajectory noise
was generated and overlaid the signal. The image was then reconstructed and
SNR was calculated. In order to secure more robust values of SNR, this was
performed 10 times for each trajectory, each time with a newly generated noise
signal overlaid onto the JEMRIS generated signal. The same reconstruction,
and SNR calculation was carried out for VD CRT.
For AVD CRT a graph of SNR relative to VD CRT can be seen in Figure 4.15,
where the maximum of 102.8% is found for TC = 2100 ms, corresponding to a
narrowing of spatial k-t-space coverage of 92.1 % along the temporal dimension.
All calculated SNR values for AVD CRT and its standard deviations are given
in Table 4.2.
==PAGE:63==
4.5 SNR
54
Figure 4.15: The SNR of AVD CRT relative to that of VD CRT for dierent values of
the constant TC and for three dierent chemical shifts.
For TVD CRT a graph of SNR relative to VD CRT can be seen in Figure 4.16,
where the maximum of 105.8% is found for TC = 2100 ms, corresponding to a
narrowing of spatial k-t-space coverage of 92.1 % along the temporal dimension.
All calculated SNR values for TVD CRT along with its standard deviations are
given in Table 4.3.
==PAGE:64==
4.5 SNR
55
Figure 4.16: The SNR of TVD CRT relative to that of VD CRT for dierent values of
the constant TC.
TC
SNR−900Hz
std−900Hz
SNR0Hz
std0Hz
SNR900Hz
std900Hz
6000
102.3
3.8
102.5
4.4
100.5
2.2
3800
102.5
3.7
102.7
4.5
100.7
2.3
2100
102.7
3.8
102.8
4.5
101.0
2.2
1440
101.9
3.7
101.1
4.5
100.1
2.1
960
100.7
3.7
99.0
4.4
98.7
2.1
720
99.4
3.6
96.9
4.4
97.2
2.0
480
91.19
3.0
86.3
4.0
88.6
1.8
Table 4.2: The SNR of AVD CRT relative to that of VD CRT for dierent values of
the constant TC. All SNR and standard deviation values are given in percent
relative to VD CRT.
==PAGE:65==
4.5 SNR
56
TC
SNR [%]
std [%]
6000
104.6
3.2
3800
105.2
4.6
2100
105.8
3.4
1440
102.8
3.1
960
90.2
4.2
720
82.3
3.6
480
55.4
2.4
Table 4.3: The SNR of TVD CRT relative to that of VD CRT for dierent values of
the constant TC. All SNR and standard deviation values are given in percent
relative to VD CRT.
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 5
Discussion
5.1
Sampling Densities
Both AVD CRT and TVD CRT narrow the eective coverage of the spatial
frequency dimension in k-t-space with time, but the trajectories are designed
such that it is done with dierent impact on the sampling densities.
VD CRT
For VD CRT the sampling density along the spatial frequency axis' of k-t-
space is kept constant along the temporal dimension. The sampling density has
been chosen to match that of a Hamming window, since it has been shown to
be a good compromise between eective spatial resolution and voxel bleeding
[28]. It has also been shown to give a relatively high SNR gain compared to
uniform weighting k-t-space acquisition followed by post processing ltering with
a Hamming window.
TVD CRT
For TVD CRT, the number of samples is kept constant no matter the value of
TC. However, the smaller the value of TC the more the samples are clustered
together in the central part of k-space as time passes by. The sampling density
along the spatial frequency axis' can be seen in Figure 4.6 for two dierent
points in time. To the right (for t=299.6 ms, the sampling density in the center
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Point Spread Functions
58
of k-space is almost 2.5 times higher than the sampling density in the center of
k-space for t=19.6 ms (as illustrated to the left in Figure 4.6). When TVD CRT
is used, no discontinuities are created in the weighting of k-t-space introduced
by the sampling density.
AVD CRT
For AVD CRT, the number of samples does change with the value of TC, and
thus the smaller the value of TC the fewer the samples in the k-t-space trajectory.
This gives two main dierences compared to TVD CRT. Firstly, the central part
of k-space has the same sampling density along the entire temporal dimension.
Secondly, discontinuities are created in k-t-space. The discontinuity can be seen
to the right in Figure 4.9 and in Figure 4.10. The discontinuity becomes more
pronounced along the temporal dimension of k-t-space, as well as it becomes
more pronounced as TC becomes smaller.
5.2
Point Spread Functions
The sampling densities of the dierent trajectories can be Fourier transformed
to obtain the corresponding PSF's. Generally the PSF's for all three designed
trajectories, demonstrate that it is possible to do a MRSI acquisition with no
need for post-processing ltering, but instead do only minor post processing
corrections to the weighting functions imposed on k-t-space by the sampling
density. Generally the improved PSF's compared to that of a uniformly weighted
k-space, gives a much better localization of the metabolites as well a reduction
in signal contamination from unwanted signals such as peripheral fat.
VD CRT
The PSF for VD CRT is given in Figure 4.5. The spectral extent of the spatial-
spectral PSF is dominated by the exponential decay multiplied onto the sam-
pling density before Fourier transforming it into the PSF. This gives a Lorentzian
shape as expected. The spatial part of the PSF has very limited side lobes, with
amplitudes below one percent of the maximum amplitude of the PSF. It can
also be noted that the width of the main lobe is wider than the nominal spa-
tial resolution of 0.5 mm. The full width at half maximum is approximately 1
mm, which will cause some signal bleeding into adjacent voxels. The severely
reduced side lobes as compared to a sinc function, does however mean that sig-
nal spread is reduced to only a few surrounding voxels, and that voxels are not
contaminated with signals from far away such as from the subcutaneous fat.
TVD CRT
For TVD CRT, the sampling density changes along the temporal dimension,
==PAGE:68==
5.3 Noise
59
and thus the eective spatial resolution and the eective FOV changes along
the temporal dimension of k-t-space. FOV is normally given as the inverse of
the sampling rate along a given direction. Here the largest distance between
two adjacent concentric rings becomes smaller and smaller and thus the FOV
becomes larger and larger along the temporal dimension. The spatial resolution
is given as the FOV divided by the number of samples along a given direction.
Here the number of samples is kept constant, while the FOV increases with time
and thus the spatial resolution becomes worse along the temporal dimension.
The eective spatial resolution and FOV of the nal image becomes a weighted
mix of the varying FOV and spatial resolution along the temporal dimension.
For TVD CRT, the spatial-spectral PSF is given for two dierent values of TC in
Figure 4.8. As for VD CRT, no side lobes with amplitude above 1 % is seen and
the spatial-spectral PSF is in general very similar to that of VD CRT. The only
dierence is a slight widening of the spatial main lobe as TC becomes smaller.
AVD CRT
For AVD CRT, discontinuities were introduced in the sampling density, with the
discontinuities becoming larger with smaller values of TC. These discontinuities
manifest themselves as emerging side-lobes of the PSF for AVD CRT which can
be seen for two values of TC in Figure 4.11. The side lobes becomes worse with
smaller values of TC, which is expected since the discontinuities in k-t-space
also becomes larger with smaller values of TC. Even though the side lobes are
visible for TC = 2100, they are still of a very small amplitude. At TC = 480
they become more severe, but they still do not extent through the entire FOV.
5.3
Noise
It was investigated how the three trajectories deals with noise, especially AVD
CRT and TVD CRT for various values of TC. The results can be seen in Table
4.1. The results indicate a dierence between AVD CRT and TVD CRT. TVD
CRT gives the same standard deviance of the noise amplitude in the image for
all values of TC, whereas the standard deviance of the noise amplitude in the
image for AVD CRT becomes smaller for decreasing values of TC. This is not
surprising, since the number of samples becomes smaller and smaller for AVD
CRT, whereas it is kept the same for TVD CRT.
==PAGE:69==
5.4 SNR
60
5.4
SNR
VD CRT has already been shown to give a considerable SNR gain when the
acquisition is matched to a lter given by a Hamming window. Hingerl et al
showed a theoretical SNR of 125.2 % relative to that of CSI followed by post
acquisition ltering. The theoretical value was almost achieved in in-vivo scans
where a SNR of 124.4 % relative to CSI was found for VD CRT [6].
The
VD CRT approach in this work has been implemented in the same way, by
matching the sampling density to that of a Hamming window. Two attempts
to additionally match the sampling density to the exponential lter along the
temporal dimension was implemented. For both these trajectories the SNR was
calculated relative to that of VD CRT and the SNR gain found here for TVD
CRT and AVD CRT relative to that of VD CRT can thus be added to the SNR
gain of VD CRT relative to that of CSI. AVD CRT reached a maximum SNR
of 102.8 % relative to that of VD CRT, while TVD CRT reached a maximum
SNR of 105.8 % relative to that of VD CRT.
The underlying reason for the SNR gains for the two trajectories are dierent.
AVD CRT reduces the noise in the images, while keeping the signal almost
constant over a range of values of TC. This is dierent for TVD CRT, where
the signal increases slightly as TC becomes smaller, but the noise is constant
in the image. Common for both trajectories is that for small values of TC it
seems as if frequency content from k-t-space is lacking and the image prole for
the circular phantom starts to deteriorate. That the mean signal of the ood
eld phantom increases with decreasing values of TC can be explained by the
increasing sampling density in the central part of k-t-space.
The results demonstrated here are promising, but should be conrmed on a
real MR scanner, since the simulations does not take things such as hardware
imperfections into account. This should not change the fact that an SNR gain
is to be found by matching the acquisition to both spatial and spectral lters.
5.4.1
Eciency
What is meant by eciency here is how much of the time between excitations
that is used for readout. The eciency is low in the implementations here, due
to the long TR used in the implementations and compared to a readout window
of 320 ms after each excitation. The sequences were implemented this way to
keep simulations simple.
The eciency of CRT in general can however be excellent as sampling is carried
==PAGE:70==
5.5 Trajectory
61
out through the entire readout window, without any disruption by re-winding
gradients such as in EPSI or spiral trajectories. It can also be readily imple-
mented with a very short acquisition delay as only short pre-winding gradients
are necessary before readout can commence. The acquisition delay can be short-
ened considerably compared to what was implemented here. The same goes for
the repetition time, which can be shortened quite a lot if the Ernst angle is used
as ip angle for the RF excitation pulse and the TR is given by Equation 2.13.
This way, spoiler gradients should be used by the end of each acquisition to
remove remaining transverse magnetization The ultimate eciency limitation
for CRT is probably imposed by SAR limitations, if T ∗
2 is very short and the
TR is given by Equation 2.13.
For the trajectories implemented here, AVD CRT has the worst eciency, since
it uses a shorter time for readout for some excitations. This is a drawback of
AVD CRT compared to TVD CRT.
5.5
Trajectory
The choice of CRT as basis for the trajectories designed here seems to be a
good choice. It can be readily designed to obtain a good PSF without the need
for ltering and an increased SNR is obtained compared to the gold standard
CSI. Additionally it has been shown here to also be applicable for somewhat
matching the lter along the temporal dimension for an additional SNR gain
compared to VD CRT. CRT can be implemented with an excellent eciency,
and since it uses spectral-spatial encoding it can do full slice acquisition much
faster compared to CSI.
When it comes to limitations, one of the drawbacks of using CRT is a more
complicated reconstruction compared to EPSI or CSI. At the current state both
gridding (NUFFT) and post gridding corrections needs to be performed. For
VD CRT the post gridding correction is relatively simple, but it becomes more
complicated for TVD CRT and AVD CRT, since the sampling densities change
along the temporal dimension of k-t-space. For CRT/VD CRT/TVD CRT to
become feasible for use in a clinical setting, a full and thoroughly tested image
reconstruction toolbox could be implemented.
CRT is probably also limited to a eld strength of B0 ≥9.4T due to gradient
demands being even further increased with higher eld strengths [6]. At the time
of this thesis, 7T eld strengths are only starting to become clinically available,
so for the near future this is not a serious problem. It is indeed an advantage
of CRT that is applicable for a wide range of eld strengths.
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
Matched lter acquisition in MRSI is a technique that can improve the PSF
while at the same time increase SNR compared to uniformly weighted k-t-
space acquisitions followed by post processing ltering. Of the various inves-
tigated spatial-spectral encoding sequences investigated for MRSI, CRT seemed
a very promising MRSI acquisition technique, which can readily be adapted to
a matched lter acquisition scheme. While CRT has been employed before to
match to a lter along the spatial dimensions of k-t-space, two dierent solutions
has been suggested here to additionally match the acquisition to the exponential
decay along the temporal dimension of k-t-space.
Both AVD CRT and TVD CRT gave a higher SNR relative to that of VD CRT.
Of the two implemented sequences, TVD CRT gave the most promising result,
with a SNR of 105.8 % relative to that of VD CRT. This additional SNR gain
can be added onto the already existing SNR gain for VD CRT compared to the
golden standard CSI, when the target lter is a Hamming window [6].
The SNR gain found for TVD CRT comes only with the cost of slightly widened
main lobe of the spatial PSF. No additional time for acquisition is used for TVD
CRT compared to VD CRT. Indeed VD CRT or TVD CRT can be achieved at
clinically feasible scan times of 5-6 minutes for full brain slice coverage with a
64 by 64 matrix size and is applicable for a wide range of eld strengths up to
9.4T.
==PAGE:72==
63
In terms of future work, the sequences should be implemented on a real MR
scanner in order to conrm the SNR gain. For the implementation of VD CRT
into a clinical setting a full and thoroughly tested toolbox for image reconstruc-
tion should be implemented.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1] Öz G, Alger JR, Barker PB, Bartha R, Bizzi A, Boesch C, Bolan PJ,
Brindle KM, Cudalbu C, Dinçer A, Dydak U, Emir UE, Frahm J,
González RG, Gruber S, Gruetter R, Gupta RK, Heerschap A, Henning A,
Hetherington HP, Howe FA, Hüppi PS, Hurd RE, Kantarci K, Klomp DWJ,
Kreis R, Kruiskamp MJ, Leach MO, Lin AP, Luijten PR, Marja«ska M,
Maudsley AA, Meyerho DJ, Mountford CE, Nelson SJ, Pamir MN,
Pan JW, Peet AC, Poptani H, Posse S, Pouwels PJW, Ratai EM, Ross BD,
Scheenen TWJ, Schuster C, Smith ICP, Soher BJ, Tká£ I, Vigneron DB,
Kauppinen RA. Clinical Proton MR Spectroscopy in Central Nervous Sys-
tem Disorders. Radiology 2014; 270:658679.
[2] Posse S, Otazo R, Dager SR, Alger J. MR spectroscopic imaging: Principles
and recent advances, 2013.
[3] Chiew M, Jiang W, Burns B, Larson P, Steel A, Jezzard P, Albert
Thomas M, Emir UE. Density-weighted concentric rings k -space trajec-
tory for 1 H magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging at 7 T. NMR in
Biomedicine 2017; p. e3838.
[4] Adalsteinsson E, StarLack J, Meyer CH, Spielman DM. Reduced spatial
side lobes in chemical-shift imaging. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 1999;
42:314323.
[5] Kasper L, Haeberlin M, Dietrich BE, Gross S, Barmet C, Wilm BJ, Van-
nesjo SJ, Brunner DO, Ru CC, Stephan KE, Pruessmann KP. Matched-
lter acquisition for bold fMRI. NeuroImage 2014; 100:145160.
[6] Hingerl L, Bogner W, Moser P, Povaºan M, Hangel G, Heckova E, Gru-
ber S, Trattnig S, Strasser B. Density-weighted concentric circle trajectories
==PAGE:74==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
65
for high resolution brain magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging at 7T.
Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 2018; 79:28742885.
[7] Jiang W, Lustig M, Larson PE. Concentric rings K-space trajectory for
hyperpolarized13C MR spectroscopic imaging.
Magnetic Resonance in
Medicine 2016; 75:1931.
[8] Furuyama JK, Wilson NE, Thomas MA. Spectroscopic imaging using con-
centrically circular echo-planar trajectories in vivo, 2012.
[9] Fessler JA, Sutton BP. Nonuniform fast Fourier transforms using min-max
interpolation. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing 2003; 51:560574.
[10] Trattnig S, Springer E, Bogner W, Hangel G, Strasser B, Dymerska B,
Cardoso PL, Robinson SD. Key clinical benets of neuroimaging at 7 T.
NeuroImage 2018; 168:477489.
[11] Mareci TH, Brooker HR. High-resolution magnetic resonance spectra from
a sensitive region dened with pulsed eld gradients. Journal of Magnetic
Resonance (1969) 1984; 57:157163.
[12] Parker DL, Gullberg GT, Frederick PR. Gibbs artifact removal in magnetic
resonance imaging. Medical physics 1987; 14:640645.
[13] Greiser A, Von Kienlin M. Ecient k-Space Sampling by Density-Weighted
Phase-Encoding. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 2003; 50:12661275.
[14] StarLack JM. Optimal gradient waveform design for projection imaging
and projection reconstruction echoplanar spectroscopic imaging. Magnetic
Resonance in Medicine 1999; 41:664675.
[15] Kühn B, Dreher W, Norris DG, Leibfritz D.
Fast proton spectroscopic
imaging employing k-space weighting achieved by variable repetition times.
Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 1996; 35:457464.
[16] Hanson LG, Schaumburg K, Paulson OB. Reconstruction strategy for echo
planar spectroscopy and its application to partially undersampled imaging.
Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 2000; 44:412417.
[17] Pohmann R, Von Kienlin M. Accurate phosphorus metabolite images of
the human heart by 3D acquisition-weighted CSI. Magnetic Resonance in
Medicine 2001; 45:817826.
[18] Schirda CV, Tanase C, Boada FE. Rosette spectroscopic imaging: Optimal
parameters for alias-free, high sensitivity spectroscopic imaging. Journal of
Magnetic Resonance Imaging 2009; 29:13751385.
[19] Pauly JM. Gridding & the NUFFT for Non-Cartesian Image Reconstruc-
tion. ISMRM Educational Course on Image Reconstruction 2012; 20:46.
==PAGE:75==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
66
[20] Mayer D, Levin YS, Hurd RE, Glover GH, Spielman DM. Fast metabolic
imaging of systems with sparse spectra: Application for hyperpolarized 13C
imaging. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 2006; 56:932937.
[21] Uecker M, Lai P, Murphy MJ, Virtue P, Elad M, Pauly JM, Vasanawala SS,
Lustig M. ESPIRiT - An eigenvalue approach to autocalibrating parallel
MRI: Where SENSE meets GRAPPA. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine
2014; 71:9901001.
[22] Pohmann R, Von Kienlin M, Haase A. Theoretical Evaluation and Com-
parison of Fast Chemical Shift Imaging Methods, 1997.
[23] De Wilde JP, Lunt JA, Straughan K. Information in magnetic resonance
images: Evaluation of signal, noise and contrast. Medical and Biological
Engineering and Computing 1997; 35:259265.
[24] Stöcker T, Vahedipour K, Pugfelder D, Shah NJ. High-performance com-
puting MRI simulations. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 2010; 64:186
193.
[25] Jiru F. Introduction to post-processing techniques. European Journal of
Radiology 2008; 67:202217.
[26] NexmannNielsen A. Optimization of Gradient Trajectories for Fast Spectro-
scopic Magnetic Resonance Imaging. Master's thesis, Technical University
of Denmark, 2016.
[27] Pipe JG, Menon P.
Sampling density compensation in MRI: Rationale
and an iterative numerical solution. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 1999;
41:179186.
[28] Skoch A, Jiru F, Bunke J. Spectroscopic imaging: Basic principles. Euro-
pean Journal of Radiology 2008; 67:230239.
==PAGE:76==
Appendix
.1
Matlab Functions
.1.1
Radii distribution
1
function
rad=newRadii ( Nring ,N0, fov )
2 % This
function
c a l c u l a t e s
a
d i s t r i b u t i o n
of
r a d i i
f or
a
number of
c i r c l e s
3 % in
order
to match the k−space
sampling
density
to
that
of a Hamming
4 % window .
Each equation
i s
numbered in
square
brackets ,
which
r e f e r s
to an
5 % equation
given
in
6 % the paper "Density−Weighted Concentric
Circle
T r a j e c t o r i e s
f or
High
7 % Resolution
Brain Magnetic Resonance
Spectroscopic
Imaging at 7T" by
8 % Hingerl
et
al
9 % Inputs :
Nring : The number of
rings
to
cover k−space
10 %
N0: Number of
voxels
along
each dimension
11 %
fov : The assigned
fov
12 % Outputs :
rad :
Vector
of
Nring x 1
r a d i i
fo r
the
c i r c l e s
ins crib ed
in
the
13 % fov
14
K_fov=1/(2∗fov ) ; % radius
of
the
f i r s t
c i r c l e
15
kmax=1/(2∗fov /N0) ; % Maximum extent
of k−space .
==PAGE:77==
Matlab Functions
68
16
17
a =0.54; % alpha parameter
fo r Hamming window
18
b=0.46; % beta parameter
f or Hamming window
19
20
c1=kmax∗( a/2−2∗b/( pi ^2) ) ; % [ B3 ]
Integration
constant
21
c2=−b∗(kmax^2) /( pi ^2) ; % [ B3 ]
Integration
constant
22
23
syms k(K) k K
24
k=(a∗K^2/2+b∗kmax^2/( pi ^2) . . .
25
∗cos ( pi ∗K/kmax)+b∗kmax∗K/ pi ∗sin ( pi ∗K/kmax)+c2 ) /c1 ; %
[ B2 ] k(K)
26
27
eq=taylor (k ,K, ' order ' ,70) ; % taylor
expansion
of
[ B2 ]
with
respect
to K
28
K=f i n v e r s e ( eq ) ; % Inverse
of
the
taylor
expansion
to
obtain K(k)
29
30
k_K=(a∗K_fov^2/2+b∗kmax^2/( pi ^2)∗cos ( pi ∗K_fov/kmax) . . .
31
+b∗kmax∗K_fov/ pi ∗sin ( pi ∗K_fov/kmax)+c2 ) /c1 ; % [ B2 ]
with K=1/(2∗FOV)
32
33
j =0:Nring −1;
34
ki=k_K+j /( Nring −1)∗(kmax−k_K) ; % [ B4 ]
coordinates
f o r
density
weighting
35
rad=double ( subs (K, ki ) ) ' ; % s ub st itu te
coordinates
into K(
k)
36
37
end
.1.2
Postcorrection for VD CRT and AVD CRT
1
function
CorrectedImage=PostCorrection ( Image , omega ,N0)
2 % This
function was written
to make post−a c q u i s i t i o n
c o r r e c t i o n s
to
3 % k−t−space
f o r VD CRT and TVD CRT.
4 % I n i t i a l l y
c a l c u l a t e
sampling
density by gridding
ones
5
Mc=ones ( length (omega) ,1) ;
6
7
w = ones ( length (omega) ,1) ;
8
9
10
F=NUFFT3D(omega ,w, 1 , [ 0 , 0 , 0 ] , [ N0,N0, s i z e ( Image , 3 ) ] , 2 ) ;
11
SD = F' ∗(Mc) ;
==PAGE:78==
Matlab Functions
69
12
13
int =1;
14
ss = [ ] ;
15
kspace_cor=f f t s h i f t ( f f t 2 ( squeeze (SD( : , : , 4 0 1 ) ) ) ) ;
16
k=i f f t s h i f t ( i f f t n ( Image ) ) ;
17
18 % Calculate
c o r r e c t i o n
f a c t o r
fo r
center
of k−space
19
f o r
i i =0.01:0.001:0.91
20
k1=kspace_cor ;
21
k1 ( f l o o r (N0/2) +1, f l o o r (N0/2)+1)=k1 ( f l o o r (N0/2) +1, f l o o r (N0
/2)+1)∗i i ;
22
k1=k1 ./ k1 ( f l o o r (N0/2) +1, f l o o r (N0/2)+1) ;
23
ww=hamming(N0+1) ;
24
ww=ww( 1 :N0, 1 ) . ∗( abs ( k1 ( f l o o r (N0/2) +1, f l o o r (N0/2)+1)) ) ;
25
ss ( int )=sum( squeeze ( abs (( k1 ( f l o o r (N0/2) +1 ,:) ) ) ) '−ww( 1 :N0
, 1 ) . ∗( abs ( k1 ( f l o o r (N0/2) +1, f l o o r (N0/2)+1)) ) ) ;
26
int=int +1;
27
end
28
[~ , ind ]=min( abs ( ss ) ) ;
29
i i = 0 . 0 1 : 0 . 0 0 1 : 0 . 9 1 ;
30
cor=i i ( ind ) ;
31
k2=kspace_cor ;
32
k2 ( f l o o r (N0/2) +1, f l o o r (N0/2)+1)=k2 ( f l o o r (N0/2) +1, f l o o r (N0
/2)+1)∗cor ;
33
k2=k2 ./ k2 ( f l o o r (N0/2) +1, f l o o r (N0/2)+1) ;
34
35 % Now c a l c u l a t e
c o r r e ct i o n
f or
remaining k−space
36
l l=ww.∗ww' ;
37
l l=l l ./max(max( l l ) ) ;
38
c o r r e c t i o n=l l ./ abs ( k2 ) ;
39
mask=zeros (N0,N0) ;
40
mask(N0/2−4:N0/2+5,N0/2−4:N0/2+5)=1;
41
mask=l o g i c a l (mask) ;
42
c o r r e c t i o n (~mask) =1;
43
c o r r e c t i o n ( f l o o r (N0/2) +1, f l o o r (N0/2)+1)=cor ;
44
45 % Introduce
c o r r e c t i o n s
on image
46
im=zeros ( s i z e ( Image ) ) ;
47
f o r
i i =1: s i z e ( Image , 3 )
48
49
k ( : , : , i i )=k ( : , : , i i ) . ∗c o r r e c t i o n ;
50
51
end
52
k ( : , : , 1 )=k ( : , : , 1 ) . / 2 ;
==PAGE:79==
Matlab Functions
70
53
CorrectedImage=f f t n (( squeeze (k) ) ) ;
54
end
.1.3
Postcorrection for TVD CRT
1
function
[ im , k]= PostCorrectionAtt ( Image ,SD,N0, Nr , att_koef
)
2 % This
function was written
to make post−a c q u i s i t i o n
c o r r e c t i o n s
to
3 % k−t−space
f o r AVD CRT.
4
ks=i f f t s h i f t ( i f f t n (SD) ) ;
5
k=i f f t s h i f t ( i f f t n ( Image ) ) ;
6
7
mask=zeros (N0,N0) ;
8
mask(N0/2−5:N0/2+7,N0/2−5:N0/2+7)=1;
9
mask=l o g i c a l (mask) ;
10
11
t_att=l i nspace (0 ,320 ,Nr) ;
12
w_size=round (N0∗sqrt (1−t_att/ att_koef ) ') ;
13
nn2=799: −1:1;
14
f o r
nz=15:785
15
n=nn2 (1 , nz ) ;
16
int =1;
17
ss = [ ] ;
18
% Calculate
c o r r e c t i o n
f a c t o r
fo r
center
of k−space
19
f o r
i i =0.01:0.001:0.51
20
k1=squeeze ( ks ( : , : , nz ) ) ;
21
k1 ( f l o o r (N0/2) +1, f l o o r (N0/2)+1)=k1 ( f l o o r (N0/2) +1,
f l o o r (N0/2)+1)∗i i ;
22
k1=k1 ./ k1 ( f l o o r (N0/2) +1, f l o o r (N0/2)+1) ;
23
i f mod( w_size (n) ,2)~=0
24
ww=[ zeros ( c e i l ((N0−w_size (n) ) /2) ,1) ; hamming(
w_size (n) ) ; zeros ( c e i l ((N0−w_size (n) ) /2)
−1,1) ] ;
25
ww=ww( 1 :N0, 1 ) . ∗( abs ( k1 ( f l o o r (N0/2) +1, f l o o r (N0
/2)+1)) ) ;
26
e l s e
27
ww=[ zeros ((N0−w_size (n) ) /2 ,1) ; hamming( w_size (
n)+1) ; zeros ((N0−w_size (n) ) /2 ,1) ] ;
28
ww=ww( 1 :N0, 1 ) . ∗( abs ( k1 ( f l o o r (N0/2) +1, f l o o r (N0
/2)+1)) ) ;
29
end
30
ss ( int )=sum( squeeze ( abs (( k1 ( f l o o r (N0/2) +1 ,:) ) ) ) '−
==PAGE:80==
Matlab Functions
71
ww( 1 :N0, 1 ) . ∗( abs ( k1 ( f l o o r (N0/2) +1, f l o o r (N0/2)
+1)) ) ) ;
31
int=int +1;
32
end
33
[~ , ind ]=min( abs ( ss ) ) ;
34
i i = 0 . 0 1 : 0 . 0 0 1 : 0 . 9 1 ;
35
cor=i i ( ind ) ;
36
37
% Calculate
c o r r e c t i o n s
f or
remaining
part
of k−space
38
k2=squeeze ( ks ( : , : , nz ) ) ;
39
k2 ( f l o o r (N0/2) +1, f l o o r (N0/2)+1)=k2 ( f l o o r (N0/2) +1,
f l o o r (N0/2)+1)∗cor ;
40
k2=k2 ./ k2 ( f l o o r (N0/2) +1, f l o o r (N0/2)+1) ;
41
l l=ww.∗ww' ;
42
l l=l l ./max(max( l l ) ) ;
43
c o r r e c t i o n=l l ./ abs ( k2 ) ;
44
45
c o r r e c t i o n (~mask) =1;
46
cc=(mean( c o r r e c t i o n (mask) ) −1) ;
47
c o r r e c t i o n (mask)=co r r e c t i o n (mask)−cc ;
48
c o r r e c t i o n ( f l o o r (N0/2) +1, f l o o r (N0/2)+1)=cor −0.25∗cc ;
49
50 % Introduce
c o r r e c t i o n s
to image
51
i f
nz==15
52
f or
i i =0:14
53
k ( : , : , nz−i i )=k ( : , : , nz−i i ) .∗c o r r e c t i o n ;
54
end
55
e l s e i f
nz==785
56
f or
i i =0:14
57
k ( : , : , nz+i i )=k ( : , : , nz+i i ) . ∗c o r r e c t i o n ;
58
end
59
e l s e
60
k ( : , : , nz )=k ( : , : , nz ) . ∗c o r r e c t i o n ;
61
end
62
63
64
c ( : , : , n)=c o r r e c t i o n ;
65
66
end
67
im=f f t n (( squeeze (k) ) ) ;
68
69
end
