==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Consequences of nonsense-mediated
decay in cancers
Analysis of genomes and exomes from 1000 Danish patients
Mathias Husted Torp
External supervisor: Frederik Otzen Bagger
Internal supervisor: Lars Rønn Olsen
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) is a process that degrades transcripts containing premature
stop codons. It has previously been reported that some tumors exploit this mechanism to at-
tenuate key tumor suppressors. To investigate this link between NMD and cancer, variant and
expression profiles of 1000 Danish patients were modelled using genomes and transcriptomes.
Several small clusters of variant profiles were identified, and based on the highly variable genes,
small clusters of expression profiles were identified as well. Through an integrated analysis com-
bining the genomes and transcriptomes, eQTL variants in the genes PNRC2, PABPC1, UPF2
and SMG1 were predicted. Investigation of the spatial structures of the proteins confirmed
that the predicted eQTL variants in these genes could alter their phenotype. Gene set enrich-
ment analysis of the thousands of genes predicted to be under regulation of the eQTL variants
revealed no significant overrepresentation of gene sets.
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis is written in a book setup using the classical IMRAD structure. This means that main
headings are called Chapters and subheadings are called Sections. The chapter “Introduction”
is thus exactly equivalent to an introduction section in a classical IMRAD article.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Contents
iii
Glossary
1
Aim of this study
2
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Degradation of mRNA containing premature stop codons
. . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Regulation of mRNAs not containing premature stop codons . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
The hallmarks of cancer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Somatic variant calling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
mRNA expression analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Methods
8
2.1
Investigating the background stop codon probability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Data collection and pre-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Filtering of low-quality samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Gene sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Somatic variant calling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6
Quantification of gene expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.7
Expression quantitative trait loci analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Results
17
3.1
Investigating the background stop codon probability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Fase1 project data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Filtering low-quality samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Somatic variant calls analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5
Gene expression analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.6
Expression quantitative trait loci analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Discussion
43
4.1
Further studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
==PAGE:5==
Contents
iv
5
Conclusion
46
A Gene sets
47
A.1
Gene sets from MsigDB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A.2
Hand-curated gene sets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
B PCA plots for outlier identification
49
B.1
mRNA expression matrix of the samples normalised to TPM . . . . . . . . . .
49
B.2
Somatic variant matrix of the samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
C Clustering plots of expression matrix
51
D Clustering plots of log-transformed expression matrix
55
E
Sequencing coverage at the genomic positions of the NMD genes
59
References
61
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Glossary
Term
Definition
BAM
Binary Alignment Map. A file format for aligned sequences and meta-data.
bp
Base pairs
CRAM
Compressed Reference-oriented Alignment Map. A loss-full reduction of BAM.
EJC
Exon junction complex. Complex that forms on the junction of two exons that forms as
a consequence of mRNA splicing.
eQTL
Expression quantitative trait loci. An analysis that integrates expression and variant
data to find correlations.
FASTQ
Text-based format for storing nucleotide sequence and corresponding quality scores
GATK
The Genome Analysis Toolkit from Broad Institute [1]. Toolbox to process
next-generation sequencing data.
GRCh38
Genome Reference Consortium Human Build 38 [3]. A reference for the human
genome.
GTF
Gene Transfer Format. A file format for sequence features, gene structures and meta
data.
IGV
The Integrative Genomics Viewer. Application for viewing genome scale data files such
as alignments (SAM, BAM, CRAM), variant calls (VCF) and other annotations (BED,
WIG).
indel
Insertion or deletion of bases.
MAF
Minor allele frequency. How large a fraction of the samples have the least frequent of
the two alleles at this position.
MsigDB
Molecular Signatures Database [4]. A collection of annotated gene sets.
PCA
Principal component analysis. Linear method for visualising multidimensional data.
Phred quality
score
Measure of the quality of the identification of the nucleobases generated by automated
DNA sequencing
PTC
Premature translation stop codon
SNP
Single nucleotide polymorphism
t-SNE
t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding. Non-linear method for visualising
multidimensional data.
TPM
Transcripts per million
Trim Galore!
Quality and adapter trimmer for high-throughput sequencing reads [2].
uORF
Upstream open reading frame. An open reading frame in the 5’UTR of an mRNA.
UTR
Untranslated region. Regions before the start codon (5’UTR) and after the stop codon
(3’UTR) on an mRNA.
VCF
Variant Call Format. Format for storing called variants and associated meta-data.
WES
Whole Exome Sequencing. Sequencing targeting the entire exome of an organism.
WGS
Whole Genome Sequencing. Sequencing targeting the entire genome of an organism.
==PAGE:7==
Aim of this study
The nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) pathway performs several house-keeping tasks throughout
the body.
Its main activation factor is the presence of premature stop codons in mRNA,
which targets a transcript for degradation, resulting in attenuation of the gene product. It
has previously been reported that this mechanism is exploited by some tumors to attenuate
expression of key tumor suppressors. Exploitation of the NMD pathway can occur through
introducing premature stop codons in genes, targeting these for degradation, and altering of
the phenotype can occur through driver mutations in genes involved in NMD.
One way of identifying driver mutations is to search for clusters of somatic variant profiles
that represent distinct disease genotypes, and distinct disease phenotypes can be identified by
searching for clusters of gene expression profiles. An integrated analysis combines the variant
profile with the expression profile to predict which driver mutations are correlated with a change
in the expression of a gene.
Performing an integrated analysis requires many samples and the data should preferentially
be processed in the same way for all samples.
Having a large data set of matched tumor
and normal samples with genome and transcriptom sequencing data originating from the same
source is a unique opportunity to examine cancer driving mutations through an integrated
analysis. The aim of this thesis is to investigate the link between nonsense-mediated decay and
cancer using the genomes and transcriptomes of 1000 Danish patients to search for potential
driver mutations that exploit or alter the phenotype of the NMD pathway.
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER1
Introduction
In 1979, the mechanism that degraded mRNA with stop codons in the coding region was
discovered [5]. It was later named the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) pathway, and
its primary known function is to scan pre-mRNA for premature translation stop codons and thus
avoid truncated proteins. Protein metabolism is expensive in terms of ATP usage (Attaching one
amino acid to one tRNA requires one ATP molecule) [6], so limiting the amount of unnecessary
translation is an efficient way of optimizing the cell energy usage [7]. Furthermore, truncation
of an arbitrary number of amino acids from the C-terminus of a protein may have unanticipated
negative effects for the organism, as it has previously been shown to substantially alter the
function of various proteins, where some are related to several cancers [8].
Although it is a topic in several previous studies [11], little is established concerning the role of
the NMD pathway in cancer development. One could hypothesize that the numerous mutations
in cancer cells interrupt the regulation of genes involved in the NMD pathway or that cancer
cells contain a higher amount of premature stop codons, which leads to higher expression of
the NMD pathway. A very recent study [14] describes how tumors introduced stop codons in
key tumor-suppressors, leading to the NMD pathway suppressing the expression of these genes.
It also confirms that some tumors regulate the expression level of the NMD pathway for their
own benefit.
1.1
Degradation of mRNA containing
premature stop codons
As mentioned, the NMD pathway is named after its ability to selectively degrade mRNAs
containing premature translation stop codons. The execution of this is heavily dependent on
the definition of a premature stop codon. Core factors, as well as some mechanisms of the
NMD pathway, are conserved across the animal kingdom [15], which suggests that it is an old
and essential process. For mammals, the definition of a premature stop codon is a stop codon
that is more than 55 nucleotides upstream of the last exon-exon junction of the mRNA [16].
The exon junction complex (EJC) is used for detection of these junctions, as it forms 20-24
nucleotides upstream of the exon-exon junction when joined after mRNA splicing [17]. NMD
decay thus depends on the splicing of pre-mRNAs, and it has previously been shown that for
some genes at least one intron is required for NMD decay to occur [18].
However, not every exon-exon junction leads to a complete assembly of the EJC, and many
complexes are assembled at other locations [19]. The underlying mechanism is not yet com-
==PAGE:9==
1.2 Regulation of mRNAs not containing premature stop codons
4
pletely understood, but it suggests that NMD decay can also occur without the presence of an
EJC.
1.2
Regulation of mRNAs not containing
premature stop codons
During the last few years another important role of the NMD pathway has been discovered:
It regulates the expression of mRNAs (also without premature stop codons) by altering the
transcript stability. This necessitates tight regulation of the NMD pathway itself for fine-tuned
control over the transcript stability [20].
The nonsense-mediated decay is strongly induced by a single factor; the presence of a premature
stop codon.
In contrast, the degradation of mRNAs without this signal is induced by the
combination of several factors such as a long 3’ untranslated region (3’UTR) and an upstream
open reading frame (uORF) [19].
1.3
The hallmarks of cancer
During initial development of a tumor, it achieves certain hallmarks that over time transforms
its regular phenotype to a tumor phenotype. To understand how the NMD pathway is connected
to these tumor development, an understanding of the enabling characteristics and hallmarks of
this process is required.
Throughout the life of a person, the mutations acquired in a cell are passed on to its successors.
Most mutations are silent, but some mutations alter the cell phenotype slightly, over time
giving it new characteristics. During the development of a primary tumor, several hallmarks
and enabling characteristics are achieved through this slow build-up of mutations [21].
These hallmarks consist of several aspects that together enable the tumor to grow continuously,
ensure the availability of sufficient nutrients for the tumor, and avoid the natural defense mech-
anisms that the body has developed to suppress sustained uncontrolled growth of disobedient
cells. One of these natural defenses is the limited number of replications for most somatic cells.
Since each chromosome is shortened a bit for each cell cycle [23], at some point, the telomeres
protecting the coding genes will be gone and the cell will die. Regular somatic cells go into
a state of cellular senescence when the telomeres are shortened to a certain extent. Another
defense mechanism is the growth suppressors, also known as tumor suppressors, that limit cell
growth and proliferation rates [24]. Finally, the immune system plays a role in suppressing
cancer by inducing apoptosis in some cases [25].
Some of the hallmarks of cancer, such as genome instability and increased mutation rates,
enable the tumor to achieve the rest of the hallmarks faster, since mutations in important tumor
suppressors and DNA repair mechanisms will further increase the mutation rates, allowing the
==PAGE:10==
1.4 Somatic variant calling
5
tumor to proliferate faster and so on. It is therefore important to find ways of detecting cancer
as quickly and easily as possible, one way of doing so could be by means of somatic variant
calling.
1.4
Somatic variant calling
The genetic profile of a tumor cell relates to the genetic profile of normal cells from the same
organism. To identify what characterizes a given tumor, it is thus necessary to compare it with
a paired blood sample. For a given position in the genome, it is now conceptually simple to call
variants: Count the number of reads from the tumor sample mapped to a given position that
contains a nucleotide that differs from the normal sample reads, and estimate the likelihood
that this is truly a variant.
However, this method only applies for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), and many
technical implications make the process more difficult to carry out in practice [27]. To fully
understand these implications, it is important to have a basic understanding of how DNA is
sequenced and aligned.
1.4.1
Next-generation DNA sequencing
Next-generation sequencing methods enable sequencing of an entire human genome in a short
time, due to its parallel nature [28]. Its primary caveat is the short read length compared to
Sanger-sequencing and so-called third generation sequencing methods such as Oxford Nanopore [29].
Next-generation sequencing methods involve several steps, and these may vary, depending on
the specific platform. This explanation is based on Illumina’s sequencing protocol used for
sequencing data in this study [30] and not all steps are explained here.
In the first step,
library preparation, the genome is cut in small fragments (<500 bp) and each fragment has
a pair of adapters ligated to its ends. The adapters both serve the purpose of tagging the
fragment with an identifier for multiplexing and enabling the fragment to bind to a flow-cell
with complementary adapters attached. Once all fragments are bound to the flow-cell, they
are amplified many times through bridge amplification. This is the second step, called cluster
generation.
After cluster generation, the reads are sequenced using sequencing-by-synthesis. One fluorophore-
marked base is added in each cycle, complementary to the amplified sequences, so the number
of cycles determines the read length. Once the reads have achieved the desired length, the
adapter identifier is also sequenced so samples can be distinguished from each other and for-
ward/reverse reads can be distinguished as well. Afterwards, the read is sequenced starting
from the other end to get the reverse read too.
Note that if the number of sequencing cycles is longer than the amplified reads, the adapter
sequence is included at the end of the read. Due to this, it is important to trim the reads for
adapter content before aligning them to a genome.
==PAGE:11==
1.5 mRNA expression analysis
6
Mapping millions of short reads to a genome of more than 3 billion bp is a non-trivial problem to
solve. This is, in part, because a read of e.g. length 150 bp may align at multiple sites, depending
on the read quality and the number of alignment mismatches allowed. Another ongoing and
closely related problem when mapping short reads is that the human genome contains many
repetitive regions. It is true for a given repetitive region that if the repeating pattern is longer
than the length of the read to be mapped, the read cannot be uniquely mapped [31]. Repetitive
regions are thus unmappable regions, and reads originating from these regions are unmappable
reads. These implications of DNA read sequencing and mapping are related to some of the
technical implications of calling somatic variants.
1.4.2
Technical implications when calling somatic
variants
Variant calls are based on the alignment of reads against a reference. The alignment process is
itself subject to errors, and misaligned reads can result in false SNPs and indels being called [32].
Importantly, references based on next-generation sequencing assemblies are incomplete in areas
with many repeats, which is the case for repetitive regions, meaning that these regions require
sequencing technology with longer read lengths to resolve [33].
This is part of an increasing concern about what is referred to as reference allele bias [32].
Reference allele bias describes that the sequence of a read must be represented in the chosen
reference genome and it must not differ too much. Otherwise, the reads are mapped incorrectly
or not at all, which introduces systematic errors in the alignment. This is, especially, a concern
in cancer samples, since regions in tumor samples may be very dissimilar to the corresponding
regions in a normal sample, due to the high mutation frequencies [34]. To link genotypes and
phenotypes by performing an integrated analysis, the variant data is to be combined with gene
expression data.
1.5
mRNA expression analysis
Gene expression levels in a cell are determined by measuring mRNA levels of genes. Microarrays
have historically been the go-to standard, but they are limited to measuring gene expression of
genes with known transcript sequences, and the probes used for binding the mRNA may bind
with different affinities, which introduces probe bias. Also, the reading is batch sensitive and
it is difficult to compare absolute expression values [35]. Furthermore, microarray experiments
are reported to be difficult to reproduce [36].
Because of the mentioned limitations of microarrays, mRNA sequencing is increasing in popu-
larity for measuring of expression levels. mRNA sequencing (RNA sequencing) is carried out in
largely the same way as DNA sequencing. Only an initial step of reverse transcription of the
RNA to cDNA before library preparation and sequencing is added. [37]. It is important that
this reverse transcription should happen as soon as possible, since RNA is less stable than DNA
and degradation may occur to varying degrees [38].
==PAGE:12==
1.5 mRNA expression analysis
7
Using RNA sequencing it is possible to measure the expression of unknown genes, if they
can be mapped to a reference genome [39]. The number of transcripts mapped to a certain
gene is an absolute fraction, so comparing expression levels of genes is also possible, if a
proper normalization method such as RPKM or TPM is used [40]. To accurately map mRNA
transcripts to their origin, splicing and processing of the pre-mRNA must be considered [39].
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER2
Methods
2.1
Investigating the background stop codon
probability
In order to investigate the occurrence of stop codons in tumor samples in the data set, a
proper background model should be established beforehand. The analyses in this thesis are
based on the Genome Reference Consortium Human Build 38 patch release 10 (GRCh38.p10),
specifically, they are based on the Ensembl release 90 [41] standard chromosomes 1-22, X, Y
and MT.
The background stop codon probabilities across the human genome were estimated by calcu-
lating the smallest Levenshtein distance from a given codon to any of the three stop codons in
the human DNA codon table. IUPAC ambiguity codes (B, D, H, K, M, N, R, S, V, W, Y) were
always considered as a mismatch. This was done for all six possible reading frames across the
entire genome, so the background probability could be easily extracted at any given position or
range.
Ensembl gene set annotations in General Transfer Format (GTF) matching the reference genome
were used to extract stop codon probabilities for different regions of the genome. The promoter
region for a gene was defined as the transcription start site (TSS) including 500 bases up-
and downstream, amounting to a total of 1000 bp for each promoter. Intragenic regions were
defined as any part of a gene that is not in an exon, and intergenic regions were defined as any
part of a chromosome that is not inside a gene, excluding the long stretches of Ns at the edges
of the chromosomes. Enhancer regions are available for hg19 [42], and they were lifted over
to GRCh38 using the rtracklayer [43] and annotatr [44] packages in R. The gene sets used are
explained in Section 2.4. Now that a background model is established, retrieval of a data set
is the next step.
2.2
Data collection and pre-processing
FASTQ-files for blood and tumor samples are produced as a part of routine diagnostics for
patients enrolled in the FaseI program at the Center of Genomic Medicine at Rigshospitalet,
Copenhagen, Denmark. This program is offered to cancer patients with advanced solid tumors,
where normal treatment has failed.
==PAGE:14==
2.2 Data collection and pre-processing
9
DNA and RNA were extracted from tumor biopsy samples in RNAlater (QIAgen) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA-sequencing was done using TruSeq Stranded Total
RNA Library Prep Kit and sequenced on a HiSeq2500 (Illumina). The reads are paired-end
reads with a read length of 150 bp, sequenced using the HiSeq2500 or NextSeq500 (100 bp)
platforms from Illumina. The DNA samples are whole exome sequencing (WES) samples.
The reads were first trimmed for Illumina sequencing adapters using “Trim Galore!” [2], while
also trimming low-quality bases and reads, filtering bases with a PHRED score below 20 and a
read length below 40 bp.
GATK 3.8-0 [1] was used to align and process the trimmed reads into BAM-files following the
best practices pipeline for pre-processing of data for variant discovery. In the interest of disk
space, BAM-files were converted to CRAM-format [45] using Samtools [46], prior to analysis.
The development of this pipeline has previously been graded in the DTU project “Building
processing pipelines for large genomic data”, but for clarity the steps being performed by the
pre-processing pipeline are included in Figure 2.1 and briefly explained here:
• trim_reads: Here the reads are trimmed by “Trim Galore!” as explained just above.
• fastqc_post_trim: Generates report to check the quality of the trimmed reads.
• bwa_mem_and_flagstat: bwa mem aligns the exome reads to the human reference
GRCh38. Flagstat produces alignment stats for quality checking.
• mark_duplicates: Picard MarkDuplicates marks PCR duplicates in the alignment, which
means that reads with the same sequence are only included once in subsequent steps.
• indel_target_creator: GATK RealignerTargetCreator creates targets for local realignment.
Local realignment is needed if the sample contains an indel compared to the used reference,
which results in many alignment mismatches around the indel that could be mistaken as
SNPs. This is important when performing variant calling on the alignments, though it is
not necessary when using MuTect2, as it is done internally.
• indel_realigner: Applies the created realignments created in the previous step.
• validate_bam: Checks validity of BAM alignments. Also outputs basic statistics about
the alignment.
• bqsr_create: The base quality scores produced by the sequencing machines are prone
to systematic errors. Since these quality scores are important for variant calling, GATK
BaseRecalibrator applies machine learning techniques to correct the scores. This step
outputs a table that tells GATK PrintReads how to recalibrate the quality scores.
• bqsr_apply_cram: Applies the scores in the table generated by GATK BaseRecalibrator.
Pipes the output BAM alignment to Samtools for conversion to CRAM-format.
• flagstat_post_processing: Same as previous Flagstat. For before/after comparison.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Data collection and pre-processing
10
• mutect2: Somatic variant calling for paired normal and tumor samples.
• star_generate_genome_indexes: Generates genome indexes required for running STAR.
Only run once for the entire pipeline.
• star: Aligns RNA reads to the human reference GRCh38 and counts the reads mapped
to each gene.
• all: Specifies which samples to run the individual steps on. Reads follow the path on
the left, Exome alignments follow the path in the middle and RNA alignments follow the
path on the right.
Now that the data is retrieved and processed, the next step is to perform an overall quality
check and filter outlier samples of low quality.
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Data collection and pre-processing
11
Figure 2.1: The steps involved in pre-processing the reads in FASTQ-format to alignments in
CRAM-format.
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Filtering of low-quality samples
12
2.3
Filtering of low-quality samples
FastQC was run on the trimmed reads and Samtools Flagstat was run on the final alignments
(CRAM-files) to generate reports used for quality-checking. Furthermore, the output from some
of the tools in the GATK pipeline such as MarkDuplicates is relevant for inferring the overall
quality of the alignment.
MultiQC was run on all the logs from the pipeline to create a report summarizing the quality
of the samples including output from the following tools:
• Cutadapt (Trim Galore!)
• FastQC
• GATK BaseRecalibrator
• Picard MarkDuplicates
• Samtools Flagstat
• Spliced Transcripts Alignment to a Reference (STAR)
Running MultiQC yields an HTML-report for viewing, as well as text files with generated
statistics for programmatical processing. The text files were used for identifying samples not
passing the quality filters.
2.4
Gene sets
Molecular Signatures Database (MsigDB) [4] gene sets were used to subset on genes involved in
apoptosis [47], p53 genes [48] and the nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) pathway [49]. Unless
otherwise is stated, the genes in the NMD pathway are used to subset to the NMD genes.
In addition to the gene sets from MsigDB, two hand-curated lists of genes were used as well:
a short list (n = 15) of NMD genes that are essential for a proper NMD response [19], and
a short list of reference genes that are used for various housekeeping tasks in mammalian
cells [50]. The short list of NMD genes is used for all analyses except data-driven analyses such
as prediction of eQTLs and calculation of background stop probabilities. The genes included in
the hand-curated gene sets as well as the NMD gene set from MsigDB are listed in Appendix
A.
2.5
Somatic variant calling
To investigate the factors that might make NMD behave differently in tumor samples than
in normal samples, the somatic variants that have accumulated in the tumor samples were
explored.
==PAGE:18==
2.5 Somatic variant calling
13
MuTect2 [51] was used for calling somatic variants on paired blood and tumor samples. Instead
of MuTect’s default soft-filters a custom filter based on the allelic frequency was applied, as
previous findings suggest [52]:
AFtumor > 0.02
∧
AFtumor > 4 · AFnormal
This custom filter ensures that all variants have a minimum tumor allele frequency, and that
this frequency is several times higher than the frequency of the normal allele in this sample.
The called variants were filtered, so only the variants overlapping with nonsense-mediated decay
genes were included. From this subset a N × S matrix was created, where N is the number
of unique variant positions in the subset and S is the number of samples. A given cell in the
matrix is then a logical value specifying if a variant was found at this position in this sample or
not. Using this encoding, indels are indistinguishable from multiple consecutive SNPs.
Some of the variants in the subset only occurred in few samples, and some samples had no
variants in the given subset. Therefore, the variant matrix was filtered for variants only occurring
in one sample, and samples with no variants in the nonsense-mediated decay genes.
Outlier samples in the variant matrix were detected by plotting the data projected onto the
two principal components and searching for samples lying in areas of low density. The variant
matrix was scaled and centered before performing the principal component analysis (PCA) to
avoid that a few SNPs drive the principal components. In this case, all samples more than 3.0
from origo when projected on to one of the two principal components are defined as low-density
samples, since the density is highest around origo. The detected outliers were removed from the
data set, and the process was repeated iteratively until no more evident outliers were present.
The PCA plots can be seen in Appendix B.2.
Several different dimensionality-reduced representations (the first two dimensions are used) of
the variant matrix were produced to search for clusters of samples with similar single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) profiles. These include:
• The outlier PCA plots
• PCA plot of the correlations of the samples
• Heatmap of the correlations of the samples
• Hierarchical clustering of the Euclidean distance between the samples
• t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) plots.
The samples were colored by either mutation load or by temporal order to check if these would
explain the patterns in the plots.
==PAGE:19==
2.6 Quantification of gene expression
14
2.6
Quantification of gene expression
The called somatic variants describe the genotype of the tumors, but in order to investigate
the phenotypes, gene expression was quantified.
RNA reads in the data set were trimmed by “Trim Galore!” as the DNA reads, but they were not
pre-processed by the GATK pipeline that does not have a best practice for RNA. Instead, only
Spliced Transcripts Alignment to a Reference (STAR) was used to align the reads to the human
reference genome and to quantify the expression levels of each gene present in the Ensembl
gene set annotation that was also used to calculate the background stop codon probabilities.
These count files were combined to a N × S matrix of read counts, where N is the number of
genes and S is the number of samples.
Some of the genes in the gene set annotation file had few read counts across all samples in the
data set, and therefore genes fulfilling the following criteria were filtered from the data set:
• Less than 10 reads in any sample
• Less than 50 samples with at least 5 reads
This count matrix was normalized to transcripts per million (TPM) using the following equa-
tion [40]:
TPM = rg · 106
lg · T ,
T =
∑
g∈G
rg
lg
Where rg is the number of reads mapped to the gene, lg is the length of the transcript of a
gene in kilobases, g is a single gene and G is all genes in the experiment.
Like the filtering of variant outliers, expression outlier samples included in the expression matrix
were detected by plotting the data projected onto the two principal components and searching
for samples lying in areas of low density. In this case, all samples more than 2.0 from origo
when projected on to one of the two principal components are defined as low-density samples,
since the density is highest around origo. The expression matrix was scaled and centered before
calculating the principal components. The detected outliers were removed from the data set,
and the process was repeated iteratively until no more evident outliers were present. The PCA
plots can be seen in Appendix B.1.
The most variable genes were identified using the coefficient of variance of the expression for
a gene and dividing it by the mean expression value squared, though this has been reported to
introduce a bias towards genes with a low mean expression [53]:
Corrected variance(x) =
var (x)
mean (x)2
==PAGE:20==
2.7 Expression quantitative trait loci analysis
15
A generalized linear model was fit to the corrected variance as a function of the mean values
larger than the 95th quantile and the genes with a Benjamini & Hochberg adjusted p-value of
less than 1 · 10−3 were selected, resulting in 5349 significant genes.
The expression matrix was log transformed, but log(x) is only defined for x > 0, and some
genes have a TPM value of 0, so an alternative log-transformation was used instead, though it
introduces some bias for low expression values:
log (x) = log(x + 1)
Several different two-dimensional representations of the expression matrix were produced to
search for clusters of samples with similar expression profiles. These include:
• PCA plots following the same procedure as for the outlier plots
• PCA plot of the correlation of samples
• Heatmap of the correlations of highly variable genes
The samples in these plots were colored according to their average counts per million values,
the gender or age of the patient, or the tumor subtype of the patient.
To find clusters of samples with similar expression profiles, k-means clustering with k ∈[2; 20]
was performed and a silhouette plot of the clusters was generated to check the robustness of
the classification. Similarly, hierarchical clustering using complete linkage as clustering strategy
was performed on the distance matrix describing the Euclidean distance between each sample.
The generated hierarchy tree was cut in 2 to 20 clusters, and a silhouette plot for each number
of clusters was generated to check the robustness of the classification. As part of the clustering
analysis, the PCA plots were colored according to the predicted clusters.
2.7
Expression quantitative trait loci analysis
To link the tumor genotypes and phenotypes, an integrated analysis combining the genomic
and transcriptomic data was performed.
The expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) analysis was performed using MatrixEQTL in
R [54]. The chosen method utilizes large matrix operations, which operate on matrices of size
F ×N, where N is the number of samples and F is the number of features, e.g. variants, genes,
or covariates. Accordingly, both the variant matrix and the expression matrix had to be subset
to only include the intersect of samples in-between the two. The following covariates for the
patients were included in the analysis: gender, age, and cancer subtype.
MatrixEQTL was run using linear models, a p-value output threshold of 1 · 10−5, the identity
matrix as covariance matrix, and otherwise default parameters. This predicted hundreds of
thousands of eQTLs, where most of them are likely to be false positives. Consequently, eQTLs
present in less than five samples were filtered.
==PAGE:21==
2.7 Expression quantitative trait loci analysis
16
2.7.1
Exploring selected eQTL genes
These eQTL variants were annotated using SnpEff [56], which gives rich annotations for all
input variants, and here the position of the variant in the protein was used to visualize the
variants in PyMol [57].
Uniprot [58] was used for annotating the protein structures with functional regions such as
binding motifs and interaction sites, and the Protein Data Bank [59] was used for retrieving
protein structures.
2.7.2
Coverage of positions with predicted eQTL
variants
To ensure that the called variants predicted to be eQTLs had sufficient coverage in the alignment,
the average coverage of the different sample types was calculated and viewed in The Integrative
Genomics Viewer (IGV) along with the eQTL variants.
The coverage of each of the final
alignments (CRAM-format) was calculated using Mosdepth. For each sample type (Normal-
DNA, Tumor-DNA and Tumor-RNA) the coverage was averaged across all samples using a
custom Python script.
A VCF-file was created containing the variants predicted to be eQTLs, and this was visualized
in IGV along with the average coverage files. The coverage for each of the NMD genes in the
hand-curated list can be seen in Appendix E.
2.7.3
Gene set enrichment analysis
To search for overrepresented gene sets in the genes predicted to be under regulation of the
eQTL variants, a gene set enrichment analysis was performed.
The output format of the eQTL analysis is a long list with all findings with p-values below
the p-value output threshold. To perform gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) on the eQTL
results, the genes in the human genome were divided in two groups using this list: Genes with
significant eQTLs in the list and genes without significant eQTLs in the list.
Table 2.1: Example contingency table for the GSEA.
With significant eQTL
Without significant eQTL
In pathway
A
B
Not in pathway
C
D
For each pathway a contingency table of the form seen in Table 2.1 was created. This table
is tested for overrepresentation of the groups using Fischer’s exact test. The result is a list of
pathways with a significant overrepresentation of eQTLs.
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER3
Results
3.1
Investigating the background stop codon
probability
In order to investigate the occurrence of stop codons in tumor samples in the data set, a proper
background model should be established beforehand. The nonsense-mediated decay pathway
has previously been exploited by tumors to promote their proliferation [14]. One way of achieving
this is to introduce premature translation stop codons (PTCs) in key tumor suppressors, so that
the NMD pathway will prevent the expression of these genes. In order to investigate if certain
gene families or genomic regions are more prone to having PTCs induced, the probability of all
possible open reading frames in the human genome, including the reading frames in non-coding
regions, were calculated. The stop codon probability of a codon is calculated as 1 minus the
minimum number of mutations required for the codon to become one of the three standard
stop codons (TAG, TAA and TGA) divided by three.
Comparisons of the probabilities across various genomic regions can be seen in Figure 3.1. In
the first block to the left, the probabilities of stop codons across the entire genome, classified
in different categories, can be seen. The first thing of note is that regions categorized as stop
codons have a higher probability of having stop codons randomly introduced. This is expected,
Figure 3.1: The probability of stop codons for various genomic regions when subsetting to
certain gene ranges. The error bars are the 95 % confidence intervals.
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Investigating the background stop codon probability
18
however, the probability is still far from 1. Whenever a stop codon occurs in the genome, the
three bases belonging to this codon are annotated as stop codons, but only the codon starting
at the first base in this region actually has a probability of 1, meaning that it is always a stop
codon.
The error bars in the plot denote the 95 % confidence intervals. There are significant differ-
ences between the average values for several of the genomic regions, especially when comparing
across the entire genome. The observed differences in stop codon probabilities are likely a con-
sequence of hidden sequence patterns such as GC content, rather than an evolutionary pressure
of preventing stop codons in this are, since stop codons are irrelevant in e.g. 5’ untranslated
regions (5’UTR). To exemplify this, the three standard stop codons (TAG, TAA and TGA) have
low GC content; only 2 out of 9 bases are G or C. This means that genomic regions with a low
GC content also naturally have a higher probability of stop codons in this analysis. Bearing this
in mind, the probability patterns across the gene family blocks are quite similar, i.e. apoptosis
genes have probabilities very similar to NMD genes and so on.
Another comparison of the probabilities across various gene ranges can be seen in Figure 3.2.
The exon block makes it easy to compare the gene families side-by-side. It seems that ribosomal
genes in general have a slightly higher probability of stop codons being introduced, whereas p53
genes have a slightly lower probability than both apoptosis and NMD genes. When comparing
to the reference genes, the p53 genes are roughly the same, indicating that the NMD genes
have a slightly increased probability for having stop codons induced.
In Figures 3.1 and 3.2, all exons in a gene are considered the same. This may not always be true
since premature stop codons in the latter exons of a gene could theoretically be less detrimental
than premature stop codons in the first exons of a gene. In order to test this hypothesis, the
average probability of stop codons for exons in all genes was calculated. The results can be
seen in Figure 3.3. When only looking at the first three exons in a gene, there seems to be a
Figure 3.2: The probability of stop codons for various gene types when subsetting to certain
genomic regions. The error bars are the 95 % confidence intervals.
==PAGE:24==
3.2 Fase1 project data
19
Figure 3.3: The line represents the average probability of stop codons in the first 10 exon
regions across all genes in the human genome. The bars illustrate how many
percent of all the exons are present in this category. So nearly a fourth of all
exons are in the type “Exon 1”.
trend that the probability of stop codons increases linearly with the exon number. After the
third exon there is no change in the probability.
The findings do not indicate that any gene ranges are more prone to premature stop codons than
others, but the average GC content of a genomic region may influence its average background
stop probability. It is not necessary to account for this in the subsequent analyses.
3.2
Fase1 project data
To investigate a possible relationship between nonsense-mediated decay and cancer, compre-
hensive genomic and transcriptomic data for hundreds of patients is needed. Collaborating with
the Center of Genomic Medicine at Rigshospitalet, this is available through their Fase1 project.
A complete data set for a patient enrolled in the Fase1 project includes paired Normal-DNA
reads, paired Tumor-DNA reads and paired Tumor-RNA reads. The most recent patient in-
cluded in the data set is Fase1079, so a total of 3237 read pairs covering all 1079 samples is
expected. However, only 2222 reads (~69 %) covering 796 patients (~74 %) were available for
this project. This is not completely unexpected, since not every patient in the Fase1 project
at the Center of Genomic Medicine requires sequencing of both the RNA and the DNA of the
tumor to receive proper treatment. Furthermore, some patient identifiers, e.g. Fase011, are
skipped completely for example if there is not enough genetic material in the tumor biopsy.
Also, sometimes the Normal-DNA sequencing is skipped, if the same patient enters the project
again with a new tumor, thereby getting a new patient identifier; These double patients are
not accounted for in this project, meaning that both Tumor-RNA samples are weighted the
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Fase1 project data
20
same as all other Tumor-RNA samples during the analyses, and the Normal-DNA sample is
only paired with the Tumor-DNA sample bearing the same patient identifier. Consequently,
many readmissions are likely to be filtered based on a missing Normal-DNA sample.
The total number of different kinds of samples included in the data set can be seen in Table
3.1.
As seen in the table, not all samples made it through the processing pipeline. Many of these
failed because of problems with the data. These samples have previously been analysed using
other tools as part of the production flow at the Center of Genomic Medicine, so many of
the data problems are likely to be minor. The samples were run through the pipeline without
any manual error handling, and many of the failed samples could potentially be processed
completely, given further inspection and debugging of individual errors. All processes exiting
with error were attempted rerun twice before being dropped.
The initial aim of analysing 1000 matched genomes and exomes is not completely met by this
data set, but the amount of available data should be sufficient.
==PAGE:26==
3.3 Filtering low-quality samples
21
Table 3.1: Counts of the number of samples covered by the available data and of how many
of the samples were processed by the GATK pre-processing best practices pipeline.
Data
available
Data
processed
Percent
processed
Normal-DNA
699
679
97.1 %
Tumor-DNA
770
671
87.1 %
Tumor-RNA
701
658
93.9 %
Normal-DNA + Tumor-DNA
673
621
92.3 %
Normal-DNA + Tumor-DNA + Tumor-RNA
583
532
91.3 %
3.3
Filtering low-quality samples
To get an overview of the overall quality of data and to filter low-quality samples, MultiQC was
run on the logs and the output files from the data pre-processing pipeline. This generated an
HTML report giving an overview of general quality statistics. This report was investigated to
identify outliers whose signal/noise ratio was considered too low. A beeswarm plot of some of
the general statistics can be seen in Figure 3.4.
In Figure 3.4 row 1, it is seen that tumor and normal samples have similar distributions of
duplicate reads with a median below 10 %. However, some samples have a large fraction of
duplicated reads, so samples with more than 60 % duplicates are discarded.
It is also seen that, generally, more reads are aligned from tumor samples than from normal
samples. The laboratory could confirm that 50 % more material from the tumor sample is
added to the sequencing machine compared to the blood sample. Thus, it is expected that
the tumor samples have more reads than the blood samples. Samples with less than 10 · 106
mapped reads have been filtered to ensure sufficient coverage.
The distribution of points in the “STAR % Aligned” plot seems to be bimodal, judging from the
beeswarm plot, Figure 3.4 third row. There is a large chunk of samples between 40 and 100 %
aligned, of which most samples have ~80 % reads aligned. There is a smaller chunk of samples
with less than 40 % reads mapped. What is not seen from the plot is that, by far, the most
frequent cause (>98 %) of reads unmapped by STAR in this dataset is reads being too short.
These reads occur after read trimming by “Trim Galore!”, which allows reads down to 40 bp
to pass through after adapter trimming. Therefore, the samples in this small chunk are likely
to contain many reads where the insert size has been too short, which indicates contamination
or degradation of the RNA material prior to sequencing. Samples with less than 40 % aligned
reads have been filtered.
The “Cutadapt % Trimmed” plot shows the percentage of the reads in a sample containing
adapter content before trimming. Note here that “Trim Galore!” was used for running Cutadapt,
and the default minimum overlap with the adapter sequence is 1 bp. This means that if the last
base of the read is coincidentally the same as the first base of the adapter, it will be trimmed
and counted in this statistic. When considering this, it is surprising that no more reads are
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Filtering low-quality samples
22
Figure 3.4: Jitter plots of some general statistics from the MultiQC report. Legend: Red =
Normal-DNA, Blue = Tumor-DNA, Green = Tumor-RNA.
trimmed for adapters. Adapter content in a high percentage of the reads of a sample indicates
bad sequencing data or contamination, so samples with more than 30 % of the reads trimmed
have been filtered.
FastQC % Dups illustrates how large a percentage of the reads are exact duplicates of each
other. Specifically, it counts how many reads that share at least 50 bp. From this plot it is
seen that the RNA reads, in general, have a very high degree of duplication, whereas the DNA
reads are mostly below 25 % duplication. This is further investigated in Section 3.3.1.
The average GC content, as calculated with FastQC, is around 50 % as expected. The DNA
samples have less variance, whereas the RNA samples are more distributed. This may partly
be explained by the higher level of sequence duplication in the RNA samples, so that fewer
sequences are weighted higher in this statistic, which effectively amplifies noise.
Read lengths are, generally, around 150 bp as expected, but there is a group of reads with a
read length of 100 bp instead, consisting of both DNA and RNA samples. Closer inspection
of the data reveals that all old samples have a read length of 100. It turns out that, in the
beginning of the Fase1 program, samples were run on Illumina HiSeq, which generates 100
bp reads, and they still use it as a backup during special circumstances. The use of different
sequence machines and read lengths will probably have introduced some noise in the final data.
Figure 3.4 was used to set up some criteria for defining low-quality samples. These can be
==PAGE:28==
3.3 Filtering low-quality samples
23
seen in Table 3.2, and all samples fulfilling at least one of these criteria have been filtered from
further analyses.
Table 3.2:
Criteria defining low-quality samples.
Statistic
Criterion
Affected samples
Picard % Duplicated
> 60
DNA
Flagstat reads mapped
< 10 · 106
DNA
STAR % aligned
< 40
RNA
Cutadapt % trimmed
> 30
All
The filters led to filtration of 13 Normal-DNA samples, 9 Tumor-DNA samples, and 25 Tumor-
RNA samples.
3.3.1
Checking the sequence duplication levels
Further analysis was required to explain why all the RNA reads have a sequence duplication
percentage of more than 50 %. To investigate this, another plot from the MultiQC report is
included in Figure 3.5.
The reads in the plot are colored according to whether they fit the typical distribution of
sequence duplication levels.
As is seen in Table 3.3, almost all DNA reads pass this test,
whereas almost all RNA reads fail this test.
Figure 3.5: Line plot from MultiQC of the sequence duplication level for all reads in the data
set. A single line shows the percentage of the reads in the library being at the
different Sequence Duplication Levels. Legend: Green = Pass, Yellow = Warning,
Red = Fail.
==PAGE:29==
3.4 Somatic variant calls analysis
24
Table 3.3: Contingency table showing the results from the sequence duplication distribution
test as the number of read files falling in each category.
Pass
Warn
Fail
Normal-DNA
1292
28
18
Tumor-DNA
1276
56
16
Tumor-RNA
13
43
1236
A distribution following an exponentially decaying function is wanted, since low sequence du-
plication is expected. Sequencing with high coverage is reflected in this plot as a flatter curve,
whereas contaminants of low complexity will produce spikes. Duplicates typically arise from PCR
artefacts or re-sequencing the same sequences due to high sequencing coverage [60]. Both may
be true in this case, since both spikes and a generally flatter curve are seen for RNA reads
compared to DNA reads. No further action is taken to accommodate this.
3.4
Somatic variant calls analysis
Somatic variants were called to characterize the tumor genotypes. The matched normal sample
is used to differentiate germline variants from somatic variants, and the combined somatic
variants of a given tumor represent its variant profile. In order to identify common genotypes,
clusters of tumors having similar variant profiles are sought.
When calling cancer somatic variants, a variant is called when the alignment of the tumor sample
differs from the alignment of the normal sample. Thus, any source of differences in the two
alignments can also be a source of somatic variants being called. One such source is technical
artifacts that arise due to sequencing errors and alignment errors, which will introduce variants
in similar regions across samples that are processed in the same way. Since tumor samples
and blood samples are sequenced using the same protocols and post-processed using the same
pipeline, these technical artifacts will likely occur equally in blood and tumor samples.
595 paired Normal-DNA and Tumor-DNA samples were processed for this project. Of these
samples some failed the variant calling, some had no variants in the NMD genes, and some
samples only had a single variant called in the NMD genes. Therefore, only 497 samples are
included in this analysis. 13 outliers were removed based on their projection onto the first
two principal components, in order to achieve a better visualization when making the cluster
analysis and to remove potential noise before searching for eQTLs.
In order to visualize the variant profiles of the different samples and search for genotype clusters,
a PCA analysis is performed. However, in contrast to calling variants with SNP arrays, where
all samples are checked for the same already known SNPs, calling variants on exome samples
will result in many previously unseen variants and also a large diversity in discovered variants
across samples. This means that some variants will only occur in few samples; they have a very
low minor allele frequency. Given the relatively small number of samples and the small genomic
==PAGE:30==
3.4 Somatic variant calls analysis
25
range from which variants are included, it is not surprising that almost all the variants in the
data set have a minor allele frequency (MAF) of below 0.02, as can be seen in Figure 3.6.
Most variants have a MAF between 0.001 and 0.005, and there are very few variants with MAFs
above 0.01. This can be an issue when doing the PCA analysis, but also when searching for
eQTLs. When searching for eQTLs using MatrixEQTL as in this project, it is recommended
to only include SNPs with a MAF of more than 0.05 [55]. Therefore, this will likely introduce
noise in all results based on these variants.
3.4.1
Variant cluster analysis
To investigate whether some patients share their variant profile or part of it, the NMD variant
matrix was projected onto the two first principal components. This projection is seen in Figure
3.7. In this plot, most of the samples are spread near origo, and one arm of samples along
each principal component is seen. Furthermore, the percentage of variance explained by these
two principal components is very low, so even after dimensionality reduction using PCA, the
variance is still spread across many dimensions. The low variance explained and the points
gathered in origo are likely due to not many variants being shared across the samples, or, said
in other terms, due to all the variants having a low minor allele frequency. It does not seem
like either the mutation load or the temporal order of the samples has any influence on the
projection in these plots, since there seems to be no color gradient in a specific direction in the
two plots.
Since nothing was found in the PCA plot of the variant matrix, other methods for data visu-
alization were tried. In Figure 3.8 the projection of the first two principal components of the
correlations between samples in the variant matrix is seen. Again, most samples are spread
around origo, but this time each principal component explains a larger part of the variance in
the data set. In this plot, the two groups of samples along the principal components contain
many more samples. Each group seems to be highly driven by one of the principal components.
As in the PCA of the variant matrix, there seems to be no pattern in the mutation load or the
temporal order of the samples over the first principal components.
Minor allele frequency
Frequency
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0
200
600
Figure 3.6: The distribution of minor allele frequencies of all variants in the data set. Note
that variants only occuring in one sample have been pre-filtered.
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Somatic variant calls analysis
26
Figure 3.7: The samples in the variant matrix projected onto the first two principal compo-
nents. The number in parentheses in the axis labels indicates how much of the
variation is captured by this principal component.
Logload: logarithm of the
mutation load in the sample, where the mutation load is simply the number of
mutations in this sample. id: the patient number in the Fase1 program, so patient
Fase1000 has id=1000.
Figure 3.8: The correlations of the samples in the variant matrix projected on to the first two
principal components. The number in parentheses in the axis labels indicates how
much of the variation is captured by this principal component. Logload: logarithm
of the mutation load in the sample, where the mutation load is simply the number
of mutations in this sample. id: the patient number in the Fase1 program, so
patient Fase1000 has id=1000.
==PAGE:32==
3.4 Somatic variant calls analysis
27
t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) was used as an alternative to PCA for
dimensionality reduction. t-SNE is non-linear, and the original structure of the data is not
preserved, but neighboring observations in the full dimensional data will also be close in the
projection. In Figure 3.9 a t-SNE plot of the variant matrix is seen. Most of the points are,
once again, centered around origo. However, there seems to be several small clusters along the
edges of the plot.
Finally, a heatmap of all the correlations of the samples confirms that multiple small clusters
are present in the data set (Figure 3.10).
Figure 3.9: A two-dimensional t-SNE plot of the variant matrix. Logload: logarithm of the
mutation load in the sample, where the mutation load is simply the number of
mutations in this sample. id: the patient number in the Fase1 program, so patient
Fase1000 has id=1000.
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Somatic variant calls analysis
28
Fase526
Fase914
Fase507
Fase874
Fase402
Fase505
Fase671
Fase409
Fase678
Fase876
Fase446
Fase366
Fase449
Fase575
Fase192
Fase535
Fase674
Fase591
Fase691
Fase70
Fase911
Fase155
Fase23
Fase364
Fase371
Fase499
Fase812
Fase54
Fase95
Fase965
Fase198
Fase690
Fase457
Fase544
Fase107
Fase191
Fase222
Fase58
Fase033
Fase227
Fase566
Fase511
Fase142
Fase817
Fase858
Fase138
Fase275
Fase584
Fase680
Fase133
Fase247
Fase438
Fase993
Fase405
Fase692
Fase335
Fase639
Fase262
Fase363
Fase833
Fase93
Fase964
Fase501
Fase039
Fase179
Fase771
Fase814
Fase317
Fase412
Fase525
Fase280
Fase915
Fase430
Fase576
Fase620
Fase437
Fase939
Fase399
Fase365
Fase380
Fase336
Fase314
Fase019
Fase696
Fase512
Fase878
Fase154
Fase783
Fase803
Fase25
Fase251
Fase602
Fase841
Fase753
Fase146
Fase018
Fase606
Fase577
Fase757
Fase101
Fase506
Fase673
Fase581
Fase645
Fase436
Fase921
Fase1032
Fase305
Fase474
Fase1017
Fase597
Fase125
Fase551
Fase531
Fase920
Fase390
Fase291
Fase1018
Fase530
Fase754
Fase356
Fase491
Fase116
Fase540
Fase624
Fase1019
Fase417
Fase223
Fase919
Fase527
Fase157
Fase233
Fase614
Fase897
Fase587
Fase1014
Fase1027
Fase292
Fase981
Fase851
Fase826
Fase384
Fase737
Fase411
Fase957
Fase282
Fase955
Fase483
Fase398
Fase003
Fase53
Fase736
Fase407
Fase424
Fase877
Fase926
Fase253
Fase556
Fase569
Fase130
Fase203
Fase450
Fase934
Fase823
Fase418
Fase496
Fase890
Fase482
Fase303
Fase337
Fase646
Fase546
Fase637
Fase1038
Fase315
Fase574
Fase26
Fase029
Fase431
Fase685
Fase281
Fase776
Fase941
Fase967
Fase545
Fase261
Fase515
Fase611
Fase958
Fase663
Fase325
Fase193
Fase1006
Fase20
Fase1011
Fase211
Fase316
Fase126
Fase888
Fase461
Fase120
Fase176
Fase57
Fase910
Fase652
Fase304
Fase008
Fase61
Fase961
Fase913
Fase168
Fase67
Fase854
Fase1073
Fase1024
Fase987
Fase341
Fase389
Fase702
Fase748
Fase123
Fase196
Fase760
Fase859
Fase659
Fase724
Fase477
Fase320
Fase666
Fase311
Fase416
Fase594
Fase593
Fase970
Fase188
Fase208
Fase463
Fase900
Fase161
Fase479
Fase167
Fase619
Fase91
Fase165
Fase404
Fase688
Fase132
Fase571
Fase347
Fase372
Fase774
Fase440
Fase976
Fase777
Fase421
Fase923
Fase180
Fase472
Fase293
Fase464
Fase896
Fase393
Fase573
Fase1033
Fase034
Fase660
Fase898
Fase327
Fase866
Fase870
Fase330
Fase845
Fase044
Fase889
Fase379
Fase181
Fase298
Fase158
Fase495
Fase195
Fase86
Fase562
Fase632
Fase151
Fase954
Fase927
Fase419
Fase687
Fase239
Fase984
Fase190
Fase604
Fase266
Fase260
Fase385
Fase400
Fase423
Fase040
Fase603
Fase94
Fase1037
Fase306
Fase55
Fase122
Fase137
Fase563
Fase82
Fase580
Fase89
Fase117
Fase869
Fase484
Fase413
Fase46
Fase1079
Fase367
Fase1040
Fase225
Fase286
Fase892
Fase904
Fase031
Fase156
Fase797
Fase215
Fase300
Fase134
Fase456
Fase935
Fase703
Fase153
Fase462
Fase550
Fase259
Fase893
Fase394
Fase785
Fase849
Fase408
Fase56
Fase470
Fase959
Fase433
Fase895
Fase185
Fase458
Fase288
Fase387
Fase936
Fase973
Fase994
Fase420
Fase532
Fase968
Fase127
Fase352
Fase119
Fase90
Fase121
Fase529
Fase374
Fase903
Fase204
Fase811
Fase013
Fase265
Fase615
Fase612
Fase975
Fase182
Fase451
Fase007
Fase228
Fase178
Fase523
Fase758
Fase187
Fase585
Fase310
Fase478
Fase112
Fase643
Fase677
Fase725
Fase1050
Fase644
Fase252
Fase607
Fase74
Fase521
Fase264
Fase429
Fase236
Fase69
Fase189
Fase246
Fase308
Fase435
Fase447
Fase453
Fase258
Fase541
Fase333
Fase100
Fase92
Fase350
Fase79
Fase536
Fase66
Fase150
Fase245
Fase001
Fase982
Fase475
Fase801
Fase872
Fase1012
Fase147
Fase328
Fase375
Fase210
Fase455
Fase864
Fase166
Fase847
Fase030
Fase1071
Fase513
Fase279
Fase331
Fase036
Fase80
Fase60
Fase886
Fase681
Fase839
Fase209
Fase47
Fase933
Fase672
Fase1015
Fase118
Fase766
Fase974
Fase647
Fase664
Fase392
Fase83
Fase460
Fase71
Fase52
Fase557
Fase358
Fase502
Fase016
Fase326
Fase297
Fase77
Fase017
Fase290
Fase795
Fase205
Fase745
Fase1054
Fase565
Fase162
Fase469
Fase172
Fase856
Fase368
Fase287
Fase761
Fase755
Fase891
Fase014
Fase489
Fase006
Fase032
Fase983
Fase995
Fase244
Fase481
Fase445
Fase410
Fase340
Fase844
Fase248
Fase322
Fase274
Fase299
Fase490
Fase848
Fase362
Fase473
Fase396
Fase428
Fase88
Fase818
Fase96
Fase351
Fase932
Fase459
Fase508
Fase145
Fase558
Fase164
Fase97
Fase108
Fase186
Fase324
Fase953
Fase442
Fase966
Fase824
Fase98
Fase925
Fase1013
Fase129
Fase152
Fase106
Fase72
Fase238
Fase519
Fase301
Fase452
Fase806
Fase863
Fase868
Fase263
Fase1000
Fase256
Fase792
Fase273
Fase357
Fase426
Fase526
Fase914
Fase507
Fase874
Fase402
Fase505
Fase671
Fase409
Fase678
Fase876
Fase446
Fase366
Fase449
Fase575
Fase192
Fase535
Fase674
Fase591
Fase691
Fase70
Fase911
Fase155
Fase23
Fase364
Fase371
Fase499
Fase812
Fase54
Fase95
Fase965
Fase198
Fase690
Fase457
Fase544
Fase107
Fase191
Fase222
Fase58
Fase033
Fase227
Fase566
Fase511
Fase142
Fase817
Fase858
Fase138
Fase275
Fase584
Fase680
Fase133
Fase247
Fase438
Fase993
Fase405
Fase692
Fase335
Fase639
Fase262
Fase363
Fase833
Fase93
Fase964
Fase501
Fase039
Fase179
Fase771
Fase814
Fase317
Fase412
Fase525
Fase280
Fase915
Fase430
Fase576
Fase620
Fase437
Fase939
Fase399
Fase365
Fase380
Fase336
Fase314
Fase019
Fase696
Fase512
Fase878
Fase154
Fase783
Fase803
Fase25
Fase251
Fase602
Fase841
Fase753
Fase146
Fase018
Fase606
Fase577
Fase757
Fase101
Fase506
Fase673
Fase581
Fase645
Fase436
Fase921
Fase1032
Fase305
Fase474
Fase1017
Fase597
Fase125
Fase551
Fase531
Fase920
Fase390
Fase291
Fase1018
Fase530
Fase754
Fase356
Fase491
Fase116
Fase540
Fase624
Fase1019
Fase417
Fase223
Fase919
Fase527
Fase157
Fase233
Fase614
Fase897
Fase587
Fase1014
Fase1027
Fase292
Fase981
Fase851
Fase826
Fase384
Fase737
Fase411
Fase957
Fase282
Fase955
Fase483
Fase398
Fase003
Fase53
Fase736
Fase407
Fase424
Fase877
Fase926
Fase253
Fase556
Fase569
Fase130
Fase203
Fase450
Fase934
Fase823
Fase418
Fase496
Fase890
Fase482
Fase303
Fase337
Fase646
Fase546
Fase637
Fase1038
Fase315
Fase574
Fase26
Fase029
Fase431
Fase685
Fase281
Fase776
Fase941
Fase967
Fase545
Fase261
Fase515
Fase611
Fase958
Fase663
Fase325
Fase193
Fase1006
Fase20
Fase1011
Fase211
Fase316
Fase126
Fase888
Fase461
Fase120
Fase176
Fase57
Fase910
Fase652
Fase304
Fase008
Fase61
Fase961
Fase913
Fase168
Fase67
Fase854
Fase1073
Fase1024
Fase987
Fase341
Fase389
Fase702
Fase748
Fase123
Fase196
Fase760
Fase859
Fase659
Fase724
Fase477
Fase320
Fase666
Fase311
Fase416
Fase594
Fase593
Fase970
Fase188
Fase208
Fase463
Fase900
Fase161
Fase479
Fase167
Fase619
Fase91
Fase165
Fase404
Fase688
Fase132
Fase571
Fase347
Fase372
Fase774
Fase440
Fase976
Fase777
Fase421
Fase923
Fase180
Fase472
Fase293
Fase464
Fase896
Fase393
Fase573
Fase1033
Fase034
Fase660
Fase898
Fase327
Fase866
Fase870
Fase330
Fase845
Fase044
Fase889
Fase379
Fase181
Fase298
Fase158
Fase495
Fase195
Fase86
Fase562
Fase632
Fase151
Fase954
Fase927
Fase419
Fase687
Fase239
Fase984
Fase190
Fase604
Fase266
Fase260
Fase385
Fase400
Fase423
Fase040
Fase603
Fase94
Fase1037
Fase306
Fase55
Fase122
Fase137
Fase563
Fase82
Fase580
Fase89
Fase117
Fase869
Fase484
Fase413
Fase46
Fase1079
Fase367
Fase1040
Fase225
Fase286
Fase892
Fase904
Fase031
Fase156
Fase797
Fase215
Fase300
Fase134
Fase456
Fase935
Fase703
Fase153
Fase462
Fase550
Fase259
Fase893
Fase394
Fase785
Fase849
Fase408
Fase56
Fase470
Fase959
Fase433
Fase895
Fase185
Fase458
Fase288
Fase387
Fase936
Fase973
Fase994
Fase420
Fase532
Fase968
Fase127
Fase352
Fase119
Fase90
Fase121
Fase529
Fase374
Fase903
Fase204
Fase811
Fase013
Fase265
Fase615
Fase612
Fase975
Fase182
Fase451
Fase007
Fase228
Fase178
Fase523
Fase758
Fase187
Fase585
Fase310
Fase478
Fase112
Fase643
Fase677
Fase725
Fase1050
Fase644
Fase252
Fase607
Fase74
Fase521
Fase264
Fase429
Fase236
Fase69
Fase189
Fase246
Fase308
Fase435
Fase447
Fase453
Fase258
Fase541
Fase333
Fase100
Fase92
Fase350
Fase79
Fase536
Fase66
Fase150
Fase245
Fase001
Fase982
Fase475
Fase801
Fase872
Fase1012
Fase147
Fase328
Fase375
Fase210
Fase455
Fase864
Fase166
Fase847
Fase030
Fase1071
Fase513
Fase279
Fase331
Fase036
Fase80
Fase60
Fase886
Fase681
Fase839
Fase209
Fase47
Fase933
Fase672
Fase1015
Fase118
Fase766
Fase974
Fase647
Fase664
Fase392
Fase83
Fase460
Fase71
Fase52
Fase557
Fase358
Fase502
Fase016
Fase326
Fase297
Fase77
Fase017
Fase290
Fase795
Fase205
Fase745
Fase1054
Fase565
Fase162
Fase469
Fase172
Fase856
Fase368
Fase287
Fase761
Fase755
Fase891
Fase014
Fase489
Fase006
Fase032
Fase983
Fase995
Fase244
Fase481
Fase445
Fase410
Fase340
Fase844
Fase248
Fase322
Fase274
Fase299
Fase490
Fase848
Fase362
Fase473
Fase396
Fase428
Fase88
Fase818
Fase96
Fase351
Fase932
Fase459
Fase508
Fase145
Fase558
Fase164
Fase97
Fase108
Fase186
Fase324
Fase953
Fase442
Fase966
Fase824
Fase98
Fase925
Fase1013
Fase129
Fase152
Fase106
Fase72
Fase238
Fase519
Fase301
Fase452
Fase806
Fase863
Fase868
Fase263
Fase1000
Fase256
Fase792
Fase273
Fase357
Fase426
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure 3.10: A heatmap of the correlations of the samples in the variant matrix. Red means
high correlation and blue means low correlation.
==PAGE:34==
3.5 Gene expression analysis
29
3.5
Gene expression analysis
The expression of all genes in the transcriptome was quantized to characterize the tumor phe-
notypes. In order to identify common phenotypes, clusters of tumors having similar expression
profiles are sought. To identify these, the expression matrix was projected onto the two first
principal components. This projection is seen in different colorings in Figure 3.11. Four outliers
have been removed, based on their projection onto the first two principal components to remove
potential noise and to achieve better visualization when doing the cluster analysis. Unlike in
the variant matrix analysis, the full data set is included, meaning that the expression matrix is
not subset to NMD genes. No separate clusters are immediately visible, but most samples are
grouped around origo. To the left of this group, many samples are organized in a line parallel
to the first principal component. In the bottom left sub figure of Figure 3.11 the samples are
colored according to the average TPM of all genes in the sample. All samples in the line in the
top left of the plot seem to have more reads than the samples near origo. These samples may
have a different expression profile than the samples near origo. There is no apparent pattern
in the other colorings of the samples (age, gender, cancer subtype).
A different visualization of the samples can be obtained by projecting the similarity of the
samples’ expression profiles. Correlation is one such similarity measure, and a PCA plot of the
correlations between the samples is seen in Figure 3.12. Again, there is no apparent pattern in
the age, gender, and cancer subtype colorings, so only the plot with colorings by average TPM
is included here. The samples in this space are distributed more evenly across both the first
and the second principal component. There seems to be a cluster at the top left corner of the
figure, where the average TPM is much higher than in the rest of the samples.
K-means clustering and hierarchical clustering using complete linkage were used for clustering
the samples. A silhouet analysis was performed on the identified clusters of samples to examine
their stability. All the clustering and silhouet plots can be seen in Appendix C.
In Figure 3.13 a representative result of the clustering is seen. In this figure, it is seen that
K-means clustering produces several large clusters, but they are not separated on the PCA
plot (top left part of Figure 3.13). Also, the many negative scores in the silhouette plot (top
right part of Figure 3.13) indicate that the clusters are not very robust. This suggests that the
generated clusters are not optimal for describing groups in the data. The hierarchical clustering,
on the other hand, (bottom row of Figure 3.13) only finds one large cluster containing nearly
all samples in the data set, and the rest of the clusters contain less than 5 samples each. The
clusters are not clearly separated in the PCA plot, but, generally, points belonging to the same
cluster are close in the plot. The overall high scores in the silhouette plot indicate that the
clusters are quite stable. This is also the case for the small clusters of less than five samples.
This suggests that the generated clusters describe the data set quite well.
Overall, it seems from the clustering analysis that the only stable clusters are small clusters of
a few samples. In general, agglomerative clustering methods, such as hclust in R [54], create
many small clusters, compared to divisive clustering. However, the findings indicate that the
expression profiles of the samples are diverse, and not easily divided in few large groups such
as cancer subtype.
==PAGE:35==
3.5 Gene expression analysis
30
Figure 3.11: The samples in the expression matrix projected onto the first two principal com-
ponents. The number in parenthesis in the axis labels indicates how much of the
variation is captured by this principal component. Age is stated in years, Reads
are listed in average TPM, NA means not available.
3.5.1
Examining only the most variable genes
In search of some larger stable clusters, the gene expression analysis from Section 3.5 was
repeated on a subset of the expression matrix, where only the most variable genes (n = 5349)
were included. This resulted in the two principal components each being driven by a single
sample. Therefore, the expression matrix was log-transformed before calculating the principal
components.
A PCA plot of the log-transformed expression matrix is seen in Figure 3.14. The samples seem
separated in two clusters, where samples in the large cluster are spread around origo. The first
principal component appears to be mostly driven by TPM, since samples to the left in the plot
have the lowest log(TPM), and samples in the right side of the plot have the highest log(TPM).
K-means clustering validates the described clusters for k = 2, as can be seen in Figure 3.15.
The average silhouette width is only 0.23, though. Hierarchical clustering does not separate
==PAGE:36==
3.5 Gene expression analysis
31
Figure 3.12: The correlations of the samples in the expression matrix projected onto the first
two principal components. The number in parenthesis in the axis labels indicates
how much of the variation is captured by this principal component. Reads are
in average TPM.
the two clusters until k = 15 (Appendix D).
==PAGE:37==
3.5 Gene expression analysis
32
Figure 3.13: Results from clustering of samples in the expression matrix in k = 9 clusters.
The top row is the K-means clustering, and the bottom row is the hierarchical
clustering. The left column is the PCA visualization of the clusters, and the right
column is the corresponding silhouette plot.
==PAGE:38==
3.5 Gene expression analysis
33
Figure 3.14: The samples in the log-transformed expression matrix projected onto the first
two principal components. The number in parenthesis in the axis labels indicates
how much of the variation is captured by this principal component. Reads are
stated in average TPM.
==PAGE:39==
3.5 Gene expression analysis
34
Figure 3.15: Results from clustering of samples in the log-transformed expression matrix in
k = 2 clusters. The top row is the K-means clustering, and the bottom row
is the hierarchical clustering. The left column is the PCA visualization of the
clusters, and the right column is the corresponding silhouette plot.
==PAGE:40==
3.6 Expression quantitative trait loci analysis
35
3.6
Expression quantitative trait loci analysis
As previously mentioned, the minor allele frequency of the called variants in the NMD genes is
so low that it potentially introduces noise in an eQTL analysis. This seems to be the case, since
more than 950000 eQTLs were predicted, collectively regulating 49334 out of 50658 genes and
the top results have extremely low p-values. To investigate this further, the number of samples
containing a variant predicted as an eQTL was plotted as a function of the eQTL ranking of
the variant (see Figure 3.16). In this figure, it is seen that the variants of top ranked eQTLs are
only present in less than five of the samples and most of them are only present in two samples.
And this is after variants only present in one sample have been filtered out. There is a tendency
towards variant eQTLs with a lower rank being present in more samples, which can be seen
from the staircase shape of the plot starting in the lower left corner. A possible explanation
of this shape is that MatrixEQTL does not weigh having a variant higher than not having a
variant. This means that a sample only having a single called variant, but an expression profile
that is very different from the rest of the samples, will result in an eQTL being predicted for
each differentially expressed gene.
To avoid that samples with few called variants drive the predictions, eQTL variants present in
less than five samples were filtered. After the filtration less than 200000 eQTLs were left, and
the extremely low p-values were gone. The remaining eQTLs consist of 221 variants altering the
expression of 34964 genes. The hypothesis at this point is that a mutation in one of the genes
in the NMD pathway is exploited in tumor cells to increase their proliferation. The variants
were therefore filtered further, so that only variants in the coding sequence of one of the NMD
genes are included.
An overview of the variants is seen in Table 3.4. Many of the variants are SNPs, as indicated
Figure 3.16: The predicted eQTLs plotted as the number of samples with the eQTL variant
as a function of their rank in the results.
==PAGE:41==
3.6 Expression quantitative trait loci analysis
36
Table 3.4: The variants driving the eQTLs that are present in at least five samples. Only the
variants present in the coding sequence of one of the NMD genes are included.
The variants present in one of the genes in the hand-curated NMD list are bolded.
Chr
Pos
Width
Gene name
Pos in protein
Reference AA
1
23961794
1
PNRC2
113
H
1
44777789
1
RPS8
129
M
3
40462029
1
RPL14
149
T
3
184321955
4
EIF4G1
457:458
ME
8
100706737
1
PABPC1
38
S
8
100706740
1
PABPC1
37
M
8
100706759
1
PABPC1
31
P
8
100706776
1
PABPC1
25
H
8
100706973
1
PABPC1
454
I
8
100706997
1
PABPC1
446
P
8
100709477
1
PABPC1
409
F
8
100709671
1
PABPC1
345
E
8
100709704
2
PABPC1
333:334
KG
8
100715486
3
PABPC1
206:207
RL
8
100715564
1
PABPC1
181
A
8
100715568
1
PABPC1
179
R
8
100715573
1
PABPC1
178
E
10
11948430
4
UPF2
1037:1038
EG
11
65120775
4
FAU
102:103
KT
12
1953157
4
DCP1B
260:261
QQ
16
11915673
4
GSPT1
15:16
GG
16
18925987
4
SMG1
18:19
GT
19
1440069
1
RPS15
20
R
X
154400837
1
RPL10
210
R
by the width of 1. The variants appear evenly distributed across the proteins, though many
of them appear within the first 50 AA of the protein. This is interesting since most proteins
consist of hundreds of AAs. There are many variants in the gene PABPC1, which makes it an
interesting target for further investigation. The three genes present in the hand-curated NMD
list are also investigated further.
3.6.1
Exploring selected eQTL genes
The proline-rich nuclear receptor coactivator 2 (PNRC2) mediates an interaction between the
mRNA decapping complex and the machinery of the NMD pathway including UPF1 [61]. This
suggests that PNRC2 is important for NMD. The protein structure of PNRC2 [62] is shown
in Figure 3.17. The complex shown in the figure is a homodimer of PNRC2. The variant is
==PAGE:42==
3.6 Expression quantitative trait loci analysis
37
located at codon 113 of the protein, which is at the end of an α-helix and the reference amino
acid at this position is Asparagine. The site of interaction between PNRC2 and UPF1 is not
known. It is thus difficult to assess, if the discovered variant has a negative impact on this
binding or not. PNRC2 has an SH3-binding motif at position 99-105, which is important for
the binding of several nuclear receptors. This variant is located close to the binding motif, so
it may alter its conformation, but this is not known.
The polyadenylate-binding protein 1 (PABPC1) binds the poly(A)-tail of mRNA. Related to
the NMD pathway, it is involved in recognition of preliminary translation stop codons through
competitive interaction with UPF1 [63], which is a key NMD protein. The protein structure of
PABPC1 is seen in Figure 3.18. The protein consists of multiple chains that form a framework
with a hole in the middle. As seen in the plot, the variants are scattered across the protein,
since the same chain is repeated several times. The combination of these variants is expected
to change the conformance of the protein and hereby also its binding specificity.
The regulator of nonsense transcripts 2 (UPF2) is part of the exon junction complex [65], which
is essential for activating NMD. A complete structure of the protein has not yet been resolved,
so visualization of the variant is not possible. However, the variant is located in a part of the
protein (position 757 – 1272) that mediates interaction with the NMD proteins EIF4A1 and
EIF1 [66]. This suggests that the interaction could be altered in individuals with the variant.
The eQTL variant is 4 nucleotides wide and spans two codons at protein position 1037-1038.
The reference amino acid sequence at this position is Aspartic acid - Glycine. Aspartic acid
carries a negative charge, and a missense mutation at this position may alter the protein polarity
at this area, which may further alter the binding motif. However, it is unlikely that changing
Figure 3.17: The protein structure of PNRC2 [62]. It consists of two chains, and the variant
has been highlighted in colors in the plot.
==PAGE:43==
3.6 Expression quantitative trait loci analysis
38
Figure 3.18: The protein structure of PABPC1 [64]. It is a multimeric protein, and a complete
chain has been highlighted in red. The variants are drawn as spheres and have
been highlighted in colors that vary by chain.
two out of 500 amino acids can have any significant effect on the protein function.
Serine/threonine-protein kinase SMG1 (SMG1) has been shown to phosphorylate UPF1 [67]
and p53 [68], which associates it with both NMD and tumor suppression. No protein structure
was found for SMG1, but several domains and regions have been characterized. The predicted
eQTL is at codon 18-19 in the protein, which is not part of a characterized domain. It is,
however, part of the region 1-1977, which mediates interaction with SMG8 and SMG9 [69]. It
is difficult to predict the consequence without the structure of the protein around the variant.
==PAGE:44==
3.6 Expression quantitative trait loci analysis
39
3.6.2
Coverage of positions with predicted eQTL
variants
It is important to assess the coverage at positions of called variants, since low coverage in the
DNA samples can result in wrong variants being called and low coverage in either the DNA
or RNA samples can result in false positives during the eQTL analysis. Since the samples in
this study are Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) samples, there is only coverage at exon regions
of the genome. This means that variants in promoters, enhancers and other regulatory sites
outside the exome are never called, since there is no data for these loci. Furthermore, since
the variant matrix in this study is filtered to only include variants overlapping with NMD genes,
only these sites need to be examined for sufficient coverage.
Three genes from the hand-curated list of NMD genes were selected for further investigation
in the previous section. Consequently, these genes should be checked for sufficient coverage.
PABPC1 was not included in this analysis, since it is not in the hand-curated list. In Figure
3.19(a), the average coverage across PNRC2 is seen.
Starting at position 23,961,500 is a
contiguous span of high coverage. In this span, only two called variants are predicted to be
eQTLs, but both before and after the span, at regions with much lower coverage in the DNA
samples, several eQTLs are predicted. These variants are more likely to be products of noise.
The eQTL from Table 3.4 is located at position 23,961,794 and is thus inside the span of high
coverage, so it is not an issue in this case.
In Figure 3.19(b), the average coverage across SMG1 is seen. Many variants are called in this
region, and many of them are predicted to be eQTLs. Generally, the eQTLs align with the
regions of high coverage, which align with the exons of SMG1. From location 18,900,000 to
18,920,000 there is a long range of generally low coverage where eQTLs are predicted anyway.
These variants are more likely to be products of noise, but the coverage may vary between
alignments and the value displayed here is only an average, so they may be true variants called.
The eQTL from Table 3.4 is located at position 18,925,987 - 18,925,990 that corresponds to
the small spike of high coverage (with four variants stacked) to the right in the figure, which,
as previously predicted, is at the beginning of the gene.
In Figure 3.19(c), the average coverage across UPF2 is seen. The picture is similar to the
coverage of SMG1, except that the predicted eQTL is located more towards the end of the
gene in this case, from position 11,948,430 to 11,948,433.
In general, low coverage may have influenced the variant calling and thus the prediction of
eQTLs, but it seems that the selected eQTLs are not affected by this.
3.6.3
Gene set enrichment analysis
To get an overview of the genes included in the filtered results from the eQTL analysis, a gene
set enrichment analysis was performed. For each tested gene set, it has been calculated whether
there is an overrepresentation of eQTL genes compared to non-eQTL genes in the gene set.
Because of the staircase structure of the plot in Figure 3.16, it is questionable whether the top
==PAGE:45==
3.6 Expression quantitative trait loci analysis
40
(a) Coverage of PNRC2
(b) Coverage of SMG1
(c) Coverage of UPF2
Figure 3.19: The predicted eQTLs and the average coverage of the different libraries displayed
in IGV. The cov_*.bw tracks are the average coverage of all samples in the
specified library at a certain position. The height of the blue bar indicates the
coverage at a given position, the scale is from 0 to 30, and larger values are
clipped. eqtl.vcf displays all the predicted eQTLs as vertical grey bars, stacking
them on top of each other when overlapping. The gene track at the bottom
shows the coding regions of genes in this area of the plot.
==PAGE:46==
3.6 Expression quantitative trait loci analysis
41
ranked eQTLs are the most significant results. Therefore, the standard gene set enrichment
analysis based on a ranked list of genes was substituted with a classical Fisher’s exact test for
testing of overrepresented gene sets. Fisher’s exact test does not account for the ranking of
the genes in the list, so any gene in the eQTL results is in the positive list, and all genes not
in the eQTL results are in the negative list.
This analysis returned 14 overrepresented gene sets, which can be seen in Table 3.5. It seems
like there is a tendency towards small gene sets (i.e. “Genes” is low) having lower p-values.
This is not unexpected, since many thousand gene sets are tested for overrepresentation, and
it is more likely that, by chance, a small gene set has a large overlap with the eQTL genes than
a large gene set.
Many of the gene sets (Name containing odorant, olfactory, sensory perception, detection
of stimulus) in the table are related to detection of smell stimuli and responding to these,
and those not related to smelling are related to G protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs) (Name
containing GPCR, G protein coupled receptor). There is no immediate link between smelling
and nonsense-mediated decay, so these hits are probably a result of the many false positives in
the eQTL list. GPCRs are a large and very diverse group of eukaryotic membrane receptors.
These may therefore somehow be linked to NMD, but since it is a very general group of
receptors, it is difficult to conclude anything without further studies. Since they respond to
external signals, they may be related to the “Detection of stimulus” gene sets. Investigating
the relationship between these gene sets EBI’s Ontology Lookup Service [70], it turns out that
many genes are shared across the sets, so an overrepresentation of genes from one set entails
an overrepresentation of genes from many of the other sets as well.
An interesting result that does not fit in the two categories outlined above is the “Mikkelsen
MEF HCP with H3K27ME3” gene set. The definition of this gene set is “Genes with high-CpG-
density promoters (HCP) bearing histone H3 trimethylation mark at K27 (H3K27me3) in MEF
cells (embryonic fibroblast)” [71].
==PAGE:47==
3.6 Expression quantitative trait loci analysis
42
Table 3.5: The gene sets predicted to have an overrepresentation of genes from the eQTL
analysis. The P-value indicates how unlikely the observed distribution is, given that
there is no overrepresentation of genes in this gene set. “Genes” is the number of
genes in this gene set and “Variants” is the number of variants associated (by the
eQTL analysis) with the genes in this gene set.
Gene set
Adj. pval
Genes
Variants
GO ODORANT BINDING
7.5 × 10−6
82
127
REACTOME OLFACTORY SIGNALING PATHWAY
1.3 × 10−22
315
165
GO OLFACTORY RECEPTOR ACTIVITY
7.7 × 10−32
376
166
KEGG OLFACTORY TRANSDUCTION
1.9 × 10−26
380
190
GO SENSORY PERCEPTION OF CHEMICAL STIMULUS
7.9 × 10−23
472
206
GO DETECTION OF STIMULUS
6.1 × 10−14
621
240
GO SENSORY PERCEPTION
4.2 × 10−10
884
280
GO G PROTEIN COUPLED RECEPTOR ACTIVITY
3.0 × 10−19
823
289
REACTOME GPCR DOWNSTREAM SIGNALING
1.4 × 10−9
779
291
GO NEUROLOGICAL SYSTEM PROCESS
3.2 × 10−4
1190
297
REACTOME SIGNALING BY GPCR
1.1 × 10−7
888
301
MIKKELSEN MEF HCP WITH H3K27ME3
1.9 × 10−5
587
307
GO G PROTEIN COUPLED RECEPTOR SIGNALING PATHWAY
1.3 × 10−12
1132
313
GO SIGNALING RECEPTOR ACTIVITY
1.9 × 10−5
1327
315
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER4
Discussion
In this study, I set out to investigate whether tumors exploit the machinery of nonsense-mediated
decay. 1000 patients were initially included in the data set, though only ~500 patients were
included in the integrated analysis.
The background stop codon probabilities for various types of genomic regions were calculated,
to investigate whether some regions are more easily exploited than others and to provide a hint
of evolutionary pressure. None of the tested gene sets had an increased probability of stop
codons, which could make them targets of NMD. There are statistically significant differences
between the regions, and they may be connected to the average GC content of the regions.
Factors other than the background stop codon probability of a gene set or a genomic region
seem more likely to make NMD target these.
To investigate factors that might make NMD behave differently in tumor samples than in normal
samples, the somatic variants that have accumulated in the tumor samples were explored. The
primary purpose of the genomic data is to call somatic variants that characterize a given tumor
sample compared to the matched normal sample. These variant profiles were sought clustered
to identify common phenotypes, but several inherent characteristics of the data set lower the
minor allele frequency: When calling somatic variants on whole exome samples, there are many
possible locations for a variant to occur, and with the relatively few samples in the data set,
many variant profiles had little or no overlap. The called variants were subset to only include
variants in the NMD genes, which reduces the overlap. This is a major cause of noise in both
the variant cluster analysis and the eQTL analysis.
The cluster analysis of the variant matrix confirms that not much signal separates the samples
based on their variant profiles. This is emphasized by most samples being spread around origo
in both linear and non-linear space. Despite the weak signal, several clusters were identified by
independent methods, and these clusters demand further investigation. It would be interesting
to repeat this analysis with more data, either by including more samples or by including a larger
fraction of the called variants.
The changes in tumor genotype are expected to result in a corresponding change in tumor
phenotype. The expression profile of a tumor is a representation of this phenotype, and it
was modelled from the transcriptome data. In contrast to the variant matrix, the expression
matrix was not subset to a range of genes, so more of the data was included. This is important
because the quality check indicated that the transcriptome data generally is of lower quality
than the genome data, and because variants in the NMD genes may regulate genes located at
any position. Searching for clusters of tumors with similar expression profiles was made difficult
by the primary components being largely driven by the total number of reads in a sample. K-
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Further studies
44
means clustering and hierarchical clustering were used as alternatives to visual inspection, but
the only robust clusters contain less than five samples, so they are not very descriptive. Based
on the identified clusters, nothing can be concluded about shared expression profiles of the
tumors at this point.
Tumors are diverse, so it is not unexpected that only few tumors share variant and expression
profiles. It is possible to identify complex relationships between variants and changes in ex-
pression of certain genes using an integrated analysis. When performing an integrated analysis
combining genome and transcriptome data, including many samples reduces noise in the out-
put. Initially, 1000 genomes and transcriptomes were sought, but upon further investigation
less than 500 samples were matched, properly processed, and of sufficient quality. The relatively
lower quality of the expression data is a point of concern, and the low minor allele frequency
of the called somatic variants further introduce noise.
Much noise was expected in the list of predicted eQTLs generated by the integrative analysis.
Even after filtration of the most questionable eQTLs, more than half of all genes were predicted
to be under regulation of at least one of the variants. Because of the many predicted eQTLs,
some were selected for further investigation.
Four genes containing variants from the eQTL analysis were further examined. Assessing the
consequence of a variant based on the structure of a protein and the location of the protein’s
secondary structures is a non-trivial task, and one should be cautious with concluding anything
without further studies. The four genes PNRC2, PABPC1, UPF2 and SMG1 are likely to alter
their phenotypes if certain driver mutations are acquired.
To characterize the changes in phenotype, gene set enrichment analysis was performed on
the genes regulated by the identified driver mutations from the eQTL analysis. No gene sets
from MsigDB were found to have an overrepresentation of genes from the eQTL list, so further
studies are needed to characterize the phenotypes resulting from acquiring the driver mutations.
In conclusion, the genomic data alone revealed several small clusters of patients with similar
variant profiles, whereas the transcriptomic data only revealed clusters when subset to the most
variable genes. The integrated analysis revealed four genes that are targets for cancer driver
mutations across the patients in this study.
A study from 2008 [72] reported that UPF2 is required for proliferation of hematopoietic stem
cells and is essential for survival of the human organism. A very recent study from 2018 [14]
reports that loss-of-function mutations in UPF1, UPF2, SMG1 and SMG6 leads to death of the
organism in mouse models. A study from 2014 [73] links pancreatic adenosquamous carcinoma
(ASC) to mutations in UPF1.
4.1
Further studies
There are several points relevant for further investigation of the data set at hand, and for further
investigation of the hypotheses proposed in this study.
==PAGE:50==
4.1 Further studies
45
Regarding further investigation of the data set, including more data, both in terms of more
samples and more features, is a way to increase the signal to noise ratio of the somatic variant
call analysis. Not subsetting the variant matrix to variants overlapping with the NMD genes
would likely increase the overlap between the samples variant profiles, resulting in variants
with higher minor allele frequencies. Higher minor allele frequencies should allow for better
dimensionality reduction, cluster identification, prediction of eQTLs and so on, making this an
interesting point for further investigation.
Predicting eQTLs with MatrixEQTL is fast and easy using the R integration, but it weighs hits
and non-hits the same, which is not correct for the type of data at hand. Calling a variant
at a given position is a more significant result (it contains more entropy) than not calling a
variant at this position. The same is true for gene expression values, where normalization is
very important to avoid a few highly expressed genes driving the analysis.
Further studies
could investigate if normalizing the variant matrix in different ways would minimize the effect
of samples with few variants driving the eQTL analysis. In addition, low coverage causes more
variants to be called, so filtering variants based on coverage may result in fewer false positives
in the eQTL analysis.
Regarding further studies of the proposed hypotheses, the four genes proposed to link NMD
and cancer (PNRC2, PABPC1, UPF2 and SMG1) after acquisition of driver mutations should
be investigated. Specifically, the mutations should be validated on a public data set, and effects
of the proposed driver mutations should be assessed through e.g. in vitro binding studies, or
in vivo studies of knockout mutations in a mouse model.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER5
Conclusion
Nonsense-mediated decay has previously been exploited in cancer to promote tumor prolifer-
ation. Genomic and transcriptomic data from 1000 Danish patients with advanced tumors
were included in this study to identify common genotypes and phenotypes across cancers. The
diverse nature of somatic variants in tumors is emphasized by the small size of the identified
variant profile clusters. The identified clusters of the tumor expression profiles are small as well,
and nothing is concluded regarding similar expression profiles.
An integrated analysis combining the genomic and transcriptomic data identified several genes
containing possible cancer driver mutations. Of these, the four genes PNRC2, PABPC1, UPF2
and SMG1 were selected for further analysis. Investigation of the spatial structures of the
proteins confirmed that the predicted eQTL variants in these genes could alter their phenotype,
but further studies are needed to conclude anything.
The eQTL variants are predicted to
regulate thousands of genes, and these genes were characterized using gene set enrichment
analysis. No significant overrepresentation of gene sets was identified in this step.
Other studies have linked nonsense-mediated decay and cancer, and it has previously been
reported that loss-of-function mutations in UPF1, UPF2, SMG1 and SMG6 in mice leads to
death of the organism.
==PAGE:52==
APPENDIXA
Gene sets
A.1
Gene sets from MsigDB
Nonsense-mediated decay genes [49]
CASC3
PPP2CA
RPL23A
RPL39
RPS16
RPS6
CTIF
PPP2R1A
RPL24
RPL3L
RPS17
RPS7
DCP1A
PPP2R2A
RPL26
RPL4
RPS18
RPS8
DCP1B
RBM8A
RPL26L1
RPL41
RPS19
RPS9
DCP2
RNPS1
RPL27
RPL5
RPS2
RPSA
EIF3E
RPL10
RPL27A
RPL6
RPS20
SMG1
EIF4A3
RPL10A
RPL28
RPL7
RPS21
SMG5
EIF4G1
RPL11
RPL29
RPL7A
RPS23
SMG6
ETF1
RPL12
RPL3
RPL8
RPS24
SMG7
EXOSC10
RPL13
RPL30
RPL9
RPS25
SMG8
FAU
RPL13A
RPL31
RPLP0
RPS26
SMG9
GSPT1
RPL14
RPL32
RPLP1
RPS27
UBA52
GSPT2
RPL15
RPL34
RPLP2
RPS27A
UHMK1
MAGOH
RPL17
RPL35
RPS10
RPS28
UPF1
MAGOHB
RPL18
RPL35A
RPS11
RPS29
UPF2
NCBP1
RPL18A
RPL36
RPS12
RPS3
UPF3A
NCBP2
RPL19
RPL36A
RPS13
RPS3A
UPF3B
PABPC1
RPL21
RPL37
RPS14
RPS4X
WIBG
PARN
RPL22
RPL37A
RPS15
RPS4Y1
PNRC2
RPL23
RPL38
RPS15A
RPS5
==PAGE:53==
A.2 Hand-curated gene sets
48
A.2
Hand-curated gene sets
Nonsense-mediated decay genes
CASC3
EIF4A3
MAGOH
PNRC2
RBM8A
SMG1
SMG5
SMG6
SMG7
SMG8
SMG9
UPF1
UPF2
UPF3A
UPF3B
Reference genes
C1orf43
CHMP2A
EMC7
GPI
PSMB2
PSMB4
RAB7A
REEP5
SNRPD3
VCP
VPS29
==PAGE:54==
APPENDIXB
PCA plots for outlier identification
B.1
mRNA expression matrix of the samples
normalised to TPM
Each plot is the result from one iteration of outlier detection.
==PAGE:55==
B.2 Somatic variant matrix of the samples
50
B.2
Somatic variant matrix of the samples
Each plot is the result from one iteration of outlier detection.
==PAGE:56==
APPENDIXC
Clustering plots of expression matrix
In each plot the top row is the K-means clustering, and the bottom row is the hierarchical
clustering. The left column is the PCA visualisation of the clusters and the right column is the
corresponding silhouette plot.
==PAGE:57==
C Clustering plots of expression matrix
52
==PAGE:58==
C Clustering plots of expression matrix
53
==PAGE:59==
C Clustering plots of expression matrix
54
==PAGE:60==
APPENDIXD
Clustering plots of log-transformed
expression matrix
In each plot the top row is the K-means clustering, and the bottom row is the hierarchical
clustering. The left column is the PCA visualisation of the clusters and the right column is the
corresponding silhouette plot.
==PAGE:61==
D Clustering plots of log-transformed expression matrix
56
==PAGE:62==
D Clustering plots of log-transformed expression matrix
57
==PAGE:63==
D Clustering plots of log-transformed expression matrix
58
==PAGE:64==
APPENDIXE
Sequencing coverage at the genomic
positions of the NMD genes
Coverage tracks and predicted eQTLs for each gene in the hand-curated list of NMD genes
visualized in IGV.
==PAGE:65==
E Sequencing coverage at the genomic positions of the NMD genes
60
==PAGE:66==
E Sequencing coverage at the genomic positions of the NMD genes
61
References
[1] A. McKenna et al., “The genome analysis toolkit: A MapReduce framework for analyzing
next-generation DNA sequencing data,” Genome Research, 2010.
[2] F. Krueger, “Trim Galore,” Babraham Bioinformatics, 2016.
[3] P. J. Kersey et al., “Ensembl Genomes 2018: an integrated omics infrastructure for non-
vertebrate species,” Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 46, no. D1, pp. D802–D808, Jan. 2018
[Online]. Available: http://academic.oup.com/nar/article/46/D1/D802/4577569
[4] A. Subramanian et al., “Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for
interpreting genome-wide expression profiles.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America, vol. 102, no. 43, pp. 15545–50, Oct. 2005 [Online]. Available:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16199517
[5] J. C. Chang and Y. W. Kan, “Beta-0-thalassemia, a nonsense mutation in man,” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 76, no. 6, pp. 2886–
9, Jun. 1979 [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/88735
[6] G. M. Cooper and R. E. Hausman, “The Cell: A Molecular Approach 2nd Edition,” in
Sinauer associates, 2000.
[7] M. Kafri, E. Metzl-Raz, G. Jona, and N. Barkai, “The Cost of Protein Production.” Cell
reports, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 22–31, Jan. 2016 [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pubmed/26725116
[8] Y. B. Kiyohara et al., “The BMAL1 C terminus regulates the circadian transcription
feedback loop,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol.
103, no.
26, pp.
10074–10079, Jun. 2006 [Online]. Available: http://www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/
pnas.0601416103
[9] J. L. Kreiling et al., “Dominant-negative effect of truncated mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-
like growth factor II receptor species in cancer,” FEBS Journal, vol. 279, no. 15, pp. 2695–2713,
Aug. 2012 [Online]. Available: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.1742-4658.2012.08652.
x
[10] M. Chelli and M. Alizon, “Determinants of the trans-dominant negative effect of truncated
forms of the CCR5 chemokine receptor.” The Journal of biological chemistry, vol. 276, no.
50, pp. 46975–82, Dec. 2001 [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
11600494
[11] M. Luo, “Therapeutic inhibition of nonsense mediated decay as a novel treatment for
pancreatic cancer,” Clinical Cancer Research, vol.
11, no.
24, 2005 [Online].
Available:
http://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/143136311
[12] Y. Ionov, N. Nowak, M. Perucho, S. Markowitz, and J. K. Cowell, “Manipulation of
nonsense mediated decay identifies gene mutations in colon cancer Cells with microsatellite
==PAGE:67==
E Sequencing coverage at the genomic positions of the NMD genes
62
instability,” Oncogene, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 639–645, Jan. 2004 [Online]. Available: http:
//www.nature.com/articles/1207178
[13] A. A. Ahmed, R. C. Bast, D. Bowtell, and J. Goldsmith, “Nonsense mediated decay defines
deleterious TP53 mutations and tumor aggressiveness in ovarian cancer,” Cancer Research, vol.
71, no. 8 Supplement, pp. 4822–4822, Apr. 2011 [Online]. Available: http://cancerres.
aacrjournals.org/lookup/doi/10.1158/1538-7445.AM2011-4822
[14] M. W. Popp and L. E. Maquat, “Nonsense-mediated mRNA Decay and Cancer,” Current
Opinion in Genetics and Development, vol. 48, pp. 44–50, Feb. 2018 [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959437X17301041
[15] Z. Kerényi et al., “Inter-kingdom conservation of mechanism of nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay.” The EMBO journal, vol. 27, no. 11, pp. 1585–95, Jun. 2008 [Online]. Available:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18451801
[16] E. Nagy and L. E. Maquat, “A rule for termination-codon position within intron-containing
genes: When nonsense affects RNA abundance.” 1998.
[17] J. Saulière, N. Haque, S. Harms, I. Barbosa, M. Blanchette, and H. Le Hir, “The exon
junction complex differentially marks spliced junctions,” Nature Structural & Molecular Biology,
vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 1269–1271, Oct. 2010 [Online]. Available: http://www.nature.com/
articles/nsmb.1890
[18] J. Zhang, X. Sun, Y. Qian, J. P. LaDuca, and L. E. Maquat, “At least one intron is required
for the nonsense-mediated decay of triosephosphate isomerase mRNA: a possible link between
nuclear splicing and cytoplasmic translation.” Molecular and cellular biology, 1998.
[19] N. Hug, D. Longman, and J. F. Cáceres, “Mechanism and regulation of the nonsense-
mediated decay pathway,” vol. 44. Oxford University Press, pp. 1483–1495, Feb-2015 [Online].
Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26773057
[20] S. Lykke-Andersen and T. H. Jensen, “Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay: An intricate
machinery that shapes transcriptomes,” Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, vol. 16, no. 11,
pp. 665–677, Nov. 2015 [Online]. Available: http://www.nature.com/articles/nrm4063
[21] D. Hanahan and R. A. Weinberg, “The hallmarks of cancer.” Cell, vol. 100, no. 1, pp.
57–70, Jan. 2000 [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10647931
[22] D. Hanahan and R. A. Weinberg, “Hallmarks of Cancer: The Next Generation,” Cell, vol.
144, no. 5, pp. 646–674, Mar. 2011 [Online]. Available: http://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S0092867411001279
[23] C. M. Counter, “The roles of telomeres and telomerase in cell life span,” Mutation Re-
search/Reviews in Genetic Toxicology, vol. 366, no. 1, pp. 45–63, Oct. 1996 [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0165111096900068?via{\%}3Dihub
[24] A. S. L. Chan, S. N. Mowla, P. Arora, and P. S. Jat, “Tumour suppressors and cellular
senescence,” IUBMB Life, vol. 66, no. 12, pp. 812–822, Dec. 2014 [Online]. Available:
==PAGE:68==
E Sequencing coverage at the genomic positions of the NMD genes
63
http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/iub.1335
[25] J. L. Messerschmidt, G. C. Prendergast, and G. L. Messerschmidt, “How Cancers Escape
Immune Destruction and Mechanisms of Action for the New Significantly Active Immune Thera-
pies: Helping Nonimmunologists Decipher Recent Advances.” The oncologist, vol. 21, no. 2, pp.
233–43, Feb. 2016 [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26834161
[26] A. Corthay, “Does the immune system naturally protect against cancer?” Frontiers in
immunology, vol. 5, p. 197, 2014 [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/24860567
[27] N. D. Roberts et al., “A comparative analysis of algorithms for somatic SNV detection in
cancer,” Bioinformatics, vol. 29, no. 18, pp. 2223–2230, Sep. 2013 [Online]. Available: https:
//academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/bioinformatics/
btt375
[28] J. Zhang, R. Chiodini, A. Badr, and G. Zhang, “The impact of next-generation sequencing
on genomics.” Journal of genetics and genomics = Yi chuan xue bao, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 95–
109, Mar. 2011 [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21477781
[29] J. Clarke, H.-C. Wu, L. Jayasinghe, A. Patel, S. Reid, and H. Bayley, “Continuous base
identification for single-molecule nanopore DNA sequencing,” Nature Nanotechnology, vol. 4,
no. 4, pp. 265–270, Apr. 2009 [Online]. Available: http://www.nature.com/articles/
nnano.2009.12
[30] Illumina, “An introduction to Next-Generation Sequencing Technology,” 2015 [Online].
Available: www.illumina.com/technology/next-generation-sequencing.html
[31] W. Li and J. Freudenberg, “Mappability and read length,” Frontiers in Genetics, vol. 5,
p. 381, Nov. 2014 [Online]. Available: http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.
3389/fgene.2014.00381/abstract
[32] B. Paten, A. M. Novak, J. M. Eizenga, and E. Garrison, “Genome graphs and the evolution
of genome inference.” Genome research, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 665–676, 2017 [Online]. Available:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28360232
[33] M. J. P. Chaisson et al., “Resolving the complexity of the human genome using single-
molecule sequencing,” Nature, vol. 517, no. 7536, pp. 608–611, Jan. 2015 [Online]. Available:
http://www.nature.com/articles/nature13907
[34] M. E. Salem et al., “Landscape of Tumor Mutation Load, Mismatch Repair Deficiency, and
PD-L1 Expression in a Large Patient Cohort of Gastrointestinal Cancers,” Molecular Cancer
Research, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 805–812, May 2018 [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pubmed/29523759
[35] P. J. Hurd and C. J. Nelson, “Advantages of next-generation sequencing versus the mi-
croarray in epigenetic research,” Briefings in Functional Genomics and Proteomics, vol. 8, no.
3, pp. 174–183, May 2009 [Online]. Available: https://academic.oup.com/bfg/article-
lookup/doi/10.1093/bfgp/elp013
[36] S. Draghici, S. Draghici, P. Khatri, A. C. Eklund, and Z. Szallasi, “Reliability and re-
==PAGE:69==
E Sequencing coverage at the genomic positions of the NMD genes
64
producibility issues in DNA microarray measurements,” TRENDS GENET, pp.
101—–109,
2006 [Online]. Available: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.
1.319.2165
[37] A. Oshlack, M. D. Robinson, and M. D. Young, “From RNA-seq reads to differential
expression results,” Genome Biology, vol.
11, no.
12, p.
220, 2010 [Online].
Available:
http://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/gb-2010-11-12-220
[38] D. J. Burgess, “Remember your driver,” Nature Reviews Genetics, vol. 13, no. 2, pp.
73–73, Feb. 2012 [Online]. Available: http://www.nature.com/articles/nrg3159
[39] A. Conesa et al., “A survey of best practices for RNA-seq data analysis.” Genome biology,
vol. 17, p. 13, Jan. 2016 [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
26813401
[40] G. P. Wagner, K. Kin, and V. J. Lynch, “Measurement of mRNA abundance using RNA-
seq data: RPKM measure is inconsistent among samples,” Theory in Biosciences, vol. 131,
no. 4, pp. 281–285, Dec. 2012 [Online]. Available: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/
s12064-012-0162-3
[41] B. L. Aken et al., “Ensembl 2017,” Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 45, no. D1, pp. D635–
D642, Jan. 2017 [Online]. Available: https://academic.oup.com/nar/article-lookup/
doi/10.1093/nar/gkw1104
[42] R. Andersson et al., “An atlas of active enhancers across human cell types and tissues,”
Nature, vol.
507, no.
7493, pp.
455–461, Mar.
2014 [Online].
Available: http://www.
nature.com/articles/nature12787
[43] M. Lawrence, V. Carey, and R. Gentleman, Rtracklayer: R interface to genome annotation
files and the ucsc genome browser. 2018.
[44] R. G. Cavalcante, Annotatr: Annotation of genomic regions to genomic annotations. 2018.
[45] M. Hsi-Yang Fritz, R. Leinonen, G. Cochrane, and E. Birney, “Efficient storage of high
throughput DNA sequencing data using reference-based compression.” Genome research, vol.
21, no. 5, pp. 734–40, May 2011 [Online]. Available: http://genome.cshlp.org/cgi/doi/
10.1101/gr.114819.110
[46] H. Li et al., “The Sequence Alignment/Map format and SAMtools,” Bioinformatics, 2009.
[47] Broad Institute, “GSEA | MSigDB | Gene Set: HALLMARK_P53_PATHWAY.” 2018 [On-
line]. Available: http://software.broadinstitute.org/gsea/msigdb/cards/HALLMARK_
P53_PATHWAY.html. [Accessed: 21-Jun-2018]
[48] Broad Institute, “GSEA | MSigDB | Gene Set: HALLMARK_APOPTOSIS.” 2018 [Online].
Available: http://software.broadinstitute.org/gsea/msigdb/cards/HALLMARK_APOPTOSIS.
html. [Accessed: 21-Jun-2018]
[49] Broad Institute, “GSEA | MSigDB | Gene Set: GO_NUCLEAR_TRANSCRIBED_MRNA_CATABOLIC_
2018 [Online]. Available: http://software.broadinstitute.org/gsea/msigdb/cards/
==PAGE:70==
E Sequencing coverage at the genomic positions of the NMD genes
65
GO_NUCLEAR_TRANSCRIBED_MRNA_CATABOLIC_PROCESS_NONSENSE_MEDIATED_DECAY.html. [Ac-
cessed: 21-Jun-2018]
[50] E. Eisenberg and E. Y. Levanon, “Human housekeeping genes, revisited.” Trends in genetics
: TIG, vol. 29, no. 10, pp. 569–74, Oct. 2013 [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pubmed/23810203
[51] K. Cibulskis et al., “Sensitive detection of somatic point mutations in impure and hetero-
geneous cancer samples,” Nature Biotechnology, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 213–219, Mar. 2013
[Online]. Available: http://www.nature.com/articles/nbt.2514
[52] M. Knudsen, “MuTect2 Pitfalls - Best Practices for Processing HTS Data.” 2017 [On-
line]. Available: http://best-practices-for-processing-hts-data.readthedocs.io/
en/latest/mutect2_pitfalls.html. [Accessed: 10-Jul-2018]
[53] E. Y. Alemu, J. W. Carl, H. Corrada Bravo, and S. Hannenhalli, “Determinants of expression
variability,” Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 3503–3514, Apr. 2014 [Online]. Avail-
able: https://academic.oup.com/nar/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/nar/gkt1364
[54] R Core Team, R: A language and environment for statistical computing. Vienna, Austria:
R Foundation for Statistical Computing, 2017 [Online]. Available: https://www.R-project.
org/
[55] A. A. Shabalin, MatrixEQTL: Matrix eQTL: Ultra fast eQTL analysis via large matrix op-
erations. 2018 [Online]. Available: https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=MatrixEQTL
[56] P. Cingolani et al., “A program for annotating and predicting the effects of single nucleotide
polymorphisms, SnpEff,” Fly, vol.
6, no.
2, pp.
80–92, Apr.
2012 [Online].
Available:
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.4161/fly.19695
[57] W. L. DeLano, “The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System,” Schrödinger LLC wwwpymolorg,
2002.
[58] T. UniProt Consortium, “UniProt: the universal protein knowledgebase,” Nucleic Acids
Research, 2018.
[59] H. M. Berman, “The Protein Data Bank,” Nucleic Acids Research, 2000.
[60] Simon Andrews and Babraham Bioinformatics, “Duplicate Sequences - Help - FastQC.”
2010 [Online]. Available: https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/Help/3
Analysis Modules/8 Duplicate Sequences.html. [Accessed: 21-Jun-2018]
[61] H. Cho, K. M. Kim, and Y. K. Kim, “Human Proline-Rich Nuclear Receptor Coregula-
tory Protein 2 Mediates an Interaction between mRNA Surveillance Machinery and Decap-
ping Complex,” Molecular Cell, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 75–86, Jan. 2009 [Online]. Available:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19150429
[62] T. Lai et al., “Structural basis of the PNRC2-mediated link between mRNA surveillance
and decapping,” Structure, 2012.
[63] J. Lim et al., “Uridylation by TUT4 and TUT7 marks mRNA for degradation.” Cell, vol.
==PAGE:71==
E Sequencing coverage at the genomic positions of the NMD genes
66
159, no. 6, pp. 1365–76, Dec. 2014 [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/25480299
[64] R. C. Deo, J. B. Bonanno, N. Sonenberg, and S. K. Burley, “Recognition of polyadenylate
RNA by the poly(A)-binding protein,” Cell, 1999.
[65] H. Chamieh, L. Ballut, F. Bonneau, and H. Le Hir, “NMD factors UPF2 and UPF3
bridge UPF1 to the exon junction complex and stimulate its RNA helicase activity.” Nature
structural & molecular biology, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 85–93, Jan. 2008 [Online]. Available:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18066079
[66] J. T. Mendell, S. M. Medghalchi, R. G. Lake, E. N. Noensie, and H. C. Dietz, “Novel Upf2p
orthologues suggest a functional link between translation initiation and nonsense surveillance
complexes.” Molecular and cellular biology, vol. 20, no. 23, pp. 8944–57, Dec. 2000 [Online].
Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11073994
[67] A. Yamashita, T. Ohnishi, I. Kashima, Y. Taya, and S. Ohno, “Human SMG-1, a novel
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related protein kinase, associates with components of the mRNA
surveillance complex and is involved in the regulation of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay,”
Genes & Development, vol.
15, no.
17, pp.
2215–2228, Sep.
2001 [Online].
Available:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11544179
[68] K. M. Brumbaugh et al., “The mRNA Surveillance Protein hSMG-1 Functions in Genotoxic
Stress Response Pathways in Mammalian Cells,” Molecular Cell, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 585–598,
Jun. 2004 [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15175154
[69] E. Arias-Palomo et al., “The nonsense-mediated mRNA decay SMG-1 kinase is regulated by
large-scale conformational changes controlled by SMG-8,” Genes & Development, vol. 25, no.
2, pp. 153–164, Jan. 2011 [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
21245168
[70] R. G. Cote, P. Jones, L. Martens, R. Apweiler, and H. Hermjakob, “The Ontology Lookup
Service: more data and better tools for controlled vocabulary queries,” Nucleic Acids Research,
vol. 36, no. Web Server, pp. W372–W376, May 2008 [Online]. Available: https://academic.
oup.com/nar/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/nar/gkn252
[71] T. S. Mikkelsen et al., “Genome-wide maps of chromatin state in pluripotent and lineage-
committed cells.” Nature, vol. 448, no. 7153, pp. 553–60, Aug. 2007 [Online]. Available:
http://www.nature.com/articles/nature06008
[72] J. Weischenfeldt et al., “NMD is essential for hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells and
for eliminating by-products of programmed DNA rearrangements,” Genes & Development, vol.
22, no. 10, pp. 1381–1396, May 2008 [Online]. Available: http://www.genesdev.org/cgi/
doi/10.1101/gad.468808
[73] C. Liu et al., “The UPF1 RNA surveillance gene is commonly mutated in pancreatic
adenosquamous carcinoma,” Nature Medicine, vol.
20, no.
6, pp.
596–598, Jun.
2014
[Online]. Available: http://www.nature.com/articles/nm.3548
==PAGE:72==
