==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
3D scour and backfi lling at span shoulders 
beneath submarine pipelines
Leon Heine Staunstrup
July 2018
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
This report was prepared by:
Leon Heine Staunstrup
Supervisor(s):
David R. Fuhrman, Associate Professor, DTU MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
Stefan Carstensen, Lektor, DTU MEKANIK
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Nils Koppels Allé
Building 404
DK- 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel (+45) 45 25 19 60
Project period:
January 2018-July 2018
ECTS:
35
Education:
MSc
Field:
Civil Engineering
Class:
No conﬁdentiality
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical University
of Denmark.
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Submarine pipelines transport important and dangerous content such as water waste, oil and
gas and are positioned on an erodible seabed subject to ﬂow conditions in the form of waves
and currents. The stability of the interface between the pipeline and the seabed is of great con-
cern as to assure the longevity of the pipeline and avoid environmental disasters.
The purpose of this project is to study in three dimensions the velocity of scour propagation
in steady currents and irregular waves, the wave induced backﬁlling of current-generated scour
holes at the span shoulder, and the time variation of scour and backﬁlling depth, monitored at
the pipe mid-span.
In this work, the scour propagation is documented using video recordings. A program is devel-
oped to manually measure the pixel distance from the initial scour hole to the propagating span
shoulder. The actual distance of propagation is found using calibration markers over the length
of the pipe from which the pixel measurements can be converted to an Euclidean distance. Test
equipment is constructed to perform distance measurements with a laser beneath the water sur-
face, so time variation of scour and backﬁlling depth can be measured. The underwater laser,
combined with two stationary lasers and an automated carriage system above the test section,
enable thorough scans of the bed morphology for each test case.
This study demonstrates that scour propagation velocity in a steady current increases with the
increase of the incoming ﬂow Shields parameter and decreases with increasing embedment of
the pipe. An augmented propagation velocity is observed at large Shields parameter with pos-
sible implications of suspended sediment. Primary and secondary scour propagation velocities
are observed for small embedments of the pipe at a considerable reduced rate compared to for-
mer studies with a suggested involvement of the Reynolds number. It is proposed that bedforms
are important for differentiating primary and secondary propagation velocities.
We show that wave-induced scour propagates with a primary and secondary propagation ve-
locity in live-bed conditions and low Shields parameter. The same behavior of the propagation
velocity is observed for wave-induced backﬁlling of current-generated scour holes, with indi-
cation of effects from the scour-induced bedforms. For a fully developed scour, the time scale
of backﬁlling is identical to a two-dimensional case. For scour not fully developed along the
pipe, bedforms show to increase the time of backﬁlling at the location of the initial scour due
to the characteristic bedforms downstream of the pipe.
This study suggests that scale effects of small-scale laboratory experiments may be observed for
the pipe-diameter-to-ripple-size ratio and that studies in this environment could be challenging
to extrapolate to real-life situations.
i
==PAGE:6==
ii
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis is submitted as a partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the degree of Master of
Science in Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. The project is credited
35 ECTS points. The theme of the project was suggested by David R.Fuhrman, however, small
adjustments have been made during the process in collaboration between the author and the
supervisor.
I would like to thank my supervisor David R. Fuhrman for introducing me to the project
and for always being available when I needed to discuss the experiment and results. Stefan
Carstensen was incredibly helpful and a great inspiration for the design of experimental equip-
ment. Titi Sui came up with many great ideas for the layout of the project and generally helped
me get a good start in the project.
I would also like to thank my fellow students at the test facility creating a good atmosphere,
and specially Mathias Trier Winther who in the darkest moments of our projects always put on
a smile big enough for both of us. And most certainly my entire family for still loving me even
though my focus has been elsewhere. Lastly my incredible girlfriend Camille Papon helping
me in every aspect of life.
Kgs. Lyngby July 23, 2018
Student (s112841)
iii
==PAGE:8==
iv
==PAGE:9==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Introduction and basic concepts to the scour process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Governing variables for scour propagation and scale effects . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Backﬁlling and equilibrium scour depth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Predicting time scale
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
Analytical expressions for scour propagation velocity in currents and waves . .
7
2.6
Expressions used in steady current analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.7
Expressions used in wave analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Experimental setup and data collection
11
3.1
General setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Test section support and automatization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Measurement equipment at test section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Laser perfomance and measuring beneath the MWL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.5
Experimental procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.6
Veriﬁcation of the setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.6.1
Velocity measurement and correction of velocity proﬁle
. . . . . . . .
19
3.6.2
Stability analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.6.3
Particle size distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.7
Measurement of scour propagation velocity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Scour propagation in a steady current
22
4.1
Results for scour propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Analysis of scour propagation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Data analysis and comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
Study comparison with Cheng et al. (2009)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5
Regression analysis of the scour propagation rate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.6
Effect of the Reynolds number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
v
==PAGE:10==
5
Wave induced scour and backﬁlling
39
5.1
Wave induced scour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Results for wave induced backﬁlling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3
Implications of bedforms at the span shoulder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.4
Time scale for backﬁlling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
2D study of scour
51
6.1
Results for time scale in waves and currents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2
Analysis and observations for the scour development . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7
Conclusion
57
7.1
Further work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A Contour plots for initial and ﬁnal bathymetry of test cases.
61
A.1
Test c21 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.2
Test c22 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.3
Test c23 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.4
Test c2c1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.5
Test c2c3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.6
Test c1c1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.7
Test c12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A.8
Test c0c1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
B
Calibration of equipment and ﬂume
70
C Tools and equipment used and produced for the realisation of the thesis
73
D Additional information of the setup
78
D.0.1
Stability analysis of pipe, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
D.0.2
Shields parameter analysis as skin friction in presence of bedforms . .
85
E
Matlab scripts
87
E.1
Meshgrid for bed morphology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
E.2
Video analysis of scour propagation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
E.3
Wave analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
F
Experimental challenges in the process
92
vi
==PAGE:11==
vii
==PAGE:12==
List of Symbols
Abbreviations
α
Ampliﬁcation factor
φ
Angle of repose for sand
ρ
Density of water
σ
Standard deviation of scour depth
σi
Standard deviation of the bed morphology
τ
Shear stress
τb
Bed shear stress
θ
Shields parameter
θc
Critical Shields parameter
θw
Shields parameter for wave
T ∗
Non-dimensional time scale of the scour process
T ∗
b
Non-dimensional time scale for backﬁlling
Tb
Time scale for backﬁlling
Vh
Scour propagation velocity
Vh1
Primary scour propagation velocity
V ∗
h1
Dimensionless primary scour propagation velocity
Vh2
Secondary scour propagation velocity
V ∗
h2
Dimensionless secondary scour propagation velocity
Vhl
Scour propagation velocity in the +y direction
viii
==PAGE:13==
Vhr
Scour propagation velocity in the −y direction
µ
Dynamic viscosity
ν
Kinematic viscosity
b
Width of the ﬂume
D
Pipe diameter
d
Grain diameter
dh
Distance from the edge of the span shoulder to the initial scour hole
d50
Mass median grain diameter
e
Embedment of the pipe
g
Acceleration of gravity
h
Water depth
ks
Equivalent sand roughness of the bed
KC
Keulegan Carpenter number
n
Porosity of the bed sediment
Q
Flume discharge
Re
Reynolds number
Reg
Grain Reynolds number
S
Equilibrium scour depth
s
Relative density of the sediment
Sf
Equilibrium scour depth at end of the backﬁlling process
St
Time variation of the scour depth
T
Time scale of the scour/backﬁlling process
Uf
Friction velocity at bed
Ut
Undisturbed ﬂow velocity at the top of the pipeline
V
Mean velocity
Cx
Small carriage moving in the x direction
Cy
Carriage moving in the y direction
l
Left side of ﬂume (+y)
Lx
Laser measuring in the x direction
ix
==PAGE:14==
Ly
Laser measuring in the y direction
Lz
Laser measuring in the z direction
MWL Mean water level
r
Rigth side of ﬂume (−y)
w
Wave gauge
x
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Submarine pipelines are used in great extent to transport important natural resources such as
gas, oil and water over long distances across the seabed. The stability of such a pipeline is
important due to the great economically and environmental consequences involved. One of
the main concerns is scour propagation along the length of the pipeline, which in this case is
supported only at the span shoulders. A potential freespan of the pipe poses a problem to the
overall stability, with increased stress at the span shoulder, potential sagging of the pipeline and
vortex induced vibrations. It is therefore of great interest to gain overall knowledge concerning
the scour processes, such as rate of scour propagation and the implications of backﬁlling.
The novel approach proposed in this thesis is the three-dimensional investigation of wave
induced backﬁlling of a current-generated scour hole. Observations are focused on the effects
at the span shoulder and on the time scale of backﬁlling midspan of the current-generated scour
hole. Wave induced backﬁlling has been investigated for two-dimensional scour by Bayraktar
et al. (2016) leading to a regression equation for the time scale of the backﬁlling process.
A complementary study is proposed for scour propagation in a steady current and for an
irregular wave time series. For a steady current, the thesis relates to the work of Hansen et al.
(1991), who investigated the relation between the scour propagation velocity and the embed-
ment of the pipe. For increasing embedment, it was found that the ampliﬁcation of bed shear
stresses at the span shoulder was reduced, leading to a decrease in the propagation velocity.
Cheng et al. (2009) investigated thoroughly the effect of increasing ﬂow Shields parameter and
embedment. The conclusion of the study was that the propagation velocity increased for in-
creasing ﬂow Shields parameter and decreased for increasing embedment, similarly reported
by Hansen et al. (1991). Cheng et al. (2009) reported also a primary and secondary propagation
velocity for large embedments e/D > 0.2 and low Shields parameter θ < 0.106. For an embed-
ment of e/D < 0.2 and Shields parameter θ > 0.106, only a single propagation velocity was
observed. This difference in observed velocities was estimated to cause a three-dimensional
ﬂow through the initial scour hole, yielding large ampliﬁcation of the bed shear stresses at the
span shoulder. When the local section of the initial scour had reached equilibrium, the ﬂow
conditions could be considered two-dimensional, with decreased bed shear stress compared to
the initial scour situation.
In the case of wave induced scour, the present study is compared to the work of Cheng.
1
==PAGE:16==
et al. (2013). They reported that the propagation velocity increases for increasing Keulegan
Carpenter number and Shields parameter and decreases with increasing embedment. Test cases
were all reported for a wave Shields parameter θ > 0.18 and a Keulegan Carpenter number
KC > 8.7. The propagation velocity along the pipe was constant, no secondary velocity was
reported.
In chapter 2, the applied theory necessary to evaluate the physical parameters of relevance
to this work is presented, while chapter 3 introduces the experimental setup used to investigate
scour propagation and backﬁlling. In chapter 4, a comparative study of scour propagation in
a steady current is presented. This includes the investigation of the scour propagation velocity
for increasing Shields parameter and embedment effects of the pipe. In chapter 5, a study
of irregular wave induced scour propagation is introduced for comparison to wave-induced
backﬁlling of current-generated scour holes, where identical wave conditions are applied. In
chapter 6, the time scale for scour development, for the steady current and irregular waves test
cases, is investigated for validation purposes. Finally discussion of the results and an outlook
to further research are given.
2
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
This chapter presents the scour processes and applied theory for the realization of this project.
First, the two-dimensional scour processes are shortly described to introduce the subject, fol-
lowed by an analysis of the non-dimensional parameters involved in scour propagation. Scour
and backﬁlling processes are then discussed, followed by a presentation of the applied theory
in data analysis.
2.1
Introduction and basic concepts to the scour process
Onset of scour beneath pipelines is observed if ﬂow conditions reach a critical stage where the
force induced by the seepage ﬂow exceeds the stabilizing force of the submerged weight of the
sand W, such that P ⩾W, as illustrated in ﬁgure 2.1. This process is called piping, driven by
the pressure difference between the upstream and downstream side of the pipe.
Figure 2.1: Illustration of pipeline with incoming ﬂow and the resulting upward force P from
the seepage ﬂow beneath the pipe and W the weight of the sand (Sumer and Fredsøe, 2002).
Onset of scour is linked to the depth-to-diameter ratio e/D and the seepage ﬂow, with e
and D being the embedment and diameter of the pipe, respectively. The criterion in waves and
3
==PAGE:18==
current for onset of scour is expressed in non-dimensional terms and reads (Sumer and Fredsøe,
2002):
For a current :
"
U 2
t
gD(1 −n)(s −1)
#
cr
⩾f
 e
D

For waves :
"
U 2
t
gD(1 −n)(s −1)
#
cr
⩾f
 e
D, KC

(2.1)
where Ut is the undisturbed ﬂow velocity at the top of the pipeline, g is the acceleration of
gravity, n is the porosity, s is the speciﬁc gravity of sand and KC is the Keulegan-Carpenter
number.
Piping leads to the next stage of the scour process or tunnel erosion, as illustrated in ﬁgure
2.2, characterized by the incoming ﬂow being diverted to the gap between the bed and the pipe,
in the form of contraction of streamlines, resulting in a local ampliﬁcation in the bed shear
stress.
Figure 2.2: Illustration of tunnel erosion beneath a pipeline (Sumer and Fredsøe, 2002).
Scour is initially three-dimensional (3D) with onset of scour occurring locally and propa-
gating over the length of the pipe. For small span lengths and large pressure gradients between
the upstream and downstream side of the pipeline, it is reported that in addition to the two-
dimensional (2D) ﬂow effects, a vortex may form upstream from the pipe and induces addi-
tional bed shear stress (Cheng et al., 2009). As the scour propagates, the scour span increases,
the pressure gradients decrease and the ﬂow conditions at the span shoulder can be considered
2D.
2.2
Governing variables for scour propagation and scale ef-
fects
The factors affecting the scour propagation velocity Vh and the scour process in general are
considered and stated as:
Vh = f(Uf, D, d, ν, e, g)
(2.2)
with Uf being the friction velocity, d the grain diameter and ν the kinematic viscosity. The
incident angle between the pipeline and the ﬂow is not considered in this analysis, but will also
have an important impact on the scour propagation velocity (Cheng et al., 2009).
The non-dimensionalization of the variables from equation 2.2, using the Buckingham Pi
theorem, reveals the governing non-dimensional terms affecting the scour propagation velocity,
so that:
Vh
Uf
= f(θ, D
ks
, e
D, Re)
(2.3)
4
==PAGE:19==
with θ being the Shields parameter, ks the equivalent sand roughness of the bed and Re the
Reynolds number. From previous studies, it is found that θ and the embedment ratio e/D of
the pipe are the main factors contributing to the scour propagation rate (Cheng et al., 2009).
The grain Reynolds number determines the critical Shields parameter important for estimating
live-bed conditions (Fredsøe and Deigaard, 1992). The ratio D/ks estimates the roughness of
the bed to the pipe diameter. The Reynolds number Re for the pipe is important when con-
sidering vortex shedding and subsequently lee-wake erosion. In previous studies, Re was not
considered essential in the analysis of scour propagation (Cheng et al., 2009).
Compared to real life situations, the system in the present study is scaled down to ﬁt labora-
tory investigation. This will potentially introduce multiple scale effects and the most important
are listed in the following (Sumer and Fredsøe, 2002):
• Re will in real life situations be a much larger ﬁgure compared to laboratory experiments
since, in the ﬁeld, the ﬂow conditions are increased and much larger pipes are used.
• The ratio of the size of bed ripples to the pipe diameter, i.e. D/ks from equation 2.3,
could affect scour observations for laboratory tests.
In real life situations however,
pipeline diameters are much larger, such that D/ks ≫.
2.3
Backﬁlling and equilibrium scour depth
Backﬁlling at the pipeline can occur due to multiple reasons, such as high incident angle of the
incoming ﬂow and sagging (Hansen et al., 1991). For this project, wave induced backﬁlling
of a current-induced scour hole is investigated. Backﬁlling is the process where sediment is
reintroduced into the scour hole and is measured as the difference between the current-induced
scour depth and the wave-induced backﬁlling depth.
For a current, the equilibrium scour depth S is a function of S/D = f(ks/D, Re, θ, e/D).
For live bed conditions and no embedment, the ratio S/D does not vary signiﬁcantly and is
written as (Sumer and Fredsøe, 2002):
S
D = 0.6
with
σ
D = 0.2
(2.4)
where σ is the standard deviation of the scour depth.
For a pipeline in wave conditions, the equilibrium scour depth is also a function of the
Keulegan Carpenter number KC. For no embedment of the pipe, KC is the factor governing
the equilibrium scour depth so that:
S
D = 0.1
√
KC
(2.5)
The equilibrium scour depth for waves will be less signiﬁcant compared to a current-induced
scour if the KC number is sufﬁciently small, and in this case wave-induced backﬁlling can
take place. Equations 2.4 and 2.5 are both valid for e/D = 0. If the pipe is embedded, the
equilibrium scour depths for current and waves are (Sumer and Fredsøe, 2002):.
For a current :
S
D = 0.625 exp

−0.6 e
D

(2.6)
For waves :
S
D = 0.1
√
KC exp

−0.6 e
D

(2.7)
5
==PAGE:20==
Backﬁlling in 2D is studied by estimating the time scale of the process. In this way, the
duration for achieving equilibrium scour depth in the case of backﬁlling can be predicted.
Wave induced backﬁlling has been studied by Bayraktar et al. (2016) in 2D. They demonstrated
that the time scale for backﬁlling T ∗
b on dimensional grounds could be expressed as T ∗
b =
f(KC, θ). In the case of regular and irregular waves, the backﬁlling time scale was empirically
demonstrated to depend on the Shields parameter as:
T ∗
b = 0.3θ−5/3
(2.8)
2.4
Predicting time scale
Experimental measurements for time variation of the scour depth St can be used to determine
time scales for scour and backﬁlling. The expression for St is as follows:
St = S

1 −exp

−t
T

(2.9)
where the time scale T can be non-dimensionalized applying the following expression:
T =
D2
q
g(s −1)d3
50
T ∗
(2.10)
The normalized time scale for scour development in the case of currents and waves is, from
empirical data, expressed as (Fredsøe et al., 1992):
T ∗= 1
50θ−5/3
(2.11)
There are two methods in order to determine the time scale T. The ﬁrst method is based on
the tangent of the scour-depth-versus-time curve at t = 0 (Sumer and Fredsøe, 2002):
Rs = St
t
for
t →0
(2.12)
Where Rs is the slope of this curve. The time scale T is then determined using the equilibrium
scour depth, such that:
T = S
Rs
(2.13)
The second method is based on integration, where the time-dependent development of scour St
is measured against the equilibrium scour depth:
T =
Z ∞
0
S −St
S
dt
(2.14)
In practice, the integration is performed until the equilibrium scour depth is reached. In this
thesis, the second method is used, as the validity of the ﬁrst strongly depends on the selection
of data.
The time scale for backﬁlling Tb is calculated in a similar fashion as equation 2.14, as suggested
in Fuhrman et al. (2014):
Tb =
Z ∞
0
St −Sf
S −Sf
dt
(2.15)
where Sf is the ﬁnal equilibrium scour depth reached at the end of the backﬁlling process. The
normalized time scale T ∗
b is then calculated in the same way as in equation 2.10.
6
==PAGE:21==
2.5
Analytical expressions for scour propagation velocity in
currents and waves
Different attempts have been made to predict the scour propagation velocity Vh. For a cur-
rent induced scour, two experimental studies, with different approaches to the problem, are
presented. Hansen et al. (1991) based their prediction for Vh on the sediment conservation
equation at the span shoulder:
d(Vol)
dt
= (qc0 −q0)βD
1 −n
(2.16)
where Vol is the volume of sediment, βD is the length of the corner region at the span shoulder,
β a scaling factor, qc0 the ampliﬁed sediment transport rate at the span shoulder and q0 is the
far ﬁeld sediment transport rate. The sediment transport rate q is estimated from the formula in
Meyer-Peter and Müller (1948):
q =
q
(s −1)gd3 8(θ −θc)3/2
(2.17)
According to formula 2.16, bed shear stress at the span shoulder τb is ampliﬁed with a factor
α due to contraction of streamlines at the pipe. Sediment at the span shoulder is therefore
removed at a faster rate than in the far ﬁeld section with τ∞, such that τ = ατ∞. Hansen et al.
(1991) chose to scale the corner area with β = 1, such that the ampliﬁcation is assumed to
apply over a length D, and reached the following simpliﬁed equation for the scour propagation
rate Vh:
Vh = qc0 −q0
e(1 −n)
(2.18)
where qc0 is calculated using the ampliﬁed Shields parameter at the span shoulder θc0 = αθ and
q0 is estimated using the far ﬁeld Shields parameter θ.
Recently, Cheng et al. (2009) proposed an analytical solution for the estimation of Vh. The
non-dimensional T ∗time scale from equation 2.11, together with a dimensional analysis of the
scour propagation at the span shoulder, are used in order to predict Vh:
Vh = K

25
q
g(s −1)d3
D tan β
θ5/3

1 −e
D


(2.19)
where β is the average slope at the span shoulder, deﬁned as the angle of repose for sand φ. K
is a scaling factor set to 14 for the primary propagation velocity Vh1 and to 4 for the secondary
propagation velocity Vh2.
In the case of rate of scour propagation due to wave action, Cheng. et al. (2013) propose
an analytical solution very similar to the prior. For regular waves, propagating with an incident
angle perpendicular to the pipe span, Vh reads:
Vh = Kw(1 −e
D)
q
g(s −1)d3
D tan φ
θ5/3
w
√
KC
(2.20)
where Kw = 11.3 is a scaling factor determined from experimental data and θw is the Shields
parameter for waves.
7
==PAGE:22==
2.6
Expressions used in steady current analysis
The theory used for test cases in a steady current is based on Sumer (2003), presented with an
analysis of the ﬂow conditions at the bed. The streamwise mean velocity u(z), in the case of
a rough wall, is a function of the following parameters: u(z) = f(τb, z, µ, ρ, k), whereρ is the
water density, z the vertical position, τb the bed shear stress, µ the dynamic viscosity and k the
roughness of the bed. In non-dimensional terms, this becomes the logarithmic law:
u(z)
Uf
= A ln(z+) + B
for
30 < z+ < 70
(2.21)
where z+ = zUf
ν
is a dimensionless vertical coordinate. This can also be expressed as:
u(z)
Uf
= A ln
 z
z0

(2.22)
where z0 is the roughness length such that z0 = ks g(k+
s ) and k+
s =
ksUf
ν
is the roughness
Reynolds number. Assuming a hydraulic rough wall (k+
s > 70), the effect of viscosity ν on the
velocity proﬁle can be neglected. In the presence of bedforms, the wall can be considered as
hydraulic rough and we obtain:
u(z)
Uf
= 2.5 ln
 
z
ks/30
!
(2.23)
Integrating equation 2.23 over the water depth gives the ﬂow resistance formula in terms of the
mean velocity V of the velocity proﬁle:
V
Uf
= 2.5 log
 30h
ks
!
−1 ≈6.0 + 2.5 log
 h
ks
!
(2.24)
By applying equation 2.23 or equation 2.24, the friction velocity Uf, and ultimately the shields
parameter θ, are determined in the same way as in the studies of Cheng et al. (2009) and Hansen
et al. (1991). The bed shear stress τb is expressed in terms of the friction velocity Uf:
τb = ρU 2
f
(2.25)
The Shields parameter is determined from the following expression:
θ =
U 2
f
g(s −1)d
(2.26)
The critical Shields number is estimated from Yalin and Karahan (1979), approximated by:
θc = 0.17(Reg + 0.6)−0.8 + 0.045 exp(−40Re−1.3
g
)
(2.27)
Equation 2.23 is a simpliﬁcation of the ﬂow process. Indeed, during an experiment, the bed
undergoes a dynamic process with no bedforms for the initial setup of an experiment where
k+
s ∈[6, 11] such that the initial state is in the category of transitional wall. In this category,
g(k+
s ) is approximated by Sumer (2003) as:
g(k+
s ) = 1/9
k+
s
+ 1
30 exp[−140(k+
s + 6)−1.7]
(2.28)
8
==PAGE:23==
For a ﬂat bed, the friction velocity is reduced compared to a rough state with bedforms, such
that for the initial part of an experiment equation 2.24 is an approximation. The course of an
experiment undergoes a longer time period with bedforms and therefore equation 2.24 is still a
reasonable approximation.
More insight is needed for understanding the impact of bedforms on the Shields parameter.
If varying the grain size or friction velocity, the ratio between the height and length of the
bedform will vary and ultimately the ﬂow resistance is affected. In the lower regime, bed shear
stress can be divided into effective shear and form drag components τb = τ ′ + τ ′′ where skin
friction is reduced in the case of bedforms. Sediment transport is affected when bedforms
are present, as bed particles generally are moved by the effective shear stress. An analysis of
Shields parameter expressed as skin friction is given in Appendix D with reference to Fredsøe
and Deigaard (1992).
2.7
Expressions used in wave analysis
When considering waves acting on a pipeline, the scour or backﬁlling process is viewed differ-
ently than for a current. First, because the circular motion of water particles creates a quasi-
symmetrical ﬂow at the pipe, the scour hole becomes symmetrical downstream and upstream
from the pipe. Second, the scour process and the equilibrium scour depth are greatly affected
by the KC number. In the case of waves, the bed shear stress τw is estimated by:
τw = 1
2ρfwU 2
m
(2.29)
where Um is the magnitude of the near-bed orbital velocity and fw is the wave friction factor.
The wave boundary layer can be laminar or turbulent, depending on the value of the Reynolds
number, which in this case is written as Re = (Uma)/ν, where a is the amplitude of near-bed
wave orbital motion. The value of the wave friction factor fw is estimated as the maximum of
the laminar f laminar
w
, smooth-turbulent f smooth
w
and the rough-turbulent f rough
w
wave friction factor.
From theoretical analysis f laminar
w
is expressed as:
f laminar
w
=
2
√
Re
(2.30)
The smooth-turbulent wave friction factor f smooth
w
is evaluated from the following expression
(Fredsøe and Deigaard, 1992):
f smooth
w
= 0.035Re−0.16
(2.31)
Finally, the rough-turbulent friction factor f rough
w
is calculated according to (Fuhrman et al.,
2013):
f rough
w
= exp
 
3.3
 a
ks
−0.16
−6.7
!
(2.32)
Here, the amplitude of near-bed wave orbital motion a is:
a = UmTp
2π
(2.33)
where Tp is the peak wave period. The undisturbed friction velocity in waves Ufm is expressed
as a function of fw:
Ufm =
s
fw
2 Um
(2.34)
9
==PAGE:24==
The Shields parameter in waves θw can then be estimated from:
θw =
U 2
fm
g(s −1)d50
(2.35)
The Keulegan Carpenter number KC is calculated according to:
KC = UmTp
D
(2.36)
The following parametric expression is used to estimate the near-bed orbital velocity Um in the
case of irregular waves(Soulsby, 2006):
Um = Hs
2
√
2
rg
h exp

−
"3.65
Tz
s
h
g
#2.1

(2.37)
where Tz ≈Tp
1.3 is the statistical mean zero up-crossing period from the wave spectrum.
In the ﬂume, the wavemaker is positioned at a larger water depth compared to the test section.
The wave height will be affected due to shoaling and is predicted using conservation of wave
energy ﬂux(Svendsen and Jonsson, 1982):
H1 = H2
scG1
cG2
(2.38)
where H1 is the wave height after shoaling, H2 is the incoming wave height, cG1 and cG2 are
the wave group velocities for the waves before and after shoaling, respectively.
From the measurements of the wave height, wave parameters are determined applying spec-
tral analysis (Sumer and Fredsøe, 2006). The wave energy spectrum Sη(f) is determined using
a Fourier transform. The zeroth moment m0 is extracted from the wave energy spectrum
m0 =
R ∞
0 f 0Sη(f) in order to calculate the signiﬁcant wave height Hm0, using the following
expression:
Hm0 = 4√m0
(2.39)
The peak frequency fp is estimated from the maximum frequency of the wave spectrum
fp = f|Sη(f)=max and the peak wave period Tp is thus:
Tp = 1
fp
(2.40)
The frequency domain of horizontal particle velocities is also estimated by applying spectral
analysis combined with linear wave theory. Um is calcultated using σu, the r.m.s value of the
orbital velocity u at the bed (Sumer and Fredsøe, 2002):
Um =
√
2σu
(2.41)
where σu is determined from the power spectrum of the orbital velocity Su(f):
σ2
u =
Z ∞
0
Su(f)df
(2.42)
Wave conditions at the test section are non-linear so applying linear wave theory will induce
an uncertainty in the estimation of Um. The Ursell parameter for the present study is in the
range of U ∈[27, 42], with U < 15 being the limit condition for which linear theory is valid.
The predictions from linear theory are considered sufﬁcient for the present study, but another
measuring method should be applied for higher precision.
10
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Experimental setup and data collection
3.1
General setup
Experiments were conducted in a wave-plus-current ﬂume, illustrated in ﬁgure 3.1. The wave-
maker of the ﬂume can provide regular and irregular waves time series. A pump system delivers
a current with a mean velocity reaching up to V = 2 m/s.
Waves are formed by the wavemaker piston at a larger water depth then at the test section for
the pipe. This will affect the signiﬁcant wave height which is taken into account when includ-
ing the effects of shoaling. Indeed, a gentle slope (1:10) guides the wave to the test section
with no abrupt change in water depth. A wave absorber is positioned downstream of the test
section and captures the majority of the wave energy. This wave absorber is positioned each
time for a wave test such that the highest point corresponds to the maximum wave elevation of
the irregular wave time series, so that maximum absorption is achieved.
The ﬂume is a closed system. For a current, water enters at the ﬂow inlet and exits at the
outlet. The ﬂume then acts as a gravitational ﬂume, where the water depth at the inlet is larger
than at the outlet. The gravitational effects should be taken into account to achieve the desired
water depth (see ﬁgure B.2 in the appendix). Flow straighteners ensure that the ﬂow undergoes
a transition to a more laminar regime, free from swirl, and achieve nearly-fully developped
velocity proﬁle.
An aluminum pipe, with a diameter D = 0.04 m, is positioned at the center of the test
section. The pipe is located on an erodible bed, which is 0.4 m thick and 0.8 m wide, such that
the scour can fully develop. The pipe is ﬁxed on a support made of U-section steel fastened to
the bottom of the ﬂume with a maximum free span of 3.2 m for the pipe. A section of 0.5D is
removed on each extremity of the pipe in order for it to slide over the support. Spacers made of
brass, illustrated in ﬁgure C.7 in the appendix, are designed to achieve the desired embedment.
The slope on the upstream end of the test section is made of rock material whereas the
slope material at the downstream side is sand. This sand slope forms naturally due to the ﬂow
conditions downstream. Tiles are used at each extremity of the test section in order to retain
the sand. Dimensions of the ﬂume are illustrated in ﬁgure 3.1 where the width is b = 4 m, and
a water depth of h = 0.5 m is maintained for the entire project.
11
==PAGE:26==
b
h
0.1m
5.5m
6.5m
4m
2.5m
7m
1m
Rock material
0.4m
z
x
Flow inlet
Flow outlet
0.4m
MWL
Waveabsorber
Wavemaker piston
1:10
1m
Support
Tiles
Flow straightener
y
x
Sand
Pipe
0.8m
Figure 3.1: Flume setup
12
==PAGE:27==
A right hand coordinate system with x, y, z is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.1. x is in the down-
stream direction with origin at the centerline of the pipe. The coordinate z spans from the bed
to the mean water level (MWL) and y is the coordinate for the pipe span, whose origin corre-
sponds to the position of the initial scour hole, always placed at the center of the ﬂume width
b.
3.2
Test section support and automatization
In order to install some of the measuring equipment, the original carriage, which is supported
on each side of the ﬂume width, is ﬁxed above the test section and the pipe. The original ﬂume
carriage was limiting the precision for measurements of the bathymetry, it was therefore only
used as a support in this work.
An alternative carriage and frame system, illustrated in ﬁgure 3.2, was designed to gain preci-
sion in the measurements, to ease the process of bathymetry measurements and also for achiev-
ing a more ﬂexible system.
x
z
y
Cx
Cy
Figure 3.2: Isotropic view of a carriage system utilized across the ﬂume for transport of
experimental equipment and sensors.
The frame system is complemented by two carriages, a small one moving in the x direction
(Cx) and one moving in the y direction (Cy) (see ﬁgures C.2a and C.2b in the appendix for
dimensions of Cx and Cy). Deﬂection at the frame suporting Cx is negligible, as very little
weight is applied and the frame is supported at four locations with a maximum span of 0.5 m.
The frame for carriage Cy is supported by the original frame that has a much greater bending
stiffness, with little deﬂection. The structural design of the frame, as well as the carriage system
itself, was made using Boschrexroth aluminum strut proﬁles. The leveling was veriﬁed using
an electronic level (Bosch DNM 120 L Professional) with a precision of 0.05°. Therefore, for
13
==PAGE:28==
a width of b = 4 m, the maximum error is 3.4 mm between the two extremities of the frame,
which is accounted for in the analysis of the data.
The carriage system was automated using Arduino software such that both Cx and Cy could
be controlled from distance. This gave an increased ﬂexibility in the use of experimental equip-
ment and saved time by reducing the need of manual work. Following main components were
used in order to mechanize the carriages:
• 1 × Arduino UNO microcontroller board
• 2 × gearmotors
DC Gearmotor
Spur Gearmotor
Nominal Voltage: 12 V
Nominal Voltage: 12 V
No Load RPM: 350
No Load RPM: 16.7
Stall Current: 5 A
Stall Current: 2.6 A
Stall Torque: 110 oz-in
Stall Torque: 778 oz-in
Shaft Diameter: 6 mm
Shaft Diameter: 6 mm
• 2× Cytron 10A DC Motor Driver Arduino Shield
• 2 × 68 mm Aluminum Wheel
The carriage system could be programmed and adapted for speciﬁc cases. Measurement equip-
ment could be introduced across the test section, also during experiments. A very essential
feature is that a thourough scan of the bed could be performed by laser measurements, which
is explained in details in section 3.3.
3.3
Measurement equipment at test section
Essential equipment was installed at the test section in order to measure and document the ob-
servations made during experiments. A picture of the setup is given in ﬁgure 3.3, illustrating
the equipment installed around the test section. The test equipment was installed in different
ways and on supports, which will be described in details.
Figure 3.3: Picture illustrating setup of test equipment.
14
==PAGE:29==
Test equipment installed on carriage system:
• Three lasers measuring distance in the x, y and z direction (Lx, Ly and Lz) are used in
order to make precise measurements of the sandbed. The technology of Lz is based on
the principle of triangulation, so that it could be used below the MWL (explained in
section 3.4). Lx and Ly are laser diode modules based on time-of-ﬂight method. Ly is
positioned on the frame and measures the distance to Cy, Lx is positioned at the lower
frame and measures the distance to Cx and Lz is positioned on the carriage Cx measuring
the bathymetry of the bed.
• A pitot tube measuring total and hydrostatic pressures which can be converted into a
velocity by applying the Bernouilli equation (Tropea et al., 2007). When placed at z ≈
0.37h, the mean velocity is measured, as predicted from the logarithmic velocity proﬁle
in equation 2.24 .
• A OTT C2 current meter with a factory given accuracy of ± 2% is used in order to
determine the velocity proﬁle over the width of the ﬂume y as depicted in ﬁgure 3.6.
• One wave gauge, w, placed on the carriage at x/D = 0 and y/D ≈10.
Test equipment installed on a supplementary frame ﬁxed downstream of the pipe:
• Cameras are ﬁxed beneath the MWL on the downsteam side of the pipe with a 3D printet
support, as illustrated in ﬁgure C.4 in the appendix. The recordings are used to observe
the scour and measure the propagation rate. Two low-light high deﬁnition usb cameras
based on a Sony IMX322 sensor were build in a watertight enclosure as shown in ﬁgure.
For supplementing video acquisition, a GoPro Hero 3+ black edition was used in certain
cases, especially in the initial part of the thesis.
• Two waterproof lights complement the camera recordings for increased visibility. They
were also used to mark the beginning of an experiment, with the lights turned at the
moment where the desired ﬂow conditions were met. When analysing the recordings,
data analysis is then adjusted to the time span where the light is observable.
Test equipment mounted near the wall of the ﬂume:
• Five supplementary wave gauges are placed at x ∈[-1.78 -1.88 -2.03 -2.08 -2.18] m
and y = 1.6 m with Boschrexroth aluminium strut proﬁles. Data is collected such that
reﬂected and standing waves can be studied, if needed.
3.4
Laser perfomance and measuring beneath the MWL
The lasers are partially used to scan the bathymetry of the bed before and after an experiment.
The precision of an initial setup is assesed and bedforms at the pipe, such as scour and ripples,
are documented. Distance measurements from Lz are combined with the measurements from
Lx and Ly in order to achieve a 3D scan of the bed (see appendix E.1). The challenge is that
the bed morphology cannot be measured with Lz, as it is build, if the ﬂume is ﬁlled with water.
A solution, without modifying Lz, is to empty the ﬂume, perform a scan and then ﬁll it again
to continue the experiment.
The impact of this extra process on the sand and the bathymetry is difﬁcult to assess and
represents a source of error. To avoid this additional uncertainty, a waterproof case for the
15
==PAGE:30==
laser is designed. The laser can thus be used under water during experiments and enables
high precision monitoring for the time variation of scour and backﬁlling depth. As illustrated
in ﬁgure 3.5, the linear relation between amplitude and measured distance is different when
inserted in water. This is due to refraction, which is characterized by:
sin θ1
sin θ2
= n2
n1
(3.1)
where θ1 is the angle of the incident laser beam, θ2 is the angle of the refracted beam, n1 ≈1.33
is the refractive index of water and n2 ≈1 the refractive index of air. From ﬁgure 3.5, the slope
of the calibration curve for Lz inserted in water is around 0.2709 and in air about 0.2037.
The ratio between the refractive index of water and air is found experimentally and yields
0.2709
0.2037 = 1.33, as predicted from equation 3.1. A depiction of the situation is given in ﬁgure 3.4,
also illustrating the working principle of laser triangulation.
Figure 3.4: Section view of Lz setup with refracted laser beam
illustrated between water/air interface.
The refractive index of plexiglas is similar to the refractive index of water and is therefore
dicarded from the analysis. The distance travelled from the Lz output and the bed will not be
affected by refraction, due to the normal incident angle. It is at the CMOS sensor that the laser
beam will be affected by refraction, between the interface of plexiglas and air as depicted in
ﬁgure 3.4.
Refraction is non-linear and varies with arcsin, therefore the laser calibration should also be
expressed in non-linear terms, but the relation can be linearized by assuming small incident
angles (ﬁgure B.3 in appendix). Lz is placed always at least z > 0.45 m away from the bed
at any time. Considering that the CMOS sensor is 2 cm away from the laser beam emitter, the
incident angle θ is less than 3° at all time, giving a maximum error of 0.4 mm. The calibration is
performed covering the distance corresponding to the maximum scour depth and to the highest
point of the pipe. Due to these assumptions, a linear relation was chosen for the calibration
curve between the output of Lz and the measured distance.
16
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.5: Lz calibration trendline when used in air and in water.
In appendix B, the calibration curves for the lasers are given in ﬁgure B.1 complemented
by the value of the calibration slopes in table B.1. The calibration was made using blocks with
a precision of 0.1 mm.
Noise on the signal for Lx and Ly were adjusted using a Hamming lowpass ﬁlter. When
performing a measurement with Cx moving backward and forthward in the x-direction, a delay
in the measurements between the x, y and z data was noted. Lx and Ly measurements are lim-
ited by an output frequency of 50 Hz. Data was collected with the data acquisition instruments
(DAQ) set to an acquisition frequency of fout = 100 Hz for maximum effect of Lz. The output
from Lx and Ly is averaged over fout due to the slower output and, together with the effect of
the lowpass ﬁlter, the Lx and Ly data should be shifted with −1/fout relative to the Lz data in
order to align the measurements. The result of this adjustment is illustrated in Appendix B,
ﬁgure B.4.
3.5
Experimental procedure
The same procedure is followed for each experiment using the same tools. This was conceived
for performing reliable experiments and ensure repeatability in the results. Different tools are
used for gaining the desired embedment of the pipe and smooth the initial surface of bed. The
different steps of the procedure are listed in the following.
Initial setup for the bed and pipe
• First the desired embedment of the pipe is met using the brass spacers illustrated in ﬁgure
C.7 in the appendix.
• The initial sandbed is waterlogged, as it eases the process of leveling the bed and helps
making a smooth uniform surface.
• The bed is leveled with a leveling tool, a squared aluminum pole. The sand is ﬂattened
with the squared pole resting on the supports at either side of the ﬂume. Sand is added or
removed in this initial leveling of the bed, if sand has been displaced or washed out from
a prior experiment.
• The bed is now leveled around the pipe. Sand is carefully introduced at the vicinity and
under the pipe, ﬁlling all the gaps between it and the bed.
17
==PAGE:32==
• The bed is leveled at the pipe with a sandlevel build for this (illustrated in ﬁgure C.3 in
the appendix). Different levels were made to achieve different embedments, by sliding
the level over the pipe. The leveling is performed at least two times, by shifting direction
along the pipe.
• An initial scour hole is made at the center of the ﬂume, from where scour propagation
will start (see ﬁgure D.1 in the appendix).
• The watertight cover in front of the lense of the camera and Lz is cleaned for limescale
and particles that may have been deposited during a previous experiment.
• The sandbed is leveled again starting from the pipe and moving towards the tiles on the
upstream and downstream side of the ﬂume.
Experiments in a steady current, waves and backﬁlling
• The ﬂume is ﬁlled with water at a very slow rate such that the bed is not disturbed and
no scour is initiated.
• An initial scan of the bed is performed where the quality of the setup is assesed.
• For a few experiments involving a steady current the pitot tube is calibrated and posi-
tioned in the ﬂume at z = 0.37h, ﬁxed on the frame of Cy.
• For experiments involving waves, the wave gauges are calibrated, with w also ﬁxed on
the frame of Cy.
• For each experiment, the time variation of scour depth is measured. Carriages Cy and
Cx are positioned such that Lz is measuring at y/D = 5 and x/D = 0.5. This position
was chosen for not being to close to the initial scour hole, and scour depth would reach
equilibrium before the end of an experiment.
• When a steady current test is performed, the wave absorber is lowered to its minimum
in order to get a free ﬂow with low blockage. Moreover, the ﬂow discharge is increased
very slowly in order to avoid any abrupt change in velocities.
• For experiments involving waves, the wave absorper is lowered or lifted such that the
highest point corresponds to the maximum wave elevation of the irregular time series.
• A video is recorded for each experiment where light is turned on to mark the beginning
of an experiment, indicating the moment where the desired ﬂow conditions are achieved.
• After the end of an experiment, the bed is scanned again to assess the scour around the
pipe and the bed morphology.
18
==PAGE:33==
3.6
Veriﬁcation of the setup
3.6.1
Velocity measurement and correction of velocity proﬁle
By observing initial experiments, scour on the left side (+y) of the ﬂume was propagating faster
than the right (−y). The velocity proﬁle over the width b of the ﬂume was measured and found
to be unsatisfactory. A correction at the inlet of the ﬂume was made (see picture in ﬁgure D.2
in the appendix) and a nearly uniform velocity proﬁle was achieved as depicted in ﬁgure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Velocity proﬁle over the width of the ﬂume before and after correction. Notice
reversed x-axis performed in comparison to ﬁgure 3.1.
The correction made was a quick ﬁx, velocities at positions exceeding y/D ∈[-25 25] were
not included in the analysis as the correction was difﬁcult to adjust, and measurements were
very time consuming. For these reasons, and to avoid wall effects, the experiments are per-
formed only in the aforementioned range of y/D. The results for the measured mean velocities
Vl and Vr, for the left and right side of the ﬂume, respectively, before and after the correction,
are illustrated in table 3.1. The standard deviation of the measurements are also shown for the
left (σl) and right side (σr) of the ﬂume. The measurements are performed with the OTT C2
ﬂowmeter and compared to the mean velocity Vf, calculated from the ﬂume discharge Q as:
Vf = Q
bh
(3.2)
The mean velocity V used in this work is calculated for both the left and the right side of the
ﬂume with equation 3.2. This is in agreement with the now corrected velocity proﬁle where Vf,
in most cases, lies within the standard deviation of the measured velocities. Some experiments
are also complemented by velocity measurements with the pitot tube.
19
==PAGE:34==
Table 3.1: Mean velocity for the left l and for the right r side of the ﬂume before and after
correction of the velocity proﬁle and their respective standard deviation
Before correction
After correction
Q
Vl
Vr
σl
σr
Vl
Vr
σl
σr
Vf
[l/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
650
0.371
0.340
0.018
0.017
0.327
0.334
0.007
0.012
0.325
730
0.426
0.388
0.013
0.019
0.369
0.380
0.008
0.008
0.365
830
0.487
0.439
0.017
0.020
0.424
0.435
0.009
0.010
0.415
3.6.2
Stability analysis
A stability analysis of the pipe in a steady current is made in order to assess the magnitude
of in-line and cross-ﬂow vibrations. The analysis is based on Guo et al. (2005) to assess the
parameters for a ﬁxed pipe and, veriﬁed with Sumer and Fredsøe (2006), it was found that no
vibrations would occur for the conducted experiments. The calculations only considered the
free span of the pipe and did not include the added stability from the bed in contact with the
pipe. The stability analysis and calculations are given in appendix D.0.1.
3.6.3
Particle size distribution
The sand used in this thesis was delivered and analysed by the manufacturer (see ﬁgure D.8
in appendix) with a relative density s = 2.56 and a median grain size d50 = 0.182 mm. To
verify the characteristics of the sand, an additional study of the particle size distribution was
performed at the DTU facilities, illustrated in ﬁgure 3.7, where d50 = 0.2 mm. The sand used
for the analysis was retrieved at the test section, where experiments had already been conducted.
It is possible that ﬁner sediment has been washed away, indicating a larger d50. The seive size
available at DTU was not optimal, leaving a gap between seive size 0.125 mm and 0.2 mm. For
this reason, the d50 from the manufacturer is used. A small variability in d50 should be expected
in the course of the project, which is estimated to have a low impact on the results.
Figure 3.7: Particle size distribution.
20
==PAGE:35==
3.7
Measurement of scour propagation velocity
Measurements of the scour propagation rate was made using video material. An example
of test c2c2 introduced in chapter 4 is shown in the following link https://youtu.be/
jyEr5Ecdp68. The real distances were marked on the pipe and by extracting images from
the video material at different time intervals, the scour development could be assessed. A pro-
gram was developed, such that the pixel distances in the image were calibrated against the
markings on the pipe. The MATLAB program is illustrated in appendix E.2. To assess the pre-
cision of the measurements, a short test was executed where the program was used to measure
the distance from y = 0 to each marker on the pipe and compared to the actual distances (see
ﬁgure B.5 in appendix). The precision is considered sufﬁcient for the purpose of the project
where the maximal error in the test case was 3 mm. The mean error is 1.07 mm with a standard
deviation of 0.97 mm.
21
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 4
Scour propagation in a steady current
The aim of the following investigation is to measure the scour propagation rate Vh for different
ﬂow velocities and embedment ratios e/D. The results are then compared to previous studies
from Cheng et al. (2009) and Hansen et al. (1991).
4.1
Results for scour propagation
Scour propagation is studied for an initial scour hole at the center of the pipe. Scour propagation
velocity Vh along the span y of the pipe is measured for different ﬂow velocities and embedment
ratios. Most test cases deal with an embedment ratio of e/D = 0.2, though Vh was also
monitored for two test cases with e/D = 0.1. Vh is determined by measuring the distance dh
from the edge of the span shoulder to the initial scour hole and by monitoring the time t of
propagation.
In the early part of the present study, an embedment of e/D = 0 and e/D = 0.5 were also
investigated. For the embedment of e/D = 0, scour initiated along the entire span of the pipe,
therefore Vh could not be investigated. A test case with and embedment ratio of e/D = 0.5
gave only a short-term scour propagation. This was probably due to self-burial at the span
shoulders, as shown in ﬁgure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Picture of the pipe and the bed proﬁle after test for e/D = 0.5, showing self-burial
at the span shoulder.
22
==PAGE:37==
Test cases with e/D = 0.5 were performed before the correction of the ﬂume ﬂowmeter, which
was not properly calibrated in the early stage of the project. The mean velocity of the current
is therefore unknown, only the ripples in ﬁgure 4.1 attest that there had been at least live-bed
conditions with a ﬂow such that θ > θc.
An embedment ratio of e/D = 0.2, for which scour propagation is observed for test cases
with increasing Shields parameter, was chosen as benchmark. As stated in section 3.6.1, the
velocity proﬁle for along y direction was corrected. For the tests prior to this correction, the
Shields parameter θ was estimated from the mean velocity measured to the left and to the right
side of the initial scour hole (see table 3.1). In this way, a single experiment was made into two
studies of Vh.
The test cases prior to the correction of the velocity proﬁle are c21, c22 and c23, with an
embedment ratio of e/D = 0.2. Small particles were introduced in the ﬂume due to a problem
at the test facility. These particles blurred the visibility in the video recordings making the
measurements less precise. The ﬁne particles were washed out in the course of the study, so
that for the remaining test cases measurements were made with the same precision as shown in
section 3.7. After the correction of the velocity proﬁle, three additional test cases, c2c1, c2c2
and c2c3 were performed, also with an embedment ratio of e/D = 0.2. Three steady current
tests, c2cb1, c2cb2 and c2cb3, are related to the backﬁlling process, again with e/D = 0.2.
Finally two tests, c1c1 where θ < θc and c1c2 where θ > θc, are performed with e/D = 0.1.
For all the test cases, Vh is divided into a left and right propagation rate. Vhl represents
the scour propagation from the initial scour hole in the +y direction and Vhr from the initial
scour hole in the −y direction. The test cases with the given ﬂow conditions and results for the
scour propgation rates are given in table 4.1. The distance dh of scour propagation-versus-time
curves are illustrated for the test cases in ﬁgures 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4.
Figure 4.2: Test cases for a steady current after correction of the velocity proﬁle with
e/D = 0.1.
23
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.3: Test cases for a steady current before (left) and after correction (right) of the
velocity proﬁle with e/D = 0.2.
24
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.4: Test cases for a steady current performed in relation to the backﬁlling study with
e/D = 0.2.
As already revealed by the study of Cheng et al. (2009), the scour propagation comes in
two steps. First, a primary velocity Vh1 expands the scour until reaching a certain propagation
distance dh. Then a slower secondary velocity Vh2 overtakes for the remaining part of the scour
propagation. A secondary propagation velocity is not observed at the left side of the ﬂume
for c2c1, c2c2 and c2c3 which is due to the mentioned experimental challenges, not affecting
the remaining test cases, that inhibited the precision needed for differentiating the propagation
velocities.
Test c1c1 did not show any secondary velocity and is also an exception of not being in the
live-bed regime, which could be the cause of this observation. For the performed tests, with the
exception of test c21, c22 and c23, it should be noted that the left and right scour propagation
are almost identical for a given friction velcity Uf. This indicates a controlled experiment and
validation of the velocity proﬁle from ﬁgure 3.6. The scour propagation rate is increasing with
increasing bed shear stress, which is clearly illustrated in ﬁgure 4.5. The position dh at which
secondary propagation velocity overtakes is roughly dh/D = 10 for the test cases illustrated in
ﬁgure 4.5. This observation applies to all test cases where e/D = 0.2.
For all test cases, the main ﬂow parameters and results for the scour propagation velocities
are given in table 4.1, where σi is a measure for the precision of the initial setup. It is expressed
as the standard deviation of the measured bed morphology at the test section.
25
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.5: Comparison of scour span development for tests with increasing bed shear stress,
where l and r representing the left and right scour propagation, respectively.
Table 4.1: Test cases in a steady current with main ﬂow parameters and results for the scour
propgation velocities. NA stands for not available and deﬁnes uncontrolled scour initiation,
unknown ﬂow conditions and/or no initial scan of bed. NP stands for no propagation and NO
for not observed
Test
V
Uf
e/D
θ
Re
Reg
Vh1.r
Vh1.l
Vh2.r
Vh2.l
σi
[m/s]
[mm/s]
[-]
[-]
[-]
[-]
[mm/s]
[mm/s]
[mm/s]
[mm/s]
[mm]
c51
NA
NA
0.5
NA
NA
NA
NP
NP
NP
NP
NA
c21r
0.340
14.5
0.2
0.071
1.04E+04
2.6
0.20
0.09
0.5
c21l
0.371
15.7
0.2
0.084
1.13E+04
2.9
0.32
NO
0.5
c22r
0.388
16.5
0.2
0.092
1.19E+04
3.0
0.44
0.26
0.7
c22l
0.426
18.1
0.2
0.111
1.30E+04
3.3
0.62
NO
0.7
c23r
0.439
18.7
0.2
0.119
1.34E+04
3.4
0.64
0.4
0.7
c23l
0.487
20.6
0.2
0.145
1.48E+04
3.8
0.98
0.67
0.7
c2c1
0.330
14.0
0.2
0.067
1.01E+04
2.6
0.2
0.18
0.11
0.11
0.6
c2c2
0.375
15.9
0.2
0.086
1.14E+04
2.9
0.37
0.37
0.21
0.22
0.7
c2c3
0.430
18.3
0.2
0.114
1.31E+04
3.3
0.57
0.55
0.29
0.29
0.7
c2cb1
0.510
21.7
0.2
0.160
1.56E+04
3.9
2.03
2.10
1.33
1.35
0.6
c2cb2
0.542
23.0
0.2
0.180
1.65E+04
4.2
2.3
2
1.3
1.46
0.6
c2cb3
0.42
17.7
0.2
0.106
1.27E+04
3.2
NA
NA
NA
NA
0.8
c1c1
0.301
12.8
0.1
0.055
1,01E+04
2.3
0.24
0.24
NO
NO
0.5
c1c2
0.330
14.0
0.1
0.065
1,09E+04
2.6
0.39
0.35
0.23
0.23
0.6
c0c1
0.330
14.0
0
0.065
1,09E+04
2.6
NA
NA
NA
NA
0.6
To verify the mean velocity Vf calculated from the ﬂume discharge, a pitot tube is used to
measure the mean velocity Vp for four test cases, with results shown in table 4.2. For the re-
maining experiments, measurements were not performed as the pitot tube only was introduced
late in the process. For the tests illustrated in ﬁgure 4.3, the mean velocity has been measured
and determined thoroughly in section 3.6.1. A small difference in the mean velocity is observed
between Vf and Vp. The difference is so minor that the velocity from the ﬂume ﬂowmeter is
estimated to be trustworthy. The difference observed could be due to the pitot tube, because of
26
==PAGE:41==
the velocity being measured at only one location y/D = 5. Indeed, the velocity proﬁle from
section 3.6.1 shown that small irregularities in velocities across the ﬂume could be expected.
Table 4.2: Velocity measurement from pitot tube Vp compared to the mean velocity Vf
determined from the ﬂume ﬂowmeter.
Test
Vf
Vp
[m/s]
[m/s]
c2cb2
0.510
0.531
c2cb3
0.420
0.436
c1c1
0.301
0.306
c1c2
0.330
0.321
4.2
Analysis of scour propagation
As proposed by Cheng et al. (2009), the difference between the primary and secondary propa-
gation velocity is controlled by the maturity of the scour span.
The primary and fastest scour propagation takes place for the initial part of the scour propaga-
tion process. This propagation velocity is controlled by a complex three-dimensional (3D) ﬂow
at the span shoulders, with an enhanced ampliﬁcation of bed shear stresses τb. In the phase of
primary scour propagation, the scour depth has not yet reached equilibrium and therefore the
ﬂow is ampliﬁed all over the scour span, affecting the propagation velocity at the span shoul-
ders.
Secondary velocity is observed when scour span and depth reach maturity. In this part of the
scour propagation, the ampliﬁcation of τb at the span shoulder is mainly due to local ﬂow con-
ditions. The ﬂow at the span shoulders, determining the propagation velocity, is considered to
be two-dimensional (2D) with mainly local processes from the incoming ﬂow affecting the bed
shear stress.
In section 4.1 it was shown that, for test cases where e/D = 0.2, this maturity was reached
for roughly dh/D = 10 and did not change signiﬁcantly for increasing Shields parameter.
For an embedment of e/D = 0.1, in test case c1c2, the span where secondary propagation
was observed is increased with dh/D = 15. This may indicate that the scour span length for
observable primary scour propagation velocity decreases with the increase in embedment.
Secondary propagation velocity in the study of Cheng et al. (2009) was only observed for
e/D ≥0.2 and low Shields parameter θ < 0.106. This does not match with the observations of
the present study as test case c1c2 with e/D = 0.1 and test cases c23l, c2cb1, c2cb1 and c2cb2,
where θ > 0.106, all show a secondary propagation rate. The ﬂow conditions of the present
study are sligthly different than for Cheng et al. (2009) where the observation at θ = 0.106 is
based on a Reynolds number Re = 2.1 · 104. It is most probably on these terms that secondary
scour rate is observable, which then is in line with the observations from Cheng et al. (2009).
For each test, an initial scan of the bed was made to measure the precision of the setup. At the
end of each test, another scan was performed, such that the ripples and the bed conditions at
the vicinity of the pipe are documented. An example of such a scan is shown in ﬁgure 4.6. The
other tests are shown in appendix A.
27
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.6: Scan of initial (top) and ﬁnal (bottom) bathymetry of test c2c2.
Referring to the 3D contour plots of the bed from ﬁgure 4.6, additional information can be
gained to explain the difference between primary and secondary propagation velocities. From
the initial setup, ﬂow conditions change as bedforms develop near the pipe and in the far ﬁeld.
As observed in ﬁgure 4.6, sedimentation develops downstream of the pipe on either side of the
scour hole and the bed is eroded upstream. This is due to the ﬂow conditions with vortices
forming at the pipe as illustrated in ﬁgure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: Illustration of ﬂow conditons at the pipe in a steady current with sedimentation
downstream and erosion upstream Sumer and Fredsøe (2002).
28
==PAGE:43==
For increasing ﬂow velocity, bedforms also increase in height (see appendix A). This is
proportional to the added resistance to the ﬂow. In the case of test c2c2, the height of the ripples
are in the order of z/D ≈0.2 when fully formed. The difference in Uf between a ﬂat and a
rough bed is explained in section 2.6, with the key point being that the increased roughness
from bedforms leads to a reduced incoming ﬂow velocity at the pipe. This observation added,
to the sedimentation and erosion taking place at the extremities of the scour hole, could affect
the propagation velocity.
Sumer and Fredsøe (2002) report that due to increased ﬂow velocities in the neighbourhood
of the pipe, no ripples are present and will therefore not affect the scour propagation. In ﬁgure
4.6 we see that ripples are present already at around x/D ≈1 away from the pipe. For that
relatively short distance, effects of the ripples should not be discarded from the analysis. In
addition to this analysis, a numerical study from Grifﬁths et al. (2015) investigated the effects
of berms on the shear stress ampliﬁcation beneath the pipe. It was found that the shear stress
ampliﬁcation decreases with the presence of berms. The berm in the present study are the rip-
ples. It could be suggested that Vh2, in addition to the analysis of Cheng et al. (2009), is due
to these bedforms developing during a test. Furthermore, in the case of test c1c1 illustrated in
ﬁgure A.6 in the appendix, no secondary scour rate is observed. The test was below live-bed
conditions, with almost no bedforms. This observation talks in favor for bedforms playing a
role in scour propagations velocities.
So far, the important result is that secondary propagation velocities are present for bedforms
when e/D < 0.2, which was not the case in the study of Cheng et al. (2009). Also, we observed
only a short-term scour propagation for e/D = 0.5 until self-burial at the span shoulder. In the
study of Cheng et al. (2009), scour propagation was observed also for e/D = 0.5. The test
performed for e/D = 0.5 is very limited in data recordings, so nothing should be concluded
for the difference observed.
29
==PAGE:44==
4.3
Data analysis and comparison
The present study is compared to the work of Cheng et al. (2009) and Hansen et al. (1991) for
validation of the test results. The comparison is done primarily for test cases where e/D = 0.2,
as sufﬁcient data was collected for a qualitative analysis.
Collected data for e/D = 0.2 is initially compared to the prediction of Vh from Hansen et
al. The ampliﬁcation factor for e/D = 0.2 by Hansen et al. is graphically estimated, where
α = 1.7 (Sumer and Fredsøe, 2002). The primary scour velocity ﬁts the prediction well,
as illustrated in ﬁgure 4.8. In Hansen et al., α was based solely on the primary propagation
velocity as the study did not enable the observation of the secondary scour rate. The results for
Vh2 are for this reason underestimated in ﬁgure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: Scour propagation rate Vh as function of bed friction Uf for e/D = 0.2.
The conﬁdence interval was estimated using spread of data in Sumer and Fredsøe (2002).
The study by Hansen et al. is very limited in the amount of collected data. For this reason
the present study should be compared to the more recent and complete experimental work by
Cheng et al. Comparison between the results from the aforementioned author and the present
study is illustrated in ﬁgure 4.9 for an embedment ratio of e/D = 0.2. Scour propagation
velocity is made non-dimensional with the friction velocity and plotted against the Shields
parameter. The non-dimensionalization ensures that the data can be compared properly as
predicted by equation 2.3. Indeed, for the same Shields parameter, the friction velocity in
Cheng et al. is larger than in the present study. The reason being that in the mentioned study
the grain size used is characterized by a d50 larger than for the present study .
For both studies, Vh1/Uf increases with increasing θ but at different rates, as shown in table
4.3.
Table 4.3: Slope for (Vh1/Uf)/θ as illustrated in ﬁgure 4.9.
(Vh1/Uf)/θ
Cheng et al.
1.85
Present study
0.74
30
==PAGE:45==
Furthermore, it is observed that, for the same Shields parameter, the non-dimensional velocity
of scour propagation Vh/Uf is much lower than expected. The main difference in the exper-
imental setup between Cheng et al. and the present study is the difference in grain size. The
diameter of the pipe used in the mentioned study is 5 cm, not much larger than the pipe used in
the present study. More analysis is needed to explain these observations.
Figure 4.9: Scour propagation rate Vh, non-dimensionalized with the friction velocity Uf, as a
function of Shields parameter. Dashed line: linear regression as seen in table 4.3.
As a ﬁrst analysis, the effects of the critical Shields parameter are investigated. The value
of the Shields parameter at incipient motion is higher for the present study compared to Cheng
et al. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 4.10, where θc is plotted against the Reynolds grain number
Reg. This suggests that the amount of sediment in motion in the far ﬁeld is less in the present
study compared to Cheng et al., if the same Shields parameter is applied.
Figure 4.10: Curve for the critical Shields parameter with data from present study and from
Cheng et al. (2009).
31
==PAGE:46==
The difference in θc is accounted for in ﬁgure 4.9, where θ and Uf are both subtracted by
their critical value of incipient motion. It is clear that the difference in θc is not the main factor
inducing the difference in the results. The difference in the observations is still too large to
validate the present study against the work of Cheng et al.
Figure 4.11: Vh1 non-dimensionalized with the reduced friction velocity (Uf −Ufc) as a
function of the reduced Shields parameter (θ −θc.)
The work of Hansen et al. is consulted to determine ampliﬁcation factors of the bed shear
stress at the span shoulder. The results are shown in ﬁgure 4.12 where the ampliﬁcation factor
α is plotted against the embedment ratio e/D for the present study, Hansen et al. and Cheng et
al. It should be noted that α from Hansen et al. is modiﬁed, where the actual θc from equation
2.27 was used instead of the constant of θc = 0.047 proposed in the study.
The ampliﬁcation factor was calculated using the measured Vh1 and equation 2.18. The
method applied is the same as decribed by Hansen et al.. First a guess is formulated for the
value of α, then iterated until the measured and calculated Vh correspond. The hypothesis
behind the formula proposed by Hansen et al. is that the ampliﬁcation factor α should decrease
with increasing value of e/D. This is not observed for the test results in the study of Cheng
et al., where α seems to increase and then reach a practically constant value for e/D > 0.1.
In the present study, there is a small decrease in the ampliﬁcation factor from e/D = 0.1 to
e/D = 0.2, as shown in table 4.4. Only for an embedment ratio of e/D = 0.1, the data
from Cheng et al. agrees with Hansen et al.. For e/D > 0.1, the results from Cheng et al.
overestimates the ampliﬁcation factor.
e/D
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Present study
1.91
1.74
Hansen et al.
2.5
1.89
Liang Cheng et al.
2.14
3.07
3.43
3.25
Table 4.4: Mean ampliﬁcation factors for the present study, Cheng et al. (2009) and Hansen
et al. (1991) for different embedment ratios.
The study of Hansen et al. is very similar to the present study, with same d50 utilized in the
test section. Hansen et al. conducted test cases for a ﬁxed pipe with both D = 5 cm and D = 2
32
==PAGE:47==
cm, for an embedment ratio e/D = 0.1. They based the ampliﬁcation factor for the remaining
embedment ratios on a pipe subjected to a load, where embement increased as the scour hole
expanded. They then observed the decrease in Vh for the increasing embedment. This is a more
simplistic method for estimating the propagation velocity. This is one of the reasons for which
in the present study tests for e/D = 0.1 were executed, for better comparison with Hansen et
al.
As presented in table 4.4, for e/D = 0.1, the present study underpredicts α compared to
Hansen et al. The observation is not coherent as the same ﬂow conditions are applied to a
very similar test case, in terms of dimensions for d50 and D. Experimental variation and ﬂow
conditions could be a main factor involved in the difference observed. A numerical study
by Shen et al. (2015) shows that the ampliﬁcation factor at the span shoulder decreases with
increasing embedment ratio. This is in agreement with the current study as illustrated in ﬁgure
4.12. Additional tests, including increased embedment ratios, should be performed in order to
obtain a more complete analysis.
Figure 4.12: Ampliﬁcation α of bed shear stress at span shoulder as a function of the
embedment ratio for primary velocities Vh1.
In table 4.4, the mean ampliﬁcation factor is shown for each embedment ratio, for the present
study, Cheng et al. and , Hansen et al. The latter authors predicted that the ampliﬁcation factor
decreases with increasing e/D. This observation, is shared with the present study.
To determine if increasing Shields parameter affects the ampliﬁcation factor, results for
Vh1 from the present study and from Cheng et al. are compared to the predicted propagation
velocity. This latter velocity is based on their respective mean ampliﬁcation factor for e/D =
0.2 given in table 4.4.
Figure 4.13 shows that the spread of α is not generally linked to the Shields parameter. The
variance of α is most likely due to disparity in experimental test conditions. Though, when
observing results from test cases with θ > 0.15 in the present study, the actual propagation
velocity is underestimated. Cheng et al. did not perform any tests for θ > 0.104, so the analogy
between θ and Vh has not been tested in this range.
Sediment transport for high Shields parameter includes augmented suspended load, which
could be the reason for this observation. This has not been accounted for in previous studies.
From video observations, sand is shown to be ejected more intensively from the span shoulder
33
==PAGE:48==
for θ > 0.15, with sediment in suspension.
Figure 4.13: Vh1 non dimensionalized with the friction velocity Uf as a function of the Shields
parameter. The slope corresponds to the propagation velocity, calculated from the mean
ampliﬁcation factor of e/D = 0.2, respectively for the present study and for Cheng et al.
(2009).
The issue with the prediction by Hansen et al. is partially the simpliﬁcation of the ﬂow
conditions at the span shoulder, presented as a 2D situation. It is in reality a 3D problem, with
a complex ﬂow pattern taking place at the pipe, where bedforms, scour hole, pipe and pipe em-
bedment interact with the incoming ﬂow. All these features combined contribute to an eventual
ampliﬁcation of τb at the span shoulder.
For now, no correlation between Cheng et al. and the present study has been determined.
The present study predicts a slower propagation velocity for a same Shields parameter. The
dimensionless factors affecting scour propagation, as shown in equation 2.3, are investigated to
comprehend the difference observed for the propagation velocity.
The effect of Reg, Uf, e/D and θc are all included in the previous analysis. D/ks is in the
order of O(50) in the study of Cheng et al. and is O(88) in the present study for the initial bed
conditions. No conclusive answer is given to why the studies do not show the same propagation
velocity.
4.4
Study comparison with Cheng et al. (2009)
A different approach to the prediction of propagation velocity is proposed by Cheng et al. in the
form of equation 2.19. The time scale T ∗of scour development in equation 2.11, combined with
a dimensional analysis of the span shoulder, is used to predict the scour propagation velocity.
Cheng et al. determines a calibration factor K in the proposed equation 2.19. In the study
K1 = 14 for Vh1 and K2 = 4 for Vh2. The calibration factors are to be determined through
experimental calibrations.
34
==PAGE:49==
Cheng et al. uses the natural angle of repose of sand in predicting the slope at the span
shoulders, but does not quantify it. By investigating the data of the mentioned study and com-
paring it to equation 2.19, it is found that an angle of repose φ = 40° is utilized. This ﬁgure
seems high, indeed an angle of repose of φ = 32° is conventionally used for marine sands. The
angle of repose does not depend on the grain diameter or density, only on the porosity n of the
sand such that when n increases, φ decreases. The potential difference in porosity is negligible
(Soulsby, 1997). In other studies φ = 45° is applied to the slope of the span shoulders (Shen
et al., 2015). There is no standardized estimation of the slope at the span shoulders, so for
comparative reasons an angle of φ = 40 is applied.
For the present study, K is calculated for the primary and secondary propagation velocity.
Data is illustrated in ﬁgure 4.14, with the predicted scour propagation velocity from equation
2.19 with K1 = 4 and K2 = 2.5.
Figure 4.14: Scour propagation velocity Vh, non-dimensionalized with the friction velocity
Uf, as a function of Shields parameter for the present study, and the predicted propagation
velocities from equation 2.19 with K1 = 4 and K2 = 2.5 (dashed lines).
In ﬁgure 4.14, the slopes ﬁt the data for Vh1 and Vh2 for a range of θ ∈[0.08 0.15]. Outside
this range, propagation velocities are overpredicted for a lower Shields parameter, and under-
predicted for a higher Shields parameter. Figure 4.15 illustrates the prediction of propagation
velocities from equation 2.19 tested against results from test cases in Cheng et al. (2009). The
ﬁt of the predicted velocity does not match all the test cases, speciﬁcally for e/D > 0.3. The
impact of the ﬂow at the span shoulder proves to be difﬁcult to predict when parameters for
e/D and θ are varied.
35
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.15: Scour propagation velocity Vh, non-dimensionalized with the friction velocity
Uf, as a function of the Shields parameter for different embedments, in the study of Cheng
et al. (2009), and the predicted propagation velocities from equation 2.19 with K1 = 14 and
K2 = 4.
4.5
Regression analysis of the scour propagation rate
The analysis in section 4.3 and section 4.4 show that popagation velocities measured in the
present study do not comply with the results from Cheng et al. (2009). As mentioned in section
4.4, the predicted Vh from equation 2.19 did not ﬁt the measured Vh for Shields parameter
θ /∈[0.08 0.15], the same observations apply to ﬁgure 4.13. For these reasons, an alternative
regression equation for the prediction of Vh is proposed, based on the method from equation
2.19.
The velocity of scour propagation is made non dimensional, expressed as a function of θ
and the embedment ratio e/D as:
V ∗
h =
VhD
q
g(s −1)d3
(4.1)
where V ∗
h is the non dimensional velocity given by:
V ∗
h = f(θ, e/D)
(4.2)
Cheng et al. (2009) observed that the slope at the span shoulders, was independent on the ﬂow
conditions. Considering that the angle of repose does not change considerably for different
grain sizes (Soulsby, 1997), the slope at the span shoulders is omitted in the analysis.
36
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.16: Non-dimensional scour propagation rate V ∗
h as a function of the Shields
parameter.
By ﬁtting the data for e/D = 0.2 to an exponential function, a regression equation for the
dimensionless primary scour velocity V ∗
h1 is given by:
V ∗
h1 = 1
3 exp(18 θ) · f(e/D)
(4.3)
The dimensionless secondary propagation rate V ∗
h2 is expressed as:
V ∗
h2 = 1
6 exp(19 θ) · f(e/D)
(4.4)
The effect of e/D is not determined for this regression analysis, as not enough data is
collected. The data for e/D = 0.1 observed in ﬁgure 4.16 shows the same tendency as for
e/D = 0.2 with a factor f(e/D) difference. This is only a very limited observation and more
data would be needed in order to draw any conclusions. The regression analysis is calculated
for f(e/D) = 1 for an embedment ratio of e/D = 0.2. The equation should be adapted in
terms of f(e/D) if more data is to be collected.
Previous studies base their prediction for Vh on analytical grounds, considering sediment
conservation or time scale of scour development complemented by a geometrical analysis.
These predictions share the fact that they are a simpliﬁcation of a complex dynamic problem.
4.6
Effect of the Reynolds number
In this section, the effect of the Reynolds number is studied shortly. Observations regarding
the difference in Reynolds number between the present study and Cheng et al. (2009) was only
investigated at a late stage of the project. Efforts were emphasised on the commonly studied
parameters for scour propagation and as a result only a short analysis is developed regarding
the turbulent effects at the pipeline. The present study and Cheng et al. are in the subcritical
regime with Re ∈[1, 1.7] · 104 and Re ∈[1.4, 2.1] · 104, respectively. Figure 4.17 shows that
37
==PAGE:52==
the Reynolds number inﬂuences the scour propagation at Re ≈1.5 · 104 for the present study.
Indeed the relation between the Reynolds number and Vh/Uf is quasi-linear until this critical
value of the Reynolds number where it then abruptly shifts to a different regime, following the
apparent trendline of scour propagation from Cheng et al. (2009). However, the datapoint for
Cheng et al. at Re = 1.4 · 104 suggests that the higher scour propagation rate is independent of
the previous suggested dependency on the Reynolds number.
Figure 4.17: Scour propagation rate Vh non-dimensionalized with the friction velocity Uf as a
function of the Reynolds number for e/D = 0.2, presenting results from the present study and
Cheng et al. (2009).
The study suggests that the observed difference in propagation velocities is partially related
to the difference in Reynolds parameter. More data needs to be collected to this analysis that
remains inconclusive.
38
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 5
Wave induced scour and backﬁlling
5.1
Wave induced scour
Following section reports scour propagation for an irregular wave time series. The study relates
to the wave induced backﬁlling where same wave conditions are applied. All test cases deal
with an embedment ratio of e/D = 0.2.
Irregular waves are used instead of monochromatic waves with intention of reducing the effect
of standing waves at the test section. Using irregular waves reduces the problem of a stationary
node or antinode above the pipe possibly affecting the ﬂow conditions. A JONSWAP spectrum
is used to deﬁne an irregular waves time series with a signiﬁcant wave height Hm0 and the
peak period Tp deﬁned at the wave maker. In ﬁgure 5.1a and ﬁgure 5.1b the results of scour
propagation are illustrated. Piping to the left of the initial scour hole did not allow for measuring
Vhl for test case IRw2.
(a) Scour propagation for IRw1.
(b) Scour propagation for IRw2.
Figure 5.1
The design waves are illustrated in table 5.1 with the signiﬁcant wave height Hm0 and the
peak wave period Tp as input parameters to the wavemaker. Hm0 is predicted from shoaling
39
==PAGE:54==
at the test section according to equation 2.38 and the amplitude of near bed velocity Um from
equation 2.37. Wave heights are measured for wave gauge w and by applying spectral analysis
wave parameters are calculated as suggested in section 2.7.
The measured Hm0 agrees with the predicted Hm0 from shoaling, except for test IRw1. This
is attributed to the wawemaker and measurements of w are trusted in this perspective. Predic-
tions for Um are analogous to the measurement based Um. The wave parameters calculated
from the data supplied by the wave gauge w are used in the proceeding analysis.
Table 5.1: Wave parameters as input to wavemaker piston, prediction from shoaling and
Soulsby (2006) and measurements from wave gauge w.
Input
Prediction
Measurement
IRw1
Hm0 [cm]
10
10.08
9.4
Tp [s]
1.7
1.7
1.73
Um [cm/s]
10.43
10.08
IRw2
Hm0 [cm]
9
9.3
9.26
Tp [s]
3
3
3.06
Um [cm/s]
13
12.70
IRw3
Hm0 [cm]
11
11.36
11.35
Tp [s]
3
3
3.05
Um [cm/s]
15.9
15.47
General parameters for wave induced scour propagation are presented in table 5.2. Due to
piping, scour propagation velocity for test case IRw3 was not reported. Test case IRw3 is used in
the analysis of time scale of scour development. Due to technical problems, scour development
for test IRw1 was not recorded. Details concerning the time scales are given in section 6.1.
Table 5.2: General parameters and results for test cases in irregular waves, NA stands for not
available
Test
e/D
Hm0
Tp
Um
Ufm
KC
θw
S0/D
T ∗
w
Vh.w1
Vh.w2
[-]
[cm]
[s]
[cm]
[cm/s]
[cm/s]
[-]
[-]
[-]
[mm/s]
[mm/s]
IRw1
0.2
9.4
1.7
10.1
1.40
4.3
0.066
NA
NA
0.167
0.102
IRw2
0.2
9.3
3
12.7
1.36
9.5
0.062
0.18
2.35
0.212
0.104
IRw3
0.2
11.3
3
15.5
1.35
11.6
0.076
0.3
3.28
piping
piping
The measured scour propagation velocity is tested against equation 2.20 from Cheng. et al.
(2013) applying wave parameters reported in table 5.2 and an angle of repose φ = 32° for the
slope at the span shoulder as reported by Cheng. et al. (2013). Results of the comparison are
shown in table 5.3.
In the prediction of scour propagation velocity Cheng. et al. (2013) only reported a pri-
mary velocity, wheras in this brief study a primary and a secondary propagation velocity was
observed. As observed in table 5.3 the prediction from Cheng. et al. (2013) is analogous to the
measured secondary velocity Vh2 and underpredicts the measured primary velocity Vh1.
Cheng. et al. (2013) uses regular waves, whereas in this study irregular waves from a JON-
SWAP spectrum is adapted. This difference however should not be the reason for why primary
and secondary propagation velocities are detected. Cheng. et al. (2013) applies wave Shields
parameter θw > 0.18 for all test cases. The increased ﬂow conditions compared to the present
40
==PAGE:55==
study could inﬂuence the fact that no Vh2 is observed in the study of Cheng. et al. (2013). In-
deed, in the study of Cheng et al. (2009) for a steady current, secondary propagation velocities
are reported only for θ < 0.106. It is suggested that same observations apply for waves though
more data should be supplied to verify this proposal.
Table 5.3: Measured primary and secondary scour propagation velocity compared to the
predicted Vh in equation 2.20 from Liang Cheng et al. (2013)
Measured Vh1
Measured Vh2
Predicted Vh
[mm/s]
[mm/s]
[mm/s]
IRw1
0.167
0.102
0.08
IRw2
0.212
0.104
0.107
The main pupose of this study was to investigate the scour propagation in waves, and com-
pare it to the backﬁlling process applying identical wave conditions. However, this limited
study illustrates that more investigation is needed in the prediction of propagation velocities in
wave conditions.
5.2
Results for wave induced backﬁlling
The ambition of this section is to make an analysis of the wave induced backﬁlling processes for
a three-dimensional study case. Results for the backﬁlling time scale are compared to Bayrak-
tar et al. (2016).
The backﬁlling study comes in two parts. First a steady current test is completed leading to
an initial developed scour hole. Secondly, waves are introduced with observations at the span
shoulders using video recordings. Lz is used to measure the time variation of scour and back-
ﬁlling depth at y = 5D and x = 0.5D for the steady current and backﬁlling test, respectively.
Equilibrium scour depth was reached for all steady current tests at the location of measurement.
The steady current test cases involved in the backﬁlling study were performed for different
mean velocities as to complement the study in section 4. Scour induced from the steady current
was interrupted before reaching the limits for camera observations so the following backﬁlling
process could be documented at the span shoulder. Backﬁlling was performed for the same
wave conditions as presented in section 5.1.
Three backﬁlling tests were completed, with test IRb2 and test IRb3 perfomed for identical
wave conditions. The reason for perfoming the same test case twice, is that the scour depth
at backﬁlling for test IRb2 did not reach equilibrium before the experiment was terminated.
Results for the observations at the span shoulder for test IRb1 and for IRb2 are shown in ﬁgure
5.2aand in ﬁgure 5.2b, respectively.
41
==PAGE:56==
(a) Scour propagation for IRb1.
(b) Scour propagation for IRb2.
Figure 5.2
The study demonstrates that for wave-induce backﬁlling of current generated scour holes,
scour propagation at the span shoulder is observed. A primary and secondary propagation
velocity is observed for test IRb1. No secondary scour rate was observed for test IRb2. For test
IRb3 piping beneath the pipeline initiated and no propagation velocity was observed. Test IRb3
is used only in the assessment of the time scale for backﬁlling T ∗
b
In table 5.4 the wave parameters for backﬁlling are presented. The wave data for test IRb1
was lost due to technical problems. The same input ﬁle as for test IRw1 was used to program the
wave maker, therefore the same wave parameters are expected as presented in table 5.1. The
signiﬁcant wave height Hm0 and the near bed velocity Um at the test section, are determined
using same methodology explained in details in section 5.1. The measurements are perfomed
with the wave gauge w, where spectral analysis is applied to predict Hm0 and Um which are
used in the assessment of the parameters in table 5.5
Table 5.4: Wave parameters for backﬁlling as input to wavemaker piston, prediction from
shoaling and Soulsby (2006) and measurements from wave gauge w.
Input
Prediction
Measurement
IRb1
Hm0 [cm]
10
10.08
NA
Tp [s]
1.7
1.7
NA
Um [cm/s]
10.43
NA
IRb2
Hm0 [cm]
9
9.34
9.24
Tp [s]
3
3
3.10
Um [cm/s]
13.08
12.54
IRb3
Hm0 [cm]
9
9.34
9.09
Tp [s]
3
3
3.08
Um [cm/s]
13.08
12.38
The backﬁlling process for all the test cases are shown in ﬁgure 5.3a, ﬁgure 5.3b and ﬁgure
5.3c. The time scale of scour development T was estimated from equation 2.15 for test case
IRb3 and IRb1. For IRb2 the method from equation 2.12 is applied, due to the scour depth not
having reached equilibrium. The equilibrium scour depth for IRb1, is used in the assesment
of T for test case IRb2. The same equilibrim scour depth is expected, due to identical wave
conditions. The backﬁlling time scale for IRb1 was also calculated according to equation 2.12.
42
==PAGE:57==
The relative small difference in results between the two methods is thus illustrated. The non-
dimensional time scale for backﬁlling T ∗
b is calculated according to equation 2.10.
Wave data and results for the backﬁlling process are illustrated on table 5.5. These results
include the equilibrium scour depth S reached for a steady current, as well as the ﬁnal scour
depth Sf at the end of the backﬁlling process. The propagation velocities measured at the span
shoulder for IRb1 and IRb2, and the non-dimensional backﬁlling time scale T ∗
b
(a) Current scour from test c2cb1
followed by backﬁlling with test IRb1.
(b) Current scour from test c2cb2
followed by backﬁlling with test IRb2.
(c) Current scour from test c2cb3
followed by backﬁlling with test IRb3.
Figure 5.3
Table 5.5: Important parameters and results for backﬁlling test cases. NA stands for not
available.
Test
Hm0
Tp
Um
Ufm
KC
θ
S/D
Sf/D
T ∗
b
Vh1.b
Vh2.b
[cm]
[s]
[cm]
[cm/s]
[cm/s]
[-]
[-]
[-]
[-]
[mm/s]
[mm/s]
IRb1
9.4
1.7
10.1
1.40
4.3
0.066
0.37
0.16
68
0.167
0.078
IRb2
9.2
3
12.5
1.35
9.4
0.062
0.42
NA
79**
0.086
NA
IRb3
9.1
3
12.4
1.34
9.3
0.061
0.33
0.14
28 (30**)
NA
NA
** Time scale estimated from equation 2.12
43
==PAGE:58==
Following observations for the backﬁlling process are made:
• At the span shoulders, scour keeps propagating with velocities as illustrated on table 5.5.
Primary and secondary propagation velocity was observed for test IRb1.
• Sand was redeposited back into the scour hole for the applied wave conditions. Backﬁll-
ing beneath the pipe is a much longer process compared to scour, as observed in section
5.1.
• For all scour tests the slope for St had converged, indicating equilibrium. Measurements
were taken at x = 0.5D, where the full extent of the equilibrium scour hole could not be
measured. This explains the reduced equilibrium scour depth compared to the analytical
from equation 2.4.
• According to equation 2.5 the equilibrium scour depth of IRb1 and IRb3 are approximately
S/D = 0.2 and S/D = 0.3, respectively. For both studies St converged, indicating that
scour reached equilibrium. The difference observed is again due to the measurements
taken at x = 0.5D.
5.3
Implications of bedforms at the span shoulder
Bathymetries for test cases involved in the study for backﬁlling are illustrated in ﬁgure 5.4,
ﬁgure 5.6 and ﬁgure 5.6. The bathymetries are illustrated for the initial setup, and for the end
of the steady current and backﬁlling test. The initial scour hole at y = 0 is clearly visible on all
the ﬁgures.
From ﬁgure 5.4 the assymetry of the scour from test c2cb1 is noticeable. This was due to
unwanted onset of scour not far from the initial scour hole. When the two scour holes merged,
Vh was estimated for the remaining scour propagation. After ended backﬁlling the bed shape
on the downstream and upstream side of the pipe is nearly symmetric. Ripples downstream
from y = 0, indicate that bedforms from c2cb1 have not been entirely replaced.
Vh1 for IRw1 and IRb1 are almost identical even though the initial bathymetry at the beginning
of each test is different. Vh2 is slower for IRb1 than for IRw1. This is expected as bedforms at the
span shoulder would increase the ﬂow resistance. But then the primary scour propagation rate
should also be affected, which is not observed. The minor difference for Vh2 could be caused
by experimental variation.
In ﬁgure 5.5 bathymetries are observed in relation to backﬁlling test IRb2. Downstream
from the pipe, bedforms from test c2cb2 are nearly replaced by the bedforms from IRb2. The
propagation velocity from test IRb2 is less than Vh1 from test IRw2. But when considering Vh2
from test IRw2, the velocity for IRb2 is almost identical, though a little lower. The lower velocity
could be explained by the heavy sedimentation from test c2cb2 downstream of the pipe. In this
case it seems that the scour propagates directly with Vh2
Finally, the backﬁlling study with IRb3 is illustrated in ﬁgure 5.6. Onset of scour for c2cb3
took place along the entire pipe span. Even though this was not planned, the test case is inter-
esting, as it gives a 2D scour situation for a 3D ﬂow environment.
44
==PAGE:59==
As a short remark, the length of ripples from IRb1 are identical to IRb2. This illustrates that
the tests were performed for the same wave conditions. The bedforms remains from test c2cb3
are still visible on the downstream side of the pipe, partly also because the time of backﬁlling
is less than in the other cases which didn’t leave the time for the waves to form an equilibrium
bedform.
It should be concluded that scour propagation velocity in the backﬁlling case, is similar to the
propagation velocities observed in section 5.1. The bedforms at the pipe will reduce the scour
propagation velocity slightly, with increased resistance at the span shoulder. With increasing
sedimentation and larger bedforms, as observed for test c2cb2, the propagation velocity is de-
creased. The reason why, in the case of IRb1, a primary and secondary propagation velocity was
observed is not clear. The difference in KC number for the two test cases could play a part.
When observing the plot of test c2cb2 the bedforms at the span shoulder upstream are much
larger than in the case of c2cb1. In addition to a heavier sedimentation, scour propagation at
the span shoulder is made more difﬁcult than in the case of c2cb1.
45
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.4: Scan of initial setup and ﬁnal bathymetry of test c2cb1 and IRb1
46
==PAGE:61==
Figure 5.5: Scan of initial setup and ﬁnal bathymetry of test c2cb2 and IRb2.
47
==PAGE:62==
Figure 5.6: Scan of initial setup and ﬁnal bathymetry of test c2cb3 and IRb3.
48
==PAGE:63==
5.4
Time scale for backﬁlling
In the study of Bayraktar et al. (2016), backﬁlling was analyzed in 2D, and a regression equation
was established to predict the backﬁlling time scale T ∗
b . The non-dimensional time scales from
the backﬁlling tests, are plotted against T ∗
b from equation 2.8 in ﬁgure 5.7.
Figure 5.7: Nondimensional time scale for the wave induced backﬁlling test compared to the
analytical from Bayraktar et al. (2016) .
For test case IRb1 and test case IRb1 the duration of backﬁlling is increased compared to
the analytical prediction in equation 2.8. For test case IRb3 the measured T ∗
b agrees with the
analytical prediction for T ∗
b .
It is interesting to notice, that T ∗for test IRb2 and IRb3 are different, even though same wave
parameters are utilized. The difference is linked to the bathymetry of the bed in the beginning of
the backﬁlling process. For IRb3 the process could be compared to a 2D situation, as explained
in section 5.3. This is certainly the reason why T ∗
b for IRb3 agrees with the predicted T ∗
b from
the study of Bayraktar et al.(2016)
In the backﬁlling test case IRb2, the bedforms are much different, and not equally formed
over the width af the ﬂume. At the downstream side of the pipe, the scour process has generated
large beforms. From the initial scour hole, the beforms have been transported downstream the
furthest, creating a triangular shape of the bedforms as seen in ﬁgure 5.5. These beforms could
cause backﬁlling to progress more slowly.
It could be assumed, that when the wave horizontal particle velocity is in the upstream di-
rection, the excess pressure induced at the bed Px is diverted as illustrated in ﬁgure 5.8 where
Px = P1 + P2. Assuming that bedforms will inﬂuence the time scale of backﬁlling.
The study proposes that for a 2D study of wave induced backﬁlling same results for T ∗
b
should be expected in a 3D study case, if scour and bedforms have reached equilibrium along
the pipe-span, or if bedforms are symmetrical distributed. Not enough data is collected to
verify the previous assumptions, more analysis and experiments should be executed before
understanding the processes involved.
Backﬁlling was measured at x = 0.5D, if measured at x = −0.5D the results would likely
be different. In an optimal situation, scour is measured just beneath the pipe for conventional
49
==PAGE:64==
purposes, and to avoid assymetry in the measurements.
Figure 5.8: Excess pressure Px with raw estimation of resultant pressure P1 and P2.
50
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 6
2D study of scour
6.1
Results for time scale in waves and currents
In addition to the 3D analysis of scour propgation, for several of the test cases in the present
study, the time variation of scour depth St was measured at x/D = 0.5 and y/D = 5. St is
illustrated for wave and for steady current test cases in ﬁgure 6.1 and in ﬁgure 6.2, respectively.
For these measurements, the time scale is calculated according to equation 2.14.
For a steady current and embedded pipe, equilibrium scour depth is predicted by equation
2.6. For test cases with no initial embedment equation 2.4 applies. As illustrated in ﬁgure
6.2, equilibrium scour depth has not been reached. This is partly due to St being measured at
x = 0.5D. St must be measured just beneath the pipe if fully compared to the analytical St
from equation 2.9
For the wave tests IRw1 and IRw2 the measured S is compared to the analytical S from equa-
tion 2.7. The analytical S overpredicts the measured S, due to the same reasons as mentioned
in previous paragraph.
Figure 6.1: Time variation of scour depth in irregular waves for test case IRw1 and IRw2 .
51
==PAGE:66==
Figure 6.2: Time variation of scour depth for current tests.
In order to verify the equilibrium scour depth in steady currents, three test cases S45 are
performed for an embedment ratio e/D = 0. Flow conditions are the same as for test c0c1 with
θ = 0.065.
For the S45 test cases, Lz is positioned with an angle of 45° to the bed. On picture 6.3 it is
shown how Lz is inclined and ﬁxed to the frame.
52
==PAGE:67==
Figure 6.3: Picture of test S45 with Lz ﬁxed on frame with incident angle of 45 °to the bed.
The laser beam is aimed at the upstream edge of the pipe at x = −0.5D where the distance
S0 is measured. At the end of a scour test, the laser beam is positioned just beneath the pipe, if
an equilbrium scour depth of S = 0.5D is assumed. This equilibrium scour depth is chosen due
to experimental observations. The error in measurements if S/D = 0.6 are only minor. The
measured distance to the position of equilibrium scour depth is S45.The situation is depicted in
ﬁgure 6.4.
Figure 6.4: Illustration of test S45 with laser Lz measuring scour beneath the pipe from an
angle of 45 °.
Under these conditions, time development of scour depth could be monitored and calculated
according to equation 6.1.
St = [S45(t) −S0] cos(45°)
(6.1)
Where the equilibrium scour depth S is:
S = [S45 −S0] cos(45°)
(6.2)
Equilibrium scour depth is measured just beneath the pipe, such that same results as pre-
dicted from equation 2.4 are expected. Equation 6.2 is just a rough estimation for the actual St,
as S45(t) is measured with an angle to the developing scour.
Test S45 was performed 3 times as illustrated in ﬁgure 6.5. The resulting equilibrium scour
depth is less than expected. Indeed the equilibrium scour depth is roughly S/D ≈0.45 instead
of the analytical prediction S/D = 0.6 from equation 2.4. The resulting equilibrium scour
depth is within the standard deviation σ/D = 0.2, so the results are trustworthy. Variation in
measured scour depth should be expected, but when repeated three times, test S45 would have
been expected to measure an equilibrium scour depth closer to S/D = 0.6
53
==PAGE:68==
Figure 6.5: S45 tests where scour is measured beneath the pipe
In order to increase the conﬁdence of the collected data, the scour depth S was measured
along the pipe for test c0c1. In ﬁgure 6.6 is illustrated that the equilibrium scour depth varies
in the range of S/D ∈[0.4 0.6]. The scour depth is likely time dependent, with bedforms
upstream inﬂuencing sediment deposition. The variation is observed in ﬁgure 6.5. The mean
scour depth from ﬁgure 6.6 is S/D = 0.47 with σ/D = 0.06. This is still a little low compared
to the analytical equilibrium scour depth.
Figure 6.6: Equilibrium scour depth measured along the pipe for test c0c1.
Time scales T ∗for tests cases in a steady current are given in table 6.1. T ∗for the wave
test cases are shown in table 5.2 in section 5.1. Combined with the S45 tests cases, they are
compared to the analytical time scale T ∗as expressed by equation 2.11
54
==PAGE:69==
Table 6.1: Measured time scale for test cases in a steady current
Test
θ
T*
c0c1
0.065
7.3
c1c2
0.065
4.1
c2cb3
0.106
3.1
c2cb1
0.160
0.49
c2cb2
0.180
0.46
S45.test1
0.065
4.48
S45.test2
0.065
4.32
S45.test3
0.065
4.06
6.2
Analysis and observations for the scour development
In ﬁgure 6.7, T ∗is illustrated for steady current and S45 test cases, and T ∗
w for the wave test
cases. The are plotted against the analytical time scale in equation 2.11. The conﬁdence inter-
val is estimated from spread of data for T ∗in Sumer, B.M. and Fredsøe, J. (2002) Sumer and
Fredsøe (2002).
Figure 6.7: Nondimensional time scale for steady current and wave test cases compared to
analytical.
First the steady current tests from ﬁgure 6.2 are described. The non dimensional time scales
T ∗are larger than the analytical for test cases θ ∈[0.0650.106] . A reason for this observation
could be that St was measured at x = 0.5D and not beneath the pipe. Only for test case c2cb1
and c2cb1 the nondimensional time scale ﬁts the analytical.
55
==PAGE:70==
The nondimensional time scale determined from the S45 analysis also overestimates the ana-
lytical. T ∗is still not in the range of the conﬁdence interval, but closer to the analytical solution
compared to the steady currents test cases from ﬁgure 6.2. With the S45 test, an eventual issue
of embedment effects is disposed of. Measurements were made just beneath the pipe so results
could be better compared to analystical analysis. The S45 tests did indeed improve the obser-
vations for tests in the lower range of Shields parameter, speciﬁcally for θ = 0.065.
In the analysis of T ∗for the irregular waves, the non dimensional time scale for IRw2 ﬁts
the analytical fairly good. For IRw3, the non dimensional time scale ﬁts less well, which is
probably due to leaning slope for St as observed in ﬁgure 6.1.
For the applied method of scour observation, only the test cases IRw2, c2cb1 and c2cb1 are
within the standard deviation of the analytical T ∗.
A part of the reason could be irregularities in the ﬂow, caused by bedforms near the measure-
ment area. This is probably the reason for the increased T ∗in the case of IRw3. Another reason
could be that scour development at x = 0.5D is not in line with the analytical T ∗. But even
when measured beneath the pipe, with test S45, an increased T ∗is still observed.
The irregularities in the time scale is likely related to the observations made for scour propa-
gation velocities Vh in chapter 4. The reasons for T ∗not conforming to the analytical expression
in equation 2.11 in the case of a steady current is not clear. Maybe there are some effects of
the 3D scour that are not included in the 2D analysis. In 3D tests scour develops from the span
shoulder, whereas in 2D study cases there is none. The effect of bedforms at the span shoulder
could also play a role, with the complex 3D ﬂow conditions taking place affecting the scour
propagation and development.
It is also possible that due to experimental ﬂaws, the velocities at the pipe are not as ex-
pected. There have been several measurements conﬁrming the mean velocities across the ﬂume,
as illustrated ﬁgure 3.6. Even though, it is possible that the ﬂow at the pipe is reduced for a
reason which is not clear. More analysis needs to be performed before a ﬁnal conclusion can
be made.
56
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
Conclusions and ﬁndings in this work are presented for a pipeline in steady current and irregu-
lar wave conditions, and for wave-induced backﬁlling of current-generated scour holes.
Current-induced scour:
• A primary and secondary velocity of scour propagation is observed for all test cases in
live bed conditions for e/D ≤0.2 and θ ∈[0.065 0.180]. It is suggested that the condi-
tion for observing secondary propagation velocity should be tested against the Reynolds
number instead of the Shields parameter.
• The observed propgation velocity was slower than demonstrated in previous experimental
work. Conlusions on this observation could not be demonstrated but is suggested to be
an effect of the Reynolds number.
• No secondary velocity for an embedment to pipe-diameter ratio of 0.1 below live bed
conditions was observed. It is proposed that this could be due to the little change in the
bed morphology during a test or/and a low turbulent intensity of the incoming ﬂow.
• A sudden increase in the propagation velocity for θ ≥0.15 is suggested to be due to an
increase in suspended sediment and Reynolds number at the pipe.
• For the same pipeline embedment, a shift from primary to secondary propation veloc-
ity was observed for roughly the same scour-hole-span to pipe-diameter ratio, with low
dependency on the range of Shields parameters tested for.
• It is suggested that secondary propagation velocity is partly associated to the occurence
of bedforms during an experiment. The bed changes from a relatively smooth surface of
the bed to a rough state with bedfoms up to around 0.3 times the diameter of the pipe in
the present study, depending on the ﬂow conditions.
• The study suggests that scale effects should be considered in the case of laboratory ex-
periments.
57
==PAGE:72==
Wave-induced scour:
• For an embedded pipe subjected to irregular waves, with wave Shields parameter θw <
0.066 and Keulegan Carperpenter number KC < 9.5, a primary and secondary propaga-
tion velocity are observed.
• Observations include that the secondary scour propagation velocity is similar in value
to the predicted velocity from Cheng. et al. (2013), whose results documented only one
velocity of scour propagation.
Wave-induced backﬁlling of current-generated scour holes
• Observations at the span shoulders indicate that scour propagates at roughly the same
rate as for wave-induced scour. The ﬂuctuations should be attributed to the difference of
initial test conditions, with wave-induced scour tested for an initial ﬂattened bed, whereas
wave-induced backﬁlling is tested for an initial state of current-generated bed morphol-
ogy.
• Two observations are made concerning time scale for backﬁlling. If the initial state of
the current-generated scour hole is symmetrical along the span of the pipe, the calculated
time scale was similar to the two-dimensional study case of Bayraktar et al. (2016). If
the pipe at the initial state of the current-generated scour hole was supported at the span
shoulders and scour had formed from an initial scour hole, the time scale of backﬁlling
was probably increased due to the characteristic shape of the scour hole and its implica-
tions on the ﬂow conditions.
7.1
Further work
It is suggested that in the case of a steady current, the effects of the Reynolds number and the
turbulence level of the ﬂow should be investigated to predict the effects on the scour propagation
velocity. Further work should apply a pipe with larger diameter such that scale effects due to the
apparent bedforms is reduced to a minimum. The time evolution of scour depth is monitored
with great precision by laser application, but for conventionally purposes it would be preferable
to measure the scour or backﬁlling just beneath a pipe. If using a transparent pipe in a material
with same refractive as water scour could be measured at that location with good precision.
In the case of waves, the scour propagation velocity should be studied for lower Shields pa-
rameter than in the study of Cheng. et al. (2013) to make apparent the conditions for secondary
propagation rate.
For wave-induced backﬁlling in a three dimensional test case, the time scale should be
investigated more thoroughly, as the present study did not deliver enough data to make any
conclusive statement.
58
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
D. Bayraktar, J. Ahmah, B.E. Larsen, S. Carstensen, and D.R. Fuhrman. Experimental and
numerical study of wave-induced backﬁlling beneath submarine pipelines. Coastal Engi-
neering, 118:63–75, 2016.
L. Cheng, K. Yeow, Zhang. Z., and B. Teng. Three-dimensional scour below offshore pipelines
in steady currents. Coastal Engineering, 56:577–590, 2009.
L. Cheng., K. Yeow, Z. Zhang, and F. Li. 3d scour below pipelines under waves and combined
waves and currents. Coastal Engineering, 83:137–149, 2013.
J. Fredsøe and R. Deigaard. mechanics of coastal sediment transport. World Scientiﬁc, 1992.
J. Fredsøe, B.M. Sumer, and M. Arnskov. Time scale for wave/current scour. International
Journal of Offshore and Polar Engineering, pages 13–17, 1992.
D.R. Fuhrman, S. Schløer, and J. Sterner. Rans-based simulation of turbulent wave boundary
layer and sheet-ﬂow sediment transport processes. Coastal Engineering, 73:151–166, 2013.
D.R. Fuhrman, C. Baykal, B.M. Sumer, N.G. Jacobsen, and J. Fredsøe. Numerical simula-
tion of wave-induced scour and backﬁlling processes beneath submarine pipelines. Coastal
Engineering, 94:10–22, 2014.
T. Grifﬁths, F. Zhao, M. Kalkhoven, and W. Shen. Seabed shear stress ampliﬁcation around
subsea pipelines: Part 1, 2D parametric study with currents. CRC Press, 2015.
B. Guo, S. Song, J. Chacko, and A. Ghalambor. Offshore Pipelines. Elsevier, 2005.
E.A. Hansen, C. Staub, J. Fredsøe, and B.M. Sumer. Time-development of scour induced free
spans of pipelines. OMAE, 5, 1991.
E. Meyer-Peter and R. Müller. Formulas for bed-load transport. Int. Assoc. Hydraul. Struct.
Res, pages 39–64, 1948.
W. Shen, T. Grifﬁths, Z. Zan, and J Leggoe. Shear stress ampliﬁcation around subsea pipelines:
Part 3, 3D study of spanning pipelines. CRC Press, 2015.
R. Soulsby. Dynamics of Marine Sands: A Manual for Practical Applications. Thomas Telford,
1997.
59
==PAGE:74==
R.L Soulsby. Simpliﬁed calculation of wave orbital velocities. Technical report, HR Walling-
ford, 02 2006.
B. M. Sumer and J. Fredsøe.
The mechanics of scour in the marine environment.
World
Scientiﬁc, 2002.
B.M. Sumer. Lecture notes on turbulence. Technical University of Denmark, DTU Mekanik,
Section for Fluid Mechanics, 2003.
B.M. Sumer and J. Fredsøe. Hydrodynamics around cylindrical structures. World Scientiﬁc,
2006.
I.A. Svendsen and I.G. Jonsson. Hydrodynamics of coastal regions. Den private ingeniørfond,
1982.
C. Tropea, L. Tarin, A, and F. Foss, J. Handbook of Experimental Fluid Mechanics. Springer,
2007.
M.S. Yalin and E. Karahan. Inception of sediment transport. Hydraulic Division-ASCE, 105:
1433—1443, 1979.
60
==PAGE:75==
61
==PAGE:76==
APPENDIX A
Contour plots for initial and ﬁnal bathymetry of test cases.
A.1
Test c21
Figure A.1: Scan of initial and ﬁnal bathymetry of test c21
62
==PAGE:77==
A.2
Test c22
Figure A.2: Scan of initial and ﬁnal bathymetry of test c22
63
==PAGE:78==
A.3
Test c23
Figure A.3: Scan of initial and ﬁnal bathymetry of test c23
64
==PAGE:79==
A.4
Test c2c1
Figure A.4: Scan of initial and ﬁnal bathymetry of test c2c1
65
==PAGE:80==
A.5
Test c2c3
Figure A.5: Scan of initial and ﬁnal bathymetry of test c2c3
66
==PAGE:81==
A.6
Test c1c1
Figure A.6: Scan of initial and ﬁnal bathymetry of test c1c1
67
==PAGE:82==
A.7
Test c12
Figure A.7: Scan of initial and ﬁnal bathymetry of test c1c2
68
==PAGE:83==
A.8
Test c0c1
Figure A.8: Scan of initial and ﬁnal bathymetry of test c0c1
69
==PAGE:84==
APPENDIX B
Calibration of equipment and ﬂume
Figure B.1: laser calibration with Lz inserted in water
Table B.1: calibration curves from ﬁgure B.1
Lx
0.6265
m/V
Ly
1.2623
m/V
Lz
0.2681
m/V
70
==PAGE:85==
Figure B.2: Calibration curve for determing initial height in ﬂume for reaching a depth of
h = 0.5m for different discharges.
Figure B.3: Relation between incident and refracted beam
71
==PAGE:86==
Figure B.4: Adjustment between Lx and Lz raw data output after measuring the pipe and
bathymetry at the pipe for multiple crossings for same position y.
Figure B.5: Illustration of the precision for measurements concerning scour propagation with
the actual distances plotted against the measurements. The optimal ﬁtting corresponds to the
situation where the measured distance is equal to the real distances on the pipe.
72
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX C
Tools and equipment used and produced for the realisation
of the thesis
x
z
y
Figure C.1: Isotropic view of entire carriage system and frame utilized over the width of the
ﬂume for transport of experimental equipment and sensors.
73
==PAGE:88==
z
y
(a) Carriage system seen from reference view x with Cx below and Cy in the top section
z
x
(b) Carriage system seen from reference view y with Cx below and Cy in the top section
Figure C.2: Dimensions and detailed drawings of the frame for the carriage system
74
==PAGE:89==
Figure C.3: Sandlevel used to level the sand at the pipe
75
==PAGE:90==
1055mm
386,3mm
80mm
70mm
240mm
630mm
Figure C.4: Camera 3D printed support
160mm
91,4mm
89,3mm
75,8mm
68mm
Ø9mm
110mm
46,4mm
Figure C.5: Support for plexiglas cylinder containing Lz
76
==PAGE:91==
60mm
Ø3mm
27mm
37mm
61mm
10mm
R38mm
R32mm
68mm
Figure C.6: Support for Lz inside plexiglas tube
Ø10.2mm
40.0mm
41.0mm
4.0mm
20.0mm
Figure C.7: Spacers used between pipe and support
77
==PAGE:92==
APPENDIX D
Additional information of the setup
Figure D.1: Example of initial scour hole
Figure D.2: Velocity correction at ﬂume inlet
78
==PAGE:93==
w
Lz
pitot 
tube
Figure D.3: wave gauge w, pitot tube and Laser Lz measuring the bed illustration
L
Lx
Figure D.4: Lx measuring distance to Cx
Ly
Figure D.5: Ly measuring distance to Cy
79
==PAGE:94==
Figure D.6: camera illustration
Figure D.7: sandlevel illustration
80
==PAGE:95==
Figure D.8: Sand properties from the manufacturer
81
==PAGE:96==
In[28]:= Quit[]
Stability assesment of the pipe
Deflection assesment
In[1]:= g = 9.81; rhos = 2700; rhow = 1000;
pipe : Inner Diameter Di,
         outer diameter Dl
         Youngs modulus e 
         moment of inertia i
         Length L to supports
In[2]:= Dl = 0.04;
In[3]:= Di = 0.036;
In[4]:= e = 65 * 10^9;
In[5]:= i = Pi * Dl^4 - Di^464;
In[6]:= L = 3.2;
Uniform load per unit length ω
In[7]:= ω = Pi * Dl^2 4 - Pi * Di^2 4* g * (rhos - rhow)
Out[7]= 3.98182
maximum deflection δ at center of pipe in mm, only if scour develops until support
In[8]:= δ = 5 * ω * L^4384 * e * i* 1000
Out[8]= 1.93537
For most experiments L<2.5 m such that δ max:
In[26]:= δmax = 5 * ω * 2.5^4384 * e * i* 1000
Out[26]= 0.720983
Assesment of induced vibrations
Me is the effective mass as function of mass of pipe Mp, mass of contents Mc and Ma the added 
mass (water displaced by pipeline)
In[10]:= Mp = Pi * Dl^2 4 - Pi * Di^2 4* g * (rhos - rhow);
In[11]:= Mc = Pi * Di^2 4* g * (rhow);
In[12]:= Ma = Pi * Dl^2 4* rhow;
In[13]:= Me = Mp + Mc + Ma;
Ce is an end condition, in this case defined as a fixed support (clamped)
In[14]:= Ce = 22.2;
Printed by Wolfram Mathematica Student Edition
D.0.1
Stability analysis of pipe,
==PAGE:97==
Natural frequency fn estimation for fixed pipe
In[15]:= fn =
Ce
2 Pi
Sqrt
e i
Me L^4

Out[15]= 4.68694
Maximum velocity Uc applied at center of pipe
In[16]:= Uc = 0.4;
Reduced velocity Ur
In[17]:= Ur =
Uc
fn * Dl
Out[17]= 2.13359
Stability parameter
In[18]:= Ks = 2 * Me * 0.125
rhow Dl^2
Out[18]= 2.37872
In[19]:= Reynolds =
Uc * Dl
1 * 10^-6
Out[19]= 16 000.
Verify for in-line vibration
In[20]:=
Result: no inline vibrations
In[23]:= Verify for cross-flow vibrations
2    stability.nb
Printed by Wolfram Mathematica Student Edition
==PAGE:98==
In[24]:=
In[25]:=
cross flow vibrations occur over the range 5<Ur<7, so therefore no cross flow vibrations should 
occur and none is observed.
stability.nb    3
Printed by Wolfram Mathematica Student Edition
==PAGE:99==
In[23]:= Quit[]
Modified shields parameter with reference to Jørgen 
Fredsøe & Rolf Deigaard (1992)
variables and constants
depth h chosen from conducted experiments, g is gravity, d is the sediment grain size and s the 
especific gravity of sand.
In[1]:= h = 0.5;
In[2]:= g = 9.81;
In[3]:= d1 = 0.182 * 10^-3;
In[4]:= s = 2.65;
In[5]:= ks = 2.5 * d;
Logarithmic velocity profile (flow resistance):
In[6]:= Uf[V_, d_] =
V
6 + 2.5 Log[h / ks]
;
Shields parameter with and without bedforms 
In[7]:= θ[V_, d_] = Uf[V, d]^2
s - 1g d
;
Engelund & Fredsøe(1982): eq: 9.77
In[8]:= θprime[V_, d_] = 0.06 + 0.3 θ[V, d]^3 2;
Flow resistance in presence of bedforms.
Engelund & Fredsøe(1982) : 9.77 & 9.5 & 9.6 combined
In[9]:= hprime[V_, d_] = h θprime[V, d]
θ[V, d]
;
In[10]:= Ufprime[V_, d_] = Sqrtθprime[V, d] Uf[V, d]^2
θ[V, d]
;
D.0.2
Shields parameter analysis as skin friction in presence of bedforms
85
==PAGE:100==
Plots showing how Uf and ultimately θ behave in presence of bedforms.
In[11]:= Plot[{Min[Uf[V, d1], Ufprime[V, d1]], Uf[V, d1], Ufprime[V, d1]},
{V, 0, 1}, PlotStyle {{Red, Thick}, {Black, Dashed}, {Gray, Dashed}},
PlotLegends {"Effective friction velocity Uf",
"Friction velocity Uf", "Skin friction velocity Uf'"},
AxesLabel {Style[V, FontSize 14], Style[Uf', FontSize 14]}, PlotLabel 
Style["Friction velocity as function of mean velocity", FontSize 14]]
Out[11]=
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0 V
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
Uf′
Friction velocity as function of mean velocity
Effective friction velocity Uf
Friction velocity Uf
Skin friction velocity Uf'
In[12]:= p1 = Plot[{Min[θprime[V, d1], θ[V, d1]], θ[V, d1], θprime[V, d1]},
{V, 0, 1}, PlotStyle {{Red, Thick}, {Black, Dashed}, {Gray, Dashed}},
PlotLegends {"Effective dimensionless \n bed shear stress θ'",
" Shields parameter θ", "Shields parameter, skin friction θ'"},
AxesLabel {Style[V, FontSize 14], Style[θ', FontSize 14]}, PlotLabel 
Style["Shields parameter as function of mean velocity", FontSize 14]]
Out[12]=
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0 V
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
θ′
Shields parameter as function of mean velocity
Effective dimensionless
bed shear stress θ'
Shields parameter θ
Shields parameter, skin friction θ'
2   
shiels_modified_compare.nb
Printed by Wolfram Mathematica Student Edition
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX E
Matlab scripts
E.1
Meshgrid for bed morphology
%% 3D-Scan analysis
%% calibration data
load('calibration.mat')
%% import data for L_x, L_y and L_z
data = dlmread(textFullFileName,';',4,0);
t = data(:,1);
x = data(:,2);
y = data(:,3);
z = data(:,4);
%% transform raw data to euclidean distances
xdata = x*x_kal;
ydata = y*y_kal;
zdata = z*z_kal;
%% create grid (Adapted when needed)
grid_x = 0.005;
% Modify for finer or coarser grid
grid_y = 0.01;
xp = [1:grid_x:3];
yp = [2:grid_y:6];
dx = grid_x/2;
dy = grid_y/2;
for i=1:length(xp)
for j=1:length(yp)
ind = find((x<xp(i)+dx) & (x>xp(i)-dx) & (y<yp(j)+dy) & (y>yp(j)-dy));
% Remove data < 2*std
and data > 2*std for a given grid point
ind_noise = find(z(ind)>mean(z(ind))+2*std(z(ind)) | z(ind)<mean(z(ind))-2*std(z
ind(ind_noise) = [];
zp(i,j) = mean(z(ind));
end
end
87
==PAGE:102==
E.2
Video analysis of scour propagation
% The pipe is calibrated from the initial scour hole at y=0 to either
% the left or the right side of the pipe with a calibration interval of 100mm.
% 2 separate studies is always performed for a same experiment where the left
% and right scour propagation is measured individually.
%% extract video
videoObject = VideoReader(movieFullFileName);
%% Modify before use
starttime = 50 ;
% Start of video analysis [sec]
interval = 60;
% How often scourdata is stored [sec]
cal_points = 11;
% Set how many calibration points
%% extract data from video
info = get(videoObject);
framerate = videoObject.FrameRate;
% framerate of the video
sampling_factor = framerate*interval;
% image sampling intervals
frameinterval = framerate/5;
% Number of frames used for skipping to next image
% if the prior has bad visibility
%% Determine time limit of video and amount of data points
numberOfFrames = videoObject.NumberOfFrames;
nFrames = floor(videoObject.NumberOfFrames/sampling_factor);
%% calibration between pixels and measured distance on the pipe
IMG_cal = read(videoObject,1);
set(gcf, 'units','normalized','outerposition',[0 0 1 1]);
imshow(IMG_cal);
zoom on;
pause()
zoom off;
cal = ginput(cal_points);
% Retrieve pixel mesurements corresponding
% to the 100mm intervals on the pipe
dis = pdist(cal);
% The pixel distances are determined
dist_cal = [0,dis(1:cal_points-1)];
distance = linspace(0,100*(cal_points-1),cal_points);
% Euclidean distance on pipe
% Calibration between pixel distance and euclidean Distance on pipe
% with polynomium of 3d degree:
fitted = fit(dist_cal',distance','poly3');
%% startpoint
start = cal(1,:);
% Calibration point at y=0
startposition = starttime*framerate;
% time for collection of first data point
%% Read amount of frames as determined by the interval (here every 60 seconds)
%read image and control figure such that for each image extracted at
%chosen time intervals it is possible to skip frames if needed such that
%optimale visibility is reached. The additional time is accounted for when
%skipping.
for k = 1:nFrames
DlgH = figure(1);
H = uicontrol('Style', 'PushButton', ...
'String', 'Break', ...
'Callback', 'delete(gcbf)');
set(gcf, 'units','normalized','outerposition',[0 0 1 1]);
88
==PAGE:103==
j=0;
% following code is for assesing the quality of the image and there may
% be chosen to skip to a next frame, the figure is escaped by presssing
% "Break"
while (ishandle(H))
IMG = read(videoObject, round((k-1)*sampling_factor+j+startposition));
imshow(IMG);
zoom on;
pause()
% you can zoom the picture, any key press
zoom off;
% escapes the zoom mode and switches to next frame
j=j+round(frameinterval);
end
close all
% account for additional frames for estimating the elapsed time
extraframes = j-round(frameinterval);
% The position of the scour span is determined. Image modification for
% increased visibility of the edges is used.
edgeThreshold = 0.5;
amount = 0.5;
B = localcontrast(IMG, edgeThreshold, amount);
figure(2)
imshow(B) ;
zoom on;
pause()
zoom off;
h = ginput(1);
% Click on image for collection position for edge of span shoulder
h1 = [start;h]; % Pixel distance between y=0 and collected data point
data{k} = h;
distance_pixels(k) = pdist(h1);
% Measure pixel distance
time(k) = (k-1)*intervalperframe+ekstraframes/framerate; % Evaluate elapsed time
display('time is',num2str(time(k)));
close;
end
%% sort data
data = cat(1,data{:});
% Measured data points in pixels
dist = distance_pixels;
% Measured pixel distances
%% Collected data
span = fitted(dist);
% Scour progression in mm determined from
% calibration and measured pixel distances
elapsedtime = time(:);
% Elapsed time data points
89
==PAGE:104==
E.3
Wave analysis
%% Input
data = dlmread(filename,';',4,0);
% calibration file for wave gauge.
load('calibration_w.mat')
%the first column is the time and the second the water level.
eta_ts(:,1) =
data(:,1);
eta_ts(:,2) =
data(:,5)*fit_a+fit_b;
%% wave analysis
% Finds the number of data-set
points = size(eta_ts(:,1));
% Spectral analysis to find the wave energy spectrum
x = eta_ts(:,2);
% Waterlevel
N = points(:,1);
% Length of the vector x
% Fast Fourier Transformation in Matlab
y = fft(x,N);
% Fast Fourier Transformation
ck = zeros(length(x),1);
ck(1) = abs(y(1))/N;
% wave data in the frequency domain
for k=2:N/2
ck(k) = 2*abs(y(k))/N;
end
delta_k = atan2(imag(y),real(y));
% Sample frequency
Delta = eta_ts(end,1)/(N-1);
fs = 1/Delta;
% Nyquist frequency
fN = 1/2*fs;
% Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT)
k = 0:N-1;
f = k*(fs/N);
% Frequency
Df = fs/(N-1);
% Frequency band width
%% Determine Hm0 and Tp
% Spectral density
Sf = (1/2*ck.^2)/Df;
% Determine m0
m0 = sum(f'.^0.*Sf*Df)
% Determine Hm0
Hm0 = 4*sqrt(m0)
% Determine Tp
fp = f((Sf==max(Sf)));
Tp = 1/fp
%% determine Um
for k=2:N/2
fun = @(k2)(2*pi*f(k)).^2-(9.81*k2*tanh(k2*0.5));
%determine wave number for each frequency
k2(k) = fsolve(fun,1);
%determine horizontal orbital velocity for linear theory
uk(k) = (9.81*2*ck(k)*k2(k))/(4*pi*f(k))*(1/cosh(k2(k)*h));
end
% Determine power spectrum of uk
Sfu = (1/2*uk.^2)/Df;
% r.m.s value of the orbital velocity at the bed
90
==PAGE:105==
sigu2 = trapz(f(2:length(Sfu)),Sfu(2:end))
% Determine near bed velocity
Um = sqrt(2)*sqrt(sigu2)
91
==PAGE:106==
APPENDIX F
Experimental challenges in the process
The ﬂume used for the thesis was repaired and calibrated at several occasions. In the following a
list of the challenges encountered are given with the approach taken in order to ﬁnd a reasonable
solution.
• The ﬂowmeter measuring the discharge through the pipe system of the ﬂume was ini-
tially not calibrated correctly such that 4 of the initial experiments were discarded as the
velocities used during the experiment not could be assessed.
• During the thesis the water tank in the laboratory was emptied by mistake causing ﬁne
particles to be introduced in the closed system of the ﬂume. 2 supplementary current tests
were discarded from the analysis as the visibity in the video recordings did not qualify
for further analysis.
• The velocity proﬁle over the width y of the ﬂume was not uniform. This was discovered
as the scour progression on the left was much faster than on the right side of the ﬂume.
Left being y and right -y (see ﬁgure 3.1). This was corrected by inserting a metal grid at
the water inlet such that the ﬂow was better distributed over the width.
• It was noted that the ﬂume tilted to the right. The observations leading to this conclusion
were
1. When emptied or ﬁlled, the last amount of water in the test section would always
be located at the right side, also leading to increased scour at that location.
2. Using a ruler, the measured distance from the ﬂoor of the building to the MWL
(mean water level) showed a difference of ≈2mm between the left and the right
side of the ﬂume, with the right side being the lowest.
92
==PAGE:107==
93
==PAGE:108==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Maritime Engineering
Technical University of Denmark 
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 1360
Fax  (+45) 4588 4325
www.mek.dtu.dk
