==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Waste heat recovery on passenger vessels for 
zero-emission power production in harbour
Th omas Gilormini
July 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Thermal Energy
Technical University of Denmark 
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 4131
Fax  (+45) 4588 4325
www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Project details
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Mechanical engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a
Master degree in Engineering design and applied mechanics.
Thesis
Title :
Waste heat recovery on passenger ves-
sels for zero-emission power production
in harbour
ECTS :
35 (6 months)
Dates :
02/01-18 - 02/07/18
Student
Name :
Thomas Gilormini
Student nr :
s161085
Main supervisor
Name :
Fredrik Hadling, Associate professor
Dept.
DTU Mechanical engineering
email :
frh@mek.dtu.dk
Co-supervisor
Name :
Enrico Baldasso, Ph.D. student
Dept. :
DTU Mechanical engineering
email :
enbald@mek.dtu.dk
Co-supervisor
Name :
Maria E. Mondejar Montagud, Postdoc
Dept. :
DTU Mechanical engineering
email :
maemmo@mek.dtu.dk
Co-supervisor
Name :
Jianhua Fan , Associate professor
Dept. :
DTU Civil Engineering
email :
jif@byg.dtu.dk
Kongens Lyngby, July 1, 2018
Thomas Gilormini (s161085)
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
High-capacity passenger vessels are characterized by significant electricity demands.
When sailing, electricity can be supplied either by propulsion engines or auxiliary
generators using fossil fuels, or by waste heat recovery (WHR) systems such as organic
Rankine cycle (ORC), using the exhaust gases.
During harbour stays, the main
engines are shut down and thus WHR units cannot be operated. Therefore, auxiliary
generators commonly produce the required electricity, which results in additional fuel
consumption and emissions of pollutants in coastal areas. A conventional solution
for zero-emission power production in harbour is the use of batteries, charged by the
shaft generators during sailing. However, batteries are expensive and have a limited
lifetime. This master thesis investigates the possibility of installing a thermal energy
storage (TES) on board passenger vessels, to make it possible to operate the WHR
systems also during harbour stays. During sailing, the exhaust gases supply the ORC,
thus producing electricity, and charge the TES as well. In harbour, the TES releases
heat towards the WHR units to produce electricity.
The project analyzes a case study on two different ship routes from the company
Fjordline, each requiring 1.0 MW of electrical power, both during sailing and harbour
stays. Based on previous studies, sensible heat storages using thermal oils are the
most promising solution. The hot and cold oil can be stored in either one stratified, or
two separate tanks. A simulation framework developed in Matlab allows comparing
the performance and economic viability of the various options (storage configuration,
thermal oil and organic fluid).
The results show that the two-tanks option is the most promising configuration,
due to its simplicity and reliability. On the studied routes, the TES-ORC system can
supply the required power during the whole harbour stays with 36 tons of a specific
thermal oil (2 tanks of 47 m3). In addition, the ORC allows drastic reductions of
the fossil fuel consumption during sailing. Comparing to the solution using batteries,
such a system is paid back in around 7 to 10 years of operation, for a ship’s lifetime
of 25 years.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors Fredrik Haglind, Enrico Bal-
dasso, Maria Mondejar (DTU Thermal Energy) and Jianhua Fan (DTU Civil engi-
neering) for supporting and advising me throughout the whole Master thesis. Special
thanks to Enrico, whose door was always open whenever I had issues with the models.
Next, I would also like to thank Lejf Larsen of Fjordline for his input in the project.
Finally, I thank my parents who supported me throughout the whole of my edu-
cation, and without whom I could not have made it in these two years abroad.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Project details
i
Abstract
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Scope of the project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Organic Rankine cycle
5
2.1
Principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Organic Rankine cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Working fluids
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Application in the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Thermal storage
9
3.1
Thermo-chemical storage (TCS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Latent heat thermal storage (LHTS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Sensible heat storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Case study
27
4.1
Ship routes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Heat sources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Overview of the system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4
Control strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Modelling framework
43
5.1
Organic Rankine cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Stratified tank
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3
Two-tanks system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.4
Heat exchanger network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.5
Model architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6
Methods of analysis
63
6.1
Performance of the system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.2
Economic analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7
Analysis of the results
79
7.1
Design of the system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
7.2
Performance of the system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
7.3
Economic analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
7.4
Final configurations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
8
Discussion
109
8.1
ORC working fluid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
8.2
Performance of the system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
8.3
Economic analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
8.4
Final design of the system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
9
Conclusion
117
9.1
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
9.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
A Model interface
121
Bibliography
123
==PAGE:11==
Nomenclature
Acronyms
CAPEX/OPEX Capital/Operational expenditures
CEPCI Chemical engineering plant cost index
CF
Cash flow
CHP
Combined heat and power
HEX
Heat exchanger
LHTS Latent heat thermal storage
LMTD Logarithmic mean temperature difference
LNG
Liquefied natural gas
MAPD Mean average percentage deviation
NPV
Net present value
ORC
Organic Rankine cycle
SHS
Sensible heat storage
TES
Thermal energy storage
WHR
Waste heat recovery
Prefixes
∆
Variation (of time, mass,...)
Symbols
α
Coverage rate
β
Savings rate
˙m
Mass flow
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
˙Q
Heat transfer
γ
Discount factor
λ
Thermal conductivity
ρ
Density
A
Area
C
Estimated cost
cP
Specific heat capacity
D
Diameter
E
Energy
e
Thickness
H
Enthalpy (Chapter 3) or height
h
Specific enthalpy (Chapter 3) or convection coefficient
hL
Phase-change enthalpy
M, m Mass
Nmix
Number of mixed slices
Nslices Number of slices in the discretized tank
P
Power
PP
Pinch-point temperature
Q
Heat
R
Thermal resistance
rmixing Mixing ratio
s
Specific entropy
T
Temperature
t
Time
U
Heat transfer coefficient
V
Volume
Y , y
Year
==PAGE:13==
Contents
xi
Subscripts
amb
Ambient conditions
aux/bat Auxiliary engines/Battery packs
c/h
Cold/Hot
COLD/HOT Cold/Hot tank
cond/conv Conduction/Convection
f
Storage fluid
in/out Inlet/Outlet conditions
int
Intermediary
min/max/D/tot/ref/rel Minimal/Maximal/Design/Total/Reference/Relative value
PB
Payback (time)
pc
Phase change
req
Required
tank
Storage tank
w/ex
Cooling water/Exhaust gases
wall
Wall of the tank
0
Initial conditions
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Context
Over the past 50 years, the Earth’s average temperature has increased at the fastest
rate in recorded history [1]. The principal cause for this accelerating global warming
is the burning of fossil fuels such as coal, oil and gas, responsible for the vast majority
of the total greenhouse gases emissions, i.e. carbon dioxyde (CO2), nitrogen oxides
(NOx) and sulphur oxides (SOx). Climate change, melting glaciers, and rising sea
levels are all consequences of what is considered as the most urgent issue of this era.
The Paris agreement, negotiated at the 21st Conference of the Parties of the UNCCC
(COP21), aimed to respond to the threat by keeping the global temperature rise below
2◦C above the pre-industrial levels. While the global energy demand is predicted to
continue rising, reducing greenhouse gases emissions is therefore crucial.
Although it is the most environmental friendly mode of transport, shipping still ac-
counts for 2.5% of the global greenhouse gas emissions [2]. Moreover, due to a growing
population and economy, shipping emissions are predicted to increase by 50% to 250%
by 2050. On the other hand, meeting the Paris agreement would require worldwide
emissions to be halved from 1990 levels by 2050 [3]. Therefore, emission regulations
were set by the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) on different sea areas
of the world. As these regulations become stronger, emission reducing technologies
are being designed on board new ships, and retrofitted to already operating vessels.
Selective catalyst reduction (SCR), exhaust gases recirculation (EGR), exhaust gases
scrubber technologies, and the use of alternative fuels are among the most common
ways to reduce NOx and SOx emissions.
To reduce CO2 emissions, however, in-
creasing the energy efficiency is the most direct solution, along with alternative fuels.
Therefore, regulations also require the use of several performance indicators, such as
the energy efficiency design index (EEDI). Besides reducing emissions and complying
with regulations, increasing a ship’s energy efficiency will also yield a decrease in its
fuel consumption, and thus its operating expenses. Consequently, energy efficiency
is a major area of concern.
Most large capacity vessels are propelled using Diesel engines, the majority of
them fuelled by heavy fuel oil (HFO) [4]. These engines, as any other thermal process,
induce significant heat losses, and around half of the total energy contained in the
fuel is dissipated in the exhaust gases, scavenge air, cooling water, and lubrication
oil. Therefore, as underlined by Mondejar et al. [5], waste heat recovery systems
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
(WHRS) show great potential in reducing fuel consumption. Such units can convert
the thermal energy dissipated by the engine into power, either mechanical or electric.
Kristiansen et al. [6] evaluated the potential of thermoelectric generators (TEG)
on board ships. This technology relies on the Seebeck effect, which converts a tem-
perature gradient, e.g. between exhaust gases and sea water, into an electric current.
TEG are modular and flexible, but their area of interest is limited to relatively small
engines. The most mature waste heat recovery technology is the Rankine cycle, which
converts thermal energy into electricity using a turbine. More precisely, Mondejar
et al. [5] concluded that the use of an organic fluid instead of steam in a so-called
organic Rankine cycle (ORC) shows great potential for maritime applications, as it
allows recovering low-temperature heat while keeping a simple design.
High-capacity passenger vessels are characterized by significant electricity de-
mands, to supply their cabins, restaurants, and other on-board services. This power
is commonly delivered using shaft generators or auxiliary machinery. Producing this
power with an ORC unit can therefore allow increasing the energy efficiency, thus
reducing the resulting additional fuel consumption and emission of pollutants. How-
ever, another particularity of most passenger vessels is the high frequency of their
stops.
The Fjordline company is Norway’s second largest shipping company in interna-
tional passenger vessels between Norway, Sweden and Denmark. Considering two of
their usual ship routes of 24 hours, harbour stays account for 6 to 12 hours, most of
them being periods of 20 to 70 minutes. Although WHRS units can allow significant
fuel savings and emission reductions during voyage, they can not be operated during
harbour stays. On the other hand, electric connection to the shore is only viable when
considering stops of several hours. Therefore, auxiliary generators are commonly used
to supply the electricity demand during harbour stays, thus resulting in additional
fuel consumption and harmful emissions in coastal areas. Approximately 230 million
people are directly exposed to the emissions in the worlds 100 most emitting ports [7],
and incentives are strong for ships to produce power in harbour without generating
pollutants.
1.2
Scope of the project
The most common approach to achieve zero-emission power production in harbour
is to charge batteries using shaft power during voyage, and use them to supply the
electric demand during harbour stays. However, batteries are expensive and have
a short lifetime compared to the ship’s 25 years. Their recycling, as well as their
high investment cost, are also concerning issues. Therefore, another alternative was
imagined. This master thesis evaluates the technical and economical feasibility of
using thermal energy storage (TES) on board passenger vessels, in order to allow
operating the ORC unit also during harbour stays. When sailing, the exhaust gases
supply the ORC, thus producing electricity, and charge the TES as well. In harbour,
the TES releases heat towards the WHR units to produce electricity.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Scope of the project
3
The coupling of an ORC unit to a TES has never been investigated for the mar-
itime application before. However, the use of TES is already well-established, espe-
cially in the solar energy sector, as it allows to solve the mismatch between power
supply and demand. Some vessels already rely on thermal storage to use the heat
directly, such as the passenger ship Viking Grace [8]. It uses the excess heat in the
exhaust gases to heat up two insulated water tanks of a total capacity of 88 m3,
which supply a part of the heat load during harbour stays, when only one engine is
running. This process is called sensible heat storage (SHS), and relies on the specific
heat capacity of the material which is heated up. Another alternative is to rely on
the latent heat, by inducing the phase change of a phase-change material (PCM).
The primary goal of the project is to identify the most promising thermal storage
technology that could be coupled to an ORC unit in order to ensure zero-emission
power production in harbour. Then, a simulation framework developed in Matlab
will allow comparing the performance of various options, i.e. storage configuration,
storage material, and ORC organic fluid.
Finally, the economic viability of these
options should also be assessed.
The project analyzes a case study on two given
different ship routes from the company Fjordline, each requiring 1.0 MW of electrical
power, both during sailing and harbour stays.
After presenting the basic principles of the organic Rankine cycle and its potential
for waste heat recovery, a literature review focused on the different technologies and
applications of thermal energy storage is presented. Based on this, the system is
described in depth, with its structure and control strategy, along with the case study
which the project focuses on. Then, the methods applied for the modelling of the
system are presented and validated, and the key indicators for the techno-economic
analysis are detailed, as well as the estimation methods used in the economic analysis.
The performance of the different system configurations are then compared. Finally,
the economic viability of the relevant solutions is assessed.
==PAGE:18==
4
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Organic Rankine cycle
In the present study, the waste heat recovery is to be achieved using a simple organic
Rankine cycle module. This chapter goes over the basic principles of the cycle, its
potential for waste heat recovery in maritime applications, as well as the candidates
for working fluid.
2.1
Principle
The Rankine cycle extracts heat from a heat source and converts it into electricity
using a steam turbine. Its scheme and its (T,s) diagram are represented on Figure
2.1. It should be understood that the working fluid, commonly steam, follows a closed
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.1: The Rankine cycle scheme (left) and (T,s) diagram (right)
loop. Starting in Point 1 of the Figure, its pressure is increased by the pump. As
the working fluid is in the liquid phase, the pumping work is relatively small. It then
enters the evaporator at Point 2. At constant pressure conditions, the heat source
transfers enough energy in the evaporator to induce the phase-change of the working
fluid, until it becomes vapour in Point 3. It is then expanded through a turbine, thus
generating power. The low pressure, wet vapour then enters the condenser in Point
4, where it is brought back to a state of saturated liquid using a cold source.
==PAGE:20==
6
2 Organic Rankine cycle
To further increase the conversion efficiency, a common configuration is to add a
heat exchanger between the turbine and the condenser, as represented on Figure 2.2.
This allows preheating the fluid before entering the evaporator by using the low-grade
Figure 2.2: The regenerated ORC
heat remaining after the expansion. Naturally, this also increases the overall cost and
complexity of the system.
In conventional steam turbine power systems, the heat source usually comes from
nuclear fission, or from the combustion of fossil fuels in a boiler e.g. coal, natural gas
and oil. Concentrated solar power is also a more recent potential heat source. The
cold source usually corresponds to a large water body, with a cooling tower. The
Rankine cycle can also be used in waste heat recovery, using the dissipated heat, e.g.
exhaust gases, as the heat source. However, although it is a relatively mature power
generation technology, the use of the Rankine cycle with steam as the working fluid
(steam Rankine cycle, SRC) is mostly limited to high temperature heat sources, i.e.
T>500◦C [5, 9]. As it is the case in the present study, exhaust gases are often found
at temperatures below 350◦C.
2.2
Organic Rankine cycle
Instead of steam, the working fluid of the cycle can be chosen to be an organic
fluid with a lower boiling temperature. This allows adding a degree of freedom in
the design phase. This approach, referred to as organic Rankine cycle (ORC), can
thus be easily tailored to suit the application, i.e. power capacity and heat source
temperature [10]. It is therefore suited for low- and medium-grade heat sources such
as biomass combustion, geothermal reservoirs, and waste heat recovery.
Besides,
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Working fluids
7
the thermophysical properties of organic fluids yield more efficient expanders [11],
especially when considering capacities of a few megawatts or less. Moreover, when
comparing to a SRC, the ORC is simple, offers almost unmanned operation and
requires very little maintenance [12, 13].
Although organic fluids also come with
challenges such as purchase cost, flammability and toxicity, the use of ORC as WHR
units is therefore promising for waste heat recovery applications, and a number of
reviews have already been focused on this matter. Lecompte et al. [12] presented
a general review of the different ORC architectures suited for waste heat recovery.
Sprouse and Depcik [13] focused their work on the use of ORC for waste heat recovery
from internal combustion engines, especially trucks. This was also the focus in Wang
et al. [14]. Zhang et al. [9] compared the potential of SRC and ORC in waste heat
power generation systems.
In their review on waste recovery aboard ships, Shu et al.
[15] presented the
ORC as a promising technology for maritime applications. From an economic point
of view, Pili et al. [16] studied the feasibility of integrating ORC modules in different
transportation sectors. They concluded that the maritime sector is a profitable and
suited application, thanks to the low weight and volume of the module compared to
the ship. More recently, Mondejar et al. [5] focused their work on the use of ORC
power systems for maritime applications. They concluded that using ORC to recover
heat from the exhaust gases and cooling water is very promising and estimated the
fuel savings around 10-15%.
2.3
Working fluids
Many organic compounds can be used as working fluids for the Rankine cycle. The
selection of the organic compound has a direct impact on the overall efficiency of the
cycle, and it is therefore a crucial step of the design. Mondejar et al. [5] made a review
of the literature focused on finding the best organic fluids, as well as recommendations
for the future based on regulations schedule.
The first organic compounds suggested in the 80’s for use in ORC were chlorofluoro-
carbons (CFC), such as R114 or R12. However, these fluids are today under consid-
eration for phase-out since 2010. On the other hand, a number of working fluids com-
monly used in ORC systems are hydrofluorocarbons (HFC), such as R134a, R245fa,
and R600a. Although their use is permitted, one should consider that it might be reg-
ulated in the future in countries following the Kyoto protocol, due to the limitations
in fluorinated greenhouse gases emissions.
Finally, the potential working fluids meeting all the environmental regulations can
be separated into three groups:
• HFOs, or hydrofluoroolefins, such as R1233zd, R1234ze(Z) and R1234ye(E).
These compounds present very low ozone depletion potential (ODP) and low
global warming potential (GWP). However, they are expensive and present
a moderate flammability.
Moreover, these present an interest mostly when
==PAGE:22==
8
2 Organic Rankine cycle
considering rather low temperature applications, i.e. heat recovery from jacket
cooling water.
• Hydrocarbons, such as cyclohexane, toluene, benzene, and cyclopentane, are
generally low cost and yield the best energy conversion efficiency. On the other
hand, they are also highly flammable.
• Siloxanes, such as hexamethyldisiloxane (MM), also show a low price, and are
moderately flammable.
2.4
Application in the study
The present study will investigate the feasibility of coupling an ORC to a thermal
energy storage unit. As it was never investigated for waste heat recovery applications,
the focus will be on the thermo-economic analysis of the system in its whole, rather
than on the ORC itself. The simple architecture represented on Figure 2.1 is chosen
for the organic Rankine cycle. The choice of the working fluid will depend on the
TES temperatures and will be aimed at optimizing the storage mass.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Thermal storage
Thermal energy storage (TES) is a key technology when it comes to energy production
and conservation.
It is a clear answer to the crucial issue of the mismatch that
can occur between power demand and supply.
As written by Duffie et al.
[17],
it is currently most widely used within the solar energy sector. Indeed, while the
residential household heating and electricity demand peaks generally occur during
the early morning or late evening, the harvest of solar energy is by far at its efficiency
maximum in the middle of the day. Because both the power demand and supply
are time-dependent, but in a different fashion, supplying a substantial fraction of the
energy need with solar energy is a challenge. Storage of the energy produced during
low-demand periods is required to meet demands during low-supply periods. This
can be done by different means, i.e. mechanical (compressed air, flywheel), chemical
(batteries), or thermal storage. When it comes to waste heat recovery as it is the case
in the present study, the energy to be stored is available as heat, thus the latter shows
a great potential. Several solutions are available when it comes to thermal energy
storage. Firstly, three types of TES are to be distinguished [18].
• Thermo-chemical storage (TCS), for which the energy is stored by inducing a
reversible chemical reaction.
• Latent heat thermal storage (LHTS), which is based on the specific latent heat
hL, the heat being stored by inducing the change of phase of the medium,
referred to as a phase change material (PCM).
• Sensible heat storage (SHS), which relies on the specific heat capacity cp of the
storage medium, as the heat is stored by increasing its temperature.
3.1
Thermo-chemical storage (TCS)
In a chemical reaction, the variation of enthalpy of the substances between the ini-
tial and final states is referred to as the heat of reaction. According to Mehling et
al. [19], any chemical reaction presenting a high heat of reaction (endothermic or
exothermic) is a good candidate for thermal storage, provided that the reverse reac-
tion allows releasing the stored heat. One possible example is to induce the oxidation
and reduction process of chemicals with oxygen, as it is easily available in the air.
==PAGE:24==
10
3 Thermal storage
As explained by Haider at al. [20], TCS has several advantages, the main one being
that it allows the heat to be stored during a long period of time (i.e. seasonal storage).
It is also flexible compared to the other solutions, as the reaction temperature can
be influenced by the storage pressure. However, the system complexity is a major
drawback, and TCS is still at the early stage of its development and is rather anecdotic
at the moment. It was therefore not further investigated for the present application.
3.2
Latent heat thermal storage (LHTS)
In LHTS, the heat is stored and released thanks to the significant change of enthalpy
that occurs when inducing the change of phase of a material. This is done using a
heat transfer fluid (HTF) flowing from the heat source to the PCM, and from the
PCM to the load. The transfer of heat from the HTF towards the PCM is referred
to as charging, whereas discharging is the inverse process.
3.2.1
Principle and process
In theory, three types of phase-change zones are available to store heat, i.e. solid-solid,
solid-liquid, and liquid-vapor, as represented on Figure 3.1 [21]. However, as explained
Figure 3.1: Temperature-time diagram for the heating of a medium [21]
by Mehling et al. [19], only the solid-liquid phase-change really presents a potential
for large-scale thermal storage. Indeed, the solid-solid phase-change only offers a low
latent heat, thus limiting its storage capacity. On the other hand, although the liquid-
vapor phase-change does have a significant latent heat, the large volume change caused
by the evaporation process makes this type of phase-change problematic for heat
storage. The solid-liquid phase-change induces a small volume variation (usually less
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Latent heat thermal storage (LHTS)
11
than 10%), while presenting a large latent heat of fusion, and will thus be considered
in the following sections.
The latent heat storage process for this case is represented in blue on Figure 3.2
[19]. It should be underlined that during the phase-change, assuming the pressure
Figure 3.2: Heat storage as latent heat for the case of solid-liquid phase-change [19]
inside the container does not change thanks to the low volume variation, the storage
medium is kept constant at the phase-change temperature Tpc. This is one of the
main advantages of LHTS compared to SHS, represented in dotted lines on Figure
3.2 with the same specific heat cp. In order to store heat, sensible storage requires to
increase significantly the medium temperature. The heat stored during melting ∆Q
is equal to the enthalpy difference ∆H:
∆Qlatent = ∆H = m × hL
(3.1)
where m is the mass of storage medium, and hL is its phase-change enthalpy, its heat
of fusion in the case of solid-liquid phase-change. Heat transferred below or further
the complete melting of the medium will result in sensible storage, the heat stored
during this phase being then expressed as function of the specific heat capacity of the
medium cp and the temperature variation ∆T:
∆Qsensible = m ×
∫T2
T1
cp(T) × dT
(3.2)
Considering a latent heat storage process occurring with a temperature variation of
∆T = T2−T1 and represented in blue on Figure 3.2, the total stored heat is expressed
==PAGE:26==
12
3 Thermal storage
as:
∆QLHT S = ∆H = m(∆h1 + ∆h2 + ∆h3)
(3.3)
Where ∆h1 = h2 −h1 and ∆h3 = h5 −h4 correspond to sensible heat, and ∆h2 =
h4 −h2 is latent heat. Assuming a constant specific heat cp,S and cp,L in solid and
liquid state respectively:
∆QLHT S = m(cp,S(Tpc −T1) + hL + cp,L(T2 −Tpc))
(3.4)
On the other hand, considering a sensible heat storage process within the same initial
and final temperatures (in red on Figure 3.2) and assuming a constant heat capacity
cp on the temperature range, the total heat stored will be:
∆QSHS = mcp∆T
(3.5)
Based on Figure 3.2 and Eqs. (3.4) and (3.5), the potential of latent heat storage
is clear: for a given medium mass and temperature variation (provided it is around
the melting temperature), the heat stored in latent form will be significantly higher
than the sensible heat, as the specific heat is smaller than the heat of fusion for most
materials.
This higher storage density is the main advantage of LHTS, as it will
require a smaller mass and volume compared to a SHS system.
3.2.2
Phase-change materials (PCMs)
Naturally, the choice of the phase-change material is crucial when designing a latent
heat thermal storage system. As highlighted by Figure 3.2, a phase-change tempera-
ture in the desired operating temperature range is the main requirement, as the goal
is to store most of the energy as latent heat. However, it is not the only charac-
teristic one should consider. As listed by Agyenim et al. [22], Sharma et al. [23]
and Mehling et al. [19], a good PCM candidate should meet a number of additional,
equally important requirements. The selection is therefore governed by the list below:
1. Suitable phase-change temperature Tpc.
2. Large phase change enthalpy hL: the higher the latent heat is, the less mass of
PCM will be required to store a given amount of energy.
3. High specific heat cp, to provide significant additional sensible heat storage
capacity.
4. High thermal conductivity λ, in order to ensure an efficient heat transfer when
storing or releasing the heat.
5. Small volume changes during phase transition. As explained before, extreme
pressure conditions in the storage tank are not desirable. Besides, to avoid con-
tainment issues, the vapor pressure should be small at operating temperature.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Latent heat thermal storage (LHTS)
13
6. Good cycling stability, i.e. a reversible freeze/melt cycle, and no degradation
after a large number of cycles.
7. Good chemical stability, to ensure a long lifetime of the PCM.
8. Compatibility with other materials, i.e. not corrosive for the vessel or surround-
ings.
9. Non-poisonous, non-flammable and non-explosive, to comply with safety re-
quirements. This is especially a concern when considering application on pas-
senger ships.
10. Little to no subcooling, in order to ensure the phase-change in a narrow tem-
perature range. Subcooling is a phenomenon which causes a liquefied material
to start crystallizing after its theoretical melting point, i.e. at a temperature
below the phase-change temperature, as illustrated on Figure 3.3 [19].
Figure 3.3: Schematic temperature change during heating (melting) and cooling (so-
lidification) of a PCM with subcooling [19]
11. Finally, the PCM should also be cheap and available in large amounts.
Among this multitude of selection criteria, it should be understood that for a given
application, it is likely that there will not be a perfect material matching all the re-
quirements. A balance is to be struck between them, and solutions are often available
within several classes of materials. As reviewed by Sharma et al. [23, 24], Zalba et al.
[25], and Farid et al. [26], materials that have been studied for the last 50 years for
their potential as PCMs are hydrated salts, paraffin waxes, fatty acids and eutectics of
organic and non-organic compounds. Figure 3.4 shows their classification. It should
be added that water, although it does not belong to this classification, was actually
the first material used as PCM, and is still commonly applied in cooling storage.
Paraffins are the most widely commercialized class of organic PCM, due to their
availability over a large temperature range. These saturated hydrocarbons all show
similar properties, and generally have a high latent heat, good cycling and chemical
==PAGE:28==
14
3 Thermal storage
Figure 3.4: Classification of latent heat storage materials
stability, and show little subcooling. Although they are more expensive than salt
hydrates, they can also be found at a reasonable price. The main drawback of paraffins
is their low thermal conductivity in the solid state, which makes the heat transfer
inefficient during freezing.
Fatty acids are of the form CH3(CH2)2nCOOH. They show similar properties to
paraffins, with a higher heat of fusion and a sharper phase transformation. However,
this comes with a high cost, around 2 or 3 times higher than the paraffins.
Salt hydrates are the oldest and most investigated types of PCM. They consist of
salt and water combined in a crystalline matrix. Their high density coupled to a high
latent heat give them a high storage capacity. Besides, their thermal conductivity is
close to that of water, and their price is generally low. The major issue with such
substances is that segregation between salt and water can occur, thus they do not
show a good cycling stability. They can also show significant subcooling.
Eutectics are minimum-melting compositions of two or more components, which
form a mixture of the components crystals during crystallization. Their main advan-
tage is that they show no segregation.
As highlighted by Agyenim et al. [22] and Mehling et al. [19], the vast majority
of the PCMs currently commercially available belong to the low temperature range,
i.e. 0◦C to 100◦C, as it is suitable for domestic heating/cooling applications. Table
3.1 gathers the current companies which supply PCMs along with characteristics of
their products. It should here be underlined that the PlusICE - H product line
of EPS Ltd is, according to their website, a ”relatively new addition to the PCM
Products range and as such the data for all the PCMs is incomplete” [27]. Except
for these products, no PCMs commercially available belong to the high temperature
range which is the scope of this project. Even though many materials have been
investigated for such applications, there has been no market yet.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Latent heat thermal storage (LHTS)
15
Table 3.1: Overview of the PCM suppliers and products
Company
Line
Type
Tpc [◦C]
hL [kJ/kg]
Products
RubiTHERM
RT
Organics
-9 - 90
150 - 250
43
SP
Salts
-48 - 90
150 - 300
21
Cristopia
-
Salts
-33 - 27
140 - 150
12
TEAP
-
Salts,
eutectics
-50 - 90
100 - 300
27
CLIMATOR
-
Salts
-20 - 70
140 - 289
11
EPS Ltd
H
Salts
100 - 800
100 - 300
40
S
Salts
7 - 100
150 - 200
22
A
Fatty acids
2 - 160
150 - 200
30
E
Eutectics
-114 - 0
100 - 330
27
3.2.3
PCM containers
Once the PCM has been selected based on the criteria mentioned previously, the
next crucial step is the design of the PCM container, i.e. its geometric and thermal
parameters. As reviewed by Regin et al. [21], three main types of storage are available:
bulk storage in heat exchangers, macroencapsulation, or microencapsulation.
Bulk storage in heat exchangers
Bulk storage in heat exchangers is a simple and cheap solution, as it relies on similar
systems as conventional heat exchangers. As shown on Figure 3.5, the containers are
generally cylindrical or rectangular, the most common geometry being the cylinder,
as it is found widely in engineering systems. Regarding cylindrical containers, three
Figure 3.5: Commonly used PCM container geometries [22]
configurations are to be distinguished.
==PAGE:30==
16
3 Thermal storage
• The pipe model, for which the PCM fills the shell, and the heat transfer fluid
(HTF) flows through one single tube.
• The cylinder model, in which the HTF flows through the shell, and the PCM
fills the tube.
• The shell and tube model, widely used in engineering systems, in which the
PCM fills the shell and the HTF flows through several tubes. This configuration
accounts for 70% of the cases [22].
Comparing the three configurations, the pipe model performs better than the cylinder
model, i.e. it generally shows a shorter melting time. This is due to the fact that the
thicker the PCM mass, the longer its melting time. Agyenim et al. [28] conducted
an experimental study using a PCM called erythritol with a melting temperature
of 117◦C. They compared the melting times of the PCM when stored in a shell-
and-tube heat exchanger, and a pipe model. Study showed that the shell and tube
system allows the heat transfer to be dominated by convection, whereas conduction
is predominant in the other configurations. The authors recorded that in the case of
the shell-and-tube system, the complete melting occurred within 5 hours, compared
to 8 hours with the pipe model.
However, as PCMs generally have a higher storage density than other materials,
and due to their low thermal conductivity, bulk storage in heat exchangers only allows
a poor heat transfer rate. A common approach to enhance the transfer is to use fins
on the tube to increase the transfer area or add a graphite matrix within the pipes.
Moreover, many PCMs, such as salt hydrates, show a poor cycling stability when
stored in large quantities as they tend to segregate.
Macroencapsulation
To ensure good stability of the PCM, and to improve the heat transfer rate with the
HTF, the PCM can often be stored in macroscopic containers of several milliliters up
to several liters. These capsules are generally containers or bags made of metal or
plastic. Examples of encapsulation systems can be seen on Figure 3.6. This system
(a) Metal spherical capsules
(b) Plastic container
Figure 3.6: Examples of PCM encapsulation ([22], [27])
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Latent heat thermal storage (LHTS)
17
configuration is referred to as packed bed storage, and consists in placing the capsules
inside a larger tank, in which the HTF flows. The common approach uses spherical
capsules inside a large cylindrical tank, as represented on Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: The packed-bed system configuration [21]
Microencapsulation
Microencapsulation is similar to macroencapsulation, the difference being the size of
the containers. Indeed, in this case, the PCM is stored in shells of 1 µm to 1000 µm
of diameter. This allows further increasing the surface to volume ratio of the capsules
as well as improving the cycling stability [19]. However, it can also increase the risk
of subcooling, and the encapsulation is a complex process.
3.2.4
Related applications
There are many different solutions and applications when considering PCMs.
As
was previously underlined, coupling an ORC to a TES on board a ship was never
investigated. However, several applications of PCM storage were found within the
scope of the study, i.e. association with ORC and/or waste heat recovery systems.
Applications within the solar sector
As previously mentioned, thermal storage is most widely used within the solar sector.
A common application of PCM storage is to use directly the heat stored. Tarwidi et
al. [29] proposed a design for a solar cooker using PCM. Based on the simulation,
Erythtritol can be used to cook 10 kg of water until boiling within 3.5 hours. Fath
==PAGE:32==
18
3 Thermal storage
[30] also proposed the design configuration of a solair air heater with a built-in PCM
storage using paraffin wax.
Several studies investigated the possibility of coupling a solar ORC to a PCM stor-
age. Most proposed applications were within the 100 - 170◦C temperature range [31–
37], for which Erythritol [31, 33, 34], magnesium chloride hexahydrate MgCl2·6H2O
[31, 34] and A164 [32, 36] appear as promising candidates. Studies conclude that cou-
pling PCM storage to solar ORC plants allows extending the operation time during
the night, as up to 80% [32, 33]. Another approach is to use the storage to smooth
the fluctuations of the heat source during daytime, to allow operating the ORC at
its design conditions [31, 34, 35]. Some studies were also aimed at analyzing the
influence of several parameters based on a simulation framework, such as mass flows
and temperature [34, 36, 37]. The proposed configurations were mostly encapsulated
PCMs [33, 36, 37] or shell and tube HEX [32].
Applications in waste heat recovery (WHR)
Another suggested area of application for PCM storage is waste heat recovery systems.
Bilodeau [38] developed a system to reduce trucks idling for overnight heating. Using
a latent heat storage unit, the waste heat from the exhaust gases is stored when
driving. The system can then supply heating of the driver’s sleeper cab during the
night without the need for the engine to be operated. Kauranen et al. [39] proposed a
system storing the waste heat from a delivery vehicle. Due to the frequent idling and
low average speed, the Diesel engine tends to run cold, thus increasing the pollutant
emissions. The tested thermal storage, using 4 kg of a salt hydrate, allowed preheating
the engine during cold start and maintaining its temperature above 70◦C, even in
subzero temperatures. In both these applications, LHTS was preferred to SHS due
to its higher storage density.
Pandiyarajan et al.
[40] also experimented with a
system using LHTS to store waste heat of the exhaust from a Diesel engine. Using
encapsulated paraffin, 10 to 15% of the fuel power could be stored at 85◦C.
On a larger scale, Dal Magro et al. [41] investigated the impact of retrofitting
a PCM storage in an existing WHR system using an ORC installed downstream of
a steel billet reheating furnace. The idea was to smooth the severe fluctuations of
the heat source mass flow in order to allow an optimal operation of the ORC unit.
The storage configuration was a shell and tube HEX. Simulations showed that im-
plementing this system allowed the thermal efficiency to rise from 15.5% to 16.4%.
Due to the very high temperatures involved, the PCM chosen was an eutectic alloy
of aluminium and silicium, with a melting temperature of 576◦C. On the other hand,
Soda and Beyene [42] tested experimentally several PCMs for waste heat recovery
of low-grade thermal energy using ORC, i.e. below 90◦C. Results showed that salt
hydrates quickly go under irreparable degradation if exposed to air. Even encapsu-
lated in air tight vessels, samples degraded after a couple of months. Waxes showed
a good long-term stability. Authors concluded that combining waxes with graphite
could allow solving their low thermal conductivity, although it would increase their
cost.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Sensible heat storage
19
3.2.5
Challenges of PCM storage
Thanks to their high storage density and isotherm heat storage, phase-change ma-
terials have an undeniable potential for thermal energy storage.
However, many
challenges are yet to be faced before they can be considered in the scope of this study.
Indeed, the vast majority of the PCMs commercially available present a melting tem-
perature well below the considered range (250 - 350◦C). Moreover, issues associated
to subcooling, segregation, and cycling stability over their lifetime are not compatible
with an industrial application, especially on board a large capacity passenger ship.
Besides the generally low thermal conductivity of PCMs, the heat transfer is also a
crucial issue during melting. Indeed, during the phase change, a moving interface
is formed between liquid and solid state. This causes the heat transfer rate to vary
as function of the thickness of both layers. The worst case is during discharging the
LHTS system, as a solid layer is formed close to the heat transfer surface, thus de-
teriorating the heat transfer rate. Their unacceptably low thermal conductivity also
requires the use of costly enhancement techniques, such as finned heat exchangers, or
encapsulation. Adding this to the relatively high cost of the materials (between 1 and
10 e/kg [19]) due to the still limited market, the economic potential of large-scale
systems is not clear. Finally, the complexity of the heat transfer makes the modelling
of such systems a time-consuming process. Therefore, the decision was made to focus
the present study on sensible heat storage, presented in details hereafter.
3.3
Sensible heat storage
As explained above, sensible heat storage (SHS) is the most simple approach to ther-
mal energy storage. Storing of the heat, referred to as the charging of the TES, is
done by transferring it to a storage medium, liquid or solid, thus rising its temper-
ature. Then, the discharge is the inverse process, i.e. the storage medium releases
heat towards the load, thus decreasing its temperature.
3.3.1
Types of systems
Sensible heat can be stored in several ways, i.e. passive or active, and direct or indirect,
as shown on Figure 3.8. Active systems refer to concepts where the storage material
circulates through a heat exchanger, whereas in passive systems the storage medium is
not transported [20, 43]. Passive systems are generally solid storage systems. Active
systems are also classified into direct or indirect systems. In a direct system, the
storage material is also used as heat transfer fluid, whereas indirect systems use a
second medium to transfer the heat.
As advanced by Haider et al. [20], passive systems, also referred to as regenerators,
have the benefits of simplicity, and the use of an often low-cost storage material.
However, the HTF temperature decreases during discharging as the storage material
cools down [43]. They also require the addition of a heat exchanger between HTF
==PAGE:34==
20
3 Thermal storage
Figure 3.8: Classification of different sensible storage concepts [43]
and storage material, between which the heat transfer is often rather low. For these
reasons, active storage systems are commonly chosen in solar power plants, and the
present paper will focus solely on active sensible heat storage.
3.3.2
Storage materials
As the principle of SHS is to store energy by raising the temperature of the medium,
a high specific heat capacity is the main requirement for a good storage material
candidate. Other criteria include:
• A long-term stability under thermal cycling.
• Compatibility with containment materials.
• High thermal conductance, to allow a high rate of charge and discharge.
• Low cost.
Sensible heat storage can be divided in two types of materials: liquid or solid media
storage.
Solid media storage
Naturally, solid media are used in passive systems, along with a HTF. Possible materi-
als are rocks, metals, concrete, sand, bricks. Table 3.2 gathers the properties of some
common solid TES materials [18]. Solid materials are generally low-cost compared to
liquid storage media. Besides, they cause no issues related to leaks or vapor pressure.
However, they generally have a rather low specific heat capacity. Moreover, the
heat transfer rate with the HTF is often poor, due to their low thermal conductivity.
It should be precised that this is not an issue for metals, although these generally
come with a high cost.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Sensible heat storage
21
Table 3.2: Properties at 20◦C of common solid TES materials
Material
ρ [kg/m3]
cp [J/(kg.K)]
Vol. capacity
[MJ/(m3K)]
Clay
1458
879
1.28
Brick
1800
837
1.51
Sandstone
2200
712
1.57
Concrete
2000
880
1.76
Aluminium
2710
896
2.43
Iron
7900
452
3.57
Steel
7840
465
3.68
Liquid storage media
liquid storage media are commonly used in active systems, either direct or indirect.
Possible candidates include water, oils, and molten salts. Table 3.3 gathers the proper-
ties and range of use of commercially available liquid TES materials. The temperature
range Trange refers to conditions with a vapor pressure below atmospheric pressure,
i.e. not requiring pressurization of the storage vessel. Molten salts refer to molten
Table 3.3: Average thermal properties of liquid storage media candidates
Material
ρ [kg/m3]
cp [J/(kg.K)]
λ [W/(m.K)]
Trange [◦C]
Water
1000
4182
0.591
25 - 95
Thermal oils
950
1900
0.11
0 - 350
Molten salts
2000
1600
0.60
250 - 800
mixtures of inorganic salts. Their main advantage is their low vapor pressure at very
high temperatures (up to 800◦C for some materials), which makes them interesting
for solar plant applications, such as in the Solar Tres project [44]. However, they are
highly corrosive [45], and their high melting temperature (above 250◦C) is an issue
when considering medium temperature (100 - 300◦C) applications.
At low temperature, water is one of the best candidates for sensible storage. In-
deed, it has a significantly higher specific heat capacity than other materials, and
is cheap and easily available in large amounts. It is naturally the most widely used
storage medium for solar based heating systems [17]. However, above 95◦C, it has a
high vapor pressure and requires pressurization of the storage vessel, which quickly
becomes costly and complex.
Petroleum based oils can be substitutes for water, as they allow to reach higher
temperatures. Although they generally have a heat capacity lower than water (40 -
50 %), they can be used up to 350◦C. The main drawback is their high cost, which
can be found between 5 and 15 e/kg.
==PAGE:36==
22
3 Thermal storage
3.3.3
System configurations
Based on the previous literature review, the choice was made to focus on liquid storage
media as they reach higher specific heat capacities, and do not require the use of an
additional heat exchanger. This means focusing on an active system, as the passive
configuration is only relevant in case of solid media storage.
Next, in the scope of the project, an indirect system configuration does not seem
relevant. Indeed, it shows potential in the solar energy sector, for which the heat is
extracted by solar collectors. In this case, it can be preferable to use a different fluid in
the collectors, to optimize the heat transfer. This was used in the Andasol I [46], using
parabolic trough solar collectors coupled to a two-tank indirect storage with molten
salts. However, this type of configuration involves a supplementary heat exchanger
compared to active direct systems, between the HTF and the storage medium. It
is therefore rarely preferred, as it involves higher investment costs and complexity.
Moreover, as the scope of this study is waste heat recovery, the heat is extracted from
the heat source by a heat exchanger (HEX). Therefore, adding a supplementary loop
between this HEX and the TES system does not present any immediate advantage.
Considering liquid storage media in an active direct system, two configurations
can be found in industrial applications: the two-tanks system, and the stratified tank,
or thermocline storage system.
The two-tanks system
The two-tank system is the most simple configuration. It consists of one cold tank and
one hot tank. During charging, as represented in Figure 3.9a, cold fluid is pumped
from the cold tank, its temperature being increased by the heat source through the
HEX. It is then injected into the hot tank. The process is inverted when discharging
(Figure 3.9b), with the hot fluid releasing heat towards the load.
Such a system is used for instance in the Solar Tres project [44] represented in
Figure 3.10, using a central receiver system solar power plant with molten salt as
heat transfer fluid and storage. The main disadvantage of this type of storage is the
need to use two tanks, thus increased costs. Moreover, the total storage volume is
twice larger than what is really necessary, as only half of the volume is occupied by
storage fluid. However, storing separately the cold and hot fluid make such a concept
a simple and low-risk approach [43].
Thermocline storage
The single tank system, also referred to as thermocline storage, relies on the thermal
stratification inside the tank and allows storing both the hot and cold fluid in the
same vessel. The hot fluid (in red on Figure 3.11) is stored in the upper part of
the tank, whereas the cold fluid is at the bottom (in blue on Figure 3.11).
This
natural stratification is maintained because of density differences between hot and
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Sensible heat storage
23
(a) Charging
(b) Discharging
Figure 3.9: Charging and discharging of the two-tanks system
cold fluid [47]. They are separated by a region of high temperature transient called
the thermocline, represented in yellow on Figure 3.11.
During charging (Figure 3.11a), the cold fluid is pumped from the bottom outlet,
to the top inlet of the tank, after receiving heat from the heat source. The discharge
of the tank consists of inverting the process, with the hot fluid pumped from the
top releasing heat to the load before the bottom inlet (Figure 3.11b). This type of
storage is usually used in combined heat and power (CHP) plants to directly store
the heat produced. The main advantage is the reduced investment costs compared
to the two-tanks system, as the storage volume is sized for the requirement.
However, mixing in the tank and thermal conductivity between the hot and cold
regions tend to deteriorate the thermocline, and keeping the cold and hot fluids
separated is a challenge. In the case of large-scale storage (such as solar power plants
of several MW), in order to help the stratification and reduce the costs, it is also
possible to use a dual media stratified storage system. The configuration is then a
passive system, using a cheap filler material inside the storage tank to store most of
the heat, the HTF flowing directly inside the tank to transfer the heat to the solid.
This was done for example in the Solar One plant, using oil and a tank filled with
rocks and sand [48].
==PAGE:38==
24
3 Thermal storage
Figure 3.10: The SolarTres power plant overview [44]
(a) Charging
(b) Discharging
Figure 3.11: Charging (left) and discharging (right) of the single tank system
3.3.4
Related applications
As mentioned above, sensible heat storage is widely investigated for its use in heating
systems, both solar and conventional. Studies showed that installing a sensible TES
can allow increasing the flexibility and operation time of the heating supply [49–51],
thus increasing the return on investment [52, 53]. Stratification yields further decrease
of the payback time [54] and is a major area of study [51, 55, 56]. Moreover, solutions
combining TES with ORC and/or WHR systems are also intensely researched.
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Conclusions
25
Coupling with ORC
Several projects investigated the association of sensible TES with an ORC power
plant, mostly powered by solar energy [57–59]. In these cases, the thermal oil flowing
in the solar collectors was also used as storage fluid in a stratified tank. Thermal
storage allowed to operate the ORC at its rate power, and acted as a buffer for the
variations in the solar power flow. Iora et al. [60] also analyzed the dynamic response
of a biomass ORC plant to a quick increase in the demand, from 30 to 100% of the
capacity. Implementing a dual-media storage using thermal oil and steel pipes allowed
to match the rise in the demand and operate the ORC at 100% load. For a power
plant of 1 MW, the total mass of storage was of 15 tons.
Waste heat recovery systems
Sensible thermal storage is a promising technology to store waste heat. Shelar and
Kulkarni [61] proposed an off-grid diesel engine-based trigeneration plant using a
thermal storage to supply heating, cooling and power demand. The jacket cooling
water is heated up by the exhaust gases and stored in the tank. It is then used to
supply the heating load and an absorption chiller. This allows the system to adapt
to various cooling and heating loads.
Thermal storage of waste heat was also investigated for use on board ships. As
cited before, the passenger vessel Viking Grace [8] is equipped with two water tanks,
heated up by the exhaust gases waste heat.
The storage is then used to supply
a fraction of the heat load during harbour stays, thus decreasing the boilers fuel
consumption.
Moreover, Baldi et al.
[62] conducted a preliminary study on the
application of thermal storage to merchant ships. Study showed that installing a
storage tank of 1000 m3 with thermal oil could reduce the fuel consumption from the
boilers by 80%.
3.4
Conclusions
The literature review revealed that latent heat thermal storage, although being very
promising thanks to its isotherm, high density storage, also raises significant issues.
The longevity and stability of the phase-change materials is heavily uncertain, and
most studies were focused on a low temperature range. Therefore, the present study
will focus the analysis on sensible heat storage. Using a liquid medium such as water or
thermal oil seems to offer a reliable and simple solution, although the storage density
is lower than with LHTS. Moreover, two storage configurations can be considered:
the two-tanks system, and the thermocline storage.
==PAGE:40==
26
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Case study
The project focuses on two ship routes of the company Fjordline, corresponding to
existing routes in the North Sea and sailed by the same type of ship. The routes
are characterized by the duration of their harbour stays and sailing phases.
The
considered ship is equipped with 2 shaftlines. On each shaftline are installed two
Wärtsilä L46DF engines, one with 6, the other with 7 cylinders. This yields a total
maximum power output of 29770 kW. All the engines are fuelled with liquefied natural
gas (LNG), i.e. predominantly methane (CH4). The gas is ignited by injecting a small
amount of pilot diesel fuel. In order to supply all the cabins and on-board services,
the ship requires 1.0 MW of electric power, both sailing and during harbour stays.
4.1
Ship routes
As provided by Fjorldine, 4 types of regimes can occur during a sailing route:
• Sailing with 4 engines at high load: this corresponds to the highest power output
for the ship. Both 7L46DF and both 6L46DF are running at high load, i.e. at
85 % of their maximum continuous rating (MCR).
• Sailing with 2 engines at high load, for an intermediary power output. In this
case, only the 7 cylinders engines are running, i.e. one 7L46DF on each shaftfline.
Again, high load refers to 85% of the maximum load.
• Sailing with 2 engines at low load, corresponding to very low power outputs, i.e.
manoeuvring in harbour or specific areas. Only the 7L46DF are being operated,
at 20% of their MCR.
• Harbour stay: all the 4 engines are shut down.
When sailing, the ORC unit can be operated depending on the waste heat available.
During harbour stays, the TES should provide enough heat to meet all of the electric
demand with the ORC. One exception is for the Route 1, which includes a long period
of harbour stay of 560 minutes, or 9 hours. In this case, shore power is used to supply
electricity, and the TES should not be operated. The number of engines Nengines
and the corresponding engine load are represented as function of time for Routes 1
and 2 on Figure 4.1 and 4.2 respectively.
As previously mentioned, Route 1 includes
==PAGE:42==
28
4 Case study
Figure 4.1: Number of engines and operating load during Route 1
a long period of shore power which was not represented on Figure 4.1. The data
corresponding to these routes can also be found in Table 4.1. Several observations
Table 4.1: Phases of sailing/harbour stay for both routes
Route 1
Route 2
Harbour
Sailing
Engines
Load
Harbour
Sailing
Engines
Load
560
Shore power
60
20
2
Low
240
4
High
70
60
150
2
High
240
4
High
60
90
150
2
High
150
2
High
50
60
150
2
High
150
2
High
40
50
150
2
High
150
2
High
20
40
20
2
Low
150
2
High
can be made.
1. At the beginning and end of Route 1, two short (20 min.) periods of low loads
can be observed. These correspond to manoeuvring in harbour. It is expected
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Heat sources
29
Figure 4.2: Number of engines and operating load during Route 2
by Fjordline that the auxiliary generators will produce the electric power during
these periods. The design of the system will therefore be conducted based solely
on the high load case.
2. In Route 1, most of the sailing is done within the same regime of engine load,
i.e. 2 engines at high load. On the other hand, Route 2 presents two significant
phases with 4 engines, and the rest with 2. It should then be understood that
the heat exchangers (HEX) of the WHR unit will be operated at their design
point for the whole Route 1, whereas Route 2 requires that they operate far
from their design conditions for almost half of the sailing duration.
3. Although it seems more challenging due to the off-design operation of the HEX,
Route 2 also offers more energy to be stored, thanks to the periods running
with 4 engines.
4.2
Heat sources
Four streams can be exploited for WHR: exhaust gases, cooling water, lubricating
oil, and scavenge air. The heat balance of a common Diesel engine is represented by
the Sankey diagram on Figure 4.3. It should be precised that heat radiation is not
a proper stream, as it occurs through all the surfaces of the engine. As underlined
by Mondejar et al. [5], the lubricating oil is not a promising heat source because it
is available at a too low temperature (i.e. 40◦C). Besides, the scavenge air, although
representing a significant amount of energy, depends greatly on the engine load, and
==PAGE:44==
30
4 Case study
Figure 4.3: Sankey diagram of a common diesel engine [63]
thus it does not show a great potential for WHR either. Therefore, only the exhaust
gases and cooling water are to be investigated as potential heat sources.
4.2.1
Jacket cooling water
Cooling circuits
As given in the Wärstilä 46DF Product guide [64], the cooling water is divided into
two separate circuits, i.e. the high temperature (HT) and the low temperature (LT)
circuit.
The HT-circuit is used to first cool down the engine cylinders liners and
heads, as well as the first stage of the charge air cooler. The LT-water is used to cool
down the lubrication oil and the second stage of the charge air. A similar cooling
system is further described by Soffiato et al. [65].
Table 4.2 gathers the temperatures involved in both cooling circuits at 100% load.
These temperatures are the same for both 6 cylinders and 7 cylinders engines. As
Table 4.2: Temperatures of the water cooling circuits [64]
HT-circuit
Temperature before cylinders [◦C]
74
Temperature after cylinders [◦C]
91
LT-circuit
Temperature before engine, max. [◦C]
38
Temperature before engine, min. [◦C]
25
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Heat sources
31
the temperature range of the LT-cooling circuit is below 38◦C, it is not relevant for
the application: too low temperatures discourage the use of WHR. However, the
water leaves the HT water circuit at 91◦C, which makes it a potential heat source,
depending on the temperatures involved in the TES.
Cooling water mass flow
Properly describing the cooling water as a heat source in the modelling framework
requires to define its mass flow. The product guide [64] gives the heat balance ˙Q
of the HT-cooling system. Knowing the inlet and outlet temperatures of the water
(Tin,HT and Tout,HT respectively), its mass flow can then obtained by a simple energy
balance:
˙mw =
˙Q
cp,w(Tout,HT −Tin,HT )
(4.1)
However, the heat balance is only given at 100% of the engine load. In order to obtain
the cooling water mass flow as a function of the engine load, data from a MAN engine
(in red on Figure 4.4) with similar power output [66] was used, scaled to fit the value
of the Wärtsilä at 100% load. The procedure was applied for both the 6 cylinders and
the 7 cylinders engines, shown on Figure 4.4 in green and blue respectively. For any
Figure 4.4: The cooling water mass flow obtained as function of the load
given load in the operational range of 20% - 100%, it is then possible to interpolate
between the two closest points to obtain the cooling water mass flow for one engine.
Results for 85% load are gathered in Table 4.3.
==PAGE:46==
32
4 Case study
Table 4.3: Cooling water mass flow and temperature obtained at 85% load
6L46DF
7L46DF
Mass flow [kg/s]
21.2
24.7
Temperature after cylinders[◦C]
91
4.2.2
Exhaust gases
The mass flow of the exhaust gases varies depending on the engines used, as well as
the engine load. Besides, the outlet temperature is the same for both the 6 cylinders
and 7 cylinders engine, and only depends on the load. Table 4.4 gathers the exhaust
gases temperatures and mass flows for both engines and for two loads [64]: 100%
and 75%. In the case considered, the high load corresponds to 85% of the maximum
Table 4.4: Temperatures and mass flows of the exhaust gases for both engines and
for two given engine loads [64]
6L46DF
7L46DF
Flow at 100% load [kg/s]
11.3
13.2
Flow at 75% load [kg/s]
8.7
10.2
Temp. after turbocharger at 100% load [◦C]
354
Temp. after turbocharger at 75% load [◦C]
373
output. As it lies between the two loads for which the temperature and mass flow are
given, a linear interpolation allows defining the desired point. Results are gathered
in Table 4.5.
Table 4.5: Exhaust mass flow and temperature interpolated at 85% load
6L46DF
7L46DF
Mass flow [kg/s]
9.74
11.4
Temperature after turbocharger[◦C]
365
4.2.3
Heat sources during ship routes
As previously mentioned, each sailing phase is associated to a number of engines
operating at a given load. The mass flow and temperature of the streams available for
heat recovery are then computed based on results from Tables 4.3 and 4.5. Therefore,
for each sailing phase, both heat sources are defined by constant temperature and
mass flow, as gathered in Table 4.6 and 4.7.
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Overview of the system
33
Table 4.6: Heat sources stream and temperature for Route 1
Harbour
Sailing
Exhaust gases
Cooling water
˙m [kg/s]
T [◦C]
˙m [kg/s]
T [◦C]
560
Shore power
Shore power
20
Low load
Low load
70
150
22.8
365
52.1
91
60
150
22.8
365
52.1
91
50
150
22.8
365
52.1
91
40
150
22.8
365
52.1
91
20
20
Low load
Low load
Table 4.7: Heat sources stream and temperature for Route 2
Harbour
Sailing
Exhaust gases
Cooling water
˙m [kg/s]
T [◦C]
˙m [kg/s]
T [◦C]
60
240
42.3
365
96.8
91
60
240
42.3
365
96.8
91
90
150
22.8
365
52.1
91
60
150
22.8
365
52.1
91
50
150
22.8
365
52.1
91
40
150
22.8
365
52.1
91
4.3
Overview of the system
Based on the conclusions from the literature review, the present study focuses on
two configurations for the thermal storage using liquid media: the thermocline, or
stratified tank, and the two-tanks system. This section details the system’s architec-
ture for both solutions, as well as the control strategy. As represented on Figure 4.5,
the idea is to store the waste heat from the exhaust gases (and cooling water, not
represented on the Figure) in the TES during sailing. Depending on the amount of
energy available, a fraction of this waste heat could also be used directly to supply
==PAGE:48==
34
4 Case study
Figure 4.5: Overview of the system during sailing (left) and harbour stay (right)
the ORC and produce power. During harbour stay, the main engine being shut off,
the TES should provide enough heat to the ORC to supply the whole of the demand.
The first step of the design is to choose the thermal storage fluids to consider
for the analysis. Moreover, the choice of the working fluid for the organic Rankine
cycle is also of major significance. Next, both systems are defined by two working
temperatures, i.e. the cold storage and the hot storage temperatures. Ideally, the
stratified storage tank should be split in two distinct temperature zones at anytime
during the route by the thermocline, the hot zone on top, and the cold zone in the
bottom. In the two-tanks system, this is achieved by the two separate tanks. These
temperatures need to be defined as they will impact the rest of the design.
4.3.1
Thermal storage fluid
Based on the literature review, several liquid media were considered for use as storage.
Table 4.8 gathers the properties and range of use of these fluids [67–70]. As mentioned
Table 4.8: Average thermal properties of liquid storage media considered in the study
Material
ρ [kg/m3]
cp [J/(kg.K)]
λ [W/(m.K)]
Trange [◦C]
Water
1000
4182
0.591
5 - 95
Therminol VP-1
974
1860
0.124
25 - 250
Therminol 66
907
2090
0.1083
0 - 350
Therminol 72
980
1850
0.1260
0 - 260
Therminol 75
953
2050
0.1213
80 - 330
in the previous chapter, the high heat capacity and low cost of water are undeniable
advantages.
On the other hand, thermal oils allow reaching higher temperatures,
which could justify their significant cost and lower heat capacity. Therminol is one of
the main suppliers of thermal oils, and presents a wide range of products, thus making
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Overview of the system
35
it easy to find suitable oils along with their thermophysical properties. Therminol
VP-1 is one of the most commonly used oil in solar power plants.
Its maximal
temperature is the lowest of the 4 oils, and it also causes issues at temperatures
below 25◦C. Therminol 72 offers similar properties, without this lower temperature
limit.
It should here be noted that, although Therminol 75 allows reaching high
temperatures, its slurry point is around 75-80◦C. Therefore, the oil should always
be stored at a temperature above 85◦C to avoid crystallization, which could cause
serious damage in the system. This would induce specific precautions, and should be
taken into account when choosing the storage fluid. Therminol 66 seems to be the
most promising thermal oil, as it allows reaching the highest temperature, and only
crystallizes at 0◦C. Molten salts were not considered due to their very high melting
temperature and corrosiveness, challenging their use on board vessels.
4.3.2
Storage fluid working temperatures
As detailed previously, two heat sources are available to charge the TES: the cooling
water, at Tw = 91◦C, and the exhaust gases, at Tex = 365◦C. As represented on
Figure 4.6, they will be used to heat up the storage fluid from its cold temperature
Tc to its hot temperature Th. This is done using two counter current heat exchangers
in series, referred to as HEX1 and HEX2 respectively, with the cooling water in first
position. The first step of the system design is to define the working temperatures of
Figure 4.6: The heat exchanger network
the storage fluid, i.e. Tc and Th.
The hot temperature
In a heat exchanger, the pinch point is the location where the temperature difference
between the hot and cold fluids is minimal, as represented on Figure 4.7. As the heat
transfer in HEX1 occurs between a liquid (cooling water) and another liquid (the
thermal storage fluid), it is reasonable to assume a minimal pinch-point temperature
of ∆PP1 = 5◦C for the design. This means that the storage fluid should leave HEX1
==PAGE:50==
36
4 Case study
Figure 4.7: The pinch point in a counter current heat exchanger
at an intermediary temperature Tint below Tint,max = Tw −∆PP1 = 86◦C. On the
other hand, HEX2 transfers heat from a gas (the exhaust gases, with similar properties
as air in case of a Diesel engine) to a liquid (the thermal storage fluid). In this case,
a minimal pinch-point temperature of 20◦C is usually assumed, i.e. the storage fluid
maximal temperature Th can not be above Th,max = Tex −∆PP2 = 345◦C. For a
given storage fluid, the hot temperature Th is therefore defined by the minimal value
between:
• The higher limit of its range of use (found in the last column of Table 4.8)
• The maximal temperature allowed by the pinch-point in HEX2, considering the
exhaust gases temperature.
Naturally, the higher this temperature, the higher the efficiency of the ORC, and thus
the lower the required fluid mass flow.
The cold temperature
The cold temperature Tc should correspond to the return temperature of the Rankine
cycle Treturn, i.e. the temperature of the storage fluid at the outlet of the evaporator,
as shown on Figures 3.9 and 3.11. For a given working fluid and heat source (i.e. the
considered storage fluid at its maximal temperature), an optimal configuration of the
ORC yields the maximal output power. This configuration corresponds to a design
discharging mass flow ˙mORC,D of the tank, and a design return temperature of the
ORC. Naturally, if the design return temperature Treturn occurs to be higher than
Tint,max = 86◦C, then the heat exchanger HEX1 will not be able to transfer heat from
the cooling water towards the storage fluid, and will therefore not be implemented in
the system.
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Control strategy
37
4.4
Control strategy
For both configurations, stratified or two-tanks, the control strategy is virtually the
same. As the main objective is to produce power without emissions while in harbour,
the focus is set on the harbour phase. This means that during sailing, the control
strategy should always ensure that the tank is charged enough to supply the ORC
during the next harbour stop. On the other hand, if more energy is available, the
thermal fluid should also feed the ORC during sailing. It is assumed that the electrical
power demand of Preq = 1.0 MW should always be met, both during sailing and
during harbour.
Therefore, using the waste heat recovery unit to produce power
during sailing will also result in decreased fuel consumption and emissions.
4.4.1
Two-tanks system
Figure 4.8 represents the whole system equipped with the 2-tanks thermal storage.
As seen on the bottom loop of the figure, the organic Rankine cycle is fed in the
Figure 4.8: Overview of the system with 2-tanks thermal storage
evaporator (Ev) by the thermal storage fluid, with a mass flow ˙mORC. The upper
loop represents the flow of thermal storage fluid. The full arrows should therefore
==PAGE:52==
38
4 Case study
always be active during harbour, and preferably also during voyage to reduce shaft
power consumption. The upper part of the loop, in dots, is only active during sailing:
it corresponds to the charging of the tank using the heat exchanger network described
previously, with a mass flow ˙mHEX. The last part of the loop, in dashed arrows,
leaving the hot tank and feeding the cold tank with the mass flow ˙mT ES, correspond
to the harbour stay.
Harbour stay
During harbour stay, as represented on Figure 4.9, neither of the heat sources is
available in the heat exchangers, and thus the upper loop is inactive. The hot tank is
discharged of its thermal fluid, which releases heat towards the ORC, thus decreasing
its temperature to the ORC return temperature Treturn, before filling the cold tank.
In order to meet the electrical demand, the mass flow entering the ORC ˙mORC should
Figure 4.9: The 2-tanks system during harbour stay
be constant during the whole duration of the harbour phase ∆tharbour, and equal to
its design mass flow ˙mORC,D. It should then be understood that, at the start of the
harbour phase, the mass of storage fluid in the hot tank required to supply the whole
of the harbour stay is given by:
Mreq = ˙mORC,D × ∆tharbour
(4.2)
This should be ensured by the charging phase, during sailing.
Voyage
Figure 4.10 represents the system during voyage. As established in Chapter 4, each
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Control strategy
39
Figure 4.10: The 2-tanks system during sailing
phase of sailing corresponds to a constant mass flow and temperature for both heat
sources, and thus to a certain amount of heat available ˙Qheat. Depending on this
heat, the mass flow in the heat exchangers ˙mHEX should then be maximized, while
ensuring the temperature of the storage fluid rises from Tc to Th. On the other hand,
the sailing phase should be used to charge the hot tank enough to supply the next
harbour phase, i.e. the hot tank should contain the mass Mreq of Eq. (4.2) after the
sailing duration ∆tsail. The required charging mass flow in the hot tank ˙mreq can
then be computed using the mass contained in the hot tank at the start of the sailing
phases, M0,h:
˙mreq = Mreq −M0,h
∆tsail
(4.3)
From this, several cases are to be considered. The control strategy is represented on
Figure 4.11.
1. If M0,h > Mreq, i.e. the hot tank is charged enough to supply the next harbour
phase:
==PAGE:54==
40
4 Case study
Figure 4.11: The control strategy during voyage
a) If ˙mHEX ≥˙mORC,D, then the available mass flow is higher than required
in the ORC. As there is no need for more power than the electrical demand,
the mass flow can then be split, a fraction going into the ORC, the other
one charging the hot tank:
˙mORC = ˙mORC,D
(4.4)
˙mT ES = ˙mHEX −˙mORC
(4.5)
b) If ˙mHEX < ˙mORC,D, the available mass flow is lower than the design mass
flow of the ORC. As the tank is already charged, this heat can still be sent
to the ORC to supply a fraction of the demand.
˙mORC = ˙mHEX
(4.6)
˙mT ES = 0
(4.7)
2. If M0,h < Mreq, the hot tank needs to be charged with ˙mreq in order to supply
the following harbour stay.
a) If ˙mHEX ≥˙mreq, this means that the amount of waste heat available is
higher than what is required to supply the tank. The ORC can therefore
also be fed.
i. If ˙mHEX −˙mreq ≥˙mORC,D: the heat available can supply both the
ORC and the TES with their required mass flow. Again, as there is
no point in overfeeding the ORC, the extra heat can also be stored in
the hot tank.
˙mT ES = ˙mHEX −˙mORC,D
(4.8)
˙mORC = ˙mORC,D
(4.9)
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Control strategy
41
ii. If ˙mHEX −˙mreq < ˙mORC,D: the tank can be charged to its required
mass flow, and the extra heat can be used to produce power with the
ORC, thus reducing the power shaft demand.
˙mT ES = ˙mreq
(4.10)
˙mORC = ˙mHEX −˙mreq
(4.11)
b) If ˙mHEX < ˙mreq, there is not enough heat to charge the tank as required.
Nevertheless, all the waste heat should be stored in the tank.
˙mT ES = ˙mHEX
(4.12)
˙mORC = 0
(4.13)
To sum up, the main focus is on ensuring that the next phase of harbour stay will be
supplied in energy. At the start of each sailing phase, the amount of heat available
is determined, as well as the amount of heat required. If there is excess heat, it will
be sent to the ORC. In this case, if the excess heat is larger than the requirement for
the ORC, it will be used to charge the tank even more. Naturally, to this should be
added that, if the hot tank is full (which means the cold tank is almost empty, as the
total volume corresponds to twice the required mass), then no more fluid will be sent
towards it:
˙mT ES = 0 kg/s. In this case, all the mass flow is directed towards the
ORC:
˙
mORC = ˙mHEX.
4.4.2
Stratified tank
For the stratified tank, the control strategy is very similar to the two-tanks system.
Figure 4.12 represents the architecture of the system. The main difference with the
two-tanks system is that, as both the hot and cold fluids are stored in the same tank,
the tank’s outlet temperature can change significantly during charging or discharging,
as the thermocline goes up or down in the tank. Figure 4.13 represents the rise of
the thermocline during a phase of discharge.
Therefore, a control is added on the tank outlet temperature: when the ther-
mocline reaches the top of the tank, the outlet temperature decreases significantly
towards Tc. The ORC should not be fed with a cold stream, thus the discharge should
be stopped. Similarly, the charging process is interrupted if the thermocline reaches
the bottom of the tank, as this means the tank is at its maximal capacity.
==PAGE:56==
42
4 Case study
Figure 4.12: Overview of the system with stratified thermal storage
Figure 4.13: The rise of the thermocline when discharging the tank
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5
Modelling framework
In order to compare the performances of both configurations, and to study their
technical and economical feasibility, a simulation tool is required. Firstly, a modelling
framework was developed to simulate the organic Rankine cycle within the Thermal
Energy section of DTU Mechanical Engineering, prior to this study. The focus of the
present thesis being rather more on the coupling with the TES than on the ORC itself,
this model is briefly presented. Then, the models of both storage tank technologies
are presented in details, as well as the methods used to simulate the performance of
the HEX network.
5.1
Organic Rankine cycle
The ORC model of DTU Thermal Energy was developed using Matlab. Several of its
tools were relevant for this study: the ORC optimization routine, and the off design
performance simulation.
5.1.1
Optimization of the cycle
Firstly, for a defined heat source (i.e. fluid properties, mass flow and temperature)
and working fluid, the model designs and optimizes the organic Rankine cycle in order
to maximize its power output. Additional constraints on the model can include boiler
outlet and pinch point temperature, and efficiencies of both the turbine and the pump.
There is also possibility for a recuperator to be added in the ORC configuration, but
it was chosen to focus this study on a simple configuration. Figure 5.1 shows an
overview of the model. The optimization of the cycle is conducted using the artificial
bee colony algorithm, a population based algorithm. The model then gives the outlet
power and outputs several diagrams: the (T, s) diagram of the optimized ORC, and
the (T,Q) diagrams of both the condenser and the boiler. The outlet temperature of
the boiler will be especially relevant for the current application, as it will govern the
minimal temperature of the storage material.
For a given working fluid and heat source, adjusting manually the mass flow of
the heat source in order to obtain the electrical demand (1.0 MW) allows obtaining
the design return temperature of the ORC as well as the design discharging mass flow
˙mORC,D. The procedure is represented on Figure 5.2.
==PAGE:58==
44
5 Modelling framework
Figure 5.1: The ORC optimization: inputs and main outputs.
5.1.2
Choice of the ORC working fluid
As mentioned in Chapter 2, a number of organic compounds are potential working
fluids for the ORC. The performance of the cycle will be greatly affected by the
choice of the working fluid. This will translate into different values of the fluid mass
flow ˙mORC,D required to supply the power demand for each working fluid.
This
parameter is of crucial importance: in order to supply the ORC during a period of
harbour ∆tharbour, the tank will need to contain at least the mass Mreq given by Eq.
(5.1):
Mreq = ˙mORC,D × ∆tharbour
(5.1)
It can be directly concluded that the higher the design mass flow for the ORC ˙mORC,D,
the higher the tank mass will be, and thus the weight and space requirements of the
system. The mass flow should therefore be kept as low as possible. The procedure
described on Figure 5.2 was repeated for several candidates of working fluid, for each
potential storage fluid.
5.1.3
Off design performance
During a route, the inlet conditions of the ORC, i.e. mass flow and temperature of the
storage fluid, are likely to differ from the design point for which it was optimized. This
will cause the overall efficiency of the cycle to decrease, thus impacting the output
power. The performance of the ORC in part load can be computed using the off
design model of the provided framework. Given the inlet mass flow and temperature
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Stratified tank
45
Figure 5.2: Procedure for the ORC design mass flow
in the boiler, the model uses the previously saved optimized configuration and varies
the cycle properties, while fixing the superheating degree at the turbine inlet. It then
gives - among others - the output power and boiler outlet temperature, also referred
to as the ORC return temperature. For each configuration, the performance map
of the Rankine cycle is therefore built using the off design model for a wide range
of values for the inlet temperature of the evaporator Tin,ORC and the fluid mass
flow ˙mORC,D. During the simulation, the ORC output power can be obtained by
interpolation from this map. This also gives the limitations in inlet temperature and
mass flow to ensure a proper function of the ORC. The lower temperature limit is
implemented as explained in Section 4.4 to avoid a too low temperature in the ORC.
As an example, Figure 5.3 represents the outlet power of the ORC for varying inlet
conditions, for Therminol 66. Moreover, a similar map is also built for the return
temperature Treturn, as it also depends on the inlet conditions.
5.2
Stratified tank
The stratified tank, also referred to as thermocline, is the most complex of the two
storage configurations. However, many studies were aimed at modelling the stratifica-
tion inside a tank, and a simple approach can yield a reasonable accuracy. Similarly
with these studies, it is assumed that the tank is a vertical cylinder of volume Vtank.
==PAGE:60==
46
5 Modelling framework
Figure 5.3: The off design performance of the ORC (Therminol 66)
5.2.1
Fundamental equations
The most common way to model a stratified tank is to use a one dimensional (1D)
approach. This is what was done in the TRSNYS software models [71, 72], as well as
in the Simulink open-source library CARNOT [73].
As shown on Figure 5.4, the tank can be discretized in Nslices horizontal slices
of height Hslice =
Htank
Nslices behaving individually as small, fully mixed tanks, as repre-
sented on Figure 5.4. Each slice will represent a layer of uniform temperature inside
the tank. For a given slice i, the inlet temperature is either the temperature of the
above slice i-1, or the bottom slice i+1, depending on the direction of the fluid mass
flow. Both cases are represented on Figure 5.5a and 5.5b respectively. In Figure
5.5a, fluid goes from the top to the bottom of the slice, i.e. it leaves the bottom of
the tank. This corresponds to the charging process previously represented on Figure
3.11a. Similarly, Figure 5.5b corresponds to the discharging process represented on
Figure 3.11b. As temperature is uniform in a given layer, the outlet mass flow of a
slice will naturally be at its temperature Ti.
Assuming the inlet temperature of the tank is known at a time step t, the tem-
perature variation for each slice can be computed by solving the following energy
balance:
mslicecp,f
dTi
dt = ˙Qflow + ˙Qcond + ˙Qloss
(5.2)
On the left side of Eq. 5.2, the variation of the energy contained in the considered
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Stratified tank
47
Figure 5.4: The tank discretization
(a) Charging of the tank
(b) Discharging of the tank
Figure 5.5: Inlet and outlet temperature of a given slice i
slice is function of its mass mslice =
Vtank
Nslices × ρf, heat capacity cp,f and temperature
variation. The thermophysical properties such as density ρf, heat capacity cp,f and
conductivity λf are all functions of the temperature. On the right side, several heat
flows can be identified:
•
˙Qflow = ˙mfcp,f(Tin−Tout) is the heat exchanged due to forced convection of the
storage fluid through the slice. As previously mentioned, the inlet temperature
Tin depends on whether the tank is charging or discharging, whereas the outlet
temperature Tout is the slice temperature Ti. Similarly with [71] and [73], the
fluid mass flow ˙mf is assumed constant on the whole tank, i.e. ˙mf,in = ˙mf,out.
This therm represents the variation of heat due to the difference of energy
contained in the mass flows going in and out of the slice.
•
˙Qcond = λeff Acond
Hslice
× (Ti+1 + Ti−1 −2Ti) is the heat exchanged by conduction
between the slices.
The area of conduction Acond = Afluid + Awall is the
==PAGE:62==
48
5 Modelling framework
sum of the inner subsection of the tank Afluid and of the ring made by its
wall Awall, as represented on Figure 5.4. The effective conductivity λeff =
λwallAwall+λfluidAfluid
Awall+Afluid
is then function of both the fluid and the wall material.
•
˙Qloss = −Utank
Nslices (Ti −Tamb) is the heat dissipated to the outside, with the
coefficient Utank being dependent on the tank insulation, and the ambient tem-
perature Tamb.
The heat balance is represented on Figure 5.6 in the case of charging of the tank.
For discharge, the direction of the forced convection arrows would be the opposite.
Considering a significant mass flow of several kilograms per second, it can be expected
Figure 5.6
that the convection will dominate the heat balance. The thermal conduction degrades
the stratification, and should be kept to its minimum.
At each time step, Eq. 5.2 is computed in a loop on all the slices. The time step is
fixed and chosen in order to avoid numeric diffusion, i.e. to avoid a local temperature
change to be spread too fast to the rest of the tank. To solve this, the volume entering
the slice during a time step ∆t should be equal to the control volume, i.e. the volume
of the slice.
∆t = mslice
˙mf
(5.3)
5.2.2
Heat losses
The tank should be insulated in order to minimize the heat dissipation to the outside.
Heat losses occur mainly through the sides of the tank, but can also be computed
through its top and bottom areas.
The heat losses on the side can be computed
with the heat transfer coefficient Uside [in W/K], based on the concept of thermal
resistance. Then, the dissipated heat for a given slice i will be computed using
˙Qloss,i = −Uside
Nslices
(Ti −Tamb)
(5.4)
As represented on the left side of Figure 5.7, three thermal resistances are to be con-
sidered on the tank’s side: the conduction resistance of the wall Rwall, the conduction
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Stratified tank
49
Figure 5.7: The heat losses through the sides and top of the tank
resistance of the insulation layer Rinsu, and the convection resistance of the outer sur-
face, Rconv. Using the conduction resistance of a cylindrical wall, Rwall and Rinsu
can be expressed using Eqs. (5.5) and (5.6) respectively.
Rwall =
ln
(
Rtank+ewall
Rtank
)
2πλwallHtank
(5.5)
Rinsu =
ln
(
Rtank+ewall+einsu
Rtank+ewall
)
2πλinsuHtank
(5.6)
On the other hand, Eq. (5.7) gives the convection resistance of the outer surface.
Rconv =
1
2π(Rtank + ewall + einsu)Htankhside
(5.7)
Where hside is the heat transfer coefficient of the side, assumed to be hside = 7.69
W/m2K as it is a common value for storage tanks. Then, the overall heat transfer
coefficient is obtained using the total thermal resistance Rtot
Uside =
1
Rtot
(5.8)
Where Rtot is given by the association in series of the three resistances:
Rtot = Rwall + Rinsu + Rconv
(5.9)
On the other hand, the heat losses through the top and bottom are both very similar.
Using the same principle of thermal resistance, the heat transfer coefficient of the top
of the tank can be computed with Eq. (5.10).
Utop = π(Rtank + ewall + einsu)2
einsu,top
λinsu
+
1
htop
(5.10)
==PAGE:64==
50
5 Modelling framework
Where einsu,top and htop = 10 W/m2K are the thickness of insulation and heat transfer
coefficient of the surface at the top of the tank. The heat losses through the bottom
of the tank will be of the same form, using hbot = 5.88 W/m2K. The heat transfer
coefficients of the top and bottom surfaces of the tank are then added to the sides
heat coefficient, giving the overall coefficient Utank.
Utank = Ubot + Uside + Utop
(5.11)
5.2.3
Inlet mixing
Depending on the inlet geometry and mass flow, mixing of the fluid can be expected
to occur in the volume around the inlet. This causes the stratification to degrade
locally, thus impacting the overall temperature distribution and system performance.
Shah et al.
[74] conducted a theoretical and experimental analysis on water jets
entering a storage tank. They ran CFD simulations of three different inlet designs:
pipe inlet, Metro inlet and Plate inlet.
The Metro and Plate inlets are different
baffle plates designed to decrease inlet mixing. As shown on Figure 5.8, a simple
Figure 5.8: CFD simulation of inlet mixing with three different inlets [74]: pipe (1),
Metro (2) and Plate (3). Temperature distribution after 1 minute (left) and 5 minutes
(right) of discharge.
pipe inlet will induce significant mixing of the layers and degrade the stratification.
Baffle plates, especially large, flat plates such as the Plate inlet, offer a solution to
reduce the mixing. To take this phenomenon into account, several approaches can
be used. Nizami [75] used a quasi-1D model with several domains around the inlet
region. Unrau [72] proposed an analytical model taking into account the different
flow regimes in the inlet region. However, the 1D model does not allow to implement
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Stratified tank
51
such solutions. Besides, adding a dimension to the model would increase significantly
its complexity as well as the computation time of the simulations.
As the goal of the present project is focused on the waste heat application rather
than on the accurate modelling of the storage tank, a simple mixing fraction rmixing
can be introduced.
This mixing fraction corresponds to a number of slices Nmix
as represented on Figure 5.9. When charging or discharging the tank, the region
Figure 5.9: Model of the inlet mixing
including these Nmix layers then behaves as one fully mixed tank, i.e. Eq. (5.2)
is solved for all these layers at once, with the mass of fluid being Nmix × mslice.
Even though one could argue this computational artifice will not allow an accurate
modelling of the mixing phenomenon, it is reasonable to assume the installation of
baffle plates around both inlets should decrease the impact of mixing in the real
system.
5.2.4
Stability of the model
As explained by Oliveski et al. [76], without external circulation (i.e. during a phase
of neither charge or discharge of the tank), the tank is submitted to natural convection
only. In this case, Eq. 5.2 results in physically inconsistent results as the 1D model
does not consider buoyancy: the cold fluid should fall towards the bottom of the tank.
Oliveski et al. showed that the approach used by Klein et al. [55] can allow solving
this issue. The procedure is represented on Figure 5.10. At each time step, a check
is made on the temperatures in the tank. If a temperature inversion is found, i.e. a
slice being cooler (blue on the Figure) than the layer below it (red), then these two
layers are mixed to their average temperature (yellow).
==PAGE:66==
52
5 Modelling framework
Figure 5.10: Procedure to solve temperature inversion
5.2.5
Validation of the model
Experimental data
In order to validate the model of the storage tank, its results were compared with
data from experimental studies conducted by Oliveski et al. [76] (referred to Exp. 1
in the following) and Zachar et al. [77] (Exp. 2). The experimental setups consisted
in the charging of a small, vertical, cylindrical water storage tank, initially at ambient
temperature. In both experiments, the tank was equipped with thermocouples along
its height to monitor the temperature distribution along time. Details of the experi-
mental setup can be found in Table 5.1. In Exp.1, details were also provided about
Table 5.1: Conditions for the validating experiments
Parameter
Exp. 1
Exp. 2
Tin [◦C]
39.8
42
Tamb [◦C]
24.5
21.7
Vtank [m3]
0.0790
0.1005
Rtank [m]
0.42
0.4
Htank [m]
0.57
0.8
˙mf [kg/s]
0.01
0.03
the insulation and walls of the tank, as shown on Figure 5.11a. On the other hand, no
insulation was applied on the tank in Exp. 2, in order to visualize the stratification
by injecting dye, as seen on Figure 5.11b. Moreover, a baffle plate was installed in
the tank of Experiment 2, in order to study its impact on inlet mixing.
Comparison with simulating tools
The performance of the model can also be compared with another simulating tool.
The CARNOT simulation program is an an open-source toolbox for the environment
Matlab-Simulink [73]. Although it offers several blocksets for the simulation of ther-
mal storages and few details are given on the simulating methods, they all rely on
the same principles as the model developed in the present study. The most simple
block, called Storage_Type_1, was used with the experimental conditions in order
to compare both models’ performances, as represented on Figure 5.12. This block
does not seem to take into account inlet mixing. Inputs include geometry of the tank,
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Stratified tank
53
(a) Experiment 1 [76]
(b) Experiment 2 [77]
Figure 5.11: The experimental setups
effective conductivity of the walls, as well as heat transfer coefficient on the sides, and
top and bottom covers.
Results
The experimental conditions were implemented in the built-in model, with a dis-
cretization of 100 nodes. To quantify the accuracy of the model, the mean absolute
percentage deviation MAPD was computed using Eq. 5.12:
MAPD = 100% × 1
n
n
∑
i=1
|S(i) −E(i)|
E(i)
(5.12)
Where n is the number of experimental points, and S(i) and E(i) are the values
given by the simulation and the experiment respectively, for the i-th point.
The
inlet mixing was calibrated in order to fit as best as possible the experimental results.
With a loop on the mixing fraction value, the configuration yielding the minimal
MAPD was chosen, as represented on Figure 5.13a. Results of both the model and
the CARNOT simulating tools are gathered in Table 5.13b. Moreover, Figure 5.14a
shows the temperature distribution along the tank height for different times of the
Exp. 1, i.e. 10, 40, 70 and 100 minutes. Figure 5.14b shows the temperature evolution
in Exp. 2 as function of time, for several tank heights. Out of twenty thermocouples
distributed along the total height and numbered from the top to the bottom, values
for the first, third, sixth, and tenth were considered (referred to as T1, T3, T6 and T10
respectively). On both figures, experimental values are represented in dots, whereas
==PAGE:68==
54
5 Modelling framework
Figure 5.12: Simulink model of the tank using CARNOT
(a) Impact of the inlet mixing (Exp.2)
(b) Results of the model validation
Parameter
Exp. 1
Exp. 2
Nslices
100
100
rmixing [%]
5.0
3.0
MAPDModel [%]
2.848
3.161
MAPDCARNOT [%]
3.150
5.328
Figure 5.13: Calibration of the inlet mixing fraction
the CARNOT simulation is in dotted lines, and the model simulation in full lines.
For Exp.1, the inlet mixing fraction was calibrated at 5.0%, against 3.0% for Exp.
2, although the mass flow is higher in the second experiment. The use of a baffle
plate to reduce mixing can explain this lower value. As seen on the plot, the model
fits the trend of the experimental results for both experiments.
Moreover, Table
5.13b reveals that the mean absolute percentage difference between the model and
the experimental data is around 3% for both cases. This is to be compared to the
CARNOT program, yielding 3% and 5%. This difference could be explained by the
fact that the block from CARNOT does not consider inlet mixing. It is likely that
==PAGE:69==
5.3 Two-tanks system
55
(a) Exp.1 - Temperature distribution along
height
(b) Exp.2 - Temperature evolution as func-
tion of time
Figure 5.14: Plots of the model validation
a thorough investigation of the software and of its more complex tools could yield
better results. To conclude, the behaviour of the model can be considered satisfactory
for the present application. It should however be underlined that the inlet mixing
fraction is a crucial parameter and has a significant impact on the accuracy of the
model. A way to minimize this uncertainty would be to assume that the tank is
equipped with baffle plates in practice, and thus the inlet mixing should be below
5%.
5.3
Two-tanks system
In the two-tanks system, it is assumed that both tanks have the same dimensions,
and insulation. Moreover, there is no thermal stratification, i.e. both tanks are fully
mixed and at a uniform temperature, referred to as THOT and TCOLD for the hot
and cold tank respectively as represented on Figure 5.15.
5.3.1
Heat balance
The uniform temperature assumption makes the modelling of this solution simple
compared to the thermocline, each tank being defined by the following heat balance:
d(Mcp(T −Tref))
dt
= ˙Qflow + ˙Qloss
(5.13)
Where M is the tank mass, and ˙Qflow is the heat variation due to fluid entering or
leaving the tank. The difference with the stratified tank is that the tank mass M and
volume V vary during the route, as the tank gets filled or emptied. As a notation,
==PAGE:70==
56
5 Modelling framework
Figure 5.15: Model of the 2-tanks system
the mass flow ˙mT ES refers to the mass flow entering or leaving the hot tank, and has
a positive or negative value respectively. In the considered case, the tank is always
either charging or discharging, i.e.
fluid either enters or leaves the tank.
During
charging, this yields, for the hot tank:
˙Qflow,HOT = ˙mT EScp,h(Tin −Tref)
(5.14)
Where the inlet temperature Tin should correspond to the hot temperature, Th. The
reference temperature Tref is chosen arbitrarily as 20◦C, and only serves mathemati-
cal purposes. On the other hand, the cold tank is being discharged:
˙Qflow,COLD = −˙mT EScp,c(TCOLD −Tref)
(5.15)
As the tank is fully mixed, the mass flow leaving the tank is at the temperature
TCOLD. Similarly, during discharge:
˙Qflow,HOT = ˙mT EScp,h(THOT −Tref)
(5.16)
Where ˙mT ES has a negative value, as the tank is being emptied. Accordingly, in the
cold tank:
˙Qflow,COLD = −˙mT EScp,c(Tin −Tref)
(5.17)
Where the inlet temperature Tin should this time correspond to the ORC return
temperature, and thus to the cold temperature Tc.
5.3.2
Heat losses
The heat losses are defined using the same method as with the stratified tank, and
same notations as in Figure 5.7. The heat transfer coefficient Utank given by Eq.
==PAGE:71==
5.4 Heat exchanger network
57
(5.11) is used to compute the heat dissipation for the whole tank. For the hot tank,
this yields:
˙Qloss,HOT = −Utank(THOT −Tamb)
(5.18)
And similarly with the cold tank, using TCOLD. It should be underlined that Eq.
(5.18) is based on the assumption that the tank has a uniform behaviour. In practice,
as the volume of fluid varies in the tank, convection occurs inside the tank between
the thermal fluid and the air filling the rest of the tank. A more accurate model of
the heat losses should take this phenomenon into account.
5.3.3
Temperature variation
Focusing now on the left side of Eq. (5.13), the energy variation in the tank can be
simplified, assuming the density ρ and specific heat cp, although they depend on the
temperature of the tank, are constant during a time step. This yields:
d(Mcp(T −Tref))
dt
= ρcp
d(V (T −Tref))
dt
(5.19)
Therefore, Eq. (5.13) can be rewritten.
ρcp
d(V (T −Tref))
dt
= ˙Qflow −˙Qloss
(5.20)
Moreover, the left term of Eq. (5.20) can be also written as the sum of two derivatives:
d(V (T −Tref))
dt
= (T −Tref)dV
dt + V dT
dt
(5.21)
The variation of volume dV
dt can be computed using the mass flow ˙m and the density
ρ. Therefore, the temperature variation dT
dt can be computed at each time step using
Eqs. (5.20) and (5.21).
5.4
Heat exchanger network
The heat exchanger network represented on Figure 4.6 is of crucial importance during
sailing, as it allows the heat transfer from the heat sources towards the storage fluid.
It should be designed to maximize the heat recovery.
5.4.1
Optimization of the network
With the working temperatures of the storage fluid (Tc and Th) defined as well as
the mass flows and temperatures of both heat sources, the heat exchanger network
can be designed. The main objective is to maximize the fluid mass flow: this will
allow maximizing the energy recovery from the heat sources, as well as minimizing
==PAGE:72==
58
5 Modelling framework
the charging time. Regarding the heat sources, the mass flows considered for the
optimization correspond to the maximal value for each voyage, found in Tables 4.6
and 4.7. Indeed, in Route 2, the mass flow of both the exhaust gases and the cooling
water can vary from a factor 2, thus the piping should be designed to receive the
highest flow.
Besides the cold and hot temperatures and the heat sources mass flow and tem-
perature, several parameters act as constraints in the optimization.
The exhaust
gases should not leave the HEX at a temperature below Tex,min = 100◦C, to avoid
liquefaction of any droplets of water in the pipes. Moreover, the minimal pinch-point
temperatures should also be taken into account for the design. Assuming an outlet
temperature for the exhaust gases Tex,out and an intermediary temperature Tint, the
heat exchangers can then be fully defined. First, the heat balance can be computed
for HEX2.
˙Q2 = ˙mexcp,ex(Tex −Tex,out) = ˙mHEXcp,f(Th −Tint)
(5.22)
Where ˙Q2 is the heat transfer from the exhaust gases towards the storage fluid, and
cp,ex and cp,f are the specific heat capacities of the exhaust gases and the storage
fluid respectively, taken at their average temperature between the inlet and the outlet.
From Eq. (5.22), the fluid mass flow ˙mHEX can be extracted, and be used in the
heat balance of the first heat exchanger.
˙Q1 = ˙mwcp,w(Tw −Tw,out) = ˙mHEXcp,f(Tint −Tc)
(5.23)
Eq. (5.23) then allows obtaining the outlet temperature of the cooling water Tw,out.
As represented on Figure 5.16, this procedure can be repeated for all combinations
of Tex,out and Tint. For each combination, a check is also made on whether the pinch
point temperatures are respected, discarding the value in case they are not. Once the
Figure 5.16: Design procedure for the HEX network
optimal configuration, and thus the design fluid mass flow ˙mHEX,D is identified, the
heat exchangers can be defined by calculating their design UA value, where U is the
overall transfer coefficient and A the heat transferring area. This is done using the
logarithmic mean temperature difference, LMTD. Assuming both exchangers are of
==PAGE:73==
5.4 Heat exchanger network
59
counter-current configurations, it is defined for HEX1 and HEX2 by Eqs. (5.24) and
(5.25) respectively:
LMTD1 = (Tw −Tint) −(Tw,out −Tc)
ln
Tw−Tint
Tw,out−Tc
(5.24)
LMTD2 = (Tex −Th) −(Tex,out −Tint)
ln
Tex−Th
Tex,out−Tint
(5.25)
Then, the design UA value is given for HEX1 and HEX2 by Eqs. (5.26) and (5.27)
respectively.
UA1,D =
˙Q1
LMTD1
(5.26)
UA2,D =
˙Q2
LMTD2
(5.27)
These values characterize the heat exchangers, and will be used to compute the per-
formance of the heat exchangers during part load operation.
5.4.2
Part load performance
As previously underlined, the mass flows of both heat sources vary by a factor 2 during
Route 2. Moreover, the outlet temperature of the stratified tank can increase when
charging the tank, when the thermocline falls towards the bottom of the tank, as
previously underlined on Figure 4.13. As the inlet conditions of the heat exchangers
network change, the efficiency of the heat transfer should decrease compared to the
design point (Tc, ˙mHEX,D). The part-load performance of the heat exchangers can
be represented using the UA approach, similarly to what was done in Hagling [78].
It consists in computing the variation of the UA value in off-design conditions, with
Eqs. (5.28) and (5.29) for HEX1 and HEX2 respectively:
UA1 = UA1,D ×
(
˙
mw
˙mw,D
)n
(5.28)
UA2 = UA2,D ×
(
˙
mex
˙mex,D
)n
(5.29)
With a typical value for the exponent n = 0.6 [78]. For each heat exchanger, a system
of three differential equations should then be solved. For HEX1, the heat transferred
from the cooling water to the fluid ˙Q1 is expressed as follows:
˙Q1 =





˙mHEXcp,f(Tint −Tin,HEX)
˙mwcp,w(Tw −Tw,out)
LMTD1 × UA1
(5.30)
==PAGE:74==
60
5 Modelling framework
Where ˙mHEX, cp,f,
˙mw and cp,w are the mass flow and specific heat of thermal
fluid and cooling water respectively. The heat exchanger inlet temperature Tin,HEX
corresponds to either the outlet temperature of the tank, or the return temperature
of the ORC, or the temperature of both flows together, depending on the case as
described in Section 4.4. Moreover, the cooling water inlet temperature Tw is given
by the engine regime, as well as the maximal available mass flow ˙mw,MAX. The fluid
outlet temperature Tint is a constrained variable and should always correspond to the
temperature designed in Section 5.4.1.
In order to solve the system of Eq. (5.30) in part load, the solver adjusts the
cooling water mass flow and outlet temperature Tw,out, while ensuring ˙mw ≤˙mw,max
and Tw,out ≥Tin,HEX. Similarly, the heat transfer ˙Q2 in HEX2 should verify the
following system.
˙Q2 =





˙mHEXcp,f(Th −Tint)
˙mexcp,ex(Tex −Tex,out)
LMTD2 × UA2
(5.31)
The variables ˙mex and Tex,out should then be adjusted in order to solve Eq. (5.31),
while verifying ˙mex ≤˙mex,max and Tex,out ≥max (Tex,min, Tint).
For a given value of TinHEX, as well as a given regime for the heat sources, Eqs.
(5.30) and (5.31) give the corresponding outlet temperature and mass flow of both
sources ensuring the heating up of the fluid from Tc to Th, at a mass flow ˙mHEX.
However, in part load conditions, it can occur that the design charging mass flow
˙mHEX,D defined in Section 5.4.1 can not be reached while fulfilling all the constraints
mentioned above. In this case, the fluid mass flow ˙mHEX should be decreased to a
value allowing the HEX network to play its role. The solving procedure is represented
on Figure 5.17. As can be expected from the temperatures and mass flows gathered
Figure 5.17: Solving procedure for the off design performance of the HEX network
in Tables 4.6 and 4.7, the exhaust gases are the main heat source in the network, i.e.
the fluid mass flow in the heat exchanger will be limited by the available mass flow of
exhaust gases. Therefore, the solving procedure starts by solving Eq. (5.31) using a
guess value for the fluid mass flow of ˙mHEX =
˙mexcp,ex(Tex−Tex,min)
cp,f (Th−Tint)
. This guess value
corresponds to the exhaust gases transferring the maximum amount of heat to the
==PAGE:75==
5.5 Model architecture
61
thermal fluid. If Eq. (5.31) can not be solved while respecting the constraints, this
mass flow is decreased by 1%. This procedure is repeated until a proper solution is
found for Eq. (5.31). Then, Eq. (5.30) is solved using the corresponding mass flow.
If a solution can not be found, the fluid mass flow should be decreased by 1% and Eq.
(5.31) should be solved again.
To illustrate this part load performance, Figures 5.18a and 5.18b show the evolu-
tion of the mass flows and temperatures involved in the heat exchanger network for
varying inlet temperature TinHEX. As can be seen on Figure 5.18a, for temperatures
(a) Mass flows
(b) Temperatures
Figure 5.18: Off design behaviour of the HEX network
below the design intermediary temperature Tint,D, only the cooling water mass flow
decreases significantly, its outlet temperature increasing slightly. This is because less
energy is required to reach the desired temperature Tint,D. As this adjustment en-
sures that the fluid is heated up to Tint,D at its design mass flow, the second heat
exchanger is not impacted. When the inlet temperature reaches Tint,D, HEX1 is no
longer active: the inlet temperature is too high for the cooling water to transfer any
heat towards the transfer fluid. This corresponds on Figure 5.18b to the temperature
for which the intermediary temperature Tint starts increasing, as it corresponds to the
inlet temperature Tin,HEX. The non-linearity in the water outlet temperature seen
on the Figure for this temperature corresponds to the shut off the HEX1, and should
not be considered. For higher temperatures, the exhaust gases outlet temperature
increases, while their mass flow is constant. The fluid mass flow can increase slightly,
as less energy is required to reach the desired temperature Th.
5.5
Model architecture
The model is based on a loop on all the phases of sailing or harbour stay. For each
phase, the exhaust gases and cooling water conditions are determined, as well as the
==PAGE:76==
62
5 Modelling framework
required mass flow based on the procedure detailed in Figure 4.11. Based on this,
the mass flows are computed as detailed in Section 5.4.2. The initial temperature
distribution is taken as the final distribution of the previous phase. A simulation
interface was also developed in order to ease the understanding of the control strategy.
Details can be found in Appendix A
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 6
Methods of analysis
In order to conduct a proper feasibility study of the project, its performance should be
analyzed as function of the main parameters of influence. To this technical analysis
should be supplemented an economic analysis of the best performing solutions, in
order to assess the viability of the project. This chapter goes through the methods
and key indicators used in both the technical and the economical analyses.
6.1
Performance of the system
The modelling framework allows simulating the behaviour of the system during a
whole route. Several variables can be used to assess its overall performance. The
aim of the study is to analyze the impact of the main parameters, i.e. the considered
storage fluid, type of storage, and storage mass.
Therefore, parameters with less
influence or interest are affected a reasonable value, as gathered in Table 6.1. The
Table 6.1: Set of parameters for the study
Parameter
Value
Unit
H : D
2.0
-
rmixing
5.0
%
∆PP1
5
◦C
∆PP2
20
◦C
Tamb
20
◦C
einsu
0.10
m
λinsu
0.03
W/(m.K)
λwall
17
W/(m.K)
aspect ratio H : D refers to the ratio between the tank height Htank and its diameter
Dtank. For a storage tank, the common value of H : D = 2 means that the height
is twice higher than the diameter. Constraining this parameter will ensure that the
impact of heat losses and conduction through the tank is not weighted higher when
varying the mass. As mentioned previously, the inlet mixing fraction should be kept
to a minimum in order to limit its negative impact on the tank stratification, and on
the overall performance. The thermal conductivity of the insulation is taken as the
==PAGE:78==
64
6 Methods of analysis
one of expanded polystyrene, as it is a material commonly used for the insulation of
storage tanks. The material of the storage tank is stainless steel.
6.1.1
Key indicators
In order to quantify how well the system performs in regard to the objectives, several
indicators are introduced.
First of all, the main goal of the project is to supply
the ship with the whole of the power requirement during harbour stays. The power
coverage rate during harbour αharbour indicates the fraction of the total harbour time
during which the demand Preq is met.
αharbour = t(PORC,harbour > Preq)
∆tharbour
(6.1)
This coverage rate should be equal to 1 if the system fulfills its primary objective, i.e.
100% of the harbour stop periods should be covered by the ORC.
On the other hand, using the ORC unit allows decreasing the fuel consumption,
both during harbour and sailing periods. When sailing, the ship requires to be pow-
ered with Preq at anytime. When the ORC can only supply a fraction of the demand,
auxiliary engines should step in and produce the remaining power. The total energy
which should be produced using auxiliary machinery Eaux is obtained using Eq. (6.2).
Eaux =
∫∆troute
0
(Preq −PORC)dt
(6.2)
This value should be as low as possible in order to reduce the operating costs as well
as pollutant emissions. As a reference, in a system which is not equipped with any
waste heat recovery system, the auxiliary machinery needs to supply Preq during the
whole of the route, i.e. 880 and 1440 minutes (14 hrs 40 min and 24 hours) for Route
1 and 2 respectively. In Route 1, the long harbour stay is provided by connection
to the shore, and is therefore not considered. This yields a total consumption of,
respectively:
Eaux,1ref = 14666 kWh
(6.3)
and
Eaux,2ref = 24000 kWh
(6.4)
To assess the performance of the system, the fuels savings can be obtained with the
reduction of auxiliary consumption as regard to these reference values βaux, obtained
for Route 1 and 2 respectively with Eqs. (6.5) and (6.6).
βaux,1 = 1 −
Eaux,1
Eaux,1ref
(6.5)
and
βaux,2 = 1 −
Eaux,2
Eaux,2ref
(6.6)
==PAGE:79==
6.2 Economic analysis
65
6.1.2
Optimization of the storage mass
For each combination of storage fluid and tank configuration, and for each route, the
mass of storage Mtank is the main parameter of influence. Minimizing Mtank will
ensure limiting the space requirements and investment costs as well as the added
shipping mass.
On the other hand, if Mtank is too low, the system will not be
able to store enough heat to supply the required power during harbour. Moreover,
a higher mass could also allow further storing of excess heat, thus decreasing the
fuel consumption during sailing.
As a preliminary design, the required mass can
be estimated as previously underlined using the ORC design mass flow and longest
harbour stay:
Mreq = ˙mORC,D × max ∆tharbour
(6.7)
This design required mass Mreq corresponds to the mass of fluid which should be
sent to the ORC for it to supply the required power during the longest harbour
stay, max ∆tharbour. However, this estimation does not take into account influence
of external parameters e.g.
heat losses, off design performance of the ORC, and
degradation of the thermocline in the stratified tank. In order to optimize the value
of the storage mass, this parameter is therefore varied around its reference value Mreq,
and its impact on the system’s performance is assessed.
The initial temperature distribution of the tank should not affect the design of the
system. Therefore, the simulation is ran twice on the same route in a row, the final
distribution of the first route being the initial distribution of the second one. In the
case of Route 1, the long period of shore power is only taken into account between
the two routes, to consider the impact of heat losses. Table 6.2 shows the resulting
phases. It should be precised that in this particular case, the total energy required to
meet the power demand during the whole route is 29333 kWh for Route 1, and 48000
kWh for Route 2. When computing the fuel savings with Eqs. (6.5) and (6.4), these
values will be taken for Eaux,1ref and Eaux,2ref .
As neither the phase of shore power, nor the phase of low load is used to charge
the tank in Route 1, both routes start with a phase of discharging, preceded - or not
- by a phase of standby. At the initial time step, the temperature distribution in the
tank is therefore set so that the tank can supply the first harbour stay.
6.2
Economic analysis
The feasibility of the system will depend greatly on its economic viability. The differ-
ent potential configurations all yield different investment costs, as well as operation
costs.
The aim of the study is to assess which design is the most interesting on
an economic basis, and how it compares to the alternative solution. For some of the
equipment, the Fjordline company provided cost estimates they use in similar studies,
including both capital and operational expenditures. Table 6.3 gathers these values.
==PAGE:80==
66
6 Methods of analysis
Table 6.2: Phases of sailing/harbour stay for both long routes
Route 1
Route 2
Harbour
Sailing
Engines
Load
Harbour
Sailing
Engines
Load
60
20
2
Low
240
4
High
70
60
150
2
High
240
4
High
60
90
150
2
High
150
2
High
50
60
150
2
High
150
2
High
40
50
150
2
High
150
2
High
20
40
20
2
Low
150
2
High
560
Shore power
60
20
2
Low
240
4
High
70
60
150
2
High
240
4
High
60
90
150
2
High
150
2
High
50
60
150
2
High
150
2
High
40
50
150
2
High
150
2
High
20
40
20
2
Low
150
2
High
6.2.1
Comparison case
For the present study, the main goal of the economic analysis is to compare the system
coupling an ORC unit to a TES device with the alternative and more conventional
solution allowing zero-emissions power production in harbour. This system relies on
the use of battery packs, usually charged with shaft power, or auxiliary machinery.
As shown on Figure 6.1, the main engine (or auxiliary machinery) is used to supply
the electrical demand during sailing, as well as to charge the batteries. During har-
bour, the main engine is shut off and the battery packs allow meeting the electrical
demand. Although this system does fulfill the primary goal of supplying power with-
out emissions in harbour, it should be underlined that the whole of the power demand
is produced using shaft power, or auxiliary machinery. This means that the energy
consumption related to the electrical supply is given, for Route 1 and 2, by Eqs. (6.3)
and (6.4) respectively.
==PAGE:81==
6.2 Economic analysis
67
Table 6.3: Estimated costs from Fjordline
Component
Parameter
Unit
Value
Capital expenditures
ORC
Investment cost
[MDKK]
28
Battery packs
Investment cost
[MDKK]
8
Operational expenditures
Shaft power
Fuel cost
[DKK/kWh]
0.58
Battery packs
Lifetime
[y]
8
Figure 6.1: The alternative solution using battery packs
6.2.2
Economic indicators
To quantify the economic potential of the system compared to the conventional al-
ternative, several economic indicators commonly used in feasibility studies of energy
projects [79] are presented in this section, as well as their specific application in the
present study.
Net present value (NPV)
The net present value is commonly used to assess a system’s economic viability. It
allows comparing different projects over time. It combines the cash outflows, such as
equipment and installation costs and operation costs, and cash inflows, such as rev-
enues from exploitation. At a given year Y , a system’s net present value is expressed
by
NPV(Y ) = −CF 0 +
Y
∑
y=1
CF y
(1 + γ)y
(6.8)
==PAGE:82==
68
6 Methods of analysis
Where CF 0 denotes the initial investment cost, or CAPEX (Capital Expenditures).
For the year y, the total cash flow CF y is given by considering the revenue and
operational cost (OPEX, for Operational Expenditures): CF y = Revenue −OPEX.
The aim of this study is to compare the solution using TES and ORC with the one
using batteries. In both cases, the revenue from the exploitation of the ship will be
the same, as the system will only impact the operational costs, i.e. fuel consumption.
Therefore, it will not be taken into account in the analysis. This will cause the NPVs
to be negative for any given year. This could seem problematic, considering a system
is commonly deemed economically viable only if its NPV is positive at the end of its
operation lifetime. However, the focus should rather be on the difference between the
NPV of the system using TES NPVT ES, and the solution using batteries, NPVbat.
This can be referred to as the relative NPV, NPVrel:
NPVrel = NPVT ES −NPVbat
(6.9)
At the end of the lifetime of the ship, the relative net present value should therefore
be positive, if the system using TES is viable compared to the batteries.
Applying the discount rate γ increases the weight in the valuation of cash flows
in earlier periods compared to cash flows in later periods. It allows representing the
time value of money, i.e. the greater benefit of receiving money now rather than later.
In maritime applications, it can be found to be between 6.6 % [80, 81] and 7.6% [82].
The average value of 7.1% will therefore be considered, keeping in mind that it could
be higher for a risk industry like shipping [81].
Payback time
The payback time (PBT) refers to the number of years required to recover the initial
investment through the cash flows of the project. The shorter the PBT, the earlier
the project will become profitable. As previously underlined, no revenue is considered
in the present study, which would yield an infinite payback time. However, again, the
focus is on the comparison between the two alternatives.
Therefore, the payback
time tP B corresponds to the number of years after which the waste heat recovery
system will become more profitable than the conventional solution, i.e. after which
the cumulative discounted cash flow (CDCF) of the TES-ORC coupling become higher
than the CDCF of the system using batteries. As could be seen in Eqs. (6.8) and
(6.9), the relative NPV at a given year Y, NPVrel(Y ), corresponds to the difference
between the CDCF of both systems. Therefore, the payback time corresponds to the
number of years necessary for NPVrel to be positive.
6.2.3
Capital expenditures (CAPEX)
In order to compare both solutions, the first step is to compute their initial investment
CF0, also referred to as capital expenditures (CAPEX). Estimating accurately the
CAPEX related to a given system is often delicate. Indeed, the cost of installation
==PAGE:83==
6.2 Economic analysis
69
and equipment can vary a lot depending on the application, as well as the company
or even country. Therefore, several estimation methods were used and compared to
evaluate the investment cost related to a given equipment. For the considered system,
several components are to be evaluated: the storage fluid as well as the tank itself,
the heat exchanger network, and the ORC. Regarding the conventional alternative,
only the battery packs should be estimated.
Chemical engineering plant cost index (CEPCI)
The CEPCI is an established institution, used by professionals since 1963 [83]. It
allows adjusting the construction costs of components from one period to another.
For a given equipment with a known base cost Cbase in the base year ybase, the
purchased cost Cy in the year y will be given by
Cy = Cbase ×
CEPCIy
CEPCIbase
(6.10)
Where CEPCIy and CEPCIbase correspond to the values of the CEPCI in the years
y and ybase respectively. The evolution of the cost index along time can be found on
Figure 6.2. As can be noted on the Figure, this adjustment will have a significant
Figure 6.2: The evolution of the chemical engineering cost index
impact, as the cost index varies from below 100 to almost 600 between the years 1963
and 2011. Depending on the base year for a given cost estimation, it will then be
adjusted to the year 2011 using the cost index. This was done for all the plots and
results given in the following sections. It should be here underlined that the value for
==PAGE:84==
70
6 Methods of analysis
the cost index could not be found for the years after 2011, and thus the reference is
taken at 2011.
Heat exchangers
As reviewed by Taal et al. [84], various methods are available to estimate the costs of
heat exchangers. Most of them are based on the heat transfer area of the considered
heat exchanger, AHEX, which can be computed using the UA value,
AHEX = UA
U
(6.11)
where U is an estimate of the heat transfer coefficient. Table 6.4 gathers the values for
HEX1 (oil - water) and HEX2 (oil - gas) [85, 86]. The areas of transfer AHEX1 and
Table 6.4: Heat transfer coefficient estimates
Type of transfer
Value [W/(m2.K]
UAHEX1
Water - Oil
500
UAHEX2
Flue gas - Oil
80
AHEX2 can then be computed using Eq. (6.11) for HEX1 and 2 respectively. This will
allow estimating their costs. The estimations used for the HEX network are gathered
in Table 6.5. As detailed in [84], Hall used data from 1982 case studies to develop
Table 6.5: Estimation methods for the HEX investment cost
Name
Correlation method
Ref.
Hall
CHall(A) = 7000 + 360 × A0.80
[84]
Corripio
CCorripio(A) = exp
{
8.202 + 0.01506 ln A + 0.06811(ln A)2}
[87]
Six-tenth
C6−10(A) = Cref ×
(
A
Aref
)0.6
[84, 88]
ICARUS
Interpolation based on the curve
[89]
correlations for the purchased heat exchanger cost. The costs of a heat exchanger
of transfer area between 100 and 6000 m3 estimated with the Hall correlation, and
adjusted with the cost index, are represented in red on Figure 6.3. Corripio et al. [87]
also derived correlations for the cost of a carbon-steel, floating-head heat exchanger
in 1982 U.S.D., as represented in green on Figure 6.3. The six-tenth method is one
of the oldest estimation procedures.
It is based on the comparison with a piece
of equipment of the same type, with a known cost Cref and area of transfer Aref
[84].
The reference costs were taken from 2011 prices found in [88] for the heat
exchanger with the transfer area closest to the considered exchanger. The results are
represented in blue on Figure 6.3. Finally, Lyons and White [89] conducted a report
for the U.S. department of energy. They presented cost curves for several equipment
==PAGE:85==
6.2 Economic analysis
71
types generated using the software ICARUS Process Evaluator and based on 1998
prices. The results converted in DKK/m2 are represented in yellow on Figure 6.3. As
the transfer areas range from 10 to 6500 m2, the cost estimate of a given HEX using
ICARUS CICARUS can easily be interpolated from the the plot.
For each considered configuration of the system, the total cost of the HEX network
can therefore be estimated using the 4 methods previously detailed. As the network
is designed with two HEXs, their cost estimate, function of their respective transfer
area, are summed to compute the total cost, as in Eq. (6.12). The cost of each HEX
is also adjusted using Eq. (6.10) and the cost index corresponding to the base year
of the method.
CHEX = CHEX1(AHEX1) + CHEX2(AHEX2)
(6.12)
For areas up to 3000 m2, Figure 6.3 reveals that all methods yield very close results,
Figure 6.3: Estimated HEX costs using the various methods
except for the Hall method which seems to underestimate the cost. Besides, the 6-
tenth method does not increase in a uniform trend with the transfer area. This is
only due to the non-uniformity of the reference heat exchangers. Overall, it can be
concluded that considering the average between the 4 methods can allow a reasonable
evaluation of the investment cost related to the HEX network.
Thermal storage fluid
The prices of the 4 considered oils were given as function of the mass of fluid by the
Therminol company, and gathered in Table 6.6. It shows that Therminol VP-1 is
the cheapest oil, which could be explained by its wide application in the solar sector.
==PAGE:86==
72
6 Methods of analysis
Table 6.6: Cost of the 4 Therminol products
Thermal oil
Price [DKK/kg]
VP-1
37.2
66
52.1
72
96.8
75
74.5
Moreover, Therminol 72 is the most expensive, with a price more than two times
higher than Therminol VP-1. Therminol 75 is also available at a high cost, whereas
Therminol 66 is closer to Therminol VP-1.
Thermal storage tank
The storage tank is a crucial component of the system, as it contains the storage fluid
and isolates it from the outside, to minimize losses. Similarly to what was done for
the heat exchangers, several methods are available. They all estimate the cost of a
given storage tank based on its storage volume, Vtank. To account for the expansion
of the fluid, the tank volume is computed based on the density of the oil ρf at its
maximal temperature Th.
Vtank = Mtank
ρf(Th)
(6.13)
In the case of the cold tank of the two-tanks system, the temperature should not vary
significantly, hence:
Vcold = Mtank
ρf(Tc)
(6.14)
The estimations used for the storage tank are gathered in Table 6.7. It should be pre-
cised that none of the estimation methods consider the impact of thermal insulation
on the total investment cost of the storage tank. Using the same correlation principles
Table 6.7: Estimation methods for the HEX investment cost
Name
Correlation method
Ref.
Corripio
CCorripio(V ) = exp
{
7.994 + 0.6637 ln V −0.063088(ln V )2}
[87]
ICARUS
Interpolation based on the curve
[89]
Michigan
Interpolation based on the curve
[90]
based on prices data of 1982, Corripio et al. [87] also derived estimation curves for
carbon-steel storage tanks, represented for a volume ranging from 20 to 150 m3 in
red on Figure 6.4. Besides, in their report to the U.S. Department of Energy, Lyons
and White [89] also derived cost curves for storage tanks for volumes ranging from
100 to 1000 m3, based on 1998 prices. The results converted in DKK are represented
in green on Figure 6.4. By interpolation, the cost estimate of a given storage tank
==PAGE:87==
6.2 Economic analysis
73
can therefore be obtained. It should however be noted that, for volumes below 100
m3, extrapolation is required. This should not affect significantly the accuracy, as
Figure 6.4 shows that the trend of the cost is very close to a linear curve. Finally,
a study published by the state of Michigan [90] in 2003 gathers cost estimates for
storage tanks of various sorts. Considering welded steel tanks, the corresponding cost
curve in DKK is represented in blue on Figure 6.4. Here again, an estimation can be
interpolated, as the volume ranges between 30 and 300 m3.
As can be observed on Figure 6.4, the three methods yield different results. For vol-
Figure 6.4: Estimate cost curves for storage tanks
umes below 80 m3, the Michigan study estimates costs between the Corripio method
(79 - 104 kDKK) and ICARUS simulations (186 - 222 kDKK). It should be kept in
mind that the Corripio method is only valid in the 5 - 90 m3 range [87]. For volumes
above this value, only the other two methods are taken into account. For each of
the configurations, the costs related to the storage tank(s) are therefore estimated
using the methods previously detailed, and the average value between the estimates
is considered.
Organic Rankine cycle
The ORC is the most expensive component of the system, as it includes an expander,
two heat exchangers, a pump and a liquid receiver. Moreover, the working fluid can
also be expensive and should be taken into account. However, estimating the required
mass of working fluid can be delicate. Quoilin et al. [11] estimated that the fluid
does not account for more than 3% of the total costs. It can therefore be neglected
in this study.
==PAGE:88==
74
6 Methods of analysis
As reviewed by Quoilin et al. [11], ORC modules can be found in various sizes,
types of technology, and target applications.
They collected the costs of several
modules, plotted on Figure 6.5a as function of their capacity, and for different uses.
Applications include waste heat recovery (WHR), combined heat and power (CHP),
(a) Costs of ORC systems [11]
(b) Interpolation of the ORC module cost
Figure 6.5: Estimation of the ORC investment cost
geothermal plants (Geothermal) and solar plants (Solar). Empty dots represent the
cost of ORC modules, whereas plain dots refer to the total cost of ORC systems.
Quoilin et al. [11] explained the scattering in the costs by the various manufactur-
ers, integration costs and market strategies. However, the data can still be used to
estimate the cost of the ORC system considered in the study.
As it is the most relevant application regarding the present analysis as well as
the category with the most collected data, the focus was set on the costs of ORC
systems in WHR applications. Moreover, as only 3 total costs are available, only
the module costs were considered. A polynomial plot can then be interpolated from
the collected costs. A degree 3 polynomial allowed minimizing the mean absolute
difference (defined by Eq. (5.12)). It is represented in red on Figure 6.5b along with
the considered costs. As seen on the Figure, the polynomial interpolation is close to
the data in the relevant region, i.e. for capacities around 1000 kW. It can therefore
be used to estimate the cost of the ORC with a reasonable accuracy.
The total costs include engineering and process integration, and can amount to
two or three times the module costs for small units [11]. They should therefore not
be neglected in the economic analysis of the ORC. As underlined by Arvay et al. [91]
in their economic analysis, the total implementation costs are generally estimated
by doubling the module costs. The estimation obtained from interpolation should
therefore be multiplied by 2 to represent the total investment cost of the ORC.
Finally, a more common approach to estimate the capital cost of an ORC is to
assume a specific cost, i.e. DKK per kW, although estimations often differ from one
reference to another. It was estimated by Schuster et al. [92] at 3755 e/kW, and by
==PAGE:89==
6.2 Economic analysis
75
Arvay et al. [91] at 3000 $/kW for the total equipment. Moreover, Fjorldine estimates
the cost of an ORC of 1100 kW capacity to be around 28 MDKK. As with the other
components, the average value yielded by the different estimation methods will be
considered for the economic analysis.
Battery packs
In the alternative system, the battery packs are the main components and should be
evaluated. The specific cost of battery cells is largely dependent on their capacity
and type. The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) studied the market
for battery storage. They assumed a specific cost of 1364 e/kWh for lithium-ion
batteries. On the other hand, the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL)
assumed a specific cost of 300$/kWh, to which should be added 2.45$/W accounting
for module, inverter, installation labor, and balance of system equipment. Finally, as
gathered in Table 6.3, Fjordline estimates batteries to cost 1100$/kWh. Here again,
the average value between this evaluations is considered for the estimation of the
capital costs. The capacity of the battery packs is taken at 1500 kWh, i.e. they
should supply 1.0 MW during at least 90 minutes.
6.2.4
Operational expenditures (OPEX)
In order to evaluate the viability of both system over the lifetime of the ship, it
is necessary to estimate the operation and maintenance (O&M) costs, also referred
to as operational expenditures (OPEX). The OPEX can be divided in two main
contributors: the system operation, i.e. the fuel consumption related to the power
production, and the maintenance costs, related to the main components.
Fuel consumption
In the present study, the main source of operational expenditure corresponds to the
fuel consumption related to power production. As listed in Table 6.3, Fjordline esti-
mates the cost of producing 1 kWh with either the shaft power or auxiliary engine
to be around 0.58 DKK. However, as shown on Figure 6.6, the price of LNG fuel
is extremely dependent on time. Between the years 2014 and 2018, it has varied
around its mean value of 45 DKK/mmBTU, going up to 63.7 DKK/mmBTU and
down to 25.6 DKK/mmBTU. This represents an amplitude of variation of ±40% of
the price. This uncertainty will be considered in the estimation of Fjordline by taking
into account three cases in the analysis, i.e. 60%, 100% and 140% of the given cost,
as gathered in Table 6.8. The low and high price of electricity correspond to extreme
cases, and their purpose is to show the influence of the fluctuations in the fuel prices
on the economic analysis of the system. Unless precised otherwise, results will be
given for the reference value.
==PAGE:90==
76
6 Methods of analysis
Figure 6.6: Price development of LNG fuel between 2014 and 2018
Table 6.8: Estimation cases for the cost of shaft power
Cost estimate
Variation to reference
Price [DKK/kWh]
Low
60%
0.35
Reference
100%
0.58
High
140%
0.81
Maintenance
Regarding other sources of operational expenditures, the cost of maintenance should
also be considered in order to assess the economic viability of the system. However,
few to no references are available on this matter. Regarding the reference system,
evaluating the longevity of batteries is delicate, but Fjordline estimates it to be around
8 years. It should be understood that the capacity of a battery slowly decreases over
its lifetime.
This estimation of the longevity corresponds to the number of years
after which the capacity goes under the requirement, assuming the initial capacity
was oversized in order to account for the degradation. Considering the lifetime of a
ship is of around 25 years, this means the batteries should be replaced several times
during the long-term operation. This can be considered as a planned maintenance
cost occurring every 8 years.
On the other hand, the organic Rankine cycle is likely to yield the highest main-
tenance costs in the whole system. Indeed, according to the manufacturer [67–70],
==PAGE:91==
6.2 Economic analysis
77
the thermal oil should provide long service life, provided they are operated under the
recommended maximum bulk temperature. Moreover, although exhaust gases can
cause particle deposition in the exchangers, the cost of this maintenance can be ne-
glected compared to the other costs involved. As underlined by Rentizelas et al. [93]
and Arvay et al. [91], one of the advantages of ORC compared to the conventional
steam Rankine cycle is its low need for maintenance. In the study of the economic
feasibility of ORC in different transport sectors, Pili et al. [16] neglected these costs
as they are not significant compared to the fuel savings. A common approach is to
estimate the maintenance cost as a fraction of the capital cost. This fraction was
estimated by Rentizelas et al. [93] at 3.5%, and by Arvay et al. [91] as 1.5 %. The
mean value of 2.5% is therefore considered in this study.
==PAGE:92==
78
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 7
Analysis of the results
The model allowed simulating the performance of the system for a given route and
set of parameters.
The methods for the techno-economic analysis of the system
detailed previously were applied based on these simulations. This chapter presents
and explains the results of the design procedure, as well as of the technical and
economic analysis of the system.
7.1
Design of the system
Several design procedures were detailed in Chapter 5 in order to optimize the system.
First of all, the working fluid was optimized for each configuration. Besides, the heat
exchanger network was also designed in order to maximize the heat recovery.
7.1.1
ORC working fluid
Figure 7.1 gathers the design ORC mass flow for the 4 thermal oils investigated and
for all the potential working fluids. It shows that for every working fluid, the mass
flows of each of the 4 oils are always in the same order: Therminol 66 (in green on
the Figure) yields the lowest mass flow, then Therminol 75 (yellow), Therminol 72
(blue) and finally Therminol VP-1 (red) with the highest mass flow. Using cyclopen-
tane, for example, yields ˙mT h66 = 6.5 kg/s, ˙mT h72 = 8.5 kg/s, ˙mT h75 = 15 kg/s and
˙mT hV P 1 = 18.5 kg/s respectively. As these thermal oils all have rather similar ther-
mophysical properties, this can be explained by the difference of temperature of the 4
oils. As could be expected, the higher the temperature of the heat source, the higher
is the ORC power output, hence the smaller required mass flow in the evaporator.
Table 7.1 gathers the three working fluids performing best for each of the thermal oils
along with the corresponding mass flow and return temperature.
The working fluids yielding the lowest mass flow all belong to the hydrocarbon
group: cyclopentane for Therminol 66 and 75, isopentane for Therminol 72 and VP-1,
benzene for Therminol 75 and n-pentane for Therminol 72. In order to minimize the
storage mass and volume, the best performing working fluid is therefore selected for
each oil. Table 7.2 gathers the final configurations for the 4 thermal oils.
On the other hand, as the maximal temperature for water is not in the same
range, a number of the considered organic compounds could not be used as working
==PAGE:94==
80
7 Analysis of the results
Figure 7.1: Impact of ORC working fluid on design mass flow using the thermal oils
Table 7.1: Best performing working fluids for the thermal oils
Thermal oil
Working fluid
˙mORC,D [kg/s]
Treturn [◦C]
Therminol VP-1
Isopentane
14.5
50.5
R1233zd(E)
15
50.1
N-pentane
16
50.5
Therminol 66
Cyclopentane
6.5
51
Benzene
6.7
80.9
Toluene
7
79
Therminol 72
N-pentane
13.5
50.4
Isopentane
13.5
50.4
R1233zd(E)
14
50.6
Therminol 75
Benzene
8.5
89.3
Cyclopentane
8.5
85
Toluene
9
86.6
fluids. Moreover, as shown by Figure 7.2, the heat source mass flows are all above
200 kg/s. Using Eq. (5.1) with an ORC design mass flow of ˙mORC,D = 230 kg/s,
and a harbour time of 90 min. (the longest harbour stay of Route 2) yields a total
mass of Mtank = 1242 tons of water. This would require a storage volume of at least
1242 m3. As mentioned previously, this volume would need to be increased in case
of a stratified tank to take into account the thermocline, and even doubled in case
of a 2-tanks system. Moreover, such a significant mass would have an impact on the
==PAGE:95==
7.1 Design of the system
81
Table 7.2: ORC working fluid and design point for the 4 thermal oils
Thermal oil
Working fluid
Th [◦C]
Tc [◦C]
˙mORC,D [kg/s]
Therminol VP-1
Isopentane
250
50.5
14.5
Therminol 66
Cyclopentane
340
51
6.5
Therminol 72
Isopentane
260
50.4
13.5
Therminol 75
Cyclopentane
330
85
8.5
Figure 7.2: Impact of ORC working fluid on design mass flow using water
fuel consumption due to the increased shipment mass. Comparing this to the 35 to
78 tons yielding less than 70 m3 of storage using the oils (with values from Tables
4.8 and 7.1), this does not seem a reasonable option for the present study. Therefore,
the use of water as thermal storage fluid was not further investigated.
7.1.2
Design of the HEX nework
The heat exchanger network can be represented using a (T,Q) diagram, as represented
on Figure 7.3 for the configuration using Therminol 66.
It reveals that although
a significant amount of energy is available in the cooling water, the temperatures
involved make the exhaust gases the main heat source. Indeed, the cooling water
leaves HEX1 at a temperature of 86◦C, because the heat transfer is limited by the
pinch point in the heat exchanger.
For each thermal oil and Route, the HEX network is therefore defined by the inlet,
intermediary and outlet temperature and charging mass flow of the storage fluid, as
==PAGE:96==
82
7 Analysis of the results
Figure 7.3: (T,Q) diagram of the HEX network (Th66)
well as the outlet temperatures of the heat sources and the UA values of both heat
exchangers. Table 7.3 gathers the HEX designs for all the configurations. It reveals
Table 7.3: HEX network design for each oil and each route (R)
Oil
R
Tint
˙mHEX,D
˙mw,D
Tw,out
UA1,D
˙mex,D
Tex,out
UA2,D
[◦C]
[kg/s]
[kg/s]
[◦C]
[kW/K]
[kg/s]
[◦C]
[kW/K]
VP-1
1
85.5
18.9
52.1
85.2
79.6
22.8
106
108.3
2
85.5
35.1
96.8
85.2
147.5
42.3
106
200.9
66
1
85.6
10.64
52.12
87.3
50.1
22.8
106
261.9
2
85.6
19.7
96.8
87.3
92.9
42.3
106
485.6
72
1
85.5
17.7
52.12
85.6
74.5
22.8
106
114.7
2
85.5
32.9
96.8
85.6
138.1
42.3
106
212.8
75
1
-
11.9
0
-
0
22.8
106
216.5
2
-
22.1
0
-
0
42.3
106
401.5
that, as could be expected from previous observations, Route 2 yields higher UA
values for both heat exchangers due to the higher mass flows. It can also be noted
that, due to the high crystallization temperature of Therminol 75, the HEX network
only uses the exhaust gases in this configuration, the cooling water being available at
a too low temperature.
==PAGE:97==
7.2 Performance of the system
83
7.2
Performance of the system
As previously explained, the storage mass is varied for each storage fluid and config-
uration, and its impact of the performance of the system is assessed on both routes.
The required mass for each storage fluid is gathered in Table 7.4. It should first be
Table 7.4: Preliminary required mass Mreq for the considered oils
Oil
Mreq [kg]
VP-1
78300
66
35100
72
72900
75
45900
underlined that for a given storage fluid, both routes require the same mass. This
could be surprising, considering that, as could be observed from Table 4.1, the longest
harbour stay of Route 1 is of 70 minutes, against 90 for Route 2. However, it should
be noted that both routes actually last 24 hours. It can therefore safely be assumed
that, when finishing a route, the ship directly starts over, in a loop. Therefore, the
last harbour stay of Route 1, lasting 20 minutes, will be followed by 20 minutes of
sailing at low load, 560 minutes of connection to the shore, and 20 other minutes
of low load, before finally 70 minutes of harbour stay. As the tank neither charges
during low load phases, nor when connected to the shore, this means the tank should
actually be sized to supply 20+70 minutes of harbour stay, i.e. 90 minutes.
As could be expected from the mass flows of Table 7.2, Therminol 66 is the oil
yielding the lowest storage mass, followed by 75. Therminol 72 and VP-1 both require
around twice the mass of storage fluid, due to their lower temperature range.
For illustration purposes, the storage mass variation will be represented by the
ratio Mtank
Mreq . Regarding the figures, the colour code is the same for every plot, and is
as follows: Therminol VP-1 in blue, 66 in green, 72 in red, and 75 in yellow.
7.2.1
2-tanks system
Route 1
Figure 7.4 shows the evolution of the harbour coverage rate as function of the mass
ratio Mtank
Mreq
using the two-tanks storage in Route 1. It reveals that the plots corre-
sponding to each of the 4 oils are very similar. This is because the control strategy
is focused on the harbour coverage, and does not depend on the storage fluid. Be-
sides, as could be predicted, the harbour coverage αharbour increases with the fluid
mass, as it yields a higher capacity of storage. Moreover, the system achieves a total
harbour coverage alphaharbour = 1 for a total mass between Mtank = 1.04 × Mreq
and 1.06 × Mreq. It was previously underlined that the tank should at least contain
==PAGE:98==
84
7 Analysis of the results
Figure 7.4: Harbour coverage as function of storage mass for the two-tanks system
in Route 1
the required storage mass Mreq in order to supply the ship during the longest har-
bour stay. Besides, the necessity to add approximately 5% of the design mass can be
explained by heat losses, as well as limitations in the volumes of the tanks. Indeed,
the model does not allow a given tank to be completely empty, as this would induce
singularities.
As an illustration, Figure 7.5 shows the storage mass in both tanks (top) and the
ORC outlet power (bottom) during Route 1, for Therminol 66. On the bottom plot,
the phases of harbour, sailing or connection to the shore are represented in red, green
and yellow respectively. It can be noted that the tanks are never completely empty.
The peaks in the power production which can be observed towards the end of several
sailing phases correspond to this limitation; as the cold tank is almost empty, the
system stops charging the TES and directs the mass flow in the ORC, thus increasing
its output power.
To avoid extreme off design conditions for the cycle, a control
on the HEX network ensures that its inlet mass flow does not go over 15% above
its design point, and the output power of the ORC is overall almost constant on the
whole Route. On the other hand, during the phases of harbour stay, the output power
of the ORC is constant. This is achieved thanks to the constant inlet mass flow and
temperature.
In accordance with the control strategy, increasing the storage mass should also
decrease the auxiliary machinery energy consumption Eaux. The variation of Eaux is
shown on Figure 7.4 as function of the mass ratio Mtank
Mreq using the two-tanks storage in
Route 1. The Figure reveals that the trend corresponds to the expectations, although
the amplitude of the decrease depends on the storage fluid. Indeed, Eaux goes from
==PAGE:99==
7.2 Performance of the system
85
Figure 7.5: Mass in the tanks (top) and ORC power outlet (bottom) during Route 1
(Th66)
over 4000 kWh to just above 1330 kWh with Therminol 66 and 75, i.e.
the fuel
savings βaux increase from 86% to 95.5%. It should here be noted that the phases of
sailing at low load, as they are not supplied with the tank, necessarily yield auxiliary
consumption. Considering 4 phases of 20 minutes as detailed in Table 6.2, this yields a
consumption of 1333 kWh. Therefore, the system can not achieve more than 95.5% of
fuel savings on Route 1, considering it is not active during the low engine load phases.
It can therefore be said that the auxiliary consumption is minimized using Therminol
66 and 75, for a storage mass of 1.04 × Mreq and 1.05 × Mreq respectively. On the
other hand, Eaux decreases from 5000 kWh to below 4000 kWh with Therminol 72
and VP-1, yielding an increase in the savings βaux from 82% up to 86%. This lower
performance is due to the higher mass flow required in the ORC. Route 1 does not
provide enough energy for the system using these oils.
Moreover, considering only the values of the storage mass yielding a total harbour
coverage αharbour = 1, it can be underlined that, for Therminol 66 and 75, further
increasing the mass will not result in higher fuel savings, as the auxiliary consump-
tion is already at its minimal value. Considering Therminol 72 and VP-1, the same
observation can be made, but it is because the system is not able to recover more of
the waste heat.
==PAGE:100==
86
7 Analysis of the results
Figure 7.6: Auxiliary energy consumption as function of the storage mass using the
two-tanks storage in Route 1
Route 2
Similarly to Figures 7.4 and 7.6, Figures 7.7a and 7.7b show the impact of the mass
ratio
Mtank
Mreq
on the harbour coverage rate αharbour and the auxiliary consumption
Eaux respectively, in Route 2. Regarding the harbour coverage rate, the observations
(a) Harbour coverage rate
(b) Auxiliary consumtpion
Figure 7.7: Impact of the mass ratio on the performance of the two-tanks system in
Route 2
made for Route 1 can also be made for Route 2. A higher storage mass yields a higher
==PAGE:101==
7.2 Performance of the system
87
harbour coverage rate, until it reaches its maximal value of 1 for a storage mass of
around 1.05 × Mreq. This is in accordance with the control strategy which prioritizes
the harbour stay.
Moreover, it can be noted that the trend of the auxiliary consumption also corre-
sponds to the expectations. However, in Route 2, the auxiliary consumption decreases
from over 4000 kWh with Mreq
2
, to below 500 kWh with 1.1×Mreq. This corresponds
to an increase in fuels savings βaux from 90% up to 98%. With Therminol 66 and
75, this consumption actually goes down to zero with 1.04 × Mreq and 1.05 × Mreq
respectively, i.e. the system is supplied only using the waste heat. Using Therminol
VP-1 and 72, the storage mass needs to be increased up to 1.4 × Mreq to achieve zero
consumption.
Mass configurations
Table 7.5 gathers the relevant configurations for each oil in the 2-tanks system. For a
Table 7.5: Relevant configurations for the 2-tanks system
Mass ratio Mtank
Mreq
Total mass
Auxiliary
Savings
Oil
Route
Min.
Max.
Mtank
Eaux
βaux
[-]
[-]
[kg]
[kWh]
[%]
VP-1
1
1.05
-
82215
3764
87.2
2
1.05
1.4
82215 - 109620
642 - 0
98.7 - 100
66
1
1.04
-
36504
1333
95.5
2
1.04
-
36504
0
100
72
1
1.05
-
76545
3818
87.0
2
1.06
1.4
77274 - 102060
662 - 0
98.6 - 100
75
1
1.05
-
48195
1400
95.2
2
1.05
1.1
48195 - 50490
81 - 0
99.8 - 100
given oil and route, several configurations can be considered in the economic analysis.
The reference configuration corresponds to the minimal mass yielding harbour storage
αharbour = 1, as gathered in Table 7.5. Besides, higher values of the storage mass
should be considered, if they yield further reduction of the auxiliary consumption. For
these cases, the choice was made to consider multiples of 0.1 × Mreq for the storage
mass. For example, using Therminol VP-1 in Route 2, the potential configurations
will correspond to the reference case Mref = 1.05 × Mreq, then M1 = Mreq + ∆M1,
M2 = Mref + ∆M2 and M3 = Mreq + ∆M3, where ∆M1 = 0.2 × Mreq, ∆M2 =
0.3 × Mreq and ∆M3 = 0.4 × Mreq. The corresponding configurations can be found
for each oil in Table 7.6.
==PAGE:102==
88
7 Analysis of the results
Table 7.6: Mass configurations for the 2-tanks system
Oil
Route
Mref
Mreq [-]
M1
Mreq [-]
M2
Mreq [-]
M3
Mreq [-]
VP-1
1
1.05
-
-
-
2
1.05
1.2
1.3
1.4
66
1
1.04
-
-
-
2
1.04
-
-
-
72
1
1.05
-
-
-
2
1.06
1.2
1.3
1.4
75
1
1.05
-
-
-
2
1.05
1.1
-
-
7.2.2
Thermocline storage
Similarly with the two-tanks system, the impact of the storage mass in the stratified
tank can be assessed. Figures 7.8a and 7.8b show the evolution of the harbour cover-
age rate as function of the ratio Mtank
Mreq in Route 1 and 2 respectively. Again, it can be
(a) Route 1
(b) Route 2
Figure 7.8: Harbour coverage rate as function of the storage mass
underlined that the trend is similar for the 4 oils, in each route. However, disparities
can be noted between the oils. Indeed, Therminol 66 stands out as it allows a com-
plete harbour coverage for 1.11 × Mreq and 1.1 × Mreq in Route 1 and 2. Therminol
VP-1, 72 and 75 all require a higher storage mass of 1.18 × Mreq, 1.27 × Mreq and
1.3 × Mreq respectively for Route 1, and 1.17 × Mreq, 1.21 × Mreq and 1.21 × Mreq
for Route 2.
The poorer performance of Therminol 75 with the thermocline storage compared
to the two-tanks system could seem surprising, but it can be explained by the lower
outlet power of the ORC in off design conditions.
During harbour stays, the oil
mass flow in the ORC should be constant to the design value ˙mORC,D, as explained
==PAGE:103==
7.2 Performance of the system
89
previously. However, the main difference with the two-tanks system is that the outlet
temperature of the stratified tank can occur to decrease during discharging due to
the rise of the thermocline, as represented on Figure 4.13. As the temperature goes
further below the design point, this yields a poorer performance of the ORC, and its
outlet power can decrease below the requirement. This is especially an issue when
considering Route 1, as less energy is available on the overall route. Figure 7.9 shows
how the temperature of the top layer of the tank Ttop (in black) affects the ORC
outlet power using Therminol 66, around 1500 min. of the simulation. In the specific
Figure 7.9: Mass in the tanks (top) and ORC power outlet (bottom) during Route 1
(Th66)
case of Therminol 75, the part load performance of the ORC is greatly affected by
the limitation in the outlet temperature of the heat source. In order to fulfill the
condition Treturn > 85◦C associated with the slurry point of this oil, the control
strategy of the ORC in off design conditions had to be modified by introducing a
throttling valve before the turbine inlet to regulate the mass flow rate of the working
fluid. Although this allows controlling the oil return temperature, this also yields a
poorer off design performance of the cycle. Therefore, the system is more affected
by the varying outlet temperature of the storage when using this strategy, specific to
Therminol 75.
The variation of Eaux is shown on Figures 7.10a and 7.10b for Route 1 and 2
respectively. The trends are similar to what was observed in Figures 7.6 and 7.7b.
Increasing the harbour coverage rate also yields a lower auxiliary consumption. Ther-
minol 66 allows minimizing the auxiliary consumption to 1333 and 0 kWh for Route
1 and 2 respectively, for a storage mass of Mtank = 1.11 × Mreq and 1.1 × Mreq. Con-
==PAGE:104==
90
7 Analysis of the results
(a) Route 1
(b) Route 2
Figure 7.10: Auxiliary energy consumption as function of the storage mass
sidering the other thermal oils, further increasing the storage mass up to 1.5 × Mreq
allows decreasing the auxiliary consumption in both routes. Table 7.7 gathers the rel-
evant configurations for each oil in the thermocline storage. Similarly as the previous
Table 7.7: Relevant configurations for the stratified storage
Mass ratio Mtank
Mreq
Total mass
Auxiliary
Savings
Oil
Route
Min.
Max.
Mtank
Eaux
βaux
[-]
[-]
[kg]
[kWh]
[%]
VP-1
1
1.18
1.5
92394 - 117450
6037 - 5080
79.4 - 82.3
2
1.17
1.5
91611 - 117450
1652 - 739
96.6 - 98.5
66
1
1.11
-
38961
1333
95.5
2
1.1
-
38610
0
100
72
1
1.27
1.5
92583 - 109350
5998 - 5258
79.5 - 82.1
2
1.21
1.5
88209 - 109350
1707 - 966
96.4 - 98.0
75
1
1.3
1.5
59670 - 68850
2647 - 1785
90.1 - 93.9
2
1.21
1.5
55539 - 68850
519 - 224
98.9 - 99.5
section, several values of the storage mass can be considered for each oil and a given
route, as gathered in Table 7.8.
7.2.3
Sensitivity analysis
The degradation of the stratification inside the tank is partly due to conduction
between the hot and cold layers. However, the main parameter of influence is the
inlet mixing, which deteriorates the thermocline if it is close to the inlet. As the
mixing fraction value was arbitrarily chosen, a sensitivity analysis was conducted
==PAGE:105==
7.2 Performance of the system
91
Table 7.8: Mass configurations for the stratified storage
Oil
Route
Mref
Mreq [-]
M1
Mreq [-]
M2
Mreq [-]
M3
Mreq [-]
VP-1
1
1.18
1.3
1.4
1.5
2
1.17
1.3
1.4
1.5
66
1
1.11
-
-
-
2
1.1
-
-
-
72
1
1.27
1.4
1.5
-
2
1.21
1.3
1.4
1.5
75
1
1.3
1.4
1.5
-
2
1.21
1.3
1.4
-
on this parameter to assess its impact on the overall analysis. Figures 7.11a and
7.11b show the evolution of the minimal mass of storage required to supply harbour
coverage as function of the inlet mixing for Route 1 and 2 respectively. For illustration
purposes, the variation is represented by the relative difference to the reference case,
i.e. for a mixing fraction of 5%. It can be noted that the impact of the inlet mixing
(a) Route 1
(b) Route 2
Figure 7.11: Sensitivity analysis on the inlet mixing fraction
fraction depends on the storage fluid and Route. It can still be underlined that it
rises with the inlet fraction, i.e. increasing the mixing from 5.0% to 10% yields a
higher mass rise than increasing it from 0.0% to 5.0%. This means the uncertainty
on the inlet mixing should not be a major issue, provided that its value stays within
a range of small values. Indeed, with a value of 10% of mixing, the mass increase
compared to the reference case is not above 5%. Moreover, assuming the use of baffle
plates to reduce the inlet mixing, it seems reasonable to consider that the results of
the analysis will be valid.
==PAGE:106==
92
7 Analysis of the results
7.3
Economic analysis
Results from the performance analysis revealed that for each thermal oil, storage
configuration and route, several values of the mass could be considered for the final
design of the system. While they all fulfill the main requirement of supplying the ship
during the whole of the harbour stays, each value of the storage mass yields different
fuel savings, as gathered in Tables 7.5 and 7.7. The economic analysis should allow
selecting the best options between them.
7.3.1
Estimation of the capital costs (CAPEX)
Heat exchanger network
Based on inputs from Tables 6.4 and 7.3, the HEX network cost estimations are
represented for each configuration on Figure 7.12 for Route 1 (red) and 2 (blue). It
should be precised that the cost of the HEX does not depend on the thermal storage
type, and is therefore the same in both configurations. Firstly, it can be underlined
Figure 7.12: Estimated costs of the HEX network for each thermal oil
that Route 2 generates higher CAPEX for the HEX network. This is due to the phases
with 4 engines, during which the mass flows of the heat sources are significantly higher
than with 2 engines. Besides, it can be noted that Therminol 66 yields the highest
investment with 4 and 5.2 MDKK for Route 1 and 2 respectively. This is due to its
broad temperature range which requires a large transfer area. Similarly, Therminol
75 also generates significant capital expenditures of 3.2 and 4.3 MDKK respectively.
However, as it does not involve the use of the cooling water heat exchanger due to
==PAGE:107==
7.3 Economic analysis
93
the high value of its cold temperature Tc, the HEX network is 20% cheaper compared
to Therminol 66. Finally, the investment cost of the HEX network is cheaper for
Therminol VP-1 and 72 and hovers around 2 and 2.8 MDKK for Route 1 and 2,
thanks to their narrow temperature range.
Storage fluid
Based on the results from Tables 7.5 and 7.7, the total costs related to the storage
fluid for each configuration are represented on Figures 7.13 and 7.14 for Route 1 and
2 respectively.
For a given route, oil and tank system, the configuration with the
Figure 7.13: Investment cost related to the storage fluid for Route 1
minimal storage mass yielding harbour coverage is represented by a red bar for the
thermocline storage, and a blue bar for the two-tanks system.
Then, as detailed
in Tables 7.6 and 7.8, the configurations with higher values of the storage mass are
shown with a circle for ∆M1, diamond for ∆M2 and square for ∆M3. Naturally, a
higher storage mass yields higher investment costs for the storage fluid.
Firstly, Figures 7.13 and 7.14 reveals that the investment costs related to the
storage fluid are similar for both routes, which could be expected from observations on
the storage mass of Section 7.2. Besides, the thermocline storage induces higher costs
of fluid due to the higher mass requirement. Therminol 72 yields by far the highest
cost between 7.41 and 10.59 MDKK, due to both its high price and required mass.
Next, Therminol VP-1, although being twice cheaper than Therminol 75, engenders
similar total costs, ranging between 3.06 and 4.37 MDKK and 3.59 and 5.13 MDKK
respectively. Thanks to its moderate price and large temperature range, Therminol
66 is the oil yielding the lowest investment, around 1.95 MDKK.
==PAGE:108==
94
7 Analysis of the results
Figure 7.14: Investment cost related to the storage fluid for Route 2
Thermal storage tank
Based on the results from Tables 7.5 and 7.7, the total costs related to the storage
tank for each configuration are represented on Figures 7.15 and 7.16 for Route 1 and
2 respectively.
The color code is the same as on Figures 7.13 and 7.14. Naturally, a
Figure 7.15: Investment cost of the storage tank for Route 1
==PAGE:109==
7.3 Economic analysis
95
Figure 7.16: Investment cost of the storage tank for Route 2
higher mass (circle, diamond and square) will yield a higher storage volume, and thus
a higher investment. In accordance with observations made regarding the storage
fluid, investment costs related to the storage tank are similar for both routes. As
could be expected, Therminol VP-1 and 72 yield the highest cost, due to the large
mass, hence volume of fluid required. With the stratified tank, costs hover around
244 and 280 kDKK for Therminol 66 and 75 respectively, and range between 375
and 417 kDKK and 388 and 430 kDKK for Therminol 72 and VP-1. The two-tanks
system yields higher costs compared to the stratified storage requiring only one tank,
around 478 and 510 kDKK for Therminol 66 and 75, and between 603 and 809 kDKK
and 727 and 833 kDKK for Therminol 72 and VP-1.
Organic Rankine cycle
Figure 7.17a shows the estimate of the ORC capital cost using the references men-
tioned above, as well as the mean value between the different references (in red). It
can be noted that the estimations based on Quoilin et al. [11] and Arvay et al. [91]
yield very close capital costs, around 21 MDKK. On the other hand, Schuster yields
the highest estimation at 30.8 MDKK. This gives a mean value of 25.3 MDKK which
will be considered for the analysis.
Battery packs
Figure 7.17b represents the capital cost estimate of the battery packs using the ref-
erences mentioned above, as well as the average estimation (in red). It can be noted
==PAGE:110==
96
7 Analysis of the results
(a) Organic Rankine Cycle
(b) Battery packs
Figure 7.17: Capital cost estimate using different references
that the estimation given by Fjordline is close to the mean value. Similarly to what
was done before, the mean value is considered for the analysis, yielding a total capital
investment of 10.4 MDKK.
Total investment costs
The total capital costs can be estimated for each fluid, storage type, and route. Fig-
ures 7.18 and 7.20a show the costs distribution for Route 1 and 2 respectively, con-
sidering the minimal storage mass yielding full harbour coverage (see Tables 7.5 and
7.7). For each oil, the stacked costs are shown with a full line for the thermocline stor-
age (left), and dotted lines for the two-tanks storage (right). As could be expected,
the ORC is the main contributor to the total costs, accounting for 70%, 80%, 81%
and 77% (69%, 77%, 79% and 75% for Route 2) for Therminol 72, 66, VP-1 and 75
respectively. On the other hand, the tank only represents between 0.7% and 2.3% of
the total investment. For Therminol 66, the HEX is the second highest contribution
with 13% (16%) of the total capital cost, the storage fluid accounting for the remain-
ing 6.4% (6.1%). For the other oils, the storage fluid represents the second largest
investment with 24%, 11% and 13% (23%, 11% and 12%).
Due to the higher mass of fluid required, the thermocline storage generally yields
higher costs than the two-tanks system. The investment cost related to the mass of
fluid is generally more significant than the cost of a second storage tank. This is not
the case for Therminol 66, as the mass of storage yielding full harbour coverage is
almost the same with the two systems. In this case, the only difference is in the cost
of the tanks, thus the two-tanks storage yields higher costs. However, the total costs
only differ by less than 4%.
It should also be noted that Route 2 yields a slightly higher capital investment
than Route 1.
This is due to the larger heat exchangers required.
However, the
==PAGE:111==
7.3 Economic analysis
97
Figure 7.18: Distribution of the capital costs for Route 1
difference only ranges from 1 to 4%, due to the small impact of the HEX in the
total costs distribution. Moreover, Route 2 also generally requires a lower amount of
storage fluid, thus compensating for the higher cost of the HEX network.
Figures 7.19 and 7.20b show the total investment cost of the system for the differ-
ent configurations, represented similarly as on Figure 7.13. In comparison, the capital
cost of the battery packs is shown in green. It can be noted that the system coupling
an ORC to a TES device yields capital costs that are 3 to 4 times higher than the
conventional solution using battery packs, with costs ranging between 31.6 and 39.2
MDKK against 10.4 MDKK. Therminol 66 and VP-1 yield the lowest costs thanks to
the low mass requirement of the former, and the low cost of the HEX network and of
the thermal oil for the latter. On the other hand, Therminol 72 generates the highest
capital expenditures, due to its high specific cost. Increasing the storage mass by 10%
of the design mass Mreq yields an increase of the total cost of around 1-2%.
7.3.2
Operational expenditures (OPEX)
Distribution and total costs
The distribution of the yearly operation and maintenance (O&M) costs are repre-
sented on Figure 7.21 for Route 1, considering the minimal mass yielding harbour
coverage. For each thermal oil, the costs are represented in full lines for the thermo-
cline storage (left), and dotted lines for the two-tanks system (right). As explained
previously, the operational expenditures account for the cost of auxiliary consumption
(in red), and for the maintenance of the ORC (in blue), the latter being a constant
==PAGE:112==
98
7 Analysis of the results
Figure 7.19: Total costs for the different configurations - Route 1
(a) Distribution of the capital costs
(b) Total costs for the different configurations
Figure 7.20: Total investments for Route 2
value in the analysis. It should be understood that these results correspond to the
minimal storage mass, and therefore to the case yielding the maximal fuel consump-
tion. The cost related to auxiliary consumption is subject to decrease for a higher
storage mass, as detailed in Section 7.2.
Route 1 generates yearly expenditures ranging from 767 kDKK up to 1.24 MDKK.
Therminol 72 and VP-1 yield the highest yearly O&M costs with 1.24 MDKK using
the thermocline storage, and 1.01 MDKK with the two-tanks system, the auxiliary
consumption accounting for 49% and 38% of the total yearly expenditures. Using
==PAGE:113==
7.3 Economic analysis
99
Figure 7.21: Distribution of the yearly O&M costs - Route 1
Therminol 66 and 75, the O&M expenditures range between 774 and 903 kDKK, with
18% to 30% of fuel consumption. Similarly, the distribution of the yearly OPEX is
represented for the different configurations in Route 2 on Figure 7.23a. It can be seen
than Route 2 generates lower operation costs compared to Route 1, and thus yearly
expenditures, ranging from 631 to 806 kDKK. In this case, the ORC maintenance
is clearly the main contributor, as it accounts for 80% to 100% of the yearly costs.
The fuel consumption is very close to zero for Therminol 66 and 75, thus these oils
generate the lowest operation costs.
The total yearly operational costs are represented on Figures 7.22 and 7.23b for
Route 1 and 2 respectively.
Again, the circle, diamond and square represent higher
values of the storage mass, as explained for Figure 7.13.
It reveals that a higher
storage mass, although yielding a higher capital investment, will also generate lower
operation costs. It should however be underlined that the impact of the storage mass
depends on the storage fluid and configuration. For instance, in Route 1 and using
Therminol VP-1 with the thermocline storage, the yearly costs are of 1.24 MDKK for
the minimal mass of 1.18 × Mreq. When increasing the storage mass to 1.3 × Mreq,
the OPEX go down to 1.16 MDKK, which represents a 7% decrease. However, when
further increasing the mass to 1.4 × Mreq, the OPEX are of 1.15 MDKK, and only
decrease by 1%. It is therefore likely that the higher investment cost yielded by the
latter mass increase will not be compensated by the savings in the operational costs
in this case.
==PAGE:114==
100
7 Analysis of the results
Figure 7.22: Yearly O&M costs for the different configurations - Route 1
(a) Distribution of the yearly O&M costs
(b) Yearly O&M costs for the different con-
figurations
Figure 7.23: Yearly O&M costs - Route 2
Impact of the fuel price
Figures 7.24 and 7.25 show the total yearly O&M costs for the minimal mass of each
configuration (red bar for the thermocline, blue for the 2-tanks storage) along with the
yearly expenditures of the alternative system using batteries (green bar), for Route 1
and 2 respectively. To show the impact of the LNG price in the analysis, the results are
also represented for the low (circle) and the high (diamond) fuel price scenarios from
Table 6.8.
It can be seen that the system using battery packs generates significantly
==PAGE:115==
7.3 Economic analysis
101
Figure 7.24: Total yearly expenditures for different fuel prices - Route 1
higher yearly costs than the alternative analyzed in the present study, i.e. between
2.5 to 4 times more in Route 1, and above than 6 times more in Route 2. This makes
sense, as the ORC produces electricity from waste heat, whereas the battery packs
always relies on auxiliary machinery. However, the difference between the yearly costs
of the two alternatives depends greatly on the fuel price. Indeed, in the case of low
LNG price, the WHRS is only 2 and 3 times lower than the conventional solution in
Route 1 and 2 respectively. On the other hand, with a high price, the OPEX differ by
a factor 4 and 7 respectively. The impact of the fuel price is greater on configurations
with a high fuel consumption. Hence, the yearly expenditures of the batteries system
varies by 40% when varying the fuel price by 40%. This could be expected, as the
only contribution to the OPEX is the fuel consumption in this case. On the other
hand, the same variation in the fuel price will impact the yearly costs of the TES
system by 20% using Therminol VP-1 in Route 1, against 0% for Therminol 66 in
Route 2. Therefore, when increasing the fuel price, the effect on the totaly yearly
expenditures is more significant for the batteries system than for the WHRS.
7.3.3
Viability of the system
The cost estimates for the capital and operational expenditures (CAPEX and OPEX
respectively) allow to obtain the net present value of a system along time. As was
shown previously, the thermocline storage yields both higher capital costs and higher
operational expenditures. It can therefore be expected that the two-tanks system
presents more economic interest.
==PAGE:116==
102
7 Analysis of the results
Figure 7.25: Total yearly expenditures for different fuel prices - Route 2
”Pure” NPV
Figure 7.26a shows the evolution of the NPV as function of time using Therminol VP-
1 in Route 1, and for all the relevant mass configurations as referred to in Tables 7.5
and 7.7. As previously underlined, the NPV represented is negative, as the revenues
(a) TES-ORC system using Therminol VP-1
(b) Alternative system using batteries
Figure 7.26: Evolution of the ”pure” NPV for both systems in Route 1
from exploitation were not taken into account in the analysis. The plots represent
the cumulative, discounted costs of installing and operating the system over time.
Nevertheless, the most valuable solution is the one with the highest NPV, i.e. the
==PAGE:117==
7.3 Economic analysis
103
NPV closest to zero, as this will correspond to the one with the lowest cumulative
costs.
Considering that the lifetime of the ship is 25 years, the focus should be
on the net present value of the system at the end of the lifetime, i.e. NPV(Y =
25 years). As could be expected, the thermocline storage has a lower NPV than the
two-tanks system. Although all the configurations start around the same investment
cost of approx. -32 MDKK, the two-tanks system final cumulative costs are of -42.9
MDKK, against approximately -45 MDKK for the stratified storage. The impact of
the discount factor γ can also be noticed, as the variation rate of the NPV decreases
over the years: the impact of the operation costs is weighted lower in later years.
Moreover, it can be seen on the Figure that, although it yields the lowest invest-
ment cost, the solution with the minimal mass is not necessary the most valuable at
the end of the period of interest. Indeed, looking for example at Figure 7.26a, the
thermocline storage with 1.18×Mreq has the lowest value after 25 years. On the other
hand, it should also be noted that a higher mass does not necessarily yield a higher
NPV, since the thermocline storage with 1.5×Mreq is not as valuable as the one with
1.3 × Mreq. A balance is to be struck between fuel savings and high investment cost.
The evolution of the NPV can also be plotted for the alternative system using
batteries. It was represented for Route 1 on Figure 7.26b. What should be underlined
is that the variation is not steady, as regular ”jumps” can be noticed over time. These
correspond to the planned maintenance of the batteries, i.e. their replacement every
8 years. Here again, the influence of the discount factor is clear, as the gaps seem to
be damped over the years, although the cost of the maintenance is always the same.
Relative NPV
Using values from Figures 7.26a and 7.26b, the relative NPV between the two systems
can be plotted. This gives an information about the viability of the system compared
to the alternative.
Figure 7.27 represents the relative NPV of the system using
Therminol VP-1 in Route 1. It can be seen that the NPV starts at a negative value
of around -20 MDKK. This was to be expected, as the investment costs yielded by
the system using an ORC are significantly higher than for the conventional system.
Moreover, the NPV increases over time. This is because the operation costs are lower
using a WHR unit.
The NPV becomes positive after 11 years for the two-tanks
storage, against 14 years for the stratified tank. This corresponds to the payback
time of the system: after these years, the initial investment of the ORC-TES is
compensated by the savings in the operation costs compared to the conventional case.
Finally, the NPV at the end of the lifetime of the ship is of 13.3 MDKK for the two-
tanks storage, against approx. 10.8 MDKK with the thermocline. It should be noted
that, for a given storage type and oil, the plots of the relative NPV are all relatively
close. In the considered example of Therminol VP-1 in Route 1, the final values for
the thermocline storage are of 10.69, 11.2, 11.04 and 10.83 MDKK for 1.18, 1.3, 1.4
and 1.5 × Mreq.
==PAGE:118==
104
7 Analysis of the results
Figure 7.27: Relative NPV for Route 1 using Therminol VP-1
Final relative NPV
As previously explained, the most crucial part of the economic analysis is to deter-
mine the final relative net present value of the system. This will represent what the
system is worth on the whole operation lifetime compared to the conventional solu-
tion. Figures 7.28a and 7.28b represent the final relative NPV for Route 1 and 2
respectively. Similarly as before, the minimal mass is represented by a red bar (left)
(a) Route 1
(b) Route 2
Figure 7.28: Final relative NPV for all the storage configurations
for the thermocline storage, and blue bar for the two-tanks system (right). Then, the
==PAGE:119==
7.3 Economic analysis
105
alternative configurations with a higher mass ∆M1, ∆M2 and ∆M3 are represented
by a circle, diamond, and square.
The Figures reveal that Route 2 yields higher final relative NPV than Route 1,
with values ranging between 30 and 40 MDKK, against less than 16 MDKK in the
best case. This is due to both the lower OPEX of the WHR system, and the higher
OPEX of the conventional system in Route 2. Moreover, as could be expected from
the previous analysis, the two-tanks system yields a higher relative NPV than the
stratified tank in most cases. For example, using Therminol 75 in Route 1, the final
relative NPV of the two-tanks system is of 14.7 MDKK, against 12.6 MDKK for the
stratified tank. Therminol 66 is an exception, as the NPV of the stratified tank is
of 15.84 MDKK at the end of the operation life, against 15.74 MDKK for the two-
tanks storage. Finally, the impact of the storage mass differs from the cases. Indeed,
although it yields a higher final relative NPV for Therminol VP-1 and 75 in Route
1, the value is lower for Therminol 72. This means that the optimal configuration
depends on the case, and on the corresponding investment and operation costs.
Best solution
As seen on Figures 7.28a and 7.28b, there is for each storage fluid and type an optimal
value of the storage mass yielding the highest relative NPV at the end of the operation
period. This is the one that should be considered when assessing the viability of the
project. Figures 7.29a and 7.29b show the final value of the relative NPV considering
(a) Route 1
(b) Route 2
Figure 7.29: Final relative NPV for the best solution and different fuel prices
==PAGE:120==
106
7 Analysis of the results
the best solution on an economic point of view, with a red bar for the thermocline,
and a blue bar for the 2-tanks storage. Moreover, to show the impact of the LNG
price in the analysis, the results are also represented for the low (circle) and the
high (diamond) fuel price scenarios from Table 6.8. In the reference case, the final
relative NPV is always positive. Route 2 yields the highest values, between 30 and 40
MDKK depending on the configuration, against 5 to 15 MDKK in Route 1. Except
for Therminol 66 for which both configurations yield very close final relative NPVs,
the two-tanks storage always generates higher worth than the stratified tank.
In
Route 1, Therminol 66 yields the highest value, then 75, VP-1 and 72. In Route 2,
Therminol 66 is also first, followed closely by Therminol VP-1, 75 and then 72.
The impact of the fuel cost is significant on the final relative NPV. Indeed, with the
low price scenario, the value goes from 5.1 MDKK to -5.7 MDKK for the stratified
storage with Therminol 72.
It should be underlined that this oil is the only one
yielding negative results, and that this only occurs in Route 1. On the other hand,
the high cost scenario multiplies by 2 the final relative value.
7.4
Final configurations
Based on the economic analysis, the best solution for each oil, configuration and
Route, were gathered in Tables 7.9 and 7.10 for Route 1 and 2 respectively.
As
Table 7.9: Final configurations yielding the highest economic value - Route 1
Oil
Storage
Th
Mtank
Vtank
βaux
CAPEX
NPV
tP B
[◦C]
[tons]
[m3]
[%]
[MDKK]
[MDKK]
[Years]
72
Stratified
260
92.6
107.4
79.5
36.8
5.14
18
Two-tanks
76.5
88.8
87.2
35.46
9.09
16
66
Stratified
340
38.7
50.3
95.5
31.6
15.8
10
Two-tanks
36.5
47.1
95.5
31.7
15.7
10
VP-1
Stratified
250
102
117
82.0
31.6
11.2
14
Two-tanks
82.2
94.8
87.0
31.1
13.3
12
75
Stratified
330
64.3
76.0
92.9
33.6
12.9
13
Two-tanks
48.2
57.0
95.2
32.6
14.7
11
before, Th refers to the high storage temperature, Mtank to the total storage mass,
Vtank to the volume of the storage tank (only the hot tank in the two-tanks system).
βaux correspond to the fuel savings on a given route, CAPEX to the total initial
investment, NPV to the final relative net present value compared to the alternative
solution, and tP B to the payback time. In accordance with previous observations, the
two-tanks system requires a lower storage mass, yields higher savings and a higher
final net present value, except for Therminol 66 for which results are very similar. The
payback time is also either the same as or lower than with the thermocline storage,
the difference lying between 0 and 2 years. In Route 2, the payback time is 7 years
==PAGE:121==
7.4 Final configurations
107
Table 7.10: Final configurations yielding the highest economic value - Route 2
Oil
Storage
Th
Mtank
Vtank
βaux
CAPEX
NPV
tP B
[◦C]
[tons]
[m3]
[%]
[MDKK]
[MDKK]
[Years]
72
Stratified
260
88.2
102.3
96.4
37.1
31.7
8
Two-tanks
77.3
89.6
98.6
36.3
33.8
8
66
Stratified
340
38.6
49.8
100
32.8
38.1
7
Two-tanks
36.5
47.1
100
32.9
37.9
7
VP-1
Stratified
250
110
126
97.9
32.6
37.06
7
Two-tanks
82.2
94.8
98.7
31.9
38.2
7
75
Stratified
330
55.5
65.6
98.9
34.0
36.3
8
Two-tanks
48.2
57.0
99.8
33.6
37.1
8
for Therminol 66 and VP-1, and 8 years for 72 and 75. In Route 1, Therminol 66
yields the shortest payback time with 10 years in both configurations, then ThVP-1
with 14, Th75 with 13, and Th72 with 18 years for the stratified tank, the two-tanks
system being paid back in 2 years less for each of these oils.
==PAGE:122==
108
==PAGE:123==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion
Based on the results obtained from the model and their techno-economic analysis,
guidelines for the coupling of an ORC to a TES can be made. Besides, limits of the
methods used should also be discussed.
8.1
ORC working fluid
In order to minimize the design discharging mass flow ˙mORC,D, the decision was
made to select the working fluid performing best for each storage fluid. As could be
expected, the corresponding fluids all belong to the hydrocarbons group. Not only
they perform better than other fluids, but they also comply with all the environmental
regulations.
However, it should be underlined that hydrocarbons are highly flammable. Their
use in the ORC therefore requires additional safety measures to be taken, especially on
board passenger vessels. These safety precautions were not considered in the present
study, and an economic impact is surely to be expected. In the future, R1233zdE
could be a competitive alternative to the use of hydrocarbon, as it is not flammable,
and has low global warming potential and ozone depletion potential. Moreover, Table
7.1 reveals that it yields a similar performance to the hydrocarbons in the 250 - 260◦C
range. However, its price is still 7 times higher than the equivalent hydrocarbons.
8.2
Performance of the system
Based on the results of the modelling framework, it can be concluded that the coupling
of a sensible thermal energy storage to an ORC unit allows zero-emission power
production in harbour. Moreover, while meeting this main objective, it also yields
significant fuel savings during sailing of at least 80% of the total demand. For certain
storage configurations, the system can actually supply the whole of the power demand.
Looking at Tables 7.5 and 7.7, several observations can be made from the technical
point of view.
==PAGE:124==
110
8 Discussion
8.2.1
Storage type
The thermocline storage yields a poorer performance compared to the two-tanks
system. It requires an added mass of 17 to 30% of the required mass Mreq to reach
full harbour coverage, against only 5% with the two-tanks system. Moreover, it does
not allow as much reduction of the auxiliary consumption. Considering the same
tank insulation and ORC, this is mainly due to the degradation of the stratification
in the tank during voyage.
Figure 8.1 represents the temperature distribution at
a given time during Route 1. It shows that the thermocline (the green to orange
Figure 8.1: Temperature distribution inside the tank
area on the Figure) accounts for a large fraction of the tank volume, and is therefore
not usable by the ORC. Moreover, the degradation of the stratification also causes
the inlet temperature of the ORC to decrease when discharging the tank in harbour.
This causes the cycle to perform in off design conditions, thus decreasing its output
power.
Besides, the inlet mixing, which is the main cause of degradation of the
thermocline, was modelled by a simple approach. Although the sensitivity analysis
revealed that its impact is not significant below 10%, the high mass flows involved will
require additional precautions such as baffle plates to ensure proper operation of the
thermocline storage. It should also be added that in the specific area of application of
the present study, the storage tank should be installed on board a ship and is therefore
likely to be subject to wave motions. Although no study investigated the impact of
such conditions on the thermal stratification inside storage tanks, it is safe to assume
it could be greatly impacted by severe sea conditions, and with it the performance of
the system. This raises questions regarding the operation of the ORC, which might
suffer from being operated in part load during long periods.
==PAGE:125==
8.2 Performance of the system
111
8.2.2
Storage fluid
Therminol 66 is the only thermal fluid yielding the minimal auxiliary consumption in
both routes. It is the oil performing best, for the lowest storage mass. This is thanks
to its main advantage, i.e. its large temperature range. More generally, it should
then be understood that the higher the storage temperature is, the better will the
system perform. Indeed, Therminol VP-1 and 72 both require more than twice the
mass flow, hence storage mass, when comparing to Therminol 66, due to their lower
storage temperature.
On the other hand, although it yields a comparable performance, the use of Ther-
minol 75 raises issues due to the high value of its lower temperature limitation. In-
deed, the requirement of Treturn > 85◦C induces a poorer off design performance
of the ORC, thus impacting the overall results of the system, especially using the
thermocline storage. Moreover, it could be argued that the additional precautions
required by this high slurry temperature limitation severely question the potential
of this oil as storage fluid. Indeed, although the temperature is not supposed to go
below the design cold temperature Tc, regular maintenance is necessary on board the
ship, and thus the system would not operate continuously over time. This means a
heatable storage vessel would be required in order to heat up the crystallized oil to a
temperature at which it can be pumped.
8.2.3
Overall performance
Firstly, Route 2 yields a higher performance of the system, and this no matter the
storage type or fluid. As previously underlined, this is due to the fact that it offers a
larger amount of waste heat with the long phases running with 4 engines. Moreover,
the auxiliary consumption can not be completely supplied by the ORC in Route 1,
as the system is not designed to be active during phases of low engine load. It should
however be underlined that Route 2 requires the HEX network to operate in two
very distinct regimes, as the mass flows of both heat sources varies by a factor 2.
Although the off design operation of the network was modelled, this is also likely to
require specific technical measures in order to ensure proper operation of the heat
exchangers.
The storage mass has a significant influence on the performance of the system.
For each configuration, a minimal amount of storage fluid is required in order to
fulfill the primary objective, i.e. complete harbour coverage. Moreover, in certain
cases, increasing the storage mass above this value allows reducing the auxiliary
consumption, and thus the operation costs of the system.
On the other hand, it
also induces higher space requirements and investment costs. Therefore, it is likely
that a balance should be struck between high capital cost and storage mass, and low
auxiliary consumption.
==PAGE:126==
112
8 Discussion
8.3
Economic analysis
The economic analysis of the system was based on the comparison with the conven-
tional alternative only using battery packs charged with shaft power. Similarly to
the technical analysis, several conclusions and guidelines can be extracted from this
study.
8.3.1
Capital costs
Comparing both alternatives, the estimated capital costs of the WHR system are
3 to 4 times higher than the conventional solution. This is mainly due to the high
investment cost of the ORC, accounting for 70 to 80% of the total, and thus impacting
greatly the final economic value. It should be underlined that the uncertainty on the
specific cost of the ORC is significant, as it is a developing technology, especially in
the transportation sector. It is expected by the industry that this cost will decrease
over the years, as units will be manufactured on a larger scale. This would further
increase the economic potential of the investigated solution.
Moreover, the impact of the storage tank on the total capital costs is almost
negligible. Although the insulation was not considered in the analysis, it is safe to
assume that the contribution of the tank is likely to remain the same.
It should
be understood that, on an economic point of view, the two-storage tanks does not
represent a higher initial investment compared to the thermocline storage. This is
especially true as the higher investment caused by the second storage tank is generally
compensated by the lower storage mass required.
8.3.2
Operational expenditures
The operational expenditures were computed considering only the fuel consumption
and ORC maintenance. It should be precised that other sources of expenditures are
to be expected, such as maintenance of the walls of the storage tank and of the heat
exchangers, but it is safe to assume the total yearly costs will not be extremely affected.
However, the study relies on the assumption that the thermal oil does not require
any replacement or maintenance over the whole operation time. This is based on the
guidelines from the manufacturer, stating that operation within the recommended
range for the bulk temperature should offer many years of service. The degradation
of the oil could still be expected considering the high storage temperature. However,
the economic analysis revealed that the storage fluid does not represent such a large
fraction of the total costs. Therefore, its replacement could have a relatively small
impact on the overall economic viability of the project, provided that it does not
occur at a too high recurrence.
==PAGE:127==
8.4 Final design of the system
113
8.3.3
Best solution
The economic study revealed that for each storage configuration and thermal oil, a
certain value of the storage mass yields the highest final relative net present value
compared to the conventional solution. This value was chosen as the best solution for
the design of the system. However, it should be underlined that two different values
of the storage mass did not always differ significantly in their economic potentials.
Therefore, although a given value of the storage mass is the best solution on an
economic point of view, perhaps it does not justify the increase of the storage volume
and mass.
Space requirements should be taken into account when designing the
system.
The analysis also highlighted the impact of the fuel price on the overall viability
of the system. Even though the considered scenarios correspond to extreme cases, it
can still be extracted from this that the economic potential of the system will increase
with rising fuel prices.
Overall, the coupling of an ORC to a TES technology is economically viable com-
pared to the conventional solution using batteries. Indeed, although it yields a sig-
nificantly higher capital cost, this is compensated by the large savings in operational
expenditures. This is especially true in Route 2, for which the fuel consumption has
a greater impact. Moreover, the two-tanks storage shows generally more economic
potential than the stratified tank. Except for the case of Therminol 66, it yields both
lower operational and investment costs, due to the higher fuel savings and the lower
mass of fluid. Considering Therminol 66, as both storage systems allow reaching the
maximal savings for a similar mass, the thermocline storage yields a slightly higher
relative net present value at the end of the operation time.
Finally, Therminol 66 is the oil with the highest economic potential. Next, Ther-
minol VP-1 and 75 yield close values, the former being preferred in Route 2, and the
latter in Route 1. Therminol 72 does not seem to be a promising candidate on the
economic point of view, mainly due to its very high specific cost.
8.4
Final design of the system
The technical analysis showed that the coupling of an ORC to a TES is feasible, and
allows great fuel savings while ensuring zero-emission power production in harbour.
On the other hand, the economic study also evaluated the potential of the different
solutions compared to the conventional alternative. By joining considerations of both
studies, general observations can be made.
Firstly, Route 2 is the alternative showing the most potential, both from the tech-
nical and economic point of view. On one hand, it involves higher mass flows of the
heat sources, thus yielding off design performance of the HEX network and higher
investment costs. However, the larger amount of heat which can be recovered make
it easier to fulfill the main objective of harbour coverage, and allows yielding signif-
icant savings in fuel consumption, and thus operation costs. Moreover, it should be
==PAGE:128==
114
8 Discussion
highlighted that, although Route 1 yields lower savings, and thus economic potential,
the design of the system is very close in both alternatives. It could therefore be possi-
ble to operate the same system on both routes. This could however mean oversizing
slightly the storage mass for Route 2, and operating the HEX network in off design
conditions for Route 1.
Then, the study tends to show that the two-tanks system should be preferred to
the thermocline storage. Indeed, it requires a lower mass of storage and allows higher
fuel savings, in most cases. This is generally translated in a higher economic value
of the system. Therminol 66 is an exception, as the difference of storage mass is not
significant between the two configurations, and as the fuel consumption is minimized
for both cases. However, it was underlined that the final values of the system differ
from less than 4% between the two cases. Therefore, considering the two-tanks system
yields a smoother operation of the ORC, and represents a lower risk in regard to
the potential impact of wave motions on the stratification, it seems more promising
compared to the thermocline storage. Naturally, specific space requirements might
impact in the decision. Indeed, the two-tanks storage will occupy twice the volume,
which might not be possible on board a given ship. However, to this could be argued
that the thermocline storage requires to be installed inside the vessel, preferably next
to the engine room, in order to minimize heat losses to the outside. On the other
hand, while this is also true for the hot tank of the two-tanks system, the cold tank
could be placed outside, as the temperature difference is not as significant. This could
allow going over the space limitations.
Table 8.1: Optimal configuration for both routes
Oil
Route
Th
Mtank
Vtank
βaux
CAPEX
NPV
tP B
[◦C]
[tons]
[m3]
[%]
[MDKK]
[MDKK]
[Years]
Th. 66
1
340
36.5
47.1
95.5
31.7
15.7
10
2
36.5
47.1
100
32.9
37.9
7
Th. VP-1
1
250
82.2
94.8
87.0
31.1
13.3
12
2
82.2
94.8
98.7
31.9
38.2
7
Finally, Therminol 66 is the best of the storage fluid candidates. From the tech-
nical point of view, it yields the highest savings with the lowest mass, and ensures
the ORC operates within the same range of operation during the whole route. This
is mainly thanks to its high storage temperature, which yields a low design mass flow
in the ORC. Moreover, its low return temperature allows recovering as much waste
heat as possible. Finally, its moderate cost also ensures that it has a high relative
NPV at the end of the operating life. On the other hand, Therminol 75 is problem-
atic due to its high crystallization temperature impacting the ORC performance, and
raising storage issues. Therminol 72 yields a reasonable performance, but its high
specific cost makes it the least viable option. This makes Therminol VP-1 the sec-
ond best candidate for the storage fluid, thanks to its low specific cost. Its wide use
in solar applications could also make it a safe choice regarding the longevity of the
==PAGE:129==
8.4 Final design of the system
115
oil. However, it does require a significant storage mass compared to Therminol 66,
and space requirements are greatly affected. Based on the considerations of both the
technical and economic analyses, Table 8.1 gathers details on the final configurations
using either Therminol 66 or VP-1, both in the two-tanks storage and for Route 1
and 2 respectively. More generally, a good storage fluid should have a high storage
temperature in order to limit the storage mass. Moreover, its specific cost should be
as low as possible, and a good stability at low temperatures is preferable.
==PAGE:130==
116
==PAGE:131==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
The feasibility study of coupling an organic Rankine cycle to a thermal energy storage
on board passenger vessels in order to achieve zero-emission power production in
harbour was conducted from both a thermodynamic and economic point of view.
The analysis was focused on a case study based on two alternative routes of the
Fjordline company.
9.1
Conclusions
The literature review on applications of thermal energy storage concluded that latent
heat thermal storage using phase-change materials is a promising technology, as it al-
lows a dense storage. However, there are issues regarding the reliability and longevity
of the PCMs, as well as the lack of industrial applications within the considered tem-
perature range. For these reasons, the study focused on sensible heat storage, the
principle being to store the heat by rising the temperature of the medium. More-
over, comparison between the possible candidates concluded that the most promising
storage fluids are industrial thermal oils, thanks to their high temperature limitation.
Two storage configurations were considered for the analysis, i.e. the two-tanks stor-
age, and the thermocline storage. In the two-tanks storage, the hot and cold fluids
are stored in two separate tanks, whereas thermal stratification allows storing the
cold in the bottom, and the hot in the top of the same tank with the thermocline
storage.
The system integration was described in details along with its control strategy.
During sailing, heat exchangers in series are used to extract heat from the exhaust
gases and cooling water to transfer it to the thermal oil. It is then stored in the
TES, and released during harbour stay to supply the ORC, thus producing the power
demand. During sailing, a fraction of the available heat can also be sent to the ORC
in order to reduce auxiliary consumption.
A model of both storage configurations was developed using Matlab, and validated
using experimental data. The performance of the heat exchanger network used to
charge the tank was also modelled. A modelling framework built within DTU Ther-
mal Energy prior to the project was used to optimize the ORC, and to simulate its
performance in part load. This allowed comparing the performance of the system in
all the different configurations. Results revealed that the two-tanks storage allows
fulfilling the main objective of harbour coverage with a lower storage mass, due to the
==PAGE:132==
118
9 Conclusion
degradation of the stratification in the thermocline storage. Considering that mixing
inside the tank is likely to be amplified by wave motions on board the ship, it can be
concluded that the two-tanks storage offers a more reliable approach. Moreover, it
also generally yields higher fuel savings over a given Route. In Route 1, the system
allows reaching up to 95% of savings, the 5% remaining being due to short periods
at low engine load. In Route 2, the ORC can supply all of the power demand, during
both the sailing and harbour phases. Therminol 66 is the thermal oil performing the
best for the lowest storage mass, thanks to its high storage temperature of 340◦C.
For each storage fluid and type, a minimal storage mass yielding harbour coverage
was identified, as well as higher values of the mass allowing larger savings.
Finally, an economic study was conducted in order to choose the optimal storage
mass. This was based on the comparison with the alternative system, using batteries
charged with shaft power in order to supply the ship in harbour stay without emissions.
The capital costs were estimated by averaging different correlation methods for each
component. The operation costs were evaluated by using the cost of energy given by
Fjordline, and considering maintenance costs of the ORC. The study revealed that the
system coupling an ORC to a TES yields a relative net present value of around 10 to
15 MDKK in Route 1, and 30 to 40 MDKK in Route 2 compared to the conventional
alternative. Moreover, the payback time is of 10 to 18 years in Route 1, and of 7 or
8 years in Route 2. An increase in the price of LNG fuel would amplify the interest
of implementing the investigated system.
Finally, by combining conclusions from the technical and the economic analysis,
the best configuration was identified. It uses the two-storage tanks with Therminol
66. The optimal storage mass is of 36.5 tons for both routes, yielding a tank volume
of 47 m3 for each tank. This configuration allows 95.5% and 100% of fuel savings
on Route 1 and 2. With a capital investment of 31.7 MDKK and 32.9 MDKK, the
system is paid back in 10 and 7 years, yielding a final relative net present value of
15.7 MDKK and 37.9 MDKK for Route 1 and 2 respectively.
9.2
Future work
The thesis work presented a thorough feasibility study of the investigated system.
As the thermo-economic analysis was based on results from a model, several aspects
should be further investigated.
9.2.1
Thermal storage
First of all, the space requirements were not considered as a constraint on the system,
as the case study was not based on an existing ship. However, it should be taken into
account that when comparing the TES alternative with the conventional solution,
the difference in the occupied volume can be of significant importance. Indeed, it is
estimated by Fjordline that the battery packs should occupy approximately 50 m3 in
==PAGE:133==
9.2 Future work
119
order to fulfill the main objective. Even in the best case configuration, this represents
only half of the storage occupied by the thermal storage alone, when using the two-
tanks system. To this must be added the space required for the implementation of
the ORC and heat exchangers. Therefore, the choice of the storage type could be
influenced by space considerations, and the thermocline could gain in potential. In
this case, a more accurate modelling of the stratification should be built, in order to
take into account the wave motions.
Moreover, the use of dual-media storage was not investigated in the study, due to
time constraints. Indeed, using a second storage medium such as sand could allow
reducing drastically the capital costs related to the storage, as well as allowing a
better conservation of the stratification inside the thermocline tank.
The control
strategy would need to be adapted, as the transfer rate between the oil and the sand
would impact the charging mass flow.
On the other hand, the storage mass is also likely to impact the total shipment
mass, and thus the fuel consumption related to propulsion. This should also be taken
into account in order to get a more accurate evaluation of the overall performance of
the system.
Finally, a more thorough analysis should be conducted regarding the processes of
degradation of thermal oils. Indeed, the longevity was assumed to be equivalent to
the lifetime of the ship, but this was only based on guidelines from the manufacturer.
9.2.2
Heat recovery
The work was focused on recovering heat from the exhaust gases and cooling water.
It is commonly considered that the scavenge air does not show a great potential for
waste heat recovery due to its high dependence on the engine load, although it does
represents a significant amount of energy. Storing this waste heat instead of using it
directly could allow smoothing the high variations in the mass flow, thus converting
it into a steady heat source. This is likely to increase the heat recovery efficiency of
the system, and thus its economic potential. Moreover, the study did not investigate
the possibility of implementing a regenerated ORC. Adding a recuperator could allow
decreasing the design mass flow, and therefore the storage mass.
9.2.3
Control strategy
The control strategy was implemented with the main objective as a priority, i.e. cov-
ering the harbour stays. However, the practical aspect of how to apply this control
was not taken into account. Indeed, it relies primarily on the difference between the
mass of hot fluid required for the next harbour stay, and the mass of hot fluid al-
ready stored. In the case of the two-tanks system, a simple measure of the volume of
fluid in the tank is relatively easy to apply in practice. However, implementing this
in the stratified tank will require a set of thermocouples measuring the temperature
distribution along the tank.
==PAGE:134==
120
9 Conclusion
Moreover, the strategy could be optimized by adding a PID-type control, con-
stantly adjusting the fluid mass flow in order to ensure that the ORC meets the
power demand, even in off design conditions. Finally, the impact of the transients in
the performance of the pumps when switching from discharge to charge mode (and
thus inverting the mass flow), as well as the ORC when starting after a short stop,
should be considered in a more thorough analysis of the performance.
==PAGE:135==
APPENDIX A
Model interface
An interface was built using Matlab for both storage configurations. It launches an
Figure A.1: The interface for the stratified storage
animation of the whole route, and represents the evolution of the temperature distri-
bution in the stratified tank, and of the mass in both storage tanks in the two-tanks
system. A set of buttons can be used to navigate in the different phases. Relevant
information regarding the mass flows and tank temperatures is also actualized during
the whole route. Figures A.1 and A.2 show the interface for the thermocline storage
and the two-tanks system respectively. Naturally, the screenshot corresponds to a
given time of the simulation, indicated by the black, vertical line on the plot in the
right part of the Figure. The animation allowed a quick understanding of the control
strategy of the system, and made debugging any issue easier.
==PAGE:136==
122
A Model interface
Figure A.2: The interface for the two-tanks storage
==PAGE:137==
Bibliography
[1]
Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC). NRDC Home website. 2018. url:
https://www.nrdc.org/.
[2]
International Maritime Organisation (IMO). Third IMO GHG Study 2014. 2018.
url: http://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/Environment/PollutionPrevention/
AirPollution/Pages/Greenhouse-Gas-Studies-2014.aspx.
[3]
European comission. Reducing emissions from the shipping sector. 2018. url:
https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/transport/shipping_en.
[4]
IHS Maritime 360. 2018. url: www.ihsmaritime360.com.
[5]
M.E. Mondejar et al. “A review of the use of organic Rankine cycle power
systems for maritime applications”. In: Elsevier - Renewable and sustainable
energy reviews (2018).
[6]
N.R. Kristiansen and H. K. Nielsen. “Potential for Usage of Thermoelectric
Generators on Ships”. In: Journal of electronic materials (2010).
[7]
O. Merk. “Shipping Emissions in Ports - Discussion paper”. In: International
transport forum (2014).
[8]
V. Lepistö et al. “Dynamic process simulation promotes energy efficient ship
design”. In: Elsevier - Ocean Engineering (2015).
[9]
X. Zhang et al. “Comparative study of waste heat steam SRC, ORC and S-ORC
power generation systems in medium-low temperature”. In: Elsevier - Applied
Thermal Energy (2016).
[10]
P. Colonna et al. “Organic Rankine cycle power systems: from the concept to
current technology, applications, and an outlook to the future.” In: Journal of
Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power (2015).
[11]
S. Quoilin et al. “Techno-economic survey of Organic Rankine Cycle (ORC)
systems”. In: Elsevier - Renewable and sustainable energy reviews (2013).
[12]
S. Lecompte et al. “Review or organic Rankine cycle (ORC) architectures for
waste heat recovery”. In: Elsevier - Renewable and sustainable energy reviews
(2014).
[13]
C. Sprouse and C. Depcik. “Review or organic Rankine cycles for internal com-
bustion enegine exhaust waste heat recovery”. In: Elsevier - Applied Thermal
Energy (2012).
==PAGE:138==
124
Bibliography
[14]
T. Wang et al. “A review of researches on thermal exhaust heat recovery with
Rankine cycle”. In: Elsevier - Renewable and sustainable energy reviews (2011).
[15]
G. Shu et al. “A review of waste heat recovery on two-stroke IC engine aboard
ships”. In: Elsevier - Renewable and sustainable energy reviews (2012).
[16]
R. Pili et al. “Economic Feasibility of Organic Rankine Cycles (ORC) in Dif-
ferent Transportation Sectors”. In: Elsevier - The 8th International Conference
on Applied Energy (2017).
[17]
J. Duffie and W. Beckman. Solar Engineering of Solar Processes - Fourth Edi-
tion. Wiley and sons, 2013.
[18]
I. Dincer and M. Rosen. Thermal Energy Storage (TES): Systems and Applica-
tions - Second Edition. Wiley and sons, 2011.
[19]
H. Mehling and L. Cabeza. Heat and cold storage with PCM. Springer, 2008.
[20]
M. Haider. “An overview of state of the art and research in the fields of sensible,
latent and thermo-chemical thermal energy storage”. In: Springler Verlag Wien
(2013).
[21]
F. Regin, S. Solank, and J. Saini. “Heat transfer characteristics of thermal
energy storage system using PCM capsules: a review”. In: Elsevier - Renewable
and sustainable energy reviews (2007).
[22]
F. Agyenim. “A review of materials, heat transfer and phase change problem
formulation for latent heat thermal energy storage systems (LHTESS)”. In: Re-
newable and Sustainable Energy Reviews - ScienceDirect (2009).
[23]
S.D. Sharma and K. Sagara. “Latent heat storage materials and systems: a
review”. In: International journal of green energy (2007).
[24]
A. Sharma et al. “Review on thermal energy storage with phase change mate-
rials and applications”. In: Elsevier - Renewable and sustainable energy reviews
(2007).
[25]
B. Zalba et al. “Review on thermal energy storage with phase change: mate-
rials, heat transfer analysis and applications”. In: Elsevier - Applied thermal
engineering (2002).
[26]
M. Farid et al. “A review on phase change energy storage: materials and appli-
cations”. In: Elsevier - Energy conversion and management (2002).
[27]
PCM Products website. 2018. url: http://www.pcmproducts.net/.
[28]
F. Agyenim, P. Eames, and M. Smyth. “Heat transfer enhancement in medium
temperature thermal energy storage system using a multitube heat transfer
array”. In: Elsevier - Renewable energy (2009).
[29]
D. Tarwidi, D. Murdiansyah, and N. Ginanjar. “Performance Evaluation of
Various Phase Change Materials for Thermal Energy Storage of A Solar Cooker
via Numerical Simulation”. In: Int. Journal of Renewable Energy Development
(2016).
==PAGE:139==
Bibliography
125
[30]
H. Fath. “Thermal performance of a simple design solar air heater with built-in
thermal energy storage system”. In: Elsevier - Renewable Energy (1994).
[31]
M. Iasiello et al. “Thermal analysis of a Phase Change Material for a Solar
Organic Rankine Cycle”. In: Journal of physics: Conference series (2017).
[32]
S. Lakhani, A. Raul, and S. Saha. “Dynamic modelling of ORC-based solar ther-
mal power plant integrated with multitube shell and tube latent heat thermal
storage system”. In: Elsevier - Applied thermal engineering (2017).
[33]
G. Manfrida, R. Secchi, and K. Stanczyk. “Modelling and simulation of phase
change material latent heat storages applied to a solar-powered Organic Rankine
Cycle”. In: Elsevier - Applied energy (2016).
[34]
P. Gang, L. Jing, and J. Jie. “Analysis of low temperature solar thermal electric
generation using regenerative Organic Rankine Cycle”. In: Elsevier - Applied
thermal engineering (2010).
[35]
J. Freeman et al. “A small-scale solar organic Rankine cycle combined heat and
power system with integrated thermal energy storage”. In: Elsevier - Applied
thermal engineering (2017).
[36]
K. Bhagat and S. Saha. “Numerical analysis of latent heat thermal energy
storage using encapsulated phase change material for solar thermal power plant”.
In: Elsevier - Renewable energy (2016).
[37]
S. Bellan et al. “Transient numerical analysis of storage tanks based on encap-
sulated PCMs for heat storage in concentrating solar power plants”. In: Energy
Procedia (2014).
[38]
S. Bilodeau. “Integrated technology based on thermal storage to reduce trucks
idling for overnight heating or cooling”. In: SAE Technical paper series (2005).
[39]
P. Kauranen et al. “Temperature optimisation of a diesel engine using exhaust
gas heat recovery and thermal energy storage (diesel engine with thermal energy
storage)”. In: Elsevier - Applied thermal engineering (2009).
[40]
V. Pandiyarajan et al. “Experimental investigation on heat recovery from diesel
engine exhaust using finned shell and tube heat exchanger and thermal storage
system”. In: Elsevier - Applied energy (2010).
[41]
F. Dal Magro, M. Arreola, and A. Romagnoli. “Improving energy recovery ef-
ficiency by retrofitting a PCM-based technology to an ORC system operating
under thermal power fluctuations”. In: Elsevier - Applied energy (2017).
[42]
M. Soda and A. Beyene. “Multiphase ultra-low grade thermal energy storage
for organic Rankine cycle”. In: International journal of energy research (2015).
[43]
A. Gil et al. “State of the art on high temperature thermal energy storage for
power generation”. In: Renewable and sustainable energy reviews - ScienceDirect
(2009).
==PAGE:140==
126
Bibliography
[44]
I. Ortega, I. Burgaleta, and F. Tellez. “Central receiver system solar power plant
using molten salt as heat transfer fluid”. In: Journal of solar energy engineering
- Vol. 130 (2008).
[45]
S. Hasnain. “Review on sustainable thermal energy storage technologies - Part
I: Heat storage materials and techniques”. In: Energy research institute, Saudi
Arabia (1997).
[46]
Solar Millenium. “The parabolic trough power plants Andasol 1 to 3”. In: Solar
Millenium AG (2008).
[47]
U. Herrmann and D. Kearney. “Survey of Thermal Energy Storage for Parabolic
Trough Power Plants”. In: Journal of solar engineering (2002).
[48]
S. Flueckiger, Z. Yang, and S. Garimella. “Thermomechanical Simulation of the
Solar One Thermocline Storage Tank”. In: Journal of solar engineering (2012).
[49]
T. Nuytten et al. “Flexibility of a combined heat and power system with thermal
energy storage for district heating”. In: Elsevier - Applied energy (2013).
[50]
D. Haeseldonckx et al. “The impact of thermal storage on the operational be-
haviour of residential CHP facilities and the overall CO2 emissions”. In: Elsevier
- Renewable and sustainable energy reviews (2005).
[51]
V. Verda and F. Collela. “Primary energy savings through thermal storage in
district heating networks”. In: Elsevier - Energy (2011).
[52]
A. Fragaki, A. Andersen, and D. Toke. “Exploration of economical sizing of gas
engine and thermal store for combined heat and power plants in the UK”. In:
Elsevier - Energy (2008).
[53]
G. Pagliarini and S. Ranieiri. “Modeling of a thermal energy storage system
coupled with combined heat and power generation for the heating requirements
of a University Campus”. In: Elsevier - Applied thermal engineering (2010).
[54]
A. Celador, M. Odriozola, and J. Sala. “Implications of the modelling of strat-
ified hot water storage tanks in the simulation of CHP plants”. In: Elsevier -
Energy conversion and management (2011).
[55]
S. A. Klein, W. A. Beckman, and J. A. Duffie. “A design procedure for solar
heating systems”. In: Solar Energy Vol. 18 (1975).
[56]
L. Kenjo, C. Inard, and D. Caccavelli. “Experimental and numerical study of
thermal stratification in a mantle tank of a solar domestic hot water system”.
In: Elsevier - Applied thermal engineering (2006).
[57]
E. Bellos and C. Tzivanidis. “Investigation of a hybrid ORC driven by waste heat
and solar energy”. In: Elsevier - Energy conversion and management (2018).
[58]
T. Zoschke, B. Seubert, and T. Fluri. “Evaluation of Different Operating Strate-
gies to Integrate Storage in a Linear Fresnel ORC Power Plant”. In: AIP Con-
ference proceedings (2017).
==PAGE:141==
Bibliography
127
[59]
S. Rodat et al. “Unique Fresnel demonstrator including ORC and thermocline
direct thermal storage: operating experience”. In: Energy Procedia (2015).
[60]
P. Iora et al. “Dynamic analysis of off-grid systems with ORC plants adopting
various solution for the thermal storage”. In: Energy Procedia (2017).
[61]
M. Shelar and G. kulkarni. “Off grid diesel engine-based trigeneration systems
with thermal storage and compression chiller for enhanced performance”. In:
International journal of sustainable energy (2015).
[62]
F. Baldi, C. Gabrielli, and F. Melino. “A preliminary study on the application
of thermal storage to merchant ships”. In: Energy Procedia (2015).
[63]
K. Senary et al. “Development of a waste heat recovery system onboard LNG
carrier to meet IMO regulations”. In: Elsevier - Alexandria engineering journal
(2016).
[64]
WÄRTSILÄ Engines. 46DF Product guide. 2016.
[65]
M. Soffiato et al. “Design optimization of ORC systems for waste heat recovery
on board a LNG carrier”. In: ScienceDirect (2015).
[66]
MAN Diesel & Turbo. CEAS Engine Data report - 5S70ME-C8.5-GI (methane)
with LP SCR & EGB. 2018.
[67]
Therminol. Therminol VP-1 - Technical data sheet. 2018.
[68]
Therminol. Therminol 66 - Technical data sheet. 2018.
[69]
Therminol. Therminol 72 - Technical data sheet. 2018.
[70]
Therminol. Therminol 75 - Technical data sheet. 2018.
[71]
E. Kleinbach. “Performance Study of One-Dimensional Models for Stratified
Thermal Storage Tank”. In: University of Wisconsin-Madison (1990).
[72]
C. Unrau. “Numerical Investigation of One-Dimensional Storage Tank Mod-
els and the Development of Analytical Modelling Techniques”. In: McMaster
University (2017).
[73]
M. Ehrenwirth. “Simulation of thermal systems with MATLAB / Simulink /
CARNOT”. In: Technische Hochschule Ingolstadt (2017).
[74]
L. Shah and S. Furbo. “Entrance effects in solar storage tanks”. In: Elsevier -
Solar energy (2003).
[75]
D. Nisami et al. “Negative buoyant plume model for solar domestic hot water
tank systems incorporating a vertical inlet”. In: ScienceDirect (2012).
[76]
R. Oliveski, A. Krenzinger, and H. Vielmo. “Comparison between models for
the simulation of hot water storage tanks”. In: ScienceDirect (2003).
[77]
A. Zachar, I. Farkas, and F. Szlivka. “Numerical analyses of the impact of plates
for thermal stratification inside a storage tank with upper and lower inlet flows”.
In: ScienceDirect (2003).
==PAGE:142==
128
Bibliography
[78]
F. Haglind. “Variable geometry gas turbines for improving the part-load perfor-
mance of marine combined cycles e Combined cycle performance”. In: Elsevier
- Applied thermal engineering (2010).
[79]
L. Kitzing, Sneum D., and R. Bramstoft. “Basic economic principles and meth-
ods”. In: Feasibility studies of energy projects - DTU Lecture notes (2017).
[80]
B. Karatzas. “What’s in the value of a vessel ?” In: Tanker Operator (2009).
[81]
M. Bockmann. “Hamburg formula for ship valuations is gaining acceptance”. In:
Lloyd’s list (2011).
[82]
C. Rivlin. Behing the screens - The discounted cash flow model. Accessed: 2018-
06-01. url: https://www.vesselsvalue.com/archive/Vessels_Value_
Methodology_-_Discounted_Cash_Flow_Model_2016.pdf.
[83]
W. Vatavuk. “Updating the Plant Cost Index”. In: Chemical engineering (2002).
[84]
M. Taal et al. “Cost estimation and energy price forecasts for economic evalua-
tion of retrofit projects”. In: Elsevier - Appled thermal engineering (2003).
[85]
Typical Overall Heat-Transfer Coefficients. Accessed: 2018-06-01. url: https:
//www.engineeringtoolbox.com/overall-heat-transfer-coefficient-
d_434.html.
[86]
K. Karczewski. “Simplified method of heat calculations of oil-air heat exchang-
ers”. In: Metallurgy and foundry engineering (2011).
[87]
A. Corripio, K. Chrien, and L. Evans. “Estimate costs of heat exchangers and
storage tanks via correlations”. In: Chemical engineering (1982).
[88]
Y. Feng and P. Rangaiah. “Evaluating capital cost estimation programs”. In:
Chemical engineering (2011).
[89]
J. Lyons and C. White. “Process Equipment Cost Estimation Final Report”. In:
U.S. Department of Energy (2002).
[90]
Tank costs. Accessed: 2018-05-15. 2003. url: https://www.michigan.gov/
documents/Vol2-35UIP11Tanks_121080_7.pdf.
[91]
P. Arvay et al. “Economic Implementation of the Organic Rankine Cycle in
Industry”. In: ACEEE Summer study on energy efficiency in industry (2011).
[92]
A. Schuster et al. “Energetic and economic investigation of Organic Rankine
Cycle applications”. In: Elsevier - Applied thermal engineering (2009).
[93]
A. Rentizelas et al. “Biomass combustion with ORC for decentralized bioenergy
applications: a techno-economic approach”. In: Proceedings of the 4th European
Conference on Economics and Management of Energy in Industry (ECEMEI)
(2007).
