==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Implementation of a chip-to-chip quan-
tum communication protocol based on
Hong-Ou-Mandel interference
M.Sc. in Photonics Engineering
Lorenzo Cardi (s151238)
Supervisors:
Davide Bacco
Karsten Rottwitt
Beatrice Da Lio
Kongens Lyngby, July 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Fotonik
Department of Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Telephone: +45 4525 6352
www.fotonik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Nowadays, the exponential growth of digital, fast and global communication connects
people on a daily basis. The requirements for privacy and security are then of rele-
vant importance and the solutions provided by classical cryptography are threatened
by technological progresses. Quantum cryptography can contribute to the task of
secrecy with a powerful solution represented by Quantum Key Distribution (QKD)
algorithms. QKD provides two users with a shared secret key proven to be uncondi-
tionally secure by the laws of quantum physics. The key can be used to encrypt and
decrypt messages, which can be exchanged over a classical channel avoiding leakages
of information to an eavesdropper listening to the communication. QKD systems can
ensure unconditionally secure communication when implemented with ideal devices.
Nevertheless, the gap between ideal and practical implementations leaves room for
an eavesdropper to implement different kinds of attacks and gain information on the
key. Detector-side channels attacks are the most sever to counteract but they can be
removed by Measurement Device Independent (MDI) protocols. In this context, this
thesis proposes the experimental implementation of Hong-Ou-Mandel (HOM) inter-
ference, between two different integrated lasers, as a first step towards chip-to-chip
MDI protocols. At first, we analyzed the HOM interference using the weak coher-
ent pulses (WCPS) emitted by a single laser. The HOM visibilities are respectively
41.6% and 39.9% for the devices that will be used in the final experiment. Finally, we
observed a visibility larger then 31.5% for the interference between these two lasers,
achieved for two different repetition rates at 100Mhz and 200Mhz.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s thesis by the title “Implementation of a chip-to-chip quantum com-
munication protocol based on Hong-Ou-Mandel interference” was prepared at the
department of Photonics Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science degree in Photon-
ics Engineering. This work was performed in the time span from January 2nd, 2018
to July 16th, 2018, under the supervision of Postdoc Davide Bacco, Prof. Karsten
Rottwitt and PhD Beatrice Da Lio.
Kongens Lyngby, July 16, 2018
Lorenzo Cardi (s151238)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
Introduction
1
1
Quantum mechanics principles
3
1.1
Qubits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Measuraments in quantum mechanics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Multiple qubits, Bell states and entanglement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
The no-cloning theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5
Hong-Ou-Mandel effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.5.1
Fock states . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.5.2
Weak coherent states . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2
Quantum cryptography
17
2.1
Information security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2
Quantum key distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2.1
QKD protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.2
Eve’s attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3
MDI-QKD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3
Integrated Semiconductor Lasers
33
3.1
Semiconductor lasers physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.1.1
Single-mode semiconductor lasers: DFB and DBR lasers . . . .
35
3.2
Laser characteristics and lasing wavelength dependence on temperature
36
3.3
Direct current modulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.3.1
Direct modulation of semiconductor lasers . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.4
Hybrid semiconductor on silicon lasers for photonic integrated circuits
43
4
Experimental Setup
47
4.1
Experimental setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2
Laser sources characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
4.2.1
Lasing wavelength-temperature relation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.2.2
Optical Beat Signal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2.3
Electrical control module and optical pulse generation . . . . .
51
4.2.4
Time stability of the lasers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.3
Band-Pass tunable filters and RF spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.4
Variable optical attenuators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.5
Optical Delay Line . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.6
Polarization alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.7
Charlie’s receiver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.7.1
The single photon detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.7.2
The time-tagger and the Matlab software . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5
Results
61
5.1
HOM interference with single laser source . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2
HOM interference between two different laser sources . . . . . . . . . .
63
6
Conclusions
65
Bibliography
67
==PAGE:9==
Introduction
The exponential growth of data traffic in optical networks is nowadays requiring
new and efficient techniques to guarantee security in the communication between
users [1]. Protecting the privacy of two parties, hiding the content of their shared
messages from a third untrusted party, is the aim of cryptography. Security of classical
cryptography is mainly based on encryption algorithms which provide computational
security. The fast increase of the computational power of classical computers and
the forthcoming advent of quantum computers pose a serious threat to traditional
cryptography systems [2].
Furthermore, even when unconditional security can be
granted, classical algorithms require the same secret key to be shared between the
authorized users.
Quantum key distribution (QKD) provides a physical solution to the existing
problem of exchanging secret keys through a technique based on the laws of quan-
tum mechanics (QM), ensuring unconditionally secure communications [3, 4, 5, 6].
Provided that the two users communicate trough the use of quantum signals, an
eavesdropper cannot get any information about the communication without intro-
ducing perturbations that would reveal its presence. In fact, every attempt of the
eavesdropper to gain information about the key would result in a generalized form of
measurement, inevitably perturbing the measured system [7, 8, 9].
QKD was born in 1984 when Bennet and Brassard proposed the BB84 protocol
[10]. In this protocol, the two users encode the bits of the key in non-orthogonal
polarization states of single photons. BB84 was the starting point for a scientific field
that quickly became productive from both a theoretical and experimental point of
view [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. Nowadays, commercial QKD systems are available on
the global market and the research is constantly improving the performances of the
components with the achievement of higher secret key generation rates over longer
distances [17, 18]. However, for ensuring secrecy, QKD protocols would require the use
of ideal devices. In practice, the gap between these and practical experimental setups
is still large enough to give room to various security loopholes, which can be targets of
several attacks. In particular, detector-side channels attacks are considered one of the
most severe threat to the security of QKD systems. Measurement device independent
(MDI) QKD protocols can remove all the existing, and yet to be discovered, attacks
to the detector-side channels. This is accomplished with the use of an untrusted relay
for the detection part of the quantum signals sent by both communicating parties [19,
20, 21, 22].
==PAGE:10==
2
Contents
Even though QKD systems can establish a shared secret key, their integration in
the preexisting classical optical infrastructure is still limited by the deficit of hand-
held and field deployable devices.
The unification of QKD with the pre-installed
networks requires compatibility and direct integration with electronic and photonic
components, the possibility to reconfigure protocols quickly and the reduction of
production costs and power consumption. The large-scale deployment of this technol-
ogy may be enabled by photonic integrated circuits (PICs), which provide enhanced
functionalities such as miniaturization, scalability and compactness. Silicon photon-
ics, in particular, is a leading platform for quantum photonic technologies with the
promise of high density integration, mass-production, mature processing techniques
and compatibility with microelectronics [23]. Some recent experiments have already
demonstrated chip-to-chip QKD systems based on polarization, space and phase as
degrees of freedom [14, 24].
In this thesis, we addressed the integration of PICs into QKD applications with
the use of semiconductor lasers integrated on chip as optical sources for MDI proto-
cols. The achievement of Hong-Ou-Mandel (HOM) interference between these lasers,
as a fundamental step for MDI, is the main result of this work. In the first chapter,
we discuss some of the QM principles and the theory behind HOM interference. In
chapter 2, the general structure of QKD protocols is discussed using the BB84 as an
example, and MDI protocols are introduced. In chapter 3, a review of the physical
principles of integrated semiconductor lasers is reported. Thus, chapter 4 explains
the components of the setup implemented for the experiment and it shows their char-
acterization. In chapter 5, we will show and comment the results obtained. Finally,
in chapter 6 we conclude summarizing the results and discussing future directions.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER1
Quantum mechanics
principles
The purpose of this first chapter is to introduce the Quantum Mechanics (QM) prin-
ciples and the constitutional concepts necessary for the understanding of this thesis.
Except for the last section regarding the HOM effect, the contents are mainly ex-
tracted from [7] and [8].
1.1
Qubits
The bit is one of the fundamental concept on which classical information and classical
computation are based on. Quantum information and quantum communication are
constructed upon an analogous concept: the quantum bit or qubit for short. The
qubit is a mathematical object with specific properties, just as the classical bit. To
begin with, it has a physical state.
In QM, a physical state is represented by a state vector in a complex vector space.
This vector space, known as Hilbert space, is generally of infinite dimension and rep-
resents a closed physical system, which by defition does not interchange information,
i.e. energy or matter, with other systems. By following Dirac’s notation, we can call
a state vector a ket and denote it by ∣α⟩. All the information regarding the physical
state is contained in the ket that, being an element of a Hilbert space, is endowed
with all the properties of vector spaces. For example, if we add two kets together,
their sum will still be a ket. If we multiply a ket by a complex number c as in:
∣α⟩c = c∣α⟩,
(1.1)
we can notice that the result is again still a ket and we can position c either on the
left or right of ∣α⟩with no difference. One of the postulate of QM is that ∣α⟩and
c∣α⟩, if c /= 0, represent the same physical state. In particular, if c = 0, the result is a
null ket. Then, we can conclude that, in QM, it is the direction of the vector space
that contains the whole information about the state.
In analogy with classical states, two possible states for a qubit can be ∣0⟩and
∣1⟩. The difference is that a qubit can also be in a state that is formed by a linear
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Quantum mechanics principles
Figure 1.1: Bloch sphere representation of a qubit ∣ψ⟩as given by (1.4). θ is the angle
formed by the state vector with the z-direction and ϕ is the angle formed with the x-
axis. The points at the two poles represent the ∣0⟩and ∣1⟩states of the computational
basis.
combination of states:
∣ψ⟩= α ∣0⟩+ β ∣1⟩.
(1.2)
This is a superposition, where α and β are complex numbers such that ∣α∣2+∣β∣2 = 1.
The state of a qubit is a vector in a two-dimensional complex vector space, where ∣0⟩
and ∣1⟩are called computational basis states and form an orthonormal basis for this
vector space.
Since ∣α∣2+∣β∣2 = 1, we proceed with a geometrical description of qubits, we can
rewrite (1.2) as:
∣ψ⟩= eiγ(cos θ
2 ∣0⟩+ eiϕ sin θ
2 ∣1⟩),
(1.3)
where θ, ϕ and γ are real numbers. The relative phase between the coefficients of the
two states has no observable effects, thus we can further ignore the term eiγ in front
of (1.3):
∣ψ⟩= cos θ
2 ∣0⟩+ eiϕ sin θ
2 ∣1⟩.
(1.4)
The numbers θ and ϕ define a point over the space of points situated on the surface
of a sphere, as shown in figure 1.1.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Measuraments in quantum mechanics
5
This sphere is called the Bloch sphere and it represents a practical tool to visualize
the state of a single qubit. In the next section, we are going to describe what it means
to perform a measurement on physical states in QM.
1.2
Measuraments in quantum mechanics
In the previous section, we observed how physical states, and then quantum states
like the qubits, can be fully described by vector states called kets. Here we introduce
functions acting on kets, which in QM are called operators or observables and represent
a measurable characteristic of the space. An operator or observable A acts on a ket
from the left and the result is still another ket:
A ⋅(∣α⟩) = A∣α⟩.
(1.5)
Generally, it is not possible to say that A∣α⟩is the multiplication of ∣α⟩by a
constant. However, there are specific kets, called eigenkets of operator A, denoted
by:
∣a′⟩,∣a′′⟩,... ⇒A∣a′⟩= a′ ∣a′⟩,A∣a′′⟩= a′′ ∣a′′⟩,...
(1.6)
where a′,a′′,... are, in general, complex numbers. Accordingly to (1.6), the ap-
plication of operator A on one of these eigenkets results in the same ket times a
multiplication factor. These factors {a′,a′′,...} are called eigenvalues of the operator
A. The physical state corresponding to an eigenket is called eigenstate. If we take in
consideration an N-dimensional vector space, the N eigenstates of the observable A
form an orthonormal basis for the space. As a result, an arbitrary ket ∣α⟩representing
a physical state in this space, can be written as the linear combination of the basis
kets of the observable A:
∣α⟩= ∑
a′ ca′ ∣a′⟩,
(1.7)
where the coefficients ca′ are complex numbers.
We can now introduce a vector space that is the dual of the ket space: the bra.
For every ket ∣α⟩in the ket space, there exists a bra ⟨α∣in the dual bra space with
a one-to-one correspondence. As a ket space is spanned by eigenkets, similarly a bra
space is spanned by eigenbras. Nevertheless, it is important to stress that the dual
bra of c∣α⟩is c∗⟨α∣, where c∗is the complex conjugate of c.
Since both kets and bras belong to a Hilbert space and Hilbert space owns the
operation of inner product, we can define the inner product between two physical
states. The product is written as a bra standing on the left and a ket standing on
the right:
(⟨β∣) ⋅(∣α⟩) = ⟨β∣α⟩,
(1.8)
==PAGE:14==
6
1 Quantum mechanics principles
generally resulting in a complex number. The inner product properties are of funda-
mental importance for the theory of measurements in QM. A postulate states that
the inner product between a bra and its dual ket is always non-negative:
⟨α∣α⟩≥0,
(1.9)
where the equality stands only if ∣α⟩is a null ket. We further derive the definition
of orthogonal states:
Definition 1.1. Two kets ∣α⟩and ∣β⟩are orthogonal if their inner product is zero.
This is shown by:
⟨α∣β⟩= 0,
(1.10)
Given a ket that is not the null ket, we can express the normalized ket ∣ˆα⟩as:
∣ˆα⟩= ⎛
⎝
1
√
⟨α∣α⟩
⎞
⎠∣α⟩,
(1.11)
which has the property ⟨ˆα∣ˆα⟩= 1. Generally,
√
⟨α∣α⟩is known as the norm of ∣α⟩.
Since ∣α⟩and c∣α⟩correspond to the same physical state, from now on, we will assume
that any physical state can be represented by a normalized ket.
After having analyzed the properties of the inner product, we can now introduce
the outer product defined as:
Definition 1.2. The outer product of two states is given by the multiplication in the
order of a ket ∣α⟩with a bra ⟨β∣which result in an operator.
The previous definition is expressed by:
(∣α⟩) ⋅(⟨β∣) = ∣α⟩⟨β∣.
(1.12)
At this point, we need to to introduce the concept of unitary operator that will
be particularly useful for the understanding of the no-cloning theorem explained in
the next section.
Definition 1.3. An operator U is said to be unitary if: UU † = 1 = U †U, i.e.
if
U −1 = U †.
This means that if we take the inverse of operator U, we obtain its hermitian adjoint,
or simply adjoint U †, which is described by the following expression:
U ∣α⟩↔⟨α∣U †.
(1.13)
In QM, unitary operators describe the evolution in time of closed quantum systems.
Indeed, if we apply U on a state ∣ψ0⟩at time t0, this operation will result in the state
∣ψ1⟩at time t1.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Measuraments in quantum mechanics
7
The last concept we need to discuss before going to the effect of a measurement
over a quantum state, is the tensor product. This mathematical tool can describe a
vector space which elements represent several sub-systems. For example, if we take
n sub-systems ordered from 1 to n and we call ∣ψi⟩the ket belonging to the i-th
sub-system, the ket belonging to the overall system is given by the product:
∣ψ⟩= ∣ψ1⟩⊗∣ψ2⟩⊗... ⊗∣ψn⟩.
(1.14)
Having discussed the mathematics of the kets and the operators, we are in position
to analyze the significance of implementing a measurement over a quantum state. The
state of a system, before a measurement, can be written:
∣α⟩= ∑
a′ ca′ ∣a′⟩= ∑
a′ ∣a′⟩⟨a′∣α⟩,
(1.15)
When a measurement is implemented, the system collapses in one of the eigenstates
of the observable A:
∣α⟩
A measurement
ÐÐÐÐÐÐÐÐ→∣a′⟩.
(1.16)
This means that whenever performed, a measurement changes the state itself. The
only exception is given by a measurement on a system that is already in one of the
eigenstates of the observable A:
∣a′⟩
A measurement
ÐÐÐÐÐÐÐÐ→∣a′⟩,
(1.17)
In this case the outcome of the measurement is certain and it is said that A is measured
to be a′. When the system is in the state described by (1.7), it is not possible to say
a priori in which of the eigenstates ∣a′⟩it will collapses because of the measurement.
We can follow a probabilistic approach:
Postulate 1.1. Having a normalized state ∣α⟩, the probability of obtaining the eigen-
state ∣a′⟩is given by ∣⟨a′∣α⟩∣2 = ∣ca′∣2.
This is one of the fundamental postulates of Quantum Mechanics (QM). We can
proceed analyzing extreme cases and observe that it perfectly holds. If we assume
that before the measurement the system is already in ∣α⟩= ∣a′⟩, the probability of
obtaining a′ or more precisely of collapsing into ∣a′⟩is predicted to be 1 as expected.
On the contrary, the probability of obtaining any other eigenstate is 0 because of
the orthogonality of eigenstates (orthogonal kets correspond to mutually exclusive
alternatives). Moreover, repeated measurements of the same observable in succession
lead to the same outcome. By measuring the observable A a second time, after a first
measurement performed as in (1.16), we get ∣a′⟩once again. To empirically determine
the probability of obtaining ∣a′⟩from state ∣α⟩, we can consecutively measure a collec-
tion of identically prepared systems as in (1.17). Such a set is called pure ensemble.
Consecutive measurements on an ensemble are needed to empirically determine the
probability of obtaining ∣a′⟩given in postulate 1.1.
At this point, it is possible to introduce the definition of expected value of an
observable for a specific state:
==PAGE:16==
8
1 Quantum mechanics principles
Definition 1.4. The expected value of an observable A with respect to a given state
∣α⟩is ⟨A⟩α = ⟨α∣A∣α⟩.
The expected value of definition 1.4 can be expressed also in the form:
⟨A⟩α = ∑
a′′ ∑
a′ ⟨α∣a′′⟩⟨a′′∣A∣a′⟩⟨a′∣α⟩
= ∑
a′ a′ ∣⟨a′∣α⟩∣
2 .
(1.18)
The last term of equation (1.18) represents the sum over all the measured values a′
times the probability for obtaining a′. We discussed that measurements in QM always
change the state of a system and the outcome of this operation can be only given by
following a probabilistic approach.
1.3
Multiple qubits, Bell states and entanglement
In the previous sections, we introduced the single-qubit state and theory of measure-
ments in QM. Now, let us suppose we have a system of two qubits, as in the case
of two classical bits, a two qubit system has four computational basis states denoted:
∣00⟩, ∣01⟩, ∣10⟩and ∣11⟩. A pair of qubits can also exist in the superposition of these
four states, thus to describe the state vector, we need to introduce four coefficients
also called amplitudes
∣ψ⟩= α00 ∣00⟩+ α01 ∣01⟩+ α10 ∣10⟩+ α11 ∣11⟩.
(1.19)
Similar to the one qubit case, the outcome of a measurement on this state would result
in x, being x one of the four possile outcomes with probability ∣αx∣2. The condition
that all probabilities have to sum to one is then represented by the normalization for
which:
∑
x∈{0,1}2
∣αx∣2 = 1,
(1.20)
where the sum is over the set of strings of length two with each letter being zero or
one.
For a set of multiple qubits, it is possible to measure just a subset of these qubits,
for example the first one. Measuring the first qubit alone, will result in the outcome
0 with probability ∣α00∣2 + ∣α01∣2. The post-measurement state is thus given by:
∣ψ′⟩= α00 ∣00⟩+ α01 ∣01⟩
√
∣α00∣2 + ∣α01∣2 .
(1.21)
The denominator is needed to satisfy the normalization condition as expected from
every legitimate quantum state.
==PAGE:17==
1.4 The no-cloning theorem
9
A well known example of two-qubits states are the Bell states or EPR pairs:
∣Φ+⟩= ∣00⟩+ ∣11⟩
√
2
∣Φ−⟩= ∣00⟩−∣11⟩
√
2
∣Ψ+⟩= ∣01⟩+ ∣10⟩
√
2
∣Ψ−⟩= ∣01⟩−∣10⟩
√
2
.
(1.22)
The Bell states own special properties, take in consideration the first state ∣Φ+⟩. Mea-
suring the first qubit of this state, only two outcomes are possible: 0 with probability
1/2, leaving the post-measurement state ∣00⟩and 1 with probability 1/2, leaving the
post-measurement state ∣11⟩. As a conseguence, every measurement of the second
qubit will always give a result equal to the measurement of the first qubit. In other
words, the measurement outcomes are strongly correlated. This type of correlation
was observed by Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen and reported in the famous EPR paper
of 1935 [25]. The behaviour of the vector state ∣Φ+⟩is independent on the distance
between the two systems or alternatively said non-local. Indeed, the Bell states are
said to be maximally entangled because of this property.
1.4
The no-cloning theorem
As explained in section 1.2, quantum measurements are tipically destructive, meaning
that they alter the state of the quantum system on which they act. A possible solution
to this problem could be the clonation of the quantum state we want to measure, so
that measuring an identycal copy of the original, the system itself would not be
affected. It turns out that in QM cloning a quantum state is impossible in general as
stated by the no-cloning theorem:
Theorem 1.1. No quantum operation exists that can duplicate perfectly an unknown
arbitrary quantum state.
To prove this theorem, let’s assume we have a unitary operator U and two quantum
states ∣ϕ⟩and ∣ψ⟩which U can copy:
∣ϕ⟩⊗∣0⟩
UÐ→∣ϕ⟩⊗∣ϕ⟩
∣ψ⟩⊗∣0⟩
UÐ→∣ψ⟩⊗∣ψ⟩.
(1.23)
==PAGE:18==
10
1 Quantum mechanics principles
Considering the inner products of the two expressions and using the fact that U is
unitary, we obtain:
⟨ϕ∣ψ⟩= (⟨ϕ∣⊗⟨0∣)(∣ψ⟩⊗∣0⟩) = (⟨ϕ∣⊗⟨ϕ∣)(∣ψ⟩⊗∣ψ⟩) =
= ⟨ϕ∣ψ⟩2 .
(1.24)
The only two solutions of equation (1.24) are ⟨ϕ∣ψ⟩= 1 and ⟨ϕ∣ψ⟩= 0. The former is
true only if ∣ψ⟩= ∣ϕ⟩, i.e. we are considering the same state, while the latter is true
only for orthogonal states. We can therefore conclude that the cloning operator U
works only for orthogonal states while it is not valid in general. Let’s see another
proof of this theorem assuming that U can indeed clone an unknown quantum state
∣ϕ⟩= α ∣0⟩+ β ∣1⟩. Then:
∣ϕ⟩⊗∣0⟩
UÐ→∣ϕ⟩⊗∣ϕ⟩= (α ∣0⟩+ β ∣1⟩)(α ∣0⟩+ β ∣1⟩)
= α2 ∣00⟩+ βα ∣10⟩+ αβ ∣01⟩+ β2 ∣11⟩.
(1.25)
Now, if we use U to clone the expansion of ∣ϕ⟩, we arrive at a different state:
(α ∣0⟩+ β ∣1⟩)∣0⟩
UÐ→α ∣00⟩+ β ∣11⟩.
(1.26)
In equation (1.26) indeed, no crossing terms compare. This result expresses again
that there not exist a cloning unitary operator U. The impossibility of cloning a
quantum state declared by the no-cloning theorem is one of the keystones of quantum
cryptography, as it will be discussed in chapter 2.
In the next section, we are going to provide a mathematical description of HOM
effect. This quantum phenomenon is the fundamental step in the realization of MDI-
QKD protocols and represents the main result of the experimental part of this thesis.
1.5
Hong-Ou-Mandel effect
The Hong-Ou-Mandel (HOM) effect is a two-photon second-order coherence effect
demonstrated in 1987 by Chung Ki Hong, Zhe Yu Ou and Leonard Mandel [26]. The
explanation of this effect in quantum optics will result to be of great importance for the
understanding of MDI-QKD protocols that will be described in section 2.3. Indeed,
for the implementation of these protocols, HOM interference with high visibility is
a requirement. This non-classical effect is a measure of the indistinguishability of
photons emitted by two different sources. In the experiment implemented in this
thesis, single photons sources will be replaced by the use of weak coherent pulses
(WCPs). In the next sections, we are going to show the difference between the use of
single-photons (Fock states) and Weak Coherent States (WCSs) in the observation of
HOM interference.
==PAGE:19==
1.5 Hong-Ou-Mandel effect
11
Figure 1.2: Behavior of photons incident on a 50:50 BS. Four possible outcomes: the
photon entering from mode a is reflected and the other transmitted, photon entering
from mode a is transmitted an the other reflected, both photons in mode a and b
reflected, both photons transmitted. When the two photons are indistinguishable,
the last two cases are cancelled out by distructive interference. This effect is known
as Hong-Ou-Mandel effect.
1.5.1
Fock states
Eventhough this project makes use of weak coherent pulses (WCPs) for the imple-
mentation of QKD protocols, it is important to show how HOM effect is based on
quantum mechanical phenomena when ideal single photon sources are utilized. This
effect occurs when two single-photon wave packets, identical in every degree of free-
dom (frequency, polarization, spatio-temporal description), are incident on a 50:50
beam splitter. If these photons perfectly overlap in time, they always come out from
the same (random) output port of the beam splitter (figure 1.2). This is due to photon
bounching, i.e. the destructive interference between the possible outcomes when the
two photons would take separate paths. Certainly, if the interfering photons are dis-
tinguishable, there will be four possible outcomes: both be transmitted or reflected,
or one be transmitted while the other is reflected.
HOM effect is usually experimentally implemented making use of two single-
photon detectors placed at the output ports of the beam splitter: one will observe a
coincidence count (simoultaneous click of the detectors) for the 50% of the times when
the two photons are distinguishable, whereas there will be no coincidences for indis-
tinguishables photons. Mathematically, we can explain this quantum phenomenon
by considering the state incident on a beam splitter as:
∣1⟩a ∣1⟩b = ˆa†ˆb† ∣0⟩a ∣0⟩b ,
(1.27)
where the single photons are in two different modes a and b with corresponding
creation operators ˆa† and ˆb†. The 50:50 beam splitter introduces a unitary trasfor-
==PAGE:20==
12
1 Quantum mechanics principles
mation, creating the output states c and d that can be written as:
ˆc† = ˆa† + ˆb†
√
2
,
(1.28)
ˆd† = ˆa† −ˆb†
√
2
.
(1.29)
Inserting (1.28) and (1.29) in (1.27), we obtain:
∣1⟩a ∣1⟩b = ˆa†ˆb† ∣0⟩a ∣0⟩b
BS
Ð→(ˆc† + ˆd†
√
2
)(ˆc† −ˆd†
√
2
)∣0⟩c ∣0⟩d
= 1
2(ˆc†2 −ˆd†2)∣0⟩c ∣0⟩d = 1
2(ˆc†ˆc† −ˆd† ˆd†)∣0⟩c ∣0⟩d = ∣2⟩c ∣0⟩d −∣0⟩c ∣2⟩d
√
2
.
(1.30)
Therefore, one can notice as the state ∣1⟩c ∣1⟩d vanishes resulting in a zero prob-
ability of the two identical photons being detected at two different output ports of
the beam splitter (non-classical effect). For the destructive interference to happen,
the photons have to arrive at the beam splitter at the same time. As a consequence,
to measure the extent of HOM interference usually an optical delay line is inserted
into the interferometer. In this way, it is possible to scan the relative delay between
the times of arrival of the wave packets. When the relative delay is zero, the number
of coincidence counts drops to zero for indistinguishable photons, showing the curve
known as HOM dip. Other parameters, as the polarization of the photons, can be
also varied to obtain the dip. The visibility of the HOM interference is defined as:
V = 1 −Rmin
Rmax
,
(1.31)
where Rmin is the coincidence count rate when the wavepackets perfectly overlap
in time (or in the degree of freedom used to obtain the dip) and Rmax is the coinci-
dence count rate when the wavepackets are sufficiently off with respect to one another.
In the case of single-photons sources, the visibility can go up to 100%(VHOM = 1) as
shown in figure 1.3.
1.5.2
Weak coherent states
In analogy with the description expressed for Fock states, HOM interference occurs
when WCSs interfere in a 50:50 beam splitter. If the two states have a rapidly varying
phase difference, when the relative delay between their times of arrival is zero, a
dip will be observed in the rate of coincidences at the two single-photon detectors.
However, as opposed to the single photon case, the visibility is reduced to a maximum
of 50% (V=0.5) due to the non-zero probability of multi-photon emission of the light
sources. Indeed, the WCSs are a practical and inexpensive way to probabilistically
==PAGE:21==
1.5 Hong-Ou-Mandel effect
13
Figure 1.3: Single photons HOM dip, figure from [26]. When two indistinguishable
single photons impinge on a 50:50 BS exactly at the same time, they always exit from
the same output mode. The number of coincidence counts of two detectors placed at
the two outputs of the BS drops to zero, showing a visibility of the interference of
100% (VHOM = 1).
create single-photon pulses. They are created by highly attenuating the optical pulses
emitted by a laser so that the average number of photons per pulse, µ, falls well below
1.
As it has been done with the Fock states case, we provide the mathematical
description of the HOM effect in the case of WCSs following the one given in [27]
. We introduce in this description the relevant parameters involved in the practical
realization of the interference. We model the input to the beam splitter as two weak
coherent states ∣α⟩and ∣β⟩as follows:
∣Φin⟩= ∣α⟩⊗∣β⟩= e−
µa+µb
2
eαˆa†+βˆb† ∣0⟩,
(1.32)
The coherent-states are complex and can be written as α = √µaeiθα and β = √µbeiθβ,
where µa and µb are the average photon numbers of the two beams interfering in
the beam splitter. To account for the action of the beam splitter, we express the
polarization vectors of the incoming beams ˆϵa,b in terms of unit vectors in the chosen
directions ˆϵH,V . Then, we can write the creation operators as linear combinations:
ˆa† = ˆϵa ⋅ˆϵHa†
H + ˆϵa ⋅ˆϵV a†
V
ˆb† = ˆϵb ⋅ˆϵHb†
H + ˆϵa ⋅ˆϵV b†
V
(1.33)
The beam splitter with reflectivity R = r2 and transmissivity T = t2, with R + T = 1,
introduces a unitary transformation:
a†
i →tc†
i + rd†
i
b†
i →rc†
i −td†
i
(1.34)
==PAGE:22==
14
1 Quantum mechanics principles
where c†
i and d†
i are the creation operators of the respective output beams, with
i = H,V . The input beam in (1.32) is then transformed into the output state:
∣Φout⟩= e−
µa+µb
2
× ∏
i=H,V
eα(tc†
i +rd†
i )ˆϵaˆϵieβ(rc†
i −td†
i )ˆϵbˆϵi ∣0⟩.
(1.35)
As a result, the probability Pmn that m(n) photons emerge at ouput c(d) is:
P (out)
mn
= e−µc−µd µm
c µn
d
m!n!
(1.36)
and µcd are the mean photon numbers at the two output ports of the beam splitter:
µc = µat2 + µbr2 + 2rtR(αβ∗ˆϵa ⋅ˆϵ∗
b)
µd = µar2 + µbt2 + 2rtR(αβ∗ˆϵa ⋅ˆϵ∗
b)
(1.37)
In real applications, the single-photon detectors are not ideal. To take in account their
characteristics, we insert their effiency parameters ηc,d and dark-count probabilities
dc,d in the calculation (the physical meaning of these parameters will be given in
details in section 4.7). Therefore, the probability that the detectors click is given by:
Pmn = P (out)
mn
× (1 −(1 −ηc)m(1 −dc)) × (1 −(1 −ηd)n(1 −dd))
(1.38)
The total coincidence probability is equal to:
P (coin) =
∞
∑
m,n=0
Pmn
(1.39)
Averaging over all phases, we can obtain the total coincidence probability in terms of
Bessel functions I0(x):
P (coin) = 1−CI0(2ηcfab cosΦ)−DI0(2ηdfab cosΦ)+CDI0(2(ηc−ηd)fab cosΦ) (1.40)
where
C = e−ηc(µat2+µbr2)(1 −dc),
D = e−ηd(µar2+µbt2)(1 −dd),
(1.41)
and fab = rt√µaµb. Φ is a measure of the polarization misalignment between the two
beams defined as:
cosΦ = ∣ˆϵa ⋅ˆϵ∗
b∣
(1.42)
The total probability that detector place at port c clicks is given by:
P (c) = 1 −CI0(2ηc
√µaµbtr cosΦ)
(1.43)
Similarly, for port d:
P (d) = 1 −DI0(2ηd
√µaµbtr cosΦ)
(1.44)
==PAGE:23==
1.5 Hong-Ou-Mandel effect
15
Figure 1.4: Simulation of HOM dip in the ideal case of WCSs. The maximum achiev-
able visibility is 50%. Parameters used are: time duration of pulses of 130ps FWHM,
average photon numbers µa = µb = 0.01, detectors efficiencies ηc = ηd = 0.15%, dark
count probabilities dc = dd = 1 × 10−6.
Finally, we can now define HOM visibility as:
VHOM = 1 −P (coin)
P (c)P (d) .
(1.45)
As expressed previously, the maximum of visibility achievable in this case is
VHOM = 0.5.
In figure 1.4, we simulated the HOM dip that can be obtained in
ideal conditions for WCPs of 130ps Full Width Half Maximum (FWHM) (defined
as the temporal width of a pulse taking as starting and ending time instances those
in which the pulse has half of its peak power) and with parameters: µa = µb = 0.01,
ηc = ηd = 0.15% and dc = dd = 1 × 10−6. The width of the HOM dip is determined
by the spectrum of the WCPs and consequently by their coherence length [26]. The
coherence length is used to quantify the degree of temporal coherence as the propa-
gation length over which coherence significantly degrades. For optical sources with a
Lorentzian optical spectrum, the coherence length is calculated as:
Lcoh = cτcoh =
c
π∆ν ,
(1.46)
where τcoh = 1/π∆ν is the coherence time, ∆ν is the FWHM optical bandwidth
of the source and c is the speed of light in vacuum.
In the first chapter of this thesis, we introduced the concept of qubit and its geo-
metrical description. We discussed some of the most important axioms and definitions
of QM with the aim of examining the probabilistic interpretation of measurements.
We showed that everytime a measurement is performed on a state, the state itself it
is changed (unless we are measuring on a state that is an eigenstate of the observ-
able). The theory of measurements together with the no-cloning theorem are the
==PAGE:24==
16
1 Quantum mechanics principles
building blocks of QKD that will be the topic of next chapter. Finally, after a brief
introduction on states of multiple qubits, like the Bell states, and on the concept
of entanglement, we explained the HOM effect. This non-classical phenomenon is
indeed the first step in the realization of MDI-QKD protocols and the focal point of
the experimental part of this thesis.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER2
Quantum
cryptography
Cryptography is a field of applications whose final aim is to guarantee authentication,
privacy and confidentiality to users [3].
In this chapter, we will introduce the basic elements of a generic cryptosystem and
explain the one-time pad algorithm. We will then proceed to discuss the structure of
QKD protocols and the reasons why they are uncoditionally secure, using BB84 as
an example. Finally, MDI protocols, which are the main focus of this project, will be
explained.
2.1
Information security
As early as the Roman times, the need for secrecy in the exchange of information was
strong and covered an important role for winning battles and conquer kingdoms [9].
The Caesarean cipher is one of the oldest and simplest example of attempt to protect
the privacy of a message: the letters of the message were shifted by a secret number of
places in the alphabet. For example, a shift of five places led A to be encrypted as F, B
as G and so on. Altough very simple and easy to break (the number of possible shifts
is limited and equal to the number of letters in the alphabet) the Caesarean cipher
already contains all the elements of a private-key cryptosystem. As it is reported in
figure 2.1, the first element of a cryptosystem is the plaintext P, the secret message
that our trusted parties Alice and Bob wishes to share. They desire to estabilish a
private communication avoiding that an eavesdropper, named Eve, can have access
to it.
Alice generates the secure ciphertext C using the secret key K known only to
Alice and Bob. Bob receives the ciphertext C and uses K to recover the original
message P:
C = C(P,K)
P = P(C,K)
(2.1)
where the cyphertext appears to be a function of the plaintext and the key while the
==PAGE:26==
18
2 Quantum cryptography
Figure 2.1: Schematic of the elements necessary in a generic cryptosystem. On the
left, the transmitter Alice encrypts the message she wants to send by using a secret
key. The obtained chipertext can now be safetely sent to the receiver Bob, who will
decrypt it with the use of a key to obtain the original message.
plaintext is function of the cyphertext and the key. The secrecy of this system is
ensured by the fact that Eve can only have access to C but not to K [9].
At this point of our discussion, one could naturally ask whether a perfect secret
cipher can exist or not. To provide an answer, we need to give a definition of perfect
secrecy: the message is perfecly secret if C gives Eve no information about P. Let us
take a set of possible plaintexts {Pi} and let {Cj} be the set of possible cyphertexts,
perfect security implies:
P(Pi∣Cj) = P(Pi),∀i,j.
P(Cj∣Pi) = P(Cj),∀i,j.
(2.2)
Hence the probability for Eve to recover the original message is the same wheter or
not she has access to the cyphertext. Also, whatever the message that Alice wants
to send to Bob, it should lead to any possible cyphertext with equal probability. If
one of these two conditions is not satisfied, perfect secrecy is lost. For perfect secrecy
to be achieved, a minimum number of keys is required. It is important to note that
different messages encrypted with the same key must lead to distinct cyphertexts,
otherwise Bob would not be able to recover the original message. As a consequence,
the number of possible cyphertexts must be at least equal to the number of messages.
This means that perfect secrecy requires the number of possible keys to be at least
as great as the number of possible messages.
The first example of algorithm able to achieve perfect secrecy was the Vernam
cipher or one-time pad. The main idea of one-time pad is that the key used to encrypt
the plaintext is random. Consequently, the cyphertext will be randomly created and
it will not carry any information. After every use, the key is discarded, so that Eve can
not gain any information from collecting subsequent messages. Being in the digital
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Information security
19
era, all the messages that are now exchanged are represented by a string of bits. Let
us discuss the main steps of one-time pad algorithm when messages exchanged are
strings of bits:
• Alice wants to send a message, composed by N bits, to Bob. She uses a key of
N randomly chosen bits to obtain the cyphertext whose bits are the result of
a modulo 2 addition between the bits of the message and the bits of the key:
C = P ⊕K. For example:
P = ...001011010...
K = ...101110100...
C = P ⊕K = ...100101110...
(2.3)
In this manner, every bit of the message is either left unchanged or flipped. If
the key is random, each of these possibilities occur with probability 1/2. As
a result, the cyphertext reflects the random nature of the key and carries no
information about the original message.
• Alice sends to Bob the cyphertext C.
• Bob decrypts the received cyphertext using the same secret key K used by Alice.
All he has to do is to perform again the modulo 2 addition between the received
cyphertext and the key: P = C ⊕K. For example:
C = ...100101110...
K = ...101110100...
P = C ⊕K = ...001011010...
(2.4)
The perfect secrecy of one-time pad can be demonstrated by starting from the prop-
erties of the key. In fact, since the key is a random string of N bits, it can take any
of 2N possible values with probability 2−N. As a result, every possible message can
be mapped to any of 2N possible ciphertexts and each of these can occur with equal
probability:
P(Cj∣Pi) = 2−N = P(Cj)∀i,j.
(2.5)
This is indeed the Shannon’s criterion for perfect secrecy given in (2.5). Even if Eve
have access to the cyphertext, she cannot gain any information about the original
message. This is clear from:
P(Cj,Pi) = P(Cj∣Pi)P(Pi) = P(Cj)P(Pi)∀i,j.
(2.6)
Finally, the mutual information between the cyphertext and the original message is
zero:
h(P ∶C) = 0.
(2.7)
==PAGE:28==
20
2 Quantum cryptography
Even though we demonstrated the perfect secrecy of one-time pad, the evident prob-
lem of this algorithm is that both Alice and Bob must share the same secret key
before exchanging private messages. It is here that quantum cryptography can be of
fundamental importance in the search for privacy. Since the information transmit-
ted on a quantum channel is known to be secure only after being transmitted (this
concept will be clarified in the next section of this chapter), it is convenient not to
share secret messages directly trough quantum communication. Instead, quantum
key distribution can provide Alice and Bob with unconditionally secure secret keys
to be used, once proved to be such, in the one-time pad algorithm or other classical
criptographyc algorithms.
2.2
Quantum key distribution
In this section, we will discuss the basic principles and the generic settings of QKD.
We already met our two authorized users Alice and Bob, who want to be able to
estabilish a private communication at distance. As discussed in the previous section,
they can use one-time pad to exchange the message over a non-secure classical channel
(CC) even in the presence of an eavesdropper, Eve, listening to the communication.
Eve indeed, is not aware of the secret key possessed by the two trusted users and she
cannot understand the content of the message. However, the classical channel needs
to be authenticated: Alice and Bob have to identify themselseves. In this way, a third
unauthorized party can listen to the communication but cannot participate in it nor
change it. Thus, Alice and Bob’s task is now to build a secure quantum channel (QC)
where to implement a QKD algorithm to share secret keys. The security on a quantum
channel is guaranteed by the fundamental physical principles of quantum mechanics.
In classical cryptography, every bit that is transmitted in a digital communication link
can be copied and stored without affecting the communication itself and leaving no
trace. Quite the opposite, when the information is encoded through non-orthogonal
quantum states, the no-cloning theorem (1.4) states that Eve cannot duplicate a
quantum state while keeping the original intact. Furthermore, any attempt of Eve
to get some information out of a quantum state would result in a generalized form of
measurement. In fact, as we explained in (1.2), any measurement implemented on a
quantum state modifies the state of the measured system. As a consequence, Alice
and Bob can exchange secret information sending non-orthogonal quantum states
over a quantum channel. The privacy of the information is protected, in principle,
from every attack of Eve, who cannot copy or measure a state without introducing
errors that Alice and Bob would be able to detect.
Since QKD protocols are based on these fundamental principles of quantum
physics, the possibility to obtain unconditional security seems to be achievable [3].
Unconditional security is defined as the ability to ensure security without imposing
any constraint on the computational resources and manipulation techniques available
to the eavesdropper, apart from what goes beyond the laws of physics.
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Quantum key distribution
21
After the transmission of a sequence of symbols, in QKD, Alice and Bob are given
the possibility to estimate how much information of the key has leaked out to Eve.
If the amount of information gained by Eve is compromising the secrecy of the key,
the two parties can abort the protocol and start again from the beginning. There are
several requirements that have to be satisfied before assuming unconditional security
[3]:
• Eve cannot have access to Alice’s transmitter nor to Bob’s receiver systems.
She cannot be aware of the key Alice is going to send an neither of the choice
of settings implemented by the two trusted users.
• Alice and Bob completely trust the random number generators that select the
state to be sent and the measurement to be implemented.
• The classical channel is authenticated with unconditionally secure protocols.
Eve cannot pass herself off as one of the two trusted users.
• Eve’s power is only limited by the laws of physics.
The failure of one of these requirements would necessarily compromise the security
assumption. It is possible to quantify the amount of information leaked to Eve ob-
serving the perturbations provoked by her actions over the quantum channel [3]:
Definition 2.1. The security of a key K can be parametrized by its deviation ϵ from
a perfect key: a key that deviates by ϵ from a perfect key is said ϵ-secure.
A perfect key is a string of fully correlated symbols that is shared between Alice and
Bob on which Eve has no information at all. The occurrence of all of the possible
strings must be equally probable a priori. An important property that a key must
satisfy is composability: the security of the key must be granted for every application
it may be used in. If an ϵ-secure key is used in a ϵ′-sicure application, composability
ensures that the whole process is at least (ϵ + ϵ′)-secure.
After having discussed the notion of security in QKD, in the next section we are
going to describe the several phases composing the structure of QKD protocols. For
this purpose, we will introduce one of the most famous example of a QKD protocol
implemented with the use of non-orthogonal quantum states: the BB84 protocol
proposed by Bennet and Brassard in 1984 [10].
2.2.1
QKD protocols
The general structure of QKD protocols is reported in figure 2.2.
Alice and Bob
need two different channels: the QC is used for the first step of the protocol, the
one responsible for the exchange of the quantum states. Eve can actively interact
with this channel: she can implement several kinds of attacks introducing errors on
the raw key produced by the two authorized users. On the CC, also defined as a
public channel, Eve can only passively listen to the communication without being
==PAGE:30==
22
2 Quantum cryptography
Figure 2.2: General structure of QKD protocols. Alice, the transmitter, sends qubits
to the receiver Bob trough the QC. The security of the produced raw key is then
improved by the steps implemented using the CC. The eavesdropper Eve can actively
interphere with the operations carried on the QC, while only passively listen to the
CC.
notice. This is because the CC between Alice and Bob is authenticated. Alice and
Bob implement the steps of the classical post-processing over the CC: they make sure
they agree on the measurement basis (sifting), they correct errors (error correction)
and finally they further increase the security of the key (privacy amplification).
In BB84 protocol, Alice and Bob encode the information in non-orthogonal quan-
tum states using the polarization state of single photons. It is well-known that we can
describe the polarization of a classical beam of light using a two-dimensional vector
in a two-dimensional complex space. In fact, with the variation of the elements of
this vectors one can represent from the generic elliptical polarization to more specific
polarizations as linear or circular. Similarly, we can describe the polarization state
of a single photon with a two-dimensional ket in a two-dimensional vector space. At
this point of the discussion, we already know that a measurement realized on this
system would result in the collapse of the measured state in one of the eigenstates of
the observable. We can introduce two orthonormal bases with the aim to represent
every polarization state of the single photons of Alice and Bob. The first basis, called
+ basis, is made by a first vector representing the vertical polarization and a second
vector representing the horizontal polarization. These can be written as follows:
∣↕⟩= [1
0]
∣↔⟩= [0
1],
(2.8)
The second basis, named × basis, is made by two vectors obtained by applying a ±45○
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Quantum key distribution
23
bit
polarization state
+ basis
0
∣↔⟩
1
∣↕⟩
× basis
0
∣⤡⟩
1
∣⤢⟩
Table 2.1: Bit to polarization coding in the BB84 protocol. The first two lines of the
table show the encoding in the + basis, while the last two lines represent the coding
in the × basis.
rotation on the horizontal polarization:
∣⤡⟩=
⎡⎢⎢⎢⎣
1
√
2
1
√
2
⎤⎥⎥⎥⎦
∣⤢⟩=
⎡⎢⎢⎢⎣
1
√
2
−1
√
2
⎤⎥⎥⎥⎦
.
(2.9)
This basis describes the diagonal and anti-diagonal polarizations. The coding of the
bits can be arbitrarily made with the assignment of every bit to a basis vector as
reported in 2.1: It is important to notice that each of the vector of the × basis have
equal projection on the vectors of the + basis:
∣⟨⤡∣↕⟩∣2 = 1
2
∣⟨⤡∣↔⟩∣2 = 1
2,
(2.10)
same for ∣⤢⟩. The same result can be shown for the projection of the vectors of
the + basis on the ones of the × basis. Two different bases on the same space that
have this characteristic are defined: mutually unbiased bases. This result is useful
for the understanding of the protocol. Indeed, when Bob will choose a different basis
(compared to Alice) for measuring a state, the outcome of the measurement will be
completely random. Given this coding, the protocol steps are now analyzed in details.
QUBIT EXCHANGE
The description begins from the top of figure 2.2. Alice prepares a photon in one of
the four polarization states discussed above and sends it to Bob trough the QC. Bob
measures the photon, indipendently, choosing a random basis between + and ×. This
step can be repeated N times, proving the two parties with a list of N pairs (bit,
basis). As a result, Alice and Bob end up with two different strings of bits called
Raw keys. The two raw keys are different because everytime Bob accomplishes a
measurement, two scenarios are possible: Bob guesses the same basis used by Alice
and measures the correct bit in a deterministic manner.
Alternatively, since the
two basis are maximally conjugate (i.e. mutually unbiased), every time he measures
choosing the wrong basis he gets a random result.
==PAGE:32==
24
2 Quantum cryptography
SIFTING
In the sifting process, Alice and Bob use the CC to agree on which bits were measured
by Bob in the correct basis. They discard the bits that were measured incorrectly
and the ones that were not received at all due to losses in the QC. Bob sends to Alice
the relative time positions of the bits he measured and the corresponding basis used
for each of these cases. It is relevant to state that Bob does not send the result of
his measurements, otherwise he will reveal to Eve information about the key. At this
point, Alice compares the choices of basis implemented by Bob to those she used to
encode the bits. Then, she discards the bits that were measured by Bob in a different
basis and sends the information to Bob so that he can do the same operation. Finally,
Alice and Bob ideally possess two same strings of bits which are called Sifted keys.
Technical imperfections as well as an eventual intervention of Eve during the qubits
exchange could anyway introduce some errors, resulting in (some) uncorrelated bits
between the Sifted keys [3]. Consequently, Alice and Bob reveal a sample of the bits
of the key and estimate the Quantum Bit Error Rate (QBER) and the amount of
information leaked to Eve. The two authorized parties can correct the errors in the
next step, called error correction.
ERROR CORRECTION
At the end of this step, alternatively called information reconciliation, Alice and
Bob will have two shorter but perfectly correlated strings of bits. To remove the re-
maining errors between the two Sifted keys, they implement classical error correction
algorithms(parity checks, CASCADE protocol... ) over the CC. The length of the
keys is reduced because, as proved by Shannon:
Definition 2.2. The fraction of perfectly correlated symbols that can be extracted
from a list of partially correlated symbols is bounded by the mutual information.
This is expressed by the following equation:
IAB = h(A) + h(B) −h(AB) = h(A) −h(A∣B),
(2.11)
where IAB is the mutual information and h(⋅) is the entropy of the probability dis-
tribution. The concept expressed by (2.11) is easy to understand if we remember
the meaning of entropy as a measure of uncertainty. Indeed, Alice and Bob have to
reveal an amount of information at least as large as the uncertainty they have on their
Sifted keys. After the error correction process, the authorized parties are provided
with two Corrected keys. The next and final process allows Alice and Bob to erase an
eventual knowledge of the keys obtained by Eve in the previous steps.
PRIVACY AMPLIFICATION
The final aim of this step is to reduce to zero Eve’s knowledge of the key. The length
of the corrected keys is further reduced by the amount of information gained by Eve.
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Quantum key distribution
25
This can be quantified as min(IEA,IEB), where IEA (IEB) is Eve’s information about
Alice’s (Bob’s) key. We consider the minimum between the two quantities because,
before the error correction process, the information leaked to Eve can be different for
the two keys. In fact, Alice and Bob agree on using as a reference key the one for
which Eve has less knowledge. After error correction and privacy amplification, the
fraction of the Sifted key that can be extracted is equal to:
r = IAB −min(IEA,IEB).
(2.12)
This phase is the final step for which Alice and Bob are able to share a final Secret
Key.
2.2.2
Eve’s attacks
In this section we are going to report some of the attacks that Eve can launch over
a QC to gain some information on the key. These can be divided in three groups:
individual, collective and coherent attacks [3]. Individual attacks are obtained by Eve
applying the same strategy over each quantum state exchanged by Alice and Bob. She
is bounded to independently measure every state right after her interception. The
Intercept-Resend (IR) attack is an example of this kind of attacks. This simple and
practical attack consists in Eve intercepting a photon sent by Alice and measuring
each qubit in one of the two BB84 basis, exactly how Bob would do.
Then, she
resends to Bob a qubit in the same state corresponding to her measurement result.
Since Eve has no knowledge of Alice’s choice of basis, she will get a correct bit half of
the times. In these cases, she will be able to resend to Bob the same quantum state
prepared by Alice and the two trusted users will not notice her presence. In the other
half of the cases, Eve will be unlucky and using the wrong basis she will resend to
Bob a copy of the photon that will be randomly wrong (because of the two mutually
unbiased basis). As a result, assuming Eve to use this strategy along all the duration
of the communication, she will have a correct knowledge of approximately the 50%
of the bits composing the sifted key.
At the same time, Eve will introduce 25%
of error rate in Alice and Bob’s keys. Thus, Eve’s presence will be easily detected
by the authorized parties during the error correction process. Hovewer, she could
apply this strategy to only a small fraction of the communication, let’s say the 10%.
In this manner, the error rate would be limited to approximately the 2.5%, while
Eve’s information would be up to the 5%. Collective attacks are similar to individual
attacks with the main difference that in this case Eve can have access to a quantum
memory. Thus, she can intercept a quantum state and store it waiting for the sifting
and error correction processes. At this point, she can gain more information about
the states implementing a collective measurement [3]. Coherent attacks consist of the
most general strategies and possible variations that Eve can implement to acquire
knowledge of the key.
Nevertheless, bounds on unconditional security have been
found to be the same as those for collective attacks.
==PAGE:34==
26
2 Quantum cryptography
Quantum side channels and zero-error attacks
The presence of losses over the quantum channel can give to Eve the possibility
of gaining information whithout adding errors to the raw keys. Losses are indeed,
the most universal example of leakage of information in a quantum side-channel,
i.e variables not taken in account when monitoring the channel[3]. Attacks on side-
channels can affect the security if not considered in privacy amplification. An example
of zero-error attack is the beam-splitting (BS) attack. At the beginning of the QC,
Eve emulates channel losses by receiving part of the photons sent by Alice trough
a beam-splitter.
Then, she creates a lossless QC to send the remaining photons
to Bob. By using this strategy, the expected quantum states received by Bob are
affected by the same losses that would be introduced by the lossy QC, meaning that
BS attack introduces no error. Another example of zero-error attack is the photon-
number splitting (PNS). Eve can implement this kind of attack in QKD protocols
that make use of WCPs to replace single-photon sources. She waits for pulses made
by more than one photon, she resends one photon to Bob and keeps the other for
her measurements. In this manner, the statistic of the Poissonian photon number
distribution is preserved at Bob’s receiver and no errors are introduced in the QC.
This attack can be avoided if Alice prepares quantum states with different intensity
values in what is called the decoy-states method.
Hacking attacks
Unconditional security in QKD protocols can be assured only under ideal conditions.
Unfortunately, the gap between ideal conditions and practical implementations is
still large enough to give rise to loopholes that Eve can exploit to launch hacking
attacks. Using the weaknesses of practical QKD systems, the eavesdropper can obtain
knowledge of the key. There are several kinds of hacking attacks:
• A well-known example is the family of Trojan Horse attacks, where Eve probes
the settings of Alice and Bob devices sending some light into them and collecting
the reflected signal.
• Detector side-channel attacks, are considered one of the most important security
loophole in conventional QKD applications [28]. In most of real QKD imple-
mentations, at Bob’s side two non-ideal single photon detectors (SPDs) are used.
For example, when the QC is implemented with optical fibers and at telecom
wavelength (1550 nm) the detectors used are generally InGaAs avalanche SPDs.
The general drawback of these devices is not only due to a low detection effi-
ciency but also to the impossibility of manufacturing two identical detectors.
As a result, the devices will manifest different efficiencies as function of one or
more variables in the time, frequency or spatial domain. The first succesfull
demonstration of detector side-channel attack was the Time-Shifting attack in
[29], based on the proposal in [30], where it was demonstrated a non-negligible
probability (4%) of breaking the security of the QKD system. The Time-shifting
==PAGE:35==
2.3 MDI-QKD
27
attack exploits the fact that to minimize the dark count rate, InGaAs SPDs usu-
ally work in gated mode. Dark counts in the detectors are given by clicks that
do not correspond to the arrival of a photon but are due to environmental light
and thermoelectric effects, thus they are considered noise. The electrical gate
signal activates the SPD only in a narrow time window when the signal pulse
is expected to arrive. Out of this window, the detectors are blind to the arrival
of a photon, meaning that in this configuration the synchronization between
Alice and Bob is critical. The time-dependent effiency mismatch between these
devices allows Eve to implement a IR attack, generating and sending to Bob a
time-shifted signal based on her measurement results. In the extreme case of
complete mismatch, Eve can acquire full information of the final key without
introducing any error.
• We also reported another type of detector side-channel attack called detector-
control attack. By using this strategy, it was demonstrated that Eve can fully
control Bob’s gated detectors with classical light pulses superimposed over a
bright CW [31]. Indeed, SPDs are sensible to brigh light even when not activated
by the gate signal, so that Eve can implement a IR attack in the following
manner: she uses a copy of Bob to measure Alice’s quantum states in a random
basis. Then, she resends the results to Bob not trough WCPs but by making
use of bright trigger pulses.
Bob has a detection event only when his basis
choice corresponds with Eve’s, otherwise he observes no detector clicks. After
the exchanging of the raw keys, Eve and Bob have the same strings of bits and
the same basis values. Now, Eve can just wait and listen to the communication
in the CC. After sifting, error correction and privacy amplification, she will end
up possessing the same final key of Alice and Bob. This and similar attacks are
generally suitable and feasible against most of QKD protocols [32]. In the next
section, we are going to introduce the MDI-QKD, a protocol that can ensure
security against all the detector side-channels attacks.
2.3
MDI-QKD
As stated in the previous sections of this thesis, QKD can ensure unconditionally
secure communication between two trusted users under ideal conditions and some
assumptions. Detector side-channel attacks, which take advantages of the limitations
of the non-ideal SPDs, remain between the most difficult to counteract. MDI-QKD
can remove all the detector side-channel attacks because it makes use of a third-
untrusted party that we can call Charlie or Eve herself, since it could be in total
control of the eavesdropper. Alice and Bob independently prepare their quantum
states like in a BB84 protocol and they send them to Charlie, who performs Bell
states measurements (BSMs) that project the incoming signals into Bell states. After
the qubit exchange, Charlie publicly announces the measurement results necessary
for the classical post-processing steps. Since the measurement setting is only used
==PAGE:36==
28
2 Quantum cryptography
for the post-selection of entanglement between the states of Alice and Bob, it can
be treated as a true black box. This is the reason why MDI is inherently immune to
all the attack on the detection system. Several works showed the advantages of the
use of this protocol, and in 2016, the distance record for secure key transmission was
demonstrated with MDI over 404km of optical fiber [22]. In the next section, we are
going to explain the different steps for the implementation of the protocol.
MDI Protocol
The use of MDI, together with the use of the decoy-state method [33], can provide un-
conditional security for QKD applications. We briefly introduced decoy-state method
as a technique to prevent Eve from launching PNS attacks when Alice and Bob replace
the use of single-photon sources with WCPs. The basic idea under this technique is
the following: in addition to the BB84 signal states with an average number of pho-
tons µ, Alice prepares in the same way some extra states (decoy states) with average
photon number ν ≠µ used for the purpose of detecting eventual attacks from Eve.
Alice’s pulses are randomly assigned to be used for the key generation or for the decoy
states, she modulates the intensity of each pulse and she send them to Bob. After
Bob’s detection of the states, Alice tells Bob which of those are signal states using
the CC. Eve cannot distinguish between the two kinds of quantum states, so her at-
tacks will be inevitably detected by the two authorized users when they will analyze
the QBER. It was experimentally shown how decoy-state method can dramatically
improve the security and performances in QKD systems [34].
In figure 2.3, it is shown the basic setup for a MDI protocol based on the BB84
polarization encoding. At first, phase-randomized WCPs are independently prepared
by Alice and Bob making use of phase modulators. Then, the pulses are randomly
encoded into one of the BB84 polarization states (∣↔⟩, ∣↕⟩, ∣⤡⟩, ∣⤢⟩) by means of a
polarization modulator. An intensity modulator is responsible for setting the average
photon number of the pulse to signal state or decoy state. Alice and Bob sends their
pulses trough a QC to an untrusted relay placed in the middle. The relay in the
middle can be an untrusted Charlie as well as a malicious Eve that is supposed to
implement BSMs that project the incoming signals into Bell states. We introduced
the four maximally-entangled two-qubits states or Bell states in section 1.3, precisely
in equation (1.22). Since the Bell states form an orthogonal basis, it exists a measure-
ment that can distinguish between the four of them. If the qubits sent by Alice and
Bob were not in a Bell state before, a BSM, that is an entangling operation, projects
them into a Bell state. As shown in figure 2.3, BSMs in Charlie/Eve receiver can be
implemented by using only linear optics. This setup allows to distinguish two out of
the four Bell states [35], specifically ∣ψ+⟩and ∣ψ−⟩. It is composed by a 50:50 beam
splitter (BS) whose two outputs are connected with two polarization beam splitters
(PBS) followed by four single-photon detectors, one for each arm of the PBSs. Assum-
ing that all the measurements are implemented in the rectilinear basis +, every time
two photons sent by Alice and Bob interphere in the BS, they are then projected into
vertical or horizontal polarization states by the PBSs. In this scheme, a succesfull
==PAGE:37==
2.3 MDI-QKD
29
Figure 2.3: Schematic of the setup of MDI protocol based on polarization encoding.
Alice and Bob’s phase randomized WCPs are encoded in BB84 polarization states
by polarization modulators(Polarization-M). Intensity modulators (IM) are used for
the generation of decoy states. Charlie’s receiver is composed by a BS where HOM
interference is observed. The two outputs of the BS are connected with two PBSs
projecting the photons into vertical or horizontal polarization states. Four SPDs are
used for the detection of the quantum states.
Projection into
A click in
∣ψ+⟩
D1H and D1V or D2H and D2V
∣ψ−⟩
D1H and D2V or D2H and D1V
Table 2.2: Projections of the BSMs into Bell states indicated by simoultaneous clicks
of Charlie’s detectors.
Bell state measurent occurs when precisely two of the four SPDs (associated with or-
thogonal polarizations) click at the same time. As summarized in table 2.2, when the
two photons come out from the same output port of the BS, a click in the detectors
D1H and D1V or in D2H and D2V indicates a projection into ∣ψ+⟩. On the contrary,
a click in D1H and D2V or D2H and D1V indicates a projection into ∣ψ−⟩.
Once the communication on the QC is completed, Charlie uses a public CC to
announce the events where he obtained a succesful outcome as well as the result of
the measurement. Alice and Bob keep the data corresponding to Charlie’s succesful
outcomes and discard the rest. Furthermore, just as in the BB84, they implement
a post-selection phase where they declare the events when they used the same basis.
==PAGE:38==
30
2 Quantum cryptography
+ basis
BSM output
× basis
BSM output
SOPs
Single photons
WCPs
SOPs
Single photons
WCPs
Alice
Bob
∣ψ+⟩
∣ψ−⟩
∣ψ+⟩
∣ψ−⟩
Alice
Bob
∣ψ+⟩
∣ψ−⟩
∣ψ+⟩
∣ψ−⟩
∣↔⟩
∣↔⟩
0
0
0
0
∣⤡⟩
∣⤡⟩
1
0
0.75
0.25
∣↕⟩
∣↕⟩
0
0
0
0
∣⤢⟩
∣⤢⟩
1
0
0.75
0.25
∣↔⟩
∣↕⟩
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
∣⤡⟩
∣⤢⟩
0
1
0.25
0.75
∣↕⟩
∣↔⟩
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
∣⤢⟩
∣⤡⟩
0
1
0.25
0.75
Table 2.3: Probabilities for BSM outputs for the cases of single photons and WCPs.
Finally, to ensure that their keys are composed by two perfectly correlated strings of
bits, either Alice or Bob has to apply a bit flip to her or his data.
In table 2.3, we summarized the probabilities for basis-compatible valid BSM
outputs. In the ideal case of Alice and Bob using single-photon sources in the basis
+, if their joint state is ∣↔A⟩∣↔B⟩, both photons are routed to either D1H or D2H
due to HOM effect in the BS. As a result, no projection into ∣ψ+⟩or ∣ψ−⟩is registered.
In case their joint state is ∣↔A⟩∣↕B⟩, there is equal probability for a projection into
either ∣ψ+⟩or ∣ψ−⟩. In complete analogy is the case where Alice and Bob use WCPs
in the basis +. The discussion for the diagonal basis × is more complicated:
• Single-photon sources: when the polarization states are equal, a projection into
∣ψ+⟩happens half of the time (probability normalized to 1) while ∣ψ−⟩is never
registered. Vice versa when the polarization states are orthogonal.
• WCPs: in this case a noise offset of 25% is introduced. In fact, the probability
of Alice (Bob) sending two photons while a vacuum is sent by Bob (Alice) is
1
2 of the probability of both the parties sending a single-photon. This result is
due to the Poissonian photon number statistics of WCPs.
At this point, Alice and Bob can derive the secret key implementing a data analysis.
The key generation is given only by the photons sent in the rectilinear basis while
the diagonal basis is only used for testing.
The reason of this choice is that the
overall error rate is too high in the diagonal basis. In fact, in the + basis, an error
corresponds to a succesfull BSM when Alice and Bob send equal polarization states.
On the contrary, in the × basis, an error is given by a projection into ∣ψ−⟩when
Alice and Bob send equal polarization states, or into ∣ψ+⟩when they send orthogonal
polarization states.
In figure 2.4, it is reported the secret key rate estimated by Alice and Bob with
the use of the decoy-state method [36]. The key rate per pulse formula is given by:
R ≥q{−Qµf(Eµ)H2(Eµ) + Q11[1 −H(e11)]}.
(2.13)
Where:
• q = 0.5 is the parameter representing the fact that Alice and Bob randomly
choose between the two bases everytime they send a photon.
==PAGE:39==
2.3 MDI-QKD
31
Figure 2.4: Simulated secret key rate obtained for MDI protocol. Parameters used:
µ = 0.5, ν = 0.1, ν0 = 0, f=1.16, ηdet = 0.15, rdc = 1kHz, timewindow = 1ns, e0 = 0.5,
edet = 0.01.
• The gain Q11 = Y11µe−µ represents the probability that Alice (Bob) sends a pho-
ton and Charlie obtains a detection. The overall gain of a pulse with intensity
µ is given by:
Qµ = Y0 + 1 −e−ηµ.
(2.14)
• The yield, Y0 = rdc ∗timewindow, is the conditional probability of a detection
event on Charlie’s side when Alice (Bob) sends no photons. In this case is given
only by the dark counts rate in the detection’s time-window. If Alice (Bob)
sends a photon, the yield becomes:
Y11 = µ(Qν −Qν0 −(ν2 −ν2
0)(Qµemu −Y0)
µν −µν0 −ν2 + 2ν0
.
(2.15)
• The error rate is expressed as:
e11 = EµQµeµ −Eν0Qν0eν0
Y11(ν −ν0)
.
(2.16)
where it appears the overall QBER of a pulse with intensity µ:
Eµ = e0Y0 + edet(1 −e−ηµ)
Qµ
.
(2.17)
• The intensities of signal state, decoy state and vacuum-decoy state are respec-
tively: µ = 0.5, ν = 0.1 and ν0 = 0.
==PAGE:40==
32
2 Quantum cryptography
• f=1.16 is the error correction inefficiency and H(x) is the binary Shannon
entropy function [19].
• η = ηdett where ηdet = 0.15 is the detectors efficiency and t is the transmissivity
given by the transmission loss , rdc = 1kHz, timewindow = 1ns, e0 = 0.5 is the
QBER for the vacuum and edet = 0.01 is the intrinsic error of the detectors.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER3
Integrated
Semiconductor Lasers
In this chapter, we report the main relevant physical principles of semiconductor
lasers necessary to understand the characterization of the devices utilized in this
work of thesis: the effects of direct modulation, the different techniques to obtain
single-mode lasers and the fabrication processes implemented for their integration on
photonic integrated circuits (PICs). Most of the first section is extracted from [37].
3.1
Semiconductor lasers physics
All lasers, including semiconductor lasers, emit coherent light trough the process
of stimulated emission. The atoms partecipating in this process are arranged in a
crystal lattice. As a consequence, the indivudual energy levels associated with a single
atoms merge in energy bands. The two relevant bands responsible for stimulated
emission are called valence and conduction bands: usually the former is filled with
electrons while the latter is nearly empty. If some of the electrons are raised up to
the conduction band trough electrical pumping, the empy states left in the valence
band are named holes. Light is produced trough the recombination of electrons in
the conduction band with holes in the valence band. The emitted photon carries
an energy given by hν ≃Eg, where Eg is the bandgap energy of the semiconductor.
Since ν = c/λ, we can observe that semiconductor lasers can operate only at a certain
wavelength near λ = hc/Eg. The energy bandgap is a parameter given by the choice of
materials, consequently to emit light at telecom wavelength (1550 nm), semiconductor
lasers are generally fabricated by a quaternary compound of InGaAsP.
Semiconductor lasers are electrically pumped using a p−n junction under forward
biasing (figure 3.1).
The structure is composed by three layers: the central core
is made of the semiconductor responsible for light emission and is called the active
layer.
The cladding layers are made by semiconductor with a larger bandgap to
confine electrons and holes in the active region. The refractive index of the active
layer is slightly larger than the surrounding ones, in this way it can act as a planar
waveguide confining the optical modes. The number of optical modes that are excited
depends on the thickness of this area. When the injected carrier density (laser bias
==PAGE:42==
34
3 Integrated Semiconductor Lasers
Figure 3.1: Schematic of a broad-area semiconductor laser.
current) exceeds a certain value, population inversion is achieved (number of carriers
in conduction band larger than in valence band) and the active region exhibits optical
gain. For laser operation, optical gain alone is not enough, an optical feedback is
needed to transform the laser in an oscillator. For this aim, the gain medium is placed
inside a Fabry-Perot (FP) cavity formed by two mirrors. In the case of semiconductor
lasers, the role of mirrors is played by the two cleaved facets. Their reflectivity is given
by the large refractive index difference across the air-semiconductor interface. The
number of longitudinal modes that is allowed to oscillate in the FP cavity is given by
the phase condition:
ν = νm = mc/2nL,
(3.1)
showing that the laser frequency ν must match one of the frequencies in the set
νm, where m is an integer, n is the refractive index of the gain medium and L is
length of the cavity. The spacing ∆νL between the longitudinal modes is constant
and it is equal to the free spectral range associated with any FP cavity:
∆νL = c/2ngL,
(3.2)
where ng is the group index. Semiconductor laser generally emits in several longi-
tudinal modes of the cavity simoultaneously.
The gain spectrum is large enough
(bandwidth∼10 THz) that many modes can be amplified at the same time, in fact,
tipically ∆νL = 150 GHz for a cavity length of L=250 µm. The laser gain spectrum
is shown in figure 3.2, the mode closest to the gain peak is called the dominant mode.
Under indeal conditions, only this mode should be able to reach the treshold and be
emitted. However, in real devices, since they are close to the gain peak, the longitudi-
nal modes at the sides of the dominant mode often substract a significant portion of
power. For many practical applications, one powerful single-mode is usually prefer-
able.
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Semiconductor lasers physics
35
Figure 3.2: Schematic of gain and loss in semiconductor laser.
Figure 3.3: DFB and DBR laser structures.
3.1.1
Single-mode semiconductor lasers: DFB and DBR
lasers
Distributed Feedback (DFB) semiconductor lasers are devices implemented with the
aim of selecting one single mode out of the resonance cavity of the laser. The optical
feedback is not obtained by the cleaved facets, instead, it is distributed troughout all
the cavity length (figure 3.3). Indeed, a Bragg grating is internally built-in designing
a periodic variation of the refractive index, this results in a distributed feedback that
occurs by means of Bragg diffraction. This phenomenon permits to couple, in the
forward and backward direction, only the optical modes which wavelength satisfies
the Bragg condition:
Λ = m(λB/2¯n),
(3.3)
where Λ is the grating period, ¯n is the average mode index and m is an integer
representing the specific order of the Bragg diffraction. The more efficient coupling,
in both the directions, is obtained for the first-order m = 1. Such gratings are formed
using holographic and litographic techniques.
In Distributed Bragg Reflectors (DBR) semiconductor lasers, with respect to DFB,
the optical feedback does not occur inside the active region (figure 3.3). A Bragg
==PAGE:44==
36
3 Integrated Semiconductor Lasers
grating is placed at both ends of the optical cavity, these gratings act as mirrors
whose reflectivity is maximum only for a wavelength λB satisfying (3.3). Therefore,
cavity losses are minimum for the longitudinal modes closest to λB and substantially
larger for all the other modes.
Both DFB and DBR semiconductor lasers are technologies implemented to emit
a single optical mode, despite the complexity of the design, they are commercialy
produced from 1980s. The Bragg grating is etched onto one of the layers surrounding
the active region, the holographic technique forms a fringe pattern on a photoresist
previously deposited on the wafer surface by interfering two laser beams. The pattern
is then etched chemically. Alternatively, litographic techniques make use of electron
beams to directly write the pattern on the electron-beam resist. In both cases, once
the grating has been etched into the substrate, the other layers are grown by epitaxial
growth technique like in common semiconductor lasers.
3.2
Laser characteristics and lasing wavelength
dependence on temperature
The operation of semiconductor lasers can be described by a set of rate equations that
govern the interactions between photons and electrons inside the active region:
dP
dt = GP + Rsp −P
τp
,
dN
dt = I
q −N
τc
−GP,
(3.4)
where P is the number of photons, N the number of electrons and I is the bias
current. The parameter G is defined as the net rate of stimulated emission and it is
defined as:
G = Γvggm = GN(N −N0),
(3.5)
while Rsp is the rate of spontaneous emission into the lasing mode. It is important
to state that Rsp is only a small fraction of the total spontaneous emission rate:
spontaneous emission occurs in all directions over a large spectrum range and only
a small part of it propagates along the cavity being emitted at laser frequency. The
number of electrons N is related to the carrier density trough the active volume V , vg
is the group velocity, Γ is the confinement factor (the optical modes extend beyond
the active layer while the gain exists only in that region) and gm is the material gain
at the mode frequency. The term P/τp takes in account the loss of photons inside the
cavity, the parameter τp is referred as the photon lifetime. The second rate equation
represents the rate at which electrons are created or destroyed inside the active region.
The parameter τc is called the carrier lifetime and it includes the loss of electrons
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Laser characteristics and lasing wavelength dependence on temperature
37
Figure 3.4: P-I curves for several temperatures. Figure from [37].
due to both nonradiative recombination and spontaneous emission.
The emission
properties of semiconductor lasers are characterized by a P −I curve (figure 3.4) that
it indicates the bias current to be applied to operate above threshold.
In figure 3.4, there are reported several P −I curves indicating the bias current
required to obtain a specific amount of power as well as the power dependence on the
operating temperature. As a matter of fact, laser performances decreases with the
increasing of temperature, the threshold current is found to grow exponentially with
temperature as:
Ith(T) = I0exp(T/T0),
(3.6)
where I0 is a constant and T0 is the characteristic parameter to express the tem-
perature sensitivity of the laser threshold. Because of this strong temperature depen-
dence, InGaAsP lasers need to be cooled down by a built-in thermoelectric cooler.
In the case of integrated semiconductor lasers, an external temperature controller is
needed to keep the system stable. The rate equations can help us to understand most
of the features in figure 3.4. In the case of Continuous Wave (CW) operation with
a constant bias current I, the derivatives in (3.4) can be set to zero. Neglecting the
presence of spontaneous emission, for currents such that Gτp < 1 we have:
P = 0,
N = τcI/q,
(3.7)
The threshold is then reached at a current for which Gτp = 1, the carrier population
shows a threshold value given by:
Nth = N0 + (GNτp)−1,
(3.8)
Finally, we can express the bias threshold value as:
==PAGE:46==
38
3 Integrated Semiconductor Lasers
Figure 3.5: Basic mechanisms of lasing wavelength change in semiconductor lasers.
Ith = qNth
τc
= q
τc
(N0 +
1
GNτp
).
(3.9)
(3.9) explains the exponential increase of the threshold current with the increasing
of the temperature. The carrier lifetime depends on the carrier popolation and de-
creases as N 2. This dependence is caused by a specific type of recombination named
Auger recombination: the excess energy given off by an electron recombining with a
hole is given to a second electron (in either band) instead of emitting the energy as a
photon. This excess of energy is then passed from the newly excited electron to the
lattice trough a series of collisions. This process is based on the ability of the charge
carriers to exchange energy, that is why Auger recombination is proportional to the
concentration of charge carriers and increases exponentially with temperature, being
responsible fot the temperature sensitivity of InGaAsP lasers. In figure 3.4, one can
notice the bending of the P −I curves with the increasing of the output power of the
laser. This effect is caused by the junction heating occurring under CW operation.
Other possible reasons are current leakage at high operating powers together with
higher internal losses. The temperature change in the active region of the laser is also
responsible for the change in the wavelength of the light emitted by the laser. It is
then possible to tune the laser wavelength in a certain range by controlling the bias
current and its operation temperature. In figure 3.5, several mechanisms responsible
for the change in the lasing wavelength are reported. The increase of the temperature
not only increments the threshold current of the laser as expressed by (3.9), but it is
also responsible for an higher refractive index in the active region. When the refrac-
tive index increases, the gain spectrum of the laser moves towards longer wavelengths.
In addition, the rising temperature is the origin of a reduction of the bandgap energy,
affecting the lasing wavelength as shown in section 2.1.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Direct current modulation
39
Figure 3.6: Illustration of the concepts of direct modulation (top) and external mod-
ulation (bottom).
3.3
Direct current modulation
A key functionality of optical communication systems is the mudulation operation,
which consists in the conversion of the high bit-rate electrical data signal into the
optical domain. We call intensity modulation the operation in which the intensity of
the laser source is varied according to the data to be transmitted. For the aim of
this work, we will focus only on this kind of modulation eventhough other kinds of
optical modulation (phase, frequency) are also possible and often implemented in the
transmission of high bandiwidth data traffic. In figure 3.6, there are reported the two
different strategies that can be used for perform this operation: direct modulation
and external modulation.
In the first case, the semiconductor laser emits light only when a bit 1 is transmit-
ted. Ideally, when a bit 0 is transmitted no light should be emitted. Basically, the
laser is turned on and off according to the transmission data in what is called an on-off
keying modulation format. In the case of external modulation, the laser emits in a
CW configuration and the power is kept constant with time. This technique makes
use of an external component, modulator, whose task is to let the light pass whenever
a bit 1 is transmitted and to block it otherwise. This switch can be implemented in
different ways, the physical process on which is based should be fast enough to switch
between its two states according to the data bit rate.
In this thesis project, directly modulated lasers have been used in the experiment.
As a conseguence, we will analyze which are the physical aspects of direct modulation
to have a more in-depth look at the benefits and limitations of this technique. There
are three main parameters to be analyzed: speed of operation, extinction ratio and
frequency chirping. The directed modulated laser has to be fast enough to switch
between high and low power levels in a fraction of the time duration of the optical
pulses we want to transmit. The extinction ratio of the transmitted optical signal is
defined as:
==PAGE:48==
40
3 Integrated Semiconductor Lasers
ER = P1
P0,
(3.10)
where P1 and P0 are the power levels corresponding to a bit 1 and 0 respectively.
In this work, the signal that was used in the experiments consists of a train of optical
pulses. The extinction ratio is then considered to be the difference between the peak
power of the pulses and the signal noise level. To explain the concept of frequency
chirping, the electric field of a lightwawe with carrier angular frequency ω0 can be
expressed as:
E(t) = R[A(t)eiω0t],
(3.11)
where A(t) represents the complex envelope of the signal. The complex envelope can
be written in terms of its modulus ∣A∣and phase ϕ as:
E(t) = ∣A(t)∣eiϕ(t) =
√
P(t)eiϕ(t),
(3.12)
Intensity modulation consists in the variation of P(t) according to the modulating
electrical signal. However, this operation results in a modulation of the phase ϕ(t)
induced by the physical process and consequently, the phase of the signal becomes a
function of time. As a matter of fact, we can define an instantaneous frequency of
the optical signal according to:
ω(t) = ω0 + δϕ
δt ,
(3.13)
showing that a time-varying phase is equivalent to a change in the instantaneous
frequency of the optical signal.
This frequency modulation is usually referred as
frequency chirping.
The effect of this phenomen results in the broadening of the
spectrum of the modulated signal and consequently in a worse tolerance to group
velocity dispersion. Indeed, the different frequency components of the spectrum of a
pulse injected in a fiber will travel at different speeds, leading to pulse broadening.
3.3.1
Direct modulation of semiconductor lasers
As can be seen in figure 3.7, intensity modulation in semiconductor lasers exploits
the dependence of the output power on the laser bias current. The bias current can
be varied according to the data to be transmitted, converting the information from
the electrical to the optical domain. When the bias current is below threshold, no
light is emitted and a 0 bit can be transmitted. When the bias current rises above
threshold, the laser emits light and consequenly a 1 bit can be transmitted. Using
the laser in this configuration, everytime a high power level is required, population
inversion has to be achieved injecting carriers inside the active region. This operation
requires time for the carrier density to reach the threshold value before lasing. As a
conseguence, this process produces a turn-on delay that can be approximated by:
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Direct current modulation
41
Figure 3.7: Illustration of direct modulation in semiconductor lasers. Figure from
[38].
td = τcln( I1 −I0
I1 −Ith
).
(3.14)
Such a delay degrades consistently the performances of directly modulated semicon-
ductor lasers when used for high speed optical applications. This is the reason why,
direct modulation is not used for bit rates higher than 10 Gbit/s, where the bit slot is
only 100ps long. Furthermore, the modulation bandwidth can be shown to increase
with the bias current according to:
∆f3dB ≈[3GN(Ib −Ith)
4π2e
]1/2,
(3.15)
where GN is related to the dependence of the rate of stimulated emission on the
carrier density and e is the elementary charge. As a consequence, high modulation
bandwith can be obtained only for large bias currents.
Observing figure 3.7, one can notice that when a laser is subjected to a transient in
its bias current, the optical power exhibits some dumped oscillations called relaxation
oscillations. The origin of this phenomenon, affecting the shape of the emitted optical
pulses, is due to the interaction between the injected carriers and the emitted photons.
The relaxation oscillation frequency and its dumping rate increase with increasing
bias. Finally, as introducted in the previous section, the permormances of directly
modulated lasers are further deteriorated by frequency chirping. Indeed, any change
in the bias current causes a change in the carrier density who in turn leads in a
change of the refractive index of the gain region. As expressed by (3.1), the phase
condition of the cavity is also dependent on the refractive index. The variation of
this parameter has as a conseguence that the instanteneous frequency of the emitted
signal will be a time varying signal. Thus, directly modulated lasers are inherently
chirped. The variations of the instantaneous frequency at the output of a directly
modulated lasers is equal to:
==PAGE:50==
42
3 Integrated Semiconductor Lasers
∆ν(t) = α
4π ( d
dt[lnPe(t)] + κPe(t)),
(3.16)
where α is the linewidth enhancement factor and κ is the adiabatic chirp coeffi-
cient. The chirp consists of the two different terms in (3.16): the former is named
transient chirp and as the name suggests, it appears only when there are variation
of the emitted power. The latter, named adiabatic chirp, is responsible for the dif-
ferent frequencies observed under steady conditions when either of the bits 0 or 1 is
transmitted. In this section, we discussed the direct modulation of semiconductor
laser as a practical technique that does not require the use of external modulators,
but that can limit the performances at high bit rates introducing pulse broadening
and frequency chirping. We are now going to analyze the technique used in this work
to overcome the drawbacks of direct modulation and obtaining well behaved optical
pulses for HOM interference.
The gain-switching
Gain-switching is a technique used in the direct modulation of semiconductor lasers to
generate short optical pulses. The interesting aspect of this method is the possibility
of obtaining compact picosecond pulse sources avoiding the use of expensive external
high-speed modulators [39]. An RF signal, as for example a train of electrical pulses,
is used in combination with the laser bias current for modulating the gain of the
laser. As we saw in the previous section, when the gain is switched by an electrical
pulse from a point below threshold to a level where population inversion is achieved,
the emitted optical pulses show relaxation oscillations. In gain-switching, the laser is
driven by an electrical signal while biased far below threshold. This technique selects
the first spike of the relaxation oscillations avoiding to excite the subsequent ones.
By doing this, it can be obtained an optical pulse that is substantially shorter in time
compared to the electrical one. As we will see in the experimental part of this thesis,
optical pulses of 130 ps FWHM are created using an electrical train of pulses of 1.5
ns FWHM.
The working principle of gain-switching is shown in figure 3.8. At time zero, when
the laser is biased below threshold, an electrical pulse rapidly builds the carrier density
until a level above threshold. Once at this level, the carrier density is consumed by
the fast increase of the photon density.
By cutting of the electrical pulse at this
point, the photon density abruptly decreases resulting in the emission of a short
optical pulse. For optimal performances, gain-switching requires long electrical pulses
with high peak-to-peak power such that they can contain an amount of injected
carriers significantly larger than the one required for population inversion. The below-
threshold condition is a requirement given by the fact that above threshold, the
maximum of population inversion is clamped to a level slighlty higher than threshold.
==PAGE:51==
3.4 Hybrid semiconductor on silicon lasers for photonic integrated circuits
43
Figure 3.8: Illustration of the gain-switching mechanism in semiconductor lasers. Fig-
ure from [39].
3.4
Hybrid semiconductor on silicon lasers for
photonic integrated circuits
So far in this chapter, the working principles and the physics under the operation
of semiconductor lasers have been analyzed. In this section, we focus on the inte-
gration of this devices into Photonic Integrated Circuits (PICs).
Specifically, the
features of the hybrid integration of III-V semiconductor materials on silicon for the
implement of laser sources are examined.
Silicon photonics is attracting a lot of
attention due to the prospect of low-cost, compact circuits that integrate photonic
and microelectronic elements on a single chip [40]. As a matter of fact, silicon has
proved to be a suitable platform for the integration of optical components as low-loss
nanowaveguides, intensity modulators, filters and multiplexers. All of this devices are
of fundamental importance for the realization of short distance data communications
as well for long-haul transmissions [41]. However, the deficit of efficient silicon light
sources is still slowing the large-scale deployment of silicon photonics platforms. This
lack has propelled the research for hybrid integration approaches as wafer-bonding
of direct-bandgap III-V semiconductor materials on structured silicon-on-insulator
(SOI) substrates.
In figure 3.9, the process flow for silicon PICs using heterogeneous integration of
III-V material on silicon is shown. The first step of the fabrication is the formation
of passive waveguides over a 200 mm SOI wafer, the silicon top layer has tipically a
thickness of 440 nm. The waveguides are created by etching the silicon top layer and
are optimized for a perfect coupling with the III-V waveguides that will be aligned on
the top in a later step. After this etching step, the thickness of the top layer is reduced
to 220 nm. Additional etching steps are then implemented to create elements of the
passive circuitry as DBR for obtaining DBR lasers. In the same manner, a vertical
output grating coupler is built with the aim of coupling the light of the laser upwards
the optical fiber. The surface of the SOI wafer is then planarized by depositing a
==PAGE:52==
44
3 Integrated Semiconductor Lasers
Figure 3.9: Process flow for silicon PICs using the heterogeneous integration of III-V
material on silicon. Figure from [40].
Figure 3.10: Cross section of III-V material wafer. Figure from [41].
silica layer and applying a chemical and mechanical polishing. At the same time, InP
wafers of 2 inches are grown with a structure composed by several layers as reported
in figure 3.10.
The semiconductor materials region is composed by a p-InGaAs contact layer
on a p-InP cladding layer, 6 quantum wells (MQW) of InGaAsP surrounded by two
confinement heterostructure layers of the same material and finally, a n-InP layer. It is
important to grow this regions in optimized conditions, defect-free surfaces have to be
achieved for high laser performances. After this step, the InP wafers are then bonded
on the SOI wafers.
The following steps consist in: the removal of InP substrate,
dry-etching trough the InGaAs layer and partly etching of the InP positive doped
waveguide cladding layer. The InP etching is then completed chemically. The active
region is encapsulated with DVS-benzocyclobutene (BCB) and an alloy of Ti/Pt/Au
==PAGE:53==
3.4 Hybrid semiconductor on silicon lasers for photonic integrated circuits
45
Figure 3.11: Schematic of the hybrid III-V/Si laser from top and side view [40].
is used for the metallization on both the p and n sides.
In figure 3.9, it is reported the schematic of one of the lasers used in the ex-
periments of this project. In the center of the device, one can notice the waveguide
responsible for the optical gain (active region). At both sides of the active region (400
µm), there are coupling regions that couples the light emitted by the III-V area to the
underlying silicon waveguide. The wavelength of the laser is selected by the DBRs
positioned on the left (300 µm) and right (100 µm) side of the device. The resulting
optical cavity is long 600 µm, the Bragg grating pitch is 237 nm with a duty cicle of
50%. The left side grating has a modal reflectivity of 97.3% and a 3dB-bandwidth
of 2.58 nm, while the one on the right side has a modal reflectivity of 46.4% and a
3dB bandwidth of 3.98 nm. The combination of these two Bragg gratings provides a
sufficiently narrow filter for single longitudinal mode operation. The light is vertically
emitted by a grating coupler on the right side of the device. Other characteristics of
this devices (optical spectrum, lasing wavelength, temperature dependence) will be
shown in the characterization of the light sources implemented in the experimental
part of this project.
==PAGE:54==
46
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER4
Experimental Setup
In the second chapter of this work, MDI-QKD and its main steps were introduced.
Alice and Bob independently prepare quantum states that they send to an untrusted
party Charlie. Charlie implements BSMs that result in the projection of the quantum
states sent by the users into one of the Bell states ∣ψ+⟩or ∣ψ−⟩with equal probability.
It was shown that for obtaining succesfull BSMs, two identical photons impacting on
Charlie’s BS have to be routed on the same output port bounching together because
of HOM interference. The achievement of HOM interference in Charlie’s receiver is
then a fundamental step for the implementation of MDI protocols. As discussed in
section 1.5, for obtaining HOM interference the photons sent by Alice and Bob must
be indistinguishable, equal in every degree of freedom.
4.1
Experimental setup
In figure 4.1, it is reported the schematic of the setup used for the implementation
of HOM interference between two different directly modulated lasers integrated on
chips. In the next chapter, the results obtained with this setup, constituting the major
achievement of this work, will be discussed. Starting from the left side of figure 4.1,
we are going to explain all of the different components used in the setup. Alice and
Figure 4.1: Schematic of the setup used for HOM interference between two different
lasers. FPGA: field frogrammable gate array. TC: temperature controller. BPTF:
band-pass tunable filter. PM: power meter. VOA: variable optical attenuator. ODL:
optical delay line. PC: polarization controller. PBS: polarization beam splitter. BS:
beam splitter. SPD: single photon detector.
==PAGE:56==
48
4 Experimental Setup
Bob are provided with two probe Stations where the chips are kept in place by the use
of vacuum pumps and their temperature is controlled by two temperature controllers
(TC). A Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) generates the Radio-Frequency
(RF) electrical signals necessary for the direct modulation of the integrated lasers.
These signals are then combined with the laser bias current making use of Bias-Tees
and sent to the lasers trough the use of two RF Picoprobes. The optical pulses emitted
by the lasers are coupled vertically to the optical fibers using the grating couplers
integrated on the chips. Then, they are sent to Band-Pass Tunable Filters (BPTF)
to remove sidebands from the laser spectra. Successively, the trains of optical pulses
are attenuated to the quantum regime using one Variable Optical Attenuator (VOA)
for each of the two paths. An Optical Delay Line (ODL), placed in Alice’s light path,
is responsible for changing the relative time delay between Alice and Bob’s pulses
at the scope of scanning the different points of the HOM dip. The WCPs can now
be aligned in polarization by the combined use of two Polarization Controllers (PC)
and two Polarization Beam Splitter (PBS) before entering in Charlie’s receiver. Two
SPDs connected to a Time-Tagger (Control Unit) detect the number of coincidences
between the photons coming out of the output ports of the BS. In the next section,
we will describe Alice, Bob and Charlie’s equipment in details, following the same
order. We will pay particular attention to the characterization of the laser sources
because of their fundamental role in the preparation of Alice and Bob quantum states
in the form of WCPs.
Moreover, at the time of writing, it is the first time that
directly modulated integrated lasers are used for implementing HOM interference
and quantum communication protocols. As a consequence, advantages and drawbacks
given by the use of this devices need to be analyzed.
4.2
Laser sources characterization
HOM interference requires the weak optical pulses emitted by the two different lasers
to be identical in every degree of freedom such as wavelength, polarization and tem-
poral shape-duration. In MDI experiments, two almost identical phase-randomized
laser sources are generally used for preparing Alice and Bob quantum states with the
aim of observing HOM interference with high visibility in Charlie’s receiver [19]. The
phase of the optical pulses is intrinsically random since we make use of lasers directly
modulated below threshold. In this section, we are going to describe the several steps
we implemented with the aim of finding two integrated lasers from two different chips
with characteristics that would allow us to observe HOM interference.
The first step towards HOM interference is to find two lasers with the same wave-
length. As explained in section 3.1 , the emission wavelength of the laser is given by
the material and length of the optical cavity. For this experiment, 6 different chips
provided by Cea Leti Tech were characterized. Every chip contains a different num-
ber of integrated lasers, either DFB or DBR, produced with the fabrication process
described in section 3.4. The lasers have different cavity length and consequently
different wavelengths.
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Laser sources characterization
49
Figure 4.2: Classification of the wavelength of the analysed integrated lasers.
Figure 4.3: CW Spectra of the lasers used in the experiment. The spectra are both
centered at 1546.6 nm. The ER of the lasers is larger than 35dB. The FWHM is 0.05
nm for the laser on the left, 0.07 nm for the right laser.
In figure 4.2, we reported the classification of the wavelengths of the integrated
devices of the 6 chips. Every device was characterized saving the spectrum at bias
threshold and at the same temperature (controlled by a TC). The wavelength range in
which a higher number of lasers emit is around 1546 nm. Thus we decided to further
characterize these particular devices. In fact, even if at this first step the wavelengths
are not identical, it is possible to slightly tune them by changing the temperature as
described in section section 3.2.
After having characterized all of the available devices, we chose two DFB lasers
placed on two different chips which CW spectra are shown in figure 4.3. At bias
threshold (49.73 mA, 42.19 mA), both of the spectra are centered around 1546.6
nm with respectively 0.05 nm and 0.07 nm of Full Width Half Maximum (FWHM).
==PAGE:58==
50
4 Experimental Setup
Figure 4.4: Lasing wavelength dependence on temperature: increasing the resistance
of the temperature controller, the temperature, and consequently the wavelength of
the laser are reduced.
The central wavelength of the lasers is temperature dependent, as we observed in
section 3.2, and consequently two TCs must be used to keep it stable. Nevertheless,
this characteristic can be used as an advantage to adjust the wavelengths in order to
obtain bandwidth overlap.
4.2.1
Lasing wavelength-temperature relation
The TCs used in the experiment are two TED200 provided by Thorlabs whose features
can be found in [42]. They are connected to a thermistor on which the chip is placed,
so that the temperature is displayed as the resistance value of the thermistor. The
resistance is inversely proportional to the temperature of the chip.
As one can observe in figure 4.4, the wavelength of the laser can be tuned in a range
of more than 1nm acting on the value of the thermistor resistance and consequently
on the temperature of the device.
If the resistance is increased, the temperature
decreases moving the wavelength of the laser towards lower values, as expected from
the theory in section 3.2. For the two lasers used in the experiment, the resistances
of the temperature controllers were set on 8.610 kΩand 8.665 kΩrespectively, at the
scope of obtaining overlap between the two spectra. In the next section, we are going
to show how another parameter, namely the laser bias current, acts on the lasing
wavelength.
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Laser sources characterization
51
Figure 4.5: Schematic of the setup used for measuring the optical beat signal between
two lasers. ESA: electrical spectrum analyzer. OSA: optical spectrum analyzer
4.2.2
Optical Beat Signal
We already showed how the temperature can be used to tune the wavelenght of
semiconductor lasers, and here we focus on the wavelength shifts caused by the laser
bias current. This aspect can be used to verify a complete overlap of the spectra
of the two laser trough the optical beat signal. figure 4.5 shows the setup used to
implement this measurement.
The CW light of the two lasers is combined into a beam splitter, to observe the two
spectra of the lasers in real time on an Optical Spectrum Analyzer (OSA). When the
two spectra are close in the frequency domain, their beating signal becomes observable
on a Electrical Spectrum Analyzer (ESA), as can be seen in figure 4.6. When there
is a complete overlap between the two spectra, the optical beating is stable around
0 Hz, where it is also visible the DC component. Increasing the bias current of one
of the two lasers, the beat signal moves to larger frequency differences meaning that
the wavelengths of the lasers are drifting apart.
This measurement is useful to gain a secure information about the overlap of the
lasers spectra. In fact, while the resolution of the ESA can go down to MHz, the
resolution of the OSA is limited to 0.1 nm. Having characterized the properties of
Alice and Bob lasers in CW, we proceed describing the methodologies used for the
direct modulation of these devices resulting in the generation of the optical pulses.
4.2.3
Electrical control module and optical pulse generation
The electrical control module, generating the signals needed in the experiment, is
a FPGA, specifically an ALTERA Stratix V GX board, whose specifications can
be found in [43]. The FPGA’s output signals are two equal signals: an electrical
train of pulses used on the one hand as a RF signal for the direct modulation of the
integrated laser (figure 4.7), and on the other hand as a synchronization of the control
unit (Time-Tagger) in Charlie’s receiver. The electrical pulses have a time duration
of 1.5 ns FWHM and a peak-to-peak voltage of approximately Vpp ≈550 mV. Two
different repetition rates have been used in the experiment: 100 MHz and 200 MHz.
==PAGE:60==
52
4 Experimental Setup
Figure 4.6: Optical beat signal between Alice and Bob’s lasers spectra observed on the
ESA. When the two spectra perfectly overlap in the frequency domain, their optical
beat is centered at 0 Hz (DC-bias component). Increasing the bias current of one of
the two laser, the beat moves to larger values of frequency. This corresponds to a
non-perfect overlap of the lasers spectra.
Figure 4.7: Left) Shape of the train of electrical pulses generated by the FPGA as
RF signal for the direct modulation of the lasers. The pulses have a time duration of
1.5 ns FWHM and Vpp = 550 mW with a repetition rate of 100 MHz. Right) Optical
pulses emitted by the integrated lasers trough the use of gain-switching. ER ≈20 dB.
Time duration of 130 ps FWHM.
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Laser sources characterization
53
Figure 4.8: Left)RF Picoprobe. Right) Electrical pads of the integrated laser.
By using a RF amplifier, the pulses are amplified until Vpp = 3.5 V, then they are
transmitted to the lasers, together with the laser bias current, using two Bias-Tees
connected to 250 µm RF Picoprobes provided by GGB INDUSTRIES INC (figure 4.8
left). The Picoprobes are made of three tips (Ground-Signal-Ground) and they have
to be attached to the three electrical pads of the DFB lasers (figure 4.8 right). The RF
probes are positioned on RPP210 positioners provided by CascadeMicrotech: these
tools permit to move the probes over the three different dimensions with precision.
For collecting the optical pulses generated by the integrated lasers, a single-mode
optical fiber is positioned vertically on the chip. As seen in section 3.4, an integrated
grating coupler is designed for the emission of the laser light vertically, with an angle
of 10 degrees with respect to the normal of the chip.
Even though the electrical pulses have a time-duration of 1.5 ns FWHM, we are
able to obtain optical pulses of 130 ps FWHM using the gain-switching technique
described in section 3.3. Finally, Alice and Bob optical pulses, as shown in figure 4.7,
have a ER ≈20 dB and they are sent trough the optical paths whose components will
be described in the next sections of this chapter.
4.2.4
Time stability of the lasers
Before going to the description of the other components of the setup, a final step in the
characterization of the lasers is reported in figure 4.9. The output power of the lasers
is plotted against time, showing its variation in a measurement of 33 minutes. It is
easy to notice, that the variation in power of Bob’s laser is limited in a range of 0.4 µW
not substantially affecting the result of the final measurements. On the other hand,
the emitted power of Alice’s laser shows a real drift to lower power levels reaching
1.2 µW less during the time of acquisition. Because of this drift, it was necessary to
==PAGE:62==
54
4 Experimental Setup
Figure 4.9: Laser power over time: on the left, Alice’s laser is too unstable to allow
an unctrolled measurement, even if, Bob’s laser, on the right, is stable enough.
manually act on the position of the optical fiber, coupling the light emitted by this
device, to keep the power stable during the measurements. As a matter of fact, the
power of the laser is proportional to the rate of coincidences detected by the SPDs.
For the sake of the experiment, the rate of coincidences must be stable when HOM
interference is not acting, in other words, when the delay between the times of arrival
of Alice and Bob’s WCPs is still too large to observe a dip. At the scope of monitoring
the power of the lasers and keep it stable, the light is collected by a 50:50 BS placed
after the BPTF for each device. A sensitive power meter (PM), connected to one of
the two output ports of the beam splitter permits to observe the laser power in real
time and properly tune it during the experiment.
4.3
Band-Pass tunable ﬁlters and RF spectra
After the generation of the trains of optical pulses, Alice and Bob need to filter the
spectra of their lasers. As explained in section 1.5, the width of the HOM dip is
related to the the spectra of the laser sources. Thus, BPTFs are used to remove
the sidebands close to laser bandwidths and limit the amount of spontaneous noise.
Indeed, imperfections in the mechanism of single-wavelength selection of the lasers
can give rise to the emission of frequency components other than the central one,
disturbing the interference. We used filters of 3dB-bandwidth of respectively 1.95
nm and 0.85 nm, which are not narrow enough to further tighten the laser spectra.
Nevertheless, the BPTFs are an important tool to obtain a “clean” measurement and
a well shaped HOM dip.
In figure 4.10, we reported the spectra of the lasers after direct modulation and
filtering. The bandwidths are both centered at 1546.3 nm with a FWHM ≈0.2 nm.
The spectra are larger, compared to those in CW, because of the direct modulation
creating new frequency components. The ER ≈25 dB is reduced because the laser
==PAGE:63==
4.4 Variable optical attenuators
55
Figure 4.10: RF-Spectra of the lasers after filtering. The spectra are both centered
at 1546.3 nm with 0.2 nm of FWHM. Alice’s laser ER ≈24 dB, Bob’s laser ER ≈20
dB.
bias current is way under treshold (Ibias1 = 4.39 mA, Ibias2 = 5.15 mA) as required
by gain-switching. Furthermore, the 1.95 nm and 0.8 nm filters add respectively 5.35
dB and 6.8 dB of losses even when optimally tuned on the laser wavelength.
4.4
Variable optical attenuators
The trains of optical pulses need to be attenuated to the quantum regime, in the form
of WCPs. Alice (Bob), using a Variable Optical Attenuator (VOA), attenuates the
power of the optical signal such that the average number of photons per pulse is less
than one. The relationship between the average output power and the mean photon
number per pulse is described by the equation:
µ = Pout
Epf ,
(4.1)
where Ep = hc/λ is the photon energy, h ≈6.626 × 10−34 Js is the Planck constant,
c ≈2.998×10−8 m/s is the speed of light in vacuum, λ = 1546.3 nm is the wavelength of
the optical signal and f = 100 MHz (f = 200 MHz) is the optical pulses repetition rate.
In the experiment, an optimal value of µ = 0.01 photon/pulse (µ = 0.005 photon/pulse)
is used to observe HOM interference. Using (4.1), it can be seen that the optimal value
of the mean photon number per pulse is obtained with Pout = 0.13 pW corresponding
to Pout = −98.9 dBm.
==PAGE:64==
56
4 Experimental Setup
Figure 4.11: Schematic of the operation of the ODL: the light is coupled out from a
fiber input, reflected back by the retroreflector made of gold mirrors and it is finally
coupled in the fiber output.
4.5
Optical Delay Line
Alice and Bob are now provided with WCPs at the same wavelength and with the
same shape/duration in the time domain. In the next section we will describe how to
align the polarization of the WCPs as the last degree of freedom for HOM effect. As
it was described in section 1.5, for scanning every point of the HOM dip, a variable
delay between the times of arrival of the pulses over the two optical paths is needed.
In the experiment, the time delay is introduced with the use of an ODL provided by
Physik Instrumente (figure 4.11) in Alice’s optical path.
The ODL is composed by a retroreflector, made of two gold mirrors, placed on a
motorized linear stage that can be controlled by a software written ad hoc on Matlab.
The stage can be moved of approximately 25 cm with a precision of 1 µm. The optical
signal is coupled out from an input fiber, reflected back by the mirrors and coupled
in the output fiber. The time delay, T, introduced by this device is directly related
to the travel range of the linear stage L and it is given by: T = 2L/c, where c is the
speed of light in vacuum.
4.6
Polarization alignment
As a final step, Alice and Bob have to align the polarization of their WCPs before
they enter into Charlie’s receiver. The polarization alignment is achieved with the
combined use of PC and PBS in fiber. Alice and Bob maximize the power at the
same output of the PBS using the PC. By doing this, they make sure that the optical
signals are in the same linear polarization, either vertical or horizontal.
Polarization alignment is the last step realized by Alice and Bob. In the next
section, we are going to analyze Charlie’s setup configuration, consisting of a 50:50
BS, two SPDs and the Time-tagger for the electrical control part.
==PAGE:65==
4.7 Charlie’s receiver
57
4.7
Charlie’s receiver
Charlie’s setup is responsible for receiving the two trains of WCPs and examine the
number of coincident counts of his detectors. For this task, a copy of the electrical
signal at 100 MHz generated by the FPGA is directly sent to the time-tagger as
synchronization signal. The time-tagger divides the incoming signal in time by 128
resulting in a final frequency of 100/128 = 0.781 MHz. The time-tagger is used as
electrical control unit for the two SPDs, each placed at one of the two output ports of
a 50:50 BS where the WCPs interfere. Let’s examine in details the working principles
of these devices.
4.7.1
The single photon detectors
The two output ports of the BS, where HOM interference is implemented, are directed
to the two SPDs as shown in figure 4.1. These are ID220 Infrared single-photon de-
tector provided by ID Quantique [44], which are cost-effective free-running detectors
based on InGaAs/InP avalanche photodiode. There are four important parameters
characterizing these SPDs: efficiency, dead time, dark count rate and jitter. The effi-
ciency ηd expresses the percentage of incoming single photons that can be effectively
detected. In this experiment, we set ηd = 15%. It is relevant to state that a higher
efficiency means a higher number of dark counts and consequently a longer dead time.
The dead time td represents the amount of time in which the detector is blind after a
detection event. This is required to avoid the afterpulse effect in which the electron-
hole pair, generated by the absorption of the incoming photon, can generate more
than a detection event. As a consequence, longer dead time results in lower afterpulse
effect. However, since during the dead time the detector is blind, this parameter lim-
its the maximum detection rate of Charlie’s receiver. These detectors permit to select
a dead time in the range from 1 µs to 25 µs. After some testing, we decided to set
td =5 µs so that the maximum detection rate of the experiment becomes 200 kHz.
The dark count rate rdc, is defined as the rate of false detection events which are not
given by the actual arrival of photons but rather from other effects. For example,
thermally generated carriers can fire the avalanche process responsible for the click of
the detector. That is to say, the dark count rate is the parameter defining the detector
noise level. For measuring this parameter, one can simply observe the detection rates
of the detector when neither Alice or Bob are sending photons. The average dark
count rate in our experiment is rdc = 1 kHz. Finally, the jitter is a random time-error
introduced by the detectors when they realize a detection. We will see the effects of
the jitter when it will be explained the Matlab software used for the measurements
in the following section.
==PAGE:66==
58
4 Experimental Setup
Figure 4.12: Histograms of the detection events in the two detectors over a bit-slot
of 10 ns.
4.7.2
The time-tagger and the Matlab software
The time-tagger used in the experiment is an ID801 Time Controller by ID Quantique
with a time resolution of 81 ps. The time-tagger collects the electrical signals produced
by the SPDs and the synchronization signal emitted by the FPGA. It is connected to
a computer interface that allows us to access all the time-tags of the detection events
registered by the SPDs. These data, together with the synchronization events are
analyzed in real time by a Matlab software written ad hoc for this experiment.
This software permits to create an histogram of the detection events of the two
SPDs and to reconstruct the shapes of the WCPs. Any click of the detectors is indeed
related in time to the previous synchronization event. The histograms, reported in
figure 4.12, are allocated in a time window of 1/100 MHz=10 ns.
The quantum
pulses appear larger because of the jitter introduced by time-tagger and detectors
(FWHM=500 ps). Being able to observe the shape and the position in time of the
WCPs, the measurements are performed through the following steps:
• The times of arrival of Alice and Bob’s pulses are aligned. This will be the point
at delay zero of the measurement, where the minimum number of coincidences
is registered.
• The coincidence window is set to 1 ns. Only the clicks registered in this window
will be considered coincidences. This operation is also needed to reduce the
noise level of the measurement.
• Trough the Matlab software, the ODL is moved of a specific amount of steps
with a fixed span such that the delay between the times of arrival of Alice and
Bob’s pulse is scanned.
==PAGE:67==
4.7 Charlie’s receiver
59
• Finally, the integration time of the measurement for every step of the ODL is
set: the software acquires the number of coincincidences detected in 10 s and
calculates the average.
In this chapter, we described in details the experimental setup used to implement
HOM interference between two directly modulated lasers integrated on two different
chips. The results of the experiment will be shown and discussed in the next chapter.
==PAGE:68==
60
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER5
Results
In this final chapter, we present the results obtained with the experimental setup
described in chapter 4. At first, the HOM dip resulting from the interference between
the WCPs emitted by Alice’s laser will be discussed and compared to the one observed
for Bob’s laser. Then, we will show the main experimental result of this thesis: the
HOM effect measured using two different integrated lasers with a direct modulation
at 100MHz and 200MHz.
5.1
HOM interference with single laser source
The first part of the experiment requires the splitting of the WCPs, generated by Alice,
over the two optical paths shown in figure 4.1. This is achieved with the use of a BS
positioned before entering the VOAs. Subsequently, the same operation is carried out
for Bob’s WCPs. The HOM dips obtained in this manner are of great importance to
understand the maximum visibility achievable with two different devices. As discussed
in section 1.5, where WCPs are used, the maximum visibility of the interference is
VHOM = 50% operating in ideal conditions, meaning that the WCPs emitted by the
lasers should be identical in every degree of freedom. When only one device is used,
either Alice’s or Bob’s, the WCPs interfering in Charlie’s BS are the same apart
from the effects introduced by the different optical paths. In other words, they will
have the same central wavelength and the same spectrum, and they will be affected
by any variation of the source in the same way. Thus, the visibility of the HOM
dip will be mainly reduced by a non-ideal optical bandwidth of the source (the laser
spectrum is not composed by a single-wavelength). The second parameter affecting
the visibility is the state of polarization of the WCPs impinging in the BS. In fact,
the laser sources are not perfectly polarized and the extinction ratio of the PBSs is
limited. As a consequence, the polarization state of the pulses will not be identical.
On the left of figure 5.1, it is shown the HOM dip resulting from the interference
between Alice’s WCPs. The number of coincidence counts is determined as a function
of the delay introduced by the ODL in one of the optical paths. As expected, the
minimum of coincidences is observed for a delay zero. The visibility of the interference
is VAlice = 1 −Rmin/Rmax = 41.6%. The width of the dip at half height is ≈0.7 cm,
representing the coherence length of Alice’s WCPs given by the properties of the
laser optical bandwidth as discussed in section 1.5. The errorbars are calculated as
the square root of the countings since the number of coincidences is governed by
==PAGE:70==
62
5 Results
Figure 5.1: Left) HOM interference for Alice’s WCPs. Optical pulses time-duration
of 130 ps FWHM for a repetition rate of 100 MHz. VAlice = 41.6 ± 8.3%. Dip width
of ≈0.7 cm. Right) HOM interference for Bob’s WCPs. Optical pulses time-duration
of 130 ps FWHM for a repetition rate of 100 MHz. VBob = 40 ± 8.6%. Dip width of
≈0.7 cm.
Poisson statistics. Furthermore, a Gaussian fit of the collected data is performed
using:
Nc = C (1 −2VHOMRT
T 2 + R2
)e
∆τ2
2σ2 ,
(5.1)
where Nc is the number of coincidences, R + T = 1/2, ∆τ is the delay in the time
of arrival of the pulses and σ is the parameter accounting for the time duration of
the pulses.
On the right of figure 5.1, it is shown the HOM dip obtained by the interference
of Bob’s WCPs. The visibility of the interference is VBob = 40%. In analogy with
Alice’s case, the width of the dip at half height is ≈0.7 cm, meaning that the optical
bandwiths of Alice and Bob’s lasers are indeed both close to 0.2 nm FWHM.
As we can observe from these first results, the HOM visibilities obtained for Alice
and Bob are both around 40%. The limit in the visibility can be explained analyzing
the optical spectra of the laser sources, as demonstrated in [45]. As a matter of fact,
an optical bandwidth of 0.2 nm, corresponding to 25.1 GHz, settles the maximum of
visibility achievable to ≈42.5%. The two BPTFs used for Alice and Bob , with a 3dB-
bandwidth in the order of 251 GHz and 100 GHz, reject the spontaneous background
noise and the side-bands close to the laser spectrum, but they do not limit the laser
bandwidths.
==PAGE:71==
5.2 HOM interference between two different laser sources
63
Figure 5.2: Left) HOM interference between Alice and Bob’s WCPs for a repetition
rate of 100 MHz. Optical pulses time-duration of 130 ps FWHM. VHOM = 31.9±8.5%.
Dip width of ≈0.7 cm. Right) HOM dip interference between Alice and Bob’s WCPs
for a repetition rate of 200 MHz. Optical pulses time-duration of 130 ps FWHM.
VHOM200MHz = 33.8 ± 16.3%. Dip width of ≈0.8 cm.
5.2
HOM interference between two different
laser sources
Now, we can proceed with the analysis of the results of the HOM interference between
the WCPs emitted by Alice and Bob.
In figure 5.2 we report the HOM dips given by the interference between the two
lasers for repetition rates of 100 MHz and 200 MHz. The dip obtained for a repetition
rate of 100MHz, shows VHOM = 31.9% and a width of ≈0.7 cm at half height. The
visibility of the interference is now limited by addictional factors compared to the sin-
gle laser cases. The WCPs emitted by Alice and Bob, although apparently similar if
observed with an oscilloscope, present some differences in their shape linked to mech-
anism of direct modulation of the two lasers. In this experiment, the electrical signals
modulating the lasers are identical but the optical cavities of the lasers are different.
Moreover, any variation of power and temperature affects the chips individually. The
most severe imperfections appear to be introduced by the slight movements of the
spectra in their relative position in the frequency domain, not shown by the limited
resolution of the OSA. To limit this effect, as also suggested by [45], two identical
BPTF with narrow 3dB bandwidth (≈13.5 GHz) can be used for limiting the optical
bandwidths of the lasers and centering them on the same wavelength with precision.
By implementing this operation, the maximum visibility in an ideal scenario can be
increased up to 46%. On the right of figure 5.2, the HOM dip obtained for a repe-
tition rate of 200 MHz shows VHOM200MHz = 33.8% and a width of ≈0.8 cm at half
height. As expected from the theory, the number of coincidence counts scales with
the repetition rate, given that we changed µ to avoid to saturate the detectors. Even
==PAGE:72==
64
5 Results
though the calculated visibility is larger, the dip for 200 MHz appears noisy and not
well shaped as in the previous case. This can be referred to a degradation in the
performance of the lasers modulated at double the frequency of the previous case.
Furthermore, since we are operating at the limit of the SPDs, the statistics in the
number of coincidences is lower and less resilient to errors.
In this chapter, we illustrated the results of the experiment on HOM interference
between two directly modulated lasers integrated on chips.
This experiment was
carried out as a first and fundamental step towards the realization of a chip-to-chip
MDI-QKD protocol. As first, we analyzed the interference between the WCPs emitted
by Alice. Then, the same experiment was implemented for Bob. The final results are
obtained interfering Alice and Bob’s WCPs for two different repetition rates.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER6
Conclusions
The goal of this thesis was the implementation of HOM interference between two
directly modulated lasers integrated on two different chips. At the time of writing, it
is the first time in the state of the art that such an experiment is realized. This kind
of destructive interference, given by the bounching of indistinguishable photons into
a 50:50 BS, represents the first step towards the realization of a chip-to-chip quantum
communication protocol. In particular, HOM interference is a requirement for the
detection of the quantum states in MDI protocols, which are QKD protocols that can
remove all the detector side channels attacks (the most difficult to counteract) and
guarantee unconditionally secure communications.
In chapter 4, we discussed the different components of the experimental setup
and their characterization. An FPGA was used for the direct modulation of the laser
sources that generate the optical pulses. After being filtered and attenuated to the
quantum regime, the WCPs travel over two different optical paths before impinging
in Charlie’s BS. An ODL, positioned in one of the two paths, controls the time of
arrival at the receiver allowing to vary the relative delay between the WCPs. The
first part of the experiment was to observe HOM interference by splitting the pulses
emitted by only one chip at the time. A HOM visibility of 41.6% and 39.9% was
obtained for the two devices. These results reflect what expected from the properties
of the optical bandwidth of the lasers given the intrinsic error of the setup. Moreover,
they represent the maximum of the visibility achievable when the two different lasers
are used together. In this case, the HOM visibilities obtained at 100 MHz and 200
MHz are respectively 31.9% and 33.8%. The reason behind the visibility reduction is
mainly due to the differencies in the optical spectra of the laser and to their relative
position in the frequency domain.
As future work, an improvement in the visibility of the HOM interference can be
obtained by using two identical narrow BPTFs, to further limit the optical bandwidths
of the lasers and center them on the same wavelength with higher precision.
A
further step is the use of gated SPDs, which would allow us to reach higher detection
rates, resulting in a greater number of detected coincidences and better statistics.
Moreover, the use of these detectors would be a fundamental improvement towards
the realization of MDI protocol, allowing for a higher secret key rate. However, before
implementing the complete MDI protocol, it is necessary to test the HOM interference
setup for different optical channel lengths connecting Alice and Bob’s transmitters
to Charlie’s receiver. Finally, the MDI protocol can be implemented using a fully
==PAGE:74==
66
6 Conclusions
integrated setup: on the transmitter side, the PICs should host not only the lasers
but also the polarization encoding systems, and on the receiver side the chip should
contain all the components required for BSMs.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
Cisco Visual Networking Index. “Global Mobile Data Traffic Forecast Update,
2016–2021.” In: (2017).
[2]
P. W. Shor. “Algorithms for quantum computation: discrete logarithms and
factoring”. In: Proceedings 35th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
Science (1994), pages 124–134. doi: 10.1109/SFCS.1994.365700.
[3]
Valerio Scarani et al. “The security of practical quantum key distribution”.
In: Reviews of Modern Physics 81.3 (2009), pages 1301–1350. doi: 10.1103/
RevModPhys.81.1301.
[4]
Hoi-Kwong Lo and H. F. Chau. “Unconditional Security of Quantum Key Distri-
bution over Arbitrarily Long Distances”. In: Science 283.5410 (1999), pages 2050–
2056. issn: 0036-8075. doi: 10.1126/science.283.5410.2050. eprint: http:
//science.sciencemag.org/content/283/5410/2050.full.pdf. url: http:
//science.sciencemag.org/content/283/5410/2050.
[5]
Miloslav Dušek, Norbert Lütkenhaus, and Martin Hendrych. “Quantum cryp-
tography”. In: Progress in Optics 49 (2006), pages 381–454.
[6]
Nicolas Gisin et al. “Quantum cryptography”. In: Rev. Mod. Phys. 74 (1 March
2002), pages 145–195. doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.74.145.
[7]
Jun John Sakurai. Modern Quantum Mechanics. Edited by San Fu Tuan. Red-
wood City, CA: Addison-Wesley, 1985.
[8]
Michael A. Nielsen and Isaac L. Chuang. “Quantum Computation and Quantum
Information”. In: Contemporary Physics 52.6 (2000), page 410. doi: 10.1119/
1.1463744.
[9]
Stephen M. Barnett. Quantum Infromation. OXFORD University Press, 2009.
[10]
Charles H. Bennett and Gilles Brassard. “Quantum Cryptography: Public Key
Distribution, and Coin-Tossing”. In: Proc. 1984 IEEE International Conference
on Computers, Systems, and Signal Processing (1984), pages 175–179. doi: 10.
1016/j.tcs.2011.08.039.
[11]
Kyo Inoue, Edo Waks, and Yoshihisa Yamamoto. “Differential phase shift quan-
tum key distribution”. In: Physical Review Letters 89.3 (2002), pages 379021–
379023. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.89.037902.
==PAGE:76==
68
Bibliography
[12]
Damien Stucki et al. “Fast and simple one-way quantum key distribution”. In:
Applied Physics Letters 87.19 (2005), pages 1–3. doi: 10.1063/1.2126792.
[13]
Davide Bacco et al. “Two-dimensional distributed-phase-reference protocol for
quantum key distribution”. In: Nature Publishing Group (2016), pages 1–7. doi:
10.1038/srep36756.
[14]
Davide Bacco et al. “Space division multiplexing chip-to-chip quantum key dis-
tribution”. In: Scientific Reports 7 (2017), page 12459. doi: 10.1038/s41598-
017-12309-3.
[15]
David F. P. . Pile. “Twin-field QKD”. In: Nature Photonics (2018). doi: 10.
1038/s41566-018-0209-1.
[16]
Boris Korzh et al. “Provably Secure and Practical Quantum Key Distribution
over 307 km of Optical Fibre”. In: 1 (2014). doi: 10.1038/nphoton.2014.327.
[17]
Alberto Boaron et Al. “Secure quantum key distribution over 421 km of optical
fiber”. In: (2018). doi: arXiv:1807.03222.
[18]
Nurul T. Islam et al. “Provably secure and high-rate quantum key distribu-
tion with time-bin qudits”. In: Science Advances 3.11 (2017). doi: 10.1126/
sciadv.1701491. eprint: http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/3/11/
e1701491.full.pdf. url: http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/3/
11/e1701491.
[19]
Yan-Lin Tang et al. “Measurement-Device-Independent Quantum Key Distri-
bution over 200 km”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 (19 November 2014), page 190501.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.113.190501. url: https://link.aps.org/doi/
10.1103/PhysRevLett.113.190501.
[20]
Yang Liu et al. “Experimental Measurement-Device-Independent Quantum Key
Distribution”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 111 (13 September 2013), page 130502. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.111.130502. url: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.
1103/PhysRevLett.111.130502.
[21]
Yi Heng Zhou et al. “Measurement device independent quantum key distribu-
tion via quantum blockade”. In: Scientific Reports 8 (July 2018), pages 158–170.
doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-21576-7.
[22]
Hua-Lei Yin et al. “Measurement-device-independent quantum key distribu-
tion over a 404 km optical fiber”. In: Physical Review Letters 117.19 (2016),
page 190501.
[23]
P. Sibson et al. “Chip-based quantum key distribution”. In: Nature Communi-
cations 8 (February 2017). url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13984.
[24]
Yunhong Ding et al. “High-dimensional quantum key distribution based on
multicore fiber using silicon photonic integrated circuits”. In: npj Quantum In-
formation (2017). doi: 10.1038/s41534-017-0026-2.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
69
[25]
Albert Einstein, Boris Podolsky, and Nathan Rosen. “Can quantum-mechanical
description of physical reality be considered complete?” In: Physical review 47.10
(1935), page 777.
[26]
C. K. Hong, Z. Y. Ou, and L. Mandel. “Measurement of subpicosecond time
intervals between two photons by interference”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 59 (18 1987),
pages 2044–2046. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.59.2044.
[27]
Eleftherios Moschandreou et al. “Experimental study of Hong-Ou-Mandel in-
terference using independent phase randomized weak coherent states”. In: PP
(April 2018).
[28]
Feihu Xu et al. “Practical aspects of measurement-device-independent quantum
key distribution”. In: New Journal of Physics 15.11 (2013), page 113007.
[29]
Yi Zhao et al. “Quantum hacking: Experimental demonstration of time-shift
attack against practical quantum-key-distribution systems”. In: Phys. Rev. A
78 (4 2008), page 042333. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.78.042333.
[30]
Vadim Makarov, Andrey Anisimov, and Johannes Skaar. “Effects of detector
efficiency mismatch on security of quantum cryptosystems”. In: Phys. Rev. A
74 (2 August 2006), page 022313. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.74.022313.
[31]
Lars Lydersen et al. “Hacking commercial quantum cryptography systems by
tailored bright illumination”. In: arXiv:1008.4593 (August 2010).
[32]
Feihu Xu, Bing Qi, and Hoi-Kwong Lo. “Experimental demonstration of phase-
remapping attack in a practical quantum key distribution system”. In: New
Journal of Physics 12.11 (2010), page 113026.
[33]
Won-Young Hwang. “Quantum Key Distribution with High Loss: Toward Global
Secure Communication”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 91 (5 August 2003), page 057901.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.91.057901. url: https://link.aps.org/doi/
10.1103/PhysRevLett.91.057901.
[34]
Yi Zhao et al. “Experimental Quantum Key Distribution with Decoy States”. In:
Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 (7 February 2006), page 070502. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.
96.070502. url: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.96.
070502.
[35]
J. Calsamiglia and Lütkenhaus. “Maximum efficiency of a linear-optical Bell-
state analyzer”. In: Applied Physics B 72.1 (January 2001), pages 67–71. issn:
1432-0649. doi: 10.1007/s003400000484. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s003400000484.
[36]
Hoi-Kwong Lo, Xiongfeng Ma, and Kai Chen. “Decoy State Quantum Key
Distribution”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 (23 June 2005), page 230504. doi: 10.
1103/PhysRevLett.94.230504. url: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.94.230504.
[37]
Govind P. Agrawal. Fiber-Optic Communication Systems. John Wiley & Sons,
2010.
==PAGE:78==
70
Bibliography
[38]
Christophe Peucheret. Generation and Detection of Optical Modulation Formats.
2012.
[39]
D.M Pataca. “Gain Switched DFB lasers”. In: Journal of Microwaves and Op-
toelectronics 1 (May 1997).
[40]
G. H. Duan et al. “Hybrid III-V on Silicon Lasers for Photonic Integrated
Circuits on Silicon”. In: IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics
20 (July 2014), pages 158–170. doi: 10.1109/JSTQE.2013.2296752.
[41]
Peter Kaspar et al. “Hybrid III-V/silicon lasers”. In: 9133 (May 2014), page 913302.
[42]
Thorlabs, TED200. http://www-3.unipv.it/optoele/didattica/Costruz_
OE/datasheets/ted200.pdf. Accessed: 2018-07-3.
[43]
ALTERA, Stratix V GX. https://www.altera.com/content/dam/altera-
www/global/en_US/pdfs/literature/manual/rm_svgx_si_dev_board.pdf.
Accessed: 2017-06-17.
[44]
ID Quantique, ID220 Infrared Single Photon Detector. https://marketing.
idquantique.com/acton/attachment/11868/f-023d/1/-/-/-/-/ID220_
Brochure.pdf. Accessed: 2018-07-6.
[45]
Z. L. Yuan et al. “Interference of Short Optical Pulses from Independent Gain-
Switched Laser Diodes for Quantum Secure Communications”. In: Phys. Rev.
Applied 2 (6 December 2014), page 064006. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevApplied.
2.064006. url: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevApplied.2.
064006.
