==PAGE:1==
MASTER’S THESIS, JULY, 2018
Chemo - Enzymatic Reactions for
Pharmaceutical Synthesis
Author
Gandhar Dhananjay Rane, s161239
MSc, Advanced & Applied Chemistry
Supervisors
Dr. John M. Woodley
Professor,
DTU - Department of Chemical &
Biochemical Engineering
Rowan Malan Lindeque
PhD Student,
DTU - Department of Chemical &
Biochemical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
 
AKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
 
I would like to express my most sincere gratitude and deep appreciation to my supervisor, Professor 
John M. Woodley. His regular guidance and ideas helped me to better approach the research problem 
and give it a good shape in timely manner. Meetings with him always provided insightful ideas while 
keeping track of the work. He also supported and guided me in all steps of experiments, 
understanding of the concepts, writing, its revision and theoretical propositions. He also provided 
editorial advice during the writing of this thesis and has encouraged me throughout the research work.   
 
                       Some very special thanks go to PhD student Rowan Malan Lindeque for sharing his 
knowledge, ideas and feedback on the work done. I would have lost my way many times without his 
help and I praise his willingness in answering all my questions. I would also like to thank my family 
for being so. 
 
 
 
      
             
                                                                                                                          Gandhar Dhananjay Rane, 
                                                                                                                                                        29TH  July, 2018 
                                                                                                                                             Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark     
                                                                                                                                     
 
==PAGE:3==
Table of Contents 
Sr. no. 
Particulars 
Page number 
1 
Introduction 
1 
2 
Objectives 
6 
3 
Early-stage biocatalytic route design 
7 
3.1 
Theoretical retro-biocatalysis 
7 
3.1.1 
Initial disconnections 
7 
3.1.2 
Identification of key structural features 
8 
3.1.3 
Appropriate disconnections and route generation 
9 
3.2 
Enzyme based route selection 
14 
3.3 
Enzyme screening 
18 
3.3.1 
Condition of the screening assay 
20 
3.3.2 
Screening method 
22 
4 
Materials and methods 
22 
4.1 
Retro-biocatalysis based route generation 
22 
4.2 
Screening experiments for enzymatic activity 
23 
4.3 
Materials 
24 
4.4 
Spectrophotometric analysis 
26 
4.5 
Time-course experiments 
28 
5 
Results and Discussion 
33 
5.1 
Retro-biocatalysis based route generation 
33 
5.1.1 
(S)-Fluoxetine 
33 
5.1.2 
(R,R)-Formoterol 
37 
5.1.3 
Human hNK-1 receptor antagonist 
41 
5.1.4 
(S)-Ontazolast 
45 
5.1.5 
(S)-Ambrisentan 
47 
5.2 
Activity assay of alcohol dehydrogenases and 
ketoreductases 
50 
5.2.1 
Choosing initial concentration of components for 
spectrophotometric assay and time-course 
experiments 
50 
5.2.2 
Spectrophotometric screening of ADHs and KREDs 
52 
5.2.3 
Batch-mode screening of ADHs and KREDs 
58 
5.2.4 
Sensitivity of screening methodologies 
59 
6 
Conclusion 
63 
7 
References 
65 
 
==PAGE:4==
1 
 
 
1. Introduction 
Biocatalysis in the pharmaceutical industry is now a well-established tool in developing second-generation 
processes for already launched APIs and for new chemical entities (NCEs) in late clinical phase (Phase I or 
Phase II clinical trials). Biocatalysis has enabled the successful implementation of second-generation 
processes for the manufacturing of Pfizer’s Atorvastatin (Lipitor) and Pregabalin (Lyrica), which have 
reached the blockbuster status. Lipitor and Pregabalin generated global sales of $10.7 billion and $3.06 
billion, respectively in 2010 [83]. The original chemical route to Pregabalin involved resolution of the 
racemic diester intermediate using (S)-Mandelic acid. However, the undesired isomer could not be 
recycled and resulted in generating enormous amount of organic solvent waste (E-factor = 86). The 
biocatalytic route, as shown in Figure 1 involved resolution using lipase (Lipolase) from Thermomyces 
lanuginosus, which is a commercially available and commonly used lipase from the detergent industry, 
enabling the recycle of undesired isomer, reducing waste (E-factor = 12) and reducing energy consumption 
by 82% [84, 2].  
 
Figure 1. Chemical and biocatalytic resolution of racemic diester intermediate for Prebalin production 
The reduction of the hydroxyketone intermediate to cis-diol is a key step in the synthesis of Atorvastatin. 
The original chemical manufacturing process involved hazardous reducing agents such as Triethylboron 
and Sodium borohydride, cryogenic conditions and mixed organic solvents (tetrahydrofuran, methanol 
and acetic acid) to achieve a 20:1 cis:trans ratio of isomers. The biocatalytic route involved a recombinant 
alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) derived from engineered E. coli, code named Ox 28, to reduce the 
hydroxyketone intermediate with 100% diastereoselectivity, as shown in Figure 2. 
However, there is a growing trend of introducing biocatalysis in initial stage development (early clinical 
and pre-clinical trials) [57, 3]. This trend, though demonstrated by only a few pharmaceutical companies 
is a result of (1) the discovery of novel enzymes, and (2) the development of time and cost-efficient 
fermentation techniques. Early-stage implementation of biocatalysis was not possible 15 years ago, due 
to the several complexities associated with developing fermentation processes; hence took longer time 
==PAGE:5==
2 
 
and considerable investment. As a result, implementing biocatalysis was prioritized only at the end of the 
drug development process, which meant that the synthetic chemistry developed during clinical trials had 
to be replaced with biocatalytic processes near the commercial launch of the API. Hence, limited time was 
available with process chemists to implement and optimize the enzyme (through protein engineering) and 
the biocatalytic process. However, paramount developments in fermentation and protein isolation 
techniques introduced the option of producing and using stable isolated enzymes instead of whole-cells 
which made enzymes available even faster and led pharmaceutical companies to integrate work on 
implementing biocatalysis much early, hence providing sufficient buffer time to optimize the enzyme and 
the process. 
 
Figure 2. Asymmetric synthesis of cis-diol intermediate using chemical and biocatalytic methods for production of Atorvastatin 
The discovery of vast number and types of enzymes able to carry out distinct transformations for 
synthesizing structurally complex molecules is also responsible for implementing biocatalysis in the early-
stages of the drug development process. The discovery of new enzymes found application in biocatalysis 
for synthesizing structurally complex molecules, such as pharmaceutical drugs. This could not be imagined 
before key breakthroughs in bioinformatics through genome mining and synthesis took place. Along with 
the development of robust directed evolution techniques, vast variety of enzymes can be made available 
extremely fast and at cheaper costs. Companies specialized in protein engineering and expression system 
such as the company DSM have exponentially expanded their libraries of enzymes nearly a hundred-fold 
as a result of the developments in the field of molecular biology. Pharmaceutical companies such as Roche 
AG, Pfizer, Novartis and many more have developed their in-house enzyme libraries for faster 
implementation of biocatalysis for drug synthesis [83]. Open and flexible partnering of pharmaceutical 
companies with enzyme-service manufactures has expanded the toolbox of enzymes ever than before 
and made enzymes easily available for efficient and fast scouting of synthetic routes for drugs in early 
development phases.  
==PAGE:6==
3 
 
The drug development process (Figure 3) is a lengthy process which begins with a complete understanding 
of the treatable disease at genetic and protein level [54], followed by identification of the target protein(s) 
involved. Once the root cause of the disease is known and well-understood, only then can the structural 
drug design process be initiated. The drug design phase is an iterative process where many probable 
candidate drug molecules (as many as 10,000 molecules [55]) are synthesized and tested for interaction 
with the drug target, and other parameters such as efficacy, potency and safety. The lead molecules are 
filtered and further optimized based on molecular features and screened again. Hence, after several 
rounds of screening, the best performing molecules (approximately 5 candidate molecules [56]), enter 
clinical trials (phase 1, 2 and 3 clinical trials), where screening continues, and the best performing 
candidate drug is selected for filing the application for FDA approval. However, during the drug design and 
optimization phase, optically pure compounds are required to be tested to measure their true activity and 
potency against the drug target. Presence of stereoisomeric impurities may affect the in-vivo activity and 
potency of the candidate, thus leading to false-negative results.  
 
Figure 3. Schematic of the drug development process depicting the early-stage implementation of biocatalysis in drug 
development 
The main objective of the drug development programs during these initial stages of drug development is 
focused on providing as many probable drug candidates as possible in highly pure form to maximize the 
chance of success. Moreover, since many candidate drug molecules are required to be tested, a time-
efficient synthetic strategy rather than a cost-efficient one is employed leading to an accelerated drug 
development [49] and therefore a faster approval from regulatory bodies [50]. From the perspective of 
==PAGE:7==
4 
 
drug development, speeding the drug development process is crucial for relevant patients, and hence for 
pharmaceutical companies since the approved drug can reduce the sufferings and substantial life-years 
[53]. The time-efficient strategy of providing a high throughput of pure candidate molecules hence, 
involves sup-optimal synthetic routes which promise speed of synthesis and purity over yield and 
conversion. The candidate molecules can be quickly synthesized using well established chemo-catalytic or 
chemo-synthetic routes nonetheless, the chemical route frequently requires harsh conditions or 
expensive reagents to achieve chemo, regio and stereo-selectivity as compared to incorporating an 
enzymatic catalyzed transformation. Hence there are substantial precedents for incorporating biocatalytic 
transformation, one of the most important being the high regio, chemo and stereoselectivity which 
biocatalysis presents. Due to the intrinsic nature of enzymes, the catalytic machinery binds the reacting 
part of the substrate, while excluding the rest; and together, with the chiral (asymmetric) nature of the 
catalytic mechanism of the enzyme, biocatalysis ensures exceptional regio and stereo control in functional 
group transformations. Furthermore, biocatalysis can perform the required transformation in much fewer 
synthetic steps as compared to conventional chemical catalysis as it circumvents the necessity of involving 
protection and de-protection of functional groups due to the inherent chemo-selectivity. Hence high 
throughput of material for clinical trials can be achieved. Implementing biocatalysis in the early-stage drug 
development phase also presents a key advantage from the future point of view of envisaging sustainable 
manufacturing of the approved API using biocatalysis. The natural medium of most of the enzymes and 
biocatalytic transformations being aqueous solutions at a constant pH value, the usage of volatile and 
hazardous organic solvents is advantageously reduced. Hence, beside clean and highly selective 
transformations, the inherent nature of biocatalysis highly aligns with the twelve principles of green 
chemistry [58, 59]. Thus, the penetration and realization of biocatalysis as a convenient tool for organic 
transformation for high value products such as APIs has increased, resulting in pharmaceutical companies 
gaining competitive advantage from implementing cheaper and environmentally benign processes [60]. 
However, for implementating biocatalysis to develop first-generation processes for APIs, it is important 
to involve biocatalysis as early as possible in the drug development process where multiple chemo-
biocatalytic route are generated and evaluated [51, 52]. The routes should be generated by carrying out 
the retro-biocatalysis of the target molecule. Retro-biocatalysis is the step-by-step deconstruction of the 
target molecule, such that biocatalytic transformation steps can be included in the resulting synthetic 
pathway. Several possible routes should be generated and evaluated to assess the feasibility of the 
biocatalytic transformation. Prioritizing the chemo-biocatalytic routes, from the diverse route options 
should be based on utilizing commercial off the shelf enzyme classes or their easily available variants due 
to the availability, versatility and cost of specially engineered enzymes or strain. However, a new spectrum 
of enzymes which include reductases, transaminases, ammonia lyases, epoxide hydrolases and 
dehalogenases are becoming available which catalyze attractive transformations more efficiently 
compared to their chemical counter-parts [3]. However, due to the shorter time frames and tight timelines 
for delivery of compounds during the drug development process, the chances of success are maximized 
by rapid screening of a large sample-size of already known commercially available classes of enzymes. 
However, the process of retro-biocatalytic route generation and enzyme-based route selection should 
initiated as early as possible during the drug development process. The optimum choice would be during 
clinical trials. Given the highly substrate specific nature of enzymes, where the number of candidate 
==PAGE:8==
5 
 
molecules (5 candidates) and structural differences (with respect to the structural variability) in candidate 
molecules is less. 
Hence to minimize the development time, a common practice in most pharmaceutical companies involves 
preparing and storing (frozen) large quantities of such enzyme solutions in well plates. Hence fast 
screening can be carried out instantly by thawing and screening the solutions in well plates for activity 
and selectivity [82, 83]. However, the accuracy of results obtained from the activity screening experiments 
depend on the precision of the implemented screening methodology and the sensitivity of the detection 
technique involved. Due to the high substrate specificity of enzymes, the optimum conditions for each 
enzyme are different. The conditions might be known or unknown depending upon the source of the 
enzyme-library. However, screening each enzyme from large library at their respective optimum 
conditions will be time-consuming. Moreover, due to high time-pressures in the drug development 
process, quick identification of enzymes active for the substrate of interest is required. Hence choosing 
the screening conditions become critical, since the screening should be effective and fast.  
 
Figure 4. Aspects and priorities followed in developing and optimizing processes through chemo-catalysis and bio-catalysis. 
Chemo-catalysts exhibit a broad scope for substrates unlike biocatalysts. Optimization of process conditions is more important in 
chemo-catalysis than in biocatalysis, however catalyst improvement is essential in biocatalysis but not so in chemo-catalysis..  
For catalytic processes to be economically viable and sustainable at commercial scale, certain process-
related parameters (Figure 4) such as the catalyst and reaction conditions must be optimized. In the case 
of a chemo-catalytic process, optimization of the reaction conditions is prioritized over the catalyst-
optimization, since the substrate specificity of chemical catalysts is usually low (can accept broad range 
of substrates). However, in case of biocatalysis, selecting the biocatalyst (through screening) and its 
optimization is the priority due to the relatively high substrate specificity of enzymes. Medium engineering 
==PAGE:9==
6 
 
and reaction conditions also play key roles in biocatalysis, but the optimization required is comparatively 
simple as compared to chemical catalysis, since most biocatalysts function in near physiological 
conditions. Hence improving the catalytic properties of the enzyme through protein engineering must be 
carried out inevitable to optimize the enzyme for the process. Thus, identification of appropriate enzymes 
through screening provides a good starting point for protein engineering to counter the time-related 
constraints involved in drug development (after clinical phase II b) and provide tailor-made enzymes, such 
that bioprocess can quickly be optimized for commercial manufacturing right after the lunch of the API.  
 
2. Objectives 
The retro-biocatalysis approach has the potential to generate vast number of possible routes, since: 1) 
theoretically every bond present in the molecule can be disconnected and 2) expansive choice of 
functional group interconversion (FGI) exists, leading to several possibilities of theoretical routes. 
Therefore, several types of enzymes can theoretically be implemented based on the biocatalytic 
transformation demanded by the route. However, not all routes are feasible due to the limited 
commercial availability of enzymes capable of carrying out the require transformation. Moreover, the high 
throughput of candidate API molecules in the clinical trial phase require synthesizing the candidate 
molecules up to kilogram quantities. Hence implementing biocatalysis as a synthetic tool requires 
biocatalytic route to be established as early and as fast as possible. Hence, a small number of practically 
conceivable routes should be chosen which involve established and emerging biocatalytic chemistries (key 
functional group transformations and bond formation steps) using commercially available and expanding 
classes of enzymes. 
To meet the tight timelines involved in the drug development programs for delivering candidate drug 
compounds for testing during the entire drug development process, fast route scouting and screening of 
appropriate enzymes is required. However, due to the unknown KM value (affinity) of specific substrate 
molecules for commonly available enzymes, the criteria for selecting reaction conditions and 
concentrations of the assay components required to be used in the enzyme screening experiments to 
expect activity remain unprecedented. Moreover, the accuracy of the screening results depends on the 
screening methodology used, which itself poses a challenge. 
Hence, the aim of this thesis was to propose novel biocatalytic routes for some known (generic) 
pharmaceutical drugs such as (S)-Fluoxetine, (R,R)-Formoterol, an hNK-1 receptor antagonist, (S)-
Ontazolast and (S)-Ambrisentan through retro-biocatalysis. Also, the screening of enzymes for measurable 
activity, based on varying the concentrations of the assay components and the screening methodology 
was proposed to be carried out. It was also aimed to compare the limitations and the suitability of 
spectrophotometric screening analysis and time-course reactions in batch-mode as screening 
methodologies. For screening, the target enzymes were chosen to be three alcohol dehydrogenases 
(ADHs) and five ketoreductases (KREDs) (source) for the proposed biocatalytic route for the key chiral 
intermediate of (S)-Ambrisentan. The chemistry involves biocatalytic oxidation of (R,S)-Methyl-2-hydroxy-
==PAGE:10==
7 
 
3-methoxy-3,3-diphenyl propionate (CAS number 178306-47-3) and biocatalytic reduction of Methyl-2-
oxo-3-methoxy-3,3-diphenyl propionate (CAS number 1431363-04-0) respectively. 
 
 
3. Early-stage biocatalytic route design 
 
3.1 Theoretical retro-biocatalysis 
Exploiting biocatalysis to achieve its maximum potential in performing organic transformations efficiently 
and in least number for steps begins from exploring the synthetic possibilities which biocatalysis can offer. 
Retro-biocatalysis is an approach which follows developmental guidelines or rules based on disconnecting 
the target molecule into small building blocks such that: (1) the enzymes, chemical catalysts and reagents 
are readily available for the key bond-forming steps and (2) the resulting building blocks can easily be 
synthesized using biocatalysis [6]. The disconnection approach helps early identification of opportunities 
for introducing biocatalysis in key stages of building the target molecule from individual building blocks. 
Moreover, it also provides a variety of choices of synthetic routes possible for the target molecule which 
can be evaluated, and the best route can be chosen to develop further.  
 
3.1.1 Initial disconnections 
The retro-biocatalytic approach of deconstructing the target drug molecule should begin with 
disconnecting easily discernible bonds which may result in stable fragments (building blocks) such that 
they can be connected using straightforward chemical or biochemical methods, as shown in Figure 5 and 
Figure 6 through examples for Cidofovir and Diltiazem [7]. These include achiral bonds such as the alkyl 
or phosphorylated sidechain derivatives of amines and alcohols (ethers). Moreover, such disconnections 
along with that of other achiral bonds such as carbon-nitrogen amide linkage and carbon-oxygen ester 
linkage should not be carried out initially if the subsequent steps do not involve their functionalization 
(FGI).  
 
Figure 5. Disconnecting the side chain containing the phosphonate group in the retro-biocatalysis of Cidofovir as the initial step. 
==PAGE:11==
8 
 
Since the mentioned disconnections result in deprotecting the rather reactive amino and alcohol 
functionalities, they might also interfere with other electrophilic centers in the building block. Also, in 
many cases, synthesis of the chiral target molecules or its building blocks require the utilization of 
resolution techniques to separate the required stereoisomer based on the stereoselective hydrolysis or 
acylation of esters/amides or alcohols/amines respectively. Hence in such cases, the initial disconnection 
of such achiral bonds should be avoided. However, such initial obvious disconnections should always be 
encouraged if they can be formed without arising any regio and chemo selectivity issues in the subsequent 
synthesis sequence. 
 
Figure 6. Disconnecting the Ethyl-amino side chain in retro-biocatalysis of Diltiazem 
3.1.2 Identification of key structural features 
The next stage in the disconnection sequence is the identification of key structural features in the target 
compound. The pharmaceutical drug molecule is structurally designed with respect to the position of 
functional groups and substituents such that the drug molecule fits the drug target in the correct 
conformation (based on structure-activity relationship) and can be easily absorbed through hydrophobic 
membranes (hydrophobic/hydrophilic balance) [12, 13]. The drug inventor companies carry out intensive 
studies to study the type, position and bulkiness of a group of atoms (for example: ring size, carbon chain 
length, primary/secondary/tertiary nature of carbons and amines etcetera) and the effect it has on the 
activity of the drug molecule [14]. However, from the retro-biocatalytic point of view, it is convenient to 
consider these simply in terms of the broad nomenclature of functional groups, such as alcohols, amines, 
esters, amides etc. Constructing the molecular scaffold and placing functional groups in their appropriate 
positions in a logical and selective manner is the goal of carrying out retro-biocatalysis. Hence 
identification of the key structural features appears to provide advantageous starting points to initiate 
disconnections.  Moreover, the identification of chiral centers (and their configuration) in the target 
compound is essentially important to direct the choice of retro-biocatalytic disconnections towards 
introducing chirality. Identification of the key structural features is also necessary to optimize the options 
of bond disconnections in preliminary stages. Since several possible disconnection options can be 
available for the target molecule, faster implementation of the biocatalytic step can be achieved by 
carrying out appropriate disconnections after considering the key structural features as the pool of routes 
==PAGE:12==
9 
 
generated is smaller (less options to choose from) but more practically appropriate (better chance of 
finding a commercially viable route). 
 
3.1.3 
Appropriate disconnections and route generation [7][75] 
The retro-biocatalytic disconnections for introducing biocatalytic pathways can be made once the key 
structural features are identified. The logic of deconstructing the functional group involves two 
approaches: the first is disconnecting certain bonds around the key feature, such that the disconnection 
leads to a different functional group. However, enzymes capable of forming the bond must be used. The 
second approach is “Functional Group Interconversion” (FGI), where the required functional group can be 
introduced using enzymes capable of transforming the new functional group to the one of interest.  
 
Figure 7. Elimination of chirality generates two possibilities: Prochiral center or a racemic mixture. Various kinds of enzymes can 
be used for the required transformation. 
However, both the approaches are FGIs conceptually, the former requires the bond to be formed whereas 
the second requires functional group alterations. Functional group interconversion (FGI) is an important 
concept of retro-biosynthesis, where the required functional group is attained after carrying out 
transformations to a selected functional group. However, approaching the disconnections of the chiral 
center in the target molecule is crucial, and evaluation of alternatives is important. Retro-biosynthetic 
bond disconnections of the chiral molecule/building block can be classified into two cases which can result 
in (1) elimination of the chiral elements, or (2) retainment of chirality, respectively. Eliminating the 
chirality of the building block generates a prochiral or a meso building block, whereby asymmetric 
synthesis can be utilized to produce the singe enantiomer of the key building block. However, retaining 
the chirality generates a chiral building unit, which may have to be treated as a racemic mixture of stereo-
isomers, or further sequential disconnections may be needed until introducing chirality becomes 
convenient. Retro-biosynthetic disconnections apparently yielding a racemic mixture can involve chemo-
biocatalytic resolution techniques. Various types of enzymes can be used to carry out the required 
transformation as shown in Figure 7. 
==PAGE:13==
10 
 
 
The carbon-oxygen bond is present in many pharmaceutical drug molecules in the form of functional 
groups such as alcohols, esters, diols, epoxides, carboxylic acids and β-substituted alcohols. There are 
several traditional FGI and bond disconnection based transformative strategies which can yield the 
required functionality using well-established biocatalytic chemistries. The functional group of interest 
typically has multiple bonds available for disconnection, and each option leads to a different functional 
group. For alcohols and diols, the disconnection of the C-O bond is an option, where it can be formed 
using alkanes and alkenes via biocatalytic oxidation. The alcohol functionality can also be formed from 
alkanes using hydratases (Figure 9: e). Cytochrome P450s have been extensively studied [8] to introduce 
the oxyfunctionality by monooxygenation of alkanes and alkenes to afford alcohols (Figure 9: a) and 
epoxides (Figure 9: c) respectively. Regioselective and stereoselective oxidation of non-activated alkanes 
and alkenes to yield the required alcohol and epoxide functionality is the key feature and utility of P450s 
monooxygenases. The classical chemical catalyzed strategy to achieve stereoselective epoxidations is 
using the enantioselective catalysis schemes developed by Sharpless and Jacobsen [10], however this 
protocol lacks regioselectivity, a broad substrate scope and requires expensive catalysts [9, 10]. 
Cytochrome P450s are very useful as they allow stereo and regio-selective oxidation of non-activated C-
H bonds and C=C double bonds to chiral alcohol functionality and chiral epoxide functionality respectively, 
with consumption of NADPH as co-factor. P450-BM3 is the most prominent example, which is a stable 
natural fusion protein, from the organism Bacillus megaterium [79, 80]. Cytochrome P450 dioxygenases 
(P450 EC 1.13.11.x) have found applications in performing stereoselective dihydroxylations to yield cis-
diols from alkenes (Figure 9: d). For example, the synthesis of the key diastereomeric intermediate of 
Indinavir, which can be produced in optically pure form via stereo and regioselective dihydroxylation of 
Indene using a P450 based dioxygenase [11].  
Cis-diol functionality can also be stereo selectively generated enzymatically using epoxide hydrolases, 
whereby the epoxide generated using monooxygenases is cleaved by water (Figure 9: j). Epoxide 
hydrolases also catalyze kinetic resolution, whereby the epoxy linkage in one stereoisomer is cleaved regio 
selectively by water leading to a diol, and the other stereoisomer remains unreacted. Biocatalytic routes 
to Taxol (anti-cancer agent) and Diltiazem (drug used to treat hypertension) involves the resolution of the 
chiral epoxide intermediate using epoxide hydrolase [82]. Furthermore, β-substituted alcohols can also 
be synthesized chemo-enzymatically using halohydrin dehalogenases, where the epoxide generated using 
monooxygenases is cleaved by nucleophiles corresponding to the β substituent (Figure 9: k) 
==PAGE:14==
11 
 
 
Figure 9. Different bond disconnections and FGI bases strategies to introduce oxygen containing functionalities [7]. a = P450 
monooxygenases, b = ketoreductases/alcohol dehydrogenases, c = P450 monooxygenases, d = P450 dioxygenases, e = 
hydratases, f = Baeyer-Villiger monooxygenases/lipases, g = lipases, h = nitrilases, i = amidases, j = epoxide hydrolases, k = 
halohydrin dehalogenases 
However, instead of disconnecting the C-O bond, FGI of the alcohol functional group to ketone or ester 
functionality is also a viable option. The asymmetric regio and stereoselective reduction of ketones using 
alcohol dehydrogenases/ketoreductases is a useful way of generating the chiral alcohol functionality 
(Figure 9: b). Lipase based resolution technique can be employed if enantio-pure alcohol functionality 
must be derived from a racemic mixture of alcohols. Ketones can be enzymatically converted to esters in 
a stereo and regio selective fashion using Baeyer-Villiger monooxygenases (Figure 9: f). Hydrolysis of the 
chiral ester functionality using chemical methods or enzymatic methods (lipase) can be carried out to yield 
the chiral alcohol or chiral carboxylic acid functionality (Figure 9: f, g). Enantio-pure carboxylic acids can 
be synthesized through stereo-selective hydrolysis of nitriles using nitrilases (EC 3.5.5.1) or from amides 
using amidases (Figure 9: i, h). Amidases and nitrilases are enzymes that hydrolyze the C-N bond of amides 
and nitriles respectively to yield chiral carboxylic acids and ammonia. 
The amine functionality plays a key role in biological systems, hence is found extensively in many 
pharmaceutical drugs and agrochemicals. There are numerous FGI based strategies to introduce the 
amino group in a molecule. The amino group can be derived from functional groups such as nitrile, amide, 
==PAGE:15==
12 
 
nitro, imine and ketone. Chemical routes to generate chiral amines using asymmetric hydrogenation of 
nitriles and partial hydrolysis (to amides) followed by reduction are well established.  
 
Figure 10. Different bond disconnections and FGI bases strategies to introduce the nitrogen containing functionalities [7]. a = 
imine reductases/mono-amine oxidases, b = transaminases, c = nitroreductases, d = amidases, e = ammonia lyases 
However, a multi-step chemo-enzymatic route using amidases to yield amides from nitriles can also be 
applied (Figure 10: d). Starting from chemo/enzymatic partial hydrolysis of nitriles to racemic amides, 
followed by resolution using amidases to yield enantio-pure amides and lastly, chemical reduction of 
amides to enantio-pure amines. Primary, secondary and tertiary aliphatic and alicyclic amines can be 
synthesized using imine reductases (Figure 10: a). IREDs are NADPH-dependent reductases which facilitate 
the interconversion of ketones to imines and amines. IREDs find extensive applications in the formation 
of a nitrogen containing ring. The retro-biocatalytic strategy for chiral aliphatic/alicyclic amines can hence 
include the interconversion of the functional group (FGI) to the corresponding imine, since the reduction 
can be stereo-selectively carried out using IREDs. However, the imine can be synthesized using simple 
condensation of an amine and a carboxyl group (ketone/aldehyde), placed at suitable positions in the 
building block. Apart from using IREDs, monoamine-oxidases can also be used to resolve racemic amine 
into its enantio-pure form. Flavin dependent monoamine-oxidases (MAO-N EC 1.4.3.4) are enzymes which 
stereo selectively oxidize amines to imines, followed by non-stereoselective reduction back to the amine. 
Hence MAO-Ns can be used to enrich (deracemize) the chiral amine from a racemic mixture. Amines can 
also be generated from the nitro functionality using nitroreductases (Figure 10: c)). Nitroreductases are 
often used for the biodegradation of nitroaromatics, however Baker’s yeast is the most popular 
microorganism used for the reduction of aromatic nitro groups to amines [15]. Perhaps the most useful 
and widely applied biocatalytic strategy to synthesize chiral amino acids and amines is using 
transaminases (Figure 10: b). Compared to traditional chemical methods of synthesizing chiral primary 
and secondary amines, which typically involve a transition metal-catalyzed asymmetric hydrogenation of 
enamines, biocatalytic transformation of ketones/keto-acids to corresponding primary amines in a stereo-
selective manner using transaminases appear as a superior alternative [16, 17]. Engineered transaminases 
==PAGE:16==
13 
 
have been applied to introduce the chiral amine functionality in the synthesis of Sitagliptin [18] and 
Dolutegravir [19, 20]. Disconnecting the C-N bond in the amine functionality, leads to a retro-biocatalytic 
alternative from alkenes. The C-N bond can be regio and stereo-selectively synthesized from alkenes using 
ammonia lyases (Figure 10: e). Lyases are enzymes that catalyze the cleavage or formation of various 
bonds. Phenylalanine ammonia lyase (PAL EC 4.3.1.24) has been successfully used to introduce the chiral 
amine functionality in indoline carboxylic acid derivatives [21]. 
The ability to form carbon-carbon bonds using biocatalytic methods is perhaps one of the most important 
developments in biocatalysis. Biocatalytic strategies to form carbon-carbon linkages are analogous to 
their chemical counterparts, such as aldol condensation, acyloin synthesis, cyanohydrin formation etc [22, 
23]. Retro-biocatalytic disconnections of C-C bonds should be considered in cases where functionalization 
of the α-carbon in a building block containing a carboxyl moiety or stereoselective desymmetrization of a 
prochiral carbonyl carbon using nucleophilic cyanide must be carried out. Aldolases (Figure 11: a, b, d, e) 
have been used to form critical carbon-carbon bonds chemo and stereo-selectively without the need for 
protecting other substituents [24]. Common donors for aldolases are shown in figure (). N-acetyl-D-
neuraminic acid aldolase has been used to synthesize N-acetyl-D-neuraminic acid, which is a key 
intermediate of the anti-influenza drug Zanamivir. Formation of chiral cyanohydrin from prochiral ketone 
is a C-C bond formation reaction. Hydroxynitrile lyases (Figure 11: c) can be used to stereo-selectively from 
cyanohydrins using HCN (hydrogen cyanide). 
 
 
Figure 11. Commonly used aldol donors and C-C bond formation strategy using aldolases and hydroxynitrile lyases [7]. a, b, d, e 
= aldolases, c = hydroxynitrile lyases 
 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
14 
 
3.2 Enzyme based route selection 
The criteria for prioritizing the chemo-biocatalytic routes to select routes which are more likely to be 
successful, depends on the enzyme required. An enzyme-catalyzed transformation requires adequate 
knowledge about the operating conditions (optimum pH and temperature, substrate specificity etc), 
hence implementing commercially exploited classes of enzymes (wild or recombinant forms with known 
substrate specificities) seem to be a preferred choice compared to those which are yet to make an impact 
on the pharmaceutical industry. Considering the high rates of attrition (one candidate out of five entering 
human clinical trials get approval for sale) [4] faced by pharmaceutical companies, and hence the need to 
maximize throughput, procurement time and the availability of biocatalysts become crucial. Moreover, 
most of the pharmaceutical drugs are complex structurally, featuring chiral functional groups (such as 
chiral amines, alcohols, esters), and are required in highly pure form during pre-clinical and clinical trials. 
Hence their biocatalytic preparative chemistries demand strategies to introduce/interconvert 
functionalities with exclusive regio, chemo and stereoselectivity. Classes and sub-classes of enzymes 
capable of fulfilling such synthetic demands have therefore received the limelight pharmaceutical 
industry, resulting in the development of their commercial scale production technologies. Hence, out of 
all the classes of enzymes used for chemical transformations, process chemists in the pharmaceutical 
industry have focused their attention on commercially available hydrolases, oxidoreductases, 
transaminases, nitrilases etc [3].  
Hence the realized biocatalytic transformations requiring commercially available enzymes (wild or 
recombinant forms) are prioritized over those requiring engineered and process-specialized (engineered) 
biocatalysts [5]. Moreover, since the cost-of-goods concerned with maximizing the throughput for clinical 
trials is not important compared to the speed of candidate development and supply, isolated form of the 
enzymes are preferred over whole-cell systems to avoid the interfering effects of a multi-enzyme system 
(whole-cells) and to better evaluate the applicability of the required biocatalytic transformation (isolated 
enzyme) to the desired form and concentration of the product.  
 
Figure 12. Enzyme types used in industrial biotransformations (based on 134 processes) [61] 
Hydrolases (44 %)
Lyases (12 %)
Isomerases (4 %)
Reducing cells (7 %)
Oxidizing cells (20 %)
Isolated Oxido-reductases (3 %)
Transferases (10 %)
==PAGE:18==
15 
 
Research in biocatalysis is dominated by the hydrolase class of enzymes, followed by redox capable 
biocatalysts. As shown in the Figure 12, hydrolases and redox biocatalysts are involved in approximately 
44% and 30% of all transformations carried out in the industry [61], based on an analysis of 134 processes. 
Hydrolases are a broad group of enzymes and are classified based on the bond type they act on [62]. 
Moreover, lipases lack the requirement of a co-factor (hence a co-factor recycling system), exhibit a broad 
substrate scope, show remarkable tolerance to high concentrations of organic solvents and are easy to 
handle (high stability), thus are comparable to conventional chemical methods of stereospecific hydrolysis 
and derivatization. Lipases form a sub-class of hydrolases which can hydrolyze chiral ester/amide bonds 
or carry out transesterifications in a regio and stereo-selective manner, hence are widely used for 
synthesizing chiral compounds through kinetic resolution of racemates or deracemization of prochiral 
compounds. Resolution of racemic mixtures involving (1) hydrolysis of esters/amides and nitriles along 
with (2) alkylation/acylation of racemic amines and alcohols, using lipases (hydrolases) are frequently 
encountered in the pharmaceutical industry. Lipases from Candida rugosa, Candida antarctica (two 
isoforms, CAL-A and CAL-B), Pseudomonas cepacia, porcine pancreas, Pseudomonas fluorescens and 
Serratia marcescens are the most common lipases used extensively at commercial scale. Serine 
endopeptidases (hydrolysis of peptidic bonds) are a group of hydrolases which are extensively used in the 
alimentary industry (fabrication of cheese, bread and other proteins), however due to their high 
stereoselectivities, they also find applications in the pharmaceutical industry. Endopeptidase from Bacillus 
licheniformis, also known as subtilisin Carlsberg or subtilisin A presents low substrate specificity (broad 
range of substrates) and high stereoselectivity, hence is employed especially in kinetic resolution for 
synthesizing chiral compounds. Penicillin G acylase (PGA) is another type of hydrolase used commercially 
for producing β-lactam antibiotics. PGAs from organisms such as Escherichtia coli, Arthrobacter viscosus 
and Bacillus megatarium are commercially available. Some successful transformations and applications of 
hydrolases in the pharmaceutical industry are shown in Table 1 [85]. 
Entry 
Biocatalyst 
Production 
parameters 
Drug 
Company 
1 
C. 
rugosa 
lipase 
Multi 
Kg, 
90% 
yield 
(ee = 99%)  
(S)-Ibuprofen 
(NSAID) 
Pfizer 
2 
Immobilized 
CALB 
Several 
hundred Kg, 
97% 
yield 
(ee = 99%) 
Lotrafiban 
(antithrombotic) 
GlasxoSmithKline 
3 
S. 
marcescens 
lipase 
40 Kg, 40-
45% 
yield 
(ee = 99.9%) 
Diltiazem 
(calcium 
channel blocker) 
Tanabe 
Pharmaceuticals 
4 
Subtilisin 
Carlsberg 
>100 
Kg, 
50% 
yield 
(ee = 99%) 
Remikiren 
and 
Ciprokiren 
(Renin 
inhibitors) 
Hoffmann La-Roche 
5 
P. 
cepacia 
lipase PS-30, 
BMS lipase 
1.2 
Kg. 
batch-1, 96% 
Paclitaxel 
(antimitotic 
agent) 
Bristol Myers Squibb 
(BMS) 
==PAGE:19==
16 
 
yield (ee > 
99.5%) 
6 
Penicillin G. 
acylase 
300 tons per 
annum, 87% 
yield 
(selectivity = 
94%)  
β-lactam 
antibiotics 
Dr.Vig Medicaments 
Table 1. Hydrolases employed in the preparation of biologically active compounds at an industrial scale [85]. 
Redox capable biocatalysts approximately cover 30% of all the industrial transformations [63]. Redox 
biocatalysis has matured as it is a valuable alternative to chemical catalyzed oxidations and reductions 
involving organic solvents and transition metal catalysts. However, due to the requirement of co-factors 
to assist their catalytic functions, in most cases redox biocatalysis involves whole-cells instead of isolated, 
which is an economical advantage. However, integrating biocatalysis in the early-stage development of 
drugs, isolated redox biocatalysts are always preferable. Redox enzymes such as monooxygenases, 
oxidases, peroxidases, dehydrogenases and ketoreductases are derived from organisms such as 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Escherichia coli, Lactobacillus kefir, Rhodococcus erythropolis and many more, 
are some commercially available enzymes which have been employed in industrial transformations, as 
mentioned in Table 2 [85].  
Entry 
Biocatalyst 
Production 
parameters 
Drug 
Company 
1 
Rhodococcus 
erythropolis a,b 
N.R., 
95% 
yield (ee = 
99%) 
Atazanavir (HIV 
endopeptidase 
inhibitor) 
Bristol 
Myers 
Squibb (BMS) 
2 
Microbacterium 
campoquemadoensis 
a,b 
Gram-scale, 
yield 
N.R. 
(ee >99%) 
Montelukast 
(anti-asthma) 
Merck and Co. 
Inc. 
3 
Rec. E. coli expressing 
enzyme from P. 
Finlandica a,b 
4 g, 50% 
yield 
(ee 
>98%) 
Anticholestrol 
drugs 
Lonza 
4 
Rec. E. coli expressing 
enzyme from 
Sporosarcina sp. a,b 
197 Kg, 91-
97% (ee > 
98%) 
Omapatrilat 
(anti-
hypertensive 
drug) 
Bristol 
Myers 
Squibb (BMS) 
5 
Rec. 
ketoreductase 
from Lactobacillus kefir 
b 
100 Kg, 90% 
yield 
(ee 
>99%) 
Sulopenem 
(anti-bacterial) 
Codexis Inc. 
6 
Streptomyces sp. 
Y-110 a,c 
70% yield 
Pravastin (anti-
cholesterolemic) 
Sankyo Company 
/ Bristol Myers 
Squibb (BMS) 
7 
Monooxygenase from 
N. autotropica a,c 
8 Kg, 24% 
yield 
HMG-CoA 
reductase 
inhibitor 
Merck Sharp and 
Dohme 
8 
Gluconobacter 
oxidans a,c 
Tons, 
90% 
yield 
α-Glucosidase 
inhibitors 
Bayer AG 
==PAGE:20==
17 
 
9 
Engineered 
transaminase 
200 
g.L-1, 
92% 
yield 
(ee >99%) 
Sitagliptin (oral 
hypoglycemic) 
Merck and Co. 
Inc. 
10 
2-Deoxyribose-5-
phosphate 
aldolase 
(DERA) 
100 g scale 
(ee 
>99%, 
de >96%) 
HMG-CoA 
reductase 
inhibitor 
Diversa 
Corporation 
Table 2. Enzymatic oxidations, reductions, transaminations and aldol condensations carried out industrially. a = whole cells, b = 
reductions, c = oxidations [85] 
Other enzymes such as transaminases, aldolases, hydroxynitrile lyases and nitrilases are worth 
mentioning, however they do not appear as commonly in the industry as compared to hydrolases and 
redox enzymes [85]. Moreover, the synthetic utility of such enzymes proves to be immensely helpful from 
environmental point of view. Asymmetric synthesis of chiral amines from prochiral ketones/aldehydes 
and oxidation/epoxidation without the use of chlorinated solvents was recognized as key areas of green 
chemistry research at the ACS-GCIPR (American Chemical Society - Green Chemistry Institute 
Pharmaceutical Roundtable), through a voting process comprised of the leading pharmaceutical 
companies [65]. Transaminases hold immense potential in converting prochiral ketones to chiral amines, 
hence they are finding increased acceptance in biocatalytic research programs [64]. Figure 13 and Figure 
14 shows some enzyme classes and their respective chemistries being developed through recombinant 
technology which can provide a substantial impact to the pharmaceutical industry. 
 
Figure 13. Chemistries catalyzed by expanding classes of enzymes which are commercially available with applications in 
industrial biocatalysis [5] 
==PAGE:21==
18 
 
 
Figure 14. New chemistries which are emerging with small enzyme libraries [5] 
  
3.3 Enzyme screening 
The huge diversity of enzymes (within a sub-class), due to their intrinsic nature, results in a large pool of 
enzymes to choose from for a specific substrate. Hence the success of such projects relies to a large extent, 
on the ability and probability of finding enzymes showing moderate or even a slight activity towards the 
specific substrate.  
The literature-survey approach followed in conventional chemical catalysis for identifying suitable 
catalysts for carrying out the required transformation, may not always yield appropriate results if applied 
to biocatalysis. In most of the cases, identification of chemical catalysts, is largely based on a substrate 
independent transformation of a functional group in a substrate. However, the identification of enzymes 
is based undeniably on the required functional group transformation, but largely on the substrate 
molecule (size and geometry) as a whole [87]. Hence, the chances of finding the right enzyme for the 
substrate of interest is generally directly proportional to the enzymes available for screening.  
Since the biocatalyst represents a significant fraction of the targeted operating cost of the drug 
manufacturing process at commercial scale [88], the biocatalyst used directly as a recombinantly 
expressed whole-cell form is sometimes economically advantageous than isolated enzymes. However, in 
the early stages of drug development, time is the limiting factor rather than cost-of-goods, hence using 
==PAGE:22==
19 
 
commercially available isolated enzymes is preferred than using whole-cell systems to establish the 
chemistry. Commercial enzymes used during the screening phase for establishing the biocatalytic route 
of synthesis must eventually be optimized (by protein engineering), once the biocatalytic route of 
synthesis is established. Biocatalyst optimization is required to arrive at a recombinant form which 
promises (1) high activity, (2) all-round (chemo, stereo and regio) selectivity and (3) stability, hence high 
space-time yield. Moreover, fermentation processes for manufacturing the recombinant biocatalyst (and 
its isolation and immobilization techniques, if required according to process requirements) must be 
development and optimized. However, both, improving and optimizing the properties of the enzyme and 
its production process takes time. Therefore, fixing the route of synthesis for a pharmaceutical drug, and 
hence the biocatalyst is required to be done at the earliest, alongside the drug development process (pre-
clinical and clinical trials), which requires a fast and efficient enzyme screening methodology to be 
implemented. 
After selecting appropriate biocatalytic routes from several routes provided from the retro-biocatalysis 
analysis, rapid screening of the enzymes is essential since the time frame for defining and developing a 
suitable process is narrow (Figure 15) The screening of enzymes is important to evaluate (1) qualitatively, 
the activity of the enzyme and the regio, chemo and stereo selectivity obtained, and (2) a rough realization 
of the space-time yield. The results obtained after screening the enzyme helps the process chemist decide 
the feasibility of the route considered. The best performing enzyme, with respect to the exhibited activity 
and selectivity hence helps decide the final route of synthesis for the drug. However, fixing the route of 
synthesis based on the performance of the enzyme raises caveats based on the (1) availability of the 
library of commercial enzymes and (2) dependence of the performance of available enzymes on the 
screening conditions and method. The availability of several variants of the enzyme largely depends on 
the class of enzyme and their commercial sources, however, performance verification of the available 
enzymes is necessary to avoid false-positive errors.  
==PAGE:23==
20 
 
 
Figure 15. Screening of enzymes is essential after selecting appropriate biocatalytic routes generated from retro-biocatalysis. 
3.3.1 Condition of the screening assay 
The choice of the screening method and proper optimization of the screening reaction conditions is 
required to realize the true potential of the enzyme. The central objective of carrying out enzyme activity 
assays is the qualitative indication of even modest activity and quantitative measurement of the initial 
rate of reaction [25]. The initial reaction rate can be approximately considered as measuring the depletion 
or formation of a measurable entity (substrate, product, co-factor) corresponding to less than 5% of 
product formation. Such a narrow measurement range at the starting substrate concentration gives a 
good approximation of the initial reaction rate, hence the enzyme activity. The activity of the enzyme, 
hence the results of screening assays depend on the reaction conditions (pH, temperature and ionic 
strength) and the concentrations of various assay components. A rough generalization can be made while 
deciding the reaction conditions for the screening assay, since different enzymes display their optimum 
activity at their respective conditions. The prevailing conditions in the cell are taken as the standard for 
mammalian enzymes, however, slight deviations from the standard conditions is tolerated. The optimum 
pH of enzymes is the pH range which corresponds to maximum activity (VMAX), which for most enzymes is 
a rather broad range between pH 7-8 (Figure 16). Hence for conducting screening assays, the preferred 
pH of the medium is near to the physiological value (pH 7.5). The activity dependence on the medium 
temperature is similar to its dependence on pH, with rapid decrease in activity at higher temperatures 
(due to denaturation). Generally, for most enzymes, three distinct temperatures are used. The 
physiological temperature (370), temperature corresponding to the generalized room temperature (250C) 
and a compromise between the two (300C). The enzyme activity at 370C (nearer to the denaturation 
temperature) can be compared to the other two to roughly estimate the optimum temperature. The ionic 
strength of the medium depends on the concentration of the buffer system used. Most enzymes tolerate 
a moderate range of ionic strength which is 0.05 M to 0.2 M.  
==PAGE:24==
21 
 
 
Figure 16. pH optimum of most enzymes lies between 7-8 (black curve). However, stable and pH resistant enzymes outside the 
physiological range (red curve) also are available [86] 
The ideal initial concentrations of the substrate and co-factors in the screening assay should be chosen 
carefully, such that they completely saturate the enzyme to (1) avoid any component to be rate limiting 
and (2) observe maximum activity (VMAX). A measure of the binding affinity given by the Michaelis constant 
KM give an estimate of the initial substrate and co-factor concentrations. The value of KM for a component 
indicates its concentration at half-saturation of the enzyme. However, according to the Michaelis-Menten 
equation [26,27], complete saturation of the enzyme can never be achieved practically. The hyperbolic 
function of the Michaelis-Menten plot (Figure 17) suggests that for saturating 99% of the enzyme 
(practically assumed saturation), the required substrate and co-factor concentration should be 100-fold 
the KM value. However, such high concentrations are difficult to achieve for poorly water-soluble 
substrates and the risk of the substrate acting as an enzyme inhibitor [86]. Hence, a compromise in initial 
substrate concentration of 10KM (corresponding to 91% saturation) is generally made. For co-factors such 
as NADH/NADPH (for nicotinamide dependent enzyme assays), the compromise is further influenced by 
the cost, and even more so if an optical assay is being applied. Since the reduced co-factors absorb at 340 
nm (nanometers), which serves as a recordable signal, the detection range of the absorbance is generally 
kept below 1 (due to the linear proportionality relationship of the molar extinction coefficient to 
absorbance). However, initial NADH/NADPH concentrations of 10-fold their KM value results in the 
absorption in the range of 50-100, which is far above the linear detection limit [28]. Hence, concentrations 
less than 2KM should be used for optical assays.  
==PAGE:25==
22 
 
 
Figure 17. A generalized Michaelis-Menten plot for enzymatic reactions. 99% saturation can be reached at high 
substrate concentration. 
The concentration of the enzyme in the screening assay should be as low as possible for complete 
saturation, however sufficient enough to observe the course of the reaction. Since the Michaelis-Menten 
plot is derived based on the assumption that the enzyme concentration is negligible [27]. The enzyme 
concentration can be varied depending upon the achieved reaction rates. The concentration of the 
enzyme is directly related to the observation time to acquire meaningful results from the assay. The most 
favorable scenario while conducting screening assays, is the observation of the linear correlation between 
the component being observed and time. The preferred time of observation hence corresponds to this 
region of linear dependence, since observing the non-linear phase may result in inaccurate results. Hence 
the concentration of the enzyme, (corresponding to the highest achievable rate) and the time of signal 
observation should be optimized by carrying out various combination.  
3.3.2 Screening method 
Literature presents several methods of carrying out screening assays which can be distinguished as (1) 
continuous assays and (2) discontinuous assays, based on the formation or depletion of a detectable 
component. Continuous assays are based on continuous detection of the measurable quantity over a 
period. However, an important consideration is that the quantity measured of the detected component 
must significantly differ from that of the other components present in the assay. The most common 
techniques employed to carry out continuous assays are using colorimeters or photometers. Such assays 
typically measure the intensity of a unique wavelength of absorption corresponding to any of the reaction 
components such as substrate, product or co-factors (NADH/NADPH at 340 nm). However, a general 
consideration while choosing the screening method is that the observed feature of the detectable 
component must differ significantly from that of the other assay components. Moreover, the intensity of 
the signal must exceed the intensity of the noise at least by a factor of 2 [86].  
 
4. Materials and methods 
4.1 Retro-biocatalysis based route generation 
==PAGE:26==
23 
 
Some new biocatalytic route were proposed for generic pharmaceutical drugs such as (S)-Fluoxetine, 
(R,R)-Formoterol, a hNK-1 receptor antagonist, (S)-Ontazolast and (S)-Ambrisentan. The retro-biocatalysis 
of the mentioned target molecules were carried out after identifying the key structural features present 
in the molecule such as chiral functional groups and critical carbon-carbon bond forming steps which can 
be efficiently introduced through enzymes as discussed in section 3.1. Appropriate bond disconnections 
and functional group interconversions were carried out to generate routes based on chemistries catalyzed 
by not only the commercially available enzymes, but also on chemistries catalyzed by emerging and 
expanding classes of enzymes as mentioned in Figure 13 and Figure 14. 
 
4.2 Screening experiments for enzymatic activity  
Screening of enzymes for the biocatalytic transformation considered in the proposed route 2 for (S)-
Ambrisentan (Figure , as shown in Figure 18 was chosen to be experimentally studied. The oxidoreductase 
class of enzymes such as alcohol dehydrogenases (ADHs) and ketoreductases (KREDs) were identified for 
the stereo-selective and non-stereoselective oxidation of secondary alcohols and stereo-selective 
reduction of ketones respectively.  The fundamental chemistry involves oxidation of secondary alcohol to 
the ketone intermediate, which can then be stereo-selectively reduced to the required (S)-alcohol. 
Moreover, the formation of (S)-alcohol can involve two different strategies: (1) non-stereoselective 
oxidation of the racemic alcohol followed by asymmetric reduction and, (2) stereo-inversion of the (R)-
alcohol via resolution-based stereo-selective oxidation of the (R)-alcohol, followed by asymmetric 
reduction. ADHs and KREDs require the use of co-factors, hence to drive the thermodynamics (put thermo 
in results) in the forward direction, co-factor re-generation is necessary. However, the requirement of 
complementary cofactors (NAD/NADP and NADH/NADPH for ADHs and KREDs) for the sequential 
oxidation and reduction, a combined one-pot cascade-type reaction for in-situ co-factor regeneration was 
the thought to be carried out. However, the enzymes for each reaction were screened separately for 
activity against the specific substrate. Screening experiments were conducted in different sets as 
mentioned in subsequent sections (Section 4.4 and section 4.5) 
==PAGE:27==
24 
 
 
Figure 18. Chosen route to experimentally screen available ADHs and KREDs. ADH = alcohol dehydrogenase, KRED = 
ketoreducase, NADP = Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate, NADPH = reduced NADP. 
4.3 Materials 
 
4.3.1 
Enzymes 
For this project, an in-house collection of ADHs and KREDs in the form of freeze-dried lyophilized 
powders were chosen to carry out the activity screening experiments. The collection included 
three ADHs (c-Lecta Chemicals GmbH) and five KREDs (Prozomix Limited), as listed in Table 3. 
However, product characteristics regarding these enzyme variants such as their nature (wild type 
or recombinant type), substrate scope, co-factor (NAD/NADP or NADH/NADPH) preference, 
tolerance to solvents and optimum pH and temperature ranges were not available. NADPH-
oxidase (c-Lecta Chemicals GmbH), was also employed in ADH screening experiments which 
included co-factor regeneration. The enzymes were stored under dry conditions at -200C to avoid 
any loss in activity arising from thermal denaturation. The stock solutions of enzymes were 
prepared by dissolving required amounts of the enzyme powder in 2 mL buffer solution in a 2 mL 
Eppendorf tube. 
 
Sr. no. 
Enzyme code-
number (Source) 
Stock solution (gL-1) 
1 
ADH 280 
2 
2 
ADH 50 
3 
ADH 30 
4 
KRED 252 
5 
5 
KRED 150 
6 
KRED 035 
==PAGE:28==
25 
 
7 
KRED 112 
8 
AKR 150 
9 
PRO-NOx 001 
5 
Table 3. Available Alcohol dehydrogenases, ketoreductases and NADPH oxidases which were used and concentrations of their 
stock solutions 
4.3.2 
Substrate 
The starting material (R,S)-Methyl-2-hydroxy-3-methoxy-3,3-diphenyl propionate in racemic form was 
provided by Alchem Synthon Pvt. Ltd in the form of white crystalline powder. The stock solution (5 mL, 5 
mM) of (R,S)-Methyl-2-hydroxy-3-methoxy-3,3-diphenyl propionate (alcohol, molecular weight = 286 
grams/mole) was prepared by diluting 250 microliters of 100 mM solution (in DMSO or THF) of the alcohol 
with desired solvents (DMSO or THF). The 100 mM solution was prepared by dissolving 2.87 grams of 
alcohol in 25 mL of the desired solvent in a 25 mL volumetric flask. 
The stock solution (5 mL, 3 mM) of Methyl-2-oxo-3-methoxy-3,3-diphenyl propionate (ketone, molecular 
weight = 284 grams/mole) was prepared by diluting 150 microliters of 100 mM solution (in DMSO or THF) 
of the ketone with desired solvents (DMSO or THF). The 100 mM solution was prepared by dissolving 2.85 
grams of the ketone in 25 mL of the desired solvent in a 25 mL volumetric flask. 
 
4.3.3 
Co-factors 
Nicotinamide based co-factors required for this project, which were) in the form of lyophilized powders. 
The co-factors being highly sensitive to temperature, they were stored as such at -200C. The stock 
solutions (2 mL, 10 mM) of respective co-factors were prepared by dissolving appropriate amounts in the 
appropriate buffer solution in a 2 mL Eppendorf tube. 
 
4.3.4 
Solvents 
The substrate being highly hydrophobic, had negligible solubility in water and aqueous buffer-based 
systems typically employed in biocatalysis. Hence, for solubilizing the substrate in such aqueous systems, 
organic solvents were used. The solvents used for solubilizing the substrate were chosen to be Dimethyl 
sulphoxide (DMSO) and Tetrahydrofuran (THF) as suggested through similar works involving enzymatic 
ketone reductions using ADHs from Lactobacillus kefir and Lactobacillus brevis [29-31]. Experiments 
related to the regeneration of reduced co-factors (NADH and NADPH) via a coupled substrate approach, 
Acetone was used as both, a solvent to solubilize the substrate (racemic starting alcohol) and as a co-
substrate for NADH/NADPH regeneration. Ethyl acetate was used as the solvent of choice in the liquid-
liquid extractive workup procedures in time-course experiments, and analytical sample preparation. All 
the organic solvents used in the experiments were dry HPLC-grade solvents..  
4.3.5 
Buffer solutions 
==PAGE:29==
26 
 
Two commonly used buffer systems were used in this enzyme screening project based on the screening 
methodology. Potassium phosphate-based buffer system (pH 7.4) was used for the spectrophotometric 
screening experiments, and Tri(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane/HCl (Tris/HCl) based buffer system (pH 
7.5) was used in time course experiments. Since the optimum pH ranges for the available enzymes was 
unknown, the common practice in such cases is to choose the pH of the assay near the physiological value 
(pH 7.5). The chemicals required for preparing the buffer systems, such as Hydrogen dipotassium 
phosphate (K2HPO4), Dihydrogen potassium phosphate (KH2PO4) and Tris was procured from (source 
companies). Potassium phosphate buffer system 
The Potassium phosphate buffer: 
The Potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) was prepared following the procedure developed by Green [32]. 
Fresh solutions were made prior to carrying out the experiments, since initiation of fungal growth may 
lead to variations in the pH resulting in experimental errors [33]. Preparation of the Potassium phosphate 
buffer requires mixing of certain quantities of 1 Molar (M) aqueous solutions of K2HPO4 and KH2PO4. 
Hence, initially separate 0.5 L solutions, each of 1M concentration of the salts were prepared by dissolving 
87.09 grams of K2HPO4 and 68.05 grams of KH2PO4 separately in 500 mL of de-ionized water. Following 
which, 80.2 mL of 1 M K2HPO4 and 19.8 mL of KH2PO4 stock solutions were mixed and the pH was 
measured using AgCl/KCl based pH meter. The pH was then adjusted to 7.4 using 5M HCl solution.  
Tris/HCl buffer: 
500 mL of the Tris/HCl buffer was prepared by dissolving 3028.5 mg of Tris in 250 mL de-ionized water 
and stirred for homogenization. The pH was then adjusted to 7.5 using 5M HCl solution, and the volume 
was made up to 500 mL in a volumetric flask by adding de-ionized water. The pH was measured again and 
re-adjusted to 7.5 using 5M HCl solution. 
 
4.3.6 
Miscellaneous  
The ketone intermediate in the reaction scheme of interest as shown in Figure 18, was prepared by 
chemical oxidation of the racemic alcohol starting material, to produce the substrate for screening the 
available KRED and as an authenticate sample for analytical purposes. The oxidation was carried out using 
the experimental procedure as mentioned in the Cipla patent [30]. The Cipla patent employs two different 
reagents to carry out the oxidation of the racemic alcohol starting material to achieve almost quantitative 
yields of the ketone: (1) Swern oxidation using Dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO) and Triethyl amine (Et3N) at 
-550C and (2) Dess Martin Periodinane oxidation using Dess Martin Periodinane (hypervalent Iodine based 
oxidizing agent) at 250C. The more practical being Dess Martin Periodinane based oxidation, the reagent 
was hence procured from Sigma Aldrich Chemicals.  
 
4.4 Spectrophotometric analysis  
==PAGE:30==
27 
 
Initially, absorption of all the individual assay components was measured through a range of 300 nm to 
700 nm, to determine their starting concentrations in the assay. This was carried out by preparing 1 mL 
solutions with known concentrations of the component in buffer. The amount of the substrate (dissolved 
in DMSO) was adjusted such that the concentration of the organic solvent remained below 5 % v/v, to 
avoid any deleterious effects on enzyme activity such as denaturation and solvent inhibition. It was found 
out that NADPH was the major contributor in the absorbance. 
The available ADHs and KREDs were screened spectrophotometrically by observing the increase and 
decrease respectively in the total absorbance of the reaction mixture at 340 nm in a spectrophotometer 
(make) at 30 0C. The total absorbance at 340 nm is highly influenced by changes in the concentration of 
the reduced co-factor (NADH/NADPH). The experiments carried out are summarized in Table 4, and the 
respective concentration of respective assay components used in respective screening experiments (sets) 
are mentioned in Table 5, Table 6, Table 7 and Table 8, Table 15 and Table 18. The concentrations of the 
enzyme, co-factor and the substrate were varied by pipetting appropriate volumes of respective stock 
solutions and diluted to a final volume of 1 mL with buffer solution in a disposable spectrophotometric 
cuvette. Initially, a blank reading for all the assay components except the co-factor solution was taken at 
340 nm in order to subtract the absorbance artifacts due to the cuvette material and the components 
exhibiting negligible absorbances. Following which, a fresh assay mixture was prepared at the required 
concentrations, thoroughly mixed and placed in the cuvette holder. The assay was conducted for a 
duration of two minutes.  
Experimental set 
Aim 
Enzymes screened 
Co-factors used 
A 
Spectrophotometric 
screening of ADH 280 
ADH 280 
NADP and NAD 
B 
Spectrophotometric 
screening of ADH 50 
ADH 50 
NADP and NAD 
C 
Spectrophotometric 
screening of ADH 30 
ADH 30 
NADP and NAD 
D 
Spectrophotometric 
screening of KREDs 
KRED 252, KRED 150, 
KRED 112, KRED 035, 
AKR 150 
NADPH 
Table 4.Experiments for screening of avilable ADHs and KREDs using spectrophotometric method 
Set A: 
 
 
 
Components 
Concentration for ADH 280 catalyzed reaction 
Experiments 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
Substrate (alcohol) 
in DMSO 
0.25 mM 
0.5 mM 
0.25 mM 
0.25 mM 
0.25 mM 
NAD/NADP 
1 mM 
1 mM 
2 mM 
1 mM 
1mM 
ADH 280 
0.2 gL-1 
0.2 gL-1 
0.2 gL-1 
0.4 gL-1 
0.8 gL-1 
Table 5. Concentrations of assay components taken in spectrophotometric screening experiments (set A) 
conducted for screening ADH 280  
==PAGE:31==
28 
 
 
Set B: 
Components 
Concentration for ADH 50 catalyzed reactions 
Experiments 
A 
B 
C 
Substrate (alcohol) in DMSO 
0.25 mM 
0.5 mM 
0.5 mM 
NAD/NADP 
1 mM 
2 mM 
2 mM 
ADH 280 
0.2 gL-1 
0.2 gL-1 
0.8 gL-1 
Table 6. Concentrations of assay components taken in spectrophotometric screening experiments (set B) conducted for 
screening ADH 50 
Set C: 
Components 
Concentration for ADH 30 catalyzed reactions 
Experiments 
A 
B 
C 
Substrate (alcohol) in DMSO 
0.25 mM 
0.25 mM 
0.5 mM 
NAD/NADP 
1 mM 
2 mM 
1 mM 
ADH 280 
0.2 gL-1 
0.4 gL-1 
0.8 gL-1 
Table 7. Concentrations of assay components taken in spectrophotometric screening experiments (set C) for screening ADH 30 
using spectrophotometer 
Set D: 
Components 
Concentration for KRED catalyzed reaction 
Experiments 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
Substrate (ketone) 
in THF 
0.105 
mM 
0.1575 mM 
0.1575 mM 
0.105 mM 
0.21 mM 
NADPH 
0.1 mM 
0.1 mM 
0.1 mM 
0.1 mM 
0.1 mM 
KRED 
0.44 gL-1 
0.44 gL-1 
1 gL-1 
1 gL-1 
1 gL-1 
Table 8. Concentrations of assay components taken in spectrophotometric screening experiments (set D) for KRED 252, KRED 
150, KRED 112, KRED 035 and AKR 150 
4.5 Time-course experiments  
The time-course experiments for qualitative screening of the available ADHs and KREDs for substrate-
specific activity were carried out by mixing the components with concentrations as mentioned in table (). 
Experiments were out carried by mixing the assay components (total volume of 1 mL) in a 4 mL glass vial. 
The vial was then placed in a thermoshaker equipment maintained at 30 0C with agitation at 800 rpm 
(rotations per minute). For experiments which involved the regenerations of the co-factor, appropriate 
amounts of the regenerating system-components were added as mentioned in Table 9. The co-factor 
regeneration experiments which involved NADPH oxidases (Nox) for regeneration of NADPH (oxidation of 
NADPH via electron transfer from molecular oxygen). Oxygen was introduced in the reactor-vial through 
a dip tube at the rate of 30 mL min-1. However, for regeneration of co-factors using the coupled co-
substrate approach (using acetone), the components required for regeneration were prepared 
individually at the required concentrations and added to the reaction mixture as mentioned above. 
Concentration of the assay components used in the experiments (sets) are mentioned in Table 10, Table 
11, Table 12 and Table 13, Table 16 and Table 19. Reactions were carried out at 1 mL with mixing the 
==PAGE:32==
29 
 
corresponding volumes of components. For reactions which were analyzed at two time-points, duplicate 
reaction mixtures were made, and sacrificial sampling was carried out. The reaction samples were 
extracted with 1 mL ethyl acetate by mixing on a vortex machine, centrifuged at 13000 rpm (rotations per 
minute) for 2 minutes. The top organic layer was analyzed by HPLC. 
Experimental set 
Aim 
Conditions 
Enzymes screened 
Co-factor used 
E 
Time course 
screening of ADHs 
with co-factor 
regenerations using 
acetone 
4 hours at 30 
0C in 
thermoshaker 
ADH 280, ADH 50, 
ADH 30 
NADP 
F 
Time course 
screening of ADHs 
with co-factor 
regenerations 
NADPH oxidase 
without oxygen 
bubbling 
4 hours at 30 
0C in 
thermoshaker 
ADH 280, ADH 50, 
ADH 30 
NADP 
G 
Time course 
screening of ADHs 
with co-factor 
regenerations using 
NADPH oxidase 
without oxygen 
bubbling 
24 hours at 30 
0C in 
thermoshaker 
ADH 280, ADH 50, 
ADH 30 
NADP 
H 
Time course 
screening of ADHs 
with co-factor 
regenerations using 
NADPH oxidase 
with oxygen 
bubbling 
2 hours at 30 
0C in 
thermoshaker 
ADH 280, ADH 50, 
ADH 30 
NADP 
I 
Time course 
screening of KREDs 
with co-factor 
regenerations using 
glucose/glucose 
dehydrogenase 
4 and 24 hours 
at 30 0C in 
thermoshaker 
KRED 252, KRED 
150, KRED 112, 
KRED 035, AKR 
150 
NADPH 
Table 9. Experiments for screening of available ADHs and KREDs using batch-mode method 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:33==
30 
 
 
Set E 
Components 
Concentrations for time-course screening of ADHs using coupled substrate 
(acetone) 
Experiments 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Substrate 
(alcohol) in 
acetone 
0.25 mM 
0.25 mM 
0.25 mM 
0.25 mM 
NADP 
- 
- 
0.2 mM 
0.8 mM 
NAD 
0.2 mM 
0.8 mM 
- 
- 
ADHs 
0.1 gL-1 
0.1 gL-1 
0.1 gL-1 
0.1 gL-1 
Table 10. Concentrations of assay components taken in batch-mode screening experiments (set E) conducted for screening ADH 
280, ADH 50 and ADH 30 including co-factor regeneration using acetone 
Set F 
Components 
Concentrations for time-course screening of ADHs using coupled enzyme 
(NADPH Oxidase) 
Experiments 
5 
6 
7 
8 
Substrate 
(alcohol) in 
acetone 
0.5 mM 
0.5 mM 
0.5 mM 
0.5 mM 
NADP 
1 mM 
1 mM 
1 mM 
1 mM 
PRO-NOX 001 
0.025 gL-1 
0.025 gL-1 
0.05 gL-1 
0.05 gL-1 
ADHs 
0.05 gL-1 
0.1 gL-1 
0.05 gL-1 
0.1 gL-1 
Table 11. Concentrations of assay components taken in batch-mode screening experiments (set F) conducted for screening ADH 
280, ADH 50 and ADH 30 including co-factor regeneration using NADPH oxidase without oxygen bubbling 
Set G 
Components 
Concentrations for time-course screening of ADHs using coupled enzyme 
(NADPH Oxidase) 
Experiments 
9 
10 
11 
12 
Substrate 
(alcohol) in 
acetone 
0.25 mM 
0.25 mM 
0.25 mM 
0.25 mM 
NADP 
0.5 mM 
0.5 mM 
0.5 mM 
0.5 mM 
PRO-NOX 001 
0.1 gL-1 
0.5 gL-1 
0.1 gL-1 
0.5 gL-1 
ADHs 
0.5 gL-1 
1 gL-1 
0.5 gL-1 
1 
gL-1 
Table 12. Concentrations of assay components taken in batch-mode screening experiments (set G) conducted for screening ADH 
280, ADH 50 and ADH 30 including co-factor regeneration using NADPH oxidase with oxygen bubbling 
Set H 
Components 
Concentrations for time-course 
screening of KREDs with co-factor 
==PAGE:34==
31 
 
regenerations using glucose/glucose 
dehydrogenase 
Experiments 
13 
14 
Substrate 
(alcohol) in 
acetone 
10 mM 
10 mM 
NADPH 
3.75 mM 
3.75 mM 
KREDs 
1 gL-1 
1 gL-1 
Glucose 
1 mM 
1 mM 
Glucose 
dehydrogenase 
(GDH) 
1 gL-1 
1 gL-1 
Table 13. Concentrations of assay components taken in batch-mode screening experiments (set H) conducted for screening 
KREDs including co-factor regeneration using glucose/GDH for 4 hours (experiment 13) and 24 hours (experiment 14) 
4.5 Sensitivity of screening methodology 
Acetophenone 
Experimental sets 
Aim 
Enzymes screened 
Co-factors used 
I 
Sensitivity of 
spectrophotometric 
screening versus 
batch-mode screening 
using acetophenone 
as model substrate 
KRED 252, KRED 150, 
KRED 112 
NADPH 
Table 14. Experiments conducted about the sensitivity of spectrophotometry and batch-mode methods for screening of available 
KREDs (KRED 252, KRED 150 and KRED 112) using acetophenone 
Set I 
Acetophenone 
Components 
Concentrations for spectrophotometric screening 
of KREDs for acetophenone 
Experiments 
15 
16 
Substrate 
(acetophenone) in 
THF 
5 mM 
5 mM 
NADP 
0.5 mM 
0.5 mM 
KREDs (KRED 252, 
KRED 150, KRED 
112) 
0.5 gL-1 
1 gL-1 
Table 15. Concentrations of assay components taken in spectrophotometric screening experiments (set I) conducted using 
acetophenone for screening KRED 252, KRED 150 and KRED 112 
Components 
Concentrations for batch-mode screening of KREDs 
for acetophenone a 
Experiments 
17 
18 
==PAGE:35==
32 
 
Substrate 
(acetophenone) in 
THF 
20 mM 
20 mM 
NADP 
5 mM 
5 mM 
KREDs (KRED 252, 
KRED 150, KRED 
112) 
0.5 gL-1 
1 gL-1 
Glucose 
20 mM 
20 mM 
Glucose 
dehydrogenase 
(GDH) 
1 gL-1 
1 gL-1 
Table 16. Concentrations of assay components taken in batch-mode screening experiments (set I) conducted using 
acetophenone using KRED 252, KRED 150 and KRED 112. a = sequential sampling after 1 hour, 4 hours and 24 hours 
Acetone 
Experimental sets 
Aim 
Enzymes screened 
Co-factors used 
J 
Sensitivity of 
spectrophotometric 
screening versus 
batch-mode screening 
using acetone as 
model substrate 
KRED 252, KRED 150, 
KRED 112 
NADPH 
Table 17. Experiments conducted about the sensitivity of spectrophotometry and batch-mode methods for screening of available 
KREDs (KRED 252, KRED 150 and KRED 112) using acetone 
Set J 
Components 
Concentrations for spectrophotometric screening of KREDs 
for acetone 
Experiments 
19 
20 
21 
22 
Substrate 
(acetone) in 
THF 
5 mM 
5 mM 
5 mM 
5 mM 
NADP 
0.5 mM 
0.5 mM 
0.5 mM 
0.5 mM 
KREDs (KRED 
252, KRED 
150, KRED 
112) 
0.2 gL-1 
0.5 gL-1 
0.8 gL-1 
1 gL-1 
Table 18. Concentrations of assay components taken in spectrophotometric screening experiments (set J) conducted using 
acetone for screening KRED 252, KRED 150 and KRED 112 
 
Components 
Concentrations for batch-mode screening of KREDs for 
acetone 
Experiments 
23 
24 
25 
26 
Substrate 
(acetone) in THF 
20 mM 
20 mM 
20 mM 
20 mM 
==PAGE:36==
33 
 
NADP 
5 mM 
5 mM 
5 mM 
5 mM 
KREDs (KRED 
252, KRED 150, 
KRED 112) 
0.2 gL-1 
0.5 gL-1 
0.8 gL-1 
1 gL-1 
Glucose 
20 mM 
20 mM 
20 mM 
20 mM 
Glucose 
dehydrogenase 
(GDH) 
1 gL-1 
1 gL-1 
1 gL-1 
1 gL-1 
Table 19. Concentrations of assay components taken in batch-mode screening experiments (set J) conducted using acetone using 
KRED 252, KRED 150 and KRED 112 
5 Results and Discussion 
5.1 Retro-biocatalysis based route generation 
5.1.1 (S)-Fluoxetine 
 
Figure 19.  Molecular structure of (S)-Fluoxetine 
Also know by trade names Prozac and Sarafem, (S)-Fluoxetine, Figure 19, is a class of SSRI drugs (selective 
Serotonine re-uptake inhibitor drugs) discovered and launched by the company Eli Lilly in 1987 [34]. The 
first asymmetric synthetic route for (S)-Fluoxetine was developed by Robertson in 1988 as shown in Figure 
20 [34].  
 
Figure 200. First asymmetric route to (S)-Fluoxetine developed by Eli Lilly [34].  a = (+)-DIP-Cl (Diisopinocampheylborane 
chloride); b = MeNH2, NaI; c = NaH, DMAC (Dimethyl acetamide), 4 
However, many chemical routes to Fluoxetine have been developed to introduce chirality using Sharpless 
asymmetric epoxidation, Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation, oxidative kinetic resolution and 
==PAGE:37==
34 
 
Ruthenium-catalyzed allylic alkylation etc [35-39]. A novel approach to Fluoxetine was developed by 
Devine and co-workers from Merck (from intermediate 6) which involved the use of a chiral auxiliary to 
introduce the chirality as shown in Figure 21 [35, 66]. 
 
 
Figure 21. Asymmetric route to (S)-Fluoxetine developed by Merck and another route involving Asymmetric Sharpless 
epoxidation [35, 66]. a = 7, THF, 0 0C (yield = 85 %); b = LiAlH4, THF -78 0C (yield = 82 %); c = i) Tf2O, Et3N, ii) NaCN (yield = 65 %), 
iii) BH3.SMe2, iv) LiAlH4 (yield = 92 %); d = (+)-DIPT (Diisopropyltryptamine), Ti(OiPr)4, t-BuOOH; e = Red-Al; f = SOCl2, 4, NaCN, 
hydrogenation 
==PAGE:38==
35 
 
 
 
Figure 22. General structure 14, derived from structural similarities between (S)-Fluoxetine, (S)-Tomoxetine, (S)-Norfluoxetine 
and (S)-Nisoxetine 
 
(S)-Norfluoxetine, (S)-Tomoxetine and (S)-Nisoxetine are structural analogues of (S)- Fluoxetine which also 
are SSRI based anti-depression drugs. However, for approaching the retro-biocatalysis of these drugs, 
some structural simplification was done since they only differ in substituents and their position of 
attachment at the phenyl ring and degree of alkylation (methyl) at the terminal amino group, as shown in 
Figure 22. 
The key structural features of the general structure (intermediate 14, Figure 22), were identified as the 
(S)-ether linkage at the C-2 carbon. Hence, logical disconnections based on these features were carried 
out as described below. The key structural feature of the molecule (S)-Fluoxetine is the chiral ether linkage 
(C2-O-C5), hence the appropriate disconnections would be that of the C5-O, C2-O bond and the adjacent C-
C bonds, C2-C3 and C3-C4. The disconnection of C1-C2 bond is not preferred since, forming that bond will 
require a rather tedious C-C bond forming chemistry involving benzene anion as a nucleophile. The 
benzene anion can be formed using superbases like LDA (Lithium di-isopropyl amine) but its highly 
reactivity nature may lead to various possibilities of non-regioselective side reactions.  
==PAGE:39==
36 
 
 
Figure 7. Proposed routes to 14. a = i) halohydrin dehalogenase, ii) H2, Pd/C, iii) N-alkylation; b = P450 monooxygenases or 
epoxisases; c = NH2R1/base; d = ADH/KRED; e = hydratase; f = i) LiAlH4/THF, ii) N-alkyation; g = N-alkylation; h = i) aldolase, ii) 
transaminase or reductive amination. 
The disconnection of C5-O bond appears to be an appealing disconnection since the hetero-atomic bond 
can be easily formed by employing metal mediated coupling chemistry. Beller and co-workers have 
demonstrated the formation of aryl-ethers (C-O bond formations at aryl positions) using Palladium-
catalysis [71]. However, the Palladium-catalyzed coupling between intermediate 13 and intermediate 24, 
might require protection of the secondary amino group, due to the nucleophilic nature of amines. Hence, 
the intermediate 13 can be envisioned as a nitrile or a nitro derivative. Therefore, after performing the 
coupling reaction, an in-situ hydrogenation of the nitrile or nitro functionality can be carried out to attain 
the amine functionality [72]. Moreover, disconnecting the C5-O bond results in unmasking the alcohol, 
resulting in the chiral alcohol intermediate 13 which is beneficial since many well-established chemistries 
exists to stereo-selectively generate the chirality and provides several sequential disconnection 
alternatives to involve biocatalytic transformations. Hence, disconnecting the C5-O bond proves as a 
lucrative starting point. 
Disconnecting the adjacent C3-C4 bond and neutralizing the (charged) synthons can lead to the chiral 
epoxide intermediate 15 and inorganic cyanide. However, the synthesis can be carried out by employing 
asymmetric synthesis approach or a resolution-based approach. Asymmetric epoxidation of styrene 
==PAGE:40==
37 
 
requires appropriate P450 monooxygenases or epoxidases to form the (S)-enantiomer of the epoxide in 
quantitative yields, followed by regio-selective cleavage of the epoxide at the β-position by nucleophilic 
cyanide, in the presence of an appropriate halohydrin dehalogenase. Employing chemical methods for the 
ring-opening reaction can be non-regioselective, since the comparatively stable benzylic carbocation 
intermediate (via SN1 pathway) is likely to be formed, resulting in the benzyl cyanide derivative. The 
resolution-based pathway requires non-stereoselective epoxidation of styrene, resulting in the racemic 
epoxide, following which, regio-selective cleavage of (S)-enantiomer of the epoxide can be carried out 
using appropriate halohydrin dehalogenases in conjunction with a cyanide-based nucleophile. However, 
the maximum yield in the resolution-based method can only reach 50 %, hence the asymmetric synthesis 
approach is preferred.  
The chiral alcohol can be generated by interconverting the alcohol group to a prochiral ketone 18, since 
appropriate oxidoreductases such as alcohol dehydrogenases (ADHs) and ketoreductases (KREDs) can 
stereo-selectively reduce the ketone. ADHs and KREDs require nicotinamide-based co-factors as the 
hydride source, which are expensive and hence, the oxidized co-factors (NAD or NADP) must be 
regenerated using a co-factor regenerating system. The co-factor regenerating system based on coupled 
substrates and coupled enzymes have been well-established for isolated enzymes [73]. 
Disconnecting the chiral C2-O bond along with the adjacent C3-H bond, can result in alkene intermediate 
19. Stereo and regio-selective hydrolysis of the alkene can be carried out enzymatically using appropriate 
hydratases.  
The chiral alcohol can also be generated from a prochiral aldehyde (22) using appropriate aldolases, which 
is also an alternative. Acetaldehyde being a common donor substrate which can be tolerated by aldolases, 
the required alcohol functionality at C2 position can be stereo-selectively formed. Following which, the 
aldehyde can be transformed to amine by employing enzymes such as transaminases or via chemical 
reductive amination techniques using methyl amine. 
 
 
 
5.1.2 (R,R)-Formoterol 
(R,R)-Formoterol (Figure 10) is a long-acting β2-agonist used in the treatment of asthma and COPD (chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease) [40]. There have been many synthetic entries, following different 
procedures for the enantio-selective preparation and diastereoselective separation techniques for (R,R)-
Formoterol [41, 42, 43]. One of the chemo-synthetic route as shown in Figure 11. 
==PAGE:41==
38 
 
 
Figure 8. Molecular structure of (R,R)-Formoterol 
 
Figure 9. A chemo-catalytic route to (R,R)-Formoterol, a = Ra-Ni, EtOH, H2; b = 120 0C, 20 h; c = Ra-Ni, HCOOH, semipreparative 
HPLC (separation); d = H2, Pd/C [42] 
As shown in the Figure 14, the condensation of the two intermediates chiral epoxide (33, intermediate A), 
and chiral amine (R-31, intermediate B) respectively, is simple and yields the required diastereomer 28 in 
good yields. The synthesis of (R,R)-Formoterol from intermediate A and intermediate B is shown in Figure 
14. The preparation of intermediate A and intermediate B using biocatalysis is known, as shown in Figure 
12 [44, 67]. Moreover, asymmetric biocatalytic synthesis of a compound (30a) closely resembling 
intermediate A has also been reported [45] involving microbial (Spingomonas paucimobilis) as shown in 
Figure 12. Biocatalytic routes for intermediate B using transaminases (asymmetric synthesis) [46] and 
lipases (resolution) [47] have also been reported in the literature.  
 
==PAGE:42==
39 
 
 
Figure 10. Chemo-enzymatic routes to key intermediates of (R,R)-Formoterol a = i) Br2/CHCl3, ii) BH3.THF; b = lipase, vinyl 
acetate; c = anhydrous K2CO3; d = EtNO2, ammonium acetate; e = LiAlH4; f = CALB, ethyl acetate, cat. Et3N. [67] 
However, a new biocatalytic route for intermediate A (Figure 15) can be imagined involving Baeyer-Villiger 
monooxygenases (BVMOs). The retro-biocatalysis involves FGI of the chiral epoxide group in intermediate 
A to intermediate 32, along with FGI of attached bromide to aldehyde through the alcohol functionality. 
Lastly, FGI of the chiral acyl functionality to methyl ketone, where forming the intermediate 35 involves a 
stereo and regio-selective Baeyer-Villiger oxidation using an appropriate BVMO. The intermediate A can 
also be formed from intermediate 36 using appropriate epoxidases. 
 
Figure 11. Proposed route to (R,R)-Formoterol. a = imine reductase, b = acid catalyzed Schiff base formation, c = acid catalyzed 
hydrolysis 
Another route can be envisioned as shown in Figure 13. Instead of carrying out four transformative steps, 
to transform the intermediate 34 to the epoxide 27, the intermediate 34 can be hydrolyzed to the chiral 
==PAGE:43==
40 
 
alcohol intermediate 34b. Following which, condensation of intermediate (R)-31 can yield the prochiral 
imine intermediate 34a. Lastly, catalytic hydrogenation of the intermediate 34a can be carried out to 
deprotect the phenolic hydroxy group (benzylic group removal) and reduce imine and nitro group, in a 
single step. 
 
Figure 12. Synthesis of (R,R)-Formoterol from key intermediates. a = BSA (Bis(trimethylsilyl)acetamide, DMSO; b = Al2O3; c = i) 
Fe/HCl, ii) HCOOH, iii) H2, Pd/C 
 
Figure 13. Routes proposed for chemo-enzymatic synthesis of (R,R)-Formoterol through retro-biocatalysis. a = Base catalyzed 
cyclization; b = hydrolysis, H2O; c = i) base catalyzed substitution, NaOH, ii) oxidation; d = Baeyer-Villiger monooxygenase, O2; e = 
P450 monooxygenase or Sharpless asymmetric epoxidation 
 
However, a new route can be imagined by simultaneously disconnecting C3-N bond to give intermediate 
(37a), followed by disconnecting the C1-C2 bond leading to aldehyde derivative 37. The three synthons 
(resulting from disconnecting two bonds) can be envisioned as the benzaldehyde derivative (37), methyl 
ketone (37b) and cyanide as shown in Figure 16. The C1-C2 bond can formed first in a stereo-selective 
manner, using appropriate hydroxynitrile lyases yielding the chiral nitrile intermediate. Following which, 
reduction of the nitrile to primary amine intermediate 37a can be carried out chemically (catalytic 
==PAGE:44==
41 
 
hydrogenation). The C-N bond (imine, (R)-33) can then be formed by reductive amination of intermediate 
37a and intermediate 25. Lastly, stereo-selective biocatalytic reduction of the imine can be carried out 
using appropriate imine reductases to yield the required stereochemistry. 
 
Figure 14. Proposed chemo-biocatalytic route to (R,R)-Formoterol. a = i) H2, Pd/C, ii) HCOOH; b = i) imine reductase; c = acid 
catalyzed condensation; d = i) hydroxynitrile lyase, ii) H2, Pd/C 
5.1.3 Human hNK-1 receptor antagonist 
The human neurokinin-1 receptor (hNK1) is a member of the seven-transmembrane G-protein coupled 
family of receptors and is primarily associated with sensory neurons in the periphery and specific areas of 
the CNS [48]. The general scaffold of the hNK-1 receptors as developed by Merck is shown in Figure 17. 
The traditional chemical synthesis of these hNK-1 receptor antagonists involves a convergent multi-step 
approach as shown in Figure 18 and Figure 19 [48]. 
 
==PAGE:45==
42 
 
 
Figure 15. General scaffold of human hNK-1 antagonist drugs and the studied variant 
 
 
Figure 16. Established chemo-catalytic routes to key intermediates to 41 and 44a/b. a = multistep syntheses sequence; b = 
NaBH4, MeOH (77 %); c = NaBH4, THF (97 %) or KRED [70]; d = for (a) NaH, Cl3CCN, for (b) aq. HBr. [68, 69]. 
==PAGE:46==
43 
 
 
Figure 17. Final construction of the scaffold for human hnK-1 antagonist drug. a = NaH,MeOH; b = multistep synthetic sequence 
[48]; c = multistep synthetic sequence [48] 
However, to simplify the synthetic route, a new intermediate can be imagined by disconnecting the C-O 
and C-N bonds as shown in Figure 20 generating intermediate 49. The idea is to react intermediate 49 and 
intermediate 43 via Michael addition in a stereo-selective manner, using a chiral auxiliary to generate 
intermediate 51 after hydrolysis as shown in Figure 21. Following which, the ketone 51 can be converted 
to the chiral amine 46 using an appropriate transaminase. Another route is to condense the ketone 51 
with the intermediate 53 or 54 to form the Schiff base. Following which the Schiff base can be stereo-
selectively reduced to give the target molecule 47 using appropriate imine reductases. 
==PAGE:47==
44 
 
 
Figure 18. A new intermediate 49, proposed for synthesizing hnK-1 antagonists. Disconnecting the C-O and C-N bond, gives 41a, 
followed by FGI of the amino and alcohol groups to alkene and ketone functionality respectively. 
 
Figure 19. Proposed chemo-biocatalytic route to hNK-1 receptor antagonist. a = condensaion of 52; b = asymmetric Michael 
addition of 43 using appropriate base, c = hydrolysis to remove, d = transamine, e = i) acid catalyzed condensation with 54; ii) 
imine reductase, f = base catalyzed condensation with 53 
==PAGE:48==
45 
 
 
 
 
5.1.4 (S)-Ontazolast 
 
 
Figure 20. Molecular structure of (S)-Ontazolast 
(S)-Ontazolast (Figure 22) is a potent inhibitor of calcium ionophore A23187-stimulated leukotriene B4 
(LTB4) biosynthesis in human peripheral blood leukocytes discovered by Boehringer Ingelheim. The 
synthetic route developed by Boehringer Ingelheim involved resolution of the racemic form of the amine 
intermediate 60 using 8-Bromo-camphor sulphonic acid, whereby the maximum theoretical yield is 50 % 
[74]. However, a scalable asymmetric synthetic route for (S)-Ontazolast was developed based on 
diastereoselective alkylation of chiral Schiff base as shown in Figure 23. The chiral Schiff base (57) was 
prepared from the amine intermediate (55) and a chiral auxiliary (R)-(+)-2-hydroxy-3-pinanone. 
Stoichiometric excess of the Cyclohexylmethyl halide (1.15 equivalents for Cyclohexylmethyl iodide and 2 
equivalents for Cyclohexylmethyl bromide), highly controlled reaction temperature of (-10 0C to 0 0C) and 
the availability of the chiral auxiliary are essentially requirements to furnish (S)-Ontazolast with > 99% d.e. 
(diastereomeric excess). Hence, such requirements can be overcome by identifying routes involving 
biocatalysis at key stages for synthesizing (S)-Ontazolast. 
==PAGE:49==
46 
 
 
Figure 21. Asymmetric chemical route to (S)-Ontazolast using chiral auxiliary 56. a = acid catalyzed Schiff base formation; b = 
asymmetric C-C bond formation; c = hydrolysis; d = condensation with 61 
The key structure feature of the molecule (S)-Ontazolast is the chiral amino group. Hence, a new route 
can be generated by disconnecting the bond C4-N (Figure 24), since the mentioned disconnection results 
in unmasking the chiral amino functionality. The C-N bond can be formed at the end of the synthetic 
sequence simply, by condensing the chiral amine 60 and imidazole intermediate 61. The chiral amino 
functionality (intermediate 60) can subsequently be formed from a prochiral ketone 60a using an 
appropriate transaminase, therefore, the most obvious choice of retro-biocatalysis is the interconversion 
of the amino functional group, in the intermediate 60 to a prochiral ketone intermediate 61. The class of 
transaminases which act on a wide range on ketones and are not restricted to the keto acid/ester 
substrate functionality can be involved. Such transaminases are termed as ω-transaminases and are 
dependent on the co-factor pyridoxamine 5’-phosphate (PMP) as both nitrogen and electron source. For 
synthesizing the ketone intermediate 60a, disconnecting the C-C bond in intermediate 60a is a viable 
option. Since the bond can be formed by condensing 2-Acetyl pyridine (62) and Cyclohexyl chloride (63) 
using an appropriate base. Thus, the asymmetric biocatalytic approach as mentioned by-passes the 
requirement of a chiral auxiliary and can also be carried out at ambient conditions.  
==PAGE:50==
47 
 
 
Figure 22. Proposed chemo-biocatalytic routes to (S)-Ontazolast. a = condensation with intermediate 61; b = transaminase; c = 
base catalyzed condensation; d = ammonia lyase, e = base catalyzed hydrolysis; f = base catalyzed condensation 
Another biocatalytic route can be envisioned from the chiral amine intermediate 60 by simultaneously 
disconnecting the C1-N bond and the adjacent C2-H bond. The disconnections result in the corresponding 
alkene intermediate (64) and ammonia, as shown in figure (). Biocatalytic hydroamination of the alkene 
intermediate 64, can be efficiently carried out by enzymes such as Amino mutase and β-methylaspartase 
[75]. Numerous chemical catalyzed hydroamination techniques have been developed, however inefficient 
co-ordination of amine (here, ammonia) and the alkene to the transition metal remains a main challenge 
in transition metal-catalyzed hydroaminations. The alkene intermediate 64 can be synthesized from 2-
Methyl pyridine (65), as shown in Figure 24. Ethylation of the aromatic nitrogen of 2-Methyl pyridine 
renders the methyl protons acidic, due to the quaternary nature of the nitrogen. Hence, appropriate base 
can be used to condense the intermediate 66 and intermediate 67. 
5.1.5 (S)-Ambrisentan 
(S)-Ambrisentan (Figure 26, 73) (under the brand names Letairis in United States and Volibris in Europe), 
is an endothelin-1 (ET-1) receptor antagonist and clinically used for the treatment of pulmonary arterial 
hypertension [76]. The commercial synthesis of (S)-Ambrisentan, as shown in Figure 25, involves the key 
chiral intermediate (S)-72. Condensation of the key intermediate (S)-72 with 4,6-dimethyl-2-
(methylsulphonyl)-pyrimidine gives (S)-Ambrisentan. The synthesis of S-(72) involves Darzens reaction, 
involving the condensation of methyl chloroacetate and benzophenone, resulting in the racemic epoxide 
intermediate 70. Following which, ring-opening of the epoxide with methanol in the presence of sodium 
methoxide gives the racemic alcohol 71. Ester hydrolysis of 71 gives the corresponding racemic carboxylic 
acid intermediate 72, which is chemically resolved using L-proline methyl ester hydrochloride to give the 
key intermediate (S)-72 in 50 % yield. The chemical resolution step hence directly reduces the overall yield 
==PAGE:51==
48 
 
by 50 %, since the undesired (R)-isomer of intermediate 72 cannot be easily transformed to the required 
(S)-isomer [77]. 
An asymmetric approach to (S)-Ambrisentan involves base catalyzed Knoevenagel condensation of 
benzophenone and methyl acetate, to give the α, β-unsaturated ester derivative (intermediate 69). 
Asymmetric epoxidation of the intermediate 69, results in the chiral S-epoxide (S)-70. Following which, 
Lewis acid mediated ring opening of the epoxide with methanol gives the chiral alcohol intermediate 72 
in its ester form. Condensation of the chiral alcohol ester intermediate 72 with 4,6-Dimethyl-2-
(methylsulphonyl)-pyrimidine followed by base catalyzed ester hydrolysis gives (S)-Ambrisentan [78]. 
However, huge quantities of solvents are required in the entire synthetic route along with extremely acidic 
conditions (approximately pH value near 1) for precipitative crystallization of (S)-Ambrisentan, generating 
highly acidic effluent and thus making the process non-sustainable. 
 
Figure 23. Established chemical routes to (S)-Ambrisentan. a = Chloro methyl acetate; b = methyl acetate; c = acid, Methanol; d = 
4,6-dimethyl-2-(methylsulphonyl)-pyrimidine, base; e = base catalyzed ester hydrolysis; f = resolution using L-proline Methyl 
ester, g = 4,6-dimethyl-2-(methylsulphonyl)-pyrimidine; h = Sharpless asymmetric epoxidation 
Biocatalytic routes (Figure 26) for preparing (S)-Ambrisentan can be realized by carrying out the retro-
biocatalysis, starting with disconnecting the C1-O bond, which results in the chiral alcohol key intermediate 
(S)-72. The pyrimidine substituent can be attached once (S)-72 is synthesized in its enantiopure form. 
Since chemical resolution of the racemic alcohol intermediate 72 results in a direct material loss by 50 %, 
appropriate bond disconnections and FGIs in (S)-72 can be carried out to incorporate asymmetric 
biocatalytic steps. 
==PAGE:52==
49 
 
 
Figure 24. Proposed chemo-biocatalytic routes to (S)-Ambrisentan. a = 4,6-dimethyl-2-(methylsulphonyl)-pyrimidine, base; b = 
lipase catalyzed resolution; c = acid hydrolysis using Methanol; d = base catalyzed condensation; e = acid catalyzed ester 
hydrolysis; f = ADH/KRED, g = ADH; h = acid catalyzed ester hydrolysis; i = O-methylation using acid/MeOH; j = epoxide 
hydrolase; k = acid catalyzed ester hydrolysis; l = O-methylation using acid/MeOH; m = aldolase 
A resolution-based route (route 1) can be generated by deracemizing the chiral intermediate (S)-72. As 
shown in Figure 26, the chiral alcohol can be generated from racemic 72 via lipase catalyzed hydrolysis of 
71, such that the (S)-isomer is selectively hydrolyzed. However, a maximum yield of 50 % can be obtained. 
A new route (route 2) can be proposed by initiating the retro-biocatalysis from the intermediate (S)-72, 
the interconversion of the carboxylic acid functionality in (S)-72 to the methyl ester functionality gives (S)-
71. Following which, interconverting the chiral alcohol functionality to the prochiral ketone (72) 
functionality results in loss of chirality in the molecule since the prochiral ketone intermediate (72) can be 
asymmetrically reduced to (S)-72 using an appropriate ADH or KRED. The ketone functionality in 72 can 
be interconverted to a racemic alcohol functionality, such that, the (R)-alcohol of the racemic mixture 71 
can selectively be oxidized to 72 using an appropriate ADH, followed by its asymmetric reduction to 
generate (S)-72. Hence, a resolution based biocatalytic oxido-reduction sequence can be carried out to 
deracemize the chiral alcohol 71. Moreover, since the solubility of esters is typically lower than that of the 
==PAGE:53==
50 
 
corresponding carboxylic acids in the frequently observed aqueous reaction medium for biocatalysis, the 
mentioned biocatalytic deracemization can also be carried out starting with the carboxylic acid derivative 
instead of its methyl ester. 
Since ADH catalyzed oxidation of alcohols and KRED catalyzed reduction of prochiral ketones require 
complementary co-factors, NAD or NADP and NADH or NADPH respectively, the deracemization can be 
carried out in-situ to serve the purpose of co-factor recycling (Figure 18). The advantage gained by 
employing an in-situ co-factor recycling system as mentioned is, that the deracemization can be carried 
out in a single step and employing separate co-factor recycling systems for the reduced (NADH or NADPH) 
and oxidized co-factor (NAD or NADP) becomes redundant. However, for such a system to efficiently be 
carried out, appropriate ADHs or KREDs exhibiting activity for such bulky substrate should be available 
(through screening) or made available through protein engineering and the chosen enzymes should also 
have opposite stereo-preferences. Nevertheless, the one-pot oxido-reduction cascade should be 
developed for commercial purposes and is not so relevant during the route scouting phase, where 
commercially available enzymes are screened for minimal activity.    
A different route (route 3) can be envisioned by disconnecting the O-Me ether linkage, resulting in the 
diol functionality (S)-74, as shown in Figure 26. Following which, the C3-O bond can be disconnected, and 
the resulting functionality can be interconverted to the chiral epoxide. The chiral epoxide can be 
generated from the alkene functionality (intermediate 69) using an appropriate P450 monooxygenase or 
epoxidase. Ring-opening of the epoxide can be carried out using an appropriate epoxide hydrolase to yield 
the diol ((S)-74) or via Lewis-acid catalyzed addition of methanol to directly attain (S)-71. 
Another possibility is the disconnection of the C2-C3 bond (route 4), resulting in the intermediates 68 and 
75. Since hydroxy-esters are generally not the common donor substrates for aldolases, three alternatives 
can be proposed, (1) the intermediate 75 can be envisioned as 2-hydroxy acetaldehyde, which is a 
common donor substrate for aldolases, (2) the intermediate 75 can be envisioned as hydroxyacetone, 
which also is a common donor substrate for aldolases and (3) protein engineering of appropriate aldolases 
to use intermediate 75 as a donor substrate. 
 
5.2 Activity assay of alcohol dehydrogenases and ketoreductases 
 
5.2.1 Choosing initial concentration of components for spectrophotometric assay and 
time-course experiments 
Due to the divergent features of enzymes, a generalization of the enzyme assay with respect to the 
concentrations of individual components is not possible. Hence, the assay must be performed at various 
concentrations of the assay components. However, initial concentration of the assay components such as 
the substrate, co-factor and the enzyme were rationally chosen, and further experiments were carried 
out by changing the concentration relative to each other. Different initial concentrations were chosen for 
==PAGE:54==
51 
 
the two assay methodologies used in this work, namely spectrophotometric detection and time-course 
reactions in batch mode. 
5.2.1.1 Substrate concentration 
Ideally the concentration of the substrate, should be much higher than the enzyme concentration 
(depending upon the KM value) to achieve maximum saturation of the enzyme active sites. However, in 
this case reduced substrate loading had to be implemented due to the poorly water-soluble nature of the 
substrate (alcohol and ketone). The substrates were dissolved in water miscible solvents like dimethyl 
sulphoxide (DMSO) and tetrahydrofuran (THF) and introduced in the assay in order to homogenize the 
reaction mixture. To avoid any effect on the enzyme activity due to the organic solvent, the amount of 
organic solvents was kept as low as possible. However, increasing the substrate loading by using a more 
concentrated stock solution of substrates, leads to precipitation, hence much lower substrate 
concentrations were used to ensure homogeneous reaction mixtures and to avoid any experimental 
errors due to scattering [86]. The stock solution of the alcohol and ketone were thus prepared at 
concentrations of 5 mM and 3 mM, such that the final concentration in the cuvette (0.25 mM and 0.105 
mM respectively) could be reached by pipetting 50 μL and 35 μL of respective solutions. However, 
employing rather low concentrations of poorly water-soluble substrates in spectrophotometric assays 
poses a limitation, since the substrate concentration may not be high enough to saturate the enzyme, 
corresponding to a lower rate of reaction. Hence, longer period of observation is required to detect any 
changes in the total absorbance of the reaction mixture. 
5.2.1.2 Co-factor concentration 
Thermodynamics of the transformation catalyzed by ADHs and KREDs, favor the reductive mode, where 
the hydride is transferred from the reduced co-factor (NADPH/NADH) to the carbonyl-containing 
substrate [89]. Hence, to drive the thermodynamics in the oxidative directions for ADH catalyzed 
reactions, the co-factor (NAD/NADP) must be provided in excess. The co-factors NAD and NADP have low 
molar absorptivity at 340 nm compared to that of NADH and NADPH. Hence spectrophotometric assay of 
ADHs relies on the principle of measuring the increasing absorbance at 340 nm. The increasing values of 
absorbance depict the formation of NADH and NADPH respectively. Hence, for qualitative screening of 
ADHs for substrate-specific activity, higher initial concentrations (1 mM) of NAD/NADP relative to 
substrate concentration can be conveniently used and also proves advantageous in driving the 
transformation towards oxidative direction. However, to quantitatively measure the initial reaction rate, 
the concentration must be chosen carefully, such that the absorbance remains below 1 at the end for 
accurate results. 
==PAGE:55==
52 
 
 
Figure 43. Absorbance of NADPH at various concentration. red = 1 mM; purple = 0.8 mM; green = 0.5 mM; dark blue = 0.3 mM; 
light blue = 0.1 mM 
However, in the case of the KRED assay, reduced co-factors NADH/NADPH serve as the hydride source. 
Qualitative and quantitative spectrophotometric assay of KREDs is based on the same principle, however 
the decrease in absorption is measured at 340 nm, indicating consumption of NADH/NADPH. Hence 
choosing their initial concentration is important for the total absorbance to lie below 1. The main assay 
components absorbing significantly at 340 nm is NADPH, as shown in Figure 43. Hence, the initial 
concentration of NADPH was chosen to be 0.1 mM respectively. 
 
5.2.1.3 Enzyme concentration 
The initial concentrations of ADHs and KREDs used in the spectrophotometric assay were chosen to be 
0.2 gL-1 and 0.5 gL-1 respectively to start with.  
5.2.2 
Spectrophotometric screening of ADHs and KREDs 
 
Experimental sets A, B, C and D: 
 
Since the co-factor preferences of the available ADHs were not known, both the oxidized co-factors, 
namely NADP and NAD were tested for each of the ADHs. Figures 27-32 shows the total absorbance 
of the spectrophotometric screening of ADH 280, ADH 50 and ADH 30, using NADP and NAD as the 
cofactors respectively, observed at 340 nm for a period of 2 minutes. The concentrations of the 
assay were varied as mentioned in Tables 5-8. Ideally, the absorption of the mixture depends largely 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
220
270
320
370
420
470
Absorbance
Wavelength nm
Absorption vs wavelength for 
different concentrations of NADPH
==PAGE:56==
53 
 
on the concentration of the reduced co-factor (NADPH/NADH) formed. Hence, an enzyme showing 
activity for the substrate should consume the oxidized cofactor (NADP/NAD) and generate 
NADPH/NADH respectively such that the total absorbance of the mixture increases, however it is 
observed that the total absorbance of the reaction mixture stays constant, indicating no reaction. 
However, for ADH 280 and ADH 30 under specific concentrations of the components, unexpected 
results were obtained. For assay using NADP, the experiments D and E (for ADH 280) and 
experiment C (for ADH 30) the total absorbances observed showed a decreasing trend over two 
minutes of observation, as shown in Figure 27 and Figure 28. This observation is contrary to the 
expected results which is an increase in total absorbance due to the formed NADHP thus indicating 
activity or the absorbance remaining constant, indicating no activity.  
 
Similar findings were made when NAD was used as the co-factor instead of NADP. Observations of 
the assay using NADP, a decreasing trend of recorded absorbances were observed under certain 
concentrations of the assay components which are experiment E (for ADH 280), experiment C (for 
ADH 30) and experiment C (for ADH 50), as shown in Figure 30-31. However, since the total change 
in observation over the course of observation is small, that is less than 0.01 units, the effect can be 
because of scattering due to the high relative protein concentration in the reaction cuvette [86]. 
 
 
Figure 25. Results for spectrophotometric screening experiments (set A) conducted for screening ADH 280, experiments A, B, C, D 
and E. 
 
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
Absorbance
Time (seconds)
Absorbance vs Time ADH 280 
using NADP
A
B
C
E
D
==PAGE:57==
54 
 
 
Figure 26. Results for spectrophotometric screening experiments (set C) conducted for screening ADH 30, experiments A, B, C 
 
Figure 27. Results for spectrophotometric screening experiments (set B) conducted for screening ADH 50, experiments A, B, C 
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0
11
22
33
44
55
66
77
88
99
110
Absorbance
Time (seconds)
Absorbance vs Time ADH 30 
using NADP
A
B
C
-0.01
0.01
0.03
0.05
0.07
0.09
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
Absorbance
Time (seconds)
Absorbance vs Time ADH 50 using 
NADP
A
B
C
==PAGE:58==
55 
 
 
Figure 28. Results for spectrophotometric screening experiments (set A) conducted for screening ADH 50, experiments A, B, C, D, 
E 
 
Figure 29. Results for spectrophotometric screening experiments (set B) conducted for screening ADH 50, experiments A, B, C 
 
 
 
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
Absorbance
Time (seconds)
Absorbance vs Time ADH 280 
using NAD
A
C
D
E
B
-0.01
0.01
0.03
0.05
0.07
0.09
0
9
18
27
36
45
54
63
72
81
90
99
108
117
Absorbance
Time (seconds)
Absorbance vs Time ADH 50 using 
NAD
A
B
C
==PAGE:59==
56 
 
 
Figure 30. Results for spectrophotometric screening experiments (set C) conducted for screening ADH 30, experiments A, B, C 
 
 
Figures 33-37 shows the total absorbance of the spectrophotometric screening of KRED 252, AKR 150, 
KRED 035, KRED 112 and KRED 150 using NADPH as the cofactor, observed at 340 nm for a period of 2 
minutes. However, except for KRED 252, KRED 112 and KRED 150, no significant decrease in the 
absorbance for other ketoreductases was noted with different concentration of the assay components 
as shown in Figures 33, Figure 36 and Figure 37, implying that KRED 035 and AKR 150 are not active 
against the ketone substrate. However, for KRED 035 and AKR 150, it is a possibility that the 
concentrations used are very low to observe any significant activity over the period of observation. 
Moreover, for KRED 252, KRED 112 and KRED 150 the decrease in the absorbance is not significant. 
Hence, this ambiguity in the result was tested by carrying out time-course experiments.   
 
Figure 31. Results for spectrophotometric screening experiments (set D) conducted for screening KRED 252, experiments A, B, C, 
D, E 
 
-0.01
0.01
0.03
0.05
0.07
0.09
0
9
18
27
36
45
54
63
72
81
90
99
108
117
Absorbance
Time (seconds)
Absorbance vs Time ADH 30 using 
NAD
B
C
A
0
0.5
1
0
7
14
21
28
35
42
49
56
63
70
77
84
91
98
105
112
119
Absorbance
Time (seconds)
Absorbance vs Time KRED 252 using 
NADPH
A
B
C
D
E
==PAGE:60==
57 
 
 
Figure 32. Results for spectrophotometric screening experiments (set D) conducted for screening AKR 150, experiments A, B, C, 
D, E 
 
Figure 33. Results for spectrophotometric screening experiments (set D) conducted for screening KRED 035, experiments A, B, C, 
D, E 
 
Figure 34. Results for spectrophotometric screening experiments (set D) conducted for screening KRED 112, experiments A, B, C, 
D, E 
0
0.5
1
0
7
14
21
28
35
42
49
56
63
70
77
84
91
98
105
112
119
Absorbance
Time (seconds)
Absorbance vs Time AKR 150 using 
NADPH
A
B
C
D
E
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
0
7
14
21
28
35
42
49
56
63
70
77
84
91
98
105
112
119
Absorbance
Time (seconds)
Absorbance vs Time KRED 035 using 
NADPH
A
B
C
E
0
0.5
1
1.5
0
7
14
21
28
35
42
49
56
63
70
77
84
91
98
105
112
119
Absorbance
Time (seconds)
Absorbance vs Time KRED 112 using 
NADPH
A
B
C
E
==PAGE:61==
58 
 
 
 
Figure 35. Results for spectrophotometric screening experiments (set D) conducted for screening KRED 252, experiments A, B, C, 
D, E 
In indirect screening methods such as the spectrophotometry, the extent of reaction is measured based 
on the consumption or generation of NADH or NADPH. Hence, while screening NADH or NADPH (or their 
oxidized co-factors) dependent enzymes such as ketoreductases and dehydrogenases, assurance about 
their substrate-specific activity can be given if the changes in total absorbance are above 0.1 units [86]. 
Since for lower values the result can be highly ambiguous due to in the results of experimental error due 
to scattering or decomposition of assay components, as seen for KREDs 252, KRED 112 and KRED 150. 
Hence, in such cases time-course screening for prolonged period is essential to directly measure the 
product formation. 
5.2.3 Batch-mode screening of ADHs and KREDs 
Sets E, F, G and H 
 
The real conversion in dehydrogenase and ketoreductase catalysis, using the available enzymes was 
tested by carrying out reactions in batch-mode over a longer period of time and employing co-factor 
regenerating system as mentioned in Table 9. Co-factor regeneration is employed to drive the 
dehydrogenase and ketoreductase reaction towards completion by making sure that the co-factors are 
not the limiting component in the assay such that the available ADHs and KREDs are qualitatively 
screening for activity. For KREDs, the co-factor was regenerated by co-oxidizing glucose (using the 
oxidized co-factor NADP) using glucose dehydrogenase. The regeneration of NAD/NADP is more 
complicated than regenerating NADH/NADPH. However, techniques for regenerating NAD/NADP such as 
the coupled-substrate approach and coupled enzyme approach are now well established [91]. Two 
different co-factor regenerating systems were used in the dehydrogenase time-course screening assay. 
Acetone was used to consume the formed NADPH and generate NADP, using the same dehydrogenase, 
and the other involved using NADPH oxidase (NOX) to oxidize NADPH back to NADP using molecular 
oxygen. The NOx enzyme requires sufficient concentration of dissolved oxygen to efficiently carry out 
the oxidation of NADPH. However, the solubility of molecular oxygen in water is extremely low at 30 0C 
(236.7 μM). Hence, to drive the reactions involving NADP regeneration using the NOx enzyme mixtures, 
0
0.5
1
0
7
14
21
28
35
42
49
56
63
70
77
84
91
98
105
112
119
Absorbance
Time (seconds)
Absorbance vs Time KRED 150 using 
NADPH
B
C
D
E
==PAGE:62==
59 
 
molecular oxygen was bubbled in the mixture at the rate of 30 mL min-1. In the case of dehydrogenases, 
Nox enzyme was used to regenerate the reduced co-factor. Experiments was carried out with (set H, 
Table 9) and without (sets F and G, Table 9) introducing pure oxygen. However, introducing oxygen at 
the mentioned flow rate led to increased foaming, hence the flow rate had to be reduced. The reduced 
flow rate meant lower amounts of equilibrium concentration of oxygen in the reaction mixture, which 
may hinder the rate of NADP regeneration. Hence this appears as a drawback of the time-course 
screening methodology, since optimal oxygen concentration cannot be reached for efficient 
regeneration of NADP. In the coupled-substrate method, where acetone was used to regenerate NADP 
using the same dehydrogenase, much higher concentrations of acetone are required. Hence a risk of 
inhibiting the dehydrogenase arises, which may result in inconclusive results. Since ADHs favor the 
reduction of the carbonyl containing substrate thus consuming NADH or NADPH over the oxidation of 
alcohol substrate, higher co-factor concentration is demanded due to the reaction thermodynamics.  
The time-course experiments for assaying the activity of the available KREDs were carried out using the 
concentrations as mentioned in Table 9, set I. A higher substrate concentration was used (10 mM), along 
with a higher concentration of NADPH (3.75 mM) as compared to spectrophotometric screening 
experiments for screening KREDs, along with co-factor recycling using glucose/GDH. Under such used 
conditions, where sufficient concentrations of the co-factor regenerating components were introduced, 
it was likely to expect activity for the available ADHs and KREDs after running the reaction for at least 24 
hours. However, no activity was detected. Hence this can be attributed to the extremely low affinity of 
the available ADHs and KREDs to their substrate, alcohol and ketone respectively. Moreover, the alcohol 
and ketone being highly bulky, some form of protein engineering of the available enzymes is required. 
However, due to lack of time, protein engineering was not chosen to be performed. 
All the reactions carried out for screening the available ADHs and KREDs using the batch-mode screening 
method were analyzed using HPLC based on the area percentage, since detecting qualitative conversion 
is of interest. The qualitative conversion was detected based on the obtained area-percentage at the 
respective retention time of the compound. Since, retention time and the area-percentage of the 
ketone (substrate) and the product (alcohol) corresponding to the initial and final concentrations 
respectively was known, any conversion obtained was essentially assumed to lie within this range. 
Sequential reaction samples were analyzed after 4 and 24 hours, however none of the available KREDs 
and ADHs were found to be active. 
However, since the spectrophotometric results for KRED 252, KRED 150 and KRED 112 indicated an 
ambiguous activity towards the ketone (from the decrease in absorption with time), but the time-course 
screening of the same enzymes did not show any conversion, hence the sensitivity of the screening 
methodology was questioned. 
5.2.4 Sensitivity of screening methodologies 
Sets I and J 
The ambiguity in the observed results with respect to the sensitivity of the screening methodology for 
KRED 252, KRED 150 and KRED 112 was tested by screening a low molecular weight and a rather simple 
==PAGE:63==
60 
 
substrate which might be a potential substrate for the KREDs. Acetophenone was then chosen as a 
model substrate to screen the available ketoreductases using both methods. Concentrations of the 
assay components chosen are mentioned in Table 15 and Table 16. Figure 38 and Figure 39 shows the 
results of the spectrophotometric screening of the three ketoreductases, where the absorbance was 
measured at 340 nm for a period of two minutes. 
 
Figure 36. Results of spectrophotometric screening experiments (set I) conducted using acetophenone for screening KRED 112. 
Red = experiment 16; blue = experiment 15 
 
 
Figure 37.Results of spectrophotometric screening experiments (set I) conducted using acetophenone for screening KRED 252. 
Red = experiment 16; blue = experiment 15 
 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
6
12
18
24
30
36
42
48
54
60
66
72
78
84
90
96
102
108
114
Absorbance
Time (seconds)
Absorbance vs Time KRED 112 using 
NADPH
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
Absorbance vs Time KRED 252 using 
NADPH
==PAGE:64==
61 
 
 
Figure 38.Results of spectrophotometric screening experiments (set I) conducted using acetophenone for screening KRED 150. 
Red = experiment 16; blue = experiment 15 
For the time-course experiments based on acetophenone the total reaction time was 24 hours, which 
was assumed to be sufficient for minimal conversion to take place. These experiments were analyzed 
using the GC instrument (gas chromatography). The initial concentration and the corresponding 
retention time of acetophenone was known. Though, the analysis of the retention time and final 
concentrations (assuming 100% conversion) of the product (2-Phenylethanol) was not carried out, the 
decrease in the relative concentration of acetophenone, based on area percentage from the 
chromatographic analysis was chosen to be the basis for qualitative screening. The results of the 
spectrophotometric screening (Figure 38-40) shows inappreciable decrease in the total absorbance at 
340 nm over 2 minutes of observation for KRED 252 and KRED 150. However, the rate of decrease of 
total absorbance was almost constant (Figure 39 and Figure 40) as the concentration of the enzyme is 
increased from 0.5 gL-1 to 1 gL-1. Whereas, this decrease in the absorbance from spectrophotometric 
screening cannot be correlated to the actual depletion of acetophenone since the batch-mode screening 
experiments do not corroborate the result obtained from sequential sampling after 1 hour, 4 hours and 
24 hours. However, to achieve distinct results from the spectrophotometric screening, instead of 
acetophenone, an even more simpler ketone was chosen to be screened for activity using the two 
methods. 
Figures 41-43 show the results of the spectrophotometric assay, carried using KRED 252, KRED 150 and 
KRED 112 using acetone as the substrate. For KRED 252 and KRED 150, the rate of decrease of total 
absorption at 340 nm consistently increases as the concentration of enzyme is increased from 0.2 gL-1 to 
1 gL-1 as shown in Table 18, which positively indicates activity of those enzymes towards acetone. The 
linear decrease observed when the enzyme concentration is 0.2 gL-1 and 0.5 gL-1 as compared to the 
enzyme concentration of 0.8 gL-1 and 1 gL-1 suggest that the initial concentration of acetone (20 mM) 
saturates the enzyme, and absorbances can be measured in the region of maximum reaction velocity 
(VMAX). Moreover, the rate of reaction (corresponding to the decrease in total absorbance) observed at 
enzyme concentration of 0.8 gL-1 and 1 gL-1 are non-linear, suggesting that the initial rate (VMAX) is 
reached early due to higher enzyme concentration. However, observing the linear part of the curve, the 
initial rate of reaction for both concentrations appear to be similar. Such an observation can be 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
6
12
18
24
30
36
42
48
54
60
66
72
78
84
90
96
102
108
114
Absorbance
Time (seconds)
Absorbance vs Time KRED 150 using 
NADPH
==PAGE:65==
62 
 
attributed to enzyme inhibition due to acetone or isopropanol [92]. In the case of KRED 112, for enzyme 
concentrations of 0.2 gL-1, 0.5 gL-1 and 0.8 gL-1, the rate of decrease of total absorbance is low as 
compared to that at 1 gL-1, suggesting enzyme inhibition at 20 mM of acetone. However, when the 
concentration is increased to 1 gL-1, sufficient activity is observed. Hence, from the results of 
spectrophotometric screening of KRED 252, KRED 112 and KRED 150, conclusion can be drawn that all 
the mentioned KREDs are active for acetone. 
 
 
Figure 39. Results of spectrophotometric screening experiments for KRED 252 using acetone. Red = experiment 19, green = 
experiment 20, purple = experiment 21, blue = experiment 22 
 
 
Figure 40. Results of spectrophotometric screening experiments for KRED 150 using acetone. Red = experiment 19, green = 
experiment 20, purple = experiment 21, blue = experiment 22 
 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
Absorbance
Time (seconds)
Absorbance vs Time KRED 252 using NADPH
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
Absorbance
Time (seconds)
Absorbance vs Time KRED 150 using NADPH
==PAGE:66==
63 
 
 
Figure 41. Results of spectrophotometric screening experiments for KRED 112 using acetone. Red = experiment 19, green = 
experiment 20, purple = experiment 21, blue = experiment 22 
 
6 Conclusion 
Choosing the initial concentrations of the substrate and enzyme in the case of dehydrogenases and 
ketoreductases hence is a challenging task, because detectable signals can only be observed if the assay 
concentrations are within a range highly specific to the enzyme. For qualitative screening purposes, 
indication of activity is enough, even if the activity profile follows a linear decrease in absorption (KRED 
112 – experiment 22; Figure 43, KRED 252 - experiments 19 and 20 Figure 41; KRED 150 - experiments 
19, 20, 21, 22) or non-linear decrease in absorption (KRED 252 - experiment 21, 22 Figure 41). For 
spectrophotometric screening, there are limitations on the initial concentrations of the co-factor (NADH 
or NADPH) to be used. Since, the Beer-Lambert’s law, which is the principle behind the 
spectrophotometric detection, is valid only for dilute solution corresponding to absorption values less 
than unity (between 0 and 1). Above which, the molar absorptivity varies non-linearly with 
concentration. Since the assay measures the depletion of NADPH, the starting concentrations of NADPH 
invariably must be kept low, such that the total absorbance remains below 1. Hence, this limits the 
maximum concentration of NADPH or NADH which can be used. In turn, to drive the reaction with a 
detectable rate, substrate concentrations demanded by the enzyme are much higher compared to the 
enzyme itself, for saturation. Significant absorption due to the substrate at 340 nm also may further 
reduce the usable substrate concentration, hence a measurable rate may not be achieved leading to 
false-positive results. However, factors such as enzyme inhibition, enzyme stability and quantitative 
analysis of the respective conversion should be evaluated only after enzymes active towards the 
substrate are screened. Since only a single combination of the assay components can be tested at once, 
the spectrophotometric method can be time-intensive. Moreover, in the spectrophotometric method of 
enzyme screening used for ADHs and KREDs, the extent of reaction was monitored indirectly by 
detecting the concentration of co-factor (NADH/NADPH), hence this method does not allow co-factor 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
Absorbance
Time (seconds)
Absorbance vs Time KRED 112 using NADPH
==PAGE:67==
64 
 
regeneration. Thus, a limitation of indirect detection is that stoichiometric amounts of co-factors are 
required to drive the reaction to completion. However, spectrophotometric screening can be carried out 
quickly over shorted time-intervals and is cost-efficient. 
However, such limitations can be overcome by employing reactions in batch-mode, where the 
concentration of substrate and product and not co-factors are measured directly using HPLC, GC or any 
other technique. Generally, batch-mode reactions are monitored after a longer period of time, to ensure 
sufficient conversion. This ensures accurate screening of enzymes; however, the method can be time-
consuming and tedious, due to the requirements of handling the reactions manually. 
For fast and efficient screening of enzymes, concurrent screening of a larger enzyme library containing 
enzymes with different substrate specificities should be carried out. The 96-well plate method is highly 
efficient, since a larger number of enzymes can be screened at a time and at a definite assay condition. 
However, the results of enzyme screening also depend upon the sample-size which was tested. Since in 
this case, a small sample-size of enzymes was available which included three ADHs and five KREDs. 
Hence it is a possibility that none of the available enzymes have affinity towards the alcohol and ketone 
substrate, as concluded from the batch-mode screening in the case presented. A larger library of 
enzymes should be tested to increase the chances of finding active enzymes towards such a highly 
functionalized and bulky substrate. Wild-type enzyme generally may not be active against the bulky and 
highly functionalized substrates as used. Hence, due to the diverse nature of enzymes and unknown 
substrate specificities, the chance of finding active enzymes out of a small sample-size remain low. 
Moreover, the substrate being highly non-natural for ADHs and KREDs, the enzyme library must contain 
recombinant enzymes. Hence, the enzyme library should also contain varieties of recombinant enzymes, 
which have been engineered specific to the substrate.  
From a wider perspective, retro-biocatalysis can hence be utilized as a tool for guiding the protein 
engineering of the available enzymes using techniques such as rational design [93] and directed 
evolution [94]. Since, retro-biocatalysis is itself a tool to generate routes to the target compound such 
that biocatalytic steps can be included, hence an ideal route can be identified based on the enzyme 
required. Moreover, since choosing the enzyme requires intensive screening, a substrate specific 
approach to engineering the available enzymes would be helpful. Protein engineering is an essential part 
of developing the bioprocess, after finding active enzymes for the route. However, since retro-
biocatalysis results in generating routes which might have different starting compounds, these 
compounds have a limited chance of finding affinity towards the available enzymes. Hence, protein 
engineering can be used to produce recombinant forms of available enzymes based on the substrate 
involved. Not only will this approach increase the chances of finding active enzymes, it also can help in 
guiding the protein engineering of the active enzymes for further engineering from the perspective of 
developing a stable and highly efficient enzyme for the bioprocess. Careful examination of the three-
dimensional structures of the available enzymes using molecular modelling, NMR spectroscopy, X-ray 
diffraction of crystals and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) can be carried out to initiate the 
engineering of available enzymes with respect to the designated substrate. 
 
==PAGE:68==
65 
 
 
7 References 
 
1. Woodley, J. M. "Choice of biocatalyst form for scalable processes." Biochem Soc Trans.(2006): 
301-303. 
2. Truppo, M D. "Biocatalysis in the pharmaceutical industry: the need for speed." ACS Medicinal 
Chemistry Letters 8.5 (2017): 476-480. 
3. Bettina M., et al. "New generation of biocatalysts for organic synthesis." Angewandte Chemie 
International Edition53.12 (2014): 3070-3095. 
4. Service R F. "Surviving the blockbuster syndrome." Science (New York, NY) 303.5665 (2004): 1796. 
5. Pollard, David J., and Woodley J.M. "Biocatalysis for pharmaceutical intermediates: the future is 
now." TRENDS in Biotechnology 25.2 (2007): 66-73. 
6. Turner, N J., and O'reilly E. "Biocatalytic retrosynthesis." Nature chemical biology 9.5 (2013): 285. 
7. Bornscheuer, U, de Souza R, and Leandro SM "A retrosynthesis approach for biocatalysis in 
organic synthesis." Chemistry-A European Journal (2017). 
8. Caswell, J M., "Engineering and application of P450 monooxygenases in pharmaceutical and 
metabolite synthesis." Current opinion in chemical biology 17.2 (2013): 271-275. 
9. Zhang, Wei, "Enantioselective epoxidation of unfunctionalized olefins catalyzed by salen 
manganese complexes." Journal of the American Chemical Society 112.7 (1990): 2801-2803. 
10. Katsuki, Tsutomu, and Sharpless B.K. "The first practical method for asymmetric 
epoxidation." Journal of the American Chemical Society 102.18 (1980): 5974-5976. 
11. Chartrain, M. "Bioconversion of indene to cis (1S, 2R) indandiol and trans (1R, 2R) indandiol by 
Rhodococcus species." Journal of fermentation and bioengineering 86.6 (1998): 550-558. 
12. Harrold, M W. "Importance of functional group chemistry in the drug selection process: case 
study." Am J Pharm Educ62.2 (1998): 213-218. 
13. Patrick, GL. An introduction to medicinal chemistry. Oxford university press, 2013. 
14. Andrews P. "Functional groups, drug-receptor interactions and drug design." Trends in 
Pharmacological Sciences 7 (1986): 148-151. 
15. Korbekandi, H. et al. "Reduction of aliphatic nitro groups using an obligately anaerobic whole cell 
biocatalyst." Enzyme and Microbial Technology 42.4 (2008): 308-314. 
16. Mathew, Sam, and Hyungdon Yun. "ω-Transaminases for the production of optically pure amines 
and unnatural amino acids." Acs Catalysis 2.6 (2012): 993-1001. 
17. Guo, Fei, and Per Berglund. "Transaminase biocatalysis: optimization and application." Green 
Chemistry 19.2 (2017): 333-360. 
18. Savile, C K., et al. "Biocatalytic asymmetric synthesis of chiral amines from ketones applied to 
sitagliptin manufacture." Science 329.5989 (2010): 305-309. 
19. Dussa N, Yatcherla S R, Meenakshisunderam S., Indian Patent, IN 2013CH00725, 2005 
20. W. Fan, P. Ding, Chinese Patent, CN 104131048, 2004. 
==PAGE:69==
66 
 
21. de Lange, Ben, et al. "Asymmetric Synthesis of (S)‐2‐Indolinecarboxylic Acid by Combining 
Biocatalysis and Homogeneous Catalysis." ChemCatChem 3.2 (2011): 289-292. 
22. Dean, S M., Greenberg, and Chi‐Huey Wong. "Recent advances in aldolase‐catalyzed asymmetric 
synthesis." Advanced Synthesis & Catalysis 349.8‐9 (2007): 1308-1320. 
23. Brovetto, M, et al. "C− C bond-forming lyases in organic synthesis." Chemical reviews 111.7 
(2011): 4346-4403. 
24. Schmidt, N G., Eger E, and Kroutil W. "Building Bridges: Biocatalytic C–C-Bond Formation toward 
Multifunctional Products." ACS catalysis 6.7 (2016): 4286-4311. 
25. Harris, T. K., and Keshwani M. M. "Measurement of enzyme activity." Methods in enzymology. 
Vol. 463. Academic Press, 2009. 57-71. 
26. Menten, Leonor, and Michaelis M I "Die kinetik der invertinwirkung." Biochem Z 49 (1913): 333-
369. 
27. Bisswanger, H., 2008. Enzyme Kinetics, Principles and Methods, 2nd ed. Wiley-VCH,Weinheim. 
28. Wagner, Fred W., et al. "Physical and enzymatic properties of a class III isozyme of human liver 
alcohol dehydrogenase:. chi.-ADH." Biochemistry 23.10 (1984): 2193-2199. 
29. Truppo, M D.,Pollard D, and Devine P "Enzyme-catalyzed enantioselective diaryl ketone 
reductions." Organic letters 9.2 (2007): 335-338. 
30. Rao, D R et al. "Process for the Preparation of an Endothelin Receptor Antagonist." U.S. Patent 
Application No. 14/352,917. 
31. Rodríguez, C, et al. "Steric vs. electronic effects in the Lactobacillus brevis ADH-catalyzed 
bioreduction of ketones." Organic & biomolecular chemistry 12.4 (2014): 673-681. 
32. Green, A A. "The preparation of acetate and phosphate buffer solutions of known pH and ionic 
strength." Journal of the American Chemical Society 55.6 (1933): 2331-2336. 
33. Hilger, Arlene B., Kendel I. Thomas, and Helmut H. Krause. "The effects of several buffers on 
growth and phosphorus nutrition of selected ectomycorrhizal fungi." Soil Biology and 
Biochemistry 18.1 (1986): 61-67. 
34. Wenthur, Cody J., Megan R. Bennett, and Craig W. Lindsley. "Classics in chemical neuroscience: 
fluoxetine (Prozac)." ACS chemical neuroscience 5.1 (2013): 14-23. 
35. Gao, Y., and K. B. Sharpless. "Asymmetric synthesis of both enantiomers of tomoxetine and 
fluoxetine. Selective reduction of 2, 3-epoxycinnamyl alcohol with Red-Al." The Journal of Organic 
Chemistry 53.17 (1988): 4081-4084. 
36. Pandey, Rajesh Kumar, Rodney A. Fernandes, and Pradeep Kumar. "An asymmetric 
dihydroxylation route to enantiomerically pure norfluoxetine and fluoxetine." Tetrahedron 
letters 43.25 (2002): 4425-4426. 
37. Ali I S, Sudalai A, Tetrahedron Letters; “Pd-Catalyzed kinetic resolution of benzylic alcohols: a 
practical synthesis of (R)-tomoxetine and (S)-fluoxetine hydrochlorides”43(31):5435-5436. 
38. Miles, W H., Elizabeth J. Fialcowitz, and E. Scott Halstead. "Enantioselective synthesis of (S)-and 
(R)-fluoxetine hydrochloride." Tetrahedron 57.50 (2001): 9925-9929. 
39. Trost, Barry M., Pierre L. Fraisse, and Zachary T. Ball. "A Stereospecific Ruthenium‐Catalyzed Allylic 
Alkylation." Angewandte Chemie 114.6 (2002): 1101-1103. 
==PAGE:70==
67 
 
40. Dang, Van, et al. "Formoterol, a long-acting β2 adrenergic agonist, improves cognitive function 
and promotes dendritic complexity in a mouse model of Down syndrome." Biological 
psychiatry 75.3 (2014): 179-188. 
41. Murase, Kiyoshi, et al. "Absolute configurations of four isomers of 3-formamido-4-hydroxy-α-[[N-
(p-methoxy-α-methylphenethyl) amino] methyl] benzyl alcohol, a potent β-adrenoreceptor 
stimulant." Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 26.4 (1978): 1123-1129. 
42. Trofast, J, et al. "Steric aspects of agonism and antagonism at β‐adrenoceptors: Synthesis of and 
pharmacological 
experiments 
with 
the 
enantiomers 
of 
formoterol 
and 
their 
diastereomers." Chirality 3.6 (1991): 443-450. 
43. Hett, R.; Fang, Q. K.; Gao, Y.; Hong, Y.; Butler, H. T.; Nie, X.; Wald, S. A. Tetrahedron Lett. 1997, 38, 
1125. 
44. Campos F M., Bosch P, and Guerrero A. "An efficient enantioselective synthesis of (R, R)-
formoterol, a potent bronchodilator, using lipases." Tetrahedron: Asymmetry11.13 (2000): 2705-
2717. 
45. Patel, Ramesh N., et al. "Microbial synthesis of chiral intermediates for β‐3‐receptor 
agonists." Journal of the American Oil Chemists' Society 75.11 (1998): 1473-1482. 
46. Koszelewski, Dominik, et al. "Synthesis of optically active amines employing recombinant ω‐
transaminases in E. coli cells." ChemCatChem 2.1 (2010): 73-77. 
47. Campos, F, M. Bosch P, and Guerrero A. "An efficient enantioselective synthesis of (R, R)-
formoterol, a potent bronchodilator, using lipases." Tetrahedron: Asymmetry11.13 (2000): 2705-
2717. 
48. Meurer, Laura C., et al. "Cyclopentane-based human NK1 antagonists. Part 2: development of 
potent, orally active, water-soluble derivatives." Bioorganic & medicinal chemistry letters 16.17 
(2006): 4504-4511. 
49. Leek, Hanna, and Andersson S. "Preparative Scale Resolution of Enantiomers Enables Accelerated 
Drug Discovery and Development." Molecules 22.1 (2017): 158. 
50. Agranat, Israel, Silvya R. Wainschtein, and Enav Z. Zusman. "The predicated demise of racemic 
new molecular entities is an exaggeration." Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 11.12 (2012): 972. 
51. Tao, J, and Jian-He Xu. "Biocatalysis in development of green pharmaceutical processes." Current 
opinion in chemical biology 13.1 (2009): 43-50. 
52. Pollard, David J., and Woodley J M. "Biocatalysis for pharmaceutical intermediates: the future is 
now." TRENDS in Biotechnology 25.2 (2007): 66-73. 
53. Stewart, David J., et al. "The importance of greater speed in drug development for advanced 
malignancies." Cancer medicine 7.5 (2018): 1824-1836. 
54. PHRMA, Biopharmaceutical research and development: The process behind new medicines. 
Pharmaceutical 
Research 
and 
Manufacturers 
of 
America 
2015; 
Available 
from: 
http://www.phrma.org/sites/default/files/pdf/rd_brochure_022307.pdf (accessed January 6, 
2015). 
55. Lawrence, X. Yu. "Pharmaceutical quality by design: product and process development, 
understanding, and control." Pharmaceutical research 25.4 (2008): 781-791. 
56. Somerville, S. "FDA's Expedited Review Process: The Need for Speed." Applied Clinical 
Trials 24.4/5 (2015): 17. 
==PAGE:71==
68 
 
57. Van Arnum, Patricia. "Applying Biocatalysis: A Technical Forum." (2009). 
58. Anastas, P. T. and Warner, J. C.; Green Chemistry: Theory and Practice, Oxford University Press: 
New York, 1998, pp. 30. 
59. Sheldon, Roger A., and John M. Woodley. "Role of biocatalysis in sustainable chemistry." Chemical 
reviews 118.2 (2017): 801-838. 
60. Tucker, John L., and Margaret M. Faul. "Drug companies must adopt green chemistry." Nat. 
News 534 (2016): 27-28. 
61. Straathof, Adrie JJ, Sven Panke, and Andreas Schmid. "The production of fine chemicals by 
biotransformations." Current opinion in biotechnology 13.6 (2002): 548-556. 
62. Faber, K. Biotransformations in organic chemistry. Vol. 4. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1992. 
63. Liese, A, Seelbach K, and Wandrey C, eds. Industrial biotransformations. John Wiley & Sons, 2006. 
64. Clapes, Pere, and Xavier Garrabou. "Current trends in asymmetric synthesis with 
aldolases." Advanced Synthesis & Catalysis 353.13 (2011): 2263-2283. 
65. Constable, David JC, et al. "Key green chemistry research areas—a perspective from 
pharmaceutical manufacturers." Green Chemistry 9.5 (2007): 411-420. 
66. Devine, Paul N., Richard M. Heid Jr, and David M. Tschaen. "Stereoselective synthesis of 2-aryloxy 
esters: An asymmetric approach to fluoxetine, tomoxetine and nisoxetine." Tetrahedron 53.20 
(1997): 6739-6746. 
67. Campos, Francisco, M. Pilar Bosch, and Angel Guerrero. "An efficient enantioselective synthesis 
of (R, R)-formoterol, a potent bronchodilator, using lipases." Tetrahedron: Asymmetry11.13 
(2000): 2705-2717. 
68. Finke, Paul E., et al. "Cyclopentane-based human NK1 antagonists. Part 1: Discovery and initial 
SAR." Bioorganic & medicinal chemistry letters 16.17 (2006): 4497-4503. 
69. Elliott, Jason M., et al. "NK 1 antagonists based on seven membered lactam scaffolds." Bioorganic 
& medicinal chemistry letters 16.11 (2006): 2929-2932. 
70. Li, Hongmei, Johannah Moncecchi, and Matthew D. Truppo. "Development of an immobilized 
ketoreductase 
for 
enzymatic 
(R)-1-(3, 
5-Bis 
(trifluoromethyl) 
phenyl) 
ethanol 
production." Organic Process Research & Development 19.7 (2015): 695-700 
71. Gowrisankar, S, et al. "A general and efficient catalyst for palladium-catalyzed C− O coupling 
reactions of aryl halides with primary alcohols." Journal of the American Chemical Society 132.33 
(2010): 11592-11598. 
72. Zhong, Jian‐Ji, et al. "A Cascade Cross‐Coupling and in Situ Hydrogenation Reaction by Visible Light 
Catalysis." Advanced Synthesis & Catalysis 356.13 (2014): 2846-2852. 
73. Dascier, D, et al. "Influence of cofactor regeneration strategies on preparative-scale, asymmetric 
carbonyl 
reductions 
by 
engineered 
Escherichia 
coli." Organic 
process 
research 
& 
development 18.6 (2014): 793-800. 
74. Roth, Gregory P., et al. "Optimization and scale-up of an asymmetric route to the LTB4 inhibitor 
ontazolast." Organic Process Research & Development 1.5 (1997): 331-338. 
75. Hönig, 
Moritz, 
et 
al. 
"Enantioselective 
Chemo‐and 
Biocatalysis: 
Partners 
in 
Retrosynthesis." Angewandte Chemie International Edition 56.31 (2017): 8942-8973. 
76. Riechers, Hartmut, et al. "Discovery and optimization of a novel class of orally active nonpeptidic 
endothelin-A receptor antagonists." Journal of medicinal chemistry 39.11 (1996): 2123-2128. 
==PAGE:72==
69 
 
77. Rao, Ramachandra D, et al. "Process for the Preparation of an Endothelin Receptor Antagonist." 
U.S. Patent Application No. 14/352,917. 
78. Peng, Xianyou, Peijun Li, and Yian Shi. "Synthesis of (+)-ambrisentan via chiral ketone-catalyzed 
asymmetric epoxidation." The Journal of organic chemistry 77.1 (2011): 701-703. 
79. Girvan, Hazel M., and Andrew W. Munro. "Applications of microbial cytochrome P450 enzymes in 
biotechnology and synthetic biology." Current opinion in chemical biology 31 (2016): 136-145. 
80. Urlacher, Vlada B., and Sabine Eiben. "Cytochrome P450 monooxygenases: perspectives for 
synthetic application." Trends in biotechnology 24.7 (2006): 324-330. 
81. Wei, Chun, et al. "Bioresolution production of (2R, 3S)-Ethyl-3-phenylglycidate for 
chemoenzymatic synthesis of the taxol C-13 side chain by Galactomyces geotrichum ZJUTZQ200, 
a new epoxide-hydrolase-producing strain." Molecules 19.6 (2014): 8067-8079. 
82. Yazbeck, Daniel R., et al. "Automated enzyme screening methods for the preparation of 
enantiopure pharmaceutical intermediates." Advanced Synthesis & Catalysis 345.4 (2003): 524-
532. 
83. Whittall, John, and Peter W. Sutton, eds. Practical methods for biocatalysis and 
biotransformations. John Wiley & Sons, 2009. 
84. Dunn, Peter J, et al. "The Development ofa Green, Energy Efficient, Chemoenzymatic 
Manufacturing Process for Pregabalin." Green Chemistry in the Pharmaceutical Industry(2010). 
85. Solano, D. Muñoz, et al. "Industrial biotransformations in the synthesis of building blocks leading 
to enantiopure drugs." Bioresource technology 115 (2012): 196-207. 
86. Bisswanger, H. "Enzyme assays." Perspectives in Science1.1-6 (2014): 41-55. 
87. Koshland Jr, Daniel E. "The key–lock theory and the induced fit theory." Angewandte Chemie 
International Edition in English33.23‐24 (1995): 2375-2378. 
88. Tufvesson, Pär, et al. "Guidelines and cost analysis for catalyst production in biocatalytic 
processes." Organic Process Research & Development 15.1 (2010): 266-274. 
89. Subramanian, S. "Thermodynamics of dehydrogenase reactions." Trends in Biochemical 
Sciences 4.5 (1979): 102-105. 
90. Rover Jr, Laércio, et al. "Study of NADH stability using ultraviolet–visible spectrophotometric 
analysis and factorial design." Analytical biochemistry 260.1 (1998): 50-55. 
91. Wang, Xiaodong, et al. "Cofactor NAD (P) H regeneration inspired by heterogeneous 
pathways." Chem 2.5 (2017): 621-654. 
92. Pereira, Denise A., Gerson F. Pinto, and Enrique G. Oestreicher. "Kinetic mechanism of the 
oxidation of 2-propanol catalyzed by Thermoanaerobium brockii alcohol dehydrogenase." Journal 
of biotechnology 34.1 (1994): 43-50. 
93. Hutchison, Clyde A., et al. "Mutagenesis at a specific position in a DNA sequence." Journal of 
Biological Chemistry 253.18 (1978): 6551-6560 
94. Economou, Chariklia, Keqin Chen, and Frances H. Arnold. "Random mutagenesis to enhance the 
activity of subtilisin in organic solvents: Characterization of Q103R subtilisin E." Biotechnology and 
bioengineering 39.6 (1992): 658-662 
