==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
   Master Thesis  
 
Taking advantage of cloudburst projects in 
Copenhagen during minor-medium rain events 
by using above-ground control 
 
Master Thesis written in the framework of the DTU TUM 1:1 Environmental Engineering Master 
Program 
 
 
 
Supervisor DTU:  
 
Assistant Prof. Morten Borup  
PhD fellow Nadia Schou Vorndran Lund 
DTU Environment 
 
Supervisor TUM: 
 
Prof. Dr. rer. nat. habil. Brigitte Helmreich 
 
 
 
 
Chair of Urban Water Systems Engineering 
 
Author: 
 
 
Anne Imig 
DTU:  s172604 
TUM: 03640775 
 
 
 
 
1 July 2018 
==PAGE:2==
2 
Preface 
This master’s thesis is submitted in fulfilment of the requirements for the master degree of the 
DTU TUM 1:1 Joint Environmental Engineering Master Program. The thesis accounts for 30 
ECTS. The project was carried out from February 1, 2018, to July 1, 2018, at the Department of 
Environmental Engineering at DTU with Assistant Professor Morten Borup (DTU) as main 
supervisor and PhD fellow Nadia Schou Vorndran Lund (DTU) and Prof. Dr. rer. nat. habil. 
Brigitte Helmreich (TUM) as co-supervisors.  
I would like to thank HOFOR for providing the MIKE URBAN model and DHI for providing the 
required licenses. Moreover, I would like to thank my supervisors, who have devoted their time 
and effort and helped me to finish this project.  
 
Anne Imig, 1. July 2018 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
3 
 
Contents 
PREFACE 
2 
CONTENTS 
3 
ACRONYMS 
6 
ABSTRACT 
7 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
8 
2 
THEORY 
9 
2.1 
Local Storm Water Control Measures (SCM) 
9 
2.2 
Local Storm Water Control Measures in Copenhagen 
12 
2.2.1 Climate Adaption Plan 
12 
2.2.2 Cloudburst Management Plan 
12 
2.3 
Implement Control for Urban Drainage Systems 
14 
2.3.1 ”Passive” Control 
15 
2.3.2 Real Time Control (RTC) 
15 
2.3.3 Data Driven Urban Water Management 
18 
3 
METHODS 
19 
3.1 
Case Area 
19 
3.2 
Modelling Storm water Control Measure in MIKE Urban 
20 
3.3 
Implementation of above-ground Real Time Control 
23 
3.3.1 Real Time Control RTC 
23 
3.4 
Comparison of results from SCM with and without above-ground control 
23 
3.5 
Data Processing 
24 
3.5.1 Continuity Balance 
24 
3.5.2 Design Criteria 
25 
4 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
25 
4.1 
Case Area 
25 
4.1.1 Rainfall and CDS Intensities 
28 
4.1.2 CBM Elements for BIR 16.1 and BIR 16.2 
29 
4.1.3 Reduced Model 
30 
4.2 
Modelling Storm water Control Measures in MIKE Urban 
31 
==PAGE:4==
4 
4.2.1 Methodology 1 
37 
4.2.2 Methodology 2 
40 
4.2.3 Methodology 3 
41 
4.3 
Implementation of above-ground Real Time Control 
50 
4.3.1 PID control scheme model 1 
52 
4.3.2 PID control scheme model 2 
56 
4.3.3 PID control scheme model 3 
59 
4.3.4 Direct Settings Control Scheme Model 
63 
4.4 
Comparison of results from SCM with and without above-ground control 
69 
4.4.1 Rain event which leads to no CSO in the case area 
71 
4.4.2 Rain event which leads to CSO but no flooding in the case area 
71 
4.4.3 Rain event which leads to CSO and flooding in the case area 
72 
5 
CONCLUSION 
73 
5.1 
Recommendations for future research 
74 
REFERENCES 
75 
APPENDIX 
I 
A Discharge at Outlet 94 465802 udloeb fiktiv for the Year 2014 
I 
B Cut Model from SCM Case Area 
II 
C Comparison Reduced to Full Model 
III 
D Dimensioning of the Cloudburst Measures in the Case Area 
IV 
E Node Level and Graphical Display in MIKE Urban for Underlying Sewer System 
VII 
F Accumulated Volume for Model with and without CBM in SCM Case Area 
VIII 
G Retention Space Filling 
X 
G.1 Retention Space Filling for varying Manning Numbers Methodology 1 CDS T=10 
X 
G.2 Retention Space Filling from Model Methodology 1 compared to 3 CDS T=10 
XI 
G.3 Retention Space filling from Model Methodology 3 compared to 3 with Pumping CDS T=10
 
XII 
H Effects of Model Methodology 3 with Pumping 
XIII 
H.1 Comparison of Proportion of CSO from MP3 to cut model 
XIII 
H.2 Ground Level Exceedance in the SCM Case Area for a CDS T=10 for the Model Methodology 
3 with Pumping 
XIV 
H.3 Ground Level Exceedance in the SCM Case Area for a CDS T=10 for the Cut Model 
XV 
I Pumps, Orifices and Link 94_466204_466203 Location in SCM Case Area 
XVI 
J Water Level and Discharge for Cut, M3P, PID Control Scheme Model 1 for Selected Nodes 
and Links 
XVII 
==PAGE:5==
5 
K Water Level and Discharge for Cut, M3P, PID Control Scheme Model 2 for Selected Nodes 
and Links 
XIX 
L Water Level and Discharge for Cut, M3P, PID Control Scheme Model 3 for Selected Nodes 
and Links 
XXI 
M Water Level and Discharge for cut, M3P, Direct Setting Control Scheme Model for 
Selected Nodes and Links 
XXIII 
DECLARATION OF ACADEMIC HONESTY 
XXV 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
6 
Acronyms  
The following page sums up the acronyms used in the thesis: 
CBM 
 
CloudBurst Measure 
CSO 
 
Combined sewer overflow 
CSS 
 
Combined Sewer System  
DMI 
 
Danish Meteorological Institute 
DWF 
 
Dry Weather Flow 
FLC 
 
Fuzzy Logic Control 
IPCC 
 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
LID 
 
Low Impact Development 
LAR 
 
Local Afledning af Regnvand 
LQR 
 
Linear Quadratic Regulators 
MPC 
 
Model Predictive Control 
NBS 
 
Nature Based Solutions 
PBRTC  
Pollution Based Real Time Control 
RTC  
 
Real Time Control 
RBC  
 
Rule-based Control 
SCM  
 
Storm water Control Measures 
SUDS   
Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems 
IDF 
 
Intensity-Duration-Frequency 
IOT  
 
Internet of things 
UDS  
 
Urban Drainage Systems 
UWM   
Urban Water Management 
WWTP  
Waste Water Treatment Plant 
WSUD   
Water Sensitive Urban Design 
WQBRTC  
Water Quality Based Real Time Control 
 
==PAGE:7==
7 
Abstract 
In this thesis an attempt is made to model and quantify the effect of Storm water Control 
Measures (SCMs) with and without the use of above-ground Real Time Control (RTC) to reduce 
Combined Sewer Overflows (CSOs). A case area in the city of Copenhagen was chosen since the 
city has planned over 300 SCMs, called Cloudburst Measures (CBMs), in their ambitious 
Cloudburst Management Plan to make the city more resilient to extreme rainfall events within 
the next 20 years. Different modelling approaches are tested and compared in order to 
determine their ability to accurately represent the intended functionality of the CBMs with and 
without above-ground RTC in MIKE Urban. The results show that it is not expedient to model 
green solutions with a decreased Manning number of the surface, however, modelling blue 
solutions with storage volume shows promising results.  Furthermore, a significant 
improvement in representing the functionality of blue solutions is achieved with the 
implementation of above-ground RTC. On a local scale, the CSO volume could be decreased by 
99.3 % with just the CBMs. Alternatively, combining CBMs with above-ground RTC, yields a 
reduction of 99.7 % (for a CDS rain event with T=1). Moreover, a positive effect on the reduction 
of CSO volume on a global scale is observed and a reduction of 65.3 % was documented (for a 
CDS rain event with T=1) using the model of CBM with above-ground RTC.  Overall, 
shortcomings of the used modelling approaches for CBMs are encountered and demand further 
studies. 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
8 
 
1 Introduction 
Due to the gradual increase in global temperatures, the occurrence of large and extreme rainfall 
events is on the rise ( (Gregersen, et al. 2014) and (OcCC 2003)), causing an increased number of 
pluvial floods (Barredo 2007). Rainfall is one of the main agents that influence Urban Water 
Management (UWM) (Ojha et al., 2015). It determines the frequency and duration of (Combined) 
Sewer Overflows (CSOs) (Mailhot, Talbot and Lavallée 2015), the hydraulic load of the sewer 
system and the performance of the Waste Water Treatment Plant (WWTP) (Li et al., 2015). As 
the existing sewer system structures are not designed for the increased runoff, caused by 
extreme rainfall events, the result is an increase in the number of CSOs, flooding of cities and 
decreased pollutant removal in the WWTP.  
Consequently, legislations set new standards to aim not only on decreasing CSOs but can be 
related to terrain flooding in the city, sewer quality or wastewater treatment (Butler and Davies 
2010). For example, the European Union adopted the EU Water Framework Directive which set 
new goals for water body quality (Parliament and Council of the European Union 2000) and 
therefore also effects the management of Urban Drainage Systems (UDS) as CSOs influence 
water quality significantly (Walters, et al. 2013). Research demands to design optimized UDSs, 
considering climate change, to keep cities habitable in the future (Arnbjerg-Nielsen, et al. 2013). 
In Garcia’s along with Mollerup’s research, three approaches for Urban Water Management, 
which cope with climate change and the changed legislative standards, are analyzed ( (García, et 
al. 2015) and (Mollerup, et al. 2015)): 
1. Local Storm Water Control Measures (SCM) (elaborated in 2.1) 
2. Implement Control of Urban Drainage Systems (elaborated in 2.3) 
3. Expand existing structures in the sewer system 
Implementing control strategies ( (Beeneken, et al. 2013), (Vezzaro, Christensen, et al. 2014) and 
(N.S.V. Lund 2016)) and local SCM ( (Sørup, et al. 2016) and (Lerer, et al. 2017))  are proven to 
be effective and cost-efficient methods. When combining these, controlling storm water above-
ground, effects like flooding and CSOs can be targeted more precisely since storm water can be 
prevented to discharge into the sewer system when downstream overflow seems inevitable. 
This has proven to be effective, especially for minor rain events, in a conceptual study from Lund 
et al. ((N.S.V. Lund, et al. (no date)) and (N. S.V. Lund, et al. 2017)) for Model Predictive Control 
(MPC).  
This thesis, with the topic “Taking advantage of cloudburst projects in Copenhagen during 
minor-medium rain events by using above-ground control”, aims on quantifying the effect of the 
implementation of SCMs and SCMs in combination with Real Time Control (RTC) for already 
planned measures in the city of Copenhagen. Computations will be carried out with MIKE Urban 
MOUSE tool, Excel and MATLAB. MIKE Urban is an urban water modelling software capable of 
calculating the hydraulic situation in the pipe systems as well as channelized flow and surface 
runoff.  The approach of expanding existing structures in the sewer system will not be targeted 
since it is costly and time intensive (García, et al. 2015), unlikely, due to short falling investments 
into the Urban Drainage System (UDS) (Eggiman, et al. 2017) and has shown lesser effects than 
SCM for extreme events (Kaspersen, et al. 2017). 
The city of Copenhagen is chosen for the case area, because it addresses the changed situation 
for the UWM in their Cloudburst Management Plan (Copenhagen City 2012). Extreme rain 
events, including Cloudbursts in the years 2010 and 2011, resulted in damages of DKK 6-9 
billion in the period of 2008-2013 (Copenhagen-City 2015). 300 local SCMs, called CloudBurst 
==PAGE:9==
9 
Solutions Measures (CBM), disconnecting 30 % of storm water from the Combined Sewer 
System (CSS) are planned to make the city more resilient to extreme rain events targeting with 
for example Retention Spaces and Green Roads (Copenhagen-City 2015).   
In order to quantifying the effects of implementation of local SCM and the control of these on the 
UDS, this thesis work is structured as follows. To begin, an appropriate case area in the city of 
Copenhagen is specified by following defined selection criteria. Upon meeting these criteria, 
CBMs are implemented into the MIKE Urban sewer network model, which is provided by the 
utility company of Copenhagen, HOFOR. For Retention Roads, three different methods are tested 
and compared to represent their performance:  
▪ 
Methodology 1: Increasing surface roughness with the Manning number in the CBM, 
with the aim to decrease the flow velocity on the Retention Road and therefore 
increase the retention above-ground, representing green solutions. 
▪ 
Methodology 2: Modelling the connection from the Retention Road to the sewer 
system with a throttle pipe and restricting the inflow into the sewer system or CBM. 
Done with a Discharge Water level restriction (Q-H) in MIKE Urban.   
▪ 
Methodology 3: Increasing the Retention Space volume connected to the Retention 
Road to represent storage volume above-ground, like rain or roadside beds.  
The results are compared towards meeting the design criteria of the Cloudburst Management 
Plan: First, sewer discharge will be allowed to reach ground level once every 10 years and 
average water levels will be allowed to exceed ground level by 10 cm once every 100 years, 
excluding areas specifically designated for flood control storage. For these areas, the cloudburst 
projects must not increase the risk of damage. Additionally, the continuity criterion of the water 
in the system before and after the implementation of the method, must be balanced. Then, a RTC 
scheme for the model of the case area with implemented CBM is defined as well in MIKE Urban. 
Lastly, the behavior of the SCM and SCM model with RTC will be compared for several rain 
intensities with a focus on small and medium rain events.   
The Theory chapter of the thesis gives an overview and background information about local SCM 
and, in particular, the legislative rules and measures planned by the city of Copenhagen. 
Moreover, the term Control for UDS from passive over RTC towards a brief insight into Data 
Driven Urban Water Management is outlined. The chapter Methods, further explains the criteria 
and their realization to define the case area as well as the performance of the CBM and the RTC 
scheme. Moreover, several methodologies to model the performance of the CBMs are illustrated. 
In the chapter Results and Discussion, the outcomes of the used methods are presented and in 
the conclusion and overall observation and outcomes are contextualized.   
2 Theory 
In this chapter different approaches and their implementation in existing UDS aiming to cope 
with the change of standards, are presented. New legislative standards aim on coping with the 
influence resulting from climate change and the short falling investments from the 
municipalities into the UDS (Eggiman, et al. 2017). Firstly, general information about SCMs will 
be presented and the SCMs, named CBM in the following, planned by the city of Copenhagen in 
their Cloudburst Management Plan. Secondly, the implementation of Control for UDS from 
passive over RTC towards a brief insight into Data Driven UWM is outlined. 
2.1 
Local Storm Water Control Measures (SCM) 
Terms to define local SCMs vary over the world, in North America the term Low Impact 
Developments LIDs is most common, in the UK Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems SUDS, 
Nature Based Solutions NBSs in Europe, Water Sensitive Urban Design WSUD and in Denmark 
==PAGE:10==
10 
Local Afledning af Regnvand LAR ( (Madsen, et al. 2017) and (Fletcher, et al. 2015)). 
Nevertheless, all these terms describe vegetation-based solution to replicate the natural 
drainage processes of an area, disconnecting storm water to discharge into the CSS ( (Keesstra, 
et al. 2018) and (Ossa-Moreno, Smith and Mijic 2017)), with the common goal to mitigate 
severity of effects of climate change in cities (e.g. CSO’s and basement flooding’s) as well as the 
impacts from industrialization era (e.g. impervious areas), improve receiving water quality, well-
being of citizens and economic situation in cities (e.g. decrease losses due to water-related 
disasters) ( (Chini, et al. 2017), (Elmqvist, et al. 2015), (Faivre, et al. 2017) and (Lafortezza, et al. 
2017)). 
Many different solutions exist and are subdivided in specifying categories, for example by 
management and problem-solving techniques (Nesshöver, et al. 2017) or soil-vegetation and 
landscape solutions (Keesstra, et al. 2018). In  Table 1 the most common SCMs are presented 
with the purpose to reduce hydraulic load on water bodies or the UDS and separate storm water 
from wastewater, categorized by the principle of operation ( (Sørup, et al. 2016), (ADSS 2002), 
(Hlavínek and Zeleňáková 2015) and (Pommer 2016)). Their benefits and related problems are 
further listed. Moreover, effects like; enhanced evapotranspiration helps to cool cities 
(Gopalakrishnan, Steyn and Harvey 2014) and more green areas improves the life quality of its 
inhabitants (Escobedo, et al. 2018) are mentioned in various publications. 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
Table 1:  Overview of most common Strom water Control Measures SCM categorized by their principle of operation, added benefit and related problems 
 
Basic principle of 
operation 
Added benefit 
Related problems 
Green Roof 
Evaporation, Detention,  
Retention 
Aesthetic, Biodiversity, Cooling 
load on the static of the house to high 
Rainwater Harvesting 
Detention 
reuse water for e.g. garden watering, 
toilet, washing machine, reduce 
drinking water consumption 
second pipe system must be installed 
in the house, risks due to pollutants 
Filter Stripes & Swales Infiltration, Transport 
Aesthetic, Cooling, Groundwater 
recharge, closest to natural 
infiltration situation 
limited space in the cities, wrongly executed 
Permeable Paving 
Infiltration, Detention 
Groundwater recharge 
(mostly) no treatment of storm water, 
decrease of traffic management capacity 
Soakaways 
Infiltration, Detention 
Groundwater recharge 
no treatment of storm water 
Rain Gardens 
Evaporation, Infiltration 
Detention 
Aesthetic, Biodiversity, Cooling, 
groundwater recharge 
accumulation of pollutants (special remediation plants), 
insect problems in summer 
Dry Basins 
Detention 
Multifunctionality (the 
space can be used for 
recreation when not used 
for storing water)  
no treatment of storm water 
Wet Basins 
Detention 
Aesthetic, Cooling, Biodiversity 
no treatment of storm water 
Constructed Wetlands 
Detention, Treatment, 
Evaporation 
Aesthetic, Cooling 
pollutants - seasonal fluctuations with removal potential 
==PAGE:12==
12 
 
An important further option, to replicate the natural drainage processes of an area, 
disconnecting storm water to discharge into the CSS, is, to unseal surfaces especially at 
private property, like: 
• 
no longer required parking spaces  
• 
too broad paths or roads paved front yards  
• 
yard surfaces 
these areas could be transformed into permeable surfaces by implementing e.g. permeable 
paving, wooden grating or seeding and grass renovation (Bayrisches Landesamt für 
Umwelt 2012).  
Limitation of the SCM are: the implementation of SCM are on small-scale, they have little 
impact on large-scale catastrophic rain events, river flooding or seaside flooding (Kabisch, 
et al. 2017). Therefore a multifunctional urban drainage system should be implemented 
with local SCM, safer proactively planned flooding areas and zoning regulations for 
housing developments ( (Fletcher, et al. 2015), (Grafton, et al. 2015) and (Burns, et al. 
2012)). Apart from the positive effects, with the upcoming of local SCM questions about 
the infiltrated pollutants and their impact of the environment emerge (Tedoldi, et al. 
2016). 
A leader in the concept of implementing SCMs in cities represents China. They are 
following the ambitious goal to reuse or absorb 70 % of the storm water in 20 % of the 
urban areas by 2020 and by 80 % of the rural areas by 2030 ( (Embassy of Kingdom of the 
Netherlands 2016), (Roxburgh 2017) and (Garfield 2017)). 
 
2.2 
Local Storm Water Control Measures in Copenhagen 
2.2.1 
Climate Adaption Plan 
The city of Copenhagen has investigated the influences of the climate change on the city 
and developed the Copenhagen Climate Adaption Plan (Copenhagen-City 2011). The 
United Nation’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) SERS A2 development 
scenario on climate change was used to predict the climate change impact on the UDS in 
Copenhagen. The scenario includes an increase in global temperature of 3 °C in the 21st 
century, the limiting of emissions decided at the Copenhagen Climate Change Conference 
at COP1 Conference and the latest calculations of the snow and ice melting predictions. 
The Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI) predicts (based on the scenario) an increase of 
25-55 % precipitation in the winter months, while precipitation in the summer months is 
expected to fall by 0-40%. Very heavy rainfalls, linked to climate change, are also called 
Cloudburst and are the effects of climate change that UDS are most vulnerable to. The 
sewers in the future will have to cope with a volume of storm water that in the maximum 
situation is around 30 % greater than today (Copenhagen-City 2011). 
2.2.2 
Cloudburst Management Plan 
Based on the findings of the Climate Adaption Plan, the Cloudburst Management Plan was 
developed. The plan aims to make the UDS more resilient for the future drainage situation 
by disconnecting 30 % of the impermeable surface from the combined sewer system and 
managing water locally and above ground with SCM. It was adopted by the Municipal 
Council on 13.12.2012. The details of the Cloudburst Management Plan (including about 
300 projects) evolving during the years of implementation (technically feasible within 20 
years) are yearly submitted for application at the Secretary for Water Supply and the 
Municipal Council (Copenhagen-City 2015). 
==PAGE:13==
13 
 
Two risk governing dimensioning rules are implemented in the Cloudburst Management 
Plan: 
1. Sewer discharge will be allowed to reach ground level once every 10 years 
2. Average water levels will be allowed to exceed ground level by 10 cm once every 
100 years, excepting areas specifically designated for flood control storage. For 
these areas the cloudburst projects must not increase the risk of damage. 
The aim is, to create a storm water control infrastructure with the following elements 
(Copenhagen City 2012): 
Cloudburst Road: Ordinary traffic roads which can function as water channels to 
convey water towards a receiving body e.g. harbour or retention 
pond, illustrated in Figure 1a. 
Retention Road: 
A road which can store and retain water with e.g. roadside beds 
and rain beds. Which also offers opportunities for urban space 
improvements with green and blue infrastructure elements, 
illustrated in Figure 1b. 
Green Road: 
Same principle as Retention Road, but on smaller scale. Its purpose 
it to retain and store water locally e.g. private shared roads, 
illustrated in Figure 1c. 
Retention space: 
A space like park or square with the hydraulic function to store 
and retain water. It avoids having too much rain on cloudburst 
roads. After the event the Retention Space is drained to the sewer 
or the cloudburst management system. Retention Space can be 
design with the additional function (or vice versa) of e.g. sunk 
parking areas, squares or sports fields, illustrated in Figure 1d. 
Cloudburst 
Pipes: 
Draining storm water at ground level with tunnels in those areas 
of the city where ground level drainage is not possible, e.g. caused 
by narrow roads or railway lines. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
14 
 
 
 
(a) Model of Cloudburst Road by the city of 
Copenhagen 
(b) Model of Retention Road by the city of 
Copenhagen 
(c) Model of Green Road by the city of 
Copenhagen 
(d) Model of Retention Space by the city of 
Copenhagen 
Figure 1: Elements of SCM Infrastructure developed by the city of Copenhagen (Copenhagen-City 2015) 
 
The CBMs will be financed out of three different sources: 
1. Private Financing (property owner installs anti-flood back flow valve or 
discontinuing floor drains in basements in their private service pipe) 
2. Revenues by charges collected by utility company (biggest part) 
3. State Taxes 
2.3 
Implement Control for Urban Drainage Systems 
The aim of a control strategy for UDS is to increase the efficiency of a UDS to meet new 
requirements listed above. Furthermore, reducing the energy consumption of the system, 
can be an aim of control (Lund and Borup 2016). 
Three control strategies will be presented in the chapter 2.3.1 and 2.3.2 differentiated in 
their level of sophistication. 
==PAGE:15==
15 
 
2.3.1 
”Passive” Control 
” Passive” control, as one of the lowest levels control, of a sewer system means, that no 
intervention in the system is possible fixed structures (e.g. basins, gates, weirs and pumps) 
are provided to work in one way. Systems with” passive” control are designed to provide 
the capacity to handle rain events of high return periods with large amount of storage 
volume. For most rain events these systems are over dimensioned, more than in 
comparison to systems with other control strategies (Butler and Davies 2010). 
2.3.2 
Real Time Control (RTC) 
A UDS is operated under RTC, if system information (e.g. rainfall, water level and flow 
velocity) is continuously collected and processed to make decisions about operation of 
devices (e.g. pumps, weirs) in the system in almost real-time, to achieve the set 
management goals ( (Butler and Davies 2010) and (Schuetze, et al. 2004)). RTC is 
implemented with different hardware components. The different hardware components 
are ( (Schuetze, et al. 2004) and (Lund and Borup 2016)): 
 
Sensors 
Which monitor the process, e.g. flow velocities, water level and rainfall 
Actuators 
Which influence the process, e.g. pumps, gates, weirs and valves 
Set-Points 
 
Desired values for controlled variables, e.g. downstream pipe flow or 
water level in basin 
Controllers  
 
which adjust actuators to achieve minimum deviations of the controlled 
process variable from its desired value 
 
Actuators are adjusted by changing the value of the manipulated variables by controllers 
which aim to obtain the controlled variable defined in the set-point component. Not all 
control techniques require a set-point and a controlled variable. With the help of the 
components and the manipulated variables and controlled variable control loops can be 
designed, which base on if-else statements. Feedforward (disturbance measurement) and 
feedback (process measurement) control loop are proposed by (Schuetze, et al. 2004), 
graphically displayed in Figure 2. A feedback controller depends on the measurements of 
the sensor, if a deviation from the set-point is measured the controller is activated, also 
called reactive controller (Vitasovic 2004). The feedforward controller anticipates the 
deviation by using a model of the process (e.g. forecasts of flow or rainfall). Also, a 
combination of both controllers is possible. Disturbances are e.g. storm water-runoff and 
sewage from other parts of the sewer system. 
==PAGE:16==
16 
 
 
Figure 2: Feedforward and feedback control scheme (inspired by Schuetze et al., 2004) 
Categorization of RTC  
RTC can be divided in different categories based on features. Most common applied 
categories are described in the following ( (Butler and Davies 2010), (Schuetze, et al. 
2004) and (Lund and Borup 2016)).  
Differentiation based on location of control: 
Local RTC is applied, if the UDS control does not depend on communication with 
other parts of the system and process measurements are taken on-site at the 
actuators location. The local operator uses the data obtained by measurements and 
his experience to adjust. The advantages of this control are; that operator on site can 
observe problems that sensor might not (e.g. odour problems, instrument 
malfunction, sediment deposits). The drawbacks are; operator cannot consider 
systemwide conditions, labour intensive which results in unmanned actuators and 
in case of emergency this results in very slow reactions. Moreover, unmanned 
actuators will result in static and conservative configurations of actuators and make 
the system less efficient in comparison to remotely controlled systems. 
Global RTC or Remote RTC is applied, if the UDS Control depends on measurements 
from different locations and actuators are operated central in a control room also 
from a control server. The great advantage of global RTC is, that the UDS can be 
operated very efficient, but it also requires attention from the operator and good 
understanding of the system dynamics. To determine the most efficient way to 
operate the facilities can be demanding and requires a lot of understanding and 
analyses of the system. Moreover, transition from local to remote RTC is costly. 
 
 
 
 
Actuator 
Controller 
Set-point from control variable 
Sensor 
Manipulated 
Variable 
Controlled 
Variable 
Disturbance 
Feedforward 
Sensor 
Feedback 
==PAGE:17==
17 
 
Differentiation based on person who controls: 
Manual RTC is applied, if the actuators are adjusted by operators. 
Supervisory RTC is applied, if the actuators are adjusted automatically (without 
the input of the operator), but the set-points are specified or approved by 
operators or by a supervising system. 
Automatic RTC is applied, if the control is realized in a fully automatic way 
(without the input of the operator) with programmed rules and control logic, 
including in all cases manual override capabilities. 
As described above the control can be based on feedforward or feedback controllers. If 
supervisory RTC or automatic RTC is applied, the two approaches can be implemented 
into control algorithms. The feedback control algorithm is also called reactive algorithm. 
The feedforward control algorithm predictive algorithm.  
Moreover, the used control algorithms can be differentiated by their scope: 
Local algorithm control (compare local RTC) 
Regional algorithm control: control on several sites 
System-wide algorithms control also called global control: algorithm control of 
the hole UDS (compare global RTC)  
by their inclusion of a mathematical model ( (García, et al. 2015) and (Vitasovic 2004)): 
Model Based Algorithms: control strategies like Model Predictive Control (MPC) and 
Linear Quadratic Regulator LQR which must be executed online to compute the set 
points and determine the control actions. 
Non- Model Based Algorithm: like fuzzy logic control and rule-based control which 
do not include a mathematical model executed online. These algorithms require a 
complete knowledge of the system and the set control rules can be formalized with the 
help of expertise operators (Schuetze, et al. 2004). 
and by optimization versus heuristic algorithms: 
Heuristic Algorithms are based on knowledge already acquired by e.g. operators. 
Examples are Rule based control RBC and fuzzy-logic control (FLC). 
Optimization-based algorithms minimize or maximize a certain objective function 
(see next paragraph). They must include forecasting (e.g. rainfall or flows) and online 
models that execute in real-time to calculate the state variable for optimization. 
Demand more computational efforts and a mathematical representation of the system 
dynamics, but they are less dependent on the expert knowledge. Examples are Model 
Predictive Control MPC, Linear Quadratic Regulator LQR, Evolutionary strategy or 
Population Dynamic based control. 
General objectives of the control strategy can be ( (Butler and Davies 2010), (García, et al. 
2015) and (Borsányi, et al. 2008)): 
Volume-based RTC: 
1. Upstream storage: storm water is retained primarily in the upper reach of the 
network to reduce downstream flooding impact. Used if the in the downstream 
reach of the network sensitive water bodies (impacted by CSOs) are present 
infrastructure which damage would cause higher financial losses. 
2. Downstream storage: opposite consideration to upstream storage 
==PAGE:18==
18 
 
3. Balanced storage: storage elements are evenly filled throughout the catchment 
Pollution based RTC PBRTC: decrease a certain pollutant e.g. organic matter, 
metals… 
Water Quality Based RTC WQBRTC: improve a certain parameter e.g. BOD, TOC, TSS, 
… 
The objective of the control strategy can be implemented in the RTC with the help of an 
objective function (mathematical optimization technique). An objective could be to 
minimize the discharge volume from CSO over a time period, expressed in function 1. 
∑𝑉𝑖→𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝑡𝑓
𝑖=𝑡𝑖
 
 
(1) 
 
 
 
Mathematical optimizing strategies could aim to maximize use of WWTP capacity, 
ensuring smooth changes in regulated flow or emptying of basins (Lund and Borup 2016).  
 
Evaluation of RTC implementation  
The first state of the art report for RTC was published by (Schilling 1989) and more and 
more addressed now with various research (Schuetze, et al. 2004). RTC has been proven 
to be more effective than conventionally operated systems in several studies( (Beeneken, 
et al. 2013), (Lund 2016) and (Vezzaro, Christensen, et al. 2014)). Generally, because of a 
fixed storage volume in a UDS design, for minor - medium rain events (depending on area 
and legislative rules set), the RTC will provide a benefit for these events. A cost benefit 
analysis should be carried out to decide whether to implement the RTC or not. Although 
the risk of failure of RTC should not exceed the risk level in the existing system (Butler and 
Davies 2010). Van Daal’s study outlined, that the improvement of efficiency due to RTC is 
dependent on the goal (van Daal, et al. 2017). 
 
2.3.3 
Data Driven Urban Water Management 
Data collection can extend the functionality and improve the efficiency of today’s UWM 
networks (Eggiman, et al. 2017). Data collection will play an increasing role in the future 
because of” smart cities” and spatially enabled societies as well as the Internet of Things 
IOT. In” smart cities” and spatially enabled societies most information can be monitored, 
transferred, stored and used to facilitate planning and managing the society and their 
government in a sustainable way ( (Steudler and Rajabifard 2012) and (Lund, Falk, et al. 
2018)). The objective of the IOT is to develop a global infrastructure to connect virtual and 
physical objects and let them interact with the help of information and communication 
technology. Eggiman’s study outlines several approaches to implement data into UWM 
(Eggiman, et al. 2017): 
1. Spatial and Temporal Rainfall Predictions 
One is rainfall predictions, rainfall is one of the main agents that influence UWM 
(Ojha, Misra and Raghuwanshi 2015). It determines the frequency and duration of 
CSOs (Mailhot, Talbot and Lavallée 2015), the hydraulic loud of the sewer system 
and the performance of the Waste Water Treatment Plant WWTP (Li, et al. 2015). 
 
==PAGE:19==
19 
 
2. Flood Risk Models 
Based on horological and hydraulic models for the development of early warning 
systems. Urban pluvial floods potentially have a high social and economic impact, 
but they are by their nature one of the least predictable challenges facing UWM 
(Jonkman and Dawson 2012). 
3 Methods 
This chapter aims to describe the methods used to reach the target of this thesis; to model 
already planned SCMs from the city of Copenhagen, CBM, develop an above-ground 
RTC for the SCMs and quantify their effect on CSO volume. Therefore, a 1D model 
of the UDS of the city of Copenhagen designed in the program MIKE Urban is used, 
provided by the utility company of Copenhagen, HOFOR. Firstly, methods used to 
find a case area meeting set criteria are described, secondly the planned local CBM 
designed by the city of Copenhagen and their implementation in a case area in the 
program MIKE Urban are displayed (shown in chapter 2.2 and 3.2). Thirdly, the 
implementation of above-ground RTC in the case area for the CBMs is elaborated 
(shown in chapter 3.3).  
In chapter 3.4 the methods used for the data processing are described. The aim of these 
are to evaluate the model performance for meeting the design criteria defined by the 
Cloudburst Management Plan (shown in chapter 2.2) and the effect on the CSO volume.  
3.1 
Case Area 
In a first step a case area is defined. The five following criteria have been established 
beforehand for the selection of the area: 
1. In the case area CBMs from the city of Copenhagen should be planned. 
2. CSO sensitive area: In the case area CSO events must occur. 
CSOs are chosen, since local SCM should target negative effects of storm water 
runoff. They have the advantage of being able to be quantified also in a 1D model of 
the UDS in the MIKE Urban software. (To quantify the flooding volume in the case 
area a 2D model would be necessary.) 
3. Effective return time for CSOs 
The CSOs in the case area should occur several times per year, in order to make an 
effect of the SCM visible.  
4. The catchment of the UDS should not be to spacious to be able to see effects of 
implementation of local SCM. 
5. The connected catchment to the SCM must contribute significantly to a CSO, so the 
influence of the implementation can be quantified. 
In order to test the first criterion defined, the Cloudburst Management Plans are matched 
to the UDS Model in MIKE Urban, ICLYN, provided from the utility company of 
Copenhagen, HOFOR. The “georeferencing” tool in the program ArcGIS is used. (As the 
type of SCM implemented is dictated by the Cloudburst Management Plan from the city of 
Copenhagen it is assumed that the effect and feasibility of the measures is tested during 
the design process by the city of Copenhagen and the involved partner’s e.g. HOFOR and 
==PAGE:20==
20 
 
Rambøll.) To test the second criterion several Chicago Design Storm CDS with return 
period of T=100, 10, 5 and 1 with a duration of 240 min and simulation time of 480 min 
are used to test where and when CSO occurs.  The duration of 240 min is chosen as it is the 
default value used in the spreadsheet provided by the Water Pollution Committee of the 
Society of Danish Engineers. The coordinates used for the CDS events are 6175000, 
715000 (WGS84 ZONE 32). For testing the third criterion, a simulation for the year 2014 
with the corresponding historical rain events from 2014 is run. The fourth criterion is 
tested by using the MIKE Urban Function Backward Flow Tracing to determine the 
catchment area contributing to the outflows. Furthermore, to test the fifth criterion the 
MIKE Urban Model is cut in strategic points to hinder the inflow from upstream and 
downstream into the SCM catchment connected to the overflow structure. Then the 
overflow volume is determined by loading the network model in MIKE Urban with the 
runoff simulation results from CDS rains with return periods of T=1, 5, 10 and 100 with a 
duration of 240 min and a simulation time of 480 min.  
Finally, a reduced MIKE Urban Model is made to safe computational time. By cutting the 
parts of the network, which are not influencing the CSO structure catchment defined with 
the above-mentioned criteria. The function Backward Flow Tracing of MIKE Urban is used 
again. Computations to define the CSO volume are carried out with Excel.  
3.2 
Modelling Storm water Control Measure in MIKE Urban 
The SCM of the Cloudburst Management Plan of the City of Copenhagen are implemented 
in the water modelling software MIKE Urban. In chapter 2.2.2 the different SCM chosen by 
the city of Copenhagen are defined.  
As the software MIKE Urban has no build-in function for especially simulating SCM chosen 
by the city of Copenhagen the SCM structures must be simulated with combining the 
existing elements from the MOUSE tool in MIKE Urban. 
The model is built under the following intentions: 
A. That storm water runs into the sewer system until its capacity is reached. Then 
storm water is retained above-ground.  
B. The capacity of the SCM is designed to convey a flood with a return time of 100 
years, following the design criteria of the Cloudburst Management Plan. 
C. The developed model should represent the reality most realistically. 
D.  The SCM is modelled above-ground and connected to the sewer system 
underground.  
In the following the combination of the elements in MIKE Urban to result in the intended 
functionality of the SCM are described. The SCM is in the following CBM: 
Cloudburst Road: 
The roads are represented by links with an open cross section profile CRS.  The cross-
section profile must be defined with a slope, either by a V-shape or a A-shape. MIKE 
Urban always generates water in every element of the system to generate a start value 
to run the model. If using a realistic slope for the profile, MIKE Urban generates water 
in the hole volume of the CRS (Roemer 2017). Therefore, a small extra V-shape can 
improve the stability of the model, highlighted in red Figure 3. Also for this reason, a V-
shape is preferable to the A-shape.  
 
==PAGE:21==
21 
 
 
Figure 3: V-shape open CRS design of Cloudburst Road  
Retention Road: 
Retention Roads are represented as the Cloudburst Roads but as they aim to retain 
water above-ground, three methodologies are tested to model this based on the 
findings from (Roemer 2017): 
 
Methodology 1 
Increasing surface roughness with the Manning number in the CBM, with the 
aim to decrease the flow velocity on the Retention Road and therefore 
increase the retention above-ground, representing green solution.  
 
Manning numbers 75 representing normal concrete defined in MIKE Urban, 68 
representing rough concrete or rubble stone and 45 representing natural river 
with soil and medium gravel bed (Schneider and Bertig 1996) are tested. The 
Cloudburst Pipes are assumed to be realized with rough concrete, brickwork 
would also be possible resulting in roughly the same Manning number of 68 
defined in MIKE Urban. The Manning number 45 representing the natural river 
bed is defined in MIKE Urban under Materials. 
 
Methodology 2 
Modelling the connection from the Retention Road to the sewer system with 
a throttle pipe and restricting the inflow into the sewer system or CBM. Done 
with a Discharge Water level restriction (Q-H) in MIKE Urban.   
 
Methodology 3 
Increasing the Retention Space volume connected to the Retention Road to 
represent storage volume above-ground from blue solutions, like rain or 
roadside beds.  
 
It is assumed, that per 25 m Retention Road, an additional Retention Space with a 
volume of 5 m3 could be realized.   
 
Furthermore, infiltration e.g. through green areas, swales or soakaways are implemented 
by decreasing the imperviousness of the catchment connected to the Retention Road and 
therefore increasing the initial loss. 
In Lerer´s research the Retention Roads and Retention Spaces are modeled by increasing 
the initial loss (Lerer, et al. 2017).  
 
==PAGE:22==
22 
 
Green Road: 
Equal to Retention Road but on smaller scale.   
 
The Cloudburst, Retention and Green Roads are connected to the sewer system over 
manholes and links. The connection can be specified by e.g. an orifice, weir, pump or 
throttle pipe.  The catchments connected to the sewer system are split into storm water 
runoff and wastewater flow. The wastewater flow stays connected to the sewer system, 
the storm water runoff is connected to the implemented SCM, illustrated in Figure 4. 
 
Retention Space: 
Are represented by basins, the sewer system (emptying function) or CBM (filling 
function) is connected to it. The connection can be specified by e.g. an orifice (with a 
weir or gate), weir, pump or throttle pipe. The water stored in the basin must be 
emptied back into the system, this can be realized by pumping the water back into the 
sewer system. For this constant flow, constant speed and variable speed pumps with 
defined start and stop levels are connected. As the Cloudburst Management Plan does 
not state in which time frame the Retention Space must be emptied after a Cloudburst 
event, it is assumed, that the pumps connected to the sewer system can empty the 
basins within one hour.  
 
Cloudburst Pipe: 
Are modelled as links with an O, egg-, rectangular or circular shape. But have a bigger 
diameter.  
 
 
Figure 4: Graphical display of implementation of SCM in MIKE Urban  
The CBMS are dimensioned to convey a CDS of T=100 years and duration of 240 min. An 
iterative approach is followed to implement the CBMs based on troubleshooting.  
A. Dimensions of CRS profile and Retention Space basin volume, following realistic 
restrictions.  
B. Different sequel of links and manholes connecting the sewer system with the CBM. 
C. Different diameters of links and manholes connecting the sewer system with the CBM. 
D. Implementing a cloudburst measure upstream and in a contributing branch. 
Sewer system 
CBM 
Orifice connection 
between sewer 
system and CBM  
Waste water 
connection  
Retention Space 
Pump for 
emptying 
Retention Space 
==PAGE:23==
23 
 
E. Changing configuration settings in the INI-file to allow simulation to run. 
F. Calibrating diameter of Cloudburst Pipes. 
G. Diameter of manholes connecting CBM and link to orifices. 
3.3 
Implementation of above-ground Real Time Control 
After the implementation and calibration of the CBM an above-ground RTC scheme for 
these are developed. In this chapter this process is described. The connection between the 
CBM and the sewer system and vice versa as well as the connection between the CBM or 
the sewer system with a Retention Space represented in a basin can be specified by e.g. an 
orifice (with a weir or gate), weir and pump. For these elements RTC functions can be 
implemented in MIKE Urban. In the build system the connections are specified by orifices 
with weirs and pumps. In Figure 4 the design in MIKE Urban is graphically displayed.  The 
aim of the control scheme is to operate the CBM in a way to reduce the CSO volume and 
moreover use it to define the modelled function of the Retention Space and Retention 
Road.  
3.3.1 
Real Time Control RTC 
The RTC scheme is used in the following way to define the function of the: 
1. Retention Roads by defining rules for a controllable gate in the orifices to restrict 
the inflow into the sewer system with RTC.  
2. Retention Space by defining rules to pump the water back into the sewer system. 
Control rules for the controllable gates in the orifices and pumps implemented into the 
CBM network are set to follow the following restrictions: 
A. Water should only be diverted into the CBMs if in the sewer network has no 
capacity left. 
B. If CSO occurs and the sewer network still has capacity, storm water can be diverted 
into the CBMs to decrease CSO volume.  
C. If CBMs are used, firstly Retention Spaces should be filled before water rises on 
Retention Roads.  
MIKE Urban MOUSE RTC offers three control types for actuators; no, setting and 
Proportional-Integral-Differential (PID) control. Weirs, gate, pumps and valves are 
controllable. 
PID control allows to define one set-point value e.g. levels or discharge values for a defined 
sensor per simulation. The PID algorithm adjusts the settings of the regulator (or outputs 
in case of pumps), according to the current error between the specified set-point and the 
actual value of the controlled variable in order to meet the set point value (DHI 2017). 
For setting control on the other hand, the control algorithm, is reduced to an explicit 
functional relation between the control variable and the regulator setting, which controls 
the system response indirectly (DHI 2017).  
For the two control types (setting and PID control) conditions, e.g. water level, discharge, 
pump on or off, and actions, e.g. weir opening, discharge or water levels, can be defined. It 
must be noted that, if the set-point and actuator are not in vicinity, results can be 
unsatisfying (DHI 2017).  
3.4 
Comparison of results from SCM with and without above-ground 
control 
In order to compre the results from the SCM model with and without above-ground 
control historical raindata from the nearest rain gauge is used. The focus lies on minor and 
medium rain events creating different scenarios in the SCM case area. 
   
==PAGE:24==
24 
 
Three rain events are compared: 
1. Rain event which leads to no CSO’s in the case area. 
2. Rain event which leads to CSO’s but no terrain flooding in the case area. 
3. Rain event which leads to CSO’s and terrain flooding in the case area. 
 
3.5 
Data Processing 
This chapter describes the data processing procedures used in this thesis. The steps of the 
iterative approach to implement the CBM based on (heuristic) troubleshooting are 
evaluated in two main areas. Firstly, by the continuity balance computed by MIKE Urban 
and secondly, the implementation of different model methodologies are evaluated by their 
effect on the set design criteria as well. 
3.5.1 Continuity Balance 
After successfully running a simulation MIKE Urban creates a summary file in which the 
discharge, water level and volumes in the different structures are listed. In the network 
simulation dialog in MIKE Urban wanted results listed in the summary file can be set. 
Moreover, MIKE Urban computes an overall continuity balance and returns the total 
deviation from the inflow. The  
𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑢𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝐵𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒= (2 −1) −(3 −4 + 5) 
             (2) 
with  
1 … Start volume in pipes, manholes and structures 
2 … End volume in pipes, manholes and structures 
3 … Total inflow volume 
4 … Total diverted volume 
5 … Water generated in empty parts of the system  
A higher deviation can therefore be caused by a variation of one of the components of 
function 2.  
For every model the total inflow in the system is compared. The values should be in the 
same range to make the obtained results comparable.  
For the cut model of the case area, created to save computational time, the Root Mean 
Squared Error (RMSE), function 3, for the discharge in one link 94_466204_466203 in the 
system is calculated. The link is chosen as it is located downstream of the CBM, more 
information are given in the following chapter 3.5.2.  The RMSE takes the square root of 
the Mean Square Error (MSE). The MSE takes the event deviation of the differences 
between the modelled and the observed data and averages them. RMSE express the error 
metric in the same units as the original data. The RMSE especially emphasis the influence 
of big value. A disadvantage is, that RMSE is sensitive to outliers as the error on RMSD is 
proportional to the size of the squared error. The optimum value is 0, the range is between 
0 – 1 (Bennett, et al. 2013).   
𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸= √∑
(𝛾̂𝑡−𝛾𝑡)2
𝑛
𝑡=1
𝑛
 
 
             (3) 
 
With 𝛾̂ fitted value, 𝛾 dependent variable and n amount of observed values for variable.  
==PAGE:25==
25 
 
In the comparison of different designed models, the relative comparison in percentage is 
chosen.  
In a further step the accumulated volume (of e.g. links, basins…) in the SCM case area is 
compared for the cut model and the model from methodology 1.  The accumulated volume 
in the links (and orifices) of the SCM case area between the models should be equal to 
proof, that the CBM model is not faulty.  
3.5.2 Design Criteria 
The effect of the different methodologies are tested with global and local system analyses 
based on these four criteria: 
Two criteria set by the Cloudburst Management Plan (Copenhagen City 2012): 
1. Sewer discharge will be allowed to reach ground level once every 10 years. 
2. Average water levels will be allowed to exceed ground level by 10 cm once every 100 
years, excepting areas specifically designated for flood control storage. For these areas 
the cloudburst projects must not increase the risk of damage. 
Resulting criteria:  
3. Storm water runs into the SCM and the wastewater into the sewer system. If the sewer 
system or partly Cloudburst Pipes have reached their maximum capacity, water is 
diverted above-ground. 
4. In order to quantify the retention ability: The time and magnitude of the peak flow and 
the CSO volume are quantified downstream of the implemented CBM in link 
94_466204_466203, illustrated in Appendix I. The implementation of the CBM should 
result in a delayed peak flow and a decreased CSO volume, as the water is retained 
above-ground. 
All simulations are carried out with the MOUSE MIKE 1D engine, which models the 
implicit, finite difference numerical solution of the one-dimensional shallow water 
equation (Saint-Vernant equation). The runoff parameters of time- area method is chosen 
for the simulations. With this method, the runoff amount is controlled by the initial loss, 
size of the contributing area and by a continuous hydrological loss and the shape of the 
runoff hydrograph is controlled by the concentration time and by the time-area (T-A) 
curve. These parameters define a conceptual description of the catchment reactivity to the 
rain event and the catchment shape (DHI 2017). 
4 
Results and Discussion  
In this chapter the results of the used methods are shown. First the result from the 
locating of the case area and decision processes are demonstrated. Then the modelling of 
SCM and implementation of RTC for the SCM in the case are documented and critically 
discussed. The model results are evaluated by the continuity balance computed by MIKE 
Urban and secondly, the implementation of different model methodologies are evaluated 
by their effect on the set design criteria as well. 
4.1 
Case Area 
The sewer structure connecting to the overflow structure consisting of weir number 94 
465802w1 and outlet 94 465802 udloeb fiktiv, illustrated in Figure 6, fulfills the first three 
criteria: 
1. In the case area CBMs from the city of Copenhagen should be planned. 
==PAGE:26==
26 
 
The maps of the Cloudburst Management Plan from the city of Copenhagen are geocoded 
to the sewer system with the software ArcGIS (Copenhagen-City 2015).  
2. CSO sensitive area: In the case area CSO events must occur. 
3. Effective return time for CSOs 
Detailed return time for CSOs for the outlet 94 465802 udloeb fiktiv are displayed in 
Appendix A.  
The overflow structure is located in the district of Utterslev in Copenhagen, the outlet 
discharges into a group of lakes and swamp land Utterslev Mose, illustrated in Figure 5. 
The city is divided up into 60 cloudburst branches, which include a collection of 
cloudburst projects (Copenhagen City, 2015b). The case area is in the branches 
Brønshøjparke, Brønshøj Torv and Skybrudsgrenene ved Utterslev Mose, illustrated in 
Figure 5a. 
 
 
(a) Map from HOFOR of different 
catchment for Cloudburst solution 
(b) Satellite image from Google Maps     
from case area  
Figure 5: Maps of case area with different characteristics 
The connected sewer structures to the outlet, identified with the Backward Flow Tracing, 
are highlighted in light blue, illustrated in Figure 6. The area is judged to be not to 
spacious and hence also fulfills the fourth criterion. It is further referred to as the case 
area.   
==PAGE:27==
27 
 
 
Figure 6: Connected sewer system structure (highlighted in light blue) to overflow structure weir 94 465802w1 
and outlet 94 465802 (highlighted in dark blue) and the SCM case area (highlighted in red) 
Two CBM projects are chosen to be tested for the fifth criterion; their particular influence 
on the CSO occurring at outlet 94 465802 udloeb fiktiv, further referred to as SCM case 
area. This extended differentiation is made because it is not possible to implement all 
CBMs planned in the case area in the scope of this thesis.  The SCM case area includes the 
projects BIR16.1 and BIR16.2 from the Cloudburst Measurement Plan (Copenhagen City 
2012), highlighted in red in Figure 6, located in the cloudburst branch Utterslev Mose. The 
influence of the catchments connected to the SCM (BIR 16.1 and BIR 16.2) on the overflow 
structure (weir 94 465802w1 and outlet 94 465802) are determined to define the 
possible effect of the implementation of CBM. Therefore, a cut model is developed, 
depicted in Appendix B. CDS rains with return periods of T=1, 5, 10, 100 durations of 240 
min and simulation times of 480 min are tested and compared to the full model overflow 
volumes, the outcomes are summarized in Table 2. 
Table 2: Overflow volume from 94_465802_udloeb_fiktiv for the CDS rains T= 1, 5, 10 and 100 with duration of 240 
min and simulation time of 480 min  
Overflow volume 
94_465802_udloeb_fiktiv 
[m³] 
CDS T=1 
240 min 
CDS T=5 
240 min 
CDS T=10 
240 min 
CDS T=100 
240 min 
Full model 
2052 
5788 
8246 
17628 
Cut model of SCM case area  
200 
2053 
3276 
8243 
Proportion on overflow [%] 
9.7  
40.4  
36.2  
47.1  
 
For CDS rain with T=1 the lowest contribution of 9.7 % from the SCM case area to the 
overflow volume is analyzed. This can be explained by the capacity of the system, with 
lower intensity of the rain the sewer system can retain most of the rainfall volume. The 
basin 94_465011 located in the catchment has a volume of 18 m³ and the basin 94_466205 
67.62 m³ (it is not entirely clear if these basins are only implemented to achieve model 
stability or to represent storage volume). Rainfalls with higher intensities and return 
==PAGE:28==
28 
 
periods result also in increased influences of the SCM catchment area to the overflow, they 
vary between 36.2, 40.4 and 47.1 % for CDS rains T=5, 10 and 100, respectively. The lower 
influence of a CDS rain event of T=10 than T=5 and T=100 can be explained by different 
reaction of the system to the rainfall intensity by e.g. flooding or backwater effects. 
4.1.1 Rainfall and CDS Intensities   
In  Figure 7 and Table 3 the CDS rain events and in Figure 8  the rain events logged at the 
nearest rain gauge 5694 Søborg Vandværk in the period 2011-2015 are illustrated. The 
rain gauge 6181403, 721023 (WGS84 ZONE 32) (Thomsen 2014).  When graphically 
comparing the peak intensities, the logged rain events show only events with return 
periods under 10 years.  
 
Figure 7: Rainfall intensity of CDS rains duration 240 min for different return periods over time (T=1 (black), T=5 
(blue), T=10 (green), T=100 (turquois))  
Table 3: Peak rainfall intensities for CDS with return periods T=1, 5, 10, 100 and duration of 240 min and their 
time of occurrence 
CDS return period 
Peak intensity 
[µm/s] 
Occurrence of Peak [min] 
T=1 
23.8 
120 
T=5 
35.5 
120 
T=10 
41.3 
120 
T=100 
63.2 
120 
 
[µm/s] 
[h] 
==PAGE:29==
29 
 
 
Figure 8: Rainfall intensity at rain gauge 5694 Søborg Vandværk for the period 2011-2015 
This indicates, that the design criteria in the CBM are chosen very conservatively and with 
respect to sustainability for many years to come (Copenhagen City 2012).  
 
4.1.2 CBM Elements for BIR 16.1 and BIR 16.2 
The CBM are composed by different elements, the BIR16.1 project consist of the 
interaction between a Green Roads, Retention Roads, Cloudburst Pipe and Retention 
Space.  They are in the Cloudburst branch Utterslev Mose and part of 13 planned 
Cloudburst Management Projects. The branch has an area of 208 ha and 4797 households 
are connected to it.  In Figure 9 the cloudburst solutions are described in terms of location, 
synergies and investment cost intended by the city of Copenhagen (Copenhagen-City 
2015). 
 
 
[µm/s] 
==PAGE:30==
30 
 
 
 
(a) Cloudburst Solution BIR16.1 
(b) Cloudburst Solution BIR 16.2 
Figure 9: Cloudburst Project in SCM case area cloudburst branch Utterslev Mose (Copenhagen-City 2015) 
4.1.3 Reduced Model  
To safe computational time, the model is reduced to the sewer structure connectedto the 
outlet structure 94_465802_udloeb _ fiktiv case area. Slight differences between the CSO 
volume and flow between the reduced and the original model are recognized. These can 
be explained by deviations caused by the numerical solution from the program or 
deviations from the continuity balance.  
 
Table 4: Comparison between CSO volume for full and cut model in [%] for CDS rain T=1, 5, 10 and 100 with a 
duration of 240 min and simulation time of 480 min  
Overflow volume 
94_465802_udloeb_fiktiv 
[m³] 
CDS T=1 
240 min 
CDS T=5 
240 min 
CDS T=10 
240 min 
CDS T=100 
240 min 
Full model 
2052 
5788 
8247 
17562 
Cut model of SCM case area 
2062 
5681 
8112 
17492 
% deviation 
0.5  
1.9 
1.6 
0.4 
 
Also, CDS rains with return periods of T=1, 5, 10, 100 are tested. The deviation lies in the 
magnitude of 0.4-1.9 % for the tested rain events, listed in Table 4. A RMSE = 0.015 [m3/s] 
is calculated for the discharge in the link between full and cut model. This indicates a good 
representation of the full model by the cut model. The deviation is considered acceptable 
as uncertainty in the model based on faulty input data and model behaviour is more 
significant. 
In Appendix C the deviation from the full model is graphically depicted at the link 
94_466204_466203 (downstream of SCM case area) with a CDS network load of T=10 a 
duration of 240 min and a simulation time of 480 min. Furthermore, no suitable other case 
areas are found in the ICLYN model from HOFOR and in order to optimize the time 
available during this thesis the decision for this case area is made.  
 
==PAGE:31==
31 
 
4.2 
Modelling Storm water Control Measures in MIKE Urban  
The SCM modelled in this thesis are the Cloudburst Projects BIR 16.1 and BIR 16.2 from 
the Cloudburst Management Plan (Copenhagen-City 2015), highlighted in Figure 6 and 
Figure 9.  
While building the model in MIKE Urban different model errors and functional problems 
occurred. The outcomes of the (heuristic) troubleshooting and calibration approaches are 
documented in the following chapter.  
A. Dimensions of CRS profile and Retention Space volume, following realistic 
restrictions.  
Firstly, the runoff occurring in the catchment of the CBM (BIR 16.1 and BIR 16.2, compare 
Figure 9) is calculated for the different CDS rains. Then the CBMs are dimensioned 
representing a possible realistic implementation and the ability to convey a runoff from a 
CDS rain T=100 duration 240 min. Street length, green space dimensions, road width and 
vegetation is considered. Google Earth images are used, compare Figure 5,  Figure 10 and 
Figure 12. 
 
Figure 10: Retention Spaces from BIR 16.1, BIR16.2 and football field dimensions in SCM case area (image from 
Google Earth) 
The Retention Space BIR 16.1 is defined with a volume of 300 m3, the Retention Space of 
BIR 16.2 with 791.8 m3. At the end of the Retention Road of BIR 16.1 the water is conveyed 
to the football field of Boldclubben Stefan, a volume of 1200 m3 is specified based on the 
elevation profile extracted from Google Earth, exact calculations are documented in 
Appendix D.  In Appendix E the node level and longitudinal profile of the sewer system in 
the SCM case area is shown.  
For the cross section of the Retention Roads a CRS profile is defined. In a first step, a CRS 
profile representing realistic dimensions, is defined and tested, if it can convey a CDS 
T=100 with a duration of 240 min. The profile proved to be able to convey the CDS rain 
and is therefore used. The middle part of 6 m represents the street which can be flooded 
up to 0.5 m, the inner left bank represents the bike path, which is listed as synergy project 
in the Cloudburst Management Plan (Copenhagen City 2015), the inner right bank parking 
spots. The inner banks can be flooded up to 0.4 m.  The outer banks represent the green 
Football Court 
Boldclubben Stefan 
BIR 16.1 
BIR 16.2 
==PAGE:32==
32 
 
space, footpath and the private land, which can be flooded up to 0.1 m in extreme cases. A 
small cavity with V-shape is implemented (Hight 0.02 m, length 0.2m) to improve model 
stability, compare Figure 11. The Cloudburst Pipe is set to a diameter of 2 m and an O-
shape following the shape of the sewer system.  No initial loss is increased for the BIR 16.1 
Retention Road, representing additional infiltration spaces. This is not done because the 
plans for this measure are interpreted as not adding additional green space. On the 
roadside of the street trees are already existent, visible in Figure 10 and Figure 12. 
 
Figure 11: CRS profile for Retention Road from CBM BIR 16.1 
The CBM BIR 16.1 is subdivided in Cloudburst Pipe and Retention Road, in Figure 13 the 
elevation profile from Google Earth and the division is graphically displayed. The elevation 
marked orange does not match with the DEM elevation model deposited in MIKE Urban, 
illustrated in Figure 13. As HOFOR plans to convey the water into the direction of the 
Retention Space of Football Field of Boldclubben Stefan alteration of the elevation profile 
might be necessary. The Cloudburst Pipe is planned for the section of the Retention Road, 
where an elevation must be surpassed, illustrated as well in Figure 12. 
 
Figure 12: Google Earth Image from CBM with elevation profile and indication of BIR 16.1, change in elevation for 
construction (orange)
 
==PAGE:33==
33 
 
Figure 13: Longitudinal Profile of Implementation of CBM BIR 16.1 in MIKE Urban (the diameter of the 
Cloudburst Pipe is set to 2 m and falsely displayed in the profile generated by MIKE Urban, no reason hereof could 
be determined) 
In Figure 13 the implementation of the CBM BIR 16.1 is displayed in MIKE Urban, 
following the plans of Cloudburst Management Plan displayed in Figure 6. A sink is 
created in the right turn of Hyrdevangen Street, due to the existing elevation profile, which 
redirects water to BIR 16.1, compare Figure 10.  In reality, to direct the water towards the 
Retention Space Football Field of Boldclubben Stefan, the elevation profile of the 
Retention Road must be altered. The beginning of the Cloudburst Pipe in the turn of the 
Hyrdevangen Street could also be discussed but must lead to an alteration of the existing 
elevation profile in the area as well.    
The connection of the storm water runoff from Strandvaenget_44 catchment is directly 
connected to the Retention Space BIR 16.2. Moreover, the catchment runoff is subdivided 
in sewer and storm water runoff. The storm water runoff is connected to the 
corresponding link in the CBM whereas the sewer discharge stays connected to the sewer 
network.  
For the basins representing the Retention Spaces the elevation of the manhole connecting 
the basin and the orifices equals or is lower than the ground level of the basin. This is done 
to avoid backwater effects.  
In Appendix D also a calculation of the maximum possible storage volume above-ground in 
the Retention Road and the Retention Spaces is listed.  According to the volume 
comparison between runoff and storage in the CBM for CDS rains of the magnitude T=1, 5 
and 10 with duration of 240 min, hypothetically 100% of the occurring storm water runoff 
could be retained above-ground and slowly released to the sewer system. 59.25% of a CDS 
T=100 rain with duration of 240 min could be retained above-ground in the case area. 
Theoretically this could cause the intended effect of a reduction of the CSO volume.  This 
will be investigated in the following sections after running a network model in MIKE 
Urban.  
 
 
==PAGE:34==
34 
B. Different sequel of links and manholes connecting the sewer system with the 
CBM. 
The sewer system and the CBM are specified with a manhole (CBM), link, manhole, orifice, 
manhole, link, manhole (sewer system) sequel. A sequel manhole (CBM), orifice, manhole 
(sewer system) lead to a faulty flow situation, compare User Guide MIKE Urban (DHI 
2017), results listed in Table 5. 
C. Different diameters of links and manholes connecting the sewer system with 
the CBM 
The manholes aside from the manhole of the CBM and sewer system branch have a 
diameter of 2 m and a depth of 2 m. The link and orifice have a rectangular profile with 2 
m height and 2 m width and the links have a length of 10 m (min link length). For model 
stability reasons dimensions could not be decrease further, listed in Table 5. An 
implementation in reality with these dimensions although, seems unlikely. The discharge 
coefficient for the orifices is set to be 1, the default setting of MIKE Urban. For the orifice 
connecting the CBM with the existing basin 94_466205 special connection diameters are 
chosen, highlighted in yellow in Figure 14. This is necessary because of the backwater 
effect, leading to an exceeded filling volume in the Retention Space of the Football Field of 
Boldclubben Stefan. This decision could be criticized the argument of exceeded filling of 
the Retention Space also holds true for BIR 16.1 (documented in the following) but as the 
basin has a very small volume (65 m3) and might be only implemented by HOFOR for 
model stability reasons, the strong backwater effect modelled by MIKE Urban might not 
correspond to reality anyhow.  
 
Figure 14: Graphical Display of the implemented structures in MIKE Urban User Interface with annotation 
explaining function of MU elements  
 
BIR 16.2 
BIR 16.1 
Football Field of 
Boldclubben 
Stefan
CBM 
Existing sewer network  
Orifices connecting CBM 
and existing sewer network  
Orifices connecting CBM and 
Retention Space   
==PAGE:35==
35 
D. Implementing a cloudburst measure upstream (BIR 15.2) and in a 
contributing branch (BIR 16.3) 
The CBMs implemented are lying in an area are several other CBM interact with each 
other. During the dimensioning the discharge influence from upstream into the modelled 
CBM and from a contributing branch are decrease by implementing partly also the CBM 
BIR 15.2 and BIR 16.3. For BIR 15.2 a Retention Space with a volume of 2000 m3 is 
implemented. And for BIR 16.3 the imperviousness of the catchment Strandvaenget_50 is 
decreased. It is assumed, that 700 m2 of green road with an imperviousness of 30% would 
be implemented, which changed the total imperviousness in the catchment from 44.78 % 
to 42.53 %.  
E. Changing configuration settings in the INI-file to allow simulation to run. 
The flood limit for basins in the configuration settings (INI-file) are changed to 200 m to 
make the simulation of a CDS T=100 and duration 240 min run. The initial settings from 
HOFOR for this setting are changed to 150 m instead of 25 m default value.  
 
F. Diameter of Cloudburst Pipe 
The maximum level of flow in the Cloudburst Pipe at a CDS rain T=100 and duration of 
240 min is observed to be 0.5 m. The diameter of the Pipe is changed from 2 m to 0.8 m 
but this changed the drainage situation significantly. To keep the system stable while 
simulation the pipe diameter is kept at 2 m. When implementing flaps to avoid sewer 
discharge to enter the Cloudburst Pipes, the simulation did not run anymore. 
 
Continuity Balance 
After the calibration process described in the sections 4.1. A - 4.1.F, the network 
simulation of the model with implemented CBM is able to run for a CDS rain T=100 
duration of 240 min and simulation time of 480 min. Also, the volume for a CDS rain of 
T=1 duration 240 min and simulation time of 480 min in the links in the SCM case area are 
compared for the model with and without CBM (in the CBM model the Manning number in 
the Retention Road is set to 75, as no water is expected to reach above ground Retention 
Road), illustrated in Appendix F. This is done to prove that the implementation of the CBM 
is not faulty and the same amount of water is present with and without CBM.  The volume 
in the links in the model without CBM is 37396 m3 and with CBM 37800 m3. The 
difference is 404.2 m3 and equals 1.07 % and can be explained with the deviation 
occurring due to the numerical solution from the program and the deviation resulting 
from the continuity balance. The water generated in empty parts of the system increased 
from 57 m3 to 1458 m3 because water is generated in the small v-profile of the CBM and in 
the implemented basins. This is further studied in calibration step G.  
 
 
==PAGE:36==
36 
Interim results from calibration steps A.-F. are listed in Table 5. 
Table 5: Interim results from calibration steps compare accumulated volume in SCM for the cut model and the cut 
model with implemented CBM for a CDS rain of T=1 duration 240 min and simulation time of 480 min  
Calibration steps 
Accumulated 
volume in 
SCM cut 
model [m3] 
Accumulated 
volume in SCM 
cut model with 
implemented 
CBM [m3] 
Difference 
[m3] 
Difference  
[%] 
C. D=1m for 
orifices 
37800 
30668 
 
7132 
23.3 % 
D. Sequel manhole 
(CBM), orifice, 
manhole (sewer 
system) 
37800 
34840 
 
2960 
7.8 % 
 
G. Diameter of Manholes connecting CBM and link to orifices 
Furthermore, the different start volumes and total inflow volumes of the continuity 
balances calculated by MIKE Urban are compared. When increasing only the diameter of 
the manhole, connecting the CBM with the link to the orifice, to 3 m, the volumes 
calculated in each component of the continuity balance are not varying significantly and 
thus the results are comparable. The results of the calibration step G are displayed in 
Table 6. Also, a change in the accumulated volume in the SCM case area is observed. The 
accumulated volume is increased to 37997 m3 and hence the deviation is decreased to 0.5 
% towards the cut model. 
Table 6: Result of continuity balance calculated by MIKE Urban for the cut model and the cut model with 
implemented CBM  
Volume [m3] 
Cut model 
Cut model with 
implemented CBM 
calibration step D 
Cut model with 
implemented CBM 
calibration step G 
(1) Start volume  
47 
43 
45 
(2) End volume  
33334 
27331 
33332 
(3) Total inflow 
32885 
30949 
32885 
(4) Total diverted 
971 
3369 
970 
 
(5) Water generated 
in empty parts of the 
system 
1458 
57 
1459 
 
An attempt is made to decrease the volume generate in the empty parts of the system by 
changing the basin geometry so a small extra volume on the bottom would only be filled. 
==PAGE:37==
37 
This did not result in a decrease in generated water on the surface, hence it can be 
concluded that the water results from the CRS profiles and the manholes. 
It must be acknowledged, that the results could be further improved by changing the set 
values targeted in step A, C, D and F in a trial and error iterative process, due to time 
restriction of the thesis this is not pursued. 
Design Criteria 
After the calibration steps the simulation is able to run for a CDS rain T=100 duration 240 
min and simulation time 480 min. Moreover, the calibration results in a model, which 
fulfills the continuity balance with an acceptable deviation.  
For the Retention Road three methods are tested to model the enhanced retention effect of 
the Retention Road and are evaluated to meet the design criteria set in chapter 3.2.1. 
Hence, after the implementation, it is verified if the governing design criteria set in the 
Cloudburst Management Plan are fulfilled (design criteria 1-3) and the retention ability is 
determined by the magnitude and time of the occurring peak flow (design criteria 4).   
4.2.1 Methodology 1 
Increasing surface roughness with the Manning number in the CBM, with the aim to 
decrease the flow velocity on the Retention Road and therefore increase the 
retention above-ground, representing green solutions.  
 
Manning numbers 75 representing normal concrete, 68 representing rough concrete or 
rubble stone predefined in MIKE Urban and 45 representing natural river with soil and 
medium gravel bed (Schneider and Bertig 1996) are tested. The Cloudburst Pipes are 
assumed to be realized with rough concrete, brickwork would also be possible resulting in 
roughly the same Manning number of 68 predefined in MIKE Urban. The connecting pipes 
between Cloudburst Measure and sewer system are defined with Manning number 85 
representing smooth concrete. An increased Manning number is expected to decrease 
shear stress and to increase flow velocity, the water is supposed to run fast in the 
connection thus a high manning number is chosen. The Manning number 45 representing 
the natural river bed was defined in MIKE Urban under Materials. Plastic for the 
Cloudburst Pipe as possible material, with a Manning number of 80 is also applicable. 
Although it is expected, that the higher Manning number will lead to less shear stress in 
the pipe and will therefore not contribute to a decreased flow velocity in the pipe and is 
therefore not examined. The evaluation is based on the results of a network simulation by 
loading the system with a runoff from a CDS rain T=100, 10, 5, duration 240 min and 
running the model for 480 min. The result showed, that with a decrease of the Manning 
number the flow velocity on the surface is decreased. For the results of a CDS rain T=100 
the highest flow velocity observed for Manning number 75 with 0.039 [m/s], followed by 
Manning number 68 with 0.036 [m/s] and 45 with 0.024 [m/s]. For the Manning number 
45, the maximum flow velocity was decreased by 38.5 % and for 68 by 7.7 % in 
comparison to Manning number 75 velocity. With the decrease of the flow velocity, caused 
by the increased roughness of the surface and hence increased shear stress it is expected 
to obtain a retardation effect in the flow situation. This is further studied in the following: 
 
The evaluation of the results showed, that the decreased flow velocity did not result in 
meeting the set governing design criteria. With a CDS rain of T=5 and a duration of 240 
min for all three Manning numbers the ground level is still exceeded at the Retention 
Space from BIR16.1 (basin 161_rs) by 0.79 m (Manning 75, 68 and 45).  This is caused 
partially by the influence of combined sewer inflow from the Strandvaenget catchments 
37 and 48 which they contribute to 22.6 % of the inflow into the case area; however, no 
CBM is planned for them. Additionally, inflow from the connected catchments upstream 
==PAGE:38==
38 
and downstream (because of slope Hydra_2, illustrated in Figure 12) influence the 
exceedance of the ground level even though the CBM 15.2 was implemented partially, 
displayed in Figure 15: hence the first criterion is not met. The flood limit changed in the 
Configuration file allows the exceedance of the basin volume, discussed in section 4.2.E.   
 
 
Figure 15: Graphical display of inflow into basin 161_rs representing Retention Space in BIR 16.1 
Furthermore, the filling volume and the degree of exceedance of the Retention Space for a 
CDS rain T=10 duration 240 min and simulation time 480 min are listed in Appendix G.1.   
The second criterion is, hence, also not met, since pressure already forces the combined 
sewer discharge above-ground for a 10-year event. 
The third criterion is fulfilled, with the restriction, that the filling volume of the basin 
161_rs is exceeded. A small amount of water is generated on the surface of the Retention 
Road and also the storm water runoff is connected to the CBM, creating a low level but 
consistent volume of water. The observed generated discharge on the CRS profiles of the 
Retention Road BIR 16.1 varies between 0.00002-0.00003 [m3/s]. 
 
For the fourth criterion the peak flows for CDS rain load T=10 in the link 
94_466204_466203 downstream of the CBM are compared for the different tested 
Manning numbers. This link is chosen as the effect from the upstream CBMs are expected 
to be visible. The peak flow velocity for the models with implemented CBM and varying 
Manning numbers is lower than that of the cut model, listed in Table 7. The reduction lies 
at 19 % for all Manning numbers.  
  
In the accumulated flow through the pipe a variation is recognized, illustrated in Table 7 
and Figure 16. The accumulated flow through the pipe is higher for the model with 
Manning number 68 in comparison to 45 and 75. The accumulated flow for Manning 75, 
68 and 45 deviates insignificantly but is 10.1 % higher than the one of the cut model. 
 
 
Inflow Strangvaenget 
37 and 48  
Inflow from 
downstream because of 
Inflow from upstream  
==PAGE:39==
39 
Table 7: Peak flow comparison for different Manning numbers, time of occurrence, magnitude and accumulated 
volume over simulation period in link 94_466204_466203, CDS T=10 duration 240 min, simulation time 480 min 
 
 
Figure 16: Hydrograph in link 94_466204_466203 model methodology 1 (Manning number 45 (blue), Manning 
number 68 (violet crosses), Manning number 75 (pink)) and cut model (black), CDS T=10 duration 240 min, 
simulation time 480 min 
Two extremes in the same range of magnitude are observed for the flow of the model with 
CBM, illustrated in Figure 16. The first extreme which is in roughly in the same time 
period as the one of the cut model, can be explained by the discharge through the sewer 
system. The peak of the cut model occurs after 1:22 h which is 38 min before the peak rain 
intensity. The second extreme from the models with CBM and varying Manning numbers 
is higher and occurs after 2:49. Small variations are observed between the model with 
Manning number 75 and 68 and the model with Manning number 45 deviates from the 
two. In general, the deviations are very small and can be explained by the very small 
amount of water actually running above-ground in the CBM in the models, as excess water 
is led to the Retention Space basin 161_rs. 
The variation in the peak flow magnitude and time of occurrence must result from the 
implemented CBM not from a changed inflow situation as proven with the continuity 
balance in the sections before. The decreased first peak flow can be explained by water 
stored in the Retention Space basins and the deviation in the added nodes, links and 
 
Peak flow [m3/s] 
Time [h]  
Accumulated flow  
[ m3] 
Cut Model without CBM  0.33 
1:22 
2828 
Model with Manning 
Number 68 
0.27 
2:49 
3147 
Model with Manning 
Number 75 
0.27 
2:49 
3146 
Model with Manning 
Number 45 
0.27 
2:49 
3146 
[m3/s] 
[h] 
==PAGE:40==
40 
structures in MIKE Urban model (for this runoff load no water is lead above-ground, into 
Retention Road). The second peak can be caused by water flowing back into the sewer 
network from the links connecting the Retention Road and the Cloudburst Pipes after 
being retained there whilst the sewer network was fully filled during the first peak flow. 
The generally decreased flow can be explained by water being stored in the basins and not 
released back in the sewer system. 
Moreover, the changes in the accumulated flow could indicate different CSO volumes. In 
Table 8 the CSO volumes of the models with different Manning numbers in the cloudburst 
measure are compared. For the Manning number 45 the overflow volume was reduced the 
most in comparison to the cut model, a reduction of 42.3 % is observed. The reduction for 
model with Manning number 75 and 68 are relative the same until the second digit. This 
could indicate, that a decreased accumulated flow in the pipe leads to a decreased CSO 
volume, this is further investigated with the different methodologies.  
Table 8: Comparison of CSO volume in case area for CDS T=10 duration 240 min, simulation time 480 min, 
methodology 1 and 3 with the cut model, indication of the total CSO reduction by the CBM with different 
methodologies 
 
When varying the Manning numbers, a decreased flow velocity on the surface of the CBM 
but no decrease of the CSO volume nor a significant delay and or decrease in the peak flow 
are observed. For a decreased Manning number on the contrary an increase in CSO volume 
in the case area is observed. 
The second maximum flow and the increased accumulated flow does not indicate a 
positive influence as expected on the system by the CBM. This may lead to the conclusion 
that the peak flow and accumulated flow situation are influenced by the pressure situation 
in the system in a complexity which does not allow conclusions towards the retention 
ability of the system. The findings are coherent with Roemer’s, and this methodology is 
hence not recommended to model green solutions (Roemer 2017). It must be mentioned, 
that no actual Manning values for Retention Roads are available and therefore it is not 
possible to evaluate which Manning number returns a realistic result (Roemer 2017). For 
further modelling the Manning number 45 is used, as it resulted in the highest decrease of 
CSO volume (0.02 %).  
4.2.2 Methodology 2 
Modelling the connection from the Retention Road to the sewer system with a 
throttle pipe and restricting the inflow into the sewer system or Cloudburst 
Measure. Done with a discharge water level restriction (Q-H) in MIKE Urban.   
 
This method has proved to be only suitable for specific cases. It is possible to restrict the 
flow into the sewer system and therefore retain water above-ground or prevent water to 
flow into the CBM but only, if the discharge in the pipes is known beforehand.  A general 
restriction applicable for different discharges and corresponding water levels is not 
CDS T=10  
Cut model 
CDS T=10 
Manning 
45 in CBM 
[m3] 
CDS T=10 
Manning 
75 in CBM 
[m3] 
CDS T=10 
Manning 
68 in CBM 
[m3] 
Total CSO Volume [m3] 
21087 
12170.41 
12174.01 
12174.51 
% reduction 
 
42.29 
42.27 
42.27 
==PAGE:41==
41 
possible to define. A use of a throttle pipes would be applicable if the network should only 
react when a certain discharge occurs.  
At this step of the model calibration it also becomes clear, that the model with static 
connection settings, will not be able to follow the intention that if the sewer system has 
remaining capacity all the storm water will be directed there firstly and then will be 
diverted above- ground. This is because the water level and the discharge in the system is 
varying for every rain event and the basin 161_rs is filled excessively.   
 
4.2.3 Methodology 3 
Increasing the Retention Space volume connected to the Retention Road to 
represent storage volume above-ground from blue solutions, like rain or roadside 
beds.  
 
It was assumed, that per 25 m Retention Road, an additional Retention Space with a 
volume of 5 m3 could be realized.  
In Table 9 the calculated additional storage volume and total increased storage volume in 
the Retention Spaces is displayed. The calculation for the length of the Retention Road 
discharging into the Retention Space can be followed in Appendix D.  
Table 9: Additional and total retention volume of the different Retention Spaces in SCM case area (colors are a 
guideline for better reading of Appendix D) 
 
By changing the Retention Space volume, the governing design criteria set in the 
Cloudburst Management Plan are not possible to be met. The evaluation is based on the 
results of a network simulation by loading the system with a runoff from a CDS rain 
T=100, 10, 5, duration 240 min and running the model for 420 min. With a CDS rain of T=5 
and duration of 240 min for the ground level is still exceeded at the Retention Space from 
BIR16.1 (basin 161_rs) by 0.76 m. As above described, sewer discharge is pressed into the 
basin, hence the first criterion is not met, compare Figure 15. This shows a positive 
impact of the increased volume on the exceeded level, its 0.03 m lower than with 
methodology 1 (Manning number 68). Additionally, the filling volume and the degree of 
exceedance of the Retention Spaces for a CDS rain T=10 duration 240 min and simulation 
time 480 min are listed and compared to the model from methodology 1 in Appendix G.2.  
A reduction in the exceeding volume from 2632 to 2222 % for the basin 161_rs are 
documented. The second criterion is hence neither met, as combined sewer is pressured 
up already for a 10-year event. 
 
The third criterion is fulfilled, with the restriction, that the filling volume of the basin 
161_rs is exceeded, no exceedance of the ground level other than at basin 161_rs and no 
other water than the auto generated one in the Retention Road is observed. 
For the forth criterion the peak flows for the load of CDS rain T=10 in the link 
94_466204_466203 downstream of the CBM are compared between the model with 
increased Retention Space volume and the one without (methodology 1, Manning number 
Retention Space 
basin 
Length Retention 
Road discharging 
into Retention 
Space basin 
Additional storage 
on surface of 
Retention Road 
[m3] 
Increased total 
storage volume in 
Retention Space 
basin [m3] 
fb 
179.6 
35.9 
1236 
BIR 16.2 
162.5 
32.5 
830.5 
BIR 16.1 
291.3 
58.3 
358.3 
==PAGE:42==
42 
set to 45), illustrated in Table 10 and Figure 17. For the increased Retention Space basin, 
no change in the peak flow but an accumulated flow from 3146 to 3122 [m3] occurs, at the 
same time step (variation in the millisecond scale caused by numerical computational 
solution of MIKE 1D engine) compared to model with Manning number 45. The decrease 
in accumulated flow between model from methodology 1 and 3 can be related to the 
increased basin size. More water is stored in the basins. The magnitude of the effect with 
0.8 % decrease is very low as also the increased basin size is very small. The accumulated 
flow is although still higher than the one of the cut model and can indicate more water 
being discharged through this pipe, listed in Table 10. This can be caused by the fact that 
more water is conveyed in the network (CBM and sewer network) because less flooding 
occurs on the surface. Or also that the pressure situation in the system contributes to the 
peak flow and accumulated flow in a complexity which does not allow conclusions 
towards the retention ability of the system. 
Table 10: Peak flow comparison for cut model, methodology 1 (Manning number 45) and methodology 3 
(Manning number 45 and increased basin size) model; time and magnitude and accumulated volume over 
simulation period, CDS T=10 duration 240 min, simulation time 480 min, in link 94_466204_466203 
 
 
Figure 17: Hydrograph for methodology 3 (increased basin size with manning number 45) (darkred) compared to 
methodology 1 (Manning number 45) (blue) and cut model scenario (black), CDS T=10 duration 240 min, 
simulation time 480 min, in link 94_466204_466203 
 
 
Peak flow [m3/s] 
Time [h] 
Accumulated flow 
[ m3] 
Cut model 
0.33 
1:22 
2828 
Methodology 3 model -
Bigger Basin 
0.26 
 
2:49 
312 
Methodology 1 model - 
Manning number 45 
0.26 
2:49 
3146 
[m3/s] 
[h] 
==PAGE:43==
43 
The hydrographs in Figure 17 show the behaviour of the models for the flow in the link 
94_466204_466203 downstream of the CBM. Also for the model from methodology 3 two 
flow extremes are observed. The flow of methodology 3 model increases faster in the 
beginning of the modelled period. The hydrograph from methodology 1 and methodology 
3 are following roughly the same extremes. For the second peak flow a decreased 
discharge for model with methodology 3 is observed. This can be explained with the 
increased storage volume; more water can be stored above-ground and thus decrease the 
discharge through the pipe.  
In Table 11 the total CSO volume in the case area for methodology 1 (Manning number 45) 
and methodology 3 (Manning number 45 and increased basin size) are summarized and 
compared to the cut model simulation results for a CDS rain event T=10 duration 240 min 
and simulation time 480 min. 
Table 11: Total CSO volume in case area, comparison methodology 1 and 3 with the cut model scenario, 
indication of the total CSO reduction by the CBM with different methodologies for CDS T=10 duration 240 min, 
simulation time 480 min 
CDS T=10  
Cut model 
CDS T=10 
Methodology 3 
model - Bigger 
Basin [m3] 
CDS T=10 
Methodology 1 
model - Manning 
45 in CBM [m3] 
Total CSO Volume [m3] 
21087 
9777 
12170 
% reduction 
 
54 
42 
 
An increase in the basin sizes shows a decrease in the CSO volume by 54 % towards the 
cut model scenario for a CDS rain with T=10. It represents an increase of 12 % towards 
the methodology 1 with Manning number 45. This shows, that even a small increase in 
basin volume representing the Retention Spaces (volume increase of 3 % for basin fb, 4.9 
% for basin 162_rs and 12.2 % for basin 161_rs) result in a significant impact on CSO 
volume in the case area.  
As the implementation of basins in general has shown an improvement in decreasing the 
CSO volume, therefore additional Retention Space like rain or roadside beds will be 
modelled with an increased basin volume of the Retentions Space in MIKE Urban in this 
thesis. Due to the exorbitant filling of the basin of Retention Space BIR 16.1 the modelling 
approach could be validated false-positive. 
Retention Space  
The last step in the modelling of the CBMs, the emptying of the basins representing the 
Retention Spaces, is added, to reproduce a realistic runoff situation. This is realized with 
pumps connecting the Retention Space basins and the sewer network. Constant speed 
pumps with the pumping power to empty every basin within an hour are implemented, for 
the basin fb the pumping speed was lowered as the receiving sewer network part was not 
able to discharge this amount of water and the simulation was not able to run. In Table 12 
the characteristics of the implemented pumps are listed.  
 
 
==PAGE:44==
44 
Table 12: Overview of characteristics of constant pumping speed pumps implemented in the CBM, start, stop level, 
name and pumping speed  
Retention Space  
Name 
basin MU 
Pumping 
speed 
[m3/s] 
Start 
Level 
[m] 
Stop Level [m] 
Football Court Boldclubben 
Stefan 
fb 
0.3  
13.2 
5.8 
BIR 16.1 
161_rs 
0.1 
13.0 
5.4 
BIR 16.2 
162_rs 
0.3 
18.2 
10.6 
BIR 15.2 
upstream  
0.5 
20.1 
10.6 
 
The pumps will start emptying the basin, when the water level is below 2 m of the ground 
level of the basin. This modification is expected to stop or at least decrease the ground 
level exceedance for the basins 161_rs and fb. For this model the basin size is kept 
increased and the Manning number in the CBM is chosen to be 45. This model is in the 
following called methodology 3 with pumping. 
As for the methodologies 1 and 3 the results of the model with emptying of the Retention 
Spaces are checked for meeting the governing design criteria. The evaluation is based on 
the results of a network simulation by loading the system with a runoff from a CDS rain 
T=100, 10, 5, duration 240 min and simulation time of 480 min.  With a CDS rain of T=5 
the ground level is still exceeded at the Retention Space from BIR16.1 (basin 161_rs) by 
1.12 m, the first design criterion is therefore not met. As above described, sewer water is 
pressed into the basin, compare Figure 15. This shows a negative impact of the pumping 
on the exceeded level, its 0.33 m higher than using methodology 1 and 0.36 m higher than 
by using methodology 3 without pumping. The second criterion is hence neither met, 
ground level is exceeded for the Retention Spaces basin 161_rs and fb.  
The third criterion is fulfilled, with the restriction, that the filling volume of the basin 
161_rs is exceeded, no exceedance of the ground level other than at basin 161_rs and no 
other water than the auto generated one in the Retention Road is observed. 
 
For the forth criterion the different peak flow volumes and the time of occurrence as well 
as the accumulated flows are listed in Table 13. The peak flow increased for methodology 
3 with pumping to methodology 3 model from 0.26 to 0.33 [m3/s] but is lower than the cut 
model peak flow 0.35 [m3/s], compare Table 13. Methodology 3 with pumping delays the 
peak flow by one minute compared to the cut model. It must be acknowledged that the 
saving time step for the simulation result was set to 1 min, hence if the peak flow delay is 
shorter than one minute, it cannot be depicted here. By implanting the emptying 
possibility of the basin, an increase in the accumulated flow is recognized from 3146 to 
4002 [m3] between model with methodology 3 and model with methodology 3 with 
pumping. The basin filling for methodology 3 with pumping is documented in Appendix 
G.3. A decrease in the filling of basin 161_rs is recognized from 7959 to 7882 [m3]. The 
design criteria set in the Cloudburst Management plan remain unfulfilled for the Retention 
Space BIR 16.1.  
 
 
==PAGE:45==
45 
Table 13: Peak flow comparison for methodology 1 (Manning number 68), methodology 3 (increased basin size 
with manning number 45) and methodology 3 (increased basin size with manning number 45) with pumping; 
time and magnitude and accumulated volume over simulation period, CDS T=10 duration 240 min, simulation 
time 480 min, in link 94_466204_466203 
 
 
Figure 18: Hydrograph of the methodology 1 (Manning number 45) (blue), methodology 3 (increased basin size 
with manning number 45) (red), cut (black), and methodology 3 (increased basin size with manning number 45) 
with pumping implemented (green), CDS T=10 duration 240 min, simulation time 480 min, in link 
94_466204_466203 
In Figure 18 the different methodologies are graphically compared. The extremes in flow 
are more distinct for methodology 3 with pumping, the peak flow is increased. And the 
duration of the second peak is longer. The flow reaches an inflection point at time 05:28 h, 
the flow reaches a higher magnitude as the compared flows of methodology 1, cut and 
methodology 3 model.  
The decrease in basin filling explains the changed flow situation. Water is led through the 
Retention Space into the sewer system and therefore increase the flow volume by 
conveying the water back to the sewer network. In Figure 19 this is graphically displayed, 
the retained volume in the basins is displayed.  
 
Peak flow 
[m3/s] 
Time [h] 
Accumulated 
flow [ m3] 
Cut model 
0.35 
1:12 
2924 
Methodology 3 model - 
Bigger Basin 
0.26 
 
2:49 
3122 
Methodology 3 model –  
Bigger Basin, Manning 
Number 45, pumping 
0.33 
1:13 
4002 
Methodology 1 model –  
Manning number 45 
0.26 
2:49 
3146 
[m3/s] 
[h] 
==PAGE:46==
46 
 
Figure 19: Graphical display of basin volume for methodology 3 and methodology 3 with pumping (dotted), basin 
Retention Space basin BIR 16.1 (blue), and Retention Space basin BIR 16.2 (black), Retention Space Football 
Court Boldclubben Stefan (orange), Retention Space BIR 15.2 (green), CDS T=10 duration 240 min, simulation 
time 480 min 
For basin of Retention Space BIR 16.2 we achieve a full emptying once after 0:38 h. After 
the water volume increases again until it reaches the pump start level again. For Retention 
Space BR 15.2 a slight decrease of the peak volume can be observed, this could indicate, 
that the pumping speed is too low to empty this basin. Also for Retention Space Football 
Court Boldclubben Stefan and BIR 16.1 only a slight decrease in volume could be 
observed, which could have the same reason. An increase pumping speed here resulted in 
the failure to run the simulation. In the end of the simulation period there is still water 
retained in the basins, a different start and stop level for the pumps, different pumping 
speeds, restrictions with pumping speed related to water level or longer simulation period 
could be defined to empty the basins. This is not followed up on, as at that point in the 
thesis it is expected that by implementing a control scheme the set design criteria can be 
reached in a more effective way. 
The accumulated volume in the link 94_466204_466203 is studied in the following: the 
deviation from the accumulated volume in the link for the cut and the methodology 3 plus 
pumping model can be caused by the fact, that the basins are not completely emptied or 
the start and stop level of the pump are not reached with this specific load of the model 
CDS T=10. A higher accumulated flow can although result in a higher CSO volume as it was 
the case in with the model from methodology 3. In Table 14 the total CSO volumes in the 
study area are listed for the methodology 1, 3, cut and methodology 3 with pumping. By 
implementing the emptying functionality, the CSO reduction of overflow volume reduces 
to 51 %. The increase in overflow volume was expected, as less water is stored in the 
basin, compare graphical display in Figure 19. 
 
 
 
[h] 
[m3] 
==PAGE:47==
47 
Table 14: Total CSO volume in case area for CDS T=10 duration 240 min, simulation time 480 min, comparison 
the methodology 1(increased basin), methodology 3 (increased basin size with manning number 45), cut and 
methodology 3 (increased basin size with manning number 45) with pumping indication of the total CSO 
reduction by the CBM with different methodologies 
CDS T=10  
Cut model 
 
CDS T=10 
Methodology 
1 model 
Manning 45 
in CBM [m3] 
CDS T=10 
Methodology 
3 model  
Bigger Basin 
[m3] 
CDS T=10 
Methodology 3 
model  
Bigger Basin + 
pumping [m3] 
Total CSO Volume 
[m3] 
21087 
12170 
9777 
10269 
% reduction 
 
42 
54 
51 
 
The result from methodology 3 with pumping also prove, that an accumulated flow 
volume does not indicate an increase in CSO volume and further, that an increased peak 
flow does not lead to an increase in CSO volume in the case area either. Hence, these 
criteria do not follow the expected results, with a decreased CSO volume we have also a 
decreased peak flow. This can be explained by the complexity of the system and the many 
path the water can chose and the resulting changed pressure situation.  
As the problem with the exceeded filling volume of the basin in Retention Space BIR 16.1 
kept on occurring a solution for this must be found. The source of the problem can be 
traced back to the changed settings in the INI configuration file, compare section 4.2.E and 
the implemented basin geometry. The highest observed water level is equal to pressure 
line in the connected manhole, illustrated in Figure 20. The filling of the manhole 
connecting the Retention Road dictates the hydraulic situation in the basin caused by the 
governing physical equations, continuity and energy conservation equation. Losses in 
pressure for example, due to friction, geodetic height and velocity changes result in a 
lower pressure level for the basin but are still elevated over its ground level. The water 
level in the basin can rise because of the available energy and changed restriction in the 
INI-file for flood limit height in basins.  
 
 
==PAGE:48==
48 
 
Figure 20: Longitudinal Profile of elements connecting Retention Road to Retention Space BIR 16.1, highest 
observed water level is equal to pressure line (red dashed line), blue area is filling of structures at time step 2:28 
h, ground level (dark red line), invert level (black line) (not illustrated for orifices, invert level set to 15 m), 
graphic created with MIKE View 
The solution could be revising the first implemented solution (setting the basin ground 
level lower as the invert level of the connected manhole to avoid backwater effects) and 
setting the ground level of the Retention Space basins equal to the ground level of the 
manhole connecting the basin to the Retention Road, Cloudburst Pipe or sewer network. 
Thus, the level of the basin fb and 161_rs are changed, compare Table 15. The changed 
model is further referred to as methodology 3 with pumping and changed levels of the 
basins. 
Table 15: Overview of characteristics of constant pumping speed pumps implemented in the CBM changed for 
troubleshooting exceeded basin filling  
Retention Space  
Name 
basin MU 
Pumping 
speed 
[m3/s] 
Start 
Level [m] 
Stop Level 
 [m] 
Football Court Boldclubben 
Stefan 
fb 
0.3  
16.35 
8.55 
Retention Space BIR 16.1 
161_rs 
0.1 
16.2 
8.4 
Retention Space BIR 16.2 
162_rs 
0.3 
18.0 
10.2 
Retention Space BIR 15.2 
upstream  
0.5 
20.32 
12.52 
 
As for the methodologies 1,3, and 3 with pumping the results of the model with emptying 
of the Retention Spaces are checked for meeting the governing design criteria. The 
simulation for a CDS rain bigger than T=5 the simulation was not able to run, as the water 
level in the links and nodes in direct vicinity of the inlet to basin 161_rs are exceeded. An 
attempt was made to iteratively define a pumping speed, for the emptying pump of basin 
BIR 16.1, which can generate a balanced situation around the Retention Space BIR 16.1. 
This resulted in a time-consuming process and was not further proceeded. It is, at that 
point of the thesis, expected that it is better to have flooding at only one point in the 
system which can easier be targeted in reality. As also the Retention Space BIR 16.1 lies in 
a depression the accumulation of water there seams realistic. The option to use above-
==PAGE:49==
49 
ground RTC to define the functionality of the Retention Space will be studied in the 
following.   
Effect on CSO Volume at Outlet 94_465802_udloeb_fiktiv 
Under section 4.2.A based on the calculation made prior to running the simulation in MIKE 
Urban, summarized in Appendix D, the hypotheses are made, that T=1, 5 and 10 with 
duration of 240 min, 100% of the occurring storm water runoff (based on results from a 
runoff simulation in MIKE Urban) could be retained above-ground and slowly released to 
the sewer system and for a CDS rain T=100, 59.25%.  Theoretically this could cause the 
intended effect of a reduction of the CSO volume.  
By running network simulation in MIKE Urban with the MOUSE 1D engine total overflow 
volume in the case area was studied throughout the different calibration steps in the 
model. The methodology 3 model with pumping is consider to reflect the reality in the 
best way.  
The CSO at the outlet 94_465802_udloeb_fiktiv for the cut model, the cut model of the SCM 
case area (illustrated in Appendix B) and the model from methodology 3 with pumping 
are compared in Table 16. This outlet is chosen for this comparison as it lies in the SCM 
case area and is the closest connected outlet to the implemented CBM and shows to be 
significantly affected by the implemented CBM, compare Appendix H.1.  
Table 16: Comparison CSO volume for outlet 94_465802_ udloeb_fiktiv for CDS rains T=1, 5, 10 and 100 with a 
duration of 240 min and a simulation time of 480 min for the cut model, cut model of SCM case area and 
methodology 3 with pumping model  
CSO volume 
94_465802_udloeb_ 
fiktiv [m³] 
CDS T=1 
240 min 
and 
simulation 
time 480 
min  
CDS T=5 
240 min 
and 
simulation 
time 480 
min 
CDS T=10 
240 min 
and 
simulation 
time 480 
min 
CDS T=100 
240 min 
and 
simulation 
time 480 
min 
Cut model  
2052 
5788 
8246 
17628 
Cut Model of 
SCM case area 
200 
2053 
3276 
 
8243 
Methodology 3 with 
pumping Model 
(M3P) 
15 (equals 
DWF 
condition)  
47 
494 
3077 
Comparison CSO 
reduction cut model 
to M3P [%] 
99.3 
99.1 
94 
83 
 
The results show, that a reduction of 99.3% for a CDS T=1 was achieved with the CBMs in 
the specific outlet. When running the model with only the DWF the discharge at outlet 
94_465802_udloeb_fiktiv over the simulation period equals 15 [m3]. This would indicate, 
that the CSO caused by storm water is 100 % reduced at this outlet. For the CDS T=5, 10, 
100 the reduction is decreasing from 99.3 % to 83 % and is therefore even higher as the 
prior calculated volumes when connecting only the SCM case area to the outlet. The 
results point towards a decrease in reduction of CSO volume, with an increased return 
time. The values are biased due to adjustments which had to be made to keep the model 
==PAGE:50==
50 
stability (e.g. allowing exorbitant filling of the Retention Space BIR 16.1 and the reduction 
of inflow into the CBM by implementing other CBM (BIR 16.3 and partly BIR 15.2) 
upstream and in contributing branches).  
This also supports the fact, that the system is very complex with strong upstream and 
slight downstream influences. The reduction is significant especially for the rain with 
small return periods. In total a reduction of 51 % (CDS rain event T=10) with the set 
calibration of the model was achieved. This also indicates, that the CBM has more 
significant effects on the outlets in vicinity to it (in case no restrictions in the model are 
set).  
Nevertheless, there is flooding in the area. The ground level exceedances are decreased 
but the volume of the Retention Space from CBM BIR 16.1 is exorbitant exceeded. In 
Appendix H.2 and H.3 the ground level exceedances before and after implementation of 
the CBM are summarized for a CDS rain T=10 duration of 240 min and simulation time of 
480 min. For the cut model the ground level is exceeded in four Manholes (even tough 
available space in sewer system) and for the Model with CBM methodology 3 with 
pumping at one basin. The restriction of the flooding to one node in the system brings the 
advantage, that special measures can be planned for this area. Furthermore, the influence 
from the additional CBM BIR 15.2 and BIR 16.3 is not incorporated in the comparison. 
Which results in the conclusion that the results can result in a false-positive 
interpretation.  
Since the model of the SCM can be differently calibrated, it must be again pointed out, that 
these values can be used to understand a trend in the implemented CBM not as an exact 
quantification of the maximum reduction of the CSO volume.    
Remaining Problems after Calibration Process  
The result of the calibration process of the implementation of the CBM still results in some 
issues: 
1. The goal set to meet the governing design criteria set in the Cloudburst 
Measurement Plan cannot be fulfilled. Flooding occurs in the basin representing 
Retention Space from CBM BIR 16.1 and violates both governing design criteria. 
Methods to change this result led to slight improvements or to unwanted 
depictions of the reality by the model, compare methodology 1, 3 and 3 with 
pumping.  
2. Preventing water to flow into the CBM if the sewer system was not filled or vice 
versa, was also partly prevented by allowing to fill up the Retention Space BIR 16.1 
excessively.   
Three approaches to address CSO’s in cities are mentioned in this thesis: Local Storm 
Water Control Measures SCM (elaborated in 2.1), implement Control of UDS (elaborated in 
2.3) or expand existing structures in the sewer system. In chapter 4.2 the attempt to 
implement local SCM based on the Cloudburst Measurement Plan from the City of 
Copenhagen is described (Copenhagen City 2012). This lead to positive effects on the CSO 
volume along with some modelling problems. Since the option of expanding the existing 
structures can be neglect caused by cost inefficiency the implementation of control is 
chosen to study further in this thesis. In particular above-ground RTC for the SCM build in 
the case area. 
4.3 
Implementation of above-ground Real Time Control  
This part of the thesis aims to study the effect of implementation of above-ground RTC for 
the SCM case area. Control for the SCMs is implemented for the model methodology 3 with 
==PAGE:51==
51 
pumping build in the program MIKE Urban and described in the chapter 4.2.3. MIKE 
Urban offers build-in functions to design RTC scheme, elaborated in chapter 3.3.1. Several 
control schemes for RTC of the model are developed, for the orifices implemented to 
connect the CBM with the sewer system and pumps for emptying the Retention Spaces, 
and compared: 
1. PID control scheme Model 1: PID control of set-point node 94_465802 level in 
combination with direct settings  
2. PID control scheme Model 2: PID control of set-point link 94_465802_fiktiv 
discharge in combination with direct settings 
3. PID control scheme Model 3: PID control of set-point node 94_465007 level in 
combination with direct settings 
4. Direct settings control scheme  
For the pump direct setting control is defined which does not differ for the four control 
schemes because, when using PID control also for the pumps, they are never switched on. 
This is caused by the fact, that the PID control aims to have a specific low discharge or 
water level and hence no extra water from the Retention Spaces is needed for that. The 
control settings for the pumps follow the assumption, that water can only be led back from 
the Retention Space into the sewer system, if the sewer system has capacity. Therefore, a 
start condition is defined for the connection node of the pump, illustrated in Table 17. If 
this criterion is valid the pump is switched on, if this criterion is no valid the pumps is 
switched off. In Appendix I, a map with the location of the pumps can be found. The pumps 
are changed to variable speed pumps, their pumping speed is defined to vary in the range 
of 0.05-0.3 [m3/s]. 
Table 17: Level in the connection node in sewer system for start condition of pumps representing the emptying 
function of the Retention Spaces 
Pump for emptying  
Name connection node 
Water level connection 
node [m] 
Retention Space BIR 16.1 
94_466210 
< 15.8 
Retention Space BIR 16.2 
94_466209 
< 16.2 
Retention Space BIR 15.2 
up_in 
< 18.4 
Retention Space Football 
Court Boldclubben Stefan 
94_465805 
< 16.0 
 
The performance of the different control schemes are evaluated based on these defined 
five criteria;  
A. Storm water should only be diverted into the CBM, if the sewer network has no 
capacity left. 
B. If CSO occurs and the sewer network still has capacity, storm water can be diverted 
into the CBM to decrease CSO volume.  
C. Continuity balance established, elaborated in chapter 3.4.1. 
D. Meet the governing design criteria of the Cloudburst Management Plan and 
resulting criteria, elaborated in chapter 3.4.2. 
 
==PAGE:52==
52 
4.3.1 PID control scheme model 1 
PID control of set-point node 94_465802 level in combination with direct settings  
PID control allows one set point for each simulation. For this control scheme the set point 
was defined to keep the water level in the node 94_465802 at 17.1 m in order to prevent 
water to be discharged over the weir 94 465802w1 and outlet 94 465802 udloeb fiktiv into 
the Utterslev Mose swamp. 
 
In the first step for the orifices 1-6, connection downstream and connection to BIR16.2 
Retention Space, displayed in Appendix I, the PID action to control the level in the node 
94_465802 to 17.1 m was defined. The weir crest level for 94 465802w1 is at 17.19 m. The 
orifices are controlled with a weir. For the orifice connecting to Retention Space BIR 16.1 
restrictions are set that if a basin level of 14.9 m is reached, the orifice weir will be closed 
otherwise it remains open. This exception is made as otherwise also the filling volume of 
the basin is exceeded as experienced and explained in chapter 4.2.3. Moreover, it was also 
possible to implement a flap in the orifices avoiding the flow of sewer discharge onto the 
surface through the orifices. A flap was implemented in the orifices 1-5 and connection 
downstream. In the previous models from methodology 1-methodology 3 with pumping 
this resulted in a crash of the simulation. When running the simulation with the runoff 
load form a CDS rains T=1 with a duration of 240 min and a simulation time of 480 min, 
the ground level is exceeded in several nodes in the simulation most substantially in the 
node Hydra_12 of the CBM. The water level is exceeded in the connection between CBM 
and sewer system. This results in the fact, that the governing design rules set by the City of 
Copenhagen cannot be met.  
 
In an attempt to improve this result, direct setting rules for orifice 3 are defined. If the 
water level in Hydra_12 exceeds 17.9 m, orifice 3 will be closed otherwise it will be open. 
After this modification it became clear, that also with the RTC control scheme it will not be 
possible to meet the defined design rules A-D in chapter 4.3 and 3.4. 
Nevertheless, the results from this simulation are evaluated in the following towards the 
four criteria, so that the four different control schemes are comparable. But the evaluation 
is restricted on the results of a network simulation by loading the system with a runoff 
from a CDS rain T=1 a duration of 240 min and simulation time of 480 min, the water 
levels in the nodes are listed in Appendix J.   
 
A. Storm water should only be diverted into the CBM if the sewer network has no 
capacity left. 
Is met - The results from a small rain runoff CDS rain T=1 show, that the ground level of 
the sewer system are exceeded at certain nodes and that water is diverted above-ground 
in the CBMs.  
B. If CSO occurs and the sewer network still has capacity, storm water can be 
diverted into the CBM to decrease CSO volume.  
Is not met - CSO occurs, but the basin volume in the Retention Space BIR 16.2, BIR 15.2 
and Football Court Boldclubben Stefan are not jet completely filled. 
C. Continuity balance established, elaborated in chapter 3.4.1. 
In Table 18 parts of the calculated continuity balance from MIKE Urban are displayed. The 
initial cut model is compared to the M3P, M3P with PID control 1 without direct settings 
for orifice 3, and interim results from model MP3 with PID Control 1 are displayed. M3P 
with PID control 1 results in the same inflow volume than the cut M3P volume. It hence 
has the same deviation from the cut model as the M3P model and therefore fulfils the 
==PAGE:53==
53 
continuity balance. Less water is generated in the empty parts of the system caused by 
deviation of water due to the control scheme. 
Table 18: Comparison of total inflow and water generated in empty parts of the system calculated by MIKE Urban 
for the cut model, model of methodology 3 (Manning number 45 and increased basin size) with pumping, PID 
control scheme model 1 without and with direct settings 
Cut model  Methodology 3 
with pumping 
model (M3P) 
PID control 
scheme model 1 
without direct 
settings 
PID control 
scheme 
model 1 
(3) Total 
inflow 
32926 
32886 
30494 
32886 
(5) Water 
generated in 
empty parts 
of the system 
82 
1518 
1119 
1353 
 
D. Meet the governing design criteria of the Cloudburst Management Plan and 
resulting criteria, elaborated in chapter 3.4.2. 
The first criterion cannot be met. As already for the CDS rain T=1 duration 240 min and 
simulation time 480 min the ground level of the sewer system nodes is exceeded, the same 
is true for the second criterion, it cannot be met as water level exceeds ground level by 
more than 0.1 m for node 94_466205 in sewer system and connections between the sewer 
system and the CBM (orifice 1 and connection downstream basin), in detail listed in 
Appendix J. The third criterion is represented by the criteria A and B. The forth criterion 
is tested by comparing the time and magnitude of the peak flow and the CSO volume.  
 
 
 
Figure 21: Hydrograph of the cut model (black), methodology 3 (increased basin size with manning number 45) 
with pumping implemented (green) and PID control model 1 (set point level94_465802 level in combination with 
direct settings), CDS T=1 duration 240 min, simulation time 480 min, in link 94_466204_466203 
The peak flow and magnitude were further studied for this control model, displayed in 
Table 19. The accumulated flow is not further investigated towards CSO volume since no 
connection between accumulated flow and CSO volume were observed for the previous 
[m3/s] 
[h] 
==PAGE:54==
54 
models. Apart from the CSO volume a connection between accumulated flow and flow 
volume over time is observed. With 5394 [m3] PID control model 1 (set point level 
94_465802 level in combination with direct settings) has the highest accumulated volume 
and also the highest average flow velocity of 0.19 [m3/s], displayed graphically in Figure 
21 and values listed in Table 19. This can be explained with the emptying of the Retention 
Spaces, that starts if the sewer system has capacity left and the fact that in Retention Space 
BIR 16.1 no exorbitant water volumes are stored anymore.   
For the PID control scheme model 1 the peak flow increased towards the cut model in 16 
%, from 0.3 to 0.35 [m3/s] and towards the methodology 3 with pumping Model (M3P) in 
18 % from 0.29 to 0.35 [m3/s].  
Regarding the time of the peak flow, for the methodology 3 with pumping model (M3P) 
and the PID Control scheme model 1 the peak flow occurs 4 min earlier.  
This could indicate a higher CSO volume and hence a negative effect of the PID control. A 
negative change towards the methodology 3 with pumping model (M3P) is to be expected 
as the Retention Space BIR 16.1 is not filled exorbitant anymore and loses its 
extraordinary retention function. But also, a substantial negative effect of the CBM with 
PID control can be for example explained with the changed flow situation (provoked by 
the RTC control scheme) and the increased exceedance of the ground level of the node 
94_466205 by 0.29 m which leads to more pressure in the connected pipe, illustrated in 
Figure 22. The increased water level is caused by the flap implemented connecting the 
node 94_466205 to the CBM and so no discharge is allowed into the CBM.  
 
 
Figure 22: Water level of the Cut Model (black), methodology 3 (increased basin size with manning number 45) 
with pumping implemented (green) and PID control model 1 (set point level 94_465802 level in combination with 
direct settings) (brown), CDS T=1 duration 240 min, simulation time 480 min, in node 94_466205 
 
 
[h] 
[m3] 
==PAGE:55==
55 
Table 19: Peak flow comparison for cut model, methodology 3 (increased basin size with manning number 45) 
with pumping implemented and PID control model 1 (set point level 94_465802 level in combination with direct 
settings); time and magnitude as well as accumulated flow over simulation period, CDS T=1 duration 240 min, 
simulation time 480 min, in link 94_466204_466203 
 
Moreover, an increased peak flow has not indicated an increased CSO volume in the 
previous models that also holds true for the PID control scheme model 1. The overflow 
volume for the PID control scheme model 1 decreased by 65 % from 3535 to 1228 [m3] 
but increases towards the M3P model by 200 [m3]. The increase towards the M3P model 
was expected as the as the Retention Space BIR 16.1 is not filled exorbitant anymore. The 
decrease towards the cut model indicates a positive effect of the implemented CBM and 
the control of it, results displayed in Table 20.   
Table 20: Total CSO volume in case area and indication of the total CSO reduction by the CBM with different 
methodologies comparison for cut model, methodology 3 (increased basin size with manning number 45) with 
pumping implemented and PID control model 1 (set point level94_465802 level in combination with direct 
settings); for CDS rain T=1 duration 240 min, simulation time 480 min 
 
CDS T=1  
Cut model 
 
CDS T=1 
Methodology 3 
with pumping 
model (M3P) 
CDS T=1 
PID control 
scheme model 1   
Total CSO Volume [m3] 
3535 
1072 
1228 
% reduction 
 
70 
65.3 
 
As a result of this PID control scheme model 1 (set point level94_465802 level in 
combination with direct settings), positive effects like decreased CSO volume towards the 
cut model, no more exorbitant filling of Retention Space BIR 16.1 like in MP3 and the 
diversion of water above ground into the CBM are observed. Also, negative effects like 
ground level exceedance at node 94_466205 are observed. The exceedance of the ground 
level would lead to a flooding of the area Football Court Boldclubben Stefan with 
combined sewer discharge in reality. Moreover, in the connection between the CBM and 
the sewer system an exceedance of the ground level is observed. Since this connection 
does not exist in reality, the situation would result in an increased water level above-
ground, hence the Retention Road. There is capacity left in the Retention Road, compare 
Appendix J. If the water would exceed the Retention Road restrictions cannot be defined at 
this point. For a CDS rain T=100 with a duration of 240 min and a simulation time of 480 
min the simulation does not run. In reality the occurrence of the storm water would not be 
restricted to one location (node in MU) but to the full extent of the Retention Road, which 
could make this model depiction faulty.  
 
 
Peak flow 
[m3/s] 
Time [h] 
Accumulated 
flow [m3] 
Average flow 
[m3/s] 
Cut model  
0.3 
01:40 
2756 
 
0.09 
Methodology 3 with 
pumping model (M3P) 
0.29 
 
01:36 
 
3232 
 
0.11 
 
PID control scheme 
model 1   
0.35 
01:36 
 
5394 
 
0.19 
 
==PAGE:56==
56 
4.3.2 PID control scheme model 2 
PID control of set-point link 94_465802_fiktiv discharge in combination with direct 
settings  
In this PID model the set point was defined to the link 94_465802_fiktiv to keep the 
discharge in this link to zero in order to prevent water to be discharged at the 94 465802 
udloeb fiktiv into the Utterslev Mose swamp.  This configuration was chosen next, to see if 
discharge or level control had different effects on the CSO overflow volume. 
 
Also in this model for the orifices 1-6, connection downstream and connection to BIR16.2 
Retention Space, displayed in Appendix H, the PID action was defined. The PID action was 
defined to control the level in link 94_465802_fiktiv to 0 [m3/s]. The orifices are controlled 
with a weir. For the orifice connecting to Retention Space BIR 16.1 restrictions were set, 
that if a basin level of 14.9 m is reached, the orifice weir will be closed otherwise it 
remains open. This exception is made as otherwise also the filling volume of the basin is 
exceeded as experienced and explained in chapter 4.2.3. Moreover, it was also possible to 
implement a flap in the orifices avoiding the flow of sewer discharge onto the surface 
through the orifices. A flap was implemented in the orifices 1-5 and connection 
downstream. In the previous models from methodology 1 - methodology 3 with pumping 
this resulted in a crash of the simulation. 
 
Also for this model it became clear, that it will not be able to meet the design criteria. The 
simulation for a CDS rain T=100 with a duration of 240 min and a simulation time of 480 
min did not run. There was no exceedance of the Hydra_12 node observed, and also when 
changing the control for orifice 3 to direct settings as in PID control scheme model 1 no 
significant change of the situation was observed. Nevertheless, the results from this 
simulation are evaluated in the following towards the four criteria, so that the four 
different control schemes are comparable. But the evaluation is restricted to the results of 
a network simulation by loading the system with a runoff from a CDS rain T=1 and 
duration 240 min and a simulation time of 480 min, the water levels in the nodes are listed 
in Appendix K.   
 
A. Water should only be diverted into the CBM if in the sewer network has no 
capacity left. 
Is met - The results from a small rain runoff CDS rain T=1 show, that the ground level of 
the sewer system are exceeded at certain nodes and that water is diverted above-ground 
in the CBMs.  
B. If CSO occurs and the sewer network still has capacity, storm water can be 
diverted into the CBM to decrease CSO volume.  
Is not met - CSO occurs, but the basin volume in the Retention Space BIR 16.2, BIR 15.2 
and Football Court Boldclubben Stefan are not jet completely filled.  
C. Continuity Balance established, elaborated in chapter 3.4.1. 
In Table 21 parts of the calculated continuity balance from MIKE Urban are displayed. The 
initial cut model is compared to the M3P and M3P with PID control scheme model 2 (set 
point discharge link 94_465802_fiktiv with direct settings). M3P with PID control scheme 
model 2 results in the same inflow volume than the M3P volume. It hence has the same 
deviation from the cut model as the M3P model and therefore fulfils the continuity 
balance. Less water is generated in empty parts of the system. 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
57 
Table 21: Comparison of Continuity balance calculated by MIKE Urban for the cut model, model of methodology 3 
(Manning number 45 increased basin size) with pumping, PID control scheme model 2 (set point discharge link 
94_465802_fiktiv with direct settings) 
Cut 
model  
Methodology 3 with 
pumping model 
(M3P) 
PID control scheme 
model 2 
(3) Total inflow 
32927 
32886 
32886 
(5) Water generated 
in empty parts of the 
system 
82 
1518 
14101 
 
D. Meet the governing design criteria of the Cloudburst Management Plan and 
resulting criteria, elaborated in chapter 3.4.2. 
The first criterion cannot be met. As already for the CDS rain T=1 duration 240 min and 
simulation time 480 min the ground level of the sewer system nodes is exceeded, the same 
is true for the second criterion, it cannot be met as water level exceeds ground level by 
more than 0.1 m for node 94_466205 in sewer system and connections between the sewer 
system and the CBM (orifice 1 and connection downstream basin), in detail listed in 
Appendix K. The third criterion is represented by the criteria A and B. The forth criterion 
is tested by comparing the time and magnitude of the peak flow and the CSO volume.  
 
 
 
Figure 23: Hydrograph of the cut model (black), methodology 3 (increased basin size with manning number) with 
pumping implemented (green), PID control scheme model 1 (set point level 94_465802 level in combination with 
direct settings) (brown), and PID control scheme model 2 (set point discharge link 94_465802_fiktiv with direct 
settings) (turquois), CDS T=1 duration 240 min, simulation time 480 min, in link 94_466204_466203 
The peak flow and magnitude were studied for the PID control scheme Model 2 (set point 
discharge link 94_465802_fiktiv with direct settings) and graphically compared to the 
other models for the link 94_466204_466203 in Figure 23 and values listed in Table 22.  
 
[m3/s] 
[h] 
==PAGE:58==
58 
For the PID control scheme model 2 the first peak flow increased towards the cut model in 
4.6 % towards the methodology 3 with pumping Model (M3P) in 7.2 % from 0.29 to 0.30 
[m3/s]. A second extreme with even a higher flow 0.31 [m3/s] is observed to a later point. 
Regarding the time of the first extreme, the peak flow occurs 5 min later than for the cut 
model that indicates a higher retention above-ground in the CBM coherent with the levels 
and discharges in the system, illustrated in Appendix J and K. The basins from Retention 
Space BIR 16.1, BIR 15.2 and Football Court Boldclubben Stefan retain more water and an 
increased flow in the Retention Road BIR 16.1 is documented.  
 
The accumulated flow was not further investigated towards CSO volume since no 
connection between accumulated flow and CSO volume were observed for the previous 
models. Apart from the CSO volume a connection between accumulated flow and flow 
volume over time is observed. With 6007 [m3] PID control scheme model 2 (set point 
level94_465802 level in combination with direct settings) has the highest accumulated 
volume and also the highest average flow velocity with 0.21 [m3/s] over time, displayed in 
Table 22. This can be explained with the emptying of the Retention Space, that starts if the 
sewer system has capacity left, the fact that in Retention Space BIR 16.1 no exorbitant 
water volumes are stored anymore and with the RTC control scheme. 
 
Table 22: Peak flow comparison for cut model, methodology 3 (increased basin size with manning number 45) with 
pumping implemented, PID control scheme model 1 (set point level 94_465802 level in combination with direct 
settings), and PID control scheme model 2 (set point discharge link 94_465802_fiktiv with direct settings); time 
and magnitude as well as accumulated flow over simulation period, CDS T=1 duration 240 min, simulation time 480 
min, in link 94_466204_466203 
 
A negative change for the peak flow towards the methodology 3 with pumping model 
(M3P) was expected as the Retention Space BIR 16.1 is not filled exorbitant anymore and 
loses its extraordinary retention function. But also, a substantial negative effect of the CBM 
with PID control can be for example explained with the changed flow situation and the 
increased exceedance of the ground level of the node 94_466205 by 0.36 m which leads to 
more pressure in the connected pipes. The increased water level is caused by the flap 
implemented connecting the node 94_466205 to the CBM, allowing no discharge into the 
CBM, as well as the RTC control function. But a positive effect, decreased peak flow, 
towards the PID control scheme model 1 was observed.  
 
Moreover, an increased peak flow has not indicated an increased CSO volume in the 
previous models that also holds true for the PID control scheme model 2. The overflow 
volume for the PID control scheme model 2 decreased by 47.4 % from 35346 to 1860 [m3] 
but increased towards the M3P model by 787 [m3]. The increase towards the M3P model 
was expected as the as the Retention Space BIR 16.1 is not filled exorbitant anymore. The 
 
Peak flow 
[m3/s] 
Time [h] 
Accumulated 
flow [m3] 
Average 
flow [m3/s] 
Cut model  
0.3 
01:40 
2756 
0.09 
 
Methodology 3 
with pumping 
model (M3P) 
0.29 
 
01:36 
 
3232 
 
0.11 
 
PID control scheme 
model 1   
0.35 
01:36 
 
5394 
 
0.19 
 
PID control scheme 
model 2  
0.3 
0.31 
01:45 
02:24 
 
6007 
0.21 
 
==PAGE:59==
59 
decrease towards the cut model indicates a positive effect of the implemented CBM and 
the control of it, results displayed in Table 23.  But an increase towards the PID control 
scheme model 1 indicates, that this control scheme is not the best choice to prevent CSO 
overflow in the case area.  
 
Table 23: Total CSO volume in case area for CDS T=1 duration 240 min, simulation time 480 min, comparison Cut 
model, methodology 3 (increased basin size with manning number 45) with pumping implemented and PID 
control scheme model 2 (set point discharge link 94_465802_fiktiv with direct settings) 
CDS T=1  
Cut model 
 
CDS T=1 
Methodology 3 
with pumping 
model (M3P) 
CDS T=1 
PID control 
scheme model 2 
Total CSO Volume [m3] 
3535 
1072 
1860 
% reduction 
 
70 
47 
 
As a result of this PID control scheme model 2 (set point discharge link 94_465802_fiktiv 
with direct settings), positive effects like decreased CSO volume towards the cut model, no 
more exorbitant filling of Retention Space BIR 16.1 like in MP3 and the diversion of water 
above ground into the CBM. Also, negative effects like ground level exceedance at node 
94_466205 are observed. The exceedance of the ground level would lead to a flooding of 
the area Football Court Boldclubben Stefan with combined sewer discharge in reality. 
Moreover, an increased CSO volume compared to PID control model 1 is observed. In the 
connection between the CBM and the sewer system an exceedance of the ground level is 
observed as well. Since this connection does not exist in reality, the situation would result 
in an increased water level above-ground, hence the Retention Road. There is capacity left 
in the Retention Road, compare Appendix K. If the water would exceed the Retention Road 
restrictions, cannot be defined at this point. For a CDS rain T=100 with a duration of 240 
min and a simulation time of 480 min the simulation does not run.  In reality the 
occurance of the storm water would not be restricted to one location (node in MU) but to 
the full extend of the Retention Road, which could make this model depiction faulty. 
 
4.3.3 PID control scheme model 3 
PID control of set-point node 94_465007 level in combination with direct settings 
For this control scheme the set point was defined to keep the water level in the node 
94_465007 at 17.50 m to prevent discharge over the weir 94_465007w1 with crest level 
17.54 m. The weir leads to the outlet 94_UM116. The overflow at this outlet was much 
affected by the implemented CBM, comparison in Appendix H.1, a reduction between 38.5-
90.5 % for different CDS rains are observed for the methodology 3 model with pumping. 
For this reason, this node is chosen. 
 
The same calibration settings as for the previous PID control scheme models apply; for the 
orifices 1-6, connection downstream and connection to BIR16.2 Retention Space, 
displayed in Appendix H, the PID action was defined. The PID action was defined to 
control the level in link 94_465007 17.5 m. The orifices are controlled with a weir. For the 
orifice connecting to Retention Space BIR 16.1 restrictions are set, that if a basin level of 
14.9 m is reached, the orifice weir will be closed otherwise it remains open. This exception 
is made as otherwise also the filling volume of the basin is exceeded as experienced and 
explained in chapter 4.2.3. Moreover, it was also possible to implement a flap in the 
orifices avoiding the flow of sewer discharge above-ground through the orifices. A flap 
was implemented in the orifices 1-5 and connection downstream. In the previous models 
==PAGE:60==
60 
from methodology 1-methodology 3 with pumping this resulted in a crash of the 
simulation. 
 
In an attempt to improve this result direct setting rules for orifice 3 were defined. If the 
water level in Hydra_12 exceeds 17.9 m, orifice 3 will be closed otherwise it will be open. 
After this modification it became clear, that also with this RTC control scheme is will not 
be possible to meet the defined design rules A-D in chapter 4.3 and 3.4. 
Nevertheless, the results from this simulation are evaluated in the following towards the 
four criteria, so that the four different control schemes are comparable. But the evaluation 
is restricted on the results of a network simulation by loading the system with a runoff 
from a CDS rain T=1 and duration 240 min and running the model for 480 min, compare 
selected node levels ad discharges in Appendix L.   
 
A. Water should only be diverted into the CBM if in the sewer network has no 
capacity left. 
Is met - The results from a small rain runoff CDS rain T=1 show, that the ground level of 
the sewer system is exceeded at certain nodes and that water is diverted above-ground in 
the CBMs.  
B. If CSO occurs and the sewer network still has capacity, storm water can be 
diverted into the CBM to decrease CSO volume.  
Is not met - CSO occurs, but the basin volume in the Retention Space BIR 16.2, BIR 15.2 
and Football Court Boldclubben Stefan are not jet completely filled. 
C. Continuity Balance established, elaborated in chapter 3.4.1. 
In Table 24 parts of the calculated continuity balance from MIKE Urban are displayed. The 
initial cut model is compared to the M3P, M3P with PID control 3 without direct settings 
for orifice 3, and interim results from model MP3 with PID Control 3 are displayed. M3P 
with PID control 1 results in the same inflow volume than the cut M3P volume. It hence 
has the same deviation from the cut model as the M3P model and therefore fulfils the 
continuity balance. The end volume in the system is lower as more water is diverted into 
the CSO structures.  
Table 24: Comparison of continuity balance calculated by MIKE Urban for the cut model, model of methodology 3 
(increased), PID control scheme model 3 (set point level in the node 94_465007 with direct settings)  
Cut model  Methodology 3 with 
pumping model 
(M3P) 
PID control 
scheme model 3 
(3) Total inflow 
32927 
32886 
32886 
(5) Water generated in 
empty parts of the system 
82 
1518 
1348 
 
D. Meet the governing design criteria of the Cloudburst Management Plan and 
resulting criteria, elaborated in chapter 3.4.2. 
The first criterion cannot be met. As already for the CDS rain T=1 duration 240 min and 
simulation time 480 min the ground level of the sewer system nodes is exceeded. The 
same holds true for the second criterion, it cannot be met as water level exceeds ground 
level by more than 0.1 m for node 94_466205 in sewer system and connections between 
the sewer system and the CBM (orifice 1, connection downstream basin, connection to 
==PAGE:61==
61 
Retention Space BIR16.1), in detail listed in Appendix L. The third criterion is 
represented by the criteria A and B. The forth criterion is tested by comparing the time 
and magnitude of the peak flow and the CSO volume.  
 
 
 
Figure 24: Hydrograph of the cut model (black), methodology 3 (increased basin size with manning number 45 
with pumping implemented) (green), PID control model 1 (set point level 94_465802 level in combination with 
direct settings) (brown), and PID control scheme model 2 (set point discharge link 94_465802_fiktiv with direct 
settings) (turquois) and PID control scheme model 3 (set point level in the node 94_465007 with direct settings) 
(dark blue), CDS T=1 duration 240 min, simulation time 480 min, in link 94_466204_466203  
The peak flow and magnitude were studied for the PID control scheme model 3 (set point 
level in the node 94_465007 with direct settings), graphically compared to the other 
models for the link 94_466204_466203 in Figure 24 and values listed in Table 25. For the 
PID control scheme model 3 the peak flow increased towards the cut model in 13 %, from 
0.3 to 0.3 [m3/s] and towards the methodology 3 with pumping Model (M3P) in 16 % from 
0.29 to 0.3 [m3/s]. The peak flow occurs 4 min earlier than for the cut model and M3P 
model that could indicate a decreased retention ability and higher CSO overflow volume. 
Less water is stored in the Retention Space BIR 15.2 and Football Court Boldclubben 
Stefan but more water is conveyed on the Retention Road BIR 16.1 in comparison to 
Model 2, node level and discharges are listed in Appendix K and L.  
 
The accumulated flow was not further investigated towards CSO volume since no 
connection between accumulated flow and CSO volume were observed for the previous 
models. Apart from the CSO volume a connection between accumulated flow and flow 
volume over time is observed. The magnitude of the accumulated flow with 5415 [m3] and 
average flow velocity of 0.19 [m3/s] of PID control Model 3 (set point level in the node 
94_465007 with direct settings) is comparable to PID control scheme model 2 (set point 
discharge link 94_465802_fiktiv with direct settings). The accumulated flow and average 
flow velocity is lower in comparison to PID control scheme model 1 (set point level 
94_465802 level in combination with direct settings), and higher than methodology 3 
(increased basin size with manning number 45 and pumping implemented), displayed in 
[m3/s] 
[h] 
==PAGE:62==
62 
Table 25.  Increased values towards the methodology 3 model can be explained with the 
emptying of the Retention Space, that starts if the sewer system has capacity left and the 
fact that, in Retention Space BIR 16.1, no exorbitant water volumes are stored anymore 
and loses its extraordinary retention function.  
 
Table 25: Peak flow comparison for cut model, methodology 3 (increased basin size with manning number 45) 
with pumping implemented, PID control scheme model 1 (set point level 94_465802 level in combination with 
direct settings), PID control scheme model 2 (set point discharge link 94_465802_fiktiv with direct settings), and 
PID control scheme model 3 (set point level in the node 94_465007 with direct settings) ; time and magnitude as 
well as accumulated flow over simulation period, CDS T=1 duration 240 min, simulation time 480 min, in link 
94_466204_466203 
 
Moreover, an increased peak flow has not indicated an increased CSO volume in the 
previous models that also holds true for the PID control scheme model 3. The overflow 
volume for the PID control scheme model 1 decreased by 65.2 % from 3535 to 1220 [m3] 
but increased for towards the M3P model by 155 [m3]. The increase towards the M3P 
model was expected as the as the Retention Space BIR 16.1 is not filled exorbitant 
anymore. The decrease towards the cut model indicates a positive effect of the 
implemented CBM and the control of it, results displayed in Table 26. The magnitude of 
CSO volume of PID control scheme model 1 and 3 as well as their reduction of 65.3 and 
65.2 % are very close and have until now yielded the best outcome for CSO reduction. 
Table 26: Total CSO volume in case area for cut model, methodology 3 (increased basin size with manning 
number 45) with pumping implemented, PID control scheme model 1 (set point level 94_465802 level in 
combination with direct settings), PID control scheme model 2 (set point discharge link 94_465802_fiktiv with 
direct settings), and PID control scheme model 3 (set point level in the node 94_465007 with direct settings) ; and 
their reduction towards the cut model,  CDS T=1 duration 240 min, simulation time 480 min, in link 
94_466204_466203 
CDS 
T=1  
Cut 
model 
 
CDS T=1 
Methodology 
3 with 
pumping 
model (M3P) 
CDS T=1 
PID 
control 
scheme 
model 1   
CDS T=1 
PID 
control 
scheme 
model 2 
CDS T=1 
PID 
control 
scheme 
model 3 
Total CSO Volume 
[m3] 
3535 
1072 
1228 
1859 
1230 
 
% reduction 
 
70 
65.3 
47 
65.2 
 
Peak flow 
[m3/s] 
Time [h] 
Accumulated 
flow [m3] 
Average flow 
[m3/s] 
Cut model  
0.3 
01:40 
2756 
0.09 
 
Methodology 3 with 
pumping model 
(M3P) 
0.29 
 
01:36 
 
3232 
 
0.11 
 
PID control scheme 
model 1   
0.35 
01:36 
 
5394 
 
0.19 
 
PID control scheme 
model 2  
0.3 
0.31 
01:45 
02:24 
 
6007 
0.21 
 
PID control scheme 
model 3 
0.34 
01:36 
 
5415 
0.19 
==PAGE:63==
63 
As a result of this PID control scheme model 3 (set point level94_465802 level in 
combination with direct settings), positive effects like decreased CSO volume towards the 
cut model and PID control scheme model 2, no more exorbitant filling of Retention Space 
BIR 16.1 like in MP3 and the diversion of water above-ground into the CBM are observed. 
Negative effects like ground level exceedance at node 94_466205 are observed. The 
exceedance of the ground level would lead to a flooding of the area Football Court 
Boldclubben Stefan with combined sewer discharge in reality. In the connection between 
the CBM and the sewer system an exceedance of the ground level is observed. Since this 
connection does not exist in reality, the situation would result in an increased water level 
above-ground, hence the Retention Road. There is capacity left in the Retention Road, 
compare Appendix L. If the water would exceed the Retention Road restrictions, cannot be 
defined at this point. For a CDS rain T=100 with a duration of 240 min and a simulation 
time of 480 min the simulation does not run.   
 
4.3.4 Direct Settings Control Scheme Model  
A fourth control scheme was developed without PID control. For every orifice, a weir 
control scheme based on direct settings, is designed based on condition and action clause. 
The conditions and actions are designed following the criteria A-B define in chapter 4.3. 
In Figure 25 the Entity-Relationship-Model for the direct control scheme of the weirs in 
orifices is shown and in Table 27 the specific values for the actuators are listed.  
 
 
 
Figure 25: Conceptual illustration of Entity-Relationship-Model for the direct setting control of weir in orifices 
 
 
Condition
Sewer system full
CSO overflow in 94 465802 
udloeb fiktiv and sewer system 
empty 
No CSO and sewer system 
empty 
Action
Weir at orifice closed to divert 
water into CBM
Weir at orifice closed 
Weir at orifice open 
==PAGE:64==
64 
Table 27: Summary of nodes and their condition and action level for the direct setting control scheme 
Actuator  
Condition 
Condition 
Action 
Action 
Node 
94_465802_ 
over_fiktiv 
Condition 
level [m] 
Close condition 
for level and 
name of node in 
sewer system 
connected to 
orifice  
Open weir 
position in 
orifice [m] 
Closed weir 
position in 
orifice [m] 
Orifice 1 
<13.0 
94_466217, 
> 18.8 m 
20.4 
22.4 
Orifice 2 
<13.0 
94_466211, 
> 19.1 m 
17.1 
19.1 
Orifice 3 
<13.0 
94_466210, 
> 18.7 
16.1 
18.1 
Orifice 4 
<13.0 
94_466209, 
> 20.1 m 
17.3 
19.3 
Orifice 5 
<13.0 
94_466206, 
> 18.7 m 
17 
19 
Orifice 6 
<13.0 
fb, 
> 15.4 
15.76 
17.76 
Connection 
Retention 
Space basin BIR 
16.2 
<13.0 
162_rs, 
 
18.1 
20.1 
Connection 
94_466205 
<13.0 
94_466205, 
> 17.8 
18.0 
20.0 
 
For the orifice connecting to Retention Space BIR 16.1 restrictions are set that if a basin 
level of 14.9 m is reached, the orifice weir will be closed otherwise it remains open. This 
exception is made as otherwise also the filling volume of the basin is exceeded as 
experienced and explained in chapter 4.2.3. Furthermore, it was also possible to 
implement a flap in the orifices avoiding the flow of sewer discharge onto the surface 
through the orifices. A flap was implemented in the orifices 1-5 and connection 
downstream. In the previous models from methodology 1 and 3 with pumping this 
resulted in a crash of the simulation. 
An attempt was made to improve the results by changing the CSO condition from level 
settings to discharge settings. The discharge condition was defined to set the discharge in 
the link 94_465802_fiktiv to 0 [m3/s]. This change did not lead to improved results and is 
documented in the following.  
 
After running the simulations for a CDS rain T=1 with a duration of 240 min and a 
duration of 480 min for both CSO conditions, it became clear, that also with the RTC 
control scheme is will not be possible to meet the defined design rules A-D in chapter 4.3 
and 3.4, compare node values in Appendix M. Nevertheless, the results were evaluated, so 
that the four different control schemes are comparable but are restricted to the results 
from the CDS rain T=1 with a duration of 240 min and a simulation time of 480 min; 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:65==
65 
A. Water should only be diverted into the CBM if in the sewer network has no 
capacity left. 
Is met - The results from a small rain runoff CDS rain T=1 show, that the ground level of 
the sewer system are exceeded at certain nodes and that water is diverted above-ground 
in the CBMs.  
B. If CSO occurs and the sewer network still has capacity, storm water can be 
diverted into the CBM to decrease CSO volume.  
Is not met - CSO occurs, but the basin volume in the Retention Space BIR 16.2, BIR 15.2 
and Football Court Boldclubben Stefan are not jet completely filled. 
C. Continuity Balance established, elaborated in chapter 3.4.1. 
In Table 28 parts of the calculated continuity balance from MIKE Urban are displayed. The 
initial cut model is compared to the M3P, direct setting control scheme model for level and 
discharge CSO condition. The results show, that the same total inflow volume but different 
generated water volumes are observed for the MP3 model compared to the direct setting 
control scheme models. The changed amount of generated water can be explained with 
the control function.  
Table 28: Comparison of continuity balance calculated by MIKE Urban for the cut model, model of methodology 3 
(with pumping M3P), direct setting control scheme model with discharge and level CSO condition; CDS T=1 
duration 240 min, simulation time 480 min   
 
Cut 
model  
Methodology 
3 with 
pumping 
model (M3P) 
Direct setting 
control 
scheme model 
Level 
Direct 
setting 
control 
scheme 
model 
Discharge 
(3) Total inflow 
32927 
32886 
32886 
32886 
(5) Water generated 
in empty parts of the 
system 
82 
1518 
1466 
1466 
 
D. Meet the governing design criteria of the Cloudburst Management Plan and 
resulting criteria, elaborated in chapter 3.4.2. 
The first criterion cannot be met. As already for the CDS rain T=1 duration 240 min and 
simulation time 480 min the ground level of the sewer system nodes is exceeded. The 
same holds true for the second criterion, it cannot be met as water level exceeds ground 
level by more than 0.1 m for node 94_466205 in sewer system and connections between 
the sewer system and the CBM (orifice 1, connection downstream basin, connection to 
Retention Space BIR16.1), in detail listed in Appendix M. The third criterion is 
represented by the criteria A and B. The forth criterion is tested by comparing the time 
and magnitude of the peak flow and the CSO volume.  
 
==PAGE:66==
66 
 
 
Figure 26: Hydrograph of the cut model (black), methodology 3 (increased basin size with manning number 45 
with pumping implemented) (green), direct setting control scheme with level (light green) and discharge (grey) 
CSO condition; CDS T=1 duration 240 min, simulation time 480 min, in link 94_466204_466203  
The peak flow and magnitude were further studied for the direct setting control scheme 
with level and discharge, graphically compared to the other models for the link 
94_466204_466203 in Figure 26 and values listed in Table 29. For the direct setting 
control scheme with level and discharge the peak flow increased towards the cut model in 
13%, from 0.3 to 0.36 [m3/s] and towards the methodology 3 with pumping Model (M3P) 
in 18 % from 0.29 to 0.36 [m3/s]. The peak flow occurs 5 min earlier than for the cut 
model, that could indicate a decreased retention ability and higher CSO overflow volume. 
More water is stored in the Retention Space BIR 15.2 and Football Court Boldclubben 
Stefan for the direct setting control scheme models than in the other models. More water 
is conveyed on the Retention Road BIR 16.1 in comparison to MP3 and PID control scheme 
model 2, node level and discharges are listed in Appendix K and M.  
 
The accumulated flow was not further investigated towards CSO volume since no 
connection between accumulated flow and CSO volume were observed for the previous 
models. Apart from the CSO volume a connection between accumulated flow and average 
flow velocity is observed. The magnitude of the accumulated flow with 5379 [m3] (level 
condition) and 5377 [m3] (discharge condition) and average flow velocity of 0.19 [m3/s] 
(level condition and discharge condition) of the direct setting control scheme is 
comparable to PID control scheme model 1 (set point level 94_465802 level in 
combination with direct settings) but is still lower than the other models. Increased values 
towards the methodology 3 model can be explained with the emptying of the Retention 
Spaces, that starts if the sewer system has capacity left and the fact that, in Retention 
Space BIR 16.1, no exorbitant water volumes are stored anymore and loses its 
extraordinary retention function.  
 
 
 
[m3/s] 
[h] 
==PAGE:67==
67 
Table 29: Peak flow comparison for cut model, methodology 3 (increased basin size with manning number 45) 
with pumping implemented, PID control scheme model 1 (set point level 94_465802 level in combination with 
direct settings), PID control scheme model 2 (set point discharge link 94_465802_fiktiv with direct settings), PID 
control scheme model 3 (set point level in the node 94_465007 with direct settings), and direct setting control 
scheme with level and discharge CSO condition; time and magnitude as well as accumulated flow over simulation 
period, CDS T=1 duration 240 min, simulation time 480 min, in link 94_466204_466203 
 
Moreover, an increased peak flow has not indicated an increased CSO volume in the 
previous models that also holds true for the direct setting control scheme model. The 
overflow volume for the direct setting control scheme for level condition by 46.5 % from 
3535 to 1891[m3] and for the discharge condition by 46.2 % from 3535 to 1901 [m3] but 
increased towards the M3P model by 818 [m3] and 829 [m3]. The increase towards the 
M3P model was expected as the Retention Space BIR 16.1 is not filled exorbitant anymore. 
The decrease towards the cut model indicates a positive effect of the implemented CBM 
and the control of it, results displayed in Table 30. The magnitude of CSO volume of direct 
setting control scheme with level and discharge CSO condition have not yielded the best 
results in comparison to the other RTC controls scheme models. This control scheme 
model is thus not recommended to be applied.  
 
 
CDS T=1 
Peak flow 
[m3/s] 
Time [h] 
Accumulated 
flow [m3] 
Average 
flow 
[m3/s] 
Cut model  
0.3 
01:40 
2756 
0.09 
 
Methodology 3 
with pumping 
model (M3P) 
0.29 
 
01:36 
 
3232 
 
0.11 
 
PID control 
scheme model 1   
0.35 
01:36 
 
5394 
 
0.19 
 
PID control 
scheme model 2  
0.3 
0.31 
01:45 
02:24 
 
6007 
0.21 
 
PID control 
scheme model 3 
0.34 
01:36 
 
5415 
0.19 
Direct setting 
control scheme 
Model Level 
0.36 
 
01:35 
 
5379 
0.19 
 
Direct setting 
control scheme 
Model Discharge 
0.36 
 
01:35 
 
5377 
 
0.19 
 
==PAGE:68==
68 
 
Table 30: Total CSO volume in case area for cut model, methodology 3 (increased basin size with manning 
number 45) with pumping implemented, direct setting control scheme with level and discharge condition CSO, 
CDS T=1 duration 240 min, simulation time 480 min, in link 94_466204_466203 
CSO volume from all 
outlets in the case 
area for a CDS rain 
T=1  
 
Cut 
model 
 
Methodology 3 
with pumping 
model (M3P) 
Direct 
setting 
control 
scheme 
model 
Level 
Direct 
setting 
control 
scheme 
model 
Discharge 
Total CSO Volume 
[m3] 
3535 
1072 
1891 
1901 
% reduction 
 
70 
46.5 
46.2 
  
As a result of this direct setting control scheme with level and discharge, positive effects 
like decreased CSO volume towards the cut model, no more exorbitant filling of Retention 
Space BIR 16.1 like in MP3 and the diversion of water above ground into the CBM are 
observed. Negative effects like ground level exceedance at node 94_466205 by 0.34-0.36 
m are observed. The exceedance of the ground level would lead to a flooding of the area 
Football Court Boldclubben Stefan with combined sewer discharge in reality. In the 
connection between the CBM and the sewer system an exceedance of the ground level is 
observed. Since this connection does not exist in reality, the situation would result in an 
increased water level above-ground, hence the Retention Road. There is capacity left in 
the Retention Road, compare Appendix M. If the water would exceed the Retention Road 
restrictions, cannot be defined at this point. For a CDS rain T=100 with a duration of 240 
min and a simulation time of 480 min the simulation does not run.   
 
When comparing the results from all RTC control schemes, PID control scheme model 1 
(set point level 94_465802 level in combination with direct settings) yielded the best 
results in terms of reduced overflow volume by 65.3 % (CDS rain event T=1) from all 
outlets in the case area. The above-ground RTC has also allowed to model the functionality 
of the CBM more effectively. The Retention Space BIR 16.1 was not filled exorbitant 
anymore. 
 
A PID and direct setting control of level has both resulted in the better results than 
discharge control (PID control scheme model 1 and direct setting control scheme model 
with level control).  
 
Effect on CSO volume from control at outlet 94_465802_udloeb_fiktiv 
To make these effects comparable to the initially maximum reduction potential calculated 
in chapter 4.1, the CSO volume at the outlet 94_465802_udloeb_fiktiv are compared, 
results listed in Table 31. The initially calculated maximum reduction volume was 9.7% 
for a CDS rain T=1 with a duration of 240 min. The reduction from the SCM model was 
defined to be much higher with 99.3 % and the reduction from the model with above-
ground control of the SCM has yielded an even higher reduction of 99.7 %, listed in Table 
31.  The values are biased due to adjustments which had to be made to keep the model 
stability (e.g. allowing exorbitant filling of the Retention Space BIR 16.1 for the MP3 model 
and the reduction of inflow into the CBM by implementing other CBM (BIR 16.3 and partly 
BIR 15.2) upstream and in contributing branches for both models).  
 
==PAGE:69==
69 
These results underline the complexity of the system. The implementation of the SCM in a 
part of the case area affects the hole system. It could be concluded, that with implementing 
more SCM the total CSO volume in the case area could be reduced more significantly. 
 
Table 31: Comparison of CSO volume and reduction at outlet 94_465802_udloeb_fiktiv for cut model, cut model of 
SCM case are, methodology 3 with pumping model (Manning number 45 and increased basin size) and PID 
control scheme model 1 with direct settings, CDS T=1 duration 240 min, simulation time 420 min, in link 
94_466204_466203 
CSO volume 
94_465802_udloeb_ 
fiktiv 
 
Cut 
model 
[m³] 
Cut model 
of SCM case 
area [m³] 
Methodology 
3 with 
pumping 
model (M3P) 
[m³] 
PID control 
scheme 
model 1 
with direct 
settings 
[m³] 
CDS T=1 
240 min and simulation 
time 480 min 
2052 
200 
15 
7 
Comparison CSO reduction 
to Cut Model [%] 
 
 
99.3 
99.7 
 
4.4 
Comparison of results from SCM with and without above-ground 
control 
This chapter aims to evaluate the performance of the designed models with and without 
above-ground control. The model from methodology 3 (Manning number 45, increased 
basin size) with pumping and the PID control scheme model 1 (PID control of set-point 
node 94_465802 level in combination with direct settings) are used for the evaluation. 
They are chosen as they have aimed the best results in the evaluation under the criteria 
defined in chapter 3.5.  
In this chapter the results will be evaluated only by means of the CSO volume in the case 
area. This is, since the results from the previous evaluation have shown, that the 
governing design criteria 1 and 2 from the Cloudburst Management Plan (Copenhagen City 
2012), elaborated in chapter 2.2.2 and 3.5, cannot be met and also, that the criteria 3 was 
only fulfilled for small rain events because of a faulty behaviour of the model for large rain 
events (exorbitant filling of Retention Space BIR 16.1). Moreover, the methods used to 
quantify the retention ability, criteria 4, time and magnitude of the peak flow downstream 
of the CBM lead to inconclusive results. 
The rain gauge 5694 Søborg Vandværk is the closest rain gauge. From it three rain events 
are chosen which create the following hydraulic situation in the case area: 
1. Rain event which leads to no CSOs in the case area: 
Event from 04.01.2011 19:58-21:13 h 
2. Rain event which leads to CSOs but no terrain flooding in the case area: 
Event from 08.06.2011 18:57-20:49 h 
3. Rain event which leads to CSOs and terrain flooding in the case area: 
Event from 02.07.2011 17:18-19:36 h 
The CSO condition for all three events has been altered to no CSO from rainfall runoff, as 
event without a rainfall load the network load defined in MIKE Urban for Dry Weather 
==PAGE:70==
70 
Flow (DWF) results in CSO events. The rainfall events are graphically displayed in Figure 
27 showing their intensity over time.  
 
Figure 27: Rainfall intensity over time for the three chosen rain events  
The Intensity-Duration-Frequency (IDF) curves from CDS rain events with different return 
periods and the IDF from the three rain events, provided by DMIs Spildevandskomitéens, 
are graphically displayed in Figure 28.  
 
Figure 28: IDF curves for CDS rain events with return times T=0.03, 0.05, 0.5, 1, 5, 10 and the three chosen rain 
events (inspired by (N. Lund 2016) 
When evaluating the rain events graphically towards their return time, with Figure 28, the 
1. Rain event has a return time lower than T=0.03. (A CDS rain event with a return time 
lower than T=0.03 could not be provided in the spreadsheet provided by the Water 
Pollution Committee of the Society of Danish Engineers.) The 2. Rain event has a return 
==PAGE:71==
71 
time roughly between T=0.5 and 1 and the return time for the 3. Rain event is higher than 
T=10.  
4.4.1 Rain event which leads to no CSO in the case area 
In Table 32 the CSO volume from the first rain event are listed. The cut, DWF from cut and 
methodology 3 with pumping model simulations, results in the same values. This indicates 
that the CBM measure does not alter the performance of the system for small rain events 
which can be conveyed by the sewer system. The same reaction of the PID control scheme 
model and the other models might be possible to explain with the fact, that based on the 
DWF network load sewer discharge is generated in the link connecting the outlets and the 
weirs of the overflow structures thus a small amount of CSO volume is caused by this.  
 
Table 32: CSO volume for every outlet structure in the case area for the cut model, methodology 3 model with 
pumping, PID control scheme model 1 for 1. Rain event as well as the DWF CSO volume for the cut model  
CSO outlet structures in case 
area 
 
1. rain event  
Cut 
model 
[m3] 
Cut 
model 
DWF 
[m3] 
Methodology 3 
model with 
pumping 
(M3P) 
[m3] 
PID 
control 
scheme 
model 1 
[m3] 
94_464271a_udloeb_fiktiv 
3.5 
3.5 
3.5 
3.5 
94_465802_udloeb_fiktiv 
2.3 
2.3 
2.3 
2.3 
94_469209B_udloeb_fiktiv 
2.5 
2.5 
2.5 
2.5 
94_GRONSPV_udloelb_fiktiv 
3.2 
3.2 
3.2 
3.2 
94_UF10 
0.05 
0.05 
0.05 
0.05 
94_UM16 
0.26 
0.26 
0.26 
0.26 
94_UM18 
0 
0 
0 
0 
94_UM26 
0.22 
0.22 
0.22 
0.22 
97_Fiktiv_vejvand_udloeb 
0.19 
0.19 
0.19 
0.19 
SUM CSO volume [m3] 
12.2 
12.2 
12.2 
12.2 
 
4.4.2 Rain event which leads to CSO but no flooding in the case area 
In Table 33 the results from the 2. Rain event are listed. A slight deviation of the CSO 
volume is encountered for the cut model and the M3P model. The DWF seams responsible 
for the most part of the CSO volume in the case area. No significant reduction of CSO 
volume with and without control towards the cut model was observed. This could 
indicate, that the classification of the rain event towards the return time does not result in 
good predictions about the CSO reduction.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
72 
Table 33: CSO volume for every outlet structure in the case area for the cut model, methodology 3 model with 
pumping, PID control scheme model 1 for 2. Rain event as well as the DWF CSO volume for the cut model  
CSO outlet structures in case 
area 
 
2. rain event  
Cut 
model 
[m3] 
Cut 
model 
DWF 
[m3] 
Methodology 
3 model with 
pumping 
(M3P) 
[m3] 
PID 
control 
scheme 
model 1 
[m3] 
94_464271a_udloeb_fiktiv 
5.54 
5.23 
5.57 
5.52 
94_465802_udloeb_fiktiv 
3.41 
3.39 
3.41 
3.4 
94_469209B_udloeb_fiktiv 
3.78 
3.76 
3.78 
3.78 
94_GRONSPV_udloelb_fiktiv 
4.87 
4.79 
4.87 
4.86 
94_UF10 
2.22 
0.08 
2.22 
2.23 
94_UM16 
0.4 
0.4 
0.4 
0.4 
94_UM18 
0 
0 
0 
0 
94_UM26 
0.33 
0.33 
0.33 
0.33 
97_Fiktiv_vejvand_udloeb 
0.28 
0.28 
0.28 
0.25 
SUM CSO volume [m3] 
20.83 
18.25 
20.87 
20.77 
 
4.4.3 Rain event which leads to CSO and flooding in the case area 
In Table 34 the results from the simulation for the 3. Rain event are listed. The event 
resulted in flooding of the Retention Space BIR 16.1 for the PID control scheme model 1 by 
479 [m3], equal to 174 %, and for the M3P model by 12409 [m3], equal to 3466 %. A 
reduction of CSO volume for the M3P and PID control scheme model 1 towards the cut 
model is documented. The reduction for the M3P model by 33.5 % is higher than the one 
for PID control model 1 with 24.6 %. This was expected, as the Retention Space BIR 16.1 is 
exorbitantly exceeded.  
 
Table 34: CSO volume for every outlet structure in the case area for the cut model, methodology 3 model with 
pumping, PID control scheme model 1 for 3. Rain event as well as the DWF CSO volume for the cut model  
CSO outlet structures in case 
area 
 
3. rain event  
Cut 
model 
[m3] 
Cut 
model 
DWF 
[m3] 
Methodology 3 
model with 
pumping 
(M3P) 
[m3] 
PID 
control 
scheme 
model 1 
[m3] 
94_464271a_udloeb_fiktiv 
6752.9 
6.5 
6520.2 
4471 
94_465802_udloeb_fiktiv 
16645.4 
4.2 
2714.2 
9166.3 
94_469209B_udloeb_fiktiv 
12606.7 
4.6 
12644.7 
12603.1 
94_GRONSPV_udloelb_fiktiv 
48.5 
5.9 
48.5 
48.4 
94_UF10 
279.6 
0.1 
279.6 
279.6 
94_UM16 
1599.7 
0.5 
926.8 
586 
94_UM18 
4883.9 
0 
4657 
4630.5 
94_UM26 
2104.8 
0.4 
2104.9 
2105.1 
97_Fiktiv_vejvand_udloeb 
0.35 
0.3 
0.35 
0.34 
SUM CSO volume [m3] 
44921.9 
22.5 
29896.3 
33890.3 
 
The results show that an increase in return time for the rain events does not result in a 
decreased reduction of overflow for the chosen historical rain events for this particular 
case area.  
==PAGE:73==
73 
5 
Conclusion 
In this thesis, different modelling approaches were applied to investigate the potential of 
Storm water Control Measures in the city of Copenhagen to reduce CSO volume with and 
without the use of above-ground Real Time Control. This was done with the following 
steps: 
1. Location of a suitable case area in the city of Copenhagen  
The election was done following several criteria. The most important criteria were to have 
CSO outlet structures in the case area and being able to prevent CSO by implementing SCM 
and above-ground RTC. Maximum control potential for different CDS rain events return 
times were determined, which lead to promising results of, 9.7 and 47.1 % maximum 
reduction potential of CSO at the connected overflow structure, for T=1 and T=100, 
respectively.  
 
2. Modelling of CBM in the case area 
In a (heuristic) troubleshooting process the already planned SCM from the Cloudburst 
Management Plan, named CBM, from the city of Copenhagen were modelled in a 1D model 
in MIKE Urban. As the elements provided are not designed to model the functionality of 
the CBMs adjustments had to be made, which did not represent the reality and may lead to 
false-positive interpretation of the obtained results.   
Different modelling approaches have been tested to represent the enhanced retention 
ability of the CBM: 
• 
Results from modelling green solutions in the Retention Road, by decreasing the 
Manning number, resulted in no significant change in CSO volume and neither an 
influence on the hydrograph in the case area. Thus, they are not considered an 
appropriate modelling approach.  
• 
Results from modelling a restricted inflow of storm water from above-ground to 
the sewer system with a discharge water level restriction (Q-H) in MIKE Urban, did 
not prove to be applicable. This is because in order to establish a Q-H restriction 
the discharge situation must be known before hand and is not variable for 
different rain events.  
• 
Results from modelling blue solutions with an increased storage volume of the 
connected Retention Spaces lead to promising results. Even a slight increase in the 
basin size resulted in a decrease in CSO volume. Due to a faulty behaviour of the 
basin representing the Retention Space BIR 16.1 for large rain events (T>10), 
leading to an expedient filling of it, these results are most likely misleading. 
Attempts to adjust the behaviour of the Retention Space BIR 16.1 lead to model 
instability for large rain events and was thus not further prosecuted.  
• 
In order to model a drainage function of the Retentions Space in reality, pumps 
were implemented to empty the basins. This resulted in an increase in CSO 
volume, which was expected as more water was lead back into the sewer system.  
 
The results from the model with implemented CBM (with blue, green solution and 
drainage function of the Retention Spaces) indicate a reduction of 99.3 and 83 % of CSO at 
the connected overflow structure, for T=1 and T=100, respectively. Hence, an increase in 
return time decreases the reduction of the CSO volume. The calculated reduction is much 
higher than firstly expected and is biased due to adjustments which had to be made to 
keep the model stability (e.g. allowing exorbitant filling of the Retention Space BIR 16.1 
and the reduction of inflow into the CBM by implementing other CBM (BIR 16.3 and partly 
BIR 15.2) upstream and in contributing branches). Further the design criteria defined in 
the Cloudburst Management Plan were not able to be met. This can be due to the 
documented strong impact from upstream and contributing branches, the fact that the 
==PAGE:74==
74 
implemented CBM in this thesis were aimed to represent a realistic and non-invasive 
solution or as the implemented CBM are located in an area where other projects 
(upstream) are planned to influence the flow situation positively and developing the 
wanted effect.  
 
3. Applying above-ground control for the modelled CBM 
In this part of the thesis several RTC schemes were developed for above-ground control of 
the modelled CBM. Also for this model with above-ground control it became clear, that the 
design criteria defined in the Cloudburst Management Plan were not able to be met. The 
simulations did not run for large rain events (CDS T>>10), this can be explained by the 
same reasons listed above for only the SCM model. The best result was obtained with a 
combination of PID level and direct setting control scheme. By implementing above-
ground control, the Retention Space BIR 16.1 was not filled exorbitant anymore (for small 
and medium rain events T<10). And a reduction of 99.7 % of CSO at the connected 
overflow structure for T=1 was observed. The value is still biased towards the one 
calculated as maximum control potential because of the additionally implemented CBM to 
remain model stability. Nevertheless, the total CSO volume from all overflow structures in 
the area was decreased by 65 % for a CDS rain event T=1, which indicates a significant 
positive effect of above-ground control of SCM and highlights the complexity of the system 
again. 
 
4. Comparing the results of the model with and without control  
In order to validate the findings, the different models were run for historical minor and 
medium rain events. The findings supported that implementing SCMs has a positive effect 
on CSO volume and the effect can be further improved by using above-ground control. An 
increase in return time for the rain events does not result in a decreased reduction of 
overflow for the chosen historical rain events. It becomes visible, that the return period of 
the rain events is not the only criteria on which the CSO volume reduction should be 
dependent on but also for example the oscillation of the intensity over time and sewer 
system set up.  
5.1 
Recommendations for future research  
The findings of this thesis could be further improved and completed by: 
• 
Implementing all planned CBM in the case area to be able to understand, if the 
complete set of the CBM in the case area leads to meeting the design criteria set in 
the Cloudburst Measurement Plan. 
• 
Using a combination of 1D and 2D model to define the flood volume more precisely 
and therefore also be able to see where adjustments of the CBM are necessary. As 
the results of this thesis could point out, that the Retention Space BIR 16.1 was 
dimensioned too small. 
• 
Using advanced RTC like MPC which could improve the performance of the system 
to handle effects from oscillating intensities from rain events.  
• 
Implementing water treatment in e.g., the Retention Spaces with constructed wet 
lands.  
• 
More studies should be carried out about the modelling approaches to represent 
CBMs with the provided elements in MIKE Urban and which of these represent the 
reality the closest.  
 
 
==PAGE:75==
75 
References 
ADSS. “Adaptive Decision Support System for the Integration of Stormwater Source 
Control into Sustainable Urban Water Management Strategies: Report 5.1. Review 
of the use of stormwater BMPs in Europe.” 2002. 
Arnbjerg-Nielsen, K., et al. Impacts of climate change on rainfall extremes and urban 
drainage systems: a review. Bd. 68. Water Science and Technology, 2013. 
Barredo, José I. “Major flood disasters in Europe: 1950–2005.” (Nat Hazards) 42:125–148 
(2007). 
Bayrisches Landesamt für Umwelt. Regenwasserversickerung – Gestaltung von Wegen und 
Plätzen Praxisratgeber für den Grundstückseigentümer. Springer, Cham, 2012. 
Beeneken, T., et al. “Real time control (RTC) of urban drainage systems – A discussion of 
the additional efforts compared to conventionally operated systems.” Urban Water 
Journal, 6 2013. 
Bennett, Neil D., Barry F.W. Croke, Giorgio Guariso, Joseph H.A. Guillaume, and Serena H. 
Hamilton. “Characterising performance of environmental modelsq.” 
(Environmental Modelling & Software) 2013. 
Borsányi, P., et al. „Modelling real-time control options on virtual sewer systems.“ Journal 
of Environmental Engineering and Science 7 (2008): 395-410. 
Burns, Matthew, Tim Fletcher, Christopher J. Walsh, Tony Ladson, and Belinda Hatt. 
Hydrologic Shortcomings of Conventional Urban Stormwater Management and 
Opportunities for Reform. Vol. 105. 2012. 
Butler, D., and J. Davies. Urban Drainage, Third Edition. CRC Press, 2010. 
Chini, C. M., J. F. Canning, K. L. Schreiber, J. M. Peschel, and A. S. Stillwell. “The Green 
Experiment: Cities, Green Stormwater Infrastructure, and Sustainability.” 
Sustainability, 2017. 
Copenhagen City. “Klimatilpasnings- og investeringsredegørelse.” Copenhagen City, 2015. 
Copenhagen City. „The City of Copenhagen: Cloudburst Management Plan 2012.“ 2012. 
Copenhagen-City. “Climate Change Adaption and Investment Statement - Part 1.” 
Copenhagen City, 2015. 
Copenhagen-City. “Climate Change Adaption and Investment Statement - Part 2.” 
"Copenhagen City", 2015. 
Copenhagen-City. “Copenhagen Climate Adaption Plan.” Copenhagen City, 2011. 
DHI. “Collection System, Modelling of storm water drainage networks and sewer collection 
systems User guide.” 2017. 
—. Mouse Runoff Reference Manual. 2017. 
Eggiman, S., L. Mutzner, O. Wani, M.Y. Schneider, and D. Spuhler. “The potential of knowing 
more: A review of data-driven urban water management.” Environmental Science & 
Technology, 2017, 51 (5) ed. 
Elmqvist, T., et al. “Benefits of restoring ecosystem services in urban areas.” Current 
Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 14 (2015): 101-108. 
==PAGE:76==
76 
Embassy of Kingdom of the Netherlands . “Factsheet Sponge City Construction in China.” 
I\&M department, 2016. 
Escobedo, Francisco J., Vincenzo Giannico, C. Y. Jim, Giovanni Sanesi, and Raffaele 
Lafortezza. “Urban Forests, Ecosystem Services, Green Infrastructure and Nature-
Based Solutions: Nexus or Evolving Metaphors?” Urban Forestry \& Urban 
Greening, 2018: -. 
Faivre, Nicolas, Marco Fritz, Tiago Freitas, Birgit Boissezon, and Sofie Vandewoestijne. 
“Nature-Based Solutions in the EU: Innovating with nature to address social, 
economic and environmental challenges.” Environmental Research 159 (2017): 
509-518. 
Fletcher, Tim D., et al. “SUDS, LID, BMPs, WSUD and more – The evolution and application 
of terminology surrounding urban drainage.” Urban Water Journal (Taylor & 
Francis) 12 (2015): 525-542. 
García, L., J. Barreiro-Gomez, E. Escobar, D. Téllez, N. Quijano, and C. Ocampo-Martinez. 
“Modeling and real-time control of urban drainage systems: A review.” Advances in 
Water Resources 85 (2015): 120-132. 
Garfield, Leanna. “China is building 30 ‘sponge cities’ that aim to soak up floodwater and 
prevent disaster.” 2017. 
Grafton, R., Katherine Daniell, Celine Nauges, Jean-Daniel Rinaudo, and Noel Wai Wah 
Chan. Understanding and Managing Urban Water in Transition. 2015. 
Gregersen, I.B., et al. Past, present and future variations of extreme rainfall in Denmark. TU 
Environment: Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark, 2014. 
Jonkman, S. N., and R. J. Dawson. “Issues and Challenges in Flood Risk Management & 
mdash;Editorial for the Special Issue on Flood Risk Management.” Water 4 (2012): 
785-792. 
Kabisch, N., H. Korn, J. Stadler, and A. Bonn. Nature-Based Solutions to Climate Change 
Adaptation in Urban Areas. Theory and Practice of Urban Sustainability Transitions. 
Springer, Cham, 2017. 
Kaspersen, P.S., N.H. Ravn, K. Arnbjerg-Nielsen, H. Madsen, and M. Drewes. “Comparison of 
the impacts of urban development and climate in exposing European cities to 
pluvial flooding.” (Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 21, 4131–4147) 2017. 
Keesstra, Saskia, et al. “The superior effect of nature based solutions in land management 
for enhancing ecosystem services.” Science of The Total Environment 610-611 
(2018): 997-1009. 
Lafortezza, Raffaele, Jiquan Chen, Cecil Konijnendijk Bosch, and Thomas B. Randrup. 
“Nature-based solutions for resilient landscapes and cities.” Environmental 
Research, 2017. 
Lerer, S.M., F. Righetti, T. Rozario, and P.S. Mikkelsen. “Integrated Hydrological Model-
Based Assessment of Stormwater Management Scenarios in Copenhagen’s First 
Climate Resilient Neighbourhood Using the Three Point Approach.” (Water) Vol. 9, 
No. 11, 883, (2017). 
Li, D., J. Wan, Yongwen Ma, Y. Wang, M. Huang, and Y. Chen. “Stormwater Runoff Pollutant 
Loading Distributions and Their Correlation with Rainfall and Catchment 
==PAGE:77==
77 
Characteristics in a Rapidly Industrialized City.” PLOS ONE (Public Library of 
Science) 10 (3 2015): 1-17. 
Lund, N.S.V. Model predictive control of the Marselisborg urban drainage system under 
uncertainty. Master's thesis, Technical University of Denmark (DTU), 2016. 
Lund, N.S.V., A. K. Falk, M. Borup, H. Madsen, and P. S. Mikkelsen. “Model predictive control 
of urban drainage systems: a review and perspective towards smart real-time 
water management.” in preparation, 2018. 
Lund, N.S.V., and M. Borup. Lecture note: Real time control of urban drainage systems. DTU 
Environment, 2016. 
Madsen, Herle Mo, Rebekah Brown, Morten Elle, and Peter Steen Mikkelsen. “Social 
construction of stormwater control measures in Melbourne and Copenhagen:.” 
Technological Forecasting and Social Change (ELSEVIER SCIENCE INC) 115 (2017): 
198-209. 
Mailhot, A., G. Talbot, and B. Lavallée. “Relationships between rainfall and Combined 
Sewer Overflow (CSO) occurrences.” Journal of Hydrology 523 (2015): 602-609. 
Mollerup, A. L., G. Sin, P. S. Mikkelsen, N. B. Johansen, and D. Thornberg. “A methodological 
approach to designing sewer system control.” Ph.D. dissertation, Technical 
University of Denmark (DTU), 2015. 
Nesshöver, Carsten, et al. “The science, policy and practice of nature-based solutions: An 
interdisciplinary perspective.” Science of The Total Environment 579 (2017): 1215-
1227. 
OcCC. “Extreme events and climate change.” (Organe consultatif sur les changements 
climatiques) 2003. 
Ojha, T., S. Misra, and N. Raghuwanshi. “Wireless Sensor Networks for Agriculture: The 
State-of-the-Art in Practice and Future Challenges.” Computers and Electronics in 
Agriculture 118 (10 2015). 
Ossa-Moreno, Juan, Karl M. Smith, and Ana Mijic. “Economic analysis of wider benefits to 
facilitate SuDS uptake in London, UK.” Sustainable Cities and Society 28 (2017): 
411-419. 
Parliament and Council of the European Union. Directive 2000/60/EC. Official Journal of 
the European Communities, 2000. 
Pommer, Konrad. “Zukunftsweisender und nachhaltiger Umgang mit Regenwasser.” 
Stadtentwässerung und Umweltanalystik Nürnberg (SUN), 2016. 
Roemer, Laura. “Analysis of modelling methodologies for retention boulevards - influence 
of extent of deployment versus movement of rainfall.” (Department of 
Environmental Engineering ) 2017. 
Roxburgh, Helen. “China's 'sponge cities' are turning streets green to combat flooding.” 
2017. 
Schilling, W. Real-Time Control of Urban Drainage Systems, the State-Of-The-Art (Water 
Science & Technology). Pergamon Pr, 1989. 
Schneider , Klaus-Jürgen, and Rudolf Bertig. Bautabellen für Ingenieure: Mit europäischen 
und nationalen Vorschriften. Düsseldorf: Werner, 1996. 
==PAGE:78==
78 
Schuetze, M., A. Campisano, H. Colas, W. Schilling, and P. Vanrolleghem. “Real-Time Control 
of Urban Wastewater Systems - Where Do We Stand Today?” 299 (12 2004): 335-
348. 
Sørup, Hjalte Jomo Danielsen, Sara Maria Lerer, Karsten Arnbjerg-Nielsen, Peter Steen 
Mikkelsen, and Martin Rygaard. “Efficiency of stormwater control measures for 
combined sewer retrofitting under varying rain conditions: Quantifying the Three 
Points Approach (3PA).” Environmental Science \& Policy 63 (2016): 19-26. 
Steudler, D., and A. Rajabifard. “Spatially Enabled Society.” The International Federation of 
Surveyors (FIG) and the Global Spatial Data Infrastructure Association (GSDI), 2012. 
Tedoldi, Damien, Ghassan Chebbo, Daniel Pierlot, Yves Kovacs, and Marie-Christine 
Gromaire. “Impact of runoff infiltration on contaminant accumulation and 
transport in the soil/filter media of Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems: A 
literature review.” Science of The Total Environment 569-570 (2016): 904-926. 
Thomsen, Rikke Sjølin. Teknisk rapport 14-03 Drift af Spildevandskomitéens 
Regnmålersystem Årsnotat 2013. Copenhagen: DMI, 2014. 
van Daal, Petra, Günter Gruber, Jeroen Langeveld, Dirk Muschalla, and François Clemens. 
“Performance evaluation of real time control in urban wastewater systems in 
practice: Review and perspective.” Environmental Modelling \& Software 95 
(2017): 90-101. 
Vezzaro, L., M. L. Christensen, C. Thirsing, M. Grum, and P. S. Mikkelsen. “Water Quality-
based Real Time Control of Integrated Urban Drainage Systems: A Preliminary 
Study from Copenhagen, Denmark.” Procedia Engineering 70 (2014): 1707-1716. 
Vitasovic, Z. Real Time Control of Urban Drainage Networks. C R C Press LLC, 2004. 
Walters, E., K. Schwarzwälder, P. Rutschmann, E. Müller, and H. Horn. “Influence of 
resuspension on the fate of fecal indicator bacteria in large-scale flumes mimicking 
an oligotrophic river.” 48 (10 2013). 
 
 
==PAGE:79==
I 
Appendix 
A Discharge at Outlet 94 465802 udloeb fiktiv for the Year 2014 
 
 
 
==PAGE:80==
II 
B Cut Model from SCM Case Area 
In the following figure, the cut model from the case area in MIKE Urban is depicted. 
 
In the Figure two locations are marked. The location named 1. depicts one cut made in the 
model. It allows to cut the inflow from downstream of the SCM to the CSO structure. The 
second cut made, named 2. in the figure, allows to cut the inflow from upstream of the 
SCM to the CSO structure.  
 
 
==PAGE:81==
III 
 
C Comparison Reduced to Full Model 
In the Figure below, the discharge in the link 94_466204_466203 for a CDS T=10 with a 
duration of 240 min and simulation time 480 min is depicted. The reduced Model 
discharge is depicted in black and full model discharge in blue.  
==PAGE:82==
IV 
D Dimensioning of the Cloudburst Measures in the Case Area 
Storage Volume generated above-ground  
  
Link name  
Up Level 
Down 
Level  
length 
slope 
1 
94_466206_46620
54 
15.09 
14.78 
71.0572 
0.2110976 
1 
94_466207_46620
6 
15.23 
15.09 
64.4823 
0.217114 
1 
94_466209_46620
8 
15.33 
15.23 
44.0957 
0.0680339 
  
Sum 
  
  
179.635   
1 
94_466210_46620
9 
15.6 
15.33 
94.9415 
0.2843855 
1 94_466211l1 
15.73 
15.6 
67.5074 
0.1925714 
  
  
  
  
162.449   
1 
94_466214_46621
3 
16.56 
15.73 
132.727 
0.6253414 
1 
94_466217_46621
6 
17.6 
16.56 
158.573 
0.6558482 
  
  
  
  
291.301   
  
  
  
SUM 
633.385   
 BIR 16.1 
  
  
CDS_1_240 
CSD_5_24
0 
CDS_10_24
0 
CSD_100_24
0 
  
  
length 
50 m 
  
  
[m3] 
[m3] 
[m3] 
[m3] 
  
  
width 
60 m 
Strandvaenget 
75 
813.7 
1,279.10 
1579.6 
2,709.40   
  
depth 
0.2 m 
Strandvaenget 
37 
433.8 
679.4 
838 
1,434.50   
  
Volume 
Retention 
Space 
300 m3 
==PAGE:83==
V 
Strandvaenget 
48 
286.6 
446.9 
550.4 
939.3   
  
Area 
Road 
  
  
Strandvaenget 
44.2 
9.321 
9.321 
9.321 
9.321   
  
5.48 m2 
  
sewer 
system 
length 
291.30
1 m2 
  
1596.32
8 m3 
  
  
Sum 
1543.421 
2414.721 
2977.32 
5092.521  
  
Sum 
1896.3
3 m3 
 BIR 16.2 
Strandvaenget 
44 
243.9 
379.5 
467.1 
796.2   
  
width 
107   
  
44.1 
234.579 
370.179 
457.779 
786.879   
  
length 
37   
  
depth 
0.2   
Retention 
Space  
791.8 m3 
  
  
Area 
Road 
5.48 m2 
sewer 
system 
length 
162.44
9 m2 
  
890.220
4 m3 
  
  
Sum 
234.579 
370.179 
457.779 
786.879 
  
SUM  
1682 m3 
Football Court Boldclubben Stefan 
Strandvaenget 
50 
800.7 
1,259.10 
1554.9 
2,668.00   
  
  
  
  
==PAGE:84==
VI 
Strandvaenget 
71 
431.9 
676.1 
834 
1,426.90   
  
Football 
Field 
  
  
Strandvaenget 
69 
170.9 
264.2 
324.6 
551.2   
  
assume 
based on 
elevation 
profile 
1200 m3 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Area 
Road 
5.48 m2 
sewer 
system 
length 
179.63
5 m2 
  
984.400
4 m3 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
SUM 
2184.4 m3 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Cloudbur
st Pipe  
474.13 m3 
Total 
  
3181.5 
4984.3 
6148.6 
10525.5  
  
Total 
Retention 
6236.8
8 m3 
Storage %  
  
<100 
<100 
<100 
59.25 
  
  
  
  
Difference 
(missing/excessi
ve volume) 
  
3055.3790
6 
1252.579
1 
88.279 
-4288.62 
  
  
  
  
==PAGE:85==
VII 
 
E Node Level and Graphical Display in MIKE Urban for Underlying Sewer 
System 
Graphical display of Node level for underlying sewer system:  
 
Table of Node Level of sewer system and implemented CBM 
Invert Level [m] 
Ground Level 
[m] 
Diameter [m] 
Hyder_112 
17.18 
19.18 
3 
Hydra_2 
17.8 
19.8 
3 
Hydra_3 
17.1 
19.1 
3 
Hydra_4 
16.35 
18.35 
3 
Hyrde_1 
20.5 
22.5 
3 
Hyrde_12 
16.2 
18.2 
3 
Hyrder_21 
17.4 
20.5 
3 
 
 
==PAGE:86==
VIII 
F Accumulated Volume for Model with and without CBM in SCM Case Area 
WITHOUT CBM 
WITH CBM  
Sewer Network Link  
Discharge 
m3 
Sewer Network Link  
Discharge m3 
94_466206_4662054 
5545.4 
94_466206_4662054 
2555.1 
94_466207_466206 
5679.1 
94_466207_466206 
2416.7 
94_466209_466208 
5787.6 
94_466209_466208 
2447.7 
94_466210_466209 
4703.6 
94_466210_466209 
1148.4 
94_466211l1 
4604.6 
94_466211l1 
3993 
94_466214_466213 
4069.7 
94_466214_466213 
3081.5 
94_466217_466216 
4106 
94_466217_466216 
3087.5 
94_466220_466219 3304.3 
94_466220_466219 
2142.2 
 
 
Link to upstream basin 
944.2 
SUM 
37800.3 
SUM 
21816.3 
 
 
Orifice_4 
516.1 
 
 
Orifice_5 
192.1 
 
 
conn_downbasin 
3.4 
 
 
orifices_6 
259.6 
 
 
conn_162 
153.3 
 
 
O_con_161 
3363.9 
 
 
Orifice_3 
2853.8 
 
 
Orifice_1 
896.4 
 
 
Orifice_2 
156.8 
 
 
SUM 
8395.4 
 
 
Hydra_4_b 
0.99 
 
 
hydrevangen_01 
1.14 
 
 
Hyrdevangen1 
1.28 
 
 
Hyrdevangen2 
1.92 
 
 
Skybrustpipe 
73.12 
 
 
Skybrustpipe_1 
152.2 
 
 
 
230.65 
 
 
basin161 
3333.16 
 
 
basin162 
438.7 
 
 
basin fb 
456.53 
 
 
basin upstream  
1284.74 
 
 
 
5513.13 
 
 
Reduced Inflow from 
Strandvaenget_44 due 
to CBM 16.3 
39.9 
 
 
Difference of water 
generated in the empty 
parts of the system 
1400.73 
 
 
 
Difference of Inflow 
from upstream branch. 
due to implementation 
1562.0 
==PAGE:87==
IX 
of cloudburst measure 
BIR15.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Water volume balance  
Sum of green cells 
minus sum of red 
cells  
 
 
 
30442.4 
 
 
Difference 
444.05 
==PAGE:88==
X 
G Retention Space Filling 
G.1 Retention Space Filling for varying Manning Numbers Methodology 1 CDS T=10 
 
Manning 
Number 
45 
68 
75 
Retention 
Space 
Basin  
fb 
[m3] 
162_rs 
[m3] 
161_rs 
[m3] 
Basin_ 
upstre
am 
[m3] 
fb [m3] 
162_rs 
[m3] 
161_rs 
[m3] 
Basin_ 
upstream 
[m3] 
fb 
[m3] 
162_rs 
[m3] 
161_rs 
[m3] 
Basin_ 
upstream 
[m3] 
max 
volume 
1200 
792 
300 
2000 
1200 
792 
300 
2000 
1200 
792 
300 
2000 
Mike 
Urban 
Calculated 
volume 
548 
624 
6092 
1447 
628 
644 
7895 
1483 
628 
644 
7895 
1483 
% 
exceeding 
0 
0 
2539 
0 
0 
0 
2632 
0 
0 
0 
2632 
0 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
XI 
G.2 Retention Space Filling from Model Methodology 1 compared to 3 CDS T=10 
 
Methodology 3 
Methodology 1 Manning number 68 
Retention 
Space 
Basin  
fb [m3] 
162_rs [m3] 
161_rs [m3] 
Basin_upstream 
[m3] 
fb [m3] 
162_rs [m3] 
161_rs [m3] 
Basin_upstream 
[m3] 
max 
volume 
1236 
831 
358 
2000 
1200 
791,8 
300 
2000 
Mike 
Urban 
Calculated 
volume 
636 
669 
7959 
1483 
628 
644,35 
7895 
1483 
% 
exceeding 
0 
0 
2222 
0 
0 
0 
2632 
0 
 
 
==PAGE:90==
XII 
G.3 Retention Space filling from Model Methodology 3 compared to 3 with Pumping CDS T=10 
 
Methodology 3  
Methodology 3 with pumping 
Retention 
Space Basin  
fb [m3] 
162_rs [m3] 
161_rs [m3] 
Basin_upstream 
[m3] 
fb [m3] 
162_rs [m3] 
161_rs [m3] 
Basin_upstream 
[m3] 
max volume 
1236 
831 
358 
2000 
1236 
831 
358 
2000 
Mike Urban 
Calculated 
volume 
636 
669 
7959 
1483 
701 
664 
7882 
1516 
% exceeding 
0 
0 
2222 
0 
0 
0 
2200 
0 
==PAGE:91==
XIII 
H Effects of Model Methodology 3 with Pumping 
H.1 Comparison of Proportion of CSO from MP3 to cut model  
 
Cut model 
MP3 
Proportion of CSO from MP3 
to cut model in [%] 
CDS 1 
CDS 5  
CDS 
10  
CDS 
100 
CDS 
1 
CDS 5  
CDS 
10  
CDS 
100 
CDS 1 
CDS 5  CDS 
10  
CDS 
100 
94_464271a_udloeb_fiktiv 
284.2 
1631.6 
2557.1 
6584.5 
219.1 
1498.
2 
2393.1 
6322.2 
22.91 
8.18 
6.41 
3.98 
94_465802_udloeb_fiktiv 
2055.6 
5691.2 
8135.6 
17729.3 
14.5 
46.9 
494.2 
3077.2 
99.29 
99.18 
93.93 
82.64 
94_469209B_udloeb_fiktiv 
140.4 
3083.0 
5653.1 
15338.7 
100.8 
2955.
5 
5603.6 
15221.
2 
28.21 
4.14 
0.88 
0.77 
94_GRONSPV_udloelb_fikti
v 
200.0 
214.4 
466.3 
1430.3 
200.1 
210.0 
453.6 
1388.7 
-0.05 
2.05 
2.72 
2.91 
94_UF10 
29.8 
75.9 
105.1 
247.8 
29.8 
75.9 
105.1 
247.8 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
94_UM16 
16.8 
327.1 
560.6 
1575.5 
1.7 
31.1 
156.3 
968.8 
89.96 
90.49 
72.12 
38.51 
94_UM18 
551.9 
1916.5 
2752.3 
5594.4 
250.8 
1611.
3 
2599.4 
5357.7 
54.56 
15.92 
5.56 
4.23 
94_UM26 
254.6 
624.6 
855.9 
1899.9 
254.6 
624.6 
855.9 
1899.8 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.01 
97_Fiktiv_vejvand_udloeb 
1.2 
1.2 
1.2 
1.2 
1.2 
1.2 
1.2 
1.2 
0.00 
0.16 
0.25 
0.00 
SUM 
3534.6 
13565 
21087 
50401 
1073 
7055 
12662 
34485 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:92==
XIV 
 
H.2 Ground Level Exceedance in the SCM Case Area for a CDS T=10 for the Model 
Methodology 3 with Pumping 
Node ID 
Minimum 
[m] 
Maximum 
[m] 
Ground 
Level [m] 
Ground Level - 
Maximum [m] 
94_466205 
14.79 
17.72 
18 
0.28 
94_466206 
15.1 
18.29 
18.89 
0.6 
94_466207 
15.24 
18.29 
19.5 
1.21 
94_466209 
15.34 
18.29 
20.28 
1.99 
94_466210 
15.61 
17.01 
18.89 
1.87 
94_466211 
15.74 
17.15 
19.18 
2.03 
94_466214 
16.57 
17.91 
20.31 
2.39 
94_466217 
17.61 
19.13 
22.33 
3.2 
Hyrde_1 
20.51 
20.87 
22.5 
1.63 
hydra_2 
17.81 
18.25 
19.8 
1.55 
161_rs 
5.01 
15.8 
15 
-0.8 
Hyrde_12 
16.21 
16.61 
18.2 
1.59 
hydra_3 
17.11 
18.29 
19.1 
0.81 
Hydra_4 
16.36 
16.43 
18.35 
1.92 
fb 
5.61 
11.27 
15.6 
4.33 
162_rs 
10.21 
18.21 
20.2 
1.99 
Basin_upstream 
12.01 
19.64 
22 
2.36 
O4_sn 
17.21 
18.29 
19.2 
0.91 
O4_cbm 
17.31 
18.29 
19.3 
1.01 
Hyder_112 
17.19 
17.19 
19.18 
1.99 
Hyrder_21 
17.41 
18.29 
20.5 
2.21 
3_o 
17.01 
18.29 
19 
0.71 
0_3 
16.9 
18.29 
18.89 
0.6 
4_bas 
17.9 
18.22 
18.15 
-0.07 
4_bas_2 
18 
18.19 
18.25 
0.06 
O6_rb 
15.68 
15.7 
17.67 
1.97 
conn162_rs 
18.11 
18.22 
20.1 
1.88 
conn162_cbm 
18.01 
18.24 
20 
1.76 
O161_sn 
15.01 
15.8 
17 
1.2 
==PAGE:93==
XV 
O161_cbm 
15.11 
15.81 
17.1 
1.29 
O3_sn 
16.01 
16.88 
18 
1.12 
O3_cbm 
16.11 
16.75 
18.1 
1.35 
O2_sn 
17.01 
17.15 
19 
1.85 
O2_cbm 
17.11 
17.15 
19.1 
1.95 
O1_sn 
20.36 
20.59 
22.35 
1.76 
O1_cbm 
20.41 
20.65 
22.4 
1.75 
 
H.3 Ground Level Exceedance in the SCM Case Area for a CDS T=10 for the Cut Model 
 
Node ID 
Minimum [m] 
Maximum [m] 
Ground 
Level [m] 
Ground Level - 
Maximum [m] 
94_466205 
14.79 
18.17 
18 
-0.17 
94_466206 
15.1 
18.51 
18.89 
0.38 
94_466207 
15.24 
18.85 
19.5 
0.65 
94_466209 
15.34 
19.16 
20.28 
1.12 
94_466210 
15.61 
19.55 
18.89 
-0.66 
94_466211 
15.74 
19.72 
19.18 
-0.54 
94_466214 
16.57 
20.44 
20.31 
-0.13 
94_466217 
17.61 
21.27 
22.33 
1.06 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
XVI 
I Pumps, Orifices and Link 94_466204_466203 Location in SCM Case Area 
 
Pump Football Court 
Boldclubben Stefan  
Orifice 4  
Orifice 5  
Orifice 6 
Orifice 3 
Orifice 2  
Orifice 1  
Pump BIR 
15.2  
Pump BIR 
16.2 
Pump BIR 
16.1 
PID Set-Point of level 
node 94_465802 
PID Set-Point of 
discharge link 
PID Set-Point of level 
node 94_465802 
Orifice connection 
downstream  
Orifice connection 
BIR 16.1 Retention 
Space  
Orifice connection 
BIR 16.2 Retention 
Space  
Link 
94_466204_466203 
==PAGE:95==
XVII 
J Water Level and Discharge for Cut, M3P, PID Control Scheme Model 1 for 
Selected Nodes and Links  
Discharge in Retention Road 
for CDS rain T=1 [m3] 
Cut 
model  
Methodology 
3 with 
pumping 
model (M3P) 
PID 
control 
scheme 
model 1 
without 
direct 
settings 
MP3 with 
PID 
control 1  
Skyburstpipe 
 
81.47 
235.1 
248.1 
Skyburstpipe_01 
 
151.8 
-23.7 
-22.54 
Hydra 4_b 
 
0.896 
75.03 
96.61 
Hydrevangen_01 
 
1.034 
747.7 
772.3 
Hydrevangen_1 
 
1.165 
585.5 
727.7 
Hydrevangen_2 
 
-1.745 
-0.682 
-1.665 
 
Outflow overflow structures 
Cut 
model  
Methodology 
3 with 
pumping 
model (M3P) 
PID 
control 
scheme 
model 1 
without 
direct 
settings 
MP3 
with PID 
control 1  
94_464271a_udloeb_fiktiv 
284.2 
219 
217.5 
228.4 
94_465802_udloeb_fiktiv 
2055.6 
14.53 
7.052 
14.54 
94_469209B_udloeb_fiktiv 
140.4 
100.7 
126.4 
136.2 
94_GRONSPV_udloelb_fiktiv 
200 
200.1 
50.89 
200.2 
94_UF10 
29.81 
29.81 
29.64 
29.81 
94_UM16 
16.84 
1.691 
0.813 
1.691 
94_UM18 
551.9 
250.8 
341 
360.9 
94_UM26 
254.6 
254.6 
253.9 
254.6 
97_Fiktiv_vejvand_udloeb 
1.211 
1.211 
0.56 
1.212 
3534.6 
1072.4 
1027.8 
1227.6 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:96==
XVIII 
Distance to Ground 
level [m] 
Cut model  
Methodology 3 
with pumping 
model (M3P) 
PID 
control 
scheme 
model 1 
without 
direct 
settings 
MP3  with 
PID 
control 
scheme 
model 1  
94_466205 
0.25 
0.21 
-0.29 
-0.29 
94_466206 
1.04 
1.1 
0.53 
0.55 
94_466207 
1.52 
1.71 
1.11 
1.11 
94_466209 
2.2 
2.49 
1.89 
1.87 
94_466210 
0.62 
2.28 
-3.14 
0.14 
94_466211 
0.89 
2.44 
0.52 
0.51 
94_466214 
1.88 
2.88 
1.71 
1.7 
94_466217 
3.57 
3.68 
3.75 
3.75 
Hyrde_1 
 
1.77 
0.41 
0.41 
hydra_2 
 
1.92 
1.21 
1.21 
161_rs 
 
-0.66 
0 
0 
Hyrde_12 
 
1.77 
-0.7 
1.96 
hydra_3 
 
1.31 
0.51 
0.97 
Hydra_4 
 
1.95 
0.08 
1.95 
fb 
 
6.3 
9.31 
7.62 
162_rs 
 
4.68 
7.46 
5.69 
Basin_upstream 
 
3.29 
4.49 
4.73 
O4_sn 
 
1.41 
6.8 
0.68 
O4_cbm 
 
1.51 
6.71 
1.17 
Hyder_112 
 
1.99 
0.36 
1.98 
Hyrder_21 
 
2.71 
1.91 
2.37 
3_o 
 
1.21 
6.41 
0.87 
0_3 
 
1.1 
7.53 
0.47 
4_bas 
 
0.24 
6.86 
-0.21 
4_bas_2 
 
0.25 
6.98 
0.25 
O6_rb 
 
1.98 
9.99 
1.98 
conn162_rs 
 
1.99 
1.99 
1.99 
conn162_cbm 
 
1.98 
1.41 
1.87 
O161_sn 
 
1.34 
1.92 
1.93 
O161_cbm 
 
1.44 
0.86 
0.86 
O3_sn 
 
1.46 
-0.62 
-0.62 
O3_cbm 
 
1.64 
1.86 
1.86 
O2_sn 
 
1.99 
0.37 
0.37 
O2_cbm 
 
2 
1.9 
1.9 
O1_sn 
 
1.84 
1.84 
1.84 
O1_cbm 
 
1.85 
1.85 
1.85 
 
 
 
==PAGE:97==
XIX 
 
K Water Level and Discharge for Cut, M3P, PID Control Scheme Model 2 for 
Selected Nodes and Links  
Discharge in Retention Road for 
CDS rain T=1 [m3] 
Cut Model  
Methodology 3 
with pumping 
model (M3P) 
PID control 
scheme 
model 2 
Skyburstpipe 
 
81.47 
148.1 
Skyburstpipe_01 
 
151.8 
108.2 
Hydra 4_b 
 
0.896 
0.896 
Hydrevangen_01 
 
1.034 
1.034 
Hydrevangen_1 
 
1.165 
1.165 
Hydrevangen_2 
 
-1.745 
-1.745 
 
Outflow overflow structures 
Cut model  Methodology 3 
with pumping 
model (M3P) 
PID control 
scheme 
model 2 
94_464271a_udloeb_fiktiv 
284.2 
219 
265 
94_465802_udloeb_fiktiv 
2055.6 
14.53 
346.6 
94_469209B_udloeb_fiktiv 
140.4 
100.7 
172.5 
94_GRONSPV_udloelb_fiktiv 
200 
200.1 
200.6 
94_UF10 
29.81 
29.81 
29.81 
94_UM16 
16.84 
1.691 
1.691 
94_UM18 
551.9 
250.8 
587.8 
94_UM26 
254.6 
254.6 
254.6 
97_Fiktiv_vejvand_udloeb 
1.211 
1.211 
1.212 
SUM 
3534.56 
1072.44 
1859.81 
 
 
 
==PAGE:98==
XX 
 
Distance to Ground 
level [m] 
Cut model  
Methodology 3 
with pumping 
model (M3P) 
PID control 
scheme 
model 2 
94_466205 
0.25 
0.21 
-0.36 
94_466206 
1.04 
1.1 
0.48 
94_466207 
1.52 
1.71 
1.02 
94_466209 
2.2 
2.49 
1.76 
94_466210 
0.62 
2.28 
0.21 
94_466211 
0.89 
2.44 
0.55 
94_466214 
1.88 
2.88 
1.65 
94_466217 
3.57 
3.68 
3.63 
Hyrde_1 
 
1.77 
1.77 
hydra_2 
 
1.92 
1.67 
161_rs 
 
-0.66 
0 
Hyrde_12 
 
1.77 
1.96 
hydra_3 
 
1.31 
0.97 
Hydra_4 
 
1.95 
1.95 
fb 
 
6.3 
7.62 
162_rs 
 
4.68 
5.7 
Basin_upstream 
 
3.29 
4.72 
O4_sn 
 
1.41 
0.68 
O4_cbm 
 
1.51 
1.17 
Hyder_112 
 
1.99 
1.98 
Hyrder_21 
 
2.71 
2.37 
3_o 
 
1.21 
0.87 
0_3 
 
1.1 
0.47 
4_bas 
 
0.24 
-0.21 
4_bas_2 
 
0.25 
0.25 
O6_rb 
 
1.98 
1.98 
conn162_rs 
 
1.99 
1.99 
conn162_cbm 
 
1.98 
1.87 
O161_sn 
 
1.34 
1.93 
O161_cbm 
 
1.44 
0.86 
O3_sn 
 
1.46 
-0.62 
O3_cbm 
 
1.64 
1.86 
O2_sn 
 
1.99 
0.37 
O2_cbm 
 
2 
1.9 
O1_sn 
 
1.84 
1.84 
O1_cbm 
 
1.85 
1.85 
 
 
 
==PAGE:99==
XXI 
L Water Level and Discharge for Cut, M3P, PID Control Scheme Model 3 for 
Selected Nodes and Links  
Discharge in Retention Road for 
CDS rain T=1 [m3] 
Cut model  
Methodology 3 
with pumping 
model (M3P) 
PID control 
scheme 
model 3 
Skyburstpipe 
 
81.47 
248,8 
Skyburstpipe_01 
 
151.8 
-22,35 
Hydra 4_b 
 
0.896 
95,25 
Hydrevangen_01 
 
1.034 
772,3 
Hydrevangen_1 
 
1.165 
727,7 
Hydrevangen_2 
 
-1.745 
-1,665 
 
Outflow overflow structures 
Cut model  Methodology 3 
with pumping 
model (M3P) 
PID control 
scheme 
model 3 
94_464271a_udloeb_fiktiv 
284.2 
219 
228.8 
94_465802_udloeb_fiktiv 
2055.6 
14.53 
14.54 
94_469209B_udloeb_fiktiv 
140.4 
100.7 
135.7 
94_GRONSPV_udloelb_fiktiv 
200 
200.1 
200.2 
94_UF10 
29.81 
29.81 
29.81 
94_UM16 
16.84 
1.691 
1.691 
94_UM18 
551.9 
250.8 
363.8 
94_UM26 
254.6 
254.6 
254.6 
97_Fiktiv_vejvand_udloeb 
1.211 
1.211 
1.212 
SUM 
3534.56 
1072.44 
1230.35 
 
 
 
==PAGE:100==
XXII 
 
Distance to Ground 
level [m] 
Cut model  
Methodology 3 
with pumping 
model (M3P) 
PID control 
scheme 
model 3 
94_466205 
0.25 
0.21 
-0.3 
94_466206 
1.04 
1.1 
0.56 
94_466207 
1.52 
1.71 
1.14 
94_466209 
2.2 
2.49 
1.9 
94_466210 
0.62 
2.28 
0.37 
94_466211 
0.89 
2.44 
0.7 
94_466214 
1.88 
2.88 
1.83 
94_466217 
3.57 
3.68 
3.85 
Hyrde_1 
 
1.77 
0.41 
hydra_2 
 
1.92 
1.21 
161_rs 
 
-0.66 
0 
Hyrde_12 
 
1.77 
0.33 
hydra_3 
 
1.31 
0.51 
Hydra_4 
 
1.95 
0.19 
fb 
 
6.3 
8.07 
162_rs 
 
4.68 
5.77 
Basin_upstream 
 
3.29 
4.7 
O4_sn 
 
1.41 
0.82 
O4_cbm 
 
1.51 
0.71 
Hyder_112 
 
1.99 
0.39 
Hyrder_21 
 
2.71 
1.91 
3_o 
 
1.21 
0.41 
0_3 
 
1.1 
0.56 
4_bas 
 
0.24 
-0.15 
4_bas_2 
 
0.25 
0.09 
O6_rb 
 
1.98 
1.96 
conn162_rs 
 
1.99 
1.99 
conn162_cbm 
 
1.98 
1.41 
O161_sn 
 
1.34 
1.92 
O161_cbm 
 
1.44 
-0.77 
O3_sn 
 
1.46 
-0.47 
O3_cbm 
 
1.64 
0.23 
O2_sn 
 
1.99 
0.52 
O2_cbm 
 
2 
0.31 
O1_sn 
 
1.84 
1.99 
O1_cbm 
 
1.85 
0.31 
 
 
 
==PAGE:101==
XXIII 
M Water Level and Discharge for cut, M3P, Direct Setting Control Scheme 
Model for Selected Nodes and Links  
Discharge in Retention 
Road for CDS rain T=1 
[m3] 
Methodology 3 
with pumping 
model (M3P) 
Direct setting 
control scheme 
model 
Level 
Direct setting 
control scheme 
model 
Discharge 
Skyburstpipe 
81.47 
248.7 
248.7 
Skyburstpipe_01 
151.8 
-22.35 
-22.35 
Hydra 4_b 
0.89 
95.21 
95.21 
Hydrevangen_01 
1.03 
772.3 
772.3 
Hydrevangen_1 
1.17 
727.7 
727.6 
Hydrevangen_2 
-1.75 
-1.67 
-1.67 
 
Outflow overflow structures 
Cut 
model  
Methodology 
3 with 
pumping 
model (M3P) 
Direct 
setting 
control 
scheme 
model 
level 
Direct 
setting 
control 
scheme 
model 
discharge 
94_464271a_udloeb_fiktiv 
284.2 
219 
249.4 
251.2 
94_465802_udloeb_fiktiv 
2055.6 
14.53 
417.1 
419.8 
94_469209B_udloeb_fiktiv 
140.4 
100.7 
162.1 
162.4 
94_GRONSPV_udloelb_fiktiv 
200 
200.1 
200.4 
200.4 
94_UF10 
29.81 
29.81 
29.81 
29.81 
94_UM16 
16.84 
1.691 
1.69 
1.69 
94_UM18 
551.9 
250.8 
574.3 
580.2 
94_UM26 
254.6 
254.6 
254.6 
254.6 
97_Fiktiv_vejvand_udloeb 
1.211 
1.211 
1.21 
1.21 
SUM 
3534.6 
1072.4 
1890.6 
1901.3 
 
 
 
==PAGE:102==
XXIV 
 
Distance to Ground 
level [M] 
Cut model  
Methodology 3 
with pumping 
model (M3P) 
Direct 
setting 
control 
scheme 
model 
level 
Direct 
setting 
control 
scheme 
model 
discharge 
94_466205 
0.25 
0.21 
-0.36 
-0.34 
94_466206 
1.04 
1.1 
0.45 
0.52 
94_466207 
1.52 
1.71 
1.03 
1.09 
94_466209 
2.2 
2.49 
1.77 
1.85 
94_466210 
0.62 
2.28 
0.21 
0.34 
94_466211 
0.89 
2.44 
0.55 
0.67 
94_466214 
1.88 
2.88 
1.65 
1.76 
94_466217 
3.57 
3.68 
3.64 
3.72 
Hyrde_1 
 
1.77 
0.41 
0.41 
hydra_2 
 
1.92 
1.21 
1.21 
161_rs 
 
-0.66 
0 
0 
Hyrde_12 
 
1.77 
0.33 
0.33 
hydra_3 
 
1.31 
0.51 
0.51 
Hydra_4 
 
1.95 
0.14 
0.14 
fb 
 
6.3 
8.05 
8.05 
162_rs 
 
4.68 
5.56 
5.59 
Basin_upstream 
 
3.29 
7.83 
7.84 
O4_sn 
 
1.41 
0.69 
0.77 
O4_cbm 
 
1.51 
0.71 
0.71 
Hyder_112 
 
1.99 
0.39 
0.39 
Hyrder_21 
 
2.71 
1.91 
1.91 
3_o 
 
1.21 
0.41 
0.41 
0_3 
 
1.1 
0.45 
0.52 
4_bas 
 
0.24 
-0.21 
-0.19 
4_bas_2 
 
0.25 
0.04 
0.04 
O6_rb 
 
1.98 
1.99 
1.99 
conn162_rs 
 
1.99 
6.99 
6.99 
conn162_cbm 
 
1.98 
6.41 
6.41 
O161_sn 
 
1.34 
1.92 
1.92 
O161_cbm 
 
1.44 
-0.77 
-0.77 
O3_sn 
 
1.46 
-0.61 
-0.5 
O3_cbm 
 
1.64 
0.23 
0.23 
O2_sn 
 
1.99 
0.37 
0.49 
O2_cbm 
 
2 
0.31 
0.31 
O1_sn 
 
1.84 
1.99 
1.99 
O1_cbm 
 
1.85 
0.31 
0.31 
 
 
==PAGE:103==
 
 
Declaration of Academic Honesty 
I, Anne Imig, hereby confirm that the document in hand titled, Taking advantage of 
cloudburst projects in Copenhagen during minor-medium rain events by using above-
ground control, is solely my own work and that every text passage, figure or diagram from 
books, papers, the Web or any other source copied or in any other way used has been 
acknowledged and fully cited. 
Anne Imig, 1. July 2018  
