==PAGE:1==
 
 
Javier Gumà Abizanda  
Sustainability-Oriented Busi-
ness Model Assessment:  
Towards Quantitative Business Model 
Assessment  
Master's Thesis, July 2018   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
 
Javier Gumà Abizanda> 
Sustainability-Oriented Busi-
ness Model Assessment: >  
Towards Quantitative Business Model 
Assessment    
Master's Thesis, July 2018   
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
2 
Sustainability-Oriented Business Model Assessment: Towards Quantitative Busi-
ness Model Assessment  
 
Author(s): 
Javier Gumà Abizanda 
 
Supervisor(s): 
Francesco Rosati 
 
 
Department of Management Engineering 
Technology Innovation Management 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
Centrifugevej 
Building 372, room 207 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
+45 254800 
 
 
 
 
 
Release date: 
 
<July 2nd 2018> 
Class: 
 
1 (Public) 
 
Comments: 
 
This report is a part of the requirements to achieve <Industrial 
Engineering & Management> at Technical University of Den-
mark. 
The report represents <35> ECTS points. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
3 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
I would like to personally thank Francesco Rosati, for the support given and the time 
dedicated through the whole duration of the thesis, especially when the direction of the 
work was unclear. 
 
I would also like to thank DTU as an institution for giving me the opportunity of expand-
ing my educational background, specifically to the Management Engineering department 
for putting together a nurturing environment on which to grow personally and profession-
ally. 
 
Special thanks also go to Per Resen Steenstrup, CEO of Resen Waves whose time feed-
back and insights could have been more helpful. 
 
Last but not least, I would like to mention all the people from my personal circle that 
supported me, coached me, motivated me during the duration of my thesis: Alejandro 
Ventura-Travesset, Alvaro Romero Chica, Patrick Grimm, Gorka Fuentes Lejarza, Fil-
ippo Gioanina and Beñat Martin Iradi 
==PAGE:6==
 
4 
ABSTRACT 
 
 
 
A rise in interest and acknowledgement of the importance of the engagement of the pri-
vate sector with sustainability objectives has led to a crescent development of sustaina-
bility-oriented business model studies. This growing study field has led to the conceptu-
alization and a new way of conducting business focusing on all three dimensions of the 
Triple Bottom Line- being economic, environmental and social- and integrating it to the 
core of its rationale. Despite an increasing number of tools, frameworks and concepts, a 
gap appears in the literature in relation to sustainable business model assessment.  
This work intends to start an iterative process of developing a comprehensive and holistic 
scale enabling to link sustainable business model designs with their impacts on all sus-
tainability directions and the strategy lying above between them. 
To do so a literature review was done allowing a deep comprehension of sustainability-
oriented business model conceptualisation, motivation and acknowledgement of different 
related tools. Based on that research, a scale construct was developed based on the criteria 
of scale validity and its different steps. Then, the developed construct was applied through 
a case study of Resen Waves Aps. Finally, feedback and recommendations from the com-
pany’s CEO were used to discuss on flaws and enhancements regarding the created con-
struct. 
 
 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
5 
TABLE OF CONTENT 
Acknowledgements ......................................................................................................... 3 
Abstract............................................................................................................................ 4 
Table of content ............................................................................................................... 5 
Table of Figures .............................................................................................................. 7 
1 
Introduction ............................................................................................................. 9 
2 
Literature Review .................................................................................................. 13 
2.1 
Literature Review Approach ............................................................................ 13 
2.2 
Business Cases for Sustainability..................................................................... 14 
2.3 
Defining Sustainability-Oriented Business Models ......................................... 17 
2.4 
Sustainability Oriented Business Model Frameworks ..................................... 20 
2.5 
Sustainability Oriented Business Model Assessment ...................................... 24 
3 
The Sustainanility-oriented Business model assessment framework ............... 27 
3.1 
A Likert Scale Framework ............................................................................... 27 
3.2 
Impact Assessment (I) ...................................................................................... 30 
3.3 
Strategy Assessment (S) ................................................................................... 35 
4 
Framework Application ........................................................................................ 39 
4.1 
Method ............................................................................................................. 39 
4.2 
The case study company: Resen Waves........................................................... 40 
4.3 
Results .............................................................................................................. 44 
4.4 
Discussion ........................................................................................................ 46 
==PAGE:8==
Table of content 
6 
5 
Conclusion............................................................................................................... 49 
References ...................................................................................................................... 51 
A Appendix A: the survey ............................................................................................. 55 
B Appendix B : Contact email format ......................................................................... 57 
C Appendix C: Resen Waves power Buoy datasheet ................................................. 58 
D Appendix D: Resen Waves SDG profile .................................................................. 59 
E Appendix D: Resen Waves Survey Answer ............................................................. 60 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
7 
TABLE OF FIGURES 
Figure 1: Criteria for Sustainability-Oriented Business Model Assessment .................. 14 
Figure 2: Financial Performance vs Social & Ecological Performance (from 
Lüdeke-Freund et al. 2016) ................................................................................... 15 
Figure 3: Major challenges of Business Sustainability (source: Lüdeke-Freund 
et al. 2016) ............................................................................................................. 15 
Figure 4: Sustainable Business Model (source: Bocken, Rana & Short 2015) .............. 18 
Figure 5: Sustainable Business Model compared to traditional Business Model 
(source: Morioka et al. 2017)................................................................................ 19 
Figure 6: Sustainable Business Model Archetypes (source: Bocken et al. 2014) .......... 20 
Figure 7: Flourishing Business model canvas (source: 
http://www.flourishingbusiness.org/) .................................................................... 21 
Figure 8: Triple Layered Business Model Canvas (source: Joyce and Paquin 
2016) ...................................................................................................................... 23 
Figure 9: GRI categories and aspects (source: G4 GRI Sustainability 
Reporting Guidelines) ........................................................................................... 26 
Figure 10: Sustainability integration and sustainability business strategies ................. 36 
Figure 11: Resen Waves Power Buoy (source: http://www.resenwaves.com/) .............. 41 
Figure 12: Conceptualization of the developed Sustainability-oriented Business 
Model Assessment Framework .............................................................................. 47 
Figure 13: Conceptualization of the SDG-SBM alignment assessment ......................... 48 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
 
9 
1  
INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, a growing number of organisations are changing the way they manage 
themselves to achieve a deeper integration of sustainability -on its three dimensions- into 
their business rationale. The three dimensions of sustainability -economic, environmental 
and social- are firstly introduced with the concept of Triple Bottom Line-hereby TBL-
(Elkington 2013) and represent the pillars on which a sustainability-oriented business 
model should be standing.  
In fact, an increasing number of organisations integrate to a greater degree the worries 
and needs of stakeholders, in opposition from just considering shareholders’ needs. Ac-
cording to Porter (Porter and Kramer 2006), social media, activists and governments are 
now holding companies accountable for their social consequences. So far, engaging with 
stakeholders and integrate societies problems into the organizations’ mission through 
Corporate Social Responsibility has been the most widespread practice. But in the cited 
paper, Porter & Kramer already talk about the possibility of using Corporate Social Re-
sponsibility not only as a “charitable deed”, and instead embed CSR to the core of busi-
ness generating “a source of opportunity, innovation and competitive advantage”(Porter 
and Kramer 2006). This could actually be seen as a first approach towards sustainable 
business models since it already discusses about integrating to a greater extent social mat-
ters to the core of the business. Still, it is only referred as a way to increase competitive 
advantage in order to maximise shareholder profits. 
In addition, the Planet’s environment appears as an urgent matter in the international 
agenda, leading governments and international organizations to push regulation towards 
“greener” requirements. As a matter of fact, and according to WWF (WWF 2012) in 2012 
worldwide activities were already using the equivalent of the resources from 1.5 planets 
to sustain themselves. Companies are therefore pushed to consider their environmental 
impact (i.e. resources, energy, CO2, water usage, their waste production, their emission 
of pollutants) and urged to report it and minimize it. 
The previously mentioned factors pressuring companies to consider sustainability on so-
cial and environmental dimensions, are to be added to economic crises rising economic 
and social inequalities both nationally and internationally. 
The rise on awareness regarding the fact that engagement of the private sector is crucial 
to address actively said economic, environmental and social events has led to the creation 
of a series of initiatives such as the Global Reporting Initiative (Global Reporting 
Initiative 2014) and the Sustainable Development Goals (Global Reporting Initiative, 
United Nations Global Compact, and wbcsd 2015). Both initiatives are widely accepted 
==PAGE:12==
Introduction 
10 
both by private sector and international community. The first one serves as a framework 
for a sustainability performance measurement considering all three dimensions, and helps 
companies to set specific sustainability goals, ultimately serving as kind of a sustainabil-
ity accounting. The second, the SDGs are a set of high level goals set by the United Na-
tions- through a multi-stakeholder initiative- intended to guide business action and strat-
egy to tackle the economic, social and environmental challenges by 2030. 
While some companies only see sustainability challenges as risks if they are not consid-
ered (Paterson 2001), others take sustainability to the core of their business by taking 
advantage of a so called sustainability business case (Schaltegger, Freund, and Hansen 
2012). Traditionally, a business model is defined as “the rationale of how an organization 
creates, delivers and captures value”(Osterwalder and Pigneur 2009). Such definition 
only considers the economic dimension of a business rationale, solely considering finan-
cial value as captured. Companies following this type of business model are driven by 
neoclassical economic theory (Brenner and Cochran 1992; Key 1999) and are primary 
obligated to maximise profits of its shareholders. Thus, any environmental or societal 
measures in such companies are taken in self-interest to enhance corporate image or solely 
on compliance motivations that would jeopardize financial income. 
But the higher engagement with sustainability -from private sector, International commu-
nity and academia- and the possibility of embedding it at the core of business is leading 
to new literature proposing sustainability-oriented business models, also called business 
models for shared value. Also, leading to new models and frameworks intended to assist 
practitioners and researchers with their work on either continue developing theory or de-
signing successful sustainable business models (Joyce and Paquin 2016; Morioka et al. 
2018). Yet, a gap appears in literature in regards to assessing the assumed positive sus-
tainability effects to support business management (Lüdeke-Freund et al. 2017). Some 
authors (Dentchev et al. 2018) tried to group SBM scholarship into the different ap-
proaches they are given exposing the fact that most of the literature addresses SBM de-
sign, value creation and innovation neglecting so far “cumulative theoretical development 
concerning the antecedents, processes and outcomes of SBMs” and the developments of 
“more sophisticated and rigorous empirical methods to investigate SBMs”(Dentchev et 
al. 2018). 
This report intends to set a first step towards the development of a tool to assist on the 
sustainability-oriented business model assessment, by analysing present organisational 
activities impact and future strategy regarding the different forming business model ele-
ments and considering the Triple Bottom Line. Said tool pretends to be a first approach 
towards creating a scale for sustainability-oriented business model performance and as-
piring to allow a better assessment on the practitioners’ side, and future empirical data 
generation for scholars. First a literature review will be exposed, to provide an overview 
of the state of the art in terms of sustainable business model design tools and frameworks, 
linked to existing theory on the concept of what an SBM is supposed to aim for. Then, 
==PAGE:13==
Introduction 
11 
the methodology and the developed framework will be explained. Finally, some examples 
of its use and perception by companies participating in the development will be exposed.
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
 
13 
2 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
2.1 
Literature Review Approach 
 
Before the ideation of an SBM assessment tool, a better understanding of the SBM con-
cept and existing approaches to conceptualization, design and assessment was required. 
To do so, a systematic literature review was done using the following keywords: 
• Sustainability 
• Sustainable Development 
• Business Model 
• Sustainable Business Model 
• Corporate Sustainability 
• Assessment 
• Sustainable Innovation 
A review of existing traditional business model concepts and frameworks was also re-
quired since a general tendency appeared of using existing business theory and expand it 
by merging sustainable development notions with it. 
The aim of this report being the ideation of a scale enabling SBM assessment, considered 
literature will be that allowing to better understand the concept of SBM -rooted in existing 
traditional BM to facilitate a transition towards this new way of conducting business-, 
and therefore developing the ways in which sustainable value is and could be designed, 
in addition to literature providing sustainability performance measures was considered of 
relevance to this work (Figure 1). Regarding the literature review sources, they were peer-
reviewed scientific journal articles and a number of practice publications from NGOs, 
institutions (i.e. UN) and consulting firms. Said articles were extracted mainly from Web 
of Science, Scopus and Google Scholar, and narrowed down to only publications in Eng-
lish summing a total of 35 cited papers in this work. 
As a result of said literature review, four main concepts were thought as critical for the 
understanding of this work: 
• Sustainable business cases (Section 2.2): as opportunities to which sustainable 
business strategy should address to create economic, environmental and social 
value. 
• The definition of Sustainable Business Model concept in literature (Section 2.3) 
==PAGE:16==
 
Literature Review 
14 
• Existing Sustainability-Oriented Business Model design tools and frameworks 
(Section 2.4): the most accepted ones by citation and use in industry 
• Links between SBM design and existing assessment literature (2.5) 
 
Figure 1: Criteria for Sustainability-Oriented Business Model Assessment 
 
2.2 
Business Cases for Sustainability  
 
Various authors (see Schaltegger et al. 2012) have related sustainable business cases with 
what they call “enlightened self-interest” which describes the situation where economic 
success is increased by achieving positive impact on environmental and/or social issues. 
Different approaches exist to explain the reason of creating sustainable business cases. 
One of them (Eden 1994) discusses if social and environmental activities are not only a 
side effect of seeking higher economic performance. Meaning that sustainable business 
cases are exclusively promoted if they serve to achieve a better reputation in different 
markets. Schaltegger, Freund, and Hansen (2012) focus on a different approach in which 
the link between voluntary social and environmental activities promote economic success 
discussing that economic success comes from said voluntary activities (Figure 2). Con-
sequently, the definition of business cases for sustainability, appears as business cases 
that “have the purpose to and do realise economic success through (not just with) an 
intelligent design of voluntary environmental and social activities” (Schaltegger et al. 
2012). 
 
==PAGE:17==
 
Literature Review 
15 
 
Figure 2: Financial Performance vs Social & Ecological Performance (from Lüdeke-
Freund et al. 2016) 
 
Said voluntary actions should address the main challenges of business sustainability also 
called corporate sustainability and their integration into business main goal materialises 
through two major concepts: effectiveness and efficiency (Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3: Major challenges of Business Sustainability (source: Lüdeke-Freund et al. 
2016) 
The effectiveness is described by positive tangible effects on all three dimensions by 
absolute measures: 
==PAGE:18==
 
Literature Review 
16 
• Economic effectiveness: is the classic goal of business and aims to support 
economic success while sustaining ecological and social dimensions. 
• Ecological effectiveness: is measured by absolute positive effects which could 
be waste and/or emission reduction, helping regeneration of ecosystems, re-
covering of wastes, etc… 
• Social effectiveness: relates to corporate social management and therefore 
measures to which extent social and cultural demands are covered by business 
activities. 
On the other hand, efficiency provides relative measures comparing effects of the differ-
ent sustainable business dimensions on each other: 
• Eco-efficiency: compares environmental impacts to economic measures (i.e. rev-
enues compared to waste generation) 
• Socio-efficiency: compares social effects to economic measures (i.e. benefits vs 
donations for social causes) 
• Eco-justice: expresses relation between environmental impacts and social indica-
tors and questions the distribution of common natural resources 
 
By acknowledging and integrating these challenges into the company’s strategy, strong 
business cases for sustainability can be created. Then, to ensure said objectives are 
achieved, business model innovation is required respect the traditional understanding of 
business models, which should lead into the creation of sustainability-oriented business 
models. 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
 
Literature Review 
17 
2.3 
Defining Sustainability-Oriented Business Models 
 
Various terms have been used to refer to sustainability-oriented business models, such as 
sustainable business models (Bocken et al. 2014), business model for sustainability 
(Schaltegger et al. 2012), flourishing/strongly sustainable business model (Upward and 
Jones 2016) amongst the most accepted. Despite the different nomenclatures, they all 
share a similar definition which is shown below. 
A sustainability-oriented business model is based on a sustainable development, defined 
as “development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of 
future generations to meet their own needs”(WCED, 1987) and intends to support busi-
ness cases for sustainability, guided by a sustainable strategy. This translates into the fol-
lowing definition of a sustainability-oriented business model (Schaltegger, Hansen, and 
Lüdeke-Freund 2016): 
 
“A business model for sustainability helps describing, analysing, managing, and communi-
cating (i) a company’s sustainable value proposition to its customers, and all other stakehold-
ers, (ii) how it creates and delivers this value, (iii) and how it captures economic value while 
maintaining or regenerating natural, social, and economic capital beyond its organizational 
boundaries.” 
 
Therefore, the first core difference between a traditional business model resides on the 
fact that the value proposition is not only addressed to customers, but to all stakeholders 
affected by it. Secondly, the value creation & delivery seeks to maximise the economic, 
social and environmental value not only in relation with the company’s offering, but also 
on the effects of the processes. Lastly, value captured is not only measured on financial 
benefits vs costs as opposed to traditional business models, but also by how capital is 
distributed beyond the company promoting social actions and by how environment is af-
fected by the company’s activities conducting an environmental balance.  
According to Schaltegger et. Al (Schaltegger et al. 2012), “management activities are 
based on managerial decisions derived from reference points such as corporate visions 
and strategies which shape the business model and the organisational development of a 
company”. By consequence, to achieve integration of sustainability based on the TBL 
dimension equally, sustainable business models should be driven to support business 
cases for sustainability. 
Getting more in depth into the different building blocks of business models for sustaina-
bility, in this report three main elements will be considered: a sustainable value propo-
sition, the value creation & delivery, and finally, the value captured. Such SBM ele-
ments are based on Richardson’s(Richardson 2008) framework of a business model, and 
different versions(Bocken et al. 2014; Morioka et al. 2018) of it have been provided in 
order to give such framework a sustainability orientation (see Figure 4 & Figure 5). In 
fact, some tools have been developed to help companies developed to allow practitioners 
==PAGE:20==
 
Literature Review 
18 
to develop sustainability-oriented value through business model thinking (Bocken, Rana, 
and Short 2015), helping to describe what a sustainable value stands for.  
The value proposition describes the offering for the customers providing a quantifiable 
social and or environmental positive effect and represents the foundational aspect in 
which the SBM is to be conceptualised and implemented. It must be noted that sustainable 
value propositions are determined in time and space, meaning that the long-term objec-
tive might be different from a punctual value proposition at a specific point in time. A 
clear example is Tesla Motors, currently providing high-end sport electric cars, but with 
the intention of transforming a whole infrastructure and using the income of said high-
end cars for developing cars for average customers. Consequently, a sustainable value 
proposition’s goals only make sense if they consider medium and long-term objectives 
as well. 
The value creation & delivery englobes the organisation’s resource capabilities and in-
ter-organisational networks allowing them to deliver the proposition it promises. Within 
an SBM the value creation & delivery should guide the organisation towards engaging 
in partnerships with companies forming its supply chain to enhance and increase re-
sources for business sustainability and supply chain management. This means the organ-
isation should engage with partners that are able to take responsibility of their own, to not 
simply shift socio-ecological impacts away from the inhouse activities. An SBM should 
consider the supply chain from its beginning to its end in all three dimensions of sustain-
ability. In addition, organisations following an SBM should motivate and inform custom-
ers of the different impacts of their consumption. As an example, FollowFish is a German 
fish and seafood company that includes as much information about their products’ impact 
in the process of their creation, to ensure customers acknowledge, before they buy their 
products, what it “costs” not only in economic terms. 
 
Figure 4: Sustainable Business Model (source: Bocken, Rana & Short 2015) 
Figure 5 provides an overview of what aspects are added to the traditional business model 
when given a holistic approach embedding sustainability at the core of its intention.  
==PAGE:21==
 
Literature Review 
19 
 
Figure 5: Sustainable Business Model compared to traditional Business Model (source: 
Morioka et al. 2017) 
Furthermore, Bocken et al. (Bocken et al. 2014) proposed a series of sustainable business 
model archetypes bringing up opportunities and inspiration to organisations on how to 
innovate and design their SBMs. Bocken et al. classify the archetypes by their innovation 
types (see Boons and Lüdeke-Freund 2013), namely: technological innovations, social 
innovations and organisational innovations. Figure 6 summarises the eight identified 
archetypes in relation with their innovation typology and provides some examples to bet-
ter illustrate their nature. 
==PAGE:22==
 
Literature Review 
20 
 
Figure 6: Sustainable Business Model Archetypes (source: Bocken et al. 2014) 
 
2.4 
Sustainability Oriented Business Model Frameworks 
 
Once the definition of the sustainability-oriented business model has been determined, 
the relevant SBM frameworks and design tools are to be reviewed. The presented SBM 
frameworks have been selected based on acceptance and relevance to this report. The first 
one is the flourishing business model also called strongly sustainable business model 
(SSBM) developed by Upward and Jones (Upward and Jones 2016). Then the Triple Lay-
ered Business Model Canvas will be presented, a sustainability business tool based on 
Osterwalder’s extensively accepted business model canvas (Osterwalder and Pigneur 
2009). Finally a SBM framework developed by Morioka et al.(Morioka et al. 2018), and 
in which business model elements are linked with SDGs, will be presented. 
2.4.1 
Strongly Sustainable Business Model 
 
Upward and Jones base their framework on what they define as a successful sustainable 
business. Described as “Businesses that define success by such a broad range-considering 
not only economic but also environmental and social outcomes- of desired outcomes that 
==PAGE:23==
 
Literature Review 
21 
attain the necessary levels performance could then claim to be successful sustainable 
businesses”. 
Then, they propose an extended business model canvas creating new elements to cover 
the organization’s context -in financial, environmental and social terms-, the nature of its 
stakeholders and their needs. To do so the SSBM expands the nine existing “questions” 
or elements used to form Osterwalder’s BMC and ensuring the organization’s “does 
well”, with seven additional “questions” guiding the designed business model to also “do 
good”. The combination of the sixteen questions include all the elements a SSBM should 
consider to hit the so-called “sweet spot” between “doing well and doing good”. Such 
questions are integrated into a design tool forming the SSBM canvas shown in Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7: Flourishing Business model canvas (source: http://www.flourishingbusi-
ness.org/) 
2.4.2 
Triple Layered Business Model Canvas 
 
The triple layered business model canvas (Joyce and Paquin 2016) is inspired by the 
highly accepted BMC (Osterwalder and Pigneur 2009) in practice. The triple layered can-
vas (TLBMC) intends to present a tool expanding the previously existing BMC, by adding 
two new canvases, resulting in three BMCs: one for each sustainability dimension. The 
economic BMC remains unchanged and therefore implies to novelty on its own. Mean-
while, social and environmental BMCs bring nine new elements each, addressing the or-
ganizations’ value proposition, creation & delivery and capture. Figure 8 shows the triple 
layered business model canvas elements. Joyce and Paquin also discuss that the TLBMC 
helps practitioners design vertically and horizontally coherent businesses. Horizontal 
==PAGE:24==
 
Literature Review 
22 
coherence refers to the fact that each layer of the TLBMC provides deeper understanding 
of the value creation on each dimension, and therefore each layer should sufficiently de-
scribe effects on its dimension throughout the linked value chain. On the other hand, ver-
tical coherence expresses the idea that all three layers of the TLBMC should be aligned, 
and a connection should be seen between the its elements in different layers. 
==PAGE:25==
 
Literature Review 
23 
 
Figure 8: Triple Layered Business Model Canvas (source: Joyce and Paquin 2016) 
 
==PAGE:26==
 
Literature Review 
24 
2.4.3 
From turning sustainability challenges into competitive 
advantage to a business model framework 
 
Morioka et al. (Morioka et al. 2018) developed a new SBM framework which offers as 
novelty on its development process. This SBM framework was developed both from lit-
erature review and practice case studies, by linking empirical studies with companies with 
SBM theory through the SDGs. As a result a new SBM framework appeared, expanded 
Richardson’s (Richardson 2008) business model framework, opposing business-as-usual 
to sustainability-oriented business model. Figure 5 shows a graphical representation of 
said business model framework, including external factors affecting the organization. 
2.5 
Sustainability Oriented Business Model Assessment 
 
According to some authors(Lüdeke-Freund et al. 2017), while some promising SBM lit-
erature has appeared in recent years regarding theoretical, conceptual and empirical ap-
proaches, there is still a missing aspect to be thought on, which is called by Lüdeke-
Freund et al. as a “gap” in the literature. This “gap” refers to “how can the assumed pos-
itive sustainability effects of business models and their innovation be assessed and meas-
ured to support management? And how can sustainable entrepreneurs control their busi-
ness models’ contribution to business cases for sustainability?”. Despite existing theory 
describing positive impacts related to the integration of sustainability into the business 
model of studied organizations (Bocken and Short 2016; Morioka et al. 2018; Morioka 
and Carvalho 2016), neither academic nor practitioner literature provides specific tools 
or frameworks allowing to realize the assessment of SBM impacts in society and envi-
ronment. Some tools exist for traditional business model assessment, such as the one of-
fered in Osterwalder and Pigneur’s (Osterwalder and Pigneur 2009), by which business 
model designers can infer their perspective on different business model elements and re-
lated variables scaling from (-5) to (+5) their level of agreement to assessment questions. 
Yet, no method to integrate and assess sustainability is offered in this case either. In fact, 
some first approaches are being made, with the appearance of the Sustainability Balanced 
Scorecard (Möller and Schaltegger 2005) focusing in this case in analyzing eco-effi-
ciency. 
Dentchev et al. (Dentchev et al. 2018) in their special volume revise SBM literature and 
call for future research agenda in relation with “six avenues” for future research: 
1. A more robust conceptualization of sustainability and SBMs 
2. Stronger and more cumulative theoretical development concerning the anteced-
ents, processes, and outcomes of SBMs; 
3. More sophisticated and rigorous empirical methods to investigate SBMs; 
4. Regularly including and studying the role of government and the related institu-
tional arrangements for the development, diffusion, and success of SBM across 
different national and regional contexts; 
==PAGE:27==
 
Literature Review 
25 
5. Examining in more depth the interactions between existing business models and 
SBMs in one sector or even one company; 
6. Creating dialogue and intersection with other research communities, such as “tra-
ditional” business model researchers, innovation scholars, or the entrepreneurship 
community. 
 
“Avenues” (2), (3) and (5) could specially benefit from further development in sustaina-
bility-oriented business model assessment concepts and tools. Development of said tools 
would be aligned with this “avenues” in the way that they would provide a better under-
standing of SBM outcomes, allowing a sophisticated empirical analysis on SBM which 
could help examining interactions with existing business models. 
Nevertheless, the GRI (Global Reporting Initiative 2014) developed the Sustainability 
Reporting Guidelines, through a multi-stakeholder involvement including “business, la-
bour, civil society, and financial markets, as well as auditors and experts in various 
fields”. The Guidelines provide series of sustainability indicators for those companies 
willing to disclose “the governance approach and of environmental, social and economic 
performance impact”. Said indicators are meant to enable companies to perform a holistic 
sustainability “accounting” but have not been explicitly related to the SBM elements so 
far (see Figure 9 for a summary of categories and aspects considered in the GRI Guide-
lines). 
Once the “state-of-the-art” of sustainability-oriented business model assessment has been 
determined, the aim of this work will be to develop an assessment framework compa-
rable to the question and scaling method offered by the Strategyzer toolbox. Said frame-
work intends link directly sustainable business model elements with their impact con-
sidering the triple bottom line. Both present business architecture and dynamic ap-
proach and strategy are considered given that SBM are aimed to have a repercussion 
not only on the short-term but also in mid and long-term. 
==PAGE:28==
 
Literature Review 
26 
 
Figure 9: GRI categories and aspects (source: G4 GRI Sustainability Reporting Guide-
lines) 
==PAGE:29==
 
The Sustainanility-oriented Business model assessment framework 
27 
3 
THE SUSTAINANILITY-ORIENTED BUSINESS 
MODEL ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORK 
The following section will present the developed framework. Said framework took the 
form of a survey containing 23 questions. On one hand, nineteen assessment questions 
were made, one to assess each SBM element on each sustainability dimension and two 
assess one specific SBM element in one specific dimension as it will be further detailed 
below. For the sake of future empirical studies, data creation and its study, four “demo-
graphic” questions were added at the beginning of the survey (see printed version in Ap-
pendix A: the survey). The SBM framework used to define SBM elements is a sustaina-
bility adapted version of Richardson’s business model framework (Richardson 2008) and 
has been shown in Figure 4. The assessment questions are coded in relation to the SBM 
element they refer to (1, 2 and 3) and the sustainability dimensions they cover (A, B and 
C). Strategy assessment questions are coded with an “S” and impact assessment questions 
are coded with an “I”. Table 1 summarises the assessment questions: 
 
  
Value Proposition (1) 
Value Creation & Delivery (2) 
Value Capture (3) 
Economic (A) 
I.1.A & S.1.A 
I.2.A.a & I.2.A.b & S.2.A 
I.3.A & S.3.A 
Environmental (B) 
I.1.B & S.1.B 
I.2.B & S.2.B 
I.3.B & S.3.B 
Social (C) 
I.1.C & S.1.C 
I.2.C & S.2.C 
I.3.C & S.3.C 
Table 1: Summary & Classification of Assessment questions 
The intention of the framework is to help both future research in terms of the previously 
cited “avenues” Dentchev et al. (Dentchev et al. 2018) call for, and SBM designers and 
practitioners being able to see the effects of their designs possibly leading to managerial 
action. From the firm perspective “you cannot manage what you do not measure”(Cooper 
and Edgett 2008) and “you are what you measure”(Hauser and Katz 1998), and thus 
companies claiming themselves to manage themselves in a sustainable manner should 
have a measure of Sustainability Performance (Morioka and Carvalho 2016). 
3.1 
A Likert Scale Framework 
 
A framework has been developed for sustainability-oriented business model assessment, 
which intends to provide a general overview of both the performance and the current 
strategy for each one of the three BM elements in all three dimensions of sustainability. 
Said assessment is done using an adapted Likert scale that uses different labels for its five 
==PAGE:30==
 
The Sustainanility-oriented Business model assessment framework 
28 
points scale both for an impact assessment and for a strategy assessment. The traditional 
five points of a Likert scale allows the quantification of an otherwise subjective or quali-
tative concept, by answering to the level of agreement/disagreement to a specific ques-
tion. The typical format of the Likert scale is therefore composed by 5 levels linked to 
their quantitative value:  
- 
Strongly disagree (1) 
- 
Disagree (2) 
- 
Neither agree or disagree (3) 
- 
Agree (4) 
- 
Strongly Agree (5) 
Consequently, the Likert scale provides a bipolar scaling method giving positive, negative 
and a neutral possibility of answering, forcing a choice into the person answering(Allen, 
I. Elaine 2007). 
The use of a Likert scale has been expanded, in this work, to quantify not only environ-
mental responsibility, but also actions and intentions including socio-economic terms 
linked with business model elements. This 5-point scale has been adapted to measure first 
the impact, and then the type of strategy, related to the three main elements studied in this 
paper for business models, being: the value proposition (VP), the value creation & de-
livery (VC&D), and the value capture (VC).  
In terms of the impact assessment, the previous Likert format has been translated into: 
- 
Negative impact (-2) 
- 
Partially negative impact (-1) 
- 
Neutral/ No significant impact (0) 
- 
Partially positive impact (1) 
- 
Positive impact (2) 
How to distinguish positive and negative impact regarding economic, environmental and 
social dimensions in the business model elements is described in depth in the following 
sub-section 3.2. Said description is meant to guide practitioners when using the frame-
work to better translate their subjective perceptions of both quantitative and qualitative 
analysis of the organisation’s performance. As a general note, SDGs (Table 2) should be 
borne in mind for a better perspective of what positive impacts can be. 
 
SDG 
Description 
1 
End poverty in all its forms everywhere 
2 
End hunger achieve food security and 
improved nutrition and promote sustainable 
agriculture 
3 
Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being 
for all at all ages 
4 
Ensure inclusive and equitable quality 
education and promote lifelong learning 
opportunities for all 
==PAGE:31==
 
The Sustainanility-oriented Business model assessment framework 
29 
5 
Achieve gender equality and empower 
all women and girls 
6 
Ensure availability and sustainable 
management of water and sanitation for all 
7 
Ensure access to affordable, reliable, 
sustainable and modern energy for all 
8 
Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable 
economic growth, full and productive 
employment and decent work for all 
9 
Build resilient infrastructure, promote 
inclusive and sustainable industrialization 
and foster innovation 
10 
Reduce inequality within and among countries 
11 
Make cities and human settlements 
inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable 
12 
Ensure sustainable consumption 
and production patterns 
13 
Take urgent action to combat 
climate change and its impacts 
14 
Conserve and sustainably use the 
oceans, seas and marine resources 
for sustainable development 
15 
Protect, restore and promote sustainable 
use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably 
manage forests, combat desertification, 
and halt and reverse land degradation and 
halt biodiversity loss 
16 
Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for 
sustainable development, provide access to 
justice for all and build effective, accountable 
and inclusive institutions at all levels 
17 
Strengthen the means of implementation 
and revitalize the global partnership for 
sustainable development 
Table 2: Main SDGs description (source GRI, United Nations Global Compact, and 
wbcsd 2015) 
On the other hand, in terms of strategy assessment, the Likert scale has been translated 
into: 
- 
Defensive (-2) 
- 
Accommodative (0) 
- 
Proactive (2) 
In this case it has been reduced to only 3 levels because of the fact that only three clear 
attitudes towards sustainability strategy have been identified, and mid-term possibilities 
==PAGE:32==
 
The Sustainanility-oriented Business model assessment framework 
30 
could bias the respondent by not being willing to choose extremes. Said three positions 
towards sustainability strategy are described in subsection 3.3. 
 
3.2 
Impact Assessment (I) 
3.2.1 
Value Proposition (1) 
3.2.1.1 
Impact assessment of Value Proposition impact in eco-
nomic terms (I.1.A) 
 
The economic impact of the Value Proposition is how the Value Proposition affects indi-
vidual/household -in case of a B2C- and the customer company’s-in case of a B2B- econ-
omy by purchasing the product/service. Such impact could be beneficial if it leads the 
customer to saving or even earning money on the long-term for example (Uber, Drive 
Now, Holaluz, etc…). This could be related to G4-EC8 set indicators of the GRI (Global 
Reporting Initiative 2014), indirect economic impacts, some of which being:  
- 
Changing the productivity of organisations, sectors, or the whole economy 
- 
Economic development in areas of high poverty 
- 
Economic impact of improving or deteriorating social or environment conditions 
- 
Availability of products and services for those on low incomes 
- 
Enhancing skills and knowledge amongst a professional community 
The impact is also related to the cost of the offering in relation to its value, meaning that 
a Value Proposition that leads to a prohibitive cost on the long term for the customer 
would be a negative impact. Some examples could be drained from high-end luxury fash-
ion brands which prices are more related to creating an illusion of status without adding 
a specific tangible value for their niche customers. It must be noted that the fact that a 
Value Proposition has a high cost does not have to mean immediately that its impact is 
negative, as long as it provides economic sustainability on the long term. It is easy to find 
example in that regard by looking into the transport and energetic offers appearing in the 
last years aiming to switch from fossil fuels toward renewable energy power. The pur-
chase of an electric car or a home battery such as Tesla Wall means a significant invest-
ment nowadays but implies a financial charge independence or at least an ease in the mid 
and long term. This example serves for both B2B and B2C scenarios. 
Finally, and to clarify, it was previously mentioned that value propositions are defined in 
time and space, meaning they can vary on the long term. In this assessment question the 
present value proposition is to be considered so that a progress can be observed if such 
variation enhances or decreases its positive economic impact in the future. 
==PAGE:33==
 
The Sustainanility-oriented Business model assessment framework 
31 
3.2.1.2 
Impact assessment of Value Proposition impact in envi-
ronmental terms (I.1.B) 
 
The impact of the Value Proposition is how the use of the product/service affects the 
environment. It could palliate the effects of Global Warming or reduce waste/pollution in 
diverse ways and at different points of its lifecycle. It could be that the environmental 
impact was generated during what Joyce & Paquin (Joyce and Paquin 2016) call the use 
phase in the environmental layer of their Triple Layered Business Model Canvas. There-
fore, in this part of the assessment, a customer’s perspective must be taken, to address 
what are the environmental impacts caused by the use of the company’s product or ser-
vice, and not the environmental “cost” of producing or delivering said product or service. 
GRI (Global Reporting Initiative 2014) indicators can also be used to support the assess-
ment at this stage, specifically those on the G4-EN section related to the products and 
services: G4-EN27. 
 For instance, during the use phase of companies like Drive Now customers are switching 
from combustion engine transport to electric powered transport causing less or no green-
house gas emissions. It could also be that by producing the offered product to customers 
Global Warming is diminished or oceans to be cleaned with companies like Sea2See 
making sunglasses from plastic waste from the oceans for example. Considering again 
the case of companies providing a switch into renewable energy electric utilities, the im-
pact from a customer’s point of view translates into a reduction of emissions due to their 
activities. 
 
3.2.1.3 
Impact assessment of Value Proposition impact in social 
terms (I.1.C) 
 
Regarding the social impact of the value proposition of a company englobes what Joyce 
& Paquin (Joyce and Paquin 2016) call the “social value” and the “end-user”. The “social 
value” is described as the “mission which focuses on creating benefit for its stakeholder 
and society broadly”, and the “end-user” describes how the value proposition addresses 
the needs of the consumers enhancing their quality of life. Therefore, and relating to the 
SDG(Global Reporting Initiative et al. 2015), the value proposition impact on a social 
dimension should be assessed by evaluating to what extent it promotes education, reduces 
poverty, enhances mobility of its customers, promotes the individuals’ freedoms, to men-
tion some of the most relevant topics. Again, indicators from the GRI are recommended 
to have a more educated choice when deciding the impact level, specifically those related 
with product responsibility G4-PR1 to 5 including customer’s health and safety and prod-
uct/service labelling. These indicators provide an overview of risks to the customer, the 
level of transparency in regard to the offering ensuring the customer’s educated choice, 
==PAGE:34==
 
The Sustainanility-oriented Business model assessment framework 
32 
and the level of satisfaction showing to which extent the offering is generating social 
value.  
3.2.2 
Value Creation & Delivery (2) 
3.2.2.1 
 Impact assessment of the Value Creation & Delivery im-
pact in economic terms (I.2.A) 
 
Since the value creation and delivery englobes “the organisation’s resource capabilities 
and inter-organisational networks…”, part of the assessment will be related to the inter-
relationships with other organisations(a), and another to the in-house activities and re-
source usage (b). (a) The value creation and delivery impact in economic terms is evalu-
ated by assessing how the deals with partners along the value chain affect them econom-
ically. Those partners can take the form of suppliers, distributors or even competitors if 
engaged with a coopetition approach. Summarizing, this assessment is related to the way 
wealth is distributed throughout the different actors in the value chain outside the organ-
ization. Various aspects can be assessed, for example: 
- 
the jobs supported in the supply chain (G4-EC8) 
- 
the procurement practices (G4-EC9): meaning if procurement is done locally pro-
moting “local” economy 
- 
the level of pricing pressure pushed to the different suppliers and distributors 
 
(b) The value creation and delivery (VC&D) impact in economic terms is evaluated in-
ternally by assessing the impact and economic treatment given to employees. In other 
words, it evaluates how economic value is distributed internally, which based on G4-EC1 
(Direct Economic Value Generated And Distributed) translates broadly into employees’ 
wages and benefits. Referring to G4-EC5 (RATIOS OF STANDARD ENTRY LEVEL 
WAGE BY GENDER COMPARED TO LOCAL MINIMUM WAGE AT SIGNIFI-
CANT LOCATIONS OF OPERATION) the percentage of employees being paid the 
minimum local wage should be considered bearing in mind what minimum wage is used 
if the company’s activities are done in various geographical regions where minimum 
wage legislation varies. 
 
 
3.2.2.2 
Impact assessment of the Value Creation & Delivery im-
pact in environmental terms (I.2.B) 
 
VC&D in environmental terms evaluates the footprint of the activities or business infra-
structure of a company. Thus, it can be evaluated by energy or water consumption, the 
transportation usage (type and distance) for its supply chain, raw material usage, waste 
==PAGE:35==
 
The Sustainanility-oriented Business model assessment framework 
33 
generation. In this element of the business model, the harmfulness of the previously listed 
items should be assessed, and thus the assessment should be more qualitative rather than 
quantitative, which will be done in the section 3.2.3.2 when realizing an environmental 
“accounting”. To clarify, the assessment at this business model element should go in the 
direction of considering the nature of the resources used and the approach given to its 
intensity of use rather than to quantify absolute measures of use. To provide some exam-
ples, the assessment could consider the use of toxic components for manufacturing or the 
energy supply includes renewable energies, if energy consumption is being reduced, car-
bon footprint palliated. The engagement of partnerships with other members of the supply 
chain should also be assessed since, as previously said, an SBM considers partners that 
take responsibility of their own. In fact, G4-EN32 proposes to report the number of sup-
pliers being screened using environmental criteria, which should provide a good measure 
of the level of engagement with environmental sustainability in the supply chain. 
3.2.2.3 
Impact assessment of the Value Creation & Delivery im-
pact in social terms (I.2.C) 
 
The social impact of the VC&D of a company is reflected by how the relations and social 
conditions are internally. It should consider the different relevant aspects, as recom-
mended by the GRI -G4-LA1 to 13- (Global Reporting Initiative 2014): 
- 
Labor Practices & Decent Work: e.g. labor/management relations, work condi-
tions, gender equality, local hiring. 
- 
Human Rights: e.g. non-discrimination, child labor, forced/compulsory labor, se-
curity practice 
- 
Benefits provided to full-time employees: e.g. life insurance, health care, disabil-
ity/invalidity coverage, parental leave. 
- 
Occupational Health and Safety 
- 
Training and education given to employees 
A number of other variables can also be considered in terms of the social impacts of the 
value creation & delivery, but these are thought to be an extensive enough sample to 
translate the perception of the impact into a 5-scale grading. 
3.2.3 
Value Capture (3) 
3.2.3.1 
Impact assessment of the Value Capture impact in eco-
nomic terms (I.3.A) 
 
In relation with the GRI guidelines, the value capture assessment should consider reve-
nues and economic value distributed, including operating costs, wages and benefits, pay-
ments to providers of capital, payments to government and community investments, lead-
ing to the economic value retained. Such retained value must be sufficient to cover 
==PAGE:36==
 
The Sustainanility-oriented Business model assessment framework 
34 
possible issues but should not be amassed just for the sake of financial profit (Felber and 
Hagelberg 2017) since it should not be the ultimate objective of the company’s activity. 
Lüdeke-Freund et al. (Lüdeke-Freund et al. 2016) even consider the possibility of busi-
ness models for shared value as possibly moving within a certain degree in defining them-
selves as profit-non-profit hybrid organizations. A clear example of such type of organi-
zation is Patagonia which after accomplishing a certain degree of success opens the de-
bate of “zero growth” as an opportunity to drive change. Consequently, the financial par-
ticipation in own generated or just joint of resources for social or environmental causes 
is to be considered. 
3.2.3.2 
Impact assessment of the Value Capture impact in envi-
ronmental terms (I.3.B) 
 
The value capture assessment in environmental terms, is done by performing an environ-
mental “balance” and comparing environmental costs and benefits (Joyce and Paquin 
2016), which could be considered as an environmental “accounting”, relative to the cur-
rent environmental situation. Such environmental costs could take the form of energy 
consumption, CO2 footprint, to mention some examples. As previously seen, the triple 
layered business model canvas considers environmental impacts and environmental ben-
efits, the same way a traditional business model would compare financial costs and reve-
nues. A Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) would help determine the so-called environmental 
costs and benefits which can also be enlightened with GRI indicators G4-EN1 to 26. To 
summarize, said GR4 indicators consider absolute measures of “costs” meaning energy 
consumption, emissions, waste production, effects on biodiversity and protected areas. 
As positive environmental benefits, some of Bocken’s (Bocken et al. 2014) SBM arche-
types can set examples to follow since most of them target a positive economic & social 
balance, but most importantly in this stage of the assessment, a positive environmental 
balance. The most relevant ones to that end are thought to be: 
- 
Maximize material and energy efficiency 
- 
Create value from waste 
- 
Substitute with renewable and natural processes 
- 
Encourage sufficiency 
- 
Repurpose for environment 
3.2.3.3 
Impact assessment of the Value Capture impact in social 
terms (I.3.C) 
 
The Social Value Capture impact relates to how the Business Model affects the evolu-
tion of poverty and inequality both within countries and between countries, such as Ara-
vind Eyecare accomplishes with their differential pricing in relation to their patients’ 
wealth. This could be achieved by economic wealth distribution, basic resources (e.g. 
==PAGE:37==
 
The Sustainanility-oriented Business model assessment framework 
35 
food water, energy), providing education in less developed areas, to provide some ex-
amples. While in 3.2.3.1 the financial investment not only in the own company’s profit 
was considered but also in social and environmental causes, the impact of said engage-
ment in those causes is to be assessed now. A direct relation can be drawn between pos-
itive social impacts and the SDGs (Table 2) by seeing how both direct and indirect ac-
tions of the company contribute to that end. 
 
3.3 
Strategy Assessment (S) 
 
In the strategy assessment, the intention of the company’s mission, vision and strategy is 
evaluated towards the previously described impacts of the different elements of the busi-
ness model (1,2 and 3) regarding the Triple Bottom Line (including A, B and C). It has 
been previously mentioned, that sustainable business models are set at a specific time and 
space, which can cause that despite a clear strategy on a long term towards sustainability, 
the present impacts might not be in line with said strategy. The impact assessment ex-
plained previously intends to depict effects on said time and space. The strategy assess-
ment intends to evaluate the long-term intentions towards sustainability in the three stud-
ied business model elements. According to Schaltegger et al. (Schaltegger et al. 2012), 
corporations can adopt three different attitudes towards all three dimensions of sustaina-
bility:  
- 
Defensive: companies just adopting sustainability to the bare mini-
mum that regulation allows them, also called “compliance strategy”. 
- 
Accommodative: this strategy towards sustainability is more cautious 
in regards of regulation. Therefore, companies following this strategy 
tend to integrate sustainability to a further extent, anticipating possible 
changes in regulation. Yet the objective of this strategy is still compli-
ance. 
- 
Proactive: companies following this strategy are integrating sustaina-
bility into their core business logic, not only thinking of compliance, 
but thinking of sustainable development of economy, society and en-
vironment. 
It must be noted, that originally, Schaltegger et al. (Schaltegger et al. 2012) mention a 
fourth strategy approach being reactive. This approach is not considered relevant to this 
study since it absolutely neglects social and environmental issues and consequently can-
not be related to a sustainability-oriented business model. 
Then, the three remaining strategy approaches depend on the level of integration of sus-
tainability into the business’ drive. These approaches to sustainability will be framing 
future business model innovations when exploiting business cases for sustainability. Fig-
ure 10 shows the relation between sustainability integration and the three approaches to 
sustainability and how it can be manifested. 
==PAGE:38==
 
The Sustainanility-oriented Business model assessment framework 
36 
 
Figure 10: Sustainability integration and sustainability business strategies 
Based on the UN SDG compass (Global Reporting Initiative et al. 2015), for businesses 
to proper integrate SDGs and thus sustainable goals into their business, five steps are 
recommended: 
1. Understand the SDGs 
2. Define priorities: translating into deciding which SDGs will be guiding the sus-
tainable strategy of the organization throughout the whole value chain 
3. Setting goals: by defining KPIs and other types of measure to ensure a proper 
following of the organization’s activities towards the set SDGs 
4. Integrating the SDGs: described as anchoring the sustainability goals within the 
business, embedding sustainability across all functions 
5. Reporting: communicating the sustainability performance of the sustainable busi-
ness model activities 
The implementation of these steps is explained in terms of integrating the SDGs, but the 
level of alignment to the SDGs can also illustrate the level of integration of sustainability 
into the business rationale. Step 2 is to be applied to the different elements of the business 
model and will imply the level of integration of sustainable goals into said elements on 
the long term. While the fulfillment of step 3 will enable the impact assessment already 
described 3.2, the definition and level of engagement on this step will reflect on the strat-
egy approach to sustainability.  
Because of the difficulty to predict strategies trying to tackle goals of such a great size 
and variety, as the ones sustainable business strategies intend to tackle, the description of 
the strategy assessment questions are grouped by the SBM element they cover. Yet, all 
three questions related to all three dimensions of sustainability are to be asked separately 
to ensure that all varieties of strategies could be assessed by the framework. 
 
==PAGE:39==
 
The Sustainanility-oriented Business model assessment framework 
37 
3.3.1 
Value Proposition (S.1.A, S.1.B & S.1.C) 
 
As opposed to the impact assessment in 3.2.1, a distinct perspective to the value proposi-
tion in economic terms is considered. The impact set a specific time and space is not 
assessed anymore, but the long-term set of objectives guided by the strategy in creating a 
positive economic impact for the customer and surrounding stakeholders. A proactive 
strategy towards value proposition should integrate one or several SDGs. It seems hard 
to anticipate which specific SDGs could be tackled by value propositions on their three 
different dimensions of sustainability, but some examples have been found to help illus-
trate. Consider, Sea2See for example, a start-up selling eyewear manufactured from plas-
tic waste gathered from the oceans. Consequently, their value proposition can contribute 
SDG 14 -Life below water-, SDG 12-Responsible consumption and production-. Another 
example of proactive sustainability strategy in terms of value proposition could be 
Coursera, contributing to disseminate quality education- SDG 4- independently of the 
geographical region, and providing a number of free courses. A third example could be 
found in the value proposition of DriveNow a German company providing a product-
service system allowing its customers to share temporally rent cars for a short duration of 
time. This car-sharing offering releases the customers from the costs of owning a car, and 
by including a number of electric cars in their fleet also contributes to green-urban-mo-
bility, therefore contributing with SDG 11-make cities and human settlements inclusive, 
safe, resilient and sustainable- for example.  
 
 
3.3.2 
Value Creation & Delivery (S.2.A, S.2.B & S.2.C) 
 
Again, direct present impacts of the value creation & delivery of the organization are 
not evaluated here, but the company’s approach and position in terms of integrating sus-
tainability. The value creation & delivery strategy assessment relates to the sustainabil-
ity approach towards all the elements related with the supply chain from types of partner-
ships that the organization would engage, to how materials, wastes and energy are con-
sidered, including the treatment given to labor. While the impact assessment (I.2.A, I.2.B 
& I.2.C) is meant to consider quantifiable measures of impacts, this stage of the assess-
ment should depict the approach given to said impacts. It could be shown by the level of 
alignment to SDGs like SDG 8 -promote sustained, inclusive economic growth, full and 
productive employment and decent work for all- in social and/or economic dimensions, 
or SDG 13 -take urgent action to combat climate change- through internal policies in an 
environmental dimension, to provide some examples. Patagonia, a North American based 
clothing company, sets a clear example of proactive strategy in their value creation & 
delivery towards sustainability. In their webpage (http://www.patagonia.com/home/) 
their approach to sustainability in the supply chain is expressed through what they call 
==PAGE:40==
 
The Sustainanility-oriented Business model assessment framework 
38 
the footprint chronicles. The footprint chronicles are internally generated reports in which 
all the different steps and impacts of all their catalogued products are described in order 
to show their intention to minimize negative environmental impact and maximize social 
impact. Said footprint chronicles are linked to internally created policies and requirements 
that are meant to influence their suppliers and distributors if they want to keep their part-
ner status. These actions express an intention and integration between business and sus-
tainability fat beyond compliance with regulation, but as a key driver of their business 
infrastructure. 
 
3.3.3 
Value Capture (S.3.A, S.3.B & S.3.C) 
 
This stage of the assessment considers the approach given to final balance of the com-
pany’s activities is. Said otherwise, it assesses how the “gains” all in economic, environ-
mental and social terms are meant to be managed and planned for the medium and long-
term. While I.3.A, B and C are meant to reflect in direct quantities or balances such as 
what the GRI defines as economic value retained -i.e. direct economic value generated 
or revenues minus economic value distributed-, or what Joyce & Paquin (Joyce and 
Paquin 2016) as environmental balance -i.e. environmental benefits vs costs or negative 
impacts- or the social balance -i.e. social benefits vs social costs-, this stage of the as-
sessment intends to reflect on the approach of the internal policies towards these “bal-
ances”. Again, Patagonia appears as an example of a proactive strategy regarding the 
value capture through the initiative “Patagonia Action Works” (https://www.patago-
nia.com/actionworks/about/) by which the company engages in donating 1% of their sales 
revenues to various causes in relation with land and water ecosystem conservation and 
waste management, climate change related organizations and other social causes. 
==PAGE:41==
 
Framework Application 
39 
4 
FRAMEWORK APPLICATION 
The developed framework was used to realize a sustainability-oriented business model 
assessment of the company Resen Waves Aps. Said assessment was made with the col-
laboration of Per Resen Steenstrup, serial entrepreneur and CEO of the company. In this 
section, (1) the method by which the results were acquired will be described, (2) then a 
short presentation will be given on the studied company for the application of the frame-
work, (3) followed by an exposition of the results concurrently with an analysis of Re-
sen Waves’ SBM to illustrate the adequacy of the answers, and (4) finally a discussion 
will be made on the application of the framework including Per’s feedback as a business 
practitioner.  
 
4.1 
Method 
 
For the application of the sustainability-oriented business model assessment, an online-
based survey was created using the online platform Survey Monkey. The choice of the 
platform was done by the ease of use, aesthetics and data treatment provided. Five demo-
graphic questions were added to the assessment framework for future data treatment in-
cluding: 
• Name of the company 
• Industry  
• Size of the company 
• Age of the company 
These questions were included because they were thought as relevant to contribute to the 
mentioned future research “avenues” in section 2.5, by allowing the generation of empir-
ical data and enabling comparisons within industry sectors. 
Contact emails were sent to 32 companies following the same structure (Appendix B : 
Contact email format), from which a reduced number answered, and finally only Resen 
Waves agreed to actively participate for this study. After said participation agreement, 
the 
survey 
was 
sent 
through 
a 
sharable 
link 
(https://www.survey-
monkey.com/r/Z5FGVS3). The result of the survey will be presented in section 4.3.  
Following, two open interviews were made with Per Resen Steenstrup, CEO of Resen 
Waves Aps. to get an experienced practitioner’s point of view- given that Per has suc-
cessfully founded four start-ups (section 4.2), always considering sustainability at the 
core of their rationale-. 
==PAGE:42==
 
Framework Application 
40 
Both the development of the survey and the interviews are intended to fulfill the early 
steps of scale validity (Bertea and Zait 2013), which should not be confused with scale 
reliability. Scale reliability (Campbell Donnad and Donnald Fiske 1959) describes the 
consistency of a measurement, which is explained by the agreement of two attempts to 
measure the same underlying construct through similar methods-measured with the 
Cronbach alpha coefficient (Cronbach 1951)-. Various types of scale validity are contem-
plated: criterion validity, content validity and construct validity.  
Criterion validity analyzes how well the construct measures variables in comparison 
with an existent construct or predictor. Given that there is no existent instrument to use 
as benchmark (section 2.5) criterion validity cannot be analyzed to this date.  
Content validity refers to the correct definition of the domain which is intended to be 
measured. According to Haynes et al.(Haynes, Richard, and Kubany 1995), when there 
is an intention to measure a latent variable, it is important to include in the construct all 
possible items that could capture the essence of the variable. The latent variables in this 
case being SBM impact and strategy, nineteen assessment questions were required, as 
a first attempt to ensure that all possible items related to business model elements and 
sustainability were captured. Furthermore, content validity requires two stages: devel-
opment stage and judgement-quantification stage. The first requires qualitative inter-
views and/or focus groups with experts in addition to an extensive literature review 
and is the stage in which this work is located. The second, is defined by the use of 
quantitative methods by which a panel of experts is to determine the relevance of the 
measured variables in the construct. 
Finally, construct validity which determines the validity of the choice of the measured 
variables and their interaction through more quantitative methods. Content validity has 
to be done previous to construct validity, which should be consider for future work in 
relation to this. 
  
 
4.2 
The case study company: Resen Waves 
 
Resen Waves Aps. is an eight years old micro company -i.e. formed by 1-9 employees- 
who positions itself in the renewable energy industry sector. The mission of Resen Waves 
is to develop a cost-effective wave power buoys that can be commercialized, starting at a 
small scale for specific applications, and later on scaling up to become a source of energy 
generation as big as wind energy. Currently, Resen Waves is manufacturing power buoys 
able to generate in a 10W-10MW scale, but in the long term they expect to be able to 
build large-scale systems providing energy in the 1MW-20MW range. Amongst the cur-
rent commercialized applications that Resen Waves solutions can be used for so far, the 
most common are: powering measurement instruments and all kind of machinery, un-
manned remote operations, hydrographic, oceanographic, whale monitoring and more. 
==PAGE:43==
 
Framework Application 
41 
Said offering is mainly provided with their only product- to date- the Resen Waves 
Power Buoy (Figure 11), which consists of a battery laying on the seabed powered by 
the movement of the buoy (see datasheet of an example of power buoy in Appendix C: 
Resen Waves power Buoy datasheet). 
 
Figure 11: Resen Waves Power Buoy (source: http://www.resenwaves.com/) 
This product allows to provide continuous power and real time data connectivity to au-
tonomous devices in the ocean as a plug-and-play solution. An installation containing the 
battery pack and the measurement equipment, if necessary, is made on the seabed and is 
connected through a mooring line to the buoy. Resen Waves’ product allows the substi-
tution of ineffective diesel powered or PV battery powered energy solutions-which re-
quires high maintenance by human workers transported by diesel powered ships- decreas-
ing a negative economic impact in their customers, as well as a negative environmental 
impact due to CO2 emissions. In addition, the continuous availability of energy allows the 
measurement equipment to acquire 3G-4G data connectivity enabling the real-time mon-
itoring of the device.  
Regarding the level of integration sustainability into Resen Waves business rationale, it 
is considered to be elevated manifesting sustainability as a guide for its business conduct 
(Figure 10). It is expressed by the acknowledgement of SDGs as a guide to conduct busi-
ness, and by the analysis of the level of alignment between the company’s offering and 
the SDGs (see D). In Per’s words: “We cannot supply a renewable energy product and 
pollute because we produce toxic waste or use toxic anti fouling paints. For the same 
reason we will not allow negative social negative impact. That is a “no go”. On the other 
hand, we must have an attractive value proposition for our customers, so we must have a 
better solution than the exiting solutions. People does not buy from us just because we 
have a renewable concept. So, all in all, we must provide an economic better solution and 
then we also want to provide an ethic solution, which is good for society and the 
==PAGE:44==
 
Framework Application 
42 
environment. I want to “feel in body and soul” that we only have positive impact in eve-
rything we do and in the way we behave towards society.” Therefore, Resen Waves busi-
ness model is considered to be a sustainability-oriented business model providing a sus-
tainable value proposition addressing an economic problem for their customers, through 
an environmentally friendly solution based on renewable power generation.  
SDG 
Description 
1 
End poverty in all its forms everywhere 
4 
Ensure inclusive and equitable quality 
education and promote lifelong learning 
opportunities for all 
5 
Achieve gender equality and empower 
all women and girls 
6 
Ensure availability and sustainable 
management of water and sanitation for all 
11 
Make cities and human settlements 
inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable 
12 
Ensure sustainable consumption 
and production patterns 
13 
Take urgent action to combat 
climate change and its impacts 
14 
Conserve and sustainably use the 
oceans, seas and marine resources 
for sustainable development 
17 
Strengthen the means of implementation 
and revitalize the global partnership for 
sustainable development 
Table 3: SDGs in which Resen Waves has a positive impact 
Regarding Resen Waves’ long-term strategy, their intention is to continue developing 
buoy power technology towards the construction of megawatt systems eventually being 
able to provide power on a utility scale. Said path is set to last an unspecified long period 
of time arguing that “the evolution cannot be rushed” (appendix D) referring to all renew-
able energy production. Acknowledging that such progression could take time, a more 
mid-term objective is set for the next ten years aiming to replace diesel generators in 
coastal areas and islands reducing expenditures for the users and greenhouse emissions, 
while increasing energy availability. In terms of their SDG profile (see D), their main 
contributions appear in relation to SDGs 1,6,7 and 14 apart from their indirect contribu-
tion to goals 4, 6, 7, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 17 as it will be further explained below. Table 3 
summarizes the mentioned SDGs and their description. 
For the framework application, CEO of Resen Waves Aps. Per Resen Steenstrup collab-
orated by filling the survey and participating in two open interviews. The first interview 
was meant to expand information related to the nature of Resen Waves activities and 
strategy. Given that Resen Waves is a micro company and the interviewee holds the CEO 
==PAGE:45==
 
Framework Application 
43 
position, it was assumed that his perspective and the company’s reality were aligned. 
Considering the open nature of the interviews, only relevant information towards the stud-
ied sustainability-oriented business model assessment construct or Resen Waves itself 
will be mentioned. It must be noted that Per Resen Steenstrup agreed that all the infor-
mation acquired during the interviews and through the exchange of emails could be used 
for this study. 
Moreover, Resen Waves was considered a relevant company for this study because of the 
level of integration sustainability into their business model, not only by the alignment and 
acknowledgement of the SDGs previously mentioned, but because of its apparent align-
ment with some of Bocken et al. (2014) archetypes (see Figure 6). Resen Waves appears 
as an example of business model matching the “substitute with renewable and natural 
process” with their innovative wave energy technology. Also, Resen Waves offering al-
lows the adoption of the archetype “maximize energy and resources” both for themselves 
and their customers by requiring less maintenance and transportation. Therefore, Resen 
Waves seemed a company that would have an impact and would potentially be interested 
in sustainability-oriented business model assessment.  
In addition, Resen Waves is the second company Per founds in the renewable energy 
sector, specially related with wave energy generation. He founded Wave-Star energy 
(http://wavestarenergy.com/) in 2003 and took part in it until 2009. After this 6 years in 
the wave energy sector, he founded Resen Waves in 2010 and is still running it at the 
present. Adding up at least fifteen years in the wave energy sector, with a sustainability 
approach to business Per’s opinion was considered as a highly relevant and potentially 
constructive in a sustainability-oriented business model context. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
 
Framework Application 
44 
4.3 
Results 
 
Per answered the survey and the results regarding Resen Waves sustainability-oriented 
business model assessment are presented in the following table: 
  
Assessment Question 
Resen Waves' Answer 
Impact assessment 
Value Proposition 
I.1.A 
Positive (+2) 
I.1.B 
Positive (+2) 
I.1.C 
Positive (+2) 
Value Creation & 
Delivery 
I.2.A.a 
Positive (+2) 
I.2.A.b 
Positive (+2) 
I.2.B 
Positive (+2) 
I.2.C 
Positive (+2) 
Value Capture 
I.3.A 
Positive (+2) 
I.3.B 
Positive (+2) 
I.3.C 
Positive (+2) 
Strategy assessment 
Value Proposition 
S.1.A 
Proactive (+2) 
S.1.B 
Proactive (+2) 
S.1.C 
Accommodative (0) 
Value Creation & 
Delivery 
S.1.A.a 
Proactive (+2) 
S.2.A 
Proactive (+2) 
S.2.B 
Proactive (+2) 
S.2.C 
Accommodative (0) 
Value Capture 
S.3.A 
Proactive (+2) 
S.3.B 
Proactive (+2) 
S.3.C 
Accommodative (0) 
Table 4: Resen Waves Sustainability-oriented Business Model Assessment 
In terms of the strategy assessment, and in relation with previously mentioned Per’s state-
ment, since Resen Waves is positioned in the renewable energy sector their approach to 
strategy for their value proposition is proactive towards sustainability in economic and 
environmental dimensions, as their focus. This approach unfolds to the rest of their SBM 
in a way that Per described the unacceptability of negative impacts in environmental or 
economic dimensions and the actual proactivity towards the use of recyclable materials 
(e.g. aluminum) and the fairness with suppliers. Furthermore, social dimension is ap-
proached through the whole SBM with an accommodative attitude, in the sense that a 
negative social impact is seen as unacceptable by top management, but no specific vol-
untary actions are taken in that direction. 
The obtained results for the value proposition seem consistent with the description of 
Resen Waves offering. A clear economic positive impact for their customers is seen in 
==PAGE:47==
 
Framework Application 
45 
terms of saving personnel costs, reducing the need of maintenance implying transporta-
tion costs to the oceanic buoys. The fact that the power buoys provide a continuous supply 
of energy stored on the seabed battery pack also allows a decrease of the energy cost in 
coastal and island regions where energy is now provided by importing diesel for diesel 
generators. Therefore, the economic savings are to be added to diesel oil savings quanti-
fied by Resen Waves (D) in as much as 100,000-200,000 tons of saved diesel and its 
related emissions. In fact, in the Resen Waves SDG profile report (D) it is stated that 
some households in island areas use as much as 30% of their income in importing diesel 
for energy generation, keeping them in poverty contributing therefore with SDG 1. Ob-
viously, since the power buoys constitute a renewable and clean source of energy, Resen 
Waves contributes with SDGs 7, 11 and 12 and 13. Moreover, the cheaper and better 
access to energy can contribute with ensuring a quality education by allowing the use of 
an increased number of learning tools consequently collaborating with the achievement 
of SDG 4. Then, provided that Resen Waves’ power buoys are being used for ocean mon-
itoring its offering definitely contributes with supporting natural life and eco-systems in 
the oceans thus contributing with SDG 14.  Overall, it is clear, and enough details have 
been provided to say that the positive impacts of the value proposition in economic, en-
vironmental and social aspects is justified. 
Summarizing, Resen Waves offering has a positive impact in all three dimensions of sus-
tainability, through economic savings, savings in fossil fuel savings and their related 
emissions, and contributing with ending poverty and quality education in isolated regions. 
Considering the value creation & delivery as well as the value capture, the answers 
expose a positive impact all dimensions. No specific detail apart from the use of recy-
clable materials for the manufacturing of the buoys and internal prohibition of using toxic 
paints was given from Per to support these answers. It must be mentioned that no other 
specific reasons were given because the respondent considered an overlapping or repeti-
tion of concepts with the strategy assessment in these SBM elements that will be treated 
on the following section.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
 
Framework Application 
46 
4.4 
Discussion 
 
A second interview was held with Per after being exposed with the framework, in order 
to get his insights, feedback and recommendations for a next iteration in the development 
of a sustainability-oriented business model assessment framework. As a reminder, this 
work sets the first step of developing a valid scale currently being at the first stage of 
content validity (see 4.1), in which all possible items related to a complete and thorough 
sustainability-oriented business model assessment. 
That being said, the first of Per’s points was that he perceived many questions were 
closely related in the way that strategy and impact assessment on the same elements and 
dimensions poses a difficulty in differentiating what is assessed. It was also mentioned 
that assessing an impact highly depends on what is understood by impact, and the current 
framework observes impact in a too general sense. In that regard, broadly assessing pos-
itive, neutral or negative impacts to all three dimensions of sustainability in all three stud-
ied business elements appeared to be insufficient. This can be seen by the fact that given 
the long-term strategy of Resen Waves, a difference should be seen between current im-
pacts and future positive outcomes when their technology would progressively scale up. 
Yet, according to the description given to the different impact assessments in 3.2, the 
acquired results in 4.3 seem reasonable. Consequently, a progression and a higher positive 
impact could hardly be observed given the current construct. Therefore, an issue was ob-
served in the definition of the assessment questions, being that the current impact as-
sessment does not relate clearly enough to on what those impacts could be, and what 
expected outcomes they are related to. To that regard, with the input from Per and their 
current way of checking their SDGs alignment, it is suggested that impact assessment 
questions should be able to link specific SBM elements with concise outcomes and 
their level of alignment. In order to really relate said outcomes with the international 
sustainability agenda, they could be identified as the SDGs themselves. Consequently, 
impact assessment would translate into answering to which degree, using a different Lik-
ert scale, how SBM elements contribute to each specific SDG. Therefore, the current ten 
impact assessment questions would become seventeen- number of SDGs- times three- 
number of SBM elements-, resulting in fifty-one questions. As a note, for each SDG, only 
contributing SBM elements’ questions should be answered, allowing the aggregation/dis-
aggregation of the analysis referring to different levels of the SBM. In addition, the de-
scription of the impact assessment done in 3.2 could be used as a sustainability logic 
helping to reduce subjectivity factor when addressing the level of alignment of the differ-
ent SBM elements to the achievement of SDGs. 
On the other hand, Per outlined the counter productiveness of asking such specific ques-
tions for a strategy assessment. The main reason behind this point is that strategies pro-
vide a broad and general guide of the expected outcomes on all short, medium and long 
term, unfolding to all the business model elements. So, according to Per a difference could 
be appreciable between the approach towards the different sustainability dimensions, 
==PAGE:49==
 
Framework Application 
47 
while the same approach should be observed throughout the three SBM elements. In fact, 
this is observed in Resen Waves assessment, where questions S.1 S.2(a & b) and S.3 
expose an identic answer for all dimensions across all the SBM elements (see Table 4). 
Thus, assessing strategy approach to sustainability in the three SBM elements could be 
combined, focusing on the approach given to the TBL on each dimension. 
It seems reasonable to identify SDGs as sustainable expected outcomes for sustainability-
oriented companies’ activities. Thus, assessing the level of adequation to SDGs and de-
picting a broad assessment of the strategy would provide a better sustainability assess-
ment than the one achieved by the previous framework. Linking SBM elements with these 
outcomes comes up as the new challenge specially in finding the adequate trade-off be-
tween assessment exhaustivity and the extent of the construct, being a relevant push-
back element from a practitioner’s point of view, based on Per’s perspective. The Sus-
tainable Development Solutions Network -SDSN-, with whom Resen Waves collaborated 
to acquire their SDG profiling, proposed a series of indicators that should help monitoring 
SDGs (Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN) 2014) in a global data gen-
eration perspective. Said monitoring framework presents global exhaustive data collec-
tion and proposes 100 base indicators to monitor SDGs achievement from a governmental 
perspective. According to Per researchers and practitioners could benefit from an adap-
tion of such tool to a business management application, by clearly relating business mod-
els with sustainability goals.  
 
Figure 12: Conceptualization of the developed Sustainability-oriented Business Model 
Assessment Framework 
While, impact assessment would be expanded in terms of survey questions, strategy as-
sessment would be reduced on a smaller scale. Despite the size augmentation of the con-
struct, Per agreed that the increased clarity of these and the mutually exclusiveness of its 
parts pays-off in terms of balancing survey length and practicality. 
==PAGE:50==
 
Framework Application 
48 
In addition, the strategy assessment would help evaluate intentionality of the impacts 
since as Per pointed out, sometimes the links between the SBM elements and their im-
pacts seem unclear - e.g. the impact of Resen Waves in education due to the energy input 
in island or coastal communities with hard/expensive access to energy-. Interest on inten-
tionality could also be of interest for researchers in analyzing how companies’ business 
focus affects their activities. 
 
Figure 13: Conceptualization of the SDG-SBM alignment assessment 
==PAGE:51==
 
Conclusion 
49 
5 
CONCLUSION 
To conclude, in this work a sustainability-oriented framework was developed based on a 
literature review and the different steps of a scale validation. Being on an early stage of 
the development, all possible items affecting the assessment of sustainability on its eco-
nomic, environmental and social dimensions within the sustainable business model ele-
ments value proposition, value creation & delivery and value capture were contemplated. 
The developed framework assessed sustainable business model impact and business strat-
egy approach regarding the triple bottom line. A description of the different impact and 
strategy assessment questions was provided using existing GRI indicators, sustainable 
business model concepts and design tools and existing business example to depict the 
nature of the assessment. Already in the description of the assessment questions, a greater 
difficulty appeared in describing strategy assessment in all three dimensions of sustaina-
bility related to all specific SBM elements once the impact assessment questions were 
described.  
Then, the framework was taken out to the real world, applying it to a case study with 
Resen Waves Aps. Resen Waves constituted an example of sustainability-oriented busi-
ness model in the renewable energy sector, which is why it was chosen to try the utility 
of the created framework. Resen Waves’ CEO, Per Resen Steenstrup provided his insights 
on the construct validity, participating on the current stage of the scale validity process in 
which content is validated. His opinion was considered as relevant in an SBM context 
due to his experience in renewable wave energy generation with and SBM approach span-
ning over fifteen years. His insights helped determine the flaws and potential enhance-
ments a next iteration of the framework development should include and discard. These 
enhancements can be summarized in a modification of the impact assessment from an 
SBM elements vs Sustainability dimensions towards an SDG vs SBM elements assess-
ment. In addition, an argument was made on the utility of “over-assessing” and trying to 
specify too much in the assessment of the strategy approach to sustainability, leading to 
the suggestion of reducing this assessment to just three questions covering the sustaina-
bility dimensions on a broad way across the SBM elements. 
Considering the limitations of this work, a greater number of case studies and practition-
ers’ points of view would have provided a greater strength to the arguments and conclu-
sions appearing in this work. It is hypothesized that the early stage of the framework 
development did not allow companies to relate to the assessment framework enough to 
allocate time and people to its development. After Per’s feedback leading to a series of 
inputs for a next iteration of the framework have been integrated the ease of relating and 
==PAGE:52==
 
Conclusion 
50 
seeing a clear outcome of its use could enhance the business side response to this research 
ambition. 
Regarding future steps of the sustainability-oriented business model assessment scale, the 
new construct covering SDG vs SBM elements, in which impact of the SBM elements 
would be determined according to the level of contribution towards the accomplishment 
of each SDG, and three broad strategy approach questions should be materialized and 
applied to different companies acquiring their feedback on its relevance. The translation 
of SDSN framework for the SDG global monitoring into SBM terms in combination with 
the impact assessment description performed in this work could help a better materializa-
tion and clarification of the relevant content for a sustainability-oriented business model 
assessment construct. 
==PAGE:53==
 
51 
REFERENCES 
Allen, I. Elaine, and Christopher A. Seaman. 2007. “Likert Scales and Data Analyses.” 
Quality Progress 40(7):64. Retrieved (http://rube.asq.org/quality-
progress/2007/07/statistics/likert-scales-and-data-analyses.html). 
Bertea, Patricea Elena and Adriana Zait. 2013. “Scale Validity in Exploratory Stages of 
Research.” Management & Marketing XI(1):38–46. 
Bocken, N. M. P., P. Rana, and S. W. Short. 2015. “Value Mapping for Sustainable 
Business Thinking.” Journal of Industrial and Production Engineering 32(1):88–
102. Retrieved (http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/21681015.2014.1000399). 
Bocken, N. M. P. and S. W. Short. 2016. “Towards a Sufficiency-Driven Business 
Model: Experiences and Opportunities.” Environmental Innovation and Societal 
Transitions 18:41–61. Retrieved (http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2015.07.010). 
Bocken, N. M. P., S. W. Short, P. Rana, and S. Evans. 2014. “A Literature and Practice 
Review to Develop Sustainable Business Model Archetypes.” Journal of Cleaner 
Production 65:42–56. Retrieved (http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.11.039). 
Boons, Frank and Florian Lüdeke-Freund. 2013. “Business Models for Sustainable 
Innovation: State-of-the-Art and Steps towards a Research Agenda.” Journal of 
Cleaner Production 45:9–19. 
Brenner, Steven N. and P. Cochran. 1992. “The Stakeholder Theory of the Firm.” 
Business Ethics Quarterly. 
Campbell Donnad and Donnald Fiske. 1959. “Convergent and Discriminant Validation 
by the Multitrait - Multimethod Matrix.” University of Chicago Vol.56,No.:1–25. 
Cooper, Robert G. and Scott J. Edgett. 2008. “Maximizing Productivity in Product 
Innovation.” Research Technology Management 51(2):47–58. 
Cronbach, Lee J. 1951. “Coefficient Alpha and the Internal Structure of Tests.” 
Psychometrika 16(3):297–334. 
Dentchev, Nikolay et al. 2018. “Embracing the Variety of Sustainable Business Models: 
A Prolific Field of Research and a Future Research Agenda.” Journal of Cleaner 
Production 194:695–703. Retrieved 
(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959652618314963?via%3Dih
ub#bbib66). 
Eden, Sally E. 1994. “Using Sustianable Development - the Business Case.” Global 
Environmental Change 4(2):160–67. 
Elkington, J. 2013. “Enter the Triple Bottom Line. In: The Triple Bottom Line.” 
1(1986):23–38. 
==PAGE:54==
References 
52 
Felber, Christian and Gus Hagelberg. 2017. “Economy for the Common Good: A 
Workable, Transformative Ethics-Based Alternative.” Next Systems Project. 
Retrieved (https://thenextsystem.org/the-economy-for-the-common-good). 
Global Reporting Initiative. 2014. “G4 Sustainability Reporting Guidelines.” Global 
Reporting Initiative 1–97. Retrieved 
(https://www.globalreporting.org/standards/g4/Pages/default.aspx). 
Global Reporting Initiative, GRI, United Nations Global Compact, and wbcsd. 2015. 
“SDG Compass: The Guide for Business Action on the SDGs.” 1–30. Retrieved 
(http://sdgcompass.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/12/019104_SDG_Compass_Guide_2015.pdf%5Cnpapers3://
publication/uuid/F2A2CA47-3E5B-45A8-AE9C-976E62E55DE7). 
Hauser, John and Gerald Katz. 1998. “Metrics: You Are What You Measure!” 
European Management Journal 16(5):517–28. 
Haynes, Stephen N., David C. S. Richard, and Edward S. Kubany. 1995. “Content 
Validity in Psychological Assessment : A Functional Approach to Concepts and 
Methods Introduction to Content Validity.” Psychological Assessment 7(3):238–
47. Retrieved (http://doi.apa.org/getdoi.cfm?doi=10.1037/1040-3590.7.3.238). 
Joyce, Alexandre and Raymond L. Paquin. 2016. “The Triple Layered Business Model 
Canvas: A Tool to Design More Sustainable Business Models.” Journal of Cleaner 
Production 135:1474–86. Retrieved 
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.06.067). 
Key, Susan. 1999. “Toward a New Theory of the Firm: A Critique of Stakeholder 
‘Theory.’” Management Decision. 
Lüdeke-Freund, Florian, Birte Freudenreich, Iolanda Saviuc, Stefan Schaltegger, and 
Marten Stock. 2017. Analytics, Innovation, and Excellence-Driven Enterprise 
Sustainability. Retrieved (http://link.springer.com/10.1057/978-1-137-37879-8). 
Lüdeke-Freund, Florian, Lorenzo Massa, Nancy Bocken, Alan C. Brent, and Josephine 
Musango. 2016. Business Models for Shared Value - Main Report. 
Möller, Andreas and Stefan Schaltegger. 2005. “The Sustainability Balanced Scorecard 
as a Framework for Eco-Efficiency Analysis.” Journal of Industrial Ecology 
9(4):73–83. Retrieved (http://doi.wiley.com/10.1162/108819805775247927). 
Morioka, Sandra Naomi, Ivan Bolis, Steve Evans, and Marly M. Carvalho. 2018. 
“Transforming Sustainability Challenges into Competitive Advantage: Multiple 
Case Studies Kaleidoscope Converging into Sustainable Business Models.” 
Journal of Cleaner Production 167:723–38. Retrieved 
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.08.118). 
Morioka, Sandra Naomi and Marly M. Carvalho. 2016. “Measuring Sustainability in 
Practice: Exploring the Inclusion of Sustainability into Corporate Performance 
Systems in Brazilian Case Studies.” Journal of Cleaner Production 136:123–33. 
Retrieved (http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.01.103). 
Osterwalder, Alexander and Yves Pigneur. 2009. Business Model Generation: A 
Handbook for Visionaries, Game Changers, and Challengers. Retrieved 
(http://www.amazon.com/Business-Model-Generation-Visionaries-
Challengers/dp/0470876417). 
==PAGE:55==
References 
53 
Paterson, Matthew. 2001. “Risky Business: Insurance Companies in Global Warming 
Politics.” Global Environmental Politics 1(4):18–42. 
Porter, Michael E. and Mark R. Kramer. 2006. “The Link Between Competitive 
Advantage and Corporate Social Responsibility.” Harvard Business Review 78–92. 
Richardson, James. 2008. “The Business Model: An Integrative Framework for Strategy 
Execution.” Strategic Change 17(5–6):133–44. Retrieved 
(http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/jsc.821). 
Schaltegger, Stefan, Florian Lüdeke Freund, and Erik G. Hansen. 2012. “Business 
Cases for Sustainability: The Role of Business Model Innovation for Corporate 
Sustainability.” International Journal of Innovation and Sustainable Development 
6(2):95. Retrieved (http://www.inderscience.com/link.php?id=46944). 
Schaltegger, Stefan, Erik G. Hansen, and Florian Lüdeke-Freund. 2016. “Business 
Models for Sustainability: Origins, Present Research, and Future Avenues.” 
Organization and Environment 29(1):3–10. 
Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN). 2014. “Indicators and a 
Monitoring Framework for Sustainable Development Goals - Launching a Data 
Revolution for the SDGs.” (July):233. 
Upward, Antony and Peter Jones. 2016. “An Ontology for Strongly Sustainable 
Business Models: Defining an Enterprise Framework Compatible With Natural and 
Social Science.” Organization and Environment 29(1):97–123. 
World Commission On Environment And Development(WCED). 1987. Our Common 
Future. Retrieved (http://www.un-documents.net/wced-ocf.htm). 
WWF. 2012. Living Planet Report 2012: Biodiversity, Biocapacity and Better Choices. 
Retrieved (https://www.karger.com/Article/FullText/255356). 
 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
==PAGE:57==
 
55 
A   
APPENDIX A: THE SURVEY 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:58==
1. Demographics
Sustainability-Oriented Business Model Assessment
1. Name of Company
2. Industry Sector
3. Size of Company
Micro (1-9 employees)
Small (10-49 employees)
Medium (50-249 employees)
Large (+250 employees)
4. Age of Company
2. Impact Assesment-Value Proposition
Sustainability-Oriented Business Model Assessment
Negative
Neutral
Positive
5. What is your perception of the economical impact of the Value proposition on the customer?
Negative
Neutral
Positive
6. What is your perception of the environmental impact of the Value proposition?
Negative
Neutral
Positive
7. What is your perception of the social impact of the Value proposition?
1
==PAGE:59==
3. Impact Assesment- Value Creation & Delivery
Sustainability-Oriented Business Model Assessment
Negative
Neutral
Positive
8. What is your perception of the economical impact of the Value Creation & Delivery internally (employees'
economic conditions)?
Negative
Neutral
Positive
9. What is your perception of the economic impact of the Value Creation & Delivery externally (external
actors)?
Negative
Neutral
Positive
10. What is your perception of the environmental impact of the Value Creation & Delivery?
Negative
Neutral
Positive
11. What is your perception of the social impact of the Value Creation & Delivery?
4. Impact Assessment- Value Capture
Sustainability-Oriented Business Model Assessment
Negative
Neutral
Positive
12. What is your perception of the economic impact of the Value Capture within the company?
Negative
Neutral
Positive
13. What is your perception of the environmmental impact of the Value Capture?
2
==PAGE:60==
Negative
Neutral
Positive
14. What is your perception of the social impact of the Value Capture?
5. Stategy Assesment-Value Proposition
Sustainability-Oriented Business Model Assessment
Defensive
Accomodative
Proactive
15. How is the company's Strategy regarding the economic impacts of the Value Proposition?
Defensive
Accomodative
Proactive
16. How is the company's Strategy regarding the environmental impacts of the Value Proposition?
Defensive
Accomodative
Proactive
17. How is the company's Strategy regarding the social impacts of the Value Proposition?
6. Strategy Assessment- Value Creation & Delivery
Sustainability-Oriented Business Model Assessment
Defensive
Accomodative
Proactive
18. How is the company's Strategy regarding the economic impacts of the Value Creation & Delivery?
Defensive
Accomodative
Proactive
19. How is the company's Strategy regarding the environmental impacts of the Value Creation & Delivery?
3
==PAGE:61==
Defensive
Accomodative
Proactive
20. How is the company's Strategy regarding the social impacts of the Value Creation & Delivery?
7. Strategy Assesment-Value Capture
Sustainability-Oriented Business Model Assessment
Defensive
Accomodative
Proactive
21. How is the company's Strategy regarding the economic impacts of the Value Capture?
Defensive
Accomodative
Proactive
22. How is the company's Strategy regarding the environmental impacts of the Value Capture?
Defensive
Accomodative
Proactive
23. How is the company's Strategy regarding the social impacts of the Value Capture?
4
==PAGE:62==
 
57 
B   
APPENDIX B : CONTACT EMAIL FORMAT 
 
 
Dear Sir/Madame, 
 
My name is Javier Gumà. I am Master student at the Technical University of Denmark 
(DTU), and I am currently working on my Master thesis on Sustainability Oriented Busi-
ness Model Assessment, to develop a framework to provide quantitative assessment 
that would potentially support decision-making.   
 
At the moment, my intention is to validate my framework by gathering data from com-
panies engaged with sustainability on their business models, as I think NAME OF COM-
PANY is.  
 
Therefore, I would really appreciate if you could redirect me to someone at NAME OF 
COMPANY that could help me with this i.e.: someone at the strategic level possessing 
the knowledge of strategy of the company in different aspects and with an overview of 
the organization functioning and performance. 
 
A short description of the assessment method is provided as an attached document. 
 
My most sincere gratitude for your time. 
 
Best Regards, 
Javier Gumá Abizanda 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
C   
APPENDIX C: RESEN WAVES POWER BUOY 
DATASHEET 
 
 
 
==PAGE:64==
DATASHEET | SMART POWER BUOY, RW-06-0.3KW
Q1  2017
RESEN WAVES are the ﬁ rst company in the World to provide continuous power and real time data 
connectivity to autonomous instruments and machinery in the oceans, as a plug and play solution. 
It is now possible to access instruments in real-time through smart phones or a web application, no 
matter where the instruments are located in the big oceans. Electric power is no more a limitation.  
Until now instruments and machinery in the sea are powered by batteries, PV or diesel generators, which 
require regular ship operation to replace batteries or supply of fuel and maintain diesel generators, 
which is costly and not always possible due to bad weather. Economizing power is normally done by 
cutting back on data transmission, which limits the applications of the instruments.
All these draw backs are effectively solved by installing a Resen Waves power buoy in the sea where the 
power and data connectivity is required. 
The buoy powers a battery pack on the seabed, through the mooring line. And the battery pack feeds 
power to the various instruments and machinery in the sea. Instrument data is logged from the buoy, 
through a ﬁ ber optic Ethernet connection in the mooring line, and the data is transmitted from the buoy 
to shore per satellite, 3G or 4G transmission.
Although every reasonable effort is made to present current and accurate information, 
Resen Waves makes no guarantee and reserves the right to make changes without prior notice. 
© 2017 – RESEN WAVES ApS.
Powers autonomous instruments in the sea 
and provides real-time data connectivity
Applications 
• Powers instruments and 
machinery
• Unmanned remote operations
• Offshore oil & gas
• Hydrographic
• Oceanographic
• AUV docking stations
• Whale monitoring
Features and beneﬁ ts
• Low weight
• Easy installation
• Plug & Play
• 24/7 operation
• No exchange of batteries 
required
Options, power & data
• 24 and 48 V DC 
• Iridium
• Imnarsat
• 3G or 4G
• Water depth + 200m
==PAGE:65==
DATASHEET | SMART POWER BUOY, RW-06-0.3KW
Q4  2016
RESEN WAVES
Diplomvej 381
DK - 2800 Kongens Lyngby 
Mail: info@ResenWaves.com
Web: www.ResenWaves.com 
Phone: +45 3940 4696
Powers installations on the 
seabed and provides real-time 
data communication to shore
Buoy
Generator power
300W continuous, 600W peak.
Outer dimensions:  L x W x H (cm)
170 x 170 x 100
Dry weight
250 to 350 kg
Pay load
40 kg
Operational conditions
Average wave height
Min. 1m, starts to produce power in ½m waves. 
See power curve for more detail.
Water depth
Min. 10m and max. 200m
Anchoring
Screw anchor or block
Speciﬁ cations
==PAGE:66==
 
Appendix D: Resen Waves SDG profile 
59 
D   
APPENDIX D: RESEN WAVES SDG PROFILE 
 
 
==PAGE:67==
Solution
Resen Waves is the first company in the 
world to provide continuous power and 
real-time data connectivity to autono-
mous instruments and machinery in the 
oceans and replace diesel generation in 
coastal areas and on islands by means of a 
plug-and-play buoy solution. 
It is now possible to use smart phones 
or a web application to access instru-
ments that monitor global warming and 
the health of the oceans in real time, no 
matter where the instruments are located 
in the big oceans. Power is no longer a 
limitation. In addition, the buoys have a 
great future potential to replace diesel 
generation, which is very costly to island 
populations due to the high transporta-
tion costs of diesel fuel.
Until now, instruments and machinery 
in the oceans have been powered by 
batteries or photo-voltaic (PV) or diesel 
generators, which require regular ship 
operation to replace batteries or diesel 
fuel and to maintain diesel generators. 
This is costly and sometimes not even pos-
sible due to difficult weather conditions. 
The buoys are like small modules that 
are low weight and can be installed from 
small local vessels, which is essential in 
the oceans and remote areas.
Next steps 
We will follow the same path in wave 
energy as that for small wind turbines, 
by starting with small commercial wave 
energy buoys and over time advance to 
bigger buoys and eventually megawatt 
systems.
The impact is small in the early years, but 
it is necessary to go through this period 
in order to reach a greater impact in the 
future. The evolution cannot be rushed. 
This applies to all new production of 
renewable energy.
There are no quick fixes or fast tracks 
to success, but only hard work in small 
incremental steps.
Planned development phases:
1.	Small-scale systems in the 
100W–100kW range
2.	Medium-scale systems in the  
100kW–1MW range
3.	Large-scale systems in the 1MW–20MW 
range
Over the next 10 years, Resen Waves will 
only deal with the small- and medium-size 
systems with the main aim being to 
replace diesel generated power in coastal 
areas and on islands worldwide. 
Resen Waves
Founder: Per Resen Steenstrup
Place of implementation: In Denmark, Helligsø.
Partners involved: Resen Waves, as a private company, 
has been the driving force in developing this new 
technology based on many years of practical experience 
in wave energy. 
Contact: Per Resen Steenstrup, prs@resenwaves.com
Find out more at: www.ResenWaves.com 
Oceans Solutions Report
SDSN NE
26
==PAGE:68==
The reduced expenditures on diesel oil 
will pay for the buoys and reduce emis-
sions of greenhouse gases accordingly. 
The small-scale systems represent a 
market of €50–100 million/year and will 
save 100,000–200,000 tons of diesel fuel 
annually. The relatively high figures 
include the fuel required for ship opera-
tion to replace batteries and fuel.
Sustainable Development Goals
According to the World Bank, some house-
holds on islands spend up to 30% of their 
income on importing diesel oil for gener-
ators, which keeps them in poverty. If a 
similar figure applied to the wealthy part 
of the world, it would throw the world 
economy into a deep recession. Resen 
Waves will hence contribute to SDG 1: 
No Poverty.
Low-cost electricity is essential for desal-
ination in remote coastal areas. We will 
reduce the cost of desalination in these 
areas to roughly €.70/m3. This will contrib-
ute to SDG 6: Clean Water and Sanitation.
Clean affordable energy is essential for all 
societies, including in remote areas. This 
is why we will have a positive impact in 
relation to SDG 7: Affordable and Clean 
Energy. The price of electricity, at this 
early stage, will be roughly €.35/kWh.
Resen Waves also works with real time 
monitoring of the oceans, which is essen-
tial to support natural life in the oceans, 
and will therefore contribute to SDG 14: 
Life Below Water. The buoys also provide 
the power needed for real-time trans- 
mission.
Goals
Postive impact on:
Goal 1: No Poverty
Goal 4: Quality 
Education
Goal 5: Gender Equality
Goal 6: Clean Water 
and Sanitation
Goal 7: Affordable 
and Clean Energy
Goal 11: Sustainable 
Cities and Communities
Goal 12: Responsible 
Consumption and 
Production
Goal 13: Climate Action
Goal 14: Life Below 
Water
Goal 17: Partnerships 
for the Goals
SDSN NE
27
Chapter 2: Smart and Clean Energy for All
==PAGE:69==
 
Appendix D: Resen Waves Survey Answer 
60 
E   
APPENDIX D: RESEN WAVES SURVEY ANSWER 
 
==PAGE:70==
Q1 Name of Company
Resen Waves
Q2 Industry Sector
Renewable energy
Q3 Size of Company
Micro (1-9 employees)
Q4 Age of Company
8
Q5 What is your perception of the economical impact of the Value proposition on the customer?
(no label)
Positive
Q6 What is your perception of the environmental impact of the Value proposition?
(no label)
Positive
Q7 What is your perception of the social impact of the Value proposition?
(no label)
Positive
#3
#3
COMPLETE
COMPLETE
Collector:
Collector:
 Web Link 1 
Web Link 1 (Web Link)
(Web Link)
Started:
Started:
 Friday, June 22, 2018 10:03:50 AM
Friday, June 22, 2018 10:03:50 AM
Last Modified:
Last Modified:
 Friday, June 22, 2018 10:36:47 AM
Friday, June 22, 2018 10:36:47 AM
Time Spent:
Time Spent:
 00:32:56
00:32:56
IP Address:
IP Address:
 77.72.50.34
77.72.50.34
Page 1: Demographics
Page 2: Impact Assesment-Value Proposition
Page 3: Impact Assesment- Value Creation & Delivery
1 / 3
Sustainability-Oriented Business Model Assessment
SurveyMonkey
==PAGE:71==
Q8 What is your perception of the economical impact of the Value Creation & Delivery internally (employees'
economic conditions)?
(no label)
Positive
Q9 What is your perception of the economic impact of the Value Creation & Delivery externally (external actors)?
(no label)
Positive
Q10 What is your perception of the environmental impact of the Value Creation & Delivery?
(no label)
Positive
Q11 What is your perception of the social impact of the Value Creation & Delivery?
(no label)
Positive
Q12 What is your perception of the economic impact of the Value Capture within the company?
(no label)
Positive
Q13 What is your perception of the environmmental impact of the Value Capture?
(no label)
Positive
Q14 What is your perception of the social impact of the Value Capture?
(no label)
Positive
Q15 How is the company's Strategy regarding the economic impacts of the Value Proposition?
(no label)
Proactive
Q16 How is the company's Strategy regarding the environmental impacts of the Value Proposition?
(no label)
Proactive
Q17 How is the company's Strategy regarding the social impacts of the Value Proposition?
(no label)
Accomodative
Page 4: Impact Assessment- Value Capture
Page 5: Stategy Assesment-Value Proposition
2 / 3
Sustainability-Oriented Business Model Assessment
SurveyMonkey
==PAGE:72==
Q18 How is the company's Strategy regarding the economic impacts of the Value Creation & Delivery?
(no label)
Proactive
Q19 How is the company's Strategy regarding the environmental impacts of the Value Creation & Delivery?
(no label)
Proactive
Q20 How is the company's Strategy regarding the social impacts of the Value Creation & Delivery?
(no label)
Accomodative
Q21 How is the company's Strategy regarding the economic impacts of the Value Capture?
(no label)
Proactive
Q22 How is the company's Strategy regarding the environmental impacts of the Value Capture?
(no label)
Proactive
Q23 How is the company's Strategy regarding the social impacts of the Value Capture?
(no label)
Proactive
Page 6: Strategy Assessment- Value Creation & Delivery
Page 7: Strategy Assesment-Value Capture
3 / 3
Sustainability-Oriented Business Model Assessment
SurveyMonkey
