==PAGE:1==
Evangelos Chiotis
Bearing fault detection in frequency
converter-driven induction motor
Master Thesis, July 2018
==PAGE:2==
Evangelos Chiotis
Bearing fault detection in frequency
converter-driven induction motor
Master Thesis, July 2018
==PAGE:3==
Title:
Bearing fault detection in frequency converter-driven induction motors
Author:
Evangelos Chiotis, s161533
Supervisors:
Nenad Mijatovic
DTU Elektro
Sanjeet Kumar Dwivedi
Danfoss Drives
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
Release date:
22 July 2018
Class:
1 (Public)
Edition:
1. edition
Comments:
This report is part of the requirements to recieve a Master of Science
at the Technical University of Denmark. The report represents 35
ECTS points.
Rights:
<Evangelos Chiotis>, <2018>
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
First of all to I would like to thank my thesis supervisors, Nenad Mijatovic of DTU Elektro
and Dwivedi Sanjeet Kumar of DANFOSS. The door to Nenad’s oﬃce was always open
and together with Sanjeets were always there whenever I ran into a trouble spot or had a
question about my research or writing. Especially Nenad who consistently allowed this
project to be my own work, but steered me in the right direction whenever he thought I
needed it and always motivated and encouraged me. I would like also to thank Dannehl
Jorg and the engineering team of DANFOSS for their valuable time that whent into our
meetings and counseling but also for the necessary equipment they had donated for the
completion of this project. Also I would like to thank my friends, family and colleagues
Evangelos Triantafyllidis, Dimitris Patso, Roi Georgousi and Dimitris Zagkanas for their
support and company they provided throughout this period, but also for proof-reading of
this document. Last, I need to thank the whole department of DTU Elektro and especially
the PowerLabDK group that not only allowed me to use their resources and facilities but
also to feel a part of it. I can only hope that the work I have done in the past few months,
can contribute a small part on the ongoing research of the people I have worked alongside
all this time.
i
==PAGE:6==
ABSTRACT
The research of condition monitoring in electric motor has been widely researched for
several years and the development of new methods in universities and the industry has
led to its evolution. Condition monitoring is integrated in every part of the production
process and new methods are reported and published within the scientiﬁc community.
The purpose of this project was to investigate the subject of bearing fault detection
in frequency converter-driven induction motors and to formulate the theory and the
corresponding methods in order to identify early-stage faults to aid predictive maintenance
in electric motors. Mechanical faults in ball-bearings are one of the most common faults
found in electric motors, these faults can cause unexpected and costly down-times both
in industrial and non-industrial applications of induction motors. Subsequently the past
years there is an increasing interest in detecting various mechanical and electrical faults by
monitoring the condition of the motor though various parameters such as vibrations, heat,
current, voltage and power. Most methods that can detect mechanical faults in the motors
bearings currently rely on the monitoring the vibration spectrum of the motor. These
methods although yield positive results and can aid in the early-stage detection of faults,
require the installation and use of expensive and invasive equipment. The additional cost
renders these methods meaningful only for large scale uses, thus an equally eﬀective and
more economic is needed.
Since the motors current and voltage are already monitored for control during operation,
it would be of great interest the development of methods able to detect these faults
by recognizing their signature in the current at an early-stage and real-time. Based on
existing theory for Condition Monitoring of these faults, the method based on the analysis
of the motor current signature (MCSA) was investigated and tested in order to detect
various early stage faults commonly encountered in applications of induction machines.
Two main bearing fault categories where simulated and tested, single point defects and
generalized roughness faults and for two diﬀerent types of control (scalar V/f, VVC+ and
V/f with the use of a quadrant PAS ampliﬁer). For the signal post-analysis some of the
existing signal analysis methods used in post-processing the motor current and two diﬀerent
signal processing methods where deployed, a Fast Fourier Transform based method and a
Short-Time Fourier Transform based method.
The acquired results give strong indications for the validity of the method and but also in
its future as a real-time monitoring tool. Both for the case of the idealized single point
defects but also for the more relevant general roughness faults, the developed methods
where able to pin point spectral components corresponding to speciﬁc bearing faults.
ii
==PAGE:7==
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
Acronym
Deﬁnition
CM
Condition Monitoring
IM
Induction motor
VVC+
Voltage Vector Control
DAQ
Data Acquisition
MCSA
Motor Current Signature Analysis
FFT
Fast Fourier Transform
STFT
Short-Time Fourier Transform
iii
==PAGE:8==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Acknowledgements
i
Abstract
ii
List of Abbreviations
iii
Table of Contents
iv
List of Figures
vi
List of Tables
viii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
General Content
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Formulation of the problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Outline of the project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theoretical Background
6
2.1
Introduction in condition monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Motor Current Signature Analysis (MCSA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Fault classiﬁcation in electrical machines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Various methods of signal processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Experimental set-up and developed methods
21
3.1
Experimental set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
DAQ system, accuracy and sensitivity of the measuring equipment . . . . .
23
3.3
Induced bearing faults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Operating conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5
Conducted experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Experimental results for single point defects
30
4.1
Scalar V/f control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
VVC+ control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3
PAS Ampliﬁer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.4
Visual inspection of the defected bearings after the experiment . . . . . . .
43
5
Experimental results for generalized roughness faults
45
5.1
Investigation of generalized roughness faults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Short-Time Fourier Transform
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
Summary and Conclusions
49
6.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2
Conclusions and Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
iv
==PAGE:9==
Table of Contents
6.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
References
53
A Appendix
57
B Appendix
60
v
==PAGE:10==
LIST OF FIGURES
1.1
Typical potential savings curve resulted form the use of CM . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Installation cost vs economic ROI of CM equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1
Probability map of electrical machines failures. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Illustration of the main structural parts for a deep grove bearing ball.
. . . . .
12
2.3
Flowchart for the bearing faults.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1
Experimental setup. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Accuracy error of Fluke i30s AC/DC Hall Eﬀect current clamp . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Ball bearing faults. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Image of an artiﬁcially created, generalized roughness bearing fault . . . . . . .
26
4.1
Low-pass ﬁlter response with a cut-oﬀfrequency of 1200 Hz used in this experiment 31
4.2
Phase A current spectrum with fault-related frequency components in detail . .
33
4.3
Phase B current spectrum with fault-related frequency components in detail . .
34
4.4
Current spectrum in detail around 455 Hz @1400 rpm - 10 N.m . . . . . . . . .
36
4.5
Current spectrum in detail between 5th and 7th harmonic @1400 rpm - 10 N.m
37
4.6
Even harmonics in the current spectrum @1400 rpm - 10 N.m . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.7
Comparison of the stator current spectrum for operation under stage 2 and
stage 4 faults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.8
Current spectrum (in detail) comparison for 0, 55.8 and 97.6 % load @1400
rpm under healthy operation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.9
Current spectrum (in detail) comparison for 0, 55.8 and 97.6 % load @1400
rpm under stage 4 fault
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.10 Current spectrum with the use of PAS @1100 rpm - 20 N.m.
. . . . . . . . . .
42
4.11 Short description of the ball bearing manufacturing process, adapted from SKF 43
4.12 Pictures of the bearing parts used, after the completion of the experiments.
On the left are the inner raceways used and on the right the corresponding
balls. On the top are the parts used for the stage 1 and 2 faults whereas on the
bottom are parts used for stage 3 and 4 faults.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.1
Generalized roughness bearing fault compared to healthy operation in terms of
the frequency content of the stator current
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Current spectrum of the stator’s current under generalized roughness bearing
fault @1400 rpm - 20 N.m.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
B.1
Comparison of the stator current spectrum for healthy operation and operation
under stage 4 fault. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
B.2
Current spectrum for healthy operation and under stage 4 bearing fault with
(V/f) control @1000 rpm - 35N.m.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
B.3
Current spectrum for healthy operation and under stage 4 bearing fault with
VVC+ control @1000 rpm - 35N.m.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
vi
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
B.4
Current spectrum in detail with the use of the VLT for motor control
. . . . .
62
B.5
Current spectrum in detail with the use of the Quadrant Ampliﬁer for motor
control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
B.6
Spectrogram of the Stator current in healthy operation with window length
equal to 15*(Number of samples per second)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
B.7
Spectrogram of the Stator current under generalized roughness bearing fault
with window length equal to 15*(Number of samples per second) . . . . . . . .
63
B.8
Spectrogram of the Stator current in healthy operation with window length
equal to 3*(Number of samples per second) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
B.9
Spectrogram of the Stator current under generalized roughness bearing fault
with window length equal to 3*(Number of samples per second) . . . . . . . . .
64
vii
==PAGE:12==
LIST OF TABLES
2.1
Advantages of Continuous and Periodic Condition Monitoring.
. . . . . . . . .
7
3.1
Nameplate parameters for the induction machines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
SKF 6208-2Z/C3 ball-bearing speciﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Characteristics of the current clamps used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Experiments conducted for bearing fault detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1
Predicted frequency components related to the induced inner raceway bearing
fault @200 rpm-10 N.m. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Current spectrum components which coincide with the predicted fault related
frequencies @200 rpm-10 N.m.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Frequency components appearing only in faulty conditions,
. . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4
Fault related frequency components @ 1400 rpm for 0% and 97.6% load . . . .
40
4.5
Predicted frequency components that appear in the stator current spectrum
with VVC+ control @1000 rpm - 35 N.m
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.6
Predicted frequency components that appear in the stator current spectrum
with PAS ampliﬁer @1100 rpm - 20 N.m
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1
Frequency components related to single point defects which appear in the
current spectrum for generalized roughness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2
Frequency components related to single point defects present in the spectrum
of the current under generalized roughness bearing fault.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
48
A.1 Measured speed of the test motor in RPM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.2 Slip of the test motor in %
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.3 Predicted frequency components related to the induced inner raceway bearing
fault @700 rpm-10 N.m. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A.4 Current spectrum components which coincide with the predicted fault related
frequencies @700 rpm-10 N.m.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A.5 Predicted frequency components related to the induced inner raceway bearing
fault @1400 rpm-10 N.m.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.6 Predicted frequency components that appear in the stator current spectrum
with (V/f) control @1100 rpm - 20 N.m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
viii
==PAGE:13==
1
INTRODUCTION
In this part, the main concept and purpose of this research are introduced. The objectives
are demonstrated and the ﬁnal aim of this project are concisely discussed. Subsequently
the content of this thesis is presented to the reader, in order to be able to comprehend the
sequence of the following chapters.
1.1
General Content
In the modern world, the number of electrical machines used in industrial and domestic
applications is increasingly growing, a trend that will inevitably continue in the following
years. Electric motors are used in almost every aspect of the daily life and their application
can vary from large manufacturing systems and transportation to small scale applications
such as cooling devices for electronic circuits. The increase of reliability of the productive
process has been always one of the main concerns of the industry. Hence, predictive
maintenance is an essential part towards improving the availability and reliability of the
equipment. It can be perceived as the evaluation of the equipment or system condition,
based on previous knowledge of the operating conditions and performance by monitoring
predetermined parameters[1].
Since three-phase induction motors are competent devices widely used in industrial and
mobility applications, heavy duty tasks with variable load conditions dictate the reliable
monitoring of these motors, especially for long-term use. As with any rotating machinery
involved in industrial processes, electric machines are exposed to adversities of diﬀerent
nature, nominally environmental, mechanical and thermal stresses. Thus, a close monitoring
of their operational state is essential, especially by considering the fact that unexpected
machine failures can lead to costly downtime and interruptions in services of critical
importance. Especially for industrial applications where the level of attention in this
subject is usually even higher, since these interruptions in the normal operation of the
machine have a direct economic cost. First and foremost, in the form of lost production
and the subsequent cost of repair needed, but also in the form of damages to surrounding
equipment that may occur. Further,for cases of medical-related applications the downtime
due to faulty equipment can also lead into harmful consequences in human lives.
These reasons dictate that a correlated reliability and monitoring of the motor needs to
become a priority for all participants in the production process and health service providers.
Electrical machines consist of a large number of both mechanical and electrical parts such
as stator windings, rotor bars and bearings. The conditions in which they operate, can
cause minor or major faults in their parts. There is a number of possible faults in electrical
machines, most of which initiate as a small declination from the normal operational state
of the machine. For the case that these faults are not detected at an early stage, they
1
==PAGE:14==
1. Introduction
can evolve and possibly have catastrophic results. Since several causes of failure degrade
relatively slow, a possibility for timely fault detection can lead to corrective and predictive
maintenance.
Condition monitoring is a solution for detecting early stage faults in electrical machines,
providing this way information about the operational status of electric machines and
may assist in the detection of a fault at an early rather than at a terminal stage. Early
stage detection can lead to successful predictive maintenance, which can in turn prevent
downtime originated from machine failures and possibly reduce the maintenance costs.
Furthermore, CM methods can assist in the optimization of the machine’s performance
and avoid signiﬁcant damage of the machine itself. The assessment of the condition of
a plant that used electric machines is built upon a number of factors, derived from the
practical analysis of the machine’s performance data [2]. These factors can be:
• Failure frequency
• Randomness of the failures
• Number of defective machine’s parts
• Potential dangers causes from deteriorated performance and reduced reliability of
the equipment
These are only some of the factors that are taken into consideration when an assessment
report is drafted. Due to practical diﬃculties involved into accurately quantifying potential
losses of an unscheduled maintenance downtime, its challenging to compile a detailed
economic study to support the need of predictive maintenance. And by considering potential
damages in the surrounding equipment this task can become even more challenging. Despite
these limitations there has been studies on the subject and a qualitative example of those
can be seen in ﬁgure 1.1.
Figure 1.1. Typical potential savings curve resulted form the use of CM, adapted from [2]
As for any investment, besides the savings CM can potentially have on the operation, the
installation and operation cost of a CM system should be considered. Both the installation
and the operational costs depend on the quality of the selected equipment and are dictated
from the environmental and operational conditions of the application. Figure 1.2 illustrates
2
==PAGE:15==
1. Introduction
the potential outcome of an investment in a CM system, based on the installation costs
and the potential savings from its application.
Figure 1.2. Installation cost vs economic return on investment (ROI) of the CM equipment [2]
The number of operational parameters that can be chosen to be monitored is steadily
increasing, as more research is being published on the subject. Some of the monitored
parameters can be mechanical ( i.e. vibrations, heat and noise) but also electrical (i.e.
current, voltage and power). In the past years great strives have been made in the ﬁeld
of sensor-driven systems. These systems are able the control the operation of electrical
machines in various applications, rendering the monitoring of such parameters possible.
Last, the expanding progress of the ﬁeld of signal processing is further assisting the real-time
monitoring of these critical parameters.
1.2
Formulation of the problem
The purpose of this project is to address the problem of mechanical faults in the ball-
bearings of variable speed frequency converter-driven induction motors and attempt to
formulate and test a theory that will enable condition monitoring of these faults. Among
the numerous approaches that have been established throughout the years, a signal-based
has been chosen. The fault detection is achieved through the analysis of the recorded
electrical signals of the motor. The parameter that is selected to be monitored in the
majority of CM systems for detecting bearing faults is the vibrations of the motor. Due to
the mechanical nature of this fault, their vibrational signature in the signal has a more
direct connection compared to any electrical signal of the monitored motor. Vibrations
can be further utilized as they are the cause of excessive noise. Acoustic analysis of this
noise can also contribute on the detection of a bearing fault. Nevertheless, vibration and
noise monitoring are achieved with the use of expensive measuring equipment. The latter
justiﬁes their employment only in critical applications.
3
==PAGE:16==
1. Introduction
Besides the vibrational or acoustic signal analysis there is an emerging signal-based method
which enables the monitoring of the motor through analysis of the motor’s stator current.
This method is being researched extensively due to the quick and inexpensive nature
of the method not requiring any dedicated and expensive measuring equipment since it
relies mainly on measurements of the motor’s current. Especially for cases of frequency
converter driven applications where the current is already being measured in the drives, to
provide control and protection of the motor, minimizing the need for additional sensing
equipment. In the case when vibrations are the monitored parameter a number of vibration
sensors need to be placed in multiple points upon the setup (i.e. motor’s frame, load,
gearbox). The fact that current can be measured either using less expensive equipment
or no additional equipment at all 9case with frequency converters), is one of the most
important advantages over other measured parameters used in condition monitoring in
electric machines.
Despite the aforementioned advantages, the eﬀect that bearing faults have on the stator’s
current is not as straightforward as in the case of vibrations, rendering fault detection
through the current more challenging. Last, it should be noted that for both cases the
fact that two diﬀerent bearing faults can create almost identical signatures, can further
complicate the identiﬁcation of the faults.
1.3
Outline of the project
The structure of this Thesis and its chapters are described below. Firstly since condition
monitoring (CM) is the general research area within which lies the work of this Thesis,
the second chapter starts with a description of CM’s characteristics, which are shortly
analyzed and compared. Due to the fact that Motor’s Current Signature Analysis (MCSA)
is the signal based method that is examined as a fault detection method in induction
motors, the chapter includes also an analysis of MCSA, which is based on its comparison
with the vibration-based methods and the limitations in its practical implementation in
industrial environment. Among the possible faults in electric machines, bearing faults are
the main interest of this MSc Thesis. Thus, after analyzing MCSA, a classiﬁcation of the
bearing faults follows along with their expected signature on the stator’s current. Last but
not least, the second chapter includes a necessary literature review on the currently used
in bearing fault detection signal processing techniques together with those used in this
project.
The following part of the work, chapter 3 entitled Experimental results, relates to the
previous one. A particular experimental setup is used for investigating the bearing fault
signatures in the stator current. Furthermore the Data Acquisition system (DAQ) is
described, in order to clarify the accuracy and sensitivity levels of the measuring equipment.
Subsequently, the current measurements for the diﬀerent single point defects which have
been created are processed oﬀ-line and the derived results the presented. The theoretically
expected signatures are compared to those which are present in the estimated current
spectrum and the indicators are validated.
Chapter four includes the current measurements for the non-controlled fault (generalized
roughness). Since the signature of this type of faults can not be predicted useful information
4
==PAGE:17==
1. Introduction
are extracted from their analysis on the frequency domain as well as in the tilled time-
frequency plane. Finally a demonstration of a relative degradation of the fault is presented.
The conclusions in chapter ﬁve summarize the important aspects of this project and
proposes some ideas and guidelines for future research.
5
==PAGE:18==
2
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Bearing faults are amongst the most commonly encountered faults in electric machines and
for that reason they have been widely examined and researched. Numerous approaches on
CM techniques can be found in literature for bearing fault detection and diagnostics in
induction machines, namely: signal based methods, model based, circuit theory based and
simulation based methods (Finite Element Methods - FEM). In this chapter, the types of
CM are going to be discussed and comparison will be made between oﬀ-line and on-line
CM. The parameters, which are measured and used in CM are listed and the speciﬁcations
that have to be met from a CM system are also determined.
Following, will be a description of the method selected to be used in this project called
Motor Current Signature Analysis (MCSA). Besides the description, also a comparison of
MCSA and the most commonly used method of bearing fault detection in electric machines
based on vibration measurements is needed. Since it is considered essential to mentioning
the practical problems for applying MCSA in an industrial environment, there needs to be
a classiﬁcation of the main bearing faults regarding their location on the bearing. As well
as a short description of their signature in the machine’s vibrations and stator’s current
which, the main parameter used for their detection. Last but not least, a necessary and
thorough literature review follows on the digital signal processing (DSP) tools and the
types of CM techniques that have been used as a reference.
2.1
Introduction in condition monitoring
An electric machines maintenance can be divided into two distinct categories, pro-active
and reactive maintenance. Within the content of pro-active maintenance there can be
a further distinction into two sub-categories. The ﬁrst category is based on the lifetime
and breakdown rates of similar parts used in similar applications as well as manufacturer
service recommendation (preventive maintenance). And the second category is built upon
measuring and monitoring the actual conditions of the equipment. The advantage of the
predictive maintenance over preventive is that the necessary downtime can be planned
in advance at the time that is needed. The corresponding downtime under preventive
maintenance, although planned in advance may not be necessary resulting in costly
inactivity within the production process.
2.1.1
Characteristics of Condition monitoring
From the early stages on the research for CM methods, two of its features were extensively
discussed, namely the operating conditions of the equipment, during which it is applied
and its periodicity. Regarding the ﬁrst characteristic there are two types of CM, oﬀ-line
and on-line monitoring. For the case of the oﬀ-line CM, during the monitoring procedure
6
==PAGE:19==
2. Theoretical Background
the monitored equipment is not operating in its normal environment conditions. On the
other hand, on-line CM is applied while the production process is running. As far as
the periodicity is concerned, CM can either be periodic or continuous. Periodic CM can
be applied either with invasive or non-invasive methods, while continuous CM is almost
always non-invasive. The advantages of both the continuous and periodic CM are listed in
table 2.1.
Table 2.1. Advantages of Continuous and Periodic Condition Monitoring.
Continuous CM
Periodic CM
• Faults can be detected as soon as
they appear
• Trends are formed automatically
• Detection of abrupt changes and
transients in the measured parameters
is possible
• Electric motors in severe operating
environments can be monitored without
the need of setting the measuring
equipment each time
• The maintenance of electric motors
can cover other possible fault sources
like removal of particles of dust
• Since periodical CM is being done
manually changes can be evaluated
by human senses which can
successfully detect mechanical
defects whose detection would be
harder using CM algorithms
• Investment in periodical CM is
considerably smaller compared to
continuous CM
In most applications (industrial, commercial or domestic) CM is applied on electric machines
in continuous mode . On-line CM systems measure the monitored parameters and supply
them into the post-processing device which handles their analysis. Despite the fact that
they can detect the fault from an early stage making both on-line and continuous CM
be beneﬁcial for the application, they are limited due to the equipment. The measuring,
storing, pre and post-processing of the monitored parameters require data acquisition
systems with high computational power and large memory in order to be able to cope with
such large amounts of data.
2.1.2
Monitored parameters in electric machines
The indicators of a fault in the monitored equipment can be detected either if the monitored
parameter surpasses speciﬁc predetermined limits, or by a change in their long-term trend.
The analysis of the parameters can be done both in the time or frequency domain (spectrum
analysis) or even in the tilled time-frequency plane (spectrograms). The nature of the
measured parameters vary and can be:
• Electrical or magnetic:
– Stator’s current
– Electrical or mechanical torque
– Power
7
==PAGE:20==
2. Theoretical Background
– Axial or stray ﬂux
• Vibrational
– Acceleration measurement
• Noise
– Acoustic noise pressure measurement
• Temperature
– Temperature measurements via thermocouples
– Thermal images
• Chemical analysis
– Oil or grease debris analysis
• Visual inspection
• Partial discharge
Each parameter from the list above can be used for on-line CM, but for some of the
aforementioned parameters the additional cost of the monitoring equipment renders these
methods suitable only for use in large electric machines. Furthermore, some of these
parameters require invasive measuring devices, which can not always be installed in the
application, while others are based on non invasive methods (vibrations versus stator’s
current).
2.2
Motor Current Signature Analysis (MCSA)
One of the most researched methods used for the detection of faults in electric machines
is by monitoring the stator’s current. As the name suggests, in this method the stator
current is the examined parameter and its frequency spectrum is analyzed in order to
obtain some useful information regarding the fault. Each fault creates its own signature in
the stator’s current which is reﬂected in the frequency spectrum with the form of speciﬁc
components. Despite a few limitations that will be discussed later in the chapter and
remain to be surpassed, MCSA is used to detect both electrical and mechanical faults
in electric machines. Mechanical faults in electrical machines, such as bearing faults are
detected because of the relative radial rotor displacement which they cause [3]. This rotor
displacement is responsible for the appearance of air-gap ﬂuctuations. These ﬂuctuations
from an electrical scope translate into variations of the reluctance and ﬂux linkage, which
in turn can be detected in the stator’s current [4].
2.2.1
Comparison between MCSA and vibration-based methods
The most commonly implemented CM methods for mechanical faults in electric machines
are based on vibration analysis. As previously discussed, MCSA relies only in measuring
the current, whereas vibration analysis methods focus on measuring the acceleration.
Subsequently, while the displacement of the rotor is reﬂected straightforward in the current
spectrum, the acceleration is integrated in order to detect this rotor displacement, which
can lead into errors [5]. Furthermore, the validity of vibration measurements highly depends
on where the measuring equipment is located but also in the mounting on the machine
frame. Bearing currents are a category of bearing faults that do not produce a change in the
8
==PAGE:21==
2. Theoretical Background
machine’s vibrations, thus they can only be detected through MCSA. Another advantage
of MCSA over vibration analysis is that in applications where the machine is diﬃcult to
be reached or there is no space for additional measuring equipment, vibrations may be
impossible to be measured (e.g. pump). Lastly in converter-fed applications, current is
measured through the drivers with a known sampling frequency, which constitutes the
method to be a low-cost solution [6].
Although promising, MCSA is not suitable yet for detecting bearing faults in early stage
which can be noticed in the vibration spectrum [7]. Moreover, the possibility of placing
the vibration measuring equipment in multiple locations on the machine’s frame, allows for
a more detailed detection of the defective part, while in MCSA the distinction on whether
the defective bearing is on the load end or on the no-load end is highly challenging in
the case that the two bearings have the same geometry. Last but not least, the biggest
challenge that MCSA has to face is the distinction and identiﬁcation of the fault-related
frequency components from those which exist in healthy operation. The latter, being the
"strongest" compared to the faulty ones and in combination with the existing noise may
cover them.
2.2.2
Limitations in the practical implementation of MCSA for
industrial uses
Since MCSA is currently an open research topic, it can be debated that its advantages
outweigh its drawbacks. Despite this, there are some physical limitations on the success rate
of MCSA and consequently its application in industrial environment [8]. These limitations
can be:
• Spectral leakage
• Necessity for high frequency resolution
• Variable load conditions
• Overlapping mechanical frequencies
Spectral Leakage
The ﬁrst limitation of the methods originates from the ﬁnite time-window of the
measurements, due to physical limitations mainly from the limited memory of the measuring
equipment. The fundamental harmonic and its multiples, cover the weak and sideband
components because of the energy diﬀerence [9, 10].
Several solutions, such as the ﬁltering of the fundamental harmonic[11] have been suggested.
Some approaches use multiple-input current and voltage signals in order to achieve better
separation of the fault related frequency components others use diﬀerent parameters such
as instantaneous power, current Park’s vector and three-phase stator current envelopes [8].
A diﬀerent approach to the problem is to use Hilbert transformations in the phase current
before its spectral analysis, in order to localize more accurately the fault related frequency
component [12]. This method will be discussed further in section 2.4.3. Furthermore,
spectral leakage is present with a considerable impact in applications with large machines
operating with low slip or in cases of operation under low load where the magnitude of
these components is quite low [13]. For example in high-power motors with low slip the
9
==PAGE:22==
2. Theoretical Background
sideband components are in close distance to the fundamental harmonic which results in
them not being easily detectable [14].
High frequency resolution
The sampling frequency of the measured parameter plays an important role in successfully
locating a frequency component and distinguish it from a neighbouring one. The frequency
resolution (∆f) is of major importance in CM systems and is deﬁned as the accuracy of
the separation of two consecutive bins in the frequency spectrum. The frequency resolution
is deﬁned by equation 2.1
∆f = fs
N =
fs
T ∗fs
= 1
T
(2.1)
Where fs is the sampling frequency, N is the number of samples acquired and T is the
total time period of measuring the signal. In literature, there can be found numerical
techniques used in order to increase the frequency resolution, e.g. Zoomed Fast Fourier
Transform (ZFFT) [15] and MUSIC algorithm [16]. But the frequency resolution is further
limited from the hardware of the measuring equipment, which can be a major hinder due
to the increased cost of higher frequency resolution measuring devices and data acquisition
systems (DAQ).
Variable load conditions and overlapping frequencies
The current signature of each fault in electric machines, either electrical (e.g. stator
windings faults) or mechanical (e.g. bearing faults) depends on the slip of the machine. In
applications with variable load, the slip of the motor changes and as a result the location
of these components, further complicating the identiﬁcation of a fault. Reasons for that
are possibly, an existing spectral smearing eﬀect or that same spectral components can be
generated from two diﬀerent faults. Furthermore, equipment such as gearboxes, used for
the control of the output speed of the motor, can generate components that can overlap
with those related to a fault. For applications like the aforementioned the most commonly
used solution is the measurement of the monitored parameter under various load conditions,
which can partially resolve this problem.
2.3
Fault classiﬁcation in electrical machines
As previously mentioned a fault in any part of the machine or in its drive can lead to a
high economic impact. Common failures occurring in electric machine components are
either electrical or mechanical and can be classiﬁed as:
• Electrical faults: short circuits in the stator’s windings, broken rotor bars and end
rings, inverter failures
• Mechanical faults: bearing faults, rotor eccentricity (static, dynamic, mixed), shaft
misalignment, faults in the load side of the drive (e.g. faults in the gearbox )
As it can be seen in ﬁgure 2.1, faults due to bearings, constitute for over 40% of all
possible machine failures, electrical or mechanical. [17]. Hence, their detection is of great
10
==PAGE:23==
2. Theoretical Background
importance and has been a topic that drew the attention of the scientiﬁc community the
past years.
Figure 2.1. Probability map of electrical machines failures, adapted from [17]
Placed on both sides of an electrical machine, they govern the direction of its rotor shaft.
Bearing faults do not lead to an immediate breakdown, but evolve in time while causing
symptoms such as:
• Unbalanced air-gap
• Voltage and Line currents
• Increase in torque pulsations
• Decrease in the average torque
• Further eﬃciency losses
• Over-heating
There are various sources that bearing failures can originate from. The most important of
which are:
• Material fatigue
• Corrosion due to water, acid, dust or
humidity
• Over-heating
• Wrong handling and/or installation
• Shaft Misalignment
• Overloading
• Excessive or lack of lubrication
2.3.1
Fault location on bearings
The most common type of bearings used in electric machines is the ball bearing. These
typically consist of six to twelve metal spheres, connected together with the use of a metal
separator called a cage and then all constrained between two concentric metal cylinders.
The cage keeps the bearing balls equally spaced thus preventing them from coming into
contact. The circular motion of the uniﬁcation of bearing balls - cage is limited between
the outer and inner ring of the bearing which are known as outer and inner raceways,
respectively. Bearing balls are lubricated with grease or oil lubricant in order to assist
their motion and reduce the friction of the system. An illustration of the structural
characteristics of a bearing can be seen in detail in ﬁgure 2.2.
11
==PAGE:24==
2. Theoretical Background
Bearing faults can initiate as defects with marginal extent, expanding and evolving in
every feature of the bearing (outer raceway, inner raceway and all the rolling elements).
For example, if a fault occurs in one of the bearing balls it will not expand immediately to
the rest, due to the fact that they are constrained from the cage. The fault though, will
spread to the inner surfaces of the inner and outer raceway as a result of the friction. In
turns the fault will pass along to the rest of the balls and the condition of the bearing will
deteriorate in a slow but steady pace, until its eﬀects on the performance of the machine
dictate its replacement.
Bearing faults are usually classiﬁed according to their location on the bearing’s parts.
Bearing faults that are localized in only one of the bearing’s parts are not usually met
in real-life applications. They can be caused for example from a steep movement of the
rotor of the machine (i.e. during its disassembling of a machine for maintenance reasons),
though they are mostly generated in an oﬀ-line mode for testing purposes. Examples of
this type of faults can be an artiﬁcially caused hole in one of the surfaces of the bearing or
a single scratch in the outer or inner raceway.
Figure 2.2. Illustration of the main structural parts for a deep grove bearing ball, adapted from
[18]
Regarding the surface that the fault appears on, bearing faults can be divided into the
following four distinctive categories:
• Outer raceway fault
• Inner raceway fault
• Cage fault
• Bearing ball fault
2.3.2
Bearing fault classiﬁcations
Another criterion used for the classiﬁcation of the faults is the eﬀect that the faults may
have in the machine’s mechanical or electrical parameters, which in turn can be measured
and used for the development of CM methods. Bearing faults can then be further divided
into two categories, depending the frequency signatures that they are responsible for in
the vibration and current spectrum of the machine[19]. Single point defects (or cyclic
12
==PAGE:25==
2. Theoretical Background
faults) are the types of faults that create speciﬁc predictable frequency components in
the vibrations of the machine. These characteristic frequency components appear in the
vibration spectrum and depend on the part of the bearing where the fault is situated. The
value of the frequency of each fault depends on the geometry of the bearing and can be
calculated using [20]:
fOuter = Nb
2 · frot · (1 −Db cosθ
Dc
)
(2.2)
fInner = Nb
2 · frot · (1 + Db cosθ
Dc
)
(2.3)
fBall = Dc
2Db
· frot · (1 −D2
b cos2θ
D2c
)
(2.4)
fCage = frot
2
· (1 −Db cosθ
Dc
)
(2.5)
where:
• frot is the rotational speed of the rotor of the machine
• Nb is the number of balls of the bearing
• Db is the ball diameter
• Dc is the bearing cage diameter
• θ is the contact angle
It follows from equations 2.2 - 2.5, that the calculation for the four characteristic frequency
components in the vibrations of the machine produced from single point defects, take into
account the geometry and dimensions of the bearing, as well as the rotational frequency of
the machine. In practice though, bearing balls not only rotate but they also slide inside the
shell between the outer and inner raceway. This can be taken into account by multiplying
these characteristic frequencies by a sliding factor k, which usually takes values between 0.8
- 1. For the case and also when the full geometry of the bearing is not known, equations
2.2 and 2.3 can be replaced by equations 2.6 and 2.7, which as approximate expressions
take into account only the number of the bearing balls[21]:
fOuter = 0.6Nbfrot
(2.6)
fInner = 0.4Nbfrot
(2.7)
When the bearings that support the rotor have an abnormality due to a fault, then each
time the bearing balls passes through the defected part of the bearing, they cause an
impulse which is recorded in the vibrations of the machine. In turn, these impulses cause
a relative radial displacement of the rotor with respect to the stator, thus producing
components in the stator’s current. Barthled et. al[22] have shown that the characteristic
13
==PAGE:26==
2. Theoretical Background
frequency components, the detectable result of these impulses, can be modulated in the
stator’s current spectrum forming components that can be calculated using:
fBearing = |fe ± kfchar|
(2.8)
Where fe is the supply frequency of the rotating machine and fchar is one of the frequencies
of each type of bearing fault given from equations 2.2 - 2.5. Experimental results in
literature, reveal that the presence of one of the characteristic frequencies in the vibrations
of the machine does not necessarily result in the appearance of components described by
2.8 in the stator’s current.
Most of the existing CM techniques for bearing fault detection, use the vibrations or stator’s
current as the monitored parameter. They focus on the detection of these characteristic
frequencies, either in the vibrations or the spectrum of the current. However, these methods
are most eﬀective for single point defects and suﬀer from eﬃciency drops for the case where
the faults are not localized in one of the bearings surfaces (parts).
These non-localized bearing faults, form another category called generalized roughness
(non-cyclic faults). The fault instead of being localized in only one of the bearing parts, it is
distributed in a large area of the bearing. As a result, the surface of the bearing irregularly
degrades and is being deformed during the progression of the fault. Unfortunately, in the
earlier stages of their occurrence these characteristic frequencies are not present neither in
the vibration nor in the stator’s current spectrum, which makes diﬃcult the assessment
of their severity. These faults are most common in industrial environments, since during
operation, the possibility of a bearing fault being locally limited is extremely low. Figure
2.3 presents a ﬂowchart that can help to understand how bearing faults of both categories
can be detected through their signature, which depends on the level of progression of the
fault.
Figure 2.3. Flowchart of the fault signature for the two categories and the detectable quantities.
2.4
Various methods of signal processing
Several techniques can be found in the literature, which are used for detecting instantaneous
frequency components in complex signals. In order to obtain accurate calculations and
results for the detection of faults (electrical or mechanical) in induction motors (IM), it is
14
==PAGE:27==
2. Theoretical Background
necessary to have knowledge of the supply frequency and the motor’s slip. For frequency
converter-fed applications, the supply frequency is determined from the converter, whereas
the slip of the machine is measured from the drivers using feedback from encoders.
Motor’s current signature analysis (MCSA) has been researched and used as a reference
in diagnostics of induction machines, both for industrial and commercial applications.
However, MCSA is a broad area, which is currently intensively investigated due to the
many frequency components can can appear in the signature of several diﬀerent faults. In
the following sections, the most commonly used Digital Signal Processing (DSP) tools for
fault detection in IM will be presented in order to acquire an insight on how each method
works and how the frequency spectrum of the monitored parameters can be obtained.
2.4.1
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)
Fourier transform (FT) is the most commonly applied DSP tool used in CM. It unfolds
the frequency composition of the examined signal by transforming it from the time into
the frequency domain. With the use of FT, the signal is decomposed into a weighted
summation of sine and cosine functions. Using the mathematical symbol of inner product
FT is deﬁned as:
XFT (f) = ⟨x, e−j2πft⟩=
Z ∞
−∞
x(t)e−j2πftdt
(2.9)
Regardless the sampling frequency, data acquisition systems record the monitored signals
at discrete time intervals ∆T within a measurement time T. Such non continuous signals
can be transformed into the frequency domain using the Discrete Fourier Transform DFT
which is expressed with:
DFT(fn) = 1
N
N−1
X
k=0
x[n]e−j2πfnk∆T ,
k = 0, 1, 2, ..., N −1
(2.10)
Where N = T∆T is the number of samples, and fn = n/T, n=0, 1, 2,..., N-1 are the
discrete frequency components. The DFT is denoted as a pair transform and its inverse
transform can then be expressed as:
xk =
1
∆T
(N−1)/T
X
fn=0
DFT(fn) · ej2πfnk∆T
(2.11)
Equations 2.10 and 2.11 show that the Fourier transform is a convolution of the time
series signal x(t) or xk in the case of DFT and a series of sine and cosine functions. The
transformation procedure measures the similarity, the signal and the sinusoidal functions
and expresses the average frequency information during the total sampling of the signal[23].
In order for the DFT of a signal with N samples to be computed, a multiplication of a
square matrix of NxN dimensions which contains the primitive nth root of the unity e
−j2π
N
by the signal is necessary. The computational cost of such an operation is the sum of
15
==PAGE:28==
2. Theoretical Background
the arithmetic operations required, which scales as N2. It follows then that the number
of arithmetic operations needed during the DFT of a signal exponentially increases with
the sampling rate of the signal. For example, the arithmetic operations necessary for
computing the DFT of a signal with 512 samples are 262144, while for a signal of 8192
samples this number rises to 67108864.
DFT based methods are among the ﬁrst methods applied in the ﬁeld of signal processing,
but due to their computational cost and process time, their use is limited. This problem
is addressed with the Cooley-Tukey algorithm or more commonly known Fast Fourier
Transform (FFT). FFT algorithms are based on the principle of recursively decomposing
the DFT of a signal with a large number of samples into DFTs of smaller length. This is
done by dividing the number of samples N in half at each step of the computing process.
As a result the number of necessary arithmetic calculations is reduced into Nlog(N), which
corresponds in a 99.4% reduction in the case of a signal with 512 samples.
The reduced computational cost of the FFT based CM methods made their use in the early
stages of CM of electric machines from the early research stages. Despite the reduced cost
though, FFT is posing two main problems. Spectral leakage and aliasing, both issues that
may occur during the computation of the FFT. Leakage is caused due to the discontinuities
of a signal when it is extended periodically when computing the FFT. A solution to this has
been given by using a window forced to contain a full period and subsequently preventing
leakage from happening. However the window itself can contribute frequency-wise into
the frequency content of the signal, hence the selection of the appropriate window is an
important factor in order to achieve minimum distortion of the frequency spectrum. The
second problem causes the appearance of frequency components in the frequency spectrum
that appear in diﬀerent locations than expected. This is a result of the violation of the
Shannon sampling theorem, which states that "if a function f(t) includes no frequencies
higher than B Hz, then it is completely determined by giving its ordinates at a series of
points spaced (1/2B) s apart" [24]. Ensuring that the sampling frequency is at least twice
as large as the fundamental frequency component of the signal, solve aliasing successfully.
Nevertheless, FFT does not provide information on whether there are variations in the
frequency content of the signal. Components that appear in the frequency spectrum
are present in a continuous base for the whole sampling time period or only at speciﬁc
intervals. More speciﬁcally, the eﬀectiveness of FFT has its limitations when it comes to
non-stationary signals, mainly due to not revealing the varying structure of the signal in
time. Furthermore, since most of the parameters that are monitored in CM systems in
industry are non-stationary, a new signal processing technique has been developed and
will be discussed in the following section.
2.4.2
Short-Time Fourier Transform STFT
The limitations that FFT has in terms of localization in time can be overcome with the use
of a sliding window of certain length, which slides through the signal in time performing
"time localized" FTs. This is the main principle behind the Short-Time Fourier Transform
(STFT) method. The window w(t) in this method, is a sliding function originally centered
around a time moment τ. At each speciﬁc moment τ the FT of the signal within the
window is computed. After the FT is performed, the window is then shifted by τ along
16
==PAGE:29==
2. Theoretical Background
the time axis and the FT is computed again for the "new" signal enclosed within the
window. Through this periodic procedure and by assuming that the signal included in the
window is stationery, the FT is performed for the entire signal. The result of STFT is the
decomposition of the signal in tilled time-frequency plane revealing possible variations of
the frequency content of the signal in time[25]. STFT is calculated (using again the inner
product mathematical symbol) the expression:
STFT(τ, f) = ⟨x, gτ,f⟩=
Z
x(t)g∗
τ,f(t)dt =
Z
x(t)g(τ −t)e−j2πftdt
(2.12)
There are many window types that can be found in literature, a detailed list of which
can be found in the work of Harris et al [26], each one developed for the requirements
of a speciﬁc applications. The Kaiser-Bessel window for example is used to segregate
two frequency components of the signal, with frequencies quite close to each other but
with a large diﬀerence in their magnitudes. Hamming and Hann windows are applied
in narrow-band random signals while Gaussian window are used in transient signals. It
is important to note that the selection of the window will aﬀect the resolution of the
STFT, both in the time but also in the frequency domains. Although higher resolution
will yield a more representative illustration of the frequency content of a signal it is not
possible for both time and frequency resolution to be inﬁnitely high but must follow the
Heisenberg-Gabor uncertainty principle[27] of equation 2.13. This limitation translates
that the resolution both in time ∆τ and frequency ∆f will always have a lower limit,
dictated by the uncertainty principle.
∆τ · ∆f ≥1
4π
(2.13)
From equation 2.13 it is obvious that ∆τ and ∆f are inversely proportional and an increase
in the resolution in time will result in a decrease in the resolution of the frequency and
vice versa. The value the time-frequency rectangle ∆τ∆f is a tool for evaluating the
performance of signal processing tools in time-frequency signal representations. Time and
frequency resolution are described analytically from the root mean square term of the time
width and bandwidth of the window function, respectively[28]:
∆τ =
 R ∞
−∞(τ −τ)2|w(t)|2dτ)
R ∞
−∞|w(t)|2dτ
! 1
2
(2.14)
∆f =
 R ∞
−∞(f −f)2|W(t)|2df)
c
R ∞
−∞|W(t)|2df
! 1
2
(2.15)
Where w(t) is the function of the selected window, W(f) is its FT. The expression in the
denominator is the energy of the window function and c is a normalization constant. It is
important to note that both ∆τ and ∆f depend only on the parameter τ. As a result, as
soon as the type of window is selected, both time and frequency resolution are constant
for the complete time-frequency plane. Thus, the right choice for the parameters will have
17
==PAGE:30==
2. Theoretical Background
a direct and important impact on the time and frequency resolution of the STFT. There
three parameters that compose a window function and will be discussed further, the shape
and length of the window and the overlapping between two consecutive segments.
Window shape
As previously discussed the main reason for limiting the frequency resolution of both
FFT and STFT is the spectral leakage. It is a result of the violation of the property of
orthogonality between the examined signal and the complex exponential function in the
aforementioned transforms. As a result of the shortening of a ﬁnite length, its spectrum
is produced from the convolution of spectral coeﬃcients and the window function [26].
The direct eﬀect of the window shape to the signal spectrum can be shown from the
fact that a smooth window assists in the reduction of leakage in the signal spectrum,
at least more eﬀectively when compared to one with sharp edges. If a window with
smooth rising and falling edges is selected, then the discontinuities at the boundaries of
the segmentation can be decreased. Eﬀectively making the frequency components of the
signal more distinguishable from each other.
Window length
The second parameter that directly aﬀects the response of a window function is its length.
The frequency resolution of the DFT is deﬁned as:
∆f = β fs
N
(2.16)
Where fs is the sampling frequency, N is the number of the signal samples (length) and β
is the equivalent noise bandwidth of the selected window shape. The longer the window
length, the higher the frequency resolution. However, according to the Heisenberg-Gabor
uncertainty principle (2.13), it is impossible to achieve the highest possible frequency
resolution without losing information from the time resolution. The localization in time
(time resolution) improves with a shorter window, while the opposite happens with the
localization in the frequency domain.
Overlapping
The last parameter that needs to be taken into consideration when developing an STFT
algorithm is the percentage of overlapping between the signal segments. For the case
of zero overlap, components of the frequency content of the signal at the boundaries of
the segments will be lost from the STFT. In most cases a 50 % or 75 % overlapping is
chosen which results in an insigniﬁcant loss of information. It should be noted, that the
computational cost of the FT of the segments is reduced as the overlapping increases[26].
2.4.3
Envelope analysis with Hilbert Transform
One of the methods that have been used in bearing fault detection is the envelope analysis
with the use of Hilbert transform (HT). The phase current signal includes the feature
18
==PAGE:31==
2. Theoretical Background
of modulation, inherited from the vibrations during the motor’s operation with a faulty
bearing. Envelope analysis has been used in the demodulation process in order the extract
the fault features and patterns from the current signal [29]. Commonly used in fault
diagnosis [12], Hilbert transform of a real signal such as the phase current of an induction
machine is used to enhance its local properties. It is be expressed as the convolution of
the signal x(t) with the function (1/t) as follows:
HT(x(t)) = y(t) = 1
πt ∗x(t) = 1
πt
Z +∞
−∞
x(τ)
t −τ dτ
= P
π
Z +∞
−∞
x(τ)
t −τ dτ
(2.17)
Where P is the Cauchy principal value of the integral. By coupling the original signal
with the corresponding Hilbert transform, the analytic signal is derived and is given from
equation 2.18, from which the demodulation is achieved.
−→x (t) = x(t) + i ∗y(t) = a(t) ∗ejθ(t)
, i =
√
−1
(2.18)
Where a(t) is the instantaneous amplitude of −→x (t) which reﬂects the energy variations of
x(t) in time and θ(t) is the instantaneous phase of −→x (t) that can be calculated from:
a(t) = [x2(t) + y2(t)]
1/2
and
θ(t) = arctan(x(t)/y(t))
The product of the Hilbert transform is a complex time series signal, whose magnitude is
the envelope signal. If an FFT is applied on the absolute value of this magnitude, then
the envelope power spectrum can be obtained. Then by removing the carrier signals it can
expose the modulation in the current signal caused from the defective bearing.
2.4.4
Wavelet transform
In the past years, wavelet transforms have been extensively researched and have emerged
as a useful signal processing tool, mainly due to their eﬀectiveness in the analysis of
non-stationary signals. They have been used for signal analysis in tilled time-frequency
plane and have been proved quite eﬃcient in multi-resolution analysis of transient signals.
Their basic advantage over STFT, also used for signal analysis both in the time but also
the frequency domain, is that they use an adaptive window through the properties of
dilation and translation of a function called "mother wavelet". The limitation of FFT which
is applied on a global level upon the signal cause the information of a signal component
localized in time to be lost, especially when the transient decays fast. This "mother wavelet"
function is changed through its two main properties and forces the original signal to change
form and subsequently spread in time and scale[30]. The Continuous Wavelet Transform
(CWT) is deﬁned as:
CWTa,b =
Z +∞
−∞
x(t)ψ∗
a,b(t)dt
(2.19)
19
==PAGE:32==
2. Theoretical Background
Where ψ is the "mother wavelet" function given from:
ψa,b(t) =
1
p
|a|ψ(t −b
a
)
(2.20)
From equations 2.19 and 2.20, it can be noticed that the transformed signal has two
parameters, the scaling parameter a > 0 (dilation) and the time localization parameter
b ∈R (translation). Wavelet transform is also reversible[31], providing the possibility of
reconstructing the original signal from the equation 2.21:
x(t) = C−1
ψ
ZZ
W(a, b)ψa,b
da
a2 db
(2.21)
Where:
Cψ =
Z +∞
−∞
| ˆψ(ω)|2
|ω|
dω < ∞
(2.22)
for
ˆψ(ω) =
Z
ψ(ω)e−jωtdt
(2.23)
The advantage of wavelets over STFT is that while in STFT the type and the width of the
window function is ﬁxed for the entire time-frequency plane. Resulting in stable time and
frequency resolutions, the same does not apply for the case of wavelets. Using wavelets
provides the beneﬁt of a non ﬁxed time and frequency resolution, which results in better
time resolution at higher frequencies and better frequency resolution at lower frequencies.
Both of these parameters depend only in the selection of the mother wavelet ψ [32].
20
==PAGE:33==
3
EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP AND DEVELOPED
METHODS
This chapter will provide a description of the experimental setup was used throughout this
period. It was provided by the DANFOSS company and it was allocated within the Drives
Lab (part of the PowerLAB in the department of Electrical engineering at DTU). The
components of the setup will be presented in detail but also the tests conducted for the
investigation of diﬀerent bearing faults will be introduced and explained. The test rig used
for the experiments was designed to have easy access to the replacement of the bearings
in the test motor, in order for the necessary experiments to be conducted. A picture of
the test rig used can be seen in ﬁgure 3.1. Following, will be a description of the Data
Acquisition System (DAQ) that was employed for the recording of the test motor’s stator
current and phase voltage signals. The purpose of this was to determine the accuracy
and sensitivity level of the measuring equipment, deﬁning this way the limits of whether
a variation in the signals can be related to the bearing fault, or should it be considered
part of the noise. An explanation of the procedure for introducing the various faults in the
tested bearings follows,in order to denote the diﬀerent nature of each fault type. At the
end of this chapter operational conditions of the test motor will be described in order to
facilitate the knowledge on the control principles which were applied on the motor.
Figure 3.1. Figure of the experimental set-up used in the condition monitoring
21
==PAGE:34==
3. Experimental set-up and developed methods
3.1
Experimental set-up
The experimental set-up used to carry out the condition monitoring, consisted of two
identical four-poles three phase induction machines, each rated at 7.478 hp (5.5 kW)
coupled together via an aluminum coupling. One of the two machines motor was to be
examined (the one in which faults where applied to), while the second one acted as a load
(generator). Table 3.1 shows the nominal values for both machines.
Table 3.1. Nameplate parameters for the induction machines
Voltage (V)
Frequency (Hz)
Speed (r/min)
Power (kW)
Current (A)
cosφ
690 Y
50
1465
5.5
6.4
0.79
400 D
50
1465
5.5
11.2
0.79
460 D
60
1765
5.5
9.6
0.79
Apart from the two motors, two variable frequency drives (VLT automation drives FC
302) provided from DANFOSS were attached to the induction machines. FC 302 are
responsible for the start-up, control and protection of the motor, oﬀering diﬀerent types
of control suitable for numerous applications. The frequency converter driving the load
machine was set on torque control closed loop with motor speed feedback from an external
encoder directly connected to the load machine. This enabled the control of the load for
the needs of the experiments. According to the objectives of this project the experiments
focused on investigating bearing faults in frequency converter-driven induction motors
controlled using scalar (V/f) open loop control. Despite the latter, FC 302 oﬀers more
options for motor control, thus it was decided to acquire measurements also for Voltage
Vector Control (VVC+). The power supply chosen was used at 400 V (@ 50 Hz) with the
machines connected in a triangle conﬁguration and the switching frequency of the drive is
4kHz. Figure 3.1 shows that the setup was place on a cage which was not entirely stable
and its should be taken into account that it could be responsible for some noise in the
current spectrum due to the induced vibrations.
Each machine was equipped with two ball-bearings, one integrated on the load side of
the rotor shaft and the other on the fan side. The probability of a fault occurring on
the load-side bearing is much higher than on the bearing on the fan side. The reason for
that is the operational conditions of the machine generating the load, can deteriorate the
condition of the bearing, e.g ﬂuctuations on the load or the resulting thermal stresses. For
that reason the introduction of the faults was done on the load bearing side, in order to
more accurately simulate normal working conditions. Table 3.2 presents the speciﬁcations
for the 6208-2Z/C3 ball-bearings that where used for all the experiments, as reported from
the manufacturer SKF1.
Table 3.2. SKF 6208-2Z/C3 ball-bearing speciﬁcations
Parameters
Values
Number of balls
9
Ball diameter (mm)
12.3
Pitch diameter (mm)
52
Contact angle of the bearing
0 ◦
22
==PAGE:35==
3. Experimental set-up and developed methods
3.2
DAQ system, accuracy and sensitivity of the
measuring equipment
Hardware
For the purpose of this project it was decided that both the the current and voltages should
be recorded. For that reason, a DAQ system was built using a NI cRIO 9082 chassis from
National Instruments, an embedded controller equipped with a re-conﬁgurable FPGA. The
stator’s current and the phase voltage of the motor was recorded using two NI 9218 analog
input modules, suitable for current measurements and one NI 9244 voltage input module
for voltage measurements. The three modules were were all set to operate synchronized
with the internal clock of one of the modules, in order to record simultaneously all three
line currents and phase voltages with the same sampling rate of 51.2 kHz.
Software
The DAQ system was developed using LabVIEW (Laboratory Virtual Instrument
Engineering Workbench), a program development application from National Instruments.
It uses graphical programming in order to create systems (such as a DAQ), representing
each component with a block diagram. It uses functions and subroutines that are contained
within its libraries, covering a large variety of programming tasks. The programs created
in LabVIEW are called virtual instruments due to the fact that they can simulate actual
instruments in terms of functioning. The speciﬁc libraries used in DAQ include speciﬁc
components necessary for the acquisition and the storage of the measurements.
Auxiliary components
The measurement of the line current for all three phases was achieved by employing
three Fluke i30s AC/DC Hall Eﬀect current clamps. The phase voltage was measured
by connecting three cables in the motor’s terminals. The speciﬁcations, according to the
manufacturer2, for the characteristics of the current clamps used for measuring the currents
can be found in table 3.3 and ﬁgure 3.2 presents the accuracy error in the readings.
Figure 3.2. Accuracy error of Fluke i30s AC/DC Hall Eﬀect current clamp
1http://www.skf.com
2http://www.ﬂuke.com
23
==PAGE:36==
3. Experimental set-up and developed methods
Table 3.3. Characteristics of the current clamps used
Measuring range
± 30 A
Output Sensitivity
100 mV/A
Accuracy (at 25◦C)
± 1% ±2 mA
Resolution
± 1 mA
Accuracy and sensitivity of the measuring equipment
From ﬁgure 3.2, it can be seen that the accuracy error of the current clamps is between
0.25 −0.35% for currents within the range of 5 and 20 A, which was the operational range
of our experiments. In logarithmic scale this accuracy level can be calculated as follows:
accuracy level = 20 ∗log10(0.25 ∗10−2) = −52.04dB
(3.1)
As far as the sensitivity level is concerned, the NI 9218 is equipped with two 24-bit ADCs.
From these 24 bits, the ﬁrst bit is used to store the sign of the current and the rest for the
storing of the value. The sensitivity level for this experiment is deﬁned by the base ten
logarithm of the ratio of the measuring range, over the number 2 raised in the power of
the available bits on the ADC, in our case 23. The expression to calculate the error is the
following:
sensitivity level = 20 ∗log10( 60
223 ) = −102.9dB
(3.2)
The accuracy and sensitivity of the equipment was used in order to determine if
measurements acquired can be used for detecting the bearing faults or they are the
result of noise in the signal. In all following ﬁgures, both the accuracy and sensitivity level
of each measurement will be displayed with the results for comparison.
3.3
Induced bearing faults
Within the context of this thesis, ball bearing faults, both for the case of single point
defects but also for generalized roughness faults were investigated. In both cases it was
considered appropriate to examine faults of diﬀerent severity. For the case of single point
defects ,this was achieved by creating diﬀerent faults of diﬀerent severity. While for the
case of generalized roughness, several data-sets were acquired after running the motor for
a period of at least 4 hours between the acquisition of each data-set. It is worth noting,
that although there is not a global severity criterion for the classiﬁcation of bearing faults
based on their signature in the stator current, they can be categorized in terms of severity
based on the frequency content of the vibration that is generated from the fault [33]. The
lifetime of the fault can be broken down into four distinct stages, depending on the severity
of the fault and the corresponding frequency features it may create in the spectrum.
During the initial stage of the fault, the frequency components produced appear in higher
frequencies, usually above 10 kHz and are not detected using basic spectrum analysis
techniques. Only high frequency techniques such as ultrasound analysis may be able to
24
==PAGE:37==
3. Experimental set-up and developed methods
pick up the components in these scales. As the fault progresses, it will start generating
lower frequency components, in the range of 1kHz-5kHz. In this case, techniques like
enveloping and demodulation might be more successful for low speed electric machines.
During the third stage, components related to the fault will start appearing below 1 kHz
and the fault will be visible also in the time waveform. Traditional DSP tools will detect
the fault, which now can be visible if the bearing is removed from the machine. In the
fourth and ﬁnal stage of the fault the replacement of the bearing is necessary.
3.3.1
Single point defect faults
Since the main objective of this project was to investigate bearing faults only through
their current frequency signature in the spectrum and no vibration measurements was
acquired, the classiﬁcation based on the eﬀects of the fault in the vibration spectrum was
not possible to be followed. The diﬀerent severity levels were achieved by removing and
reinserting the grease into the bearing. A single point defect (cyclic controlled fault) was
created by scratching with an electrical drill the inner raceway surface of the bearing. This
enabled to search for speciﬁc frequency components in the current spectrum related to the
inner raceway (described from equations 2.3 and 2.8). The grease was initially removed
from two healthy bearings, later they where artiﬁcially drilled in the surface of the inner
ring. The severity of the fault was determined from the depth of the cavity in the inner
part of the bearing. The artiﬁcially created cavities are indicated by the red circles in
ﬁgure 3.3, both for stage two and stage four faults.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.3. Images of two diﬀerent stages of artiﬁcially created cavities in the inner raceway of
the bearing. On 3.3(a) a stage 2 bearing fault is shown whereas on 3.3(b) a stage 4
fault.
As previously discussed, the severity of the fault determines what stage the fault is. Thus
in order to try and simulate all four categories, the space were the bearing’s balls are
situated within the outer and inner rings was ﬁlled with grease. This was done in order
to diminish the severity of the fault since the grease is facilitating the complex motion
(rotational-sliding) of the bearing balls and creates two intermediate faults. Thus, the
bearing in ﬁgure 3.3(a) was used to simulate stage 1(with the addition of grease) and 2
25
==PAGE:38==
3. Experimental set-up and developed methods
(without the addition of grease) faults and similarly the bearing of ﬁgure 3.3(b) to simulate
faults 3 and 4. After acquiring current measurements for these four faults the grease was
removed again in order to observe visually the degradation of the fault. The degradation
of the faults is shown in the Appendix (ﬁgures 4.12).
3.3.2
Generalized roughness faults
Generalized roughness faults are non-controlled faults and are more commonly met in real
applications. In order to simulate a bearing fault in this category, iron ﬁlings were inserted
in a healthy bearing without removing the grease. After the faulty bearing was placed
in the motor, the setup was left to operate. The operation of the motor contributed in
the assimilation of the iron ﬁlings from the grease characterized by a relative uniformity.
In order to investigate also the progression of this type of fault, ten diﬀerent data-sets of
current and voltage measurements were recorded. Between the acquisition of each data-set,
the set-up was left to operate for a suﬃcient time, in order for the fault to evolve and its
level of the severity to be more noticeable. Figure 3.4 depicts the iron ﬁlings (dark-coloured
particles visible on the outer and inner ring) already mixed with the grease in the bearing.
Figure 3.4. Image of an artiﬁcially created, generalized roughness bearing fault
3.4
Operating conditions
Within the context of this project, bearing faults were investigated with the test motor
running under two diﬀerent types of control. More emphasis was given into the ﬁrst type,
since it is the most commonly used in industrial applications and it was the so-called scalar
V/f control. In everyday life applications there is a need of motor to maintain a constant
output torque while operating in variable speed. The change in the speed of an induction
motor can occur in one of the following three ways: [20, 34, 35]
• Changing the number of poles of the machine
• Changing the magnitude of the supply voltage
26
==PAGE:39==
3. Experimental set-up and developed methods
• Changing the frequency of the supply voltage
Despite the fact that the third option has the most suﬃcient and promising results, it can
also lead in an increase of the motor’s impedance and a decrease in the current when the
frequency of the supply voltage is increased.
3.4.1
Scalar (V/f) control
The concept of controlling the current of the motor by changing the voltage and the
frequency has lead to the scalar control which is based on the changing of these two
parameters at the same time. The speed of the motor can be changed by altering the
supply frequency, which in turns causes a change in the motor’s impedance. This change
in the impedance will result in a change of the current and for the case it drops it will
aﬀect the output torque of the motor, eﬀectively decreasing it. Reducing the supply’s
frequency at a rated supply voltage will lead to a saturation of the air-gap ﬂux Ψm resulting
in excessive stator current and distortion of the ﬂux. These issues can be potentially
avoided by simultaneously adjusting the frequency and the voltage while keeping their
ratio constant so that the air-gap ﬂux is always maintained at a desirable steady state
level.
The connection between voltage, frequency and torque can be explained using the torque
speed equation for an induction motor:
T =
3
2 · ωm
I2
r · Rr
s
(3.3)
where:
• T is the torque of the motor in the air-gap
• ωm is the mechanical rotational speed
• Ir is the rotor current
• Rr is the rotor resistance and
• s is the slip of the motor
From equation 3.3, it can be seen that the torque is inversely proportional to the frequency
while the voltage being directly proportional. With this type of control, the torque can be
maintained at all operating stages up to the motor’s nominal speed value.
Scalar (V/f) control can be divided into two categories based on whether or not it uses
feedback signals for controlling the speed and torque of the motor. The ﬁrst category
called open loop control does not require any feedback signals, thus it is preferred in
industrial applications due to its low cost and simple implementation. The second category
is the closed loop version of this type of control, is a more precise and robust solution
for controlling the speed of the machine than the open loop. A signiﬁcant advantage of
the close loop over the open loop control is that the torque is always accessible at every
operating point due to the fact that it is used as a feedback signal for control. This does
not happen in the case of open loop where the torque can be controlled only at the nominal
operating point. Other variables which are used as feedback signals from the closed loop
27
==PAGE:40==
3. Experimental set-up and developed methods
control are the slip of the machine (proportional to the torque) and in some special cases
the current which is used for controlling the ﬂux.
3.4.2
Voltage Vector Control + (VVC+)
The second type of motor control used in the experiment was voltage vector control +
(VVC+). Due to the fact that its investigation was not a primary objective of this project
it will not be described in detail. However some of its basic principals should be introduced
in order to understand its eﬀect on the motor’s operation. The open loop VVC+ which
was applied to the motor can be actually considered as a closed loop system even though
it does not require any feedback from external encoders. The feedback signals come
from the variable frequency drive (VFD) itself. The microprocessor which integrated in
the VFD creates an accurate motor model which is updated continuously based on the
motor’s operating parameters. The voltage and the current requirements for the motor are
compared to the reference set from the model and modiﬁed accordingly in order to meet
the application requirements. These modiﬁcation are accomplished with the necessary
error corrections which result in optimized motor performance over a large range of speed
and load combinations. Some of the most important advantages of VVC+ are:
• Nearly sinusoidal output current waveform
• Continuous modelling of the motor
• Automatic adjustment of the inverter switching pattern for all operating conditions
3.5
Conducted experiments
In order to acquire more complete results and gain a more complete perspective of the
bearings fault signature in the stator’s current, it was deemed best to investigate the entire
speed and load capability range of the test motor up to its nominal values (1465 rpm -
35.851 N.m.). For each fault the current was measured at 14 diﬀerent speeds ranging from
100-1400 rpm, with a step of 100 rpm. Furthermore 5 diﬀerent load cases were investigated,
for loads of 0, 10,20,30 and 35 N.m.. One thing to note is that due to both the test motor
and the load (generator) being air-cooled induction machines, the steady state of the motor
could not be maintained in low speeds and high loads. For that reason for the load cases
of 30 and 35 N.m., the current was measured after the motor had reached 700 rpm. On
the contrary, due to the nature of VVC+ control and its ability to ensure reliable start
even at low speeds, the current was recorded for every chosen speed and load level.
Apart from the operation of the motor under the control of the variable speed drive a
4-Quadrant Ampliﬁer (Spitzenberger & Spies PAS 7500) was used, in order to simulate the
grid. This was done in order to avoid the use of the frequency converter and the harmonics
that would be introduced in the current frequency spectrum from the VFD switches. The
ampliﬁer provided the option of predetermined frequency and voltage output applying an
open loop scalar (V/f) control. The lowest output that could be achieved through the
ampliﬁer was 10 Hz corresponding to 80 V or 46.19 VRMS, based on the ratio V
f = 400
50 = 8
calculated from the nominal values of the motor. For the single point defects one data-set
of measurement was acquired for each fault stage, while in the case of generalized roughness
10 data-sets were acquired in order to investigate the degradation of the fault. In order to
28
==PAGE:41==
3. Experimental set-up and developed methods
achieve the degradation of the generalized roughness fault, between the acquisition of each
data-set the motor was run continuously for at least 4 hour period. The analytic list of
experiments conducted for the purpose of this project are listed in the table 3.5.
Table 3.4. Experiments conducted for bearing fault detection
Control
Single Point Defect
Generalized Roughness
Speed (rpm)
Load (N.m.)
Speed (rpm)
Load (N.m.)
V/f
100-1400
0,10,20
100-1400
0,10,20
700-1400
30,35
700-1400
30,35
VVC+
100-1400
0,10,20,30,35
-
-
V/f with PAS
300-1400
0,5,10,15,20
-
-
29
==PAGE:42==
4
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS FOR SINGLE
POINT DEFECTS
This chapter includes the experimental results for the induced single point defects. In
the ﬁrst part, results from single point defects, tested while controlling the motor with
V/f control, are going to be presented and discussed. Following will be a comparison
between the results obtained while using VVC+ control and subsequently the outcome of
controlling the motor with the ampliﬁer will also be introduced for comparison reasons.
Two methods were used for post-processing the current measurements during the
investigation of the faults.
In the beginning FFT was employed in order to acquire
the frequency spectrum of the current. Comparing the frequency content of the current
measured under healthy operation with the one measured with the faulty bearing reveals
the diﬀerences related to the bearing faults. As mentioned in the 3.3 four diﬀerent fault
levels were examined.
Analyzing the results showed that two factors that aﬀect the
frequency content of the current are the operating speed of the motor and the load. Thus,
it is relevant to present the following results:
• Three diﬀerent speeds for the same load and
• 5 diﬀerent loads for the same motor speed
Their comparison will illustrate whether there is any connection between the fault related
components, the speed of the motor and the load.
The second technique was used in post-processing the measured current is STFT in order
to investigate the behaviour of the frequency content of the current under faulty conditions
both in frequency and time domain. The time length of the acquired data-sets varies
from 25-40 seconds and in the post-processing process the ﬁrst 3 seconds were disregarded
in order to avoid any transients phenomena caused from the initiation of the recording
procedure.
4.1
Scalar V/f control
The ﬁrst case that is going to be presented are the results of the experiment while operating
the motor with (V/f) control. The measured current was post-processed using FFT of
a data-set of 17 seconds for the ﬁrst set of measurements. The results from the motor
speeds of 200, 700 and 1400 rpm are selected to be displayed for operation under 10 N.m.
load. The frequency components presented in this section are normalized by a factor of
10 in order to be comparable. The current signals in this project were ﬁltered using a
FIR low-pass ﬁlter with a cut-oﬀfrequency of 1200 Hz, whose response is shown in ﬁgure
??. The purpose of that ﬁlter is to ﬁlter out higher harmonics and avoid aliasing. The
30
==PAGE:43==
4. Experimental results for single point defects
reason for the selection of the cut-oﬀfrequency is that the noise level above 1000 Hz is
below the sensitivity level of the measuring equipment, thus it would be useless to check
for frequency components higher than this level.
0
5
10
15
20
25
Frequency (kHz)
-160
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Magnitude (dB)
Magnitude Response (dB)
Figure 4.1. Low-pass ﬁlter response with a cut-oﬀfrequency of 1200 Hz used in this experiment
4.1.1
200 rpm - 10 N.m.
As previously discussed in section 3.3 the induced fault was introduced in the inner raceway
of the bearings. Subsequently, the frequency components expected to appear or to show an
increase in their amplitude can be found from equations 2.3 and 2.8. From these equations
it can be seen that the fault related frequency components depends on the rotational speed
of the motor and its slip. The rotational speed was acquired using the measured values
from the load driver and the encoder connected to the load (generator). The measured
rotational speed and the motor’s slip,that can be calculated using equation 4.1 can be
found in in Appendix A in tables A.1 and A.2 respectively.
slip = Reference speed −Rotational speed
Reference speed
(4.1)
The fundamental frequency component illustrated in ﬁgures 4.2 and 4.3 is calculated based
on the supply frequency set from the converter and the corresponding reference speed of
the motor from the following expression:
ffundamental = reference speed ∗PP
60
(4.2)
Where PP is the number of pole pairs of the induction machine. For the case of 200 rpm,
the fundamental frequency was calculated to be 6.667 Hz.
31
==PAGE:44==
4. Experimental results for single point defects
It should be noted that the accuracy of the measurements of the rotational speed is of
great signiﬁcance since the expected frequencies directly relates to it. In all conducted
experiments a mean value of the rotational speed is used due to the oscillating nature
of the value, with and average standard ±2 rpm. Furthermore, based on the the design
guide of the FC 3021the encoder input accuracy has a maximum error of 0.05 % of full
scale which corresponds to 0.73 rpm, while the open loop control speed accuracy is ±8
rpm (30 −4000 rpm). The predicted frequency components related to the inner raceway
bearing fault with k = 1, 2, 3, ..., 10 in equation 2.8 are presented in the table 4.1. The (+)
and (-) signs indicate the corresponding signs in these equations for the calculated values
of these frequency components
Table 4.2 includes all frequency components found in the current spectrum with a value
within the range of ± 1.5 rpm from the predicted ones which can be found in table 4.1
and are noted in a red font. The diﬀerence in values is connected to the value of rotational
frequency that was used in the calculation of the values in table 4.1. The maximum
increase in their value is almost 5 dB while its mean value is around 2.5 dB. If this increase
is translated into absolute values it corresponds to around 1.8 mA and 0.9 mA respectively.
All the components presented in table 4.2 do exist both in healthy operation and under
faulty conditions. Although their values are above the sensitivity level of the equipment
used in the experiment, they are below the predetermined accuracy level. This classiﬁes
them close the accuracy limit of the current clamp (3.2) and can be considered as noise.
However, if the spectrum of the stator current is analyzed it can be noticed that due to
the background noise level, some components can be covered in one of the phases while
the same does not apply for the others.
Table 4.1. Predicted frequency components related to the induced inner raceway bearing fault
@200 rpm-10 N.m.
Predicted frequency (Hz)
Inner
Raceway
Outer
Raceway
Ball
Cage
k
(+)
(-)
(+)
(-)
(+)
(-)
(+)
(-)
1
24.47
11.14
17.66
4.33
19.44
6.10
7.89
5.45
2
42.28
28.95
28.65
15.32
32.21
18.88
9.11
4.22
3
60.09
46.75
39.65
26.31
44.98
31.65
10.33
3.00
4
77.89
64.56
50.64
37.31
57.75
44.42
11.55
1.78
5
95.70
82.36
61.64
48.30
70.52
57.19
12.77
0.56
6
113.50
100.17
72.63
59.30
83.30
69.96
14.00
0.66
7
131.31
117.98
83.62
70.29
96.07
82.73
15.22
1.88
8
149.12
135.78
94.62
81.28
108.84
95.51
16.44
3.11
9
166.92
153.59
105.61
92.28
121.61
108.28
17.66
4.33
10
184.73
171.39
116.61
103.27
134.38
121.05
18.88
5.55
1https://www.danfoss.com/en/
32
==PAGE:45==
4. Experimental results for single point defects
Table 4.2. Current spectrum components which coincide with the predicted fault related
frequencies @200 rpm-10 N.m.
Frequency
components
Healthy
Operation
Stage 1
Fault
Stage 2
Fault
Stage 3
Fault
Stage 4
Fault
(Hz)
Magnitude(dB)
Cage related
3
-55.9
-53.76
-52.49
-61.16
-53.63
10.3
-53.82
-50.49
-50.97
-52.41
-53.48
12.8
-55.12
-58.28
-55.39
-55.83
-55.04
Ball related
18.95
-66.69
-64.34
-61.83
-61.83
-63.82
32.3
-66.48
-77.62
-64.76
-64.76
-66.95
Inner
Raceway
related
46.65
-46.65
-45.61
-46.35
-46.65
-45.77
83
-61.38
-64.12
-63.05
-60.43
-62.67
113.3
-62.73
-62.73
-62.82
-63.45
-63.35
153.3
-68.34
-68.37
-68.58
-67.43
-67.57
166.6
-67.3
-65.55
-65.55
-67.3
-66.03
186
-79.99
-77.37
-79.79
-76.48
-81.78
As an example, the current spectrum for phases A and B are presented in ﬁgures 4.2 and
4.3 respectively. In the two ﬁgures the diﬀerence in the background noise level is obvious.
While in the ﬁrst ﬁgure the current spectrum of the faulty signal has a lower background
noise level the opposite happens in phase B. The zoomed details in each image corresponds
to the same components related to the fault. They are a result of the combinations of
equations 2.5 and 2.8 for k=19 and k=92 respectively. While in phase A these components
are not clearly visible due to the noise level diﬀerence in phase B, they show a larger
increase in magnitude that suggests that they can be used as fault indicators.
Figure 4.2. Phase A current spectrum with fault-related frequency components in detail
33
==PAGE:46==
4. Experimental results for single point defects
Figure 4.3. Phase B current spectrum with fault-related frequency components in detail
4.1.2
700 rpm - 10 N.m.
The next case presented is for a motor speed of 700 rpm and 10 N.m. load. Table A.3
presents the predicted frequencies related to the fault calculated again from the formulas
that describe the fault signature in the vibrations and current spectrum.
As it can
be observed from table A.4 in Appendix A, the frequencies that match the predicted
components for k = 1, 2, 3, ..., 10 in equation 2.8 show a small increase which cannot relate
them directly to the fault, due to the fact that this increase could be considered as noise
as in the previous case. However, there is a component which appears only in stage 2 and
stage 3 faults which also shows an increase in magnitude with the severity of the faults.
Furthermore, it must be noted that besides the ﬁrst ten terms of the equation 2.8 that
describes the signature of each fault in the current, there are components corresponding to
higher values of the integer parameter k in the same equation. The component at 73.35 Hz
(k=22, cage related) for example shows a magnitude increase of 8.5 dB between healthy
operation and operation under stage 4 bearing fault. Another example of components
which appear only in faulty conditions are the one at 161.8 Hz (k=42, cage related) that
have an increase of 12 dB. Table 4.3 shows four components that appear to increase
signiﬁcantly compared to those described in table A.4, always by considering that the noise
level in that area of the spectrum is around -87 dB.
34
==PAGE:47==
4. Experimental results for single point defects
Table 4.3. Frequency components appearing only in faulty conditions,
Frequency
Component (Hz)
Healthy
Operation
Stage 4
fault
Value of k in the
current equation
Magnitude in dB
176.5
-
-76.03
35(+)
210
-83.29
-77.48
53(-)
276.4
-
-71.85
68(-)
323.1
-
-73.07
68 (+)
They are close to the predicted values found from equation 2.8 and the value of k is also
shown in the same table ((+) and (-) indicate which sign is used for their calculation in
the previous equation). These are not the only components that appear to show a larger
increase compared to those in table A.4 or appear only under faulty conditions. The
higher the frequency component, the lower its value level, suggesting that its distance from
the accuracy level increases. The more the value of a component moves further from the
accuracy level, the less reliable it is to be consider as an indicator for the fault. For cases
though where the increase is larger than the accuracy limit of the current clamps (2 mA),
all corresponding components can be considered as fault indicators.
4.1.3
1400 rpm - 10 N.m.
The last case that is going to be presented for a load of 10 N.m. is for 1400 rpm which is
the highest speed that the motor has been tested in. Based on the speed the fundamental
harmonic is, the predicted frequency components are presented in Appendix A in table
A.5. Figure 4.4 presents part of the spectrum, in this area it can be noticed that the noise
baseline of the faulty signal is around 4-5 dB bigger in comparison with the healthy one.
Four components are presented in the ﬁgure that are close to the predicted (vertical red and
blue lines). This diﬀerence in the values of those components can be considered acceptable
when the error in the rotational frequency is considered. Two of these components appear
only under faulty conditions, while those at 446.2 and 463.3 Hz both have an increase of
about 5 dB. The same apllies for the area between the 5th and 7th harmonic as it can be
seen in ﬁgure 4.6.
35
==PAGE:48==
4. Experimental results for single point defects
445
450
455
460
465
Frequency (Hz)
-96
-94
-92
-90
-88
-86
-84
-82
Magnitude (dB)
(V/f) control @1400rpm-10Nm
Healthy operation
Under stage 4 fault
expected cage related frequency components (+)
expected cage related frequency components (-)
X: 446.2
Y: -85.58
X: 446.3
Y: -89.64
X: 452.8
Y: -85.65
X: 452.6
Y: -86.56
X: 463.3
Y: -86.09
X: 463.4
Y: -90.84
Figure 4.4. Current spectrum in detail around 455 Hz @1400 rpm - 10 N.m
Another thing that was noticed in the stator current spectrum was the appearance of even
harmonics especially the 2nd,4th and 8th. The analysis of the induced EMF and sinusoidal
currents stems from the assumption of a purely sinusoidal waveform. This does not apply
in practice, where deviations from this idealistic picture exist. Speciﬁcally for the case of
even harmonics, the ﬂux wave shape presents a half-wave symmetry. where T is the period
of the supply sine waveform, even harmonics cannot exist in the current and thus cannot
be visible in its Fourier spectrum. Their appearance in the current spectrum suggests a
non-symmetrical air-gap ﬂux, which in turns means a ﬂuctuating air-gap. These harmonics
can be predicted using equations 2.4 and 2.8 and are related to the bearing balls or from
the formulas for eccentricity faults in induction machines [20]. Since these harmonics
exist both in healthy operation and under fault, and additionally their increase under
fault can be considered negligible, they can be explained from eccentricity. After inducing
the faults the bearings were replaced in the test motor in the lab and the two motors
where aligned within 0.5 mm. Subsequently, apart from a possible inherent eccentricity of
the manufacturing process, some eccentricity may has been introduced from the bearing
replacement procedure.
36
==PAGE:49==
4. Experimental results for single point defects
275
280
285
290
295
300
305
310
315
Frequency (Hz)
-90
-88
-86
-84
-82
-80
Magnitude (dB)
(V/f) control @1400rpm-10Nm
Healthy operation
Under stage 4 fault
expected cage related frequency components (+)
expected cage related frequency components (-)
X: 276.6
Y: -82.77
X: 276.2
Y: -85.08
X: 276.5
Y: -87.78
X: 279.7
Y: -85.27
X: 292.8
Y: -85.63
X: 296.4
Y: -85.82
X: 307
Y: -86.3
X: 313.1
Y: -86.11
Figure 4.5. Current spectrum in detail between 5th and 7th harmonic @1400 rpm - 10 N.m
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Frequency (Hz)
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Magnitude (dB)
(V/f) control @1400rpm-10Nm
Healthy operation
Under stage 4 fault
Accuracy level
Sensitivity level
X: 46.65
Y: -9.175
X: 93.35
Y: -55.33
X: 186.6
Y: -65.91
X: 373.4
Y: -66.09
Figure 4.6. Even harmonics in the current spectrum @1400 rpm - 10 N.m
Based on the results not being consistent with the severity of the fault, it appears that
there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the two initial faults induced in the bearings
(stage 2 and stage 4). Furthermore if the spectrum of the two faults is compared, it can be
noticed that the noise level in the current does not have a signiﬁcant diﬀerence. This can
be seen in ﬁgure4.7.
37
==PAGE:50==
4. Experimental results for single point defects
100
200
300
400
500
600
Frequency (Hz)
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
Magnitude (dB)
(V/f) control @1400rpm-10Nm
Under stage 2 fault
Under stage 4 fault
Accuracy level
Sensitivity level
X: 46.65
Y: -9.175
Figure 4.7. Comparison of the stator current spectrum for operation under stage 2 and stage 4
faults
The noise baseline of the two signals is almost identical, with the stage 2 fault being slightly
noisier than stage 4 fault. A comparison with the noise level of the healthy signal (B.1)
may imply that the intended severity of the faults was not achieved. However the severity
of the faults as well as their degradation is going to be validated also based on the photos
showing the bearings disassembled (Appendix A, ﬁgure 4.12), while their parts are going
to be illustrated separately at the end of this chapter.
4.1.4
Comparison of the current spectrum for the same motor speed
between diﬀerent loads
After investigating how the speed aﬀects the detection of the bearing faults in the spectrum
of the stator current, the same must be done for the eﬀect that the load will have on the
detection. Thus, the results for diﬀerent loads at the same speed are going to be presented.
Figures 4.8 and 4.9 illustrate the diﬀerences between the current spectrum under healthy
operation and under stage 4 fault for 0, 20 and 35 N.m corresponding to 0, 55.8 and 97.6
%.
38
==PAGE:51==
4. Experimental results for single point defects
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
370
380
Frequency (Hz)
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
Magnitude (dB)
(V/f) control @1400rpm-10Nm
0 N.m.
20 N.m.
35 N.m.
Accuracy level
Sensitivity level
Figure 4.8. Current spectrum (in detail) comparison for 0, 55.8 and 97.6 % load @1400 rpm
under healthy operation
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
370
380
Frequency (Hz)
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
Magnitude (dB)
(V/f) control @1400rpm-10Nm
0 N.m.
20 N.m.
35 N.m.
Accuracy level
Sensitivity level
Figure 4.9. Current spectrum (in detail) comparison for 0, 55.8 and 97.6 % load @1400 rpm
under stage 4 fault
Figures 4.8 and 4.9 depict an area of the current spectrum ranging from 280-380 Hz for
healthy operation (4.8) and for a stage 4 fault (4.9). This area was selected intentionally
in order to show clearly the diﬀerences which occur with a rise on the load of the motor.
39
==PAGE:52==
4. Experimental results for single point defects
As it can be noticed, for the case of a load of 20 N.m., more components appear in the
frequency content of the stator current and the same applies for 35 N.m.. However similar
allocation of frequency components occur both in healthy operation and when the fault
has been introduced in the test motor. Further conclusions can be derived by a comparison
of zero load example and with 97.6% load between the healthy and faulty operating state
for speed equal to 1400 rpm.
Table 4.4 lists the components which were found to increase in magnitude both in no load
and 97.6 % load test. The selection of the speed and loads was intentional due to the
fact that the results are more prominent in the highest testing as well as in the lower and
upper limit of the load testing range. It can be noticed that, while in both cases there are
components that whose magnitude increase in faulty operation compared to the healthy in
the test with 35 N.m. there are components that appear only in faulty conditions. It can
be also noticed that the components are below the accuracy level calculated from equation
3.1, thus the reliability of the measurements is not high. However, the lower level of the
increase of these components whether they were present in the healthy state or appear
only under faulty conditions, is 5 dB (equal to 2 mA) which are more than the accuracy
error of the used current clamps.
Table 4.4. Fault related frequency components @ 1400 rpm for 0% and 97.6% load
Frequency
(Hz)
Healthy operation
Stage 4 fault
k
Location
Magnitude in dB
0 N.m. load
0.18
-68.88
-65.36
-1
ball
153.1
-76.77
-74.42
+12
cage
283.3
-88.26
-83.23
-37
cage
350
-94.47
-87.5
+34
cage
420
-89.16
-85.46
+42
cage
446
-115
-85.84
+45
cage
35 N.m. load
23.88
-63.49
-56.03
-8
cage
124.8
-
-71.13
+9
cage
146.6
- 73.83
-65.67
-22
cage
151.1
-82.51
-72.77
-23
cage
153.4
- 70.75
-65.94
-26
cage
180.04
-
-75.53
+23
cage
246.8
- 77.21
-69.67
-11
cage
453.1
-
-79.66
-11
ball
841.2
-
-85.33
-102
cage
862.8
-
-87.63
-20
ball
980
-
-88.65
-118
cage
40
==PAGE:53==
4. Experimental results for single point defects
4.2
VVC+ control
In this section the diﬀerences between the (V/f) and how VVC+ control will be presented.
Also how they can aﬀect the stator’s spectrum and subsequently inﬂuence the detection
of bearing faults. An example of the measurements will help to better understand of the
signature of bearing faults in the stator’s current when the motor is controled via the
VVC+ mode. Figures B.2 and B.3 present the current spectrum for the case of 1100 rpm
and 35 N.m., both for using the VVC+ and (V/f) control.
By tracking the fundamental harmonic in both cases, it can be noticed that, although for
the case of (V/f) the fundamental can be found at 33.35 Hz corresponding to a speed equal
to 1000.5 rpm that is not the case for the VVC+ control. The fundamental frequency which
appears in ﬁg B.3 corresponds to a speed of 1032 rpm. This can be explained by considering
the characteristics of the VVC+ control. As mentioned in section 3.5 the voltage and the
current are constantly compared to their reference values and the model of the motor is
updated. Since in (V/f)control the measured rotational frequency for a reference value of
1000 rpm at 35 N.m. is 969 rpm (table A.1) VVC+ control counterbalances this reduction
in speed by increasing the reference speed, in order for the rotational speed to reach the
requirements of the application (for this case a speed of 1000 rpm).
Table 4.5 lists the predicted frequency components that appear in the current spectrum of
the motor. It should be noted that all components located in the spectrum are not present
in the healthy operation. All components listed show an increase of more than 8 dB from
the average noise level of the part of the spectrum in which they are located. Nevertheless,
the magnitude of this components are below the established accuracy level which decreases
their reliability.
Table 4.5. Predicted frequency components that appear in the stator current spectrum with VVC+
control @1000 rpm - 35 N.m
Frequency
(Hz)
Healthy operation
Stage 4 fault
k
Location
Magnitude dB
130.2
-
-64.83
+15
cage
194.8
-
-77.32
-36
cage
218.9
-
-76.46
+39
cage
245.2
-
-78.91
-44
cage
336.6
-
-74.09
-4
inner r.
365.3
-
-72.07
+52
cage
614.3
-
83.81
-102
cage
707.2
-
-88.69
-8
inner r.
829.5
-
-81.3
+125
cage
836.1
-
-86.83
+126
cage
41
==PAGE:54==
4. Experimental results for single point defects
4.3
PAS Ampliﬁer
The last part of the investigation for the single point defects includes the use of a quadrant
ampliﬁer during the experiment. After the disconnection of the VLT drive the test motor
was connected to the ampliﬁer. The load machine (generator) was still driven from its own
VLT drive with torque control. The type of control that the ampliﬁer provides is open
loop (V/f) control and it was achieved by setting the desired frequency and the RMS value
of the corresponding supply voltage based on the ratio (V/f) which is derived from the
nominal values of the motor. Due to the mode of operation the ampliﬁer required the load
machine to work as a motor in this case thus the slip is negative in this case. Of course the
the range of the rotational speed was the same as with the frequency converter due to the
fact that the slip relies on the load. Due to the negative slip some harmonics that depend
on the slip have "shifted" around the basic harmonics of the current which is illustrated in
ﬁgures B.4 and B.5 in the Appendix section.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Frequency (Hz)
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Magnitude (dB)
(V/f) control @1100rpm-20Nm
healthy operation
under stage 4 bearing fault
accuracy level
sensitivity level
X: 36.65
Y: -8.12
Figure 4.10. Current spectrum with the use of PAS @1100 rpm - 20 N.m.
Figure 4.10 depicts the level of noise in the spectrum of the current under healthy operation
and under stage 4 bearing fault. It is visible that both signals have almost the same
noise level. The frequency components that appear to rise in the stator current spectrum
with the ampliﬁer are listed in the table 4.6. The number of predicted components which
correspond to the existing ones is larger than those present in the current spectrum for the
same speed and load with the use of the VLT drive, which are presented in the Appendix
section in table A.6. It can also be observed that the increase in the magnitude of these
frequencies has an average value of 3 dB apart from the last which increases for more than
6 dB. Thus, these components despite the fact that correspond to the predicted ones can’t
be used as indications of the fault due to the fact that they are below the accuracy error
of the measuring equipment.
42
==PAGE:55==
4. Experimental results for single point defects
Table 4.6. Predicted frequency components that appear in the stator current spectrum with PAS
ampliﬁer @1100 rpm - 20 N.m
Frequency
(Hz)
Healthy operation
Stage 4 fault
k
Location
Magnitude dB
23.3
-62.55
-59.33
18
cage
170
- 82.62
-79.76
-36
cage
185.3
-65.16
-66.99
+4
ball
186.2
-69.8
-67.99
+21
cage
243.3
-
-84.17
+29
cage
259.5
-64.19
-63.54
+6
ball
260.5
- 71.73
-68.91
-8
ball
396.6
-78.76
-74.95
+61
cage
408.1
- 90.11
-83.76
+10
ball
4.4
Visual inspection of the defected bearings after the
experiment
Following the investigation of the single point defects, it was decided to visually inspect
the two defected bearings after the completion of the experiment. The purpose of that is
to acquire a relative overall view regarding the degradation of the fault. Due to the fact
that the manufacturing process of a ball bearing (shortly described in ﬁgure 4.11) is a
quite complex procedure, it is not easy to disassemble a bearing. The same steps need to
be counter-followed in order to separate the bearing parts.
Figure 4.11. Short description of the ball bearing manufacturing process, adapted from SKF
Due to lack of equipment in order to accomplish the dismantling of a bearing following the
opposite procedure from the manufacturing process, it was decided to cut the two bearings
43
==PAGE:56==
4. Experimental results for single point defects
with an electrical cutter. The result is presented in ﬁgure 4.12.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.12. Pictures of the bearing parts used, after the completion of the experiments. On the
left are the inner raceways used and on the right the corresponding balls. On the
top are the parts used for the stage 1 and 2 faults whereas on the bottom are parts
used for stage 3 and 4 faults.
Figures a and b in 4.12 show the degradation of the bearing used to simulate stage 1 and
2 bearing faults, while ﬁgures c and d refer to the bearing used in stage 3 and 4 bearing
faults. The visual inspection of the two bearing reveals that the two cavities located in the
the inner raceway of the bearings have not degraded to a point that the degradation could
be visually distinguished. Furthermore, the balls do not appear to have any scratched or
marks from the their contact with the drilled surface of the inner raceway. Keeping in
mind that these conclusions are based only in visual inspection of the bearing parts, it can
be derived that in order for a bearing fault to degrade, the motor has to operate for longer
time than it had.
44
==PAGE:57==
5
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS FOR
GENERALIZED ROUGHNESS FAULTS
5.1
Investigation of generalized roughness faults
As mentioned in section 2.3.2 generalized roughness faults are the most common in real
applications and they do not have a speciﬁc signature neither on vibrations nor in the
motor’s current, making their detection more challenging. Within the context of this
project ten diﬀerent data-sets were acquired for generalized roughness faults. This was
done in order to allow the fault to evolve, then observe a possible connection of the fault
with speciﬁc components. Furthermore, since the iron ﬁllings mixed with the grease came
in contact with all the parts of the bearing, it was investigated whether they have aﬀected
any particular bearing part enough to observe its signature in the motor’s current. The
acquired results were post-processed using the same methods as for the single point defects.
Initially FFT was applied in the stator’s current in order to produce its spectrum. It
can be noticed that the generalized fault had an increase the noise level of the signal [36].
Figure 5.1 presents the spectrum for operation at 400 rpm and under a load of 20 N.m., to
illustrate this increase in the noise level.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Frequency (Hz)
-160
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Magnitude (dB)
(V/f) control @400rpm-20Nm
healthy operation with V/f control
under generalized roughness fault with V/f control
accuracy level
sensitivity level
X: 13.35
Y: -7.577
Figure 5.1. Generalized roughness bearing fault compared to healthy operation in terms of the
frequency content of the stator current
Components related to the bearing balls but also for the cage where present, suggesting
45
==PAGE:58==
5. Experimental results for generalized roughness faults
degradation. Although present, the magnitude of those components does not constitute as
a deﬁnitive indicator for the presence of a fault. Table 5.1 lists several components that
either appear only after the fault was induced or they presented an increase compared to
the healthy operation.
Table 5.1. Frequency components related to single point defects which appear in the current
spectrum for generalized roughness
Frequency
component (Hz)
Healthy
operation
Generalized
Roughness
k
Location
Magnitude in dB
0 N.m. load
53.3
-71.06
-67.83
-16
cage
65.65
-70.45
-21
cage
91.25
-86.54
-74.86
+ 42
cage
133.3
-85.9
-78.24
- 59
cage
143.5
-84.63
-79.1
-63
cage
222
-88.06
-82.32
+16
ball
489.7
-96.94
-88.94
+191
cage
613
-95.82
-84.79
-46
ball
20 N.m. load
5.2
-52.79
-49.37
-3
cage
37.8
-72.13
-69.68
+4
ball
81.7
-80.6
-28
cage
84.05
-79.32
- 29
cage
113.4
-83.51
-78.16
+41
cage
166.3
-86.85
-81.25
+12
ball
216.2
-87.75
-83.83
+18
ball
228.9
-90.8
+19
ball
293.6
-101.3
-92.39
+22
ball
5.2
Short-Time Fourier Transform
For the duration of this project, the current was measured during the motor’s steady state,
although the stator’s current is a non stationary signal. Due to this, it was decided to use
a time-frequency signal analysis method in order to examine if there are characteristics
in the signal that transform in time and if those are related to the bearing faults. For
this reason, Short-Time Fourier Transform (STFT) was employed, that can provide a
time-frequency representation of the signal.
The characteristics of bearing faults are reﬂected in the stator current as amplitude
modulation and as phase modulations. The amplitude modulations occur when the bearing
is under failure which will force the rotor to move along the radial direction. This in
turn, causes air-gap ﬂuctuations causing characteristic frequencies to rise in the current
spectrum with the form of amplitude modulation [37]. Phase modulation occurs due to
the fact that a damaged bearing creates periodic pulse forces on the rotor, which result in
torque ﬂuctuations that create frequency components in the current in the form of phase
modulations [38, 39]. The same signal can have both mono and multi-component features,
both of which can be proven with the use of algebraic identities [40] and with numerical
time-frequency representations. Furthermore, there are cases where a mono-component
46
==PAGE:59==
5. Experimental results for generalized roughness faults
signal can be non-stationary while multi-component signals are stationary. This suggests
that a signal can have both stationary and non-stationary characteristics.
Thus it is necessary to present results of the STFT computed using diﬀerent window
lengths. A short window can provide a satisfactory time resolution, while the frequency
resolution is poorer and insuﬃcient to separate components with frequencies close to
each other. Whereas a large window in the computation of the STFT’s spectrogram may
achieve a high frequency resolution, but at the cost of not illustrating the modulation
of the signal in time[40]. Furthermore, diﬀerent window shapes are suitable for diﬀerent
uses. For example, the Kaiser window is suitable for resolving frequency components with
frequencies close to each other but of diﬀerent magnitudes. A Gaussian window is applied
in the analysis of transient signal, while a Hamming window can be more suitable for
narrow-band signals.
By considering these properties while using the STFT to analyze the stator current, two
diﬀerent windows where used (Kaiser, Gaussian, Hamming) and three diﬀerent window
lengths were tested. From these three windows that were tested only the Kaiser provided
acceptable results due to its property to resolve neighboring frequency components, while
the other two were causing distortion to the signals.
Considering what it was discussed in 5.2, two diﬀerent window lengths where tested for
the case of 400 rpm and a load of 20 N.m. The window type that was used was Kaiser
window and it was applied with a length equal to:
• 3 · Ns for a short window
• 15 · Ns for a long window
where Ns is the number of recorded samples per second, based on the sampling frequency
of the equipment used ( (fs = 51.2kHz). The short window is large enough not to cause
any undesired distortion to the current spectrogram, while the larger window is smaller
than the the theoretical largest window that suggests that at least two overlaps should
occur in order for the STFT to have suﬃcient results.
The spectrograms in ﬁgures B.6 and B.7 correspond to the healthy and faulty operation
respectively. These where produced using a kaiser window with a length of 15 · Ns and
show three of the components that appeared to show an increase in the FFT. For the case
where the window is large, a better localization in frequency is achieved, thus the values of
the components marked in the spectrogram are close to those from the FFT. Figure B.6
shows the values of the same components under healthy operation which are the value of
the noise level at the area that the component is present. Figures B.8 and B.9 show the
spectrogram of the stator current computed with a use of a much shorter window. Hence
the localization in time is better with the cost of poorer frequency resolution. That’s the
reason of the larger diﬀerences in the values of the components magnitude, when comparing
the spectrograms with two diﬀerent window lengths. However still two of the components,
namely those at 84.05 and 228.9 Hz still maintain the same magnitude diﬀerence between
the healthy and faulty operating conditions.
Subsequently, an example of a higher speed is presented in order to see also the behaviour
of a generalized fault in more extreme conditions. The case of 1400 rpm at 20 N.m. load
47
==PAGE:60==
5. Experimental results for generalized roughness faults
is selected. In ﬁgure 5.2 the stator’s current spectrum is depicted. It can be observed that
the noise level of the faulty signal is slightly lower than in the healthy operation.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Frequency (Hz)
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
Magnitude (dB)
(V/f) control @1400rpm-20Nm
healthy operation with V/f control
under generalized roughness fault with V/f control
accuracy level
sensitivity level
X: 46.65
Y: -7.3
Figure 5.2. Current spectrum of the stator’s current under generalized roughness bearing fault
@1400 rpm - 20 N.m.
Table 5.2 includes four frequency components related to single point defects which are
present in the frequency content of the stator current of them motor when operating under
generalized roughness bearing fault. Even though generalized roughness do not have a
signature that can be described from the equations of single point defects, there are some
components related to a fault in one of the bearing parts which could mean that the fault
has began to aﬀect these parts.
Table 5.2. Frequency components related to single point defects present in the spectrum of the
current under generalized roughness bearing fault.
Frequency
(Hz)
Healthy operation
Stage 4 fault
k
Location
Magnitude in dB
146.7
-75.11
-69.51
+22
cage
346.9
-67.01
-59.22
+45
cage
553.9
-81.51
-71.89
+11
ball
647.2
-83.68
-75.67
-79
cage
48
==PAGE:61==
6
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The objective of this thesis was to investigate bearing faults in induction machines driven
with frequency converters. Understanding the nature of each fault, induce them in the
bearings, familiarize with the measuring equipment and learning how to use frequency
converters were some of the milestones that had to be followed. Furthermore learning
the geometry of the induction machine and participating in the process of changing the
bearings inside the machines were valuable lesson that were acquired throughout this
project. The main idea was to evaluate existing methods of bearing fault detection through
the stator current of the machine. The methods provided results that are in accordance
with the theoretical background of bearing fault detection.
6.1
Summary
Two diﬀerent fault categories were investigated, namely single point defects and generalized
roughness. The ﬁrst category reﬂects on the vibrations of the machine and subsequently in
the stator’s current with speciﬁc components reveal in the current spectrum and described
from the equations 2.2-2.8. As far as generalized roughness faults are concerned, it is more
diﬃcult to detect them due to the fact that they don’t have a speciﬁc signature and they
create broadband components in both vibrations and current.
In order to create the single point defect the inner ring of two bearings was drilled inducing
an artiﬁcial scratch, so the fault would be controlled. In order to comply with the objective
of the thesis and examine faults of diﬀerent severity 2 new intermediate faults in terms of
severity were created by reinserting the grease in the bearings which was initially removed.
Subsequently the bearings were inserted in the test motor and current measurements were
acquired. Two methods were used for obtain information about the fault signature on the
stator’s current. The ﬁrst was Fast Fourier transform (FFT) which revealed he frequency
content of the current. Following the literature and the theoretical background some
of the predicted components, which describe single point defects, some of the predicted
components were detected. After completing the post-processing it can be concluded that
not all of the predicted components appear in the spectrum of the current. Furthermore,
only a small percentage show signiﬁcant increase in order to be able to validate their
detection. Considering the accuracy and sensitivity level of the measuring equipment
the majority of the components increase within those limits which reduces the reliability
of the measurements. In addition, the measured components do not necessarily show a
consistency with the severity of the fault, meaning that their magnitude does not rise as
the fault gets more severe. These frequency components depend on the slip of the machine,
which results in a shifting through the frequency spectrum as the speed of motor changes.
The operation of the test motor was tested with two types of control. Scalar (V/f) control
49
==PAGE:62==
6. Summary and Conclusions
which was part of the main objectives of this Thesis and voltage vector control (VVC+),
both in open loop mode. Both control types aﬀected the experimental process with its
diﬀerent characteristics. As an example can be mentioned that due to the characteristics
of (V/f) control and the fact that both machines were air cooled, when the motor was
controlled with (V/f) and for high loads the current was measured only above 700 rpm.
At the last part of the investigation of single point defects an ampliﬁer was used to drive
the test motor in order to avoid the switching frequencies of the driver.
6.2
Conclusions and Observations
Initially, it has to be mentioned that an excessive noise was noticed during the operation
under fault in both single point defect and generalized roughness case. In single point defect
faults a diﬀerence was noticed when the grease was reinserted in the bearing, while the
noise between stage 2 and 4 was not distinguishable. As far as the noise under generalized
roughness fault is concerned was much more extreme compared to single point defects.
Based on the results that were acquired, it can be concluded that even though not all of the
components which appear in the current spectrum show a signiﬁcant magnitude increase
under faulty operation, there are some which validate the predicted components from the
theoretical formulas. In order to locate them all three phases should be monitored, due
to the fact that the measured current may contain integrated noise, which can originate
from many causes such as the measuring equipment. Since the experimental set-up as all
electrical systems is not an ideal system, this noise may exist in only one phase and thus,
fault related components can be covered from such noise in this particular phase while
they are visible in another one.
The fault-related component’s magnitude rises in such range that they are not limited
neither from the accuracy and sensitivity level of the equipment, nor from the accuracy
error. Furthermore it has been noticed that the higher the speed and the load combination
the more components appear in the spectrum and the higher is their increase. One more
thing that was observed is that, regardless which part of the bearing is the fault located on
it can aﬀect other parts especially the bearing balls and the cage that binds them and keeps
them appropriately distanced. This conclusion emanates from the fact that the majority of
the fault components which are present in the current spectrum are related to the bearing
balls and the bearing cage. At this point it has to be mentioned that the fact in the text
of this Thesis the majority of the comparison were made between healthy operation and
stage 4 bearing fault and only in at 200, 700 and 1400 rpm and at 10 N.m. The reason for
that as mentioned above is that the components do not show any consistency regarding
the severity of the faults and thus, the most severe fault was chosen to be presented. Last
but not least, it was observed that the faults created in the inner raceway of the two test
bearings have not spread in other parts of the bearings, since neither in the balls or in the
cage were found any visible indicators of the evolution of the fault.
Generalized roughness is the second category of bearing faults which due to the fact that it
does not have any speciﬁc signature neither in machines vibrations nor in the current, it is
really diﬃcult to be detected. In order to create such a fault, iron ﬁlings were inserted in a
new bearing before it was placed in the test motor. During this part of the experimental
50
==PAGE:63==
6. Summary and Conclusions
process 10 diﬀerent data-sets of current were acquired in order for the fault to be degraded.
Before each measurement the motor was left operating for a period of 4-5 hours each time.
After post-processing the current measurements, an idea that was followed was that known
components related in single point defects and described from their equations should be
searched in the frequency content of the current. This was followed due to the fact that a
generalized roughness fault can be simulated as multiple single point defects, and that some
of them might be identiﬁed through their signature in the current. This was successfully
implemented and some components related mostly to the bearing faults and the cage have
been found. This can be logically explained from the fact that the iron ﬁlings could have
aﬀected the interior of the bearings. Furthermore, the existence of these components was
veriﬁed also from the Short-Time Fourier (STFT) that was used as an alternate method of
detecting those frequencies.
The predictive maintenance, part of which is the condition monitoring of electric motors
requires continuous or periodical monitoring of the motor’s health in order to be able to
evaluate its operating conditions. Furthermore, The cost of condition monitoring systems
could be decreased if the measured parameters don’t need expensive and invasive measuring
equipment. Especially in the case of frequency converter driven electric motors, parameters
such as the current and voltage are already measured for control and protection of the
motor;s itself. Thus, the cost would be minimum compared to an expensive vibration
sensor.
6.3
Future work
In this Thesis, test were conducted in order to clarify the possibility of detecting bearing
faults through their signature in the stator’s current spectrum. One of the subjects that
can be regarded as work is to explore statistically the possibility of the appearance of
those fault-related components in the current spectrum of the motor by continuously
(or periodically) monitor its condition. Another interesting perspective is to study the
evolution of the faults in more depth, which could relate to the statistical approach of
the fault related frequency components. The test motor should be left to run for even
more time periods, before the current is measured again. This could assist in ascertaining
whether the observed components are present due to the fault or they are related to other
factors. Furthermore a possible consistency of their magnitude and the severity of the fault
could be researched.
The online bearing fault detection is also of great importance, since it can show whether
there is a possibility of early stage bearing faults detection through the stator current.
Naturally such experiment will require large amount of memory and processing power from
the measuring equipment but it could also lead in the formulation of a proﬁle of the fault
progression regarding the period that the fault was detected until the period it needs to be
replaced.
Another aspect which could possibly be researched in the future is the combination of
several parameters such as the voltage and the three phase power, as a possible indicator
for the bearing faults. This of course will require the use of diﬀerent signal processing
tools the exploration of which could also be an area for further research. Analysis of the
51
==PAGE:64==
6. Summary and Conclusions
current in tilled time frequency domain or the development of FFT algorithms with higher
resolution than the simple FFT assisted by speciﬁc ﬁlters.
The experiment should also be repeated with the machine placed in a stable base and
not on a vibrating test bench, as it was the case in this set-up. This would eliminate
any interference from the vibrating test bench which can have an eﬀect in the measured
signals. The research of the behaviour of the motor current under load change could be a
research subject which is quite interesting since it is common in industrial applications,
and could reveal the eﬀect of the load combined with the bearing faults. Last but not least
the research possibilities can be expanded with the use of machines of diﬀerent power and
nameplate parameters.
52
==PAGE:65==
REFERENCES
[1]
E L Bonaldi, Levy Lacerda Oliveira, and Germano Lambert-t. Proposing a Procedure
for the Application of Motor Current Signature Analysis on Predictive Maintenance
of Induction Motors. (June), 2007. doi: 10.13140/RG.2.1.2836.7605.
[2]
R Keith Mobley. An Introduction to Predictive Maintenance (Second Edition). 2002.
ISBN 978-0-7506-7531-4. doi: 10.1016/B978-075067531-4/50018-X.
[3]
Annette Muetze. Bearing Currents in Inverter-Fed AC-Motors. 2003.
[4]
Andrew M. Knight and Sergio P. Bertani. Mechanical fault detection in a
medium-sized induction motor using stator current monitoring. IEEE Transactions
on Energy Conversion, 20(4):753–760, 2005. ISSN 08858969. doi:
10.1109/TEC.2005.853731.
[5]
Fabio Immovilli, Alberto Bellini, Riccardo Rubini, and Carla Tassoni. Diagnosis of
bearing faults in induction machines by vibration or current signals: A critical
comparison. IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, 46(4):1350–1359, 2010.
ISSN 00939994. doi: 10.1109/TIA.2010.2049623.
[6]
Bram Corne, Bram Vervisch, Colin Debruyne, Jos Knockaert, and Jan Desmet.
Comparing MCSA with vibration analysis in order to detect bearing faults - A case
study. Proceedings - 2015 IEEE International Electric Machines and Drives
Conference, IEMDC 2015, pages 1366–1372, 2016. doi:
10.1109/IEMDC.2015.7409240.
[7]
Anders Brandt. ANALYSIS SIGNAL ANALYSIS AND. 2010. ISBN 9780470746448.
[8]
R. Puche-Panadero, M. Pineda-Sanchez, M. Riera-Guasp, J. Roger-Folch,
E. Hurtado-Perez, and J. Perez-Cruz. Improved resolution of the MCSA method via
Hilbert transform, enabling the diagnosis of rotor asymmetries at very low slip. IEEE
Transactions on Energy Conversion, 24(1):52–59, 2009. ISSN 08858969. doi:
10.1109/TEC.2008.2003207.
[9]
Jee Hoon Jung, Jong Jae Lee, and Bong Hwan Kwon. Online diagnosis of induction
motors using MCSA. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, 53(6):1842–1852,
2006. ISSN 02780046. doi: 10.1109/TIE.2006.885131.
[10] Mario Eltabach, Ali Charara, and Isamil Zein. A Comparison of External and
Internal Methods of Signal Spectral Analysis for Broken Rotor Bars Detection in
Induction Motors. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, 51(1):107–121, 2004.
ISSN 02780046. doi: 10.1109/TIE.2003.822083.
[11] H. Douglas, P. Pillay, and A. K. Ziarani. Broken rotor bar detection in induction
machines with transient operating speeds. IEEE Transactions on Energy Conversion,
20(1):135–141, 2005. ISSN 08858969. doi: 10.1109/TEC.2004.842394.
53
==PAGE:66==
References
[12] Z. K. Peng, Peter W. Tse, and F. L. Chu. A comparison study of improved
Hilbert-Huang transform and wavelet transform: Application to fault diagnosis for
rolling bearing. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 19(5):974–988, 2005.
ISSN 08883270. doi: 10.1016/j.ymssp.2004.01.006.
[13] Ian M. Culbert and Wendell Rhodes. Using current signature analysis technology to
reliably detect cage winding defects in squirrel-cage induction motors. IEEE
Transactions on Industry Applications, 43(2):422–428, 2007. ISSN 00939994. doi:
10.1109/TIA.2006.889915.
[14] William T. Thomson and Mark Fenger. Current signature analysis to detect
induction motor faults. IEEE Industry Applications Magazine, 7(4):26–34, 2001.
ISSN 10772618. doi: 10.1109/2943.930988.
[15] S H Kia, H Henao, and G a Capolino. A High-Resolution Frequency Estimation
Method for Three-Phase Induction Machine Fault Detection. IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics, 54(4):2305–2314, 2007. ISSN 0278-0046. doi:
10.1109/TIE.2007.899826.
[16] Alberto Bellini, Fiorenzo Filippetti, Domenico Casadei, Amine Yazidi, and Gerard
Capolino. Monitoring of induction machines currents by high frequency resolution
analysis. Conference Record - IAS Annual Meeting (IEEE Industry Applications
Society), 5(2):2320–2325, 2006. ISSN 01972618. doi: 10.1109/IAS.2006.256865.
[17] Hai Gang Zhang, Sen Zhang, and Yi Xin Yin. A novel improved ELM algorithm for a
realindustrial application. Mathematical Problems in Engineering, 2014, 2014. ISSN
15635147. doi: 10.1155/2014/824765.
[18] Mohd Suﬁan Othman, Mohd Zaki Nuawi, and Ramizi Mohamed. Induction motor
bearing fault detection using hybrid kurtosis-based method. International Journal of
Applied Engineering Research, 10(AUGUST 2015):33452–33456, 2015.
[19] Jason R Stack, Thomas G Habetler, and Ronald G Harley. Fault Classiﬁcation and
Fault Signature Production for Rolling Element Bearings in Electric Machines. IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRY APPLICATIONS, 40(3), 2004. doi:
10.1109/TIA.2004.827454.
[20] Hamid A. Toliyat, Subhasis Nandi, Seungdeog Choi, and Homayoun Meshgin-kelk.
Electric Machines - Modeling Condition Monitoring and Fault Diagnosis. 2013. ISBN
9781420006285. doi: 10.1201/b13008-1.
[21] R. L. Schiltz. Forcing frequency identiﬁcation of rolling element bearings. May 1990.
[22] Robert G. Bartheld, Thomas G. Habetler, and Farrukh Kamran. Motor Bearing
Damage Detection Using Stator Current Monitoring. IEEE Transactions on Industry
Applications, 31(6):1274–1279, 1995. ISSN 19399367. doi: 10.1109/28.475697.
[23] Alan V. Oppenheim, Ronald W. Schafer, and John R. Buck. Discrete Time Signal
Processing (2nd edition), 2008.
54
==PAGE:67==
References
[24] Abdul J. Jerri. The Shannon Sampling Theorem—Its Various Extensions and
Applications: A Tutorial Review. Proceedings of the IEEE, 65(11):1565–1596, 1977.
ISSN 15582256. doi: 10.1109/PROC.1977.10771.
[25] Tsz Kin Hon. Time-Frequency Analysis and Filtering based on the Short-Time
Fourier Transform. 2013.
[26] F.J. Harris. On the use of windows for harmonic analysis with the discrete Fourier
transform. Proceedings of the IEEE, 66(1):51–83, 1978. ISSN 0018-9219. doi:
10.1109/PROC.1978.10837.
[27] Leon Cohen. Time-Frequency Distributions-A Review. Proceedings of the IEEE, 77
(7):941–981, 1989. ISSN 15582256. doi: 10.1109/5.30749.
[28] Olivier Rioul and Martin Vetierli. Wavelets and Signal Processing. pages 14–38, 1991.
[29] W. Sun, G. An Yang, Q. Chen, A. Palazoglu, and K. Feng. Fault diagnosis of rolling
bearing based on wavelet transform and envelope spectrum correlation. Journal of
Vibration and Control, 19(6):924–941, 2013. ISSN 1077-5463. doi:
10.1177/1077546311435348.
[30] Hai Qiu, Jay Lee, Jing Lin, and Gang Yu. Wavelet ﬁlter-based weak signature
detection method and its application on rolling element bearing prognostics. Journal
of Sound and Vibration, 289(4-5):1066–1090, 2006. ISSN 10958568. doi:
10.1016/j.jsv.2005.03.007.
[31] Jing Lin and Liangsheng Qu. Feature extraction based on morlet wavelet and its
application for mechanical fault diagnosis. Journal of Sound and Vibration, 234(1):
135–148, 2000. ISSN 0022460X. doi: 10.1006/jsvi.2000.2864.
[32] Yufeng Zhang, Zhenyu Guo, Weilian Wang, Side He, Ting Lee, and Murray Loew. A
comparison of the wavelet and short-time fourier transforms for Doppler spectral
analysis. Medical Engineering and Physics, 25(7):547–557, 2003. ISSN 13504533. doi:
10.1016/S1350-4533(03)00052-3.
[33] Vibration Analysis deﬁnitions.
http://www.mobiusinstitute.com/site2/default.asp.
[34] Juha Pyrhonen, Tapani Jokinen, Valeria Hrabovcova, and Hanna Niemela. Design of
Rotating Electrical Machines. 2008. ISBN 978-0-470-69516-6.
[35] Jean Claude Trigeassou. Electrical Machines Diagnosis. 2013. ISBN 9781848212633.
doi: 10.1002/9781118601662.
[36] Ahmed A Elfeky, Mahmoud I Masoud, and Ibmhim F El-arabawy Smieee. Signature
Production for Rolling Element Bearings in Induction Motor. pages 0–4, 2007.
[37] Randy R Schoen, Thomas G Habetler, Senior Member, Farrukh Kamran, Student
Member, Robert G Bartheld, and Senior Member. Motor Bearing Damage detection
using stator current monitoring. 31(6):1274–1279, 1995.
55
==PAGE:68==
References
[38] Jean Faucher, Ieee Member, Camichel Bp, Camichel Bp, and Camichel Bp. Indicator
for Bearing Fault Detection in Asynchronous Motors using Stator Current Spectral
Analysis. pages 570–575, 2008.
[39] Martin Bl, Pierre Granjon, Bertrand Raison, and Gilles Rostaing. Models for Bearing
Damage Detection in Induction Motors Using Stator Current Monitoring.
[40] Gavin R Putland and Boualem Boashash. CAN A SIGNAL BE BOTH
MONOCOMPONENT AND MULTICOMPONENT? (2):1–4.
56
==PAGE:69==
A APPENDIX
Table A.1. Measured speed of the test motor in RPM
Load (N.m.) →
0
10
20
30
35
Reference Speed
(RPM) ↓
Measured Motor Speed
(RPM)
100
100
93
83
73
69
200
200
193
183
173
169
300
300
293
283
273
269
400
400
393
383
373
369
500
500
493
483
473
469
600
600
593
583
573
569
700
700
693
683
673
669
800
800
793
783
773
769
900
900
893
883
873
869
1000
1000
993
983
973
969
1100
1100
1093
1083
1073
1069
1200
1200
1193
1183
1173
1169
1300
1300
1293
1283
1273
1269
1400
1400
1393
1383
1373
1369
Table A.2. Slip of the test motor in %
Load (N.m.) →
0
10
20
30
35
Reference Speed ↓
Motor’s slip (%)
100
0
0.07
0.17
0.27
0.31
200
0
0.035
0.085
0.135
0.155
300
0
0.023333333
0.056666667
0.09
0.103333333
400
0
0.0175
0.0425
0.0675
0.0775
500
0
0.014
0.034
0.054
0.062
600
0
0.011666667
0.028333333
0.045
0.051666667
700
0
0.01
0.024285714
0.038571429
0.044285714
800
0
0.00875
0.02125
0.03375
0.03875
900
0
0.007777778
0.018888889
0.03
0.034444444
1000
0
0.007
0.017
0.027
0.031
1100
0
0.006363636
0.015454545
0.024545455
0.028181818
1200
0
0.005833333
0.014166667
0.0225
0.025833333
1300
0
0.005384615
0.013076923
0.020769231
0.023846154
1400
0
0.005
0.012142857
0.019285714
0.022142857
57
==PAGE:70==
A. Appendix
700 rpm - 10 N.m.
Table A.3. Predicted frequency components related to the induced inner raceway bearing fault
@700 rpm-10 N.m.
Predicted frequencies (Hz)
Part of the
bearing
Inner Raceway
Outer Raceway
Ball
Cage
k↓
(+)
(-)
(+)
(-)
(+)
(-)
(+)
(-)
1
87.6024
40.9358
63.0142
16.3476
69.4306
22.7639
27.7423
18.9243
2
151.8715
105.2048
102.6952
56.0285
115.5278
68.8612
32.1513
14.5154
3
216.1406
169.4739
142.3761
95.7094
161.6251
114.9584
36.5603
10.1064
4
280.4097
233.743
182.057
135.3903
207.7223
161.0557
40.9693
5.6974
5
344.6788
298.0121
221.7379
175.0712
253.8196
207.1529
45.3783
1.2884
6
408.9479
362.2812
261.4188
214.7521
299.9168
253.2502
49.7873
3.1206
7
473.2169
426.5503
301.0997
254.4331
346.0141
299.3474
54.1963
7.5296
8
537.486
490.8194
340.7806
294.114
392.1113
345.4447
58.6053
11.9386
9
601.7551
555.0884
380.4616
333.7949
438.2086
391.5419
63.0142
16.3476
10
666.0242
619.3575
420.1425
373.4758
484.3058
437.6392
67.4232
20.7566
Table A.4. Current spectrum components which coincide with the predicted fault related
frequencies @700 rpm-10 N.m.
Frequency
components
Healthy
Operation
Stage 1
Fault
Stage 2
Fault
Stage 3
Fault
Stage 4
Fault
(Hz)
Magnitude(dB)
Cage
11.8
-54.65
-59.04
-60.58
-64.95
-63.45
63.15
-74.86
-82
-71.25
-71.89
-71.47
Ball
69
-74.66
-75.79
-72.86
-73.61
-77.06
115.1
71.76
-72.26
-69.65
-74.28
-73.84
115.6
-71.93
-68.54
-69.38
-69.08
-73.02
161.3
-79.86
-
-79.17
-76.29
-
299.2
-
-
-88.02
-85.63
-86.13
299.7
-66.41
-63.11
-63.11
-63.11
-63.11
438.2
-81.69
-77.89
-77.05
-80.14
-77.95
Inner
Raceway
218.8
-80.43
-75.06
-80.41
-74.73
-76.31
233.3
-83.89
-82.45
-81.59
-79.35
-82.45
344.3
-90.18
-89.74
-89.02
-87.85
-85.83
362.4
-89.74
-85.11
-89.12
-85.11
-88.96
58
==PAGE:71==
A. Appendix
1400 rpm - 10 N.m.
Table A.5. Predicted frequency components related to the induced inner raceway bearing fault
@1400 rpm-10 N.m.
Predicted frequencies (Hz)
Part of the
bearing
Inner
Raceway
Outer
Raceway
Ball
Cage
k↓
(+)
(-)
(+)
(-)
(+)
(-)
(+)
(-)
1
175.9
82.6
126.4866
33.1532
93.03
0.3033
55.5355
37.7978
2
305.2
211.9
206.3065
112.9731
139.3933
46.06
64.4044
28.9289
3
434.5
341.2
286.1264
192.793
185.7566
92.4233
73.2733
20.06
4
563.8
470.5
365.9463
272.6129
232.12
138.7866
82.1422
11.1912
5
693.1
599.7
445.7662
352.4329
278.4833
185.1499
91.0111
2.3223
6
822.3
729
525.5861
432.2528
324.8466
231.5133
99.8799
6.5466
7
951.6
858.3
605.406
512.0727
371.2099
277.8766
108.7488
15.4155
8
1080.9
987.6
685.2259
591.8926
417.5732
324.2399
117.6177
24.2844
9
1210.2
1116.9
765.0458
671.7125
463.9366
370.6032
126.4866
33.1532
10
1339.5
1246.1
844.8657
751.5324
510.2999
416.9666
135.3554
42.0221
1100 rpm - 20 N.m.
Table A.6. Predicted frequency components that appear in the stator current spectrum with (V/f)
control @1100 rpm - 20 N.m
Healthy
Operation
Stage 4
Fault
Frequency
components (Hz)
Magnitude(dB)
0.7
-60.18
-55.5
4.647
-63.65
136.6
-69.63
-74.89
181.1
-66.52
-64.26
263.6
-61.88
-66.03
396.6
-78.76
-74.95
59
==PAGE:72==
B APPENDIX
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Frequency (Hz)
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Magnitude (dB)
(V/f) control @1400rpm-10Nm
Healthy operation
Under stage 4 fault
Accuracy level
Sensitivity level
X: 46.65
Y: -9.175
Figure B.1. Comparison of the stator current spectrum for healthy operation and operation under
stage 4 fault.
60
==PAGE:73==
B. Appendix
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Frequency (Hz)
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Magnitude (dB)
(V/f) control @1400rpm-10Nm
Healthy operation
Under stage 4 fault
Accuracy level
Sensitivity level
X: 33.35
Y: -4.136
Figure B.2. Current spectrum for healthy operation and under stage 4 bearing fault with (V/f)
control @1000 rpm - 35N.m.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Frequency (Hz)
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Magnitude (dB)
VVC+ control @1000rpm-35Nm
Healthy operation
Under stage 4 fault
Accuracy level
Sensitivity level
X: 34.4
Y: -2.85
Figure B.3. Current spectrum for healthy operation and under stage 4 bearing fault with VVC+
control @1000 rpm - 35N.m.
61
==PAGE:74==
B. Appendix
Figure B.4. Current spectrum in detail with the use of the VLT for motor control
Figure B.5. Current spectrum in detail with the use of the Quadrant Ampliﬁer for motor control
62
==PAGE:75==
B. Appendix
Figure B.6. Spectrogram of the Stator current in healthy operation with window length equal to
15*(Number of samples per second)
Figure B.7. Spectrogram of the Stator current under generalized roughness bearing fault with
window length equal to 15*(Number of samples per second)
63
==PAGE:76==
B. Appendix
Figure B.8. Spectrogram of the Stator current in healthy operation with window length equal to
3*(Number of samples per second)
Figure B.9. Spectrogram of the Stator current under generalized roughness bearing fault with
window length equal to 3*(Number of samples per second)
64
==PAGE:77==
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
Write ISBN XX-XXXXX-XX-X (or delete)
