==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
Msc Thesis 
DTU Management Engineering 
Banedanmark 
Interface Management in Railway Projects 
Eva Cuvertoret 
July 2018 
==PAGE:2==
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
3 
 
 
 
 
Interface Management in Railway Projects 
 
 
 
Eva Cuvertoret 
 
 
 
Msc Thesis 
July 2018 
 
 
 
Banedanmark 
& 
DTU Management Engineering 
Technical University of Denmark 
==PAGE:4==
4 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
5 
 
 
Supervisor 
Christian Thuesen 
Associate Professor 
Engineering Systems Division 
Management Engineering 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
Co-Supervisor 
Henrik Sylvan 
Director of DTU Railtech 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
Company Supervisor 
Carlos Ernesto Guillemot Gascón 
Banedanmark 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
6 
 
Abstract 
This thesis takes its point of departure the fact that many of the most expensive mistakes and delays in 
construction projects could be traced back to interface issues (1). Banedanmark acknowledges these 
problems and that the lack of Interface Management between different engineering disciplines leads to 
unnecessary iterations and rework which cause additional costs and delays on projects. 
This thesis aims at investigating the main interface issues present in railway construction projects, 
specifically at Banedanmark. Then, suggestions to improve the current situation are given based on the 
experts’ experiences and relevant literature. 
The first part of the thesis provides a theoretical background based on a literature study. Then, the case 
study is presented with an introduction to the objectives and structure of Banedanmark as well as a brief 
description of its major projects.  
The second part of the thesis consists of the analysis. First, the interface issues are examined, including an 
introduction to the concept of interface issues, the main interface issues according to this research and their 
description. The dynamics around the interface issues are also described. At the end of the analysis, 
suggestions to proactively mitigate the interface issues are proposed. The proactive mitigations consist of 
two types of measures: individual proactive mitigations and proactive strategies. 
At the end, the thesis presents a discussion based on the key findings from the previous parts and the 
conclusions of the thesis.  
 
 
==PAGE:7==
7 
 
Contents 
ABSTRACT 
6 
READER’S GUIDELINE 
11 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
13 
1.1. 
BACKGROUND 
13 
1.2. 
PROBLEM STATEMENT 
13 
1.3. 
PURPOSE OF THE STUDY 
14 
1.4. 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
14 
2. METHODOLOGY 
16 
2.1. 
RESEARCH DESIGN 
16 
2.2. 
DATA COLLECTION METHODS 
17 
2.2.1. 
RESEARCH CLARIFICATION 
17 
2.2.2. 
DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 
17 
2.2.3. 
PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY 
18 
2.2.4. 
DESCRIPTIVE STUDY II 
18 
2.3. 
RESEARCH CONSTRAINTS AND ASSUMPTIONS 
18 
3. LITERATURE BACKGROUND 
20 
3.1. 
COMPLEXITY 
20 
3.1.1. 
SOURCES OF COMPLEXITY 
20 
3.1.2. 
TYPES OF PROJECT COMPLEXITY 
21 
3.1.3. 
HOW TO DEAL WITH COMPLEXITY 
22 
3.2. 
SYSTEMS ENGINEERING (SE) 
22 
3.3. 
INTRODUCTION TO INTERFACE MANAGEMENT (IM) 
23 
3.3.1. 
INTERFACE DEFINITION 
23 
3.3.2. 
TYPES OF INTERFACES 
24 
3.3.3. 
INTERFACE MANAGEMENT (IM) 
24 
3.3.4. 
CAUSES OF CONFLICT: INTERFACE ISSUES 
25 
3.3.5. 
EXAMPLE TO CONCEPTUALIZE INTERFACES 
26 
3.4. 
THE SPECIFIC CASE OF RAILWAY PROJECTS 
27 
3.5. 
COMPLEXITY IN RAILWAY PROJECTS 
27 
3.6. 
INTRODUCTION TO THE INTERFACES IN RAILWAY PROJECTS 
29 
3.6.1. 
TYPES OF INTERFACES 
29 
3.6.2. 
INTERFACE MANAGEMENT 
29 
3.6.3. 
INTERFACE ISSUES IN RAILWAY PROJECTS 
30 
==PAGE:8==
8 
 
3.7. 
SUMMARY 
30 
4. CASE STUDY: BANEDANMARK 
31 
4.1. 
INTRODUCTION 
31 
4.2. 
THE ORGANIZATION 
32 
4.3. 
BANEDANMARK ’S MAIN PROJECTS AND PROGRAMMES 
33 
4.3.1. 
THE SIGNALLING PROGRAMME 
33 
4.3.2. 
THE ELECTRIFICATION PROGRAMME 
34 
4.3.3. 
THE NEW LINE COPENHAGEN-RINGSTED 
34 
4.3.4. 
THE RINGSTED–FEHMARN LINE 
35 
5. ANALYSIS PART I: DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 
37 
5.1. 
INTERFACE ISSUES 
37 
5.1.1. 
INTERFACE ISSUES - DYNAMICS 
37 
5.1.2. 
MAIN INTERFACE ISSUES 
38 
5.2. 
DEPENDENCIES BETWEEN INTERFACE ISSUES 
45 
5.3. 
REACTIVE AND PROACTIVE MITIGATIONS 
46 
6. ANALYSIS PART II: PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY 
49 
6.1. 
INDIVIDUAL PROACTIVE MEASURES 
50 
6.2. 
PROACTIVE STRATEGIES 
54 
6.2.1. 
STRATEGY 1 - INTERFACE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM: A SYSTEMATIC APPROACH 
55 
6.2.2. 
STRATEGY 2 - PROJECT DELIVERY METHODS 
61 
6.2.3. 
STRATEGY 3 - DECISION-MAKING FRAMEWORK 
67 
6.2.4. 
STRATEGY 4 - ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE 
70 
6.3. 
CONCLUSIONS 
73 
7. DISCUSSION 
74 
7.1. 
WHY IS INTERFACE MANAGEMENT SO IMPORTANT IN RAILWAY PROJECTS? 
74 
7.2. 
IMPLICATIONS IN THEORY 
74 
7.3. 
IMPLICATIONS IN PRACTICE: RECOMMENDATIONS FOR BANEDANMARK 
75 
7.4. 
SCOPE AND FRAMEWORK OF PROJECTS 
76 
7.5. 
ARE ALL PROBLEMS IN PROJECTS ORIGINATED AT THE INTERFACES? 
77 
7.6. 
RESEARCH EVALUATION 
77 
7.6.1. 
VALIDITY AND RELIABILITY 
77 
7.6.2. 
GENERALISABILITY 
77 
7.6.3. 
LIMITATIONS 
78 
==PAGE:9==
9 
 
8. CONCLUSION 
80 
8.1. 
KEY FINDINGS: ANSWERING THE RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
80 
8.2. 
GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 
83 
8.3. 
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH 
84 
APPENDIX 1 -  DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 
85 
APPENDIX 2 – DEPENDENCIES BETWEEN INTERFACE ISSUES 
90 
APPENDIX 3 – INDIVIDUAL PROACTIVE MEASURES 
92 
APPENDIX 4 – EXAMPLE OF PROJECT STRUCTURE AND COMPLEXITY 
105 
APPENDIX 5 – INTERVIEW GUIDE AND WORKSHOP METHODOLOGY 
111 
APPENDIX 6 – LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
113 
APPENDIX 7 – LIST OF TABLES AND FIGURES 
114 
REFERENCES 
117 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
10 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
11 
 
Reader’s Guideline 
This short section presents an overview of the thesis outlining the different chapters. Figure 1 presents the 
complete roadmap of the thesis. 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
Introductory section, the problem statement is defined along with its background. A brief introduction to 
Banedanmark is provided and the research scope and context are outlined. The last part presents the 
research questions which are answered throughout the thesis. 
Chapter 2: Methodology 
This chapter describes the applied research methodology, presenting the literature and empirical research 
approaches and how they are applied to the thesis.  
Chapter 3: Literature Background  
This chapter introduces the theoretical background considered relevant for the thesis. Complexity, Systems 
Engineering and Interface management theories are introduced. Then the theories are discussed for the 
specific case of railways.  
Chapter 4: Case Study 
This chapter presents an overview of Banedanmark, the case study. The chapter aims at providing an 
overview of the objectives and structure of Banedanmark as well as a brief description of its major projects.  
Chapters from 1 to 4 correspond to the Research Clarification, which aims at presenting the current 
situation, the problem statement and the research goals. 
Chapter 5: Analysis Part I: Descriptive Study 
The analysis presents the findings of the different stages of this research and it is divided in chapters 5 and 
6.  
Analysis Part I corresponds to the Descriptive study and includes first the state-of-the-art research analysing 
the main interface issues in several sectors and applying the findings to the railway sector. Then, the findings 
from the empirical research are presented. 
Chapter 6: Analysis Part II: Prescriptive Study 
The second part of the analysis corresponds to the prescriptive study and includes the proposal of measures 
and strategies to mitigate the interface issues in railway projects. 
Chapter 7: Discussion 
This chapter discusses the findings presented in chapters 5 and 6 and includes the implications for theory 
and practice and the research evaluation. 
Chapter 8: Conclusion 
In the conclusion, the research questions are answered and summarized and the suggestions for future 
research are presented. 
Chapters 7 and 8 correspond to the Descriptive Study II, which aims at providing research evaluation, 
implications for theory and practice, conclusions and suggestions for future research. 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
12 
 
 
 
Figure 1 - Structure of the thesis 
  
 
 
==PAGE:13==
13 
 
1. Introduction 
This chapter introduces the background and framing of this thesis. The introduction consists of the 
background, the problem statement, the research goals and objectives and the research questions. 
1.1. Background 
Infrastructures play a paramount role in the economic growth of a country (2). Railway construction 
projects involve major capital investments (3). 
Majority of infrastructure projects are affected by time overruns. These overruns vary from few months to 
as high as five or more years, placing the project viability at risk (2). 
The European Court of Auditors carried out an audit on the cost-efficiency and effectiveness of EU co-
funding for high-speed rail infrastructure investments since 2000. The audit assesses the construction costs, 
delays, cost overruns and use of high-speed lines which received investment support. The findings remark 
that cost overruns, construction delays and late entry into operation are a norm instead of an exception (4). 
The report presents a total of 25.1 billion euro of aggregate cost overrun at line level. Some examples are: 
a 76.1% of actual cost overrun in the construction of the Berlin-Munich line, a 26.1% in Rhin-Rhône, 28.1% 
in LGV Est Européenne and a 38.5% in the line Madrid-Barcelona-French Border, among others (4). 
Apart from the cost overruns, delays are also significant: eight of the thirty audited projects were delayed 
at least one year, and five lines (out of the total of ten lines) experienced delays of more than one decade 
(4).  
Some Danish railway construction projects are also subject to the problems introduced above, delays and 
cost overruns. Specifically, Banedanmark acknowledges these challenges. Banedanmark is currently 
upgrading the speed on the main and regional lines, building new lines, electrifying a large part of the 
network and renewing the signalling system on the entire railway network in order to create the railway of 
the future (5). 
1.2. Problem statement 
Historically, the success of a project was defined as getting the job done within the constraints of time, cost 
and scope according to the triple constraints theory (6). In some industries, the size and complexity of the 
projects need more constraints to be considered in order to measure the success or failure of a project.  
In railway projects, as in other multidisciplinary projects, it is necessary to prioritize constraints. Not 
meeting all the success criteria does not indicate that a project was a total failure. The following breakdown 
is used for categorizing the success or failure of projects (7): 
• 
Complete Success: The project met all the success criteria, value was created and all constraints 
were adhered to. 
• 
Partial Success: The project met the success criteria, the client accepted the deliverables, and 
value was created, although one or more of the success constraints were not met. 
• 
Partial Failure: The project was not completed as expected and may have been canceled early in 
the life cycle. However, knowledge and/or intellectual property was created that may be used on 
future projects. 
• 
Complete Failure: The project was abandoned and nothing was learned from the project. 
Numerous projects have resulted in dramatic cost overruns and delays due to interface management issues 
(Nooteboom, 2004). Interfaces are generally considered as the links between different construction 
components, stakeholders and project scopes (8). 
==PAGE:14==
14 
 
Railway construction projects are multidisciplinary projects which require the integration of several 
subsystems and numerous components. Apart from the technical complexities, there are numerous parties 
directly or indirectly involved which create multiple interfaces among the various contractors, suppliers, 
engineering teams for different disciplines, operators, political stakeholders, third parties and the owners. 
When interfaces are not carefully managed, interface issues could occur and lead to unnecessary iterations 
and rework, extra costs and time overruns (9). Consequently, a lack of Interface Management in projects 
may cause difficulties to meet the success constraints or even result in problems after the project is handed 
over (6). Hence, an effective management and coordination of the extensive and diverse nature of interfaces 
throughout the project life cycle is critical to overall project success.  
This thesis takes its point of departure in the fact that many of the most expensive mistakes and delays 
could be traced back to interface issues, as discussed in other studies (1). Banedanmark acknowledges these 
problems and that the lack of IM between different engineering disciplines leads to unnecessary iterations 
and rework which cause additional costs and delays on projects. 
 
1.3. Purpose of the study 
The present master thesis aims at investigating the main interface issues present in railway construction 
projects at Banedanmark. Based on the experts’ experiences and relevant literature, recommendations on 
how Banedanmark should handle interface issues are given.  
The main tasks of this thesis are therefore to:  
• 
Review theory and literature on interfaces and interface issues in order to acquire basic knowledge 
on the study. 
• 
Perform empirical research to identify and understand interface issues in railway construction 
projects and analyze the results. 
• 
Compare the literature review and the empirical study and make a discussion about the findings 
and results. 
• 
Give recommendations on how Banedanmark should mitigate and deal with the interface issues. 
1.4. Research questions 
The problem statement and the research methodology have been used to formulate the Research Questions 
(RQ) that need to be answered for achieving the goals presented in the previous section.  
1. What are the theories to base the research upon in order to address the interface management in 
railway projects? 
a. What are the interfaces?  
2. What are the interface issues likely to occur in future railway projects in Banedanmark? 
a. What are the dynamics surrounding the interface issues? 
3. What could be done to reduce the occurrence and impact of the interface issues? 
4. What are the implications for theory and practice? 
The presented questions are addressed throughout the report. The next chapter (Methodology) describes 
the research methodology used to answer the research questions. 
 
 
The lack of interface management among stakeholders and different engineering disciplines during 
the development of construction projects is causing unnecessary rework, additional costs and delays. 
(1) 
==PAGE:15==
15 
 
 
 
==PAGE:16==
16 
 
2. Methodology 
This chapter presents the research methodology and the research methods used in this study to answer the 
research questions introduced in the previous chapter. 
2.1. Research Design 
The thesis follows as a general approach the Design Research Methodology (DRM). DRM was created as 
an approach and a set of supporting methods to be used as a framework for doing design research aiming 
not only at understanding the situation but at improving it (10). 
Design Research Methodology is used to develop knowledge that professionals of a specific discipline can 
use to design solutions for their problems (10). 
As the main purpose of the research is to get insight that will lead to solutions to be implemented in the 
field of railway projects, DRM is identified as a relevant research strategy. The iterative nature of DRM is 
adapted to the research to investigate the problems around interfaces described in the previous chapter. 
DRM is performed in four different stages in this thesis as stated in the original form by Blessing and 
Chakrabarti (10): research clarification, descriptive study, prescriptive study and descriptive study II. 
• 
In the research clarification, the research problem is defined including the research scope and goals. 
The research clarification consists of the problem statement, research questions and goals, 
literature background and the introduction to the case study, Banedanmark. The research 
clarification is presented throughout chapters 1, 2, 3 and 4.  
• 
The descriptive study consists of three phases:  
o The first phase explores the literature on interface issues in the form of a state-of-the-art 
research. Literature related to several construction sectors including the railway sector is 
reviewed with the purpose of finding the main interface issues in construction projects that 
could affect Banedanmark ’s projects and to get a better understanding about the topic prior 
to the next phase. 
o The second phase consists of the empirical research which is based on interviews with 
professional experts in railway projects. 
o The third phase presents the findings from both literature and empirical research. 
• 
The prescriptive study focuses on finding possible mitigations to change the current situation into 
the desired situation. Literature review and workshops are the base for this stage. 
• 
The last part of the DRM is the Descriptive Study II. The content of this study is adapted to the 
thesis. DRM originally targets the investigation of the impacts of the support provided in the 
previous stage and its ability to realize the desired situation.  It is not possible to test in a real project 
the suggestions provided in the prescriptive study during this project since the lifecycle of railway 
projects is much longer than the limited research period of the Msc thesis. Therefore, the 
implementation of the results is not part of this stage as it might be expected according to DRM.  
Instead of measuring the results after implementation, the author provides at this stage the research 
evaluation and the implications for theory and practice.  
As shown in Figure 2, the stages follow the order presented above but in general this study is an iterative 
process. Between all stages there are work iterations since the content of each phase is connected and 
dependent on the previous and next stages.  
==PAGE:17==
17 
 
 
Figure 2 - Detailed representation of the followed design research adapted from Blessing and Chakrabarti 
2.2. Data Collection Methods 
The data collection methods for this study were observation, participation, literature review, interviews and 
workshops. 
2.2.1. Research Clarification 
Observant and participant 
During the whole study, the author was employed at Banedanmark which provided the opportunity to 
observe and experience the interface problems in first-hand. The author had the opportunity to interact 
with professionals in formal and informal settings. 
Literature review 
At this stage, literature review was performed to create a literature background describing the theories to 
base the research upon to address the interface management in railway projects. The literature review was 
performed based on peer reviewed studies and ensuring the use of high-quality literature. 
2.2.2. Descriptive Study 
Observant and participant 
See §2.2.1. 
Literature review 
At this stage, literature review was performed to obtain the main interface issues present in projects 
according to the literature (state of the art). The state-of-the-art research was performed based on peer 
reviewed studies, ensuring the use of high-quality literature. 
==PAGE:18==
18 
 
Interviews 
A total of 8 interviews were conducted. The objective of the interviews was to obtain descriptions of the 
real-life situation from the interviewees’ different perspectives. Besides, the interviews provide themselves 
a chance to get deeper understanding of the topic. 
All interviews were conducted in face-to-face manner at the workplace of the interviewees. The author tried 
to maintain a variation in positions in the organizational hierarchy and disciplines. The interviewees are 
professionals from the railway sector. The roles are, among others: project manager, contract manager, 
interface manager, test manager, design and engineering manager etc. From the nine interviewees, seven 
are currently working in Banedanmark projects, and the remaining two work at DTU Railtech and Atkins. 
The interviews were performed as semi-structured interviews. A semi-structured interview is a meeting in 
which the interviewer does not strictly follow a formalized list of questions. The interviewer might 
formulate open-ended questions, allowing for a discussion with the interviewee following the list of 
questions to guide the conversation (11). Semi-structured interviews were chosen to allow the conversation 
to be natural and to leave room for unexpected reflections. 
The interviews were started once the state-of-the-art research was completed. In each interview, an 
overview of this project was presented prior to the interview questions. An interview guide was prepared 
and reviewed by both DTU and Banedanmark supervisors.  
The interview guide consisted of an outline of questions but the order was improvised according to the 
interviewees’ narrative. This deviation created space for unexpected outcomes and out-of-the-box 
reflections. The semi-structured interviews were very relevant since they provided input for the descriptive 
and prescriptive studies. 
All interviews were recorded. The interview guide and more information about the interviewees can be 
found in §Appendix 5 – Interview guide and workshop methodology 
2.2.3. Prescriptive Study 
Observant and participant 
See §2.2.1 for further information about the methodology. 
Workshops 
Several workshops were arranged for different topics during this study. The purpose of the workshops was 
to discuss the findings and provide suggestions for improvement. The following workshops were arranged: 
• 
Workshop 1: Presentation of research results and analysis of dependencies between interface issues  
• 
Workshop 2: Proactive mitigations: suggestions for improvement  
Further information about the workshops can be found in §Appendix 5 – Interview guide and workshop 
methodology. 
2.2.4. Descriptive Study II 
The input for this stage were the key findings from the previous phases. 
2.3. Research constraints and assumptions  
To execute the research, the scope and constraints must be defined. To demarcate the problem, the starting 
points and constraints are defined: 
• 
The research shall focus on railway construction and renewal projects; 
==PAGE:19==
19 
 
• 
The empirical research shall focus on Banedanmark projects; 
• 
The research shall make conclusions based on the data received from Banedanmark projects; 
• 
The research shall focus on finding the main interface issues and the possible mitigations; 
• 
The research on the interface issues shall be conducted from the client perspective. Therefore, 
internal interface issues in the supplier side or in other parties are not considered. 
The empirical data is provided from professionals working in different projects in Banedanmark. 
Specifically, the input is related to projects in the Signalling Program, the Electrification Program and the 
New Line Copenhagen-Ringsted. The New Line Copenhagen-Ringsted is a new construction project 
including participants from all subsystems. The projects in the Electrification program and the Signalling 
Program are line upgrades which do not include all subsystems. Both types of projects share the processes 
but the main differences are related to the project complexity. The project complexity differs between both 
types of projects due to the number of project stakeholders, the different technical subsystems and the 
operational constraints, among others. 
 
 
==PAGE:20==
20 
 
3. Literature Background 
This chapter aims at providing a theoretical background based on a literature study. Section §3.1 presents 
the complexity theory, followed by an introduction to Systems Engineering in section §3.2. Afterwards, the 
subject of Interface Management (IM) is introduced in section §3.3. The last section gives a conclusion 
including a summary of the chapter. 
 
3.1. Complexity 
In 2000s, project complexity was considered the cause of lots of management problems in large engineering 
projects. Project complexity was not clearly understood while projects were becoming more complex. Many 
researchers have attempted to improve the understanding and the ways of managing the project complexity 
(12), (13). 
Projects can be seen as a dynamic system composed of a large number of interdependent tasks executed by 
different people (14).  
The concept “complexity” is widely used in many fields of science, which makes difficult to create a 
standard definition applicable to all perspectives.  For this research, the complexity is studied from the 
engineering project perspective. Hence, “complexity” refers to a dynamic system composed of a large 
number of interconnected elements (14). 
“Project complexity is the property of a project which makes it difficult to understand, foresee and keep 
under control its overall behavior, even when given reasonably complete information about the project 
system” (15). 
3.1.1. Sources of complexity 
In order to have a clear understanding of project complexity, it is necessary to look at the different factors 
creating complexity. The key factors making a project complex are (16): 
• 
Stakeholders: the project complexity is function of the number of people involved (internal and 
external). However, it is not only the number of stakeholders that make a project complex, but also 
their interactions and interferences. 
• 
Interdependencies: interdependencies can arise from different aspects, between people, 
processes or systems. As the number of interdependencies increase, the project becomes more 
difficult to be managed.  
• 
Interfaces: The number of interfaces has a direct affection on the project complexity but their 
interdependencies are which become crucial in projects. The concept of interface and its impact 
on project complexity is further described in the following sections. 
• 
Uncertainty: It is a key characteristic of complex projects since it is related to a lack of information 
and unpredictability.  
• 
Novelty:  Novelty is directly related to people and can be seen as a cause rising uncertainty in a 
project, rather than a factor making a project complex. 
• 
Technology: technical complexity is due to the novelty of the technology or to the number of 
technical interfaces. 
According to Azim, the main factors generating project complexity: interdependencies, interfaces and 
uncertainty. The rest of the factors are defined in relation to the main characteristics.  
RQ 1: What are the theories to base the research upon in order to address the interface management 
in railway projects? 
==PAGE:21==
21 
 
Other authors such as Bosch-rekveldt and Geraldi [ (12) and (13)] provide other sources of complexity 
such as size, variety, importance of the project, experience, etc.  
3.1.2. Types of project complexity 
Since the last decades, projects are becoming more complex and larger because of huge advances in 
technology. Geraldi (17), studied the historical development of the complexity framework, proposing a new 
categorization of project complexity: socio-political, pace, dynamic, uncertainty and structural complexity. 
 
Figure 3 - Historical Development of Complexity Framework (Geraldi, 2011). 
Structural complexity 
The structural complexity refers to the number of interdependent elements. This type of complexity is 
based on three attributes (size, variety and interdependence) and can be divided in three groups: 
technological, contextual and organizational complexity (17). 
Technological complexity refers to the processes for converting inputs into outputs. The organizational 
complexity refers to the relationships in a project organizational structure such as communication, reporting 
and allocating tasks. The contextual complexity mainly refers to the project constraints.  
Uncertainty complexity 
Uncertainty is related to the predictability and it comes from the lack of knowledge and from the implicit 
randomness in every project. 
The attributes related to this category are: novelty, experience and availability of information (17). 
The lack of information can be associated to the ambiguity of scope, goals and requirements (lack of 
strategic direction), which are consequences of the lack of knowledge and experience of the different 
stakeholders involved in the project. 
Dynamic complexity 
The dynamic complexity refers to the natural tendency of a project to be in constant change throughout its 
lifecycle and it is intrinsic in all the other categories, as they are all subject to changes through the different 
project stages. 
Pace complexity 
The pace complexity refers to the temporal aspect of a project (project speed). 
==PAGE:22==
22 
 
Socio-political complexity 
The socio-political complexity results from a combination of political and emotional aspects involved in 
projects. Four attributes are related to the socio-political complexity: the importance of the project, the 
support to the project from the stakeholders, the convergence in interests from the different stakeholders, 
and the transparency of the project and the stakeholders’ interests (17). 
3.1.3. How to deal with complexity 
“Complexity is created and managed by breaking down the system into manageable pieces and integrating 
different pieces in a coherent way” (14). 
Separating and integrating the different pieces of a project is essential in order to manage complexity. 
Separating the work helps to get the work done but integration is needed to coordinate the interdependent 
pieces (14). 
Adaptation is necessary for responding to changing conditions. Changes come from the maturity of the 
project and from external influences. Separating and integrating activities are also affected by these changes 
and that makes adaptation necessary in projects. When changes occur, the project needs to be adapted to 
the new situation and this adaptation may be done by separating and integrating iterations throughout the 
project lifecycle (14). 
3.2. Systems Engineering (SE) 
Systems Engineering (hereafter SE) is an approach to systematically organize complex projects. According 
to “NASA Systems Engineering Handbook”, Systems Engineering is defined as: 
‘Methodical, multi-disciplinary approach for the design, realization, technical management, operations, and 
retirement of a system1.’ 
Managing a project consists on managing the technical aspects of the project, managing the project team 
and managing the costs and schedules (18). These aspects are interrelated and SE focuses on the technical 
aspects related to decisions costs and schedules and on providing these to the project manager, which 
denotes that Systems Engineering plays a key role in the project organization. 
(18) describes the three types of processes that form the engine of the SE: 
• 
System Design Processes: The processes are used to define and baseline stakeholder 
expectations, generate and baseline technical requirements, decompose the requirements into 
logical and behavioral models, and convert the technical requirements into a design solution that 
will satisfy the baselined stakeholder expectations.  
• 
Product Realization Processes: The product realization processes are applied to each 
operational/ mission product in the system structure starting from the lowest level product and 
working up to higher level integrated products.  
• 
Technical Management Processes: The technical management processes are used to establish 
and evolve technical plans for the project, to manage communication across interfaces, to assess 
progress against the plans and requirements for the system products or services, to control tech-
nical execution of the project through to completion, and to aid in the decision-making process. 
                                                     
1 ‘“system” is the combination of elements that function together to produce the capability required to meet a need.’ 
 
==PAGE:23==
23 
 
Interface Management is included in SE as part of the “Technical Management Processes” and it is 
considered key for project success (18). 
3.3. Introduction to Interface Management (IM) 
3.3.1. Interface Definition 
The concept of interface is commonly used in many sectors. As it happens with the complexity, creating a 
standard definition is not easy since the concept is applicable to different disciplines. According to Oxford 
dictionary, an interface is ‘a point where 2 systems, subjects, organizations, etc. meet and interact.’ 
Other definitions are: 
 ‘Interfaces are places where a system or component affects the environment or another component 
(physically and functionally) and vice versa’. (19) 
Complex projects require an integrated control plan that clearly describes the interfaces with all the 
stakeholders involved. Interfaces can be considered as an abstract concept since interfaces are the 
boundaries where two or more parties (areas of responsibility) interact and affect each other.  
Hence, interfaces appear when: 
• 
Two or more units interact 
• 
A unit affects another unit 
• 
When there is an interdependency between units. 
Related concepts 
Integration, as described in previous sections, refers to holding different pieces together. Interdependency, 
however, refers to the relation between those integrated pieces.  
There are three different types of interdependencies between activities, systems or organizations: pooled, 
sequential or reciprocal (20). 
 
 
Figure 4 -Thompson’s classification of types of interdependence and concomitant (Morris, 2013) 
• 
In pooled interdependence the units operate independently but the individual results are important 
to the success of the organization. 
• 
Sequential interdependence happens when the interfacing activities follow one another. Once unit 
needs to be finished before the next unit can begin its work.  
• 
Reciprocal interdependence is the most complex relation since the output from one unit is the 
other unit’s input and vice versa. 
 
==PAGE:24==
24 
 
3.3.2. Types of Interfaces 
Understanding the meaning and the different types of interfaces is essential to identify the existing issues 
to be solved in a complex project. However, there is no standard categorization although several studies 
have been conducted providing numerous definitions and categorizations.  
The general distinction is made between internal and external interfaces: interfaces existing within a system 
(between its components and subsystems) are called internal interfaces. Interfaces between different 
systems or in relation with the environment are usually out of the scope of work and are called external 
interfaces. 
According to PMI, project interfaces can be divided between static and dynamic interfaces. Static interfaces 
are the basic organizational interfaces which do not change throughout the project lifecycle. Dynamic 
interfaces are defined as process interfaces which mark the milestones for transitions in the project’s 
evolution. 
PMI also states the difference between product interface and process interface. Product interfaces can be 
divided into performance (performance between subsystems or components of a product) and physical 
interfaces (between interconnecting parts of a product). Process interfaces cover change of responsibility 
interfaces, management of interfaces and information interfaces (21). 
Pavitt & Gibb, 2003 (22), classified project interfaces into three main categories: physical, contractual, and 
organizational. Physical connections between two or more elements or components are called physical 
interfaces. Organizational interfaces occur among the parties involved in the project. Interfaces among 
parties also occur due to the division of the project into work packages, known as contractual interfaces.   
The different interface categorizations provided by different authors are shown in the following table: 
Interfaces categorization 
References 
Personal, organizational, systematic. 
Stuckenbruck (1983) 
Static and dynamic interfaces. 
Morris (1983) 
Time interfaces, geographic interfaces, technical interfaces, and social 
interfaces 
  Healy (1997); Stuckenbruck  
  (1983); Wren (1967) 
Attachment, 
spatial, 
transfer, 
control 
and 
communication, 
environmental, ambient, and user. 
Sanchez (1999) 
Functional, physical, and organizational. 
Laan et al. (2000) 
Inadequate contract and specification, financial problems, environmental 
problems, and other problems. 
Al-Hammad (2000) 
Product and project. 
Archibald (2003) 
Physical interfaces, contractual interface, organizational interfaces. 
Pavitt and Gibb (2003) 
Actual, functional, extended, temporal, and future interfaces. 
Korman et al. (2003) 
Management, experience, coordination, contract, acts of God, and 
regulation. 
Huang et al. (2008) 
Physical, functional, contractual/organizational, and resource interfaces. 
Chen et al. (2010) 
Management, experience, negotiation, contract, unavoidable, and law. 
Ku et al. (2010) 
Table 1 - Interface categorization (Weshah, 2013) 
3.3.3. Interface Management (IM) 
Interface Management (hereafter IM) is the process of managing responsibilities and coordination among 
parties, phases, or physical entities which are interdependent in a project (Shokri, 2012).  
IM aims at avoiding or minimizing potential issues on interfaces by understanding the project complexity 
from all perspectives. By detecting potential issues in advance, IM helps maintaining a balance between the 
scope, time, cost and quality (23). 
==PAGE:25==
25 
 
IM shall be considered throughout the project life cycle although most interface issues are discovered during 
the manufacturing, construction and commissioning phases of a project (due to the establishment of new 
relations) (23). 
 
3.3.4. Causes of conflict: interface issues 
As introduced in §1.2, interfaces have traditionally been a source of issues in railway projects (24). This is 
due to the causes of conflict on the interfaces (9). Several authors have studied these causes of conflict on 
the interfaces in construction projects in the last years: 
Chen et al. 2007, conducted a study to categorize the main causes of conflict on interfaces in construction 
projects, following the method of the Cause & Effect (C&E) Diagram invented by Kaoru Ishikawa in 1968. 
The interface issues were studied from a multidisciplinary perspective, the different key players that may 
cause interface problems in a construction project: people, methods/processes, resources, documentation, 
project management and environment.  
 
 
Figure 5 - The C&E Structure of the Multi-Perspective Approach (Chen, 2007) 
From the People perspective, the four major causes leading to interface issues include poor communication 
among parties, poor coordination among parties, poor decision making and financial problems.  
The cause factors of interface issues from the Methods/Processes perspective are construction and assembly 
problems, inferior design problems and manufacturing issues.  
From the Resources perspective, the causes are labor issues, material issues, equipment issues, information 
issues, space conflicts among labor, materials and equipment, and minor resource issues. 
The causes of conflict from the documentation perspective include lack of interface databases, lack of other 
interface documentation, change order problems, inadequate contracts, delayed permits and approvals and 
inadequate specifications and drawings. 
The causes related to project management perspective are poor project management, poor interface 
management, planning and scheduling issues and inappropriate work packaging and subcontracting. 
Finally, the environment perspective includes as causes the weather, geological problems at site, cultural 
diversity, local regulations, labor and materials availability and unsafe working environment. 
‘Interface management is a process to assist in controlling product development when efforts are 
divided among parties (e.g., Government, contractors, geographically diverse technical teams, etc.) 
and/or to define and maintain compliance among the products that should interoperate.’ (18) 
 
==PAGE:26==
26 
 
This model categorizes the causes leading to interface issues and gives a good overview of the usual 
problems that may appear. However, it does not determine which are the most dominant problems in 
construction projects.  
Several authors have written about the major causes leading to interface issues from different perspectives: 
• 
Mousli & E-Sayegh, 2016 (25), studied the main interface problems in the design and construction 
phases of the projects, concluding that the top five design-construction interfaces problems are: 
lack of coordination in the design phase, lack of specialist construction managers, poorly written 
contracts, lack of project management and time limitation in the design phase.  
• 
Huang, Lin & Ku et al, 2008 (26), divided the interface problems into financial problems, 
environmental problems, inadequate contract specification, cultural difference, technological 
improvement, track characteristics and other common interface problems. A total of 28 interface 
problems were found and reduced to six representative factors: management, experience, 
coordination, acts-of-God and regulation. 
 
Figure 6 - Inter-relationship among interface problems. (Huang, Lin & Ku, 2008) 
• 
Liu, 2014 (6), classified the main interface problems into contractual, physical and organizational.  
• 
Other authors, e.g. Iarcon and Mardones (1998), determined a list of the main causes of conflict 
without including a categorization. The list includes ‘defects of individual specialists and the lack 
of coordination among specialties’, ‘changes introduced by the owner and designers’, 
‘inconsistencies among drawings and specifications’, ‘designers with little knowledge’ and ‘non-
technical specifications’. 
3.3.5. Example to conceptualize interfaces 
As stated in previous sections, the concept of interfaces may be difficult to define. This section aims at 
creating a better understanding on the perspective of interfaces for this study: the concept, its types, and 
their relations are explained making use of a simile with LEGO bricks. 
Separation and integration are key for dealing with complex projects. 
When separating a project into work packages, we could assume each 
work package as a LEGO brick which is provided by a different 
organizational unit.   
Each brick has an especific position in the project and is related to 
other bricks. When integrating the different bricks, it is necessary to 
connect them in the correct order and to the required bricks.  
Figure 7 - LEGO bricks (ISTOCK) 
==PAGE:27==
27 
 
Two relevant aspects have to be considered when connecting bricks: 
• 
First, depending on how the bricks are connected, the shared common area has different sizes. 
These common areas between bricks are the interfaces, and not all the interfaces are equally 
important. The importance of an interface can thus be compared to the space two bricks share in 
their common side.  
• 
There are numerous possibilities for connecting the bricks. There is no standard way of connecting 
the bricks correctly. These possibilities are the ways Interface Management can be performed. 
Interface Management is about connecting the different bricks in the best possible way in order to complete 
the project according to the success criteria. As it happens with LEGO bricks, integrating the different 
project “pieces” is not a standard activity and can be performed in many different ways. 
3.4. The specific case of railway projects 
In rail projects, the project team has to deliver a fully integrated railway solution that is designed and 
implemented in accordance with the requirements of the infrastructure owners, satisfies all relevant 
regulations and addresses the concerns of all stakeholders, and provides a commercially viable operational 
railway (27). All this has to be delivered on time and on budget. 
Rail projects are amongst the most complex projects of all construction fields and there are relative 
attributes comparing to other sectors. Railway projects are characterized by: 
- 
high cost 
- 
uniqueness 
- 
high level of impact 
- 
great number of stakeholders 
- 
numerous and long stages 
- 
multidisciplinary 
- 
work packages delivered by one or more contractors 
- 
numerous interfaces (internal and external) 
The specific attributes of railway projects regarding project complexity and interfaces are explained in this 
chapter. 
 
3.5. Complexity in railway projects 
In order to understand the complexity dimensions in railway projects, specifically in Banedanmark ’s 
projects, the author has developed a different categorization based on the complexity frameworks proposed 
by Geraldi (17) and Chapman (28) as well as analyzing Banedanmark ’s projects. 
The author considered necessary the adaptation of the categorization proposed by Chapman (28) since the 
dimensions of complexity proposed by this author for the railway sector do not consider three fundamental 
aspects of project complexity: the dynamics, pace and uncertainty. 
The resulting composition is presented in Figure 8, and includes four dimensions of complexity (finance, 
management, tasks and context), which are always influenced by three complementary dimensions 
(uncertainty, pace and dynamics).  
RQ 2: How are the theories to base the research related to the railway sector? 
==PAGE:28==
28 
 
 
Figure 8 - Complexity dimensions in railway projects 
Finance complexity  
The finance complexity is determined by the following aspects: 
• 
Overall funding: Detailed and precise budget estimations are usually not available at early stages of 
the project. Budgets are estimated based on assumptions, and hence there is uncertainty about 
meeting the project budget throughout the project life cycle (28).  
• 
Origin of the funds: most railway projects are public funded, which increases dramatically the 
number of stakeholders (28). 
• 
Payment to contractors: Difficulties for making accurate payments to contractors (28). 
• 
Change orders: Change orders increase the costs, which may result in exceeding the available 
funding  
• 
Financial control: high financial control is needed over the project life cycle (28). 
Management complexity 
This dimension considers several sources of complexity such as:  organizational structure (internal and 
external), geographical dispersion of project actors, project management practices, and iterations of the 
scope and strategies due to lack of project definition, among others (28). 
In rail projects, numerous internal departments are involved in the project and need to be coordinated and 
aligned. Apart from the internal organizational structure, the large number of contractors, suppliers and 
consultants participating in the project provide further complexity (28). 
According to Burdon, 1996 (29), the basic organization of a railway project may include: 
• 
Promoter, usually the infrastructure owner, who will direct and control policy matters. 
• 
The project execution unit (infrastructure owner organization or an outside organization such as a 
consulting group hired to act as the Promoter’s agent) 
• 
The contractors who create the physical entity using human and physical resources at the work 
site. 
The many stakeholders' requirements mean that most railway projects have a large number of soft 
(managerial, contractual, human) interfaces (29).  
Context complexity 
Context complexity considers aspects such as cultural diversity, political, legal, regulatory, environmental, 
developmental and social factors. 
==PAGE:29==
29 
 
Task complexity 
The task complexity refers to the technical complexities affecting the different stages of the project:   
• 
Numerous and long stages 
• 
Multidisciplinary projects 
• 
Necessity of complementary civil constructions such as bridges or tunnels 
• 
Low error margin in civil works (construction phase) 
• 
Several complex subsystems usually designed independently (variety of high technology systems), 
which rises the complexity in the construction phases. 
• 
Many rail projects are upgrades of the existing infrastructure and require the planning of works to 
be performed with the minimum disruption to the existing railway. 
• 
This division of work results in a large number of hard (technical, physical) interfaces. These 
interfaces are interrelated and result in dynamic complexity. 
Uncertainty, Dynamics and Pace complexity 
Uncertainty, dynamics and pace are considered as complementary complexities since they affect the four 
dimensions described above.  
Pace complexity refers to the deadlines, plans and schedules that are to be followed in each phase of the 
project. Producing detailed plans from the beginning of the project and estimating precise durations is not 
an easy task considering the inherent uncertainty of the rail projects.  
Dynamic complexity arises where effects over time of the relationships within a system are subtle and the 
results of actions are not obvious; or where short term and long-term effects are significantly different; or 
where effects are locally different from effects on a wider scale (27).  
Hence, dynamic complexity is strongly related to both the uncertainty and pace complexities. As meeting 
deadlines is considered crucial to the project success, changes may occur. Due to the high level of 
uncertainty in the early stages of the project, many assumptions are taken in the preliminary designs of a 
rail project. This may result in changes in the scope, design, strategy or methods. 
3.6. Introduction to the interfaces in railway projects 
In dynamically complex projects the large number of varied and interrelated interfaces is a major project 
risk. The significance of the functionality of the interfaces against their cost, the impact of them not being 
ready on time, and the fact that interfaces pick up the effects of any delays on either side of the boundary 
means that interfaces and their management (or lack of management) are critical to the success of the 
project. 
3.6.1. Types of interfaces 
For the railway sector, Burdon (29) categorized the interfaces in the following categories: system interfaces, 
organizational interfaces and human interfaces. 
It is important to consider that in railway projects there are not only interfaces between physical “sub-
systems” and their responsible organizations, but also between the responsibilities allocated to the 
“operator” contract and the “systems” contract. These interfaces consist of the functional requirements for 
the infrastructure, and the restrictions of the infrastructure upon the operators.  
3.6.2. Interface Management 
One of the most important tasks to be undertaken by the project manager is associated with the 
identification and management of the main project interfaces. Interface management consists of identifying, 
==PAGE:30==
30 
 
documenting, scheduling, communicating and monitoring the interfaces related to the product and the 
project. These will exist between the many systems which have to come together in the right way and at the 
right time if the projects to be completed successfully in accordance with the objectives set at its inception. 
Interface management can drive the project by identifying what needs to be decided (and when), what has 
been decided and what opportunities are there for further optimization.  
3.6.3. Interface issues in railway projects 
Literature related to interface issues on rail projects is not extensive. However, the existing studies related 
to this topic point on the contract management as one of the main issues.  
According to Brunton and Tarling, et al., 2003, the consistent high-risk areas of large projects are its 
interfaces, particularly those between contracts. Unclear definition of responsibilities is considered one of 
the main sources of conflict on interfaces (27). 
In railway projects, interface issues rise at a very late stage when the different systems have been installed, 
usually during the integration testing. The unclear responsibilities for interfaces is critical at this stage since 
the mitigation of the interface issues is usually very expensive and time consuming (24). 
3.7. Summary 
This chapter covers the theoretical background considered essential for a good understanding of this study. 
The chapter introduces the concepts of “Complexity”, “Systems Engineering” and “Interface 
Management”. 
In order to understand the concept of Interface Management, this chapter presented the Interface 
Management in the general context of a project. The key concepts from this chapter are reflected in the 
questions below: 
What is an interface? 
Interfaces are common boundaries where 2 systems, units, organizations, subjects, etc. interact and meet. 
Interfaces can be divided into numerous categories such as static, dynamic, internal, external, physical, 
organizational, contractual, etc. 
What is Interface Management? 
Interface Management aims at coordinating and managing the common boundaries among units/parties 
involved in a project. 
How is Interface Management related to Systems Engineering and Complexity? 
Interface Management is considered a process inside the Systems Engineering, which is an approach to 
systematically deal with project complexity.  
Why is Interface Management a key practice for project success? 
Separating and integrating are key activities for dealing with complexity. Interfaces allow the separation and 
integration by defining the common boundaries.  IM is considered a key aspect in project success since 
interface issues may impede meeting the success criteria of the project.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:31==
31 
 
4. Case Study: Banedanmark 
This section aims at providing an overview of the objectives and structure of Banedanmark as well as a 
brief description of its major projects. The chapter consists of an introduction to the company, a description 
of the organization, and a brief description of the four major projects. 
4.1. Introduction 
Banedanmark is a state-owned enterprise under the Ministry of Transport and Building. The company owns 
and manages the Danish state railway network. Banedanmark is the railway infrastructure manager and its 
clients are the train operating companies such as DSB, Arriva, and freight companies i.e. DB Cargo and 
Hector Rail (30).  
The main activities performed by Banedanmark are: to manage and monitor train services, to ensure the 
correct maintenance of the network, to extend the railway network by building new lines, stations and 
bridges, to provide traffic information and to plan future rail road projects on the S-bane and the main 
lines. 
 
Banedanmark in numbers (90) 
• 
2,270 employees 
• 
Approximately 3,000 trains run day and night on the rail network. 
• 
More than 1 million trains a year. 
• 
More than 40,000 arrivals and departures daily. 
• 
More than 196 million passengers are transported annually. 
• 
Approximately 8 million tons freight are transported annually on the network. 
• 
Average number of trains on a weekday: 
o 2,023 passenger trains  
o 1,179 S-tog 
o 60 freight trains 
• 
Danish network: 
o Length 1,956 km  
o Over 3,000 km of tracks  
o 2,342 Bridges  
 
Figure 9 - Banedanmark in numbers (91) 
==PAGE:32==
32 
 
4.2. The Organization 
Banedanmark is headed by the CEO and consists of five divisions: Construction Division, Technical 
Division, Traffic, HR and Economy. In addition, there are four areas: Executive Secretariat, 
Communication, Quality and Safety and the Signaling Programme. 
 
Figure 10 - Banedanmark's organization (31) 
The Executive Secretariat (Direktionsekretariat) 
The Executive Secretariat is responsible for supporting the development of the framework for 
Banedanmark and the Executive Board, as well as for coordinating the contact with the Ministry of 
Transport. 
Communication (Kommunikation) 
The communication is responsible for the company's relations with the press, ensuring the development 
and anchoring of Banedanmark's communication strategy, and runs the company's internal and external 
communication media. 
Quality and Safety (Kvalitet og Sikkerhed) 
Quality and Safety is responsible for supporting the CEO and the entire Banedanmark in relation to the 
overall Railway Safety, Working Environment and Quality Work. 
Signaling Programme (Signalprogrammet) 
Description of the Signaling Programme is provided in §4.3.1. 
Construction Division (Anlæg) 
Anlæg is Banedanmark's construction division and is responsible for the construction and renewal projects 
on the rail network across the country. Anlæg is divided in Anlæg West, Anlæg East and three of 
Banedanmark's major projects and programmes: The Electrification Programme, Ringsted-Femern project 
and The New Line Copenhagen-Ringsted. 
Technical Division (Teknik) 
The Division of Technology includes two areas: Production and Technical Operation. Teknik is responsible 
for monitoring and maintaining Banedanmark’s railway installations and systems.  
==PAGE:33==
33 
 
Traffic Division (Trafik) 
Traffic Operations is responsible for planning, developing and allocating capacity on the Danish rail 
network. 
Human Resources (HR) 
HR supports management in running and developing the business through recruitment of new employees, 
staff management, education, competence development and ensuring a good working environment. 
Economy and Planning Division (Økonomi og Planlægning) 
Economics and Planning Division consists of the areas of Economics and Planning, Purchasing, and IT. 
• 
Economics and Planning must ensure good planning and management of Banedanmark‘s economy 
in accordance with applicable goals and requirements. 
• 
Purchases are the procurement of railway supplies from suppliers, as well as all Banedanmark’s 
procurement of goods and services. 
• 
IT is responsible for Banedanmark‘s IT architecture and development of Banedanmark’s IT 
systems. 
4.3. Banedanmark ’s Main Projects and Programmes 
This paragraph presents an overview of the four main projects and programmes currently carried out by 
Banedanmark: The Signalling Programme, The Electrification Programme, The New line Copenhagen-
Ringsted and the Ringsted-Fehmarn line.  
4.3.1. The Signalling Programme 
The objective of the Danish Signalling Programme is to replace all signalling on the entire Banedanmark 
railway network with ERTMS and all signalling on the Copenhagen S-bane with CBTC, decision taken by 
the Danish parliament in 2009 (32). 
The decision to fund a total replacement programme was an historic decision made by a broad political 
majority. A total renewal of all signalling on a national rail network in a single programme has never been 
attempted on this scale before in Europe. (32) 
The programme is unique in its approach of focusing on economies of scale and creating a competitive 
market situation to ensure optimized price and quality.  Comparative studies of different strategies showed 
that the total replacement was simply the best and most economical solution, providing the best 
performance at the lowest investment (32). In 2013, the total investment was estimated at EUR 2.5 billion 
and consisted of the following 10 projects: 
• 
Fjernbane network split into 2 projects: East and West. 
• 
Fjernbane Onboard equipment project (ERTMS and STM). 
• 
S-bane including onboard. 
• 
GSM-R radio and data system. 
• 
Civil Works (Traffic Control Centres and Technical Object Buildings). 
• 
SPOR20 (development of new operational rules). 
• 
Extension of the transmission network and other minor deliveries. 
• 
Training of all train drivers and control staff of the operators. 
• 
Enterprise Service Bus. 
The large framework contracts cover design, build and maintenance over the entire life cycle of the new 
systems (33). Four main contracts were awarded at the core of the programme:  
==PAGE:34==
34 
 
• 
with Siemens for the København S-bane CBTC infrastructure and onboard systems; 
• 
with Alstom for the Fjernbane East infrastructure; 
• 
with Thales/Balfour Beatty Rail for the Fjernbane West infrastructure; 
• 
with Alstom for the Ertms onboard systems. 
The expected benefits from the programme are (34): 
- 
Punctuality: Delays caused by the signaling are expected to decrease by 80%. 
- 
Safety: Uniform level of safety country wide. 
- 
Capacity: Double up the capacity of the rail Danish network. 
- 
Improved operational rules 
4.3.2. The Electrification Programme 
The Electrification programme is a large-scale project for the electrification of a large part of the Danish 
state railway network included in the Anlæg division. (35) 
The Electrification Programme aims at creating the framework for a more modern railway system with 
cheaper and more stable operation, while the expansion of the operation of electrical trains will reduce 
pollution and contribute to a cleaner environment. (35) 
The programme currently includes the electrification of 9 
sections: Esbjerg-Lunderskov, København-Ringsted, 
Køge 
Nord-Næstved, 
Ringsted-Holeby, 
Roskilde-
Kalundborg, Fredericia-Aarhus, Aarhus-Aalborg, Vejle-
Struer, and Aalborg-Frederikshavn.  
The tender phase for the Electrification contract was 
prepared by Banedanmark with Systra and COWI, being 
the Design and Build contract awarded to EPAS 
consortium (Siemens and Aarsleff) in May 2015. The 
contract covers the electrification of the nine sections 
presented above. (36) 
The first line (Esbjerg-Lunderskov) was opened in 2017, 
the København-Ringsted and Køge Nord-Næstved lines 
are in progress and the remaining are upcoming sections. 
(35) 
 
4.3.3. The New Line Copenhagen-Ringsted 
Banedanmark is building a new 60-km electrified railway 
between Copenhagen and Ringsted via Køge, the New Line Copenhagen-Ringsted (hereafter NLCR or 
KhRg). The new line is being built for speeds up to 250 km/h, becoming the first high-speed railway in 
Denmark. (37) 
The new line is the largest rail project in years (37). The total capacity of the new line was planned to be 24 
trains per hour per direction (38). Originally the budget was estimated DKK 10.4 billion and the project 
was planned to include: 
• 
60 km double track railway 
• 
Electrification of the new line 
• 
ERTMS (European Rail Traffic Management System) 
Figure 11 - EP scope of work in 2016 (36) 
==PAGE:35==
35 
 
• 
An additional track at Køge St. 
• 
Platforms at Ny Ellebjerg St. 
• 
Track renovation at Ringsted St. 
• 
A new station (Køge Nord) 
• 
A connection to Lille Syd 
In November 2017, Banedanmark announced a delay in the fitment of the trains for the new signalling 
system and the parliament made the decision of installing legacy system on the new line to be able to operate 
until the trains are ready for the new signalling system. The line is currently planned to be opened in May 
2019 with a five-block solution (legacy signalling system) (37).  
Further information about the NLCR is included in the §Appendix 4 – Example of project structure and 
complexity. 
4.3.4. The Ringsted–Fehmarn Line 
The Ringsted- Fehmarn Line is the railway connecting Denmark and Germany across the Fehmarn Belt. 
The rail link is expected to improve the infrastructure linking Scandinavia to the rest of Europe, and to 
reduce travel times between Copenhagen and Hamburg (39).  
The line was originally estimated to provide 20 passenger train services each day between Denmark and 
Germany by 2025, compared with six passenger trains running per day before the construction started 
(39). 
In May 2013, NIRAS and Rambøll were awarded a contract to provide detailed design for the expansion 
and speed upgrade of the railway. 
The upgrade of the line between Ringsted and Nykøbing F Station is currently planned to be completed in 
2021 and the electrification in 2024. (40) 
Currently the budget is EUR 1.3 billion and the project currently includes: 
• 
A new extra track along the existing line between Vordingborg and south of Holeby, where the 
line connects to the fixed link across Fehmarn Belt. 
• 
The line is planned to be upgraded to 200 km/h for passenger trains, from the current 160 km/h 
(Ringsted-Vordingborg) and 120 km/h (Vordingborg-Rødby Havn).  
• 
The line is planned to be electrified and to have a new signalling system, designed to ensure better 
punctuality and reliability. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:36==
36 
 
 
 
==PAGE:37==
37 
 
5. Analysis Part I: Descriptive Study 
This chapter presents the key findings from the first part of the analysis: the descriptive study. First, the 
objectives of the research are described, followed by an introduction to the concept of interface issues and 
the description of the main issues found in this study. The second section introduces the dependencies 
between the interface issues. The last part of this chapter introduces the concept of reactive and proactive 
mitigations.  
The research question presented below is answered throughout this chapter:  
 
5.1. Interface Issues 
As introduced in §1.2, interfaces have traditionally been a source of issues in railway projects (24). The 
question is ‘Why?’. What are the challenges surrounding interfaces that make them so critical?  
The answer relies on the interface issues. The interface issues are the sources of conflict or challenges 
around the interfaces. For instance, in railway projects there are numerous teams and departments involved 
which are inter-dependent between each other, creating many organizational interfaces. In these 
organizational interfaces between two or more departments, a possible interface issue could be poor 
communication. If there is poor communication between the involved parties, conflicts are likely to occur 
due to misunderstandings and different priorities, among others. 
The objective of the research is to find the main interface issues in railway projects, specifically in 
Banedanmark. To fulfil the objective, the descriptive study consists of a state-of-the-art and empirical 
research which aim at finding the main issues. The findings from both the literature of the state of the art 
and the empirical research are merged and analyzed jointly throughout the following sections.  
5.1.1. Interface Issues - Dynamics 
As presented above, the interface issues refer to the challenges around the interfaces. To understand the 
concept of interface issues is essential to understand how do they work – the dynamics around interface 
issues.  
During the literature review, a better understanding about the dynamics surrounding the interface issues 
was obtained. This overview acquired during the literature review was consolidated in a later stage during 
the interviews. Based on the literature review and the discussions conducted during the interviews, the 
following figure has been created to present the basic dynamics around the interface issues: 
 
Figure 12 - Dynamics surrounding interface issues 
R.Q. 2 What are the interface issues likely to occur in future railway projects in Banedanmark? 
• 
What are the dynamics surrounding the interface issues? 
==PAGE:38==
38 
 
For each interface (an organizational interface, technical interface, contractual interface…) there might 
occur some issues or challenges. These challenges result in initial consequences which are usually the point 
where the interface issues become visible. When the project participants realize about the presence of the 
problem (initial consequence), reactive mitigations are used to minimize as much as possible the impact on 
the project. These mitigations might not always be able to completely mitigate the effect of the interface 
issue(s) on the project.  
An example for technical interfaces is presented in Figure 13: 
 
Figure 13 - Imprecise definition of interfaces 
As explained in Chapter 3, railway projects are characterized for being multidisciplinary projects with several 
complex subsystems and hence, numerous technical interfaces. For technical interfaces one of the main 
challenges is to identify all interfaces and define them in a way that there is no room for interpretation. 
When designing individually two different subsystems which have to be integrated at a later stage, one of 
the possible interface issues is the imprecise identification and definition of interfaces. If the parties 
involved in the design do not align the design of all the interfaces, one of the possible initial consequences 
might appear in the integration phase as incompatibility between systems. Once the initial consequence 
becomes visible, the project aims at solving the problem by implementing reactive mitigations, in this case 
work iterations even including changes in the design (if necessary). The reactive mitigation might solve the 
functionality issue which might end up in cost and time overruns (final consequences). 
5.1.2. Main interface issues 
To answer the research question presented at the beginning of this chapter, in §5.1, both an state of the art 
and an empirical research were conducted. The state of the art consisted of the analysis of a total of 18 
authors considered appropriate for this research and the empirical research consisted of a total of 8 
interviews. 
From the state of the art phase, 33 interface issues have been found. Some of these issues are identified by 
authors referring to interface issues in construction projects.  
After completing the state of the art research, the empirical phase helped validating the findings from the 
literature and adapting them for the specific case of railway projects and Banedanmark. The objective of 
the interviews was to get an insight about the main interface issues in Banedanmark’s projects, the dynamics 
and the impact and consequences of the main issues. 
The findings are presented in the present section and the complete study can be found in §Appendix 1 .  
As a summary, the joint findings have been obtained according to the following criteria:  
• 
All the interface challenges mentioned by the interviewees are considered key issues since they have 
flourished in Danish railway projects. 
==PAGE:39==
39 
 
• 
From the state of the art phase (findings presented in §3.6), the following findings have been 
included: 
o Issues mentioned by at least 33% of the authors that have not been identified by the 
interviews. This measure is taken to broaden the findings from the interviews and to 
ensure alignment between the findings from the literature and the interviews. From the 
issues mentioned by a third of the authors, all except two were remarked in the interviews.  
o All the issues mentioned in railway-related articles. This measure is taken since these issues 
are the result of studies related to other railway projects. All the issues mentioned in articles 
related to the railway sector except for one were covered by the interviews. 
Based on the above-presented criteria, a total of 15 issues have been included as main interface issues for 
railway projects in Banedanmark. From the complete set of issues, eight were remarked by both the 
interviewees and the articles analyzed during the literature research, four were only mentioned by the 
interviewees and the last three were only remarked in the literature.  
The joint findings are shown in Table 2 - Final results (Merged from literature and empirical research).  
Interface Issue 
Imprecise definition and design of the interfaces  
Complicated technical interfaces  
Poor quality work 
Project organization and unclear division of responsibilities 
Poor communication among parties  
Stakeholder management 
Cultural diversity 
Teams dispersed geographically  
Planning issues 
Contractual disputed 
Project nature issues 
Decision making 
Poor coordination among parties 
Labor issues 
Project parties unfamiliar with local laws, regulations and requirements 
Table 2 - Final results (Merged from literature and empirical research) 
5.1.2.1. 
Description of the main interface issues 
This section aims at providing an overview of each interface issue (it could also be called source of conflict 
on the interfaces). For each interface issue a general description according to the literature is given, followed 
by specific examples raised during the empirical research for the case of Banedanmark projects.  
1. Imprecise identification and definition of technical interfaces 
Railway projects are usually split into sub-projects despite the inherent interface risks. Potential interface 
risks are often forgotten or not studied generally because the risks are not clear enough at that stage of the 
project (41). 
Imprecise identification and definition of the technical interfaces is likely to exacerbate the difficulty of the 
Interface Management. The main challenge in technical interfaces is to define the interfaces that are to be 
used for the development of the different subsystems. (42) 
The definition of technical interfaces is always a critical activity in multidisciplinary projects. Imprecise 
definition of interfaces may occur due to numerous sub-causes: ignoring the interdisciplinary nature of the 
project, lack of compatible design standards, lack of understanding interfaces, the great number of physical 
interfaces, complicated system integration, the variety of products and components, the lack of 
coordination between specialties, etc. (Chen, et al., 2008). 
==PAGE:40==
40 
 
According to an interviewee, “The most expensive mistake that can be made during the design phase is not 
defining accurately the interfaces between systems because it results in inconsistencies between them and 
to solve the problem a complete iteration of work might be needed. “ (43) 
The difficulty in the process of defining an interface (between two suppliers or subsystems) relies on 
creating a definition that does not leave any room for interpretation. If there is room for interpretation, the 
system might not behave consistently because in the end the different parties might implement the 
specifications in a slightly different manner and it could even result in non-working systems. 
In railway projects where the supplier is responsible for the design (Design and Build contracts) the 
difficulty from the customer (Banedanmark) perspective is the lack of control during this process, since the 
suppliers define together the detailed design. Banedanmark would define the main concept of functional 
behavior (the operational aspects), but the technical implementation (technical details such as the 
information to be exchanged between systems and the time response) are defined by the suppliers through 
a detailed analysis (43).  
The initial consequence from the imprecise identification and definition of technical interfaces can vary 
from the realization that some interfaces are not allocated to a person responsible for them and thus work 
is missing, to incompatibility between systems. To solve these initial consequences, reactive mitigations 
such as work iterations might be needed. The reactive mitigations require time and cost, which, if it is not 
considered in the planning and budget, may result in cost overruns and/or delays as final consequence (43). 
2. Complicated technical interfaces 
Railway projects are well known for having complicated technical interfaces. These projects involve a variety 
of high technology systems usually designed independently. Many rail projects in Banedanmark are 
upgrades of the existing infrastructure and require the planning of works to be performed with the 
minimum disruption to the existing railway. 
For instance, in the lines in operation where a new signalling system is being installed, the testing phase has 
to be performed affecting the less possible to the operation of the line. Tests are normally performed during 
the night, switching from the current signalling system to the new one in testing mode (process called 
change over system).  Once the testing session is finished, the system is switched back to the operational 
mode. This interface is critical since any issue might affect the operation. A lack of coordination in this 
process might result in postponement of the tests, which might involve extra costs and delays for other 
activities. (43). 
Moreover, if during the design phase the different systems are designed independently, interface issues 
might appear at a later stage due to the interdependencies between them. The system designs are very 
complex and a mistake or change in one system’s design may affect the others, resulting in work iterations 
from all the design parties (43). 
3. Poor quality work 
Poor quality work refers to the deliverables not meeting the quality requirements. The poor quality in project 
deliverables (poor written documents, installation works…) mainly arises from the lack of skilled and 
experienced people.  
In Banedanmark, employees working in programmes may work for several projects at the same time. This 
might result in people prioritizing some tasks for a specific project leaving another project in the 
background. Deliveries to this second project might not be detailed enough and the team receiving it might 
ask for a more detailed version. Again, work iterations and more time are needed.   
On the other hand, some suppliers also work on several projects at a time. It has been experienced that 
suppliers allocate certain tasks to employees without enough experience. This might lead to poor quality 
deliveries if the process is not supervised by a senior employee. (43) 
==PAGE:41==
41 
 
Poor quality work results in deliverables not meeting the requirements. Normally rework is needed to 
update and complete the document, which requires at least extra time as a final consequence (and 
sometimes it could also affect the cost). (43) 
4. Project organization and unclear division of responsibilities 
The project organization has great impact on how the responsibilities are divided. (43). Besides, there is a 
direct influence on the communication flow. “Organizational structure can greatly impact the 
communication necessary to complete projects successfully” (44). 
The more complex a project is, the more departments/teams are likely to be involved. The dependencies 
among teams (deliverables, scope overlaps…) are organizational interfaces. In railway projects, the number 
of activities is very extensive, so the lack of agreement in the responsibilities will generate conflicts in the 
interfaces between teams. If responsibilities are not clear, some activities might not be covered, while others 
are done twice, performing redundant work (43). 
 “One of the basic but most challenging activities in projects is to identify all the needed activities to 
complete the project and to allocate them to the relevant people” (43). If the division of responsibilities is 
not clearly defined or it is done in a later stage of the project, there might be time overruns due to the 
difficulties for reaching an agreement and for finding the right person to manage a certain issue or interface. 
Mismatch between the contract responsibilities and the interface management responsibilities can lead to 
increased project risks, costs, and non-optimal mitigations (Harrison, et al., 2004).  
These scenarios might be demoralizing for the project participants and can also impact the timeline and 
budget of the entire project. 
5. Poor communication among parties 
Communication is a very broad term. Unsuccessful communication processes generate more than 90 per 
cent of total conflicts in the construction industry (Mitkus, 2013). In an organizational context, 
communication refers to the interaction and flow of information between internal and external stakeholders 
through various channels (Duff, Victoria. 2015). 
Communication is key in all types of projects. Assuring information exchange among all stakeholders is 
essential for project success since it affects every activity done in a project. Most of the authors stand out 
the importance of communication and agree on the poor communication as one of the major sources of 
conflicts between interfaces. 
Communication within the same party is usually much better performed than across the boundary of parties 
(45). Lack of communication and delayed or ineffective communication are considered as the two sub-
causes of poor communication (45). 
Poor communication easily generates design errors and misalignments due to lack of knowledge, directly 
creating delays and thus leading to not meeting the time constraint.  In the specific case of railway projects, 
communication is extremely important due to the high level of dependency between activities and the great 
number of stakeholders. 
When a decision or assumption is taken for certain activity, all the dependent activities shall be aware and 
consider that assumption. If communication flow does not work correctly, work iterations are needed due 
to processes not aligned and activities not completed as required. 
6. Poor stakeholder management 
In multidisciplinary projects and specifically in railway projects, numerous stakeholders are involved 
throughout the project lifecycle. Communication and coordination with all of them is fundamental to avoid 
rework due to misunderstandings.  
==PAGE:42==
42 
 
Stakeholder management becomes an interface issue due to lack of stakeholder involvement, lack of 
commitment and misalignment on the interests from the different stakeholders among others.  
Special attention must be paid to the external stakeholders, those who have the power to influence and 
even stop the project and those who expect to gain benefit from the project (Brunton & Tarling, 2003). 
Banedanmark is a state-owned enterprise under the Ministry of Transport and Building (30). The primary 
political stakeholder is the Ministry of Transport, which is the funder and the principal certification agency 
through the transport authority Trafikstyrelsen (32). 
Apart from the political stakeholders, the neighbors, suppliers, other departments in Banedanmark, other 
projects, the steering committee, etc. are also stakeholders (46). 
The final consequences of a lack or poor stakeholder management are delays due to parties not aware of 
certain milestones or lack of information and commitment. As discussed in §Poor decision making, some 
stakeholders might even lead to a change in the project scope (affecting functionality aspects) which leads 
to delays and extra costs.  
7. Cultural diversity 
Due to a resource shortage in the railway industry and in order to meet the talent needed for complex 
projects, many companies are now hiring foreign professionals. Cultural diversity might lead to interface 
problems due to different behaviors or understandings among participants (45). Cultural diversity does not 
only refer to cultural differences between countries, but it also includes different organizational cultures 
(43). 
Some Banedanmark projects are characterized for the international character, due to the collaboration of 
multiple national and international consulting companies. Some suppliers are also international since the 
tender strategy followed at Banedanmark aims at ensuring maximum competition by attracting both Danish 
and international suppliers, as further explained in § Project parties unfamiliar with local laws and 
regulations. (30). 
According to Chen, cultural diversity implies difficulties in the communication and coordination among 
parties, due to different behaviors and understandings. This situation might lead to work iterations due to 
misalignments which in turn may involve extra costs and even project delays. 
8. Teams dispersed geographically 
Railway projects are well-known for the great number of companies involved. Teams are likely to be 
dispersed geographically due to the difficulties for allocating all the parties involved in the same building.  
The relation between the different teams involved in the project might be influenced by the proximity or 
distance between them. Geographically dispersed teams might experience more misalignments or 
miscommunications leading to work iterations when alignment is needed and thus requiring extra time.  
Moreover, when teams are dispersed it might be difficult to involve them in the general context of the 
project leading to lack of commitment from those parties. The lack of commitment usually results in delays 
for specific tasks since the team ‘producing’ is not aware of the importance of the deliverable for the team 
receiving it (43). See further information in §Planning issues. 
9. Planning issues 
A good Interface Management relies on planning, interface identification, assessment, monitoring, control 
and interactions with other contractor’s processes (INTEC Engineering 2003). Poorly managed planning 
and scheduling (activities not identified, inappropriate work sequence, dependencies not identified, lack of 
communication of the plan to the relevant stakeholders…) leads to interface issues and increases the need 
for Interface Management (Chen, et al., 2008). 
==PAGE:43==
43 
 
Planning of activities, scopes and responsibilities for the whole project and consideration of all contract 
interfaces should be given careful attention even before bidding (Shrive 1992). 
According to PMI, one of the main reasons for schedule overruns are planning issues. “Lack of Integration 
Management in project planning results in coordination issues delaying the projects” (Study on project 
schedule and cost overruns, PMI, 2012) 
A special characteristic of planning in Banedanmark projects is that a bad planning might not only affect 
the deadlines of a project but several. For instance, in the programmes (where some resources are shared), 
if an activity cannot be completed according to the plan, other projects might be affected by this internal 
delay. Externally, when suppliers or equipment are hired for a specific time and the activities are postponed, 
problems regarding availability of the supplier for completing the activity at another time may arise. In 
addition, financial compensation to the affected parties might be necessary. 
Moreover, a lack of commitment from project participants and stakeholders also affects the planning. All 
relevant parties might be aware of the main milestones of the project and the dependencies between the 
relevant activities. It has been experienced that when a department/team is not committed or often involved 
in the project, their activities are usually delayed and eventually may impact the whole planning (43). 
Hence, planning issues usually lead to extra cost and time overruns. However, quality might also be affected. 
In cases where deadlines are very tight, decisions supposing a reduction of the scope might be made to 
comply with the deadlines. See further information about scope reduction in §Poor decision making.  
10. Contractual Disputes 
This issue includes the different factors leading to contractual disputes such as requirements not well 
defined in contracts, poor written contracts, contract type not appropriate for the project, among others. 
According to a study conducted by PMI about project schedule and cost overruns, “Inefficient contract 
management results in contractual disputes and law problems slowing down the project progress”. 
There are numerous alternatives regarding contract strategy. The boundary between the client and the 
contractor is dependent on the chosen option. The choice of boundary affects the responsibilities for 
interfaces and consequently the management of the interfaces (Harrison, et al., 2004). 
Besides, the lack of a clear and concise definition of the project requirements and acceptance criteria makes 
it impossible to carry out verification and validation to provide proof that the requirements have been met 
(Brunton and Tarling, et al., 2003).  
When contract documents only include functional requirements, but miss the customer requirements 
(success criteria), the suppliers might not deliver according to the client’s expectations. In case the missing 
requirement is a key success criteria for the client, rework for completing this criterion might be needed, 
coming along with the needed extra time (43). 
Contractual disputes between client and supplier are seen very often in railway projects. When a tender is 
awarded to the most economically advantageous option, suppliers later rise contractual disputes for every 
activity or requirement not covered by the contract. An example could be the situation when the suppliers 
raise contractual disputes for participating in integration activities with other suppliers (43). 
11. Project nature issues 
Project nature issues mainly refers to the decisions made at the beginning of the project that might suppose 
a conflict at the interfaces at a later stage. It might become into an interface issue due to the unclear 
definition of scope, lack of experience in a specific type of projects, and unrealistic project objectives. 
According to PMI, “Scope creep is a primary factor impacting cost overruns” (Study on project schedule 
and cost overruns, PMI, 2012). 
==PAGE:44==
44 
 
The project nature might affect interfaces if a great change of scope occurs during the project lifecycle. The 
scope is defined based on the original idea phase, where numerous assumptions shall be taken. If the 
assumptions and decisions taken during the preliminary project phases are wrong and the project team is 
not able to meet the project requirements, a change of scope is needed, generating delays and cost overruns 
(43). 
12. Poor decision making 
Decision making is a very broad term. Decision making is present at all hierarchical levels and it directly 
influences the project delivery process and the final results.  
Poor decision making easily increases design conflicts and error and thus rework is required, leading to time 
and costs overruns (Chen, et al, 2008). 
According to Chen, there are five sub-causes generating poor decision making: 
• 
The complexity and uncertainty of the project 
• 
Lack or outdated information  
• 
Slowness of decision making process 
• 
Lack of experience in design and construction 
• 
Bad policy for handling relationships between companies 
Due to the great uncertainty present at the initial stages of a project, assumptions are needed. These 
assumptions have a great impact on the project, especially on the design phase, where they are used as a 
basis for starting the design. In case the assumptions are not correct and modifications are needed, a partial 
or full iteration of the design might be required, leading to a time overrun at least in the design phase (43). 
Decision making in Banedanmark’s projects is especially critical due to the impact on other projects and 
the public character of the project. The projects are public funded and it is of major importance to deliver 
what was promised, as above discussed in §Project nature issues. 
Hence, the final consequences of poor decision making might be the reduction of the scope, delays or cost 
overruns. 
13. Poor coordination among parties 
Coordination between teams is more than “cooperating” with each other. Coordination involves mutual 
respect, shared vision and mutual understanding of roles and responsibilities. (47) 
The interdisciplinary nature of a project adds special coordination needs in design and construction phases 
where the compatibility between systems shall be ensured. In construction projects, lack or poor 
coordination results in interface issues. When parties are unwilling to bear coordination and resolution 
responsibilities, misalignments in procedures and requirements occur, resulting in incompatibilities between 
systems or in deliveries not meeting the customer requirements (Chen et al., 2008). 
In railway projects, coordination is even more critical due to the great number of stakeholders and project 
participants. As described in §Poor communication among parties, in railway projects there is a high level 
of dependency between activities and other projects. Thus, poor coordination among parties impacts 
negatively in the project results, including delays and cost overruns as final consequences (43). 
14. Labor issues 
Labor issues refer to the shortage of resources and low skilled people. Several authors remark the impact 
of low-skilled labor on the interfaces. “Adequate availability of skilled resources at all levels of a project 
organization is a critical factor for project success” (Study on project schedule and cost overruns, PMI, 
2012). 
==PAGE:45==
45 
 
Chen et al., 2008, states that low-skilled labor directly results in schedule conflicts. Several authors agree 
that skilled and productivity of laborers is essential to deliver a high-quality work. 
Railway projects, as multidisciplinary projects require the participation from numerous engineers and 
project managers for the different engineering disciplines and subsystems. Moreover, programmes in 
Banedanmark share resources for several projects, which requires extra coordination and increases the 
dependencies between projects. Hence, labor issues may even result in delays due to unavailability of 
resources and the high dependency between projects.  
15. Project parties unfamiliar with local laws and regulations 
Nowadays it is very common to have foreign suppliers involved in big projects. It is essential to ensure a 
good understanding of the local laws and regulations affecting the project, especially if the suppliers are not 
familiar or have no experience in the specific region. 
Banedanmark’s tender strategy aims at ensuring maximum competition by attracting both Danish and 
international suppliers (30). In principle, there is no prerequisite to form a consortium with Danish 
companies to win the tender. For instance, while the Electrification Programme awarded in 2015 the tender 
to the EPAS consortium (Siemens and Aarsleff) where Aarsleff is a Danish company, there are other cases 
where the supplier is international and does not form a consortium. This is for instance the case of Thales 
and Alstom in the Signalling Programme, among others. 
When a supplier is not familiar with local laws and practices, time is spent in understanding the local laws 
and reviewing and validating processes to align them with the applicable laws and regulations. These 
processes are very time consuming and when it is not considered in the planning, it may result in project 
delays. 
5.2. Dependencies between interface issues 
As it is presented in some examples of section §5.1, an interface issue may lead to the occurrence of another 
issue. For instance, when employees are working on several projects at the same time and need to prioritize 
due to tight deadlines, some tasks might be delayed or the quality of the document is affected to deliver on 
time. This example shows how labour issues might lead to poor quality work. 
The presence of various of these examples during the interviews, where the occurrence of an interface issue 
leads to the appearance of another interface issue, directs the research to the following questions: ‘How are 
the interface issues connected?’, ‘What are the dependencies between interface issues?’ 
To answer these questions, a workshop was organized to analyse the dependencies from the perspective 
of the current projects in Banedanmark. The findings are described throughout the current section and 
further information about the analysis is included in §Appendix 2 –.  
From the workshop and the subsequent analysis, there is one indisputable conclusion: there is a ripple effect 
due to the high level of dependency between the interface issues. The appearance of one interface issue is 
likely to promote the appearance of others.  
 
Figure 14 - Current situation 
==PAGE:46==
46 
 
Figure 14 represents this concept: Interface issue “A” appears in the project (for instance poor 
communication). Poor communication is likely to exacerbate the unclear division of responsibilities 
(interface issue “B”). This could generate the appearance of other interface issues such as poor-quality work 
or contractual disputes. Then the dynamics are the same as presented in §5.1.1, initial consequences would 
be treated with reactive mitigations which aim at reducing the impact on the project as much as possible. 
An example of the ripple effect using the poor communication among parties as trigger is presented in the 
Figure 15. When poor communication among parties is a well settled issue around interfaces, then other 
interface issues are likely to occur. For the specific case of poor communication, the main triggered issues 
are: imprecise identification and definition or interfaces, poor quality work, poor stakeholder management, 
planning issues, contractual disputes, poor decision making and poor coordination among parties. All these 
issues share the need of efficient communication. Thus, poor communication affects directly to the 
occurrence of these other issues. When there is a lack of communication, things are neither clarified nor 
aligned, and the technical interfaces might not be well defined, deliverables might not meet the quality 
requirements, there might be a lack of commitment and involvement of stakeholders, the planning might 
not reflect the reality since it might be missing information, decisions might be poorly made due to a lack 
of relevant information and coordination among parties would get worse due to the lack of communication. 
In turn, these issues might even generate other interface issues to continue the ripple effect. 
 
Figure 15 - Example ripple effect in interface issues 
The ripple effect existing among interface issues implies that to mitigate the interface issues, all of them 
shall be treated. Trying to mitigate an isolated interface issue without addressing the rest might not result 
in the desired situation. Hence, to successfully mitigate the issues the complete set shall be addressed.   
5.3. Reactive and proactive mitigations 
Interface issues have consequences. As introduced in § 5.1.1, interface issues result in initial consequences 
and eventually in final consequences, after trying to mitigate the impact of the interface issues. But these 
mitigations are reactive, which means that they are put in place once the interface issues have appeared. “A 
reactive approach focuses on needs created by changes which have already occurred” (48). 
The interviews revealed that the reactive mitigations are currently used to minimize the impact of the 
interface issues. Examples of reactive mitigations could be work iterations, postponement of certain activity, 
late alignment and agreements, restructuring the planning, late completion of the work, etc.  
For answering the question of ‘what could be done in order to mitigate the interface issues?’ the reactive 
mitigations are not enough since reactive implies waiting for the problems, to deal with things as they come. 
==PAGE:47==
47 
 
To fully mitigate the interface issues the solution relies on avoiding them, removing them by using proactive 
mitigations (43). 
Proactive approaches aim at identifying opportunities and in taking preemptory action against potential 
problems and threats (Business Dictionary). Figure 16 presents the difference in application and philosophy 
between reactive and proactive mitigations. The use of proactive mitigations is essential for removing the 
interface issues. While reactive mitigations are implemented to reduce the impact of an interface issue, 
proactive mitigations tackle the interface issues by preventing their appearance. 
 
Figure 16 - Difference between reactive and proactive mitigations 
Railway projects are currently addressing the interface issues by using reactive mitigations. Proactive 
mitigations are needed in order to reduce the occurrence of the main interface issues present in the projects.  
 
Figure 17 - Desired situation 
Based on the above presented, Figure 17 has been created to show the desired situation for future projects. 
By removing (or reducing) the appearance of the different interface issues, the final consequences such as 
time and cost overruns could be reduced.  The need for proactive mitigations is the starting point for the 
next stage of the project, presented in the Chapter 6: The Prescriptive Study. 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
48 
 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
49 
 
6. Analysis Part II: Prescriptive Study 
This chapter presents the key findings from the second phase of the analysis: The Prescriptive Study. The 
chapter answers the third research question by proposing suggestions to mitigate the issues described in 
the Descriptive Study. 
 
After defining the main interface issues in railway projects, the next step is to analyse what could be done 
to avoid or reduce their occurrence. For this phase, the specific characteristics of the case study are 
considered.  
The objective of this chapter is to describe the different practices that could be implemented in order to 
mitigate the issues defined in the previous chapter.  
As discussed in §5.2, the level of dependency among the issues is very high, which implies that they cannot 
be completely mitigated through individual approaches. The appearance of certain issue usually entails the 
appearance of others. Based on the findings presented in the previous chapter: the ripple effect and the 
need for proactive mitigations, two types of measures are developed: individual proactive measures and 
proactive strategies. 
 
Figure 18 - Types of mitigations presented in this study 
The individual proactive measures are specific measures to be applied to each of the interface issues. This 
type of measures provides flexibility since they can be implemented individually, giving the possibility of 
prioritizing some issues. These measures might also be considered as starting points, since they can be 
implemented in the short-term period. However, if these measures are implemented alone, a full mitigation 
cannot be expected since there might be non-covered gaps.  
The proactive strategies resulted from the following question: “How can the individual proactive measures 
be implemented?” This question was raised during the individual analysis for each interface issue. The 
conclusion was that it is necessary to implement integrated strategies which address several interface issues 
simultaneously.  
The chapter consists of: 
• 
Individual proactive measures 
• 
Proactive strategies 
• 
Conclusion 
R.Q. 3 What could be done to reduce the occurrence and impact of the interface issues? 
==PAGE:50==
50 
 
6.1. Individual proactive measures 
This chapter introduces the individual proactive measures for each interface issue. As discussed in the 
previous section, the individual proactive measures are recommended as a starting point or for partial 
mitigation (short term measures). This chapter includes an introduction to what is needed for each interface 
issue.  
The sets of measures have been created based mainly on the recommendations provided in both the 
interviews and workshops. Also, some measures are suggested in the literature. The complete set of 
measures can be found in §Appendix 3. 
1. Imprecise definition and design of technical interfaces 
Precise identification and definition of technical interfaces is crucial for the project success. Ideally all 
technical interfaces impacting the design of the different subsystems should be identified and defined prior 
to the design phase (latest at the revision of the draft design). However, the identification process shall 
continue during the installation to ensure that no interface is discovered close to the test and commissioning 
phases. 
High visibility of the interfaces is needed to reduce the project risks by early identification, allocation of 
responsibilities and action. (49) 
The high dependency between designs of different subsystems requires understanding from all responsible 
parties. The identification of technical interfaces should not only be responsibility of the Interface Managers 
but a collaborative approach between all the parties, fostering a thoughtful analysis and definition of each 
interface.  
The set of individual measures can be found in §Imprecise definition and design of technical interfaces, 
Appendix 3.  
2. Complicated technical interfaces 
As stated above, early identification of all interfaces is essential. However, not all interfaces are equally 
critical or complicated. Complicated interfaces require a profound technical assessment.  
The complicated technical interfaces are considered as a specific case inside the imprecise identification and 
definition of technical interfaces.  
The set of individual measures can be found in §Complicated technical interfaces, Appendix 3.  
3. Poor quality work 
One of the most important conditions for completing a project successfully is to meet the customer’s 
requirements. This applies not only for the handover of the final subsystems but for all intermediate 
deliverables (43).  
Producing high-quality deliverables is crucial for avoiding work iterations. The reason is that the outputs of 
each activity are usually the input for other activities, and deliverables not meeting the receiver’s 
requirements and needs involve iterations of the validation process. 
Avoiding requests for improvement of documentation would facilitate compliance with the time schedule. 
This can only be achieved if all relevant parties understand the importance of each deliverable and its 
dependencies, and if there is high commitment and willingness to comply with the requirements and 
expectations from the receiver.  
The set of individual measures can be found in §Poor quality work, Appendix 3.  
4. Project organization and unclear division of responsibilities 
==PAGE:51==
51 
 
The project organization shall be clearly defined from the beginning of the project. The type of organization 
is a key decision since it has a great impact on the performance and relation between the different parties.  
When creating the project organization, the dynamics both inside and outside the project organization shall 
be considered. It is vital to define how the connection with the external parties will be and the levels of 
hierarchy. 
A clear division of responsibilities streamlines the processes and decision making. By providing information 
to all project members about the responsibilities of each department/team, the project ensures the 
involvement of the right members for each activity. 
The set of individual measures can be found in §Project organization and unclear division of responsibilities, 
Appendix 3.  
1. Poor communication among parties 
The importance of communication in projects is undisputed (50). However, communication itself usually 
has not the attention it requires. 
Consistent and constructive communications help avoiding blame culture and increase the effectiveness. 
(51) Since the project environment is dynamic and changes are constant, the communication structure shall 
be flexible. 
Communication is heavily constrained by formal organizational structure: the vast majority of 
communication occurs within business unit and functional boundaries, not across them. This points to the 
importance of drawing the right organizational boundaries  (52) 
The set of individual measures can be found in §Poor communication among parties, Appendix 3.  
2. Poor coordination among parties 
Communication and coordination are closely linked. The way communication strategies are implemented 
directly affects the coordination among parties and vice versa.   
The set of individual measures can be found in §Poor coordination among parties, Appendix 3.  
3. Stakeholder management 
Railway projects are well known for the great number and type of stakeholders. Stakeholder management 
shall be a proactive management that ensures trust, collaboration, commitment and engagement from all 
stakeholders. 
Each type of stakeholder has different interests, requirements and expectations, which demands different 
approaches and even individual processes. These processes need to be integrated into the overall 
stakeholder management process to ensure everyone is working towards the same goals.  
The set of individual measures can be found in §Stakeholder management, Appendix 3.  
4. Cultural diversity 
Most companies aim at having a culture based on shared beliefs. This is especially challenging in the railway 
industry, where project organizations are formed by international consultants with different working 
cultures.  
Cultural diversity refers to both working culture and national culture. Understanding the different working 
cultures is crucial to keep communication and collaboration at the right levels. 
The set of individual measures can be found in §Cultural diversity, Appendix 3.  
5. Teams dispersed geographically 
==PAGE:52==
52 
 
Collocated teams are most efficient because of the constant exchange of information face-to-face. 
Collocation shall be considered as a priority for future projects. 
Colocation involves placing all or many of the active project team members in the same physical location, 
enhancing their ability to perform as a team (53). Active project team members include both the internal 
organization and the suppliers.  
Although collocation is the best scenario, it is not always possible to do so, since the globalization of 
projects involves the need for virtual teams.  
The set of individual measures can be found in §Teams dispersed geographically, Appendix 3.  
6. Planning issues 
The project schedule shall be used as a tool for communication, management of stakeholders and their 
expectations, and a basis for performance reporting.  
When possible, the detailed project schedule should remain flexible throughout the project to adjust for 
gained knowledge, increased understanding of the risk, and value-added activities 
Engagement and commitment of all the stakeholders is needed. All the parties shall be aware of the 
importance and impact of their deliveries in the time schedule due to the dependencies between parties. 
The set of individual measures can be found in § Planning issues, Appendix 3.  
7. Contractual disputes 
The type of contract shall match the nature of the project in order to avoid contractual disputes since the 
way a contract is done has a major bearing on the interface management (54). All requirements must be 
defined in a clear, unambiguous and concise manner and must be supported by an acceptance statement 
that describes how the requirement will be proven (27). 
The set of individual measures can be found in §Contractual disputes, Appendix 3.  
8. Project Nature 
The concept of project nature is very broad. Scope creep occurs when scope or requirements management 
does not occur. Changes to scope need to follow a clear process to prevent haphazard changes. The 
opposite can also happen, in which project teams prevent changes by strictly enforcing scope and doing 
what is called “scope kill.” 
The set of individual measures can be found in §Project Nature issues, Appendix 3.  
9. Poor decision making 
Decision making takes place at all phases and all levels of a project. When talking about decision making, it 
is important not to think only about the strategic and tactical decisions, but the operational part, the 
decisions that are seemingly small operating choices made day-today. 
Getting those decisions right requires an environment that prepares people at every level to make the 
correct decisions.  
The set of individual measures can be found in §Poor Decision Making, Appendix 3.  
10. Labour issues 
Labor issues refers both to labor shortage and poor skilled people. Having a clear overview of the needed 
resources and roles from the beginning of the project facilitates the creation and adaptation of the team to 
each project phase. 
==PAGE:53==
53 
 
Moreover, talent management should be on the top of the agenda for mitigating the labour shortage in the 
railway industry. 
The set of individual measures can be found in §Labor issues, Appendix 3.  
11. Project parties unfamiliar with local laws and regulations 
Understanding the local laws and regulations is time consuming if the process starts from scratch. It is 
essential to get onboard the project people with the knowledge, so processes can be optimized and 
unexpected events regarding laws and regulations can be avoided.   
The set of individual measures can be found in §Project parties unfamiliar with local laws and regulations, 
Appendix 3.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:54==
54 
 
6.2. Proactive strategies 
This chapter presents four proactive strategies as a result of the integration of the individual objectives and 
proactive measures presented on the previous chapter: 
1. Interface Management program: a systematic approach 
2. Project Delivery methods 
3. Decision - Making Framework 
4. Integrated Organizational Culture  
The first strategy aims at covering the interface issues related to technical interfaces. It provides an overview 
of the basic guidelines of how to identify and elaborate the technical interfaces in a systematic way, based 
on the approach proposed by Staats, 2014 (1), and adapted to the railway projects with the specific measures 
considered necessary to mitigate the interface issues in Banedanmark ’s projects. 
The second strategy aims at creating awareness of the importance and impact of the contracts in the 
interfaces. The strategy first introduces the factors influencing the contracts and the recommended 
requirements to be consider for future projects. Then, the different project delivery methods that could be 
used for future projects are described, differentiating between conventional delivery methods and new 
delivery methods. 
The third strategy aims at providing a base for the creation of a decision-making framework for railway 
projects. This strategy combines the model proposed by Townsend (55) with specific recommendations as 
a basis for creating a simple and very practical model. 
The last strategy aims at providing a base for the creation of an integrated organizational culture. This 
strategy provides the basic insights to create an integrated culture which helps improving the project results 
in the company by mitigating several interface issues.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:55==
55 
 
6.2.1. Strategy 1 - Interface Management program: a systematic approach 
The first strategy aims at covering the interface issues related to technical interfaces. As it is described in 
§5.1.2,  one of the most expensive mistakes that could be made during the design phase is not defining 
accurately the interfaces between systems. The purpose of this strategy is to make the management of 
technical interfaces easier by using a systematic approach. 
Staats, 2014 (1), developed a systematic approach for identification, management and control of the 
technical interfaces along all the phases of construction projects. This method is adapted to the main 
interface issues identified for railway projects in Denmark. The structure follows the approach proposed 
by Staats and includes specific measures considered necessary to mitigate the interface issues in 
Banedanmark ’s projects. 
This strategy is mainly structured around the issue of imprecise identification and definition of interfaces. 
However, other interface issues such as poor-quality work, project organization and unclear definition of 
responsibilities, poor communication and coordination among parties and planning issues also benefited 
from this strategy.   
The Interface Management program consists of an Interface Management Plan and the Interface 
Management Processes. 
Interface management plan 
The implementation of a systematic IM process involves the development of an Interface Management 
Plan (hereafter IMP), which clearly describes the roles, responsibilities, and expectations of the client, 
suppliers and all relevant parties. The objective of the plan is to ensure all parties understand the Interface 
management objectives for the project.  
Some projects in Banedanmark use these plans. For instance, the Signalling Programme developed an IMP 
with the purpose of early identification of issues with potential for impact to the cost or schedule.  
Staats suggests that to ensure the right people, processes and tools, the IMP shall include at least the 
following:  
• 
IM objectives, including relevant definitions and goals for the project 
• 
Clear roles and responsibilities of all involved parties including the IM team  
• 
Plan for conflict resolution  
• 
Clear description of communication strategies  
• 
Procedures to handle change 
• 
Description of all registers and standard documents which are to be used during the project  
Interface management process 
When the Interface Management organization, objectives and definitions are clear, the IM processes shall 
be defined. All objectives described in the IMP are met by following the IM processes. 
The IM process consists of five steps: identification, documentation, communication, control and closing 
of the interfaces.  
1. Interface Identification  
Management of interfaces starts with the identification of the interfaces. “From a technical perspective, the 
first task to be done in a project is to identify all the interfaces, the boundaries of the system and the projes” 
(43). Identification of all interfaces shall be done at the early phases in a collaborative way (see measure 1. 
in §Imprecise definition and design of technical interfaces, Appendix 3). Since this activity requires huge 
expertise regarding the different subsystems, ensuring the participation of the right people is crucial.  (42) 
==PAGE:56==
56 
 
First, during the getting started phase, the project manager shall allocate the right people to the tasks related 
to the identification and definition of interfaces (creation of interface management team). This is part of 
the creation of an interface management team. It is recommended that the interface management team is 
be controlled by the more senior and experienced members of the team (see measure 1. in §Imprecise 
definition and design of technical interfaces, Appendix 3) (49). 
Definition of the system shall be described in a detailed way at the beginning of the project, aiming at 
covering all technical interfaces (see measure 2. in §Imprecise definition and design of technical interfaces, 
Appendix 3). The design managers for each subsystem and the interface management team should work 
together at this stage to define the system in as much detail as possible with the information available up to 
this point. Also, members of other disciplines such as planning, construction, testing, safety and 
maintenance should participate in the process next to the design teams so the system definition also covers 
the construction part and the static and dynamic testing (42). 
In the tender preparation, interface managers shall describe all the identified technical interfaces so they are 
included in the tender documents, together with the division of responsibilities for the main interfaces (see 
measure 3. in §Imprecise definition and design of technical interfaces, Appendix 3). A benchmarking can 
be performed to obtain knowledge about what are the main interfaces and the way of handling them in 
other railway projects (43). 
Since the start of the draft design, it is essential to raise awareness among all parties of the importance of 
the interface identification and definition process. The interface management team shall ensure that all 
parties are aware and committed to participate and provide input for this process (see measure 5. in 
§Imprecise definition and design of technical interfaces, Appendix 3) (42). 
The identification of interfaces mainly happens during interface management meetings. These meetings are 
arranged by the interface manager and all involved parties should be invited. If available, interface registers 
or lessons learned documents of reference projects could be consulted although the identification of 
interfaces is mainly based on the experience of the project members (1). 
During the draft and detailed design, the system shall be defined in more depth as more information is 
known and decisions regarding design are made.  The detailed system definition and benchmarking (if 
needed) facilitates the tasks of the interface management team (see measure 2. in §Imprecise definition and 
design of technical interfaces, Appendix 3) (42). 
2. Interface Documentation  
According to the method proposed by Staats, the documentation that should be provided during the 
interface lifecycle includes: Interface Register, Interface Agreements and Interface Control Document. 
A Document Management System (hereafter DMS) shall be used to storage of all the relevant 
documentation of the project. All relevant interface-related documents shall be available on the DMS and 
should be accessible for all involved stakeholders, at all times. Access shall be provided to all relevant parties 
in order to prevent information to get lost and avoids misunderstandings.  
Register  
Each identified interface shall get an ID-number and shall be placed in the Interface Register (IR). The IR 
shall provide updated and accurate information. When the interface information is available, the team 
members are able to make decisions faster due to the accuracy of the information. 
Interface Agreements  
Interface Agreements (hereafter IA) are used to record and control the exchange of information and 
deliverables between two parties. The IAs shall be used for inter-disciplinary and external interfaces.  
==PAGE:57==
57 
 
The deliverable shall be agreed by the two parties, both the requester and the responder. The following 
information should be provided in the agreement (but not limited to): who are the involved parties and 
their roles; required information or deliverables, responding document(s), the action items, date of the 
agreement and deadline for meeting the conditions.  
Each IA might have several Action Items (hereafter AI). The actions are small tasks which shall be executed 
to fulfil the agreement. 
In the IAs is specified what specific information has to be exchanged, and what the roles and responsibilities 
of all interacting parties are.  
To make clear who the responder and who the requester is in an IA, a responsibility matrix can be used. 
An example of responsibility matrix is a RACI-matrix (56), which aims at increasing the visibility and 
eliminating ambiguity in the roles and responsibilities regarding the execution of each interface. 
RACI stands for Responsible, Accountable, Consulted and Informed. The description of roles for the 
interface execution is as follows:  
• 
Responsible: The party/person responsible for the interface overall performance. 
• 
Accountable: The party/person who generates the interface agreement and has the authority to 
approve the correctness of the work. This person also makes the final decision to close the related 
agreement. 
• 
Consulted: The party/person who responds to the IAs and provides the deliverables.  
• 
Informed: The parties who shall be informed about the status of the interface agreement.  
Another variation is the RASCI-matrix, where “S” stands for Supportive: The party/person who gives 
support to facilitate the process. 
Interface Control Document  
Staats suggests the use of an Interface Control Document (hereafter ICD) for control of complex interfaces. 
In this document both parties should work on the interface solution, documenting all interface 
characteristics, and describing the process for the interface resolution.   
The ICD could be used as a specification to align the interface requirements and responsibilities without 
leaving room for interpretation (see measure 4. in §Complicated technical interfaces, Appendix 3). (42) 
3. Interface Communication  
One of the most important parts of any IMP is the communication’s plan (1).  It shall include what, how 
and when to communicate the information regarding interfaces. This plan has to be aligned to the project’s 
communications program/strategy for how suppliers and all parties shall communicate with each other (see 
measure 12. in §Poor communication among parties, Appendix 3). 
According to Staats, most important methods to communicate are:  
• 
Electronic communication and face-to-face meetings;  
• 
Registers and tools  
• 
Reports and drawings 
• 
Update Notifications  
Face-to-face meetings  
All interfaces shall be discussed during the interface meetings. These face-to-face meetings shall be held on 
a regular basis and the agenda shall include discussions about the details, status, progress and possible 
agreements. 
==PAGE:58==
58 
 
The interface manager is responsible to engage communication between the different involved parties in 
case of conflict, where the interface manager shall have the authority to take decisions on behalf and in the 
interest of the project. 
Meet the milestones meetings can be used to communicate and monitor the most important interfaces to 
all project parties (see measure 6. in §Poor communication among partiesComplicated technical interfaces, 
Appendix 3). The Copenhagen-Ringsted project has lately been using these meeting with satisfactory 
results. Better coordination and alignment between the main disciplines involved has been experienced.   
Registers and tools  
Presented in §Interface Documentation. 
Reports and drawings  
Reports and drawings are used to communicate the design solution to the design and construction teams 
and the main stakeholders.  
a. Clash control 
Physical interfaces can be easily verified identified by checking the design drawings. Clash detection 
software in 3D modeling programs should be used to facilitate this process. Building in 3D increases the 
visualization of the project, which eases the identification of interfaces and the communications processes, 
since visual tools are of huge help to ensure understanding of all parties (1).  
The Copenhagen-Ringsted project used a 3D model for the civil works (see example in Figure 16).  The 
use of the 3D models generated satisfactory results by providing better understanding of the project, helping 
with the control of measurements etc. (57)  
 
Figure 19 - Example tender material Copenhagen-Ringsted (Banekonference slides, 2015) 
It is important to include the design of all subsystems in the 3D model to ensure a complete overview. (43) 
Building Information Modeling (BIM) programs are a huge assistance in construction projects development 
and can be used for clash control. BIM software has an assisting role in the IM process. Clash detection 
software could easily detect physical clashes in the design in advance, which helps preventing integration 
issues.  
 
Update notifications  
The IM team should notify the responsible for each interface of the upcoming deadlines. Automated 
processes could facilitate this task by sending electronic reminders to the relevant parties (1). 
==PAGE:59==
59 
 
4. Interface Control  
The progress of the interfaces, and the exchange of interface information, must be monitored to ensure 
each party receives the requested information in a timely manner.  
Monitor and control of the interfaces is necessary to keep an eye on the overall progress, to prevent and 
solve integration issues, and to verify the design solutions during the whole project lifecycle.  
The IM team is responsible for monitoring the interface data as stated in the IR. The IM team should 
organize regular interface meetings. The IR, IA register and AI register are used to monitor all interfaces. 
The registers and reports should provide the project team with the data they need to continually monitor 
the progress.  
• 
Configuration Management  
Configuration Management (hereafter CM) is a discipline which should be applied over the project’s life 
cycle to control changes. Some projects in Banedanmark apply this discipline 
The CM team is responsible for the management and monitoring of the overall progress of the project. 
This is done by approving, rejecting and monitoring changes during mainly the design and 
construction/installation phases. CM’s scope includes document management, baseline control and change 
management. 
• 
Project planning 
Extra control is needed to prevent potential issues with the most crucial interfaces. Thus, project schedule 
shall be integrated and contain all milestones to ensure that interfaces with high schedule-related risk are 
easily identified by each party (see measure 1 in § Planning issues, Appendix 3). 
As part of the project planner’s scope, any impact caused by an interface shall be assessed and reported to 
the interface coordinator. The project planner and interface manager shall work very closely to assure all 
impacts on the schedule caused by an interface are controlled (see measure 5 in § Planning issues, Appendix 
3). 
It is also essential that the planners have technical knowledge and play active roles, ensuring that milestones 
are achieved (see measures 2 and 4 in § Planning issues, Appendix 3) 
• 
Verification  
As part of interface control, the design of all components related to an interface must be verified. All parties 
shall follow and include a verification and validation system (see measure 1. in §Poor quality work, Appendix 
3). 
System Verification and Validation Plan shall be developed to guarantee that all requirements are verified 
and validated through test and inspections (58).  
5. Interface closing 
Staats includes as the final step of the IM process the interface closing. The interfaces are closed when all 
involved parties agree on the correct completion of all needed deliverables. After closure attention might 
be required to make sure all components meet the requirements.  
Implementation 
The implementation of this strategy requires effort from the three hierarchical levels: 
• 
Strategic level: To create the general guidelines. 
==PAGE:60==
60 
 
• 
Tactic level: To adapt the general guidelines to the project and to integrate them in the different 
disciplines. Then, to transmit and introduce the guidelines to the operational level (workshops 
could be a way to communicate the needed information).  
• 
Operational level: To follow the adapted model in a daily basis. 
Contributions and limitations 
This strategy provides an overview of the basic guidelines of how to identify and elaborate the technical 
interfaces in a systematic way. The strategy could be used as a starting point to develop general guidelines 
to be used in Banedanmark as standards. The guidelines should be flexible so the projects can adapt them 
to their specific needs. 
However, it should be noted that the proposed strategy is based on a theoretical approach and thus it should 
be tested on a real-life project to see the results and improve the approach. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:61==
61 
 
6.2.2. Strategy 2 - Project Delivery Methods 
As introduced in§3.4, contractual interfaces are critical in railway projects (Brunton and Tarling, et al., 2003). 
During the interviewees this statement was confirmed, contractual disputes are one of the main interface 
issues in railway projects leading to delays, extra costs and even scope creep. The purpose of this strategy 
is thus to create awareness of the importance and impact of the contracts in the interfaces. The suggestions 
presented throughout the strategy are mainly based on the individual proactive measures for avoiding 
contractual disputes. However, other interface issues such as poor-quality work, poor communication and 
coordination among parties, project parties unfamiliar with local laws and regulations, and imprecise 
identification and definition of technical interfaces, are also benefited from this strategy. 
The strategy first introduces the factors influencing the contracts and the recommended requirements to 
be consider for future projects. Then, the different project delivery methods that could be used for future 
projects are considered, differentiating between conventional delivery methods and new methods. 
Factors influencing the contract 
According to Roos, 2013, the main factors influencing the contracts in railway projects: risks and 
uncertainties, project complexity, opportunities to innovate and the project size (59). 
Risks and uncertainties 
According to Roos, uncertainties and risks are related to each other because when the project uncertainty 
is high, the risks are also high. 
The risks related to the uncertainties of the different processes can be influenced by the procurement 
strategy. When a project is characterized by high uncertainty, the risks in the beginning of the project are 
very high (59)..  
Complexity 
To handle the complexity of a project the level of cooperation, the project delivery method and the payment 
principle is important. The complexity and uncertainty of the project are correlated since a project with a 
lot of uncertainties in the process is complex to handle. When there are unclear conditions about the 
delivery strategy for the project, the project shall be identified as a complex project (59)..  
When the project complexity is high, it is essential to use a payment principle that eases the handling of 
complexity and fosters cooperation among parties. The most appropriated payment principle for this case 
is the target cost payment principle (59).. 
Opportunities to innovate 
The opportunities to innovate go together with project complexity and level of uncertainty. 
To obtain the best result from innovative solutions, Design and Build delivery method is the most 
appropriate. However, when the project does not need innovative solutions, the recommended choice is 
Design-Bid-Build (59)..  
Project size 
Finally, the greater the project size, the greater cooperation is needed since there are more parts to control 
and handle (59). 
 
==PAGE:62==
62 
 
6.2.2.1. 
Conventional delivery methods 
Roos and Holmberg, 2013, developed a systematic approach for contract selection in rail projects. Since 
contract disputes are one of the most common interface issues, the use of this tool to analyse the contract 
needs depending on the project type might be very useful to avoid contract disputes in future projects. 
The contract selection methodology proposed by Roos and Holmberg consists of an introduction the main 
concepts to be considered in the contracts and the contract selection, considering Build and Design2 
contracts and Design-Bid-Build3 contracts (general contracts). 
Main concepts 
• 
Procurement procedure: evaluation of the tender. The award decision of the tenders is normally 
based either on the lowest price or the most economically advantageous tender. In the most 
economically advantageous tender, the contractor is chosen based on the combination of price and 
other factors that are important for the project.  
• 
 Project delivery method: the contract type. In the methodology proposed by Roos, either Design-
Bid-Build (DBB) or Design and Build (DB).  
• 
Payment principle: the most common payment principles are the variable and fixed cost payment 
principles (59). 
o Fixed price: “Contract that provides for a price which normally is not subject to any 
adjustment unless certain provisions (such as contract change, economic pricing, or 
defective pricing) are included in the agreement” (60). 
o Variable cost (target cost): “Final agreed-upon cost which serves as a basis for computing 
cost savings in incentive type contracts” (60). 
Contract selection  
Roos categorized the contract types depending on the level of uncertainty in the project. Four options are 
described: small contracts, technical products, well defined functional requirements and complex and 
uncertain projects. 
Option one: small contracts 
First option includes projects with low uncertainty, low complexity, and small size with few alternative 
solutions for the contractors to innovate. 
These projects are not subject to high risk, according to Roos. Design-Bid-Build (DBB) delivery method 
should be used in combination with fixed or variable price. The payment principle choice depends on the 
bill of quantity (if it is made or not). 
 
                                                     
2 Construction contract where both the design and the construction are the responsibilities of the same contractor 
(60). 
3 Traditional contracting method in which design and construction phases of a construction project are bid and 
performed by two independent contractors under two distinct contracts (60). 
 
==PAGE:63==
63 
 
Option two: technical products 
The second option includes projects with low uncertainty, low complexity, small size and few opportunities 
for innovation. The difference with the first option is that there is high product uncertainty, where the 
functional requirements are hard to define.  
Design and Build method is recommended for projects included in this option, which requires more 
involvement from the contractor. The payment principle can be either fixed or variable cost payment, which 
shall be chosen based on the risks, being usually fixed price in the case the contractor can manage the risks 
and variable cost if the risks are very high. 
For this case, it is recommended to include in the payment principle bonuses and incentives for time, cost, 
and quality accomplishments. 
 
Option three: well defined functional requirements 
The third option includes projects with high uncertainty, high complexity and high opportunities for 
innovating. The functional requirements of the project are easy to define and the detailed design could be 
executed in different ways.  
Design and Build method is recommended for projects in this option, since the contractor has the 
opportunity to deliver innovative solutions. The payment principle can be fixed or target cost, although 
fixed price is recommended because the functional requirements are defined easily. In case the risks are 
high, the target cost principle should be used. 
Also for option three, the payment principle should include bonuses and incentives for time, cost, and 
quality. 
 
Option four: Complex and uncertain projects 
The fourth option includes projects with high uncertainty, high complexity and great opportunities to find 
innovative designs. As opposed to option three, functional requirements in projects included in this option 
are hard to define.  
There are high uncertainties in both the processes and the product. In these cases, the focus shall be on 
promoting cooperation through the payment principle instead of on the project delivery method. The 
payment principle shall be target cost to allocate the risks between the project participants. 
Design-Bid-Build and Design and Build method are equally recommended. The method shall be chosen 
based on who the client wants to have the responsibility of the risks and uncertainties and considering the 
need of innovative solutions. 
==PAGE:64==
64 
 
The payment principle should include bonuses and incentives for time, cost, and quality. 
 
Contract Requirements 
Once the project delivery method has been decided, it is crucial to prepare an appropriate contract. 
According to the interviews, many contractual disputes could be mitigated by adding different types of 
requirements in the contracts.  This is not an easy task since creating a very detailed contract supposes that 
the contractors will ask for change requests every time the client asks for something which is not included 
in the contract.  
According to Tarling, 2003, all requirements must be clearly defined, in an unambiguous and concise 
manner, including a description of how it will be approved (49). Moreover, all requirements must be 
traceable to an originating stakeholder’s need. (49) 
During the workshop dedicated to find proactive measures, the following characteristics and types of 
requirements were identified as essential for future projects: 
Requirements regarding labour resources:  
• 
The suppliers’ employees shall have specific qualifications and relevant experience. 
• 
The suppliers’ CV’s shall be approved by the client.  
• 
The participation of juniors and seniors in the project shall be balanced. The client might 
establish a maximum percentage of junior positions in the supplier side. 
• 
These requirements apply for the whole process.  
• 
Roles and responsibilities of each party shall be included in the contracts. Responsibilities 
shall also cover activities after the commissioning (for instance the suppliers should be 
responsible for investigating any defects after the commissioning) 
Requirements regarding the success criteria: 
• 
The contract shall state that the supplier shall not only deliver a working system but also satisfy the 
client success factors. It is thus essential to specify the success criteria for the client (end user KPI) 
in the contracts and the suppliers must deliver according to it.  This shall be clearly described 
considering that the client and supplier do not have the same perspective. 
Other requirements: 
• 
Communication processes between the client and contractors could be included as part of a 
communications plan to be followed by all contracting parties. 
• 
The risk sharing principles shall be specified in the contracts. 
• 
Contracts shall include constraints and penalties for delays.  
Adding these requirements to the contracts should help mitigating a percentage of the contractual disputes. 
However, this measure cannot completely mitigate contractual disputes since there would still be many 
different organizations connected by several contracts with different objectives. 
The following section presents a delivery method which aligns objectives and reduces organizational 
interfaces.  
==PAGE:65==
65 
 
6.2.2.2. 
New project delivery method: Alliances  
This section aims at presenting a new way of contracting that could be used for Banedanmark ’s projects: 
project alliances. The following subsections describe the concept, principles and features of the project 
alliances.  
The concept of Project Alliance 
Project alliance is a project delivery method based on joint contracts between the key participants of a 
project. Through the contract, the involved parties agree on assuming joint responsibility for the design 
and construction of the project, which is to be implemented through a common organization where all 
risks (both positive and negative) are shared (61). 
Principles  
The main principles of project alliances are: 
• 
An alliance is a contractual framework between the client (owner participant) and one or more 
private sector parties (non-owner participants)  Multi-party contract 
• 
All parties create a core joint organization 
• 
Core team has common goals  “We all win or we all lose” mindset  No blame culture 
• 
Pains and gains are shared 
• 
Open books principle is followed 
• 
Core team is engaged to innovate and to provide outstanding execution 
 
The main objectives of alliance contracting are, according to Lahdenperä: 
1. Harmonizing the interests of all parties involved in the alliance in regard to reaching the project 
goals.  
 
Figure 20 - Interests of the contracting parties in alliances 
2. Combining expertise from an early stage in order to benefit the project. 
3. Improving the economic aspects of high risk projects. 
Features of project alliances 
Project alliance can be described through its structural and collaborative features. Features are divided in 
features related to structural arrangements (hard features) and features related to the nature of collaboration 
(soft features). The structural features are unambiguous and are necessary for the implementation of 
alliances. On the other side, collaborative features are preconditions for the correct functioning of the 
project alliance, and can be implemented in different degrees.  
The following tables present the main features of project alliances: 
Performance level  
==PAGE:66==
66 
 
Features related to structural arrangements: 
 
Table 3 - Features related to structural arrangements (61) 
Features related to nature of collaboration: 
 
Table 4 - Features related to nature of collaboration (61) 
Contributions and limitations 
The main contribution of this strategy is the creation of awareness regarding the importance and impact of 
the contracts in the interfaces. The conventional contract types introduce the common contracts currently 
used in rail projects. The suggestions presented regarding specific requirements are expected to reduce the 
contractual disputes. Moreover, the last part presents a new project delivery method: the alliances.  
Contract management is an entire management discipline and due to time limitations, this strategy needs 
further development and analysis. The strategy introduces the need of further work in order to mitigate the 
contractual disputes by improving contract requirements and adapting the contract types to each project. 
Finally, regarding the project alliances, since Banedanmark is a state-owned enterprise, further analysis 
regarding legislation is needed to ensure the possibility of implementing alliances or to study and analyze 
the needed variations in the legislation for the implementation.  
 
 
==PAGE:67==
67 
 
6.2.3. Strategy 3 - Decision-making framework 
The third strategy aims at providing a base for the creation of a decision-making framework for railway 
projects. This strategy was pointed out at the workshops as strongly needed since decision making has an 
impact on most of the other issues.  
This strategy is structured around the issue poor decision making. However, other interface issues such as 
project nature issues and poor communication are also benefited from this strategy.   
The decision-making framework proposed by Townsend is now introduced. First, the main factors to be 
considered when taking decisions are described, followed by the introduction to the three steps to be 
followed and tools to assist the decision-making framework. The last part includes specific factors to be 
considered in Banedanmark ’s projects. The model proposed by Townsend is adapted to the specific needs 
of railway projects by introducing individual proactive measures. 
Factors to consider when taking decisions 
When project managers make decisions, these influence the Triple Constraints4 (62): cost, schedule and 
scope. Thus, taking decisions, the impact on the triple constraints shall be considered. 
• 
In regard to project scope, the following should be considered (but not limited to): is any functionality 
affected? How much? Is it a critical functionality? Is the project missing quality? 
• 
In regard to the schedule, the following should be considered (but not limited to): can activities be 
performed jointly? Can activities be scheduled differently? Can certain milestones or activities be 
missed or eliminated? 
• 
In regard to the cost, the following should be considered (but not limited to): can the project afford 
over cost in a specific phase/activity? Can the cost be reduced?   
Apart from considering the triple constraints, based on the workshop outputs the following specific factors 
should also be considered for the decision-making model: 
• 
Long term impact: decision makers shall think in the long term and not only about how to solve 
problems in the short term.  
• 
Impact on future owners: decision makers shall involve the future owners and evaluate the impact 
on the different alternatives for them. 
• 
In cases of scope reduction:  
o Do not forget what was promised to the public, try to offer the closest solution to the 
original plan.  
o In case of a “temporary scope reduction”, the costs of completing the project in the future 
shall be considered.  
• 
Decisions shall not be made evaluating only the budget, but the triangle. 
Steps 
There are three components to the Decision-Making Framework: Identification (gather inputs), Analysis 
of Information, and Outcomes Evaluation (positive or negative outcomes that can result from the decision). 
 
Figure 21 - Components of the decision-making framework (based on Townsend model) 
                                                     
4 The tripe constraints (time, cost and scope) are the classic form of measuring project success. (62) 
==PAGE:68==
68 
 
Identification (gather inputs) 
The first step is to identify which are the goals the decision aims to achieve and which are the different 
alternatives. 
All necessary input for making the decision shall be gathered at this stage. The input should include at least, 
but not limited to: how much time is available for the decision making, what would be the impacts of each 
alternative (time available for the execution/implementation of the decision, cost implication and scope 
affections), what data is necessary for taking the decision and the risks associated to each identified 
alternative. 
Analysis of information 
The decision makers shall consider the following at this stage:  the needed and available resources for each 
alternative, which are the possible mitigations for each risk identified in the previous phase, if enough 
information is available and up-to-date for each alternative, and what would happen if no decision is made. 
Also some questions related to regulations and policies should be considered by the decision makers: 
• 
Are there any regulatory implications for the alternatives? 
• 
Are there any company policies that suppose an implication for the alternatives? 
Outcomes Evaluation 
The final step before selecting the decision, is to identify all the outcomes (positive and negatives) that are 
associated to each alternative. It is important to be honest and objective when reporting to the Decision 
Maker the possible outcomes for each alternative analyzed. 
The model is summarized in Figure 22.  
 
Figure 22 - Decision-making model (63) 
Implementation 
In order to create a decision-making framework, it is not necessary to develop a complicated model. After 
creating the model, the most important part is to ensure that all project members at different decision levels 
==PAGE:69==
69 
 
(strategic, tactic and operational levels) understand the model and implement it. This can be done by 
creating a team charter5 which includes the decision-making criteria and processes for the project team. 
Contributions and limitations 
It is highly recommended to railway projects to establish a decision-making framework for their projects. 
It does not necessarily have to be based on the model proposed by Townsend. This strategy combines the 
model proposed by Townsend with specific recommendations as a basis for creating a simple and very 
practical model. 
As in the first strategy, it should be noted that the proposed strategy is based on a theoretical approach and 
further research is needed to adapt the decision-model as much as possible to the different projects’ needs. 
Moreover, it should be tested on a real-life project to see the final results and improve any necessary aspects. 
 
 
 
                                                     
5 The team charter is a document which establishes the team values, agreements and operating guidelines for the team. It might 
include: team values, communication guidelines, decision making criteria and processes, conflict resolution processes and team 
agreements. (53) 
==PAGE:70==
70 
 
6.2.4. Strategy 4 - Organizational culture 
The last strategy aims at providing a base for the creation of an integrated organizational culture. According 
to the findings of this research, railway projects in Banedanmark are characterized by cultural diversity due 
to the great number of consultants, suppliers and other stakeholders. Hence, it is strongly recommended 
to create and establish an integrated culture to avoid issues related to cultural diversity (mainly 
miscommunications, misunderstandings and misaligned interests and objectives). 
Besides cultural diversity, other interface issues such as poor communication, poor collaboration and 
complex stakeholder management could be mitigated by the implementation of a culture that aligns and 
integrates all the project participants.  
An overview of the basic concepts or an organizational culture is presented in this section: first, the 
importance of the organizational culture is introduced, followed by the culture components and the 
different types of culture.  
Importance of organizational culture 
“An organization’s culture is its DNA - its core identity” (53). 
The organizational culture generates a sense of commitment and order that influences every aspect of the 
organization, including the external perceptions. Culture impacts the processes, the employee attraction to 
the company, employees’ productivity, the company reputation, etc. (64) 
Even if the organization’s procedures and strategies are very strong, in case they are not aligned with the 
organizational culture, the culture would trump the strategies.  
Culture components 
The culture is defined by three components:  
• 
Values: the company mission, what it does and how is the company 
is represented.  
• 
Assumptions: the attitudes, often unconscious, formed through 
company processes and actions that inform what employees think.  
• 
Artifacts: the representation of the company in the form of 
technologies, publications, products, processes, its location and 
architecture. 
Based on the workshop for recommendations, the components for the 
integrated culture should consider the following: 
• 
Culture values: communication, trust, transparency, empathy and collaboration among parties 
• 
Open minded culture where diversity is not a problem 
• 
Integration and adaptation of all involved cultures 
• 
All parties shall share objectives and beliefs 
• 
All parties involved in a project shall belief in the project 
• 
Common and unique language 
• 
No-blame culture 
Types of organizational culture 
Cameron and Quinn (65) defined two major dimensions demonstrating that there is a link between the 
culture and the effectiveness of the organization. These dimensions are the foundations for the Competing 
Values Framework (a framework for the different organizational cultures). The two dimensions are: 
Figure 23 - Culture components (64) 
==PAGE:71==
71 
 
• 
Flexibility versus Stability:  adaptation and dynamism versus control. For instance, some 
organizations might prefer adaptable managers while others value manager who are consistent 
(constant). 
• 
Internal versus External: internal orientation focus on collaboration and unity while external 
orientation focus on differentiation and competition. For example, while some organizations focus on 
internal relationships, others prioritize establishing a niche market.  
The dimensions are formed by the core values which represent the opposite. The components of the culture 
(values, assumptions and artifacts) are represented by the opposing dimensions. 
The two dimensions form four options which correspond with a pure culture type with different features. 
The options are: collaborate culture, create culture, control culture and compete culture, respectively. 
Usually organizations always have a dominant culture and there might include different subcultures. Figure 
25 introduces the basics of each option:  
 
Figure 24 - Organizational cultures and dimensions (figure based on: How to create successful organizations)  
The collaborate culture (also known as clan culture) aims at building teams and doing things together. The 
main features of this culture are the commitments, empowerments, human development, cohesion, 
engagements, collective wisdom and long-lasting partnerships (66). 
The create culture (also known as adhocracy culture) envisions the future by innovating, creating and 
handling discontinuity, change and risks. Freedom of thought and action, experimentation, failing fast and 
learning from mistakes are the main features of this culture (66).  
The control culture (also known as hierarchy culture) aims at increasing consistency and reliability by 
improving processes and efficiency. This culture pays attention to details and makes careful decisions and 
precise analyses (66). 
Finally, the compete culture (also known as market culture) aims at competing and moving fast to win. The 
control culture focuses on delivering results and making fast decisions to achieve the goals. (66). 
Based on the research findings and the recommendations from the workshop, it is strongly recommended 
to create an integrated culture including the above-mentioned factors and taking as main culture the 
collaboration type, merging it with several subcultures. 
==PAGE:72==
72 
 
Implementation 
The implementation of a new organizational culture is a 
very complex process. This section presents the basics for 
the implementation of a new culture.  
As it happens with the other strategies, the 
implementation of a new culture requires effort from the 
three hierarchical levels:  
• 
Strategic level: to articulate a clear vision of the 
new cultural change and should also ensure the 
creation of guidelines that lead to an effective 
cultural change. It is important to regularly 
measure the employee satisfaction levels in order 
to identify areas of improvement. Several criteria can be used such as for example complaint levels 
and satisfaction scores (perception).  
• 
Tactic level: to model in the projects the types of behaviors needed to support the company's 
desired culture. To explain and influence together with the strategic level to the operational level 
the need for a culture change. 
• 
Operational level: to avoid being entrenched in the current way of doing things and being averse 
to change. It is also important that the operational level understands the need of a change and to 
be participate in the process. 
Contributions and limitations 
This strategy provides the basic insights to create an integrated culture which helps improving the project 
results in the company, by mitigating several interface issues among other aspects. The implementation of 
an integrated culture would align the vision and values of all project participants which eventually would 
lead to the improvement of the communication, trust, transparency, empathy and collaboration among 
parties. 
Unfortunately, organizational cultural changes usually take much longer than is necessary because of the 
aversion to change. As presented above in this section, railway projects in Banedanmark are characterized 
by cultural diversity due to the great number of consultants, suppliers and other stakeholders, which 
increases the complexity of the process. Moreover, the strategy presented above only provides basic insights 
and much work has to be done in order to create and implement a successful strategy that improves the 
general project results and also mitigates the interface issues. 
 
 
Figure 25 - Workspace for collaborative culture 
(Haworth, 2015) 
==PAGE:73==
73 
 
6.3. Conclusions 
Four strategies have been proposed throughout this chapter: the creation of an Interface Management 
Program (systematic approach for technical interfaces), different Delivery methods, Decision-making 
framework and the creation of an integrated Organizational Culture. 
These strategies are the result from the individual analysis of each interface issue and aim at mitigating as 
much as possible the main interface issues identified in this research. 
The following figure represents which interface issues are expected to be fully or partially covered by the 
implementation of each strategy: 
 
Figure 26 - Mitigations resulting from each strategy 
These four strategies cover most of the interface issues. However, two interface issues are not mitigated: 
• 
6.  Stakeholder Management 
• 
8. Teams dispersed geographically 
For mitigating these issues, it is necessary to implement the individual proactive measures proposed in 
Appendix 3 for Stakeholder management and Teams dispersed geographically. 
As stated in the introduction, in order to avoid and reduce as much as possible the occurrence of the 
interface issues, it is recommended to implement the four strategies and all individual measures. This is 
because the strategies aim at covering several issues but do not include the complete set of measures for all 
interface issues.  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:74==
74 
 
7. Discussion 
This chapter introduces the importance of interface management in railway projects. Then, a discussion 
about the findings is facilitated. The final part of this chapter includes the research evaluation: validity and 
reliability, generalizability and limitations are discussed. 
This paragraph explains the meaning of the main results, the importance of the results and relates the 
findings with those of similar studies. 
 
7.1. Why is interface management so important in railway projects? 
As introduced in §1.2, interfaces are among the great number of possible causes of project failure. One of 
the main causes of project failure are the issues surrounding interfaces (9).  
In this study, interfaces are defined as the common boundaries (or links) where 2 systems, units, 
organizations, subjects, etc. interact and meet.  
Railway construction projects require the participation of many parties such as the client, suppliers, 
subcontractors, safety authorities, assessors, ministry of Transport and operators among others. This 
creates complex relationships which have plenty of interface problems between them, leading to time 
overruns, quality impacts and cost overruns.  
Apart from the great number of stakeholders, railway projects are multidisciplinary and require the 
integration of several subsystems and numerous components. All interfaces shall be considered from the 
first phase of the project to prevent integration issues.  
The lack of Interface Management might cause difficulties to meet the success constrains. Hence, an 
effective management of interfaces throughout the project life cycle is directly related to the project success. 
The mitigation of interface issues shall be a major point on the agenda of effective and efficient interface 
management. 
7.2. Implications in theory 
This study contributes to the interface management literature in general but it also opens a new way of 
thinking about the root causes of interface problems in railway projects and the way to mitigate them.  
The following implications for theory result from this study: 
• 
A new perspective on the dimensions of complexity in railway projects included in the complexity 
framework provided by Robert J. Chapman [A framework for examining the dimensions and 
characteristics of complexity inherent within rail megaprojects (28)]. 
• 
There is no extensive literature regarding interface management for the railway sector. This study 
collaborates adapting and extrapolating results from studies dedicated to the construction sector 
into the railway industry. 
• 
A list of the main interface issues in railway projects, including some issues not discussed in the 
reviewed literature. Even though the research was focused on the specific case of Banedanmark 
projects, as discussed in §7.6, the results could be extrapolated to other projects in the railway 
sector with little variation. 
• 
Introduction to the analysis of dependencies among the interface issues. 
• 
See §Suggestions for further research. 
R.Q. 4 What are the implications for theory and practice? 
==PAGE:75==
75 
 
7.3. Implications in practice: recommendations for Banedanmark 
The main contribution of the study for Banedanmark is the identification of the main interface issues in 
the projects as well as proposals for mitigation by the implementation of proactive strategies and individual 
proactive measures.  
The proactive mitigations proposed in the previous chapter cannot be implemented without joint 
cooperation. To accomplish better results by improving practices and performance at the interfaces, effort 
from numerous parties at different hierarchical levels is required.  
At the project level, interface management shall start from the beginning of the project. As described in 
§6.1, project hierarchy can be divided into strategic level, tactic level and operational level and each group 
should work on different types of measures. 
The actions recommended for each group are presented below: 
Operational level: all project members shall be aware of the importance of the interfaces and the effects 
that a poor interface management would have in the project. Once the members of the operational level 
are informed about the procedures to ensure a better performance at the interfaces, all should become 
participants and collaborate at the interfaces, instead of waiting to the interface management team to solve 
all problems around interfaces. Understanding that the interface managers need support and collaboration 
from all project members would facilitate their work and reduce the interface issues. Although the 
understanding and common vision about the importance of interfaces might be the most important step, 
it is recommended to follow and implement all the individual measures stated in §Appendix 3 
Tactic level: this level includes project managers from both Banedanmark and suppliers. Then, the priority 
for this level should be to evaluate which measures proposed in this study shall be prioritized and to ensure 
the correct implementation. It is recommended to implement as many measures and strategies as possible. 
It is of essential importance that members of the tactic level are an example for all the project participants. 
Some of the measures included in the appendix are: 
• 
To create an interface management team ensuring participation of the right people. The 
interface management team must be controlled by the more senior and experienced members 
of the team. 
• 
To create awareness about the importance of interfaces in the operational level. 
• 
To perform periodic checks to the organization and its performance (how is it working).  To 
adapt organization according to the project phase and the specific situation 
• 
To ensure verification and validation processes in all parties involved in the project 
• 
To involve suppliers and all relevant stakeholders in the processes stated in §Proactive 
strategies. 
• 
To use the valuable experiences from previous projects to broaden this study and leverage 
performance at the interfaces. 
• 
To ensure suppliers and third parties are involved in the planning and an integrated planning 
is created. All parties shall be aware of the importance of the relevant activities and milestones. 
Strategic level: at this level (project director and management group) the focus should be on the 
implementation of the proactive strategies and on ensuring there is coordination with other projects in 
regard to the strategies. Together with the tactic level, the strategies shall be adapted to the project. 
On the other hand, at company level there are also implications. Top management shall be involved in the 
process of implementing the strategies and provide the required support for the correct implementation. 
Some of the measures that need more support from the top management might be: 
• 
Deep analysis in regard to the procurement strategies for each project. 
==PAGE:76==
76 
 
• 
Creation of the integrated organizational culture (see §Strategy 4 - Organizational culture). 
• 
Getting more skilled resources and working with universities to connect Banedanmark to the 
students and to prepare them to become useful members of Banedanmark ’s projects. 
• 
Invest in training the employees so they can broaden their knowledge about interfaces and 
how to improve performance at the interfaces. 
Finally, improving performance at the interfaces for better project results must also be the ambition for the 
authorities and political stakeholders.  
 
7.4. Scope and framework of projects 
This research is focused on the internal project perspective. Focusing on the interface issues gives a one-
dimensional approach, only considering the internal project challenges.  This section aims at providing an 
insight of the external perspective not covered by this research but considered relevant to provide a 
complete overview of the main challenges in railway projects.   
The internal perspective based on the interface issues leads to conclusions related to for instance, the project 
organization. An example of conclusion from the internal perspective could be that the organizational 
triangle formed by the Electrification Programme, the Signalling Programme, and the Copenhagen-
Ringsted organization was not set up clearly (43).   
However, apart from the organizational set ups, it could be argued that some projects do not have clear 
goals and incentives (43). The New Line Copenhagen Ringsted is subject to discussions in regard to these 
issues:   
• 
The line was design for a maximum capacity of 24 trains per hour per direction. However, the limit 
capacity of Copenhagen Central Station is approximately 17 trains arriving from the west side per 
hour (38).  
• 
Moreover, other parts of the network are not being upgraded according to earlier plans. For 
instance, necessary fly-over in Ny Ellebjerg. This supposes that freight trains coming from Sweden 
towards Ringsted direction will have to cross the track in opposite direction. The same when trains 
from west (for example Aarhus) will have to wait at Vigerslev before continuing to Copenhagen 
Central Station. The missing flyover in Ny Ellebjerg lowers the capacity of the whole line by 
approximately 20% (43). 
• 
Finally, the dependencies of the Copenhagen Ringsted project with the Signalling Programme 
(which is responsible for the fitment of the trains with the new signalling system) led the project 
to the decision of installing the legacy signalling system and to delay the commissioning (currently 
planned for May 2019) (43). 
This results in both the public and decision makers asking why they are not receiving what was promised 
at the beginning of the project. 
The facts presented above are examples of problems and challenges originated outside the scope of the 
project (but in the project framework) and which also result in the project not meeting all the success 
criteria. The Copenhagen Ringsted line is used as example in this section, but the issues originated in the 
project frameworks appear in most of the projects (43). 
The main contribution for Banedanmark is the description of the main interface issues that can be 
found in their projects and the ways to improve the situation. This study opens a new perspective to 
look at the interfaces and proposes suggestions for future research and analysis so performance at the 
interfaces can continue improving. 
==PAGE:77==
77 
 
7.5. Are all problems in projects originated at the interfaces? 
Based on the discussion presented in the previous section (§7.4), it can be said that not all problems 
preventing railway projects to fulfill the success criteria are caused by interface issues.  
Certainly, interface issues form part of these problems affecting the project results. Figure 29 shows how 
interface issues are risks able to change the target of the project (expected results) and the final actual results. 
 
Figure 27 - Project risks due to interface issues [based on the model of project risks proposed by (67)] 
After this research, it can be said that the main interface issues presented in this study are from now on 
predictable interface issues and thus, projects should focus on mitigating them proactively. The objective 
should be to anticipate as much as possible all these problems to mitigate them proactively or to be well 
prepared to address them reactively. However, there will always be unpredictable issues supposing a risk 
on project success (67).  
7.6. Research evaluation 
The final section of the discussion evaluates the research in terms of validity, reliability, generalizability and 
limitations. 
7.6.1. Validity and reliability 
Validity refers to the data representing the reality and the results of the study accurately reflecting the studied 
problem (68). Reliability can be defined as the absence of differences in the research results if it is replicated 
(68).  
The best validity is to test the results on a real-life project. It was not possible to test it due to the academic 
nature of this study. Instead, constant reviews through the course of the project ensured validity and 
reliability: 
• 
Regarding the data provided in the interviews, all participants are professional experts on the sector 
with minimum six years of experience in railway projects.  
• 
During the analysis, several workshops were conducted to discuss the research results and to 
perform brainstorming for suggestions for improvement. This process was iterative, which ensures 
consistent results. 
Moreover, weekly meetings with DTU and Banedanmark supervisors provided detailed feedback on the 
course of the project.  
7.6.2. Generalisability 
Generalization refers to the degree the research results can be extended or applied to wider social settings 
(69). 
==PAGE:78==
78 
 
This research was conducted for the specific case of Banedanmark ’s railway projects and consisted of a 
state-of-the-art research and empirical research based on interviews to industry experts. Based on the 
findings presented by other studies reviewed during this project, the author believes the results could be 
applied to other companies equivalent to Banedanmark with little adaptation. Most of the interface issues 
found for the specific case of Banedanmark are also remarked by other studies regarding interface issues in 
the construction and railway sector. However, some issues are not mentioned by other authors and are 
considered main issues in Banedanmark ’s projects. Hence, the author considers the results presented in 
this study are valid to other cases but it is strongly recommended to review and apply the findings to the 
specific situation, since there might be some issues missing in the specific case and some issues considered 
great issues in this study might not be relevant in that case. 
7.6.3. Limitations 
Three research limitations are considered the main constraints of this study: 
• 
The Msc thesis is limited to six months. The first part of the research (dedicated to find the major 
interface issues) took more than half of the period to identify and provide the main issues as precise 
as possible according to reality. Then, the rest of the period was dedicated to investigate the 
possible mitigations to avoid (or to reduce) the presented issues. 
• 
The great size of the topic is considered one of the main complexities of the research process. 
Further research is needed to improve and adapt the methods proposed in this study. See 8.3. 
• 
Finally, as with any study using interviews, the data collection might be influenced by insufficient 
resources, time limitation and transparency of the respondents.  
==PAGE:79==
79 
 
 
 
==PAGE:80==
80 
 
8. Conclusion 
This chapter presents the conclusions of the research. The chapter consists of key findings followed by a 
general conclusion and suggestions for future research. 
8.1. Key findings: answering the research questions 
As presented in §1.3, the purpose of this study is to investigate the main interface issues present in railway 
construction projects at Banedanmark and to provide recommendations to improve performance at the 
interfaces.  
The purpose mentioned above is addressed through the following Research Questions: 
1. What are the theories to base the research upon in order to address the dominant causes of conflict 
on interfaces in railway projects? 
Chapter 3 presented the theories which compose a context for this study: Complexity, Systems Engineering 
and Interface Management.  A brief description of each theory and how they relate to railway projects are 
provided in chapter 3. 
These are the three theories considered as an essential background for understanding this study. 
In summary, separating and integrating are key activities for dealing with complexity. Interfaces allow the 
separation and integration by defining the common boundaries and hence, interface management is 
considered a key aspect in project success since interface issues may impede meeting the success criteria of 
the project.  
a. What are the interfaces? 
For this study, interfaces are defined as the common boundaries where 2 systems, units, organizations, 
subjects, etc. interact and meet. Interfaces can be divided into numerous categories such as static, dynamic, 
internal, external, physical, organizational, contractual, etc. 
2. What are the interface issues likely to occur in future railway projects in Banedanmark? 
Both a state of the art and empirical research were conducted. The final results of the research include a 
total of 15 issues, from which 8 were remarked by both the interviewees and the articles analyzed during 
the literature research, 3 were only mentioned by the interviewees and the last 4 were only found in the 
literature research. 
The main interface issues found in this research for the specific case of Banedanmark are the following: 
• 
Imprecise identification and definition of interfaces 
• 
Complicated technical interfaces 
• 
Poor quality work 
• 
Project organization and unclear division of responsibilities 
• 
Poor communication among parties 
• 
Poor coordination among parties 
• 
Poor stakeholder management 
• 
Cultural diversity 
• 
Teams dispersed geographically 
• 
Planning issues 
• 
Contractual disputes 
• 
Project nature issues 
==PAGE:81==
81 
 
• 
Poor Decision making 
• 
Labor issues 
• 
Project parties unfamiliar with local laws and regulations 
 
a. What are the dynamics surrounding the interface issues? 
The dynamics surrounding the interface issues are described in §5.1.1. These dynamics can be summarized 
as follows: 
The interface issues result in initial consequences (usually the moment when the interface issues become 
visible). When the project participants realize about the presence of the problem (initial consequence), 
reactive mitigations are applied or implemented to minimize as much as possible the impact on the project. 
These mitigations might not always be able to completely mitigate the effect of the interface issue(s) on the 
project.  
Moreover, the analysis highlighted the high level of dependency between the interface issues. The 
appearance of one interface issue is likely to promote the appearance of others.  
The interviews revealed that the reactive mitigations are currently used to minimize the impact of the 
interface issues. Examples of reactive mitigations could be work iterations, postponement of certain activity, 
late alignment and agreements, restructuring the planning, late completion of the work, etc.  
3. What could be done to reduce the occurrence and impact of the interface issues? 
To fully mitigate the interface issues the solution relies on avoiding the interface issues, on removing them 
by using proactive mitigations (43). Proactive approaches aim at identifying opportunities and in taking 
preemptory action against potential problems and threats (60).  
 
Figure 28 - Difference between reactive and proactive mitigations 
To create a consistent mitigation strategy, two types of measures are needed: individual proactive 
measures and general proactive strategies. These are described in Chapter 6. 
The individual proactive measures are specific measures to be applied to each of the interface issues. This 
type of measures provides flexibility since they can be implemented individually, giving the possibility to 
prioritize some issues. These measures might also be considered as starting points, since they can be 
implemented in the short-term period. However, if these measures are implemented alone, a full mitigation 
cannot be expected since there might be non-covered gaps.  
The proactive strategies are a result of integrating the individual measures in a way that facilitates their 
implementation covering multiple issues at a time. The four presented strategies are: 
1. Interface Management program: a systematic approach 
2. Project Delivery methods 
3. Decision - Making Framework 
4. Integrated Organizational Culture  
 
==PAGE:82==
82 
 
Interface Management program: a systematic approach 
A systematic approach for interface management is presented based on the method elaborated by Staats, 
2014. The IM process consists of five steps (interface identification, documentation, communication, 
control and closure).  
The identification is usually mainly based on the experience of the project members but lessons learned 
reports from other projects can be used as starting point. It is of essential importance to arise awareness 
among all parties of the importance of the interface identification process.   
Interface Agreements (IAs) should be used to create agreements for the exchange of information around 
interfaces. These agreements include Action Items (AIs), which are small tasks assigned to a team member. 
The completion of these actions is necessary to comply with the requirements described in the IA. Finally, 
Interface Control Documents (ICDs) should be used for the elaboration of complicated interfaces, which 
need a more comprehensive analysis.  
A communication plan must be created in the early design phase to join the IM program. Project members 
should be aligned in what information should be communicated, how should it be communicated, and 
when should it be communicated. Forms to communicate are registers, online communication, face-to-face 
meetings and notifications.  
Monitor and control of the interfaces is a must to prevent integration issues. The Configuration 
Management team controls the overall project progress approving, rejecting and monitoring changes.  
For the successful implementation of the Interface Management process, digital technical tools are required 
for assisting the IM program.  
Project Delivery Methods 
Contractual disputes are one of the most common interface issues. The main factors influencing the 
contracts in railway projects are: risks and uncertainties, project complexity, opportunities to innovate and 
the project size. (59) 
Different project delivery methods must be analysed in order to prepare a detailed and appropriate contract. 
According to the interviews, many contractual disputes could be mitigated by adding different types of 
requirements in the contracts.  This is not an easy task since creating a very detailed contract supposes that 
the contractors will ask for change requests every time the client asks for something which is not included 
in the contract.  
Regarding the project alliances, since Banedanmark is a state-owned enterprise, further analysis regarding 
legislation is needed to ensure the possibility of implementing alliances or to analyze the variations needed 
in the legislation for allowing the implementation of alliances in the relevant cases.  
Decision Making 
The creation of a decision-making framework would facilitate the alignment in decision making from 
different parties of the project as well as to maximize the probability of positive outcomes due to the 
systematic way of analyzing and making decisions.  
The importance of decision making relies on the fact that decisions influence the Triple Constraints: cost, 
schedule and scope. Thus, when making decisions, it is essential to consider the impact on the triple 
constraints. 
• 
In regard to project scope, the following should be considered (but not limited to): is any functionality 
affected? How much? Is it a critical functionality? Is the project missing quality? 
==PAGE:83==
83 
 
• 
In regard to the schedule, the following should be considered (but not limited to): can activities be 
performed jointly? Can activities be scheduled differently? Can certain milestones or activities be 
missed or eliminated? 
• 
In regard to the cost, the following should be considered (but not limited to): can the project afford 
over cost in a specific phase/activity? Can the cost be reduced?   
Organizational Culture 
Projects in Banedanmark are characterized by cultural diversity due to the great number of consultants, 
suppliers and other stakeholders. The creation and establishment of an integrated culture would avoid issues 
due to cultural diversity (mainly miscommunications, misunderstandings and misaligned interests and 
objectives). 
The integrated culture shall consider the following: 
• 
Culture pillars: communication, trust, transparency, empathy and collaboration among parties 
• 
Open minded culture where diversity is not a problem 
• 
Integration and adaptation of all involved cultures 
• 
All parties shall share objectives and beliefs 
• 
Common and unique language 
• 
No-blame culture and risk sharing 
Stakeholders 
As discussed in §6.3, apart from the four proactive strategies, all the individual proactive measures suggested 
for an efficient stakeholder management should also be applied since the proactive strategies do not cover 
the poor stakeholder management specifically: 
Railway projects are well known for the great number and type of stakeholders. Each type of stakeholder 
has different interests, requirements and expectations, which demands different approaches and even 
individual processes. These processes need to be integrated into the overall stakeholder management 
process.  
Stakeholder management must be a proactive management that ensures trust, collaboration, commitment 
and engagement from all stakeholders. Alignment of key stakeholders is critical to ensure everyone is 
working towards the same goals. The key to this alignment is a well planned and executed interface 
management process.  
4. What are the implications for theory and practice? 
The main theoretical contribution is a new way of thinking about problems and dynamics at interfaces in 
railway projects and the way to mitigate them.  
The main contribution of the study for Banedanmark is the identification of the main interface issues in 
their projects, proposals for mitigation by the implementation of proactive strategies and individual 
measures and the suggestions for future research and next steps. 
8.2. General Conclusions 
The thesis took as its point of departure that many of most expensive mistakes and delays could be traced 
back to interface issues. The lack of interface management between different engineering disciplines could 
lead to unnecessary iterations and rework which cause additional costs and delays on the projects. 
By conducting this study and answering the research questions throughout the report, several conclusions 
were extracted. The main conclusions are summarized below: 
==PAGE:84==
84 
 
When interfaces are not carefully managed, interface issues could occur and lead to unnecessary iterations 
and rework, extra costs and time overruns. Consequently, a lack of Interface Management in projects may 
cause difficulties to meet the success constrains or even result in problems after the project is handed over.  
Moreover, the analysis highlighted a high level of dependency between the interface issues. The appearance 
of one interface issue is likely to promote the appearance of others (ripple effect).  
The interviews revealed that the reactive mitigations are currently used to minimize the impact of the 
interface issues. Examples of reactive mitigations could be work iterations, postponement of certain activity, 
late alignment and agreements, restructuring the planning, late completion of the work, etc.  
In order mitigate the appearance of interface issues, the solution relies on avoiding the interface issues, on 
removing them by using proactive mitigations (43). Proactive approaches aim at identifying opportunities 
and in taking preemptory action against potential problems and threats (60). 
The core of all the proactive mitigations can be summarized as follows: 
• 
Interface Managers should consider and analyze the issues presented in this study and focus on 
mitigations. 
• 
It is of essential importance that interface issues are understood not only by interface managers 
but by all project participants. All project participants should beware of the importance and 
possible impact of interfaces on the projects.  
• 
Enough budget shall be considered at the beginning of the project to cover all the interface 
management activities and to allow the project to form an interface management team according 
to the project needs. 
• 
Alignment on the vision from all project parties is crucial for project success, specifically at the 
interfaces. 
• 
Clear scope of work and division of responsibilities have a great impact on performance at the 
interfaces. 
In summary, effective management and coordination of the extensive and diverse nature of interfaces 
throughout the project life cycle is critical to overall project success. 
8.3. Suggestions for further research 
As stated in the limitations of this research (§7.6.3), the strategies need further development, especially the 
procurement methodology.  
The application of the presented individual proactive measures and proactive strategies in real life projects 
would be a natural extension of this thesis. By doing so, the results could be tested and the approaches 
could be improved and further developed. 
Moreover, it is recommended to further analyze the dependencies and the ripple effect in the interface 
issues. It would be very beneficial for the projects to be aware of the main triggers so mitigations can focus 
on them. 
Finally, this research covers the predictable conflicts around interfaces, but as discussed in §7.4 and §7.5, 
there are numerous causes of conflict in railway projects not covered by this thesis which would be very 
useful to identify and analyze. First, the issues at interfaces caused from an external party, and secondly the 
issues leading to delays, scope creep and cost overruns in railway projects non-related to interfaces.    
 
 
==PAGE:85==
85 
 
Appendix 1 -  Descriptive Study 
This appendix includes the processes followed during the Descriptive Study. In the chapter dedicated to 
the first part of the analysis, only the research results and their description are included.  
The Descriptive Study consists of a state of the art research based on literature review and an empirical 
research based on interviews to collect real life experiences. 
State of the art research 
Chapters 1 and 3 present the importance of Interface Management and its impact on project success. 
In order to improve the current interface-related practices, the author considered essential to focus on 
investigating which are the main problems and conflicts surrounding interfaces. The first stage of this study 
is to analyze the main factors causing interfaces issues based on a literature research.  
 
Exploring key factors causing interface issues from several perspectives 
This section aims at determining what are the main causes of conflict (hereafter interface issues) on 
interfaces from different perspectives.  Literature research has been conducted on several sectors of interest 
including articles related to construction and railway management. 
First, the main findings from each sector are described and the second part of this section includes the 
general results of the research and the conclusions. 
Sectors of interest  
The objective of this research is to find out what are the main causes of conflict on interfaces in the relevant 
sectors.  
Project Management 
From the project management perspective, the interfaces are usually analyzed following one of the 
following approaches: dividing into static and dynamic interfaces or creating a new categorization. 
Morris classified the project interfaces between static and dynamic. ‘Static interfaces are basic organizational 
interfaces that do not change with the evolution of the project — and dynamic interfaces — process 
interfaces that mark key transitions in the project’s evolution.’ The main interface issue from this 
perspective are: 
• 
Poor definition of the static interfaces throughout the project lifecycle, which can lead to 
organizational problems of blurred definition of responsibilities. 
• 
Inadequate control of the dynamic interfaces has direct negative impact on project cost, schedule 
and scope performance.  
• 
Ineffective communication among parties. 
• 
Poor control of the design/construction interface, which is considered the most critical interface. 
Maloney et al. (2012), classified the factors that can affect the interfaces in four different categories: 
• 
Culture: the attitudes, values, behavior and environment of the owner organization, the 
contractor(s) and the overall front end planning team 
• 
Execution Process:  the project systems, processes and procedures that are used to define 
interface points and develop interface agreements 
R.Q. 2 What are the interface issues likely to occur in future railway projects in Banedanmark? 
==PAGE:86==
86 
 
• 
Information shared/Communication:  the data elements that are used to define interface points 
and agreements 
• 
Barriers:  obstacles such as unclear definition of contractors’ roles and responsibilities in an 
Interface Management Program 
 
Construction Projects 
This section is included in §3.3. 
Railway Projects 
Literature related to interface issues on rail projects is not extensive. However, the existing studies related 
to this topic point on the contract management as the main issue.  
According to Brunton and Tarling, et al., 2003, the consistent high-risk areas of large projects are its 
interfaces, particularly those between contracts. Unclear definition of responsibilities is considered one of 
the main sources of conflict on interfaces (Brunton, 2003). 
In railway projects, interface issues rise at a very late stage when the different systems have been installed, 
usually during the integration testing. The unclear responsibilities for interfaces is critical at this stage since 
the mitigation of the interface issues is usually very expensive and time consuming (Harrison, 2004). 
Research findings – literature research 
A total of 18 authors were analyzed and considered appropriate for this research. Fifteen articles are 
construction management related and the remaining three are railway-related articles. Due to the lack of 
studies focused on interface management in the specific case of railway projects, the author of this research 
considered the construction sector in general as basis for the research. This decision has been based on the 
author’s belief that railways are part of the construction sector and hence there are several similarities. The 
results from the literature research are verified with the data obtained from railway-related studies and the 
empirical data at a later stage. 
The research aimed at finding the major sources of conflicts in the interfaces. Many studies have been 
conducted by several authors and numerous articles have been written stating the major sources of conflicts 
surrounding the interfaces. For this reason, the literature research has been performed in two steps: a 
general search collecting all the issues mentioned by the authors and then a subsequent analysis regarding 
the importance of each source of conflict. 
The comparison of several authors leads to the conclusion that the main causes of conflict from 
the project management perspective are: 
o Poorly defined objectives 
o Insufficient/no control of the process and procedures 
o Lack of component identification 
o Lack of consideration of interfaces from the early phases of the project 
o Poor or inadequate design 
o Scheduling issues 
o Blurred definition of responsibilities 
o Ineffective communication among parties 
o Cultural issues 
o Lack of integrated development teams with fast problem-solving capability 
==PAGE:87==
87 
 
A summary of results from the general search is shown in Table 5. In total, 33 sources of conflict were 
found: 
No. Sources of conflict in interfaces (Interface issues) 
References (see table 5) 
1 
Poor coordination among parties 
1,3,6,7,8,11,12,13,14,18 
2 
Poor communication among parties 
1,2,3,4,5,9,10,11,12,13,14,15 
3 
Unclear division of tasks and responsibilities 
3,5,16,17 
4 
Poor decision making 
1, 2, 10,11,12,14 
5 
Financial problems 
1,9,10, 
6 
Insufficient negotiation 
12,13,14 
7 
Poor or Lack of project management 
7,9,10,11 
8 
Poor or Lack of Interface Management 
2,3,11 
9 
Inappropriate work breakdown and project decomposition 
11,17, 
10 
Planning and scheduling issues: Inconsistent planning 
1, 2, 3,10,13,12,18 
11 
Lack of management supervision 
10 
12 
Unclear system completion requirements 
6,8,9,16 
13 
Type of organization structure 
9 
14 
Interfaces with other interdependent projects 
9 
15 
Lack of alignment between major documents 
9 
16 
Cultural diversity 
11,18 
17 
Unexpected events affecting project scope 
16 
18 
Site conditions: weather and geological conditions 
1,10,11,14 
19 
Project nature issues 
9, 
20 
Inadequate specifications and drawings 
1,6,10,11,14 
21 
Design complexity 
7 
22 
Inferior design of interfaces 
11 
23 
Construction and assembly problems 
2,11,14 
24 
Poor quality work 
1,10 
25 
Labor issues (poor skills and productivity of laborers) 
1,3,6,8,10,11,12,14,18 
26 
Material issues 
8,9,11 
27 
Equipment issues 
11 
28 
Space conflicts among labor 
3,11, 
29 
Poor framing of contract document - Poorly written contracts 
(Insufficient specifications) 
1,7,10,11,14,16 
30 
Awarding contract to the lowest price regardless of quality 
8, 
31 
Inappropriate choice of contract type 
17 
32 
Violating of contract conditions  
1,10 
33 
Project parties unfamiliar with the local laws, regulations and 
requirements 
18 
Table 5 -  Sources of conflicts in interfaces – References 
Table 6 includes the references of the interface issues presented in the table above. 
Ref No. 
Category 
References 
1 
Construction 
Liu (2014) 
2 
Construction 
Varghese and Senthilkumar (2010) 
3 
Construction 
Staats (2014) 
4 
Construction 
Mitkus (2013) 
5 
Construction 
Fritschi (2002) 
6 
Construction  
larcón and Mardones (1998) 
7 
Construction 
Al Mousli & El-Sayegh (2016) 
8 
Construction 
K.Z. Sha'ar (2017)  
9 
Construction 
Weshah (2013) 
==PAGE:88==
88 
 
10 
Construction 
Al-Hammad (2000) 
11 
Construction 
Chen (2007) 
12 
Construction 
Ku (2010) 
13 
Construction  
Graumann and Schlei (1982); 
14 
Construction 
Ayudhya (2011) 
15 
Construction 
Al-Hammad and Assaf (1992) 
16 
Railway 
Brunton and Tarling (2003) 
17 
Railway 
Harrison (2004) 
18 
Railway 
Huang (2008) 
Table 6 - Literature Research References 
Table 7 shows collects all the interface issues mentioned in the railway-related articles. 
Ref 
No
. 
Interface Issue 
1 
Poor coordination among parties 
3 
Unclear division of tasks and responsibilities 
10 
Planning and scheduling issues: Inconsistent planning 
16 
Cultural diversity 
25 
Labor issues (poor skills and productivity of laborers) 
29 
Poorly written contracts 
31 
Inappropriate choice of contract type 
33 
Project parties unfamiliar with the local laws, regulations and requirements 
Table 7 -  Sources of conflict identified in Railway-related articles 
Empirical Research 
The empirical research aims at finding the main interface issues in railway projects in Banedanmark that are 
likely to occur again in future projects.  
After completing the state of the art research, the empirical phase helps validating the findings from 
literature and adapting them for the specific case of railway projects and Banedanmark. 
More information can be found in § Error! Reference source not found.. 
Research findings – empirical research 
A total of 8 interviews have been conducted with the objective of getting an overview of: 
• 
The major interface types in railway projects 
• 
Main challenges surrounding the interfaces 
• 
Dynamics surrounding the interface issues 
• 
Consequences of the challenges (impacts on the final project result) 
The interviewees are railway experts currently working in Danish railway projects. Table 8 shows the major 
interface issues detected in the interviews and the corresponding references. 
No. Sources of conflict in interfaces 
Int. 
number 
1 
Imprecise identification and definition of technical interfaces  
1,3,6 
2 
Poor quality work 
1,4,6 
3 
Complicated Technical Interfaces  
2,5,8 
4 
Project organization and unclear division of responsibilities 
1,2,3,6,7,8 
5 
Poor communication among parties 
1,2,3,6 
==PAGE:89==
89 
 
6 
Complex stakeholder management 
2,3,4,5,6,8 
7 
Cultural diversity 
1,8 
8 
Teams dispersed geographically 
1,3,6 
9 
Planning issues 
1,3,5,6 
10 
Contractual disputes  
1, 6,7,8 
11 
Project nature issues 
2,8 
12 
Poor decision making 
2,6,8 
Table 8 - Findings empirical research 
 
==PAGE:90==
90 
 
Appendix 2 – Dependencies between interface issues 
This appendix includes the results from the first workshop, dedicated to the identification of dependencies 
between interface issues.  
The concept of dependencies between interface issues and the major findings are included in §5.2. This 
section includes a matrix of dependencies created during the workshop, which aims at presenting the 
complexity of this phenomenon.  
 
Imprecise identification and definition (tech. int.) 
Poor quality work 
Complicated technical interfaces 
Project organization & unclear responsibilities 
Poor communication among parties 
Stakeholder management 
Cultural diversity  
Planning issues 
Contractual disputes 
Project nature issues 
Poor decision making 
Poor coordination among parties 
Labour issues 
Project parties unfamiliar with local laws /regulations 
Imprecise identification and definition  
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
Poor quality work X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
Complicated technical interfaces X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
Project organization & unclear responsibilities 
X 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
Poor communication among parties X 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
Stakeholder management X 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
Cultural diversity  X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
Planning issues X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
Contractual disputes 
 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
Project nature issues 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
Poor decision making X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
Poor coordination among parties X 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
Labour issues X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
Project parties unfamiliar with local laws /reg. 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
The matrix presented above is not a symmetric matrix. This means that interface issue “A” might generate 
the appearance of interface issues “B”, but does not necessarily mean that “B” triggers the occurrence of 
“A”. An example can be explained with stakeholder management and imprecise identification and definition 
of technical interfaces: While poor stakeholder management might lead to imprecise identification and 
definition of interfaces because some parties might not be involved in the process of identifying and 
defining the technical interfaces, imprecise identification of technical interfaces is not likely to cause poor 
stakeholder management. However, it can be argued that, if not all technical interfaces are identified, then 
some stakeholders might not be involved in a process they should be. 
==PAGE:91==
91 
 
Naturally there are some interface issues that trigger the appearance of more issues than others. The 
discussions during the workshop lead to the conclusion that the most problematic interface issues (from 
the perspective of triggering the appearance of more issues), are the following:  
• 
Project organization and unclear division of responsibilities 
• 
Stakeholder management 
• 
Poor Decision-Making 
• 
Poor communication among parties 
• 
Labor issues 
• 
Cultural diversity 
However, a deeper analysis regarding dependencies between interface issues is needed to corroborate the 
outcomes of this stage of the analysis. Thus, the matrix presented above can be used as a starting point or 
as a representation of the dependency phenomenon, but it cannot be presented as final results.  
Although the dependencies presented above need further analysis, there is one indisputable conclusion: 
there is a ripple effect due to the high level of dependency between the interface issues. The appearance of 
one interface issue is likely to promote the appearance of others, as explained in Chapter 5.  
 
 
==PAGE:92==
92 
 
Appendix 3 – Individual Proactive Measures 
This chapter includes the individual proactive measures for each interface issue. This chapter is to be applied 
when the purpose is to address a specific interface issue.  As discussed in §Error! Reference source not 
found., the application of the individual measures shall not be expected to fully mitigate an issue. For that 
purpose, the integrated strategies shall be implemented (see §Error! Reference source not found.). 
The individual application of the measures presented in this appendix shall be done as a starting point or 
for partial mitigation (short term measures).  
The following sections present the individual proactive measures for each interface issue including a brief 
description of what should be done for mitigating each issue, a set of individual measures (divided in 
measures to be implemented at the strategic, tactic, or operational level) and a schematic map of when and 
by whom should the measures been implemented (this section is a general recommendation and might 
change depending on the project). 
Imprecise definition and design of technical interfaces 
Precise identification and definition of technical interfaces is crucial for the project success. Ideally all 
technical interfaces impacting the design of the different subsystems should be identified and defined prior 
to the design phase (latest at the revision of the draft design). However, the identification process shall 
continue during the installation to ensure that no interface is discovered close to the test and commissioning 
phases. 
High visibility of the interfaces is needed to reduce the project risks by early identification, allocation of 
responsibilities and action. (49) 
The high dependency between designs of different subsystems requires understanding from all responsible 
parties. The identification of technical interfaces should not only be responsibility of the Interface Managers 
but a collaborative approach between all the parties, fostering a thoughtful analysis and definition of each 
interface.  
Proactive measures: 
Strategic level 
No measures have been identified for this level. 
Tactic level 
1. Identification of all interfaces shall be done at the early phases in a collaborative way. Since this 
activity requires huge expertise regarding the different subsystems, ensuring the participation of 
the right people is crucial.  (42) 
o Interface management has to be controlled by the more senior and experienced members 
of the team. (49) 
Operational level 
2. Definition of the system shall be described in a detailed way at the beginning of the project, aiming 
at covering all technical interfaces. (42) 
o The system definition shall cover the construction part, and the static and dynamic testing. 
(42) 
o To ensure a precise definition of the interfaces, not leaving room for interpretation: (42) 
▪ 
The involved parties shall create specifications which shall be agreed and 
implemented by all. This ensures an alignment in the design for the different 
subsystems. 
▪ 
Common engineering rules include the design principles provided to the supplier 
as basis for the design. The rules shall be validated before any party uses them as 
==PAGE:93==
93 
 
a design basis since any change on the rules could result in major changes in the 
project. 
3. To identify the main technical interfaces before the contract negotiation. (42) This approach would 
allow the project: 
o To analyse each interface: what would be needed and who should be the main involved 
parties 
o To incorporate in the contracts the division of responsibilities for each interface 
o To establish a generic procedure to monitor and control these interfaces throughout the 
project lifecycle 
4. Benchmarking about the common practices in other countries can be performed in case there is a 
lack of expertise in a specific topic. (42) 
5. Raising awareness among all parties of the importance of the interface identification process. (42) 
Complicated technical interfaces 
As stated above, early identification of all interfaces is essential. However, not all interfaces are equally 
critical or complicated. Complicated interfaces require a profound technical assessment.  
The complicated technical interfaces are considered as a specific case inside the imprecise identification and 
definition of technical interfaces. Apart from the measures specified in the section above, the following are 
additional measures for the specific case of complicated technical interfaces. 
Proactive measures  
Strategic level 
No measures have been identified for this level. 
Tactic level 
1. To foster the search for the complicated aspects of technical interfaces (42) 
2. The interface management team shall promote active resolution of these technical interfaces. (42) 
Operational level 
3. The design of complicated interfaces shall be addressed by the designers of the involved 
subsystems, working together to design them. They must agree who designs which part of the 
interface avoiding independent designs. (43) 
4. To create specifications to align the interface requirements and responsibilities without leaving 
room for interpretation. (42) 
5. Alignment in the decisions surrounding the interfaces, and then information shall be sent to all the 
relevant parties. (42) 
Poor quality work 
One of the most important conditions for completing a project successfully is to meet the customer’s 
requirements. This applies not only for the handover of the final subsystems but for all intermediate 
deliverables.  
Producing high-quality deliverables is crucial for avoiding work iterations. The reason is that the outputs of 
each activity are usually the input for other activities, and deliverables not meeting the receiver’s 
requirements and needs involve iterations of the validation process. 
Avoiding requests for improvement of documentation would facilitate compliance with the time schedule. 
This can only be achieved by understanding by all relevant parties of the importance of each deliverable 
and its dependencies, commitment and willingness to comply with the requirements and expectations from 
the receiver.  
==PAGE:94==
94 
 
Proactive measures  
Strategic level 
No measures have been identified for this level. 
Tactic level 
1. All parties shall include a verification and validation system in their internal procedures. (42) 
2. To create a team responsible for ensuring the validation of requirements. 
3. To ensure good definition of requirements for generic processes. 
4. The suppliers shall also apply all the above-mentioned. See Error! Reference source not found. 
5. Some measures mentioned in  Error! Reference source not found. are valid for this section. 
 
Operational level 
6. For the critical deliverables, the expectations and requirements should be specified and discussed 
between the producer and the receiver. 
7. All documents shall be reviewed and approved by both the producer and the receiver. 
8. To promote the early defect detection. Defect management shall start earlier in the project. (42) 
The project organization shall be clearly defined from the beginning of the project. The type of organization 
is a key decision since it has a great impact on the performance and relation between the different parties.  
When creating the project organization, the dynamics both inside and outside the project organization shall 
be considered. It is vital to define how the connection with the external parties will be and the levels of 
hierarchy. 
A clear division of responsibilities streamlines the processes and decision making. By providing information 
to all project members about the responsibilities of each department/team, the project ensures the 
involvement of the right members for each activity. 
Proactive measures  
Strategic level 
1. When creating the project organization, clearly stated lines of responsibility, authority and project 
interface relationships shall be defined. 
• 
To ensure that the project participants work in accordance with the lines and relationships 
defined. 
2. The organization shall be created considering how to foster communication among all project 
participants. Small, focused teams with resources will generally be “better” than heavily structured 
groups that require approvals before each step. 
3. Flexible organization: railway projects are very dynamic and thus the organization shall be able to 
adapt to the different phases of the project. 
• 
 Use self-organizing teams, where the teams function with an absence of centralized 
control. Successful self-organizing teams usually consist of generalized specialists, instead 
of subject matter experts, who continuously adapt to the changing environment and 
embrace constructive feedback. 
Tactic level 
4. Depending on the project size and the interfaces found during the identification phase at the 
beginning of the project, an analysis about the needs of the interface management team shall be 
done.  The size of the interface management team might vary from project to project but it is 
crucial to be aware of the need of skilled and experienced people for this role. (42) 
Roles and responsibilities of each party (internal and external) shall be clearly defined from the beginning 
of the project. The different teams/departments shall agree on their scopes. (42) 
==PAGE:95==
95 
 
5. To develop a matrix of responsibilities: this could be done for both roles and departments/teams.  
• 
The use of tools like RACI (Responsible, Accountable, Consulted, Informed) might be 
helpful to manage roles and responsibilities on projects. It can also be used to clarify 
decision making. (1) 
• 
To create a complete and precise matrix of responsibilities is essential to align it with the 
work breakdown structure, which shall include the main activities and the dependencies 
between them. (42) 
• 
Tools less detailed than the matrix of responsibilities can also be developed. It is 
recommended to show the team members the flow of work in the team and who does 
what.  It is important to ensure the team members understand the dynamics within the 
team. (42) 
6. Get involved in other departments’ processes. It is important for the participants not only to know 
about their teams’ scope and responsibilities but also to have a clear overview of who is responsible 
for what outside their team. This would accelerate and facilitate the problem resolution and 
allocation of responsibilities.  
7. The project organization and the division of responsibilities shall be monitored throughout the 
project lifecycle: 
• 
by scheduling formal team check-ins, 
• 
interdepartmental reviews 
• 
encouraging informal “touch base” among team members. 
 
Operational level 
No measures have been identified for this level. 
Poor communication among parties 
The importance of communication in projects is undisputed (50). However, communication itself usually 
has not the attention it requires. 
Consistent and constructive communications help avoiding blame culture and increase the effectiveness. 
(51) Since the project environment is dynamic and changes are constant, the communication structure shall 
be flexible. 
Communication is heavily constrained by formal organizational structure: the vast majority of 
communication occurs within business unit and functional boundaries, not across them. This points to the 
importance of drawing the right organizational boundaries  (52) 
Proactive measures  
Strategic level 
1. To foster communication policies in the company. Communication shall be a fundamental pillar 
of the company’s culture.   
2. Allocate employees in a way that communication is encouraged. The closer and easier to reach 
each other, the easier it is to install a communication culture. (42) 
3.  Language is a main factor to consider in communication activities. Projects shall define an official 
language, and all documentation must be written in that language. 
Tactic level 
4. Sending newsletters with all the changes would keep all parties informed. This could be done in 
different levels of detail, for internal and external stakeholders. 
• 
A change log should be used to keep track of all changes and change requests. 
5. To create different mailing lists to communicate with different stakeholders. (70) 
==PAGE:96==
96 
 
6. Meet the milestones meetings from the beginning of the project, including the people responsible 
for each team. After the meeting, the participants shall clearly communicate the outcomes and 
actions to their teams, ensuring that all of them are on the same page. (42) 
7. Managers shall implement the communication culture first, being an example to follow.  
8. To ensure that people work in small groups and not individually. Groups of two ensure a constant 
knowledge sharing and constant communication, which would also be reflected in communication 
with other parties. This practice has an impact in resources (see Error! Reference source not 
found.) (42) 
9.  Develop and implement a simple plan to communicate with priority audiences throughout the 
project. (71) 
10. Facilitate communication and data management tools.  
11. For interdepartmental communication, staff meetings can be used to provide general updates of 
the project. (42) 
12. To develop a strategic communication plan adapted to the project. The objective of the plan shall 
be to align and to provide the basis of a communication culture. The plan is not enough, the culture 
shall not be installed through a document, but by different practices such as periodic workshops 
and conferences to instruct the culture of communication. (42) 
• 
the process of developing an approach and a plan for project communications shall 
consider the needs of each stakeholder, the available resources, and the needs of the 
project.  
 
Operational level 
13. Short, daily stand-up meetings are a good tool to share and receive information.  
• 
Scrum practices 
14. Learn from past miscommunications and create lessons learned register. 
15. Communication via email involves interpretation from both the receiver and the sender.  Face-to-
face communication shall always be prioritized. 
Poor coordination among parties 
Communication and coordination are closely linked. The away communication strategies are implemented 
directly affect the coordination among parties and vice versa.  Individual measures are provided for both 
although the recommendation is to treat them jointly. 
Proactive measures  
Strategic level 
No measures have been identified for this level. 
Tactic level 
1. A collaborative culture can be shaped by building relationships with other departments.  Key 
aspects of the collaborative culture should be: 
• 
a sense of collective responsibility for the project’s success 
• 
a sense of trust between departments/teams 
2. Initiate periodic meetings with your counterparts to understand their progress and challenges, while 
helping each other brainstorm ideas and problem-solve. (51) 
3. Foster trust and empathy (42) 
• 
Long-term, successful collaboration is built upon trust and transparency. Trust is the 
foundation of any high-performing team and transparency is a critical element in building 
trust among team members. (51) 
 
==PAGE:97==
97 
 
Operational level 
4. Celebrate small wins:  Celebrating wins and acknowledging each other’s roles in the success of a 
milestone or project helps cultivate trust and respect among team members from different 
departments. Small wins help sustain momentum and motivation while breaking down barriers and 
silo walls. It feels good to win, and if “winning” requires interdepartmental collaboration, then such 
acknowledgement will provide positive reinforcement for future work together. (51) 
5. Encourage feedback:  It is important to provide and accept constructive feedback framed in a way 
that focuses on the circumstances. (51) 
6. Well-run, purposeful meetings get a lot done and generate enthusiasm and buy-in for your project. 
Poorly run meetings do just the opposite. The difference in meeting outcome often is tied to the 
level of pre-meeting planning, facilitation that is appropriate to the level of potential conflict, and 
adequate preparation on the part of participants. (72) 
7. Special attention shall be paid to the coordination with external stakeholders who might be working 
with several projects. For instance the project shall ensure authorities are aware of the plans and 
processes for the approval phase so they can anticipate the workload for the different projects and 
meet the deadlines. 
Stakeholder management 
Railway projects are well known for the great number and type of stakeholders. Stakeholder engagement is 
essential for project success. 
Stakeholder management shall be a proactive management that ensures trust, collaboration, commitment 
and engagement from all stakeholders. 
Each type of stakeholder has different interests, requirements and expectations, which demands different 
approaches and even individual processes. These processes need to be integrated into the overall 
stakeholder management process.  
Alignment of key stakeholders is critical to ensuring everyone is working towards the same goals. The key 
to this alignment is a well planned and executed interface management process. 
Proactive measures  
Strategic level 
1. Political stakeholders: The primary political stakeholder is the Ministry of Transport with the 
certification agency through its transport authority Trafikstyrelsen. Government is a decision-
making partner. Risks can be abated by early and continuous government consultations attendant 
iterative decision-making.  
Tactic level 
2. Performing a deep identification of stakeholders. No stakeholder can be forgotten and the 
classification shall be done in a way that facilitates the processes.  
o Stakeholder mapping will help you identify the different stakeholders for your project, 
their connection to the issue your project is concerned with, and the best methods for 
engaging them. 
o Once all stakeholders are identified, the scope for each stakeholder needs to be defined. 
The stakeholder scope needs to be identified during the early stages of the project to clarify 
each party’s responsibilities and duties based on the role that they are taking in the project 
delivery. 
3. Develop a collaboration charter with your stakeholders to define values, expectations, interests, 
communication processes, how decisions will be made, and how conflicts will be handled. (73) 
o Do not forget about determine the information required by the stakeholders to participate 
in the project.  
==PAGE:98==
98 
 
4. Consider the role of your project in your stakeholders’ lives when choosing and scheduling 
engagement strategies – not all the parties have the same interests/objectives. (73) 
5. Do not set a unique strategy with stakeholders. The different types of stakeholders and 
requirements demand different approaches, resulting in individual processes agreed for each 
category of stakeholder.  
6. With the receivers: (42) 
o Guarantee dialogue and their involvement from the beginning of the project. 
o Keeping them engaged and committed to the project. 
o Alignment of objectives: status check monitoring throughout the project lifecycle the 
alignment of objectives. 
o To ensure they provide feedback. 
o The receivers shall participate in the design review and the validation of different 
processes. 
o Great misalignments between parties shall be escalated until an agreement is reached. 
7. Engagement: 
o To create engagement plan. The plan shall be based on the collaboration charter created 
with each stakeholder. The engagement plan shall be a well-known tool by all project 
members. (73) 
o Establish good relationships with the stakeholders, especially the point of connection 
between them. (42) 
o Use of visual tools like to orient stakeholders to the goals of the project, making clear their 
role in it. 
o As phases finish, formally close them out, conduct lessons learned sessions, and celebrate. 
This helps keeping stakeholders engaged. 
8. Some stakeholders as the suppliers are chosen based on the cost. It is essential to consider in the 
bidding process the confidence and trust the suppliers would give to the client (42). 
9. Foster trust among stakeholders throughout the project lifecycle. 
10. Some stakeholders will have the capacity and desire to be more involved in the project than others. 
Think about opportunities for self-selected stakeholders to collaborate on specific elements of the 
project through the development of targeted working groups. (73) 
11. To ensure all stakeholders see the value, benefits and opportunities from the project. The search 
for common objectives results in commitment and engagement. 
12. All stakeholders shall be aware of the importance of an integrated process. (42) 
 Operational level 
13. To ensure good and constant communication with all stakeholders.  
o The communication tools defined in §Poor communication among parties, shall be 
applied, when relevant, with all the stakeholders. 
o All stakeholders shall be kept informed, decisions shall be taken considering their 
expectations. (42) 
▪ 
Stakeholder requirements need to be prioritized and ranked. Stakeholders with 
the most interest and the highest influence are often prioritized at the top of the 
list. 
o Use of newsletters with external stakeholders (42). 
o Involvement of the Management level of each stakeholder Group in the Steering 
Committees. If necessary, several Steering Committees can be created for different groups 
of stakeholders.  
14. Constant feedback: give them the opportunity to provide feedback on what is working and what 
could be improved from their perspective. (73) 
15. The stakeholder groups identified as essential to the successful delivery of project objectives shall 
be involved in project reviews.  
==PAGE:99==
99 
 
Cultural diversity 
All companies aim at having a culture based on shared beliefs. This is especially challenging in the railway 
industry, where project organizations are formed by international consultants with different working 
cultures.  
Cultural diversity refers to both working culture and national culture. Understanding the different working 
cultures is crucial to keep communication and collaboration at the right levels. 
Proactive measures  
Strategic level 
1. To create a shared culture considering the consultants. (42) 
o Open minded culture 
o Diversity shall not be a problem. Consider all the different involved cultures and adapt  
o Sharing objectives and beliefs shall be the core of the culture 
o Communication shall be part of the culture 
o Cultivate empathy 
o Official language 
o Belief in the projects, common objectives 
o No blame culture 
Tactic level 
2. Cultural awareness: understanding the differences between individuals, groups, and organizations 
helps minimizing misunderstandings and miscommunication.  
3. Considering stakeholders: cultural awareness can help to plan the communication strategies based 
on the cultural differences and requirements of stakeholders and team members. (42) 
4. Workshops and team building activities can be used for integrating the culture. Settle a new culture 
down takes time and it should be a constant process. (42) 
 
Operational level 
No measures have been identified for this level. 
Teams dispersed geographically 
Collocated teams are most efficient because of the constant exchange of information face-to-face. 
Collocation shall be considered as a priority for future projects. 
Colocation involves placing all or many of the active project team members in the same physical location, 
enhancing their ability to perform as a team (53). Active project team members include both the internal 
organization and the suppliers.  
Although collocation is the best scenario, it is not always possible to do so, since the globalization of 
projects involves the need for virtual teams.  
Proactive measures  
Strategic level 
1. When creating the project organization, collocation shall be considered a priority. If colocation is 
not possible for the entire project, it can be done at strategically important times during the project. 
(42) 
==PAGE:100==
100 
 
2. Provide the needed facilities to get the maximum benefit from collocation: as many meeting rooms 
as possible, common places to share information and other facilities that enhance communication. 
(42) 
Tactic level 
No measures have been identified for this level. 
Operational level 
No measures have been identified for this level. 
Reactive measures 
Geographically dispersed teams: The challenges of managing dispersed teams are mainly related to 
communication: avoiding gaps in sharing experiences between team members, and difficulties for tracking 
the progress of the different tasks, etc. 
Strategic level 
1. Integrated systems with automated update possibilities: to have up-to-date information available 
to all as soon as possible. 
Tactic level 
2. Develop specific communication strategies: on is bound to take place via remote channels like 
email, telephone and indicated data management systems.  
3. Meeting rooms shall be equipped with conference equipment: televisions, speakers, microphones, 
cameras. (42) 
4.  The tools should be organized in consideration of the actual work in projects and the information 
flow related to progress of the project. 
Operational level 
No measures have been identified for this level. 
Planning issues 
The project schedule shall be used as a tool for communication, management of stakeholders and their 
expectations, and a basis for performance reporting.  
When possible, the detailed project schedule should remain flexible throughout the project to adjust for 
knowledge gained, increased understanding of the risk, and value-added activities 
Engagement of all the stakeholders and commitment is needed. All the parties shall be aware of the 
importance and impact of their deliveries in the time schedule due to the dependencies between parties. 
 
Proactive measures  
Strategic level 
No measures have been identified for this level. 
Tactic level 
1. Time schedules shall be integrated and not controlled individually.  
o Buy-in from all parties regarding the integrated planning. The project schedule has to be 
signed off by all parties after agreeing to the given timelines. 
o All the parties shall be involved in the creation of the integrated planning 
o Meet the milestones meetings to create and monitor the integrated planning. 
2. To ensure the planners have technical knowledge (42) 
==PAGE:101==
101 
 
3. Each organization/team is responsible for some processes. The inputs and outputs of these 
processes between organizations shall be aligned and coordinated. (42) 
Operational level 
4. Planners shall have active roles, ensuring that the milestones are achieved. (42) 
5. Planners and interface managers shall work very closely (42) 
6. Provide context: to ensure commitment from all parties, ensure visibility and understanding of 
how they impact the whole project.  (51) 
7. The planning shall include: (42) 
o Constant updates. The milestones shall always be updated. 
o Periodic checks of the deliverables. 
o Sufficient allowance in the schedule for unexpected events  
o Extra time for approvals: keeping authorities informed throughout all the project, ensuring 
they know the processes and what will be delivered to them, among others. Coordination 
with other projects for approvals might be needed. See §Poor coordination among parties 
o Any deviation in achieving the milestones should have a suitable mitigation for completing 
the project on time. 
8. Ensure constant monitoring of the planning. 
Contractual disputes 
The type of contract shall match the nature of the project in order to avoid contractual disputes since the 
way a contract is done has a major bearing on the interface management (Weshah et al., 2013). All 
requirements must be defined in a clear, unambiguous and concise manner and must be supported by an 
acceptance statement that describes how the requirement will be proven (Brunton and Tarling, et al.,2003). 
Proactive measures  
Strategic level 
2. The current bidding criteria include award the contracts either to the lowest price or to the best 
price-quality ratio. (30)The bidding criteria could be modified to ensure a more objective 
evaluation: (42) 
• 
not only minimum price. The criteria shall remove the most expensive and cheapest.  
• 
quality criteria shall be included: 
o the duration of the construction and installation affecting the operational lines, time 
the trains are out of service… If bidders include these data in the tendering, the 
information provided by the different suppliers can be compare to choose the better 
option, and this can be used for penalties in case the supplier does not comply with 
their proposal included in the tendering. 
• 
trust in the supplier shall be valued 
3. Creation of Dispute Resolution Board for conflicts related to the contracts.  
4. Consider that the lower the margins are, the more the suppliers will fight for extra money and 
change requests. (42) 
5. Contracts for mega projects: tenders for each project, giving priority to the prior suppliers but 
forcing them to keep effort. (42) 
• 
All contracts in the project shall be integrated. This requires that the interface management 
processes must be defined in the contracts in such a way that they work together effectively 
and efficient. 
Tactic level 
6. Definition of requirements included in the contracts (42) 
• 
All requirements must be clearly defined, in an unambiguous and concise manner. Each 
requirement shall include a description of how it will be approved. (49) 
==PAGE:102==
102 
 
• 
All requirements must be traceable to an originating stakeholder’s need. (49) 
• 
Requirements regarding labour resources:  
o specific qualifications including relevant experience.  
o Maximum percentage of junior positions 
o These requirements apply for the whole process.  
• 
Roles and responsibilities of each party shall be included in the contracts. Responsibilities 
shall also cover activities after the commissioning (for instance the suppliers should be 
responsible for investigating any defects after the commissioning) 
• 
Communication processes with the client 
• 
The contract shall state that the supplier shall not only deliver a working system but to 
satisfy the client success factors. It is thus essential to specify the success criteria for the 
client (end user KPI) in the contracts so the suppliers must deliver according to it.  This 
shall be clearly described considering that the client and supplier do not have the same 
perspective. 
• 
The risk sharing shall be specified in the contracts. 
7. Contracts shall include constraints and penalties for delays. (42) 
8. Interfaces shall be defined in the contracts, including the division of responsibilities. Both main 
technical interfaces and contractual interfaces. (42) 
9. Design and build contracts – requirement for the suppliers: 
• 
 to work with their own assessor and to obtain the safety approvals. (42) 
Operational level 
10. Requirement management shall start from the tendering phase and continues until V&V is 
completed. This is a good method to control and co-work with a design and build contractor.  
Project Nature issues 
The concept of project nature is very broad. Scope creep occurs when scope or requirements management 
does not occur. Changes to scope need to follow a clear process to prevent haphazard changes. The 
opposite can also happen, in which project teams prevent changes by strictly enforcing scope and doing 
what is called “scope kill.” 
Proactive measures  
Strategic level 
No measures have been identified for this level. 
Tactic level 
1. Create scope models early in a project to foster discussion and agreement on scope. Context 
Diagrams, Use Case Diagrams, SIPOC charts, etc. are simple tools that visually clarify scope. They 
can also be used to build on as the project's product is progressively elaborated. (74) 
2. Using the concept of progressive elaboration, requirements should be collected and analyzed to 
ensure a complete and consistent set. 
3. Review all requirements with stakeholders and getting approval by stakeholders authorized to 
approve them. 
4. Include lack of stakeholder participation as a risk, and build in contingencies for the likely 
occurrence of this risk. (74) 
5. Decompose projects into smaller subprojects. (74) 
 
Operational level 
6. Requirements traceability  
==PAGE:103==
103 
 
a. A traceability matrix is a standard tool for supporting this concept. (75) 
7. Use project status reporting that engages sponsors, focusing on progress towards the deliverables 
Poor Decision Making 
Decision making takes place at all phases and all levels of a project. When talking about decision making, it 
is important not to think only about the strategic and tactical decisions, but the operational part, the 
decisions that are seemingly small operating choices made day-today. 
Getting those decisions right requires an environment that prepares people at every level to decide and 
deliver.  
Proactive measures  
Strategic level 
1. Create a decision framework  
Systematic Decision Model. See §Strategy 3 
• 
. An example could be the use of: (55) 
o RASCI Model 
o Decision Threshold Matrix 
• 
Include criteria (42) 
o Thinking long term and not only in short term 
o Think about the owners after the project completion: what is the impact for them? 
o In cases of scope reduction:  
• 
Think about what was promised to the public  
• 
What would be the costs of completing the project in the future?  
o Not thinking only about the budget but also about the system 
Tactic level 
2. Create a team charter and include the decision-making criteria and process. (53) 
Operational level 
3. If teams are to make faster, better decisions, then those decisions need to be made at the lowest 
possible level in the organization. 
4. Focus on decisions, not discussion. (76) 
• 
Meetings have usually three components: sharing of information, discussions, and 
decisions. It is recommended to do the sharing before the meeting. Sending out the 
information prior to the meeting and requiring the participants to read it before attending 
will provide more time for making the decisions.  
Labor issues 
Labor issues refers both to labor shortage and poor skilled people. Having a clear overview of the needed 
resources and roles from the beginning of the project facilitates the creation and adaptation of the team to 
each project phase. 
Talent management should be on the top of the agenda for mitigating the labour shortage in the railway 
industry. 
Proactive measures  
Strategic level 
1. Avoiding lack of resources in the project: 
==PAGE:104==
104 
 
• 
Offer attractive and well-located work place as well as opportunities for professional growth. 
(42)  
• 
Public system vs private sector: Salary negotiations and accessibility to the company need to 
be reviewed: improved salary and better career structure are needed. (42) 
• 
Ensure that the HR department is focused on taking care of the employees instead of on 
paperwork.  Employees need to feel valued by the company. (42) 
2. Lack of resources in the sector: attracting fresh talent in the industry 
• 
Engage students  (42) 
o Cooperation with universities 
o Work very closely with universities, promoting the public railway sector.  
o Inform about the job opportunities in the public railway sector. 
o Offer part-time job opportunities to students involving them from the beginning of 
their studies. 
• 
Ensure universities prepare and qualify students with the needed skills, adapting the courses 
to the needs of the industry. (42) 
• 
Work with international universities to promote the Danish railway sector. (42) 
Tactic level 
3. Planning of resources: 
• 
Plan resource management. (53) 
• 
Well planned and organized roles and responsibilities. (53) 
• 
Include enough budget for the employees. (42) 
• 
Include training in the budget. (42) 
4. An interface manager who advises the customer regarding the optimum points at which to split 
the project, ensures that the database of requirements contains a complete set of interface 
requirements and follows and manages discussions regarding interfaces throughout the entire 
duration of the project will enable interfaces to be manager in a structure manner. (77) 
 
Operational level 
No measures have been identified for this level. 
Project parties unfamiliar with local laws and regulations 
Understanding the local laws and regulations is time consuming if the process starts from scratch. It is 
essential to get onboard the project people with the knowledge, so processes can be optimized and 
unexpected events regarding laws and regulations can be avoided.   
Proactive measures  
Strategic and tactic level 
1. The contract shall include requirements making sure that: (42) 
• 
Suppliers have partnerships with local companies 
• 
All suppliers shall have local employees throughout the project lifecycle 
2. To make sure both internally (client side) and externally (suppliers, assessors…) that every 
team/department has at least one local member. (42) 
Operational level 
No measures have been identified for this level. 
==PAGE:105==
105 
 
Appendix 4 – Example of project structure and complexity 
The New Line Copenhagen-Ringsted 
This appendix aims at providing an overview of the complexity present in Banedanmark ’s projects. The 
New Line Copenhagen – Ringsted project is used as an example to show how a project is structured, 
describing the project purpose, technical structure, project phases, tendering process and contracts, main 
stakeholders, roll-out strategy (commissioning strategy), and the project timeline.  
Project purpose 
The objective of the NLCR project was originally to build a new railway line ensuring the connection 
between Copenhagen and Ringsted, which will offer better timetables with more departures, fewer delays 
and shorter travel times (37). 
The project is part of the Danish high-speed plan (Timemodellen) which aimed at improving the customer 
service by reducing the travel times at national level by building new lines and upgrading the existing ones. 
The objective was to reach one hour travel times between Copenhagen-Odense, Odense-Esbjerg, Odense-
Aarhus and Aarhus-Aalborg. Kolding, Federicia, Vejle, Horsens and Randers were also included in the 
Timemodellen (37).  
Specifically, the NLCR project has a direct influence on the two most important railway corridors in 
Denmark: at national level is the connection to Jutland, and at international level is the connection to 
Germany (Ringsted-Femern, which will be built as part of the Trans-European Transport Network, TEN-
T Corridors). 
The NLCR will be a supplement to the existing line from Copenhagen to Ringsted via Roskilde, which is 
one of the busiest routes in Denmark. The NLCR was designed to ease pressure on the current bottleneck 
between Høje Taastrup and Valby. There were several possibilities to solve the bottleneck and the 
government decided to build a new rail from Copenhagen to Ringsted. This was the most expensive 
solution, but this solution offered capacity improvements, shorter travel times and fewer delays. 
Technical structure  
The NLCR project has a strong multi-disciplinary character consisting of several subsystems: 
• 
Infrastructure subsystem: tracks and civil works; earth works, drainage systems, pipes, cables and 
bridges 
• 
Energy subsystem 
• 
Control command, signalling subsystem and operational rules 
The New Line Copenhagen Ringsted is mainly developed by 3 projects in Banedanmark: the project New 
Line Copenhagen Ringsted, responsible for the Infrastructure subsystem and system integration, the 
Electrification Programme, responsible for the Energy subsystem, and the Signalling Programme, 
responsible for the Control Command, Signalling subsystem and implementation of the new operational 
rules.  
The Railway technology area is the point of contact of the project with the Signalling Programme (SP) and 
the Electrification Programme (EP). The NLCR is part of the scope of both SP and EP, which make a very 
specific organization, as shown in Figure 29 - Special features of the NLCR organization (Banekonference 
slides, 2016). EP and SP shall deliver a system to the NLCR, which is responsible for the integration of all 
systems. 
 
==PAGE:106==
106 
 
 
Figure 29 - Special features of the NLCR organization (Banekonference slides, 2016) 
Project phases  
The project started in 2009 with the idea phase, when the government took the decision of building the 
new line. In 2010, Banedanmark took over the project and the preparatory works were started. This initial 
period of preparatory works included the following activities: 
- 
Geotechnical/hydrogeological drillings 
- 
Expropriation easements 
- 
Utility replacements (600 installations from 55 owners) 
- 
Archaeology excavations 
- 
Authority approvals (mainly from municipalities) 
During the preparatory works phase, the Design and Tender works started. At the beginning of this phase, 
preliminary designs were created and in order to complete the final design of the tracks and civil works, 
many assumptions were taken since EP and SP were not designed at that stage.  
Both the energy subsystem and control command subsystem were designed after the track and civil works 
designs. The construction works started in 2012 while both EP and SP designs were conducted. During 
this stage, special attention was paid to the design of both EP and SP to avoid gaps between subsystems 
during the installation works. The test and commissioning phase was planned for 2018 and the line was 
expected to be opened on December 2018. 
 
Figure 30 – Time line NLCR (Banekonference slides, 2017) 
==PAGE:107==
107 
 
While the timeline above gives an overview of the major activities and their durations (in 2017), the project 
can be divided in three general phases: project phase, construction phase and completion phase. From a 
customer-supplier relation perspective, the project can be divided in more specific phases. Figure 32 shows 
the general project phases and the specific phases for Design and Build Contracts. 
 
Figure 31 - General Project phases and phases for Design and Build Contracts (Banekonference slides, 2015) 
Organizational levels 
The organizational levels for the NLCR include: 
- 
The strategic level, managed by Banedanmark ‘s project director and the project managers. 
- 
The tactic level, formed by both the client and the suppliers’ management. 
- 
The operational level, which includes consultants, contractors and suppliers. 
When the organizational levels were planned, the division of responsibilities was expected to be divided as 
shown in the Figure 32 below. The client was expected to be responsible for the strategic level and half of 
the tactic level decisions, while the suppliers, contractors and consultants would be responsible for the other 
half of the tactic level and the operational level.  
 
Figure 32 – Planned organizational levels (Banekonference slides, 2015) 
However, it has been experienced throughout the project phases that in a daily basis, it is the client who 
has taken a major part of the tactic level decisions, as shown in Figure 33. 
 
Figure 33 - Organizational levels in a daily basis (Banekonference slides, 2015) 
==PAGE:108==
108 
 
Contracts 
The design and construction of the project was divided into several contracts, some of which were Design 
and Build while others are Build contracts.  The civil works (including track construction) were separated 
into lots of Tender Packages (hereafter TPs).   
 
Figure 34 - Tender Packages Vigerslev-Køge (Banekonference slides, 2015) 
 
Figure 35 - Tender Packages Køge-Ringsted (Banekonference slides, 2015) 
Both the energy subsystem and control command subsystem were tendered as Design and Build contracts. 
The Design and Build contracts were awarded between the contract negotiation phase and the draft design 
phase. As shown in Figure 38, once the contracts were awarded, the contractors started the design phases, 
while the consultants were responsible for the phases prior to the contract award, including the getting 
started and third part agreements, tender preparation and contract negotiation.  
 
Figure 36 - Contract award for Design and Build Contracts in NLCR (Banekonference slides, 2015) 
The main contracts awarded in the project are the following: 
- 
For the civil and track works, five Join Venture Consultancy Contracts have been awarded to create 
the necessary input for the Design and Build Contracts and Build Contracts.  
- 
Eleven Design and Build Contracts  
- 
Nine Build Contracts 
- 
The Electrification Contract (part of the general Electrification Programme contract) 
- 
The Signalling Contract (part of the general Signalling Programme contract) 
==PAGE:109==
109 
 
 
Figure 37 -  Main contracts in the NLCR (Banekonference slides, 2017) 
Main stakeholders 
Internal stakeholders 
Steering Committee: The steering committee makes strategic decisions and monitors the project, 
controlling the scope, costs and time schedule. 
Several internal departments (BDK projects and programmes) are involved in the project: 
- 
KhRg: The Project New Line Copenhagen Ringsted is responsible for the Infrastructure 
subsystem, the installation of the signalling system (legacy system) and to ensure the system 
integration of the new line.  Besides the New Line, NLCR project also have 2 projects, the upgrade 
of Vigerslev Station, and the upgrade of Ringsted Station, which connect the New Line with the 
existing infrastructure. 
- 
Electrification Programme: The Electrification Programme is responsible for the energy 
subsystem. They coordinate the activities performed by their supplier and they are responsible for 
controlling the design and the installation works and to report the necessary documentation to the 
system integration team, KHRG. 
- 
Signalling Programme: The Signalling Programme is responsible for the command control and 
the signalling subsystem (ERTMS). SP organisation is divided into several different 
projects/department, being the most relevant for the project Fjernbane Infrastructure East (FIE) 
and Operations. They coordinate the activities performed by their supplier and they are responsible 
for controlling the design and the installation works and to report the necessary documentation to 
the system integration team, KHRG. 
- 
Other BDK departments: The project includes many actors from different departments in 
Banedanmark.  
o BDK Trafik (Traffic Operation)  
o BDK Teknik (Technical Operation) 
o BDK Kvalitet og Sikkerhed (Quality and Safety) 
Other stakeholders 
- 
National Safety Authority (NSA): responsible to issue the authorisations and approvals for the 
New Line, including the Authorisations for Testing and the Applications for Placing into Service. 
- 
DSB: DSB is the operator and railway undertaking applicant for tests using DSB trains. 
- 
EP supplier: Responsible to deliver and commission the electrification system, according to the 
contract with EP. 
- 
SP supplier for onboard equipment: Responsible to deliver and commission the onboard 
signalling system, according to the contract with SP Onboard. 
==PAGE:110==
110 
 
- 
SP supplier trackside: Responsible to deliver and commission the trackside signalling system, 
according to the contract with SP FIE.  
- 
KhRg suppliers: Responsible to deliver and commission the infrastructure subsystem, according 
to the contracts with KHRG. 
- 
Others: Hector Rail, municipalities, neighbours, assessors, public (railway users), etc. 
 
 
==PAGE:111==
111 
 
Appendix 5 – Interview guide and workshop methodology  
This appendix shows the preparation of the interviews and the workshops. The appendix consists of the 
basic information of the interviews, including participant’s roles and interviews dates, the interview guide 
and the description of the workshops. 
Interview Participants 
A total of eight interviews were conducted throughout this thesis. The interviews were conducted after the 
completion of the state of the art research and the findings from the interviews helped at validating the 
findings from the literature and at adapting them to the specific case of railway projects and Banedanmark. 
The objective of the interviews was to get an insight about the main interface issues in Banedanmark’s 
projects, the dynamics and the impact and consequences of the main issues. 
The participants’ roles and the date of the corresponding interviews are shown in the following table:  
Int. 
number 
Role 
Projects covered in the interviews 
Int. Date 
1 
Safety Manager 
SP: EDL (West) and KhRg (EP) 
16-03-2018 
2 
Director Railtech  
KhRg 
20-03-2018 
3 
Test Manager 
EP: Section 1 and KhRg 
28-03-2018 
4 
Design Manager 
SP Onboard 
28-03-2018 
5 
Project Manager 
SP: EDL North (East) 
03-04-2018 
6 
Test Manager 
KhRg 
16-04-2018 
7 
Contract Manager  
SP Onboard 
16-04-2018 
8 
Director Project Delivery Practice  
SP 
17-04-2018 
Table 9 - Participants' roles and interview dates 
Interview guide 
As described in §2.2, the interviews were performed as semi-structured interviews. A semi-structured 
interview is a meeting in which the interviewer does not strictly follow a formalized list of questions. The 
interviewer might formulate open-ended questions, allowing for a discussion with the interviewee following 
the list of questions to guide the conversation (11). Semi-structured interviews were chosen to allow the 
conversation to be natural and to leave room for unexpected reflections. 
The interview guide contains general questions with the purpose of introducing the projects covered in the 
interviews and a set of main questions. The general introductory questions were related to: 
 
Figure 38 - General introduction 
The following figure shows the main questions included in the interview guide: 
- 
Brief description of the project: project type, duration, main activities 
- 
Project organization: involved parties (both internal and external) 
- 
Main phases of the project 
==PAGE:112==
112 
 
 
Figure 39 - Main questions 
Workshops 
As introduced in §2.2, several workshops were arranged for different purposes during this study. The main 
purpose of the workshops was to discuss the findings and to provide suggestions for improvement. The 
workshops were organized with some of the interviewees. 
The following workshops were arranged: 
• 
Workshop 1: Presentation of research results and analysis of dependencies between interface issues 
 (42) Date: 24-04-2018. 
• 
Workshop 2: Proactive mitigations  (42) Date: 08-05-2018. 
Apart from the above-mentioned workshops, other smaller workshops were conducted with only one 
participant to discuss the research findings and analysis during the project.  
The first workshop was organized with three interviewees to analyse the dependencies from the perspective 
of the current projects in Banedanmark.  
The second workshop was arranged with the purpose to collect recommendations to mitigate the interface 
issues. The workshop covered each interface issue individually, providing individual proactive measures for 
each of them. The recommendations from the workshop were, together with recommendations from the 
literature, the input for the creation of the proactive strategies presented in Chapter 6. The complete sets 
of individual proactive measures can be found in §Appendix 3. 
 
 
 
 
- 
What are the main interfaces in the project?  
- 
What are the interface types identified in the project? How are they distributed in the project phases 
and across the different stakeholders? 
- 
What are the main challenges surrounding the interfaces (interface issues) – key players causing 
problems on the interfaces? 
- 
What are the dynamics around the interface issues? 
- 
What are the mitigations to reduce the impact of the interface issues on the project?  
- 
Consequences - Did you complete the project on time, according to schedule and within the 
budget, what are the reasons? 
- 
From your perspective, what would be the main areas/aspects to be improved? 
- 
What could be done to mitigate the appearance of interface issues? 
==PAGE:113==
113 
 
Appendix 6 – List of abbreviations 
Abbreviations 
Meaning 
AI 
Action Item 
BIM 
Building Information Modelling 
C&E 
Cause & Effect 
CBTC 
Communication Based Train Control 
CEO 
Chief Executive Officer 
CM 
Configuration Management 
CR 
Change Request 
DBB 
Design Bid Build 
DMS 
Document Management System 
DRM 
Design Research Methodology 
EP 
Electrification Programme 
ERTMS 
European Rail Traffic Management System 
HR 
Human Resources 
IA 
Interface Agreement 
ICD 
Interface Control Document 
IM 
Interface Management 
IMP 
Interface Management Plan 
IR 
Interface Register 
NLCR 
New Line Copenhagen Ringsted 
PMI 
Project Management Institute 
RACI 
Responsible Accountable Consulted Informed 
RQ 
Research Question 
SE 
Systems Engineering 
SP 
Signalling Programme 
STM 
Specific Transmission Module 
TP 
Tender Package 
V&V 
Verification and Validation 
 
 
==PAGE:114==
114 
 
Appendix 7 – List of tables and figures  
List of tables 
Table 1 - Interface categorization (Weshah, 2013) ............................................................................................... 24 
Table 2 - Final results (Merged from literature and empirical research) ........................................................... 39 
Table 3 - Features related to structural arrangements (Lahdenperä, 2009) ...................................................... 66 
Table 4 - Features related to nature of collaboration (Lahdenperä, 2009) ....................................................... 66 
Table 5 -  Sources of conflicts in interfaces – References ................................................................................... 87 
Table 6 - Literature Research References .............................................................................................................. 88 
Table 7 -  Sources of conflict identified in Railway-related articles ................................................................... 88 
Table 8 - Findings empirical research ..................................................................................................................... 89 
Table 10 - Participants' roles and interview dates ............................................................................................... 111 
 
List of figures 
Figure 1 - Structure of the thesis ............................................................................................................................. 12 
Figure 2 - Detailed representation of the followed design research .................................................................. 17 
Figure 3 - Historical Development of Complexity Framework (Geraldi, 2011). ............................................ 21 
Figure 4 -Thompson’s classification of types of interdependence and concomitant (Morris, 2013) ........... 23 
Figure 5 - The C&E Structure of the Multi-Perspective Approach (Chen, 2007) .......................................... 25 
Figure 6 - Inter-relationship among interface problems. (Huang, Lin & Ku, 2008) ....................................... 26 
Figure 7 - LEGO bricks (ISTOCK) ....................................................................................................................... 26 
Figure 8 - Complexity dimensions in railway projects ......................................................................................... 28 
Figure 9 - Banedanmark in numbers  ..................................................................................................................... 31 
Figure 10 - Banedanmark's organization (Banedanmark, Organisation, 2018) ................................................ 32 
Figure 11 - EP scope of work in 2016 (Banedanmark, Electrification Programme, 2016) ........................... 34 
Figure 12 - Dynamics surrounding interface issues .............................................................................................. 37 
Figure 13 - Imprecise definition of interfaces ....................................................................................................... 38 
Figure 14 - Current situation .................................................................................................................................... 45 
Figure 15 - Example ripple effect in interface issues ........................................................................................... 46 
Figure 16 - Difference between reactive and proactive mitigations .................................................................. 47 
Figure 17 - Desired situation .................................................................................................................................... 47 
Figure 18 - Types of mitigations presented in this study ..................................................................................... 49 
==PAGE:115==
115 
 
Figure 19 - Example tender material Copenhagen-Ringsted (Banekonference slides, 2015) ........................ 58 
Figure 20 - Interests of the contracting parties in alliances ................................................................................. 65 
Figure 21 - Components of the decision-making framework (based on Townsend model) ......................... 67 
Figure 22 - Decision-making model (Townsend A. C., 2013) ............................................................................ 68 
Figure 23 - Culture components (Haworth, 2015) ............................................................................................... 70 
Figure 24 - Organizational cultures and dimensions ............................................................................................ 71 
Figure 25 - Workspace for collaborative culture (Haworth, 2015) .................................................................... 72 
Figure 26 - Mitigations resulting from each strategy ............................................................................................ 73 
Figure 28 - Project risks due to interface issues .................................................................................................... 77 
Figure 29 - Difference between reactive and proactive mitigations .................................................................. 81 
Figure 29 - Special features of the NLCR organization (Banekonference slides, 2016)............................... 106 
Figure 30 – Time line NLCR (Banekonference slides, 2017) ........................................................................... 106 
Figure 31 - General Project phases and phases for Design and Build Contracts .......................................... 107 
Figure 32 – Planned organizational levels (Banekonference slides, 2015) ...................................................... 107 
Figure 33 - Organizational levels in a daily basis (Banekonference slides, 2015) .......................................... 107 
Figure 36 - Tender Packages Vigerslev-Køge (Banekonference slides, 2015) ............................................... 108 
Figure 35 - Tender Packages Køge-Ringsted (Banekonference slides, 2015) ................................................ 108 
Figure 36 - Contract award for Design and Build Contracts in NLCR (Banekonference slides, 2015) .... 108 
Figure 39 -  Main contracts in the NLCR (Banekonference slides, 2017) ...................................................... 109 
Figure 40 - General introduction ........................................................................................................................... 111 
Figure 41 - Main questions ..................................................................................................................................... 112 
 
 
==PAGE:116==
116 
 
 
==PAGE:117==
 
References 
1. Staats S. Interface management in multidisciplinary infrastructure project development. ; 2014. 
2. PMI Ka. Study on project schedule and cost overruns. 2012. 
3. Kwok PMA. Value engineering for railway construction projects: Cost driver analysis. SAGE. 2010. 
4. ECA. A European high-speed rail network: not a reality but an ineffective patchwork. ; 2018. 
5. Banedanmark. Projects. [Online].; 2018. 
6. Liu T. Conflicting Objectives in Interfaces of. ; 2014. 
7. Belack HKaC. Managing Complex Projects: Wiley; 2012. 
8. Shokri S, Maloney K, MacGillivray S. Integrated interface management system and project schedule. 
Gerontechnology. 2012. 
9. Nooteboom U. Interface Management Improves On-time, On-Budget Delivery of Megaprojects. JPT 
Online, Society of Petroleum Engineers. 2004. 
10
. 
Blessing & Chakrabarti L. DRM, a Design Research Mrthodology: Springer; 2009. 
11
. 
Doyle A. The balance careers: Semi-Structured Interviews. [Online].; 2018. Available from: 
https://www.thebalancecareers.com/what-is-a-semi-structured-interview-2061632. 
12
. 
Bosch-rekveldt M. Managing project complexity. 2011. 
13
. 
Morris PWG,JG. Managing the institutional context for projects. Project Management Journal. 2009. 
14
. 
Geraldi et al. TCOJ&S. How to DO Projects? A Nordic Flavour to Managing Projects; 2017. 
15
. 
Ludovic-Alexandre Vidal FM. Understanding project complexity: implications on project management. 
; 2015. 
16
. 
Azim SW. Understanding and Managing. ; 2010. 
==PAGE:118==
118 
 
17
. 
Geraldi J, Maylor HWT. Now, let's make it really complex (complicated) A systematic review of the 
complexities of projects. ; 2011. 
18
. 
Hirshorn SR. NASA Systems Engineering Handbook; 2007. 
19
. 
BAM KG. SE-Wijzer, Handleiding Systems Engineering voor BAM infra. ; 2008. 
20
. 
Thopmson JD. Organizations in Action. In.: McGraw-Hill; 1967. 
21
. 
Harrison P, Hamilton BA. An overview of Interface Management. In Joint Rail Conference; 2004; 
Baltimore, Maryland. 
22
. 
Pavitt TC, Gibb AGF. Interface Management within Construction: In Particular, Building Facade. 
JOURNAL OF CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT. 2003. 
23
. 
Crumrine T, Nelson R, Cordeiro C. Interface management for subsea sand control completions. 2005. 
24
. 
Hamilton PHaA. An overview of itnerface Management. In Joint Rail Conference; 2004; Baltimore, 
MAryland. 
25
. 
AL Mousli MH, El-Sayegh SM. Assessment of the design–construction interface problems in the UAE. 
Architechtural Engineering and Design Management. 2016. 
26
. 
Huang RY, Huang CT, Lin H, Ku WH. Factor analysis of interface problems among construction 
parties. Journal of Marine Science and Technology. 2008. 
27
. 
Brunton J, Tarling K. Dynamically complex rail projects - A systems engineering view. In Joint Rail 
Conference; 2003. 
28
. 
Chapman RJ. A framework for examining the dimensions and characteristics of complexity inherent 
within rail projects. International Journal of Project Management. 2015. 
29
. 
Burdon IP. The ex:ecution and administration of light-rail projects. Engineering Management Journal. 
1996. 
30
. 
Banedanmark. 
International 
Suppliers 
Day. 
[Online].; 
2016. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.trafikverket.se/contentassets/951961537f42495c9f39f7a3c47a7f93/banedanmark_nina
_uldal.pdf. 
==PAGE:119==
119 
 
31
. 
Banedanmark. Organisation. In ; 2018: https://www.bane.dk/da/Om-Banedanmark/Organisation. 
32
. 
Banedanmark. The Danish Signalling Programme: Total renewal of all signalling on the Danish rail 
network. ; 2013. 
33
. 
Managing Banedanmark’s Signalling programme. Railway Gazette International. 2012. 
34
. 
Banedanmark Ra. A case study from Denmark: Danish Signalling Programme. In ; 2012. 
35
. 
Banedanmark. 
Electrification 
Programme. 
[Online].; 
2018. 
Available 
from: 
https://uk.bane.dk/Projects/Electrification-Programme. 
36
. 
Banedanmark. Electrification Programme. In Banekonference 2016; 2016; Copenhagen. 
37
. 
Banedanmark. 
NLCR 
Project. 
[Online].; 
2018. 
Available 
from: 
https://uk.bane.dk/Projects/Copenhagen_Ringsted. 
38
. 
AEradet. 
Arbejderbevægelsens 
Erhvervsråd. 
[Online].; 
2006. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.ae.dk/files/arkiv/erhverv-samfund/2006/jernbaneprojekt-fh.pdf. 
39
. 
Railway Technology R. Ringsted-Fehmarn Railway Link. [Online].; 2014. Available from: 
https://www.railway-technology.com/projects/ringsted-fehmarn-railway-link/. 
40
. 
Banedanmark. 
Ringsted 
Fehmarn 
project. 
[Online].; 
2018. 
Available 
from: 
https://uk.bane.dk/Projects/Ringsted_Fehmarn. 
41
. 
Couwenberg F. Interface management on rail infrastructure projects: the special case of signalling. 
Eurail press. 2015. 
42
. 
Thesis WI. Workshop - Recommendations. ; 2018 May. 
43
. 
Thesis II. Interface issues. ; 2018 March-April. 
44
. 
Richards F. How organizational structure affects projects. [Online].; 2018. Available from: 
http://smallbusiness.chron.com/organizational-structure-affects-projects-21868.html. 
45
. 
Chen. Multiperspective approach to Exploring Comprehensive Cause Factors for Interface Issues. 
ASCE - Journal of Construction Engineering and Management. 2008;: p. pp.432-441. 
==PAGE:120==
120 
 
46
. 
Banedanmark. Vejledning til interessentanalyse. ; 2014. 
47
. 
Wong L. [Online].; 2016. Available from: https://www.workzone.com/blog/9-ways-to-improve-
collaboration-between-departments/. 
48
. 
Baungaard L. From a reactive to a proactive approach. DTU Management Engineering. 2010. 
49
. 
Tarling JBaK. Dynamically complex rail projects - A systems engineering view. IEEE/ASME Joint 
Rail Conference. 2003;: p. 103-107. 
50
. 
Whitaker K. Principles of Software Development Leadership:Applying Project Management Principles 
to Agile Software Development.; 2009. 
51
. 
Wong L. Workzone. [Online]. Available from: https://www.workzone.com/blog/9-ways-to-improve-
collaboration-between-departments/. 
52
. 
Kleinbaum AM. Communication (and Coordination?) in a modern, complex organization. 2008. 
53
. 
PMI. PMBOK 6th Edition; 2017. 
54
. 
Weshah N, El Ghandour W, Jergeas G. Factor analysis of the interface management (IM) problems 
for construction projects in Alberta. NRC Research Press. 2013. 
55
. 
Townsend AC. DECISION MAKING: A practical framework for project managers. [Online].; 2013. 
Available from: https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/presentation/5a1b/8836ab71104ae69ad. 
56
. 
DTU. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://apppm.man.dtu.dk/index.php/Responsibility_Assignment_Matrix_(RACI_Matrix). 
57
. 
Banedanmark. The New Line Copenhagen Ringsted. In Banekonference; 2015; Copenhagen. 
58
. 
Hulsen J. System Engineering for Re-signalling projects. Parker and Associates Inc. 2010. 
59
. 
Roos et al. RHaE. Selection of project contract for rail infrastructure projects. ; 2013. 
60
. 
Dictionary 
B. 
Dictionary, 
Business. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/design-build-D-B-contract.html. 
==PAGE:121==
121 
 
61
. 
Lahdenperä P. Project alliance. ; 2009. 
62
. 
Baratta A. The triple constraint: a triple illusion. PMI. 2006. 
63
. 
Townsend AC. Decision Making: a framework for project managers. In ; 2013: Federal Management 
Systems, Inc. 
64
. 
Haworth. How to create a successful organizational culture. In.: Haworth; 2015. 
65
. 
Quinn et al. KCaR. Diagnosing and changing organizational culture: Wiley; 2006. 
66
. 
Bremer M. Organizational culture: Create, Collaborate, Control, and Compete. [Online].; 2016. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.ocai-online.com/blog/2016/09/Organizational-culture-Create-
Collaborate-Control-Compete. 
67
. 
Andersen DL. Project Risk Management – Inside Out. In IPMA Expert Seminar; 2011. 
68
. 
Collis J. Business Research: A practical guide for undergraduate and postgraduate students: Palgrave 
Macmillan; 2009. 
69
. 
Bryman A. Business Research Methods: Oxford; 2011. 
70
. 
Community 
Tool 
Box. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://ctb.ku.edu/en/table-of-
contents/participation/promoting-interest/e-mail/main. 
71
. 
NERRA. Best practices for communicating with stakeholders. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.nerra.org/collaborative-project-toolkit-best-practices-archive/. 
72
. 
NERRA. Best practices for effective meetings. [Online]. Available from: http://www.nerra.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/08/doing_collaborate-with-stakeholders_best-practices_effective-
meetings.pdf. 
73
. 
NERRA. 
Best 
practices 
for 
engaging 
stakeholders. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.nerra.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/doing_collaborate-with-stakeholders_best-
practices_engaging-stakeholders.pdf. 
74
. 
Larson R&LE. Top five causes of scope creep. and what to do about them. [Online].; 2009. Available 
from: https://www.pmi.org/learning/library/top-five-causes-scope-creep-6675. 
==PAGE:122==
122 
 
75
. 
Marone O. PMI. [Online].; 2000. Available from: https://www.pmi.org/learning/library/requirement-
traceability-tool-quality-results-8873. 
76
. 
Ward 
JL. 
How 
to 
make 
better, 
faster 
project 
decisions. 
[Online].: 
https://www.pmi.org/learning/library/better-faster-project-decisions-9651; 2015. Available from: 
https://www.pmi.org/learning/library/better-faster-project-decisions-9651. 
77
. 
Couwenberg F. Interface Management on rail infrastrcutre projects. [Online].; 2015. Available from: 
https://cdn.movares.nl/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/SIgnal-Draht-Interface-management-on-rail-
infrastructure-projects-the-special-case-of-signalling-april-2015.pdf. 
79
. 
Søndergaard M. MAnaging Banedanmark's signalling programme. ; 2012. 
80
. 
Mason C. Systems Engineering and Tram Projects. INCOSE. 2008. 
81
. 
Walker DHT. Understanding the motivation and context for alliancing in the Australian construction 
industry. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MANAGING PROJECTS IN BUSINESS. 2016. 
82
. 
Clarke O. Alliancing and partnering: Forming a successful alliance. 2012. 
83
. 
NASA. Systems Engineering Handbook; 2007. 
84
. 
Interface Management Terms. [Online]. Available from: http://interfacemanagement.org/interface-
terms.html#mainText. 
85
. 
Fosberg KJ. INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook: Wiley; 2015. 
86
. 
Burge S. The Systems Engineering Tool Box. 2011. 
87
. 
Lahdenperä et al. PaPP. Alliance Contracting: How do we make it in Finland. In European 
Infrastructure Procurement Symposium; 2012; Copenhagen. 
88
. 
Ghandour. Factor Analysis of the Interface Management problems for Construction Projects in 
Alberta. NRC Research Press. 2013. 
89
. 
Gutierrez 
M. 
SFGATE. 
[Online].; 
2018. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.sfgate.com/politics/article/California-high-speed-rail-project-facing-more-
12741787.php. 
==PAGE:123==
123 
 
90
. 
Banedanmark. Banen i tal. [Online].; 2018. Available from: https://www.bane.dk/Presse/Banen-i-tal. 
91
. 
Banedanmark. Procurement, tenders, and upcoming projects in Banedanmark. In ; 2017. 
92
. 
Barrow DBaK. Danish ERTMS programme facing seven-year delay. International Railway Journal. 
2017. 
 
==PAGE:124==
124 
 
 
