==PAGE:1==
 
 
Ziyu Wang  
s161652 
State Estimation Model for Distribution 
Network Incorporating Information 
from Multiple Physical Domains 
Master Thesis, September 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
 
Ziyu Wang  
s161652 
State Estimation Model for Distribution 
Network Incorporating Information 
from Multiple Physical Domains 
Master Thesis, September 2018  
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
State estimation model for distribution network incorporating information from multi-
ple physical domains 
 
Author(s): 
Ziyu Wang, s161652 
 
Supervisor(s): 
Associate Professor Dr. Guangya Yang 
PhD Student Theis Bo Rasmussen 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE) 
Technical University of Denmark 
Elektrovej 325 
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
 
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee 
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00 
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11 
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk 
 
 
Release date: 
 
1 September 2018 
Class: 
 
1 (Public) 
 
Edition: 
 
1. edition 
Comments: 
 
This report is a part of the requirements to achieve Master of 
Science (MSc) in Electrical Engineering at Technical University 
of Denmark. 
The report represents 35 ECTS points. 
Rights: 
 
© Ziyu Wang, 2018 
 
==PAGE:5==
I 
PREFACE 
The presented master thesis is carried out at Center for Electric Power and Energy (CEE), 
Department of Electrical Engineering at Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The report 
is part of the thesis project aimed at fulfilling the requirements of acquiring a Master of Sci-
ence (MSc) Degree in Electrical Engineering with specialization on Electric Energy System 
at DTU. The thesis project is equivalent to 35 ECTS points.  
This project is focused on proposing, building, analysing and evaluating a state estimation 
model on low voltage grid incorporating information from multiple physical domains and 
evaluating its performance and benefits in the perspective of DSOs. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
II 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
On finishing this thesis project, I would like to send my special gratitude to my two supervi-
sors, Associate Professor Dr. Guangya Yang and PhD student Theis Bo Rasmussen from CEE, 
Department of Electrical Engineering at DTU, thanks for their devoted help and patient guid-
ance from my first special course working with them until my master thesis. I would also like 
to send my thanks and love to my beloved girlfriend, Haoxuan Wang, MSc from Department 
of Environmental Engineering at DTU, thanks for her encouragement, support and every de-
licious meal cooked for me. Finally, I would send all my best wishes to my beloved families 
far away in China, especially my mother, Prof. Yan Hu, PhD in Electrical Engineering from 
Shenyang University of Technology, thanks for her professional knowledge and care. 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
III 
ABSTRACT 
As the demand of clean energy increases nowadays, the share renewable-based generation 
units can be seen increasing in recent years. More and more distribution generation units 
(DGs), especially wind and PV power plants, are integrated into the distribution grids. In 
Denmark, PV power plants are usually integrated with residential loads, i.e. integrated into 
the low voltage (LV) distribution grids, and the “prosumers” are formed.  
This change makes the LV grids more active. To cope with the new challenges in the power 
system, establishing high-performance real-time monitor system so that the operation of the 
system can be controlled in a more efficient and appropriate way. State estimation (SE), as an 
important tool in planning and monitoring power system is introduced in to the distribution 
grids. Many SE methods are developed and investigated in the past decades. However, most 
of the studies in distribution system state estimation are focused on medium voltage grid, with 
only few focused on the LV networks.  
In this project, a state estimation model in LV network incorporating grid knowledge from 
multiple physical domains is proposed to carry out state estimation on an LV grid model. An 
ICT system is modelled to send the measurements from the grid model to the SE model as 
inputs. Simulated metering errors and data losses are applied onto the measurements.  
The proposed model is tested with different data loss degrees in the measurements for a time 
period of 12 hours. With different grid knowledge implemented, the observability of the for-
mulated SE problems is improved, and estimation results is also accurate and reliable. The 
performance of the estimator is evaluated with statistical parameters. By comparing with one 
state-of-the-art method, i.e. using historical data or pseudo measurements, it is proven that the 
proposed model is performing better the one with historical data.  
The possibility of utilizing the estimation results to benefit the grid analysis in the perspective 
of the DSOs is also discussed. With these estimation results, the voltage imbalance degree of 
the system and the load buses with highest and lowest voltage in the system are the most di-
rect observations and can be easily obtained. Based on these results, the power balance and 
the self-consumption conditions at each load bus in the network can be calculated and the 
interaction between the LV grid and the external grid can therefore be evaluated. After this, 
the changing trend of the loading rate of the distribution transformer at the substation can be 
predicted analytically based on the power balance and the self-consumption conditions in the 
network and other knowledge. 
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
 
TABLE OF CONTENT 
Preface .................................................................................................................................. I 
Acknowledgement............................................................................................................... II 
Abstract.............................................................................................................................. III 
1 
Introduction .................................................................................................................. 1 
1.1 
Background ............................................................................................................. 1 
1.2 
State of the Art ........................................................................................................ 3 
1.3 
Project Objectives ................................................................................................... 7 
1.4 
Thesis Outline ......................................................................................................... 8 
2 
Methodology ................................................................................................................. 9 
2.1 
State Estimation Theory ........................................................................................ 11 
2.2 
Modelling of the Low Voltage Grid ....................................................................... 13 
2.3 
Modelling of the ICT System ................................................................................ 17 
2.4 
State Estimator ...................................................................................................... 20 
2.5 
Applications and Benefits ...................................................................................... 30 
3 
Results and Discussion ............................................................................................... 35 
3.1 
Validation of the State Estimator ........................................................................... 35 
3.2 
Benefits from the State Estimator .......................................................................... 46 
4 
Conclusion .................................................................................................................. 59 
5 
Limitations and Future Work .................................................................................... 63 
5.1 
Limitations ............................................................................................................ 63 
5.2 
Future Work .......................................................................................................... 64 
References .......................................................................................................................... 65 
A System Information........................................................................................................ 71 
B Results and Figures ........................................................................................................ 75 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
 
1 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 
Background 
In recent years, the demand for clean energy keeps increasing due to climate challenges. Be-
sides, conventional energy resources, i.e. fossil-fuel-based energy resources, are limited and 
non-renewable while sustainable energy resources, such as solar, wind, tidal and hydro ener-
gy, are abundant in the nature and cause no environmental problems [1], [2].  
These renewable energy resources are widely distributed in the nature and can be used to 
generate electric power. Different from bulk electric system (BES), the generation units built 
based on renewable energy resources are operating depending on smaller scale facilities. Ac-
cording to the definition given by NERC (North American Electric Reliability Corporation), 
they are called distributed energy resources (DERs). Therefore, the generation units formed 
based on them are called distribution generations (DGs) [3].  
Wind, hydro and solar are the most widely used renewable energy resources in European Un-
ion (EU) with share of 15.57%, 15.54% and 10.41%, respectively, of total installed capacity 
of electric power generation units by 2016 and these figures are still increasing year by year. 
In Denmark, the three figures are 36.58%, 0.07% and 5.94%, respectively [4]. Solar photo-
voltaic (PV) power plants in Denmark are mostly installed at low voltage (LV) level in the 
form of roof-top PV panels [5].  
Because of the intermittent nature of solar energy, PV generation is affected by weather con-
ditions. The variation in generation can cause voltage rise and instability in system. Thus, 
energy storage system (ESS), as one of the most efficient methods of solving this problem, is 
adopted [6]. In the perspective of the distribution system operators (DSOs), the costs of pow-
er production and system operation are reduced and more integration of DGs is possible. At 
the generation side, peak shaving can be realised and curtailment during off-peak time and 
power outage, which are the worst cases, can be avoided. In the consumers’ point of view, 
ESS can be used as backup power supply. Thus, the consumers can have more reliable power 
supply. With the spread of electric vehicle (EV) recently, EV has become an alternative asset 
to keep normal operation of renewable-based grid. Moreover, smart EV charge solutions, 
such as Vehicle to Grid (V2G), increases controllability to system regulation [7]–[9].  
==PAGE:12==
 
Introduction 
2 
Because of the increasing penetration of PV in LV grid, the loads are becoming more and 
more active than before. The strategy of “generation meets demand” is changing to “load ad-
justs to meet generation”, and the conventional “consumers” concept is eventually transform-
ing towards the modern “prosumers”. As a consequence, the power grid becomes more com-
plex and less predictable. This change brings different impacts to the distribution grid. Be-
cause of this, the attention on transmission systems is moving to the distribution grids, and the 
traditional focus on generation side is shifted towards the load side, and the demand side 
management (DSM) is thereby established [9], [10].  
Solar power has become indispensable in modern renewable power systems. The integration 
of PV in the LV grids has brought impact into distribution grids in both positive and negative 
aspects. PV integration can reduce power losses in the power grid, but it also introduces bi-
directional power flow, which can cause congestion, voltage rise and difficulties in protection 
scheme coordination in distribution grids [11]. All these impacts make the monitoring of the 
system more important and essential.  
Different from the transmission grids, the distribution grids are mostly in radial structure or 
weakly meshed. Because the radial structure is the simplest circuit topology, it has the ad-
vantage of being easy to design and determine the rating of the components in the system. But 
in terms of flexibility and planning in a long-run perspective, it has disadvantages including 
overload at nodes closer to the substations, voltage fluctuation problem at far-end nodes and 
unbalanced operation. These problems make it essential to monitor and control the distribu-
tion systems efficiently. However, another problem lying behind this is the limited implemen-
tation of metering infrastructures in distribution grids due to economic, political and technical 
reasons, especially in LV networks [10], [12].  
State estimation (SE) is a tool used in planning, designing and monitoring of power grids. SE 
is a process of assigning values to unknown state variables based on certain criterion [13]. It 
was first introduced into power system in the 1960s and its basic theory was formed in the 
1970s by Fred C. Schweppe and J. Wildes from Massachusetts Institution of Technology 
(MIT). With the aid from computer technology, SE has been developed and improved over 
the past decades. Because measurements usually contain errors caused by the metering sys-
tems, the process also minimizes the errors based on specific statistical theory. The technique 
of transmission system state estimation (TSSE) has been used practically and is a mature 
technique after three decades of development [14], [15].  
Since the 1990s, the research interests in the distribution system state estimation (DSSE) 
started increasing as the study focuses moved to power distribution grids. Different from 
transmission grid, distribution grid has characteristics of higher 
𝑟
𝑥 ratio (ratio of resistance and 
reactance), lack of measurements, distributed in multiple areas and usually operating in un-
==PAGE:13==
 
Introduction 
3 
balanced conditions. Therefore, the conventional methods for TSSE are not perfectly suitable 
for DSSE problems and need adaptation. Although any pioneers have conducted a great deal 
of studies to improve and optimize the methods, there are still problems and challenges to be 
faced with [16], [17]. Because of the increasingly active role of LV distribution grids, the 
power flow in the network becomes less predictable where real-time monitoring becomes 
more and more crucial to the system operation [18]. However, the lack of measurements 
makes it difficult to realise.  
In high voltage (HV) transmission grids and distribution grids at medium voltage (MV) level, 
the substations are well-equipped with phasor measurement units (PMUs) and supervisory 
control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems. The deployment of the ICT systems and ad-
vanced metering infrastructures (AMIs) in the distribution grid has been increasing in recent 
years [19], [20]. Italy, as the pioneer of deploying smart meters in EU, started the project in 
2001 and has reached 99% coverage by 2011 according to the statistics from Europe Com-
mission. Denmark started the roll-out project in 2011 and it is expected to reach 100% of de-
ployment by 2020 [21]. However, the problems of communication asynchronization and fail-
ure, cyber-attacks from the external and imbalance among three phases are challenges exist-
ing in DSSE. Even with the wide deployment of smart meters, it is still not sufficient to iden-
tify the prosumer information [22]. 
1.2 
State of the Art 
Different DSSE methods have been developed over the past two decades. But DSSE tech-
niques have not been implemented into practice yet because of technical burdens which is 
mainly caused by lacking investment in ICT and metering infrastructure [17]. Implementation 
of DSSE is still in demonstration stage, such as IDE4L (Ideal Grid for All). Many other re-
searchers are devoted to developing different SE methods to fit different problems.  
From the reviews made by [16] and [17], there are different ways of “filling in the blanks in 
measurements”, i.e. improving the observability by means of processing pseudo measurement 
and historical data with statistical methods. Measurements from AMIs and PMUs are also 
introduced into SE for this purpose. Most studies in DSSE are focused on the primary distri-
bution grids (MV level) with only few focused on the LV grids [23], [24].  
• 
State Variables 
Complex node voltage is the most commonly used state variable in SE. In some studies, it has 
been proven to be accurate but less efficient to use node voltage, because in the gradient-
based methods, e.g. Newton-Raphson method, the Jacobian matrix needs recalculated and 
updated in every iteration. Besides, because of high 
𝑟
𝑥 ratio, it is not practical to apply decou-
==PAGE:14==
 
Introduction 
4 
ple methods. In large systems, the computation can be inefficient. For this reason, branch 
current is also used as state variable in recent researches [15]–[18].  
Current-based SE is adopted in some recent studies and is proven to be efficient in radial-
structured networks. The study done in [25] proposed a current-based DSSE where complex 
voltage in rectangular form is selected as the state variable. By this means the Jacobian can be 
constant during the computation process. 
• 
Method in Early Stage 
In earlier stages, there are also studies on adapting conventional TSSE techniques in DSSE. 
But because of the radial structure and high 
𝑟
𝑥, methods like decouple methods and DC meth-
ods (linear estimation) are not suitable for DSSE. DSSE usually has observability problem 
because of lacking measurements and a problem is sometimes not solvable. A system is con-
sidered as observable when there is high redundancy in measurements, i.e. more measure-
ments than state variables. To solve this, pseudo measurements, such as historical data with 
high uncertainty, are used to increase the observability. However, the accuracy and reliability 
of the results is relatively low because of the uncertainty. 
• 
Load Adjustment Method 
The load adjustment method is implemented in [26]–[29]. With this, the loads are adjusted 
according to the load modelling based on the load profiles, which is formulated based on his-
torical load data and pseudo measurement. The load profiles do not follow any distribution 
sometimes. Thus, Gaussian mixture model is often adopted to model load profile distribution. 
Then the measurements are specified as solution constraints. However, with the increasing 
integration of DERs, the load profile becomes more difficult to model.  
• 
Dynamic Method 
The dynamic state estimation (DySE) method for DSSE, which is also known as forecasting-
aided state estimation (FASE), is proposed in recent years. In the studies conducted in [30] 
and [31], the pseudo measurements from history records are used to “forecast” the system 
states, such as loads, when an SE is needed. Kalman filter technique is normally used in this 
method to filter out the “errors” in those “forecasted results”. By this means, the accuracy of 
the results can be guaranteed to some extent, but the computational bottleneck and efficiency 
should also be taken into consideration.  
The FASE method was first used on TSSE problems but researchers are interested in adapting 
it into DSSE problems [16], [17]. In MV network, the loads are aggregated at the secondary 
(10/0.4 kV) substations. Thus, the loads normally follow certain characteristics and are pre-
==PAGE:15==
 
Introduction 
5 
dictable and this method has been widely used in DSSE. However, in the LV level, the load 
characteristic of a single customer or house is extremely dynamic and difficult to predict, and 
the forecasting accuracy is low.  
• 
Multi-area Method 
The distribution grids have numerous substations and feeders distributed in different areas, 
which makes the computation and analysis process time-consuming. Furthermore, different 
from mesh-structured transmission grid, most of the buses in the MV grids are decoupled 
from each other because of their radial structures. Therefore, a multi-area state estimation 
(MASE) method, also known as distribution method or hierarchical method, is proposed to 
solve the existing problems in distribution grids with extreme large scale and complex struc-
ture by dividing the system into many smaller sub-areas, and then the SE is solved within 
each sub-area. By assigning proper boundary conditions, these estimators can run in parallel 
so that the computation speed and efficiency can get improved [32].  
An MASE is used to perform estimation to meet real-time computational requirements for 
distribution management system (DMS) in the study done by [33]. This method is also used 
by the study in [34] to divide the system into smaller sub-networks conducting a multi-level 
SE in order to meet the demand of assessing the communication between the transmission 
and distribution grid. But MASE in DSSE can be challenging due to the limited amount of 
actual measurements which are deterministic to the accuracy and observability of the estima-
tion. For this reason, MASE is usually used together with other methods, such as DySE. 
Therefore, MASE is more suitable for MV and HV grids.  
• 
Integration of AMIs 
With the development of the real-time metering infrastructure, the integration of data from 
the AMIs comes to DSSE. With PMUs installed in transmission grids, AMIs like smart me-
ters are implemented in the distribution grids. More researchers are interested in investigating 
the applications of integrating AMI data in DSSE [23]. In most of the current literatures, the 
measurements from different time periods are gathered to perform load estimation or fore-
casting based on certain mathematical and statistical principles.  
Studies done by [20], [23] and [35] have evaluated the effects of real-time monitoring and 
integration of AMIs in distribution grids. It is proven that thanks to the deployment of AMIs, 
a cost-effective and efficient way of real-time monitoring can be achieved. It is also possible 
to aggregate metering information at secondary substations and perform a series of analysis 
including SE to obtain operation states of LV grids. Because of the large amount of data com-
ing from smart meters in LV grids within a distribution grid, there would be a high stress on 
the communication networks where data loss or asynchronization can occur [36].  
==PAGE:16==
 
Introduction 
6 
The studies done by [37] and [38] have investigated the incorporation smart meter in three-
phase SE. It is assumed that all the data input to SE model are measured by smart meters and 
believed that smart meters are with high resolution and accuracy. The fine results show that 
the SE results are in high accuracy and the computation process only takes few iterations to 
reach convergence. However, in reality, some of the inputs assumed in the study may not be 
available in distribution grids, such as line flow in the transmission lines.  
A similar study is done in [28] but with a smaller network consisting of 16 nodes operating in 
balanced condition. The SE model is built based on load adjustment method with measure-
ments obtained from AMIs. Besides, various measurement error sources are tested in the 
study and a quantitative comparison is conducted between SE results obtained from condi-
tions with and without AMI measurements. It is proven that the deployment of AMIs in dis-
tribution grids results in higher accuracy.  
The research presented in [39] has conducted tests on using measurements stored in smart 
meter from the previous day to perform SE on the up-to-date system states. This study is done 
based on a 75-node MV distribution network, with the load profiles taken from Ireland. By 
including small amount of real-time measurements, a reliable estimation over the system op-
eration can be acquired. This makes it possible to perform a relatively reliable and accurate 
SE when there is a big loss of real-time measurements. However, this method is not suitable 
for applying in the LV networks, because the load profile of LV networks is quite dynamic 
and there can be big variation between two days.  
An study on using asynchronous smart meters is done in [36] where a load variation model is 
built based on short-term load profile in distribution grid to calculate the errors of the “pre-
dicted” measurements. The study proposes an approach to use asynchronous measurements in 
a reliable way. It is approved that with this model, the accuracy of SE results is improved.  
Research in [40] has investigated into the SE in LV grids with the aid of smart  meter meas-
urements. A cloud-based smart metering architecture is built allowing the SE model to be 
scalable and flexible. In this paper, it is assumed that the unbalanced condition between phas-
es is not available, and a phase-decoupled SE model is proposed to execute parallel computa-
tion for each phase. In reality, however, the coupling between phases is tight and not negligi-
ble, especially in the cables due to the short distance between conductors.  
When smart meters are first introduced into the power system, it is claimed that they have 
fairly accuracy and reliability. The study in [41] has investigated the measurement errors of 
smart meters caused by the electromagnetic interference (EMI) from some external sources or 
bad calibration of the meters. The EMI between the active infeed converters, such as the IG-
BTs or other power electronic based converters used in the PV inverters, and the smart meters 
==PAGE:17==
 
Introduction 
7 
can affect the metering accuracy. In the worst case, the deviation can reach as high as 582% 
the actual values according to the results obtained from field tests.  
• 
Summary 
To summarise, the existing studies in DSSE are mainly focused on the MV grids, with only 
few on the LV level. In most of the studies on DSSE, it is assumed that the system is operat-
ing under balanced condition and only single-phase SE is conducted. Besides, many studies 
take smart meters into account, but they simply assume that all the measurements are collect-
ed and aggregated at the MV substations. The effects of DERs (e.g. PV systems), EVs and 
batteries integrated in the distribution grids are not considered. Furthermore, the methods and 
assumptions implemented in MV grids are not suitable for LV grids because the characteristic 
of unbalanced operation and highly dynamic loads.  
1.3 
Project Objectives 
Although many studies have been done until now, there are still challenges and problems to 
be faced with. As summarised in the end of Section 1.2, most of the studies on DSSE are fo-
cused on MV networks. However, because of the increasing penetration of PV systems in LV 
networks, the monitor of LV network operation is becoming more essential. The blank in LV 
grid state estimation should be filled. Unfortunately, the DSSE techniques and methods used 
in MV grids are usually not suitable for LV grids.  
In LV networks, there is more information from multiple physical domains other than the 
electrical power system, which can be utilized to help improve the observability and accuracy 
of SE. For example, the energy consumption of the customers within certain periods can be 
used to estimate the loads and weather information can contribute to the estimation of the PV 
generation. Such information is not available for MV grids. Therefore, this project is aimed at 
developing a three-phase SE model that utilizes information from both the electrical power 
system and other physical domains. To link the grid and the state estimator, an ICT system is 
required. The performance of the proposed model is evaluated in the end. To achieve these 
goals, the following objectives of the project are therefore established:  
➢ Build an LV grid model including PV systems, batteries and EVs; 
➢ Model a simplified ICT system; 
➢ Develop an SE model incorporating knowledge from multiple physical domains; 
➢ Evaluate the performance of the proposed SE model; 
➢ Investigate the applications and benefits from the perspective of DSOs. 
More details about the methods implemented to achieve these objectives are introduced more 
specifically in Chapter 2.  
==PAGE:18==
 
Introduction 
8 
1.4 
Thesis Outline 
A brief outline of the report is given in the following paragraphs so that the readers can have 
an overview of the present thesis and the working contents.  
Chapter 2 introduces the methodologies that have been implemented in the process of the 
project with details, including the basic state estimation theory, modelling of the LV grid and 
modelling of the ICT system the state estimator, and the grid knowledge implemented in the 
estimator. The potential benefits are also introduced.  
Chapter 3 is devoted to presenting and analysing the results acquired from the estimator, in-
cluding the evaluation of the estimator performance, the benefits that can be obtained from 
the proposed estimator are discussed. 
Chapter 4 concludes the working contents of the thesis project based on the results and the 
analyses that have been done in Chapter 3.  
Chapter 5 discusses the limitation of the proposed state estimator and further improvements 
are thereby analysed. The methods to conduct these improvements are briefly introduced as 
well.  
In the appendices, Appendix A presents the basic information of the studied LV grid and Ap-
pendix B presents the relevant results which are not included in the main context due to the 
amount of results and figures.  
 
==PAGE:19==
 
9 
2 
METHODOLOGY 
As introduced previously, with the SE techniques implemented widely in transmission grid, 
the SE applied in distribution grid however is still at the stage of demonstration. Among the 
studies in DSSE, with most of the studies focused on the distribution grid at MV level, only 
few investigates into SE implemented at the LV level.  
From the literature, it is known that the most widely used DSSE method in MV grid is FASE. 
The core of this FASE method is to use historical data or pseudo measurements of loads to 
forecast or predict the load at this moment. However, the load profile in LV network does not 
follow a certain probability distribution and it is therefore not as predictable as that in MV 
grid.  
Although a generic load profile of LV grid is proposed by CIGRE in [42], the load in LV grid 
is still much less predictable because it is affected by human behaviours significantly. There-
fore, such kind of method is not suitable for SE implemented in LV grid. However, because 
the LV grids are becoming more and more active than before due to the increasing PV inte-
gration in the LV grids, the monitoring of the LV grid becomes crucial to the normal system 
operation. Moreover, as the problems raised in Chapter 1, including the unbalanced operation 
in LV networks, less predictable load profiles and lack of measurements and metering infra-
structure, the DSSE methods developed for distribution grids at MV level are not suitable for 
LV grids. Therefore, different methods are needed.  
As introduced in Chapter 1, there is more information, or grid knowledge, in LV networks 
other than the electrical power system and such information can be useful in improving the 
observability and accuracy of the state estimation in LV networks. Concerning the existing 
problems and challenges in DSSE, the demand for SE implemented in LV networks and the 
available information in the network, a three-phase state estimation model implemented in 
distribution grid at LV level incorporating with different grid knowledge is proposed and built 
in this project.  
Different from the transmission grids, where the state estimators are normally implemented in 
centralised control rooms, in distribution grids, the state estimators should be implemented in 
the decentralised substations where data concentrators are used to collect data from the meters 
installed at different nodes within the grid. In LV networks, the state estimator should be im-
==PAGE:20==
 
Methodology 
10 
plemented at MV/LV substations so that the estimator can receive measurement and other 
grid knowledge and perform estimation on the operation state. In this way, the operation of 
the feeders can be monitored efficiently.  
To realise this, an ICT system is necessary in such system, because it establishes the commu-
nication between the grid and the monitoring system at the substation. With this setup, the 
state estimator can execute periodically based on the measurements collected from different 
nodes in the grid and the grid knowledge acquired from different domains. By this means, the 
operators can be provided with an overview of the system operation states and further anal-
yses can be conducted based on the estimation results.  
In this project, the state estimator is built for an LV grid and implemented at the 10/0.4 kV 
substation. To simulate a complete process of power system operation, data acquisition and 
state estimation, an LV grid model and an ICT system model are essential. Therefore, a com-
plete model consisting of an LV grid model, a state estimator and a simplified ICT system 
that established the communication with the grid model is modelled. The layout of this pro-
posed model is illustrated in Figure 2-1.  
Low voltage grid 
model
Grid topology
Load information
PV system modelling
Battery modelling
Information from 
multiple physical 
domains
State Estimator
Further analysis
ICT System 
Model
Start
Return results
Simulation 
Results
Output
Input
Simulated measurement 
errors
Simulation configuration 
and control
EV model
Output
 
Figure 2-1 A conceptual diagram of the model 
The ICT system model in Figure 2-1 is built based on Python programming and the LV grid 
is modelled in DIgSILENT PowerFactory. Different system components, including loads, 
==PAGE:21==
 
Methodology 
11 
EVs, PV systems and batteries are modelled within the LV grid model. The ICT system 
communicates with the grid model in PowerFactory controlling the load flow calculation. 
The simulated measurement errors are added onto the load flow results in the ICT system and 
the results are then exported via the ICT system. The results acquired through the ICT system 
are then used in the state estimator as inputs. The details of structuring and building different 
sections of the complete model illustrated in Figure 2-1 are introduced and discussed with 
details in the remaining sections in this chapter.  
Because of the characteristic of unbalanced operation, it is neither practical nor precise to 
represent an LV network with equivalent single line diagram as it is done in most studies on 
MV grids. Additionally, the unbalanced operation can affect the performance of the DERs, 
i.e. PV systems in this project, functions such as frequency response and voltage regulation 
functions [43]. Therefore, the proposed SE model must be in three-phase form.  
2.1 
State Estimation Theory 
As defined in [14], state estimation is a process of estimating the operation states of the whole 
system based on a number of measurements from the metering system and minimizing the 
errors contained in the measurements. Therefore, it is sometimes considered as a signal pro-
cessing method or a optimization problem in some literatures [17]. The measurements are 
normally analogue quantities, such as voltage magnitude, current magnitude active power and 
reactive power. In LV grids, the angles are not measured and thus not available.  
In SE theory, the measurements of different quantities are represented by 
𝑧= ℎ(𝑥) + 𝜀 
(2-1) 
where z represents the measurements acquired from the metering infrastructure, h(x) the “re-
al” values of the measurements represented by a series of functions defined by the state varia-
bles x, and ε represents the measurement errors which is usually considered to follow Gaussi-
an distribution with zero mean, namely ε~N(0, σ). With the errors represented by ε=z-h(x) and 
the linear transformation property of Gaussian distribution, the measurement z also follows 
Gaussian distribution, i.e. z~N(h(x), σ). The probability density function (PDF) of the meas-
urement is 
PDF =
1
𝜎√2𝜋𝑒
−(𝑧−ℎ(𝑥))2
2𝜎2
 
(2-2) 
According to the definition of SE given at the beginning of this section, an SE problem can be 
solved by means of least square method to estimate the maximum likelihood, which is a 
==PAGE:22==
 
Methodology 
12 
mathematical method firstly proposed by Carl Fredrich Gauss. Because all the measurements 
are considered as independent from each other, the covariance between any two of the meas-
urements is zero and the weighted least square (WLS) criterion is fulfilled. This method is 
aimed at minimizing or eliminating the residual in the measurements, i.e. the errors ε as much 
as possible with the measurements assigned with different weighting factors based on their 
reliability. The weighting factors, or weights are determined by the variances of the meas-
urements. Because all the measurements are independent from each other as stated previous-
ly, each measurement is an independent event and thus the combined PDF of all the meas-
urements is calculated as the product of the PDF of each single measurement, namely 
PDF = ∏PDF𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
(2-3) 
From these equations, it can be seen that the maximum value of the PDF, namely the maxi-
mal probability, occurs when z-h(x) reaches the minimal value. Hence, by applying logarithm, 
it yields 
max PDF = min (𝑧−ℎ(𝑥))2
2𝜎2
 
(2-4) 
Therefore, the objective function is 
𝐽(𝑥) = min ∑(𝑧𝑖−ℎ𝑖(𝑥))2
𝜎𝑖
2
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
(2-5) 
An SE problem formulated in the form of Equation 2-5 is called WLS-based state estimation, 
where the element  
1
𝜎𝑖
2 in Equation 2-5 is the weight of the ith measurement and 𝜎𝑖
2 is the vari-
ance of the corresponding measurement. Therefore, the matrix is called the covariance matrix. 
In the perspective of statistic theory, covariance measures the variability between data. Ac-
cording to the statements about WLS criterion, the covariance between two measurements is 
0 and the matrix is therefore a diagonal matrix.  
The measurements with higher weights have higher reliability and vice versa. For example, 
reliable pseudo measurements have relatively higher weights [37]. In this project, the weights 
are determined by the standard deviation of metering measurement errors and the time. It is 
assumed that the weights are linearly correlated to the time. For example, if the standard de-
viation of the metering error is 1% and the measurement is taken 20 minutes ago, then the 
standard deviation of the measurement is 20 times larger and the weighting factor of this 
==PAGE:23==
 
Methodology 
13 
measurement therefore becomes 
1
(20×1%)2 = 5. When data with different variances are added 
up, the combined variance is the mean value of all the variances and the weights are calculat-
ed with the same method.  
The WLS-based SE is usually solved by conventional gradient-based methods in most of the 
studies, e.g. Newton-Raphson method. But this method could be less efficient and accurate 
when some of the measurement errors and noises are not normally distributed, i.e. not follow-
ing Gaussian distribution [38], or when the system is large. Since SE problem is also seen as 
optimisation or curve fitting problem, heuristic method is theoretically an alternative to solve 
such SE problems.  
Heuristic method is a category of different methods basically based on search for optimal 
solutions following certain criterion. Different constraints are normally applied to obtain rea-
sonable results [44]. Genetic algorithm (GA) is one of the most widely used heuristic methods 
originating from the theory of gene and heredity in biology. Although GA has advantage of 
fast converging, the results can be irrational after some generations, especially when there are 
a large number of equations and variables to be solved. Therefore, Newton-Raphson method 
is adopted in this project.  
2.2 
Modelling of the Low Voltage Grid 
The grid is built based on an area in Allinge, Bornholm. The LV grid is connected to the 
10/0.4 kV Substation 125. In this area, the loads are close to each other and the buses are 
connected by underground LV cables instead of LV overhead lines, which are used more fre-
quently in the LV grids in rural areas, where loads are far away from each other [42].  
Before starting the modelling work, some simplifications are made to simplify the work to 
some extent, including: 
➢ All the loads have smart meters installed and all the meters are with the same accuracy 
class so that all the variances of the measurement errors are the same;  
➢ All the smart meters measure the voltage magnitude, active power and reactive power 
in each phase so that the measurements acquired from all buses are the same;  
➢ Residential PV systems are distributed in the grid with 100% penetration and all of 
them are three-phase connected;  
➢ All the loads with residential PV systems also have batteries installed;  
➢ All the batteries get charged when the PV generation is higher than the load consump-
tion and discharge in opposite condition;  
➢ All loads have EVs and the types of chargers and the distribution of different types is 
known;  
==PAGE:24==
 
Methodology 
14 
➢ The loads with single-phase chargers have smaller EV batteries while those with 
three-phase chargers have larger ones; 
➢ All the EVs start getting charged from 45% of their full capacity until fully charged;  
➢ All the EVs get charged immediately after being plugged to the chargers;  
➢ No EV smart charging solution, such as vehicle to grid (V2G), is implemented to the 
chargers. In this way, the EVs can be treated as normal loads.  
The layout of the LV grid used in this project is shown in Figure 2-2. As shown in Figure 2-2, 
the grid has two feeders consisting of totally 32 buses connecting 71 loads. Feeder 1 consists 
of Bus 2 to Bus 22 and Feeder 2 consists of Bus 23 to Bus 32. The external grid in the system 
represents the MV grid which this LV grid is connected to. The details of the grid model, in-
cluding number of loads, EVs, PV systems and batteries connected at each load bus, the dis-
tribution of different types of EV chargers and the phases these chargers are connected to, are 
summarised in Table A-1 and A-2 in Appendix A. 
 
Figure 2-2 Layout of the LV grid 
All the loads are modelled as three-phase general loads in PowerFactory. To simulate the 
unbalanced operation of the LV grids, all the loads are defined as unbalanced loads so that the 
load profile of each single phase can be defined separately, and the load profiles are time-
dependent. The parameters of PV systems and batteries are defined in three-phase form. All 
the loads are residential loads and their power factors are 0.95 [42]. 
The PV systems are connected to each load bus. In this project, only steady state operation is 
considered and the transients, such as fault, are not of the interests. Therefore, the state inside 
the PV inverters is not necessary and the PV systems do not have to be represented with de-
==PAGE:25==
 
Methodology 
15 
tailed models, namely the inverter circuit consisting of power electronic components, such as 
IGBTs, inductors and capacitors. The PV systems can be modelled by the “PV system” model 
provided in PowerFactory with specific control strategies applied. Because the 
𝑟
𝑥 ratio in the 
LV grids is high, which is normally larger than 1, the active power (P) control is more effec-
tive than reactive power (Q) control in terms of the voltage regulation efficiency [45]. There-
fore, the control strategy selected is the dynamic power factor support (PF(P) control) instead 
of the dynamic reactive power support (Q(U) control) or constant reactive power control, 
which are more commonly implemented in larger scale PV power plants. 
The parameters of the control strategy are configured according to the Danish grid code for 
power plants up to and including 11 kW (Category A1), Technical Regulation 3.2.1 (TR 
3.2.1), published by the Danish transmission system operator (TSO) Energinet. According to 
TR 3.2.1, with the power generation below and including 50% of its nominal value, the in-
verters are operating at unity PF while the PF decreases linearly to 0.9 (lagging) with the 
generation increasing from 50% to 100%, as shown in Figure 2-3 [46]. The vertical dotted 
line represents the inflection point of the plot, i.e. the point 
𝑃actual
𝑃nominal = 0.5. 
 
Figure 2-3 PF(P) control characteristic 
The effect of the PV module orientation is included when assigning generation profiles to PV 
systems. It is assumed that all the modules have the same fixed tilts, but the orientation differs 
slightly. In the most optimal condition, all the modules face the south to get the strongest ir-
radiance during the day. However, because of the limitation of roof area and shape, house 
location and geographic conditions, the orientation of the modules can deviate from the “real” 
south, which makes the generation profiles different. Therefore, the peak production time of 
different PV inverters may not occur simultaneously [47], and this is included in the time 
characteristics assigned to the PV systems in PowerFactory.  
As mentioned previously, the penetration level of the PV integration in the grid model is 
100%. There are mainly three different ways of defining the penetration level of DERs in 
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
                
             
   
            
==PAGE:26==
 
Methodology 
16 
power system. They are the ratio of the rated DER power to the local fault level, the ratio of 
the rated DER power and the transformer rating which can be seen as an equivalent normali-
zation of the first one, and the ratio of the active power, i.e. the ratio of the power generation 
from DERs and the local load [48]. The penetration level in this project is defined with the 
third method, namely 
𝐿PV =
𝑆ins
𝑛load𝑆PV
 
(2-6) 
where Sins is the total installed PV capacity in the grid, nload the total number of loads in the 
grid ,71 in this project, and SPV is the estimated maximum PV capacity installed for each load, 
which in Denmark is between 4 and 6 kVA for non-commercial residential use [6]. The aver-
age value, i.e. 5 kVA is selected for this project. For each load, a PV system is installed, i.e. 
connected to the same load bus in PowerFactory. Therefore, the total installed capacity of PV 
in the LV grid model studied in this project is 355 kVA.  
The data of PV generation used in this project are recorded from the PV power plants in-
stalled on the roof of Building 325 located at DTU Lyngby Campus by the SCADA system in 
the control room in Building 329A. The weather information is recorded with 1-minute reso-
lution for one day and the generation data are given with 30-second resolution. The PV power 
plant is integrated into the grid through three three-phase inverters. Because the total installed 
capacity is 26 kW and the power factors of the PV systems used in the model are 0.9, the 
measurements data must be scaled down by multiplying  
5×0.9
26
= 0.25 before they are used in 
PowerFactory.  
The EVs are modelled by the “Low Voltage Load” model in PowerFactory with unity power 
factor (pure resistive loads) applied. The state of charge (SoC) is simulated by defining time 
characteristics for them. Their power consumption is zero when they are not being charged 
(either disconnected to the chargers or fully charged) and starts increasing when they are 
plugged to the chargers and being charged. The parameters of the EV chargers are regulated 
by international standard IEC 62196 published by International Electrotechnical Commission 
(IEC). Three different types are selected in this project, including Type 1 (single-phase, 220-
240 V, 32 A), Type 2 (three-phase, 400 V, 16 A) and Type 3 (three-phase, 400 V, 32 A), all 
of which are distributed randomly in the grid model. The EVs are then configured as single-
phase or three-phase loads according to the corresponding charger types. The loads having 
single-phase chargers have smaller batteries (75 kWh) in their EVs while those having three-
phase chargers have larger batteries (100 kWh) in the EVs. The EVs start getting charged 
immediately after being connected to the chargers until they are fully charged and no smart 
charge solutions are implemented as stated in the assumptions. 
==PAGE:27==
 
Methodology 
17 
The batteries are modelled with the “Static Generator” model with the category “storage” 
selected in PowerFactory. The energy capacity of all the batteries are set to 13.5 kWh accord-
ing to the parameters of Powerwall 2 Model manufactured by Tesla. The charging and dis-
charging state of the batteries follow the generation from the PV systems and the demand 
from the loads. The batteries get charged when the PV generation is higher than the demand 
until it is fully charged and discharge when the PV generation is lower than the demands until 
it is empty. The static generators in PowerFactory are treated as generators and follow the 
generator’s convention, i.e. positive power for generating and negative power for absorbing. 
Therefore, the charging and discharging process of the batteries are represented by negative 
and positive output active power in PowerFactory, respectively.  
The control strategy is applied according to the Danish grid code for battery plants, i.e. Tech-
nical Regulation 3.3.1 (TR 3.3.1) Category A1 (up to and including 11 kW). Likewise, the 
batteries are capable of providing reactive power support to the grid. Therefore, PF(P) control 
is applied as well and by this means can the batteries play similar roles as the PV systems do. 
According to TR 3.3.1, the batteries are operating at unity PF with the power generation be-
low 50% of its nominal value, while the PF linearly decreases to 0.9 (lagging) with the gen-
eration increasing from 50% to 100% which is identical to the characteristic of the PV power 
plants shown in Figure 2-3 [49]. 
2.3 
Modelling of the ICT System 
The ICT system plays an essential and important role in the modern cyber-physical energy 
systems. It builds the communication between the grid and the monitoring system. In LV 
networks, the measurements of the smart meters are collected and sent to the monitoring sys-
tem via the ICT systems. The performance of an ICT system can be evaluated from different 
aspects, such as communication speed, noises and integrity of received data.  
Based on some demonstration projects and field tests that have been done by other research-
ers, it is found that the biggest challenges lying in LV network state estimation is the monitor-
ing problem which makes the state estimation more difficult and challenges. Because the state 
estimation mainly depends on the input data and the redundancy of measurements, missing 
data can be critical to the performance of the state estimator [50]. Therefore, this project 
mainly focuses on evaluating the state estimator with different data loss degrees, i.e. in the 
perspective of the integrity of data.  
The ICT system model in this project is built based on Python programming. A Python mod-
ule called “PowerFactory” integrated in PowerFactory enables them to communicate with 
each other. Python can control the configuration and simulation taking place in PowerFactory 
and PowerFactory can return information to Python.  
==PAGE:28==
 
Methodology 
18 
Furthermore, there are large number of different modules, methods and functions developed 
specifically for integrating Python programming into PowerFactory. With appropriate func-
tions implemented, interesting information such as the system component properties, the sim-
ulation configurations and the calculation results can be obtained from PowerFactory through 
Python programming [51], [52]. Therefore, Python programming is suitable for modelling 
such a simplified ICT system and is adopted in this project.  
The details of a real ICT system, such as the communication path like optic fibre or Wi-Fi 
and different communication protocols, are not modelled here due to the complexity and dif-
ficulty. The simplified model should basically have the following functions:  
1) Communicate with the LV grid model built in PowerFactory; 
2) Obtain the properties of the system components from PowerFactory; 
3) Configure the calculation, including the set-up of load flow calculation parameters and 
assigning time characteristics to the corresponding parameters of different elements in 
the grid model;  
4) Control of the load flow calculation, including starting the calculation process, the to-
tal number of the load flow calculations to be executed and the time interval between 
two calculations;  
5) Process the calculation results, i.e. exporting results and adding simulated metering er-
rors to the results.  
Acquire grid information
(including properties of system 
components, number of different 
components)
Load flow calculation 
configurtion
Start load flow calculation
Load flow calculation 
results
Export to data files
Simulated 
measurement errors
Results without errors
Results with errors
Python programming
DIgSILENT PowerFactory
Communication via Python module 
 PowerFactory.pyd 
Add errors onto 
the results
 
Figure 2-4 Operation principle of the ICT system model 
 
==PAGE:29==
 
Methodology 
19 
The details of the proposed ICT model and its basic operation principles are illustrated in 
Figure 2-4.  
When the smart meters are first introduced into the power system, they are claimed to have 
high accuracy and the measurements are reliable. Although it is found that the smart meters 
can sometimes have extremely high errors caused by EMI according to some reports from the 
customers and the study conducted by [41], this phenomenon does not frequently occur. 
Therefore, such kind of situation is not considered in this model.  
It is assumed that the accuracy of all the smart meters installed at the loads is of Class B 
which means that the standard deviation of the metering error is 1% for both voltage magni-
tude and power measurements (including both active power and reactive power) [53]. To 
simulate this error, a series of random normally distributed numbers with 0 mean and 1% 
standard deviation are generated as the errors for both power and voltage magnitude meas-
urements. By this means, the range of the generated metering error is between ±3% according 
to Gaussian distribution theory in statistics. The generation of the errors is realised by means 
of the normally distributed number generation function in the Python module NumPy 
(numpy.random.normal). The active power, reactive power, and voltage magnitude are meas-
ured with kW, kvar and volt, respectively.  
After finishing all the calculations, the results are exported and stored in data files. The volt-
age magnitudes and angles without errors are exported used as benchmark to evaluate the 
performance of the estimator. The data with errors and data loss are exported to be used as 
inputs in the state estimator. Other information and parameters about the grid, including cable 
impedance, number of load buses, loads and other system components, are also exported. 
There is one simple way of conducting a time-series load flow calculation in PowerFactory, 
which is to define time characteristics for the specific parameters of different components and 
change the study time in PowerFactory for each calculation. However, when the system is 
large and has many components, the process of assigning time characteristics to every single 
system component is time consuming. Instead, the parameters are assigned with a set of new 
values every time a new calculation is carried out.  
The data loss is implemented to the data set by replacing data at random positions in the data 
set with NaNs (short for “Not-a-number”). To ensure the results fulfil the statistic require-
ments, data loss with different distribution should be tested. To simplify the whole process, 
the data loss simulation is not included in the ICT system modelled in Python but finished at 
the beginning of the estimator instead. The state estimation calculation with different data 
loss degrees, ranging from 20% to 100% with a step of 20%, are calculated.  
==PAGE:30==
 
Methodology 
20 
2.4 
State Estimator 
Since the SE model is built for the LV grid model shown in Figure 2-2, the state estimator is 
implemented at the 10/0.4 kV substation namely Bus 1 in the grid model, which is also the 
slack bus (reference) for the load flow calculation. The state estimator of the proposed model 
is built in MATLAB programming based on the WLS criterion. The layout of the estimator 
structure is shown in Figure 2-5.  
Imported data are the calculation results from PowerFactory, including the voltage magni-
tudes at each bus, active and reactive power of loads, PV systems and batteries and the active 
power of EVs, all of which are given by each phase. This process emulates the receival of LV 
network measurements through the ICT system. Then the lost data are detected, and their dis-
tributions are found at the same. If any data loss is detected in the measurements, the empty 
positions are filled by implementing different “grid knowledge”. This step must be done be-
fore any further calculation or analysis, because any calculation process involving NaNs in 
the data set results in NaNs, which is meaningless. 
All the values are converted to per unit values and the active and reactive power injection at 
each bus are then calculated in the step data processing. Because the SE is conducted in three-
Data import
(Results from PowerFactory)
Data loss detection
Grid knowledge 
implementation
Objective function formation
(Power mismatch functions, 
Jacobian and Hessian matrices)
Estimation and Solution
Data processing
(Remove lost data, per-unit conversion 
and calculate bus power injection )
 
Figure 2-5 Structure of the estimator 
==PAGE:31==
 
Methodology 
21 
phase form, the nominal phase-to-ground voltage, i.e.  
400
√3 ≈231 V is selected as the base 
value of the voltage and the base value of power is chosen based on the installed capacity of 
one single three-phase PV system, namely 5 kVA. Afterwards, the objective function can be 
established. 
2.4.1 
Objective Function 
As stated previously, the coupling between phases is quite tight, especially in cables due to 
the short distance between sectors. Thus, the mutual effects between phases are not negligible 
under unbalanced operation and it is not precise enough to represent the cables only with their 
series impedance or the π-equivalent circuit. The voltage between phases must be taken into 
consideration in the computation process as well [54]. Therefore, the mutual impedance be-
tween phases must be included when the bus admittance matrix is structured. A detailed cable 
model including its series impedance and the mutual impedance between phases is described 
in [55], as shown in Figure 2-6.  
In PowerFactory, a cable can be defined with two different ways. The first one it to utilize the 
general transmission line model and the second one is to use the cable system, where the very 
detailed parameters, including both physical and electrical parameters of a cable can be de-
fined in this model. To simplify the grid model and the formulated problem to some extent, 
the former one is selected in this project.  
In the general transmission line model, by selecting the category as cable, a cable can be easi-
ly modelled. A cable is defined by its positive sequence impedance, negative sequence im-
pedance and zero sequence impedance. By converting the impedance matrix of a cable from 
 
Figure 2-6 Series admittance circuit of three-phase cables 
Image source: Reference [55] 
==PAGE:32==
 
Methodology 
22 
the sequence domain to the phase domain, the self-impedance and mutual-impedance be-
tween phases of a three-phase cable can be obtained [56], yielding  
[
𝑍𝐴𝐴
𝑍𝐴𝐵
𝑍𝐴𝐶
𝑍𝐵𝐴
𝑍𝐵𝐵
𝑍𝐵𝐶
𝑍𝐶𝐴
𝑍𝐶𝐴
𝑍𝐶𝐶
] = [𝑨] × [
𝑍0
0
0
0
𝑍1
0
0
0
𝑍2
] × [𝑨]−1 
(2-7) 
where subscriptions 0, 1 and 2 represent zero sequence, positive sequence and negative se-
quence, and the matrix [A] is the conversion matrix used in symmetrical component analysis 
converting different quantities from the phase domain to the sequence domain. The matrix [A] 
consists of coefficient 𝛼= 1∠120° and 1 and it is structured by  
𝑨= [
1
1
1
1
𝛼2
𝛼
1
𝛼
𝛼2
] 
(2-8) 
Concerning the unbalanced conditions and the coupling between phases, the mismatch func-
tions should be established in per-phase form as well. A three-phase DSSE model for distri-
bution grid real-time monitoring is proposed in [57] and the mismatch functions used in this 
project are built based on its theory. The mismatch functions for calculating P and Q injection 
at each load bus, i.e. h(x) in the objective function, are 
𝑃inj,𝑖,𝜑= |𝑉𝑖,𝜑| ∑(∑|𝑌𝑖𝑗(𝜑, 𝑘)||𝑉𝑗|cos⁡(𝜃𝑖,𝜑−𝜃𝑗,𝑘−𝛿𝑖𝑗(𝜑, 𝑘))
3
𝑘=1
)
32
𝑗=1
 
(2-9) 
and 
𝑄inj,𝑖,𝜑= |𝑉𝑖,𝜑| ∑(∑|𝑌𝑖𝑗(𝜑, 𝑘)||𝑉𝑗|sin⁡(𝜃𝑖,𝜑−𝜃𝑗,𝑘−𝛿𝑖𝑗(𝜑, 𝑘))
3
𝑘=1
)
32
𝑗=1
 
(2-10) 
respectively, where the subscript i represents the objective bus while j is the bus connected to 
Bus i, and φ and k represent the objective phase and other phases, respectively. In these two 
equations, the number 1,2 and 3 represent Phase A, B and C, respectively.  
In this circumstance, the bus admittance matrix of the system is different from the one in the 
single-phase case. The mutual impedance between phases should be included as stated previ-
ously. Each element in the matrix now becomes a 3-by-3 matrix as shown in Equation 2-7. 
Therefore, the size of the admittance matrix is no longer equal to the bus number, but 3 times 
of it, i.e. 96-by-96 in this project.  
==PAGE:33==
 
Methodology 
23 
Because the power is measured by every single system component rather than the power in-
jection at each load bus. The bus injection is calculated by subtracting the total consumption 
(loads and EVs) from the total generation (output of PV systems and batteries) at the same 
bus. At these load buses, positive power injection indicates higher generation while negative 
power means higher consumption. Although there is neither generation units nor loads con-
nected to the reference bus, it is still connected to the external grid. Therefore, the power in-
jection at the reference bus is equal to the power from the external grid. If the power is posi-
tive, power flows into the LV grid and if it is the opposite condition, then power is fed into 
the external grid. The active and reactive power of the external grid are considered to be 
measured by the meters installed at the MV substation and it is thus assumed to be updated all 
the time without any data loss happening.  
The inputs sent into the state estimator include the calculated active and reactive power injec-
tion, and all the voltage magnitudes except the magnitudes of the reference bus. In Power-
Factory, both voltage magnitudes and phase angles are locked during a load flow calculation. 
Therefore, the voltage magnitude of each phase at the reference bus is considered to be 
known and correct, and they are removed from the measurements, mismatch functions and 
the state variables to be solved for the same reason. In reality, the angles are not measured by 
the smart meters in the LV grid and no angle is included in the measurements.  
As discussed in the previous section, the weights are determined based on both the measure-
ment errors of the corresponding data and the time they are measured. In the situation where 
no data loss occurs, the weights of all the measurements are the same, i.e. the standard devia-
tion of the smart meter error, namely 
1
(1%)2 = 10000. 
2.4.2 
Grid Knowledge Implementation 
As stated previously, there is grid knowledge, or grid information, other than the electrical 
power system, that can be utilised to increase the availability of the measurements, or the ob-
servability of the problem. As far as concerned in this project, selected available information 
includes weather information, EV registration information, energy consumption billings of 
the loads and information about the batteries, such as control strategies and energy capacity. 
Such information is assumed as accessible for the operators through various sensors and 
agreements with the customers.  
The weather information used in the propose SE model includes temperature and solar irradi-
ance, which are monitored by local weather stations in real-time. Communication can be es-
tablished between the substation and the weather station so that the operators in the substation 
can access to these data whenever there is a need. Besides, the temperature and solar irradi-
ance can also be measured by thermometers and irradiance sensors, respectively. The meas-
==PAGE:34==
 
Methodology 
24 
urements can be recorded by a meter similar to smart meter and sent to the substation. Other 
information about the PV systems installed at the loads, including the capacity, manufacturers 
and control strategies of the PV inverters should also be registered at the stakeholders, i.e. 
sellers, substations and DSOs.  
The commercialisation of V2G pilot project is taking place in Denmark [58] and to make the 
plan progress properly, agreements between users and stakeholders, such as the electricity 
sellers and DSOs, should be signed. By this means, related information is registered at rele-
vant organisations. Although it is assumed that no smart charging solution is implemented, in 
reality, this information should be available. The registered information can include charger 
types, the parameters of the chargers and related parameters of the EVs, such as type, capaci-
ty of the batteries and the manufacturers. Normally there is a bi-meter measuring the charging 
current and power of the chargers. Therefore, this information can be obtained and used by 
the operators in the state estimator aiding the estimation process.  
The smart meters measure not only electrical quantities like voltage and power, but they also 
record the energy consumption of the customers and this information is received and collect-
ed by the electricity sellers so that they can calculate the billings of different customers. It is 
assumed that related data in the smart meters are sent to the sellers, not to the substation di-
rectly. Therefore, the loss of other measurements does not affect the energy consumption data. 
These data can be provided by the sellers and the operators in the substation can use them 
whenever there is a need.  
Because the batteries installed at loads are also DG units according to the definition given by 
NERC and they play similar roles to the PV systems, their information should be registered at 
the stakeholders as well, such as the manufacturer, capacity and the control strategies, when 
they are installed at the loads.  
As concluded in [50], there are usually data losses in the measurements which are represented 
by NaNs in this project. To replace the lost data, different available grid knowledge intro-
duced in the previous paragraphs is implemented as the project title has indicated. Historical 
data, as stored in the database, can also be seen as a special kind of grid knowledge and can 
be used together with other information.  
As mentioned previously, different from the MV networks, the load profiles of LV networks 
do not follow certain probability distribution and it is thus difficult to model them with specif-
ic mathematical models. For this reason, the load profiles are much less predictable, and the 
prediction accuracy is rather low. With the energy consumption information of the loads rec-
orded, the lost data in the load measurement can be estimated.  
==PAGE:35==
 
Methodology 
25 
It is assumed that the energy consumption information is recorded by the meter and sent to 
the substation from the sellers every 15 minutes and no data loss happens during the data 
transmission. The load at current moment is estimated by calculating the average of the 15-
minute energy consumption, i.e.  
𝑃Load = 𝐸Load
𝑡
 
(2-11) 
where ELoad is the energy consumption for the last 15 minutes and t is the time period which is 
equal to 15 minutes in this condition. By estimating the load with Equation 2-11, lower 
weights should be assigned to the corresponding results.  
According to the previous introduction about the variance and weighting factors used in this 
project, the standard deviation of the estimated load is 15 times that of the real-time meas-
urements (1%), and the variance is thus calculated by 𝜎Load
2
= (15 × 1%)2. Because the resi-
dential customers only pay for the active power they have consumed, only the active power of 
the loads can be estimated in this way. 
However, since the power factors of all the residential loads are equal to 0.95 on average ac-
cording to the generic load profile of LV grid defined by [42], the reactive power consump-
tion can hereby be estimated by  
𝑄Load =
𝑃Load
tan(cos−1(0.95)) 
(2-12) 
with the same weights assigned to these reactive power estimations as the corresponding ac-
tive power estimations.  
As common knowledge, PV generation is dominantly affected by the weather conditions (ir-
radiance G and temperature T). With the weather information and the information of the PV 
systems in hand, the PV generation can be easily estimated. The actual PV generation can be 
estimated by its ideal generation, the standard experiment conditions and the actual condi-
tions, i.e. actual temperature and solar irradiance, yielding 
𝑃act = 𝑃std ×
𝐺act
𝐺std × 𝛼(1 + (𝑇act −𝑇std)) 
(2-13) 
where the parameters subscripted with “std” represent the quantities under the standard exper-
iment conditions (Gstd=1000 W/m2, Tstd=25℃ and Pstd=4.5 kW in this project) and the param-
eters with “act” indicate that they are the values under the actual conditions. The quantity α is 
==PAGE:36==
 
Methodology 
26 
the temperature coefficient of the PV panel material which is a constant. In this project, it is 
assumed that the PV panels are made of crystalline silicon (c-Si) and the α value of the c-Si 
material is 0.45% ℃-1 [59].  
Because the control strategy applied inside the PV inverters is known, the reactive power can 
be estimated based on the actual control strategy setup. As mentioned in the grid model, 
PF(P) is implemented to all the PV systems installed in this area. From the PF(P) characteris-
tic illustrated in Figure 2-3, the actual power factor PFact can be obtained according to the 
actual active power generation. According to the PF(P) characteristic, if the actual active 
power output Pact is less than or equal to 0.5 p.u., the actual reactive power Qact is zero while 
if Pact is larger than 0.5 p.u., then Qact is calculated by 
𝑄act =
𝑃act
tan(cos−1(𝑃𝐹act)) 
(2-14) 
Since the weather information used in the project is assumed to be accurate and complete, the 
variance values assigned to the estimated active and reactive power are determined based on 
only the standard deviation of the metering errors, i.e. 𝜎PV
2 = (1 × 1%)2.  
The lost SoC data of the EVs are determined by checking the SoC measured and stored by the 
bi-meters 20 to 15 minutes before. If the specific EV is being charged all the time during this 
period, it is assumed it is still being charged at the moment the SE is executed. The lost 
charging power is not directly replaced by the historical data because they contain measure-
ment errors. Instead, it is calculated by using the information of the charger, namely the type, 
the charging current and voltage of the corresponding chargers. Lower weights, or higher 
variance values are assigned to these corresponding estimated values. The variance values for 
these estimated values are determined by the average variance during this period as 𝜎EV
2 =
(
15+20
2
× 1%)
2
.  
As stated in the assumptions, all the batteries installed in this area are equipped with the same 
control strategy, i.e. following the difference between PV generation and load demand. 
Therefore, with the active power of the load, PV generation and EV charging estimated, the 
active power output from the batteries can be easily estimated. In the assumptions, it is stated 
that all the batteries installed in this area are produced by the same manufacturer and the same 
control strategy, i.e. PF(P), is implemented to all the batteries. The reactive power output can 
be estimated with the method as the PV generation, i.e. by means of the PF(P) control charac-
teristic plotted in Figure 2-3. The PF can be determined by the actual output and then the re-
active power can be calculated in the same way as Equation 2-14. Since the battery output is 
estimated by combining loads, PV systems and the EVs, the variance values of the estimated 
==PAGE:37==
 
Methodology 
27 
values are determined by calculating the average variance of all these three quantities, i.e. 
𝜎Battery
2
=
𝜎Load
2
+𝜎PV
2 +𝜎EV
2
3
.  
Since it is the power injection at each load bus that is involved in the objective function, all 
these four estimated quantities at each load bus should be added up to obtain the estimated 
power injection at the corresponding load buses. The variance values of the corresponding 
estimated power injection are calculated by taking the average of the variance values of all 
the four estimated values, i.e. 𝜎𝑃inj
2
=
𝜎Load
2
+𝜎PV
2 +𝜎EV
2 +𝜎Battery
2
4
 and the weights are thus calculat-
ed by 
1
(𝜎𝑃inj)
2.  
Because there is a lack of relevant information to estimate the voltage magnitudes in the 
available grid knowledge used in this project and the voltage usually is not as dynamic as 
loads. Therefore, the lost data in voltage magnitudes are substituted directly with the histori-
cal data measured 15 minutes before and the variance of the corresponding value is 𝜎|𝑉|
2 =
(15 × 1%)2. The corresponding weights are calculated by 
1
(𝜎|𝑉|)2.  
The variances for different quantities estimated from different grid knowledge introduced in 
the above paragraphs are summarised in Table 2-1.  
Table 2-1 Variances of power estimated based on grid knowledge 
Voltage magnitude 𝜎|𝑉|
2  
(15 × 1%)2 = 0.0225 
1
𝜎|𝑉|
2 = 44.444 
PV generation 𝜎PV
2  
(1 × 1%)2 = 1 × 10−4 
1
𝜎PV
2 = 1 × 104 
EV charging 𝜎EV
2  
(15 + 20
2
× 1%)
2
= 0.0306 
1
𝜎PV
2 = 32.653 
Battery 𝜎Battery
2
 
𝜎Load
2
+ 𝜎PV
2 + 𝜎EV
2
3
= 0.0177 
1
𝜎Battery
2
= 14.825 
Bus injection 𝜎𝑃inj
2
 
𝜎Load
2
+ 𝜎PV
2 + 𝜎EV
2 + 𝜎Battery
2
4
= 0.0177 
1
𝜎𝑃inj
2
= 14.825 
 
==PAGE:38==
 
Methodology 
28 
2.4.3 
Solution Process to the Formulated Problem 
As stated previously, Newton-Raphson method is adopted to solve the formulated SE prob-
lem. During the computation process, the observability of the SE problem is checked in every 
iteration. The flow chart of the complete solution process is illustrated in Figure 2-6.  
Input to estimator
Initial conditions
Calculate [J], [H] matrix, and the 
mismatch functions
Observability check
Observable?
Calculate the first iteration
Calculate the norms of difference between 
current and previous iteration 
Smaller than tolerance?
Update the Jacobian and Hessian matrix
Calculate the state 
varibales
Converage
Exit
Observability check
Observable?
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
 
Figure 2-7 Flow chart of the solution process 
==PAGE:39==
 
Methodology 
29 
As mentioned previously, the whole system consists of totally 32 load buses and the Jacobian 
matrix cannot be structured for each phase separately because of the tight coupling between 
phases. All the related elements of all three phases must be bound together and put into one 
matrix. Therefore, the Jacobian matrix and Hessian matrix are complex and big in size (285-
by-285). The derivation process of the analytic form of Jacobian matrix is already quite time-
consuming which is inevitable in this model. Therefore, to save some of the burdens in the 
computation process, the analytic form of the Hessian matrix is not derived. Instead, its nu-
meric form is calculated directly by 
𝑯= 2 × 𝑱𝑇𝑾𝑱 
(2-14) 
where J is the Jacobian matrix in numeric form and W is the covariance matrix which is diag-
onal as introduced before. Because the values of the variables at the reference bus are locked 
during the calculation, they are considered as known and therefore removed from the un-
knowns to be solved. The corresponding elements in the mismatch functions and the Jacobian 
matrix should also be removed.  
The observability of the formulated problem is checked in every iteration during the computa-
tion process by means of a simple numeric method, namely calculating and checking the de-
terminant value of the gain matrix G, which is equal to 
1
2H. If the value of the determinant |G| 
is equal to 0, G is a singular matrix which means that the inverse of the Hessian matrix is not 
invertible, and the given SE problem is thus not solvable [14]. If the value of |G| is extremely 
close to 0, the iteration may still be able to converge, but the precision of the results can be 
considerably low due to the badly structured Hessian matrix. If this occurs, the iteration will 
be terminated immediately. Otherwise, the state variables are solved by 
𝒙𝑖+1 = 𝒙𝑖−𝑯−1 (−2 × 𝑱𝑇𝑾(𝒛−𝒉(𝑥𝑖))) 
(2-15) 
where the matrix x is the matrix of the unknowns and the superscript i represents the results 
calculated in the ith iteration.  
The estimator executes every certain period and it does not have to be real-time because the 
data acquisition process may have time delay and the computation process also needs time to 
finish [18]. To initialize the solution process, some initial values of the state variables must be 
assigned in order to calculate the initial conditions of the problem. In this circumstance, a flat 
start is adopted. All the voltage magnitudes are assigned with 1 per unit. And the initial an-
gles are determined based on the phases. The initial values assigned to the angle of Phase A, 
B and C are 0°, -120° and 120°, respectively. During the solution process, the angles are al-
==PAGE:40==
 
Methodology 
30 
ways constrained between -180° and 180°. After finishing all the calculations, all the results 
are exported for further process and analysis.  
2.5 
Applications and Benefits 
2.5.1 
Validation on the State Estimator 
The performance of the state estimator is of great importance because the results affect the 
subsequent processes, such as monitoring and control of the system operation, and the deci-
sions and instructions made by the operators. Therefore, it is essential to evaluate the perfor-
mance of the proposed state estimator after obtaining all the estimation results.  
The performance of the state estimator is evaluated and validated after obtaining all the re-
sults. The accuracy of results is described by the error of the results. Different statistical indi-
ces are used to describe the distribution of the accuracy compared with the benchmark. Af-
terwards the accuracy of the results is compared with a state-of-the-art method where only 
historical data are implemented. Further analysis on the benefits from the state estimator and 
the results are investigated afterwards. More details about this part are discussed in the next 
chapter.  
To present an overview of the performance, the statistic parameters including the mean values 
μ and the standard deviations σ of the result errors are calculated based on all the results. 
Normally, the relative error can quantify the error of a data set more correct and intuitive. 
However, in this situation, the relative error cannot reflect the actual situation, especially for 
the estimated voltage angles. Therefore, in this project, the absolute values of the absolute 
errors are calculated to evaluate the accuracy of the estimation results, namely by 
𝜀= |𝑥estimated −𝑥benchmark| 
(2-16) 
where xestimated is obtained by taking the average of the results estimated with three different 
data loss degrees, i.e. 
𝑥estimated = 1
3 ∑𝑥𝑟
3
𝑟=1
 
(2-17) 
where subscription r represent simulation round where different data loss distributions are 
simulated. The xestimated includes voltage magnitude and angle.  
By combining the mean values and the standard deviations of the result errors, the accuracy 
and reliability of the estimation results can be presented. Because the average accuracy of the 
==PAGE:41==
 
Methodology 
31 
results is calculated based on the results obtained from different data loss distributions and 
different time stamps, to cover the range of the error distribution as much as possible, the 
accuracy is described with μ±3σ. Based on the Gaussian distribution theory in statistics, μ±3σ 
can cover 99.7% of the data distribution, as shown in Figure 2-8. 
 
Figure 2-8 Demonstration of Gaussian distribution 
(Image source: http://www.muelaner.com/wp-
content/uploads/2013/07/Standard_deviation_diagram.png) 
Since all the errors are calculated by their absolute values, only the positive 3σ is included in 
the final evaluation results. The result errors are evaluated in the aspect of both different load 
buses in the grid and different time stamps. 
2.5.2 
Benefits from the State Estimator 
Upon on all the estimation results, the evaluation and validation of the state estimator perfor-
mance, the benefits from the state estimator in the perspective of the operators are analysed 
and discussed in this section. Similar to the SE implemented in the transmission networks, the 
operators can get an overview of the system operation conditions and further benefits can be 
done based on these results.  
The most direct observation from the estimation results is the voltage unbalanced condition. 
Because of the characteristic of unbalanced operation in the LV grid and the unbalanced op-
eration can affect the operation of the grid, the monitor of the voltage unbalanced degree is 
important for the operators to make right and reasonable decisions. Because the SE performed 
in this project is a three-phase SE, the voltage magnitude of each phase at each load bus can 
be observed directly from the estimation results and the unbalanced degree between phases 
can be easily evaluated from the results. Besides, the buses with the highest and lowest volt-
==PAGE:42==
 
Methodology 
32 
age magnitudes can also be acquired from the results so that the operator can know which 
buses are the most likely to have over-voltage or under-voltage problems.  
Furthermore, in a distribution substation, the loading condition of the transformer is of great 
importance, because overloading of a transformer may result in blackout in an area or even 
more areas in the worst case. The estimated results, together with the grid knowledge imple-
mented in the estimator, can be used to help estimate the operation state of the grid and the 
potential risk of having overloading problems in the distribution transformer located at the 
10/0.4 kV substation.  
The loading rate of a distribution transformer in the substation is mainly affected by the inter-
action between the LV grid and the external grid. In this project, this interaction between the 
grids at two voltage levels is evaluated and represented by the self-consumption condition at 
each load bus in the grid, which is defined by 
𝑆𝐶=
𝑃Consumption
𝑃Generation
× 100% 
(2-18) 
where PConsumption is the sum of load consumption, EV and battery charging while PGeneration 
consists of PV generation and battery output. The results acquired from the estimator is not 
sufficient to conduct this calculation. Therefore, to obtain these two parameters, the grid 
knowledge that has been implemented in the state estimator can be used again.  
From this calculation, the generation and consumption conditions are known. If SC is lower 
than 100%, it means that the generation is higher than the consumption and the demand from 
the loads can be completely covered by either the PV systems or the batteries. If it is the op-
posite condition, then the generation is lower than the consumption and it is not able to cover 
the demand from the loads. A SC value close to 100% indicates a high self-consumption de-
gree while a SC value much lower or much higher than 100% is considered as a low self-
consumption degree. Based on this calculation, the interaction between the LV network and 
the external grid can be obtained.  
The power injection at each bus is calculated in two different ways, i.e. Pinj, estimator by using 
the power balance function given by Equation 2-9 with the estimation results and Pinj, knowledge 
by using the grid knowledge as follows 
𝑃inj,knwoledge = 𝑃PV + 𝑃Battery⁡charge −(𝑃Battery⁡discharge + 𝑃Load + 𝑃EV) 
(2-19) 
The difference between Pinj, estimator and Pinj, knowledge at each load bus and the sign of the differ-
ence is used to present the reliability of the SC estimation at each load bus. If the difference is 
==PAGE:43==
 
Methodology 
33 
close to zero, the estimated SC is considered as reliable. As this difference grows larger, the 
reliability of the SC results becomes lower and lower. If the difference is extremely high, ob-
viously, it indicates that Pinj, knowledge is far from the Pinj, estimator and implies that Pinj, knowledge is 
likely to have the opposite sign as Pinj, estimator. If this situation takes place, then the corre-
sponding SC results should not be trusted. In the situation where Pinj, knowledge is close to Pinj, 
estimator but they have opposite signs, the SC results can still be reliable to some extent. Be-
cause both Pinj, knowledge and Pinj, estimator are close to 0 in this situation and the SC level is high 
in any case.  
The transformer loading rate can be thereby approximately estimated based on these analyses 
and discussions. By combining the generic residential load profile defined by CIGRE in [42] 
and some of the grid knowledge, the variation trend of the transformer loading rate can be 
estimated. With further referring to the current loading rate of the transformer, the potential 
overloading risks can be roughly predicted. Case studies and example for this is analysed and 
discussed in the next chapter.  
 
==PAGE:44==
==PAGE:45==
 
35 
3 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The performance of the proposed state estimation model is evaluated by comparing the results 
calculated with grid information and results calculated with the historical data. And then the 
potential contributions from the estimated results are investigated in an analytical way as 
well.  
It takes the estimator 5 to 10 minutes to finish the computation process and export results, and 
it takes 5 iterations on average to reach convergence. However, in the scenarios where data 
loss degree is very high, e.g. 100%, it may take more iterations and longer time to converge. 
In the worst case, it takes about 20 minutes and more than 10 iterations to converge. But the 
time can differ from the performance of computers. Therefore, it is determined that for each 
data loss degree, the estimator executes every 30 minutes for totally 12 hours from 6 to 17 
o’clock (25 time stamps). For each time, the estimator runs for three rounds with different 
data loss distributions. Thus, there are 75 calculations for each data loss degree.  
Genetic algorithm is also tested on some simple examples in the beginning of building the 
state estimator. The computation time is much shorter than the Newton-Raphson method. 
However, even with different constraints (including both equality and inequality constraints) 
implemented into the algorithm, the final results are still strange and irrational.  
The case where neither historical data nor grid knowledge is implemented is also tested in the 
project. With the lowest data loss degree implemented in this project, i.e. 20%, the problem is 
not solvable due to the lack of measurements. From this result, the importance of building the 
proposed state estimation model can be reflected.  
3.1 
Validation of the State Estimator 
The validation process of the performance of the proposed state estimator is done by compar-
ing the results from the estimator with the load flow calculation results without any errors, 
which is exported from PowerFactory as a benchmark. The mean values and the standard 
deviations of the absolute errors are then calculated based on the total 75 calculations, which 
makes it reliable in the perspective of statistics. Then the proposed model is compared with a 
state-of-the-art method, namely the model with historical data implemented. The result errors 
obtained from both methods are compared.  
==PAGE:46==
 
Results and Discussion 
36 
The error of the estimated voltage angle is plotted against the estimated voltage magnitude in 
Figure 3-1. The average error in the scatter plot is calculated by taking the average of the er-
rors at all the buses at all the time stamps, namely by 
𝜇𝜀= 1
25 ∑( 1
32 ∑𝜀𝐵,𝑡
32
𝐵=1
)
25
𝑡=1
 
(3-1) 
By making this scatter plot, the distribution of the estimation result errors can be observed. 
The cyan dotted line and the pink dotted line in the plot represent the approximate distribution 
of the blue scatters and the red scatters, respectively.  
 
Figure 3-1 Estimated angle error against estimated magnitude error 
It can be seen that in general the results calculated with the grid knowledge have higher accu-
racy and better performance because they are concentrated within a smaller range. From the 
cyan and the pink line plotted in Figure 3-1, it can be seen that the distribution of the scatters 
approximately follows linear correlation. Therefore, it is indicated that estimated magnitudes 
with high accuracy can result in estimated angles with higher accuracy. Because in LV grids, 
the voltage angles are not measured by the smart meters, the improvement in the meter per-
formance of the smart meters or using smart meters with higher accuracy can improve the 
accuracy of estimating the voltage angle.  
As stated previously, there are totally 5 different loss degrees are tested in this project, from 
20% to 100% with a step of 20%. Due to the amount of the results and related plots, only the 
results from the two cases at two ends, namely data loss degree of 20% and 100%, are pre-
sented with details (plots and discussion) in this chapter. Selected results of the rest cases are 
summarised in this chapter as well and the related plots are put in Appendix B. The results at 
the reference bus are not included in the analysis and discussion because they are considered 
as known and accurate values.  
 
    
    
    
    
    
                      
 
   
 
   
 
   
                    
                           
                          
==PAGE:47==
 
Results and Discussion 
37 
The error of the estimation results with data loss degrees of 20% and 100% are plotted in Fig-
ure 3-2 and 3-3, respectively. The errors are calculated based on taking the average of the 
error at each load bus over time stamps, i.e.  
𝜇𝜀𝑖= 1
25 ∑(𝜀𝑡𝑖)
25
𝑡=1
 
(3-2) 
where the subscription i represent bus numbers. 
With the dashed lines in the figures representing the distribution of the result error range, i.e. 
μ+3σ, the distribution of the result errors is described. Because the errors are calculated by the 
mean values, with such representation, the actual error of the results is represented, and the 
analysis is thus more reliable in the perspective of statistics as discussed in the previously 
sections and chapters.  
 
(a) Angle error in degree 
 
(b) Magnitude error 
Figure 3-2 Error against bus with 20% data lost 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
          
 
 
  
                    
                           
                            
 
  
  
  
  
  
          
 
   
   
                      
==PAGE:48==
 
Results and Discussion 
38 
As shown in Figure 3-2, generally, with the grid knowledge implemented, the results have 
much higher accuracy and reliability (narrower range of error distribution) than the results 
obtained with historical data implemented. In the scenario where the grid knowledge is im-
plemented, the error is fairly low, and the range of the error is also very narrow according to 
Figure 3-2. 
By referring to the LV grid model in Figure 2-1 and the curves plotted in Figure 3-2, it can 
also be seen that the error increases as the distance between the reference bus and the objec-
tive bus increases. According to Figure 3-2, it can be seen that the error reaches the maximum 
at Bus 15, 16 and 17, which are the three furthest buses in the feeder.  
One reason to this is that the tiny errors contained in the estimation results of the previous 
buses are accumulated to a higher error and these errors can propagate through the arithmetic 
calculations. Moreover, the power losses in the cables connecting the load buses are not con-
sidered in the state estimation process either. Therefore, as going deeper and further along the 
feeder, the error can accumulate, and the reliability of the results can thus decrease, which 
means that the operator should be careful when dealing with the estimation results of the bus-
es located far from the reference bus and making decisions on these buses.  
==PAGE:49==
 
Results and Discussion 
39 
 
(a) Angle error 
 
(b) Magnitude error 
Figure 3-3 Error against bus with 100% data lost 
Figure 3-3 shows the result error with 100% data lost. It can be seen that the scenario with 
only historical data applied can perform better than the other one at some load buses in this 
situation. In this case, the increase in the error as the distance increases is more obvious. 
Compared with Figure 3-2, the accuracy is much lower. 
In terms of the estimated angle, according to Figure 3-3(a), it can be seen that the range of the 
error distribution is wider when only the historical data are implemented in the state estimator 
although the average error is a little bit lower. Therefore, the estimated angle obtained with 
the grid knowledge is still more reliable.  
As the load buses with highest estimation errors in Feeder 1 and Feeder 2 respectively, the 
estimation errors of Bus 15 to 17, and Bus 31 to 32 obtained from all the five different data 
loss degrees are summarised in Table 3-1, where εθ and ε|V| represent the estimation errors of 
the voltage angles and magnitudes, respectively, and the values in the parenthesis are the er-
rors of the results calculated with the historical data. 
 
  
  
  
  
  
          
 
 
 
 
                    
                           
                            
 
  
  
  
  
  
          
 
    
    
    
    
                      
==PAGE:50==
 
Results and Discussion 
40 
 
Table 3-1 Summary of result error of selected load buses 
Data loss degrees 
20% 
40% 
60% 
80% 
100% 
Feeder 
Load 
buses 
Quantities 
Feeder 1 
Bus 15 
εθ [°] 
0.401 
(2.542) 
0.608 
(2.702) 
0.703 
(2.700) 
0.864 
(2.403) 
1.143 
(0.667) 
ε|V| [p.u.] 
0.00730 
(0.0498) 
0.00783 
(0.0519) 
0.0131 
(0.0512) 
0.0208 
(0.0474) 
0.0242 
(0.0161) 
Bus 16 
εθ [°] 
0.402 
(2.550) 
0.612 
(2.710) 
0.709 
(2.708) 
0.872 
(2.410) 
1.162 
(0.669) 
ε|V| [p.u.] 
0.00733 
(0.0500) 
0.00791 
(0.0520) 
0.0133 
(0.0513) 
0.0211 
(0.0475) 
0.0246 
(0.0162) 
Bus 17 
εθ [°] 
0.408 
(2.579) 
0.627 
(2.740) 
0.735 
(2.738) 
0.910 
(2.439) 
1.228 
(0.678) 
ε|V| [p.u.] 
0.00756 
(0.0507) 
0.00821 
(0.0527) 
0.0144 
(0.0520) 
0.0222 
(0.0482) 
0.0262 
(0.0166) 
Feeder 2 
Bus 31 
εθ [°] 
0.210 
(0.604) 
0.262 
(0.585) 
0.277 
(0.661) 
0.285 
(0.627) 
0.394 
(0.187) 
ε|V| [p.u.] 
0.00424 
(0.0147) 
0.00586 
(0.0155) 
0.00966 
(0.0173) 
0.0109 
(0.0161) 
0.0137 
(0.0461) 
Bus 32 
εθ [°] 
0.226 
(0.640) 
0.277 
(0.579) 
0.293 
(0.688) 
0.305 
(0.654) 
0.408 
(0.198) 
ε|V| [p.u.] 
0.00473 
(0.0157) 
0.00650 
(0.0159) 
0.0108 
(0.0179) 
0.0118 
(0.0167) 
0.0143 
(0.0484) 
 
==PAGE:51==
 
Results and Discussion 
41 
According to Table 3-1 and referring to Figure B-1, B-2 and B-3 in Appendix B, it can be 
observed that the estimation error obtained with grid knowledge increases as the data loss 
degree increases while the result errors obtained with historical data do not change too much 
as the data loss degree increases. Generally speaking, the state estimator with grid knowledge 
implemented behaves better than the one with historical data. However, when the data loss 
degree is as high as 100%, the state estimator with the historical performs better at some load 
buses. Therefore, a reliable and stable metering infrastructure is crucial to the performance of 
the state estimator.  
Additionally, the mean error of the state variables the network is also evaluated and plotted 
against different time stamps, as shown in Figure 3-4 and 3-5, respectively. The mean error at 
each time stamp is calculated by taking the average of the angles and magnitudes of all 32 
buses, namely by 
𝜇𝜀𝑖= 1
32 ∑(𝜀𝐵𝑖)
32
𝐵=1
 
(3-4) 
where the subscription ε represents error and i represents time stamps.  
Likewise, only the results obtained with data loss degree of 20% (Figure 3-4) and 100% (Fig-
ure 3-5) are presented with details in this section. The results and related plots are put in Ap-
pendix B. The solid lines with markers represent the changing trend of estimation error 
against time and the dashed lines represent the distribution of the range of the errors, namely 
μ+3σ.  
==PAGE:52==
 
Results and Discussion 
42 
 
(a) Angle error 
 
(b) Magnitude error 
Figure 3-4 Error against time with 20% data lost 
The angle error and magnitude error with 20% data lost are shown in Figure 3-4(a) and (b), 
respectively. It can be seen that before 11 o’clock, the result errors of both scenarios are quite 
close to each other (with the blue curve slightly lower). Afterwards, the error of the results 
calculated with historical data becomes larger and distribute in a wide range while the results 
calculated with grid knowledge still maintains within a very small range.  
However, as shown in Figure 3-5, when the data loss degree is as high as 100%, the accuracy 
of the results in the two scenarios is close. When a data loss problem as severe as this occurs, 
the historical data and the grid knowledge can be used together to improve the accuracy of the 
estimator as discussed in Figure 3-2 and 3-3. Besides, when the energy consumption infor-
mation of the loads is utilized, some processes, such as prediction to the load, can be applied 
to further improve the performance of the estimator.  
 
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
 
 
  
                    
                           
                            
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
 
   
   
                      
==PAGE:53==
 
Results and Discussion 
43 
 
(a) Angle error 
 
(b) Magnitude error 
Figure 3-5 Error against time with 100% data lost 
The irradiance and temperature during the day are plotted in Figure 3-6(a) and Figure3-6(b), 
respectively. The data plotted in Figure 3-6 are measured from the PV power plant installed 
on the roof of Building 325 located at DTU Lyngby Campus.  
From Figure 3-6, It is can be seen that the PV generation increases faster around noon than it 
does in the morning and reaches its peak in the afternoon at around 1 o’clock. The change in 
the irradiance is more dynamic in the afternoon which can be caused by the floating clouds in 
the sky covering the sun for some periods, which makes the PV generation more fluctuating. 
Therefore, the historical data of the PV generation are much less accurate and reliable than 
the weather information. Thus, the estimation results are less accurate if calculated with his-
torical data.  
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
 
 
 
 
                    
                           
                            
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
 
    
   
                      
==PAGE:54==
 
Results and Discussion 
44 
 
(a) Solar irradiance 
 
(b) Ambient temperature 
Figure 3-6 Weather information 
Even though the actual output from the PV systems can be affected by the orientation and the 
location of the PV modules, it is still more reliable to estimate PV generation with real-time 
weather information measurements.  
As the errors reach the highest between 13 and 17 o’clock and the PV generation is highly 
dynamic during the same period, the result error against time stamps obtained from all the 
five data loss degrees are summarised in Table 3-2.  
    
    
    
    
    
                                        
    
 
   
   
   
   
 
                  
==PAGE:55==
 
Results and Discussion 
45 
Table 3-2 Summary of result error of selected time period 
Data loss degrees 
20% 
40% 
60% 
80% 
100% 
Time stamps 
Quantities 
13:00 
εθ [°] 
0.215 
(2.121) 
0.230 
(2.101) 
0.305 
(2.176) 
0.294 
(1.811) 
0.558 
(0.514) 
ε|V| [p.u.] 
0.00374 
(0.0384) 
0.00509 
(0.0411) 
0.0113 
(0.0403) 
0.0156 
(0.0361) 
0.0177 
(0.0117) 
14:00 
εθ [°] 
0.263 
(2.716) 
0.268 
(3.053) 
0.400 
(2.911) 
0.541 
(2.592) 
0.781 
(0.839) 
ε|V| [p.u.] 
0.00483 
(0.0556) 
0.00566 
(0.0598) 
0.0132 
(0.0586) 
0.0183 
(0.0548) 
0.0304 
(0.0226) 
15:00 
εθ [°] 
0.225 
(2.789) 
0.429 
(3.070) 
0.386 
(3.225) 
0.530 
(2.658) 
0.736 
(0.751) 
ε|V| [p.u.] 
0.00598 
(0.0584) 
0.00739 
(0.0599) 
0.00882 
(0.0630) 
0.0174 
(0.0554) 
0.0264 
(0.0197) 
16:00 
εθ [°] 
0.357 
(3.623) 
0.450 
(3.551) 
0.495 
(3.676) 
0.615 
(3.156) 
0.748 
(0.7315) 
ε|V| [p.u.] 
0.0102 
(0.0660) 
0.0102 
(0.0699) 
0.0126 
(0.0708) 
0.0235 
(0.0594) 
0.0239 
(0.0142) 
17:00 
εθ [°] 
0.226 
(3.353) 
0.653 
(3.841) 
0.505 
(3.596) 
0.719 
(4.028) 
0.681 
(0.847) 
ε|V| [p.u.] 
0.0101 
(0.0667) 
0.00930 
(0.0690) 
0.0108 
(0.0712) 
0.0160 
(0.0756) 
0.0208 
(0.0169) 
 
==PAGE:56==
 
Results and Discussion 
46 
Based on the values listed in Table 3-2, referring to Figure B-5, B-6 and B-7 in Appendix B, 
it can be seen that the accuracy of the results decreases as the data loss degree increases. Be-
sides, as time goes, the accuracy also decreases. Even with high data loss degree as high as 
80%, the scenario with grid knowledge applied still performs better.  
By observing and comparing the data listed in Table 3-1 and 3-2, it can be seen that the result 
errors obtained with the historical data at the same bus or the same time do not change very 
much as the data loss degree increases when the data loss degree is below 100%. When the 
data loss degree reaches 100%, the result error drops to a fairly low level and at some load 
buses or time stamps, the errors are even lower than the errors obtained with the grid 
knowledge. Therefore, when the data loss degree is extremely high, such as 100%, the histor-
ical data and the grid knowledge can be implemented collaboratively to improve the accuracy 
of the estimation results.  
3.2 
Benefits from the State Estimator 
With the periodic execution of the state estimator implemented at the substation, the operators 
sitting in the control room can get benefits from the acquired results by using these results for 
further analysis. All the results used in this section are obtained from the state estimator with 
grid knowledge implemented.  
After obtaining all these results from the estimator and finishing the analysis on the perfor-
mance of the estimator, the potential application and benefit of using these results are ana-
lysed in this section, including the observation of the voltage imbalance degree of each bus, 
the estimation of the self-consumption situation in the grid and the estimation on the trans-
former loading rate change.  
3.2.1 
Voltage Imbalance 
Since the estimation results include voltage magnitudes and angles, the most direct observa-
tion from the estimated results is the voltage imbalance degree between phases. The voltage 
can affect power flow and current flowing in the cables. Besides, the operation of the PV sys-
tems is also influenced by the unbalanced condition. It is therefore meaningful and important 
to monitor the voltage.  
As shown in Figure 3-7, the mean voltage magnitude of each phase together with the mean 
value of all three phases at each bus is plotted. The error bars added are representing the reli-
ability and the distribution of the errors of the results.  
==PAGE:57==
 
Results and Discussion 
47 
 
Figure 3-7 Mean voltage magnitude  
Following the black plots in Figure 3-7, it can be seen that the average voltage magnitude of 
three phases stays close to 1 p.u. and the voltage does not drop too much with the distance 
increases. The error bars are also lying within in the voltage tolerance regulated by TR 3.2.1. 
Without considering the three phases, the network seems to operate properly. However, if 
looking into the three phases separately, it can be seen that the system is operating under un-
balanced condition and some load buses are likely to experience under-voltage and over-
voltage problem. Therefore, the proposed SE model provides the operator with detailed oper-
ation conditions of the network. The actual conditions of each phase are revealed with the 
results obtained from the proposed model.  
From Figure 3-7, it can be seen that the unbalanced condition on Phase C is the most severe 
and Phase C is the most likely phase to have overvoltage or under-voltage problem as the 
error bars indicate. According to the information about the EV chargers listed in Table A-2 in 
Appendix A, most of the single-phase EV chargers are connected to Phase C. Therefore, 
Phase C at most buses is likely to have under-voltage problem when there are too many EVs 
being charged in the same periods. It can also be seen that as the distance increases, the buses 
are more likely to have under-voltage problem, which is also one of the weaknesses of radial-
structured network.  
With the voltage magnitude obtained from the state estimator, the voltage magnitude at each 
load bus in the network at every time stamp can be monitored. The corresponding buses with 
the highest and the lowest voltage magnitudes can also be known the same time.  
 
  
  
  
  
  
          
   
   
   
   
   
 
   
   
                             
       
       
       
               
==PAGE:58==
 
Results and Discussion 
48 
 
(a) Phase A 
 
(b) Phase B 
 
(c) Phase C 
Figure 3-8 Maximum and minimum voltage magnitudes with 20% data lost 
As shown in Figure 3-8, the maximum and minimum voltage magnitude of each phase at 
each load bus in the network and the corresponding load bus numbers at each time stamp are 
plotted. With the voltage magnitude obtained from the state estimator, the voltage magnitude 
at each load bus in the network at every time stamp can be monitored. The corresponding 
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
   
   
 
   
              
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
                 
                 
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
   
   
 
   
              
   
   
   
   
  
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
   
   
 
   
              
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
==PAGE:59==
 
Results and Discussion 
49 
load buses with the highest and the lowest voltage magnitudes can also be known the same 
time. The two pink dotted lines in the three plots in Figure 3-8 represent the upper and lower 
limit of voltage magnitude tolerance, namely 1.1 p.u. and 0.85 p.u., respectively, according to 
TR 3.2.1 [46]. The plots start from 12 o’clock because the voltage magnitudes including the 
error bars are within the tolerance all the time before 12 o’clock. Based on this, it can be 
clearly observed which buses in the network are experiencing over-voltage or under-voltage 
problems and the operator can make decisions and instructions more efficiently. 
The error bars are added based on the standard deviations of the data and they present the 
distribution of the errors, from which the reliability of the results can be seen. For example, 
although the voltage at Bus 16 lies within the tolerance at 15 o’clock, the error bar extends 
out of the range. When this occurs, the operator should pay attention to these buses. Because 
the actual voltage magnitudes at some buses can be higher than the upper limit or lower than 
the lower limit.  
The plots shown in Figure 3-9 are calculated based on the results estimated with 100% data 
lost. Compared with Figure 3-8, some differences in the maximum voltage magnitude and the 
corresponding buses are found and results like this may result in wrong decisions or instruc-
tions from the operators. Therefore, the performance of the metering infrastructure is crucial 
to the system monitor and control.  
Based on these results, the operator can see which bus is experiencing problem with voltage 
and whether voltage regulation or other control is required in this network. The results calcu-
lated with 20% data lost is more reliable than the other results, because it has the lowest data 
loss degree.  
From these two sets of plots, it is observed that Phase C of Bus 16 has the most severe under-
voltage problem. Based on the information listed in Table A-1, there are totally 4 EVs con-
nected to Bus 16, with two of them three-phase type and two of them connected to Phase C. 
Besides, Bus 16 is located at the far-end of the feeder. Therefore, if all the four EVs connect-
ed to this bus are being charged at the same time, then the voltage drop can be rather high. 
Similar problem may occur to Bus 17 as well. Bus 17 is also located at the far-end of the 
feeder and even further than Bus 16 and it has totally four EVs connected to it as well. Alt-
hough Bus 15 is also located far from the reference bus, it has fewer EVs (two) connected and 
the under-voltage problem here can be less severe than the other buses.  
At the same time, Bus 16 also has over-voltage problem at Phase A. The reason to this can be 
that the PV systems and batteries generate power simultaneously due to the high consumption 
at the bus, and this can cause voltage rise. Based on this result, the operator can have an over-
view of the EV charging, PV and battery generation conditions at certain buses.  
==PAGE:60==
 
Results and Discussion 
50 
 
(a) Phase A 
 
(b) Phase B 
 
(c) Phase C 
Figure 3-9 Maximum and minimum voltage magnitudes with 100% data lost 
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
   
   
   
 
   
              
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
                 
                 
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
   
   
   
 
   
              
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
   
   
   
 
   
              
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
==PAGE:61==
 
Results and Discussion 
51 
In the literatures, the real-time monitoring based on SE is usually focused on MV networks 
and only monitors one single phase instead of all three phases. As emphasized in the previous 
sections and chapters, the unbalanced conditions in LV networks cannot be ignored. Single-
phase over-voltage or under-voltage problems can also cause severe problems in LV grid. 
Therefore, all the tree phases should be monitored so that a better vision of the abnormal con-
ditions in the grid can be observed.  
3.2.2 
Self-consumption Estimation 
As discussed in the previous chapters, the interaction between the LV grid and the external 
grid is important because this can reflect the operation condition of the grid, such as the load-
ing rate of the distribution transformer located at the substation. Based on the statement in 
Chapter 2, the interaction between the LV grid and the external grid is evaluated by the self-
consumption condition at each load bus.  
With the results obtained from the state estimator, i.e. voltage magnitudes and angles, the 
active power balance (PB) of all the load buses can be calculated by means of Equation 2-9. 
A rough overview of the self-consumption condition of each load bus and the interaction be-
tween the LV grid and the external grid can be obtained from the values and the signs of PB. 
If PB is positive, this bus has generation surplus while the generation at this bus is not able to 
cover the demand from the loads if the PB is negative. If the sum of all the positive PBs is 
larger than the sum of all the negative PBs, then the LV grid has power surplus is exporting 
power to the external. If it is the opposite situation, then the LV grid is importing power from 
the external grid.  
From the values of PB at different load buses, an overview of the self-consumption condition 
at each bus can be obtained. To know details about the self-consumption state at each load 
bus, SC at each load bus are calculated based on Equation 2-17. To know the related parame-
ters involved in the calculation, namely total generation and consumption at the bus, the grid 
knowledge used in the estimator are used again. The implementation of the grid knowledge is 
defined by Equation 2-19.  
Two examples of SC estimated at different time are plotted in Figure 3-10. The results pre-
sented in the examples are calculated based on the estimation results obtained with 20% data 
lost. The black dashed line with asterisk markers in the figures represents the error of PB in 
per unit calculated by  
==PAGE:62==
 
Results and Discussion 
52 
𝜀𝑃𝐵𝑖= 𝑃inj,estimator𝑖−𝑃inj,knowledge𝑖 
(3-4) 
In the two plots illustrated in Figure 3-10, the red dotted line represents 0 p.u. of the PB error 
εPB and the pink dotted line represents the 100% of the SC. 
 
(a) SC estimation at 7:00 
 
(b) SC estimation at 13:00 
Figure 3-10 SC estimation examples at different time 
If the black asterisk markers are close to the red dotted line, the corresponding SC values are 
more reliable and vice versa. Because neither generation units nor loads are connected to Bus 
1 and Bus 23, the PB values at these two buses are always equal to or close to 0. Due to the 
way that SC is calculated in this project, the SC results at these two buses are likely to be 
meaningless values, such as infinity. Thus, the SC values of these two buses are set to 0. If 
infinity occurs at other buses, it is implied that both PV systems and batteries connected at 
this bus are generating nothing while the load is non-zero.  
 
   
    
    
                          
 
   
 
   
 
                               
 
  
  
  
  
  
   
                      
                        
 
   
    
    
                          
  
  
 
 
 
 
                               
 
  
  
  
  
  
   
                      
                        
==PAGE:63==
 
Results and Discussion 
53 
To elaborate the results and discussion, the load profile information is necessary. A generic 
daily load profile of LV networks is described and defined by CIGRE based on the LV grid in 
the real world [42], as shown in Figure 3-11. The blue solid curve in the figure represents the 
residential load profile.  
 
Figure 3-11 Generic daily load profile of LV grid in Europe 
Image source: Reference [42] 
From Figure 3-10, there are some considerably high SC values found. According to Equation 
2-17, this is caused by either high demand or low generation. As shown in Figure 3-11, resi-
dential load starts increasing at around 6 o’clock in the morning when people wake up and 
start cooking breakfast. Besides, people normally do not charge their EVs in the morning. 
Therefore, if the high SC value occurs in the morning, it is mainly because the low PV gener-
ation in the morning according to Figure 3-6(a) and the relatively high load consumption. 
According to the load profile in Figure 3-11, the change in the load is quite high from time to 
time in the morning and this also makes the error high. 
At 1 o’clock in the afternoon, the PV generation reaches its peak and the load is moderate at 
this time and does not change much during the next few hours according to Figure 3-11. 
Therefore, it can be seen that 100% of the SC is reached at some load buses and at some bus-
es the generation is higher than the consumption according to Figure 3-10(b). However, from 
Figure 3-11, it can be seen that there are still buses with SC higher than 100% even with high 
PV generation. This is probably caused by the EV charging. Some of the EVs start getting 
charged at this time. The consumption of EV charging can be high and the total consumption 
at the buses therefore may not be covered by the PV generation and the battery output even 
==PAGE:64==
 
Results and Discussion 
54 
the PV generation is high. Based on this knowledge, the percentage of EVs being charged can 
also be roughly estimated.  
The weather data and the PV generation data are measured from April. At this time in Den-
mark, the weather is still a little bit cold and the sun rise time is not as early as that in the 
summer as indicated by Figure 3-6. Heating facilities may still be used in the morning, which 
results in high load consumption. Therefore, the results in this part can differ if the season and 
climate change. Following the common knowledge, for example, more load buses can have 
SC close to 100% in the morning in summer when the solar irradiance can be high even in the 
morning.  
3.2.3 
Transformer Loading Condition Estimation 
With all these analyses, arguments and the measurements, the interaction between the LV 
grid and the external grid, as well as the loading rate of the distribution transformer at the 
substation can be roughly estimated. Because the overloading of transformer is a severe and 
commonly seen problem at a substation, it is meaningful to conduct such an analysis. By 
combining the operation state from the estimator and the generic load profile defined in Fig-
ure 3-11, the changing trend of the transformer loading rate in the next few moments can be 
predicted analytically, and whether potential overloading problem can happen can therefore 
be predicted.  
 
Figure 3-12 Demonstration of transformer loading rate 
A demonstration of the transformer loading rate is plotted in Figure 3-12. This is not plotted 
based on real measurements. It is just a simple demonstration of the change of transformer 
loading rate. Negative values represent the power is flowing out of the LV grid while positive 
values mean that power is injecting into the LV grid.  
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
    
 
   
                
==PAGE:65==
 
Results and Discussion 
55 
The loading rate of a transformer is conventionally always positive. However, as shown in 
Figure 3-12, there is negative loading rate presented. In this project, it is assumed that nega-
tive loading rate represent power flowing out of the LV grid. Because of the high penetration 
of PV systems in the grid, when the PV generation is high, and the load consumption is low, 
it is possible to have power fed into the external grid and this is represented as negative trans-
former loading rate.  
With the power flowing into and out of the LV grid measured at the 10/0.4 kV substation, i.e. 
the active power of the external grid in the LV grid model in PowerFactory, the loading rate 
of the transformer at current time can be obtained. Based on the current state of the trans-
former and the analyses that have been done, the changing trend of the transformer loading 
rate in the very near future can be predicted so that the operators can know whether there are 
any potential risks such as overloading problem and they can make decisions in advance. 
Some examples and cases studies about this at different time are raised to discuss about it in 
the remainder of this chapter.  
• 
Early Morning 
Suppose some reliable information about SC condition is known to the operator and the esti-
mated generation and consumption are already acquired as well. Suppose this situation is in 
the early morning, for example at 7 o’clock. The SC degree can be low at this time, and the 
loads and PV generation are increasing. But they start increasing at a relatively low level and 
increase with a moderate rate. Furthermore, EVs are normally not charged in the morning. 
Therefore, even the loading rate of the transformer is high, the transformer may have no po-
tential risks because later on the increase in the loads becomes slower and therefore not much 
extra power is needed from the external grid.  
• 
Afternoon 
Referring to Figure 3-10(b), suppose the operator receives the information at noon between 
12 and 13 o’clock. From Figure 3-10(b), it can be seen that at some buses the SC values are 
much lower than 100%, which means generation is much higher than the consumption at 
these buses. In this circumstance, the power is flowing upward injecting into the external grid. 
If the transformer is heavily loaded already at this time, it can be more heavily loaded or even 
overloaded in the near future, because PV generation keeps increasing afterwards according 
to Figure 3-6.  
• 
Evening 
If this information is acquired in the evening, for instance at 18 o’clock, the PV generation 
decreases while the loads start increasing rapidly according to Figure 3-6 and 3-11, and most 
==PAGE:66==
 
Results and Discussion 
56 
of the EVs are usually being charged at this time because most people have gone back to 
home from work. Therefore, the consumption at the load bus can be rather high and even with 
the batteries may not such high consumption be covered. More power importing is required to 
from the external grid. If the loading rate of the transformer is already high, for example 85% 
or higher, during the next few minutes, the transformer is likely to experience overloading 
problem. If the current loading rate is low, such as 30%, then the transformer is likely to be 
capable of handling the potential large power injection.  
• 
Night 
If this situation occurs in the night, like 9 to 10 o’clock, the EVs are normally being charged 
during this period and the load consumption is high according to Figure 3-11. At this time PV 
generation is almost zero and the batteries may not be enough to cover the consumption. 
Hence, more power is needed drawn from the external grid, and the transformer is faced with 
high power flow. If the loading rate is already high, then the transformer is likely to experi-
ence overloading problem if no action is taken.  
• 
Summary 
If a generic loading profile of this network and generic behaviour of people living in this area 
can be established based big data technology, it is feasible to estimate the transformer loading 
rate numerically based on these results and analyses.  
Some of the PB errors are considerably high which is the consequence of the accumulation of 
the errors in the five elements in Equation 2-17, i.e. PPV, Pbattery charge, Pload, PEV, and Pbattery 
discharge, and the tiny errors in the estimated results. Among all these five elements, PPV has the 
highest reliability because it is calculated based on the weather information, which is the de-
terministic factor to the PV generation. The estimation of EV SoC can also be reliable to 
some extent. Because the charging process of EVs can take a few hours, they are not as dy-
namic as general loads. Therefore, if the EVs are being charged 20 minutes ago, then it is 
very likely to be being charged right now. However, once the charging process is finished, the 
change in the active power is big, which can cause high error. Compared with PV systems 
and EVs, the loads in the LV network are much more dynamic due to the unpredictable hu-
man behaviours. One single load in the LV network is much lower than that in the MV and 
HV networks. Even the switch on and off activity of the lights inside a house can cause big 
changes in the load. The dynamic characteristic of loads makes their roles in the estimation 
the least reliable and the least predictable. Because the low reliability of load estimation, the 
estimation of battery SoC is not as reliable as that of PV systems and EVs. All these reasons 
result in the high error of the PB values.  
==PAGE:67==
 
Results and Discussion 
57 
In current literatures, the results from the state estimator are used to calculate power injection 
at buses and line flow in the transmission lines in order to monitor them. By this means, 
whether any component is overloaded can be acquired. In this project, compared with the 
previous studies, the state estimation results are combined with different grid knowledge to 
get more information, such as the discussion in this section, to analytically predict the chang-
ing trend of the transformer in the substation, and by this means, the potential overloading 
problems can be known by the operators in advance. As mentioned above, if generic load 
profile for the LV grid in specific areas can be built based on big data techniques, this predic-
tion can be done more precise. Because the load LV grid is more dynamic compared with MV 
and HV grids, it can be beneficial to know the potential risks that are likely to happen in the 
next few moments.  
With all these analyses and discussions, there are still further efforts that can be applied to 
improve the accuracy and the reliability of the results, and the benefits from the state estima-
tor. The contents related to further efforts that can be made to improve the model and its ap-
plications are to be discussed in Chapter 5. 
 
==PAGE:68==
==PAGE:69==
 
59 
4 
CONCLUSION 
In this project, a state estimation model on LV grid incorporating grid knowledge is proposed 
and tested. To simulate a simplified practical system, a simplified ICT system and an LV grid 
model are built. Different data loss degrees are tested with the established model. With all the 
results obtained, the performance of the estimator is evaluated, and the potential applications 
are discussed analytically. Some conclusions are hereby drawn.  
As stated in the previous chapters and sections, data loss exists in the measurements. With the 
grid information from different physical domains, i.e. the grid knowledge, to substitute the 
lost data can significantly improve the observability of formulated SE problems.  
In terms of the accuracy of the results, it is proven that the errors of the estimated results are 
low in general. And then the performance of the estimator is evaluated by comparing with 
one of the state-of-the-art methods, i.e. using historical data. It is proven that the estimator 
with grid knowledge generally performs better with different data loss degrees. The accuracy 
of the estimated results is much higher, and the range of the error distribution is narrower as 
well according to the plots presented in Section 3.1. However, when the data loss degree is 
extremely high, such as 100%, the grid knowledge can be implemented in collaboration with 
historical data to improve the accuracy of the results.  
The performance, including the computation efficiency and the accuracy of the results, is 
mainly affected by the following factors: 
➢ The scale of the network; 
➢ The accuracy of the measurements. The error contained in the measurements also af-
fects the computation efficiency of the estimator.  
➢ The data loss degree of the measurements. The accuracy becomes lower and lower as 
the data loss degree increases;  
➢ Time, or the PV generation. The accuracy is generally lower in the morning when 
then PV generation is lower and less dynamic. This affects especially the scenario us-
ing historical data. Although the PV generation is calculated based on the weather in-
formation in the grid knowledge implementation, the measurements of the weather in-
formation also contains error and the process measuring of the irradiance and tem-
==PAGE:70==
 
Conclusion 
60 
perature has relative long delay. Thus, the parameters used at this moment can actual-
ly be the parameters few minutes ago;  
➢ Distance between objective buses and the reference bus. Because the error can accu-
mulate as going deeper and further into the feeder due to the coupling between buses, 
the results of the buses located at the far-end in the feeder are less reliable.  
From these, it can be concluded that high-performance real-time monitoring systems and me-
tering infrastructure are crucial to the performance of the state estimator. Thus, there are high 
requirements on the ICT system to ensure the high-quality communication between the smart 
meters installed at the load-end and the monitor system in the control room at the substation. 
Measurements with lower errors and data loss degree can lead to more accurate and reliable 
estimated results and the operators can have better overview of the system and make better 
decisions.  
Addition to the evaluation of the estimator performance, the potential applications are inves-
tigated analytically in the perspective of system operators’ benefits. The operation states of 
the system can be obtained, and it is feasible to use these states to conduct further analysis. 
With the proposed SE model, the operator can have an insight in all three phases instead of 
one single phase. A better and clearer can be provided to the operator. 
The most direct observation acquired from the results is the voltage at each load bus in the 
system. The imbalance degree among three phases can be monitored and then the buses with 
the highest and lowest voltage magnitude can be known. With this, the operators can know 
which buses have over-voltage and under-voltage problems and decide whether any control is 
needed applied or not. But the information differs with different data loss degrees. Therefore, 
the quality of the ICT infrastructure is crucial.  
Then the correlation between the power balance and the self-consumption condition at each 
load bus are analysed and discussed. The self-consumption condition at each load bus can be 
estimated with these results. Starting from this point, combining with the grid knowledge, 
such as common user behaviours and time, the charging status of the EVs can be estimated in 
a reliable aspect. Furthermore, an overview of the PV generation conditions and battery status 
can also be roughly estimated.  
Afterwards, based on the estimated results, different grid knowledge and the discussion in last 
paragraph, the changing trend of the loading rate of the distribution transformer situated at the 
substation can be roughly predicted, not quantitively, but analytically, so that the operators 
can be aware of the potential coming overloading risk in the near future and whether any ac-
tion is required to keep network operating properly.  
==PAGE:71==
 
Conclusion 
61 
To summarise, with the proposed state estimation model, the observability of a formulated 
state estimation problem and the accuracy can be improved. But the reliability of the results is 
affected by the data loss degree. The performance of the ICT system is important. With these 
results from the state estimator, the operator can get the benefits of monitoring all three phas-
es at the same time in order to get a clearer vision over the system operation, acquiring the 
self-consumption condition of each load bus in order to know the interaction between the LV 
grid and the external grid, and analytically estimating the changing trend of the transformer 
loading rate in order to predict potential risk of having overloading. 
 
==PAGE:72==
==PAGE:73==
 
63 
5 
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
5.1 
Limitations 
Although the proposed state estimation model has some advantages, due to the time limita-
tion, there are still some limitations that can be further improved.  
In the state estimation process, as discussed in Section 3.1 of Chapter 3, the power losses in 
the cables connecting the load buses are not considered. The ignorance of the losses can cause 
the deviation between the actual power injection and the estimated power injection at each 
load bus. The small deviations at the buses close to the reference bus can be accumulated to a 
big deviation at the buses far from the reference bus, resulting in higher error less reliable 
results at these buses.  
As stated in the assumption, the PV penetration is 100%. The effect of different PV penetra-
tion degrees is not evaluated. As Figure 3-5, 3-5, B-5, B-6 and B-7 indicate, the change in PV 
generation can affect the accuracy of the results. Thus, it is likely that the penetration degree 
of the PV system in the network have correlation with the performance of the estimator. Be-
sides, as there are no smart charging solutions are applied, they are simply treated as loads. 
Thus, the effect of the active participant of EVs is not included. Furthermore, the control 
strategies of the PV systems and the batteries in the grid model are considered to be the same. 
However, different control strategies can be mixed within one area.  
In the grid knowledge implementation process, the uncertainty in the weather information is 
not taken into account. The weather information is considered to be correct and reliable, and 
no data loss or delay are applied onto the weather data. But in reality, the data set used in the 
estimator may have these uncertainties, which is one of the sources of the errors in the estima-
tion results. The load is estimated by taking the average of the energy consumption for 15 
minutes, i.e. the average power during the last 15 minutes. This can also be improved by im-
plementing simple prediction on it. Although the actual value is not easy to predict, its change 
trend at least can be estimated based on more historical data with certain statistic methods. In 
this way, the error of the estimated load in the estimator can get decreased so that the accura-
cy of the results can be further improved.  
==PAGE:74==
 
Limitations and Future Work 
64 
Furthermore, due to the computation efficiency of the estimator, only three rounds are exe-
cuted for each time. With low data loss degrees, the statistical parameters including the mean 
values and the standard deviations can be less reliable than those of the high data loss de-
grees. This can be further improved by running more calculations. Additionally, the bad de-
tection (BDD) is not implemented in this project either.  
In the discussion of the possibility to use the result to contribute to the system analysis and 
operation, the calculation of power balance and self-consumption does not involve error dis-
tribution information. The analysis of the transformer loading rate can thus be discussed ana-
lytically. However, the reliability of results is crucial to decision makers to control the net-
work operation. When the power balance is calculated, the reliability of the results can be 
evaluated by aggregating the reliability of each element in the equations, which requires the 
theory of error propagation and covariance calculation in statistics. 
5.2 
Future Work 
➢ Evaluate the effects caused by different PV penetration degrees in the grid model. 
This can be done in the similar way as the evaluation of different data loss degrees. 
The penetration can increase from 0 to 100% with step of 20%; 
➢ Evaluate the effects caused by different control strategies of the PV systems and the 
batteries in the grid model. The distribution of different control strategies can be ran-
domly generated and applied to the grid model;  
➢ Include the effects caused by the uncertainties in the weather information. Specifical-
ly, the delay of the weather data arrival, errors in the weather measurements and the 
loss of data are included and implemented; 
➢ Apply simple prediction on the load estimation part in the process of grid knowledge 
implementation in the estimator. Based on more historical combined with the generic 
load profile plotted in Figure 3-9, simple prediction of the changing trend of the load 
can be done; 
➢ Analyse the reliability and error in the power balance calculation. The covariance be-
tween estimated results (voltage magnitudes and angles) are calculated and by com-
bining the error propagation theory, the reliability of the power balance Pinj, estimator 
(Equation 2-7) can be evaluated. Besides, the accuracy of four elements to calculate 
Pinj, knowledge (Equation 2-19) are also evaluated by assessing their reliability based on 
grid knowledge and statistical theory so that the reliability of self-consumption condi-
tion can be evaluated;  
➢ Perform BDD on the proposed state estimation model; 
➢ Improve the computation efficiency of the estimator. 
 
==PAGE:75==
 
65 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
X. Yu and Y. Xue, “Smart Grids: A Cyber-Physical Systems Perspective,” in 
Proceedings of the IEEE, 2016, vol. 104, no. 5, pp. 1058–1070. 
[2] 
R. F. Arritt and R. C. Dugan, “Distribution system analysis and the future Smart Grid,” 
2011 Rural Electr. Power Conf., vol. 47, no. 6, pp. B2-1-B2-8, 2011. 
[3] 
North American Electrical Reliability Corporation (NERC), “Distributed Energy 
Resources - Connection Modeling and Reliability Considerations,” Atlanta, US, 2017. 
[4] 
EU Energy in Figures: Statistical Pocketbook 2017. Brussels: European Commission, 
2017. 
[5] 
International Energy Agency (IEA), Photovoltaic Power Syatems Programme Annual 
Report 2016. IEA PVPS, 2016. 
[6] 
G. Yang et al., “Voltage rise mitigation for solar PV integration at LV grids: Studies 
from PVNET. dk,” J. Mod. Power Syst. Clean Energy, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 411–421, 
2015. 
[7] 
N. D. Hatziargyriou, D. Škrlec, T. Capuder, P. S. Georgilakis, and M. Zidar, “Review 
of energy storage allocation in power distribution networks: applications, methods and 
future research,” IET Gener. Transm. Distrib., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 645–652, 2016. 
[8] 
D. Pudjianto, M. Aunedi, P. Djapic, and G. Strbac, “Whole-systems assessment of the 
value of energy storage in low-carbon electricity systems,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, 
vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 1098–1109, 2014. 
[9] 
F. Katiraei and J. Romero Agüero, “Studies for Utility-Scale Photovoltaic Distributed 
Generation,” IEEE Power & Energy Magazine, pp. 62–71, 2011. 
[10] G. T. Heydt, “The Next Generation of Power Distribution Systems,” IEEE Trans. 
Smart Grid, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 225–235, 2010. 
[11] K. Balamurugan, S. D., and R. T., “Impact of distributed generation on power 
distribution systems,” Energy Procedia, vol. 25. pp. 93–100, 2012. 
[12] R. Sanchez, F. Iov, M. Kemal, M. Stefan, and R. Olsen, “Observability of Low 
Voltage grids : actual DSOs Challenges and Research Questions,” in 2017 52nd 
International Universities Power Engineering Conference (UPEC), 2017. 
[13] F. C. Schweppe and J. Wildes, “Power System Static-State Estimation, Part I, II, III,” 
IEEE Trans. Power Appar. Syst., vol. PAS-89, no. 1, pp. 120–135, 1970. 
[14] A. J. Wood, B. F. Wollenberg, and G. B. Sheble, “Chapter 9 Introduction to State 
Estimation in Power Systems,” in Power Generation, Operation and Control, Edition 
==PAGE:76==
References 
66 
3., John Wiley & Sons, 2014, pp. 403–467. 
[15] O. Alsaç, N. Vempati, B. Stott, and A. Monticelli, “Generalized state estimation,” 
IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 1069–1075, 1998. 
[16] B. Hayes and M. Prodanovic, “State Estimation Techniques for Electric Power 
Distribution Systems,” 2014 Eur. Model. Symp., pp. 303–308, 2014. 
[17] A. Primadianto and C.-N. Lu, “A Review on Distribution System State Estimation,” 
IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 1–1, 2016. 
[18] A. Monticelli, “Electric power system state estimation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE, 
2000, vol. 88, no. 2, pp. 262–282. 
[19] S. T. Mak and E. So, “Integration of PMU, SCADA, AMI to accomplish expanded 
functional capabilities of Smart Grid,” CPEM Dig. (Conference Precis. Electromagn. 
Meas., pp. 68–69, 2014. 
[20] S. Lu, S. Repo, D. Della Giustina, F. A. C. Figuerola, A. Lof, and M. Pikkarainen, 
“Real-Time Low Voltage Network Monitoring - ICT Architecture and Field Test 
Experience,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 2002–2012, 2015. 
[21] “Benchmarking smart metering deployment in the EU-27 with a focus on electricity,” 
Brussels, 2014. 
[22] S. Lefebvre, J. Prevost, and L. Lenoir, “Distribution state estimation: A necessary 
requirement for the smart grid,” IEEE Power Energy Soc. Gen. Meet., vol. 2014–
Octob, no. October, 2014. 
[23] S. C. Huang, C. N. Lu, and Y. L. Lo, “Evaluation of AMI and SCADA Data Synergy 
for Distribution Feeder Modeling,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 1639–
1647, 2015. 
[24] S. Bhela, V. Kekatos, V. Tech, and S. Paul, “Power Distribution System Observability 
With Smart Meter Data,” in Conference on Signal and Information Processing 
(GlobalSIP), 2017 IEEE Global, 2017, pp. 1070–1074. 
[25] C. N. Lu, J. H. Teng, and W. H. E. Liu, “Distribution system state estimation,” IEEE 
Trans. Power Syst., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 229–240, 1995. 
[26] I. Roytelman and S. M. Shahidehpour, “State Estimation for Electric Power 
Distribution Systems in Quasi real-Time Conditions,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv., vol. 
8, no. 4, pp. 2009–2015, 1993. 
[27] M. K. Celik and W.-H. E. Liu, “A practical distribution state calculation algorithm,” 
IEEE Power Eng. Soc. 1999 Winter Meet. (Cat. No.99CH36233), vol. 1, pp. 442–447, 
1999. 
[28] Z. Jia, J. Chen, and Y. Liao, “State estimation in distribution system considering 
effects of AMI data,” in Conference Proceedings - IEEE SOUTHEASTCON, 2013. 
==PAGE:77==
References 
67 
[29] R. Singh, B. C. Pal, and R. A. Jabr, “Distribution system state estimation through 
Gaussian mixture model of the load as pseudo-measurement,” IET Gener. Transm. 
Distrib., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 50–59, 2010. 
[30] F. Shabaninia, M. Vaziri, S. Vadhva, and J. Vaziri, “A novel state estimation 
formulation for distribution grids with Renewable Energy Sources,” IEEE Power 
Energy Soc. Gen. Meet., vol. 94720, pp. 1–5, 2012. 
[31] M. Brown, D. Coutto, S. Member, J. Cesar, S. De Souza, and S. Member, 
“Forecasting-Aided State Estimation — Part I, II,” vol. 24, no. 4, 2009. 
[32] N. Nusrat, M. Irving, and G. Taylor, “Development of distributed state estimation 
methods to enable smart distribution management systems,” 2011 IEEE Int. Symp. Ind. 
Electron., pp. 1691–1696, 2011. 
[33] I. Džafić, M. Gilles, R. A. Jabr, B. C. Pal, and S. Henselmeyer, “Real time estimation 
of loads in radial and unsymmetrical three-phase distribution networks,” IEEE Trans. 
Power Syst., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 4839–4848, 2013. 
[34] A. R. Abbasi and A. R. Seifi, “A new coordinated approach to state estimation in 
integrated power systems,” Int. J. Electr. Power Energy Syst., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 152–
158, 2013. 
[35] X. Han et al., “Real-time Measurements and their Effects on State Estimation of 
Distribution Power System,” in The 4th IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid 
Technologies Europe (ISGT Europe), 2013, pp. 1–5. 
[36] A. Alimardani, F. Therrien, D. Atanackovic, J. Jatskevich, and E. Vaahedi, 
“Distribution System State Estimation Based on Nonsynchronized Smart Meters,” 
IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 2919–2928, 2015. 
[37] X. Feng, F. Yang, and W. Peterson, “A practical multi-phase distribution state 
estimation solution incorporating smart meter and sensor data,” IEEE Power Energy 
Soc. Gen. Meet., pp. 1–6, 2012. 
[38] A. Al-Wakeel, J. Wu, and N. Jenkins, “State estimation of medium voltage distribution 
networks using smart meter measurements,” Appl. Energy, vol. 184, pp. 207–218, 
2016. 
[39] K. Samarakoon, J. Wu, J. Ekanayake, and N. Jenkins, “Use of delayed smart meter 
measurements for distribution state estimation,” in IEEE Power and Energy Society 
General Meeting, 2011, vol. 15. 
[40] M. Pau et al., “Low voltage system state estimation based on smart metering 
infrastructure,” in 2016 IEEE International Workshop on Applied Measurements for 
Power Systems (AMPS), 2016. 
[41] F. Leferink, C. Keyer, and A. Melentjev, “Static energy meter errors caused by 
conducted electromagnetic interference,” IEEE Electromagn. Compat. Mag., vol. 5, 
==PAGE:78==
References 
68 
no. 4, pp. 49–55, 2016. 
[42] CIGRE, “Benchmark Systems for Network Integration of Renewable and Distributed 
Energy Resources,” Paris, 2014. 
[43] Z. Wang, T. B. Rasmussen, and G. Yang, “Test of PV inverters under unbalanced 
operations Test of PV inverters under unbalanced operation,” in 7th International 
Conference on Renewable Power Generation (RPG), 2018. 
[44] M. Gavrilas, “Heuristic and metaheuristic optimization techniques with application to 
power systems,” in 12th WSEAS International Conference on Mathemetical Methods 
and Computational Techniques in Electrical Engineering (MMACTEE’10), Selected 
Topics in Mathematical Methods and Computational Techniques in Electrical 
Engineering, 2010, pp. 95–103. 
[45] M. Juamperez, G. Yang, and S. B. Kjær, “Voltage regulation in LV grids by 
coordinated volt-var control strategies,” J. Mod. Power Syst. Clean Energy, 2014. 
[46] Energinet, “Technical regulation 3.2.1 for power plants up to and including 11 kW 
(Plant category A1),” Energinet, Fredericia, Denmark, 2016. 
[47] S. B. Kjær, C. H. Benz, and A. Gonlazez, “Impact of New Danish Hourly Based Net 
Metering on the Acceptable Solar PV System Cost,” in 28th European Photovoltaic 
Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition (EU PVSEC), 2013, pp. 4457–4451. 
[48] C. Schwaegerl, M. H. J. Bollen, K. Karoui, and A. Yagmur, “Voltage control in 
distribution systems as a limitation of the hosting capacity for distributed energy 
resources,” in CIRED 2005: 18th International Conference And Exhibition on 
Electricity Distribution, 2005. 
[49] Energinet, “Technical regulation 3.3.1 for battery plants,” Fredericia, Denmark, 2017. 
[50] S. Repo et al., “The IDE4L Project: Defining, Designing, and Demonstrating the Ideal 
Grid for All,” IEEE Power Energy Mag., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 41–51, 2017. 
[51] PowerFactory, Advanced Tutorial Python, Edition 5. Gormaringen: DIgSILENT 
Gmbh, 2017. 
[52] PowerFactory, Python Function Reference, Revision 4. Gormaringen: DIgSILENT 
Gmbh, 2018. 
[53] A. Abdel-Majeed and M. Braun, “Low voltage system state estimation using smart 
meters,” in 2012 47th International Universities Power Engineering Conference 
(UPEC), 2012. 
[54] J. D. Glover, M. S. Sarma, and T. J. Overbye, “Chaoter 8 Symmetrical Components,” 
in Power System Analysis and Design, Edition 5., Cengage Learning, 2012, pp. 419–
470. 
[55] T.-H. Chen, M.-S. Chen, K.-J. Hwang, P. Kotas, and E. A. Chebli, “Distribution 
==PAGE:79==
References 
69 
system power flow analysis - a rigid approach,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv., vol. 6, no. 
3, pp. 1146–1152, 1991. 
[56] F. M. Gonzalez-longatt, L. Rueda, and H. Verdejo, “Modelling of Transmission 
Systems Under Unsymmetrical Conditions and Contingency Analysis Using 
DIgSILENT PowerFactory,” in PowerFactory Applications for Power System 
Analysis, Springer International Publishing Switzerland, 2014, pp. 27–59. 
[57] M. E. Baran and A. W. Kelley, “State estimation for real-time monitoring of 
distribution systems,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 1601–1609, 1994. 
[58] L. Noel, G. Z. de Rubens, J. Kester, and B. Sovacool, “The Status and Challenges of 
Electric Vehicles in Denmark - 2017,” Aarhus, Denmark, 2017. 
[59] O. Dupré, R. Vaillon, and M. A. Green, “Chapter 2 Temperature Coefficients of 
Photovoltaic Devices,” in Thermal Behavior of Photovoltaic Devices, Springer 
International Publishing AG, 2017, pp. 29–74. 
 
==PAGE:80==
==PAGE:81==
 
71 
A   
SYSTEM INFORMATION 
Table A-1 Grid information 
Load bus 
Load number 
PV number 
EV number 
Battery number 
01_125_0.4 kV 
0 
0 
0 
0 
02_528 
2 
2 
2 
2 
03_529 
2 
2 
2 
2 
04_530 
1 
1 
1 
1 
05_531 
3 
3 
3 
3 
06_532 
2 
2 
2 
2 
07_540 
4 
4 
4 
4 
08_10149 
2 
2 
2 
2 
09_10150 
3 
3 
3 
3 
10_10151 
1 
1 
1 
1 
11_10152 
3 
3 
3 
3 
12_10153 
1 
1 
1 
1 
13_10154 
2 
2 
2 
2 
14_389 
5 
5 
5 
5 
15_10155 
2 
2 
2 
2 
16_359 
4 
4 
4 
4 
17_360 
4 
4 
4 
4 
18_10156 
2 
2 
2 
2 
19_10157 
6 
6 
6 
6 
20_10146 
1 
1 
1 
1 
21_10147 
1 
1 
1 
1 
22_10148 
1 
1 
1 
1 
23_533 
0 
0 
0 
0 
==PAGE:82==
 
System Information 
72 
24_534 
3 
3 
3 
3 
25_535 
2 
2 
2 
2 
26_536 
4 
4 
4 
4 
27_537 
1 
1 
1 
1 
28_538 
1 
1 
1 
1 
29_9922 
1 
1 
1 
1 
30_9923 
2 
2 
2 
2 
31_9924 
2 
2 
2 
2 
32_9925 
3 
3 
3 
3 
Load bus 
Load number 
PV number 
EV number 
Battery number 
Table A-1 has listed the number of loads, PV systems, EVs and the batteries connected to 
each load bus. The number of different components connected to a bus is equal to the number 
of loads connected to the same bus. Among the 32 buses, the Bus 01_125_0.4kV is selected 
as the reference bus, or slack bus, in the load flow calculation.  
This slack bus is connected to the external grid as introduced in the main text. A step-down 
transformer connects the 0.4-kV bus and the 10-kV bus in the external grid. The transformer 
is in Dy5 connection and its capacity is 100 kVA.  
In Table A-2, the distribution of EV charger type and the phase they are connected are listed. 
As mentioned in the main text, according to standard IEC 62196, Type 1 (220-230 V, 32 A) 
is single-phase charger while Type 2 (400 V, 16 A) and Type 3 (400 V, 32 A) are three-phase 
types.  
According to TableA-2, there are 49 out of 71 (69.01%) loads equipped with three-phase type 
chargers, namely Type 2 and Type 3. Among the rest 22 loads having single-phase type 
chargers, 10 of them (45.45%) are connected to Phase C while 8 of them (36.36%) are con-
nected to Phase B. The rest are connected to Phase A. The distribution of different types of 
chargers and the phases they are connected to are generated randomly by using the uniformly 
distributed random integer number function (randi function) in MATLAB. 
==PAGE:83==
 
System Information 
73 
Table A-2 EV chargers 
Names 
Types Phases Names 
Types Phases Names 
Types Phases 
528_2 
1 
C 
10154_4 
3 
ABC 
10157_8 
2 
ABC 
528_3 
2 
ABC 
10154_5 
2 
ABC 
10146_3 
1 
C 
529_2 
1 
A 
389_2 
1 
B 
10147_3 
3 
ABC 
529_3 
1 
C 
389_3 
1 
A 
10148_3 
2 
ABC 
530_2 
3 
ABC 
389_4 
1 
B 
534_2 
2 
ABC 
531_2 
3 
ABC 
389_5 
1 
C 
534_3 
2 
ABC 
531_3 
3 
ABC 
389_6 
1 
B 
534_5 
3 
ABC 
531_4 
1 
C 
10155_2 
3 
ABC 
535_3 
1 
A 
532_2 
2 
ABC 
10155_3 
1 
B 
535_4 
3 
ABC 
532_3 
3 
ABC 
359_2 
3 
ABC 
536_2 
3 
ABC 
540_2 
2 
ABC 
359_3 
2 
ABC 
536_3 
2 
ABC 
540_3 
3 
ABC 
359_4 
1 
C 
536_4 
2 
ABC 
540_4 
3 
ABC 
359_5 
1 
C 
536_5 
3 
ABC 
540_5 
1 
B 
360_2 
1 
C 
537_4 
3 
ABC 
10149_3 
3 
ABC 
360_3 
2 
ABC 
538_2 
2 
ABC 
10149_4 
2 
ABC 
360_4 
3 
ABC 
9922_3 
2 
ABC 
10150_3 
2 
ABC 
360_5 
3 
ABC 
9923_3 
3 
ABC 
10150_4 
2 
ABC 
10156_3 
3 
ABC 
9923_4 
2 
ABC 
10150_5 
2 
ABC 
10156_4 
3 
ABC 
9924_4 
1 
B 
10151_4 
2 
ABC 
10157_3 
3 
ABC 
9924_5 
1 
B 
10152_3 
1 
C 
10157_4 
1 
C 
9925_3 
2 
ABC 
10152_4 
3 
ABC 
10157_5 
1 
A 
9925_4 
2 
ABC 
10152_5 
3 
ABC 
10157_6 
3 
ABC 
9925_5 
1 
B 
10153_3 
3 
ABC 
10157_7 
2 
ABC 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
==PAGE:85==
 
75 
B   
RESULTS AND FIGURES 
The results estimated with data loss degree of 40%, 60% and 80% of and the comparison be-
tween two scenarios discussed in Section 3.1 are shown in Figure B-1, B-2 and B-3, respec-
tively. By comparing these plots and the figures discussed in Section 3.1, it can be observed 
that as the data loss degree increases, the accuracy becomes lower and the range of the error 
distribution grows larger. 
 
(a) Angle error 
 
(b) Magnitude error 
Figure B-1 Error against bus with 40% data lost 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
          
 
 
  
                    
                           
                            
 
  
  
  
  
  
          
 
   
   
                      
==PAGE:86==
 
Results and Figures 
76 
 
(a) Angle error 
 
(b) Magnitude error 
Figure B-2 Error against bus with 60% data lost 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
          
 
 
  
                    
                           
                            
 
  
  
  
  
  
          
 
   
   
                      
==PAGE:87==
 
Results and Figures 
77 
 
(a) Angle error 
 
(b) Magnitude error 
Figure B-3 Error against bus with 80% data lost 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
          
 
 
  
                    
                           
                            
 
  
  
  
  
  
          
 
   
   
                      
==PAGE:88==
 
Results and Figures 
78 
The rest results of the accuracy and comparison against the time stamp that have been dis-
cussed in Section 3.1 are plotted in Figure B-4, B-5 and B-6, respectively. These three figures 
and plots correspond to the results calculated with data loss degree of 40%, 60% and 80%, 
respectively. 
 
(a) Angle error 
 
(b) Magnitude error 
Figure B-4 Error against time with 40% data lost 
 
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
 
 
  
  
                    
                           
                            
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
 
   
   
                      
==PAGE:89==
 
Results and Figures 
79 
 
(a) Angle error 
 
(b) Magnitude error 
Figure B-5 Error against time with 60% data lost 
 
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
 
 
  
  
                    
                           
                            
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
 
   
   
                      
==PAGE:90==
 
Results and Figures 
80 
 
(a) Angle error 
 
(b) Magnitude error 
Figure B-6 Error against time with 80% data lost 
From all these plots, it can be seen that with the increasing data loss degree, the accuracy of 
the results decreases, and the range of error distribution becomes wider. Generally speaking, 
the estimator with grid information implemented performs better than the one with only his-
torical data applied.  
In Figure B-7, B-8 and B-9, the buses with maximum and minimum voltage magnitudes are 
plotted, corresponding to results calculated based on data loss degree of 40%, 60% and 80%. 
Likewise, it can be seen that the buses with maximum and minimum voltage magnitudes can 
differ with different data loss degrees. Thus, it can be concluded that the data loss degree af-
fects the estimated results and the decisions requiring the operators to make.  
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
 
   
   
                      
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
 
   
   
                      
==PAGE:91==
 
Results and Figures 
81 
 
(a) Phase A 
 
(b) Phase B 
 
(c) Phase C 
Figure B-7 Maximum and minimum voltage magnitudes with 40% data lost 
 
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
   
   
 
   
              
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
                 
                 
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
   
   
 
   
              
   
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
   
   
 
   
              
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
==PAGE:92==
 
Results and Figures 
82 
 
(a) Phase A 
 
(b) Phase B 
 
(c) Phase C 
Figure B-8 Maximum and minimum voltage magnitudes with 60% data lost 
 
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
   
   
 
   
              
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
                 
                 
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
   
   
 
   
              
   
  
  
   
   
   
  
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
   
   
 
   
              
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
==PAGE:93==
 
Results and Figures 
83 
 
(a) Phase A 
 
(b) Phase B 
 
(c) Phase C 
Figure B-9 Maximum and minimum voltage magnitudes with 80% data lost 
 
 
 
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
   
   
 
   
              
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
  
   
   
   
                 
                 
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
   
   
 
   
              
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
     
     
     
     
     
     
    
   
   
 
   
              
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
==PAGE:94==
 
Results and Figures 
84 
 
==PAGE:95==
==PAGE:96==
 
 
 
 
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE) 
Technical University of Denmark 
Elektrovej 325 
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00 
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11 
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk 
