==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Inter-cell interference mitigation techniques
in LTE networks
Vasileios Angelakis (s161220)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Fotonik
Department of Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 343
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 6352
www.fotonik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis explores the interference mitigation techniques on LTE networks with a
focus on the eICIC Almost Blank Subframe on heterogeneous network deployments.
The first chapters will give an overview of the state of the art of LTE networks along
with all the necessary knowledge needed to further understand the concept, and need,
of interference coordination. Furthermore a more in-depth overview of the almost
blank subframe technique will be presented in addition with data and graphs from
a simulation executed in MatLab. In conclusion, the results will be analyzed and
discussed.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
Mobile networks always fascinated me, even before I came to understand their bril-
liance and importance. Born in the early 90s, I had the opportunity to witness with
my own eyes the exponential growth of cellular networks. Huge leaps from 2G to 3G
and eventually to 4G, brought us today, just a few years away from the deployment
of 5G which engineers all around the world still try to perfect. One of the challenges
of 5G was the main drive for this master thesis. Interference mitigation will have
a vital role in future deployments and the reasons for it are explained later in this
paper. I hope going through it, will be as enjoyable as it was for me to work on this
awesome aspect of radio networks.
Kongens Lyngby, August 18, 2018
Vasileios Angelakis (s161220)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor Henrik Lehrmann Christiansen.
Even though throughout the months I was engaged with my master thesis, our meet-
ings could be counted in my one hand fingers, his courses were the ones that provided
for me all the necessary background and foundation of my research. He was the one
who provided the spark that ignited my love for research on mobile communications.
Last but not least I would like to thank my family and especially my grandmothers,
for without their help I wouldn’t be able to be here today.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Mobile network deployments
3
2.1
What is a Heterogeneous network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Radio Interference
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Interference
9
3.1
What is Interference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
How is interference measured in LTE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Interference mitigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4
ICIC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5
eICIC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Almost Blank Subframe
17
4.1
What is the Almost Blank Subframe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
ABS considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Cell Range Expansion and ABS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
Future of interference mitigation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
ABS performance evaluation
29
5.1
Motive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Implementation on MatLab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Results analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.5
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Conclusion
39
A An Appendix
41
Bibliography
45
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Mobile communications have become part of our everyday life. Both young and old
people interact daily with mobile devices for their basic needs of communication.
Especially with the booming market of smartphones since 2010, multimedia such
as music and video became even more accessible to the users through a handheld
device which provides both connectivity and entertainment. The telecommunication
providers have to keep up with the constantly increasing amount of data requested
by the mobile users, maintaining the coverage and capacity of their network while
pushing for higher bit rates through new, more advanced technologies.
When people refer to mobile phones/smartphones, they neglect the presence of
the massive infrastructure which is deployed, that enable them to make use of those
devices. As the technology progress and the capabilities of smartphones increase, so
does the demand of coverage and capacity of mobile networks. In the mid 00s, when
the 3G became available, smartphones were just a concept and the existed mobile
phones had low demands for data transfer. Nowadays an average phone can easily
take video in 1080p resolution and with the easy access of social media, users want
to watch and share content that require high bit rates and low latency.
Even though the last few years the need of data seem to remain the same, it still
continues to grow. As seen in figure 1.1, the data traffic from Q1 of 2017 to Q1 of
2018 grew 50% from almost 10 to almost 15 Exabyte [9]. This tremendous increase
in data transfer need, calls for more advanced networks. From the early 90s to late
00s, major improvements were made in mobile networks, that enabled us to squeeze
more information per Hertz, in other words, increase the spectral efficiency. From
2-bits per symbol of QPSK to 6-bits per symbol of 64-QAM, the total throughput
over time was constantly increasing as mobile networks made a huge leap every time
a new generation became accessible. The deployment of LTE though, drove mobile
communications to almost reach the theoretical limit of channel capacity as described
by Shannon [10, Chapter 1.1.2, page 3] .
With the spectral efficiency almost at
its peak, engineers had to turn their focus into increasing the network efficiency,
improving the currently deployed networks.
That’s when heterogeneous networks
gained major interest.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: Ericsson traffic measurements (Q1 2018) [9].
Heterogeneous networks are projected to be of high significance in the future
network deployments.
This leads to a plethora of users subjected to interference
caused by high and low power base stations that are spread around them. In the
following chapters, different scenarios of heterogeneous networks are presented along
with interference coordination techniques that enable those networks to be viable.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Mobile network
deployments
2.1
What is a Heterogeneous network
As heterogeneous can be described a network, which consists of devices and users
operating in different configurations, hardware or even protocols. For example, as
seen in figure 2.1, a network deployed by 3 identical LTE macro stations forming a
group of 9 cells is a homogeneous network. On the other hand a network deployed by
3 identical LTE macro stations that on top of them operate a network of 4 LTE pico
stations, is a heterogeneous network. If the cells at the scenario a) have both LTE
and UMTS capabilities, then it is again a heterogeneous network.
Figure 2.1: a) Homogeneous b) Heterogeneous.
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Mobile network deployments
Stacking different technologies over the same geographical area is not something
new to the mobile communication networks and so is not the term and existence of het-
erogeneous networks. Over the years of mobile networks progression, old technologies
like GSM remain operational. This enables an old GSM-only capable phone to still be
able to operate up to day. So using the same area but a different air-interface, GSM
and LTE create a multi-tier and multi-air-interface network, providing the ability to
the user to access whichever needed.
At the scenario described in figure 2.1 b), both macro and pico cells offer LTE
connectivity sharing not only the same geographical location but even the same fre-
quency spectrum. Together, they create a multi-tier network which shares the same
air-interface. This is the scenario on which this paper will focus the most since, for
all the reasons explained later on, it is most probable to be the dominant scenario in
the 5G deployment [13].
2.1.1
Macro - pico scenario
The deployment of every wireless network is focused on two different aspects. Cov-
erage and capacity. The macro-pico scenario can address both of those needs. It
can increase the coverage by deploying pico cells at the edge of the macro cells or
blind/shadowed spots, and it can also increase the capacity since it is self-backhauled
and does not act as a relay attached to the nearest macro station.
As aforementioned, this scenario is the main focus of this paper. Below are listed
some of the reasons why this scenario was selected, while later own they are explained
in detail.
• Operational frequency
• Cell size of pico cells
• Main use of pico cells
• Cell Range Expansion (CRE) mechanism
• Closed Subscriber Group (CSG) mechanism
In LTE deployments, especially in urban areas, this is a very common scenario.
Since LTE mostly operates with a frequency reuse factor of 1, which briefly translates
to all neighbor cells using the same frequencies [8], the pico cells with LTE capabilities
are no exception. As a result, pico cells introduce interference to the macro users
within their vicinity while their own users are affected by interference from the macro
cell.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 What is a Heterogeneous network
5
Cell sizes are highly depended on the transmission power as well as the environ-
ment on which the signals propagate (Building, lakes, etc). In an urban scenario,
where the deployment of pico cells makes the most sense, the main cell size factor
is the transmission power. A typical pico base station transmits at approximately
30dBm while a macro station at 46dbm [10, Chapter 2.2, page 31]. That being said,
the radius of a macro cell can be several kilometers while a pico cell can reach up
to few hundred meters. That makes the pico cells very versatile when it comes to
interference research since their radius can be small enough so that the whole cell
fits entirely within the vicinity of the macro cell while at the same time maintains a
reasonable distance from the macro station, hence avoiding really high interference.
In addition, their transmission power is high enough to allow users to camp on them
without extra handling or manipulation needed and multiple pico cells can fit inside
a macro cell.
Pico cells offer a great variety of uses.
They can benefit the overall network
efficiency by increasing the coverage and capacity.
Their range is big enough to
provide solutions such as covering the increasing demand at a sold-out arena, where
people want to stream video or perform video calls to their friends. Additionally,
compared to a macro or micro station, pico stations can be quickly set up by mobile
networks operators. Overall, the macro-pico scenario is a very realistic scenario that
will probably dominate the fifth generation of mobile networks.
The CRE is a mechanism which aims on offloading the macro cells to the pico
and femto cells. It does so by biasing the received power, hence tricking the user into
thinking that the signal received by the pico station is higher than it really is. This
leads to reporting biased quality of signal values. Subsequently, the vicinity of the
stations, which make use of the CRE, appear to be virtually increased while more users
choose to connect to those stations than the macro station which also has a strong
presence in the area. Of course this mechanism requires some sort of interference
mitigation techniques, since the interference in the area of ”fake” coverage is really
high. Further information and figures about the CRE mechanism are presented at
section 4.3, after some essentials about the operation of LTE are explained.
In addition to the CRE, where the interference is somewhat increased, mobile
users may also fall under the radius of a CSG cell. CSG stands for Closed Subscriber
Group, a mechanism which enables stations to only allow specific users under their
services. Usually those stations are pico or smaller, with the majority of them lying
under the femto category. CSG cells may be used by companies that want to expand
the coverage or capacity of their employees devices but at the same time they don’t
want other people or passers-by to connect to their services. Of course that doesn’t
mean that the signal those stations transmit is isolated and not detectable by other
users but it’s the station itself that deny service to not subscribed users and the
nearby stations won’t initiate a handover towards those cells. As a result, a user who
stands relatively close to one of those CSG stations is subjected to high interference.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Mobile network deployments
2.2
Radio Interference
Since the beginning of mobile communications, engineers faced the problems intro-
duced when two stations transmit their signals in the same frequency or part of
frequencies. As technology progressed and devices started to become more demand-
ing, the mobile networks had to provide bigger and bigger capacity for their users.
It was soon realized that the future technologies need a higher bandwidth but at the
same time the radio spectrum was becoming more and more dense, especially on the
licensed spectrum.
The introduction of 4G networks lead to an increase in bandwidth and the decision
of the neighbor cells (and the layered cells as well) to operate in the same frequency.
This allowed mobile operators to increase the capacity of their network as well as
keep the costs down since they didn’t have to buy many more licensed frequencies to
accommodate the new technologies. At the same time, multiple signals operating in
the same area had a negative effect on the users whose receivers struggle to distinguish
the correct signal from the interference.
Heterogeneous networks became a necessity for the 4G and eventually the 5G
networks. Layers upon layers of mobile cells only add more complexity to the problem,
just like more people talking in a room makes it harder for two people to communicate
with each other. After all these years of big technological improvements on spectral
efficiency, engineers managed to squeeze a big amount of information per Hertz. So
much that the spectral efficiency of recent mobile networks appears to be close to
Shannon’s theoretical limit which exponentially increase the difficulty of increasing
the spectral efficiency.
Network efficiency may be the key step which will help to increase the capacity of
already deployed LTE networks as well as the future ones. The LTE network consist
of both wired and wireless parts. As a general rule, the backhaul (which is most of
the times wired) should never be the bottleneck when it comes to capacity planning,
so a backhaul with unlimited capacity is assumed. The radio access on the other
hand, poses multiple challenges, since the channel on which the electromagnetic waves
propagate depends on an extended variety of factors. Wired connections usually make
use of optical fibers, coaxial cables or even Ethernet copper cables. All those wave
guides are highly efficient with layers of protection and very specific characteristics.
On the contrary, antennas use the open air environment as a propagation channel.
One of the most common ways to calculate the propagation losses is to make use
of a radio propagation models such as Okumura-Hata model, COST 231–Walfish–
Ikegami Model and many others. The complete breakdown and analysis of this models
is far from the scope of this paper but the parameters needed to calculate the path loss
is a good indicator of how many factors can affect the radio waves. The Okumura-
Hata model, for example, appears to be accurate enough for companies to use it
==PAGE:17==
2.3 summary
7
for simulation purposes and the results are pretty close to the ones coming from
field measurements. The parameters Okumura-Hata takes into consideration are the
following.
• Central frequency
• Distance
• Base station antenna height
• Mobile stations antenna height
• Environment area (Urban, metropolitan, suburban, rural)
Especially the last parameter tends to be very complex since it considers buildings
and other physical elements that might get in the line of sight of the two antennas.
What those models fail to consider though, is noise in form of interference from other
antennas operating in the same frequency, in the same area. Antennas location, the
surrounding environment or even operating frequencies can be some of the reasons of
high attenuated signal at the receiver, which leads to low signal quality, but interfer-
ence in the channel also plays a significant role in the signal quality. In contrary to
all the degradation factors above, interference is probably the only one which can be,
to a certain extend, mitigated in several ways which will be presented later.
2.3
summary
The future of mobile networks drift towards heterogeneous deployments. LTE net-
works make use of layered cells to increase their capacity with a trade-off of interfer-
ence. The macro-pico scenario is a very interesting example of those deployments due
to its size, use and collaboration with mechanisms such as the CRE and CSG that
challenge the interference coordination techniques.
==PAGE:18==
8
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Interference
3.1
What is Interference
Interference is a physical phenomenon where two or more waves of almost the same
frequency superpose one with another to form a combined wave where the amplitude is
higher, lower or canceled out in comparison with the wave of interest. This translates
into a disturbance of the wave of interest in a way that is from a little up to completely
distorted.
Even though this scientific explanation is rather complicated, humans
interact with waves daily in order to perform even the simplest of tasks, therefore
there are a lot of examples of interference in our everyday life.
Lights and sounds are also waves, operating in different frequencies. In an oral
conversation between two people in a room, the mouth can be characterized as the
transmitter of a signal and the ears as the receiver. An optimal scenario would be for
both of them to speak in turns. This way only one signal propagates through the air
medium from the transmitter to the receiver. In another scenario the same two people
are located in a crowded room where people are talking with each other. The same
conversation now becomes way more difficult since the signals of many transmitters
end up in the receiver of our subject, hence making it harder to detect and decode the
signal of interest. The rest of the signals in the room form what is called interference
3.2
How is interference measured in LTE
There are a couple of ways to measure the interference in LTE networks. All the
measurements take place where it makes the most sense to, and that’s at the mobile
station. Afterwards, the mobile station report some of the measured data back to the
station. In LTE, there are three main measurements of interference [5]
• SINR: Signal to Interference Noise Ration
• RSRP: Reference Signal Receive Power
• RSSI: Received Signal Strength Indicator
• RSRQ: Reference Signal Receive Quality
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Interference
Since LTE heterogeneous networks operate at the same frequency and are deployed
on layers, it’s more than inevitable that the antenna of the mobile station will also
receive signals from all the base stations that operate around it. This results into
signals overlapping, making it hard for the receiver to ”read” the symbols destined
for it. SINR 3.1 is defined as the ratio of the received signal power to the received
interference, plus the noise at the receiver, where interference 3.2 is the summation
average of the received signals of the rest of the stations.
SINR =
Received signal
Received Interference + Noise
(3.1)
Received Interference =
∑n
1 Received signaln
n
, n →Number of remaining stations
(3.2)
The bigger the ratio, the better the signal quality is. SINR may not be directly
reported to the base station but it’s a very important measurement. The received
signal power on its own is of minor importance for budget planning of the channel.
Even if the received signal is extremely powerful, the receiver may not be able to
decode it if an interfering source is equally or more powerful. On the other side, a
weak signal with no interference present, but still more powerful than the sensitivity
threshold of the receiver, may be able to deliver a higher throughput.
For that
reason, mobile stations make use of the SINR in order to calculate the Channel
Quality Indicator (CQI) [6] . The CQI is a 4-bit integer representing the quality of
the channel. It can take values ranging from 0 to 15, with 15 being the best and 0
the out of range indicator. As seen in table 3.1 [4] the higher the SINR, the higher
the CQI value which indicates to the station to use a more advanced modulation type
and a higher coding rate.
Another important set of measurements in LTE is the RSRP, RSSI and RSRQ.
While RSSI is a measurement that has been around for many years and is reported
even at GSM networks, RSRP and RSRQ were first introduced in LTE. The RSRP is a
cell specific measurement which measures the average received power over the specific
Resource Elements that carry reference signals over the entire bandwidth, therefore
only the symbols that carry reference signals are targeted. The RSRP values are
collected for all the cells within the reach of the mobile station and then they are
reported to the base station which uses them to rank all the cells within reach of the
user in terms of signal power. As mentioned before, signal power is a good indication
of the strength of nearby stations but it is not enough to indicate to which one the
user should connect to.
RSSI is also a cell specific measurement which in contrary with the RSRP, it
measures the received power within the whole wide-band, including interference from
==PAGE:21==
3.2 How is interference measured in LTE
11
Figure 3.1: 4-bit CQI Table (3GPP TS 36.213 v15.2.0) [4].
all the cells within reach of the user and the noise of the channel. Combining the
RSRP and RSSI the user is able to compute the RSRQ as seen at the equation 3.3.
RSRQ = CellRSRP
RSSI
(3.3)
It is important to mention a few things about the aforementioned measurements.
Even though RSRP, RSSI and RSRQ are well defined in the 3GPP releases, the SINR
is not, making it vendor specific so values between different devices may differ. On the
same side, CQI values are standardized as to what they represent but the calculation
of CQI is also vendor specific since it also depends on the signal processing capabilities
of the mobile station to instruct the station, up to which CQI value will be able to
decode.
As a final outcome of those measurements one could say that SINR is used to
determine which CQI value the mobile station can afford to use, while the RSRQ
values of every cell within reach of the mobile station are used by the connected
station to determine the link qualities and handle the handovers.
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Interference
3.3
Interference mitigation
In the previous sections, the necessity of Heterogeneus networks, the effect of inter-
ference and how to measure it, were covered in detail. The rest of this chapter is
dedicated on how to mitigate the interference on LTE networks.
Interference mitigation can be achieved either in the time or the frequency domain.
As the name implies, time division techniques mitigate the interference by separating
signals or resources in the time domain. Just like three people talking to each other,
in order for one to be able to listen and decode the speech of another, only one should
talk at a time. If for example, the person A tries to receive and decode the speech
of person B, but person C speaks at the same time, then the speech of the latest
interferes with the speech of B. In order to mitigate this interference in time domain
a restriction should be applied as to who should talk, and when.
On the other hand, frequency division techniques mitigate interference by separat-
ing signals or resources in the frequency domain. In this scenario, depict two people
discussing in a crowded noisy room. The more people in the room, or the closer or
louder the people, the harder it is for the two subjects to communicate with each
other. That is because the human’s communication equipment, vocal cords and ears,
which can be translated into the antennas of a mobile station, operate in the same
frequency spectrum. In order to mitigate this interference in the frequency domain
a restriction should be applied on the frequency spectrum by, for example, replacing
the crowd of people with a crowd of bats whose sounds would not be detected by the
human ”antennas”
In order to easily understand the following techniques, it is important to break
down how the physical channel of an LTE frame looks like.
In figure 3.2 a LTE
frame is presented. An LTE frame has a duration of 10 ms and is divided into 10
subframes with duration of 1 ms. Each subframe consists of two slots and each slot is
constructed by 7 symbols in a time length of 0.5ms and 12 sub-carriers in a frequency
span of 180kHz. The smallest unit in an LTE frame that can be appointed to a user
is a resource block which has a duration of 1 slot and the bandwidth of 12 sub-carries.
An LTE system with a 10 Mhz bandwidth contains 50 Resource Blocks that can be
assigned to users [14].
Wireless networks operate using electromagnetic waves, just like people use sound
waves to communicate. There two ways of analyzing an electromagnetic signal. That
is by ”watching” it in the time domain or the frequency domain. In figure 3.3 an
LTE waveform of one subframe (1ms) and bandwidth of 10Mhz is shown. On the left
the oscillations of the waveform in the time domain are visible while on the right the
same waveform appears in the frequency domain in respect to the power.
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Interference mitigation
13
Frequency
1 Frame = 10 Subframes = 20 Slots
180 kHz
1 Subframe = 1 ms
1 slot = 0.5 ms
12 subcarriers x 7 symbols
Time
Figure 3.2: LTE frame explained.
Figure 3.3: LTE waveform with Bandwidth 10Mhz in Time (left) and Frequency
(right).
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Interference
This waveform is extracted from the transmitter of a base station of a LTE MatLab
simulation, hence no interfering signals are being present. It is clear that a nearby
station transmitting in the same time, on the same frequency would create a waveform
which is really similar with the one present in figure 3.3. With both signals in the air,
the user’s equipment, tuned on the same frequency would receive both of them and
will have to distinct the one that is destined for it, just like people are able to listen
and decode sounds coming from multiple sources at the same time.
3.4
ICIC
Inter-Cell Interference Coordination, or ICIC, was introduced by 3GPP on release
8 [2]. Its purpose was to help mitigate the interference present at the edge of the
cells, where the users are mostly affected due to the high attenuation of the signal
transmitted from the station. With a main consideration on the traffic channels a
set of techniques were released, mitigating interference on the power and frequency
domain.
In ICIC three main mitigation scenarios were presented, including both frequency
and power techniques.
Figure 3.4 depicts the first scenario where the two neighbor cells do not share
any common resource blocks. This is a combination of frequency and time domain
interference mitigation technique since on this example for the first subframe the
green cell has no resource blocks allocated, hence for the duration of this subframe no
transmission takes place. Same with the third subframe. During the same subframe
though both the blue and the green cell transmit, but on different sub-carriers. This
scenario has a huge impact on throughput over time, since resource blocks are shared
between the neighbor cells, therefore the whole frame cannot be utilized. This scenario
definitely benefits the user located and served at the edge of the green cell, but the
remaining users that ideally are under no interference, still cannot utilize the whole
frame.
For that reason, the second scenario comes as an improvement to the first one
proposing a zone in the middle of the cell, as a no interference zone, where its users
can be allocated on all resource blocks of a frame. On the other hand, users at the
edge of the cells still make use of the first scenario, so that interference is reduced.
Figure 3.5 depicts this scenario where the users within the vicinity of the middle of
the cell radius take advantage of all the resource blocks of the frame while the user
at the edge is limited to the resource blocks available on this specific cell.
The third scenario proposed by the ICIC on release 8 is also the most ideal solution.
It mitigates interference on the power domain, a kind of mitigation technique that it
has yet to be perfected till today. By changing the power of specific Resource blocks
==PAGE:25==
3.5 eICIC
15
Time
Time
Frequency
Frequency
Figure 3.4: ICIC scenario 1.
Time
Time
Frequency
Frequency
Time
Frequency
Figure 3.5: ICIC scenario 2.
for specific users, full resource blocks utilization can be achieved as well as keeping
the interference low. The separation of the resource blocks combines the first and
second scenario, where users in the middle of the cell make use of all the resource
blocks in low power and users at the edge make use of specific resource blocks in full
power or even higher power, since those specific resource blocks are not used by the
neighbor cell.
At this point it becomes clear that the early stage of interference mitigation had
little concern about layered networks, like the Macro-Pico scenario, even though
these techniques could be applied on these networks as well. Also, the interference
mitigation add extra load on the network in the form of signaling between stations
in order to exchange data about their resource blocks allocation.
3.5
eICIC
As the mobile networks became more and more technologically advanced and the
demand scaled, the need for more heterogeneous deployments arises.
Telecommu-
nication networks started to get denser, not only in regards to neighbor cells but
even inside the cell. Layers of networks appeared, creating the need for interference
mitigation within the cell.
Enhanced ICIC was included on the 3GPP release 10 [1] with main focus on the
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Interference
heterogeneous networks. While ICIC appeared to work fine for neighbor-to-neighbor
scenarios just like the ones presented on the previous section, it wasn’t designed for
inter-cell interference such as the one introduced by the macro-pico scenario. The
following list include some of the main differences between mitigating interference
between neighbor-to-neighbor cells and cell within cell
• Mix of low and high power base stations
• Heavy interference on control channels
• Time domain coordination was needed for intra-frequency interference
• Closed Subscriber Group cells appear mostly on pico and femto.
• Users offloading to smaller cells requires good interference coordination
To address all those issues, new coordination methods were needed. The solution
was the addition of a new technique, on top of the already existed ICIC introduced
techniques, called Almost Blank Subframe, or ABS. The ABS is a time domain in-
terference mitigation technique which aims to reduce interference on both traffic and
control channels. It does so by allocating different subframes or group of subframes
to different base stations, creating, as the name implies, black subframes on which
affected cells can transmit almost interference free.
ABS is the main focus of this paper since it completely covers the subject of inter-
cell interference mitigation on LTE. The next chapter is dedicated on ABS and an
in-depth presentation of its operation is presented.
3.6
Summary
In this chapter a more detailed approach to interference was presented. Examples of
what is interference were provided along with the ways it is measured in LTE. The
need of interference mitigation was introduced and the physical layer of LTE was
depicted with figures. At last, 3GPP’s ICIC and eICIC were explained briefly and
the different needs on interference mitigation between neighbor-to-neighbor cells and
cell-within-cell scenarios were listed.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4
Almost Blank Subframe
4.1
What is the Almost Blank Subframe
Almost Blank Subframe, or ABS in short, is a interference coordination technique
first introduced in release 10 of 3GPP under the Enhanced ICIC (eICIC) packet of
interference mitigation [1]. It is part of the time domain mitigation techniques and its
main purpose is to relief inter-cell interference, mostly on Macro-pico or Macro-femto
scenarios.
As its name implies, ABS allows stations to coordinate their subframes so that two
interfering cells won’t use the same subframe to schedule users. To better understand
both the problem and the solution, the following scenario was constructed, where
four pico cells are deployed within the macro cells vicinity, on a reasonable distance
from the macro station. Both the macro and the pico stations operate in the same
frequencies. In figure 4.1 the aforementioned scenario is presented, where the big blue
cell is the macro, while the four green cells are the pico.
Figure 4.1: Macro-Pico scenario.
==PAGE:28==
18
4 Almost Blank Subframe
Pico cells, have a way lower transmission power than macro cells, since their
intended use is to cover an area of a couple of hundred meters, compared to the macro
stations which act as main serving points covering up to a few kilometers. Since the
pico cell users are covered within the radius of the macro cell, some interference is
expected. ABS reduces the interference by associating different subframes to different
stations mostly according to their class.
The class of the cell is not the only consideration when allocating ABS patterns.
For example, on the scenario depicted in figure 4.2 users connected on the pico stations
are affected by the macro station and vice-versa. Of course, pico stations are weaker
than the macro so the majority of the affected users are pico users. In this case, the
macro station is the aggressor while the pico station is the victim. The opposite can
occur in case of CSG pico cell and a user close-by which is not part of this group so
it has to connect to the macro cell (figure 4.3). In that case, the CSG pico station is
the aggressor and the macro station is the victim, since its user is affected. The pico
cells are too far apart to interfere with each other so subframes can be classified as
Macro-used subframes and pico-used subframes.
Figure 4.2: Non-CSG Macro-Pico
scenario.
Figure 4.3: CSG Macro-Pico
scenario.
With the macro cell being the aggressor and the pico cell the victim in our CSG-
free scenario, a simplified version of an ABS pattern could look like the one in figure
4.4. The aggressor cell marked with blue is only allowed to schedule users during the
even subframes, while the victim cell ,marked with yellow, utilizes the remaining odd
==PAGE:29==
4.2 ABS considerations
19
subframes. For both of them, during the red subframes, scheduling is prohibited.
Aggressor 
Victim
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Figure 4.4: ABS allocation.
4.2
ABS considerations
While the idea of using an ABS pattern for every frame looks easy and ideal, it
introduces a variety of challenges to the system. eICIC, in contrary to its previous
version, is supposed to reduce interference also in the control channels region and by
a first glance it looks like it does, since during the ABS, stations are not allowed to
schedule. The truth is that completely prohibiting stations from transmitting would
cause several issues on the backwards compatibility of the system. Just like every
deployment in the real world, previous still operating technologies should always be
considered even though backward compatibility adds extra complexity and drawbacks
on the planning of future techniques. The reason ABS is called ”Almost blank” and
not just ”blank” is because, even though users are not scheduled for the downlink
during the ABS, the station still transmits some vital control channels such as [[12,
Chapter 8, Page 100],[10, Chapter 4.2.3, Page 74]:
• PSS: Primary Synchronization Signal
• SSS: Secondary Synchronization Signal
• PBCH: Primary Broadcast Channel
• PCFICH: Phycical Control Format Indicator Channel
• PHICH: Physical HARQ Indicator Channel
• PDCCH: Physical Downlink Control Channel
Although the control channels of the aggressor are not completely muted during
the ABS, the interference occurred by the control signals transmission is nonetheless
reduced due the lack of scheduled data in the subframe.
==PAGE:30==
20
4 Almost Blank Subframe
4.2.1
ABS allocation
The subframes allocation also has a huge impact on the efficiency of the interference
coordination. As shown on section 3.2, mobile stations make use of the SINR of the
link to calculate the CQΙ. The CQI indicates the kind of modulation type and coding
rate to be used for the downlink, thus it affects the throughput. Less interference in
the channel leads to higher CQI values which leads to higher bit rates. On the other
side though, ABS carry no data and that translates to zero data bit rate. This makes
the scenario illustrated in figure 4.4 controversial.
The table shown in figure 4.5 presents the association of Modulation and Coding
Sceme (MCS) with the Transport Block Size (TBS). The TBS value translates into
bits per subframe. Assume a scenario where no ABS is in effect and a pico cell user
reports a CQI value whose bit rate is 13 bits per 1ms as stated on the following table
4.5 [4] (The association between MCS and TBS is standardized but the association
between CQI and MCS is vendor specific)
That means that for the whole frame, a single user with a full buffer scheduled for
the full frame over an interfered channel (Single Input Single Output antenna inter-
face) and 50 Resource Blocks available (10 Mhz bandwidth) will be able to transmit
650 bits. Introducing an ABS pattern as seen in figure 4.4 would presumably allow
the user to use the highest possible MCS with a TBS of 1300 bits. Being scheduled
for only the half of the subframes in the whole frame though, at the end of the length
of the frame he will only be able to receive 650 bits, same as not using the ABS and
settling for a lower MCS.
It’s clear that the interference coordination in this case had no impact on the
throughput of the user over a period of a frame but this remains an over-simplified
scenario. In reality the user will be queued along with other users in the scheduler
so the benefit of higher bit rate per frame would have a greater impact. Nonetheless,
the allocation of the ABS remains a trivial for the implementation of this technique
since reserving too many subframes can have a negative effect on the total efficiency
of the network.
The exact ABS allocation ratio is not standardized, thus it relays on the vendor’s
equipment to make the right choice. A reasonable configuration would have the ratio
of ABS subframes over the total subframes to be the same with the users of the victim
cell over the total users of both the aggressor and victim cell.
4.2.2
ABS configuration
eIC32IC offers two ways of configuring the ABS. The first one is done through the
OAM configuration for static ABS patterns while the second one allows for the sta-
tions to communicate and dynamically configure the ABS through the X2 station-to-
==PAGE:31==
4.2 ABS considerations
21
Figure 4.5: MCS to TBS association table (3GPP TS 36.213 v15.2.0) [4].
station link [3].
The first option of OAM configuration offers a semi-static ABS allocation for
scenarios where the ABS patters won’t need to change and adapt depending on how
crowded the victim cell is. For example, assume a macro-femto scenario where the
femto cell is a CSG cell deployed by a company for boosting their LTE coverage and
capacity. A user standing or passing close by this cell will have to remain connected
to the macro cell but at the same time be subject to high interference produced by
the femto cell.
In this case, the femto cell is the aggressor and the macro cell is
the victim. CSG cells, because of their nature, usually require constant interference
coordination to avoid degrading the performance of nearby cells at the area they
operate on, therefore a static ABS pattern could be applied..
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Almost Blank Subframe
On the other hand, a more dynamic scenario such as the commonly used macro-
pico scenario, would require a more dynamic ABS allocation. Using the second option
given on the LTE networks, X2 load information messages can be exchanged between
the victim and aggressor cell in order to inform each other for the interference detected
on their subframes and dynamically re-allocate the ABS patterns, if that’s needed.
4.2.3
ABS re-configuration frequency
Yet another point of consideration for the ABS mechanism, is the re-configuration
frequency of subframes. In the scenario of dynamically adjusted ABS, the cells ex-
change information about the interference of their subframes. A turning point of
the mechanism’s efficiency is how often should those patterns change and what is
the effect of their changes. It is sometimes to hard to realize how fast systems work
especially when they are interconnected with human actions. A whole LTE frame has
a duration of 10ms, which translates into 100 frames per second. A pico cell has an
average radius of 200 meters and the average walking speed of a human is 1.4 meters
per second. In short it will take for a walking human approximately 142 seconds or
14.200 frames to walk right through the the middle of a pico cell. If the system is set
to react fast for every small parameter then an excessive amount of signaling will be
needed to apply all those changes
For that reason the aggressor cell may ask for extra information from the victim
cells like the current ABS pattern used and the ABS utilization rate. An update on
the Radio Link Monitoring (RLM) and Radio Resources Monitoring (RRM) can also
be directed.
4.2.4
RLM/RRM measurements on ABS
By default the UEs perform RLM and RRM measurements described on section 3.3
on all the subframes as they monitor the radio environment for changes that require
adaptation.
If no ABS pattern is applied, those measurements work as intended,
offering a good estimation of the radio interface. In case of an ABS pattern being
applied though, the measurements that take into consideration the interference in the
channel become compromised.
A simplified example would help describing the effect of wrongly-timed measure-
ments. If a UE is served by a pico cell and that pico cell is victim of a macro cell
aggressor, then the UE would report high interference in the channel in the form of
low RSRQ values. In that case the two cells may communicate and arrange an ABS
pattern where for two subframes, the aggressor cell would schedule no users, hence
reduce the interference produced for the benefit of the victim cell. If the UE is not
instructed to restrict the RLM and RRM measurements within those two subframes
then the overall interference would be indeed reduced a bit, since for two subframes
the aggressor remains silent, but with the user measuring the link on the whole frame,
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Cell Range Expansion and ABS
23
interference for the non-ABS is still present. In short, the UE will be measuring the
total and not the effecting interference.
4.3
Cell Range Expansion and ABS
So far we’ve seen how the ABS technique of eICIC assists on coordinating the inter-cell
interference. Apart from that, the effective interference mitigation enables engineers
to further enhance already deployed or future networks by using technologies such
as the Cell Range Expansion (CRE) mechanism to offload users to the smaller, less
crowded cells [7]. This would be impossible to achieve without ”removing” the inter-
ference.
Heterogeneous networks in principle enable big capacity expansions. A good mo-
bile network planning would never allow the backhaul to be the bottleneck for its
capacity, so whenever there is a capacity ceiling, that is because of the radio access.
Heterogeneous networks have layers of self-backhauled cells that increase the capacity
drastically. Macro stations are usually referred as High Power Nodes (HPN) while
smaller stations like pico and femto referred as Lowe Power Nodes. Since the node
selection mechanism on LTE strongly relies on the RSRP measurements made by the
UEs, it is witnessed that UEs tend to associate mostly with HPNs, leaving the LPNs
underutilized.
Figure 4.6: Normal Macro-Pico scenario. Figure 4.7: CRE Macro-Pico scenario.
The CRE mechanism virtually increase the radius of the LPN cells on which it
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Almost Blank Subframe
is applied by instructing users to apply an offset to the RSRP values reported. This
offset value is carefully selected. The result of this bias-ing is that users are handed
over to what they appear to be more powerful cells when in reality it’s just a trick.
Figures 4.6 and 4.7 depict the effect of CRE on a macro-pico scenario where two of
the three users appeared, are close to the pico cells but not close enough to connect to
them, even though the signal may be relatively good, because the signal coming from
the macro cells is superior. By applying the CRE mechanism in collaboration with
eICIC, the users are able to connect to the pico cells without being heavily interfered
from the macro cell.
Some of the benefits of the CRE mechanism that eICIC enables are:
• Macro cell offloading
• Achievable cell splitting gain
• Lower power consumption on the downlink and uplink
• Better capacity planning
However, inevitably this technique exposes users to really high interference which
has to be mitigated. That’s when ABS comes into place. Without the coordination
provided by eICIC this mechanism is doomed to fail since the interference would lead
to undecodable signals on the receiver of the phones and frequent outages (which are
highly avoided by RLM and RRM restriction to non-ABS).
4.4
Future of interference mitigation
4.4.1
Further Enhanced ICIC
The release 11 of 3GPP introduced an upgraded versions of the eICIC firstly intro-
duced on release 10. The upgraded version came by the name of Further Enhanced
ICIC which includes small additions to the eICIC as well as a completely new UE
interference cancellation proposition.
One of the major drawbacks of the ABS mechanism was that during the muted
period all the resources were going to waste. No users can be scheduled at this time
leading to a reduce on the systems capacity. FeICIC came with an enhanced version
of the ABS called non-zero power ABS or reduced power ABS. The idea is that,
instead of completely blocking the scheduling of users during the ABS, users with a
really good signal quality, could be scheduled with a lower power, hence the ”non-
zero power” part of its name (figure 4.8). This could significantly restore the capacity
==PAGE:35==
4.4 Future of interference mitigation
25
ABS
Time 
Power 
Non-zero
ABS
Time 
Power 
Figure 4.8: Normal ABS vs Non-zero ABS.
since users close to the base station could be scheduled during the ABS with a low
power while users further away could be scheduled during a normal subframe.
Once again, this mechanism leaves some of its aspects uncovered. For example,
what is considered a good signal quality user and how can it be secured that no CRE
users of nearby pico or femto cells will be affected. A lot of information needs to be
exchanged between the aggressor and victim cells in order for this mechanism to be
applicable.
What the ABS fails to completely mitigate though is the interference produced
on the control channels, since those cannot be muted for backwards compatibility
purposes. For that reason, feICIC sets the basis for an introduction of interference
coordination techniques that are meant to be performed by the UEs. By providing
enough information about the allocation of the control channels of the nearby aggres-
sor cells, UEs in the future, given that they will be able to support this operation,
will be able to estimate the expected interference and to a certain extend ”subtract”
it from the total interference received. This way the interference will be lowered even
more, something that would potentially enable the CRE mechanism to increase their
offset value even more, further expanding its benefits.
Of course both those mechanism should first go under extended testing before
they are implemented. Especially the UE interference mitigation may sound like a
good solution but it will probably have a huge impact on the computational power
needed by the mobile device and since nowadays mobile phones suffer from battery
duration, an extra load will definitely be undesired.
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Almost Blank Subframe
EICIC had a huge positive effect on the deployment of heterogeneous networks
since it enabled the successful and viable layering of high power stations such as
macro and micro with lower power nodes such as pico and femto. FeICIC is expected
to further increase the feasibility of those networks
4.4.2
CoMP
Last but not least, a technology which is meant to revolutionize the mobile networks
is in the works for many years, but due to its complexity it has yet to be released
or standardized. Coordinated Multi-Point, or CoMP, is a set of techniques which
aim, not only to mitigate interference at the cell edges, but also make use of it in a
constructive way. CoMP proposes two different approaches to this problem.
The first approach focuses on the joint processing of the transmitted and received
data. The users are meant to be connected to multiple base stations at the same
time. The same user will be scheduled and receive data from 2 or more different base
stations. This will significantly increase the signal quality and actively decrease the
interference. The user will have multiple benefits from these techniques by enjoying
high bit rates and a more stable connection while geographically switching between
cell sites, since he will be already connected to the next base stations. On the other
side, computational demands will increase for the user who will have to decode mul-
tiple signals. The base stations as well are expected to have an increased load, not
only because of the extra users to be scheduled but also because of the intense X2
signalling required to maintain a good coordination with the neighbor cells. Addition-
ally, since the data of the same user have to be transmitted from multiple stations,
the backhaul load is expected to double or triple.
The second approach focuses on a single transmission and reception point but
with the control of multiple base stations. The scheduling of the users is carefully
done with cooperation of neighbor base stations in order to reduce the interference.
On top of that, in order to even more reduce or eliminate interference from nearby
stations, intense beamforming will be performed at the transmission antennas of the
stations for the co-scheduled users so that the main-lobe of the antenna’s radiation
will be pointed to the user.
Both approaches are really complex and their implementation is very demanding,
mostly because of the intense coordination needed between the neighbor cells. The
most realistic scenario would be the deployment of CoMP to make use of the already
centralized nature of the C-RAN. This way the need for doubling or tripling the
backhaul capacity is eliminated and the X2 coordination is happening ”within a
room”.
==PAGE:37==
4.5 Summary
27
4.5
Summary
This chapter covers in detail the operation of eICIC’s ABS mechanism. Examples
and deployment considerations are presented through graphs and tables. In principle
the ABS mechanism is very easy to explain and implement but there are multiple
factors that make its deployment troublesome. At the ABS considerations section,
the majority of those factors are discussed in detail. Section 4.3 explains how further
benefits can be achieved with the assist of interference coordination, by using the
CRE mechanism.
At last, an overview of the future of interference mitigation is
presented.
==PAGE:38==
28
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5
ABS performance
evaluation
5.1
Motive
After excessive research of the almost blank subframe mechanism, I decided to test
its performance by simulating its operation on LTE. A simulation called ”Monster”,
created by two PhD student’s of Denmark’s Technological University was used, since
it was able to simulate the whole operation of an LTE station and mobile. The tools
used were the program MatLab from Mathworks along with a lot of functions included
in the LTE System Toolbox, also from Mathworks. [14]
The main drive for simulating the ABS was to witness whether or not the theo-
retical impact is reflected on an actual scenario. In theory the ABS mechanism can
significantly benefit the operation of a pico cell which is subjected to interference by
a macro cell in a macro-pico scenario. It is often seen though that some mechanisms
that are very promising, in reality they are really hard to implement or they pose
more drawbacks than benefits.
Of course, at the end of the day, this is just a simulation and its limited by sev-
eral factors compared to an actual field testing. Apart the iner-workings of the base
and mobile stations which are highly deterministic and depended on inputs, the air-
interface has to be simulated according to models as seen at section 2.2. The channel
attenuation for example, is modeled using models such as the winner, okumura-hata
or the proposed ones from ITU or 3GPP. These models provide a close to reality
approximation of the channel but are not real field measurements. Interference calcu-
lations strongly depend on models such as the aforementioned so the results compared
to real life phenomena may vary.
If it appeared that simulating the ABS was easily achievable, the main goal would
be to research the effect of a dynamic ABS allocation based on the users mobility and
association.
==PAGE:40==
30
5 ABS performance evaluation
5.2
Implementation on MatLab
Monster is a simulation of an LTE network, from the base station to the mobile
device and back. It simulates the downlink as well as the uplink with a focus on the
downlink side. In the simulation it was possible to tweak a wide variety of parameters
such as the amount of macro, micro and pico cells, their position on a Manhattan
grid, the amount of users and their type (pedestrian, vehicular, static, etc), as well
as a lot of physical layer parameters such as the frequencies of operation, the noise
figures, etc. The complete list of the parameters can be found on the Appendix. It’s
also important to notice that the simulation was round-driven and each round was
one subframe (1ms).
Figure 5.1 briefly depicts the operation of the monster simulation. At the ini-
tialization all the stations and users are created according to the parameters given.
Afterwards the users are associated with stations and the scheduler decides which
(and if) users will be scheduled for the subframe. The channel is then traversed based
on the model selected. The user receives and decodes the waveform, created the up-
link waveforms and the channel is traversed. The base station receives and decodes
the waveform. At last the simulation loops again to round two.
This is a very simplified version of the operation of the monster simulation. Every
single step consists of many functions calculating all the aspects of the LTE such as
interference, creation of reference signals, Data channels allocation, Resource blocks
mapping, modulation and coding schemes, RLM AND RRM measurements, CQI
values and many more.
For the interference testing purposes, the following scenario was constructed, for
which the parameters are listed below together with a layout and a heatmap (figure
5.2).
• Macro stations: 1
• Pico stations: 4
• Number of Users: 25
• Traffic model: Full Buffer
• Downlink Frequency: 1.84 Mhz
• Uplink Frequency: 1.74 Mhz
A seen in figure 5.2, the macro station is positioned in the middle and the 4 pico
cells layered around it at 0, 90, 180 and 270 degrees. The users are also scattered
in the grid and their association with the stations is presented by doted lines. The
==PAGE:41==
5.2 Implementation on MatLab
31
Initialization 
Users Scheduling
Downlink
waveforms
generation
Channel Traverse 
Mobile stations
reception and
decoding 
Uplink waveforms
generation 
Base stations
reception and
decoding 
Finish
Figure 5.1: Monster simulation flow chart.
Blue lines: Downlink, Green lines: Uplink
Blue nodes: Base stations operation, Green nodes: Mobile stations op-
eration.
bold lines show which users are actually scheduled at the time the screen-shot was
taken. The fact that both users from macro and pico stations are scheduled implies
that no ABS was used on this scenario since for the sake of easier debugging, the
ABS subframes complement each other. When the macro station transmits, the pico
stations remain silent and vice-versa.
This scenario was chosen because it fits perfectly our study on interference. More
specific, user 10, seen as a red triangle north of the macro station, became the main
focus for the testing of the ABS. This user’s mobile is associated with the pico cell
while at the same time relatively close to edge of the pico cell towards the side of
the macro station. At that position the interference is high and the user’s signal is
expected to be highly influenced by the macro station.
==PAGE:42==
32
5 ABS performance evaluation
Figure 5.2: Simulation layout and heatmap.
Apart the scenario selection, quite a few changes had to be made in the simu-
lation in order to simulate the ABS. Monster had a limited implementation of the
ABS as part of the scheduling mechanism which would or would not schedule users
according to a pattern of ABS mask set at the parameters. Inter-cell interference
wasn’t considered and the functions had to be tricked in order to calculate interfer-
ence coming from different station type (macro and pico). At last, few mini-touches
were made in different functions to allow the simulation to work with the ABS and
some extra results to be logged (such as RSS measurements for all the stations not
just the associated).
5.3
Results analysis
The figures 5.3 and 5.4 below were taken from the simulation and show the RSRP
values reported from user 10. User 10 was selected because of its location (the red
triangle user north of the macro station in figure 5.2) on the grid which is close enough
to be associated with pico station 2 but still well within the influence of the macro
station. As expected, the pico station has higher RSRP values than the macro.
A few noticeable things about the two plots. The scenario of plot 5.3 is using a
10-bit ABS mask of the following bits, [1010010000]. Every bit represents a subframe.
Bits ”1” are ABS in respect to the macro station while bits ”0” ABS for the pico
==PAGE:43==
5.3 Results analysis
33
Figure 5.3: ABS user 10 RSRP plot
for macro and pico.
Figure 5.4: No ABS user 10 RSRP plot
for macro and pico.
station.
Every 10th round the mask resets and starts over.
So on these graphs,
for 100 rounds, this bit sequence repeats itself 10 times.
Outsourcing data from
these graphs can be a little difficult so the following table was constructed showing
the average RSRP values for both stations using two different evaluation techniques.
The first one takes the average of all the 100 rounds values while the second one, only
the RSRP values of which the measurement coincides the ABS of the opposite type.
The results are far from what’s expected. Especially for the pico station measure-
ment, the RSRP of station 2 during the ”muted” period of the macro station was
supposed to be the same or higher. It is also noticed that during the ABS of the pico
cell, the RSRP for the pico cell is higher than during the actual transmission. During
the ABS, the stations are supposed to still transmit control signals for the sake of
backwards compatibility but with lower power. Here obviously the power is higher.
The possible reason for that anomaly was detected a few weeks prior to the dead-
line of this paper and it was impossible to be fixed within the time frame. It seems that
during the ABS, indeed only control signals are sent on the waveform but the power
of the antenna is not correctly normalized (if normalized at all) so the whole power
is focused on those resource elements that carry symbols. This leads to higher power
transmission. An attempt was made for correction of the error but this created more
All values
Opposite ABS only
Macro station
-94.5542
-93.8933
Pico station
-68.6155
-74.428
Table 5.1: RSRP average.
==PAGE:44==
34
5 ABS performance evaluation
problems, some of whom coming from complex function created from Mathworks.
Figure 5.5 shows the RSSI as measured from user 10. The RSSI which measures
the signal power on the whole bandwidth provides a clearer view of the interference.
It is noticeable that the drops on the RSSI plot follow the pattern of the ABS mask,
which is what expected since for bit ”1” in the mask, the agressor cell, which in this
case is the macro, becomes ”muted”.
Figure 5.5: RSSI plot from User 10.
Even though some of the measurement values do not appear to reflect our expec-
tations, the following constellation plots present precisely the effect of interference on
the user’s receiver. The scenarios used remain the same and the constellations below
show the received signal from the pico station to user 10. The only changes are that
for figures 5.6 and 5.7 the interference is turned off, so the signal from the macro
station does not affect the user. For figures 5.8 and 5.9 the interference is turned on
but ABS is turned off, so all station transmit on all the subframes. Finally for figures
5.10 and 5.11 the interference is turned on and the ABS is on as well, so only one
class type of stations transmit at the same subframe, hence the aggressor macro cell
only transmit control signals.
==PAGE:45==
5.3 Results analysis
35
Figure 5.6: Constellation diagram,
User 10,
Interference: OFF
ABS: irrelevant.
Figure 5.7: Equalized constellation dia-
gram,
User 10,
Interference: OFF,
ABS: irrelevant.
Figure 5.8: Constellation diagram,
User 10,
Interference: ON,
ABS: OFF.
Figure 5.9: Equalized constellation dia-
gram,
User 10,
Interference: ON,
ABS: OFF.
==PAGE:46==
36
5 ABS performance evaluation
Figure 5.10: Constellation diagram,
User 10,
Interference: ON,
ABS: ON.
Figure 5.11: Equalized constellation dia-
gram,
User 10,
Interference: ON,
ABS: ON.
The user is using a low CQI value of 3, that is why the modulation type is just
a QPSK. The reason for it, is because the constellations were extracted on the first
round and the users always start with a low CQI value to avoid decoding problems in
case of heavy interfered channels. It is clear that when interference is turned off, the
signal the user receives is extremely clear and the symbols can even be extracted with
the eye at the equalized constellation. When interference is on but ABS is off, the
received signal as seen in figure 5.8 is heavily disturbed. At last, the set of figures that
both interference and ABS are on, the received signal appears to have significantly
lowered interference while the majority of the symbols resemble the ones of 5.6 with
a few scattered points.
The figures above nicely present the outcome of the interference mitigation its
effects. The equalized constellations depict the symbols received. On all scenarios
the transmitted signal is the same so in a perfect scenario the received signal would
be as flawless as the one at figure 5.7 where the symbols are tightly spread around the
expected points. When interference is present, the signal coming from the base station
of interest is distorted from the presence of the interferer’s signal and depending on
the power of both signals, the symbols get dispersed, as seen in figure 5.9.
The
detection mechanism would still be able to classify the symbols because of the nature
of QPSK which is highly robust. Each quarter would represent a symbol and the signal
would be still decodable. At last, figure 5.11 shows that the equalized constellation
==PAGE:47==
5.4 Summary
37
diagram at the receiver of user 10 is remarkably less interfered, due to no data are
transmitted from the macro station. Since the symbols are way more compact around
the expected locations, a higher modulation scheme could be probably used with
success, in comparison to the non-ABS scenario where a higher modulation scheme
would be impossible.
5.4
Summary
Although the monster simulation was a really helpful tool to understand in depth the
operation of the LTE system on all its aspects, from the scheduling of the users to the
traverse of the channel and countless other details, the actual implementation of the
ABS was pretty hard within the time frame. When first received, the simulation had
some basic ABS features implemented but only regarding the scheduling of the users
on the downlink. At the parameters section a 10-bit ABS mask could be selected
based on which the scheduler would, or would not allocate subframes to the users.
Apart from that, no other considerations were made on the actual implementation of
the ABS.
On top of that, the simulation wasn’t really designed to simulate layered inter-
ference, so the function responsible to the interference calculation was checking and
applying interference only on the stations with the same class. A way to by-pass
this was to ”fake” the class of the stations in order to force the program to calculate
the interference from all the stations. Also, the resource blocks available for all the
stations had to be the same otherwise the function wouldn’t work, removing one more
parameter that would affect the interference simulation.
Another challenge for the testing of interference was that whenever it was getting
higher, even though it was mitigated, some users would report NaN CQI values and
the simulation would crash. After several fixes in the code this still remains an issue
up to date, making the testing of high interference scenarios impossible. A simple
implementation of the CRE mechanism was added to the simulation for the testing
of those high interference scenarios but it was impossible to test even for the simplest
scenarios. The initial layout would still show users who were previously connected to
the macro station, now associating with the pico ones, but that was all that could be
extracted.
A possible reason for the crash of the simulation on the CRE high interference
scenarios is that RLM and RRM measurements were not restricted to ABS subframes,
so the users would report really high interference. The RSSI is one of those measure-
ments which is really affected by being measured in the wrong subframe while cell
specific measurements such as the RSRP should in principle not be affected by ABS
or non-ABS. That is not the case with this simulation. It is suspected, that because
of all the not appropriate changes in the code to fake the effect of multi-class interfer-
==PAGE:48==
38
5 ABS performance evaluation
ence, both the macro and the pico cells were using the exact same channels for control
and acquisition, instead of using subframe time shifting to avoid the conflict [[7],[10,
Chapter 4.2.3.3, page 84]]. That would explain the higher power of the RSRP values
reported for the pico cell during the ABS subframe of the macro cell, caused by the
anomaly on the normalization of the signal explained above plus the same channels
used for the reference signals [11].
Overall, the understanding of this complex simulation, to the point that I was
feeling confident to change aspects of it, took way more time than expected and as a
result some ideas of improvement were not even attempted.
5.5
Future work
The implementation of the ABS on the monster simulation showed that even by only
stop scheduling data for users on the downlink of the aggressor cell, can have a signif-
icantly positive impact on the users of the pico stations, judging by the constellation
diagrams of the latest.
However there are several factors that, if successfully im-
plemented, could create a more ”realistic” simulation of the eICIC’s ABS. The fact
that some crucial aspects of the ABS are vendor specific will always make what is
”realistic”, subjective.
The following list, lists some possible aspects regarding ABS that could have an
impact on the ABS and it is suggested as future work
• RRM and RLM measurments restriction
• Power normalization for empty subframes
• Reduced power of control channels during ABS
• Dynamic ABS allocation
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
Throughout my research on interference mitigation and heterogeneous networks, it
became clear that the LTE technology is far more complex than i have thought. So
many technologies and mechanism work together to create a stable network, providing
a flawless experience for the end-user. Heterogeneous networks will definitely be a
thing of the future since there is almost no other way to meet the demands of capacity.
Interference will continue to increase and careful coordination of it will be mandatory
for the smooth operation of the future networks. Some of the technologies presented
on this paper are already implemented while other are yet to become commercially
available.
The Almost Blank Subframe was chosen for a more excessive study due to the fact
that it is highly versatile and it combines the goods of both time and frequency coordi-
nation. It is one of the latest interference coordination techniques to be commercially
available and the research is still on-going with the non-zero power ABS. While ABS
do solves a lot of interference related issues and it enables heterogeneous networks to
be deployed, it’s not perfect, leaving the fragile control channels uncovered.
One of the main challenges researching on the LTE was that some of its aspects
are vendor specific. Even though technologies such as the Almost Blank Subframe
are standardized as to the messages exchanged, vendors and engineers have a lot of
freedom on how to implement them. This leaves a lot of space for optimization for
the companies but a mystery in the academic world as to how they actually operate.
Assumptions had to be made and evaluated; assumptions that may or may not reflect
the reality.
==PAGE:50==
40
==PAGE:51==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
1
%% SIMULATION PARAMETERS
2 clear all
3 Param.reset = 0;% Boolean used to reset the folder structure and reload
everything
4 Param.rmResults = 0;% Boolean to clean the results folder
5 Param.logToFile = 0; % Boolean, if true all logs are re-directed to a file
in /logs
6
7 % Boolean used to enable the drawing of plots and other cool stuff
8 Param.draw = 1;
9
10 % Booelan used to store the transmission data, that is each TB, codeword,
waveform
11 Param.storeTxData = 0;
12
13 % Integer used to control the number of scheduling rounds (subframes) to
simulate
14 Param.schRounds = 10;
15 Param.seed = 42;% Integer used for the simulation seed
16 Param.mobilitySeed = 19; % Integer for randomizing user positioning and
trajectories , TRY 15 SEEMS WRONG
17 % Boolean to save a whole LTE frame for the macro eNodeB for testing
18 Param.saveFrame = 1;
19
20 %% Draw functions
21 Param.generateHeatMap = 0;% Boolean to control the generation of a heatmap
of the pathloos in the scenario
22 Param.heatMapType = 'perStation';% String to control the type of heatmap
23 Param.heatMapRes = 10;% Heatmap resoultion in metres
24
25 %% Network
26 Param.numSubFramesMacro = 50;% Integer used to set the number of RBs for a
macro eNodeB
27 Param.numSubFramesMicro = 25;% Integer used to set the number of RBs for a
micro eNodeB
28 Param.numSubFramesPico = 50;% Integer used to set the number of RBs for a
pico eNodeB
29 Param.numSubFramesUE = 25;% Integer used to set the number of RBs for the
uplink
30 Param.numMacro = 1;% Integer used to specify the number of macro eNodeBs in
the scenario (currently only 1)
31 Param.macroHeight = 35;% Double used to specify the height in metres of the
macro eNodeBs
==PAGE:52==
42
A An Appendix
32 Param.numMicro = 0;% Integer used to specify the number of micro eNodeBs in
the scenario
33 Param.microPos = 'uniform'; % Array of char to decide the positioning of the
micro BS (uniform, random, clusterized)
34 Param.microUniformRadius = 400;% Double radius of distance from centre for
microBS in metres
35 Param.microHeight = 25;% Double used to specify the height in metres of the
micro eNodeBs
36 Param.numPico = 4;% Integer used to specify the number of pico eNodeBs in
the scenario
37 Param.picoPos = 'uniform'; % Array of char to decide the positioning of the
micro BS (uniform, random)
38 Param.picoUniformRadius = 300;% Double radius of distance from centre for
picoBS in metres
39 Param.picoHeight = 5;% Double used to specify the height in metres of the
pico eNodeBs
40 Param.numEnodeBs = Param.numMacro + Param.numMicro + Param.numPico;
41 Param.ueHeight = 1.5;% Double used to specify the height in metres of the
UEs
42 Param.numUsers = 25;% Integer used for the number of UEs
43 Param.mobilityScenario = 'pedestrian';% Integer to choose the mobility
scenario (pedestrian , vehicular, static, superman, straight)
44 Param.buildings = 'mobility/buildings.txt';% Path for loading the file with
the buildings
45 Param.mobilityStep = 0.01;
46 Param.pucchFormat = 2;% PUCCH format (only 2 and 3 work)
47 Param.handoverTimer = 0.01;% X2 Handover timer in s (time needed from
starting and handover to its completion)
48 Param.CRE = 0; %Set 1 for Cell Range Expansion enabled, 0 for disabled
49 Param.CIO = 5; %CRE bias value in dbm (CIO = Cell Individual Offset)
50 Param.AllInterference = 1;
51
52
53 %% Traffic
54 Param.primaryTrafficModel = 'fullBuffer'; % Primary traffic model ['
fullBuffer', 'videoStreaming', 'webBrowsing']
55 Param.secondaryTrafficModel = 'fullBuffer'; % Secondary traffic model ['
fullBuffer', 'videoStreaming', 'webBrowsing']
56 Param.trafficMix = 0.5; % Mix in the UEs between primary and secondary
traffic models in %
57 Param.ueArrivalDistribution = 'Static'; % Arrival distribution for the UEs [
'Poisson', 'Uniform', 'Static']
58 Param.poissonLambda = 5; % Mean of the Poisson process in ms
59 Param.uniformLower = 6; % Lower limit of the Uniform process in ms
60 Param.uniformUpper = 10; % Upper limit of the Uniform process in ms
61 Param.staticStart = 0; % Static start time in ms
62
63 %% Positioning (TR 36.872) - Only for "clusterized" microPos setting
64 Param.macroRadius = 250; % radius of the macro cell
65 Param.minUeDist = 20; % minimum distance between UEs and macro
66 Param.numClusters = 1; % number of clusters
67 Param.ueClusterRadius = 70; % radius of a cluster for UE placement
68 Param.microClusterRadius = 50; % radius of a cluster for micro placement
69 Param.minClusterDist = 105; % minimum distance between cluster center and
macro
==PAGE:53==
A An Appendix
43
70 Param.interClusterDist = 100; % minimum distance between cluster centers
71 Param.microDist = 20; % minimum distance between micro cells
72 %% Physical layer
73 Param.ulFreq = 1747.5;% Double used for the uplink carrier frequency in MHz
74 Param.dlFreq = 1842.5;% Double used for the downlink carrier frequency in
MHz
75 Param.prbSym = 160;% Integer used for the number of OFMD symbols in a RB
76 Param.ueNoiseFigure = 7;% Double used for the UE noise figure in dB
77 Param.eNBNoiseFigure = 7;% Double used for the BS noise figure in dB
78 Param.eNBGain = 0; %Antenna gain of the eNB.
79 Param.prbRe = 168;% Integer used for the number of RE in a RB
80 Param.PRACHInterval = 10; %Given as the number of subframes between each
PRACH.
81 %% Channel configuration
82 Param.channel.modeDL = 'ITU1546';% String to control the channel mode in DL
['winner', 'eHATA', 'ITU1546', '3GPP38901']
83 Param.channel.modeUL = 'B2B';% String to control the channel mode in UL
84 Param.channel.region = 'Urban';% String to control the channel region
85 Param.channel.enableFading = true;
86 Param.channel.enableInterference = true;
87 Param.channel.enableShadowing = false; % Only capable for 3GPP38901
88 Param.channel.computeCoverage = false; %Only a visualization feature. Force
the recomputation of the coverage, otherwise loaded from file if stored.
89 Param.channel.LOSMethod = '3GPP38901-probability'; % ['fresnel', '3GPP38901-
probability']
90 % WINNER CONFIGURATION , only if 'winner is used'. See docs for the different
varieties.
91 if strcmp(Param.channel.modeDL,'winner')
92
Param.channel.region = struct();
93
Param.channel.region.macroScenario = '11';
94
Param.channel.region.microScenario = '3';
95
Param.channel.region.picoScenario = '3';
96 elseif strcmp(Param.channel.modeDL, '3GPP38901')
97
Param.channel.region = struct();
98
Param.channel.region.macroScenario = 'UMa';
99
Param.channel.region.microScenario = 'UMi';
100
Param.channel.region.picoScenario = 'UMi';
101 end
102 %% SON parameters
103 Param.nboRadius = 100;% Double to set the maximum radius within which
eNodeBs are considered as neighbours in metres
104 Param.tHyst = 0.001;% Double to set the hysteresis timer threshold in s
105 Param.tSwitch = 0.001;% Double to set the eNodeB switching on/off timer in s
106 Param.utilLoThr = 1;% Integer for the threshold for the low utilisation
range (>= 1)
107 Param.utilHiThr = 100;% Integer for the threshold for the high utilisation
range (<= 100)
108 Param.otaPowerScale = 1; % Value to scale the OTA power.
109
110 %% Scheduling
111 Param.scheduling = 'roundRobin';% String for the scheduling policy to use (
currently only 'roundRobin')
112 Param.refreshAssociationTimer = 0.010;% Double to choose the interval in s
to run refreshUsersAssociation
113 Param.icScheme = 'simpleABS';
% simpleABS , none
==PAGE:54==
44
A An Appendix
114 Param.absMask = [1,0,1,0,0,1,0,0,0,0];
115 Param.dynamicABS = 0;
116
117 %%%%% SETUP STUFF - DON'T TOUCH UNLESS YOU KNOW WHAT YOU'RE DOING
118 %% HARQ & ARQ
119 Param.harq.rtxMax = 3;% Integer to choose the maximum number of HARQ
retransmissions
120 Param.harq.rv = [1,3,2];% Integer array for the redundacy version values
121 Param.harq.proc = 8;% Integer to choose the number of parallerl HARQ
processes
122 Param.harq.tout = Param.harq.proc/2 -1;
123 Param.rtxOn = 1;% Boolean used to enable retransmissions
124 Param.arq.bufferFlusTimer = 20;% Timer for flushing out of place TBs in the
RLC buffer in seconds
125 Param.arq.maxBufferSize = 1024;% Maximum number of TBs that the RLC can
store at the same time as integer
126 Param.arq.rtxMax = 1;% Integer to choose the maximum number of ARQ
retransmissions
127 %% PHY
128 Param.maxTbSize = 97896;% Double used for the maximum size of a TB for
storing in bits
129 Param.maxCwdSize = 10e5;% Double used for the maximum size of a codeword for
storing in bits
130 %% Buildings
131 Param.buildings = load(Param.buildings);
132 Param.buildingHeight = [20,50];% Double interval used to specify the height
interval in metres of the buildings
133 Param.area = [min(Param.buildings(:, 1)), min(Param.buildings(:, 2)), ...
134
max(Param.buildings(:, 3)), max(Param.buildings(:, 4))];
135 Param.buildings(:,5) = randi([Param.buildingHeight],[1 length(Param.
buildings(:,1))]);
136
137 save('SimulationParameters.mat', 'Param');
.
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
3GPP. “3GPP Release 10”. In: (2014).
[2]
3GPP. “3GPP Release 8”. In: (2014).
[3]
3GPP. “E-UTRA and E-UTRAN overall description (3GPP TS 36.300 v10.6.0)”.
In: (2011).
[4]
3GPP. “Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA); Physical layer
procedures (3GPP TS 36.213 V15.2.0)”. In: (2018).
[5]
Farhana Afroz et al. “SINR, RSRP, RSSI and RSRQ Measurements in Long
Term Evolution Networks”. In: 7 (August 2015), pages 113–123.
[6]
X. Chen et al. “A novel CQI calculation scheme in LTE-A systems”. In: 2011
International Conference on Wireless Communications and Signal Processing
(WCSP). 2011, pages 1–5. doi: 10.1109/WCSP.2011.6096767.
[7]
A. Damnjanovic et al. “A survey on 3GPP heterogeneous networks”. In: IEEE
Wireless Communications 18.3 (2011), pages 10–21. issn: 1536-1284. doi: 10.
1109/MWC.2011.5876496.
[8]
H. E. E. O. M. Elfadil, M. A. I. Ali, and M. Abas. “Fractional frequency reuse
in LTE networks”. In: 2015 2nd World Symposium on Web Applications and
Networking (WSWAN). 2015, pages 1–6. doi: 10.1109/WSWAN.2015.7210297.
[9]
Ericsson Mobility Report 2018. 2018. url: https : / / www . ericsson . com /
assets/local/mobility- report/documents/2018/ericsson- mobility-
report-june-2018.pdf.
[10]
Rose Qingyang Hu and Yi Qian. Heterogeneous cellular networks. John Wiley
& Sons, 2013.
[11]
Stefania Sesia, Issam Toufik, and Matthew Baker. LTE, The UMTS Long Term
Evolution: From Theory to Practice. Wiley Publishing, 2009. isbn: 0470697164,
9780470697160.
[12]
Antti Toskala and Harri Holma. LTE Advanced: 3GPP Solution for IMT-Advanced.
Que. url: https : / / www . safaribooksonline . com / library / view / lte -
advanced-3gpp/9781118399422/.
==PAGE:56==
46
Bibliography
[13]
S. Yeh et al. “Capacity and coverage enhancement in heterogeneous networks”.
In: IEEE Wireless Communications 18.3 (2011), pages 32–38. issn: 1536-1284.
doi: 10.1109/MWC.2011.5876498.
[14]
Houman Zarrinkoub. Understanding LTE with MATLAB: From Mathematical
Modeling to Simulation and Prototyping. 1st. Wiley Publishing, 2014. isbn:
1118443411, 9781118443415.
