==PAGE:1==
Assessment of ecosystem impacts
using underwater video technics 
across wild blue mussels, Mytilus edulis, 
fishing areas under Nature 2000 protection 
Irene Sàez Devís
MSc Thesis, 2 September 2018
Danish Technical University Aqua
Supervisors, DTU Aqua:
Grete E. Dinesen
Ciaran McLaverty
Ole E. Eigaard
Jens Kjerulf Petersen
==PAGE:2==
Tables summary 
I. 
Table 1. Type of data extracted from images along each transect and the five basins. 
II. 
Table 2. Table gathering by basin the number of initial transects and images after 
sampling, number of images after the filtering process, number of final transects and 
images. The last column has the total meters analysed by basin. 
III. 
Table 3. Total number of transects per basin and use of the area (fished and non-
fished). Number in brackets stands for initial sampled transects. 
IV. 
Table 4. Taxonomy of mobile epifauna group, sessile epifauna group and habitat 
builders 
epifauna 
group 
include 
in 
further 
analysis 
for 
this 
study 
(http://www.marinespecies.org/, 10/04/2018) 
V. 
Table 5. Mean coverage values of M. edulis beds per image by basin and last year of 
fishing event.  
VI. 
Table 6. Black box data related to the last fishing episode by basin. In brackets the 
number stands for the initial sampled transect. The number out of the brackets stands 
for the transects analysed. The grey background stands for those time periods which 
were used together to increase statistical power. 
VII. 
Table 7. Sessile and mobile epifauna abundance based on the basin which were found 
and if they were either in a fished (F) or a none fished (nF) area. The abundance of 
epifauna is based on the sum of 20 images, notice that for Horsens basin there is also an 
abundance (sum) of 100 images. In brackets is the number of transects analysed.  
VIII. 
Table 8. Table with p-value of Levene (L) analysis of variance and Kruskal – Wallis 
(K-W) non-parametric test analysis presenting the chi-square (χ2), the degrees of 
freedom (df) and the p-value (p). The taxa significantly different statistically is shown 
on bold. The three firs tables (A – B – C) are the results form 20 images 
==PAGE:3==
standardization, the last table stands for Horsens results from the 100 images 
standardization (D).    
IX. 
Table 9. Table with the post hoc results from Dunn test. Z value and p-value are shown. 
Lillebælt results from the 20 images standardization (A), Horsens results from the 100 
standardization (B). In bold are highlighted the statistically significant results.     
  Figures summary 
X. 
Figure 1. Maps of the studied area, the 5 sampled basins are present with white marks 
indication the location of the transects (A). Horsens fjord basin (B), Littlebaelt channel 
basin (C), Løgstor basin fjord system (D), Lovns fjord system basin (E) and Nissum 
fjord system basin (F). From B to F fishing area and sediment type are shown.  
XI. 
Figure 2. Examples of images that were not valid for the analysis. None of the legs on 
the floor (A), the frame is not completed on the image (B), not all legs on the floor (C - 
D - E), plume make it not possible to see the image (E - F) and unfocussed (F). 
XII. 
Figure 3. Image editing from the initial photo extracted from the video to other settings 
that would allow to see better what is there. Image extracted from the video with 
already some settings modified (A), first image edition (B) and second image edition 
(C). 
XIII. 
Figure 4. Correlation graph between abundance of epifauna (nº of individuals/image) 
by Mytilus edulis beds coverage (%). In yellow is highlighted the thresholds of the 
factor M. edulis beds coverage (%).  The R2 values for both mobility epifauna groups 
are at the top right side of the graph.  
XIV. 
Figure 5. Number of transects in the study by the last year they were fished (Black box 
data). 
XV. 
Figure 6. Conceptual outline of statistical analysis conducted in the present study. 
==PAGE:4==
XVI. 
Figure 7. Species Accumulation curves (AC’s) from row number of images extracted 
from the video. Based on Chao1 estimator calculation. Standard error is shown as pale 
blue bars for non-fished transects and pale red bars for fished transects. Red: Fished 
transects and Blue: none fished transect. Orange line at 20 images is the minimum 
number of images needed to have a complete sampling from the area to standardize all 
basin sampling effort.  
XVII. 
Figure 8. Number of images per transect and basin once images with errors have been 
filtered. Yellow line indicates the number of images which were used to standardized 
across transects. Error 1-4 (See section 2.2). 
XVIII. 
Figure 9. nMDS plot overlaid with the basins (H: Horsens, LB: Littlebælt, Lg: Løgstor, 
Lv: Lovns and Ni: Nissum) and the two-level fishing factor (F: fished and nF: none-
fished). 
XIX. 
Figure 10. Abundance of each response taxa by the two levels fishing factor (F: fished; 
nF: none fished) and by basin. Sessile taxa (A) and mobile taxa (B) by percentages. 
Sessile and mobile taxa (C) relative percentages. The abundances are based on the sum 
of the 20 images in each transect, Horsens basin abundance was also calculated with the 
sum of 100 images. 
Annexes tables and figures summary 
I. 
A1 Table. Metadata and detail information about the transects by basin. Last column 
highlighted in grey the transects which were used for the final analysis.  
II. 
A2 Table. Explanatory variables mean coverage and standard deviation by basin and by 
last year the transects were fished. 
III. 
A3 Table. Explanatory variables mean coverage and standard deviation of by basin and 
by transect. 
==PAGE:5==
IV. 
A.1 Figure. Comparison of the features of the various general methods available 
(Rumohr, 2013). 
V. 
A2 Figure. Species and taxa found at the images: Gastropod indet. (Løgstor transect t2) 
(A), Asterias rubens (Littlebælt transect 6) (B), Flustra foliacea (Littlebælt transect 10) 
(C), Portiferea indet. (Littlebælt transect 10) (D), Metridium senile (Løgstor transect 6) 
(E), Carcinus maenas (Løgstor transect t1) (F), Ophiuroidea indet. (Nissum transect 1) 
(G), Bryozoan indet. (Nissum transect 2) (H), Ascidiacea indet. (Nissum transect 8) (I), 
Actiniaria indet. (Løgstor transect 6) (J), Callinacetes sapidus (Løgstor transect 2) (K), 
Paguridae indet. (Horsens transect 3) (L) and Actinia equina (Nissum transect 9) (M). 
VI. 
A3 Figure. Coverage of explanatory variables by basin and last year of fishing period. 
Sediment variables (A), Vegetation variables (B), biogenic substrate variables (C) and 
all explanatory variables together (D).  
VII. 
A4 Figure. Graphs with the sessile and mobile abundance (nº of individuals per image) 
plotted against different factors related to substrate (%) (from (A) to (D)): rock and 
pebbles sediment coverage (A), sand sediment coverage (B), mud sediment coverage 
(C), epiphytic mat coverage (%) (D). Correlation graph between M. edulis beds 
coverage (%) and sand sediment coverage (%) (E). 
 
==PAGE:6==
Assessment of ecosystem impacts using underwater video technics across 
wild blue mussels, Mytilus edulis, fishing areas under Nature 2000 protection  
Irene S. Devis* 
* National Institute of Aquatic Resources, AQUA section, Danish Technical University (DTU), Building 201, 
Kemitorvet, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark (s162733@student.dtu.dk) 
Abstract 
An ecosystem-based approach to fisheries management considers the full array of interactions that may 
occur because of fishing a target species. In the case of mussel fisheries allocated within Nature 2000 
areas, several ecosystem components need to be engaged in the monitoring process. The ecosystem 
services should not be threatened by dredging activities, instead it is aimed to improve the overall area 
status. Epifaunal are known to be first affected by fishing technics as dredge. Therefore, its community 
composition and abundance might be a useful to assess both fisheries impact on the ecosystem and 
mussel stocks. The present study focusses its efforts in testing and improving the use of underwater 
video (UV) techniques. Traditional sampling is based on intrusive technics which besides from 
damaging the ecosystem are both costly economically and timely. The use of still image photographs, 
collected from video transects, to describe the distribution of benthic epifaunal communities in five 
coastal basins across Denmark is done. Both fishing and environmental factors are known to influence 
the distribution and abundance of epifaunal communities. The results show that, geographic location 
(the basin) was the primary factor most influencing benthic community composition. Overall, mobile 
epifauna was found in higher abundances in fished areas while sessile epifauna behave the opposite 
way. Across sites, fishing had a negative effect on both the number of individuals and species, although 
opposite patters resulted at two Limfjord basins. Habitat features were also shown to have a significant 
positive effect on the abundance of long living sessile species, such as Fultra foliacea. Those results 
have implications for the management of the fishery, and monitoring of benthic components. in 
management based on the sampling methodology and potential possibilities of the extracted data are 
discuss too.  
Keywords: Fisheries ecosystem base management, underwater video technics, epifauna community 
composition, Mytilus edulis dredging   
==PAGE:7==
1. Introduction 
Habitats Directive requires to assess potential impacts of human activities on nature ecosystems which 
are protected under the figure of Nature 2000 areas. The 5 areas analysed (Figure 1) in the present study 
are frame under this scope. Mytilus edulis (Linneaus, 1756) are used as a bioremediation tool in highly 
eutrophic ecosystems (Dolmer and Frandsen, 2002). Fishery on wild stocks and harvesting of cultured 
blue mussels make possible to remove the excess of nutrients coming from land by a so-called ‘down-
stream’ solution. A sustainable fishery management must ensure that mussel stocks can uphold this 
nutrient retention service (Dolmer and Frandsen, 2002). Due to its bioremediation quality, wild stock 
mussel fisheries are allowed within Nature 2000 areas. Such as is the case in the areas investigated in 
the present study. Although, monitoring of the ecosystem needs to be done regularly to ensure that 
fishery’s impact does not interfere on the ecological services which the protection is aiming for (Dolmer 
and Frandsen, 2002).  
Dredging for wild stocks of blue mussels is an important fishery that generates income locally in rural 
coastal areas and contributes to food provision regionally. Limfjord mussel fishery accounts for between 
50 - 90% of the Danish mussel fishery at present. Landings of mussels have declined from around 
100,000t in 1990 to around 25,000t per year since 2006  (Brand et al., 2014). Landings are reported by 
production area, there are 42 of them, same scale is applied if enclosures need to be done. Fishery of 
mussels is restrictive, based on quotas per vessel with an amount of 31 vessels certificated for wild 
stocks fishing. Those can land 30t per week per vessel, although fishermen unilaterally and voluntarily 
apply a lower quota to their activities, during the fishing season (Brand et al., 2014). 
From an environmental point of view, mussel dredging is known to be one of the more destructive 
forms of demersal fishery. It directly disturb and disrupt the structure and functioning of the benthic 
communities associated with Mytilus edulis (Linneaus, 1756) (Mérillet et al., 2017). Due to its 
ecological importance in many boreal coastal areas, mussel dredging may significantly affect the form 
and the function of the benthic ecosystems (Dolmer, 2002). The dredge action may also resuspend 
bottom sediment, oxygen-consuming substances and nutrients (Dolmer and Frandsen, 2002). This may 
cause physical disturbance and destabilisation of the sediment which might have an effect. For instance, 
an increase amount of suspended particulate matter for a few hours after dredging, might lead towards 
==PAGE:8==
an oxygen decrease and an increment the amount of ammonia within the dredge area, having a local 
effects on particle load and nutrient regimes (Dolmer and Frandsen, 2002). Effects in the recolonization 
by epifaunal organisms of the sea-floor followed by the cessation of dredging (Smith et al., 2006) have 
also been studied. For instance, mobile epifauna as Asteria rubens (Linnaeus, 1758) was found in higher 
abundances in areas after dredging due to the availability of new food resource (Riis et al., 2003; Smith 
et al., 2006). Overall the numbers and densities of epifaunal taxa within dredged treatments are typically 
lower (Smith et al., 2006). 
From a management point of view conservation objectives and sustainable management of coastal 
biodiversity and use of natural resources involve monitoring of the status of several biodiversity 
components in large areas. Monitoring and assessment should include fish and macroinvertebrate  
resources,  but  also  fixed  fauna,  essential  habitats,  and  protected  or emblematic  species (Mallet 
and Pelletier, 2014). Video monitoring systems have strengths as replicability, low cost and non-
intrusive methodology which are crucial in both management and fisheries fields. The recent 
development of underwater video devices could provide an alternative sampling method. Nowadays, to 
assess fisheries, experimental dredging is carried in areas which are not closed by national regulation 
and at water depths > 3 metres along 100 m on the sea-bed (Brand et al., 2014). The methodology aims 
to assess the mussels stock present in the area to further create models which can predict the mussel’s 
stocks. The described method is intrusive and costly. Grab sampling is also used to assess the ecosystem 
status based on infauna community composition. The data extracted is of high resolution, although is 
covers a small portion. Therefore, to sample broad areas extensions might not be the best option. 
Besides, the method is also invasive and time-consuming, during the sampling and in the lab (A1. 
Figure and A1 Table). As the areas are protected, a non-invasive able to sample large areas in a cost 
effective way could fulfil both current monitoring challenges (Mallet and Pelletier, 2014). Epifauna is 
barely sampled by traditional and scientific fishing gear such as grabs or haps due to their over-
dispersed distribution on the seabed and low catchability (Mérillet et al., 2017) or they get damage by 
the sampling technic used such as trawls or dredges (Mérillet et al., 2018). Also, as mentioned above, no 
sampling of areas above 3 m depth is carried. The video imagery provides information on the 
undisturbed habitat (Rees, 2009) allowing to acquire also epifauna samples. The video methodology 
followed allow comparisons between the epifaunal composition along areas which have been fished in 
==PAGE:9==
recent periods and non-fished areas. By non-fished areas is understood grounds which have not been 
fished at least since 2011. The whole area studied has been under fishing pressure for several decades, 
therefore no pristine area to use as a control site was not available.  
The aims of this study were to: (i) evaluate the sampling effort needed to assess epifauna distribution 
using a non-destructive sampling technic; (ii) analyse the effects of mussel fishery and habitat 
complexity as drivers potentially shaping epifauna distribution; and (iii) evaluate the implication for 
fisheries and environmental management and monitoring. 
2. Material and methods 
From section 2.2 a detail explanation of each step taken has been describe to able the replicability of the 
present study.  
2.1 
Study areas 
The study areas include a coastal channel (Lillebælt) and a fjord in inner Danish waters (Horsens Fjord) 
and a coastal fjord system in the northern part of Denmark (the Limfjord) (Figure 1).  
2.1.1 
Horsens Fjord 
The marine end member (Figure 1.B) is water from the Bælt Sea which forms the transition zone 
between the North Sea and the Baltic Sea and hence displays large variations in salinity    (8 to 31 psu) 
and nutrient concentrations. (http://www.noaa.gov/research, 17/07/2018). The surface area of the Fjord 
is approximately 46 km2 with 20 km of coastline. The annual freshwater input is in the order of 100 
Mm3. The mean depth is 2.9 m besides a narrow shipping channel with a depth between 7 and 22 m. 
The residence time of water in the fjord is about 20 days (Jylland, 2015). 
2.1.2 
Lillebælt  
The Lillebælt (Figure 1.C) is a coastal channel transitioning the saltier Kattegat and the brackish western 
Baltic Sea with a salinity range from 9 to 20 psu (Rönnberg and Bonsdorff, 2004). The 10% of water 
exchange between the mentioned water bodies flows through Lillebælt. Its surface is 351.89 km² 
(https://www.protectedplanet.net/67888 16/07/2018). The northern part is the widest being 50 km long 
and from 800 m to 28 km wide. Its depth varies from shallow lagoons to deeper trenches averaging 35 
==PAGE:10==
meters, with a deepest point at 81 meters. In the narrow part of Lillebælt, where the current is strong and 
water 
movement 
is 
high, 
hypoxia 
is 
absent. 
(http://oceana.org/sites/default/files/euo/OCEANA_Little_Belt_5.pdf, 16/07/2018). 
2.1.3 
The Limfjord sub-basins: Løgstør, Lovns and Nissum broads 
The Limfjord connects with the North Sea (32 to 34 psu) to the west and the Kattegat              (19 to 25 
psu), to the east (Marine and Report, 2017). Therefore, it presents a salinity gradient from west to east 
and brackish water conditions in the inner parts (salinities of about 20 to 25 psu). The Limfjord is a 
coastal fjord-like system situated in northern Denmark. with a coastline of 1,000 km, a surface area of 
1,575 km² (Marine and Report, 2017). It consists of several basins that are separated by shallow waters 
or narrow sounds. The mean depth is 4.9 m, and maximum depth is 28 m. The tidal amplitude is 10 to 
20 cm, and vertical mixing is mainly wind driven (Dolmer and Frandsen, 2002). The catchment area is 
7,528 km², of which 62% is arable land (Dinesen, Grete E. et al., 2011). Stratification occurs for about 
half the summer season. Water clarity has been reduced and anoxia and hypoxia occur regularly from 
July to September (Dinesen, Grete E. et al., 2011; Dolmer and Geitner, 2004), particularly in the inner 
southeaster parts of the estuary. The water volume of the fjord system has a total of 7.4 km3 from this 
the annual water exchange is 8 to 9 km3 being the mean annual freshwater inflow from the catchment 
area 2.6 km2.  
Løgstør Broad (Figure 1.D) is the largest of the central sub-basins of the Limfjord, it is easterly 
connected with Kattegat. Its salinity ranges from 22 to 32 psu which is highly influenced by Kattegat 
waters. Depth range from 6 to 25 m with a mean depth of 11 m.   
Lovns Broad (Figure 1.E) is situated in the southern east of the Limfjord system. It is the second most 
isolated basin with a 1km connected opening to the rest of Limfjord. Its mean depth is 5 m (Dalsgaard, 
2003) and its salinity is 24 psu.  
Nissum Broad (Figure 1.F) is the most western of the Limfjord sub-basins with an extension area of 
64 km², and it connects the North Sea with the Limfjord system. The salinity in the basin has a broad 
range from 12 to 31 psu which is mostly drive by freshwater catchment which is annually 15 Km3. 
Mean depth is 1 m although the depth ranged from 1 to 5 m. Residential time of the water is 25 days 
(Miljøministeriet, 2011). 
==PAGE:11==
2.2 
Field sampling 
In each basin, the transects were selected via a stratified sampling design. The main factors considered 
in their placement included: fished / non-fished conditions and sediment type (sand or mud). All the 
transects were placed on a fixed depth band of 5 – 12 m (Figure1).  
Along each transect videos were recorded using a POV.HD camera (Clip as record method, 1080p30 for 
video resolution and frame rate, a high image quality High 12 MBits/sec, video file format .mp4, NTSC 
as video output and a time and date stamp overlay), mounted onto a top-down camera frame, holding a 
quadrat 0.5 m x 0.5 m with a scale bar of 5 cm overlaying the seafloor. The tetrapod holding the camera 
was towed along the transect at a constant distance of 75 cm and lowered to contact the seafloor 
resulting in down-ward facing images. This technic is named ‘leap-frogging’ (periodically raising and 
lowering) the frame over the length of the transect. From the video several images were extracted. The 
system was drifted for approximately 10 mins at ~ 0.6 – 0.8 knots in a straight line. This resulted in 
between 8 – 61 images acquired per transect. The consistency and regularity of `drops` was sometimes 
affected by high winds, due to the inability of the (small) vessel to maintain the desired towing/drifting 
speed. In high winds, a reduced number of images were acquired over a specific transect.  Footage 
length in time varied from 5 minutes 40 seconds and 17 minutes 59 seconds and from 21.573 m to 
689.985 m (A.2 Table). The start and end positions of the transect relate to the point at which the 
camera contacted the seafloor and from the moment the camera left the seabed. The camera system was 
raised and lowered to the seabed approximately every 17 seconds, which equates to a drop to the seabed 
approximately every 6.4 m ± 2.6 m.  Strong winds during the field campaign linked with poor visibility 
and currents made the video recording and the ability to keep it still on the seafloor difficult. Main 
reasons to discard an image were: (1) if the quadrant did not lay on the floor on its four legs keeping a 
constant scale (Figure 2.A and C); (2) if the quadrant did not fit in the image, therefore the image didn’t 
have the 100% of the information inside the quadrant (Figure 2. B); (3) if the contact with the seafloor 
was strong, plumes will raise up making the image to blurred to see through and making it unable to 
capture an image (Figure 2.D-E); (4) if the image itself was unfocused (Figure 2. F).   
==PAGE:12==
2.3 
Image data extraction 
A large amount of data was extracted from an image, ranging from broad description of the transect to 
semi-quantitative data (degree of coverage, mostly applied to habitat complexity and habitat builders); 
and quantitative (nº of individuals, applied to epifauna counts) (Table 1) 
To define the data quality of each image a value between 1 and 3 (1 being the lowest image quality and 
3 the highest image quality) was evaluated for each one. Quality of image was defined as follows: an 
image was deemed low quality if very unfocused/plumes from seafloor (Figure 2. E – F), if not all 
angles of the quadrat were on the sea floor (Figure 2. A – C - D – E) or if the 0.25 m2 quadrat was not 
complete inside the image (Figure 2. B). Therefore, a value between 1 or 2 was assign to those images 
presenting one or a combination of this quality parameters (A2. Table). Images had to be edited by 
changing contrast, white balance and focus to get the best quality image to proceed with the data 
extraction. Readjustments along some video footages transects were done several times (Figure 3) to 
detect all organisms present. 
After this filtering process, a large amount of data was lost (Table 2). Although, each basin had between 
5 or 10 transects which were categorized as high-quality images (value 3, Table 3). A total of 37 
transects (Figure 1), 17 were placed in fished areas and 20 in non-fished areas. 
Species accumulation curve (AC’s) did not reach an asymptote at any of the station and neither between 
fished and non-fished transects. Therefore, the non-parametric estimator Chao 1 was calculated for each 
station by the two levels fishing factor (Figure 4). Chao 1 is a diversity index based on the number of 
rare species in a sample, designed to estimates species richness under the assumption that not every 
species present has been capture (Meyer et al., 2015). It uses the occurrence of singletons and 
doubletons, the number of species recorded only one or twice in a sample, to estimate the total number 
of individuals in the sample (Chao and Chiu, 2016). AC’s curves could not be used to distinguish fished 
transects from non-fished transect. Subsequently per transect, abundance data was summed, and 
coverage data (e.g. M. edulis beds) were averaged. 
2.4 
Epifauna and ecosystem complexity variables 
Epifaunal species are defined as those macrofaunal species which live in close association with the 
surface of the sea-bed (Smith et al., 2006). Furthermore, many epifaunal species are preyed upon by 
==PAGE:13==
fishes, while others (e.g., hydroids and erect bryozoans) provide refugia, especially for juvenile fish 
species such as sole, dab and plaice (Smith et al., 2006). 
Epifauna are assumed to be the most impacted by dredging as they are removed or damaged by the 
mechanical action of it. The used of non-destructive sampling equipment such as underwater video 
devices allow for sampling of epifauna which is barely sampled by traditional and grabs and haps due to 
their over-dispersed distribution on the seabed and low catchability (Mérillet et al., 2017).   
The complexity of the ecosystem shapes the structure of food webs, mediates predator–prey dynamics, 
provides refuge for young animals, and fosters increased biodiversity through niche partitioning (Wilson 
et al., 2014). It is understood as ecosystem complexity the features present which micro-modify physical 
or chemical characteristics for example water flow, nutrients concentration and substrate texture. The 
features could be both biotic or abiotic, for instance, vegetation, mussel beds, rocks, sand and sessile 
epifauna. 
2.4.1 
Sessile and mobile epifauna 
Epifaunal species recorded were counted and categorized by mobility traits either sessile or mobile 
(Table 4), taxonomic names were based on Words Registered of Marine Species (WORMS, 
05/04/2017). In total, 4 sessile and 5 mobile taxa were identified (Figure A.1). Colonial species such as 
bryozoa and porifera were included in the study and each distinct colony was counted as one individual, 
in accordance with similar studies (Dolmer, 2002)..  
2.4.2 
Sediment and habitat structure 
In addition to the abundance data, several semi-quantitative data were extracted to describe the 
ecosystem 
complexity 
and 
habitat 
builders 
(A3. 
Table 
and 
A4 
Table). 
The ecosystem complexity included abiotic sediment type, vegetation and biogenic substrate.  Three 
abiotic sediment were considered: mud, sand and ‘rocks and pebbles’. The latter, ‘rocks and pebbles’, 
was found always combined with the other two types. For vegetation three categories were considered: 
foliose 
macrophyte, 
filamentous 
macrophyte 
and 
seagrass. 
Habitat builders or biogenic substrate was categorized as alive blue mussel beds (M. edulis), alive oyster 
beds (O. edulis) and shell debris. These three ecosystem complexity features would have a total 
coverage of 100% together (A4 Figure). Therefore, the total coverage included the sum of the three 
==PAGE:14==
coverages: abiotic sediment, vegetation and biogenic substratum. They were indeed, correlated between 
them and dependent from each other. 
It was also extracted the coverage of epiphytic mat present on each image. This explanatory variable 
was independent from the others as it was not summing with the rest. At the final analysis the coverage 
of M. edulis beds (Figure 5) was the only habitat complexity included in the univariate analysis. Sand 
coverage was considered as it explains some of the epifauna composition (A3 Figure. B) but it was 
strongly correlated with M. edulis beds coverage. Epiphytic mat was used at the univariate analysis too, 
but no significant results were shown in any case. Table 5 summarized the average coverage of M. 
edulis beds along the different fishing periods and basins.  
2.5 
Fishing factor 
As part of the Danish Mussel Policy, all vessels operating in Natura2000 areas are required to carry on 
board ‘black-box’ devices which log the vessels geographic location and register fishing activity by the 
winch (starting or ending of fishing time). Compared to other forms of fisheries surveillance devices, 
black-box data is highly spatially accurate, as a position is recorded every 10 seconds. This resource 
facilitated the creation of highly spatially accurate maps of fishing activity, from which it was determine 
‘fished’ 
and 
‘non-fished’ 
areas. 
The years for which black-box data was available varied for each basin, but data was generally available 
for the period 2011-2017 (Table 6 and Figure 6). Depth was measured from the fishing vessel Egon P, 
owned and operated by the Danish Shellfish Centre (DSC) meanwhile fieldwork was done. 
2.6 
Statistical analyses 
A conceptual outline of the laboratory and statistical analyses is presented in Figure 7. Significance was 
accepted at the upper 95% confidence limit in both multivariate and univariate analysis. For both 
multivariate and univariate analysis 20 images per transect were used (see section 2.6.1 for second 
standardization applied for Horsens basin too). Although, for the former the epifauna was sum by 
transect, therefore, transects were the replicates, and both explanatory and habitat builder’s coverage 
data was averaged. For univariate analysis it was used the 20 images as replicates within each transect. 
Transects with zero abundances of all taxa were excluded from both multivariate and univariate analysis 
==PAGE:15==
2.6.1 
 Standardization 
Two different standardization in the number of samples units per transect were applied before the 
statistical analysis. The first standardization applied was based on the AC’s curves results (Figure 4). 
The orange line lays on the sample unit number 20 where the curves reach an asymptote shape, it is the 
case for all basins but Horsens. This meant that even increasing the sampling effort no more species 
were likely to be sampled after 20 images. At the other hand, after the filtering process, most of the 
transects had at least 20 images (Figure 8). Therefore, it was not needed to extrapolate the sampling. For 
those transects with several images (> 20) a randomize selection of 20 images was done 
(https://www.random.org/lists/, 05/04/2018).  Although, this standardization lead to a loss of 
information (Melo et al., 2003) from the largest sampled transects. Therefore, it was decided to apply 
another standardization of 100 images per transect for Horsens basin. Three reasons engage this 
decision. First Horsens was the only basin which did not reach an asymptotic shape of the AC’s curve 
(Figure 4). Consequently, more sampling effort was needed to have a complete sampling of the area. 
Secondly, to avoid the lost of information carried by the 20 images standardization. Thirdly, Horsens 
had more of the transects categorized as ‘high quality’ (A2 Table).  
Both standardizations were used along the univariate analysis to check if this loss of information had an 
influence in the output results. For multivariate analysis was used the 20 images standardization.  
2.6.2 
Multivariate analysis 
Multivariate analysis of similarity ANOSIM (Analysis of Similarities, Clarke and Green, 1988; Clarke 
1993) is a non-parametrical test which operates on a ranked dissimilarity matrix considering the counts 
in each site (Bray Curtis dissimilarity matrix). ANOSIM is widely used by community ecologists and it 
is employed to compare the variation of species abundance and composition among sampling units 
(Clarke and Warwick, 1993). The resulting R statistic is constrained between the values −1 to 1. 
Positive numbers suggest more similarity within sites, therefore dissimilarity between groups. Negative 
values suggest more similarity between sites, therefore dissimilarities are greater within groups than 
between groups. This latter situation rises the possibility of wrong assignment of samples to sites 
(Clarke 
and 
Warwick, 
1993).  
An ANOSIM two ways crossed test was done to the 5 basins and the two-level fishing factor.  
Abundance of epifauna from each transect was calculated as the sum of individuals in the 20 images to 
==PAGE:16==
have one value in each response variable per transect (Table 7). Regarding coverage data, these were 
calculated by taking the mean coverage of a given variable by the 20 images analysed (A2. Table). 
ANOSIM was conducted with PRIMER software package (Clarke and Gorley, 2001) generating a 
dissimilarity matrix with all the epifauna species (excluding habitat builder’s taxa). A non-metric 
multidimensional scaling plot (nMDS) was generated to represent the ANOSIM results (Figure 9). 
2.6.3 
Univariate analysis 
Gross community metrics used included the number of individuals (N) and the species richness (S). 
These were calculated with PRIMER 6 (Plymouth Routines in Multivariate Ecological Research, Clarke 
and Gorley, 2006). Besides, individual response variables were tested and the two main mobility groups 
too. Transects with a taxa abundance of zero were excluded from the analysis (Table 7 and Figure 10). 
Løgstør and Nissum were not included in the univariate analysis due to the lack of statistical power 
(Table 6). Consequently, the analysis was carried to Horsens, Lillebælt and Lovns basins. The two 
factors tested were time since last fishing period and M. edulis beds coverage. Both standardizations 
were used for Horsens, the other two basins, Lillebælt and Lovns, the analysis was carried with the 20 
images standardization.  
To be able to use the non-parametrical Kruskal -Wallis test of variance (K-W) two of the following 
assumptions needed to be met: normalized data or equality distribution of variances. None of the taxa 
was normally distributed. Therefore, a Levene’s test (L) of equality of variances of non-normally 
distributed data was done. If the result was significant (p < 0.05) neither of the two assumptions was 
met. Consequently, K-W test could not be used. K-W is non-parametric and testes for differences in the 
medians between groups within the factor levels (Table 8). When significant differences for K-W test 
were found (p < 0.05) related to M. edulis beds coverages factor, a post-hoc analysis with Dunn test was 
done (packages “dunn.test” and “FSA”). Dunn test is a non-parametric pairwise multiple comparisons 
procedure based on rank sums. When K-W null hypothesis is rejected it is used as a post hoc procedure 
to identify the levels of the factor tested where the significant differences occurred (Table 9). The 
fishing factor did not have more than two levels; therefore, Dunn test was not applied.  
==PAGE:17==
3. Results 
3.1 
Assessment a low cost under water video methodology 
Video and stills photography, provided by using Campods and drop-frame methodology is a valuable 
non ‐ destructive method of assessing all types of seabed habitats at small scale but at high resolution  
3.1.1 
 UW video transects – using a still image approach  
The quality of photographs and video images depends largely on water clarity. The chances of  
encountering good visibility can be increased by deploying the equipment at slack ‐ water periods. 
The quality and versatility of the equipment are critical in determining the success of surveys (Rees, 
2009). The Campod is an efficient tool for obtaining high‐resolution video, photographic imagery of 
habitat type and epibenthic organisms. Although, for the present study the equipment was more likely to 
be considered a Campod prototype. 
A total of 9h and 5 min of video footage were analysed, covering 5 basins (Figure 1) covering a sum of 
55 transects.  A number of 1,873 ± 95.27 images were extracted and categorized by quality value (A1 
Table). Along the way 19 transects had to be excluded from the final analysis (Table 2). Also, almost 
half of the images were unused too. The main reason for its exclusion was due to bad quality footage 
related to weather conditions coupled with the prototype nature of the sampling equipment. Strong 
winds during the field campaign linked with poor visibility and currents made the video recording and 
the ability to keep it still on the seafloor difficult.  
To extract the images from the video footage, it was crucial to use the built in VLC image 
editing/manipulation software to undertake back and forward loops and slow video motion footage 
(VLC software). Time was included in the images when captured so it would be known the time span of 
the transect and the time distance between one drop and the other.  
When processing the images basic image editing needed to be done. White balance, filter application, 
colours correction, brightness and saturation were the most common precedents applied (Figure 3). 
Some transects had to be modified through different set of setting along the footage as changes on 
surrounding light would happen and the image quality would therefore decrease (Figure 3). 
==PAGE:18==
Data extraction resolution had different layers of quality. Regarding species identification, from the 9 
selected taxa used for the study. Three of them could not be identified to more than class (Ophiuroidea 
indet., Ascidiacea indet. and Porifera indet.), and one could be categorized to family (Paguridae indet). 
Therefore, from the response epifauna four taxa were taxonomically identify at specie level (Table 4). 
Related to coverage, when quantifying the ecosystem variables like sediment, vegetation or biogenic 
substrate it was decided to get a result of 100% coverage taking all variables into account. Doing so all 
variables were indeed dependent one from the other.   
As each image represents 0.25 m2 of seabed, and 20 images were taken per transect a total area of 5 m2 
is covered by transect. From table 2 it can be calculated that video transects covered 468.2 ± 23.8 m2 
along the 5 basins although the area analysed in the present study was 185 ± 8.1 m2. No measurements 
of size and weight were done. Further to this, the leap fogging nature of the image collection meant that 
a continuous stitched image of the seabed was not possible. This is as the camera system was lowered 
and raised from the seabed along the transect, and the depth of the camera was not constant throughout.  
3.1.2 
Images sampling effort  
Species accumulation curves (ACs) did not reach an asymptote for any station, therefore Chao1 index 
non-parametrical estimation of diversity was used based on individual photos (Figure 4). Horsens was 
the basin that had the highest estimated richness (9.50 ± 7.19) at one of its non-fished transects (transect 
9).  Horsens presented lower Chao1 estimation at fished areas and Lovns the opposite having the fished 
transects a higher estimated richness being 4.0 ± 0.91 (transect 1) and the in non-fished the lowest (1.00 
± 0.0 at transect 8). The AC’s from Lillebælt and Løgstør, from both fished and non-fished areas, 
displayed mixed results. In both, the highest values were from fished transects, with 6.96 ± 5.29 for 
Løgstør and 5.63 ± 1.55 for Lillebælt. Regarding non-fished transect Løgstør had highest estimation 
6.00 ± 4.19 and Lillebælt was 4.00 ± 0.83. Nissum just had one transect fished therefore it could not be 
compared. Although this only transect, had a richness mixed with the non-fished AC’s. Nissum 
maximum 
estimation 
was 
6.26 
± 
2.34 
(Figure 
4) 
at 
non-fished 
transect 
2. 
Within the Limfjord basins the difference between the highest and the lowest estimated richness is three 
species, meanwhile at the basins situated at the inner Danish waters this difference increases to six 
species.  
==PAGE:19==
3.2 
Epifauna taxa analysis: community composition and abundance.  
3.2.1 
Multivariate analysis of epifauna community composition in correlation to basin and mussel 
fisheries  
Multivariate results from the ANOSIM two-way cross test between basins and the two-levels fishing 
factor showed significant differences in epifaunal composition done by the former (ANOSIM, Global R 
= 0.225 and p = 0.002). Meanwhile across basins the fishing factor did not present any significant 
differences. An nMDS plot was generated to represent the results (Figure 9). The plot is based on the 
total sum of epifauna abundance per transect. From pairwise tests, the largest differences in faunal 
composition are between Nissum and Lovns (r = 0.53, p = 0.02), Nissum and Horsens (r = 0.48, p = 
0.009) and Lillebælt (r = 0.47, p = 0.01). Løgstør is closer to Nissum (r = - 0,01, p = 0.50) in fauna 
composition than to the other basins. Lovns presents an alike fauna composition when compared to 
Lillebælt (r = - 0,05, p = 0.60) or Horsens (r = 0.07, p = 0.30). ANOSIM results indicate that basin is 
driving the particularities of the epifaunal composition and might be masking the factors of more 
interest for the present study. Therefore, it was decided that instead of analysing the whole mussel 
fisheries ground as a single unit, to check for each basing. This way a more precise fishing factor could 
be included from the black box data and mussel’s beds coverage could be used as a factor.   
3.2.2 
Univariate analysis of epifauna abundance in correlation to mussel fisheries and M. edulis 
substrate  
In other to test if the differences in abundance among basins are caused by either fisheries activities or 
by mussel bed’s coverage (ecosystem complexity) it was used the univariate approach. Univariate 
analysis by basin were done to each response epifauna taxa (Table 4), the species richness, the number 
of individuals and the two mobility groups (mobile and sessile). A Leven’s test of homogeneity of 
variance for non-parametrical data, and, when applicable, Kruskal-Wallis was tested. Results are 
presented in table 8. Lillebælt and Lovns are considered to show long-term effects after fishing 
episodes. Lovns had transects fished 2 years before the sampling and Lillebælt from 3 years before the 
sampling. Horsens was considered to show short-term fishing effects as the transects were fished 
between one year before the sampling or during the same year of sampling.  
==PAGE:20==
3.2.2.1 
Number of individuals (N), species richness (S) and mobility trait groups  
The number of individuals (N) and number of species (S) varied when analysed towards the fishing 
periods in Lovns (p = 0.02) and Horsens (p = 0.002) (Table 8. A – B – C). Also, at Lovns both mobility 
groups were different in its abundances (sessile group p = 0.02 and mobile group p = 0.002) regarding 
the two different fished periods (Table 8.A). At Lillebælt the sessile group had different abundances (p 
= 0.03) but in this case related to mussel bed coverage factor (Table 8.C). Those differences were found 
when the coverage of mussel beds decrease from medium to low (p = 0.008) (Table 9.A). Overall, the 
number of individuals and amount of species present was affected by the fishing factor at two of the 
basins. Meanwhile, mobile epifauna had different abundances amongst fishing periods at Lovns and 
sessile epifauna was different in abundances at Lillebælt, when the amount of mussel beds coverage 
decreased from medium to low.  
Horsens second standardization resulted in differences not only for the number of individuals and 
species (p << 0.01) but also for both mobility traits groups (p << 0.01) amongst the two factors (Table 
8.D). Dunn test results are shown in table 9.B with extremely significant levels (p << 0.001) on both 
mobility traits when coverage was different from higher to lower levels (Table 9). Biotic metrics also 
showed differences when high coverage varied to lower (p << 0.01) or to no coverage (p < 0.01) at all 
(Table 9.D). 
3.2.2.2  Individual sessile and mobile taxa abundance 
3.2.2.2.1 
Lovns 
 
At Lovns significantly differences in abundance of A. equina and M. senile were found between areas 
fished in 2015 and 2011 (p = 0.01) (Table 7.A). Biogenetic substrate was found not significant along the 
taxa tested. Consequently, fishing influences the abundance of the sessile group A. equina and M. senile.  
3.2.2.2.2 
Lillebælt 
 
Lillebælt basin is the only with presence of Flustra foliacea (Table 7), being its abundance different (p 
= 0.02) (Table 8.B) when biogenic substrate is tested. From Dunn pairwise test, it was shown that those 
abundance differences happened when M. edulis beds coverage went from medium coverage, highest 
coverage was not present in the area, towards lower coverages (Table 9.A). F. foliacea, just present at 
Lillebælt, seems to depend on the availability of mussel’s beds substrate.  
==PAGE:21==
3.2.2.2.3 
Horsens second standardization  
 
From sessile taxa, A. equina and M. senile group abundances were significantly different among areas 
fished in 2017 and areas fished in 2011 (p <<0.001) (Table 8.D). The same taxa presented differences in 
abundance (p = 0.02) regarding biogenic substrate when coverage differed from high to low (p =0.03) 
and high to medium (p = 0.01) or from low to none coverage (p = 0.03; Table 9.B).  
Regarding mobile taxa, differences in abundance of Asterias rubens were found when fishing (p << 
0.001) and M. edulis beds coverage (p = 0.02) were tested. The latter differences were found between 
high mussel’s beds coverage and medium (p = 0.04) and at the same time when medium coverage was 
compared to no-coverage (p = 0.04; Table 9.B). Abundances of Gastropoda indet. also differed in its 
abundance in function of M. edulis coverage factor (p = 0.002) (Table 7.C). This abundance difference 
was when mussel beds went from high or medium coverage towards not being coverage present at all 
(Table 9.B).  
In this case, A. equina and M. senile group and A. rubens happened to be influenced in abundances by 
both factors. At the other hand, Gastropoda indet. abundance depended on mussel beds coverage.   
4. Discussion 
The present study aimed to assess epifauna composition if either fishing or ecosystem complexity (M. 
edulis beds coverage) were the main drivers for the observed patterns related to the number of 
individuals, species richness, sessile and mobile epifauna groups and single epifauna taxa along the 
mussel fisheries grounds investigated.  
4.1 
Video sampling methodology 
The Campod is an efficient tool for obtaining high-resolution video and consequently high-resolution 
still images of habitat type and epifauna organisms, although it is only used on relatively small spatial 
scales (Rees, 2009). Besides, only a small footprint on the sea-floor is left as a side-effect (Rees, 2009). 
The quality of the images is linked strongly with weather conditions, as water clarity, it is crucial to 
sample when there are slack-water periods. If weather conditions are not optimal the footage will not 
provide high-resolution data. This quality image dependency is because the frame is suspended above 
the seabed and therefore, it will move with the motion of the surface vessel, making the viewing of the 
==PAGE:22==
image unpleasant in rough weather conditions. Because of this extremely sensitivity, the Campod 
method was not a robust methodology to be applied in the present study. In relation to the large amount 
of time used to collect and analyse the video, the quality of the final still images and its value in 
evaluating fisheries effects on epifauna, the method was not optimal. Around 50% of the sampling 
material was lost along the filtering and selection process (Table 3). For monitoring proposes, accurate 
comparisons of images from the same transect taken at different times are needed. Therefore, camera 
positioning is highly important. One sampling technique that could be used is images of fixed plots. 
This way, comparisons between different years could be done. A better suggestion would be to use 
either a low cost Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUV’s) or low cost Remote Operated Vehicles 
(ROVs) (Rumohr, 2013). Both systems would maintain a constant scale, able to take images at regular 
intervals and capturing 3D images of the area. Those two facts would allow quantitative measurements 
and ease the standardization. If compared to infauna methodologies, it would allow to cover a larger 
area than core sampling and reduced the laboratory time (A.1 Figure). The cost and time-consuming 
methodology for surveying benthic infauna and identifying the collected organisms suggests that 
focusing on epifaunal organisms could be more cost-effective for monitoring management action (de 
Juan et al., 2009). By using those video sampling techniques fishing pressure could also be studied 
based on the size of organism and the position in relation to the seafloor. A higher fishing pressure has 
been correlated to asexual reproduction of species like M. senile leading to have a small size than in 
other areas where fishing does not occur (Riis et al., 2003). In order to quantify size the organism have 
to be at the same level plane within the field of view of the camera (same distance from the camera), be 
at the same orientation for size measurements and the scale have to remain constant (Hinz et al., 2011).  
However, what would make the swift to UV technics is its strength to sample broad areas in a cost-
effective way, its replicability and easy standardization. Fisheries ecosystem-based management is 
aiming to reach a better understanding of how the ecosystem functions to use its natural resources 
accordingly. Optimizing the yield and minimizing the costs or risks. Assessment and further modelling 
of mussel stocks would be reach through underwater video technics, instead of current sampling, as it 
works in a scale in where more ecosystem features could be included, for instance epifauna, the 
coupling between the benthos and the pelagic systems.  
==PAGE:23==
4.1.1 Sampling design and field campaigns  
Using non-extractive methods during scientific surveys should be encouraged, especially when fragile 
species are present (MÉRILLET et al., 2017). Video sampling is a method which provides a true picture 
of the quantitative composition of the epifauna (Jørgensen et al., 2016). Extractive techniques have an 
impact on biodiversity, which may not be desirable in the context of monitoring conservation strategies 
(Ices CM and Acom, 2016). When sampling epifauna patchy assemblages in ecosystems several 
numbers of images are needed to cover the area. Therefore, the acquirement of a constant video footage 
at constant scale and distance from the sea-bottom is a more solid methodology to capture the whole 
picture of the area. This can be standardized and used at several sampling years to compare and monitor 
of the evolution of the ecosystem along time. 
The sampling was hampered by poor weather conditions coupled with the prototype nature of the 
equipment used in this pilot study. A monitor system on board, to keep track of how the video footage 
was being recorded, would have been beneficial. Alternatively, videos could have been checked on land 
to provide information of the quality of the images being captured and whether this could be improved 
by gear and sampling adjustments. There were four main reasons why a large amount of data was lost 
(Figure 2), resulting in the discard of images and whole transect data (Table 3). Firstly, not all legs or 
none of the legs of the equipment on the sea-floor made the scale not be trustable and changed the field 
of view (Figure 2.A and C). Secondly, not all the quadrant inside the image made the area not equal 
across the images analysed (Figure 2. B). Thirdly, plumes of suspended sediment when the equipment 
landed on the sea-floor made some images blurry (Figure 2.D-E). Lastly, unfocused image made the 
identification of taxa impossible (Figure 2. F). The three first reasons could probably have been reduced 
by a monitoring system on boar the research vessel. Furthermore, the fishing periods were acquired 
once the sampling was done. Black box data was not available beforehand, resulting in an unbalanced 
design lacking in statistical power. Therefore, the basins Løgstør and Nissum were excluded from the 
univariate analysis (unequal replication of the transects (Table 6)). Black box data and underwater video 
as low cost AUV’s or ROV’s, generate high resolution data covering large areas. From the present study 
it was proven that the sampling design is crucial to reach a robust statistical power to allow the analysis 
of the studied area. If the equipment available is not the most suitable for the purposes of the study, then 
special attention should be paid when planning the monitoring campaign and the sampling. Therefore, 
==PAGE:24==
for further studies those factors should be considered to improve the sampling campaign and make it 
easy to generate statistical solid results. 
4.1.2 Data extraction 
The benefit of video sampling is it gives a true picture of the quantitative distribution of the larger 
epifauna organisms that can be identified (Jørgensen et al., 2016). Using constant scale, a picture of the 
whole ecosystem could be analysed and compared. As the methodology resulted in ‘leap-frogging’ it 
was not possible to extract information between the drops to the sea-floor, therefore the total transects 
were reduced to only a few still images, with consequences to the type of data collected. Low density 
and highly patchy species, such as the common starfish, Asteria rubens (Linnaeus, 1758), or highly 
mobile species such as large decapods, were underrepresented in the dataset.   
All explanatory variables, including the biogenic substrate M. edulis beds, related to habitat complexity 
were extracted as coverage. The coverage sums of them accounted for the 100% seen at the image. This 
approach was decided to have a precise description of the features present in the image.  Consequently, 
this precision made the ecosystem complexity variables to be strongly correlated. For instance, when 
more sediment coverage was present in an image, inevitably less percentage of the other ecosystem 
complexity variables could be present. As M. edulis coverage was two of the main factors to be studied, 
to see its influence on epifauna abundance, the other ecosystem complexity had to be excluded from the 
analysis. For further studies, sediment type could be extracted from GIS shape files avoiding such 
correlation. It is known that fauna types differ depending on the sediment (Hinz et al., 2011). For 
example, the sediment type sand, would have been included as a factor as it explains some of the 
epifauna composition (A.1 Figure. B). Biogenic substrate as mussel beds or oyster beds could be sized if 
the scale along the transects is constant. By doing so, sediment type and biogenic substrate would be not 
correlated. Deeper analysis regarding synergies and exploring relationships between fisheries and 
ecosystem complexity could be done. Dredging is meant to lead to several changes in the habitat 
structure (Kaiser et al., 2006). The effects of trawling on structuring fauna in the Kattegat on deep-
muddy sediments where fauna is less adapted to physical pressure due to the low natural disturbance on 
such sea-floor types (Pommer et al., 2016). Mussel fisheries therefore, could potentially influence 
structuring organisms. In images where macroalgae were present, it was not possible to extract 
information on sessile or mobile epifauna because of the macroalgae cover.  When it comes to analysis 
==PAGE:25==
of diverse assemblages, such as the ones associated with rocks, 2D video methodologies as “leap-
frogging” might not be the best method to monitor, as no 3D dimension was captured.  
Equipment like low cost ROVs (Remote Operating Vehicles) or low cost AUV (Autonomous 
Underwater Vehicles) equipped, if darkness surroundings are expected, with 3D HDTV cameras 
(Rumohr, 2013) would allow those measurements by capturing a 3D image. If a higher resolution can be 
achieved, more accurate data can be extracted, for instance size and position. Therefore, the results 
might be more detailed for the propose of the study. Both systems would maintain a constant scale, 
allowing to take images at regular intervals, have a 3D image of the area, make quantitative 
measurements and be able to standardize the methodology for further comparation along different time 
periods. It would cover more area than core sampling and reduced extremely the laboratory time (A4 
Figure). In the present study, forwarding and reversing the video helped to optimize the extraction of the 
response data, identifying the taxa before the image got covered by plumes or in the right time when all 
legs where on the sea-floor.   
Abundance data included nine epifauna taxa. Sessile taxa was selected based on its vulnerability to 
dredging, based on the assumption that large-bodied individuals with limited mobility and a fragile body 
tend to be most affected by trawling (Hinz et al., 2011). Mobile epifauna was based on its feeding 
strategy. For examples, starfish has been found in high numbers where high trawling intensity was 
present (Hinz et al., 2009) as a possibly response to elevated food availability in form of biota killed or 
damaged by trawling. Also, A. rubens has several feeding sources, but it has been proved that mainly 
feeds on M. edulis (Agüera, 2015) and they can potentially be a threat to biogenic reefs (Canal-Vergés 
et al., 2014).  Another example would be Ophiuroidea indet. which have been found in other studies to 
be present within the following 48h after the ecosystem suffers an alteration (Sciberras et al., 2018). 
Both sessile and mobile epifauna taxa, were selected, also considering the function they played in the 
ecosystem and the availability of the observer to identify them. From those 9 taxa, 4 groups were 
identified at the species level. Therefore, a low resolution regarding species composition was reached 
which is one of the limitations linked to video sampling technics (Mérillet et al., 2017).  
==PAGE:26==
4.1.3 Standardization and species richness 
Using sample size to compare assemblages may produce erroneous conclusions driven by the strong 
positive relationship between species richness and sample size (Melo et al., 2003). To equal sample 
sizes, extrapolating data from the smallest samples to the largest was considered. This method ensure 
that samples are comparable in size and that information is not lost, which occurs when the 
standardization size is applied to the smallest sample (Melo et al., 2003). Therefore, it was decided to 
use 20 images, as the majority of the transects met these criteria after the filtering process. However, for 
Horsens basin a second standardisation was applied. Here, 100 images were selected due to the AC’s 
curves, which curves were not reaching an asymptote. An indication that sampling was not complete at 
the area. The second standardization aimed to test if, by increasing the number of images, more 
information was gained. It was assumed that not all species present were detected. Therefore, Chao1 
richness extrapolation index to make AC’s was selected.  
Chao1 is a richness estimator which assume that many undetectable or invisible species occurred in 
those assemblages (Chao and Chiu, 2016). It also assumes that rare species are nearly homogeneous in 
its detection probabilities. Ergo, rare species could be heterogeneously spread. Chao1 fulfil the 
ecosystem analysed in the present study where species were patchy distributed, and the equipment used 
did not allow to perceive the 3D structure of diverse assemblages. Although the mentioned limitation, 
Chao1 index provided valuable information. Horsens (9.5 ± 7.19) was the basin with higher species 
richness, followed by Løgstør (6.96 ± 5.29), Nissum (6.26 ± 2.34), Lillebælt (5.63 ± 1.55) and finally 
Lovns (4.00 ± 0.91) presented the lowest values. Løgstør and Nissum have similar values, which could 
be related to the fact that both have connectivity with either the Kattegat or the North Sea. Horsens and 
Lillebælt are place where the water exchange from the Baltic Sea to the Kattegat occurs. Therefore, 
more species would be present, that could be a reason of why the difference between the highest 
estimation and the lowest estimation richness presented a value of 6 species in those basins. Which is 
double from the basins at the Limfjord which was 3. It is coherent that Lovns basin had the lowest 
estimation richness as it is the most isolated basin in the Limfjord, therefore no source of recruitment is 
nearby. 
The second standardization, conducted on Horsens data, showed that this basin needed a higher 
sampling effort compared to the rest of the basins. Different epifauna abundance results were found with 
==PAGE:27==
this second standardization. The limitations of this extrapolation are that it relies on a small number of 
images, which subsequently had to be used four times to complete the set of 100 images (Figure 8). 
Epifauna is over-dispersed on the seabed, clumping in high abundances (Rumohr, 2013). Benthonic 
assemblages are patchy in distribution and abundance. Patchiness is known to be mostly drive by 
external processes which could be cause of both anthropogenic or natural causes (Rumohr, 2013). The 
latter encompasses events like storms or oxygen depletion which could destroy those assemblages. As 
anthropogenic dredging is considered to have severe consequences on benthonic clumps (Smith et al., 
2006; Rumohr, 2013; Sciberras et al., 2018;). In the Limfjord between the 15 – 20% of the area suffers 
from oxygen deficiency (< 2 mg l-1) and from 5 – 10% is affected by dredging (Dolmer and Frandsen, 
2002). Therefore, the studied areas are expose to both externalities, consequently it is characterized by a 
high patchiness distribution of its epifauna.  
4.2 
Epifauna taxa analysis: community composition and abundance.  
Examination of the epifaunal samples suggests that, at the studied basins, higher sessile species richness 
was present at non-fished areas compared to fished areas (Table 7). A greater number of individuals (N) 
were present in non-fished areas. Sessile epifauna numbers were higher at non-fished areas and mobile 
epifauna numbers were higher at fished areas (Figure 10). Two basins slipped from those patterns, 
Lovns and Løgstør, which had the opposite patterns. The two basins place at inner Danish waters, the 
numbers and densities of taxa within the dredged areas are typically lower compared with the non-
fished areas. Meanwhile, in Limfjord the opposite occurs (Table 7). 
4.2.1 
Multivariate analysis of epifauna community composition in correlation to basin and mussel 
fisheries  
The results indicated that basin factor played a major role (p = 0.002) compared to that of fishing. 
Therefore, the geolocation of them and its physical and chemical particularities make the fauna 
composition to differ. In fact, some taxa analysed occurred only in one or two of the basins. For 
instance, Flustra foliacea was present only in Lillebælt. Nissum basin had the fauna composition most 
different compared to the rest (Figure 9). Although it presented an equal fauna composition towards 
Løgstør, mostly because they share the presence of Ophiuroidea indet. taxa (Table 7). Although, Nissum 
and Løgstør could be considered to represent quite different environmental conditions as they are place 
==PAGE:28==
at opposite extremes of the Limfjord. Nissum is the western basin connected with the North Sea and 
Løgstør the eastern basin connected with the Kattegat (Figure 1). Those two mentioned water bodies are 
habitats for Ophiuroidea indet., therefore, they are a source of recruiting population. Across the inter-
connection they could have reach the basins and settle as the physical conditions were adequate and 
because of the food resource availability. Ophiuroidea indet. was present in Nissum (transect 1 and 3) 
and in Løgstør (transect 5). The two species at Limfjord of Ophiuroidea indet. are either suspension 
feeders or feed from deposit organic matter from the ground. In those transects a thick layer of epiphytic 
mat was present (A3. Table). Consequently, elevated abundances of Ophiuroidea indet. in those areas 
appear to have been sustained for long time following the cessation of dredging.  
Lillebælt, Horsens and Lovns happened to present a similar fauna composition although with different 
patterns. Lovns is the system that reacts opposite to the others. Lovns is placed at the south of Limfjord 
and is the most isolated basin. It presents a minimum water exchange and insignificant tides which 
make it unique in its physical characteristics. Lillebælt and Horsens are fjords located along the Kattegat 
and inner Danish waters (Figure 1). As the basin factor had such an influence in the fauna composition, 
each basin was studied individually and therefore a more specific fishing factor could be applied.  
As strong influences regarding basin were detected it was decided to break down the areas into single 
basin analysis to detect possible influences on epifauna abundance related to mussel fisheries or 
biogenic substrate (M. edulis beds) 
Two of the basins couldn’t be analysed due to lack of statistical power mostly based on the great loss of 
images due to a non-high-resolution sampling with the Campod leading an unbalanced design.  
4.2.2 
Univariate analysis of epifauna abundance in correlation to mussel fisheries and M. edulis 
substrate by basin 
4.2.2.1 
Lovns 
Lovns transects were last time fished in 2015 therefore it was considered to show the long-term fishing 
effects. From AC’s it was appreciated that Lovns had different patterns than the other 4 basins 
presenting a higher Chao1 estimation at fishing transects (Figure 4). Lovns is located at the southern 
part of the Limfjord which is considered to be one of the most eutrophicated where oxygen depletion 
occurs every year (Riisgård et al., 2012). Therefore, Lovns system is constantly under disturbance 
==PAGE:29==
allowing the settlement of competitive species which can deal with these physical and chemical 
conditions. Both biological metrics had significant results when fishing was tested (Table 8.A). Fished 
areas had higher species richness and higher number of individuals. These differences in the biological 
metrics could be explain by the ecosystem complexity on the areas. All the non-fished transects were 
placed on mud substrate with a high coverage of epiphytic mat and filamentous macrophytes. These two 
variables would make the spotting of species more difficult as they could have been present but covered. 
At the other hand, the fished transects had sand as substrate with some rocks and pebbles too, higher M. 
edulis beds coverage and almost absent coverage of filamentous macroalgae (A.3. Table). All those 
ecosystem complexity variables increased the diversity of niches able for a higher number of species to 
settle, for instance A. equina, M. senile or Porifera indet (Table 8.A). Hard substrate availability as 
rocks, pebbles or M. edulis beds made from those fished transects a convenient area for several sessile 
species to settle and with them the mobile epifauna will come in search for food resource. In fact, those 
two mobility groups where also found in significantly different abundances (Table 7.A) when 
comparing fished and non-fished areas. From the sessile group, the mentioned group of A. equina and 
M. senile happen to have a significantly different distribution too. M. senile in other studies has shown 
to be a dominant spatial competitor colonizing bare substrata and consuming free-swimming larvae and 
repelling recruits that actively avoid settling near them (Riis et al., 2003). Lovns water exchange is 
almost absent and has been proved that larvae of this plumose anemone are stimulated by water flow to 
spread (Riis et al., 2003). During the year 2013 M. senile was the most frequently observed specie on 
cultivated mussels from the Limfjord (Marine and Report, 2017). Which means that numerous larvae 
might be in the basin without chances to spread out from it. This would have made this plumose 
anemone capable to settle in newly fished areas 2 years ago and settle thanks to its dominance in spatial 
competition and the resource availability. Measurements on size would have allow for testing 
differences among fishing pressures at Lovns fjord. The population structure of M. senile reflects the 
conditions of the surrounding environment when water flow is low they tent to maximise its body size 
to reach a greater food supply (Riis et al, 2003). Asexual reproduction will decrease body size of the 
organisms but will ensure survival. Those physical characteristics of the basin, together with the oxygen 
depletion, the patchy distribution of the epifauna, the salinity range and the high eutrophication, make 
Lovns extremely particular. In the present study, M. edulis beds coverage was found to be higher in 
==PAGE:30==
average along Lovns basin than any other basin (Table 5), even at fished transects. Therefore, neither 
physical characteristics of the basin, passed dredging activity or high abundances of A. rubens, 
considered a potential regulatory factor for blue mussel stocks (Petersen et al., 2016), had an severe 
influence on M. edulis. For further studies, the way mussel beds are display in the space could be 
studied by measuring its size and shape. From videos it was observed that most of the mussel’s beds 
were positioned in long lines on the sea-floor. The position and shape of this macrozoobenthic specie is 
important when defending from predators as A. rubens (Agüera, 2015). The eutrophication provides 
food resource to this filtering organism which can be exploited. By growing it acts as a bioremediation 
tool for the recovery of the area which is of first priority (Dolmer and Frandsen, 2002). Has been 
publish that the annual landing of 100,000 t of mussels corresponded to a removal of nutrients 
equivalent to 7% of the annual nitrogen input and 40% of the annual phosphorus input from the 
watershed (Dinesen, Grete E.et al., 2011). 
4.2.2.2 
Lillebælt 
Lillebælt basin is the deepest and has the stronger currents of the analysed basins in the present study. 
Flustra foliacea specie was only present in this basin and it might be linked to the mentioned physical 
characteristics. These colonial animals depend on the currents to breath as they do not have a respiratory 
system and they feed by passive filtration of phytoplankton, detritus and dissolve organic matter (Riis et 
al., 2003). Besides, it presented different abundance subjected to M. edulis coverage (Table 7.B). 
Mussels are habitat builders, they provide refugee for several fauna species in different life stages, 
engage the benthic-pelagic food chain and provide hard substrate for sessile epifauna to attach. The 
results found are similar to other studies were this bryozoan was found attached to hard substrata as 
gravel, shell debris and blue mussels (Riis et al., 2003). Flustra foliacea was present where several 
ecosystem features rocks and pebbles, shell debris, medium to high blue mussel beds coverage and 
macroalgae were found too (Table 9.A). As 3D image was not able, where it was more abundant it 
couldn’t be seen below if other epifauna was there too. Complex ecosystems required a more precise 
sampling which would allow to study the 3D structure of the samples (Mallet and Pelletier, 2014). 
Therefore, this specie could be an indicator of the ecosystem complexity status as its presence is bond to 
several ecosystem features. In fact, the sessile taxa mobility group showed to be significantly different 
==PAGE:31==
in its abundances when mussel beds coverage factor was tested, therefore to assess the status of the 
ecosystem to target sessile species is recommended.  
4.2.2.3 
Horsens 
At Horsens basin the ACs did not reach an asymptote curve (Figure 4), therefore Horsens never was 
sampled completely. Even without a complete survey, differences were found regarding both biotic 
metrics when testing for fishing time periods (Table 8.B). From the 7 epifaunal species found at 
Horsens, just 5 were present at fished transects with low number of individuals (Table 7). The other two 
species, which were present at non-fished transects, were sessile epifauna. A higher coverage of rocks 
and pebbles were present in those areas. Consequently, ecosystem complexity plays a role on the 
settling of sessile species. As has been seen in other studies (Riis et al., 2003; Smith et al., 2006), 
predatory species such as the starfish Asterias rubens, were observed to move into an area following 
disturbance of the sea-bed. Those results were based on experimental fishing studies. In table 7 the 
abundances of A. rubens and Carcinus maenas were higher in non-fished transects than fished areas. 
This could be because of the spatial distribution and shape of the mussel aggregates. They appear to be 
large aggregates which might be difficult for predators as A. rubens to feed on. It has been studied that 
predator’s species will stay in one area if food resource is available (Smith et al., 2006). Therefore, 
predator species might have move to areas where food resource was easier to get as the non-fished areas 
of Horsens were mussel beds were more spread and smaller.  
When applying the second standardization of 100 images two taxa presented different abundances when 
fisheries factor was tested (Table 8.D).  A. rubens and M. senile were more abundant at non-fished 
areas. The fishing disturbance is responsible for creating a new food source (Smith et al., 2006) 
therefore it was expected that A. rubens would be found in higher abundances in fished areas. Although 
it was not what was found in this study. Fished areas presented a higher abundance of mussel beds, 
clumped in large numbers. Consequently, to explain the absence of A. rubens in fished areas could be 
explain through the optimal diet theory (ODT) in which is explained that predators select prey items to 
optimize net energetic gain. Mussel beds with higher abundances, means that the attachment system gets 
more complex (Agüera, 2015) and the predator may chose to move where easier prey can be caught. 
Also, a larger portioning of niches in the non-fished areas would increase the chance for A. rubens to 
feed in other food resources. Starfish has a preference for blue mussels but it is indeed a generalist 
==PAGE:32==
predator (Agüera, 2015). The presence of rocks and pebbles might have led M. senile to settle at the 
non-fished areas as hard substrate is available in the area. Size measurements M. senile reflects the 
conditions of the surrounding environment (Riis et al., 2003), consequently it could be interesting for 
further studies. Both taxa and Gastropoda indet. where differently distributed too if mussel beds 
substrate were present (Table 8.D).  M. senile was more abundant when higher mussel’s coverage 
(Table 9.B) meanwhile Gastropoda indet. had the opposite pattern (Table 9.B). The latter could not have 
been detected when mussels’ beds were found in high abundances as they are small organism that could 
have been covered. In fact, the differences in abundances were when comparing high coverages of blue 
mussels towards no coverage (Table 9.B). In the case of M. senile, those abundances differ when high 
substrate vary to medium or low (Table 9.B). The availability of hard substrate is therefore influencing 
the settling of this sessile taxa (Riis et al., 2006).  
4.3 
Management  
Within an ecosystem-based approach to fisheries management, a better understanding of the temporal 
variations in spatial patterns of biodiversity is needed (Mallet and Pelletier, 2014). Monitoring and 
assessment should include macroinvertebrates resources as they have an important ecosystem role 
coupling the benthic to the pelagic ecosystem. Underwater video is a tool which will allow fulfilling 
those gaps. Besides of providing direct observations of species in their natural habitat, the methodology 
is not invasive which make them more convenient for monitoring protected areas. The ability of video 
systems to produce many observations can also be used in a spatial perspective, for instance to 
investigate changes in macrofauna composition and to correlate those communities with environmental 
variables or anthropogenic pressures. Ecosystems alike the included in the present study, are 
characterized by presenting a patchy distribution of the epifauna, with several extensions bare sediment 
areas. A broad spatial sampling is needed to have a complete picture of the present status in order to 
carry an ecosystem-based management approach. Although the present study had several issues related 
to the sampling design and the unbalanced analysis of the data it has been proved that image monitoring 
is a strong tool in assessing habitat status in a short time and in a cost-effective way. At basins with 
enough sampling it was possible to assess fishing effects on epifaunal composition and most important 
it was given a broad description of the ecosystems complexity and its relationship with the epifauna 
present. Also, the Limfjord basins, have been heavily exploded and shaped by human pressures as 
==PAGE:33==
fishing activities or the constant nutrients’ runoff from agricultural practices. Those have led to anoxia 
episodes, loss of water’s clarity and consequently the regression of protected seagrasses (Cymodocea 
nodosa) and loss of several commercial fish species. Fisheries ecosystem management-based approach 
would meet the aims of EU Water Frame Directive (WFD) environmental directives regarding water 
quality (reduction of total nitrogen inputs) with the exploitation of aquatic resources. Mussel farming 
would be a win – win scenario as it affects the nutrient cycle of the sound by exporting nutrients from 
the system. It has been estimated that the annual landing of 100,000 t of mussels corresponded to a 
removal of nutrients equivalent to 7% of the annual nitrogen input and 40% of the annual phosphorus 
input from the watershed (Dinesen, Grete E.et al., 2011).   
5. Conclusion 
Seabed video and camera surveys provide a low cost, non-destructive, and quantitative method to assess 
benthic community composition and structure over large geographic areas. Furthermore, these 
techniques provide information on species and habitats which are un-sampled or damaged using more 
traditional technics. As the studied areas are under the conservation umbrella of Nature 2000 a shift 
towards video-based sampling methodologies is needed to reduce the impact to the ecosystem during 
field collections. 
From this study it has been shown that underwater video (UV) could provide a useful tool in the 
monitoring of fisheries effects on epifaunal communities. Sessile long-life spam organisms are key 
ecosystem components when it comes to assess dredging impacts. The mechanical action of the dredge 
damages both, sessile epifauna and the substrate where they settle.  Therefore, by setting management or 
monitoring strategies around those species, which some of them occurred to be basin specific, is a 
promising methodology to stablish a long-term monitoring programme to detect changes of the 
ecosystem.  
Ecosystems under constant disturbances have epifaunal composition patterns linked to physical and 
chemical processes. Consequently, in areas subject to high levels of disturbance, fisheries effects can be 
masked. More research is needed including variables as oxygen depletion which is known to have a 
high mortality effect on M. edulis populations.  
==PAGE:34==
A deeper study on the space layout, shape and complexity of mussel matrices is in need to understand 
the prey – predator dynamics from A. rubens. Starfish is found in high abundances along the fishing 
units studied and it is an increasing issue challenging mussel fisheries management. Furthermore, to 
sustain the ecological services, which the European protection figures attempt to maintain, the 
knowledge of how mussel’s association with its conspecifics functions is crucial to understand how they 
naturally avoid predation. Besides, the area studied host several species which are feeding in the same 
natural resource as mussel fisheries. Therefore, a certain number of beds need to be kept holding the 
ecological services of the area. If a better understanding of the beds complexity and functionality 
through simple size and shape measurements of the clumps could be acquired, it could be a 
breakthrough in fisheries ecosystem-based management.  
When the equipment necessary to carry such study is available it would be possible to substitute current 
sampling methodology based on destructive and invasive technics as scientific dredging. Consequently, 
the assessment to mussel fisheries could be based on bed’s coverage becoming an easier and cost – 
effective way to predict and model mussel stocks. However, from the present study M. edulis beds 
coverage was extracted, therefore a pilot modelling study could be carried in a near future.  
Acknowledgements 
The author wishes to thank the PhD Ciaran McLaverty who, besides from being a supervisor from the 
present master thesis, took care of its development. He also carried the field campaigns where the video 
sampling was done.  Also, thanks to the rest of the supervisors involved, Ole E. Eigaard and Jens 
Kjeruful Petersen. Specially thanks to Grette E. Dinesen who, besides from being a supervisor too, spent 
long afternoons addressing the structure of the paper. The author also thanks the Danish Shellfish Centre 
institution who provide the necessary human, logistic and economic resources to proceed with fields 
campaigns and provide the fishing effort data from the Black box placed on the fishing boats. Finally, 
thanks to Danish Technical University and particularly the Aqua section to hold the Aqua & 
Technology (A&T) master’s programme which have allowed the author to do the present master thesis. 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
 
-Fenchel, T. Oecologia (1975) 20: 19. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00364319 
 
 
6. References 
Agüera, A., 2015. The role of starfish ( Asterias rubens L .) predation in blue mussel ( Mytilus eludes L 
.) seedbed stability https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.1.3866.3524 
Brand, A.R., Maar, M., Andrews, J.W., Tjørnelund, S., Vilsund Blue, M., Parken, F., 2014. Intertek 
Fisheries Certification (IFC) 10A Victory Park Victory Road INTERTEK FISHERIES 
CERTIFICATION Denmark Blue Shell Mussel and Cockle Dredge Fishery FINAL REPORT 
Client name(s) and address Intertek Fisheries Certification (IFC). 
Canal-Vergés, P., Nielsen, P., Nielsen, C.F., Geiter, K., Petersen, J.K., 2014. Konsekvensvurdering af 
fiskeri på blåmuslinger i Lovns Bredning 2014/2015. DTU Aqua. 
Chao, A., Chiu, C.-H., 2016. Species Richness: Estimation and Comparison. 
Dalsgaard, T., 2003. Benthic primary production and nutrient cycling in sendiments with benthic 
microalgae and transient accumulation of macroalgae. Limnol. Oceanogr. 48, 2138–2150. 
de Juan, S., Demestre, M., Thrush, S., 2009. Defining ecological indicators of trawling disturbance 
when everywhere that can be fished is fished: A Mediterranean case study. Mar. Policy 33, 472–
478. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2008.11.005 
Dinesen, Grete E.; Timmermann, K.; Roth, E.; Markager, S.; Ravn-Jonsen, L.; Hjorth, M.; Holmer, M.; 
Støttrup, J.G., 2011. Mussel production and Water Framework Directive targets in the Limfjord, 
==PAGE:36==
Denmark: an integrated assessment for use in system-based management Research, part of a 
Special Feature on A Systems Approach for Sustainable Development in Coastal Zones. Ecol. Soc. 
https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-04259-160426 
Dolmer, P., Frandsen, R., 2002. Evaluation of the Danish mussel fishery: suggestions for an ecosystem 
management approach. Helgol. Mar. Res. 56, 13–20. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10152-001-0095-6 
Dolmer, P., Geitner, K., 2004. Integrated Coastal Zone Management of cultures and fishery of mus- sels 
in Limfjord , Denmark. 
Hinz, H., Prieto, V., Kaiser, M.J., 2009. Trawl disturbance on benthic communities: chronic effects and 
experimental predictions, Ecological Applications. 
Hinz, H., Tarrant, D., Ridgeway, A., Kaiser, M.J., Hiddink, J.G., 2011. Effects of scallop dredging on 
temperate reef fauna. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. https://doi.org/10.3354/meps09166 
Ices CM, Acom, 2016. ICES WGDEC REPORT 2016 International Council for the Exploration of the 
Sea Conseil International pour l’Exploration de la Mer. 
Jørgensen, L.L., Planque, B., Thangstad, T.H., Certain, G., 2016. Vulnerability of megabenthic species 
to trawling in the Barents Sea. ICES J. Mar. Sci. https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsv107 
Jylland, V., 2015. Horsens Fjord 1–18. 
Kaiser, M.J., Clarke, K.R., Hinz, H., Austen, M.C.V., Somerfield, P.J., Karakassis, I., 2006. Global 
analysis of response and recovery of benthic biota to fishing. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 
https://doi.org/10.3354/meps311001 
Mallet, D., Pelletier, D., 2014. Archimer Underwater video techniques for observing coastal marine 
biodiversity : A review of sixty years of publications ( 1952 – 2012 ). Fish. Res. 154, 44–62. 
==PAGE:37==
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fishres.2014.01.019 
Marine, A., Report, P.C., 2017. MSC SUSTAINABLE FISHERIES CERTIFICATION Limfjord Blue 
Shell Mussel ( Rope grown ). 
Melo, A.S., Pereira, R.A.S., Santos, A.J., Shepherd, G.J., Machado, G., Medeiros, H.F., Sawaya, R.J., 
2003. Comparing species richness among assemblages using sample units: Why not use 
extrapolation methods to standardize different sample sizes? Oikos. https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1600-
0706.2003.11893.x 
Mérillet, L., Kopp, D., Robert, M., Salaün, M., Méhault, S., Bourillet, J.F., Mouchet, M., 2018. Are 
trawl marks a good indicator of trawling pressure in muddy sand fishing grounds? Ecol. Indic. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2017.11.016 
MÉRILLET, L., MOUCHET, M., ROBERT, M., SALAÜN, M., SCHUCK, L., VAZ, S., KOPP, D., 
2017. Using underwater video to assess megabenthic community vulnerability to trawling in the 
Grande Vasière (Bay of Biscay). Environ. Conserv. 1–10. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0376892917000480 
Meyer, K.S., Sweetman, A.K., Young, C.M., Renaud, P.E., 2015. Environmental factors structuring 
Arctic megabenthosâ€”a case study from a shelf and two fjords. Front. Mar. Sci. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2015.00022 
Miljøministeriet, 2011. Vandplan 2009-2015. Nissum Fjord, Jylland. 
Petersen, J.K., Gislason, H., Fitridge, I., Saurel, C., Degel, H., Nielsen, C.F., 2016. Fiskeri efter 
søstjerner i Limfjord Fagligt grundlag for en forvaltningsplan Fiskeri efter søstjerner i Limfjord 
Fagligt grundlag for en forvaltningsplan. 
Rees, H.L., 2009. ICES TECHNIQUES IN MARINE ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCES GUIDELINES 
==PAGE:38==
FOR THE STUDY OF THE EPIBENTHOS OF SUBTIDAL ENVIRONMENTS International 
Council for the Exploration of the Sea Conseil International pour l’Exploration de la Mer. 
Riis, A., Dolmer, P., Riis, A., 2003. The distribution of the sea anemone Metridium senile (L.) related to 
dredging for blue mussels (Mytilus edulis L.) and flow habitat. Ophelia 57, 43–52. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00785236.2003.10409504 
Riisgård, H.U., Andersen, P., Hoffmann, E., 2012. From Fish to Jellyfish in the Eutrophicated Limfjord 
(Denmark). Estuaries and Coasts. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12237-012-9480-4 
Rönnberg, C., Bonsdorff, E., 2004. Baltic Sea eutrophication: Area-specific ecological consequences, 
in: Hydrobiologia. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:HYDR.0000019238.84989.7f 
Rumohr, C.J.S. and H., 2013. METHODS FOR THE STUDY OF MARINE BENTHOS METHODS 
FOR THE STUDY OF MARINE BENTHOS Fourth Edition Library of Congress Cataloging-in-
Publication Data, Fourth Edi. ed. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Sciberras, M., Jan, |, Hiddink, G., Jennings, S., Claire, |, Szostek, L., Kathryn, |, Hughes, M., Kneafsey, 
B., Leo, |, Clarke, J., Ellis, N., Adriaan, |, Rijnsdorp, D., Robert, |, Mcconnaughey, A., Hilborn, R., 
Jeremy, |, Collie, S., Pitcher, | C Roland, Amoroso, R.O., Ana, |, Parma, M., Suuronen, | Petri, 
Michel, |, Kaiser, J., 2018. Response of benthic fauna to experimental bottom fishing: A global 
meta-analysis. Fish Fish. 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1111/faf.12283 
Smith, R., Boyd, S.E., Rees, H.L., Dearnaley, M.P., Stevenson, J.R., 2006. Effects of dredging activity 
on epifaunal communities - Surveys following cessation of dredging. Estuar. Coast. Shelf Sci. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecss.2006.04.026 
Wilson, K.L., Allen, M.S., Ahrens, R.N.M., Netherland, M.D., 2014. Use of underwater video to assess 
freshwater fish populations in dense submersed aquatic vegetation. Mar. Freshw. Res. 66, 10–22. 
https://doi.org/10.1071/MF13230 
==PAGE:39==
Supplementary material 
Appendix A. 
I. 
Table A1. Metadata and detail information about the transects by basin. In grey at the last 
column there are marked the transects that were used for the final analysis.  
II. 
Figure A1. From (a) to (d) graphs with the sessile and mobile abundance (nº of individuals per 
image) plotted against different factors related to substrate (%): (a) rock and pebbles sediment 
coverage, (b) sand sediment coverage, (c) mud sediment coverage, (d) epiphytic mat coverage 
(%). (e) Correlation graph between M. edulis beds coverage (%) and sand sediment coverage 
(%). 
III. 
Figure A.2. Comparison of the features of the various general methods available (Eleftheriou, 
2011.). 
IV. 
Figure A.3. Species and taxa found at the images: (A) Gastropod indet. (Løgstør transtect t2), 
(B) Asterias rubens (Lillebælt transect 6), (C) Flustra foliacea (Lillebælt transect 10), (D) 
Portiferea indet. (Lillebælt transect 10), (E) Metridium senile (Løgstør transect 6), (F) Carcinus 
maenas (Løgstør transect t1), (G) Ophiuroidea indet. (Nissum transect 1), (H) Bryozoan indet. 
(Nissum transect 2), (I) Ascidiacea indet. (Nissum transect 8), (J) Actiniaria indet. (Logstro 
transect 6), (K) Callinacetes sapidus (Løgstør transect 2), (L) Paguridae indet. (Horsens transect 
3), (M) Actinia equina (Nissum transect 9). 
  
 
 
Foreword (optional): Motivation, personal statement (Natural Science and Communication → 
Management). Which journal is followed: Journal of Shellfish Research (Journal of Sea Research) 
ARTICLES cover all aspects of shellfish research, including: •Biology •Ecology •Physiology 
•Biochemistry •Pathology •Fisheries •Aquaculture •Management 
 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:41==
 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Maps of the studied area, the 5 sampled basins are present with white marks indication the location of the transects (A). 
Horsens fjord basin (B), Littlebaelt channel basin (C), Løgstor basin fjord system (D), Lovns fjord system basin (E) and Nissum fjord 
system basin (F). From B to F fishing area and sediment type are shown. 
 
 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Examples of images that were not valid for the analysis. None of the legs on the floor (A), the frame is not completed on the image (B), not all legs on the floor (C - 
D - E), plume make it not possible to see the image (E - F) and unfocussed (F). 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Image editing from the initial photo extracted from the video to other settings that would allow to see better what is there. Image extracted from the video with already some 
settings modified (A), first image edition (B) and second image edition (C). 
 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
Figure 4. Correlation graph between abundance of epifauna (nº of individuals/image) by Mytilus edulis 
beds coverage (%). In yellow is highlighted the thresholds of the factor M. edulis beds coverage (%).  The 
R2 values for both mobility epifauna groups are at the top right side of the graph.   
 
 
==PAGE:46==
 
 
Figure 5. Number of transects in the study by the last year they were fished (Black box data). 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
 
Figure 6. Conceptual outline of statistical analysis conducted in the present study. 
 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Species Accumulation curves (AC’s) from row number of images extracted from the video. Based on Chao1 estimator calculation. Standard error is shown as pale blue 
bars for non-fished transects and pale red bars for fished transects. Red: Fished transects and Blue: none fished transect. Orange line at 20 images is the minimum number of 
images needed to have a complete sampling from the area to standardize all basin sampling effort. 
 
==PAGE:49==
 
 
Figure 8. Number of images per transect and basin once images with errors have been filtered. Yellow 
line indicates the number of images which were used to standardized across transects. Error 1-4 (See 
section 2.2). 
 
==PAGE:50==
 
Figure 9. nMDS plot overlaid with the basins (H: Horsens, LB: Littlebælt, Lg: Løgstor, Lv: Lovns and Ni: Nissum) 
and the two-level fishing factor (F: fished and nF: none-fished). 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
    
 
 
 
Figure 10. Abundance of each response taxa by the two levels fishing factor (F: fished; nF: none fished) and by basin. Sessile taxa (A) and mobile taxa (B) by 
percentages. Sessile and mobile taxa (C) relative percentages. The abundances are based on the sum of the 20 images in each transect, Horsens basin abundance was 
also calculated with the sum of 100 images. 
 
==PAGE:52==
Table 1. Type of data extracted from images along each transect and the five basins. 
Descriptive data 
Semi-quantitative data 
Quantitative data 
Brief description by transect, 
overall view.  
Sediment coverage (sand, mud and 
rocks/pebbles) 
Vegetation coverage (Macrophytes 
filamentous, macrophyte foliose and seagrass) 
Biogenic substrate coverage (alive M. edulis 
and O. edulis beds and detritus shells) 
The 9 groups of 
epifauna where 
registered as count 
data 
 
==PAGE:53==
Table 2. Table gathering by basin the number of initial transects and images after sampling, number of images after the filtering process, number of final transects and 
images. The last column has the total meters analysed by basin.  
Basin 
Nº of initial 
transect 
Nº of initial 
images (0.25 m2) 
Nº images after 
filtering (errors 1-4) 
Nº of final transects 
Nº of final images 
(0.25 m2) 
Total final transects 
length (m) 
Horsens 
11 
316 
295 
10 
200 
91,264.39 
Lillebælt 
10 
340 
251 
8 
160 
1,357.35 
Løgstør 
16 
621 
377 
7 
140 
2,225.69 
Lovns 
10 
346 
256 
6 
120 
2,056.99 
Nissum 
8 
308 
151 
5 
100 
824.18 
Total 
55 
1,931 
1,330 
36 
720 
97,728.6 
 
==PAGE:54==
 
Table 3. Total number of transects per basin and use of the area (fished and non-fished). Number in 
brackets stands for initial sampled transects. 
Basin 
Nº of transects 
Fished 
Non-fished 
Horsens 
10 (11) 
4 (5) 
6 (6) 
Lillebælt 
8 (10) 
4 (5) 
4 (6) 
Løgstør 
7 (16) 
4 (9) 
3 (7) 
Lovns 
6 (9) 
3 (5) 
3 (4) 
Nissum 
5 (9) 
1 (4) 
4 (5) 
 
==PAGE:55==
Table 4. Tonomy of mobile epifauna group, sessile epifauna group and habitat builders epifauna group include in further analysis for this study 
(http://www.marinespecies.org/, 10/04/2018) 
Study 
code 
Common 
name 
Phylum 
Class 
Order 
Family 
Genus 
Species 
Authority 
S1 
Tunicate 
Chordata 
Ascidiacea  
Indet. 
  
  
  
Blainville, 1824 
S2 
 
Sea tomatoe 
Cnidaria 
Anthozoa 
Actiniaria 
Actiniidae 
Actinia 
A. equina 
Linnaeus, 1758 
Sea anemone 
Cnidaria 
Anthozoa 
Actiniaria 
 Indet.  
  
 
- 
Plumose sea 
anemone 
Cnidaria 
Anthozoa 
Actiniaria 
Metridium 
Metridium 
M. senile  
Linnaeus, 1761  
S3 
Sponge 
Porifera 
Indet. 
  
  
  
  
Grant, 1836 
S4 
Bryozoan 
Bryozoa 
 Gymnoleamata 
Cheilostomatida
  
Flustridae  
Flustra  
F. foliacea 
Linnaeus, 1758  
M1 
Shore crab 
Arthropoda 
Malacostraca 
Decapoda 
Carcinidae 
Carcinus 
C. maenas 
Linnaeus, 1758 
Crab 
Arthropoda 
Malacostraca 
Decapoda 
Portunidae 
Callinectes 
C. sapidus 
Rathbun, 1896 
M2 
Hermit crab 
Arthropoda 
Malacostraca 
Decapoda 
Paguridae 
Indet.   
  
Latreille, 1802 
M3 
Starfish 
Echinodermata 
Asteroidea 
Forcipulatida 
Asteriidae 
Asterias 
A. rubens 
Linnaeus, 1758 
M4 
Brittle star 
Echinodermata 
Ophiuroidea 
Indet. 
  
  
  
Gray, 1840 
M5 
Gastropod 
Mollusca 
Gastropoda 
Indet. 
  
  
  
Cuvier, 1795 
H1 
Blue Mussel 
Mollusca 
Bivalvia 
Mytilida 
Mytilidae 
Mytilus 
M. edulis 
Linnaeus, 1758 
H2 
Oyster 
Mollusca 
Bivalvia 
Ostreida 
Ostreidae 
Ostrea 
O. edulis 
Linnaeus, 1758 
 
==PAGE:56==
Table 5. Mean coverage values of M. edulis beds per image by basin and last year of fishing event.  
 
2017 
2016 
2015 
2014 
2013 
2012 
2011 
Horsens 
22.72 ± 0.03 
1.05 ± 0.04 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
3.62 ± 0.03 
Lillebælt 
NA 
NA 
NA 
7.29 ± 0.15 
NA 
NA 
2.12 ± 0.02 
Løgstør 
NA 
3.30 ± 0.03 
NA 
NA 
0.9 ± 0.17 
9.20 ± 0.94 
4.82 ± 0.01 
Lovns 
NA 
NA 
2.00 ± 0.69 
NA 
NA 
29.13 ± 0.66 
18.27 ± 0.03 
Nissum 
NA 
0.55 ± 0.04 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
1.94 ± 0.01 
 
==PAGE:57==
Table 6. Black box data related to the last fishing episode by basin. In brackets the number stands for the initial 
sampled transect. The number out of the brackets stands for the transects analysed. The grey background stands for 
those time periods which were used together to increase the number of replicates.  
 
2017 
0 years 
2016 
1 year 
2015 
2 years 
2014 
3 years 
2013 
4 years 
2012 
5 years 
≤ 2011 
≤ 6 years 
Total transects 
Horsens 
3 (3) 
1 (1) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
6 (6) 
10 (11) 
Lillebælt 
- 
- 
- 
4 (5) 
- 
- 
4 (6) 
8 (10) 
Løgstør 
- 
1 (2) 
0 (3) 
- 
1 (2) 
2 (2) 
3 (7) 
7 (16) 
Lovns 
- 
- 
3 (3) 
- 
- 
1 (2) 
2 (4) 
6 (9) 
Nissum 
- 
1 (3) 
0 (1) 
- 
- 
- 
4 (5) 
5 (9) 
 
==PAGE:58==
Table 7. Sessile and mobile epifauna abundance based on the basin which were found and if they were either in a fished (F) or a none fished (nF) area. The abundance of 
epifauna is based on the sum of 20 images, notice that for Horsens basin there is also an abundance (sum) of 100 images. In brackets is the number of transects analysed. 
 
Sessile epifauna 
Mobile epifauna 
Ascidiacea 
indet. 
Actinia equina and 
Metridium senile 
Porifera 
indet. 
Flustra 
foliacea 
Carcinus maenas and 
Callinectes sapidus 
Paguridae 
indet. 
Asterias 
rubens 
Ophiuroidea 
indet. 
Gastropoda 
indet. 
Horsens 
20 
images 
F (4) 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
0 
3 
nF (6) 
4 
6 
2 
0 
3 
2 
5 
0 
7 
100 
images 
F (4) 
3 
0 
0 
0 
7 
4 
0 
0 
22 
nF (6) 
8 
21 
9 
0 
15 
21 
16 
0 
21 
Lillebælt 
F (4) 
0 
0 
0 
2 
6 
1 
7 
0 
3 
nF (4) 
0 
1 
7 
11 
0 
0 
4 
0 
3 
Løgstør 
F (4) 
6 
3 
3 
0 
8 
1 
16 
106 
3 
nF (3) 
1 
5 
1 
0 
2 
0 
12 
1 
12 
Lovns 
F (3) 
1 
7 
1 
0 
2 
0 
5 
0 
8 
nF (3) 
1 
0 
0 
0 
2 
0 
0 
0 
1 
Nissum 
F (1) 
6 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
3 
102 
2 
nF (4) 
40 
10 
9 
0 
14 
0 
7 
107 
4 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
Table 8. Table with p-value of Levene (L) analysis of variance and Kruskal – Wallis (K-W) non-parametric test analysis 
presenting the chi-square (χ2), the degrees of freedom (df) and the p-value (p). The taxa significantly different statistically is 
shown on bold. The three firs tables (A – B – C) are the results form 20 images standardization, the last table stands for Horsens 
results from the 100 images standardization (D).   
A 
Lovns  
Sessile taxa 
group 
A.equina 
and M. 
senile 
Mobile 
taxa 
group 
Number of 
individuals (N) 
Species 
richness (S) 
Last fishing 
period on 
2015 and 
2012/2011 
L  
0.10 
0.19 
0.10 
0.10 
0.06 
K-W 
χ2 
5.90 
9.40 
9.20 
9.40 
9.20 
df 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
P 
0.02 
2e-3 
2e-3 
2e-3 
2e-3 
 
B 
Lillebælt 
Sessile taxa 
group 
Bryozoa indet. 
Last fishing 
period on 
2014 and 
2011 
L  
0.20 
0.12 
K-W 
χ2 
3 
2.20 
df 
1 
1 
p 
0.08 
0.1 
Mytilus 
edulis beds 
(%) 
L  
0.66 
0.47 
K-W 
χ2 
7 
7.80 
df 
2 
2 
p 
0.03 
0.02 
 
 
C 
Horsens  
Number of 
individuals (N) 
Species richness (S) 
Last fishing 
period on 
2017/2016 
and 2011 
L  
0.22 
0.23 
K-W 
χ2 
0.17 
0.24 
df 
1 
1 
p 
0.02 
0.02 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:60==
 
D 
Horsens  
Sessile 
taxa 
group 
A. equina 
and M. 
senile. 
Mobile 
taxa 
group 
Asterias 
rubens 
Gastropoda 
indet. 
Number of 
individuals 
(N) 
Species 
richness 
(S) 
Last 
fishing 
period on 
2017/2016 
and 2011 
L  
0.13 
0.20 
0.49 
0.07 
3e-3 
0.13 
0.07 
K-W 
χ2 
74 
12 
49 
8.1 
- 
12 
13 
df 
1 
1 
1 
1 
- 
1 
1 
p 
2e-16 
7e-4 
3e-12 
4e-3 
- 
5e-4 
4e-4 
Mytilus 
edulis 
beds (%) 
L  
0.86 
0.72 
0.44 
0.54 
0.13 
0.20 
0.06 
K-W 
χ2 
320 
10 
140 
7.1 
15 
24 
24 
df 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
p 
2e-16 
0.02 
2e-16 
0.07 
2e-3 
2e-5 
2e-5 
 
==PAGE:61==
Table 9. Table with the post hoc results from Dunn test. Z value and p-value are shown. Lillebælt results from the 20 images standardization (A), Horsens results from 
the 100 standardization (B). In bold are highlighted the statistically significant results.  
 
A 
Lillebælt 
 Flustra foliacea 
Total sessile taxa 
Mussel coverage 
Z 
p-value 
Z 
p-value 
Low 
Medium 
-2.79 
5e-3 
-2.62 
8e-3 
None 
-1.33 
0.18 
-1.51 
0.13 
Medium 
None 
2.10 
0.03 
1.80 
0.07 
 
 
B 
Horsens 
Actinia equina 
and Metridium 
senile 
Total sessile taxa 
Asterias rubens 
Gastropoda indet. 
Total mobile 
taxa 
Number of 
individuals (N) 
Species richness 
(S) 
Mussel coverage 
Z 
p-value 
Z 
p-value 
Z 
p-value 
Z 
p-value 
Z 
p-value 
Z 
p-value 
Z 
p-value 
High 
None 
1.52 
0.13 
13.17 
1.29e-39 
0.99 
0.32 
-2.07 
0.04 
8.12 
4.57e-16 
2.95 
3.19e-3 
-2.46 
0.01 
Low 
-2.13 
0.03 
11.13 
8.50e-29 
1.75 
0.08 
-0.90 
0.36 
8.67 
4.32e-18 
-1.54 
0.13 
-1.55 
0.12 
Medium 
2.43 
0.01 
2.82 
4.83e-3 
2.09 
0.04 
0 
1 
1.98 
4.73e-2 
0.71 
0.47 
0.72 
0.47 
Medium 
none 
-1.78 
0.07 
13.52 
1.13e-41 
-1.97 
0.04 
-2.83 
4e-3 
7.95 
1.93e-15 
-4.52 
5.24e-6 
-4.51 
6.55e-6 
Low 
0 
1 
-10.41 
2.27e-25 
0.60 
0.54 
1.16 
0.25 
-8.39 
4.88e-17 
2.95 
3.19e-3 
2.97 
3.01e-3 
Low 
none 
-2.13 
0.03 
1.64 
0.10 
-1.51 
0.13 
-1.77 
0.08 
-2.21 
2.69e-2 
-1.29 
0.19 
-1.25 
0.21 
 
==PAGE:62==
1 
 
 
Supplementary material 
A1 Table. Metadata and detail information about the transects by basin. Last column highlighted in grey the transects which were used for the final analysis. 
Basin 
Nº of 
Transects 
Use 
Depth (m) 
Video (decimal 
degrees) 
Video out (decimal 
degrees) 
Length 
video 
(min: 
seg) 
Length 
transect 
(m) 
Nº of 
videos 
N º of initial 
images 
(images after 
filtering) 
Value 
data 
Reason transect 
was not 
considered for 
study or stayed 
in 
Out 
Longitude 
Latitude 
Longitude 
Latitude 
Horsens 
11 
 
T1 
Fished 
10.1 
9.8 
10.095 
55.792 
10.094 
55.791 
10:44 
90.53 
1 
36 (36) 
3 
Used 
T2 
Non-
fished 
10 
10.1 
10.117 
55.810 
10.117 
55.810 
11:24 
63.31 
1 
36 (36) 
3 
Used 
T3 
Non-
fished 
10.3 
10.1 
10.139 
55.797 
10.138 
55.796 
6:57 
98.27 
1 
22 (21) 
2 
Used 
T4 
Fished 
9.5 
9.1 
10.380 
55.895 
10.380 
55.896 
8:26 
68.71 
1 
34 (33) 
3 
Used 
T5 
Non-
fished 
10.6 
8.9 
10.354 
55.892 
10.354 
55.893 
6:40 
139.08 
2 
33 (32) 
3 
Used 
T6 
Non-
fished 
11.2 
10.8 
10.373 
55.895 
10.373 
55.895 
7:49 
33.29 
1 
28 (28) 
3 
Used 
T7 
Fished 
8.1 
8.8 
10.324 
55.897 
10.324 
55.898 
11:11 
101.28 
1 
29 (29) 
3 
Used 
T8 
Fished 
9.1 
9.1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
07:26 
- 
 
1 
9 (9) 
1 
Short in images. 
Bad quality of 
video footage 
T9 
Non-
fished 
8.4 
8.7 
10.343 
55.894 
10.344 
55.894 
7:39 
21.57 
1 
33 (32) 
3 
Used 
T10 
Non-
fished 
9.7 
10.5 
10.351 
55.880 
10.351 
55.881 
7:16 
118.35 
2 
31 (29) 
3 
Used 
T11 
Fished 
9.3 
10.9 
10.354 
55.905 
10.353 
55.907 
7:51 
90.530 
1 
27 (24) 
3 
Used 
==PAGE:63==
2 
 
 
 
 
 
Basin 
Nº of 
Transects 
Use 
Depth (m) 
Video (decimal 
degrees) 
Video out (decimal 
degrees 
Length 
video 
(min 
: seg) 
Length 
transect 
(m) 
Nº of 
videos 
N º of initial 
images 
(images after 
filtering) 
Value 
data 
Reason transect 
was not 
considered for 
study 
In 
Out 
Longitude 
Latitude 
Longitude 
Latitude 
Lillebælt 
 
 
10 
T1 
Fished 
12.8 
8.4 
9.866 
55.331 
9.867 
55.333 
9:26 
173.66 
1 
31 (31) 
2 
Used 
T2 
Non-
fished 
8.3 
8.8 
9.855 
55.342 
9.858 
55.342 
9:38 
339.46 
1 
32 (30) 
3 
Used 
T3 
Non- 
fished 
12.2 
12.1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
4:34 
- 
1 
16 (-) 
1 
Not all angles on 
the sea floor. Bad 
quality footage. 
T4 
Fished 
12.1 
9.2 
9.743 
55.318 
9.744 
55.319 
7:45 
190.11 
1 
29 (26) 
3 
Used 
T6 
Non-
fished 
12.2 
8.3 
9.742 
55.327 
9.742 
55.326 
17:49 
184.92 
2 
69 (54) 
3 
Used 
T7 
Fished 
7.4 
7.6 
9.842 
55.285 
9.843 
55.285 
12:16 
130.71 
1 
33 (26) 
3 
Used 
T8 
Non-
fished 
9.3 
6.1 
9.278 
 
56.661 
9.276 
56.661 
10:44 
142,31 
1 
40 (20) 
3 
Used 
T9 
Non-
fished 
10.1 
9.1 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
8:39 
- 
1 
11 (11) 
2 
Short in images 
and unfocussed 
T10 
Non-
fished 
12.2 
9.6 
9.710 
55.301 
9.720 
55.279 
14:21 
102.47 
2 
61 (31) 
3 
Used 
T11 
Fished 
8.8 
10.3 
9.722 
55.278 
9.746 
55.292 
7:39 
236.02 
1 
20 (20) 
3 
Used 
 
==PAGE:64==
3 
 
 
 
 
Basin 
Nº of 
Transects 
Use 
Depth (m) 
Video 
(decimal degrees) 
Video out 
(decimal degrees 
Length 
video 
(min-
sec) 
Length 
transect 
(m) 
Nº  
of 
videos 
N º of initial 
images 
(images after 
filtering) 
Value 
data 
Reason transect 
was not 
considered for 
study or stayed 
in 
out 
latitude 
Longitude 
latitude 
longitude 
Løgstør 
16 
T1 
Fished 
7.4 
7.4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
9:48 
-- 
1 
21 (19) 
1 
Poor light and 
very unfocussed. 
T2 
Non- 
fished 
7.5 
7.5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
9:07 
- 
 
28 (18) 
2 
Unfocussed and 
not all angles on 
the sea-floor 
T3 
Non- 
fished 
7.1 
7.1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
14:08 
- 
2 
23 (-) 
1 
Frame not all in 
the image. 
T4 
Fished 
6.6 
6.6 
- 
- 
- 
- 
10:30 
- 
1 
21 (-) 
1 
Frame not all in 
the image. 
T5 
Non-
fished 
6.1 
6 
9.089 
56.980 
9.089 
56.982 
10:38 
212.38 
1 
33 (29) 
2 
Used 
T6 
Non-
fished 
6 
5.5 
9.055 
56.992 
9.057 
56.994 
9:09 
236.42 
1 
33 (30) 
2 
Used 
T7 
Non-
fished 
6 
5.4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
9:02 
- 
1 
58 (-) 
1 
Very unfocussed, 
multiple image 
editing settings 
T9 
Non-
fished 
6 
5.7 
9.065 
56.992 
9.067 
56.993 
9:03 
248.40 
1 
30 (28) 
2 
Used 
T10 
Fished 
4.4 
4.4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
21:13 
- 
- 
26 (-) 
2 
Good quality 
video. Not all 
frame on the 
image 
T11 
Non-
fished 
4.3 
4.3 
- 
- 
- 
- 
8:26 
- 
- 
12 (-)  
1 
Unfocussed, short 
on images. 
==PAGE:65==
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Basin 
Nº of 
Transects 
Use 
Depth (m) 
Video 
(decimal degrees) 
Video out 
(decimal degrees) 
Length 
video 
(min-
sec) 
Length 
transect 
(m) 
Nº  
of 
videos 
N º of initial 
images 
(images after 
filtering) 
Value 
data 
Reason transect 
was not 
considered for 
study or stayed 
in 
out 
longitude 
latitude 
longitude 
latitude 
Løgstør 
16 
T12 
Fished 
6.4 
6.4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
9:54 
- 
- 
53 (-) 
2 
Frame not all in 
the image. 
T1t 
Fished 
6.3 
6.3 
8.967 
56.939 
8.970 
56.941 
7:17 
371.69 
1 
42 (27) 
3 
Used 
T2t 
Fished 
7.5 
7.5 
8.991 
56.889 
8.997 
56.890 
8:51 
689.98 
1 
31 (30) 
3 
Used 
T3t 
Fished 
7.4 
7.4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
5:40 
- 
1 
14 (-) 
 
Short on images 
and not all angles 
on the sea-floor. 
T4t 
Fished 
6.5 
6.5 
9.056 
56.957 
9.058 
56.958 
5:40 
280.83 
1 
26 (20) 
2 
Used 
T5t 
Fished 
6.2 
6.2 
9.012 
56.978 
9.013 
56.980 
9:54 
185.99 
1 
36 (32) 
3 
Used 
Lovns 
10 
T1 
Fished 
3.8 
3.8 
9.245 
56.640 
9.2423 
56.640 
6:32 
277.99 
1 
27 (26) 
2 
Used 
T2 
Non- 
fished 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
28:57 
 
- 
1 
17 (12) 
2 
Short in images 
and very 
unfocussed. 
T3 
Non- 
fished 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
09:48 
- 
1 
29 (-) 
2 
Frame not all in 
the image 
T4 
Fished 
3.3 
3.5 
9.286 
56.688 
9.283 
56.688 
8:13 
287.51 
1 
21 (20) 
3 
Used 
T5 
Non-
fished 
4 
4.1 
9.190 
56.667 
9.188 
56.666 
20:19 
240.26 
3 
57 (44) 
2 
Used 
T6 
Non-
fished 
3.8 
3.2 
9.232 
56.682 
9.227 
56.680 
19:21 
535.64 
3 
70 (52) 
3 
Used 
T7 
Fished 
3.5 
4 
9.311 
56.656 
9.309 
56.657 
9:46 
230.24 
1 
40 (34) 
3 
Used 
T8 
Non-fished 
3.3 
3.2 
9.278 
56.661 
9.276 
56.661 
7:02 
263.50 
1 
37 (9) 
1 
Short in images 
 
==PAGE:66==
5 
 
 
 
 
Basin 
Nº of 
Transects 
 
Use 
 
Depth (m) 
Video 
(decimal degrees) 
Video out 
(decimal degrees) 
Length 
video 
(min-
sec) 
Length 
transect 
(m) 
Nº  
of 
videos 
N º of initial 
images 
(images after 
filtering) 
Value 
data 
Reason transect 
was not 
considered for 
study or stayed 
in 
out 
latitude 
longitude 
latitude 
longitude 
Lovns 
7 
T9 
Non- 
fished 
3.1 
3.7 
- 
- 
- 
- 
9:42 
- 
1 
19 (11) 
1 
Short in images 
T10 
Fished 
3.6 
3.9 
9.184 
56.627 
9.182 
56.627 
8:08 
283.35 
1 
26 (24) 
2 
Used 
Nissum 
8 
T1 
fished 
6.1 
6.1 
8.425 
56.582 
8.425 
56.583 
12:06 
138.74 
1 
41 (39) 
3 
Used 
T2 
non-
fished 
6.5 
6.5 
8.490 
56.596 
8.489 
56.596 
14:12 
150.37 
1 
53 (48) 
3 
Used 
T3 
non-
fished 
6.8 
6.8 
8.467 
56.591 
8.467 
56.593 
10:16 
184.43 
1 
38 (22) 
3 
Used 
T4 
Fished 
5.7 
5.7 
- 
- 
- 
- 
08:17 
- 
1 
20 (-) 
2 
Hight quality 
video. Not all 
frame in the 
image 
T6 
non-
fished 
6 
6 
8.341 
56.679 
8.340 
56.680 
6:42 
173.83 
1 
26 (26) 
3 
Used 
T7 
Fished 
7.1 
7.2 
- 
- 
- 
- 
7:31 
- 
1 
22 (-) 
2 
Not all frames in 
the image 
T8 
Non-
fished 
6.9 
6.9 
- 
- 
- 
- 
13:51 
- 
1 
48 (-) 
1 
Not all frame in 
the image 
T9 
non-
fished 
5.7 
5.6 
8.320 
56.566 
8.319 
56.613 
10:06 
176.81 
1 
36 (24) 
3 
Used 
 
==PAGE:67==
6 
 
 
 
 
A2 Table. Explanatory variables mean coverage and standard deviation by basin and by last year the transects were fished. 
 
 
Fishing 
Mud 
Rocks and 
Pebbles 
Sand 
Epiphytic mat 
Macrophyte 
laminaria 
Seagrass 
Macrophyte 
filamentous 
Mytilus edulis 
beds 
Ostrea 
edulis beds 
Shell detritus 
Horsens 
2017 
0 
0.33 ± 0.00 
55.8 ± 17.36 
34.78 ± 16.77 
0 
0.33 ± 0 
4.83 ± 4.07 
22.72 ± 0.03 
0 
16.57 ± 7.90 
2016 
0 
0 
63.45 ± 11.61 
79.5 ± 12.66 
0 
0 
0 
1.05 ± 0.04 
0 
35.50 ± 11.80 
2011 
24.85 ± 6.52 
3.06 ± 0.62 
40.59 ± 6.29 
69.00 ± 3.39 
3.24 ± 1.32 
0 
0.84 ± 0.26 
3.62 ± 0.03 
0.01 ± 0 
23.78 ± 1.96 
Lillebælt 
2014 
43.49 ± 12.58 
0.99 ± 0.28 
32.16 ± 9.72 
43.77 ± 8.89 
0.12 ± 0.03 
0 
1.74 ± 0.76 
7.29 ± 0.15 
0.11 ± 0.05 
14.10 ± 2.67 
2011 
31.79 ± 9.27 
1.85 ± 0.92 
43.35 ± 12.70 
34.61 ± 9.19 
1.31 ± 0.43 
0.04 ± 0.01 
2.66 ± 0.72 
2.12 ± 0.02 
0 
16.87 ± 3.95 
Løgstør 
2016 
73.30 ± 17.03 
0.25 ± 1.12 
0 
80.50 ± 12.76 
0 
0 
0.25 ± 0.79 
3.30 ± 0.37 
0 
22.90 ± 14.81 
2013 
35.50 ± 6.32 
0 
27.17 ± 8.64 
78.00 ± 0.44 
0 
0 
0 
9.20 ± 0.94 
0 
28.12 ± 3.22 
2012 
90.10 ± 16.18 
0 
0 
88.40 ± 12.59 
0 
0 
0.10 ± 0.45 
0.90 ± 0.17 
0 
8.90 ± 15.35 
2011 
70.33 ± 7.58 
0.22 ± 0.12 
0 
76.20 ± 7.72 
0 
0 
0 
4.82 ± 0.01 
0 
24.63 ± 6.59 
Lovns 
2015 
54.85 ± 41.40 
0 
0 
94.10 ± 7.38 
1.00 ± 4.47 
0 
3.15 ± 6.11 
2.00 ± 0.69 
0 
39.00 ± 39.62 
2012 
0 
0.17 ± 0.43 
54.92 ± 2.51 
48.43 ± 4.32 
0 
0 
1.4 ± 1.10 
29.13 ± 0.66 
0 
14.42 ± 0.89 
2011 
48.77 ± 3.75 
0 
0 
75.42 ± 3.02 
0 
0 
14.62 ± 6.18 
18.27 ± 0.03 
0 
11.18 ± 3.22 
Nissum 
2016 
0 
0 
80.50 ± 11.70 
39.50 ± 11.91 
0 
0 
1.45 ± 3.47 
0.55 ± 0.04 
0 
17.50 ± 9.85 
2011 
24.94 ± 0.13 
7.40 ± 1.32 
41.41 ± 4.15 
55.35 ± 2.99 
0 
1.07 ± 0.41 
9.17 ± 2.51 
1.94 ± 0.01 
0.35 ± 0.26 
13.71 ± 1.58 
==PAGE:68==
7 
 
 
 
A3 Table. Mean and standard deviation of explanatory variables coverage by basin. All transects analysed are present. 
 
Horsens 
Transect 
Fishing 
Mud 
Rocks and 
Pebbles 
Sand 
Epiphytic 
mat 
Macrophyte 
laminaria 
Seagrass 
Macrophyte 
filamentous 
Mytilus 
edulis beds 
Ostrea 
edulis 
beds 
Shell detritus 
4 
2017 
0 
0 
47.25 ± 5.34 
0 
0 
0 
14.50 ± 4.07 
38.00 ± 0.62 
0 
0 
7 
2017 
0 
0 
53.85 ± 7.88 
36.75 ± 9.83 
0 
0 
0 
20.20 ± 0.01 
0 
25.950 ± 4.16 
11 
2017 
0 
0 
66.30 ± 4.14 
67.60 ± 6.94 
0 
0 
0 
9.95 ± 0.05 
0 
23.750 ± 3.74 
1 
2016 
0 
0 
63.45 ± 11.66 
79.50 ± 12. 66 
0 
0 
0 
1.05 ± 0.04 
0 
35.50 ± 11.80 
2 
2011 
85.60 ± 1.89 
0 
0 
77.00 ± 0.17 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.10 ± 0.45 
14.30 ± 1.87 
3 
2011 
0 
6.65 ± 0.14 
84.00 ± 3.58 
76.50 ± 3.58 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
9.35 ± 2.80 
5 
2011 
0 
2.25 ± 0.91 
76.70 ± 3.12 
75.75 ± 2.73 
0 
0 
0 
0.85 ± 0.41 
0 
20.20 ± 2.52 
6 
2011 
63.50 ± 1.98 
0 
0 
78.00 ± 2.38 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
36.50 ± 1.98 
9 
2011 
0 
8.70 ± 2.25 
23.45 ± 1.69 
27.50 ± 3.81 
19.45 ± 2.55 
0 
3.90 ± 1.10 
20.85 ± 2.77 
0 
23.650 ± 1.41 
10 
2011 
0 
0.75 ± 0.41 
59.40 ± 2.74 
79.25 ± 2.33 
0 
0 
1.15 ± 0.48 
0 
0 
38.70 ± 2.74 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:69==
8 
 
Lillebælt 
Transect 
Fishing 
Mud 
Rocks and 
Pebbles 
Sand 
Epiphytic 
mat 
Macrophyte 
laminaria 
Seagrass 
Macrophyte 
filamentous 
Mytilus 
edulis beds 
Ostrea 
edulis 
beds 
Shell 
detritus 
1 
2014 
83.2 ± 4.29 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
5.40 ± 0.18 
0 
11.40 ± 2.99 
4 
2014 
90.75 ± 2.78 
0 
0 
48.10 ± 8.10 
0 
0 
0 
8.35 ± 0.82 
0 
0.90 ± 0.22 
7 
2014 
0 
1.90 ± 0.73 
50.15 ± 6.82 
40.25 ± 8.28 
0.25 ± 0.20 
0 
6.30 ± 2.10 
14.80 ± 0.11 
0.45 ± 0.35 
26.15 ± 4.43 
11 
2014 
0 
2.05 ± 0.51 
78.50 ± 3.82 
86.75 ± 2.96 
0.25 ± 0.20 
0 
0.65 ± 0.43 
0.6 ± 0.09 
0 
17.95 ± 0.49 
2 
2011 
56.8 ± 6.23 
0 
0 
0 
1.60 ± 0.85 
0 
4.10 ± 0.71 
5.10 ± 0.80 
0 
32.40 ± 5.60 
6 
2011 
70.35 ± 5.71 
0 
0 
17.30 ± 8.72 
0 
0 
0.15 ± 0.17 
1.00 ± 0.05 
0 
28.50 ± 5.53 
8 
2011 
0 
0 
97.30 ± 1.23 
85.15 ± 2.44 
0 
0 
0.40 ± 0.32 
0.50 ± 0.05 
0 
1.80 ± 0.80 
10 
2011 
0 
7.40 ± 3.40 
76.10 ± 7.56 
36.00 ± 6.53 
3.65 ± 1.89 
0.15 ± 0.17 
6.00 ± 2.45 
1.90 ± 1.05 
0 
4.80 ± 1.57 
 
Løgstør 
Transect 
Fishing 
Mud 
Rocks and 
Pebbles 
Sand 
Epiphytic mat 
Macrophyte 
laminaria 
Seagrass 
Macrophyte 
filamentous 
Mytilus 
edulis beds 
Ostrea 
edulis 
beds 
Shell detritus 
t5 
2016 
73.30 ± 4.26 
0.25 ± 0.28 
0 
80.50 ± 3.19 
0 
0 
0.25 ± 0.19 
3.30 ± 0.03 
0 
22.90 ± 3.70 
t4 
2013 
90.10 ± 16.18 
0 
0 
88.40 ± 12.59 
0 
0 
0.1 ± 0.45 
0.90 ± 0.17 
0 
8.90 ± 15.35 
t1 
2012 
0 
0 
54.35 ± 12.21 
68.25 ± 7.25 
0 
0 
0 
0.85 ± 0.07 
0 
44.80 ± 22.23 
t2 
2012 
71.00 ± 8.90 
0 
0 
87.75 ± 7.88 
0 
0 
0 
17.55 ± 0.04 
0 
11.45 ± 7.67 
5 
2011 
61.30 ± 7.01 
0 
0 
53.15 ± 6.84 
0 
0 
0 
10.05 ± 0.01 
0 
28.65 ± 4.97 
6 
2011 
53.50 ± 3.87 
0 
0 
75.95 ± 3.80 
0 
0 
0 
4.40 ± 0.02 
0 
42.10 ± 3.33 
9 
2011 
96.20 ± 1.21 
0.65 ± 0.57 
0 
99.50 ± 0.56 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3.15 ± 0.83 
 
==PAGE:70==
9 
 
Lovns 
Transect 
Fishing 
Mud 
Rocks and 
Pebbles 
Sand 
Epiphytic mat 
Macrophyte 
laminaria 
Seagrass 
Macrophyte 
filamentous 
Mytilus edulis 
beds 
Ostrea 
edulis beds 
Shell detritus 
1 
2015 
0 
0 
40.95 ± 7.42 
49.40 ± 7.91 
0 
0 
4.10 ± 1.98 
38.30 ± 0.46 
0 
16.65 ± 2.48 
4 
2015 
0 
0 
46.05 ± 10.15 
50.90 ± 12.50 
0 
0 
0.10 ± 0.15 
40.15 ± 0.06 
0 
13.70 ± 4.28 
7 
2015 
0 
0.50 ± 2.24 
77.75 ± 5.12 
45.00 ± 3.86 
0 
0 
0 
8.95 ± 0.26 
0 
12.90 ± 3.43 
5 
2012 
54.85 ± 41.40 
0 
0 
94.10 ± 7.38 
1.00 ± 4.47 
0 
3.15 ± 6.11 
2.00 ± 0.69 
0 
39.00 ± 39.62 
6 
2011 
16.35 ± 8.21 
0 
0 
72.00 ± 8.31 
0 
0 
40.70 ± 11.85 
12.60 ± 0.20 
0 
8.85 ± 3.46 
8 
2011 
92.90 ± 3.16 
0 
0 
89.85 ± 3.32 
0 
0 
0.40 ± 0.42 
5.45 ± 0.65 
0 
1.25 ± 0.59 
10 
2011 
37.05 ± 30.14 
0 
0 
64.40 ± 8.77 
0 
0 
2.75 ± 2.13 
36.75 ± 0.15 
0 
23.45 ± 7.02 
 
Nissum 
Transect 
Fishing 
Mud 
Rocks and 
Pebbles 
Sand 
Epiphytic 
mat 
Macrophyte 
laminaria 
Seagrass 
Macrophyte 
filamentous 
Mytilus 
edulis 
beds 
Ostrea 
edulis 
beds 
Shell detritus 
1 
2016 
0 
0 
80.50 ± 11.69 
39.5 ± 11.91 
0 
0 
1.45 ± 3.47 
0.55 ± 0.04 
0 
17.50 ± 2.46 
2 
2011 
0 
0 
78.25 ± 4.55 
67.75 ± 4.79 
0 
0 
2.80 ± 1.91 
0.95 ± 0.04 
1.00 ± 0.62 
17.00 ± 2.25 
3 
2011 
99.75 ± 0.28 
0 
0 
71.00 ± 4.72 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.25 ± 0.28 
6 
2011 
0 
7.95 ± 2.80 
64.60 ± 9.31 
66.65 ± 9.47 
0 
0.10 ± 0.11 
14.25 ± 5.89 
0.25 ± 0.28 
0.25 ± 0.28 
12.60 ± 4.12 
9 
2011 
0 
21.65 ± 1.16 
22.80 ± 1.28 
16.00 ± 2.31 
0 
4.20 ± 0.85 
19.65 ± 1.59 
6.55 ± 0.19 
0.15 ± 0.17 
25.00 ± 1.89 
 
 
 
==PAGE:71==
10 
 
 
 
A.1 Figure. Comparison of the features of the various general methods available (Rumohr, 2013).. 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
11 
 
A 
 
B 
 
C 
 
D 
 
E 
 
F 
 
==PAGE:73==
12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
G 
 
H 
 
I 
==PAGE:74==
13 
 
J 
 
K 
L 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:75==
14 
 
M 
 
A2 Figure. Species and taxa found at the images: Gastropod indet. (Løgstor transect t2) (A), Asterias rubens (Littlebælt 
transect 6) (B), Flustra foliacea (Littlebælt transect 10) (C), Portiferea indet. (Littlebælt transect 10) (D), Metridium senile 
(Løgstor transect 6) (E), Carcinus maenas (Løgstor transect t1) (F), Ophiuroidea indet. (Nissum transect 1) (G), Bryozoan indet. 
(Nissum transect 2) (H), Ascidiacea indet. (Nissum transect 8) (I), Actiniaria indet. (Løgstor transect 6) (J), Callinacetes 
sapidus (Løgstor transect 2) (K), Paguridae indet. (Horsens transect 3) (L) and Actinia equina (Nissum transect 9) (M). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:76==
15 
 
 
A 
 
==PAGE:77==
16 
 
B 
 
==PAGE:78==
17 
 
C 
 
==PAGE:79==
18 
 
D 
 
A3 Figure. Coverage of explanatory variables by basin and last year of fishing period. Sediment variables (A), Vegetation variables 
(B), biogenic substrate variables (C) and all explanatory variables together (D). 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:80==
19 
 
(A) 
 
(B) 
 
(C) 
 
(D) 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
20 
 
(E) 
A4 Figure. Graphs with the sessile and mobile abundance (nº of individuals per image) 
plotted against different factors related to substrate (%) (from (A) to (D)): rock and 
pebbles sediment coverage (A), sand sediment coverage (B), mud sediment coverage 
(C), epiphytic mat coverage (%) (D). Correlation graph between M. edulis beds 
coverage (%) and sand sediment coverage (%) (E). 
 
 
