==PAGE:1==
New Light Sources for Retinal
Photocoagulation
Master Thesis
Written by:
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg (s134278)
Supervised by:
Department of Photonics Engineering:
Researcher Anders K. Hansen
Senior Scientist Peter E. Andersen
Glostrup Hospital:
Clinical professor Michael Larsen
Technical University of Denmark
August 10th 2018
==PAGE:2==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
Abstract
Diabetic eye diseases such as Proliferative Diabetic Retinopathy (PDR) and Diabetic Macular Edema (DME)
are the leading cause of blindness in working age adults. Despite not thoroughly understanding the method
of function, retinal photocoagulation is the go-to treatment against PDR and DME.
Through time many studies have compared different treatment parameters in order to ﬁnd the most suit-
ing for the laser, which results in least collateral damage to the rest of the retina. However many of the
parameters such as wavelength, beam diameter, and treatment time are still up for investigation.
In this study a numerical model is developed in the program MCmatlab and a model in a petri dish has been
developed, in order to compare treatment parameters. These models show great potential.
These two models make it possible to compare the incident parameters of the laser on a predeﬁned struc-
ture. They models has been used to compare the treatment wavelength, beam diameter, pulse length, pulse
number and beam shape. Especially using a Laguerre-Gaussian beam for retinal photocoagulation is show-
ing great potential.
Technical University of Denmark
Page i of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:3==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
Contents
Technical University of Denmark
Page ii of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:4==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
Acknowledgements
First and foremost I would like to thank my supervisors Researcher Anders Kragh Hansen DTU Fotonik and
Senior Researcher Peter E. Andersen, for always keeping an open door, for always being ready for discus-
sions and pushing me down unexplored paths.
I owe my thanks to clinical professor Michael Larsen of Rigshospitalet Glostrup, who has been incredi-
bly generous with his time and knowledge, giving me invaluable insight into a world in which I had never
stepped foot six months ago. He has been incredibly generous in sharing his experience
I would also like to thank Norlase Aps and the wonderful employees. They have been incredibly kind in
letting me borrow lasers and equipment and good ideas for conducting the experiments.
I would also like to thank Senior Scientist Lars Lindvold of DTU Nutech, who has been helping me with
fabricating the phantoms used for the experimental work of this thesis. Thank you for tirelessly coming up
with new suggestions for the optimal structure, and for teaching the way around a lab which does not only
contain optical tables.
Finally I would like to thank my family and my friends who have been bearing with me through the past
six months. I owe a big thank you to my incredible boyfriend who apart from moral support and always
cheering me on has made sure the fridge was always full and that I always got something to eat, even when
this work was too exciting to put away.
On the ﬁnal note, I would like to thank my beloved grandfather who from a very early age sparked my
interest in technology and natural sciences
List of Abbreviations
λ - Wavelength of incident light
µa(λ)/µa - The absorption coefﬁcient of tissue
µs(λ)/µs - The scattering coefﬁcient of tissue
µm - micrometers 10−6 m
DME - Diabetic Macular Edema
DR - Diabetic Retinopathy
FEM - Finite element method
FOM1 - Figure of Merit 1
FOM2 - Figure of Merit 2
FOM3 - Figure of Merit 3
g - The anisotropy factor of tissue
Ga - Gaussian
LG - Laguerre-Gaussian01 beam shape
MC - Monte Carlo
nm - nanometers 10−9 m
OCT - Optical Coherence Tomography
PDR - Proliferative diabetic retinopathy
PDMS - Silicone base layer
PRP - Pan-retinal photocoagulation
RPE - Retinal Pigment Epithelium
SDOM - Standard Deviation Of Mean
VEGF - Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor
Technical University of Denmark
Page iii of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:5==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
List of Figures
List of Tables
Technical University of Denmark
Page iv of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:6==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
1
Introduction
Diabetes is the leading cause of blindness in working age adults [1]. According to the world Health Orga-
nization [2], 8.5 % of the world adult population had diabetes in 2014. This number had risen from 4.7 %
in 1980, and is only expected to keep rising. Diabetes can have serious consequences for the human body,
including kidney and nerve damage, increase the risk of stroke, and can result in Diabetic Retinopathy [3].
Diabetes is a chronic disease which occurs either when the pancreas stops producing insulin or the body
cannot effectively use the produced insulin [2]. Insulin is the hormone which regulate how the body uses
and stores glucose and fat [4]. Insulin is also the hormone which aids in the transport of glucose from the
blood stream to the cells. If a person has diabetes the glucose will not be transported from the blood to
the cells, and will instead remain in the blood stream [5]. High blood glucose levels can contribute to the
formation of fatty deposits in the blood vessel walls, which over time can restrict blood ﬂow or hardening of
the blood vessels [6].
The human eye is full of tiny blood vessels, making them very vulnerable to ischemic diseases such as di-
abetes. Therefore, most people who has had diabetes for a longer period of time, will eventually develop a
diabetic eye disease. The most common diabetic eye diseases are Diabetic Retinopathy and Diabetic Mac-
ular Edema.
The go-to treatment for Diabetic retinopathy has for many years been retinal photocoagulation [7]. Pho-
tocoagulation uses a light source to create small intensive burns on the retina. Historically a large number
of different light sources has been applied, including the sun and Xenon-Arch lamps. These light sources
were replaced by lasers in the the 1970’s due to their narrow spectrum and large variety of wavelengths [8].
Many studies have investigated optimal properties for photocoagulation treatments, both the wavelength
[7], the diameter [9], and duration of treatment [9] has been investigated, even the beam shape has been
investigated in one case [10]. Very few however studies more than one parameter.
The purpose of this project is to develop models to evaluate and compare all the most important parame-
ters regarding photocoagulation for the treatment of Diabetic Retinopathy. This is done, in Chapter 2.1, by
understanding the structure of the human eye, paying special attention to the retinal layers. This chapter
also investigates the effect diabetes has on the eye.
Chapter 3 describes the mechanisms behind photocoagulation, and shares the theories as to why photo-
coagulation treatment works, for both pan-retinal photocoagulation and other treatment types. Follow the
mechanisms behind laser and tissue interaction is described, with special focus on the scattering and ab-
sorption mechanisms. A large part of this chapter is devoted to describing considerations regarding the
most important parameters for photocoagulation, including wavelength, treatment time and beam type
considerations. This chapter concludes by brieﬂy describing alternative treatments to photocoagulation.
Two models are created in Chapter 4, a numerical model is created using the program MCmatlab, and a
petri model are created. They are described, evaluated and discussed based on the purpose of using them
to compare photocoagulation parameters.
Following this Chapters 5 and 6, describes the performed experiments and the results obtained by using the
numerical and the petri models respectively.
Throughout the report models and results are discussed as they are obtained, however Chapter 7 discusses
the obtained results even deeper and compares them to each other. Following this, Chapter 8, concludes
the report, before the report is wrapped by an outlook onto the work which could be built on top what was
started here in Chapter 9.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 1 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:7==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
2
The Human Eye
The eyes are the single most important organ for human vision, and has a very complex structure. The eyes
are responsible for detecting light rays from the environment and transforming these into signals which
can be processed in the brain. This Chapter is devoted to the human eye, Chapter 2.1 brieﬂy describes
the overall structure of the human eye, before describing the retina and the back of the eye in more detail,
since this is the location of the most important layers in order to understand photocoagulation. Chapter
2.2 describes the changes which happens in the eye of a diabetic patient, and which consequences these
changes can bring.
Figure 1: Illustration of the human eye borrowed from the Florida Eye Clinic [11]
2.1
Structure of the Eye
Figure 1 is an illustration borrowed from Florida Eye Clinic [11] depicting the structure of the full eye as
seen from the side. Brieﬂy; the front of the eye is covered and protected by the cornea. The cornea is also
responsible for 65 - 75 % of the total focusing power of the eye [12]. Behind the cornea is a liquid in the
anterior chamber which the light must pass, before it passes through the pupil. The size of the pupil varies
depending on the lighting condition. In low lighting conditions the pupil dilates to let in more light, and in
situations with bright light the pupil constricts to limit the amount of light entering the eye [13]. Behind the
pupil is the lens, the lens can change its shape in order to change the focal length of the eye to always create
sharp images of the world [14]. The Vitreous humor ﬁlls the space between the lens and the retina, this
helps maintain the shape of the eye and absorbs any shocks. The Vitreous humor consist of approximately
99 % water with the last 1 % being collagen and hyaluronic acid which helps give the consistency [15].
Lining the back of the eye is the retina, as will be elaborated further in the next paragraph. Behind the
retina, between the RPE layer and the choroid, is the location of Bruch’s membrane. This functions as barrier
between the RPE layer and the choroid [17]. Following Bruch’s membrane is the choroid. This layer contains
a lot of blood vessels which supplies the outer part of the retina with oxygen and nutrients [18]. Furthermore
the choroid is rich in sensory nerves [19], a person will therefore feel pain if this layer is heated.
The ﬁnal layer as can also be seen in Figure 1 is the sclera. The sclera is the white tissue surrounding the eye
directly connecting to the cornea and continuing all the way around to the optic nerve [20]. The function of
the sclera is to protect the eye and keep the shape of it.
The retina
The retina is the lining of the back of the eye, this is where the photoreceptor cells are located. An illustration
of the retina is seen in Figure 2, this Figure is borrowed from [16]. The retina consist of ten different layers
including the membranes separating the cell layers. In the central part of the retina, as depicted in Figure 1
Technical University of Denmark
Page 2 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:8==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
Figure 2: Illustration of the layers in the human retina, borrowed from [16]
the fovea is located in the center of the macula. This area is responsible for the central sharp vision and is
where the light is focused on to by the cornea and the lens [21].
The outermost layer of the retina is the Retinal Pigment Epithelium (RPE). The RPE is thin containing
melanin granules [22]. The RPE layer is highly absorbing and apart from absorbing stray light and thereby
improving image quality of the eye [23], the RPE also brings nutrients and oxygen from the choroid to the
photoreceptors as well a recycles and detoxiﬁes products involved in the phototransduction process [24].
The photoreceptors are located just above the RPE layer. Humans have two kinds of photoreceptors, the
rods and the cones. These specialized neurons are responsible for the visual system, the rods being respon-
sible for vision in dim light and cones for ﬁne visual detail and colour [25]. The rods are primarily located
in the periphery of the eye, being responsible for the peripheral vision, while the cones are mostly concen-
trated in the macula, and are the only photoreceptor cells in the fovea.
The rest of the layers in the retina are largely responsible for transforming and transporting the electrical
signals generated by the rods and cones into the brain where they are further interpreted [26]. The transport
between the eye and the brain happens trough the optic nerve as seen in Figure 1. The oxygen demand of
the retina is the highest for any tissue in the body, and it therefore relies on two circulatory systems to meet
this demand. The inner 2/3 of the retina relies on the retinal vasculature and the outer 1/3, including the
photoreceptors and the RPE, are supplied by the choroidal circulation [27].
Absorbing pigments
Different absorbing pigments are located in different areas of the retina. Three important occular pigments
are found in the eye, these are melanin, xanthophyll and haemoglobin [22]. These pigments all absorb
wavelengths in the visible spectrum, however not all pigments are distributed equally across the eye, and
not all pigments absorb all wavelengths. Figure 3a depicts the absorption spectrum of the three main ab-
sorbers. The Figure depicts both oxygenated and deoxygented hemoglobin as well as the absorption of the
RPE layer as a whole which is important to keep in mind when discussing retinal photocoagulation.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 3 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:9==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
(a) The absorption spectrum for the three main absorbers
in the human eye macular xanthophyll, haemoglobin and
melanin. Depicted is also the absorption coefﬁcient of the
RPE as a whole. The illustration is borrowed from "Retinal
Laser Photocoagulation" [22]
(b) Image of the variation in melanin distri-
bution in the human RPE layer. The image is
borrowed from [28]
Figure 3: Absorbing pigments in the human eye.
Xanthophyll is located primarily in the inner and outer plexiform layers of the macula [7], and can be seen
to absorb primarily in the blue-green area of the spectrum, with no absorption in the long green, the yellow
or the red wavelengths. Haemoglobin and oxyhaemoglobin are located in the blood vessels. These two are
seen to absorb most wavelengths, a major difference between the two is seen where deoxyhaemoglobin ab-
sorbs more of the red light than oxyhemoglobin. Finally, melanin is primarily found in the RPE and choroid
layers [22]. Melanin is seen to absorb across the whole visible spectrum, however the absorption coefﬁcient
decreases slightly with increasing wavelength. One thing which is important to notice with melanin is the
uneven distribution of the individual granules in the RPE layer as can be seen in Figure 3b. This uneven
distribution means that even though a very even absorption distribution is seen in Figure 3a, the actual
absorption of the eye might be very different, since some areas might absorb more and some areas might
absorb less.
2.2
Diabetes in the eye
As mentioned in Chapter 1, diabetes is an ischemic disease affecting the whole body, including the eyes.
Ischemia means there will be a local lack of oxygen due to constricted blood vessels stemming from raised
blood glucose levels. Having uncontrolled diabetes over a longer period of time can ultimately lead to dia-
betic eye disease, which is a group of eye conditions which can affect people with diabetes [1]. The diabetic
eye diseases include diabetic retinopathy (DR) and diabetic macular edema (DME) as well as cataracts and
glaucoma [1]. Of this group, DR is the most common cause of vision loss in working age adults [29]. DR
alone was in 2010 responsible for 2.6 % of blindness world wide, having increased from 2.1 % from 1990
[30].
As mentioned in Chapter 1, raised blood glucose levels for a longer period of time can cause damage to the
tiny blood vessels by narrowing them down. Having damaged blood vessels in the eye(s) might lead to DR,
which according to the National Eye Institute may progress in four stages [1]:
1. Mild nonproliferative retinopathy: small microaneurysms occur at the earliest stages, these may leak
ﬂuid into the retina.
2. Moderate nonproliferative retinopathy: the blood vessels that nourish the retina begins to swell and
distort, they may also loose their ability to transport blood. Both cases may contribute to the devel-
opment of DME.
3. Severe nonproliferative retinopathy: many more blood vessels are blocked, which results in a lacking
blood supply of the retina. The areas secrete growth factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) [? ] to signal the retina to grow new blood vessels.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 4 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:10==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
4. Proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR): the growth factors triggers the proliferation of new blood
vessels. These blood vessels are however fragile and are more likely to leak or bleed. This stage is also
accompanied by scar tissue in the retina which can contract and lead to retinal detachment, causing
permanent blindness.
As can be seen from this list, all stages of DR can imply some leaking of ﬂuid into the retina. If this ﬂuid
builds up in or around the macula, this brings with it a new condition called diabetic macular edema [?
]. As described in Chapter 2.1, the macular is the area responsible for the central sharp and colour vision.
Therefore a build-up of ﬂuid in the macula can ultimately lead to blindness. DME is the leading cause of
blindness among people with DR [1]. DME can develop at any stage of DR, however the risk becomes larger
as the disease progress, it is therefore crucial to treat and manage DR before it progresses to the later stages.
In the early stages it is possible to limit the consequences by better managing the diabetes [? ]. If managing
diabetes is not enough and the DR keeps progressing or if DME develops, photocoagulation is usually the
go-to treatment plan [? ]. Photocoagulation will be described and discussed in Chapter 3.
3
Photocoagulation
Photocoagulation has for years been the golden standard in treating retinal diseases such as DR and DME.
This chapter gives an overview of retinal photocoagulation in Chapter 3.1, including pan-retinal photoco-
agulation, and theories as to why this treatment works. After this, in Chapter 3.2 is given a brief introduction
to laser-tissue interactions, in order to understand the thermal interaction resulting in photocoagulation.
Following, in Chapter 3.3, considerations regarding ideal treatments are given before Chapter 3.4 brieﬂy
describes the few alternatives currently used instead of photocoagulation.
3.1
Overview of Photocoagulation
Retinal photocoagulation treatments involve a laser beam focused directly on to the retina. It is still not
thoroughly understood how and why retinal photocoagulation works [? ? ], however several hypothesis
exits. A few of these will be discussed in this chapter.
Pan-retinal Photocoagulation
Pan-retinal photocoagulation (PRP) is used in the treatment of PDR. In PRP the photons from the laser are
absorbed by the melanin in the RPE layer, transformed to heat, which diffuses and severely damaging or
killing the photoreceptors [? ]. The exact mechanisms of the laser treatment is still unknown [? ]. It is how-
ever believed that since the photoreceptors consume most of the oxygen in the retina, killing of peripheral
photoreceptors will limit the need for oxygen in the photoreceptor layer, making it possible for oxygen and
other nutrients to penetrate from the choroidal circulation trough the layers of dead photoreceptors and be
consumed in the remaining layers. This will balance the supply and demand for oxygen in the retina, and
bring down the stimulation of VEGF [? ]. Photocoagulation usually prevents further deterioration of vision,
if applied early in the development of the disease. However, photocoagulation does not restore lost vision
[? ].
When determining the power level to use for PRP, it is said to be titrated. This means that the power level is
slowly raised until a white-ish spot appears [? ]. When this spot appears the temperature of the proteins in
the tissue has been high enough to vibrate rapidly. This vibration is strong enough to break down the pro-
tein structure [? ]. This also means that photocoagulation is an irreversible process. When this white spot
appears, it means that photocoagulation has been obtained, and light scattering from the damaged tissue
prevents penetration of laser light to underlying tissues [7]. Re-treatment is therefore not possible. Treat-
ment is performed over a few times resulting in up to 1200-1500 burns with a diameter of approximately 0.5
mm across the retinal periphery [? ]. Applying this many laser spots results in up to approximately 30 % of
the photoreceptors in the peripheral retina are damaged [? ]. Killing this many photoreceptors lowers the
demand of oxygen of the outer retina by up to 20 % [? ].
Technical University of Denmark
Page 5 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:11==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
For a photoreceptor cell to die, it is necessary to kill the cell body located in the outer nuclear layer. This
means that for PRP treatment to have a therapeutic effect, it requires a thermal damage reaching the outer
nuclear layer as depicted in Figure 2. This a part of way the peripheral vision is sacriﬁced in order to keep
the center vision.
Other treatment theories
Of other theories it is believed that for the DME, the therapeutic effect is associated with the restoration of
a new RPE barrier [? ] after photocoagulation. If this is the case, this means that only the RPE layer needs to
undergo thermal damage and that the photoreceptors can be spared.
A third theory is that only damaging the RPE layer, but not killing the cells, is enough for treatment. The
theory is that this damage will make the eye restore the RPE cells which ensures continuity of the RPE layer.
This treatment spares the photoreceptors, and vision [? ].
These theories include to thermally damage but not kill the photoreceptor cells in the retina. In order to do
this, it is crucial that only the tails of the photoreceptors and not the cell bodies in the outer nuclear layer
is damaged. This means that the thermal damage must be conﬁned to only the RPE layer and the outer
segments of the photoreceptor layer.
3.2
Laser tissue interaction
When photons from any light source hits the surface of tissue, they can either be reﬂected, refracted, scat-
tered or absorbed. Reﬂection from occular tissue usually does not exceed 2 % [8]. Furthermore, reﬂections
are accounted for using the lens during photocoagulation in the clinic. The photons which do penetrate
the surface and entering the tissue will be refracted toward the axis vertical to the surface. In the tissue,
the incident photons will interact with the tissue, which will result in an exponential decrease of the power
ﬂuence due to absorption and scattering. The power ﬂuence at a given distance inside the tissue is given by
the Lambert Beer law
I(z) = (1−ks)I0 exp
¡
−(µa +µs)z
¢
,
(1)
where I(z) is the light intensity at the given position in z, I0 is the light intensity at the surface, kz is the spec-
ular reﬂection coefﬁcient, µa is the absorption coefﬁcient and µs is the scattering coefﬁcient. Both the ab-
sorption and scattering coefﬁcients are functions of the wavelengths of the incident light, this will however
not be written explicitly. The probability that a photon is absorbed or scattered by a tissue is determined
by the absorption and scattering coefﬁcient of this tissue respectively. These coefﬁcients are therefore a
measure of how far a photon of a given wavelength can penetrate into a material, in this case tissue, before
it is absorbed or scattered, in average. The absorption and scattering coefﬁcients are typically measured in
inverse centimeters [cm−1].
The interaction between light and tissue can stimulate a variety of processes, including coagulation. For
photocoagulation the absorption and scattering processes are the most important, and will be described
further below.
Absorption
When a photon is absorbed by chromophores in tissue, this governs a transition from a ground state to
an excited state of the absorbing molecule. This excited state can be either a electronic state, or a higher
vibrational or rotational state, depending on the energy of the absorbed photon, and the energy gap in the
absorbing molecule. As the energy of a photon needs to higher than the energy gap of the transition from
a lower to a higher energy level, the probability that an incident photon can excite a molecule such as a
chromophore in tissue, is typically higher for shorter wavelengths.
An increase in rotational and vibrational states results in a temperature increase of the absorbing molecule.
This means that the temperature is directly proportional to the total absorbed energy. If heat diffusion is not
Technical University of Denmark
Page 6 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:12==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
Figure 4: Illustration of the possible fates of a photon incident on tissue. The photon is either reﬂected,
scattered or absorbed. Illustration borrowed from [? ]
Temperature
Consequence
37 °C
Normal
45 - 50 °C
Hyperthermia
60 - 80 °C
Denaturation of proteins and coagulation
100 °C
Vaporization and thermal decomposition
> 100 °C
Carbonization
> 300 °C
Melting
Table 1: Consequences of temperature rise in biological tissue. The table has been modiﬁed from [? ]
taken in to account, then the temperature rise governed by photon absorption is linear with time, in with a
constant beam intensity, given as
T (z,t) = µaI(z)t
ρc
.
(2)
Where T (z,t) is the temperature at position z and time t. µa is the absorption coefﬁcient, I(z) is the beam
intensity in position z, ρ is the density of the tissue and c is the thermal conductivity, also of the tissue [8].
Whether the heat diffusion should be taken into account depends on the pulse of the beam compared to
the thermal relaxation time of the tissue. The relaxation time is
τ = L2
4α,
(3)
where L is the diffusion length and α ≈1.4×10−3 is a good approximation of the thermal diffusivity [? ]. The
absorption of a photon can lead to several thermal and non-thermal processes in the tissue. Of the non-
thermal photomechanical such as tissue disruption by laser pulses, or photochemical which can be direct
breakage of chemical tissue bonds [? ]. The thermal reactions depends on the temperature obtained by the
absorption. These processes can be seen in Table 1, as a function of the temperature.
As can be seen in Table 1, the different temperatures can result in more or less fatal damages to the affected
tissue. Irreversible thermal damage of tissue such as the retina is both dependent on time and temperature
[8], as can be seen in Figure 5 which is borrowed from [8]. It should be noted that there seems to be a mistake
on the ﬁrst axis, I believe that 1.E+00, should have instead been 1.E+01.
In Figure 5 it is seen that a low temperature requires a longer heating time to result in irreversible damage,
while a higher temperature requires shorter time. A good mathematical model for the thermal damage
in the millisecond regime is the Arrhenius damage model. This model describes thermal injury using the
Arrhenius integral
Technical University of Denmark
Page 7 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:13==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
Figure 5: Illustration of the Arrhenius approximation borrowed from [8].
Ω(τ) = −ln
µD(τ)
D0
¶
= A
Z τ
0
µ
−
EA
R ·T (t)
¶
,
(4)
where D(t) is the concentration of living cells at time t, D0 is the initial amount of living cells. EA is the
activation energy of the process and A is the rate constant. R is the universal gas constant and T (t) is the
temperature at time t. This model assumes that tissue damage happens when the concentration of the
living cells drops below a critical value. This threshold value is by convention 1/e. This means that when
the fraction of non-damaged proteins in the individual cell drops below 1/e ≈37%, the cell is irreversibly
damaged. This corresponds to an Arrhenius value of Ω= 1 [8].
Scattering
Scattering on the other hand occurs due to relative differences in refractive index inside a medium. These
refractive index differences can for instance be caused by cell membranes or intracellular structures [? ]. It
is common to discuss two types of scattering, elastic and inelastic scattering. The inelastic scattering has
incident and scattered photons of different wavelength. This type of scattering is weak in biological tissue
[? ]. Elastic scattering is however pronounced in biological tissue. In this type of scattering the incident
and scattered photons have the same wavelength [? ]. The elastic scattering can again be divided into
two different types, Mie and Rayleigh scattering. Mie scattering happens when the size of the scattering
particle is comparable to the wavelength of the incident light. This type of scattering has a wavelength
dependence of λ−x where ≈0.5 ≤x ≤2 [8]. Finally Rayleigh scattering is governed by particles which are
smaller than the incident wavelength. This type of scattering has a very strong wavelength dependence, the
scattering coefﬁcient is proportional to λ4 [? ]. The occular tissue primarily results in Rayleigh scattering
of the light, this means that the scattering in the human eye has a strong wavelength dependence, and the
shorter wavelengths will be scattered far more than the longer wavelenghts.
When a photon encounters a scattering particle, it will be scattered and thereby travel in a different direc-
tion. The mean cosine of the angle between the incident direction and the scattered direction is known as
the anisotropy factor [? ], g:
g =< cos(θ) > .
(5)
The anisotropy factor can have any value between -1 and 1. The higher the anisoptropy factor, the more of
the light is scattered in the forward direction. [? ]. If g = 0, the scattering is said to be isotropic, meaning
that all directions of scattering are equally probable [? ].
Technical University of Denmark
Page 8 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:14==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
3.3
Treatment considerations
This chapter will describe and discuss the already investigated cases, and discuss a potentially good treat-
ment which can be investigated further by using the models and methods described in Chapter 4.
3.3.1
Wavelength considerations
As described in Chapter 1, many wavelengths has been considered and tested for retinal photocoagulation
through time. When deciding on the wavelength to use for photocoagulation it is important to keep in mind
the tissue to be coagulated, and which absorbers are present in this tissue. As described in Chapter 2.2, the
primary absorbers in the human eye are melanin, hemoglobin and xantophyll.
Furthermore, it is important to keep scattering in mind. Before the laser hits the retina, it must ﬁrst pass
through approximately 2 cm liquid with optical properties similar to water. The vitreous body in front of the
retina sets some limitations to the selection of wavelengths for retinal photocoagulation. As watermolecules
only has an approximate size of 0.3 nm [? ], Rayleigh scattering is the most pronounced, and the scattering
therefore has a strong dependence on the used wavelength.
Apart from scattering, water also has signiﬁcant absorption for many wavelengths apart from the visible.
An illustration and description of the biological window can be found in Appendix ??. When discussing the
absorption of water, the term biological window is often used. This term describes the window in between
where water has signiﬁcant absorption peaks. Water has an incredibly high absorption coefﬁcient for wave-
lengths lower than ≈300 nm, as well as wavelengths above ≈1 µm. This must also be kept in mind when
selecting the optimal wavelength.
Therefore, to sum up, the ideal wavelength for retinal photocoagulation has good penetration through the
occular media and maximal absorption in the target pigments [22]. This chapter will brieﬂy discuss some
of the wavelengths which has already been tested or considered for retinal photocoagulation.
Blue-green
On the short end of the scale, the blue-green lasers, such as a combination of 488 nm and 514.5 nm has been
the predominant laser for occular procedures, among those photocoagulation, for many years [22]. This
is because melanin absorbs the short wavelengths very well as seen in Figure 3a. These short wavelengths
however scatter more, and despite being better absorbed, it requires a higher laser power in order to achieve
coagulation due to the scattering.
Furthermore, the scattered blue-green light most likely does not contain enough energy to result in coag-
ulation anywhere else in the eye, it does however carry enough energy to induce photochemical damage
[22], and since this happens by the scattered light, it can happen anywhere in the eye, which is a highly
undesirable effect.
Finally, retinal xantophyll is located in the inner and outer plexiform layers of the macular [7]. Therefore if
short wavelengths are used for photocoagulation it will be absorbed in the inner macular, directly heating
the inner retina, resulting in undesired retinal damage in the macular region.
Green
Green 514.5 nm and 532 nm lasers has been the most popular for many years, since they are absorbed well
in melanin and is minimally absorbed in xanthophyll. This property makes the green wavelengths usable
for photocoagulation in the macular region, as well as in the periphery [22].
Furthermore, the green 532 nm laser is absorbed very well by the absorption peak in hemoglobin seen in
Figure 3a. This can be an advantage since the melanin distribution can vary across the retina as seen in
Figure 3b. This means that in some areas the light will be absorbed very well by the melanin in the RPE,
however in other areas the light will penetrate straight through the RPE layer. Having a high absorption in
hemoglobin ensures that the power is absorbed in the beginning of the choroid layer instead, and can still
have a therapeutic effect.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 9 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:15==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
Yellow
The yellow wavelengths such as 568.2 nm and 577 nm has for long been thought to have even better thera-
peutic effects than the green wavelengths [7]. Especially 577 nm posses similar qualities as 532 nm, however,
it has even higher absorption in hemoglobin, and it scatters less than the shorter green wavelengths [22].
Due to the lower scattering there is less risk of photochemical retinal damages. Furthermore, the penetra-
tion depth is long enough to reach the RPE layer, and short enough to limit the absorption to this layer,
thereby minimizing patient pain, theoretically [7].
Finally, the use of yellow lasers has for many years been limited by the costliness and the bulkiness of the
krypton yellow lasers and the dye lasers. However, the recent introduction of the more compact and cost-
effective 577 nm diode yellow laser has made the yellow laser more usable in ophthalmology [22].
Red and NIR
On the far end of the scale, also red and IR lasers has been used to obtain photocoagulation since these
wavelengths scatter less. Especially for diffuse diabetic macular edema, 810 nm has been applied since
they will affect deeper layers and not damage the inner retinal layers [? ]. Furthermore, the low scattering
coefﬁcient makes these long wavelengths better for treating patients with dense occular media, such as
cataracts [22]. On the other hand, the absorption coefﬁcient of these long wavelengths as can be seen in
Figure 3a, is only approximately 20 % compared to blue wavelengths. This means that higher powers and
longer treatment times are needed in order to obtain the same therapeutic effects as with short wavelengths.
This can lead to a greater patient discomfort during treatment [22].
3.3.2
Treatment time considerations
Originally photocoagulation was performed using laser pulses of 100 ms up to 500 ms [7]. However, now
laser pulses between 10 ms to 200 ms are regularly used [8], therefore this chapter will brieﬂy discuss the
thoughts behind the treatment duration.
Initially longer pulses of around 50 ms to 200 ms were applied for retinal photocoagulation. These long
pulses resulted in intense retinal lesions, not only affecting the photoreceptors but also the inner retina [? ].
Further, as can also be seen in Figure 6a, during long pulses the heat diffuses long distances. For a pulse of
100 ms the heat can diffuse up to 200 µm [8].
For shorter pulses the burn diameter is more controllable, and the heat is more conﬁned to the RPE layer
and the photoreceptors [? ]. However, for shorter pulses, the temperature needs to be higher to obtain
coagulation as seen in Figure 5. Furthermore the power difference between a light treatment and a rupture
is very small for short pulse durations as seen in Figure 6b. This means that for short pulse durations it can
be hard to control the intensity of the laser burn, and there is a risk of rupturing Bruch’s membrane [? ].
Recently pulse duration between 10 ms and 30 ms are being applied [? ]. As can be seen in Figure 6, these
durations result in a more controllable thermal diffusion, while there is also a large power difference be-
tween a light treatment and rupture. These pulses can therefore be preferable.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 10 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:16==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
(a) Lesion diameter as a function of laser power and du-
ration of exposure. Laser beam size on the retina is 132
µm as indicated by the dashed line. The ﬁgure is bor-
rowed from [8].
(b) Threshold power for retinal photocoagulation in rab-
bit eye as a function of pulse duration. Laser beam size
on the retina is 132 µm. Clinical grades indicated by
the colors: light, moderate, intense,very intense, rup-
ture. The ﬁgure is borrowed from [8].
Figure 6: The impact of pulse duration on burn diameter 6a and clinical lesion grade 6b
A recent development in retinal photocoagulation is micropulse laser delivery. This technique uses an en-
velope of micropulses instead of the CW waves which are currently used. By using a series of micropulses
the generated heat will be conﬁned to the area where it is absorbed [? ]. It is believed that mechanism of this
treatment is retinal tissue hyperthermia, which as seen in Table 1 is below the temperature for coagulation
cell death. This technique thereby spares the cells. The details of why this technique works are however still
unclear [? ]. If the mechanism is hyperthermia in cells, it will be desirable to conﬁne the heat to the RPE cell
layer. It has been postulated that in order to conine the heat within the RPE layer pulses of less than 0.7 ms
are needed [? ]. A big disadvantage for this technique is however that main goal is cell hyperthermia and
not coagulation, there is a lack of visible endpoint, which can result in undertreatment [? ].
3.3.3
Beam type considerations
Usually photocoagulation is done using a Gaussian laser beam, this is however not necessarily the most
ideal type of beam. The Gaussian beam as depicted in Figure 7a tends to reach overtreatment in the center
of the beam, and undertreatment in the periphery [7]. This is partially due to the power distribution within
the beam, and partially because of thermal diffusion conﬁning the heat in the center of the beam.
According to clinical professor Michael Larsen from Rigshospitalet Glostrup a desirable temperature distri-
bution is shaped like a hockey puck, and is controllable in diameter and height. This means that the shape
of the coagulated area must be close to vertical if the retina is seen from the perspective as in Figure 2.
Since the temperature diffuses in all directions, a top-hat beam as seen in Figure 7c, cannot solve the prob-
lem, since this will still result in an over-treatment in the center of the area, and under-treatment in the
periphery.
A third alternative as suggested by Professor Michael Larsen, and to the best of my knowledge only suggested
once in literature [? ], is a Laguerre-Gaussian01 (LG) beam as illustrated in Figure 7b. This type of beam has
a high power along the periphery and zero power in the middle of the beam. This means that if the diameter
of the beam is designed to ﬁt the thermal diffusion length of the illumination time, it should theoretically
be able to ensure a temperature distribution close to the desired hockey puck.
When discussing the diameter compared to the treatment time as well as the beam shape, one parameter
is important to keep in mind, the thermal diffusion constant. For tissue this constant is approximately 2
µm/ms [8]. In order to ensure optimal treatment it is important to ensure that the diameter of the doughnut
Technical University of Denmark
Page 11 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:17==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
mode is not so large that an untreated area will turn up in the middle of the treated area. Also, this constant
is important to keep in mind when determining the minimum radius, in order to avoid over treatment in
the center of the ring. the ideal diameter must therefore be approximately given by
d = 2kτ,
(6)
where k is the diffusion constant τ is the time of illumination and the prefactor 2 is because the heat diffuses
from both sides of the circle, and therefore only half the time is needed for diffusion. It is important to note
that this is the diameter of the hole in the middle and not the diameter of the beam itself since this is deﬁned
as the 1/e cut-off, and is therefore including the illumination area.
Figure 7: Beam proﬁle of the three discussed beam shapes (a) is a Gaussian beam, (b) is a Laguerre-
Gaussian beam and (c) depicts a TopHat beam proﬁle. The image is borrowed from [? ]
3.4
Alternative treatments
Even though retinal photocoagulation is usually the main treatment for PDR and clinically signiﬁcant DME,
few other alternatives are possible. These alternatives has been described in the article "New Diagnostic
and Therapeutic Approaches for Preventing the Progression of Diabetic Retinopathy" [? ], these will brieﬂy
be described here based on the article.
The ﬁrst alternative is anti-VEGF agents. These are already used for center-involving diffuse DME, since
photocoagulation within the macular carries great risks. Using this form of treatment anti-VEGF agents are
injected into the eye every 1-2 months for the ﬁrst year, not as often the following years. This treatment is
generally safe, however it is an invasive procedure which may lead to side effects and complications such as
retinal detachment and impaired wound healing.
The second alternative is a steroid therapy. Intravitreal steroids has been reported to have good results,
however these tend to bring complications such as intraoccular pressure and cataracts. Furthermore after
treatment with steroids DME tends to reccur shortly after treatment, down to a maximum of 3 months.
However, despite these complications, in cases where photocoagulation is not an option, such as some
cases of DME, or cases where photocoagulation does not stop the development of DME, steroids can be a
good alternative [? ].
4
Models
Two models have been created in order to test the thoughts and considerations regarding the treatment
parameters as discussed in Chapter 3.3. These two models are respectively a numerical phantom and a
petri phantom. These two models will be discussed and described individually in this chapter. Their re-
spective strengths and weaknesses, and the assumptions made in order to fabricate them will be presented
thoroughly. The numerical phantom will be described in Chapter 4.1, along with a brief introduction to the
Monte Carlo program MCmatlab. The petri phantom will subsequently be presented in Chapter 4.2.
4.1
Numerical phantom
The numerical phantom is constructed in order to simulate heat deposition and thermal damage during
retinal photocoagulation. The numerical phantom is constructed using the program MCmatlab, which is
described in Chapter 4.1.1. The structure of the phantom is described in chapter 4.1.2, while the validity of
the phantom is discussed in Chapter 4.1.3.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 12 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:18==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
Figure 8: Illustration of the numerical phantom used in the MCmatlab simulations.
4.1.1
MCmatlab
MCmatlab is a simulational program created by Dominik Marti and Anders K. Hansen, DTU Fotonik, which
has not yet been published on. It consist of a Monte Carlo (MC) solver, and a Finite Element (FE) solver. The
MC solver is based on the program mcxyz.c, developed by Steven Jacques. mcxyz.c simulates the distribu-
tion of light within complex tissues using the (MC) method [? ].
MC simulations are based on the random walks which photons can make while inside tissue. These ran-
dom walks are governed by statistics [? ]. In MCmatlab, the simulation domain is divided into voxels, of a
predeﬁned size. The size of these voxels determine the resolution of the simulations. Each voxel is assigned
optical and thermal properties, based on user inputs. After the generation of the tissue, a photon is sent into
the tissue. Steven Jacques has in [? ] written a description of what happens to the generated photon in the
tissue, the following is an overview. The photon will travel a random distance within the tissue, this random
distance is calculated based on a random number and the attenuation coefﬁcient of the local tissue. Then
the weight of the photon will be reduced based on the local absorption coefﬁcient. The remaining photon
will be scattered based on the anisotropy factor. This will give the photon a new direction, before a new step
is taken. This process is repeated for a large amount of photons. If sufﬁciently many photons are simulated,
the resulting paths and photon distribution will resemble the real-life laser-tissue interaction very well.
After running the MC simulation MCmatlab runs the Finite Element time-domain solver. This calculates
the heat deposition in every voxel based on the absorbed weight of photons, as well as the tissue damage
based on the Arrhenius damage model described in equation (4). If Ω> 1 in a certain voxel, this voxel is
considered thermally damaged and this is marked in the 3D volumetric output as shown in Figure 9a.
4.1.2
Structure of phantom
The numerical phantom consist of six distinct layers in the back of the eye. The layers are, from below,
sclera, choroid, RPE, photoreceptors, neural retina and the vitreous body. The four middle layers are to
scale, however the the sclera and the vitreous body has been downsized in order to keep simulation times
down. An illustration of the model can be seen in Figure 8. The optical and thermal properties of the layers
can be seen in Table 2.
As mentioned in Chapter 2.1, the vitreous body consist of 99 % water, therefore, both optical and thermal
properties for this layer is taken to be water. Furthermore the thermal properties of the choroid and the
sclera are also assumed to be water, while the thermal properties of the retina and the RPE are found indi-
vidually in literature [? ].
In the description of the human eye in Chapter 2.1, the human retina was described to have 10 distinct
layers, this model however only consist of three such layers, the RPE, the photoreceptors and the neural
retina respectively. To the best of my knowledge the optical and thermal properties of each distinct layer
Technical University of Denmark
Page 13 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:19==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
Symbol
VB
NR
PR
RPE
Ch
Sc
Absorption coefﬁcient
µa(532)
4.45e-4[? ]
2.25
42.75
1085
160
5
(cm−1)
µa(577)
8.80e-4[? ]
2.0
38
994
140
4
Scattering coefﬁcient
µs(532)
1.6e-5
340
340
1159
734
1024
(cm−1)
µs(577)
1.2e-5
300
300
1162
683
891
Anisotropy
g
0.99
0.97
0.97
0.84
0.90
0.90
()
Volumetiric Heat Capacity
VHC
4.04
3.680
3.680
3.680
4.04
4.04
(J/(cm3 ·K))
Density
ρ
1e-3
1e-3
1e-3
1e-3
1e-3
1e-3
(kg/cm3)
Thermal Conductivity
TC
6.2e-3
5.65e-3
5.65e-3
5.65e-3
6.29e-3
6.29e-3
(W/(cm·K))
Thickness 1
d
745
160 [? ]
100[? ]
25
300
170
(µm)
Activation Energy
EA
273.4e3
273.4e3
273.4e3
422.5e3
(J/mol)
pre-exponential factor
A
3e44
3e44
3e44
7.6e66
(1/s)
Table 2: Optical and thermal properties for every layer in the numerical model. The absorption and
scattering absorption coefﬁcients are a function of wavelength, and are therefore written for each of
the two used wavelengths. VB = Vitreous Body, NR = Neural retina, PR = Photoreceptors, RPE = Retinal
Pigment Epithelium, Ch = Choroid, Sc = Sclera. Unless otherwise stated, the absorption and scattering
coefﬁcients as well as the anisotropy factors has been read of the tables in [? ]. Likewise, unless otherwise
stated, the volumetric heat capacity, the density and the thermal conductivity has been found in [? ].
of the retina has not yet been measured. For this reason, it has only been possible to ﬁnd the coefﬁcients
for the full retina and the RPE. It is however known that the function of the photoreceptors is to absorb
photons [? ], therefore the retina in the simulations has been split into three, the RPE, the photoreceptor
layer which is assumed to absorb 95 % of the what is absorbed in the retina, and the neural retina, which is
assumed to only absorb 5 %. All other optical and thermal properties are assumed to to be the same for the
photoreceptors and neural retina.
In Table 2, the Arrhenius activation energy and the Arrhenius exponential pre-factor of the sclera and the
vitreous body are not found. These parameters are used to calculate the thermally damaged volume and
since the thermally damaged volume will never reach the sclera or the vitreous body, according to the form
of evaluation described in Chapter 4.1.4, these are not used.
4.1.3
Validity of model
The numerical model is an idealization of a real human eye, and some parameters are close to reality, while
others deviate. One difference which has already been shortly mentioned is the fact that the retina only
consist of three layers, and that only the back of the eye is being modelled. These are however not the
only differences, from this idealized model to the real world. This chapter will elaborate further on these
differences and the consequences they bring.
Static model
Since no power or time dependencies are taken into account in the model, this is a static model. The most
important of the dynamic properties which are not included in the model are photo bleaching and blood
ﬂow in the choroid layer.
Photo bleaching is a reduction in the sensitivity photoreceptors has towards light, following illumination by
bright light [? ]. Based on the properties of the two different types of photoreceptors, rods and cones, it is
Technical University of Denmark
Page 14 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:20==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
a reasonable approximation not to include photo bleaching. This is due to the fact that rods, which as de-
scribed in Chapter 2.1 are responsible for vision in low light conditions saturate and bleach in light brighter
than twilight [? ]. Since the photocoagulation treatment is performed in the clinical setting illuminating the
back of the eye with a slit lamp before and during the treatment, the rods are already unresponsive before
the treatment begins. Furthermore, bleached photoreceptors do not recover for at least ﬁve minutes after
bleaching [? ]. Therefore photobleaching of the rod photoreceptors are not taken into account. Also the
cones must be taken into account regarding the static model. Cones which are responsible for the central
vision can however not saturate in steady light, no matter how bright it is [? ]. Bleaching of cone photorecp-
tors therefore does not need to be included in the model either.
Furthermore, the heat sinking and cooling of the treated area due to choroidal blood perfusion is not taken
into account because of the very little effect this has on the results. With a pulse length of 200 ms it is in [? ],
calculated that the difference in peak temperature is less than 1 % by including the cooling from the blood
ﬂow. This effect is even less for shorter pulses. the heat sinking and cooling effects are therefore in this work
considered to be insigniﬁcant.
Finally, only immediate photocoagulation responses are included in the model. Due to the time and tem-
perature dependence on the thermal damage, some retinal damage does not become apparent until after
treatment [7]. As the model only a certain on time (τ), and a diffusion time of 5τ, these delayed processes
are not taken into account in the model. These processes are however not taken into account in the evalua-
tion of the immediate retinal burn in the clinic either, and the results of the simulations should therefore be
comparable to the results obtained in the clinic.
Only back of eye
In the description of the numerical model in Chapter 4.1, it was determined that the thicknesses of the
retina and choroid layers in the model are representative and realistic based on the given sources. The
vitreous body and the sclera are however only represented, but not with the correct thicknesses, and the
cornea, aqueous body and the lens are not represented at all. The aqueous body is however another layer
of liquid very similar to the vitreous body, while the cornea and the lens are focusing powers, which along
with the contact lens applied by the doctor focuses the beam on to the retina. This focusing is programmed
in MCmatlab, and is therefore not necessary to include the layers in the simulations.
The extra thickness of the vitreous body is not included in the simulations due to the extra time it would
have taken to run the simulations. Including the full layer of the vitreous body would have resulted in a
larger fraction of the incident beam being scattered and absorbed. Such extra scattering and absorption
will however mostly have inﬂuence on the power needed to obtain a certain treatment. To argue for this
postulate a treatment on the back of the eye is compared to treatment of an eye consisting of the full vitreous
body in Chapter 5.2.
Variations in pigmentation
MCmatlab does not require any symmetries. This means that in principle the variation in melanin distri-
bution as depicted in Figure 3b, could have been included in the model. Also a variation in the thickness
of the RPE layer as well as other layers could have been included. Including these variations of parameters
would have made it possible to obtain more realistic results of the simulations.
However, since the heating of individual granules can be ignored due to having heating durations in the
range between 10 µs and 1 s [? ], the individual granules does not need to be included in the model. Fur-
thermore, the inclusion of these varying parameters would result in more complicated models. The param-
eters has therefore been kept non-varying across all simulations in order to be able to compare the obtained
results to each other.
In order to compare the results of a varying pigmentation, and thereby varying absorption coefﬁcients
across the retina and from person to person, a simulation has been performed which includes variations
in the absorption coefﬁcient in the RPE layer. The description as well as results of this simulation is seen in
Chapter 5.3 .
Technical University of Denmark
Page 15 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:21==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
General Validity
Finally in order to run a ﬁnal veriﬁcation of the numerical phantom a single simulation has been performed.
The resulting tissue damage illustration is seen in Figure 9a. This illustration is compared to a histology
taken of a retina of a dutch-belted rabbit having undergone retinal photocoagulation. The histology is seen
in Figure 9b.
(a) Tissue damage illustration of photocoagulation per-
formed using a 577 nm laser, beam diameter 200 µm,
and a power of 300 mW for 20 ms
(b) Histology of retina of dutch-belted "mildly" coagu-
lated using a 577 nm laser for 20 ms. The yellow scale
bar is 135 µm This histology is taken directly after pho-
tocoagulation. The image is borrowed from [? ].
Figure 9: Comparison between treatment on numerical phantom and treatment on retina from dutch-
belted rabbit.
The damage in the numerical phantom in Figure 9a, can be compared to the damage on a rabbit retina
in Figure 9b. Both treatments has been performed using a 577 nm laser. As is seen in Figure 9, the pho-
tocoagulation has the simulations in Figure 9a damaged the RPE layer, the photoreceptors, and a slight
overtreatment has happened as a small portion of the neural retina has also been damaged. The same thing
can be seen in Figure 9b. Even though the retinal burn is classiﬁed as a mild coagulation, it is seen that the
RPE layer, the photoreceptors and a small portion of the rest of the retina has been damaged. These two
coagulations has been performed using close to the same parameters as seen in the ﬁgure descriptions, and
this serves as a veriﬁcation of the simulation model.
4.1.4
Evaluation
In order to compare the results obtained from the simulations in Chapter 5, three Figures Of Merit has
been developed. These three Figures of Merit denoted FOM1, FOM2 and FOM3 are made to be able to
compare the the different parameters, with respect to the different thoughts on an ideal treatment discussed
in Chapter 3.3.
A 2D illustration of the deﬁnition of the Figures of Merit can be seen in Figure 10. FOM1 is deﬁned as the
percentage of the outer nuclear layer which has been coagulated, compared to the percentage which has
not. Similarly FOM2 is deﬁned as the percentage of the outer photoreceptor layer which has been coagu-
lated, but FOM1 is subtracted. The limit for coagulation is the voxels in which 1 ≤Ω, according to equation
(4). Finally FOM3 is used as a limiting Figure. This Figure is deﬁned as the percentage of a volume 50 µm
above the photoreceptor layer, added to a volume 50 µm below the RPE layer. If FOM3 > 0 this has been
deﬁned as over treatment, and the simulations are in that case stopped. Both FOM1 and FOM2 are deﬁned
as a function of the diameter of the incident beam. They furthermore have rotational symmetry around the
vertical axis, resulting in a disk like structure. FOM3 is deﬁned as two square plates covering the full volume
illustrated in Figure 10, however only a cross-section is depicted.
These Figures of Merit are created in a way where they can evaluate the differences in treatment for several
types of photocoagulation. In pan-retinal photocoagulation where it is needed to treat the photoreceptor
Technical University of Denmark
Page 16 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:22==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
Figure 10: Illustration of the numerical phantom used in the MCmatlab simulations, including the Fig-
ures of Merit. The blue box is the area of FOM1, the red box is the area of FOM2 while the two black boxes
in combination are FOM3. The width of FOM1 and FOM2 is the same as the diameter of the incident
beam.
cell bodies, it is desirable to have parameters which maximize FOM1, while for treatments which requires
to thermally damage the photoreceptors, but not killing them, FOM2 should me maximized.
Some treatment parameters will be evaluated based on a therapeutic window. In literature the therapeutic
window is deﬁned as the ratio between the power needed to obtain a rupture, and the power needed for
mild photocoagulation [8]. The width of the therapeutic window is a measure of the relative safety of the
photocoagulation parameters. Classically a width of the therapeutic window of more than 2 is desired, in
order to accommodate for changes in pigmentation of the retina. The therapeutic window for this work
is deﬁned as the power at which over-treatment occurs, relative to power at which photoreceptor damage
occurs. This means the power at which FOM3 > 0, relative to the power at which FOM2 > 0. This is a
more narrow deﬁnition of the therapeutic window than in [8], since the power at which FOM3 > 0 is not
necessarily the power needed for rupture, since rupture occurs at approximately 180 °C [? ]. This means
that the width of the therapeutic window cannot be directly used to compare the treatments parameters to
other treatments in literature, it is however a good indication and possibility of evaluation the treatments in
this works.
As the therapeutic window is deﬁned from the power-level at which photocoagulation begins, it is important
to ﬁnd the correct point. Simply taking the ﬁrst point at which FOM2 > 0 can however turn out to give
misleading results. Therefore a linear regression is constructed based on the two ﬁrst powers at which FOM2
> 0, the beginning of photocoagulation is deﬁned as the crossing of this point with the power-axis. Similarly,
some treatments are evaluated based on the height of the FOM2-curve. Because of the relatively large step-
size of the power in the simulations, there is a risk that the peak of this FOM is not on the curve. Therefore,
to compensate for this, the peak is calculated as the top-point of a ﬁtted second degree polynomial, f (x) =
ax2 +bx +c, constructed by all the points on the FOM2 curve larger than 0.
These Figures of Merit are as mentioned designed to be a part of the evaluation for several types of photo-
coagulation, and are counted based on the number of voxels which has Ω> 1. One major advantage of this
method of evaluation is that it can run automatically and, stores all Figures of Merit in a matrix which can be
accessed after the simulation. This automatication makes it possible to run a large number of simulations,
and thereby vary several parameters.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 17 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:23==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
A second limiting measure which could have also been used as a limiting factor is the temperature in every
point of the retina. This way the simulation could run until a rupture temperature is reached. This form of
evaluation would make it possible to compare the different parameters to other treatments from literature
based on the therapeutic window. However, as the point treatment is to only treat the photoreceptors and
not the inner retina, a cut-off at FOM3 > 0 instead of at 180 °C is more suiting.
4.2
Petri phantom
A next step from ﬁnding the results of the simulations performed and discussed in Chapter 5, would be to
test on human eyes. This is however not an option. Other options would have been pigs or dutch belted-
rabbits, which have previously been used [? ? ]. There is however a problem that when a person or animal
dies the RPE separates from the rest of the retina. This means that in order to use real eyes, the test subject
must be alive. This has not been a priority or a possibility in the work for this thesis to ﬁnd test animals, and
therefore two different phantoms were created in order to experimentally test the ﬁndings. This chapter
presents the fabricated phantoms, discuss the validity of these, and which other possible options could
have been chosen. Finally the way of assessing the results will be presented.
4.2.1
Structure of phantom
This phantom is a three layered model, as illustrated in Figure 11. These two types of phantoms were created
in close collaboration with Senior Researcher Lars Lindvold, DTU Nutech. Two different types of phantoms
were created, with only the base layer being different in the two. The bottom layer of the ﬁrst type is a 6 %
porcine skin gelatin solution, representing the choroid and the sclera. In the second type, the bottom layer
consist of a 184 Sylgard Silicone. The middle layer in both types consist of a heat proof EFA 0790-72041
matte black spray paint representing the RPE layer. Finally the top is a layer of egg whites symbolizing the
rest of the retina. A detailed recipe of this phantom can be found in Appendix ??.
Figure 11: Sketch of the phantom constructed in order to experimentally test the laser. The phantom
has three distinct layers, consisting of a base layer, black spray paint and egg white, in order to mimic
the back of the eye.
The optical and thermal properties of the individual materials used for the layers, can be seen in Table 3.
Characterization of absorber layer
In order to verify the absorber layer, and ﬁnd the absorption coefﬁcient, a simple experiment was per-
formed. The weight of four glass plates was measured, before they were spray coated with the paint, for
1, 3, 5 and 7 seconds respectively. After this, the weight of these was measured again. Following this, the
absorbance spectrum of these four glass plates were measured using a spectrophotometer. The absorbance
measurements can be seen in Figure 12a.
Rewriting Lambert Beers law from equation (1), and neglecting the reﬂection and scattering, it is possible
to ﬁnd the absorption coefﬁcient by the equation
µa(λ) = 2.303 A(λ)
t
,
(7)
while knowing that the absorbance A = log10
µ I0
I
¶
. It is assumed that the absorbing material in the spray
paint is carbon, therefore using a density of 1.887 g/cm3 and knowing that the glass plates are 50 mm by 76
Technical University of Denmark
Page 18 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:24==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
Symbol
Gelatin
Sylgard 184
Spray paint
Egg white
Absorption coefﬁcient
µa(577)
5540
-
(cm−1)
Scattering coefﬁcient
µs(577)
-
-
-
(cm−1)
Anisotropy
g
0.9
0.9
0.99
()
Volumetiric Heat Capacity
VHC
(J/(cm3 ·K))
Density
ρ
1e-3
1e-3
1.887e-3
1.026e-3
(kg/cm3)
Thermal Conductivity
TC
6.2e-3
2.7e-3
(W/(cm·K))
Thickness
d
≈4.5
≈4.5
≈10 ×10−4
≈0.1
(cm)
Table 3: optical and thermal properties of the gelatin and silicone phantom, of the layers which are
possible to ﬁnd. The absorption coefﬁcient is calculated, and the thermal conductivity is a table value.
The rest of the parameters are the best and closest approximations.
mm, it is possible to calculate the average thickness of the layers. The measured absorbances as a function
of wavelength for each plate is depicted in Figure 12a, while the speciﬁc absorbance for each glass at λ = 577
nm is depicted in Figure 12b. The absorption coefﬁcient can therefore be calculated using equation (7) and
the slope in Figure 12b.
(a) Absorbance measurements for the different thick-
nesses of absorber layer.
(b) The absorbance of the absorber layer for λ = 577 nm
as a function of layer thickness.
Figure 12: Absorbance measurements of the absorber layer of petri phantom.
A ﬁfth measurement was taken of a glass plate without spray paint, and this is subtracted from the results in
Figure 12a. As can be seen, the absorbance is very even across the whole visible spectrum of wavelengths.
It is however also seen that the absorbance of the thick ﬁlm is not as even as the three others. This is due to
interference and multiple reﬂections in the glassplate. The measurement of these for absorbances makes it
possible to calculate the absorption coefﬁcient to be µa(577) = 5540.
4.2.2
Validity of model
Egg whites exhibits coagulation effects similar to both cow, pig and human blood [? ]. It coagulates at
temperatures around 65 °C, which as was described in Chapter 3, the human retina also does. Therefore egg
Technical University of Denmark
Page 19 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:25==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
white is a good and very accessible medium to mimic the human retina. Well before all experiments, the
egg whites were taken out of the fridge in order to obtain a temperature closer to that of the human retina.
The EFA 0790-72041 black spray paint which is a substitute for the RPE layer is chosen because it has ab-
sorption across the whole visible spectrum as was seen in Figure 12a. This can therefore be used to test the
yellow laser for this experiment, but also any other wavelengths which might be of interest in the future.
Furthermore this black spray paint is matte, so the reﬂection is very low, which corresponds well with the
actual RPE layer. Finally the paint is heat resistant up to 400 °C which is far above the need for these exper-
iments, however regular spray paint is not and will start bleaching at far lower temperatures. This makes
the phantom unusable. The absorption coefﬁcient of the black paint is far higher than what is needed, the
thickness of the layer is however lower, and the total absorbance will therefore ﬁt fairly well to that of the
human eye.
Many other types of absorbers have been tested in the development of this phantom, among those is rho-
damine b and permanent marker, however none of them showed as much potential as the spray paint.
As the gelatin layer consist mostly of water, the thermal conductivity is also close to that of water. This
thermal conductivity of the sclera and choroid is also what is assumed in the numerical model which is
described in Chapter 4.1. This is therefore a ﬁtting choice. A second property of the gelatin which is impor-
tant to notice is the fact that the gelatin becomes soft at temperatures around 40 °C [? ]. This property is
incredibly useful since this can be used as a marker for over-treatment, as will be described in Chapter 6.1.1.
The silicone has a thermal conductivity which is lower than that of the gelatin. This means that the heat will
not be conducted away from the injury as fast as it will in the eye. There is therefore at risk that the effect
of the laser will be overstated using this phantom. It is however easy to fabricate, and lasts for a longer time
before going bad.
As described there are differences between the two types of phantoms, theoretically the gelatin phantom
should be more similar to human eye tissue, they will however both be tested in Chapter 6, to see if there is
an actual difference.
As a ﬁnal test of the validity of the phantom, a treatment has been performed, and is compared to an actual
treatment on a retina of a dutch-belted rabbit, as was also done to the numerical model in Chapter 4.1.3.
(a) Photocoagulation "treatment" performed on gelatin
phantom using a 200 µm spot size and power level of 1.1
W for 200 ms. The white scalebar is 100 µm
(b) Histology of retina "mildly" coagulated using a 577
nm laser for 20 ms. The yellow scale bar is 135 µm This
histology is performed directly after photocoagulation.
The image is borrowed from [? ]
Figure 13: Comparison between treatment on petri phantom and treatment on rabbit retina.
As can be seen in Figure 13, it is possible to obtain photocoagulation similar to the photocoagulation ob-
tained in the rabbit retina, using the petri phantom. It is however also noticed that the power needed to
obtain treatment is far larger than otherwise expected, and the volume of the treated area is far larger for
the petri phantom than in the retina of the rabbit.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 20 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:26==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
Figure 14: Illustration of the evaluation of the OCT images of the petri phantom. The treatment angle
is seen to be measured as the angle between horizontal and the angle of the treatment. As can be seen
drawn in blue. The size markers in the image are 100 µm.
It is important to notice that phantom was the best possible solution. The experiments conducted with
these phantoms should however be seen as a proof of concept that it is possible to conduct the experiments
in the lab, and not as a guideline for the most optimal treatment.
4.2.3
Evaluation
The evaluation of the performed experiments is more an evaluation of the collected group of results, and
comparisons between the experimental results, and will only to a very little degree be compared to the
results of the simulations presented in Chapter 5. This is due to the large differences between the numerical
and the petri phantom.
After treatment of the petri phantom an image is taken using Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT). OCT
is a non-invasive imaging technique based on light interference [? ], often used to image the human retina.
It has a high spatial, resolution of 4-20 µm, and close to real time imaging. An OCT A-scan is a depth scan in
one position. The A-scan is taken by using a white light source and a moving detector, thereby measuring
the interference of every wavelength. A ﬁnal OCT image is generated by collecting a series of A-scans into
a B-scan. A series of B-scans can be averaged in order to bring down signal noise. The OCT images for this
work is taken using medium sensitivity, every A-scan is averaged 20 times and every B-scan is averaged 10
times, in order to bring down the noise of the signal.
The OCT images taken is afterwards evaluated using the image editing tool imagej. This makes it possible to
measure the diameter, the height of the treated area as well as the left and right treatment angle as illustrated
in Figure 31. By measuring the diameter and height of the treatment it is possible to compare the effect
of the laser beam. By measuring the left and right angle it is possible to compare the two beam shapes.
Based on the considerations on the ideal treatment to be shaped like a hockey puck, the angle can be a part
of determining whether the sides of the treated are more vertical. Finally, as can be seen in Figure 31, a
portion of the treatments has developed an air bubble above the treated area. This is a tell-tale sign that
overtreatment has occurred. This is expected to happen at these high powers, it will however be evaluated
if there is a difference in phantom type or beam type with respect to the bubble formation.
Since the diameter, height and angles are hard to measure exactly on the OCT images, they are all measured
three times and the average is taken.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 21 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:27==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
5
Simulations
This chapter presents the performed simulations, as well as how they are performed. Furthermore in chap-
ter 5.2, the simulations of a full eye is compared to the simulations run on only the back of the eye, in order
to compare the outcome and the losses passing through the vitreous body in the eye. Chapter 5.3 similarly
compares the difference between the effects of varying the absorption coefﬁcient of the RPE layer, in or-
der to illustrate the consequence of varying melanin concentration across the retina and from individual to
individual.
Following this, a series of measurements was performed in order to compare and evaluate an ideal treat-
ment setting. These simulations vary the wavelength, the diameter of the beam, the pulse duration and
the number of pulses. All the results of the simulations in this chapter except for the wavelength compar-
isons in Chapter 5.4 are presented both for LG and Gaussian mode proﬁles. In Chapter ??, the two modes
are compared based on all the previous presented results. These chosen simulations were limited by the
considerations done in Chapter ??, which theoretically discuss the ideal treatments.
All the simulations will all be evaluated and compared based on the Figures of Merit presented in Chapter
4.1.4.
5.1
Experimental Setup
All simulations are performed on the numerical phantom described in Chapter 4.1. The size of the domain
is 1500 µm in all directions. This domain is subdivided into 150 voxels in each direction, resulting in a voxel
size of 10 µm in both the x, y and z directions. This size has been chosen in order to have at least two
voxels vertically in each layer, however the number of voxels has been limited due to time limitations of
the simulations. The size of the simulational domain is chosen in order to not obtain thermal damage or
diffusion outside of the domain, even for large beam diameters.
The all simulations has been run with both a 532 nm laser and a 577 nm laser of both Gaussian and Laguerre-
Gaussian beams. The settings of the lasers has been kept as realistic as possible. The laser is focused on the
retina as it also happens in the clinic. It is assumed that the laser is directly incident on the retina, with only
a vertical trajectory unit vector, which is what is aimed for clinically. The divergence half angle of the laser
is calculated by
Θ = M2
λ
πw0
,
(8)
where M2 is the beam quality factor, and w0 is the waist width. This term is included in the calculations.
The waist width is given in the simulations, and can be fabricated using lenses in real life. The beam quality
factor has been measured for both beam types based on a Norlase 577 nm laser diode similar to the one
also used in experiments in Chapter 6. For the Gaussian beam, the beam quality factor should theoretically
have a diffraction limited beam(M2 = 1), however, the beam has previously been characterized to have
M2 = 1.1 in both the x- and y-directions. For the simulations the beam quality for the Gaussian beam has
been assumed to be M2 = 1.2.
For the experiments in Chapter 6, the beam quality of the LG beam was found to be M2 = 2.17. This value
has been used in the simulations, even though it is most likely an overestimation as discussed in Chapter 7.
The powers used to run the simulations are deﬁned based on a predeﬁned power ﬂuence. This is deﬁned as
P = Favπr 2
τ·n
,
(9)
where r is the beam radius, τ is the treatment time, n is the number of pulses, and Fav is the predeﬁned
power ﬂuence. This is in the simulations set to be a number between 4 and 25. These power ﬂuences have
from trial-and-error been found to correspond to powers within the therapeutic window. Deﬁning the input
power based on the power ﬂuence has several advantages. First of all, it makes the automatacation of the
MATLAB script used to run the simulations easier, and results in fewer simulations which cannot be used
Technical University of Denmark
Page 22 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:28==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
Figure 15: Illustration of the full eye used in the MCmatlab simulations used to compare the full eye to
the back of the eye.
since the power is either too low to result in treatment, or so high that it results in over-treatment. The
second advantage is that this ﬂuence makes it easier to compare both treatment times and beam diameters.
With changing beam diameters and treatment time the incident power is seen to change, based on equation
(9), however the number of incident photons on a given area, the power ﬂuence, is not changing. Having
such a variation in power ﬂuence makes it possible to compare both diameters and treatment times to each
other.
5.2
Full vs Back of eye
The ﬁrst simulation which has been run is an analysis of the effect on the results which it has to limit the
simulation domain to be only the back of the eye, and not include the whole vitreous body. Figure 16, is a
scatter plot of FOM1 and FOM2 as a function of the wavelengths for a whole eye and only the back of the eye
using λ = 532 nm and λ = 577 nm respectively. The blue curve is for the whole eye and the red curve is for
only the back of the eye. The simulation domain for the full eye can be seen in Figure 15, while the domain
for the back of the eye is the one depicted in Figure 8. The only difference between these two simulations
is the thickness of the vitreous body. In the back of the eye the thickness of the vitreous 745 µm, while the
thickness of the vitrous body in the full eye is 1.5695 cm based on a human eye being averagely 24 mm in
full size. The rest of the parameters for the simulation is as described in Chapter ??.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 23 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:29==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
(a) FOM1 and FOM2 plotted for the simulation of the full
eye (blue) and the back of the eye (red) respectively, λ =
532 nm.
(b) FOM1 and FOM2 plotted for the simulation of the full
eye (blue) and the back of the eye (red) respectively, λ =
577 nm.
Figure 16: Comparison between full domain and the back of the eye for λ = 532nm 16a and λ = 577 nm
16b. The simulations has been performed using beam diameter of 200 µm and 20 ms.
It is seen in Figure 16, that the difference between the full eye and the back of the eye, is primarily that the
power needed to obtain a certain damage is higher for the full eye compared to the back of the eye.
Furthermore it seems as if the heat is more conﬁned in the simulations regarding the back of the eye com-
pared to the full eye. This can be seen by the difference in activation of the three different Figures of Merit.
The difference between treatment onset in FOM2 is 14.9 % for λ = 532 nm and 18.3 % for λ = 577 nm. The
treatment onset is however only 5.3 % for λ = 532 nm and 7.2 % for λ = 577 nm for the treatment onset dif-
ference in FOM1. Finally the cut-off happens 7.6 % before for the full eye than the back of the eye for λ = 532
nm and 8.2 % earlier for λ = 577 nm. This means that there is a risk that the results presented in the follow-
ing chapters might be slightly better than they are in reality. However, the phenomenon is present for both
wavelengths in all cases, why the model should be good enough to compare all the different treatments.
It should however be kept in mind when transferring the results from the computer to actual patients as
would have been necessary anyways.
5.3
Variation analysis
As a second analysis of the model a variation of the absorption coefﬁcient of the RPE layer has been per-
formed. This is due to the reported differences in the melanin distribution across the retina and from person
to person. A difference of up to a factor 2 has been reported, therefore the simulations had varying absorp-
tion coefﬁcients between µa/2 and 2µa. The results can be seen in Figure 17.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 24 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:30==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
(a) Plot of FOM1 (stars) and FOM2 (circles), for varying
absorption coefﬁcients of the RPE layer.
(b) Therapeutic window for the different absorption co-
efﬁcients
Figure 17: Comparison between varying absorption coefﬁcients of the RPE layer. The simulations has
been performed using λ = 532nm, Gaussian beam with a diameter of 200 µm and 20 ms.
It is seen that the variations in the absorption coefﬁcient results in a slight change of the power required
to obtain treatment. The variations however also result in a slight change in the width of the therapeutic
window. This Figure is not used to compare the two wavelengths, but to compare the effect of a variation of
the absorption coefﬁcient. It is seen that with a decreasing absorption coefﬁcient, the width of therapeutic
window decreases, while increasing absorption coefﬁcient results in a wider window. This is important to
keep in mind when comparing the results in the following chapters.
5.4
Wavelength
Based on the discussion on possible wavelengths in Chapter 3.3, two possibly good wavelengths has been
chosen for simulations. These are the popular 532 nm and 577 nm. 532 nm has been the standard wave-
length for years now, however theoretical studies has found advantages of using 577 nm over 532 nm for
retinal photocoagulation. After the development of the 577 nm laser diode, this is also beginning to be-
come a wavelength used for photocoagulation. Several theoretical and clinical studies has compared these
two wavelengths [7], however none of these studies has found that one wavelength was signiﬁcantly better
than the other. This chapter compares these two wavelengths using a Gaussian beam proﬁle with several
different diameters.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 25 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:31==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
(a) Plot of FOM1 (stars) and FOM2 (circles), of the two
different wavelengths. With a beam diameter of 100 µm
and treatment time of τ=5 ms.
(b) Plot of FOM1 (stars) and FOM2 (circles), of the two
different wavelengths. With a beam diameter of 300 µm
and treatment time of τ=5 ms.
(c) Plot of FOM1 (stars) and FOM2 (circles), of the two
different wavelengths. With a beam diameter of 100 µm
and treatment time of τ=35 ms.
(d) Plot of FOM1 (stars) and FOM2 (circles), of the two
different wavelengths. With a beam diameter of 300 µm
and treatment time of τ=35 ms.
Figure 18: Comparison between the different wavelengths used for treatment. The blue ﬁgures denotes
λ = 532 nm, and red denotes λ = 577 nm. Compared based on varying beam diameters and pulse lengths.
It is seen in Figure 18, that the difference between using λ = 532 nm and λ = 577 nm is very slim. It is
observed that FOM2 of the yellow laser is slightly higher than the green laser, both for variations in the
beam diameter and the treatment time. This is however not signiﬁcant. Only a selection of the obtained
results are presented in Figure 18, however, the same tendency is seen for all diameters and all treatment
times. Furthermore it can be observed that the simulations of the yellow wavelength has been stopped
slightly before the green wavelength. It should however be noted that the step-size of the power is higher
for the yellow wavelength than the green, and the tendency is therefore not necessarily as pronounced as it
seems in Figure 18.
To compare the wavelengths further, the therapeutic window as a function of diameter for both wavelengths
τ = 5 ms and τ = 35 ms has been plotted in Figure 19a. Finally also the maximum of FOM2 has been plotted
using both a short and a long pulse duration, for all possible diameters and both wavelengths in Figure 19b.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 26 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:32==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
(a) The therapeutic window plotted for the two different
wavelengths.
(b) The Maximum value of FOM2 plotted for two the two
different wavelengths.
Figure 19: Width of therapeutic window and the maximum value of FOM2 as a function of diameter.
Plotted for both wavelengths
In Figure 19, it is seen that the difference between the two chosen wavelengths is very small. It is however
seen in Figure 19a, that the therapeutic window for λ = 577 nm, seems slightly larger than the therapeutic
window for λ = 532 nm. Similarly in Figure 19b it seems that the maximum height of FOM2 is slightly higher
for λ = 577 nm, than for λ = 532 nm. Since the difference between the wavelengths is so small, the results
of the following chapters will be presented only for λ = 577 nm. They will however be presented for both
Gaussian and Laguerre-Gaussian beams. These two beam types will be presented in Chapter 5.8.
5.5
Diameter
The beam diameter for a photocoagulation treatment is typically chosen based on convenience. A larger
diameter requires fewer burn spots to cover a full retina in pan-retinal photocoagulation. A smaller beam
diameter however better ﬁts between the blood vessels of the retina which are not desirable to hit. Typical
beam diameters in the clinic vary from 200-500 µm [? ]. This study apply beam sizes from 100 µm to 400
µm.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 27 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:33==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
(a) Figures of Merit as a function of the incident ﬂuence
for two Gaussian beams with different diameter.
(b) Figures of Merit as a function of the incident ﬂuence
for Gaussian and Laguerre-Gaussian beams with diame-
ter = 100 µm.
(c) Figures of Merit as a function of the incident ﬂuence
for Gaussian and Laguerre-Gaussian beams with diame-
ter = 300 µm.
(d) Figures of Merit as a function of the incident ﬂuence
for two Laguerre beams with different diameter.
Figure 20: Comparison between the used diameters. For both Gaussian and Laguerre-gaussian beams
As is seen in Figure 20, the diameter of the incident beam has a big inﬂuence on the power needed to obtain
treatment. Both for the Gaussian beam shape in Figure 20a, and the LG beam in Figure 20c, the power
needed to obtain treatment is lower for a diameter of 300 µm than what is needed for a diameter of 100 µm.
Even though the power ﬂuence is the same for both diameters plotted in Figure 20 the incident power is
higher for a larger diameter than for a small diameter according to the deﬁnition of the incident power in
equation (9). Therefore it is expected that the onset of treatment happens for the larger diameters before the
smaller diameter. What is crucial to compare in these experiments is therefore the quality of the treatment.
Figure 22 depicts the width of the therapeutic window in Figure 21a while the maximum of FOM2 is depicted
in Figure 21b. Finally the maximum value of FOM1 is depicted in Figure 22.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 28 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:34==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
(a) The width of therapeutic window as a function of
beam diameter plotted for the two different times and
beam types
(b) The maximum value of FOM2 as a function of beam
diameter plotted for the two different times and beam
types
Figure 21: Width of therapeutic window and the maximum value of FOM2 as a function of diameter.
As is seen in Figure 22, the diameter of the incident beam does not have a big inﬂuence on the width of the
therapeutic window in Figure 21a. The biggest effect on the width of the therapeutic window is the pulse
length as will be discussed in Chapter 5.6. Neither does the diameter have a large inﬂuence on the maximum
level of FOM2 as seen in Figure 21b, with a slight advantage to the smaller diameters.
The diameter does on the other hand have a big inﬂuence on the maximum level of FOM1 as seen in Figure
22, where the maximum of FOM1 is plotted for the Gaussian beam shape in Figure 22a, and the LG beam
shape in Figure 22b. It is seen that for the Gaussian beam shape, the difference is not very pronounced,
however for the LG beam, the diameter of the beam dramatically changes and increases the maximum ob-
tainable value for FOM1. This is as mentioned a big advantage for pan-retinal photocoagulation to have a
large FOM1, since this results in full treatment of all photoreceptors, without overtreating any photorecep-
tors. A comparison between the two types of beams will be presented in Chapter ??.
(a) The maximum value of FOM1 as a function of beam
diameter plotted for the Gaussian beams
(b) The maximum value of FOM1 as a function of beam
diameter plotted for the Laguerre Gaussian beams
Figure 22: Maximum value of FOM1 as a function of diameter. For both beam types
5.6
Pulse length
As was indicated in Chapter 5.5, the pulse length can also have a signiﬁcant impact on the results of a
photocoagulation treatment. As described in Chapter 3.3, treatment times has previously been around 100
Technical University of Denmark
Page 29 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:35==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
to 500 ms, however, recently treatment times of 20 ms to 200 ms have become more popular since this
limits the patient discomfort during treatment. As the incident power in the simulations change based on
the treatment time, as with the beam diameter, the initial comparisons are therefore based on FAV as with
the beam diameters.
(a) Figures of Merit as a function of the incident ﬂuence
for two Gaussian beams with different treatment time.
(b) Figures of Merit as a function of the incident ﬂuence
for Gaussian and Laguerre-Gaussian beams with treat-
ment time of 5 ms.
(c) Figures of Merit as a function of the incident ﬂuence
for two Gaussian beams with different treatment time.
(d) Figures of Merit as a function of the incident ﬂuence
for Gaussian and Laguerre-Gaussian beams with treat-
ment time of 35 ms.
Figure 23: Comparison between the different treatment times.
In Figure 23, it is seen that the short treatment time has an earlier onset of treatment than the long exposure
time. Like it was the case with the difference in the beam diameter, this can be explained by the deﬁnition
of the power as described in equation (9). A shorter exposure time results in a higher power of the incident
beam. For this reason, also the treatment time is evaluated based on the quality of treatment based on the
Figures of Merit and the width of the therapeutic window. The width of the therapeutic window as a function
of treatment time is seen in Figure 24a, while the maximum of FOM2, also as a function of the treatment
time is seen in Figure 24b. Finally Figure 25 depicts the maximum value of FOM1 for increasing treatment
times.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 30 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:36==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
(a) The width of therapeutic window as a function of
treatment time plotted for the two different times and
beam types
(b) The maximum value of FOM2 as a function of treat-
ment time plotted for the two different times and beam
types
Figure 24: Width of therapeutic window and the maximum value of FOM2 as a function of treatment
time.
It is seen in Figure 24a, that the treatment time has a big inﬂuence on the width of the therapeutic window.
It is seen that the width decreases dramatically with increasing treatment times. However, as described in
Chapter 3.3, with decreasing treatment times is a higher risk of rupturing Bruch’s membrane due to a need
for higher powers.
The maximum value of FOM2 seen in Figure 24b, is on the other hand not very affected by the treatment
time. This means that in order to perform a photocoagulation treatment where the photoreceptors should
be damaged but not killed, the treatment time does not make a difference, in the effect of the treatment.
If pan-retinal photocoagulation is to be performed, the treatment time however greatly inﬂuences the effect
of the treatment, as is seen in Figure 25. Here it is seen that for both the Gaussian and LG beam shapes in
Figure 25a and 25b respectively, that the maximum value of FOM1 increases with increasing treatment time.
This is clearly seen for the Gaussian beam proﬁle with a big beam diameter, and especially the the LG beam
proﬁle with the big diameter. For the smaller diameters the cut-off of treatment seems to occur earlier for
the longer treatment times. This is discussed more extensively in Chapter 7.
(a) The maximum value of FOM1 as a function of treat-
ment time plotted for the Gaussian beams
(b) The maximum value of FOM1 as a function of treat-
ment time plotted for the Gaussian beams
Figure 25: The maximum value of FOM1 as a function of treatment time plotted for both Gaussian and
Laguerre-Gaussian beams for two different beam diameters
Technical University of Denmark
Page 31 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:37==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
5.7
Number of pulses
As described in Chapter 3.3, a new technique of photocoagulation is micropulsing. This technique is be-
coming popular by the hopes of conﬁning the thermal damage to the RPE layer, without rupturing Bruch’s
membrane. Since the goal of the simulations run in this chapter is to reduce the pulse power, the results are
plotted with respect to power and not FAV which has otherwise been done in the previous chapters varying
both beam diameters and treatment times. The comparisons of different treatment times and number of
pulses can be seen in Figure 26
(a) Figures of Merit as a function of the incident power,
for few short pulses and few long pulses.
(b) Figures of Merit as a function of the incident power,
for few short pulses and many short pulses.
(c) Figures of Merit as a function of the incident power,
for few short pulses and many long pulses.
(d) Figures of Merit as a function of the incident power,
for many short pulses and many long pulses.
Figure 26: Figures of Merit as a function of the incident power for varions in pulse number and dura-
tions.
Figure 26, depicts a few different scenarios and possibilities of short and several pulses. It is seen throughout
the cases in Figure 26, that in general few longer pulses keeps the power down, however as is seen in Figure
26a, this also results in high FOM1. Which was undesirable. Many short pulses also keeps the power low as
is seen in Figure 26b, however this also results in high FOM1. The same tendency is also seen for many long
pulses in Figure 26c and 26d. In order to compare a larger quantity of simulations, the Figures of Merit for
the different cases are seen in Figure 27.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 32 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:38==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
(a) The maximum value of FOM1 as a function of treat-
ment time and number of pulses. Plotted for Gaussian
beam with λ = 577 nm
(b) The maximum value of FOM2 as a function of treat-
ment time and number of pulses. Plotted for Gaussian
beam with λ = 577 nm
Figure 27: The maximum value of FOM1 and FOM2 as a function of treatment time and number of
pulses. Plotted for Gaussian beam with λ = 577 nm
It is seen in Figure 27 that many short pulses such as 8-10 pulses of 0.5 ms, keeps FOM1 low and FOM2
high as desired. It is however in therapeutic window in Figure 28 seen that the therapeutic window for this
treatment is very narrow. A wide therapeutic window is on the other hand found using few long pulses as for
example 2 pulses of 5 ms. This keeps FOM1 relatively low and FOM2 high. A wide therapeutic window is also
found using 2 pulses of 0.5 ms. This is likewise seen to keep FOM1 low as well as FOM2 high. In general a
low FOM1 is found by using only few pulses, this however keeps the power high, so the therapeutic window
must be kept in mind when selecting treatment parameters.
Figure 28: The width of therapeutic window as a function of treatment time plotted for the two different
times and beam types
5.8
Beam shape
Throughout this chapter both the beam diameter and the pulse length have been plotted and compared
for both Gaussian and LG beams, but the two beams have not been compared to each other. This will be
done in this chapter. Apart from the Figures already presented in Chapters 5.5 and 5.6, Figure 29 has been
generated in order to compare the two beam shapes.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 33 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:39==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
(a) Figures of Merit as a function of the incident power,
for few short pulses and few long pulses.
(b) Plot of FOM1 (stars) and FOM2 (circles), of the two
different wavelengths. With a beam diameter of 300 µm
and treatment time of τ=5 ms.
(c) Plot of FOM1 (stars) and FOM2 (circles), of the two
different wavelengths. With a beam diameter of 100 µm
and treatment time of τ=35 ms.
(d) Plot of FOM1 (stars) and FOM2 (circles), of the two
different wavelengths. With a beam diameter of 300 µm
and treatment time of τ=35 ms.
Figure 29: Comparison between the Gaussian and LG mode used for treatment. The blue ﬁgures denote
Ga modes, and red denotes LG. Compared based on varying beam diameters and pulse lengths.
Figure 29a, the maximum values of FOM1 and FOM2 are shown as a function of the beam diameter. It is seen
that for narrow beam diameters the maximum values are the same for both beam shapes. This corresponds
to what is seen in Figure 20d. It seems that the diameter is not large enough to obtain the beneﬁt from the
whole in middle and therefore obtains the same therapeutic effects as the Gaussian beam. It is however
seen that as the diameters increase the LG beam results in higher FOM1 than the Gaussian beams with the
same beam diameter. It is however seen in Figure 20b, 20d, 23b and 23d, that the power needed to begin
treatment is a little higher for the LG beam than the Gaussian beam. This is due to the power being used on
a larger area of the retina, for the LG beam. Similarly in these Figures it is seen that the cut-off power is also
higher for the LG beams than the Gaussian beams.
In Figure 29b the maximum values of the Figures of Merit are depicted as a function of the treatment time.
In this Figure it is seen that FOM2 does not change with the beam shape. FOM1 on the other hand increases
dramatically by using the LG beam instead of the Gaussian beam.
In Figures 29c and 29d, the width of the therapeutic windows are are depicted as functions of beam diameter
and treatment time respectively. In these Figures it is seen that for all beam diameters and all treatment
times, the therapeutic window is wider for the LG beam than for the Gaussian beams, which is also what is
seen in Figure 24a.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 34 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:40==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
6
Experiments
In order to experimentally verify the results presented in Chapter 5, several series of measurements has
also been performed in the lab. Chapter 6.1 shows and describes the setup used for the experiments. 6.1.1
describes the evaluation method for these experiments. The following chapters describes and discusses the
obtained results.
6.1
Experimental Setup
The setup as can be seen in Figure 30 consist of a 577 nm Norlase laser diode and mirrors for aligning. A
Thorlabs WPV10L-532 zero order wave retarder is used to generate a doughnut beam when necessary, as
well as several lenses to focus and design the beam diameter.
(a) Setup used for alignment, in order to optimize the
beam proﬁle. The setup consist of the 577 nm laser diode,
two mirrors to direct the beam, a Thorlabs WPV10L-532
zero order wave retarder to generate the doughnut beam,
a f=1019 mm lens and ﬁnally a 50 mm lens, projecting the
far ﬁeld image of the vortex on to the wall
(b)
Figure 30
Figure 30a is a sketch of the experimental setup used, with the various changeable parts illustrated. The
laser beam is illustrated by the blue lines. For the alignment of the doughnut beam, the red components in
the setup are used. Here the beam passes from the laser, which is the blue box, is aligned by the two mirrors
to hit the wave retarder exactly in the center. The wave retarder is marked in Figure 30a as the light blue
line. After the wave retarder is a lens with focal distance f1 = 1019 mm, creating a soft focus of the doughnut
beam from the wave retarder 101.9 cm farther down along the table. After approximately 104 cm a second
lens with focal distance f2 = 50 mm is located. This lens projects the far-ﬁeld image from the ﬁrst lens on
to the wall close by. This second lens is placed closer to lens one than their combined focal lengths because
this will image the doughnut beam sharply on to the wall. This can be described by the thin lens equation
1
f = 1
s + 1
s′ ,
(10)
where f is the focal length of the lens, s is distance from the object to the lens, and s′ is the distance from
the lens to the image. Using this equation on lens 2, it can quickly be seen that the wall must be inﬁnitely
far away, if the the total distance between these two lenses is equal to the combined focal length. Therefore
the second lens is moved closer, in order to move the image plane on to the wall. The alignment for this
is done by adjusting the distance for the image to be the sharpest possible. It should be noted that the
Technical University of Denmark
Page 35 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:41==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
beam generated by the vortex retarder is not a true Laguerre-Gaussian beam, but rather a doughnut shaped
beam as described by Thorlabs [? ]. It needs mentioning that the wave retarder is designed for a center
wavelength of 532 nm, while the laser wavelengths in the experiments are 577 nm. This means that the
quality of doughnut beam will not be as high as for a 532 nm laser. But as seen be seen in Figure ??, it is still
possible to generate a yellow doughnut beam.
6.1.1
Evaluation
Figure 31: Illustration of the evaluation of the
OCT images of the petri phantom. The treat-
ment angle is seen to be measured as the angle
between horizontal and the angle of the treat-
ment. As can be seen drawn in blue. The size
markers in the image are 100 µm.
For performing the experiment, the black components are
added to the setup. A periscope mirror is inserted in to the
beam between the ﬁrst and second lens in order to project the
focal point on to the phantom placed below. The phantom is
marked by the black circle in Figure 30a. This part of the setup
is seen in Figure 30b. The ﬁnal component added is a shutter,
sketched as the black rectangle added between vortex retarder
and the lens. Three different lenses are used in order to use
three different beam sizes. Lens1 has a focal length of f = 201
mm, f = 501 mm and f = 1019 mm. Using the equation
w0 = 2λ
π · f
d ,
(11)
where w0 is the focused beam diameter, λ is the wavelength
of the beam, f is the focal length of the lens and d is the di-
ameter of the incident beam, it is possible to calculate the di-
ameter of the focused beam. With the three lenses, the di-
ameter is calculated to be w1 = 40.30µm, w2 = 100.45µm and
w3 = 204.32µm, with an incident beam diameter in the widest
direction of 1.832 mm as has previously been measured for a
similar laser. This measurement can be seen in Appendix ??.
When the lens is changed in the setup, the periscope mirror
is also moved accordingly, so the beam waist always hits the
surface of the phantom. The distance from lens to periscope
and from periscope to surface of phantom has been measured
using a tape measure and ruler, but has not been aligned to the
last millimetre. This is due to the calculated Rayleigh length.
This is calculated using the equation
ZR =
πw2
0
λ
.
(12)
The respective Rayleigh lengths are ZR1 = 8.84 mm, R2 = 5.49 cm and ZR3 = 22.7 cm. This length is a measure
of the axial distance where the beam has not grown larger than
p
2w0 [? ]. From this it is evident that
the beam is relatively within the given diameter, for quite a distance, and the exact distance from lens to
phantom is of course aimed for, but as is seen by the calculated Rayleigh lengths, it is not crucial.
6.1.2
Performed experiments
Using this setup three different types of experiments have been conducted. All three types have been con-
ducted on both types of phantoms described in Chapter 4.2.1. Instantly after treatment and OCT image is
taken and is evaluated as described in Chapter 6.1.1.
1. Three consecutive measurements with exactly the same parameters.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 36 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:42==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
2. A short series of measurements, same exposure time, varying the power levels. Only Gaussian beams.
3. A larger series of measurements varying the laser spot size, the beam type and the exposure time.
Keeping a constant power level.
The ﬁrst set of experiments have been conducted in order to compare and ﬁnd the variation of three differ-
ent measurements, in order to compare the consistency of the treatments. The second series of experiments
is done in order to validate the treatment and compare the different power levels to each other. This series
of measurements are performed only with the Gaussian beam because the beam proﬁle and beam quality
changes with different input current, as has been measured on a similar laser and can be seen in Appendix
??. The function of the vortex retarder is only good using a Gaussian beam, therefore this beam type has not
been included in these measurements.
The ﬁnal series of measurements is a large series varying the treatment time, the diameter and the beam
shape. Five different treatment times are used of 20, 50, 100, 200 and 300 ms respectively. This is done
since it is not possible to vary the input power, and this is thus a way to vary the incident energy. These
measurements were performed in order to compare the different input energies, but more importantly, to
evaluate the beam shape. The results of all the measurements are presented in Chapters 6.2-6.4.
6.2
Variation measurement
The ﬁrst series of experiments as mentioned three measurements using exactly the same parameters. The
resulting spot diameters, heights and treatment angles are found in Table 4.
Gel
Silicone
Dia (µm)
H (µm)
Right
Left
Dia (µm)
H (µm)
Right
Left
1
730
326
54
62
1485
396
47
40
2
1024
359
46
55
1525
253
45
30
3
1193
464
54
54
1363
207
27
32
MEAN
982
383
52
57
1458
285
40
34
SDOM
135
42
3
3
49
57
6
3
Table 4: Comparison of three identical measurements. 100 ms pulse length, 200 µm beam diameter.
The egg whites were 23.8 °C. D = Diameter of damage, H = height of the damaged area, Right is the right
angle of the damaged area and Left is the left angle of the treated area.
In this Table it is seen that even with the same incident parameters the deviations from measurement to
measurement is large. This large deviation must be added to the uncertainty of the measurement. As the
resolution of the measurement is 4-20 µm as described in Chapter 6.1.1. This means that the results of this
Chapter should be viewed more as trends and especially the results in Chapter 6.4 should be considered
more as a proof-of-concept, than to be results to be directly applied to patients.
One of the tendencies which can be seen from this experiment is as expected, that the PDMS phantom
results in more tissue damage from the same laser parameters, based on the lower thermal conductivity as
discussed in Chapter 4.2.1.
6.3
Power measurement
This experiment is performed in order to compare the effects of the different power levels on each phantom.
Only the power level has been altered for these measurements, the beam diameter has been kept at 200 µm,
the treatment time is 100 ms, and the beam shape is Gaussian.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 37 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:43==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
(a) The size of the treated area as a function of the inci-
dent power for both Gel and Silicone phantoms
(b) The angle of the treated area as a function of the in-
cident power for both Gel and Silicone phantoms
Figure 32: Comparsion of treatment dimensions for various power levels.
Figure 32 show the tendencies of the two different phantoms when affected by the laser beam. It is seen that
both the height and the diameter of the damaged volume tends to increase with increasing power in Figure
32a. This corresponds to the results presented in Figure 32b, where it is seen that the treatment angles in
both sides tend to increase with increasing power. These results can therefore be used to further conﬁrm
the behavior of the phantom. Even though the treated volumes are larger than aimed for, they still prove the
expected trend.
6.4
Beam shape
Finally a series of measurements have been performed in order to compare the treatment of the doughnut
beam to the regular Gaussian beam.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 38 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:44==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
(a) The height of the treated area as function of treat-
ment time
(b) The width of the treated area as function of treatment
time
(c) The size of the left angle of the treated area as func-
tion of treatment time
(d) The size of the right angle of the treated area as func-
tion of treatment time
Figure 33: Height, width and angles of the treated areas. Compared for both beam types of long and
short pulses.
Figure 33, show the measured dimensions of the coagulated areas on the silicone phantom. The plotted
dimensions are averaged over three consecutive measurements on the same OCT images to account for
human errors. The errorbars are the SDOM. It is seen in the Figure 33a, that the treated height is generally
higher for the Gaussian beams than the doughnut beams, in accordance with the results obtained for the
simulations in Chapter 5.8. A general trend observed across the results presented in Figure 33, is that the
dimensions of the doughnut beam of 50 µm corresponds well to the dimension obtained by the 50 µm
Gaussian beam, this is also in accordance with the results obtained in the simulations.
This evaluation has not taken over-treatment into account. Over-treatment is not desired, it can therefore
be used as an evaluation method to favor the beam type which is less likely to overtreat. Overtreatment is
as described in Chapter 6.1.1 deﬁned as the occurance of an air-bobble following treatment. Table 5, is an
overview of the parameters resulting in overtreatment.
In Table 5, it is seen that the doughnut beam does not tend to overtreat the phantoms as much as the Gaus-
sian beams. Even though the deﬁnition of overtreatment is different in these experiments compared to the
simulations, the results still correspond to the ones obtained in Chapter 5.8. What is also observed in this
Table is that the smaller beam diameters tend to overtreat more than the larger beam diameters for both the
Gaussian and the doughnut modes. This also seems to indicate that the real advantages of the doughnut
beam are not found until the diameter is of a certain width, as discussed in Chapter 3.3.
Finally as a proof of concept Figure 34 presents an image of the coagulated area on a gelatin phantom treated
with a doughnut laser beam with a diameter of 200 µm for 200 ms. Figure ?? is an overview and a zoom is
Technical University of Denmark
Page 39 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:45==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
Gel
Silicone
Gaussian
Doughnut
Gaussian
Doughnut
50
100
200
50
100
200
50
100
200
50
100
200
20 ms
X
X
X
X
50 ms
X
X
X
X
X
X
100 ms
X
X
X
X
X
X
200 ms
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
300 ms
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Table 5: Comparison of three identical measurements. 100 ms pulse length, 200 µm beam diameter.
The egg whites were 23.8 °C. D = Diameter of damage, H = height of the damaged area, Right is the right
angle of the damaged area and Left is the left angle of the treated area.
seen in Figure 34b.
(a) Overview image of circular treatment area
(b) Zoom image of circular treatment area
Figure 34: Image of circular treatment area
Figure 34, shows an undertreated phantom, treated with a doughnut beam. In this Figure, the hole in the
middle of the coagulated area is visible. This image shows that it is possible to create a doughnut-shaped
coagulated area.
7
Discussion
Throughout the work for this thesis many parameters for lasers for retinal photocoagulation have been
tested, using the developed models. Many results and parameters have been investigated and discussed
already, however many has also been left out of the discussion until now.
An important factor which has not been discussed thoroughly until now is the human factor. This factor
plays a major role in more than one way. Regarding the experiments conducted on the petri phantoms the
human factor plays a role regarding the data analysis. With this being the case it cannot be guarantied that
the measurements are conducted the same way every time, as is also clearly seen by the standard deviations
of the mean presented in Figure 33. It has been accounted for as much as possible by measuring everything
three times. However all experiments are only performed once, and as can be seen in Table ??, this also
brings uncertainties.
A second human factor which also needs mentioning is the fact that all simulations and experiments for this
work has been conducted with human tissue in mind. There is however not one such thing as human tissue.
As has already been discussed both optical and thermal parameters of human tissue varies greatly from
Technical University of Denmark
Page 40 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:46==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
person to person, or even from one place in the eye to the next. This human factor also means that none
of the models take outside parameters into account. With diabetes there is also a higher risk of developing
cataracts [? ]. This risk is not accounted for in any of the models, as with any other outside inﬂuence.
Furthermore blood vessels on the retina are not taken into account in any of the models. Hitting a blood
vessel can in reality risk coagulating the blood vessel instead of thermally damaging the photoreceptors
underneath.
First of all, the type of evaluation must be mentioned. The Figures of Merit were developed in order to
compare treatment parameters for pan-retinal photocoagulation. They can also be used to evaluate coagu-
lation where the cell bodies should be spared. These Figures of Merit are however not intended to evaluate
sub-threshold or non-damaging photocoagulation. As it is still unclear how the mechanisms of photocoag-
ulation works, it is also unclear whether these Figures of Merit are ideal, or could be developed further.
As was also discussed in Chapter 5.2, there are differences between performing the simulations on the back
of the eye compared to performing them on the full eye. Had time permitted it, I would have like to perform
all simulations on the model of the full eye. The simulation time for the full eye is however 8 times larger than
the simulation time for only the back of the eye, which would result in almost two months of simulations.
As was mentioned in Chapter 4.1.3, the parameters of both the laser and the models are desired to be kept
as close to reality as possible. In order to so, the beam proﬁle of the doughnut beam was measured, in order
to obtain a correct divergence angle. This results of this measurement can be seen in Appendix ??. The
beam proﬁler used to measure the beam proﬁle however needs only very little incident power. This means
that the output power of the laser is turned down, which in results in poorer beam quality. This poorer beam
quality leads to a poorer beam quality of also the doughnut mode. However, when the actual measurements
for results in Chapter 6, are performed the beam quality is expected to be higher. The M2 = 2.17 is therefore
meant as a worst case scenario.
Finally it needs mentioning that while working on the presentations for the data from the simulations in
Chapter 5, it was discovered that an error has occurred regarding the divergence angle used in the simula-
tions. The divergence angle should have been deﬁned as in equation (8), instead the divergence angle in all
simulations is deﬁned as
Θwrong =
¡
M2¢2
λ
2w0
.
(13)
Due to the very large amount of simulations run for this thesis, it has not been possible to redo all simula-
tions, this error however does not inﬂuence the results signiﬁcantly. Since this mistake would inﬂuence the
results using the small beam diameters the most, the Rayleigh length of a 100 µm beam with a wavelength
of 577 nm has been calculated based on equation (12). This is calculated to be 1.36 cm. This means that
the width of the beam does not change signiﬁcantly from the retina to the RPE layer, even with a higher
divergence angle. Furthermore, to ensure this, one more simulation was performed. This simulation com-
pares the results of using the wrong divergence angle to the results obtained by using the correctly deﬁned
divergence angle. The results of this simulation is seen in Figure 35
Technical University of Denmark
Page 41 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:47==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
(a) Evaluation of using wrong divergence beam to right
divergence beam for Gaussian beam shape.
(b) Evaluation of using wrong divergence beam to right
divergence beam for Laguerre-Gaussian beam shape.
Figure 35: Evaluation of wrong vs right divergence angle.
As can be seen only very slight deviations between the results generated using the correct divergence angle
and the ones using the wrong one.
Finally, taking a look at the project description, the plan of the project was to investigate the important laser
parameters used for photocoagulation experimentally. This should have been investigated on a phantom
specially designed to imitate a human eye. The experimental ﬁndings should be backed up by simulations
before the best parameters should be tested on rats in vivo. As it turned out the numerical simulations gave
excellent results, and were far easier to compare to each other, focus has been shifted from the experiment
to the simulations for this thesis. However the most important parameters of the lasers such as wavelength,
beam diameter, pulse length and beam shape has still been investigated.
8
Conclusion
Through the work conducted for this thesis two models has been developed in order to compare the most
important treatment parameters for retinal photocoagulation.
The petri phantoms have been used as a proof of concept. Pulse powers between 500 mW and 1100 mW
has been applied to these phantoms with pulse lengths between 20 ms to 300 ms. The tendencies obtained
by this model corresponds to is expected, the resulting treated volumes are however bigger than expected.
Using these petri phantoms it has furthermore been shown that the risk of overtreatment seems to decrease
with the use of a doughnut-shaped beam instead of a regular Gaussian beam shape.
Using the numerical model created in MCmatlab, it has been possible to compare parameters such as treat-
ment wavelength, beam diameter, pulse time number of pulses, as well as the beam shape. These are com-
pared based on three Figures of Merit which have been developed with the purpose of evaluating the quality
of a performed photocoagulation. A high quality photocoagulation is determined to thermally damage the
outer nuclear layer of the retina, the cell bodies of the photoreceptors, without damaging the inner retina.
The two current most popular wavelengths for photocoagulation 532 nm and 577 nm has been compared,
and despite theoretical advantages to 577 nm, no signiﬁcant difference was found between these two wave-
lengths. Beam diameters between 75 µm and 400 µm have been investigated and compared. For none
of the used diameters it was possible to obtain a full pan-retinal photocoagulation, without overtreating.
The same tendency was seen when comparing pulse lengths from 2 ms to 50 ms, it does not seem possi-
ble to obtain full pan-retinal photocoagulation without overtreating, by using a Gaussian beam. By using a
Laguerre-Gaussian beam on the other hand, it seems that wider beams at longer exposure times makes it
possible to reach full photocoagulation with overtreating and damaging the inner retina.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 42 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:48==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
Finally also the number of used pulses has been evaluated for the use of sub-threshold photocoagulation.
The optimal shape of treatment for this case was determined to maximize the damage in the outer segments
of the photoreceptors, without damaging the cell bodies. For this case it was determined that a few short
pulses shows great potential. These result in a lot of thermal in the outer photoreceptor layer, while also
keeping the therapeutic window wide. The resulting temperature in the RPE layer has however not been
measured, and it is therefore not possible to say if these treatment parameters would result in a rupture of
Bruch’s membrane based on the local temperature in the RPE layer.
To sum up, it has been possible to develop two models which can be used to compare the parameters for
retinal photocoagulation. These have already been used to compare different parameters, and especially
the application of a Laguerre-Gaussian beam shape shows great potential for pan-retinal photocoagulation.
However, since it is still not fully known how the photocoagulation treatment actually works, it can be hard
to evaluate which form of treatment is the best. However, no matter how the treatment actually works, and
how the individual doctor prefers to treat his patient, above or below threshold, this thesis has developed a
way to compare different laser settings, diameters, wavelengths pulse lengths and many other properties of
both laser and tissue.
9
Future Work
The models developed and the results obtained during this project shows great potential for future use and
future development.
At the moment the model built in MCmatlab is a static model only varying the different optical and thermal
properties in the z-direction. MCmatlab however does not need symmetries, and it is therefore possible to
include variations in layer thicknesses and optical coefﬁcients. This would make it possible to be closer to
also evaluate the effects of cataracts or the varying density in melanin granules in the RPE layer.
A second type of photocoagulation which has not been evaluated in this project at all is focal photoco-
agulation. This type of photocoagulation aims the laser beam directly at a leaking blood vessel to seal it.
MCmatlab also has the potential to create blood vessels, and the inclusion of such would open for a whole
new kind of evaluations.
Also the Figures of Merit could be developed. They have been exactly as desired for the evaluations of pan-
retinal photocoagulation, for the work conducted in this thesis. However, in order to compare the effects of
the shorter pulses or compare the effect of sub-threshold photocoagulation it is also needed to compare the
temperatures in various locations in the retina.
Finally, the great potential of the Laguerre-Gaussian beam for the use in pan-retinal photocoagulation
should be examined further. More simulations needs to be run, with a large variations of optical and ther-
mal properties in order to evaluate, the potential of this beam shape even deeper. After a very thorough
testing the next step could for instance be tissue.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 43 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:49==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
References
[8] Daniel Palanker and Mark S. Blumenkranz. doi: 10.1016/B978-1-4557-0737-9.00039-4.
[] Mechanisms of laser-tissue interaction: Ii. tissue thermal properties.
Journal of Lasers in Medical
Sciences, 4(3):99–106, 2013. ISSN 22286721, 20089783.
[1] The National Eye Institute (NEI). Facts About Diabetic Eye Disease | National Eye Institute. URL https:
//nei.nih.gov/health/diabetic/retinopathy.
[2] Colin D Mathers and Dejan Loncar. Projections of Global Mortality and Burden of Disease from 2002
to 2030. PLoS Medicine, 3(11):e442, 11 2006. ISSN 1549-1676. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030442.
URL http://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0030442.
[3] How does diabetes affect the body?
.
URL \url{https://www.diabetes.co.uk/how-does-
diabetes-affect-the-body.html}. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[4] Insulin. URL https://www.diabetes.co.uk/body/insulin.html. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[5] Facts about diabetes and insulin. URL https://www.nobelprize.org/educational/medicine/
insulin/diabetes-insulin.html. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[6] The effects of diabetes on your body, .
URL https://www.healthline.com/health/diabetes/
effects-on-body#6. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[7] Martin A. Mainster. Wavelength selection in macular photocoagulation. Ophthalmology, 93(7):952–
958, 1986. ISSN 15494713, 01616420. doi: 10.1016/S0161-6420(86)33637-6.
[9] The impact of pulse duration and burn grade on size of retinal photocoagulation lesion implications
for pattern density. Retina-the Journal of Retinal and Vitreous Diseases, 31(8):1664–1669, 2011. ISSN
15392864, 0275004x.
[10] Christopher Sramek, Jefferson Brown, Yannis M. Paulus, Hiroyuki Nomoto, and Daniel Palanker. Im-
proved safety of retinal photocoagulation with a shaped beam and modulated pulse. Proceedings
of Spie–the International Society for Optical Engineering, 7550(1):75500V, 2010.
ISSN 24109045,
16057422, 1996756x, 0277786x. doi: 10.1117/12.841079.
[11] Eye conditions. URL https://www.floridaeyeclinic.com/eye-conditions/eye-conditions-
2/. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[12] Facts
about
the
cornea
and
corneal
disease,
.
URL
https://nei.nih.gov/health/
cornealdisease. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[13] Facts about the cornea and corneal disease. URL https://www.allaboutvision.com/resources/
pupil.htm. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[14] Lens. URL https://www.healthline.com/human-body-maps/lens#1. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[15] Vitreous and aqueous humor.
URL https://www.healthline.com/human-body-maps/eye-
vitreous-and-aqueous-humor#1. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[16] Simple
anatomy
of
the
retina.
URL https://webvision.med.utah.edu/book/part-i-
foundations/simple-anatomy-of-the-retina/. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[17] Bruch’s membrane. URL https://www.blindness.org/glossary/bruchs-membrane. Accessed:
2018-10-08.
[18] Debora L. Nickla and Josh Wallman.
The multifunctional choroid.
Progress in Retinal and Eye
Research, 29(2):144–168, 2010. ISSN 18731635, 13509462. doi: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2009.12.002.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 44 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:50==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
[19] Comparison of laser photocoagulation for diabetic retinopathy using 532-nm standard laser versus
multispot pattern scan laser. Retina-the Journal of Retinal and Vitreous Diseases, 30(3):452–458, 2010.
ISSN 15392864, 0275004x.
[20] Structure function of the eye. URL https://www.teachingvisuallyimpaired.com/structure--
function-of-the-eye.html. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[21] What is the macula?
URL https://www.vmrinstitute.com/what-is-the-macula/. Accessed:
2018-10-08.
[22] Retinal laser photocoagulation. Medical Journal of Malaysia, 65(1):88–95, 2010. ISSN 03005283.
[23] The retinal pigment epithelium in health and disease. Current Molecular Medicine, 10(9):802–823,
2010. ISSN 18755666, 15665240.
[24] Retinal pigment epithelium (rpe).
URL http://www.blindness.org/glossary/retinal-
pigment-epithelium-rpe. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[25] Photoreceptor cells (photosensitive cells). URL https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmedhealth/
PMHT0024257/. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[26] Retina, . URL https://www.britannica.com/science/retina. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[27] David J. Browning. Diabetic Retinopathy, DIABETIC RETINOPATHY. Springer New York, 2010. ISBN
0387859004, 0387858997, 1282828479, 1489981489, 9786612828478.
[28] Martin A Mainster.
[29] Facts about diabetic eye disease, . URL https://nei.nih.gov/health/diabetic/retinopathy.
Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[30] Causes of vision loss worldwide, 1990–2010: a systematic analysis. URL https://www.thelancet.
com/journals/langlo/article/PIIS2214-109X(13)70113-X/fulltext. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[] Einar Stefánsson. The mechanism of retinal photocoagulation – how does the laser work? European
Ophthalmic Review, 02(01):76, 2009. ISSN 17561795. doi: 10.17925/EOR.2009.02.01.76.
[] Facts about macular edema, . URL https://nei.nih.gov/health/macular-edema/fact_sheet.
Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[] Diabetic retinopathy.
URL https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/diabetic-
retinopathy/symptoms-causes/syc-20371611. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[] Automatic temperature controlled retinal photocoagulation.
Journal of Biomedical Optics, 17(6):
061223, 2012. ISSN 15602281, 10833668.
[] The impact of pulse duration and burn grade on size of retinal photocoagulation lesion implications
for pattern density. Retina-the Journal of Retinal and Vitreous Diseases, 31(8):1664–1669, 2011. ISSN
15392864, 0275004x.
[] Panretinal photocoagulation for treatment of proliferative diabetic retinopathy.
URL https:
//www.aao.org/munnerlyn-laser-surgery-center/laser-treatment-of-proliferative-
nonproliferative-. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[] Young Gun Park and Young-Jung Roh. New diagnostic and therapeutic approaches for preventing the
progression of diabetic retinopathy. 2016.
[] Non-damaging retinal phototherapy: Dynamic range of heat shock protein expression. Investigative
Ophthalmology and Visual Science, 52(3):1780–1787, 2011. ISSN 15525783, 01460404.
[] Yutaka Ichimura.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 45 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:51==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
[] Heat shock protein expression as guidance for the therapeutic window of retinal laser therapy.
Proceedings of Spie–the International Society for Optical Engineering, 9693:969319, 2016.
ISSN
24109045, 16057422, 1996756x, 0277786x.
[] J Raider, R Brinkmann, C Wirelauber, H Laqua, and R Birngruber. Retinal sparing by selective reti-
nal pigment epithelial photocoagulation. Evidence-based Eye Care, 1(2):98–99, 2000. ISSN 15364836,
15258599. doi: 10.1097/00132578-200001000-00018.
[] Past, present, and future of endobronchial laser photoresection. URL http://jtd.amegroups.com/
article/view/6163/5908. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[] Ashley J Welch and Martin J.C Gemert. Optical-thermal response of laser-irradiated tissue. 2011. doi:
10.1007/978-90-481-8831-4.
[] Aesthetic applications of intense pulsed light. Aesthetic Applications of Intense Pulsed Light, pages
1–133, 2011.
[] G. Romano and F. Fusi. Laser-tissue interaction principles: beam penetration in tissues (part II).
[] Paras N. Prasad and A John Wiley Sons. Introduction to biophotonics. 2016. doi: 10.1.1.994.8437.
[] Diameter of water molecule. URL http://bionumbers.hms.harvard.edu/bionumber.aspx?id=
103723&ver=0. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[] Diode laser (810 nm) versus argon green (514 nm) modiﬁed grid photocoagulation for diffuse diabetic
macular edema. Ophthalmology, 104(9):1433–1441, 1997. ISSN 15494713, 01616420.
[] Therapeutic window of retinal photocoagulation with green (532-nm) and yellow (577-nm) lasers.
Ophthalmic Surgery Lasers and Imaging, 43(4):341–347, 2012. ISSN 19382375, 15428877.
[] Recent developments in retinal lasers and delivery systems. Indian Journal of Ophthalmology, 62(1):
50–54, 2014. ISSN 19983689, 03014738.
[] Dynamics of retinal photocoagulation and rupture. Journal of Biomedical Optics, 14(3):034007, 2009.
ISSN 15602281, 10833668.
[] J. W. Kim, J. I. Mackenzie, J. R. Hayes, and W. A. Clarkson. High-power er:yag laser with quasi-top-hat
output beam. Optics Letters, 37(9):1463–1465, 2012. ISSN 15394794, 01469592. doi: 10.1364/OL.37.
001463.
[] Steroid injection, vitrectomy may be laser alternatives for diabetic retinopathy.
URL https:
//www.healio.com/optometry/retina-vitreous/news/print/primary-care-optometry-
news/\%7B4af4c87e-7a6a-411c-840d-2c5a34eb4915\%7D/steroid-injection-vitrectomy-
may-be-laser-alternatives-for-diabetic-retinopathy. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[] mcxyz.c, . URL https://omlc.org/software/mc/mcxyz/. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[] Monte carlo simulations, . URL https://omlc.org/software/mc/. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[] Monte carlo modeling of light transport in tissues. 1995.
[] Handbook of optics. McGraw-Hill,.
[] Quantiﬁcation of photoreceptor layer thickness in normal eyes using optical coherence tomography.
Retina-the Journal of Retinal and Vitreous Diseases, 26(6):655–660, 2006. ISSN 15392864, 0275004x.
[] Monte Carlo Simulation. Optical properties of ocular fundus tissues-an in vitro study using the double-
integrating-sphere technique and inverse. 2014. doi: 10.1.1.470.5204.
[] Seyyed Abbas Mirnezami, Mahdi Rajaei Jafarabadi, and Maryam Abrishami. Temperature distribution
simulation of the human eye exposed to laser radiation. Journal of Lasers in Medical Sciences, 4(4):
175–181, 2013. ISSN 22286721, 20089783.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 46 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:52==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
[] Structure and function of photoreceptors, .
URL https://www.britannica.com/science/
photoreception/Structure-and-function-of-photoreceptors. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[] Bleaching desensitization: background and current challenges. Vision Research, 43(28):3011–3019,
2003. ISSN 18785646, 00426989.
[] Why rods and cones? Eye, 30(2):179–185, 2016. ISSN 14765454, 0950222x.
[] Light adaptation and dark adaptation of human rod photoreceptors measured from the a-wave of the
electroretinogram. Journal of Physiology-london, 518(2):479–496, 1999. ISSN 14697793, 00223751.
[] Thermal interaction of multi-pulse laser beam with eye tissue during retinal photocoagulation: Ana-
lytical approach. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 112:480–488, 2017. ISSN 18792189,
00179310.
[] Temperature-controlled retinal photocoagulation reliably generates uniform subvisible, mild, or mod-
erate lesions. Translational Vision Science and Technology, 4(5):9, 2015. ISSN 21642591.
[] Alexander Sher, Bryan W. Jones, Philip Huie, Yannis M. Paulus, Daniel Lavinsky, Loh-Shan S. Leung,
Hiroyuki Nomoto, Corinne Beier, Robert E. Marc, and Daniel Palanker. Restoration of retinal structure
and function after selective photocoagulation. Journal of Neuroscience, 33(16):6800–6808, 2013. ISSN
15292401, 02706474. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1044-12.2013.
[] M. Xiao, D. McLeod, J. Cranley, G. Williams, and M. Boulton. Growth factor staining patterns in the pig
retina following retinal laser photocoagulation. British Journal of Ophthalmology, 83(6):728–736, 1999.
ISSN 14682079, 00071161.
[] Egg white as a blood coagulation surrogate. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 128(1):480–
489, 2010. ISSN 15208524, 00014966, 01630962.
[] members of the GMIA. GELATIN HANDBOOK. 2012.
[] Optical coherence tomography: Fundamental principles, instrumental designs and biomedical appli-
cations. Biophysical Reviews, 3(3):155–169, 2011. ISSN 18672469, 18672450.
[] Igor Kozak and Jeffrey K Luttrull. Modern retinal laser therapy. Saudi Journal of Ophthalmology, 29(2):
137–46, 137–146, 2015. ISSN 13194534. doi: 10.1016/j.sjopt.2014.09.001.
[] Thorlabs.
URL https://www.thorlabs.com/newgrouppage9.cfm?objectgroup_id=9098&pn=
WPV10L-532. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
[] Bahaa E. A. Saleh, Malvin Carl Teich, and Barry R. Masters. Fundamentals of photonics, second edition.
Journal of Biomedical Optics, 13(4):049901, 2008. ISSN 15602281, 10833668. doi: 10.1117/1.2976006.
[] Diabetes and cataracts. URL https://www.aao.org/eye-health/tips-prevention/diabetes-
cataracts. Accessed: 2018-10-08.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 47 of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:53==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
Appendices
A
Phantom recipe
The recipe for the creation of phantoms. Written by Lars Lindvold, DTU Nutech.
I et 150 ml bæger glas afvejes 6 gr. gelatine (G1890 Sigma Gelatin fra svinehud 300 bloom). Der tilsættes
100ml destilleret vand. Glasset sættes på en standard laboratorie magnet omrører med opvarmning og
en teﬂon belagt magnetomrører pind kommes i blandingen. Uden varme kører magnet omrøreren med
500 RPM indtil gelatinen er kvældet op, hvilket giver sig til udtryk ved at blandingen ligner tapetklister.
Processen tager 20 min og det er vigtigt, at man lader gelatinen kvælde op på denne måde, da det ellers er
meget vanskeligt at opløse den bagefter når man varmer blandingen op. Derefter tændes der for varmen og
med et termometer i blandingen kan man nu observere at blandingen ved omkring 40 grader Celcius bliver
helt klar. Forsæt med opvarmning indtil temperaturen er nået op på 50 grader Celcius hvorved al gelatine
pulveret skulle være helt opløst. Hele denne proces tager ca. 20 min. Nu tilsættes der 0.1 ml glutardialdehyd
(G6403 Sigma Aldrich) som har til formål at krydsbinde gelatinen så den bliver hærdet let. Glutardialdehyd
gør også at eventuel bakterievækst på overﬂaden af gelatinen reduceres betydeligt. 9 ml af den færdige
blanding kommes i en ø 50 mm Petriskål af polystyren plast. Derefter lægges låget på og gel fantom sættes
til at gelere i et par timer. Processen kan gøres hurtigere ved at sætte Petriskålen i et køleskab. Derved tager
det kun 30 min at få gelen til at stivne. Efter at gelen er stivnet er den klar til at få lagt absorberlag på som
beskrevet senere, da det er den samme metode, der anvendes ved silikone fantomet.
Vores procedurer ved fremstilling af silikone fantom baseret på Sylgard 184 (et Dow Corning produkt) er:
50 ml af binder og 5 ml hærder blandes godt sammen i et papbæger indtil blandingen er fuldstændigt uk-
lar af luftbobler. Derefter anbringes bægeret i en eksikator og en membran pumpe af typen New Leybold
DiVac 1.2L Dual Stage Diaphragm Vacuum Pump for Chemical Laboratories PN 13509 tilsluttes således at
der opstår et vakuum i eksikatoren. Derved vil de luftbobler som er fanget i silikoneblandingen langsomt
forsvinde. Processen kræver lidt tålmodighed, da afboblingen i begyndelen er voldsom og derfor kræver
det, at man skiftevis lukker luft ind eksikatoren og pumper ned igen. Efter at gentaget processen et par
gange kan man derefter lade bladingen stå med vakuum pumpe tilkoblet og efter 30 min skulle blandingen
være glasklar. 9 ml af blandingen kommes i en ø 50 mm Petriskål af polystyren og sættes i et varmeskab ved
60 grader Celcius i mindst 24 timer før blandingen er vulkaniseret. Processen forløber hurtigere ved højere
temperaturer, men så smelter polystyren. Evt. kan man anvende Petriskåle af glas hvis man gerne vil forko-
rte denne del af processen. Nu er fantomerne klar til at få lagt absorber lag på. Dette sker ved at sprøjtemale
dem EFA 0790-72041 som er matsort alkyd maling, der er varmefast til 400 grader Celcius. For at mindske
svineriet med malingen er Petri skålen sat i bunden af en papkassen 50 x 50 x 50 cm, hvor man så retter
spraydåsen i mod og sprøjter i ca 3 sekunder i en afstand på 35 - 40 cm. Henover papkassen er anbragt en
meget kraftig punktudsugning. Derefter skal malingen tørre i 24 timer.
Technical University of Denmark
Page I of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:54==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
Figure 36
Technical University of Denmark
Page II of 43
August 2018
==PAGE:55==
New Light Sources for Retinal Photocoagulation
Rikke Nygaard Aasbjerg
Figure 37
Technical University of Denmark
Page III of 43
August 2018
