==PAGE:1==
MOLECULAR DYNAMICS STUDIES ON THE PARTITIONING OF
CHOLESTEROL, CHOLESTERYL ESTER AND ALKYL
COMPOUNDS INTO POPC BILAYERS
DTU-TUM 1:1 MSc PROGRAM IN PHYSICS & 
NANOTECHNOLOGY
COLLOIDS AND  BIOLOGICAL INTERFACE 
BIOMOLECULAR DYNAMICS 
TUM-Physics
STUDENT:
Matteo Pantalfini
SUPERVISORS:
Martin Zacharias
Jens Baek Simonsen
Manuel Hitzenberger
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Lipid molecules represent the fundamental units guaranteeing biological structural stability. The
hydrophobic eﬀect causes phospholipids, the most abundant class of lipids in biology, to assemble
spontaneously into bilayers. These double-layered structures constitute the cellular membranes and
regulate their properties, allowing the compartmentalisation of and within the cell, which ultimately
support the most crucial life functions.
Despite their still signiﬁcant biological relevance, in more recent times lipid bilayers have played a
primary role in the evolution of medicine, by being the protagonists and catalysts for the nanotechnolo
gical revolution in the medical sciences, now broadly referred to as nanomedicine.
Lipid bilayers can now be easily engineered to design nanometers-sized carriers which preserve
drug molecules within the hostile circulatory system and safely deliver them to their targets, by
preventing their metabolisation. The eﬀectiveness of such cures based on nanomedicine innovations
signiﬁcantly depends on the stability of the fundamental lipid bilayer structures constituting the
membranes of these artiﬁcial cargos.
Therefore, it is of fundamental importance that the therapeutically active (drug) / ﬂuorescent (dye)
molecules embedded in these lipid bilayers are released at the proper time, with the proper rate and
at the right location. However, of the same importance is to keep the molecule stably linked to the
bilayer to preserve the function (in case of drug molecule) or the scope (in case of labels) for which it
was design. This link is provided by lipid-anchors, which are conjugated to the molecule of interest
and that are supposed to stick tightly to the lipids of the bilayer.
To best engineer lipid-anchors, it is obviously crucial to investigate and optimise their partitioning
into lipids. However, as the partitioning atomic-level insights are inherently hidden in experiments,
molecular dynamics simulation naturally present itself as a strong method to elucidate what is really
happening at such small scales.
In this study, standard molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were employed to scrutinise the
partitioning behaviour into pure POPC bilayers of four candidate lipid anchors, namely cholesterol,
cholesteryl ester, 1,2-di-O-Hexadecyl-Glycerol and 1,5-di-O-Hexadecyl-3,5-Hydroxy-Pentanol. While
the ﬁrst two candidates are steroid-derived compact molecules, the latter are compounds with long
alkyl tails, therefore providing two quite diﬀerent classes of lipid-anchors to be analysed.
40 simulations were run, 10 per candidate. Each single simulation was 500 ns long, a relatively
long time frame which allowed to really explore extensively the candidates’ trajectories. In this time
frame, in 39 out of 40 cases the molecule was seen to be able to more or less easily penetrate the
bilayer and stabilise in the lipids.
Amber suite of programs was used to dissect the trajectories and to extract data relevant to the
quantiﬁcation of the partitioning behaviour of the molecules, as visualised with VMD tool.
Hydration was studied as the molecules crossed the water/lipid interface. The drop in the number
of bound water molecules was registered, for both the upper and lower hydration shells, at the same
time frame as the drop in solvent accessible surface area, providing a strong method to identify
the three partitioning regimes: hydrophilic (outside of the bilayer), transitory (across the interface),
hydrophobic (inside the bilayer). RMSD and RMSF calculations were performed to characterise the
structural ﬂuctuations of the lipid-anchors both inside and outside the bilayer, where the calculated
diﬀusion coeﬃcients provided complementary information on the mobility of the molecules in the
three-dimensional space.
i
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I sincerely thank Jens Simonsen for providing me the guidelines of this master thesis project and
supervising me from the Nanotech Department of the Technical University of Denmark. Despite the
physical distance, the insights he provided helped me to deﬁne the limits, focus on the scope and
contextualise this master thesis project.
The work for this project is solely based on molecular simulation method. Thereby, this project
wouldn’t ever been possible without the supervision of Martin Zacharias and without the support
of his welcoming group of Biomolecular Modeling at the Technical University of Munich. Finally,
together with Prof. Zacharias, Manuel Hitzenberger have supported me with precious advises for
the most eﬀective development of the project and to properly set up the simulations. I hereby thank
both of them again for the patience and kind availability they continuously have shown.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
ii
List of Figures
v
1
Previous MD Studies on Partitioning into Lipids
1
2
Molecular Simulations
4
2.1
Foundations of Molecular Dynamics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Molecular Mechanics Force Field and Geometry Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Statistical Mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Long-range Dispersion Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Long-range Electrostatic Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
Constraints and Restraints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.7
Monte Carlo Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.8
Properties from Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Molecular System under Investigation
16
3.1
Cholesterol and Cholesteryl Ester . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
1,2-di-O-Hexadecyl-Glycerol ; 1,5-di-O-Hexadecyl-3,5-Hydroxy-Pentanol . . . . . . .
18
3.3
1-Palmitoyl-2-Oleoyl-sn-Glycero-3-Phosphocholine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Amber Package
20
4.1
Amber Force Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
System Preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Running Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
Analyzing Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Simulations
25
5.1
System Setup and MD Settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.1.1
Cholesterol Simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.1.2
Core Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2
Trajectory Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6
Results and Discussion
38
6.1
Hydration Data: Solvent Accessible Surface Area and Hydration Shells . . . . . . . .
39
6.2
Partitioning Data: Timeframes Outside and Inside bilayer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.3
Structural Data: RMSD and RMSF
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.4
Transport Data: Diﬀusion Coeﬃcients and Travel Distances . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.5
Results Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7
Conclusions
50
References
53
A Solvent Accessible Surface Area and Upper Hydration Shells
54
B Root-Mean-Square Deviations and Fluctuations
58
C Mean Square Displacements and Diﬀusion Coeﬃcients
61
==PAGE:5==
List of Figures
1
Cholesterol (COL) and Cholesteryl ester (EST) 2D chemical structures, side-by-side.
Despite remarkably similar, the two structures diﬀer because of the group linked to C3.
For this reason, EST tends to be more hydrophilic than COL. MarvinSketch software
was used for the design. Carbon atoms are numbered according to the cholesterol
standard chemical convention. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2
1,2-di-O-Hexadecyl-Glycerol (HEX) and 1,5-di-O-Hexadecyl-3,5-Hydroxy-Pentanol (PEN)
2D chemical structures, side-by-side. Despite remarkably similar, the two structures
diﬀer because of the additional carbon atoms between the two ether groups in PEN
with respect to HEX. For this reason, PEN’s long alkyl chains are further distanced
when compared to HEX’s long alkyl chains. MarvinSketch software was used for the
design. Carbon atoms are numbered according to a non-standard convention based
on the distinction between an ”odd” and an ”even” alkyl chain. . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
1-Palmitoyl-2-Oleoyl-sn-Glycero-3-Phosphocholine (POPC) 2D chemical structure. MarvinSketch
software was used for the design. Carbon atoms are numbered according to a non-standard
convention based on the distinction between an ”odd” sn1 palmitoyl and an ”even”
sn2 oleoyl alkyl chain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
List of ﬁles required (input) and produced (output) by sander. . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Initialisation: reading of all topology information and reference structures and initialisation
of follow-up actions/analyses. Setup: processing of all topology-dependent aspects
of each action.
Action: one-frame-at-a-time reading of input trajectories, action
processing and writing out of output coordinates. Analysis: analysis of accumulated
data. Data formatting: formatting of any data slated for output and writing to disk.
Taken from [40].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6
RMSD plots for bilayer-embedded cholesterol as parametrised in LIPID14 (black) and
in GAFF2 (red).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7
RMSF plots for bilayer-embedded cholesterol as parametrised in LIPID14 (black) and
in GAFF2 (red).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
8
CHARMM-GUI Membrane Builder protocol to build a 128 POPC bilayer with a
cholesterol molecule embedded in the upper leaﬂet. Listed in bold the personalizable
options, on light grey background the ﬁve step of the building process. Calculated
size, as at step 5 : 66.57 (X), 66.57 (Y), 79.36 (Z); # of atoms: 29567; # of lipids: 67
on top, 64 on bottom; # of water: 4061; # ions: 10. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
9
Snapshots of the four lipid bilayers with embedded candidate molecules COL, EST, HEX
and PEN, represented as Van der Waals spheres. In red the water molecules, in blue the
choline lipid heads, in green the oleoyl lipid tails and in orange the palmitoyl lipid tail. Ions
are too small and too few to be visible.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
10
Bash scripts to be run on the cluster. In light blue the job settings, in black the loaded
modules.
The core script is inside the rectangular box.
For the equilibration job, the
input ﬁles are eq$s.in, triscol h.prmtop, equi$c.rst and equi$c.rst; while the output ﬁles
are equi$s.out, equi$.rst and equi$s.nc. For the production job, the input ﬁles are prod.in,
triscol h.prmtop, col prod$c.rst; while the output ﬁles are col prod$s.out, col prod$.rst and
col prod$s.nc. These ﬁles are colour-highlighted based on their type, as listed in the coloured
panel and speciﬁed in Fig. 4.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
iv
==PAGE:6==
11
Partitioning regions as identiﬁed by three diﬀerently coloured sections of an exemplary
SASA plot. The hydrophilic regime is deﬁned by the time frame (in ns) corresponding
to the blue section, while the transition regime is associated to the turquoise section
and the hydrophobic regime is associated with the cyan section. Over each section an
exemplary simulation snapshot is placed, in order to accompany the solvation state
of the lipid-anchor (PEN here) with its location within the simulation box. In these
snapshots, red points represent water, blue lines the PC head of POPC, orange lines
the PA tails and green lines the OL tails of the lipids. The lipid-anchor is shown in
its VdW spheres representation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
12
RMSD (a), RMSF (b), MSD (c), SASA and water shells (d) of EST, as for the ﬁrst of the
ten runs. While (d) covers the whole simulation run, (a), (b) and (c) results were calculated
only for the simulation time when the lipid-anchor was seen in water (W) or in lipids (L). .
37
13
SASA and water molecules counting for the four lipid-anchors. The values represent
averages over ten simulations per lipid-anchor. The darker shades of blue and violet
indicate the inside of the bilayer, while the lighter blue and violet the outside. . . . .
39
14
Fraction of time over 500 ns spent by COL, EST, HEX and PEN outside (light yellow)
and inside (dark yellow) the bilayer and in the transition region, for each one of the
ten simulations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
15
RMSD and RMSF averages, standard deviations, minimal and maximal values for the
four lipid-anchors. For each molecule, also the atoms which registered the minimal
and maximal ﬂuctuations were reported. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
16
Diﬀusion constants along the three directions are shown along with the average and
maximal travel distances for COL, EST, HEX and PEN. The entries of the table are
averages over ten simulations per candidate. Dark grey rows relate to the hydrophobic
environment, while light grey to the hydrophilic environment. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
17
SASA statistics. (L) means in lipids, (W) in water. The ﬁrst row indicates the number
of run out of the ten. In yellow are highlighted the run whose SASA record was chosen
to be plotted in Fig. 19 for cross-comparisons among the four candidates
. . . . . .
54
18
SHELL statistics. (L) means in lipids, (W) in water. The ﬁrst row indicates the
number of run out of the ten. In yellow are highlighted the run whose water counting
record (only upper shell) was chosen to be plotted in Fig. 20 for cross-comparisons
among the four candidates. For each statistical variable variable (Avg, Sd, min, max)
the upper row refers to the upper shell, the lower to the lower shell.
. . . . . . . . .
55
19
SASA. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
20
SHELL. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
21
RMSD and RMSF statistics. (L) means in lipids, (W) in water. The ﬁrst row indicates
the number of run out of the ten. In yellow are highlighted the run whose RMSD
record (green) and RMSF record (pink) were chosen to be plotted in Fig. 22 and Fig.
23 for cross-comparisons among the four candidates. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
22
RMSD.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
23
RMSF. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
24
Diﬀusion constants statistics.
(L) means in lipids, (W) in water.
The ﬁrst row
indicates the number of run out of the ten. In yellow are highlighted the run whose
D record was chosen to be plotted in Fig. 25 for cross-comparisons among the four
candidates.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
25
DIFFUSION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Previous MD Studies on Partitioning into Lipids
Lipid bilayers have the remarkable ability to welcome a wide variety of both hydrophobic and
amphiphilic molecules, generally denoted as solutes.
The incorporation of such solutes happens
as a natural consequence of the hydrophobic eﬀect and the self-assembly nature of lipid bilayers
(see Section 3.3). However, these amphiphilic molecules do alter the membrane properties. For
example, Decker et al. demonstrated that adding cholesterol to POPC-based liposomes rigidiﬁed
the membrane [8]. Therefore, a sound investigation on such alterations is generally very important.
In any case, linking solutes to lipids and lipid bilayers is not just useful for the tuning of the
physical properties and therefore functioning of the bilayers, but it is also of fundamental interest
for those designing lipid-based drug carriers [9]. For example, when short-interfering RNA (siRNA)
were chemically conjugated to a cholesterol group, Soutschek et al demonstrated a superior uptake in
various tissues and drastic reduction of apolipoprotein B-encoding mRNA to which these siRNA were
designed to target [10]. High levels of apolipoprotein B are correlated to high levels of cholesterol,
corresponding to an increased risk of coronary heart disease.
Despite most methods to calculate the partition coeﬃcients of solutes in membrane are traditionally
empirical, since many years molecular simulations have provided precious, detailed insights into the
partitioning processes.
Already in 1995, Alper et al.
used atomic level MD simulations to show the complexity of the
diﬀusion processes of benzene within hydrated DMPC bilayers.
The solute’s rates of diﬀusion
responded to temperature changes diﬀerently in diﬀerent regions of the bilayer, discovering the
role of jumps (single, large movements) between voids whose size and availability are spatially
inhomogeneous and dependent on both temperature and torsional isomerisation of the lipids [11].
Marrink and Berendsen discussed extensively about the distribution of these voids in membranes
and its inﬂuence on small solutes’ diﬀusion, especially within the theoretical framework of the
three-regions model for the lipid membrane: interface, soft polymer, ﬂuid decane [12]. The probability
of ﬁnding a cavity in the dense head group region of lipids decreased exponentially with the volume
of the cavity, while in the chain region it scaled as a power of the volume and in the low-density
central region of the membrane the cavities were evenly distributed and with much larger sizes [13].
In 2004, Bemporad et al. remarked how atomistic simulations, unlike experiments, allow direct
calculation of diﬀusion and partition coeﬃcients of solutes at diﬀerent depths inside a lipid membrane,
proving also that solute diﬀusion is less size-dependent and solute partitioning more size-dependent
than previously thought [14].
However, not just small solutes have been studied using molecular dynamics simulations. In 2010,
Boggara and Krishnamoorti employed the potential of mean constrained force method - the free
energy calculation approach brieﬂy mentioned in Section 2.8 - to study two nonsteroidal antiinﬂam
matory drugs [15]. For the PMF method, at any instant there is only one drug molecule per 128
lipid molecules: this resonates with the simulations performed in this master thesis, where for each
simulation run only a single and large molecule was made passed through the upper leaﬂet.
Boggara and Krishnamoorti simulated two charge states of the drugs (neutral and anionic) to account
for their behaviour at pH values above and below drug pKa. They discovered that although hydrogen
bonding initially inﬂuenced charged drug partitioning, as the drug size and hydrophobicity increased,
this type of interaction became less signiﬁcant.
1
==PAGE:8==
Moreover, while both drugs irrespective of their charge state were found to have high partition
coeﬃcients in the lipid bilayer from water, the charged forms were found to permeate fully hydrated
and the neutral forms unhydrated [15]. This study was indeed remarkable because clearly distinguish
ed a solubility-diﬀusion mechanism for the permeation of neutral drugs from a transient-pore mechan
ism, which instead characterises the permeation of charged drugs.
The three-regions model for the diﬀusion proposed by the MD studies by Marrink and Berendsen
[12] was further challenged by the combined MD simulations and experiments by Tejwani et al., who
concluded that such model was not applicable to larger solutes spanning substantial fractions of the
bilayer thickness, as the solutes used in this thesis study.
By looking at free energy proﬁles of large and amphiphilic drug-like molecules, Tejwani et al.
further conﬁrmed that methods to predict passive solute permeability based on partitioning are
not always reliable. This was evidenced by the fact that even compounds that exhibited a barrier
to permeation can show partitioning. In particular, their candidate molecules’ preferred binding
region (high partition coeﬃcient region corresponding to minimum of the transfer energy proﬁle)
was at the interface, a diﬀerent location than the transport barrier domain (low partition coeﬃcient
corresponding to maximum of the transfer energy proﬁle) at the center of the bilayer [16].
Interestingly, the same authors also investigated the functional group dependence of solute partitioni
ng. One of their candidates carried an hydroxyl group, another carried an amine group and the last
one both the hydroxyl and the amine groups.
Comparisons of their free energy proﬁles revealed that the hydrocarbon chain interior of the membra
ne is the most selective region to chemical structure because the free energy of transfer in that region
varied to a remarkably greater extent than in other regions of the membrane. On the other hand, the
contributions of the hydroxyl and amino groups to the free energies of solute transfer from water to
the interfacial region were close to zero. This result suggested that the free energy decrease associated
to solute transfer into the head group region of the bilayer occurred with minimal loss in solvation by
H-bonding to the polar functional groups on the solute and was largely driven by hydrophobicity [16].
Phosphatidylcoline (PC) lipids are the most abundant lipids in mammalian membranes [17], but
they are also experimentally convenient [18].
For these reasons, these lipids are also the most
commonly used as membrane models for molecular dynamics simulations.
A recent MD study by Loura et al. investigated the partitioning behaviour of pyrene, a four-rings
molecule commonly used as a ﬂuorophore, into POPC bilayers with varying amount of cholesterol.
They found that pyrene favoured the hydrophobic acyl chain region close to the glycerol group of
the lipid molecules and also caused ordering of such chains in pure POPC bilayers [19].
On the other hand, embedding pyrene in binary POPC-cholesterol bilayers generated a disordering
eﬀect, shown by an increase of the area per lipid molecule and a decrease in the bilayer thickness
and in the acyl chain order parameter, therefore opposing the ordering eﬀect of cholesterol which
has been extensively demonstrated [19].
The state-of-the-art molecular method to calculate the partitioning of solutes into lipid membranes
is now represented by COSMOmic, introduced by Klamt et al. in 2008 but now broadly used among
the scientiﬁc community involved in the design of smart drug-delivery systems.
COSMOmic is
an extension of COSMO-RS for anisotropic systems like micelles and lipid bilayers. It consists in
splitting the system into layers of same size along the bilayer normal and then calculate the atomic
composition for each one of them.
2
==PAGE:9==
Each layer is treated as a homogeneous liquid and the solute is placed into a speciﬁc layer with
diﬀerent orientations, to calculate the partition function. Finally, the free energy proﬁles ∆G(zi)
can be extracted, thereby allowing to calculate the partition coeﬃcients [20].
A great advantage of COSMOmic over standard MD simulations is that it eﬃciently screens partition
coeﬃcients. Indeed, a calculation with this powerful technique takes only a few minutes, versus MD
simulations which are very computationally expensive: for one free energy proﬁle more than 30
individual umbrella sampling simulations are necessary, each one of them taking up to 48 hours [21].
In 2014, for the ﬁrst time, Jakobtorweihen et al. compared MD simulations, COSMOmic simulations
and experimental results on the same set of data. They proved almost complete agreement of the
three diﬀerent approaches when calculating free energy proﬁles, partition coeﬃcients and solute
orientations in a bilayer membrane [21].
Concerning solute partitioning into micelles, a similar comparison between umbrella sampling MD
simulations, COSMOmic technique and experimental data was carried out for the ﬁrst time by
Yordanova et al. in 2017. They studied the behaviour of not only neutral solutes but also charged
solutes into four diﬀerently charged micelles: nonionic, zwitterionic, anionic and cationic.
As Jakobtorweihen et al., Yordanova et al. also proved overall agreement between MD and COSMOm
ic for the calculation of the free energy proﬁle of neutral solutes, as well as agreement of both
methods with experimental partition coeﬃcients. However, for both free energy proﬁles and partition
coeﬃcients, depending on the simulated system the results for charged solutes showed some deviations
between the simulation methods and experimental data [22].
In conclusion, despite COSMOmic’s great potential of becoming the industry standard for the
theoretical calculations of partition coeﬃcients, the simpler MD approach was preferred for the
purpose of the simulations in this master thesis.
Indeed, as remarked in the previous study [21], COSMOmic technique’s biggest drawbacks are
that it does require information about the bilayer structure, which is exclusively obtainable by MD,
and that it has shown some issues in describing the behaviour of PC lipids. Last but not least, MD
simulations can provide details at atomistic resolution, while COSMOmic cannot.
3
==PAGE:10==
2
Molecular Simulations
This chapter treats the molecular simulations ﬁeld on a theoretical level. Despite the content in a
particular section is relatively independent from the content of the other sections, the sections are
thought to be read according to their order, as the reader is ﬁrst introduced to the basic concepts
and then to the more speciﬁc aspects and settings which an MD user is expected to be familiar with.
In Section 2.1 the foundations are presented, while the molecular force ﬁelds on which simulation
models are based are described in section 2.2.
In section 2.3 the statistical mechanics foundation of molecular simulations is detailed and its relevant
practical implications are explained to make the reader appreciate the connection between MD and
statistical mechanics.
Long-range interactions need to be taken into account separately, as their treatment aﬀect the
outcomes of molecular dynamics simulations. They are discussed in sections 2.4 and 2.5.
In section 2.6 it is explained how experimental constraints and restraints are introduced and used
in a computer simulation.
The Monte Carlo Method is introduced in section 2.7 and the Metropolis algorithm is discussed
in the context of biomolecular simulations.
Finally, section 2.8 details the approaches for data extraction and biological properties calculations.
All the content of this chapter forms the basis over which Amber suite of programs is built, the
software package used in this thesis work.
4
==PAGE:11==
2.1
Foundations of Molecular Dynamics
Motivation.
The majority of non-ideal many-body systems, modelling relevant and natural phenomena, cannot
be solved analytically.
For this reason, molecular simulations were introduced to reproduce the
behaviour of molecules in reality and to investigate the complexity of many-body systems using
computer simulations. These computational techniques are a valid support to experimental methods,
which not only suﬀer irreducible practical limitations and costs, but also prevent the possibility
to directly visualise the driving forces underlying phenomena at molecular level.
Currently, the
computational capability available to molecular simulations is pushed to study systems up to 100
nm and with motions up to a few ms. However, computer power is doubling every 1.5 years.
Algorithms for Trajectory Propagation.
Assuming a system with N particles with coordinates r = (r1, r2, ...r3N) and velocities v = (v1, v2, ...v3N),
the forces depend only on particle positions:
Fi(r) = ∂U
∂ri
(1)
where U is the interaction energy of the system (see next subsubsection on Molecular Mechanics
Force Field). However, in a Newtonian framework the equation of motion Fi(r) = mi
d2ri
dt2 can be
solved analytically only for small systems (N < 3), while for larger systems numerical integration in
small steps is required. The two most basic and common numerical integration algorithms are the
Verlet and the Velocity Verlet algorithms.
The Verlet method is developed from the forward and backward Taylor expansions of the coordinates
up to third order (error O(∆t4)). By summing them, the following rule is obtained:
r(t + ∆t) ≈2r(t) −r(t −∆t) + F (t)
m ∆t2
(2)
This algorithm is fast, time reversible and guarantees good short-term energy conservation as well
as a small long-term energy drift. However, to start integration, r(t) and r(t −∆t) - therefore
v(t) because r(t −∆t) = r(t) −v(t)∆t - need to be speciﬁed. The velocities are derived from the
knowledge of the trajectory and they are only used to calculate kinetic energy and instantaneous
temperature: Verlet algorithm does not use the velocities to compute new positions, thus diﬃculties
arise in case of constant temperature simulations.
The Velocity Verlet method was introduced to generate velocities at the same time points as the
positions in order to correctly and simultaneously calculate kinetic energy, potential energy and
total energy. It is developed by splitting in two half steps the equivalent leap-frog scheme, which in
turns provides a better approximation of Newton’s equations than the Euler method by replacing
v(t) with v(t + ∆t/2) .
Leap-Frog (3) and Velocity Verlet (4) schemes :
r(t + ∆t) = r(t) + v(t + ∆t/2)∆t ; v(t + 3/2∆t) = v(t + ∆t/2) + F (t + ∆t)
m
∆t
(3)
r(t + ∆t) = ... ; v(t + ∆t/2) = v(t) + F (t)∆t
2m
; v(t + ∆t) = v(t + ∆t/2) + F (t + ∆t)∆t
2m
(4)
These last two algorithms are also time reversible, but are favoured over the simple Verlet algorithm
because they also assure angular momentum conservation, symplecticity and are less susceptible to
round-oﬀerrors because terms of order ∆t instead of ∆t2 are added to something of order unity.
5
==PAGE:12==
2.2
Molecular Mechanics Force Field and Geometry Optimization
Energy Function.
Dynamics at the molecular level is regulated by interatomic interactions, both intramolecular and
intermolecular. The forces generated have a quantum mechanical origin, therefore quantum mechani
cs (QM) represents the uniquely complete physical description. The speciﬁc geometry of a molecule,
deﬁned by the geometry and number of its chemical bonds, is dictated by the form of the electrons
wave function. However, numerical issues arise. Not only an approximate electron wave function
can be calculated, but also the numerical demand increases rapidly with the size of the system under
investigation, with the consequence that many biomolecular systems are too large to be tackled with
QM methods. By invoking the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, the electrons motion can be split
from the nuclear motion and safely be neglected. The energy function (force ﬁeld) for a molecule
can be expressed as a function of just the nuclear coordinates:
E(r1, r2, r3, ..., rn) = E(x1, y1, z1, x2, y2, z2, x3, y3, z3, ..., xn, yn, zn). In their simplest form, the single
terms of this atom-centered force ﬁeld control the bond length, the bond angle and the torsion
around a bond with harmonic functions (5). In addition, a Lennard-Jones (LJ) energy term models
concurrently the short-range steric repulsion of non-bonded atoms following Pauli exclusion principle
and the short-range attractive London dispersion interactions between inducing and induced dipoles
due to the ﬂuctuations of asymmetrical electrons clouds (6). Finally, to account for the non-uniform
electrons shielding of atom nuclear charges, eﬀective partial charges are assigned to each atom and
their interaction obeys Coulomb’s Law (6).
Ubonded =
X
bonds(ij)
k(ij)
2
(rij−r(ij)
0
)2+
X
angles(ijk)
k(ijk)
2
(φijk−φ(ijk)
0
)2+
X
torsions(ijkl)
k(ijkl)
2
[1+cos(n(ijkl)τ−τ (ijkl)
0
)]2
(5)
Unon−bonded =
X
pairs(ij)
[A(ij)
r12
ij
−B(ij)
r6
ij
] +
1
4πϵrϵ0
X
pairs(ij)
qiqj
rij
(6)
Equilibrium bond lengths, angles and torsions (r(ij)
0
, φ(ijk)
0
, τ (ijkl)
0
) are extracted from high resolution
crystal structures. Bond stretching, bending and dihedral force constants (k(ij), k(ijk), k(ijkl)) are
derived from infrared spectroscopy studies. LJ parameters (A(ij), B(ij)) and partial point charges
mimicking electrons charge distributions are calculated with quantum mechanical methods.
Energy Minimization.
Geometry optimization is most frequently performed using (two) methods employing gradients: the
energy minimum (null gradient) is searched by calculating derivatives of all force ﬁeld terms along
the direction of steepest change of the energy function.
In the optimized version (optimal step length) of the Steepest Descend Method, the energy and
gradient are calculated at the starting point, then a one-dimensional (line) minimization is performed
to ﬁnd the energy minimum along the gradient direction. This is done by calculating the energy at
three points along the gradient direction, ﬁtting to them a quadratic function, taking the minimum
of the quadratic ﬁt as a new point while simultaneously eliminating the highest energy point and
ultimately iterating the quadratic ﬁtting to the new set of points, until the energy change is below
a preset threshold. Then, a step is taken along the gradient direction,
−gk
|gk| , with the just found
optimal step length, λ1D, which guarantees that the new point, Rk+1, is at the minimum of the
gradient direction: Rk+1 = Rk + λ1D
−gk
|gk| . Thus, a new gradient is calculated at Rk+1 and the line
minimization plus step taking stages are repeated until the number of iterations has exceeded a preset
number. However, the directions of successive steps are orthogonal to each other, resulting in limited
performance especially for narrow energy valleys. Another method can speed up minimization.
In the Conjugated Directions Method, the actual step direction, Vk, depends not only on the current
gradient, gk, but also on the previous search direction, Vk−1: Vk = −gk +
gkgk
gk−1gk−1 Vk−1.
6
==PAGE:13==
2.3
Statistical Mechanics
Thermodynamics and Ergodic Hypothesis.
Molecular simulations can also elucidate thermodynamics aspects.
Equilibrium thermodynamic
quantities A are calculated as ensemble averages ⟨A⟩from the speciﬁc phase space density ρ characteri
stic of the chosen ensemble:
⟨A⟩ens =
R
ρens(rN, pN)A(rN, pN)drNdpN
R
ρens(rN, pN)drNdpN
=
R
ρens(rN, pN)A(rN, pN)drNdpN
Qens
(7)
where the type of ensemble ens is picked according to the thermodynamic variables (N, V, T, P, E)
whose values remain (approximately) conserved within the system under investigation.
While in statistical mechanics trajectories of states are deﬁned in the phase space as functions of
positions and momenta, in molecular dynamics trajectories are the states evolution as a function of
time. The Ergodic Hypothesis bridges statistical mechanics with molecular dynamics: by assuming
that averaging over a small number of particles for a long time is the same as averaging over a
large number of particles for a short time, this theorem states that for time →∞time-averaging is
equivalent to ensemble-averaging.
⟨A⟩= lim
τ→∞
1
τ
Z τ
0
A(t)dt
(8)
On a practical level, this implies that the longer the simulation, the closer it gets to explore all the
conﬁgurations spanning the phase space: ideal condition of perfect, unlimited sampling.
Ensembles.
Mainly the Isothermal-Isobaric Ensemble - ρNP T (rN, pN) ∝exp(−β[H(rN, pN) + PV ]) -, but also
the Canonical Ensemble - ρNV T (rN, pN) ∝exp(−β[H(rN, pN)]) -, are generally preferred over
the Micro-Canonical Ensemble (NVE) to analyse biophysical systems because system properties are
interesting at a given temperature and all states are already ”weighted” according to their Boltzmann
probability: temperature relates to particle momenta through the Equipartition Theorem and the
Maxwell-Boltzmann Distribution, ﬂuctuating as 2/3N. Therefore, temperature control and pressure
control methods are required to produce NPT and NV T ensembles.
Coupling to a thermostat or barostat generally follows the Andersen scheme (stochastic coupling),
the Berendsen scheme (weak coupling), or the Nose-Hoover scheme (extended system coupling).
In the Andersen scheme, temperature or pressure coupling is represented by stochastic collisions
whose frequency deﬁnes the coupling strength. Successive collisions are uncorrelated (distribution
of time intervals is Poissonian) and in between the system evolves according to Newton’s Law. This
method produces a canonical distribution, but due to the random perturbation it is not proper to
calculate transport (kinetics) properties.
In the Berendsen scheme, temperature is controlled by rescaling the velocities vnew
i
at every time
step so that the method forces the system towards the desired temperature T0 at a rate given by the
relaxation time: vnew
i
= vold
i
[1 + ∆tstep
τT
( T0
T −1)]1/2. While the perturbation of the system remains
weak, this scheme not exactly produces a canonical distribution. Similarly, when both the external
and internal virial (sum over force time position) are found to extract the instantaneous pressure P
of the system, pressure control is maintained by changing the volume of the box at each time step
by scaling each dimension: r
′ = χ1/3r , χ = 1 −βT
∆tstep
τP
( P0
P −1).
In the Nose-Hoover scheme, temperature or pressure coupling is accomplished by ’re-scaling’ the
system with the additional degrees of freedom s and ps associated with the bath. The Nose-Hoover
equations of motions including the thermodynamic friction variable ξ = s
′p
′
s/QNose are obtained
by taking the conjugate derivatives of H
′
Nose of the extended system in the real variables. Despite
requiring more programming eﬀorts with respect to stochastic coupling and weak coupling schemes,
the Nose-Hoover scheme does not heavily disturb the generated trajectories and produces a NVT
(or NPT) ensemble, where relaxation/heat transfer (or ’pressure transfer’) is regulated by QNose.
7
==PAGE:14==
2.4
Long-range Dispersion Interactions
Boundary Eﬀects and Simulation Box.
Simulations of a ﬁnite system require to consider the boundaries of the system if one wishes to
simulate one of the possible thermodynamic ensembles. In these limited systems a large amount of
particles accumulate close to the edges and experience forces which are diﬀerent from the the forces
exerted on particles in the bulk.
To minimise the contribution of particles close to the boundaries, it is required to simulate systems
of a large size, to keep the ratio of particles at the boundaries to particles in the bulk as small as
possible. However, the time t needed to calculate the energies and forces in the system is proportional
to N 2, with N being the number of particles.
Another way to overcome the problem of the boundary eﬀects is to apply periodic boundary
conditions: the system becomes modular and particles do not accumulate anymore at the edges.
When particles reach an edge, they are re-imaged as entering from the opposite edge.
The computational eﬀort of calculating interactions between particle i and all images of particle
j, which are theoretically inﬁnite, is however extremely large. For a short-range potential, heavy
calculations can be avoided by performing the minimum image convention approximation, which
relies upon the assumption that particle i interacts only with the closest periodic image of particle
j.
To further reduce the burden of heavy computations, while still keeping the image distance
constant, the number of particles can be simply reduced by using non-cubic simulation boxes of
smaller volumes, such as rhombic dodecahedron or truncated octahedron.
Truncation Schemes.
The number of non-bonded pairs of a simulation system grows as N(N −1)/2. To avoid artefacts
when using periodic boundary conditions or to limit the computational eﬀort, a cut-oﬀdistance
beyond which dispersion interactions are neglected is introduced.
The Simple Truncation of interactions beyond rcut can introduce simulation artefacts because the
potential contains a discontinuity at rcut:
it abruptly drops to zero, putting at risk the total
conservation of energy. This can be avoided by shifting the potential by the value of the potential
at rcut:
V cut(rij) = V (rij) −V (rcut),
rij < rcut.
V cut(rij) = 0,
rij > rcut.
(9)
A common truncation alternative of dispersion interactions is the employment of a Switching
Function. This replaces the tails of Lennard-Jones potentials by switching them oﬀto zero in a
continuous way.
SV dW (rij) = 1,
rij < ron.
SV dW (rij) =
(R2
off −r2
ij)(R2
off + 2r2
ij −3R2
on)
(R2
off −R2on)3
,
ron < rij < roff.
SV dW (rij) = 0,
rij > roff.
(10)
In the Twin Range Cutoﬀscheme, two or more radii are deﬁned so that close (primary) neighbours,
within rin, are distinguished from far (secondary) neighbours, within rout. The interactions and
forces due to primary neighbours change more rapidly than the forces due to secondary neighbours,
therefore the secondary forces need to be updated less frequently than the primary forces in this
eﬃcient scheme.
Finally, the Neighbour List method also introduced an internal radius rc and an external radius
rv. This scheme takes advantage of the fact that the number of interacting particles’ pairs can be
limited by keeping a pairs list containing all neighbours within the cutoﬀradius of each atom. In
case of Verlet List, all atoms within rv (rv > rc) are kept together and the list is updated at frequent
intervals to check if any particle moves out or into the sphere of radius rv around the selected atom.
8
==PAGE:15==
2.5
Long-range Electrostatic Interactions
Ewald Sums and Particle Mesh Ewald.
The electrostatic energy of a periodic system of point charges in a cubic box of length L is:
UCoulomb = 1
2
N
X
i=1
qiφ(ri) , φ(ri) =
N
X
j=1,j̸=i
X
n
qj
|rij + nL|
(11)
The summation to calculate φ(ri) needs to be done including all periodic boxes (in all directions)
and is only conditionally convergent because the unit boxes are generally neutral with an overall net
dipole moment: sum converges absolutely only in the uncommon case of null net dipole moment.
Alternative methods which improve the convergence are required. Ewald Sums and Particle Mesh
Ewald are based on the Ewald concept to split the electrostatic interaction into a smooth, long-range
part computed in reciprocal space and a singular, short-range part computed in real space:
q
r = qf(r)
r
+ q(1 −f(r))
r
(12)
In Ewald Sums, a Gaussian screening charge distribution is placed around each point charge of
opposite sign so that it cancels the charge exactly (at large distance). The potential at a position
r from atom i is then only due to the non-screened part of the charge qi up to the distance which
leads to rapid decay of the potential. To recover the original system, a Gaussian compensating
charge distribution is introduced to exactly oﬀset the added Gaussian screening. Finally, by solving
Poisson’s equations, the total electrostatic energy includes: the long-range interaction of the point
charge i at ri with N charges j represented as compensating Gaussians, its embedded (to be
subtracted) self-energy contribution arising from the point charge at the origin of such Gaussians,
and ﬁnally the short-range pair-wise interaction of the screened point charges.
UCoulomb = 1
2
N
X
i=1
qi[φlong −φself + φshort] =
=
1
2V
X
k̸=0
N
X
i=1
N
X
j=1
4πqiqj
k2
eik(ri−rj)e−k2/4α
−
rα
π
N
X
i=1
q2
i + 1
2
N
X
i̸=j
qiqj
rij
erfc(√αrij)
(13)
In practice, both reciprocal-space and real-space sums are cut-oﬀ. α must be chosen so that terms
separated by r > rcut are neglected. The scaling is O(N 2) due to the Fourier part (making the
method ineﬃcient for large systems) but by adapting rcut to α, it gets to O(N 3/2).
The Particle Mesh Ewald (PME) approach is the current standard to account for long-range electrosta
tics. The same Ewald splitting idea is used, but instead of directly calculating the Fourier transforma
tion of the charge distribution at every time step, the charges are smoothly spread over a regular
grid of n grid points, where the Poisson equation can be solved very eﬃciently (nlog(n) scaling)
using Fast Fourier Transformation (FFT). To prevent the discretization of the charge distribution
to compromise the accuracy, the grid spacing is recommended to be kept at 1˚A, so that the longest
wave length (largest k in FFT) representing the long-range potential is safely larger than that.
Fast Multipole Method and Reaction Field Methods.
FMM is a O(N) scaling method based on the decomposition of the grid into a k-dimensional tree
where each node contains a multipole expansion of the charge distribution.
Reaction Field approaches are computationally inexpensive methods where electrostatic energy is
calculated by summing over all pair-wise interactions within rc and accounting for the Onsager
reaction ﬁeld beyond rc assuming a dielectric continuum εs: Uij = qiqj
4πε0 [ 1
rij +
(εs−1)r2
ij
(2εs+1)r3c ].
9
==PAGE:16==
2.6
Constraints and Restraints
Lagrange Multipliers and SHAKE algorithm.
Bond constraints (rigid rods) are preferred over bond restraints (harmonic springs) because by
applying the former, molecules motion is unaﬀected (negligible mass-metric tensor eﬀects) while
computational eﬀort is drastically reduced: the time step ∆t can be safely pushed to 2 fs. Indeed,
to satisfy the integrator assumption that the velocities and accelerations are constant over the time
step used, the rule of thumb for its assignation is ∆t = τ/10, where τ is the period of the fastest
motion in the system, which is bond-angle vibration (≤2000cm−1) for molecules with constrained
bonds, versus bond-stretching vibration (≤3000cm−1) for molecules with restrained bonds.
On the other hand, constraints are avoided on angles because possible dihedral angle transitions
would be underestimated, producing artifacts in dynamics, and because the mass-metric tensor
eﬀects are not negligible due to the biased ratio of probabilities of conﬁgurations in the unconstrained
and constrained system, with the latter lacking kinetic and potential energy degrees of freedom.
Constraints are introduced by embedding them in the Lagrangian via Lagrange multipliers:
L′ = L−P
k λkσk(rN) with σk(ri, rj) = r2
ij −d2
ij = 0 being the constraint function for bonds, which
equals 0 when atoms i and j are separated by d.
Thus, the equation of motion mi¨qi = −∂U
∂qi −P
k λk
∂σk
∂qi = Fi + P
k Gk can be integrated only by
calculating the Lagrange multipliers with a method which rigorously fulﬁl the constraints at each time
step. For a single time step, the Verlet integrator reads r(t + ∆t) = 2r(t) −r(t −∆t) −λ
mr(t)∆t2 =
rfreeflight(t + ∆t) −λ
mr(t)∆t2. By requiring that (r(t + ∆t))2 = d2, a quadratic equation in λ is
obtained:
d2 = (r(t + ∆t))2 = (rfreeflight(t + ∆t) −λ
mr(t)∆t2)2
(14)
In practice, for many bond length constraints this becomes a set of unsolvable, coupled quadratic
functions: each pair of atoms can be involved in multiple bonds.
The ﬁrst approximation is a linearization step to keep only terms up to linear in λ. The resulting
equation is a matrix equation of the form Aλ = c: inversion of A solves for the λ vector. However,
not only the solutions are not exact because deriving from a truncation step, but the matrix inversion
approach itself is very expensive and it is applied directly only to small molecules with very few
constraints like water: the algorithm is called M-SHAKE.
An alternative approach is the one inspiring the SHAKE algorithm. After the linearization stage,
instead of trying to simultaneously fulﬁl all constraints by matrix inversion, the constrained equations
are decoupled, so that at each step a pair of atoms (1, 2) is involved solely in the single constrain
between them. Once λk(t) is found, the constrained coordinates rc
k1(2) are reset along the direction of
the old bond vector rk1k2, in opposite directions (constraint force pulls atoms together) and weighted
by the inverse mass 1/mk1(2):
λk(t) =
[ruc
k1k2(t + ∆t)]2 −d2
k1k2
2(∆t)2[m−1
k1 + m−1
k2 ]rk1k2(t)ruc
k1k2(t + ∆t) →rc
k1(2)(t + ∆t) = ruc
k1(2)(t + ∆t) ∓(∆t)2m−1
k1(2)λkrk1k2
The algorithm is iterated until all constraints are satisﬁed. However, SHAKE requires more iterations
(slower) than M-SHAKE because couplings are neglected and sometimes it fails because of a too
large free-ﬂight step, preventing it to simultaneously satisfy all bond constraints within a given
tolerance criterion of maximum number of iterations.
Restraints.
Restraints are commonly used to restrain certain properties preferably to experimental data related
to quantities directly measured in the experiment. By adding special potential energy terms generated
by an harmonic force for which the force constant is explicitly speciﬁed, deviations from an experiment
ally reproduced target value are penalised.
Also time averages can be restrained: in NOE experiments the distance extracted from the cross-peaks,
which indicates the spatial proximity between two nuclei, is already an average over time.
10
==PAGE:17==
By recalling that NOE intensity goes as r−6 because arising from the dipolar interactions between
nuclei, the applied restrain is the following:
V (r) = (1/2)k(¯r −r0)2
if ¯r > r0,
with
¯r(t) = [1
t
Z t
0
exp(−t′
τ )(r(t −t′))−6dt′]−1/6
(15)
= 0
if ¯r ≤r0
The expression for ¯r(t), that still needs to be discretised to be used in MD simulations, shows how the
memory of times long ago must be damped, otherwise the system becomes less and less responsive
to the restraint: the more back in time (t′), the smaller the contribution. τ determines how much
the past values contribute to the average. The larger is τ, the less responsive the restraint is to what
goes on instantaneously (Time-Averaged Restraint) producing broad distance ﬂuctuations, while the
closer it gets to zero the more the restraint aﬀects the instantaneous value (Instantaneous Restraint),
producing smaller and tighter distance ﬂuctuations. In case of experiments with conﬂicting NOE
distances, where no single structure prevails without any NOE upper bound violations, Time-Avera
ged Restraining is preferred because allows oscillatory and alternating fulﬁlment of the bounds
versus the Instantaneous Restraint that ’tries hard’ to fulﬁl them together, ultimately failing because
limiting atoms motions too much.
A similar approach can be applied to restrain the 3J spin-spin coupling constant for two atoms i and
j to the experimental value 3J0, with an additional harmonic potential term. In this case, issues arise
with the Time-Averaged Restraint: the average value lags behind the instantaneous value and the
restraining force will still be active for some time after 3J(t) equals 3J0 (overshooting), producing
large structural ﬂuctuations. Moreover, the Karplus relation suggests that several dihedral angle
values can be associated to a measured 3Jij: the resulting multi-value function requires enhanced
sampling methods to explore all the possible solutions.
Finally, an harmonic restraint can also be applied to adjust the distance between the donor and
the acceptor ﬂuorophores as well as the orientation factor of their dipoles to satisfy an experimental
FRET eﬃciency E0.
2.7
Monte Carlo Method
Random Numbers Generator.
In the context of molecular simulations, MC method is an alternative to MD to generate conﬁguratio
ns compatible with an ensemble and to extract thermodynamic quantities. It presents similar issues
with respect to system boundaries aﬀecting long-range dispersion interactions and with periodicity of
the box requiring truncation of long-range electrostatic interactions. Compared to MD, its two main
advantages are that no forces are required and sampling versatility, i.e. broad variety of possible
moves. However, diﬀerently from MD, no kinetic information can be extracted and the high density
of certain systems allows only a very small number of random moves (high rejection rates).
MC technique was introduced to evaluate multidimensional integrals such as conﬁgurational integrals,
where systematic integration schemes fail: in a conﬁgurational integral the overwhelming majority
of systematically selected points in each coordinate will have an extremely small Boltzmann factor.
Instead, in MC the points are selected randomly and the Boltzmann factor is calculated, thus the
procedure is repeated for many trials and the estimation of the integral stops when a desired accuracy
is achieved.
Importance Sampling and Metropolis Method.
Considering that the majority of trials make a negligible contribution to the integral, the importance
sampling approach was introduced to speed up the process and was directly embedded in the
Metropolis method: by generating a sequence of states such that every state occurs with appropriate
probability, the random numbers get chosen from a distribution that allows function evaluation in
regions that make important contributions to the integral.
11
==PAGE:18==
Taking as an example the Canonical ensemble: ⟨A⟩NV T =
R
drNρNV T A(rN). By sampling conﬁgura
tions at random, the integral can be estimated from a chosen distribution ρ so that ⟨A⟩NV T =
⟨A ρNV T /ρ⟩trials: the closer ρ gets to ρNV T , the better the accuracy of the estimation. Metropolis
method generates directly an ensemble of states with ρ = ρNV T by building a chain of state for
which the limiting distribution is ρNV T .
In a Markov chain, a sequence of trials where the outcome of each trial depends only on the trial
that immediately precedes it, the transition probability of going from state m to state n is πmn.
Starting from some initial probability, the limiting distribution ρ = limr→∞ρ(1)πr must satisfy the
matricial eigenvalue equation ρπ = ρ, where the stochastic matrix π has eigenvalue unity. Another
requirement is the ”microscopic reversibility”: ρmπmn = ρnπnm →ρm
ρn = πnm
πmn : in order to achieve
the ’canonical’ condition that the ratio between probability of states should be given by the ratio
of their Boltzmann factors, the rates of transitions should also be related by a Boltzmann factor.
So, a particle is picked randomly, a random displacement is generated and its associated new energy
calculated, and ﬁnally the move is accepted or rejected according to the following Metropolis criteria:
acc(m →n)
acc(n →m) = ρ(n)
ρ(m) = exp(−β(U(n) −U(m)))
(16)
acc(m →n) = ρ(n)
ρ(m), if ρ(n) < ρ(m) or acc(m →n) = 1, if ρ(n) ≥ρ(m)
(17)
or :
acc(m →n) = min(1, exp(−β(U(n) −U(m))))
(18)
A Markov chain generated according to the Metropolis acceptance rule generates a sequence of states
compatible with a canonical ensemble (in the limit of long chains).
Metropolis method in the isobaric-isothermic ensemble requires random moves in coordinates and
in the volume of the system, typically performed using periodic boundary conditions:
acc(old →new) = min(1, exp(−β[U(sN
new, Vnew)−U(sN
old, Vold)+P(Vn−V0)+Nβ−1ln(Vn/V0)] (19)
The potential energy of each particle is given in terms of scaled variables ri = Lsi and it needs to be
recalculated for each step in the volume coordinate V = L3 in terms of the length of the simulation
box:
Un =
X
i<j
ε( σ
rij
)n =
X
i<j
ε( σ
Lsij
)n
box
−−−−→
change Un(Lnew) = ( Lold
Lnew
)nUn(Lold)
(20)
In conclusion, in a grand canonical ensemble the number of particles is a variable. Thereby, a Monte
Carlo step in such ensemble consists of either particle displacement, particle insertion or particle
removal:
acc(sold →snew) = min(1, exp(−β[U(sN
new) −U(sN
old)]))
(21)
acc(N →N + 1) = min(1,
V
λ3(N + 1)eβ[µ−U(N+1)+U(N)])
(22)
acc(N →N −1) = min(1, V N
λ3 e−β[µ+U(N−1)−U(N)])
(23)
Simulations in the grand-canonical ensemble oﬀer a number of advantages for certain systems.
12
==PAGE:19==
2.8
Properties from Simulations
Calculation Approaches.
System properties can be generally extracted by four diﬀerent approaches.
The ﬁrst is based on the ergodic hypothesis discussed above and on the fact that conﬁgurations are
already sampled with the proper Boltzmann weight: by time averaging an instantaneous quantity A
captured at the phase space snapchat Γ(t), its average value A is the ensemble average. End-to-end
distances, pressure and temperature are common examples of properties extracted in this way.
A = ⟨A(Γ(t))⟩
(24)
The second approach consists in considering mean squared ﬂuctuations around the averages plus
some thermodynamic relationships. Heat capacities, thermal expansion coeﬃcients, compressibilities,
dielectric permittivity are common properties related to ﬂuctuations of energy, pressure, volume or
dipole moment of the simulation system.
δ2(A) = ⟨A2(Γ(t))⟩−⟨A(Γ(t))⟩2
(25)
The third approach consists in calculating time integrals of correlation functions in combination
with some relationship for macroscopic transport coeﬃcients, by applying the Green-Kubo Relation
or the corresponding Einstein Relation.
γ =
Z ∞
0
dt⟨˙A(Γ(t)) ˙A(Γ(0))⟩
,
2tγ = ⟨[A(Γ(t)) −A(Γ(0))]2⟩
(26)
The fourth and last approach is free-energy calculation. Helmholtz free energy (therefore entropy)
is neither a canonical average of some instantaneous observable, neither can be determined by
straightforward averaging over a trajectory: evaluating its value would mean evaluating the partition
function (impossible for most systems) therefore in practice what is computed is the free-energy
diﬀerence.
A = −kBTlnQ(N, V, T) = −kBTln[
R
drNe−βU(rN)
Λ3NN!
]
,
∆A = −β−1ln(Q1/Q0)
(27)
In the following, free-energy calculation principal techniques will be brieﬂy mentioned for their high
relevance in MD studies, but without exploring their deep intricacies, because not employed in this
work. For the speciﬁcs, the reader is invited to dive into the related literature.
• Counting: ∆A is taken from the ratio of probabilities of ﬁnding the system in state 0 or 1.
∆A = −kBTlnK
(28)
• Thermodynamic Integration: ∆A as the reversible work along a path from state 0 to 1.
A(1) −A(0) =
Z λ=λ1=1
λ=λ0=0
⟨∂H(rN, pN; λ)
∂λ
⟩λdλ
(29)
Temperature or Pressure Integration are a special case of thermodynamic integration:
A(T2)
T2
−A(T1)
T1
=
Z 1/T2
1/T1
⟨H(rN, pN)⟩T d(1/T)
,
A(V2) −A(V1) = −
Z V2
V1
PdV
(30)
• Perturbation: simulation of state 0 and ∆A taken from estimating the relative probability of
the conﬁgurations for state 1.
A(1) −A(0) = −kBTln⟨exp[−β(H(1) −H(0))]⟩0
(31)
Widom particle insertion is a special case of the perturbation formula:
µex = −kBTln
Z
dsN+1⟨e−β∆U⟩N
(32)
13
==PAGE:20==
• Overlapping Distribution Method: simulation of states 0 and 1 and ∆A computed as an oﬀset.
βµex = f1(∆U) −f0(∆U)
(33)
• Potential of Mean Force: free energy as a function of a coordinate, for example from using
restraints.
AR(R′) = −kBTlnPR(R′) + const
(34)
Structural Quantities.
A central concept is the radial distribution function (RDF) g(r), which describes the structure
of a mixture. In fact, if σ is the particle diameter, g(r)ρ4πr2dr represents the mean number of
particles in a spherical shell at radius r and of thickness dr, where ρ is the bulk (number) density
of particles. Indeed, g(r) is proportional to the probability of ﬁnding a second particle at a distance
r from a selected reference particle and therefore describes how structure deviates from randomness
due to correlation between the particles. To better understand the concept of RDF, it is useful
to observe some features of RDF proﬁles with r: for r →0 g(r) →0 because particles cannot
overlap due to Lennard-Jones repulsion, for r →∞g(r) →1 and describes the bulk, and for ρ →0
g(r) →exp[−βU(r)] because distribution only depends from the potential energy. Moreover, by
looking at a RDF proﬁle as a continuous function of r, each peak that comes in a progressive way
with r describes, respectively, the ﬁrst coordination shell (nearest neighbours at r = σ), the second
coordination shell (second nearest neighbours at r = 2σ) and so on.
The more such peaks are
resolved/distinguishable from each other, the longer range is the structural order of the mixture and
the more the mixture ultimately resembles a solid rather than a liquid or gas.
The RDF is useful because it can be easily extracted from simulations, can be directly compared to
x-ray scattering experiments which display the so-called structure factor to which RDF is related
through the Fourier transform, and it is even connected to thermodynamic quantities. In fact, it can
be shown that, if A(rN, pN) = A(rN) = P
i<j a(rij) is a sum of pair terms (for example potential
energy or virial), then ⟨A⟩/N = 2ρπ
R ∞
0
g(r)a(r)r2dr. It can also be shown that the gradient of
kBTlng(r) is an averaged force, therefore −kBTlng(r) is a reversible work, that is to say a free
energy: −kBTlng(r12) = AR(r12), where AR(r12) is the Potential Mean Force between particles 1
and 2.
Other than RDF, structural properties can also be monitored in terms of time series or probability
distributions. Examples of such properties would be end-to-end distances, dihedral angles, solvent-ac
cessible surface areas (related to hydrophilicity), radius of gyration (related to compactness of
structure) and hydrogen-bonds presence (related to the stability of proteins’ secondary structures).
Other structural properties which can be analysed and that are also expressed as time series are the
RMSD, the RMSF (both calculated for this work) and Clustering of conformations (not calculated).
RMSD characterises structural diﬀerences and conformational changes, like protein unfolding, and is
expressed as the time series of the atom-positional root-mean-square deviation of a set of Na atoms
with respect to a given reference structure:
RMSD(t; rref) =
v
u
u
tN −1
a
Na
X
i=1
(ri(t) −rref
i
)2
(35)
RMSF is related to crystallographic B-factors ((8π2/3)(RMSF(i))2 = Bi), therefore characterises
structural ﬂexibility. It is expressed as atom-positional root-mean-square ﬂuctuations around average
position, where i picks the atom and the series is over Nt frames:
RMSF(i) =
v
u
u
tN −1
t
Nt
X
n=1
(ri(tn) −⟨ri⟩)2
(36)
14
==PAGE:21==
Clustering of conﬁgurations serves to cluster and identify similar structures along the simulation
time-frame according to a conformational similarity criterion.
Cluster analysis is performed by
computing the RMSD between each pair of sampled structures and pairs of structures within a
chosen RMSD cutoﬀare grouped together in the same cluster, within which the structure with most
neighbours is deﬁned as the central-member structure. The simultaneous and complete identiﬁcation
of the same central-member structures among simulations started from diﬀerent initial velocities can
be a proof of the phase-space convergence of the sampling.
Transport Properties.
The Diﬀusion Coeﬃcient D is the principal transport property and will also be extracted from the
simulations within this study. It can can be calculated from either the simple Einstein Relation or
from the Green-Kubo Relation.
D enters Fick’s Second Law, for which the solution is a Gaussian:
∂c(r, t)
∂t
−D ▽2 c(r, t) = 0 , c(r, 0) = δ(r)
→
c(r, t) =
1
(4πDt)d/2 e−r2/4Dt
(37)
By looking at the variance of the movement of the particle (mean square displacement MSD), the
time evolution of the second moment ⟨r2(t)⟩=
R
dr c(r, t)r2 is ∂/∂t⟨r2(t)⟩= ∂/∂t
R
dr c(r, t)r2 =
D
R
dr ▽2 c(r, t)r2. By partial integration and by the application of the Gauss theorem, the Einstein
Relation is obtained as:
∂
∂t⟨r2(t)⟩= 2dD , d = dimensions
(38)
This connects the macroscopic transport concept of a diﬀusion coeﬃcient D (due to a concentration
gradient) to the microscopic MSD. In a computer simulation, the MSD can be obtained from
the distance travelled by the particle of interest during time t, therefore by averaging over many
suﬃciently separated time origins, the Einstein relation is derived:
⟨r2(t)⟩=
1
Norigins
X
t0
[r(t0 + t) −r(t0)]2
→
2dD = lim
t→∞
MSD
t
(39)
The slope of the plot of MSD vs. time is obtained via linear regression. For small t (inertia regime)
good statistics is obtained, while after the linear diﬀusive regime, for large t, statistics is poor. To
convert from units of ˚A
2/ps to 10−5cm2/s, the slope is multiplied by 10.0/(2n). In a MD output,
both the calculated diﬀusion constants as well as the results of the ﬁt are reported.
It is important to note that due to the fact that diﬀusion is calculated from initial positions only,
diﬀusion calculated for small numbers of atoms will be inevitably stochastic, so the results are most
sensible when averaged over many atoms. This facts would need to be considered when discussing
the simulations results of this study.
In the Green-Kubo approach, the diﬀusion coeﬃcient is calculated as an integral over the velocity
autocorrelation function. If ∆r(t) =
R t
0 dt′v(t′), then 2dD = limt→∞d/dt⟨r2(t)⟩= limt→∞2⟨v(t) ·
r(t)⟩= limt→∞2
R t
0 dt′⟨v(t′) · v(t)⟩= limt→∞2
R t
0 dt′⟨v(0) · v(t −t′)⟩. The velocity autocorrelation
function depends only on the time diﬀerence and averaging is over suﬃciently separated time origins:
⟨v(t′) · v(t)⟩= ⟨v(0) · v(t −t′)⟩,
⟨v(0) · v(τ)⟩=
1
Nori
Nori
X
i=1
v(ti) · v(ti + τ)
(40)
With τ = t −t′ and d=3, the Green-Kubo Relation for the three-dimensional diﬀusion coeﬃcient D
is:
D = 1
3
Z ∞
0
dτ⟨v(0) · v(τ)⟩
(41)
15
==PAGE:22==
3
Molecular System under Investigation
In this chapter is discussed the molecular system which was probed by the simulations. The simulated
systems comprised of ≈30000 atoms. In particular four systems were prepared, all sharing a pure
POPC lipids bilayer made of 128 POPCs, 64 per leaﬂet, and 0.15 M KCl ions for proper electrostatic
balancing of the lipids polar head groups.
The only diﬀerence among the four systems was the solute, lipid-anchor molecule which consisted in
the candidate to be probed: cholesterol, cholesteryl ester, 1,2-di-O-Hexadecyl-Glycerol and 1,5-di-O-
Hexadecyl-3,5-Hydroxy-Pentanol.
In Section 3.1, cholesterol and cholesteryl ester are brieﬂy introduced and then each one is described
and compared to the other. The same is done for 1,2-di-O-Hexadecyl-Glycerol and 1,5-di-O-Hexadecyl
-3,5-Hydroxy-Pentanol in Section 3.2. In Section 3.3, POPC molecule is ﬁrst introduced in its greater
context as a component of biological membranes, then analysed more in details.
The content of Sections 3.1-3.3 are deliberately focused on the chemical structures of the discussed
molecules, rather than their function / involvement in biological processes.
Properties are only
sometimes mentioned, especially in relation to the lipophilicity of the molecule, i.e. its inclination
to dissolve into and interact with lipids.
16
==PAGE:23==
3.1
Cholesterol and Cholesteryl Ester
Cholesterol and Cholesteryl esters have been studied for decades. Their chemical syntheses have been
extensively investigated in the past, as well as their interconnected physiological role [1, 2]. Also
cholesterol’s role in numerous pathologies has been already elucidated [3, 4]. Ultimately, cholesterol’s
unique abilities to promote liquid-ordered phase in membranes and to form the so-called lipid rafts
was previously discussed [5]. Separately, this study focuses on their partitioning into POPC bilayers.
Cholesterol molecule (COL) is made of a steroid nucleus attached to an isocytyl aliphatic side-chain
at C17. The steroid nucleus is composed by gonane - a tetracyclic hydrocarbon ring structure which
is a fusion of a phenanthrene ring with a cyclopentane ring - enriched with two methyl groups
attached to C10 and C13. The four rings have trans ring junctions. The side-chain, the two methyl
groups and also the hydroxyl group attached to C3 are at an angle (to the rings) above the plane
with β-stereochemistry. There is a double bond between C5 and C6. Therefore, cholesterol molecule
has a rigid, planar four-rings core with a ﬂexible, hydrophobic tail.
Cholesteryl esters are generally the condensation product of the polycyclic alcohol, cholesterol, and
an aliphatic carboxylic acid. Cholesteryl esters have a structure very similar to cholesterol. The
isocytyl aliphatic side-chain is maintained at C17 and the steroid nucleus is still composed by gonane.
However, the hydroxyl group characterising cholesterol is here usually substituted with an esteriﬁed
fatty acyl chain. Indeed, cholesteryl esters can be identiﬁed and named according to the esteriﬁed
fatty acyl chain, which overall also makes them generally much less polar than free cholesterol [6].
Anyway, the cholesteryl ester molecule (EST) investigated in this study results more polar than
natural, free cholesterol: the esteriﬁed chemical group linked to C3 tends to be more hydrophilic
than the simple hydroxyl group of cholesterol (Fig. 1). This feature is expected to more or less
aﬀect the partitioning of cholesteryl ester in lipid membranes, ultimately altering its dynamic and
kinetic behaviour with respect to standard cholesterol.
Figure 1: Cholesterol (COL) and Cholesteryl ester (EST) 2D chemical structures, side-by-side.
Despite remarkably similar, the two structures diﬀer because of the group linked to C3. For this
reason, EST tends to be more hydrophilic than COL. MarvinSketch software was used for the design.
Carbon atoms are numbered according to the cholesterol standard chemical convention.
17
==PAGE:24==
3.2
1,2-di-O-Hexadecyl-Glycerol ; 1,5-di-O-Hexadecyl-3,5-Hydroxy-Pentanol
1,2-di-O-Hexadecyl-Glycerol and 1,5-di-O-Hexadecyl-3,5-Hydroxy-Pentanol are two representative
organic compounds of the alkyl class.
Such class of compounds have been extensively used for
decades as drugs or labels because they are properly engineered to possess a strong lipophilicity.
This study is focused on their partitioning into POPC bilayers.
1,2-di-O-Hexadecyl-Glycerol molecule (HEX) is made of two alkyl straight-chains composed by 16
carbon atoms each, connected by an head group containing three hydrophilic functional groups: two
ether groups and an hydroxyl group on top.
1,5-di-O-Hexadecyl-3,5-Hydroxy-Pentanol (PEN) is also made of two alkyl straight-chains composed
by 16 carbon atom each. However, its head is bigger than the head of HEX because other than the
common hydroxyl group, the two ether groups are further distanced by additional carbon atoms.
For this reason, PEN head’s steric eﬀect is the widening of the gap between the two long alkyl chains
(Fig. 2). This feature is expected to more or less aﬀect the partitioning of PEN in lipid membranes,
ultimately altering its dynamic and kinetic behaviour with respect to HEX.
Figure 2: 1,2-di-O-Hexadecyl-Glycerol (HEX) and 1,5-di-O-Hexadecyl-3,5-Hydroxy-Pentanol (PEN)
2D chemical structures, side-by-side. Despite remarkably similar, the two structures diﬀer because
of the additional carbon atoms between the two ether groups in PEN with respect to HEX. For
this reason, PEN’s long alkyl chains are further distanced when compared to HEX’s long alkyl
chains. MarvinSketch software was used for the design. Carbon atoms are numbered according to a
non-standard convention based on the distinction between an ”odd” and an ”even” alkyl chain.
18
==PAGE:25==
3.3
1-Palmitoyl-2-Oleoyl-sn-Glycero-3-Phosphocholine
1-Palmitoyl-2-Oleoyl-sn-Glycero-3-Phosphocholine (POPC) is a phosphoglyceride, the most abunda
nt class of phospholipids in animal cell membranes. Phosphoglycerides’ feature is the three-carbon
glycerol backbone, while phospholipids, the most abundant membrane lipids, denote molecules with
a polar head group containing a phosphate group and two hydrophobic hydrocarbon tails, usually
fatty acids. Such tails normally contain between 14 and 24 carbon atoms. One tail typically has
one or more cis-double bonds (unsaturated lipid), while the other tail does not (saturated lipid).
Because cis-double bonds alter the steric conformational equilibrium of straight-chains, they tend
to bend the tail forming a kink. Therefore, diﬀerences in the length and saturation of the fatty acid
tails inﬂuence how phospholipid molecules pack against one another, ultimately aﬀecting the ﬂuidity
of the membrane.
The bilayer structure characterising cell membranes is naturally assembled: cylinder-shaped amphiph
ilic molecules such as POPC arrange themselves into a sealed, spherical, bilayer compartment to
prevent the exposure of the hydrophobic hydrocarbon tails to water, which would be energetically
unfavourable.
Extensive theoretical calculations and experiments have also shown that it is the mobility of the
constituent lipids that stands at the basis of the ﬂuidity of the membrane they form: POPC molecules
can undergo later diﬀusion, ﬂexion, rotation and ﬂip-ﬂop to the opposite leaﬂet of the bilayer.
Ultimately, the membrane bilayer ﬂuidity is dependent on the overall mobility of the upper leaﬂet
with respect to the lower and vice versa, which in turn is aﬀected by the chains interdigitation and
the chemical nature of the constituent lipids. Indeed, the cis-double bond in the oleic acid tail of
POPC makes it more diﬃcult to pack the bent chains together, thereby making the lipid bilayer
more ﬂuid and thinner than bilayers formed by saturated, fully straight chains [7].
POPC molecule has a three-carbon glycerol backbone.
It is formed by a palmitic acid (sn1,
saturated) long-chain and an oleic acid ((sn2, unsaturated)) long-chain linked through ester bonds
to adjacent carbon atoms of the glycerol, while the third carbon atom of the glycerol is attached to
a phosphate group, which in turn is linked to a choline head group (Fig. 3).
The phosphate group is negatively charge, while the choline group is positively charged. The resulting
P −−N + electric dipole provides polarity to the molecule, which can therefore not only form hydrogen
bonds and favourable electrostatic interactions with water molecules, also polar, but also interact
with the polar heads of COL, EST, HEX and PEN. On the other hand, the palmitoyl and oleoyl
tails of POPC likely interact with the hydrophobic alkyl chains and steroid rings of the previously
described molecules (Fig. 1 and 2).
Figure 3:
1-Palmitoyl-2-Oleoyl-sn-Glycero-3-Phosphocholine (POPC) 2D chemical structure.
MarvinSketch software was used for the design.
Carbon atoms are numbered according to a
non-standard convention based on the distinction between an ”odd” sn1 palmitoyl and an ”even”
sn2 oleoyl alkyl chain.
19
==PAGE:26==
4
Amber Package
The software package of choice was Amber, one of the widest used packages for biomolecular
simulations. It is a collection of numerous programs that are well-integrated. By working together,
these programs allow to setup, perform, and analyse MD simulations [23]. Amber package was picked
over others because of the convenience of Antechamber program for semi-automatic parametrisation
of COL, EST, HEX and PEN (see Sections 3.1 and 3.2).
The code developed for the bundle
of programs is based on the theory discussed in Chapter 2. In the following, further details are
provided about the core characteristics of Amber, reviewed in the context of the work presented in
this master thesis.
4.1
Amber Force Fields
Based on the components of the system under investigation (Chapter 3), a lipid force ﬁeld, a water
model with associated atomic ions, and a general force ﬁeld were to be speciﬁed. The chosen lipid
force ﬁeld, LIPID14, was needed to model the palmitic acid (PA) and the oleic acid (OL) tails of
the POPC molecules, as well as their phosphatidylcholines (PC) head groups. The chosen water and
ions models, TIP3P and jc tip3p, were used to include explicitly the water molecules for system
solvation and the K+ and Cl−ions for electrostatic balancing. Finally, the standard general Amber
force ﬁeld, GAFF2, was employed to model the four molecular candidates , namely cholesterol,
cholesteryl esters, 1,2-di-O-Hexadecyl-Glycerol and 1,5-di-O-Hexadecyl-3,5-Hydroxy-Pentanol. This
would not have been otherwise possible (within the Amber environment) without GAFF2, because
EST, HEX and PEN are non-standard molecules.
• LIPID14 is the current standard force ﬁeld for lipids. Several Van der Waals and dihedral
angle parameters have been reﬁned to ﬁt experimental data and quantum energies. New partial
charges have also been derived for the head and tail groups [24]. LIPID14’s format requires
each phospholipid molecule to be split into three residues: sn-1 tail residue (PA), head group
residue (PC), sn-2 tail residue (OL), in this order. Atoms from the same residues must be in the
same blocks, which in turn are consecutive to each other. Every three blocks, a TER card must
be appended to indicate the end of a lipid molecule. Since the POPC bilayer was designed using
the CHARMM-GUI Membrane Builder ([25, 26]), the python script charmmlipid2amber.py
was used to convert the CHARMM-formatted PDB ﬁle into the conventional LIPID14 PDB
format just mentioned, so that the Amber environment could be compatible.
• TIP3P is an explicit solvent model.
The water molecules are considered as rigid water
monomers represented by three interaction sites, with further improvements of the energy
and density for liquid water with respect to the original model [27].
The Joung/Cheatham monovalent ion parameters for TIP3P model were obtained by ﬁtting
solvation free energies, radial distribution functions, ion-water interaction energies, crystal
lattice energies and lattice constants for non-polarizable spherical ions [28, 29].
• GAFF2 force ﬁeld, like the traditional AMBER force ﬁelds, uses a simple harmonic function
form for bonds and angles. However, diﬀerently from the latters, atom types are more general
and cover almost all the organic chemical space that is made up of C, N, O, S, P, H, F, Cl, Br
and I [30]. Other than being a complete force ﬁeld, i.e. missing parameters are rare, the great
advantage of GAFF2 is that it is completely compatible with the AMBER macromolecular
force ﬁelds, like the ones employed in this study, i.e. LIPID14 and TIP3P/jc tip3p. Moreover,
GAFF2 atom types, except metal types, are in lower case while AMBER atom types are
always in upper case: AMBER and GAFF2 force ﬁelds can thereby be loaded together,
without any conﬂict.
This perfect compatibility has been used since its introduction to
simulate complex, hybrid biomolecular systems, such as bilayers [31, 32]. The parametrisation
of GAFF2 is similar to the parametrisation for standard AMBER (see Section 2.2).
20
==PAGE:27==
4.2
System Preparation
The bilayer systems under investigation, i.e. POPC-X (X being COL, EST, HEX, or PEN), were
prepared using the three Amber programs Antechamber, LEaP and ParmEd.
• Antechamber is a suite of programs which serves to prepare input ﬁles for LEaP, starting
from a three-dimensional structure, as found in a PDB ﬁle. Antechamber, designed to be used
with GAFF2, automated the process of developing parameters for the various combinations of
atom types found in the candidate molecules COL, EST, HEX and PEN. The main program,
also called antechamber, was used: 1) to convert the input PDF ﬁle of the candidate molecules’
structures complete with all hydrogens into a Tripos Mol2 ﬁle, containing connectivity informati
on; 2) to assign atomic charges and atom types. To do so, antechamber automatically executed
other programs: sqm, atomtype, am1bcc, bondtype. In the process many intermediate ﬁles,
recognisable by their upper-case names, were automatically generated. sqm computed the
AM1 Mulliken charges required for the AM1-BCC procedure (detailed in [33, 34]). atomtype
assigned the atom types from a deﬁnition set, in this work context bcc (standing for AM1-BCC
charge method). am1bcc ﬁrst read in the ac ﬁle with assigned AM1-BCC atom types and full
bond types, then the bcc parameter ﬁle (.dat), and ﬁnally generated an output ac ﬁle with
AM1-BCC charges. bondtype read in simple bond types from an ac ﬁle and wrote an output
ac ﬁle with assigned bond types as from the set of six diﬀerent types deﬁned in AM1-BCC
([33, 34]): single bond, double bond, triple bond, aromatic single bond, aromatic double bond
and delocalised bond.
After antechamber workﬂow was completed, parmchk was run on the produced Mol2 ﬁle
containing the molecule’s structure and connectivity. parmchk read in ﬁrst the Mol2 ﬁle, then
an atomtype similarity index ﬁle containing the indexes for the 8 force ﬁeld parameters in
equations (5) and (6), and ﬁnally the force ﬁeld ﬁle for GAFF2. The output was a force ﬁeld
modiﬁcation ﬁle (frcmod) which contained missing force ﬁeld parameters that were needed
for the candidate molecule, but not supplied by the force ﬁeld (.dat) ﬁle.
• LEaP was run via the tleap shell script, directly within the terminal. This program’s scope
is to create force ﬁelds ﬁles and to generate the input to be used for the Amber molecular
mechanics programs (see next section Running Simulations). Simply, LEaP is a command-line
interface that accepts text commands, ordering the program to perform speciﬁc operations on
object. Each command acts upon its arguments and some commands return objects which are
associated with a variable via an assignment statement. The object is the fundamental entity
in LEaP. In this work, UNITs type of objects were loaded, the most complex type available.
These contain RESIDUEs types of objects, i.e. collection of ATOMs types of object, which
in turn are the elementary, building blocks objects deﬁned by the following features: name,
type, charge, elements, position. UNITs, when paired with PARMSETs objects, contain all
the information required to perform a calculation using Amber.
PARMSETs are objects
that contain the parameters r(ij)
0
, φ(ijk)
0
, τ (ijkl)
0
, k(ij), k(ijk), k(ijkl), A(ij), B(ij) of equations (5)
and (6) discussed in Section 2.2.
They are loaded from force ﬁeld data ﬁles (.dat) and
frcmod ﬁles: the formers contain the most likely combinations of bond, angle and dihedral
parameters, while the latters any missing parameter (in case the loaded molecule presents
combinations not yet parametrised).
The LEaP protocol consisted in force ﬁelds loading,
structures loading, solvation and conversion of the UNITs-contained parametrised structure
into topology (parmtop) and coordinate ﬁles in Amber-readable format.
• ParmEd is a python-scripted topology editor that enables post-processing of the parmtop ﬁle
coming out of LEaP. It was invoked to repartition the masses of each hydrogens (HMassRepar
tition), set to 3.024 daltons while re-adjusting the mass of the heavy atom to which H is
attached so that the total mass is conserved [35]. With this trick the MD integration time step
was pushed from 2 fs to 4 fs, resulting in 2x quicker simulation runs.
21
==PAGE:28==
4.3
Running Simulations
Three MD simulation engines were run for this work: sander, pmemd and pmemd.cuda.
The
ﬁrst program, sander, is the original tool for performing simulation. It was designed for optimal
serial computing performance and it used to be the most equipped of the three in terms of features
and methods available [23]. The second program, pmemd, is a re-written version of sander for
high-performance calculations (larger and more complex systems) and improved parallel scalability.
The third program, pmemd.cuda, is pmemd but ported to GPU platforms using NVIDIA’s CUDA
language, for the ultimate performance enhancement [36, 37]. Regardless of the program used, each
whole simulation is run in three stages of progressive duration: minimisation (relaxation of the
geometry), equilibration (heating) and production (production and collection of analysable data).
Each stage can be performed in more than single runs.
The total simulation time is chosen to
make sure that convergence is achieved, i.e. long enough that the system has explored extensively
the phase space, so that the equilibrium values of the quantities of interest have reached statistical
stability (see Ergodic Hypothesis in Section 2.3).
• Sander is the Amber module which normally carries out energy minimisation, molecular
dynamics and application of harmonic restraints (see Sections 2.1, 2.2 and 2.6 for the theoretical
foundation).
sander was launched via terminal by calling argument ﬁles of the following
types: mdin, mdout, prmtop, inpcrd, restrt, refc, mdcrd, mdinfo. In the following table, brief
descriptions of each one of these ﬁles are listed.
Figure 4: List of ﬁles required (input) and produced (output) by sander.
The most important ﬁles are the mdin ﬁles. These text ﬁles contain all the instructions needed
by sander to run the simulations according to the user needs, user objectives and modelled
system’s requirements. In Section 5.1, on pag. 31, will be presented the main settings for
the simulations of this work, as encoded in the mdin ﬁles. A detailed description of all the
possible settings in mdin ﬁles is provided in Sections 18.6-18.9 and 20.3 of Amber 16 Manual
from Amber website [38].
• Pmemd has evolved into the primary MD engine within the Amber Software package suite.
It was written with the primary goal of improving the performance of the most frequently
used methods of sander. pmemd input ﬁles and output ﬁles exactly replicate sander: pmemd
simply runs more rapidly, scales better in parallel using MPI (Message Passing Interface), works
smoothly on signiﬁcantly higher numbers of processors, uses dynamic memory allocation so less
resident memory and, above all, can make use of NVIDIA GPUs for acceleration (pmemd.cuda)
[23]. Overall, pmemd was ideal for simulating the ≈30000 atoms solvated bilayer system, which
is deﬁnitely a large system, for a time long enough to visualise the whole penetration pathways
of the candidate molecules from the water region to the acyl chains membrane region.
A
supercomputer was also available for pmemd.cuda runs to further speed up the performance.
22
==PAGE:29==
4.4
Analyzing Simulations
Analysis of biomolecular simulations is usually supported by the usage of visualisation tools, as
well as speciﬁc programs for processing the coordinate trajectories and the data ﬁles generated by
pmemd.cuda. Among the most convenient and user-friendly softwares for visualisation, V MD was
here used to display the system and follow the pathways undertaken by the candidate molecules
partitioning into the POPC bilayer. To process the trajectories, cpptraj was the program of choice
for its extensive range of functionalities, while the Python script mdout analyzer.py was only used
for quick graphical analysis for conﬁrming convergence of the runs. Finally, Xmgrace allowed to plot
the data generate by cpptraj from the trajectories.
• VMD is a molecular graphics program devised for the display and analysis of molecular
assemblies, especially biopolymers. This program allows to display simultaneously any number
of structures and with a wide range of rendering styles and colouring methods [39].
The
Graphical Representations window is a very useful panel which allows to create multiple
representations for the same loaded system, where each representation embodies a particular
rendering method and colouring scheme for a selected subset of atoms. Such atoms are selected
via an extensive atom selection syntax, which integrates Boolean operators and expressions.
Last but not least, V MD has been purposely designed with the ability to animate imported
MD simulation trajectories, which can also be analysed via user-deﬁned, personalised scripts
to run in a text interface using the Tcl embeddable parser.
• Mdout analyzer.py is a Python script which was used to rapidly parse and analyse the energy
components printed in the output ﬁles (mdout) from pmemd.cuda. Each mdout was combined
into a single data set and a GUI window allowed to select the energy components available
for graphical analysis. This script was primarily invoked to check the convergence (energy
conservation).
• Cpptraj is the primary program within Amber suite and was designed to be run as a batch job
with a series of commands as input, to process and analyse coordinate trajectories and the data
therein derived. Developed from ptraj, cpptraj is C++ coded and signiﬁcantly more eﬃcient
compared to the former, especially when dealing with NetCDF trajectories [40]. Among the
many available cpptraj’s tools, some of the following were used in this study: conversions
among trajectory formats, imaging with periodic boundary conditions, retention of only the
closest water molecules, and monitoring/calculation along trajectories of area per molecule,
RMSF, RMSD, RMS average correlation curve, translational and rotational diﬀusion, h-bonds
lifetimes, lipid order parameters, solvent-accessible surface area, radius of gyration, radial
distribution function and solute’s watershells. cpptraj’s convenience lied also on the availability
of many test cases that served as guidelines of how to run the various commands. In this thesis
work, the program was used to extract data related to the diﬀusion of the candidate molecules
in both aqueous and lipid environment, their structural RMSD and RMSF, and their solvent
accessible surface area and hydration shells.
In Section 5.2 will be presented further details about the commands and their associated
quantities of interest for this work, i.e. whose outputs will be discussed in Chapter 6. In Fig.
5 on the next page the overall program ﬂow of cpptraj is summarised.
• Xmgrace is a convenient 2D plotting tool. In this thesis work, this program was used to display
the trajectories-derived data extracted from the simulations with cpptraj. Xmgrace allowed to
change the appearances of the plots as well as to manipulate the plotted data set and re-plot
them. It was very useful also to calculate some statistics on the data and to overlay the plots
of data from diﬀerent simulations to cross-compare them.
23
==PAGE:30==
Figure 5:
Initialisation:
reading of all topology information and reference structures and
initialisation of follow-up actions/analyses. Setup: processing of all topology-dependent aspects of
each action. Action: one-frame-at-a-time reading of input trajectories, action processing and writing
out of output coordinates. Analysis: analysis of accumulated data. Data formatting: formatting of
any data slated for output and writing to disk. Taken from [40].
24
==PAGE:31==
5
Simulations
This chapter explains the methodologies and approaches used to tackle the partitioning problem
with MD simulations, within the context of this project.
First, system setup and MD settings are thoroughly explained and choices are commented in section
5.1. In particular, it is discussed the importance of performing single cholesterol simulations to
justify the feasibility and accuracy of what constituted the core simulations, i.e. the simulations of
the POPC bilayers together with the lipid-anchors.
In section 5.2, it is described in detail the procedure to manipulate the data derived from the
simulations, in order to elucidate how the analysis of the molecules’ trajectories was performed and
how insights on the partitioning could be revealed.
25
==PAGE:32==
5.1
System Setup and MD Settings
This study was comprised of two consecutive rounds of simulations: 1) single cholesterol simulations
and 2) COL/EST/HEX/PEN-POPC simulations - from here on denoted as core simulations -. The
single cholesterol simulations represented the required step in order to justify the core simulations
and to validate their results.
5.1.1
Cholesterol Simulations
This round was performed with three diﬀerent solvent conditions: empty space, water and lipid
bilayer. The principal aim of these simulations was to assess the quality of cholesterol parametrisation
via the Antechamber protocol based on GAFF2 force ﬁeld and to justify its implementation. Indeed,
a more accurate cholesterol parametrisation has been recently included in an expansion of LIPID14
Amber force ﬁeld [41]. Therefore, by verifying the compatibility of the RMSD and RMSF obtained
via Amber (LIPID14) with that obtained via Antechamber (GAFF2) in three diﬀerent solvent
conditions, the GAFF2-based parametrisation was validated for cholesterol. In Fig. 6 and in Fig.
7 are shown RMSD and RMSF values, respectively, in the case of cholesterol embedded in the lipid
bilayer. CHL is the label of the cholesterol residue unit, as for LIPID14. COL is the corresponding
label as re-deﬁned for GAFF2.
Figure 6: RMSD plots for bilayer-embedded cholesterol as parametrised in LIPID14 (black) and in
GAFF2 (red).
26
==PAGE:33==
Figure 7: RMSF plots for bilayer-embedded cholesterol as parametrised in LIPID14 (black) and in
GAFF2 (red).
The compatibility is proved by the overlapping values of the averages (see their standard deviations)
of RMSD and RMSF values for the two diﬀerent parametrizations. This implied that the data derived
from POPC-COL simulations with GAFF2-parametrised COL could be safely compared to those
extracted from POPC-EST/HEX/PEN simulations with GAFF2-parametrised EST/HEX/PEN,
for which a parametrisation within LIPID14 force ﬁeld is still not available.
27
==PAGE:34==
5.1.2
Core Simulations
In total 40 simulations were run, i.e. 10 simulations for each one of the following 4 solutes, all of
them in 128 POPC molecules pure bilayers: COL molecules, EST molecule, HEX molecule and PEN
molecule. Each simulation included a minimisation step, via sander, an equilibration step and a
production step, both via pmemd.cuda, to exploit the supercomputer capabilities.
First of all, COL, EST, HEX and PEN chemical structures were designed with Avogadro, the free
cross-platform molecular editor. By using Avogadro, it was possible to relax these structures using
GAFF force ﬁeld, i.e. the same used in the follow-up MD simulations. Each one of the 4 molecules’
relaxed 3D structures were then saved as .pdb ﬁles.
As introduced in Section 4.2, Antechamber program was used to 1) calculate the atomic point charges
using the AM1-BCC charge model. 2) convert these .pdb ﬁles into Tripos Mol2 formatted ﬁles. After
checking the sqm output ﬁle to verify that the quantum mechanics charge calculation completed
successfully, the Mol2 ﬁles were open to check their content: molecule’s 3D structure, atom charge,
atom number, atom name, atom type and the bonding at the end of the ﬁle. After this, the parmchk
program was run to test if all the parameters required by the molecules were available. When this
was not the case, frcmod ﬁles were written containing a list of only the missing parameters and
Antechamber automatically ﬁlled in such parameters by analogy to available similar parameters.
To assemble the core lipid bilayer structure, the CHARMM-GUI Membrane Builder was used [42].
In Fig. 8 the protocol of the membrane builder is summarised.
Figure 8: CHARMM-GUI Membrane Builder protocol to build a 128 POPC bilayer with a cholesterol
molecule embedded in the upper leaﬂet. Listed in bold the personalizable options, on light grey
background the ﬁve step of the building process. Calculated size, as at step 5 : 66.57 (X), 66.57 (Y),
79.36 (Z); # of atoms: 29567; # of lipids: 67 on top, 64 on bottom; # of water: 4061; # ions: 10.
At this point, the generated POPC lipids, cholesterols, waters and ions have been combined
into a single membrane structure .pdb ﬁle, which was saved in the working directory. However, the
CHARMM-GUI .pdb-formatted ﬁle must be reformatted to a ﬁle that follows the Lipid14 format that
LEaP expects. Therefore, charmmlipid2amber.py was used as a robust residue and atom renaming
and reordering script to perform the conversion into the format described in Amber Force Fields,
Section 4.1.
28
==PAGE:35==
The standard name by which LIPID14 force ﬁeld recognises the cholesterol residue in a .pdb ﬁle is
CHL. Thus, before opening up LEaP for force ﬁelds parameters loading, the residue(s) name CHL in
the .pdb of the bilayer was replaced by COL: in this way LEaP would have unambiguously assigned
LIPID14 force ﬁeld parameters only to the PA, OL and PC residues deﬁning POPC molecules,
while the COL residues would have been parametrised according to GAFF2 force ﬁeld, as required
(see Cholesterol Simulations, subsection 5.1.1).
To generate the .pdb ﬁles for EST-POPC, HEX-POPC and PEN-POPC without worrying about
proper formatting and, above all, without re-using the CHARMM-GUI Membrane Builder, which
does not include pre-prepared structures for EST, HEX and PEN, the COL-POPC .pdb was simply
triplicated and edited. The COL residue in the duplicates was replaced, along with its atoms, by
the EST(/HEX/PEN) residue as taken from the .pdb ﬁle generated before with Avogadro. At this
point, the four .pdb ﬁles including both lipid bilayer and solute molecule were properly formatted
and ready to be loaded in LEaP.
Firstly, LEaP was opened and LIPID14, TIP3P and GAFF2 force ﬁelds were sourced to load the
standard parameters (.dat ﬁles) and the libraries built within each one of the force ﬁelds. frcmod
ﬁles were also added to include the ions parameters included in ionsjc tip3p force ﬁeld.
Secondly, the Antechamber-produced Mol2 ﬁles containing the deﬁnitions of the candidate molecules’
structures (connectivity included) were loaded in variables named as they were encoded in the .pdb’s,
i.e. COL, EST, HEX, PEN. With this operation, the GAFF2 libraries containing the force ﬁeld
parameters were loaded into the newly built units COL, EST, HEX, PEN.
At this point, any
PARMSETs loaded using this command were included in LEaP’s library of PARMSETs that was
searched. After this, the Antechamber-produced frcmod ﬁles were loaded via loadamberparams
command to provide LEaP with any missing parameter might have existed in the newly built units.
Once that the solute molecules have been correctly parametrised, the .pdb ﬁles generated via
Membrane Builder and converted via charmmlipid2amber.py were loaded via the command loadpdb
into a new unit variable deﬁned MEMBRANE.
This function searched the variables already
deﬁned within LEaP for variable names (COL, EST, HEX and PEN) that mapped to residue names
within the ATOM records of the .pdb ﬁle. When a matching variable name was found, the contents
of the variables were added to MEMBRANE, which contained the structure being loaded from the
.pdb ﬁle. Adding the contents of the matching UNIT into the UNIT being constructed means that
the contents of the matching UNIT are copied into the UNIT being built, i.e.
residues named
COL/EST/HEX/PEN in the unit MEMBRANE were going to be parametrised according to
GAFF2 libraries, as for the residues named COL/EST/HEX/PEN in the units COL/EST/HEX/
PEN.
As atoms were read from the ATOM records, their coordinates were written into the correspondingly
named ATOMs within MEMBRANE. If the entire residue was read and it was found that ATOM
coordinates were missing, then external coordinates were built from the internal coordinates that
were deﬁned in the matching UNIT. This allowed LEaP to build coordinates for hydrogens and
lone-pairs which were not speciﬁed in the original membrane .pdb ﬁles.
The size of the periodic box in MEMBRANE required to be re-estimated from the original values
calculated by the Membrane Builder (See caption of Fig. 8). This is because CHARMM-GUI builds
lipid bilayers in a way that might not prevent lipids to extend beyond the solvation layers in the X
and Y dimensions. Therefore, by implementing a shell script, it was possible to better estimate the
periodic box dimensions by using the water molecules’ coordinates for this measurement. For X, Y,
Z, the code calculated, respectively: 67.487, 67.510, 80.654. These values were then assigned to the
box deﬁned for the system in MEMBRANE.
29
==PAGE:36==
In conclusion, saveAmberParm was used to make LEaP search its list of PARMSETs for parameters
deﬁning all of the interactions between the ATOMs within MEMBRANE and to produce Amber-rea
dable topology and coordinate ﬁles.
Finally, LEaP was quit and these two output ﬁles, after
ParmEd editing (see Section 4.2), could ﬁnally be used as input for each one of the 40 simulations’
minimisation, equilibration and production steps via pmemd(.cuda).
In the following ﬁgure (Fig. 9), chosen snapshots of the MD simulations of the four systems are
shown as visualised with VMD. In the boxes on the next page the settings for the three simulation
steps will be explained, while Fig. 10 shows the two bash scripts written for the equilibration step(s)
and the production step, respectively.
(a) 3 COL in 128 POPC bilayer.
(b) EST in 128 POPC bilayer.
(c) HEX in 128 POPC bilayer.
(d) PEN in 128 POPC bilayer.
Figure 9: Snapshots of the four lipid bilayers with embedded candidate molecules COL, EST, HEX and
PEN, represented as Van der Waals spheres. In red the water molecules, in blue the choline lipid heads, in
green the oleoyl lipid tails and in orange the palmitoyl lipid tail. Ions are too small and too few to be visible.
30
==PAGE:37==
1] MINIMIZATION
The ﬂag to run minimisation was set to 1 and the the initial coordinates (but not velocities) were read from the inpcrd ﬁle: the
simulation was run as new one, not as a restart. The format of the ﬁnal coordinates, velocities and box size written to ﬁle restrt was
set to NetCDF for more eﬃcient computations. Energy information was printed in human-readable form to ﬁles mdout and mdinfo
every 100 integration steps. The maximum number of cycles of minimisation was set to 10000 and the method of minimisation was
switched from steepest descent to conjugate gradient after 5000 cycles. The simulation ensemble was set to microcanonical (NVE),
with constant total energy classical dynamics. The solvent was explicit and the variable controlling the implementation of the
periodic boundaries for the calculation of non-bonded interactions was set to constant volume. PME was on and the nonbonded
cutoﬀwas set to 10 Angstroms, beyond which the long-range electrostatics was calculated in the Fourier space. No pressure scaling
was applied because constant pressure periodic boundary conditions were not used.
2] EQUILIBRATION
The equilibration phase was a cycle of six runs: two NVT simulations followed by four NPT simulations. A bash script was written
for the equilibration job to be run on the cluster (see Fig. 10a).
1st run. 25000 integration steps of 0.001 ps each, for a total of 25 ps NVT simulation. The MD simulation was run without
minimisation and as a new run. Temperature was regulated with a Langevin dynamics scheme, with a collision frequency set to
1.0 ps−1. The initial velocities were assigned from a Maxwellian distribution at 303.15 K. The temperature was kept constant at
such value all along. Long-range forces were smoothly suppressed from 10 to 12 Angstroms, beyond which they were totally cut.
SHAKE algorithm was applied to constrain bonds containing hydrogen. Energies and coordinates were printed every 1000 steps,
while a restart ﬁle every 10000 steps. Both output coordinate trajectory ﬁle and the restart ﬁle were written in binary NetCDF
format, that is highly precise, small-sized and much faster to read and write. NMR dihedral and positional restraints were applied,
with an harmonic force constant set to 2.5 kcal/(mol˚A
2), to keep all residues ”bound” to the reference structure in refc ﬁle, which
was here set to be the restart inpcrd ﬁle.
2nd run. Again 25 ps NVT simulation, but not run as a new simulation because it was a restart of the 1st run, so velocities were
read from the inpcrd ﬁle. Everything else was set the same as the previous run.
3rd run. 25 ps NPT simulation, restart of the 2nd run. Constant pressure periodic boundary conditions were used and the volume
of the unit cell was adjusted (by small amounts on each step) to make the computed pressure approach the target external pressure,
which was set to 1 bar. A Monte Carlo barostat was used for the constant pressure control. Because the pressure scaling was
set to be semi-isotropic, the surface tension was required to be kept constant, at 0 dyne/cm across the two interfaces (default for
lipid bilayers) in the xy plane. The algorithm for surface tension regulation was an extension to the Berendsen pressure scaling
algorithm that adjusted the tangential pressure evaluation in order to maintain a constant surface tension. Also in this run NMR
dihedral and positional restraints were applied. However, the harmonic force constant was lowered to 1.0 kcal/(mol˚A
2) to make
the system more ﬂuid. Apart from the above mentioned, all the other options were the same as the 2nd run.
4th run. 50000 integration steps of 0.002 ps each, for a total of 100 ps NPT simulation, restart of the 3rd run. All the options
were the same as the 3rd run, except the harmonic force constant for constraining the bonds, which was further lowered to 0.5
kcal/(mol˚A
2).
5th run. Again 100 ps NPT simulation, restart of the 4th run. All the options were the same as the 4th run, except the harmonic
force constant for constraining the bonds, which was further lowered to 0.1 kcal/(mol˚A
2).
6th run. Again 100 ps NPT simulation, restart of the 5th run. The long-range interactions cutoﬀwas lowered from 10 to 8
Angstroms and the force-based switching function was set oﬀ. NMR dihedral restraints were not applied in this run, but positional
restraints were, with a force constant of 0.1 kcal/(mol˚A
2).
3] PRODUCTION
A bash script was written for the production job to be run on the cluster (see Fig. 10b).The production run was a NPT simulation
500 ns long. It was performed in 25 iterations of 5000000 4fs-long steps each, i.e. 20 ns per iteration. The ﬁrst iteration was run as a
restart of the 6th equilibration run, while the following 24 iterations were run as restart of the closest previous iteration, respectively.
Temperature control followed a Langevin dynamics scheme with the same options discussed above. Pressure control and surface
tension control were also achieved with the same strategies mentioned above. The cutoﬀdistance for long-range interactions was
risen up to 10 Angstroms, providing slightly better accuracy despite the increased computational cost. Energies were printed every
250000 steps and coordinates every 25000, while a restart ﬁle every 50000 steps. Both output coordinate trajectory ﬁle and the
restart ﬁle were written in binary NetCDF format, especially suitable for the otherwise too large production output ﬁles. All the
other options not mentioned here were kept the same as the previous runs.
31
==PAGE:38==
These settings, encoded in the mdin text ﬁles (see Fig.
4), were the same for each whole
simulation, regardless of the candidate molecule under simulation. Options which are not explicitly
speciﬁed in the above tables are assumed to be assigned the default values, as deﬁned in Sections
18.6-18.9 and 20.3 of Amber 16 Manual freely available for download from Amber website [38].
Below, the bash scripts for the equilibration and production iterations are shown, together with a
table specifying the type of input/output ﬁles required/produced, as introduced in Fig. 4.
(a) Job script for the equilibration runs.
(b) Job script for the production runs.
Figure 10:
Bash scripts to be run on the cluster.
In light blue the job settings, in black the loaded
modules. The core script is inside the rectangular box. For the equilibration job, the input ﬁles are eq$s.in,
triscol h.prmtop, equi$c.rst and equi$c.rst; while the output ﬁles are equi$s.out, equi$.rst and equi$s.nc.
For the production job, the input ﬁles are prod.in, triscol h.prmtop, col prod$c.rst; while the output ﬁles
are col prod$s.out, col prod$.rst and col prod$s.nc. These ﬁles are colour-highlighted based on their type,
as listed in the coloured panel and speciﬁed in Fig. 4.
32
==PAGE:39==
5.2
Trajectory Analysis
In order to ﬁnd the most eﬀective lipid anchor among the four candidate molecules, the analysis
focused on four aspects which are complementary for assessing the stability of the probed molecules.
First, the hydration of the candidates was assessed over the whole set of simulation frames by
measuring the solvent accessible surface area (SASA) and by counting the number of water molecules
within the upper and lower hydration shells, with cutoﬀradii of 5.0 ˚A and 3.4 ˚A, respectively.
Second, the candidates’ partitioning behaviour was observed by comparing the trajectories, visualised
with V MD, with the hydration data. In particular, the transition from an hydrophilic regime outside
the lipid bilayer to an hydrophobic regime inside of it was deﬁned as the steep drop in both SASA
and waters counting occurring at a range of frames where the candidate lipid-anchors were seen at
the water/lipids interface.
Third, the lipid-anchoring molecules’ structural deviations were investigated by calculating their
RMSD and RMSF both outside and inside the POPC bilayer.
Last but not least, the ultimate measure of the molecules’ stability within the bilayer was represented
by transport data. By looking at diﬀusion-related quantities, the transport of the candidates in both
aqueous and lipid environments was characterised.
These data were extracted from the trajectories forming the whole set of 500 ns-long 40 simulations,
10 per candidate. The following simple assumption was made. The candidate expected to be the
most stable in a biological or experimental lipid bilayer is the one that shows:
1. The worst overall hydration inside the bilayer (Section 6.1);
2. The highest de-hydration going from the outside to the inside of the bilayer (Sections 6.1);
3. The largest hydrophobic partitioning as shown by the longest presence inside the bilayer (6.2);
4. The least variable structure inside the bilayer (Section 6.3);
5. The most ﬁxed position inside the bilayer (6.4);
Therefore, in view of this assumption, the aim of the analysis was to identify the molecular candidate
with the most of or ideally all the following features (as inside the bilayer):
• Tiniest solvent accessible surface area and the least number of bound water molecules;
• Longest time in contact with the lipids;
• Smallest RMSD and RMSF values;
• Shortest distance traveled and smallest diﬀusion coeﬃcients.
The analysis was carried out with Cpptraj, Xmgrace and VMD (See Section 4.4). Cpptraj was the
primary program and it was launched to read all the trajectories, to extract the derived data of
interest and to calculate statistics. Then, Xmgrace plotting tool allowed to display such data and
VMD to further investigate into these data by visualisation of the evolution of the trajectories with
an atomic resolution.
Overall, 480 sets of data were analysed, which amounts to over one million of single data considering
the ≈5000 frames per simulation.
33
==PAGE:40==
Speciﬁcally, 120 sets of data were derived for each one of the four candidates.
40 sets of data
were extracted for the structural analysis (20 combined for in water and in lipids RMSD and an
equivalent number for RMSF), 40 for the transport analysis (20 combined for MSD and distance
travelled in water and in lipids, 20 combined for the diﬀusion coeﬃcients in water and lipids) and
40 for the hydration analysis (20 combined for SASA in water and in lipids, 20 combined for water
counting in water and in lipids).
This large number of data allowed to calculate meaningful statistics and to identify macro trends
and behaviour of the candidate molecules along the whole trajectories.
By using cpptraj, the statistics were computed as averages throughout the whole data in single
runs. The numbers in the tables reported in Sections 6.1, 6.3 and 6.4 represent the average values,
over the 10 simulations per candidate, of the averages computed by cpptraj for the single simulations.
The table in Section 6.2 reports the partitioning of the four candidates among the bilayer lipid
environment, the transition region and the aqueous region, as determined by identifying the simulation
time frames for the three diﬀerent regimes of SASA, as shown in Fig. 11. For the validation of the
accuracy of these data, VMD tool was employed to visualise the molecular trajectories and to verify
that the observed time frames identiﬁed in the SASA plots coincided with the slots of frames where
COL/EST/HEX/PEN appeared in the three partitioning regions. In Fig. 11 are also shown the
average values of SASA in water and in lipids, used in the following Section 6.1 to calculate ∆SASA
(and similarly ∆lower and ∆upper).
Simple scripts were written to invoke action commands that operated on frames read in by the
trajin command one at a time. The following commands served the goal of this thesis project: surf,
watershell, rmsd, atomicﬂuct, and diﬀusion.
• surf calculated the surface area of the atoms in the residue of interest, using the LCPO
algorithm [43]. The neighbour list, as deﬁned in Truncation Schemes paragraph of Section
2.4, was calculated for all solute’s atoms (all the atoms that did not form water) so the surface
area calculated represented the contributions of the residue’s atoms to the overall surface area,
not the area as if the residue was an isolated system. It is suggested to the reader to keep in
mind that this is exactly the reason why negative results can be expected in case only a small
fraction of the solute is selected for calculating the SASA. Indeed, this will be the case as the
lipid-anchor’s atoms represent only a small fraction of all the atoms of the other 128 POPC
molecules forming the solute in the simulated system. SASA units are ˚A
2.
• watershell command counted the number of water molecules within a certain distance of the
residue’s atoms in order to deﬁne the ﬁrst (lower) and second (upper) hydration shells. The
cutoﬀdistances were set to the standard values of 3.4 ˚A and 5.0 ˚A for the lower and upper
water shells, respectively.
• rmsd command calculated the coordinate RMSD (see RMSD in Structural Quantities, Section
2.8) of the input trajectories with respect to the ﬁrst frame, chosen as the reference frame.
The trajectories were ﬁrst split according to their assigned partition region (see ﬁg. 11 and
its caption) and the ﬁrst frame, used as a reference for the RMSD calculation, was ether the
ﬁrst ”hydrophilic” frame or the ﬁrst ”hydrophobic” frame. Thus, both the RMSD in water
and the RMSD in lipids were obtained for the lipid-anchors. The mask selection on which the
command operated corresponded to the residue of interest (COL/EST/HEX/PEN), as deﬁned
in the structure ﬁle. The calculation was mass-weighted and the best-ﬁt RMSD plots were
extracted. Best-ﬁt RMSD calculation means that the structure is rotated and translated so as
to minimise the RMSD to the reference structure. RMSD units are ˚A.
34
==PAGE:41==
• atomicﬂuct command computed the positional ﬂuctuations (see RMSF in Structural Quantities,
Section 2.8) of the single atoms of the residue of interest, both outside (hydrophilic region) and
inside (hydrophobic region) the POPC bilayer. To exclude rotations and translations from the
computed ﬂuctuations, an RMS ﬁt to the ﬁrst frame of the interested region was performed so
that the chosen reference frame coincided with the reference frame used for RMSD calculations.
This allowed to compare the RMSF ﬂuctuations with the RMSD ﬂuctuations, with the former
representing ﬂuctuations averages over time frames for each atom and the latter ﬂuctuations
averages over atoms for each time frame. RMSF units are also ˚A.
• diﬀusion command computed the mean square displacement (MSD) plots averaged over all
the atoms forming the residue of interest.
The diﬀusion of the individual atoms was not
considered. Overall MSD, MSD in X direction, MSD in Y direction, MSD in Z direction were
all calculated both outside and inside the bilayer, as well as the total distance traveled and the
diﬀusion coeﬃcients D (overall and in X, Y, Z) according to the Einstein relation (see (39) in
Transport Properties, Section 2.8). The reader should keep in mind that for simulating travel
distances, mean-square displacements and therefore diﬀusion coeﬃcients, the simulation box
was required to be ”opened” and the trajectories to be ”unwrapped” so that the molecules
could take continuous paths. The noimage option was therefore integrated to the diﬀusion
command to remind the program that trajectories had been properly unwrapped. MSD units
are ˚A
2/ps, distance traveled units are ˚A/ps and D units are 10−5cm2/s.
In Fig. 12 are shown the outputs that the above discussed commands produce, for the ﬁrst of the
ten simulation runs of cholesteryl ester residue, i.e. EST. These should help the reader to interpret
the data discussed in section 6 as well as to better read the plots in the appendices. The plots in
the appendices recollect in the same graphs the quantities extracted from four chosen simulations of
the four lipid-anchors. Each one of these four simulations was chosen among the ten simulations as
per reproducibility of the quantities’ average values over the ten simulations.
In Fig. 12a both the RMSD ﬂuctuations in water and in lipids are displayed against the simulation
time on the X axis. As could be intuitively imagined, the in-lipid RMSD (blue) average value was
(for this simulation) slightly smaller than the in-water RMSD because the anchor is more stabilised
in lipids rather than in water. Also as expected, because the ﬁrst respective frames were used as the
reference frames, both the plots started from 0 ˚A and grew ﬂuctuating to a constant average value,
indicating convergence of the simulation.
In Fig. 12b, the atomic ﬂuctuations in ˚A are displayed for each one of the atoms of EST both
inside and outside the bilayer. Increasingly larger ﬂuctuations were observed for the atoms in the
tail region of the molecule, as it should be because of its higher ﬂexibility with respect to the rigid
steroid rings core. Moreover, the in-water ﬂuctuations resulted slightly larger than the in-lipids
ﬂuctuations, as also predictable.
In Fig. 12c, MSD plots for the three axis, overall MSD and distance travelled outside the bilayer are
presented against time. While the overall displacement is mostly caused by very large displacements
in the x direction for the ﬁrst 150 ns, immediately after that displacements along y were seen to
prevail.
In Fig. 12d, water shells (lower is red, upper is green) and SASA ﬂuctuations (black) are shown
against the total simulation time of the ﬁrst run.
EST lipid-anchor was clearly and abruptly
seen to be penetrating the bilayer after about 250 ns from the start. Bilayer penetration strongly
corresponded to a drastic drop of both solvent accessible area and waters bound.
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 11: Partitioning regions as identiﬁed by three diﬀerently coloured sections of an exemplary
SASA plot. The hydrophilic regime is deﬁned by the time frame (in ns) corresponding to the blue
section, while the transition regime is associated to the turquoise section and the hydrophobic regime
is associated with the cyan section. Over each section an exemplary simulation snapshot is placed,
in order to accompany the solvation state of the lipid-anchor (PEN here) with its location within
the simulation box. In these snapshots, red points represent water, blue lines the PC head of POPC,
orange lines the PA tails and green lines the OL tails of the lipids. The lipid-anchor is shown in its
VdW spheres representation.
36
==PAGE:43==
(a) in-water RMSD (black) and in-lipid RMSD (blue)
of EST, 1st run.
(b) in-water RMSF (red) and in-lipid RMSF (black)
of EST, 1st run.
(c) MSD overall (black), in X (red), in Y (green), in
Z (blue) and distance travelled (yellow) of EST, 1st
run.
(d) SASA (black) and number of waters in the upper
5.0 ˚A (green) and lower 3.4 ˚A (red) hydration shells
of EST, 1st run.
Figure 12: RMSD (a), RMSF (b), MSD (c), SASA and water shells (d) of EST, as for the ﬁrst of the
ten runs. While (d) covers the whole simulation run, (a), (b) and (c) results were calculated only for the
simulation time when the lipid-anchor was seen in water (W) or in lipids (L).
37
==PAGE:44==
6
Results and Discussion
The results of this work are split into hydration data, partitioning data, structural data and transport
data.
Each one of these categories include properties which are associated with complementary
aspects of the partitioning problem.
In particular, in section 6.1 the hydration of the lipid-anchors is characterised in terms of calculations
of the solvent accessible surface area and counting of water molecules within the hydration shells.
The results obtained from the hydration analysis were then used to present the partitioning data, in
section 6.2, where the partition is characterised according to the deﬁnition of three well-distinguishable
regions (and associated time regimes): outside the lipid bilayer (hydrophilic regime), inside of it
(hydrophobic regime) and while transitioning into it (transitory regime). These have been extensively
characterised and commented.
In section 6.3 structural ﬂuctuations are characterised in terms of RMSD and RMSF values, presented
side-by-side in the same table to possibly discover any diﬀerence in the ﬂuctuations with time as
averaged over atoms (RMSD) versus averaged over time frames for each single atom (RMSF).
In section 6.4, transport data are discussed and cross-compared. Diﬀusive motions were characterised
in terms of traveled distances and diﬀusion coeﬃcients along the three dimensional space.
For section 6.5, an outlook of all the results is provided to the reader.
The main ﬁndings are
here mentioned and brieﬂy commented.
38
==PAGE:45==
6.1
Hydration Data:
Solvent Accessible Surface Area and Hydration
Shells
The capability of a molecule to be hydrated by surrounding water molecules is a central aspect to
be considered when designing and analysing molecules for medical applications. Drug molecules to
be targeted towards cellular membranes require their hydropathy index to be properly engineered so
that the molecule travels smoothly and undisturbed towards the lipid interface, but then favourably
partition into it to manifest its desired eﬀects.
The larger is the number of waters that tend to be bound to a molecule, the more it should be
diﬃcult to get rid of them while penetrating a lipid interface in order to make lipid-lipid interactions
prevail and stabilise the molecule into the bilayer.
The table in Fig.
13 collects average values, standard deviations, minimal and maximal values
for both waters counting (output of watershell script) and SASA (output of surf script).
The
data are displayed for the four lipid-anchors and the counting of the water molecules was split into
the number of waters within 3.4 ˚A (ﬁrst/lower hydration shell) and within 5.0 ˚A (second/upper
hydration shell). All the numbers represent the average values calculated over the ten simulations
per lipid-anchor.
The columns ∆lower, ∆upper and ∆SASA represent, respectively, the average loss of waters in the
lower shell while transferring from the outside to the inside of the bilayer, the average loss of waters
in the upper shell while transferring from the outside to the inside of the bilayer and the average
contraction in ˚A
2 of the solvent-accessible surface area.
Figure 13: SASA and water molecules counting for the four lipid-anchors. The values represent
averages over ten simulations per lipid-anchor. The darker shades of blue and violet indicate the
inside of the bilayer, while the lighter blue and violet the outside.
39
==PAGE:46==
The average values of the number of water molecules inside the bilayer suggest an almost doubled
hydration from COL to EST, with the ester which in lipids is averagely bound to 5.4 water molecules
in its lower hydration shell and to 11.4 in its upper shell. This eﬀect can only be explained by the
larger hydrophilicity of EST when compared to COL, as a consequence of its more polar head group
(see Fig. 1). In fact, apart from their heads, COL and EST are indeed equivalent.
On the other hand, EST, HEX and PEN’s capability of being hydrated was comparable, averaging
to about 6 water molecules bound in the lower shell and 11-12 in the upper shell. The standard
deviations follow the trend of their associated averages. However, the absolute hydration of the four
molecules is not too diﬀerent. COL is still the least hydrated on a water-per-atom level, but the
reader should acknowledge the diﬀerent dimensions of COL, EST, HEX and PEN. While COL is
made of only 74 atoms and EST of 80 atoms, HEX molecule is made of 110 atoms and PEN of
116. This implies that 0.04 water molecules solvate a single atom of COL in the lower shell, while
0.07, 0.05 and 0.05 solvate a single atom of EST, HEX and PEN in the same shell. Therefore, the
absolute solvation of PEN is comparable to the absolute solvation of COL and it is EST to appear
the most hydrated on an atomistic level.
By comparing the number of water molecules in the lower shell with the number in the upper
shell for all the four anchors inside the bilayer, it can be seen that this number is doubled in the
distance range 3.4-5.0 ˚A from the molecules’ surfaces. The same trend was reported for the number
of bound waters when the molecules were found outside the bilayer, suggesting that water mean
distribution was not aﬀected by the bilayer penetration.
Minima and maxima values also follow the same trend: both the minimum number of waters and
the maximum number of waters doubled in the upper shell with respect to the number in the lower
shell, and for both the hydrophilic and the hydrophobic region.
A further conﬁrmation of the constant, mean water distribution around the lipid-anchors was
provided by the ∆lower and ∆upper drops.
The drop in waters counting in the upper shell due
to penetration doubled the drop in the lower shell. The largest absolute drops were registered for
the lower and upper shells of PEN, respectively measured at around 72 water molecules and around
138 water molecules, respectively.
As also the averaged SASA values progressively increased in the order COL, EST, HEX and PEN,
a much more interesting data was represented by ∆SASA. HEX’s SASA dropped by 883 ˚A
2 when
the molecule slid into the bilayer, PEN’s SASA dropped by 894.4 ˚A
2, COL’s SASA by 464.9 ˚A
2 and
EST’s SASA by 583.3 ˚A
2.
Considering the similar structures of COL with EST and of HEX with PEN, it makes more sense to
compare their SASA’s drops as couples. Thus, while PEN’s SASA drop was only 1.3 % higher than
HEX’s SASA drop, EST molecule lost 25.5 % more solvent-accessible surface area when compared
to the loss of COL. This result indicates that the esteriﬁcation of COL that becomes EST produces
a much larger relative de-hydration with respect to the chemical diﬀerences which cause the alkyl
tails separation of HEX to be increased in PEN.
To better validate the SASA and waters counting analysis, for each one of the four candidates
it was picked the simulation in which the average over its whole trajectories was the closest to the
average over the ten simulations, as displayed in the Avg column of Fig. 13. Thus, this chosen
simulation was assumed to be the most representative of the candidate molecule’s biological SASA
and hydration shells and the four simulations selected as explained could be plotted together to
cross-compare macro trends among the diﬀerent candidates. These plots are shown in Appendix A.
40
==PAGE:47==
6.2
Partitioning Data: Timeframes Outside and Inside bilayer
A ﬁrst level analysis of lipid-anchors’ behaviour at the water/lipid interface was carried out by
identifying the hydrophilic/hydrophobic partitioning in terms of simulation time frames where the
molecule was observed (with VMD) fully outside or fully inside the POPC bilayer, respectively.
A more accurate analysis of the partitioning was allowed by the association of these visualised
trajectories with the corresponding hydration regime in SASA plots (see Fig.11), which helped in
deﬁning three well-distinguished regions: hydrophilic, hydrophobic and also transitory.
The partition time frames are reported in the table of Fig. 14, where the observations are organised
as per number of the run (columns) and per candidate of interest (rows). For each molecule, three
partition time frames were identiﬁed: hydrophilic (light yellow), hydrophobic (dark yellow) and
transitory (light grey). For the hydrophobic frames, also the leaﬂet was speciﬁed, where + indicates
a molecule oriented with its polar head-pointing axis vector parallel to the bilayer normal (Z axis),
while - antiparallel to it.
The last column reports the partition times and the preferred leaﬂet, as a percentage, as averages
over all the ten 500ns-runs, therefore representing the core results.
Figure 14: Fraction of time over 500 ns spent by COL, EST, HEX and PEN outside (light yellow)
and inside (dark yellow) the bilayer and in the transition region, for each one of the ten simulations.
41
==PAGE:48==
Before discussing the values in the AVG column, it is worth to notice the three odd runs, i.e. the
4th COL run, the 4th PEN run and the 9th PEN run.
For the entire 4th run, cholesterol molecule kept tumbling in the aqueous region outside the bilayer.
This observation represents a very rare event, as in the other nine runs cholesterol enters the bilayer
quite early on the 500 ns timescale.
The second anomalous run is the 4th run of PEN, where the molecule was observed to ﬂip between
the two leaﬂets, by spending 131.5 ns in the lower leaﬂet, 139.7 ns in the upper leaﬂet and ﬁnally
stabilising in the lower leaﬂet again for the remaining 201 ns of simulation (overall 472.2 ns in the
hydrophobic region). Flip-ﬂop events have been largely reported to be rare for cholesterol [44] but
PEN is diﬀerent because of its larger and more ﬂexible structure. The trajectories of the two alkyl
tails of PEN were indeed observed to always follow independent pathways. This implies that if the
tails split apart in the middle of the bilayer, it is possible that the lipid-lipid interactions between
one tail and the lipids of one leaﬂet alternatively prevail over the lipid-lipid interactions between the
other tail and the lipids of the opposing leaﬂet.
The third odd run is the 9th run of PEN. By following the trajectories with VMD, the molecule
was seen to transport itself from the outside to the inside of the bilayer in just one single frame,
precisely from the 52nd to the 53rd, equivalent to the smallest transition residence of just 0.1 ns.
On the other hand, in all the other 39 runs the molecules took some time before settling completely
in the lipid region, often displaying disordered conﬁgurations at the interface. The transition region
residence time was measured averaging to 6.3 ns for COL, 9.8 ns for EST, 4.6 for HEX and 4.3 for
PEN. However, only free energies studies could identify a steep drop in the lipid barrier free energy,
possibly corresponding to a quasi-instantaneous formation of a cavity where PEN can quickly jump
in.
Interestingly, while COL and EST preferred to stick to the lower leaﬂet (67% and a 60%), HEX chose
the upper leaﬂet with a 60% probability and PEN was indiﬀerent. Considering the pure POPC and
symmetric composition of the bilayer, it is expected these percentages to converge to 50% for a larger
number of independent simulations. This assumption is also supported by the observation that no
leaﬂet was preferred over the other when considering the conﬁguration with which the molecule
entered the bilayer, i.e. either front penetration with its polar head or reverse penetration with its
hydrophobic tail or everything else in between. Also, in some cases one leaﬂet was bypassed and the
molecule ﬁnished in the opposing leaﬂet, but also this phenomenon was not inﬂuenced by the upper
or lower nature of the leaﬂet.
In the AVG column a clear trend arises: all the four candidates showed a hydrophobic/hydrophilic
partitioning greater than one: all the four lipid-anchors, over 500 ns-long simulations, preferred to
stick to the lipid bilayer rather than tumbling in water. This demonstrates not only that 500 ns
simulations are suﬃciently long to capture the whole penetration dynamics, but also that all the
four molecules settle in the bilayer quite early and seem to remain stable in it for long.
Of the four candidates, the worst performing is HEX, not only because of the lowest partitioning
in the lipid environment (only 334.2 ns) but also because of its highest partitioning in the aqueous
environment (149.7 ns). This result disqualiﬁes the assumption that two alkyl tails would provide
a better lipid-anchor (because of enhanced lipid-lipid interactions) than a single-tail sterol-derived
molecule such as COL and EST. The second worst candidate was EST, with a residence time in the
bilayer averaging to 341.2 ns. On the other hand, COL performed strong, showing a great aﬃnity
for the lipid environment, spending on average 388.1 ns in it.
42
==PAGE:49==
In conclusion, PEN resulted to be the molecule with the highest hydrophobic partitioning. This
molecule spent on average 432.3 ns inside the hydrophobic region. However, its most interesting
feature was the absolute lowest hydrophilic partitioning among the four anchors: only about 52 ns
were spent in water, more than 2.5 times less than COL, EST and HEX spent on average outside
of the membrane. This implies that PEN’s transition regime lasted only 4.3 ns.
From an engineering point of view, this result suggests that proper chemical modiﬁcations could
easily make PEN even more lipophilic, further enhancing its hydrophobic partitioning and transforming
it into a very eﬀective lipid-anchor for nanomedicine applications. For comparison, the time frames
when COL, EST and HEX appeared to be at the bilayer interface lasted respectively 6.3 ns, 9.8 ns
and 4.6 ns because of their much higher hydrophilic partitioning when compared to PEN.
43
==PAGE:50==
6.3
Structural Data: RMSD and RMSF
The RMSD calculation is one of the most reliable tools for structural diﬀerences identiﬁcation. It
represents the time series of the atom-positional root-mean-square deviation of the set of atoms
forming the candidate of interest with respect to a reference structure which was here deﬁned as the
candidate’s structure in the ﬁrst frame of either the ”hydrophilic” or ”hydrophobic” trajectories.
The RMSF calculation characterises structural ﬂexibility and it is an intrinsically diﬀerent quantity
from RMSD. It is expressed as atom-positional root-mean-square ﬂuctuations around average position
and the time series is over a set of pre-selected frames.
In the table of Fig. 15, RMSD’s averages, standard deviations, minimum and maximum values
are reported for COL, EST, HEX and PEN as the averages over all the ten runs per molecule and
along the trajectories where the molecules were in water (light green) as well as along the trajectories
where the molecules were in lipids (dark green). For each candidate, RMSD statistics is sided by
RMSF statistics, where light pink-coloured rows relate to the hydrophilic region, while the dark
pink-coloured rows to the hydrophobic region.
It is important to observe that despite diﬀerences in RMSD values testify for structural variations
along the trajectories, the numbers themselves are to be considered relative in the sense that the
reference structure with respect to which the calculation is performed is diﬀerent from one molecule to
the other. Therefore, large RMSD values do not represent here an issue as they would if computing
the RMSD with respect to a reference frame which is supposed to reproduce a correct pose in a
docking study, where the lower are the values, the better is the accuracy.
Figure 15: RMSD and RMSF averages, standard deviations, minimal and maximal values for the
four lipid-anchors. For each molecule, also the atoms which registered the minimal and maximal
ﬂuctuations were reported.
44
==PAGE:51==
The ﬁrst column shows increasingly higher RMSD average values for COL, EST, HEX and PEN,
respectively. While COL and EST RMSDs are even lower than 1.5 ˚A, HEX settles at 4.1 ˚A and
PEN at 4.6 ˚A inside the bilayer. This can be addressable to the planar and more rigid structures of
the steroid-derived molecules versus the highly ﬂexible alkyl tails of HEX and PEN.
In particular, the larger conformational freedom of PEN with respect to HEX, as represented by 0.5
˚A-larger RMSD value, is the consequence of three additional C −C bonds separating the two ether
groups in PEN versus in HEX (see Fig. 2). For this reason, wider atomic ﬂuctuations were expected
for the atoms of the tails because of the reduction of possible steric clashes in the region in between
the tails. In fact, RMSF average in lipids for PEN is 3.5 ˚A, while for HEX only 2.6 ˚A.
Despite it is not reported in Fig. 15 table, also RMSD calculations with the hydrogens excluded
from the anchors’ structures were performed. As expected, by excluding the hydrogens from the
calculation, the RMSD displayed slightly smaller values than their hydrogens-included counterparts
for all the candidates analysed. However, hydrogens contributions to the simulated deviations were
diﬀerent for the four molecules: while for EST their presence accounted for 0.24 ˚A diﬀerence, for HEX
the diﬀerence was 0.35 ˚A. This observation is coherent with the highest hydrophilic partitioning of
HEX discussed in the previous section. Indeed, it is possible that the hydrogens in HEX pull the
molecule in order to best form hydrogen bonds with the surrounding waters and that their exclusion
reduce the molecule’s RMSD to a greater extent than for the other three candidates.
Interestingly, the standard deviations of RMSF averages are larger than the standard deviations
of RMSD averages for COL and EST, despite their RMSD averages are larger than their RMSF
averages. On the other hand, the opposite is true for HEX and PEN, for which both the RMSD
averages and their standard deviations are larger than RMSF averages and related standard deviations.
The minimum RMSD values for the candidates fell into a range of 0 to 0.2 ˚A with no noteworthy
diﬀerence and they always occurred at the very beginning of the trajectory, as could have been
predicted because of the choice of their respective ﬁrst frame structures as the reference structures.
On the contrary, the maximum values diﬀered a lot because of the quite diﬀerent structures of the
four molecules that make them converge at very diﬀerent RMSD average values further along the
trajectory.
However, as previously mentioned, the RMSD value alone cannot be considered a high-quality
index of the stability of a molecule inside a lipid environment. In fact, a molecule can still achieve a
conﬁguration which might be deviated a lot from its starting, reference structure, but that is much
more stable in lipids than the stable conﬁguration in lipids of another molecule which is much more
similar to its reference structure.
The RMSF calculation allowed to compare the ﬂuctuations of the same atoms of the same residue
when the latter was located outside versus inside the membrane, therefore measuring the inﬂuence
of the hydrophilic versus the hydrophobic environments on the molecule’s ﬂexibility.
Following the trend reported for the RMSD values, also RMSF values were seen to be increasing
from COL to EST to HEX to PEN, as visible in the Avg column of Fig. 15. Curiously, the atomic
ﬂuctuations appeared to be slightly dampened by the surrounding lipids when compared to the
outside the membrane only for HEX molecule, going from 3.1 to 2.6 ˚A. On the contrary, COL,
EST and PEN RMSF’s averages did not diﬀer at all among the two partition regions and even their
standard deviations were constant across the bilayer.
45
==PAGE:52==
Minimal RMSF values ranged only from 0.2 to 1.8 ˚A in lipids, versus the wider range from 0.2
to 2.1 ˚A in water. For the maxima, values ranged from 2.4 to 6.2 ˚A in lipids and similarly from 2.4
to 6.4 ˚A in water. It is noteworthy to observe how RMSF minima occurred unambiguously at the
22nd atom for COL and EST, while for EST maxima were reported for two diﬀerent atoms in one
region with respect to the other, as also both minima and maxima of HEX and as maxima of PEN.
To better validate the RMSD (and RMSF) analysis, for each one of the four candidates it was
picked the simulation in which the RMSD (and RMSF) average over its whole trajectories was
the closest to the average over the ten simulations, as displayed in the Avg column of Fig. 15.
Thus, this chosen simulation was assumed to be the most representative of the candidate molecule’s
biological RMSD (and RMSF) and the four simulations selected as explained could be plotted
together to cross-compare macro trends among the diﬀerent candidates. This was done for both the
”hydrophobic” and the ”hydrophilic” RMSD (and RMSF). These plots are shown in Appendix B.
46
==PAGE:53==
6.4
Transport Data: Diﬀusion Coeﬃcients and Travel Distances
Diﬀusive motions of the four candidates were characterised by the mean square displacements (MSD)
calculations as averaged over all the atoms of the residue of interest and using the distance traveled
from the initial positions. MSD plots were produced for both the hydrophilic and the hydrophobic
region with the purpose of revealing the inﬂuence of the surrounding environment on the molecules’
diﬀusive capabilities.
MSD values are not reported explicitly in the table of Fig. 16, which instead presents the diﬀusion
coeﬃcients (D) as derived from the MSD via the Einstein relation (see Transport Properties in
Section 2.8 and formula (39)). D are derived for the three cartesian directions from which an overall
coeﬃcient Dr is also extracted and reported. The last two columns of the table contain the average
and the maximal distances traveled by the molecules, as averaged over the ten runs for each one of
the four and measured in ˚A/ps units. To evaluate whether the diﬀusive motions were anisotropic or
isotropic, standard deviations were also reported, to more accurately compare the averages values.
Figure 16: Diﬀusion constants along the three directions are shown along with the average and
maximal travel distances for COL, EST, HEX and PEN. The entries of the table are averages over
ten simulations per candidate. Dark grey rows relate to the hydrophobic environment, while light
grey to the hydrophilic environment.
The ﬁrst column, Dr, clearly evidences the much higher mobility of the candidates in the aqueous
region versus the lipid region. As this result was obviously expected, it is worthy to quantify how
higher Dr is in water with respect to inside the bilayer. While for COL it is around 11 times larger,
for HEX 15 times larger and for PEN 10 times larger, for EST is even 27 times larger, with Dr in
water measured at 32.4 10−5cm2/s and in lipid at only 1.2 10−5cm2/s.
47
==PAGE:54==
By looking also at Dx, Dy and Dz for EST, this result is expected to be the consequence of the
absolute smallest diﬀusion coeﬃcient registered for the bilayer region (0.2 10−5cm2/s) and the by far
largest Dy for the hydrophilic region (71.3 10−5cm2/s). Thus, this very constrained diﬀusion along
the x direction within the POPC lipids makes EST the most still molecule among the four candidates.
It is also interesting to observe that with the exception of the above mentioned Dx in lipids for
EST, the tiniest diﬀusion coeﬃcients are all displayed along the z direction, which clearly seemed to
be the most constrained axis in both the aqueous and the lipids regions for all the candidates except
COL, whose z-motion in water was captured with a diﬀusion coeﬃcient around 5 times higher than
the second highest Dz, registered for HEX.
This abnormally large Dz for COL in water conﬁrmed the need to further compare the standard
deviations. Indeed, the large Dz of COL in water, was measured with a standard deviation of 26.3.
This means that within such large range, COL’s Dz in water resulted to be comparable to EST,
HEX and PEN’s Dz in water.
Similar arguments are valid for Dx and Dy, as their related standard deviations assure that the
average values lay within the same range, proving the isotropy of diﬀusion along the x and y
directions not only in the hydrophilic region, but also in the hydrophobic region, as it should be
considering the homogeneous composition of the bilayer made of only POPC lipids.
The reader should bear in mind that some standard deviations imply the existence of negative values
for the diﬀusion coeﬃcients, which is physically unrealistic. This is because of the way diffusion
command in cpptraj calculate the diﬀusion coeﬃcients from the MSD. The linear regression method
caused the slope of the ﬁts to be negative when the molecules within the relatively small box returned
back to their initial position.
However, this issue is expected to be solved by either enlarging the box to extend the diﬀusion
path or by increasing the number of atoms to reduce the inherent stochasticity. Indeed, as the
diﬀusion is calculated from initial positions only, the results would be most sensible only when
averaged over many atoms.
In Appendix C, Fig. 25, the overall diﬀusion constants are compared for the four lipid-anchors
as per the simulation chosen to represent them, according to the same strategy followed for the
SASA, hydration shells, RMSD and RMSF analysis.
48
==PAGE:55==
6.5
Results Outlook
The hydration analysis revealed that EST was the most hydrated molecule on a waters-per-atom
level.
At the same atomistic level, COL resulted to be the least hydrated.
However, despite
larger overall hydration of HEX and PEN, their waters-per-atom counting was comparable to
the waters-per-atom for COL. Therefore, the water counting data did not found any candidate
signiﬁcantly more de-hydrated than the others inside the POPC bilayers.
Also, the water mean distribution over the two shells was not at all aﬀected by the penetration
of the bilayer, i.e. the number of bound waters in the upper shells was always twice the respective
number in the lower shell, regardless of the partitioning region.
When comparing in pairs the ∆SASA of COL with EST and of HEX with PEN (couples of molecules
with comparable structures), EST showed by far the largest solvent accessible surface contraction.
On the contrary, PEN’s and HEX’s ∆SASA were comparable.
The partitioning analysis discovered three anomalous runs among the 40 simulations: 4th COL
run, 4th PEN run and 9th PEN run. In the 4th run, cholesterol was not able to enter the lipid
bilayer, while in the 4th run of PEN, the molecule ﬂipped back-and-forth among the two leaﬂets.
PEN’s 9th simulation revealed an instantaneous transition into the bilayer, still not explainable.
Overall, the candidate which spent the least time anchored to the lipids is HEX, thereby disqualifying
the assumption that two alkyl tails would provide a better lipid-anchor than single-tailed molecules
such as COL and EST. This observation was also supported by the relatively very strong anchoring
of COL to the lipids. PEN resulted to be the most sticking anchor to the lipids, showing the highest
lipophilicity, the lowest hydrophilicity and the by far shortest transition time across the interface.
RMSD and RMSF calculations revealed that the larger the molecule, the higher the ﬂuctuations.
Thereby, PEN was quite more ﬂexible than HEX and signiﬁcantly more than EST and COL. For
COL and EST, it was also observed that the values of RMSF varied more over ten runs than the
values of RMSD, despite RMSF averages being lower than RMSD averages. The opposite was seen
for HEX and PEN.
Unfortunately, RMSF calculations demonstrated that the candidates were not necessarily more
stable and less ﬂuctuating in lipids. Indeed, the lipids considerably dampened the atomistic ﬂuctuatio
ns only for HEX, showing that candidates’ structures ﬂexibility is not generally too aﬀected by the
lipids.
As EST was seen in the hydration studies to lose the most number of waters and solvent accessible
surface when sliding into the bilayer, diﬀusion studies showed that this was accompanied by the
largest drop in average overall diﬀusion coeﬃcient, proving EST to be the most ﬁxed lipid-anchor
inside the hydrophobic region.
Moreover, the diﬀusion-related quantities conﬁrmed the expected stillness of all the anchors along
z axis, because of their polar heads striving to keep contact with the water molecules outside the
bilayers, and the isotropy of the diﬀusion along x and y, both inside and outside the bilayer.
49
==PAGE:56==
7
Conclusions
This master thesis project focused on the partitioning into pure POPC bilayers of four lipid-anchors,
pair-wise compared according to their structures. Overall, the molecular dynamics simulations, as
used and set up in this study, proved to be an eﬀective method to tackle the partitioning problem,
which is currently of extreme relevance when designing drug molecules or dyes for nanomedicine
applications.
However, the results outlined in section 6.5 and detailed in sections 6.1-6.4, have not revealed any
signiﬁcantly more eﬀective lipid-anchor than the others. Despite this, many experimental aspects
and expected biological properties were conﬁrmed by the molecular simulations.
The barrier represented by the water/lipids interface was proved to be relatively very small for all
the four anchors, which penetrated and stabilised in the bilayer relatively quickly, as proved by the
steep drops of solvent accessible surface area, bound waters and diﬀusion coeﬃcients. Interestingly,
a few water molecules were still found to be bound to the anchors even when the latter was stably
buried in the lipids. However, RMSD and RMSF calculations showed that ﬂuctuations were still
comparably present within the bilayer with respect to the outside of it.
The time constraints of this project unfortunately have not allowed to implement two strategies
which could more unambiguously evidence the diﬀerences in the partitioning of the four anchors.
First, it should be observed that the overall strong preference of the molecules to spend time
inside the bilayer rather than outside of it limited drastically the sampling of conﬁgurations in the
hydrophilic region. This inherently aﬀected the statistics for the data recorded when the molecules
tumbled inside the water, especially for the diﬀusion coeﬃcients which were computed from starting
positions. This could be improved by collecting more data in the hydrophilic region, by simulating
for longer times the molecule without interactions with hydrophobic regions.
Second, and last but not least, the results here obtained with standard molecular dynamics simulations
should be backed up by free energies studies. These free energy calculation techniques, very brieﬂy
mentioned in section 2.8, are very powerful and allow to investigate the thermodynamics of the
partitioning process, as well as to quantify the force required to extract anchors from lipid bilayers,
providing a valuable benchmark for designing eﬀective lipid-anchors, which ideally do not leak from
artiﬁcial membranes of nano-carriers even under physiological conditions.
50
==PAGE:57==
References
[1] A. J. Brown and L. J. Sharpe, Cholesterol Synthesis, sixth edit ed.
Elsevier, 2015. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-63438-2.00011-0
[2] M. Korber,
I. Klein,
and G. Daum,
“Steryl ester synthesis,
storage and hydrolysis:
A contribution to sterol homeostasis,” Biochimica et Biophysica Acta - Molecular and
Cell Biology of Lipids,
vol. 1862,
no. 12,
pp. 1534–1545,
2017. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbalip.2017.09.002
[3] V. Cartocci, M. Servadio, V. Trezza, and V. Pallottini, “Can Cholesterol Metabolism
Modulation Aﬀect Brain Function and Behavior?” Journal of Cellular Physiology, vol. 232,
no. 2, pp. 281–286, 2017.
[4] F. D. Porter and G. E. Herman, “Malformation syndromes caused by disorders of cholesterol
synthesis,” Journal of Lipid Research, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 6–34, 2011. [Online]. Available:
http://www.jlr.org/lookup/doi/10.1194/jlr.R009548
[5] A. Buchanan, “What ’ s So Special About,” Lipids, vol. 10, no. April 2014, pp. 37–41, 2013.
[6] G. S. Ginsburg, D. Atkinson, and D. M. Small, “Physical properties of cholesteryl esters.”
Progress in lipid research, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 135–167, 1984.
[7] Alberts and Johnson, Molecular Biology of The Cell.
Garland Science, 2015.
[8] C. Decker, A. Fahr, J. Kuntsche, and S. May, “Selective partitioning of cholesterol and a
model drug into liposomes of varying size,” Chemistry and Physics of Lipids, vol. 165, no. 5,
pp. 520–529, 2012. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2012.04.001
[9] O. G. Mouritsen, “Lipids, curvature, and nano-medicine,” European Journal of Lipid Science
and Technology, vol. 113, no. 10, pp. 1174–1187, 2011.
[10] J. J. Rossi, “A cholesterol connection in RNAi,” Nature, vol. 432, no. 7014, pp. 155–156, 2004.
[11] D. Bassolino-Klimas, H. E. Alper, and T. R. Stouch, “Mechanism of Solute Diﬀusion through
Lipid Bilayer Membranes by Molecular Dynamics Simulation,” Journal of the American
Chemical Society, vol. 117, no. 14, pp. 4118–4129, 1995.
[12] S.
J.
Marrink
and
H.
J.
C.
Berendsen,
“Permeation
Process
of
Small
Molecules
across
Lipid
Membranes
Studied
by
Molecular
Dynamics
Simulations,”
The
Journal
of Physical Chemistry,
vol. 100,
no. 41,
pp. 16 729–16 738,
1996. [Online]. Available:
http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/jp952956f
[13] A. Pohorille, M. H. New, K. Schweighofer, and M. A. Wilson, “Insights from computer
simulations into the interaction of small molecules with lipid bilayers,” Current Topics in
Membranes, vol. 48, no. Membrane Permeability, pp. 49–76, 1999.
[14] D. Bemporad, C. Luttmann, and J. W. Essex, “Computer simulation of small moleculle
permeation across a lipid bilayer:
Dependence on bilayer properties and solute volume,
size, and cross-sectional area,” Biophysical Journal, vol. 87, no. 1, pp. 1–13, 2004. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1529/biophysj.103.030601
[15] M. B. Boggara and R. Krishnamoorti, “Partitioning of nonsteroidal antiinﬂammatory drugs
in lipid membranes: A molecular dynamics simulation study,” Biophysical Journal, vol. 98,
no. 4, pp. 586–595, 2010. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.2009.10.046
51
==PAGE:58==
[16] T. Ravindra, D. Malcolm, and B. Anderson, “Functional Group Dependence of Solute
Partitioning to Various Locations within a DOPC Bilayer:
A Comparison of Molecular
Dynamics Simulations with Experiment,” International Journal of Drug Development and
Research, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 26–33, 2011.
[17] G. Van Meer, D. R. Voelker, and G. W. Feigenson, “Membrane lipids: Where they are and how
they behave,” Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 112–124, 2008.
[18] S. Endo, B. I. Escher, and K. U. Goss, “Capacities of membrane lipids to accumulate neutral
organic chemicals,” Environmental Science and Technology, vol. 45, no. 14, pp. 5912–5921, 2011.
[19] L. M. Loura, A. M. Do Canto, and J. Martins, “Sensing hydration and behavior of pyrene
in POPC and POPC/cholesterol bilayers:
A molecular dynamics study,” Biochimica et
Biophysica Acta - Biomembranes, vol. 1828, no. 3, pp. 1094–1101, 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamem.2012.12.014
[20] A. Klamt, U. Huniar, S. Spycher, and J. Keldenich, “COSMOmic: A mechanistic approach
to the calculation of membrane-water partition coeﬃcients and internal distributions within
membranes and micelles,” Journal of Physical Chemistry B, vol. 112, no. 38, pp. 12 148–12 157,
2008.
[21] S. Jakobtorweihen, A. C. Zuniga, T. Ingram, T. Gerlach, F. J. Keil, and I. Smirnova, “Predicting
solute partitioning in lipid bilayers: Free energies and partition coeﬃcients from molecular
dynamics simulations and COSMOmic,” Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 141, no. 4, 2014.
[22] D. Yordanova, E. Ritter, T. Gerlach, J. H. Jensen, I. Smirnova, and S. Jakobtorweihen,
“Solute Partitioning in Micelles: Combining Molecular Dynamics Simulations, COSMOmic,
and Experiments,” Journal of Physical Chemistry B, vol. 121, no. 23, pp. 5794–5809, 2017.
[23] R. Salomon-Ferrer, D. A. Case, and R. C. Walker, “An overview of the Amber biomolecular
simulation package,” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Molecular Science, vol. 3,
no. 2, pp. 198–210, 2013.
[24] C. J. Dickson, B. D. Madej, ˚A. A. Skjevik, R. M. Betz, K. Teigen, I. R. Gould, and R. C.
Walker, “Lipid14: The amber lipid force ﬁeld,” Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation,
vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 865–879, 2014.
[25] B. R. Brooks, C. L. B. III, J. A. D. Mackerell, L. Nilsson, R. J. Petrella, B. Roux, Y. Won,
G. Archontis, C. Bartels, S. Boresch, A. Caﬂisch, L. Caves, Q. Cui, A. R. Dinner, M. Feig,
S. Fischer, J. Gao, M. I. Hodoscek, and M. Karplus, “CHARMM: The Biomolecular Simulation
Program B.” Journal of computational chemistry, vol. 30, no. 10, pp. 1545–1614, 2009.
[26] S. Jo, J. B. Lim, J. B. Klauda, and W. Im, “CHARMM-GUI membrane builder for mixed
bilayers and its application to yeast membranes,” Biophysical Journal, vol. 97, no. 1, pp.
50–58, 2009. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.2009.04.013
[27] W. L. Jorgensen, J. Chandrasekhar, J. D. Madura, R. W. Impey, and M. L. Klein, “Comparison
of simple potential functions for simulating liquid water,” The Journal of Chemical Physics,
vol. 79, no. 2, pp. 926–935, 1983.
[28] I. S. Joung and T. E. Cheatham, “Determination of alkali and halide monovalent ion parameters
for use in explicitly solvated biomolecular simulations,” Journal of Physical Chemistry B, vol.
112, no. 30, pp. 9020–9041, 2008.
[29] I. S. Joung and T. E. Cheatham III, “Halide Ions Using Water-Model-Speciﬁc Ion Parameters,”
Journal of Physical Chemistry B, vol. 113, no. 40, pp. 13 279–13 290, 2009.
52
==PAGE:59==
[30] J. M. Wang, R. M. Wolf, J. W. Caldwell, P. a. Kollman, and D. a. Case, “Development and
testing of a general amber force ﬁeld,” J. Comput. Chem., vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 1157–1174, 2004.
[31] B. Jojart and T. Martinek, “Performance of the General Amber Force Field in Modeling
Aqueous POPC Membrane Bilayers.” J Comput Chem, vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 2051–2058, 2007.
[32] L. Rosso and I. Gould, “Structure and Dynamics of Phospholipid Bilayers Using Recently
Developed General All-Atom Force Fields.” Journal of computational chemistry, vol. 29, no. 10,
pp. 24–37, 2008.
[33] A. Jakalian, B. L. Bush, D. B. Jack, and C. I. Bayly, “Fast, Eﬃcient Generation of High-Quality
Atomic Charges. AM1-BCC Model: I. Method,” Journal of Computational Chemistry, vol. 21,
no. 2, pp. 132–146, 2000.
[34] A. Jakalian, D. B. Jack, and C. I. Bayly, “Fast, eﬃcient generation of high-quality atomic
charges. AM1-BCC model: II. Parameterization and validation,” Journal of Computational
Chemistry, vol. 23, no. 16, pp. 1623–1641, 2002.
[35] C. W. Hopkins,
S. Le Grand,
R. C. Walker,
and A. E. Roitberg,
“Long-time-step
molecular dynamics through hydrogen mass repartitioning,” Journal of Chemical Theory and
Computation, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 1864–1874, 2015.
[36] S. Le Grand, A. W. G¨otz, and R. C. Walker, “SPFP: Speed without compromise - A
mixed precision model for GPU accelerated molecular dynamics simulations,” Computer
Physics
Communications,
vol.
184,
no.
2,
pp.
374–380,
2013.
[Online].
Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2012.09.022
[37] D. Xu, M. J. Williamson, and R. C. Walker, Advancements in molecular dynamics simulations
of biomolecules on graphical processing units.
Elsevier Masson SAS, 2010, vol. 6, no. C.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1574-1400(10)06001-9
[38] (2016) Amber home page. [Online]. Available: http://ambermd.org.
[39] W.
Humphrey,
A.
Dalke,
and
K.
Schulten,
“VMD:
Visual
Molecular
Dynamics,”
Journal of Molecular Graphics,
vol. 14,
no. 1,
pp. 33–38,
1996. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0263785596000185
[40] D. R. Roe and T. E. Cheatham, “PTRAJ and CPPTRAJ: Software for processing and analysis
of molecular dynamics trajectory data,” Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation, vol. 9,
no. 7, pp. 3084–3095, 2013.
[41] B. D. Madej, I. R. Gould, and R. C. Walker, “A Parameterization of Cholesterol for Mixed Lipid
Bilayer Simulation within the Amber Lipid14 Force Field,” Journal of Physical Chemistry B,
vol. 119, no. 38, pp. 12 424–12 435, 2015.
[42] E. L. Wu, X. Cheng, S. Jo, H. Rui, K. C. Song, E. M. D´avila-Contreras, Y. Qi, J. Lee,
V. Monje-Galvan, R. M. Venable, J. B. Klauda, and W. Im, “CHARMM-GUI membrane builder
toward realistic biological membrane simulations,” Journal of Computational Chemistry, vol. 35,
no. 27, pp. 1997–2004, 2014.
[43] J. Weiser, P. S. Shenkin, and W. C. Still, “Approximate atomic surfaces from linear
combinations of pairwise overlaps (LCPO),” Journal of Computational Chemistry, vol. 20, no. 2,
pp. 217–230, 1999.
[44] S. Jo, H. Rui, J. B. Lim, J. B. Klauda, and W. Im, “Cholesterol ﬂip-ﬂop: Insights from free
energy simulation studies,” Journal of Physical Chemistry B, vol. 114, no. 42, pp. 13 342–13 348,
2010.
53
==PAGE:60==
A
Solvent Accessible Surface Area and Upper Hydration Shells
Figure 17: SASA statistics. (L) means in lipids, (W) in water. The ﬁrst row indicates the number of run out of the
ten. In yellow are highlighted the run whose SASA record was chosen to be plotted in Fig. 19 for cross-comparisons
among the four candidates
54
==PAGE:61==
Figure 18: SHELL statistics. (L) means in lipids, (W) in water. The ﬁrst row indicates the number of run out of the
ten. In yellow are highlighted the run whose water counting record (only upper shell) was chosen to be plotted in Fig.
20 for cross-comparisons among the four candidates. For each statistical variable variable (Avg, Sd, min, max) the
upper row refers to the upper shell, the lower to the lower shell.
55
==PAGE:62==
Figure 19: SASA.
56
==PAGE:63==
Figure 20: SHELL.
57
==PAGE:64==
B
Root-Mean-Square Deviations and Fluctuations
Figure 21: RMSD and RMSF statistics. (L) means in lipids, (W) in water. The ﬁrst row indicates the number of run
out of the ten. In yellow are highlighted the run whose RMSD record (green) and RMSF record (pink) were chosen to
be plotted in Fig. 22 and Fig. 23 for cross-comparisons among the four candidates.
58
==PAGE:65==
Figure 22: RMSD.
59
==PAGE:66==
Figure 23: RMSF.
60
==PAGE:67==
C
Mean Square Displacements and Diﬀusion Coeﬃcients
Figure 24: Diﬀusion constants statistics. (L) means in lipids, (W) in water.
The ﬁrst row indicates the number
of run out of the ten. In yellow are highlighted the run whose D record was chosen to be plotted in Fig. 25 for
cross-comparisons among the four candidates.
61
==PAGE:68==
Figure 25: DIFFUSION.
62
