==PAGE:1==
Master Project
Anton Bay Andersen (s134245)
Technical University of Denmark, Center for Electron Nanoscopy
August 2018
Supervisors: Thomas Willum Hansen (DTU CEN) and Tim Booth (DTU NANOTECH)
2D materials: Sample preparation and
electron microscopy characterization
By:
Anton Bay Andersen (s134245)
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Characterization methods
3
2.1
Transmission Electron Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
The equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
Image formation in the Transmission Electron Microscope
. . . . . . . .
5
2.1.3
HRTEM image simulation with the multislice algorithm . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Spectroscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.1
Principle component analysis for noise reduction in spectroscopic imaging
16
3
Sample preparation method
20
3.1
The samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Choice of method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
In situ lift out
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
Beam damage considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Sample preparation results
30
4.1
Method nr 1 - Standard procedure, aggressive gallium thinning . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.1
WSe2 on Al2O3/Au sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Method nr 2 - Gold protection, gentle gallium thinning, argon polishing . . . . .
38
4.2.1
WSe2 on Al2O3/Au sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2.2
PtSe2 on Al2O3/Au sample
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2.3
MoS2 on Si/SiO2 sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3
Method nr 3 - Carbon, gold protection, gentle gallium thinning, argon polishing
48
4.3.1
MoS2 on Al2O3/Au sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.4
Method nr 4 - Carbon, gold protection, aggressive gallium thinning, gallium
polishing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.4.1
PtS2 on Al2O3/Au sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.4.2
PtSe2 on Al2O3/Au sample
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
2
==PAGE:3==
4.4.3
MoS2 on Al2O3/Au sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5
Structural determination of 2D materials by comparison with simulated im-
ages
59
5.1
PtS2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2
MoS2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6
Conclusion
75
7
77
Bibliography
78
7.1
Appendix - Simulated ion penetration depths and trajectories and electron en-
ergy distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
7.2
Appendix - SE images of lift out procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
7.3
Appendix - Additional characterization results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
7.3.1
Additional simulated images of PtS2 on Au . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
7.3.2
Additional simulated images of MoS2 on Au . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Two dimensional materials have shown many interesting properties and perspectives over the
recent years. Their often special intrinsic properties, high sensitivity to the chemical environ-
ment and the lack of lattice matching constraints due to the non covalent nature of the bonding
between layers makes design-able meta materials a promising perspective. The technological
barriers needed to be overcome to realize the perspectives of these materials are at least three
fold. Large scale production of materials with low defect density has to be possible. Combining
the materials to form the desired stacks of designer crystals has to be possible with suﬃcient
accuracy. Patterning the stacks with suﬃcient accuracy has to be possible. Development of
techniques for all facing these challenges require high accuracy and reliable characterization.
Characterization techniques often have special sample requirements. Therefore eﬀorts into the
sample preparation have to be made. This work presents the adjustments made to make lamel-
las by the in situ lift out with dual beam equipment suitable for HRTEM investigations of 2D
materials in cross section on high Z substrates. Special eﬀorts into protecting the material dur-
ing the milling are made with the addition of protective layers and adjustments of the milling
scheme. The best outcome of the preparation procedure are investigated with HRTEM and the
results are characterized by comparison with HRTEM image simulations.
==PAGE:5==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Over the past years a high interest in 2D materials have developed sparked by the discovery of
graphene exfoliated from graphite. These materials exhibit interesting intrinsic properties such
as very high carrier mobility as reported for graphene [20] and PtSe2[24], quantitatively diﬀerent
electronic structure properties, seen for example for MoS2 in [23] where the bandgap changes
with the number of monolayers in a stack. This is, in its own right, very interesting for the
future of material science. Many of these properties are closely related to a 2D material having
few defects and can be heavily modiﬁed by the chemical environment. Hence growing large
scale high purity 2D materials and characterization of these are of high interest for material
science. The technologically very interesting properties of these materials is three fold. The
intrinsic properties in are very usable in for example modern electronics or photo voltaic cells.
The way the materials bond, when layered on each other, is not restricted by lattice matching
in the same way as many 3D crystal structures, since since Van der Walls bonding rather
than covalent bonding is responsible for holding the layers together. The properties of the
materials are heavily aﬀected by the chemical environment and thus tailoring of some material
properties could be done in a relatively easy way. These three properties suggest that it, at
least in theory, should be possible to fabricate tailored 3D crystal/stacks of 2D materials with
the desired properties for a certain application.
We are however not at a point where this is possible. It requires much more work in both
fabricating the 2D materials, characterizing the fabrication methods, the materials and the
layered structures/devices made with these materials. In terms of fabricating these materials
recent work at DTU has developed a promising process for fabrication metal chalcogenides, that
is 2D materials of the type MXn where M is a metal and X is a non metal or chalcogen. This work
is focused on the sample preparation of the outcome of this process for transmission electron
microscopy characterization. Since electron microscopy techniques have the spatial resolution to
measure the few atomic layers these materials consist of and coupled with powerful spectroscopic
tools such as Electron Energy-Loss Spectroscopy (EELS) can contribute with valid insights into
these materials properties. The reason that it is not a focused characterization study is that
unlike hBN or Graphene, which transfers easily from the bulk substrate by standard processes,
the new production process gives a 2D materials bound strongly to the substrate. Furthermore
many of the metal chalcogenides are much more mechanically fragile than for example graphene
while some are also unstable in air. Therefore to examine these materials, as they come out of
the fabrication process, it is necessary to prepare the samples from the bulk in another way.
The main aim of this project is therefore to establish a sample preparation process that allows
1
==PAGE:6==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
for the characterization of these materials as they come out of the fabrication process and utilize
this process to the extent possible.
Page 2 of 102
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 2
Characterization methods
This Section is focused on how the transmission electron microscopy characterization meth-
ods work and what results they can provide. In particular the setup used for transmission
electron microscopy, both for Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) and Scanning Trans-
mission Electron Microscopy (STEM) and how to the resulting images can be interpreted will
be covered. The section will also cover the spectroscopy techniques Energy-dispersive X-ray
Spectroscopy (EDS) and Energy Electron Loss Spectroscopy along with a noise reduction algo-
rithm based on principle component analysis used for improving signal to noise ratio in spectral
imaging.
2.1
Transmission Electron Microscopy
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) is as the name suggests a microscopy technique based
on forming images with the transmitted electron beam either as coherent image formation as
is the case for regular TEM or as sequential image formation as is the case for Scanning
Transmission Electron Microscopy (STEM).
2.1.1
The equipment
In this project two diﬀerent types of transmission electron microscopes are used. They are, in
brand names, Tecnai T20 and Titan. On Figure 2.1 a general overview of a TEM, based on the
Titan layout, is shown. Note that the components marked with dashed lines are not present in
all microscopes used in this project.
3
==PAGE:8==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
Specimen
X-ray collimator
Upper objective
Mini condenser
Probe corrector
C3
C2 aperture
C2
C1
Monochromator
Gun lenses
Electron gun
Lower objective
Image corrector
Projection system
HAADF detector
Retractable CCD/CMOS camera
Aperture/BF detector
Magnetic prism
CCD
Figure 2.1: General overview of TEM including the special components, three condenser system
(Titan), monochromator (Titan), probe corrector(Titan) and image corrector (Titan). The
special components are marked with dashed lines. This sketch is based on the information
provided in the Titan Manual [8].
The components are, from the top, the electron gun from which the electrons are emitted. For
the Tecnai this is a thermionic gun. More precisely a LaB6 crystal heated to high temperatures
so that electrons evaporate from the surface due to high thermal energy and are then accelerated
to the high energy used for transmission electron microscope. For the Titans it is a schottky ﬁeld
emission gun, that is a gun which relies on the very high electric ﬁeld which can be generated
on the surface of sharp objects. Note that this gun is not cold but also heated to both aid
the extraction of electrons and avoid that gas adsorbes on the tip and degrading the emission
properties. Before the gun lenses the electrons are accelerated by a large electric ﬁeld, it is here
the beam energy is deﬁned. The gun lenses deﬁne the ﬁrst cross over and the initial beam. The
condenser system, the lenses labeled C, deﬁnes the illumination of the sample. Though the
mini condenser and the upper objective does this as well it is the condenser system that is used
to choose the area of illumination and type of illumination - focused or parallel illumination. A
Tecnai microscope is equipped with two condenser lenses while a Titan microscope is equipped
with three. The probe corrector is a set of lenses which correct for diﬀerent aberrations in
the probe forming condenser lenses. The X-ray collimator is the entrance to the EDS detector,
here the x-ray’s generated from the beam sample interactions are detected. Below the specimen
is the lower objective lens. This is the image deﬁning lens. The image corrector is a set of
lenses used to tune the aberrations of the lower objective lens. The projection system deﬁnes
the plane projected onto the camera/detectors and magniﬁes the image/back focal plane. The
HAADF detector is a detector disc with a hole in the center used to count the number for
electrons scattered above a certain angle. The retractable CCD/CMOS camera is the camera
used to acquire images in TEM mode. The aperture on the entrance of the magnetic prism,
Page 4 of 102
==PAGE:9==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
used to separate the beam in terms of energy for EELS, is also where the bright ﬁeld detector
for STEM is located.
Figure 2.2 shows ray diagrams illustrating a Titan microscope (left) and a Tecnai microscope
(right) in both TEM and STEM mode. Only the gun, condenser lenses(C1-C3 for Titan C1-
C2 for Tecnai), beam limiting aperture (C2 aperture), minni condenser, objective lenses and
detectors (CCD/CMOS camera, BF detector and HAADF detector) are drawn.
The main
diﬀerence here being that the Titan microscopes have three condenser lenses which allows for
parallel illumination in a range and better focusing of the beam when forming a probe.
Specimen
(a) Solid black:
Ray diagram illustrating
STEM/probe mode. Red Dashed: Ray dia-
gram illustrating TEM mode. Both for a three
condenser system as on the Titan microscopes.
Specimen
(b) Solid black:
Ray diagram illustrating
STEM/probe mode.
Red Dashed: Ray di-
agram illustrating TEM mode.
Both for a
two condenser system as on the Tecnai mi-
croscope.
Figure 2.2: Ray diagrams of STEM and TEM for the two types of microscopes used in this
project the Titan(left) and the Tecnai(right).
2.1.2
Image formation in the Transmission Electron Microscope
As described in 2.1.1 there are two modes of illumination. Parallel beam illumination (TEM
mode) and focused beam illumination (STEM mode). Both are, very generally speaking, just
a scattering experiment of high energy electrons on a sample. Electrons with a kinetic energy
Page 5 of 102
==PAGE:10==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
of say 100keV has velocity of ≈0.6c which means that the scattering is a relativistic quantum
mechanical problem [19, 17]. The description of the interaction between the incoming electron
and the sample may be approximated as the interaction of the incoming electron with the
sample potential
V (r) =
Nions
X
k=1
−e2Zk
|r −Rk| +
Nelectrons
X
k=1
e2
|r −rk|.
(2.1)
Where Rk is the position of the nuclei with atomic number Zk, rk is the position of the elec-
trons in the sample and r is the incoming electron. With the relativistic corrected stationary
Schr¨odinger equation for the incoming electron being [17]
EΨb(r) =
−ℏ2∇2
2γm0
−eV (r)

Ψb(r)
,
γ = 1 +
E
m0c2.
(2.2)
Where E is the kinetic energy of the incoming electron, m0 is the rest mass of the electron,
e is the elementary charge, V is the potential of specimen and the subscript stresses that
the equation is governing the incoming beam electron. Though this is a theoretically good
starting point it is of little practical interest as it is written here. Though the physics of the
beam sample interaction are on a fundamental level the same for both parallel and focused
illumination. There are major diﬀerences in what physical properties of the sample can be
extracted and how they can be extracted.
HRTEM:
The illumination in TEM mode is parallel, or close to, as illustrated by the red
dashed lines on Figure 2.2. If the sample is thin1 and the electron energy high we may to
ﬁrst order regard the result of the sample beam interaction as perturbation only modifying the
phase of the incoming wave [7]. This exit wave (The wave function after passing through the
sample) can then in a plane just below the sample be described as
Ψexit = exp
h
−i π
λU V (x, y)
i
.
(2.3)
Where V is the projected electrostatic potential of the sample in the beam direction, λ is
wavelength associated with the used acceleration voltage and U is the acceleration voltage.
This shows that in principle the exit wave contains all information about the location of the
atoms in the sample. However just below the sample the intensity/probability distribution
would just be unity so simply measuring the distribution would yield no information about
the sample. The way a useful signal is generated in HRTEM in general is through an image
forming lens, the lower objective lens. The eﬀect of a lens is to Fourier transform the signal
(This is seen in the back focal plane where diﬀraction patterns are present).
Ψback focal plane = Ψexit(q) = F(Ψexit(r)).
(2.4)
Note that for q > 0 this corresponds to a diﬀracted beam. In the image plane the ”almost”
reversed Fourier transform is seen [7]. Only considering spherical aberration Cs, defocus Z and
partial temporal coherence only caused by chromatic aberration Cc this eﬀect is described by
the so called transfer function t(q)E(q) as
Ψimage = F−1(Ψexit(q)t(q)E(q)).
(2.5)
1here meaning that few scattering events occur in the sample and scattering is mainly elastic
Page 6 of 102
==PAGE:11==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
Where
t(q) = exp
−2πi
λ
χ(q)

, E(q) = exp
"
−2π2(∆Z)2
λ2
 ∂χ
∂Z
2#
(2.6)
∆Z = Cc
∆U
U
, χ(q) = 1
2q2λ2Z + 1
4q4λ4Cs.
(2.7)
To show what this means for how diﬀerent spatial frequencies of the exit wave are transferred to
the ﬁnal image, the Fourier transform of the ﬁnal image I(q) = F(I(r)) = F(Ψimage(r)Ψ∗
image(r))
is considered.
I(q) =
Z
dre−2πiqrΨimage(r)Ψ∗
image(r)
=
Z
dr e−2πiqr
Z
dq′ e2πiq′rΨexit(q′)t(q′)E(q′)
 Z
dq′′ e−2πiq′′rΨ∗
exit(q′′)t∗(q′′)E∗(q′′)

=
Z
dq′′
Z
dq′ Ψexit(q′)t(q′)E(q′)Ψ∗
exit(q′′)t∗(q′′)E∗(q′′)
Z
dr e−2πi(q′′−q′+q)
=
Z
dq′′
Z
dq′ Ψexit(q′)t(q′)E(q′)Ψ∗
exit(q′′)t∗(q′′)E∗(q′′)δ(q′′ −q′ + q)
=
Z
dq′′ Ψexit(q′′ + q)t(q′′ + q)E(q′′ + q)Ψ∗
exit(q′′)t∗(q′′)E∗(q′′)
(2.8)
Assuming that only the linear interference are relevant, that is only terms of the type Ψ(q)Ψ(0)
are relevant, and noting t∗(q) = t(−q) the above reduces to
I(q) = [Ψexit(q = 0)Ψ∗
exit(−q) + Ψexit(q)Ψ∗
exit(q = 0)] t(q)E(q),
(2.9)
consistent with the linear result in [32]. This means two things, we can recover information
about the structure of the sample when using an image forming lens but the result is diﬃcult to
interpret directly. The reason for the diﬃcult direct interpretation is that diﬀerent frequencies
are transferred diﬀerently hence direct interpretation of the HRTEM image in relation to the
atomic potential should be made with caution. The usual interpretation that fringes reﬂect
atomic potentials periodicity is therefore what one has to resort to if the only available infor-
mation is in the image. One can, if enough parameters are known, make image simulations to
deduce extra information.
Page 7 of 102
==PAGE:12==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Imaginary part of transfer function for pa-
rameters resembling a Tecnai T20 microscope
(Cs = 1mm, Cc = 1mm, ∆U=2V, U = 200kV)
seen on the dashed line, ﬁne tuned image cor-
rector (Cs = 5µm) and less ﬁned tuned image
corrector (Cs = 100µm) Titan microscope (Cs =
100µm, Cc = 1mm, ∆U=1.5V, U =300kV) and
a seen on the solid line. All at Schertzer defocus
Z = −√λCs.
(b) Elastic and inelastic diﬀerential scattering
cross sections based on atomic models for gold
(Z=79) for electrons with a kinetic energy of
300keV. Both for the Thomas Fermi model with
r0 = a0Z1/3 from [5]. The average energy loss
has been set to the 30eV.
Figure 2.3
The imaginary part of the idealized transfer function presented in (2.7) for parameters resem-
bling the Tecnai T20, an image corrected Titan microscope and a non image corrected Titan
microscope are shown in Figure 2.3a. From this it is fairly obvious that the image corrector,
which is the reason for the low spherical aberration coeﬃcient, lets one resolve features less
than 1˚A if it is ﬁnely tuned while without it about 2˚A on the Tecnai T20. In terms of sample
requirements one needs a sample that is so thin that the beam interacts weakly with the sample.
Not so weakly that multiple scattering does not occur at all but weak enough for images to
actually form. That is it has to be thin. The thinner the better in general. In terms of actual
numbers less than 100nm is probably a fair starting point for any type of sample, however
this number can be heavily modiﬁed by the chemical composition of the sample since heavier
elements scatter more strongly than lighter elements.
STEM:
Image formation in Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy (STEM) is, com-
pared to HRTEM, much simpler. The reason is that the entire lens discussion is related to
forming the probe and not after the beam sample interaction and thus is not part of the image
formation directly. Whereas images in HRTEM/TEM are formed by illuminating the entire
region of interest and using a lens to form an image of the exit wave images in STEM are formed
by focusing the probe and then scanning the probe over the region of interest. The signal is then
collected by the detectors (HAADF/BF detector) as indicated on Figure 2.2 and at each point
the amount of counts on the detector then corresponds to the pixel value. The detectors simply
measure the amount of electrons scattered above one angle and below another. Hence what we
are measuring here is the scattering cross section integrated over a certain solid angle given by
the detector and the camera/detector length set by the projection system. This gives a much
Page 8 of 102
==PAGE:13==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
more straight forward interpretation of the generated signal. In general we should expect three
diﬀerent types of contribution to the scattering cross section, incoherently elastic scattering
(purely scattering of the atomic potential), coherent elastic scattering (diﬀraction) and inelas-
tic scattering (mainly scattering of the electron cloud around the atoms with energy transfer
from the primary incoming electron to the sample). In order to get an impression of how the
scattering cross sections of these processes diﬀer two simple models from [5] are considered.
They are the expression for the elastic scattering cross section by Wentzel where screening of
the nuclei is taken into account with an attenuation and a similar model for inelastic scattering
by Lenz.
dσelastic
dΩ
= 4γ2Z2
a2
0
1
(q2 + 1/r2
0)2 , q = 2k0 sin (θ/2)
dσinelastic
dΩ
= 4γ2Z
a2
0q4

1 −
1
(1 + q2r2
0)2

, q = k2
0(θ2 + θ2
E) , θE = ¯E/γm0v2
(2.10)
Where Z is the atomic number, a0 is the borh radius, γ is the relativistic Lorenz factor, θ is
the scattering angle, k0 is the wave vector of the incoming electron, r0 is a characteristic decay
length of the screened nuclei potential, ¯E is the average energy loss and v is the velocity of the
incoming electron. Taking gold as an example the above expressions are plotted for incoming
electrons with a kinetic energy of 300keV, assuming an average energy loss of 30eV, in Figure
2.3b. Here it can be seen that for scattering angles less than ≈50mrad the signal is mixed
as both (incoherently) elastic and inelastic. The coherent scattering angles can be determined
from some typical Bragg reﬂections in gold ([111],[200],[220]) at 300keV which are in order
(4.1mrad, 4.8mrad, 6.8mrad ). Meaning that for higher angles the elastic signal dominates
with approximately one to two orders of magnitude which is the reason for High Angle Annular
Dark (HAADF) being a powerful tool for acquiring directly interpretable structural information.
2.1.3
HRTEM image simulation with the multislice algorithm
To obtain a more direct interpretation HRTEM images simulations can be used. In this project
the simulations have been made with the multislice algorithm QSTEM developed by Christiph
Koch by using the Python interface PyQSTEM developed by Jacob Madsen during his PhD
project [22]. The derivation of the multislice algorithm presented here is based on the derivations
found in [17],[18] and [22]. The starting point is (2.2) and the division of the wave function
into two parts as
Ψb(r) = Ψ(r) exp(2πiz/λ).
(2.11)
Where the z direction is chosen as the propagation direction of the beam and λ is the relativistic
wavelength of the beam electron. Only considering elastic scattering the kinetic energy of the
electron is then
E =
h2
2mλ2.
(2.12)
Inserting this into (2.2), and deﬁning the relativistic mass m = γm0, gives
EΨ(r) exp(2πiz/λ) =
−ℏ2∇2
2m
+ −eV (r)

Ψ(r) exp(2πiz/λ).
(2.13)
Page 9 of 102
==PAGE:14==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
Calculating the Laplace operator acting on the wave function separately ﬁrst gives
∇2Ψ(r) exp(2πiz/λ) =

∇2
xy + ∂2
z

Ψ(r) exp(2πiz/λ)
= exp(2πiz/λ)∇2
xyΨ(r) + ∂2
zΨ(r) exp(2πiz/λ)
(2.14)
Focusing on the propagation direction
∂2
zΨ(r) exp(2πiz/λ) = ∂z exp(2πiz/λ)
2πi
λ Ψ(r) + ∂zΨ(r)

= exp(2πiz/λ)
"
−
2π
λ
2
Ψ(r) + 22πi
λ ∂zΨ(r) + ∂2
zΨ(r)
#
.
(2.15)
Inserting this gives
h2
2mλ2Ψ(r) exp(2πiz/λ)
= exp(2πiz/λ)
 
−ℏ2
2m
"
−
2π
λ
2
Ψ(r) + 22πi
λ ∂zΨ(r) + ∂2
zΨ(r) + ∇2
xyΨ(r)
#
−eV Ψ(r)
!
⇕
0 = −ℏ2
2m

∇2
xyΨ(r) + 4πi
λ ∂zΨ(r) + ∂2
zΨ(r) + 2eV m
ℏ2
Ψ(r)

⇕
0 = ∇2
xyΨ(r) + 4πi
λ ∂zΨ(r) + ∂2
zΨ(r) + 2eV m
ℏ2
Ψ(r).
(2.16)
Since the motion is dominantly in the z direction which is already captured by the exponential
term in the original separation and since λ is very small the second order derivative with respect
to z is expected to be negligible and the equation is approximated as
0 =

∇2
xyΨ(r) + 4πi
λ ∂zΨ(r) + 2eV m
ℏ2

Ψ(r)
⇕
∂zΨ(r) =
 λi
4π∇2
xy + i2πmeλ
h2
V

Ψ =
 λi
4π∇2
xy + iσV

Ψ.
(2.17)
This gives a formal starting point if Ψ(r) is known at some z value, as is the case for parallel
and homogeneous illumination in TEM/HRTEM experiments. The formal solution from the
known position z to z + ∆z is then by [18]
Ψ(x, y, z + ∆z) = exp
Z z+∆z
z
dz′
 λi
4π∇2
xy + iσV (x, y, z′)

Ψ(x, y, z)
for ∆z suﬃciently small ≈exp
 λi
4π∆z∇2
xy + iσV∆z(x, y, z)

Ψ(x, y, z)
V∆z(x, y, z) ≡
Z z+∆z
z
dz′ V (x, y, z′).
(2.18)
Page 10 of 102
==PAGE:15==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
The diﬀerential operator ∇2
xy and the projected potential V∆z(x, y, z) do not commute so the
evaluation of the exponential function is not trivial. Further approximations have to be made.
Given suﬃcient thin slice thickness the exponential may be expanded as
Ψ(x, y, z + ∆z) =
exp
 λi
4π∆z∇2
xy

exp {iσV∆z(x, y, z)} Ψ(x, y, z) + 1
2

iσV∆z(x, y, z), λi
4π∇2
xy

(∆z)2 + ...
= exp
 λi
4π∆z∇2
xy

t(x, y, z)Ψ(x, y, z) + O(∆z)2.
(2.19)
Where the transmission function has been deﬁned as t(x, y, z) = exp {iσV∆z(x, y, z)}. The
practical evaluation of the exponential operator is still not possible. To ﬁnd a more convenient
expression for this the expression is Fourier transformed in the x, y plane.
Ψ(kx, ky, z + ∆z) =
=
Z
dxdy exp(2πi(kxx + kyy))
∞
X
n=0
1
n!
 λi
4π∆z∇2
xy
n
t(x, y, z)Ψ(x, y, z).
(2.20)
Integrating by parts and assuming that t(x, y, z)Ψ(x, y, z) vanishes at inﬁnity2 gives
Ψ(kx, ky, z + ∆z) = exp

−iπλ∆z(k2
x + k2
y)
 Z
dxdy exp(2πi(kxx + kyy))t(x, y, z)Ψ(x, y, z).
(2.21)
Meaning that in real space it will be a convolution. Hence the propagation of Ψ from z to
z + ∆z may be expressed as
Ψ(x, y, z + ∆z) = p(x, y, ∆z) ⊗(t(x, y, z)Ψ(x, y, z))
p(x, y, ∆z) =
1
iλ∆z exp
iπ(x2 + y2)
λ∆z

,
t(x, y, z) = exp

iσ
Z z+∆z
z
dz′ V (x, y, z′)

,
σ = 2πemλ
h2
.
(2.22)
From this one may recognize the previous description of beam sample interaction which gave a
phase modulation as
Phase modulation from [7] = π
λU V∆Z =
π
λ(E/e)V∆Z = 2πemλ
h2
V∆Z = σV∆Z.
(2.23)
Meaning that the simple description as a pure phase modulation is simply neglecting the eﬀect of
the ∇2
xy operator, that is the term responsible for self interference. If a potential is given (2.22)
gives a recipe for calculating the exit wave if suﬃciently many slices are used. The potentials
used for the simulations in this project are the screened atomic potentials implemented in
PyQSTEM, they are parametrized potentials where the core is taken as a Coulomb potential
2In any real experiment the beam has a ﬁnite sized spatial distribution so this assumption is always met.
Page 11 of 102
==PAGE:16==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
and the screening of core by the electron cloud is based on the electronic density obtained from
Hatree Fock calculations of single atoms [22]. Though PyQSTEM allows for the addition of
potentials obtained from DFT calculations or similar, which accounts for redistribution of the
electronic cloud due to bonding, this was not attempted since the computational cost would be
far too high3. Furthermore the changes reported by [30] when taking bonding into account in
image simulations are mostly relevant for light elements and in the case where one wishes to see
the eﬀect of single atomic substitutions in monolayers or molecules adsorbed onto monolayer
samples.
The concept of suﬃcient thin slice thickness has been a crucial part of the derivation of the
multislice algorithm. To employ the multislice algorithm in a reasonable way one must therefore
test how thin the slices should be for the calculation to be reasonable, that is one must converge
the calculation. To avoid converging every single calculation a test structure is chosen. The test
structure is chosen to be consisting of the heaviest atoms in the calculations, that is gold atoms,
since the heaviest atoms scatter the strongest and thus gives the largest amount of redistribution
of the electron wave function. The crystal is orientated such that a [111] direction is along the
x direction and a [110] direction is along the y direction and z is the propagation direction of
the beam. The atomic model is illustrated on Figure 2.4b. The pixel size has been chosen to
be 0.01nm for the convergence test to keep computational cost at a reasonable level. For the
comparison with experiments the pixel size was chosen so that feature sizes of the image would
be captured. The regular way of doing a convergence calculation in a situation where the exact
result is not known, is to make a very reﬁned calculation to which more coarse calculations are
measured with respect to. For this case it was implemented as
Deviation =
R
dxdy|ΨCoarse −ΨFine|2
R
dxdy|ΨFine −ΨPlane|2
(2.24)
Since the eﬀect of the sample on the incoming plane wave is to perturb the plane wave, the
normalization is chosen to make sure that the calculation is converged when compared to the
size of the perturbation. Since the end goal is to compare with experimental data the expected
noise level in the experimental data should also be taken into account since this sets the scale
at which comparisons can be made. Features in the simulated image with a smaller magnitude
than the noise level could falsely be expected to show up in the image and lead to wrong
interpretations when comparing experimental and simulated image. Therefore three types of
convergence criteria are compared for Ψ in (2.24). The exit wave, a simulated image with
spherical aberration 5µm, focal spread 1nm, defocus 0nm and the same simulated image but
with the addition of the Poisson noise, which is the type of noise expected [22], for typical doses
with a 1s exposure used for radiation insensitive materials. On Figure 2.4 the results of the
deviation versus the slice thickness for the diﬀerent convergence criteria are shown. On Figure
2.5 the exit wave (phase and amplitude), the simulated image with and without noise are shown
for diﬀerent slice thicknesses. The ﬂattening of the convergence curves with the addition of
noise4 shows the expected noise level compared to the actual image signal. The convergence
curve based on the pure image or exit wave the calculations appears to be converged at about
3 × 103 to 4 × 103 layers pr nm with a deviation of 5.5% and 2.5% respectively. However this
is far below what can be expected to be measured if one considers the convergence curves with
noise added for doses typically used for radiation insensitive materials. These curves show that
3The simulated structures often consist of thousands of gold atoms.
DFT calculations with this many
electrons requires far more computational power than what was available.
4They ﬂatten at the level of the noise and therefore not at 0%
Page 12 of 102
==PAGE:17==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
the absolute contrast diﬀerences can not be distinguished from about 103 slices pr nm with a
slight diﬀerence depending on the dose. Furthermore the images in Figure 2.5 show that even
though absolute contrast diﬀerences are observed the features in the simulated images, distances
between the features and the size of the features are well captured already from 250 slices pr
nm. Since the computational limit for the structures simulated in this project is roughly 3×104
slices, 250 slices pr nm allows for simulation of up to 120nm thick samples while still being able
to compare sizes and types of features in the image.
Note that since important experimental parameters such as sample thickness, defocus and
spherical aberration are often not known to a high precision and since the structure used for
the simulations is often idealized the main aim with the simulations has been to create a range
of simulated images of one or several possible structures to compare with the experimental
images in a semi quantitative manner. Since many approximations are made it does not allow
for fully quantitative comparison on an absolute contrast scale. However the in general large
disagreement (a factor of 2-4) between the measured and simulated absolute contrast [15], the
so called Stobbs factor problem, makes such comparisons diﬃcult even if all parameters were
known to a high precision.
Page 13 of 102
==PAGE:18==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Convergence analysis for the atomic model shown in Fig-
ure 2.4b where the convergence is compared with respect to
the exit wave and an image.
(b) Atomic model used for convergence
test.
The height in the z direction is
0.5nm.
(c) Convergence analysis for the atomic model shown in Fig-
ure 2.4b for simulated image with the addition of counting
noise for diﬀerent doses.
Figure 2.4: Atomic model used for convergence test of slice thickness, the convergence test made
on the exit wave, an image and an image with the addition of counting noise for a given dose.
The simulated images were made for a spherical aberration 5µm, focal spread 1nm, defocus
0nm, acceleration voltage 300kV. The reference calculation had layer spacing of 0.1pm (inverse
layer thickness of 104nm−1.
Page 14 of 102
==PAGE:19==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Phase of simulated exit
wave 250 slices pr nm.
(b) Phase of simulated exit
wave 500 slices pr nm
(c) Phase of simulated exit
wave 1000 slices pr nm
(d) Amplitude of simulated
exit wave 250 slices pr nm.
(e) Amplitude of simulated
exit wave 500 slices pr nm
(f)
Amplitude
of
simulated
exit wave 1000 slices pr nm
(g) Simulated image with 250
slices pr nm.
(h) Simulated image with 500
slices pr nm.
(i) Simulated image with 1000
slices pr nm.
(j)
Simulated
image
with
added noise corresponding to
7000e−1/˚A2 250 slices pr nm.
(k)
Simulated
image
with
added noise corresponding to
7000e−1/˚A2 500 slices pr nm.
(l)
Simulated
image
with
added noise corresponding to
7000e−1/˚A2 1000 slices pr nm.
Figure 2.5
Page 15 of 102
==PAGE:20==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
2.2
Spectroscopy
From the inelastic scattering of high energy electrons with a thin sample three signals can
in general be expected to carry information of the sample.
Photons emitted in the relax-
ation of the electronic structure, the primary electrons deﬂection (momentum transfer) and the
primary electrons energy-loss. The spectroscopy methods are called Energy-Dispersive X-ray
Spectroscopy (EDS/EXD) and Electron Energy-Loss Spectroscopy (EELS). A simple sketch
of a process generating EELS and EDS signal is show on Figure 2.6. This type of process is
the one typically used to acquire chemical information about the sample since the energy of
the emitted photon will have an energy speciﬁc for the given element while the energy-loss
of the electron will carry information about the element and the density of states in the con-
duction band. EDS is often used to acquire information of the chemical information of the
sample where EELS is often both used as a means of acquiring chemical information and/or
rather sophisticated information about the electronic structure and excitations of this such as
plasmons, phonons or details of the bonding between atoms from the ﬁne-structure of core-loss
edges. The main use of these methods in this project has been for two purposes. To reconstruct
chemical images from STEM-EDS mappings that is images where the intensity is the amount
of counts in an energy bin/range corresponding to an EDS peak. Thickness estimation from
low-loss EELS spectra to use as input parameters in HRTEM image simulations. The thickness
estimation from low-loss EELS spectra used here is the so called log ratio method [6]. Where
the thickness, t, in units of the mean free path, λ, is estimated from the ratio of the electrons
which have not been scattered inelastically, I0, and the electrons which have been scattered
inelastically It as
t/λ = ln(It/I0).
(2.25)
This is then converted to an actual thickness by multiplying with a, known from the literature,
mean free inelastic path of the material.
S states
P states
Valence Band
Conduction Band
e−
e−
ℏω
Figure 2.6: Diagram of a process where an incoming electron transfers energy to the sample by
exiting an s state electron to a valence state and emission of an x-ray by the relaxation of a p
state electron to an s state.
2.2.1
Principle component analysis for noise reduction in spectro-
scopic imaging
Acquiring a EDS spectrum with a high signal to noise ratio may take from 10’s of seconds to
several minutes depending on sample thickness, sample composition and energy range of inter-
est. So building an entire image with an entire spectrum in each pixel from these spectroscopy
methods by scanning a probe over the region of interest and simply increasing the acquisition
Page 16 of 102
==PAGE:21==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
time to a point where adequate signal to noise ratio is achieved often leads to accuracy compro-
mises elsewhere. The spatial drift of a sample over 30 min may be a few to 10 nm and the sample
might be changed by the continuous beam exposure such that the sample is not stable in time
both limiting the reliability and resolution of the measurements. Multivariate statistics oﬀers
simple (and fairly powerful judging by other peoples work [16],[25],[26]) models for separating
noise and signal, such that lower signal to noise ratio is needed in the original acquired spectra
to extract chemical information. Of interest here is Principle Component Analysis carried out
with the principle value decomposition method after a transformation which takes the Poisson
noise in spectra and turns it into to Gaussian noise which the principle value decomposition
methods are designed to deal with [16],[13].
The following derivation of principle components used for principle component analysis (PCA)
is based on [12]. The theoretical starting point is a known covariance matrix Σ describing the
variance of vector x consisting of p variables. The goal is then to ﬁnd the functionals αk which
maximizes the variation var(α′
kx) = α′
kΣαk where the prime denotes the transpose, subject to
a reasonable constraint. Since αk will end up describing the direction of the k’th most variance
in x a very reasonable requirement will be α′
kαk = 1. The hope is then that one can make due
with a few of these directions to describe the physical quantities in the data while the remaining
will describe noise. Beginning from α1, and utilizing the method of Lagrange Multipliers, the
goal is then to ﬁnd
max
α1∈Rp [α′
1Σα1 −λ1(α′
1α1 −1)] .
(2.26)
To ﬁnd the maximum the functional derivative with respect to α1 is set equal to zero.
δ [α′
1Σα1 −λ1(α′
1α1 −1)]
δα1
= 2(Σα1 −λ1α1) = 0.
(2.27)
Hence α1 is merely an eigenvector of the covariance matrix with eigenvalue λ1. To ﬁnd α2 we
again want to maximize the variation subject to the constraint that the length of α2 is unity
with the extra addition that the covariance cov(α′
2x, α′
1x) = α′
2Σα1 = λα′
2α1 = 0. Following
the same procedure as above the result after setting the functional derivative equal to zero is
then
Σα2 −λ2α2 −φα1 = 0.
(2.28)
Forming the inner product with α1 then gives
α′
1Σα2 −λ2α′
1α2 −φα′
1α1 = −φα′
1α1 = 0.
(2.29)
Meaning that φ = 0. Generalizing the above considerations gives that αk is the k’th eigenvector
of Σ with eigenvalue λk = var(α′
kx), meaning that the higher the eigenvalue the more of the
variation in the data is along the αk direction.
Hence one can then distinguish the noise
components from the signal components by the size of the eigenvalues. In general one would
expect that the signal eigenvalues would be the few eigenvalues that are signiﬁcantly larger
than the the rest which are expected to be fairly constant.
Consider a n×p matrix S where n is the number of spatial point where a spectrum with p bins
has been acquired. The covariance matrix is then calculated as
Σ =
1
p −1S′S.
(2.30)
Page 17 of 102
==PAGE:22==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
From this point any method of ﬁnding the αk’s and λk’s can then be used. It turns out that
the most common method is not starting from Σ but rather the singular value decomposition
(SVD) described in [14] which says that S can always be decomposed such that
S = ULA′.
(2.31)
Where U and A are orthonormal matrices of dimension n × r and p × r. L is an r × r diagonal
matrix and r is the rank of S. Then the columns of A will be then be αk’s from before and
the elements of L are then √λk and U closely related to √λk, S and αk’s. The number of αk’s,
that is r, is chosen by looking at the magnitude ordered λk’s. They tend to decrease drastically
over the ﬁrst few k’s to a more constant value. The logic is then that the constant values reﬂect
noise while the ﬁrst reﬂect the physical signal of interest, if it is greater than the noise level.
The reconstruction is then done with r chosen such that only the directions with eigenvalues
greater than the noise level are used for the reconstruction.
The method above actually builds on the energy bin’s having even and normal distributed
noise [16],[13]. This is arguably not the case with regular spectroscopy [16]. Since regular
spectroscopic methods either count photons or electrons the noise should be expected to be
Poisson distributed [16] and hence dependent on the number of counts in the energy bin.
In this project this has been accounted for by using a transformation, given by [16], which
transforms the data so that the the Poisson distributed noise is Gaussian distributed noise
before performing the SVD and then the reverse transformation after. The entire data analysis
regarding spectral images has been performed with HyperSpy [9] where both SVD and the
mentioned transformation algorithm are implemented.
An example of result when using SVD for denoising is illustrated with a single spectrum from a
spectrum image consisting of 42x121 spectra is shown in Figure 2.7. From the ﬁgure it is seen
that the algorithm which accounts for Poisson noise separates the signal and noise better by
the large diﬀerence between the ﬁrst few λk’s and the rest of the λk’s. Furthermore the EDS
spectrum reconstructed using regular SVD shows negative counts which is obviously wrong.
The spectrum here was speciﬁcally chosen to illustrate this problem by picking the spectrum
from a region with fewer counts than the majority of the spectrum image.
It arises from
the assumption that the noise is Gaussian and evenly distributed. This means that physical
components and noise are often mixed and large counts in some regions give large overestimates
of the noise in regions with smaller amounts of counts and thus gives results such as negative
counts. This is further supported by the spectrum here stemming from a region of Al2O3 and
therefore should not show peaks at ≈10keV. Those peaks / the noise in this region is instead
a result of a large Au rich region in the spectrum image where the noise is far larger due to
Au scattering more strongly than Al2O3. Note that the spectrum reconstructed with PCA
accounting for Poisson noise does not completely remove the peaks but reduce them strongly.
Page 18 of 102
==PAGE:23==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) The EDS spectrum before denoising.
(b) EDS spectrum reconstructed from three αk di-
rections using regular SVD algorithm.
(c) Resulting λk after regular SVD.
(d) EDS spectrum reconstructed from four αk di-
rections using SVD algorithm accounting for Pois-
son noise.
(e) Resulting λk after SVD algorithm accounting
for Poisson noise.
Figure 2.7: Example EDS spectrum from spectrum image of WSe2 before denoising, after
denoising with regular SVD algorithm and after denoising with SVD algorithm accounting for
Possion distributed noise along with log plot of the ordered λk from which the dimension of the
reconstructed model was chosen.
Page 19 of 102
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 3
Sample preparation method
This Section covers the type of samples examined in this project, the general sample preparation
procedure used and the reason for the choice of this method. The goal of the sample preparation
procedure is in general to make as a sample thin as possible and as homogeneous as possible
in the viewing direction to allow for characterization in a TEM.
3.1
The samples
The samples examined in this project are made by Dr.
Abhey Shivayogimath from DTU
Nanotech. They stem from a newly developed universal technique for synthesizing 2D materials
which relies on diﬀerent solubility’s of elements in diﬀerent compounds to achieve an interface
limited growth. The general procedure as outlined in [29] is illustrated in Figure 3.1 for the
synthesis of a general compound MX2. The starting point is a c-plane wafer of sapphire as
illustrated in Step 1. A thin layer, thickness of approximately 20nm, of metal M is deposited
onto this wafer (Step 2).
A thick layer, thickness of approximately 300nm, of Au is then
deposited (Step 3). The wafer is then baked at 850◦C to produce a single phase alloy of metal
X and Au or to dissolve the amount of M possible in Au (Step 4). The wafer is then, at
the same temperature as step 4, exposed to a vapor of precursor X (Step 5). Due to the low
solubility of the precursor X in Au the growth is limited to form a thin layer of MX2 at the gold
surface. Since many of the types of materials one could think of synthesizing this way can be
either mechanically fragile or sensitive to air it would be ideal to be able to study them without
having to transfer them from the gold surface or while they are encapsulated by some protective
layer. The production technique is still new and therefore uniform coverage can not be readily
expected, nor a very high degree of coverage and therefore examining a very speciﬁc site on the
sample would also be ideal. Making a preparation procedure which can do all these things for
this type of samples is therefore desirable. A single sample of MoS2 transferred to a Si wafer
with SiO2 layer on top has also been examined. Since MoS2 production and transfer is more
standard, this sample was able to serve as references for the sample preparation techniques.
20
==PAGE:25==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
Step 1: Starting point
c-plane sapphire wafer
Step 2: M deposition
M ∼20nm
c-plane sapphire wafer
Step 3: Au deposition
Au∼300nm
M∼20nm
c-plane sapphire wafer
Step 4: Alloying M and Au
Au M alloy∼320nm
c-plane sapphire wafer
Step 5: Exposure to X vapor/gas
MX2 ∼3˚A
Au M alloy∼320nm
c-plane sapphire wafer
Figure 3.1: The 2D materials fabrication process described in [29] for the production of MX2.
3.2
Choice of method
Since one of the requirements of the preparation procedure is that it should leave the sample to
be examined as it was synthesized, therefore transfer from the substrate was ruled out. Cross
sections of the sample was therefore needed, since the sample is not homogeneous in other
directions. Broadly speaking two general types of preparation methods can give this.
One is based on sandwiching two layers of the wafer together, such that the 2D material and
Au M alloy is in the center, and then thinning this ﬁrst by grinding then by broad beam, low
angle, low acceleration voltage ion milling. This procedure has the advantage that it generally
leaves little surface damage sue to the low milling angle and low acceleration voltage. The
drawback is that it is time consuming and no control over which part of the surface one ends
up being able to characterize.
The other is focused ion beam methods where a thin lamella is extracted from the sample and
positioned on a grid suitable for TEM holders. The focused ion beam is in general destructive,
otherwise it would not be useful for milling. The main drawback of this method is therefore,
that interesting part of the sample might be destroyed during preparation. It however oﬀers
a very high control over which area is examined, which is useful, for the connection with
Page 21 of 102
==PAGE:26==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
other experiments on the same samples which often are optical microscopy, SEM and Raman
spectroscopy, for samples with non homogeneous coverage.
Due to the high control over which area is examined with the focused ion beam methods this
was chosen. The problem with surface damage would then be attempted to be solved with
protective layers deposited onto the surface before using the focused ion beam method.
3.3
In situ lift out
The main goal of the lift out process is to extract a small piece of a bulk like sample (typical
SEM sample) and attach it to a grid suitable for TEM imaging without damaging the surface.
The desired sample outcome is a lamella thin enough to be suited for TEM/STEM/EELS/EDX
measurements (<100nm is desirable) with a ﬂat side where the 2D material can be viewed in
cross Section. The main steps of the procedure used in this project is described below here. The
procedure is heavily based on the general guidelines provided by Zoltan Imre Balogh (Academic
Laboratory Technician at DTU CEN) and the note provided by FEI [27].
Step 1,2: Protective Pt deposition
When a suitable region of interest has been located selected by SEM, it is necessary to protect
the surface from damage from the ion beam. A typical deposition scheme is illustrated on
Figure 3.2 and 3.3. The ﬁrst layer is deposited using the electron beam to minimize surface
damage from the subsequent ion beam deposition, imaging and milling. The deposition is done
by exposing the sample to a precursor of metal organic gas and scanning the electron beam
over the area where deposition is desired. This causes the gas molecules to decompose and
parts of the decomposed products deposit on the surface. The electron beam settings used
for the deposition are high tension (HT) of 2-5kV with a high current 5.5nA. The deposition
thickness listed in Figure 3.2 and 3.3 are approximate numbers estimated from the following
cross sections and images acquired during preparation. The reason for even having an ion
beam deposition afterwards is that the ion beam leaves a much thicker deposition within a
reasonable time which protects against the ion beam in the following steps. There is a clear
risk of damaging the surface during both depositions. The HT and current used for the ion
beam assisted deposition is 30kV and 0.26nA.
15µm
1.5µm
(a) Top view
15µm
0.1µm
(b) Cross sectional view
Figure 3.2: Illustration of First layer of protective platinum deposition with use of the electron
beam. HT 2-5kV current 5.5nA and precursor gas.
Step 3,4: Initial rough cut and rough cleaning
As illustrated in Figure 3.4a and 3.4b, the rough cut creates a trench on either side of the
region of interest in steps of increasing depth closer to the region of interest. This step milling
is to minimize re-deposition of the milled material close to the region of interest. The milling
is done by raster scanning the beam in the region where milling is desirable. The depth of the
cut is chosen to be about 4µm, which is far deeper than the surface region of interest. The
Page 22 of 102
==PAGE:27==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
1µm
15µm
1.5µm
(a) Top view
15µm
0.1µm
1µm
(b) Cross sectional view
Figure 3.3: Step 2: Second layer of protective platinum deposition with use of the Gallium/ion
beam HT 30kV current 0.26nA and precursor gas.
deep cut is chosen to achieve suﬃcient mechanical stability of the ﬁnal TEM sample, suﬃcient
material at the bottom to mill away in step 5 and suﬃcient room for milling in step 5 (Milling
in very tight quarters leaves heavy re-deposition making the deﬁned feature deviate heavily
from the desired). The trench is positioned a few µm away from the region of interest mainly
to accommodate for sample or beam drift while milling. The HT is 30kV and the current is
the highest used in the entire process of 9-20nA.
Step 4, illustrated in Figure 3.4c and 3.4d, simply cleans up the sides of the region of interest
from re-deposition of milled material and reduces the thickness to that of the region of inter-
est. The same HT of 30kV is used but the current is reduced to 0.9-2.7nA and to achieve a
smoother surface the milling is done by scanning a line at a time moving closer to the region
of interest/Platinum deposition .
1µm
15µm
1.5µm
25µm
14µm
(a) Step 3: Top view after rough cut.
4 µm
2 µm
(b) Step 3: Side view after rough
cut.
20 µm
1.5µm
(c) Step 4: Top view after rough cleaning
(d) Step 4: Side view after rough
cleaning
Figure 3.4
Page 23 of 102
==PAGE:28==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Step 5: Front view of undercut.
(b) Step 6: Attachment to omniprobe and cut
free.
(c) Step 7: Attachment to TEM grid and cut
free from transfer needle.
Figure 3.5: Illustrations of step 5-7 of the lift out procedure.
Step 5: Undercut
This step cuts a strip away at one side, the entire bottom and half of the other side of the
lamella leaving it only supported by a small part in one end. The current used for the cut
is 0.44-0.9nA. The width of the strips were increased from the usual recommendation of 1µm
to 1.5µm after several failed lift out attempts due to re-deposition re attaching the lamella on
the side where the milling is not performed. An illustration of the result after the undercut is
shown on Figure 3.5a.
Step 6: Attachment to transfer needle and lift out
This step attaches the lamella to a very thin needle in one end by a small amount of platinum
deposition, using the ion beam and cuts it free at the other end, leaving the lamella hanging
on the thin needle. An illustration of the result after the attachment is shown on Figure 3.5b.
Step 7: Attachment TEM grid
This step transfers the needle to the TEM grid. The lamella is brought close to the TEM copper
grid by moving the transfer needle, a thin platinum strap is deposited using the ion beam on
the grid and the platinum attaching the lamella to the needle is cut away. A illustration of the
attached lamella is shown on Figure 3.5c.
Step 8: Final thinning with Ga beam
After step 7 the result is a lamella attached to a TEM grid with a thickness far too high for
TEM investigations. The sample is then successively thinned with the ion beam from the view
seen in Figure 3.6a. The indicator used to judge the thickness of the sample is the protective
platinum layer since thinning tends to leave a wedge shape with the thinnest part being the
Page 24 of 102
==PAGE:29==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
protective platinum. Depending on how thin the sample is desired to be the thinning is stopped
when the platinum is close to disappearing or when it has been removed in some regions leaving
very thin areas next to these. The sample might still be thicker than desired after this step if
the thinning is stopped before the protective platinum is removed from some regions, depending
on the composition. If the sample is ”light” such as Si, C or Al the sample has been seen to
be transparent enough for TEM investigations without milling the protective layers completely
away at HT of 200-300kV. Though fringes consistent with a [200] reﬂection was observed in a Si
crystal suggesting plural scattering such as [11¯1]+[1¯11]. For heavier elements such as Pt or Au
thinning as much as possible was necessary to achieve transparency for TEM while additional
polishing for STEM is most likely still necessary.
(a) SE image generated electron beam of sample
after the attachment to TEM grid. The sample is
tilted to show the ion beam view during milling.
(b) SE image generated with the electron beam
during the ﬁnal thinning steps.
Figure 3.6: SE images illustrating the view and milling angles during the ﬁnal thinning with
the Ga beam.
3.4
Beam damage considerations
The electron beam and the ion beam can both alter the sample.
Therefore considerations
regarding beam exposure must be made to estimate the amount of beam damage to expect
in the ﬁnal sample and how to minimize it.
Figure 3.7 illustrates the four diﬀerent types
of exposure (angle and ion/electron) the sample is exposed to during preparation procedure.
Table 3.1 shows the beam type, settings angle of exposure and estimated dose.
Table 3.2
has estimates of the sample thickness, in the ﬁnal viewing direction, during the preparation
steps. Table 3.3 has maximum penetration depths for Gallium ions and Argon ions and depth
where electrons only have 5% of their energy left for the relevant acceleration voltages in gold,
platinum and carbon targets estimated from Monte Carlo simulations. The reason for using
the maximum penetration depth for ions is because changes to the sample are of interest here.
If an ion is left somewhere in the sample then the sample has been altered. For electrons
Page 25 of 102
==PAGE:30==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
such a simple consideration does not apply.
All materials indeed contain many electrons.
Furthermore charging does not persist for long periods of time1 and therefore charging eﬀects
from the preparation will therefore not be present when the sample is examined. Damage from
local heating could be of concern however considering the fabrication method of the materials
and other steps in the preparation procedure2 this would not be the preparation step which
destroyed the sample. Usually the damage from electron beams considered is the so called knock
on damage. That is sputtering or at least displacing an atom from its original position due to a
head on collision with an incoming electron. The common model for a threshold energy is given
in [28]. The model considers a single atom with atomic number A and an incoming electron,
with kinetic energy E0, deﬂected by the ﬁeld of the nuclei at an angle θ. By conservation of
momentum and energy the electron must transfer an amount of energy E [28] which leads to
the following expression for the energy transfer of a collision.
E = Emax sin2 (θ/2)
Emax = E0
1.02 + E0/106
465.7A
(3.1)
Note that all energies are in units of eV and A is the atomic mass number (total number of
neutrons and protons in the core). If the energy transfer exceeds some displacement energy
Emax ≥Ed the atom will be knocked out of its original position. Displacement energies are
typically on the order of 50eV so maximizing the energy transfer by setting θ = 180◦gives E0
in the order of 100kV or above. This is far above the acceleration voltages used during the
preparation procedure. However this model only considers sputtering with low dose exposure
which is probably a good assumption in most TEM experiments. Extended exposure3 as is the
case in the sample preparation used here may not be modelled well with these considerations.
Zr crystals have been shown to restructure heavily when repeatedly exposed to electron probes
with acceleration voltages as low as 30kV [11] even though the predicted knock on beam energy
threshold is on the order of 400keV. The authors of [11] report the damage observed at the
surface of the sample, but do not report the depth of this nor give an estimate of a way to
estimate this. To get close to an estimate, an energy cutoﬀof 5% of the incoming beam energy
was chosen, hence on the order of 200eV for the used acceleration voltages. The choice here
is to approximate the interaction volume since the damage due to sample beam interactions
is here assumed to be contained within the interaction volume. The results of the simulations
from which the table is based on are shown in appendix 7.1.
Step 1-4
For step 1-4 the roughly 100nm of protective carbon/platinum layer should be
suﬃcient to protect the surface from damage in these steps considering the penetration depth of
Gallium ions for any of the examined materials do not exceed 50nm. Only the initial deposition
with the electron beam may cause surface damage which can be minimized by choosing a lower
acceleration voltage and depositing a heavy material such as gold onto the surface prior to the
lift out.
1The sample is grounded on the SEM stage with silver paint to replenish the emitted secondary electrons.
No charging eﬀects were observed during the lift outs performed.
2The sample is heated when mounting on the Aluminum stud for SEM/FIB to melt the crystal bond used
for attachment.
3The sample is imaged with the electron beam multiple times at all stages to align milling patterns and
examine the results of milling and or deposition.
Page 26 of 102
==PAGE:31==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
Step 5-7
For step 5-7 the sample is exposed to the Gallium beam at quite high doses and
due to the angle there is no protection of the sides. However the sample is microns thick at this
point and the penetration depth of the Gallium ions is not higher than 50nm for the materials
considered here. So the sides of the lamella will be damaged, but the damaged region will be
milled away at a later point.
Step 8
For step 8 the sample is exposed to the electrons from the side while the sample is
thin enough that the electrons penetrate the sample completely if 5kV is used but not much
more than a quarter of the way if 2kV is used. The surface layers are protected from the
Gallium beam during the milling if we only consider the penetration depth of Gallium ions
in platinum/carbon. However the beam is held at ﬁxed point for extended duration’s of time
to mill away material and hence we should not expect the beam to only aﬀect the protective
platinum/carbon layer. Considering that the trajectories in the simulations fan out almost
equally in all directions a rough estimate of the penetration depth is probably slightly less than
the simulated depths. By this logic the Gallium beam could leave up to ≈40nm of potentially
damaged regions both sides but, as shown later, such high degree of amortization/damage was
not directly observed. Most likely due to the part of the sample, which interacts with the
Gallium beam, is milled away.
Step 9
For step 9 it is seen that low energy ions have very low penetration depths and one
should therefore be able to mill away the potential 10’s of nm of damaged regions from the
Gallium milling and only end up with a few nm’s of damaged region. This is if redeposition is
ignored. Milling with the Gallium beam tends to leave little redeposition on the milled region,
especially if the milling is conducted by scanning single lines closer to the surface. Two types
of equipment can be used for the ﬁnal milling: the FIB equipment if the acceleration voltage
is adjusted or an Argon mill. The Equipment used for the Argon milling is by many used for
this ﬁnal polishing stage since it allows for extra milling after the sample has been checked in
the TEM whereas the using the FIB equipment for this step allows for greater control over the
milling angles and the region which is milled. Both were used for diﬀerent samples.
Page 27 of 102
==PAGE:32==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
Ga+/e−
Surface layer(s)
Substrate
(a) Step 1 - 4.
e−
Ga+
Surface layer(s)
Cut out substrate
(b) Step 5 - 7.
Ga+
e−
Surface layer(s)
Cut out substrate
(c) Step 8.
Ar+/Ga+
Surface layer(s)
Cut out substrate
(d) Step 9.
Figure 3.7: Illustration of beam exposure directions during preparation procedure. Note that
the drawing is not perfect to scale. The angles with respect to the normal of the surface layer(s)
are (a) Ga+ 0◦, e−0◦(b) Ga+ 38◦, e−0◦(c) Ga+ 0-3◦, e−38◦(d) Ar+ 5◦.
Step
Ion beam
Ion-angle-setting-dose
e- beam
angle-settings-dose
1
N/A
0◦-2-5kV 5.5nA-31 nC/µm2
2
Ga+-0◦-30kV 0.26nA-0.5 nC/µm2
N/A
3
Ga+-0◦-30kV 20nA-30 nC/µm2
38◦-2-5kV 5.5nA-4 nC/µm2
4
Ga+-0◦-30kV 9nA-15 nC/µm2
38◦-2-5kV 5.5nA-4 nC/µm2
5
Ga+-38◦-30kV 0.9nA-5 nC/µm2
0◦-2-5kV 5.5nA-10 nC/µm2
6
Ga+-38◦-30kV 26pA-5-6 nC/µm2
0◦-2-5kV 5.5nA-10 nC/µm2
7
Ga+-38◦-30kV 26pA-5-6 nC/µm2
0◦-2-5kV 5.5nA-10 nC/µm2
8
Ga+-0/3◦-30kV 0.44nA/26pA-15 nC/µm2
38◦-2-5kV 5.5nA-10 nC/µm2
9
Ar+/Ga+85◦-1/2kV 130pA-N/A
N/A
Table 3.1: Overview of typical beam exposure during preparation, estimated from pixel size
and dwell time from SE images, during preparation procedure. Note that the beam angle is
measured with respect to the normal of the original substrate surface.
Page 28 of 102
==PAGE:33==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
Step
Estimated thickness (nm)
1
Bulk
2
Bulk
3
5000
4
2000
5
2000
6
2000
7
2000
8
100-200
9
50-150
Table 3.2: Table over estimated thickness of lamella after the preparation steps.
Ga 30kV(0◦/3◦/38◦/52◦)
Ar 1kV/Ga 2kV 85◦
Au
35nm/35nm/30nm/30nm
5nm/6nm
Pt
30nm/30nm/28nm/25nm
5nm/5nm
C
45nm/45nm/35nm/35nm
3nm/4nm
Electrons 2kV 0◦/52◦
Electrons 5kV 0◦/52◦
Au
14nm/10nm
44nm/35nm
Pt
12nm/10nm
40nm/32nm
C
50nm/45nm
260nm/200nm
Table 3.3: Table over calculated penetration depths of ions and electrons for diﬀerent angles
measured with respect to the surface normal of the substrate estimated from Monte Carlo
simulations using the TRIM software package [33] developed by James F. Ziegler for ions and
Casino software package [2],[1] for electrons. The resulting distributions and trajectories can be
seen in the appendix - Simulated ion penetration depths and trajectories and electron energy
distributions.
Page 29 of 102
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 4
Sample preparation results
This section is focused on the results obtained for the diﬀerent variations of the lift out procedure
used. As indicated in Section 3.4 the main eﬀect on the ﬁnal result of the sample preparation is
expected to be related to the protection layers used and the ﬁnal thinning and polishing steps.
Adjustments of thinning procedures, protection layers and ﬁnal polishing steps have been made
in an iterative manner. Hence after each sample was prepared it was examined with TEM and
in some case also by STEM-EDS. On the basis of these results the preparation was either
adjusted or the preparation procedure was repeated on another type of sample if the results
were not clear. The choice of TEM and STEM-EDS as the main characterization methods here
was made because the suitability of the sample for TEM investigations is most easily judged
by with TEM investigations. Furthermore TEM can also provide information of the atomic
structure of the sample which can help judge the amount if the used protection layers are
suﬃcient. STEM-EDS was chosen to support the results of TEM with chemical information.
The reason for not choosing EELS for this was that many of the elements of interest in this part
are heavy elements such as gold and platinum which are more easily observed with EDS than
EELS. In Table 4.1 the diﬀerent variations of the in situ lift out procedure made are listed.
30
==PAGE:35==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
Method
nr
Thinning
step 8
Polishing
step 9
Protection
layers
1
Ga+ focused beam
±3◦0.44nA-26pA
Thinned til
protection layers
almost gone
Ga+ broad beam
±5◦10pA 1.3kV
After ﬁrst examination
Ar+ broad beam
±5◦130pA 1.2-0.9kV
500nm e−deposited Pt/C
2µm Ga+ deposited Pt/C
2
Ga+ focused beam
0◦0.44nA-46pA
Thinned til
protection layers
were still
thick
None
After ﬁrst examination
Ar+ broad beam
±5◦130pA 1.2-0.5kV
2nm sputtered Au
2µm e−deposited Pt/C
2µm Ga+ deposited Pt/C
3
Ga+ focused beam
0◦0.44nA-46pA
Thinned til
protection layers
were still
thick
None
After ﬁrst examination
Ar+ broad beam
±10◦130pA 1.2kV
3min 125A C arc evaporation
2nm sputtered Au
2µm e−deposited Pt/C
2µm Ga+ deposited Pt/C
4
Ga+ focused beam
0◦0.44nA-46pA
Thinned til
protection layers
almost gone
Ga+ broad beam
±5◦1pA 2kV
3min 125A C arc evaporation
2nm sputtered Au
2µm e−deposited Pt/C
1µm Ga+ deposited Pt/C
Table 4.1: Diﬀerent variations of the thinning, polishing and protective layers used for the in
situ lift out procedure in this project. The focused beam thinning is done by milling a line away
at a time with a focused beam whereas the broad beam is done by raster scanning the area to
be milled with a defocused beam. Note that the thickness of e−and Ga+ deposited Platinum
and sputtered Au a layers are the machine settings used and not a measured thickness.
4.1
Method nr 1 - Standard procedure, aggressive gal-
lium thinning
This section covers the results from the characterization of the WSe2 on Al2O3/Au sample
made with preparation method nr 1. This was the ﬁrst sample prepared and examined in this
project. Since the preparation of this sample was made during the introduction to the dual beam
equipment the lift out was performed by Zoltan Imre Balogh, Academic Laboratory Technician
at DTU-CEN, who gave the introduction. Only the ﬁrst lamella prepared and examined in
this project was made by Zoltan Imre Balogh all other lamellas examined in this project were
prepared by the author of this report. Since this was the ﬁrst lamella prepared from the sample
it was not known if this method would be feasible at this point.
The gold layer could be
polycrystaline which would make cross sectional investigations impossible. The surface of the
gold layer could be too uneven for the 2D material to be viewed in cross section. The samples
could have too high degree of damage after the lift out procedure to make investigations of the
2D materials impossible. Since it is impossible investigate the structure of the sample before
Page 31 of 102
==PAGE:36==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
the preparation procedure, before and after comparisons giving a clear result of the eﬀect of
the preparation procedure were not possible. Instead an iterative trial and error based method
was employed.
4.1.1
WSe2 on Al2O3/Au sample
Since this was the ﬁrst sample examined and the ﬁrst lift out made from this type of samples
it was chosen to use a standard lift out procedure to provide a baseline. Hence no protection
layers prior to the lift out were deposited and the thinning and polishing steps were done as
recommended by the TEM lamella preparation manual [27].
Cross sectional TEM on Tecnai T20 before Ar polishing:
On Figure 4.1a a TEM image
showing the layered structure of the sample along with arrows indicating the composition of
the layered materials. The contrast diﬀerence between the electron beam and ion deposited
platinum layers are caused by the electron beam deposition having a higher carbon to platinum
ratio than the ion beam deposition. Close to the sapphire substrate a dark region is seen. From
the TEM image this appears as diﬀraction contrast. This region was shown to be dominantly
Tungsten from STEM-EDS experiments. The results of these experiments are shown later in
this section. Between the the gold and deposited platinum interface and the tungsten layer
darker areas are seen. These areas were observed to move with tilt and defocus consistent with
diﬀraction contrast. On Figure 4.2 a diﬀraction pattern acquired in the gold layer is shown.
The angles between the reﬂections and the inverse distances were found to be consistent with
a [1¯10] zone axis in Au with crystal structure data from [4] found through ICSD within 1◦
and 3%. The deviations of the angles and lengths were within the size of the diﬀraction spots.
Moving the select area diﬀraction aperture did not change the diﬀraction pattern, as long as
it was kept away from the Tungsten layer and the deposited platinum layers. That only one
diﬀraction pattern is visible in the entire gold region suggests that the crystal domains in the
gold layer are larger than the examined region and cross sectional investigations are therefore
a meaningful approach. Smaller domains or defects may be enclosed within the larger domain
even though the signal is dominated by the large crystal. On Figure 4.1b a TEM image of
the gold deposited platinum interface is shown. On Figure 4.3 the two highlighted regions in
Figure 4.1b are shown. lattice fringes parallel with the surface are observed in both regions. All
lattice fringes were measured to be 2.33˚A ± 0.05˚A consistent with [111] planes in Au. The two
magniﬁed images of the gold interface shows no consistent feature deviating from what can be
explained with lattice fringes from [111] planes in Au parallel to the interface. The surface is
seen to have rather many jumps only a few atom high over a few nm, showing that the surface
is not ﬂat on the atomic scale. From the results it is not clear if this is due to damage from
the preparation or if the jumps were precent before the lift out.
Page 32 of 102
==PAGE:37==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Overview image with indication of the visible
layers in the sample.
(b) Image of the gold and electron beam deposited
platinum interface.
Figure 4.1: HT 200kV.
Figure 4.2: Indexed diﬀraction pattern from the Au layer acquired with a select area diﬀraction
aperture. The zone axis is [1¯10]
Page 33 of 102
==PAGE:38==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Region 1 in Figure 4.1b
(b) Region 2 in Figure 4.1b
Figure 4.3
Cross sectional TEM on Tecnai T20 after ion polishing:
On Figure 4.4 a TEM image
of the lamella is shown before and polishing with Argon ions. The extra polishing was not
made to reduce the thickness of the sample since the sample, over most of the lamella, was
thin enough for lattice fringes to be visible. It was made to check if the diﬀraction contrast
observed was due to surface damage from milling which should then be reduced if this was the
case. The polishing was performed in two steps. The ﬁrst was 10 min with an acceleration
voltage of 0.9keV and a beam current of ≈130pA. The second was 5 min with an acceleration
voltage of 0.5keV and a beam current of ≈130pA. Thinning was performed from both sides
of the lamella, the ion beam angle, following the deﬁnition used in Section 3.4, was ≈5◦. By
the mass/thickness contrast the sample is seen to be slightly thinner. The dark regions in the
gold layer consistent with diﬀraction contrast are not observed to be diminished. This suggests
that the diﬀraction contrast is most likely not due to surface damage during preparation, which
have been removed by Argon polishing, since the Argon ions are expected to produce far less
surface damage than the regular lift out procedure. It is therefore expected to be a feature of
the sample itself.
Page 34 of 102
==PAGE:39==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Before ion thinning.
(b) After ion thinning.
Figure 4.4: TEM images of the same region of lamella 1 before and after ion thinning with Ar
ions. HT 200kV.
STEM EDS mapping on Tecnai T20 after Argon polishing
On Figure 4.5a a STEM-
DF image of the lamella is shown. The contrast suggests that the lamella is not of constant
thickness but rather thicker in the left side of the image than the right. The same type of
features which appeared as darker regions in the gold layer in the TEM images here appear
bright. This is consistent with diﬀraction contrast if one considers that major crystal orientation
in the gold layer is tilted oﬀaxis and the collection angle being fairly low meaning that the
major crystal domain would not be oriented on a zone axis while the smaller domain may be
and therefore would appear brighter.
The EDS map was acquired as 521x164 pixels with a total acquisition time of ≈15min to
minimize decrease drift1 at a stage tilt of ≈20◦to increase collection eﬃciency. On Figure 4.5b
the sum of all the EDS spectra acquired during the map shown with indication of the lines
used for construction of the chemical maps. The energies were chosen as the known edge of the
chemical compound which had the mostly localized signal. This was done in accordance with
the logic that other edges due to broadening, and bremsstrahlung may add a ”false” signal
to the energy bin of a chemical edge but cannot remove it. The maps were constructed by
binning the EDS map from 521x164 spatial pixels to 128 x 41 spatial pixels and then denoised
by reconstruction from the four signiﬁcant principle components as described in Section 2.2.1.
The chemical maps for aluminum, oxygen, tungsten, gold, platinum and gallium are shown in
Figure 4.6. Note that the selenium map is not shown here since no signal corresponding to
selenium was observed to be larger than the noise level. Brightness/contrast is adjusted such
that that the highest number of counts in a spatial bin is white and the lowest is black. The
115min is indeed a long time when considering stage drift. However some signal has to be generated and
this acquisition time was observed to be near the shortest possible to get suﬃcient signal for making chemical
maps, even if denoising was employed afterwards.
Page 35 of 102
==PAGE:40==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
typical values for the highest and lowest values in a spatial bin are roughly 5 and 0 counts. From
the maps it is seen that the aluminum and oxygen is located at the bottom consistent with
the substrate being sapphire. The Tungsten map shows a ≈50nm thick layer located on top
of the sapphire substrate. The gold map shows the gold located on top of the tungsten layer.
The platinum and gallium maps show less platinum in the electron beam deposited platinum
layer and the gallium mostly located in the gallium deposited platinum layer. Meaning that
the alloying step did not alloy the gold and tungsten as was expected prior to examining the
sample.
(a) STEM-DF Image of lamella 1 after ion thinning. The red region marks the region where the EDS
map was acquired.
(b) EDS spectrum of the entire examined region constructed by summing all the acquired spectra in
the EDS map. The vertical lines show the energies chosen to construct the chemical maps and the
corresponding edges. The bin width is 20eV.
Figure 4.5
Page 36 of 102
==PAGE:41==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Aluminum Kα Map
(1.48-1.50keV)
(b)
Oxygen
Kα
Map
(0.52-0.54keV)
(c)
Tungsten
Lα
Map
(8.38-8.40keV)
(d) Gold Lα Map (11.44-
11.46keV)
(e)
Platinum
Lα
Map
(9.44-9.46keV)
(f)
Gallium
Lβ
Map
(1.12-1.14keV)
Figure 4.6: EDS maps denoised by reconstruction from four signiﬁcant principle components
as described in section 2.2.1.
Page 37 of 102
==PAGE:42==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
4.2
Method nr 2 - Gold protection, gentle gallium thin-
ning, argon polishing
The tilted gallium thinning used in method 1 for the focused beam thinning was done to make
the lamella of even thickness perpendicular to the gold layer. Since thinning with no tilt gives
wedge shaped samples. Even thickness perpendicular to the gold layer of the lamella is of
little interest for the characterization of 2D materials. Furthermore the lamellas tend to bend
and twist if they do not have a thicker ”back” part to hold them which makes aligning them
diﬃcult. Therefore no tilt in step 9 of the preparation procedure was chosen, though it did
not eliminate the bending and twisting completely it did reduce the bending and twisting to a
reasonable level if combined with lower dwell time during the thinning scans which mean that
only the outermost part of the lamella is thinned. The thinning was furthermore not done as
aggressively as for method 1. The logic being that the sample could be thinned afterwards
with Argon ions which could produce less surface damage. The sputtered gold was deposited
as a protection layer from the subsequent electron beam platinum carbon deposition.
The
less aggressive thinning was chosen as an attempt to see if the uneven surface of the previous
lamella was a result of damage during thinning. The protective gold layer was deposited for two
reasons. The ﬁrst being that it could protect the surface during the initial platinum deposition
and the second that it could provide a clear boundary where the 2D material should be present.
The electron beam deposited platinum layer set thickness was increased from 0.5µm to 2µm.
4.2.1
WSe2 on Al2O3/Au sample
Cross sectional TEM on Tecnai T20:
On Figure 4.7 the gold deposited platinum interface
is shown.
The lamella had the same feature as the lamella prepared with method 1, even
[111] Au lattice fringes visible over the entire Au layer, apart from the gold deposited platinum
interface being more uneven and the sample being less transparent, possibly due to the gold
sputtering. No features qualitatively diﬀerent from what is shown in Figure 4.7 were observed
along the gold deposited platinum interface.
Page 38 of 102
==PAGE:43==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
Figure 4.7: Cross sectional TEM image of the electron beam deposited platinum and gold
interface of Lamella 2.
4.2.2
PtSe2 on Al2O3/Au sample
Since the WSe2 sample had not been observed to alloy the tungsten and gold layers another
sample was also examined. The lack of evidence of a 2D material could be the result of the
alloying step of the growth process failing, which could be expected to result in the 2D material
never being grown.
Cross sectional TEM on Tecnai T20:
On Figure 4.8a a SE image of the initial platinum
deposition is shown. The region here was chosen because these features were reported by the
group growing the material to correlate with signals in raman spectroscopy consistent with
monolayers of PtSe2 on the surface. On Figure 4.8b a stitched overview image of the lamella
is shown. The bottom layer is the sapphire substrate, the darker region on top of this is the
gold platinum alloy, the bright layer on top of the gold platinum alloy is the electron beam
deposited platinum, the layer on top of this is the ion beam deposited platinum. Holes between
the Sapphire substrate and the gold layer are seen to correspond to the features in the SE image.
In Figure 4.8c a higher magniﬁcation image of the hole number two counted from the left on
Figure 4.8b is shown. On Figure 4.9a, 4.9b and 4.9c the gold deposited platinum interface is
shown. The two ﬁngers at the surface were measure to be spaced with 5˚A ± 0.5˚A, 6.5˚A ±
0.5˚A and 5˚A ± 0.5˚A for 4.9a, 4.9b and 4.9c. From [10], found through ICSD, the expected
reﬂection from multilayers would be a [001] type, corresponding to the thickness of two layers
of PtSe2, which would be 5.08˚A. In general the lamella was observed to be too thick for TEM
investigations and should therefore be polished with argon ions.
Page 39 of 102
==PAGE:44==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) SE image during preparation of the initial plat-
inum deposition.
(b) Stitched overview image.
(c) Gold sapphire interface near the top of the
lamella
Figure 4.8: Comparison of the features seen in TEM and SEM images from the PtSe2 sample.
HT 200kV.
Page 40 of 102
==PAGE:45==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Gold deposited platinum interface near the top
of the lamella.
(b) Gold sapphire interface near the top of the
lamella
(c) Gold deposited platinum interface near the top
of the lamella.
Figure 4.9: Gold and deposited platinum interface of the PtSe2 sample. HT 200kV.
STEM EDS mapping on Tecnai T20:
To see if the platinum and gold alloyed, STEM-EDS
mapping was also performed. On Figure 4.10a a STEM-DF image of lamella 1 is shown. The
same type of features which appeared as darker regions in the gold platinum alloy layer in the
TEM images here appear bright as was the case for the WSe2 sample.
The EDS map was acquired as 184x976 pixels with a total acquisition time of ≈20min to
minimize stage drift at a stage tilt of ≈20◦to increase collection eﬃciency. On Figure 4.10b
Page 41 of 102
==PAGE:46==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
the sum of all the EDS spectra acquired during the mapping is shown with indication of the lines
used for construction of the chemical maps. The maps were constructed by binning the EDS
map from 184x976 spatial pixels to 46x122 spatial pixels and then denoised by reconstruction
from the four signiﬁcant principle components as described in section 2.2.1.
The chemical maps for aluminum, oxygen, gold, platinum and gallium are shown in Figure 4.11.
From the maps it is seen that the aluminum and oxygen is located at the bottom consistent
with the substrate being sapphire. The platinum and gold seems to form an even alloy, within
the detection level.
(a) STEM-DF Image of lamella 1 The red region marks the region where the EDS map was acquired.
Experiment performed the 28’th of March 2018 at DTU-CEN.
(b) EDS spectrum of the entire examined region constructed by summing all the acquired spectra in
the EDS map. The vertical lines show the energies chosen to construct the chemical maps and the
corresponding edges. The bin width is 10eV.
Figure 4.10
Page 42 of 102
==PAGE:47==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Aluminum Kα Map (1.48-1.49keV)
(b) Oxygen Kα Map (0.52-0.53keV)
(c) Gold Lβ Map (11.44-11.45keV)
(d) Platinum Lα Map (9.44-9.45keV)
Figure 4.11: EDS maps denoised by reconstruction from signiﬁcant principle components as
described in section 2.2.1.
Cross sectional TEM on Tecnai T20 before Argon polishing and on Titan after:
On
Figure 4.12 a TEM image is shown before and after ion thinning. Note that it was not the
same microscope used before and after. The thinning was performed in two steps. The ﬁrst
was 10 min with an acceleration voltage of 900V and a beam current of ≈130pA. The second
was 5 min with an acceleration voltage of 500V and a beam current of ≈130pA. Thinning was
performed from both sides of the lamella, the ion beam angle, following the deﬁnition used in
section 3.4, was ≈5 −8◦. Figure 4.13 (a) and (b) shows the dark regions moving with defocus,
notice the bright edge on (a) corresponds to underforcus and the darker edge on (b) corresponds
to overfocus. On 4.13 (c) the same region is shown after thinning. The image is acquired with
a Titan microscope and shows both regions where no lattice fringes are visible and diﬀerently
oriented domains corresponding to deviations from a perfect crystal or redeposition from the
milling in these regions.
Figure 4.12a and 4.12c show a magniﬁed image of the same region before and after ion thinning.
The clear fringes before ion thinning seems to be partly masked as if redeposition during the
milling has left a layer of material at the top of the lamella and/or made a fairly uneven surface.
Other features observed to deviate from [111] fringes in Au are shown on Figure 4.12b and 4.12d.
The general result of the Argon polishing for this sample was that the sample became more
transparent since it became thinner but many features became masked with what is most likely
redeposition from the milling.
Page 43 of 102
==PAGE:48==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Before ion thinning. 10’th of April 2018. Tec-
nai T20 . HT 200kV.
(b) After ion thinning. 11’th of April 2018. Titian
microscope . HT 300kV.
(c) After ion thinning. 11’th of April 2018. Titian
microscope . HT 300kV.
(d) After ion thinning. 11’th of April 2018. Titian
microscope . HT 300kV.
Figure 4.12: TEM images of the same region of lamella from PtSe2 sample before and after Ion
thinning with Ar ions.
Page 44 of 102
==PAGE:49==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.13: Illustration of the movement of the dark regions with defocus (a) and (b) and loss
of visibility of lattice fringes in the substrate corresponding to the dark regions (c). (a) and
(b) were acquired before ion thinning on a Tecnai T20 (c) were acquired after ion thinning on
a Titan microscope.
4.2.3
MoS2 on Si/SiO2 sample
From the previous results damage during the preparation could not be ruled out since the
gold sputtered onto the surface could not be distinguished from the original gold substrate.
Furthermore the ends of the lamella which were not protected show a single crystal of gold
suggesting that even if the gold layer was damaged during the preparation it would not leave
an amorphous layer but rather re-crystallize with the same orientation as the gold substrate.
Furthermore it could at this point not be ruled out if the lack of clear results from the previous
two samples could be because the material synthesis process was failing. Therefore a reference
sample allowing for the determination of this was needed. This sample was MoS2 transferred
to a Silicon wafer with thermally grown Silicon dioxide on top. Since silicon is much lighter
than gold it is expected to be far more transparent and thus require less thinning. Furthermore
Silicon which has been exposed to the gallium beam is left amorphous [21] and will therefore
work as a reference for beam damage during preparation. No ion thinning of this sample was
performed.
Cross sectional TEM on Tecnai T20:
On Figure 4.14a a low magniﬁcation TEM image
showing the layered structure of the sample is shown. At the interface of the electron beam
deposited platinum and the gallium deposited platinum layers, a brighter contrast is seen. This
layer was measured to be 40nm.
On Figure 4.14b and 4.14c the tip of the lamella where
beam damage from the milling is seen. Note the dark region in the silicon crystal before the
amorphous region begin. On Figure 4.14d an image of the silicon substrate after aligning the
lamella is shown. By Fourier transforming the image the zone axis were determined to be
(110) but with a distinct signal corresponding to a (200) reﬂection. This signal is expected
to be the result of two (111) type of reﬂections which combined can produce fringes with a
periodicity corresponding to a (200) reﬂection. The Fourier transform and a calculated and
indexed diﬀraction pattern for a silicon (110) zone axis is shown in the appendix Additional
characterization results. On Figure 4.15 the only two regions where lattice fringes parallel to
Page 45 of 102
==PAGE:50==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
the surface were visible is seen. From the results seen here the increased surface roughness
observed for the WSe2 sample likely was due to the sputtered gold layer becoming part of the
larger gold crystal substrate. The high atomic number and the roughness of the sputtered gold
layer probably makes detection of mono layers of 2D materials impossible and hence only where
there is more than one layer can be seen. In general the spacing of the fringes seen in Figure
4.15 were measured to be ranging from 4˚A to 7˚A depending on the width of the averaged line
scan and where they were measured. The large spread was due to the large contrast from
the deposited gold overlapping the fringes. On (a) taken from the most ﬂat part away from
the deposited gold layer, and measuring over four and ﬁve fringes to get an estimate of the
variation, the fringes were measured to be 6.3˚A ±0.2˚A. From [3] found through ICSD the [002]
reﬂection, which is the one to be expected here2, is listed for bulk MoS2 of the structure type
MoS2(4H) is reported to be 6.15˚A.
2The [002] reﬂection corresponds to the distance between the mono layers of MoS2 since the stacking of the
mono layers in the bulk structure requires a unit cell twice the height of the of a monolayer.
Page 46 of 102
==PAGE:51==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Overview image with indicating of the visible
layers in the sample
(b) Overview image showing beam damage near
the tip of the lamella.
(c) High magniﬁcation of where beam damage in
the silicon layer begins.
(d) Image of Silicon Silicon dioxide interface after
alignment of the lamella.
Figure 4.14
Page 47 of 102
==PAGE:52==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.15: High magniﬁcation TEM images silicon dioxide sputtered gold interface of the two
locations in the sample where lattice fringes parallel to the surface were visible.
4.3
Method nr 3 - Carbon, gold protection, gentle gal-
lium thinning, argon polishing
On the basis of the results of the method 2 it was deemed that a layer of a light material
should be deposited onto the surface prior to the gold protection layer to avoid the deposited
gold layer masking the 2D material, as was observed in the previous section. The choice was
to arc evaporate carbon onto the surface, even though this is a very time consuming process
due to the long cool down time of the equipment and with very low degree of control over the
thickness it was the only process available at DTU-CEN which could deposit few nanometers
of a light material. The thinning procedure was the same as for method 2 and 3.
4.3.1
MoS2 on Al2O3/Au sample
Cross sectional TEM/STEM on Titan before and after ion thinning:
On Figure
4.16 the gold carbon interface and the sapphire gold interface is shown before ion thinning.
The Sapphire gold interface shows segregation of the molybdenum and gold as predicted in
[29]. The lamella was far too thick for TEM experiments before the Argon Polishing. Lattice
Page 48 of 102
==PAGE:53==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
fringes in the gold layer were only visible in a few 100nm of the entire 10µm long interface. The
interface was to the most part observed to be atomically ﬂat with few larger steps/slopes. The
two fringes seen on Figure 4.16 (b) and (c) were measured to be 3.2˚A ±0.2˚A and 3.0˚A ±0.2˚A.
From the molecular model of MoS2(4H) in [3] found through ICSD the distance between the
sulfur layers of MoS2 is 3.17˚A however direct interpretation of such distances should be made
with caution. Since the lamella was very thick it was attempted to polish it with Argon ions
to thin it. Since the previous lamellas had shown some degree of redeposition the thinning was
done from the other side to see if the redeposition was mainly from the protective platinum
layers which were impacted head on. Meaning that the Argon beam was impacting the lamella
from the substrate side and not the protective platinum side. Since the lamella was covered by
the grid from this view at low tilt angles the sample was tilted so that the angle of milling was,
following the convention in section 3.4, 10◦. The acceleration voltage used was 1.3kV the current
was 130pA. The milling was performed for 10 min on either side. No apparent redeposition
features were observed near the gold deposited carbon interface however the sapphire substrate
did show features consistent with amortization. On Figure 4.17 the same place on the lamella
is shown before and after ion thinning. The lamella is seen to be just thin enough after the
thinning for lattice fringes to be visible in the gold layer, but the diﬀerence is largest in the gold
particle on the far right. The feature near the surface was not present after the milling at this
location. Due to the lamella being thinner a region where a dip was present in the gold layer
became visible and revealed numerous layers on top of the gold. This region is shown on Figure
4.18. The fringes were measured to be 6.2±0.2˚A, consistent with multi layers of MoS2, in the
area where they were the most pronounced. In the other areas of the shown region they were
measured to be from 5˚A to 7 ˚A. The large spread is likely to be due to bending and overlapping
of the fringes.
Page 49 of 102
==PAGE:54==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a)
Gold
sapphire
interface
showing deposited molybde-
num phase segregating from
gold layer due to the low solu-
bility of molybdenum in gold.
(b) Gold carbon interface.
(c) Gold carbon interface.
Figure 4.16: TEM images of the MoS2 on Al2O3/Au sample.
(a) Before Ion thinning.
Experiment per-
formed the 30’th of March 2018
(b) After Ion thinning. Experiment performed
the 30’th of March 2018
Figure 4.17: Same place on the lamella before and after ion thinning.
Page 50 of 102
==PAGE:55==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
Figure 4.18: Gold carbon interface near a dip in the gold layer after ion polishing.
4.4
Method nr 4 - Carbon, gold protection, aggressive
gallium thinning, gallium polishing
From the previous sections it is seen that polishing with argon ions does create a thinner
lamella and redeposition artifacts can be minimized by milling from the substrate side. However
the lamella after polishing was still too thick and the low resolution of the Argon mill made
it impossible to judge the actual thickness while milling. The bending and twisting of the
lamella and manual nature of the thinning steps simply leaves a varying result, as seen by the
transparency of the gold layer in the previous lamellas, and therefore the preparation procedure
does not leave the exact same thickness every time. Therefore ﬁnding a universal milling scheme
would not be feasible and adjustments to the ﬁnal polishing step would have to be made for
every sample. Even though one could proceed in smaller steps for each lamella and checking
the results in the TEM between milling operations this would be very time consuming and
since there is always a risk of breaking the lamella when moving the grid from holder to holder
this was deemed to be a less than optimal. Most likely the lamella would be broken before
an optimal thickness would be achieved. Judging by the silicon substrate from the results of
the MoS2 sample on silicon/silicon dioxide the ﬁnal thinning steps does not leave too high
amounts of damage to the lamella in the regions where suﬃcient protection is found. These
things combined suggests that the lamella could be thinned during the thinning steps to the
desired thickness without noticeable artifacts if suﬃcient protection layers are deposited. Since
the combination of deposited carbon and gold prior to the lift out procedure gave the desired
Page 51 of 102
==PAGE:56==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
visible layer in method nr 3 no further adjustments to the protective layers were made. The
method was therefore adjusted so that thinning were made as aggressively as possible, that
is till the protection layers were almost gone in some parts and completely removed in others
so that in the transition between these locations, areas where there were suﬃcient protective
layers left while the lamella was still thin enough to image the gold layer should be found.
4.4.1
PtS2 on Al2O3/Au sample
Though no amorphorization artifacts were observed in the previously mentioned samples where
the protective layers were still remaining, a low kV polishing with the gallium beam in the FIB
equipment only takes a few minutes of the several hours long lift out procedure. Therefore a
ﬁnal polishing with 2kV 1pA gallium beam at an angle of 5◦was made for 2min on either side
for this sample. The same features as were shown to be voids underneath the gold layer in the
PtSe2 samples were observed with SEM during the lift out. Since they were found to be voids
underneath the surface and therefore not of direct interest in for this study the lift out made
from a ﬂat region away from these features.
Cross sectional TEM and STEM on Titan:
On Figure 4.19 an overview STEM-DF
image and a higher magniﬁcation TEM image of the lamella is shown. The bright area near
the bottom of (a) is seen to be the result of small crystal domain with a diﬀerent orientation
than the majority of the gold layer as seen on (b). On Figure 4.20 the gold deposited carbon
interface roughly 100nm further up the lamella from the bright feature in 4.19 (a). The interface
appears atomically ﬂat with clear [111] fringes visible and weakly visible [110] fringes. The gold
layer near the interface was measured to be 84±3nm thick from low-loss EELS where the mean
free path for gold was taken from [31]. Near the surface regions, with a thickness of roughly 10˚A
to 5˚A, of features are observed which are qualitatively diﬀerent than those in the gold region.
The high visibility of lattice fringes and the few artifacts observed at the gold deposited carbon
interface suggests that the deposition layers used oﬀer suﬃcient protection and visibility while
the thinning and polishing method leaves a suﬃciently thin sample for high resolution imaging.
Since the features seen here are not only a certain lattice fringe spacing they were chosen for
comparison with simulated images. This is shown in Section 5.1.
Page 52 of 102
==PAGE:57==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Cross sectional STEM-DF
image acquired on Titan mi-
croscope at the 22’nd of June
2018 at DTU-CEN.
(b) TEM image of the bright region near the bottom of (a).
Acquired at the 20’th of June 2018 at DTU-CEN.
Figure 4.19: Overview STEM image and high resolution TEM image of the diﬀerently oriented
region in the gold layer giving the bright diﬀraction contrast in the STEM image.
Page 53 of 102
==PAGE:58==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.20: TEM images of the gold deposited carbon interface.
Page 54 of 102
==PAGE:59==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
4.4.2
PtSe2 on Al2O3/Au sample
On Figure 4.21 the gold and protective layer interface is shown for the two lamellas prepared
with the method nr 4. The surface is clearly too uneven in the viewing direction for imaging
of the interface and the protective carbon coating is nowhere to be seen. The interface showed
these features along the entire length of the lamella. The most simple possible explanations
for this are the patterns during the platinum deposition had drifted, that the lamella had too
high degree of beam damage due to excessive thinning, that the lamella was uneven prior to
the lift out or that the arc evaporation did not leave a suﬃciently thick protective carbon layer.
The thickness was measured to be 69±6nm3 with EELS which is not much thinner than the
PtS2 sample which showed a very ﬂat interface. The transition from electron beam deposited
platinum and gallium beam deposited platinum was found on the second lamella. The platinum
gold surfaces had not show this uneven features previously hence it is unlikely that the platinum
gold alloy in this sample should have this distinct feature prior to the lift out. This only leaves
the carbon layer being too thin. Even though the arc evaporation was done with the same
parameters as for the PtS2 sample (125A current in six bursts of 30s through the rods) the
sharpening, ﬁtting and therefore ﬁnal contact is manual which gives a fair amount of variation
in the deposition rate. Furthermore the carbon rods occasionally give oﬀsparks which could
damage the sample.
(a) Image of the Gold and protection layer
interface of the ﬁrst lamella made with with
method 4 of the PtSe2 on Al2O3 sample. .
(b) Image of the gold and protection layer
interface of the second lamella made with
method 4 of the PtSe2 on Al2O3 sample.
Figure 4.21: TEM images of the gold deposited carbon interface of the two lamellas made from
the PtSe2 samples.
4.4.3
MoS2 on Al2O3/Au sample
On Figure 4.22 the interface of the lamella prepared with method nr 4 of the MoS2 sample on
Al2O3/Au substrate is shown. The interface is almost atomically ﬂat and in several regions
3The inelastic mean free path was taken from [31]
Page 55 of 102
==PAGE:60==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
showed qualitatively diﬀerent features along the gold carbon interface from regular Au. Mostly
the regions were too wide to be mono layers (>1nm) but in a few regions features small enough
to be mono layers were found.
The images showing the clearest features were chosen for
comparison with simulated images. The thickness was measured from low loss EELS to be
80±5nm in the gold layer near the gold carbon interface.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.22: Images of the gold and protection layer interface of the lamella made with method
4 of the MoS2 on Al2O3 sample.
4.5
Summary
Method nr 1:
This preparation procedure was based on the TEM lamella preparation
manual and involved heavy thinning and no protection layers applied prior to the lift out
procedure.
Only a single lamella was prepared with this method.
The examined lamella
Page 56 of 102
==PAGE:61==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
was extracted from a sapphire wafer on which Tungsten and gold had been deposited and
subsequently exposed to Selenium vapor to grow Tungsten Diselenide.
The lamella was in
general thin enough for TEM investigations which showed a dominantly mono crystalline Au
layer by diﬀraction experiments.
The TEM investigations showed two types of diﬀraction
contrast, a stripe in the bottom of the gold layer, more or less randomly distributed regions in
the gold layer and a fairly rugged gold surface. The bottom stripe was shown by STEM-EDS
measurements to be the deposited Tungsten layer which had not alloyed with the gold layer.
Method nr 2:
Based on the results from method nr 1 this procedure was adjusted in three
ways.
The electron beam deposited platinum layer was made thicker, gold was sputtered
onto the surface prior to the lift out and the thinning was made less aggressively. The logic
being that extra protection was layers could be necessary to preserve the 2D material and
the sample could be thinned afterwards with Argon ions.
Three samples were made with
this procedure. The samples prepared was, the same bulk sample as prepared with method
nr 1. A sapphire wafer onto which platinum and gold had been deposited and subsequently
exposed to Selenium vapor to grow platinum diselenide on the gold surface. A sample with
molybdenum disulﬁde transferred from the previous type of sample onto a Silicon wafer with
a thermally grown Silicon dioxide layer on top. The two samples from the sapphire wafers
showed little diﬀerence compared to method nr 1 apart from being a little less transparent
and while thinning with Argon ions did make the samples more transparent artifacts likely
to be caused by redeposition were observed to cover the gold surface. The argon ions were
impacting the lamella from the protection layer side. The lamella prepared from the Silicon
wafer showed that the sputtering of gold had probably destroyed or at least made detection
due to shadowing monolayers of the 2D material impossible since only fringes consistent
with multilayers of molybdenum disulﬁde were found in only two locations on the entire lamella.
Method nr 3:
The results from method nr 2 showed that the sputtered gold layer was
deﬁnitively masking and perhaps destroying the 2D material on the surface.
Therefore it
was chosen to arc evaporate carbon on to the surface prior to sputtering gold. The thinning
procedure was the same apart from the thinning with Argon ions which was made such that
the ions were impacting from the Sapphire substrate side.
A single lamella was prepared
with this method from a sapphire wafer with molybdenum and gold deposited on top and
subsequently exposed to sulfur to grow molybdenum disulﬁde on the gold surface. The lamella
was far too thick for TEM investigations prior to argon polishing and still quite thick after.
The gold was observed not to alloy evenly with the molybdenum layer. A single spot where lat-
tice fringes consistent with multilayers of molybdenum disulﬁde was found after argon thinning.
Method nr 4:
From method 3 it was clear that more Argon polishing than feasible would be
required to get the sample thin enough for the gold layer to sustain lattice fringes and overall
visibility if the same thinning scheme with the gallium beam were used. Therefore the same
thinning procedure as the one used in method 1 was used since it had given suﬃciently thin
samples. Three lamellas prepared with this method was made, all with arc evaporated carbon
and sputtered gold layers deposited prior to the lift out procedure. The samples were in general
Page 57 of 102
==PAGE:62==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
thin enough for gold fringes to be visible and also some other features along the edge of the
gold protection layer interface for the MoS2 and PtS2 samples but not for the PtSe2 sample
where the carbon deposition most likely did not leave enough material to protect from the gold
sputtering. The samples thicknesses were measured from low loss EELS to be 60-90nm near
the gold protection layer interface. The results from the MoS2 and PtS2 samples suggest that
the protection layers are suﬃcient to protect the 2D material during preparation, or at least
does so little damage that material is left to examine in some regions, and that the samples are
thin enough that information of few atomic layers near the gold surface can be obtained with
HRTEM at least.
Page 58 of 102
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5
Structural determination of 2D
materials by comparison with
simulated images
Ideally the sample would be thin and stable enough for HAADF STEM and STEM-EELS
measurements, which would give directly interpretable results. Both were attempted for the
PtS2 sample but due to the thickness of the sample achieving high enough resolution with
a focused probe in the gold layer was simply not possible.
This can be understood if one
considers that the probe is cone shaped along the beam direction where the width of this
cone in the sample roughly gives the resolution achievable. With a thickness of 80nm and a
convergence angle of 8mrad, which were used in the attempts, and an ideal setting of the focal
length in the center of the sample gives a largest cone width of 0.32nm which is larger than the
largest lattice spacing of gold. However it was still be possible to distinguish the [111] planes
on top of a large diﬀuse background in some regions. The resolution was not high enough
to resolve layers near the deposited carbon layer or the [110] planes. With the preparation
method allowing for resolving few atomic layers between the gold substrate and the protective
carbon layer in the PtS2 and MoS2 sample with HRTEM an attempt at characterizing these
layers should at least be made. The main problem with characterizing sample base solely on
HRTEM is that the resulting images are not directly interpretive but instead comparison with
simulations have to be made in one way or another. Since the parameter space is too big
to search completely if all parameters (aberrations, atomic positions, atomic species) are set
completely free and since the contrast can in general not be compared on an absolute scale, just
minimizing the diﬀerence between the simulated image and the measured image and employing
an optimization algorithm would not be feasible. Instead a more manual approach, allowing
for ﬁxing of certain parameters to keep the computational costs within reasonable limits while
keeping the approximations made known, was employed. Also to keep computational demands
within the hardware limits the number of slices per nm was limited to 300-375 depending
slightly on the length of the structure. There are two categories of these ﬁxed parameters, the
parameters regarding the imaging and the parameters regarding the atomic structure of the
sample. The parameters and approximations used for the imaging are:
• The imaging may be computed as described in (2.4) and the cross term coeﬃcient (see
[32] for extra details) responsible for extra attenuation of the transfer function is therefore
assumed to be separable.
59
==PAGE:64==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
• The Illumination is perfectly parallel.
• Only chromatic aberration, spherical aberration and defocus contribute to the coherent
contrast transfer function.
• The chromatic aberration coeﬃcient Cc is 1mm.
• The spherical aberration coeﬃcient Cs is 0.1mm, which is roughly the value measured
when tuning the image corrector of the Titan microscope prior to ﬁne tuning.
• The spread in beam energy is 1.8eV (measured FWHM of zero loss peak in EELS) giving
a focal spread of
1.8eV
300keV Cc = 6nm.
• The addition of Poisson noise corresponding to a dose of 5000 electrons/˚A2(mean value
of the distribution) is the only eﬀect of the camera/detection.
The approximations regarding the atomic structure of the sample are:
• The sample consists of a single crystal of gold with a monolayer of the 2D material on
one of the [111] surfaces whereas the other is bare gold. This allows for comparison of
both types of interfaces. The amorphous carbon layer is not taken into account.
• In the viewing direction the 2D material is as thick as the gold layer.
• No restructuring eﬀects are taken into account and the crystal structure of the 2D material
and the gold are taken as the bulk structures found through ICSD.
• The thickness of the sample is the average thickness measured from low loss EELS. The
measured thicknesses were for the PtS2 sample 84nm±3nm and for the MoS2 sample
80nm±5nm.
Page 60 of 102
==PAGE:65==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
5.1
PtS2
On Figure 5.1a and 5.1b two cutout, of the acquired images chosen for comparison with simu-
lated images are shown. These two regions were chosen since they were the ones with the most
visible features in the fringes closest to the deposited carbon layer.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.1: Regions from images chosen for comparison.
On Figure 5.2 the two structures chosen for initial qualitative comparison with the measured
images are shown. The orientation of the 2D material was chosen on the basis of the crystal
structure from [10] found through ICSD. The reason for only choosing these two orientations,
is that the acquired images show dots, which often correspond to columns of atoms. These
two orientation types are the only orientations where columns of atoms are aligned with the
viewing direction, given that the c axis of the crystal structure is perpendicular to the viewing
direction. As a starting point the gold to sulfur layer distance was set to 2.52˚A which is that
of the bulk interlayer distance in the PtS2 structure. This is probably not the actual distance
between the gold and the sulfur layers but does give a starting point.
Page 61 of 102
==PAGE:66==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a)
PtS2
unit
cell
viewed
along the layering direction
(along the c crystal axis di-
rection). The crystallographic
data
was
taken
from
[10]
though ICSD and viewed with
ASE (Atomic Simulation En-
vironment). The sulfur atoms
are yellow and the platinum
atoms are gray.
(b) Atomic model with the
PtS2 layer orientated with the
z/beam direction along the −→a
direction.
(c) Atomic model with the
PtS2 layer orientated with the
z/beam direction along the
−→a −−→b direction.
Figure 5.2: Illustration of unit cell and atomic model used to calculate the simulated images.
The bonding distance of the 2D material and the gold surface (gold to sulfur plane) is set to
the distance between the PtS2 layers (sulfur to sulfur plane) in the bulk which is 2.5169˚A.
On Figure 5.3 simulated images for the two atomic models considered for diﬀerent defocus values
are shown. The simulated images of the structure shown in Figure 5.2b does not qualitatively
agree with the simulated images. Furthermore the simulated signal would most likely in a
real situation merely be a blur. This does agree with the regions found during the experiment
where a blurry wide line was observed between the gold fringes and the deposited carbon
layer, however anything not clearly visible would also agree in that situation. The pure gold
surface (the left side on the simulated images) does not directly capture the features seen in the
simulated images either. The simulated images of the structure shown in Figure 5.2c does for
defocus values of -10nm and -15nm show the same qualitative features as seen in the acquired
images in Figure 5.1b and Figure 5.1a. The poor signal to noise ratio in 5.1a does however
make for a very rough agreement. Purely judging by looking at two images with diﬀerent scales
is obviously not the most accurate way of determining the agreement in the size of the features.
This can, to some extent, be done with averaged line scans. To facilitate comparison of the
width of the peaks and features the curves have been aligned vertically and horizontally. The
line scan perpendicular to the 2D material has been aligned based on the two outer most fringes
whereas the line scan along the 2D material has been aligned based on the center peak. On
Figure 5.4 averaged line scans of the simulated image for the defocus value which gave the best
qualitatively agreeing features and the image from Figure 5.1b is shown.
Page 62 of 102
==PAGE:67==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Defocus 0nm. PtS2 −→a direction along
beam.
(b) Defocus -5nm.
PtS2 −→a
direction
along beam.
(c) Defocus -10nm.
PtS2 −→a direction
along beam.
(d) Defocus -15nm.
PtS2 −→a direction
along beam.
(e) Defocus 0nm. PtS2 −→a −−→b direction
along beam.
(f) Defocus -5nm. PtS2 −→a −−→b direction
along beam.
(g) Defocus -10nm. PtS2 −→a −−→b direc-
tion along beam.
(h) Defocus -15nm. PtS2 −→a −−→b direc-
tion along beam.
Figure 5.3: Simulated images of a monolayer of PtS2 on a gold [111] surface viewed in cross
section for diﬀerent defocus values for the two structures considered.
Page 63 of 102
==PAGE:68==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Measured image from Figure 5.1b.
(b) Simulated image with the defocus (-
23nm) giving the best qualitative agree-
ing features.
(c) Averaged vertical line plots of the high-
lighted red region in (a) and (b)
(d) Averaged horizontal line plots of the high-
lighted yellow region in (a) and (b)
Figure 5.4: Comparison of the best qualitatively agreeing simulated image and the measured
image.
The averaged line scans show a fair agreement for the vertical line scan, and in the region to the
far right in the horizontal line scan where the fringes from the PtS2 layer are present (to the far
right of the plot). The general slope of the line scan from the measured image is expected to be
the result of the dark and delocalized diﬀraction contrast observed previously in the gold layer
and is therefore not taken into consideration in the comparison. The distance between the 2D
material and the gold seems to be set incorrectly based on the poor alignment of the fringes
from the gold region. This is to be expected due to the fairly arbitrary binding distance chosen.
To see if the agreement of the simulated image could be made better, a range of simulations
with diﬀerent distance between the gold layer and the 2D material was made. The results of
these simulations can be seen in the Appendix 7.3.1 Additional simulated images of PtS2 on Au.
Averaged line scans of the images with the defocus value giving the best qualitative agreeing
features from the same regions as shown above can be seen on Figure 5.5, 5.6 and 5.7. The
vertical line scan (yellow region) shows a fair agreement for gold-sulfur binding distances from
2.1˚A and upwards. The features from the horizontal line scan (red region) shows a generally
good agreement for the fringes from the PtS2 layer, but the features near the gold layer are best
captured for bonding distances set to 2.15˚A, 2.2˚A and 2.25˚A. The best estimate of the bonding
distance between the gold layer and PtS2 (measured from gold layer to closest sulfur layer)
Page 64 of 102
==PAGE:69==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
with this method is therefore be 2.2±0.05˚A. In total the comparison with simulated images has
shown a fair agreement of a PtS2 layer on top of the gold [111] plane oriented such that the
−→a −−→b direction is along a [110] type direction on the gold with a bonding distance of the PtS2
layer to the gold surface of 2.2±0.05˚A.
Page 65 of 102
==PAGE:70==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Defocus -20nm, Au-S distance 2˚A. Red re-
gion.
(b) Defocus -20nm, Au-S distance 2˚A. Yellow
region
(c) Defocus -23nm, Au-S distance 2.1˚A. Red
region.
(d) Defocus -23nm, Au-S distance 2.1˚A. Yel-
low region
(e) Defocus -24nm, Au-S distance 2.15˚A. Red
region.
(f) Defocus -24nm, Au-S distance 2.15˚A. Yel-
low region
Figure 5.5: Comparison of averaged line scans from the regions shown in 5.4 for simulated
images with the distance between the gold and sulfur layer set to 2.0˚A, 2.1˚A and 2.15˚A.
Page 66 of 102
==PAGE:71==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Defocus -24nm, Au-S distance 2.2˚A. Red
region.
(b) Defocus -24nm, Au-S distance 2.2˚A. Yel-
low region
(c) Defocus -24nm, Au-S distance 2.25˚A. Red
region.
(d) Defocus -24nm, Au-S distance 2.25˚A. Yel-
low region
(e) Defocus -24nm, Au-S distance 2.3˚A. Red
region.
(f) Defocus -24nm, Au-S distance 2.3˚A. Yellow
region
Figure 5.6: Comparison of averaged line scans from the regions shown in 5.4 for simulated
images with the distance between the gold and sulfur layer set to 2.2˚A, 2.25˚A and 2.3˚A.
Page 67 of 102
==PAGE:72==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Defocus -24nm, Au-S distance 2.4˚A. Red
region.
(b) Defocus -24nm, Au-S distance 2.4˚A. Yel-
low region
(c) Defocus -24nm, Au-S distance 2.6˚A. Red
region.
(d) Defocus -24nm, Au-S distance 2.6˚A. Yel-
low region
Figure 5.7: Comparison of averaged line scans from the regions shown in 5.4 for simulated
images with the distance between the gold and sulfur layer set to 2.4˚A and 2.6˚A.
5.2
MoS2
This Section follows the same method as the structural characterization of PtS2 sample (Section
5.1). On Figure 5.8a and 5.8b the two cutout of the acquired images chosen for comparison with
simulated images are shown. These two regions were chosen since they were the ones with the
most visible features in the fringes closest to the deposited carbon layer. Since the image seen
on ﬁgure 5.8a has a too low signal to noise level to compare with line scans only the image seen
in ﬁgure 5.8b was compared to the simulated image with line scans. A monolayer of MoS2 has
essentially the same crystal structure as that of PtS2, therefore the same type of orientations of
the MoS2 layer were simulated. This is again by the same logic that columns of atoms can give
rise to dots in in HRTEM images as the ones seen in the experimental images. On ﬁgure 5.10
simulated images for diﬀerent defocus values, for the two orientations considered, are shown
on ﬁgure 5.9. The closest match is the orientation with the −→a −−→b along the beam direction.
Page 68 of 102
==PAGE:73==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
However the agreement is in general poor for both types. The reason for the poor agreement
could be due to the high distance of 2.98˚A between the sulfur and gold atoms.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.8: Regions from images chosen for comparison with simulated images.
(a)
MoS2
unit
cell
viewed
along the layering direction
(along the c crystal axis di-
rection). The crystallographic
data was taken from [3] though
ICSD and viewed with ASE
(Atomic Simulation Environ-
ment).
The sulfur atoms are
yellow and the molybdenum
atoms are green.
(b) Atomic model with the
MoS2 layer orientated with the
z/beam direction along the −→a
direction.
(c) Atomic model with the
MoS2
layer orientated with
z/beam orientated with the
z/beam direction along the
−→a −−→b direction.
Figure 5.9: Illustration of bulk unit cell and atomic model used to calculate the simulated
images. The bonding distance of the 2D material and the gold surface (gold to sulfur plane)
is set to the distance between the MoS2 layers (sulfur to sulfur plane) in the bulk which is
2.9766˚A.
Page 69 of 102
==PAGE:74==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Defocus 0nm.
MoS2 −→a
direction
along beam.
(b) Defocus -5nm.
MoS2 −→a direction
along beam.
(c) Defocus -10nm.
MoS2 −→a direction
along beam.
(d) Defocus -15nm.
MoS2 −→a direction
along beam.
(e) Defocus 0nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b direction
along beam.
(f) Defocus -5nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b direction
along beam.
(g) Defocus -10nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b direc-
tion along beam.
(h) Defocus -15nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b direc-
tion along beam.
Figure 5.10: Simulated images of a monolayer of MoS2 on a gold [111] surface viewed in cross
section for diﬀerent defocus values for the two structures considered.
Page 70 of 102
==PAGE:75==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Measured image from ﬁgure 5.8b with in-
dication of regions from which averaged line
scans were made.
(b) Simulated image with the defocus (-10nm)
giving the best qualitative agreeing features
with indication of regions from which averaged
line scans were made.
Figure 5.11
On ﬁgure 5.11 the regions where the line scans compared in ﬁgure 5.12 and 5.13 were made are
shown. They were aligned in the same way as the line scans of PtS2 on gold. The simulated
images can be seen in Appendix 7.3.2. The general agreement is indeed diﬃcult to asses even
though the binding distance of 2.1˚A and 2.2˚A does give the best peak to peak distance. The
signal to noise ratio in the experimental image is indeed at a level where it is diﬃcult to reject a
structure based on comparison of the line scans, especially since a pure gold surface and MoS2
on a gold surface for the compared distances does not give qualitative diﬀerent results as seen
in the line scans. On ﬁgure 5.14a averaged line scans for a pure gold surface is compared to the
averaged line scans from the experimental image. The agreement between the pure gold surface
and the gold surface with MoS2 on top with this type of comparison is in fact almost equally
good. The features in the data are just not pronounced enough to make the distinction between
the two structures even though the experimental image shows a pronounced feature along the
deposited carbon layer. However if one looks closely at the measured image the gold shows a
contrast reversal from left to right which could suggest a thickness variation. The outermost
two fringes might just be a step in thickness of the gold layer. This shows the clear weakness
of the method. The structure has to produce images with qualitatively diﬀerent features which
are highly visible. The initial simpliﬁed guess of the atomic structure has to match the actual
atomic structure. Otherwise results regarding the atomic structure of the sample are diﬃcult
to obtain in an unambiguous way.
Page 71 of 102
==PAGE:76==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Defocus -11nm, Au-S distance 2.0˚A. Red
region.
(b) Defocus -11nm, Au-S distance 2.0˚A. Yel-
low region
(c) Defocus -11nm, Au-S distance 2.1˚A. Red
region.
(d) Defocus -11nm, Au-S distance 2.1˚A. Yel-
low region
(e) Defocus -11nm, Au-S distance 2.2˚A. Red
region.
(f) Defocus -11nm, Au-S distance 2.2˚A. Yellow
region
Figure 5.12: Comparison of averaged line scans from the regions shown in 5.11 for simulated
images with the distance between the gold and sulfur layer set to 2.0˚A, 2.1˚A and 2.2˚A.
Page 72 of 102
==PAGE:77==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Defocus -11nm, Au-S distance 2.3˚A. Red
region.
(b) Defocus -11nm, Au-S distance 2.3˚A. Yel-
low region
(c) Defocus -11nm, Au-S distance 2.4˚A. Red
region.
(d) Defocus -11nm, Au-S distance 2.4˚A. Yel-
low region
(e) Defocus -11nm, Au-S distance 2.5˚A. Red
region.
(f) Defocus -11nm, Au-S distance 2.5˚A. Yellow
region
Figure 5.13: Comparison of averaged line scans from the regions shown in 5.11 for simulated
images with the distance between the gold and sulfur layer set to 2.3˚A, 2.4˚A and 2.5˚A.
Page 73 of 102
==PAGE:78==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a)
(b) Averaged line scan for the red region,
shown in ﬁgure 5.14a, compared to the aver-
aged line scan from the acquired image.
(c) Averaged line scan for the yellow region,
shown in ﬁgure 5.14a, compared to the aver-
aged line scan from the acquired image.
Figure 5.14: Comparison of the experimental averaged line scans with averaged line scans over
a pure gold surface from a simulated image.
Page 74 of 102
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
This report has documented, the process of developing a preparation method for characteriza-
tion of 2D materials on gold surfaces directly from the bulk, to use for cross sectional transmis-
sion electron microscopy characterization. The lift-out method used for the sample preparation
along with considerations of the possible eﬀects of beam exposure during the sample prepa-
ration. The characterization methods, including the multislice algorithm for image simulation
and principle component analysis for noise reduction in spectral imaging. The characterization
from comparison of simulated images with HRTEM images.
In this project, the inﬂuence of milling schemes and protection layers of the the sample prepara-
tion of 2D materials for TEM characterization has been investigated in an iterative manner. In
total 10 lamellas were prepared with the lift out procedure as part of the iterative adjustments
made to the milling schemes and protective layers. The sample preparation was adjusted in
four major steps starting from a method nr 1 the standard method only relying on ion and
electron beam deposited platinum layers. This method was used to make a lamella from a
sample consisting of a sapphire substrate with a gold layer on top, where there was supposed to
be one or several layers of WS2. The sample was thin enough for TEM investigations but did
not show features corresponding to a 2D material near the surface. An attempt at protecting
the 2D material was made with method nr 2, by depositing gold onto the surface prior to the
lift out procedure, and thinning less aggressively with the gallium beam but thinning with low
kV argon ions afterwards. The WS2 sample, a similar sample but with PSe2 and a sample of
MS2 transferred to a silicon wafer with silicon dioxide on top was examined with this method.
No apparent diﬀerences were observed from method nr 1 to nr 2 in the WS2 and PtSe2 samples
other than lamellas being thicker prior to thinning with broad beam argon milling and showing
redeposition features after. The MS2 sample showed that the deposited gold layer was deﬁni-
tively shielding the 2D material and perhaps destroying it. To make the 2D material visible in
cross section carbon was arc evaporated onto the surface prior to depositing gold in method nr
3. A sample consisting of a sapphire substrate with a gold layer where MoS2 was examined.
The redeposition features were minimized during argon milling by changing the milling direc-
tion and the gold surface was made visible by the deposited carbon, but the lamella did not
achieve a satisfactory ﬁnal thickness. The milling scheme was therefore changed in method 4
to be as aggressive as possible. Three samples prepared with this method were examined. A
PtS2, PtSe2 and a MoS2 sample all with sapphire gold substrates. The PtS2 and MoS2 samples
were measured to be roughly 80nm thick and showed clearly visible lattice fringes in the gold
layer with a clear gold carbon interface and features along the interface which could be the 2D
75
==PAGE:80==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
materials. The PtSe2 sample did not show a clear interface between the gold and deposited
layers, most likely due to the deposited carbon layer not being thick enough.
The samples were too thick for STEM investigations which would have been the ideal charac-
terization method. The samples were suitable for HRTEM investigations and comparison with
simulated images. Ranges of simulated images based on the the measured energy spread of the
beam, the sample thickness measured with EELS and crystal structures from ICSD were made
for varying binding distances and defocus values was compared with the images of the PtS2 and
MoS2 samples. The agreement for the PtS2 sample was in general fairly good for the PtS2 layer
oriented with the −→a −−→b crystal direction of the PtS2 layer along a [110] direction on the gold
layer. The best agreement was found for binding distances between the PtS2 layer and gold in
the rage 2.15˚A to 2.25˚A. For the MoS2 sample the agreement was fair but problematic due to
the features of MoS2 viewed in cross section either giving a single bright line or features which
are not qualitatively diﬀerent than a pure gold surface. The features of the best experimental
images showed contrast reversals in the gold layer suggesting the simpliﬁed atomic structure
used to make the simulations were a poor match. Distinction between the pure gold surface and
MoS2 on a gold surface were not possible to make with certainty on the basis of the acquired
images.
The sample preparation was adjusted to a level where the sample was thin enough and ho-
mogeneous enough in the viewing direction for HRTEM investigations and comparison with
simulated images to be meaningful. Comparison with simulated images are not always feasible,
some structures simply look too alike to distinguish with this method. Therefore further work
in the preparation method should be made, with emphasis on making a thinner sample. Method
nr 4 along with experiments with longer exposure at glazing angles with low kV gallium ions
after the ﬁnal thinning steps is likely to be a good staring point. Due to the high control over
tilt and rotation of the sample and high beam control when using the FIB equipment used for
the lift out procedure. If this does not give satisfactory results broad beam argon milling is the
last resort and should be made at with the ions impacting the sample from the substrate side
to reduce redeposition as observed previously in this work.
Page 76 of 102
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 7
77
==PAGE:82==
Bibliography
[1] DANY JOLY XAVIER TASTET VINCENT AIMEZ RAYNALD GAUVIN DO-
MINIQUE DROUIN1, ALEXANDRE R´EAL COUTURE. Casino v2.42—a fast and easy-
to-use modeling tool for scanning electron microscopy and microanalysis users. SCAN-
NING, 29:92–101, 2007.
[2] DANY JOLY XAVIER TASTET VINCENT AIMEZ RAYNALD GAUVIN DO-
MINIQUE DROUIN1, ALEXANDRE R´EAL COUTURE. monte carlo simulation of elec-
tron trajectories in solids (casino). http://www.gel.usherbrooke.ca/casino/, 2018.
[3] Prof. Dr. F. Jellinek Dr. K. D. Bronsema, Dr. J. L. De Boer. On the structure of molyb-
denum diselenide and disulﬁde. Zeitschrift f¨ur anorganische und allgemeine Chemie, 540:
15–17, 1986. doi: 10.1002/zaac.19865400904.
[4] EL Yates EA Owen. Precision measurements of crystal parameters. Philosophical Maga-
zine, 15:472–488, 1933.
[5] R. F. Egerton. Electron Energy Loss in the Electron Microscope, chapter 3.1.2 Physics of
Electron Scattering - Atomic models. Springer, 2011.
[6] R. F. Egerton. Electron Energy Loss in the Electron Microscope, chapter 5.1.1.1 Log-Ratio
method. Springer, 2011.
[7] Rolf Erni. Abberration - Corrected Imaging in Transmission Electron Microscopy, chapter
2. High-Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy. Imperial College Press, 2010.
[8] FEI. Titan manual. Technical report, FEI Company, 30 May 2006.
[9] Vidar Tonaas Fauske Pierre Burdet Eric Prestat Petras Jokubauskas Magnus Nord Mike
Sarahan Katherine E. MacArthur Duncan N. Johnstone Joshua Taillon Jan Caron Vadim
Migunov Tom Furnival Alberto Eljarrat Stefano Mazzucco Thomas Aarholt Michael Walls
Tom Slater Florian Winkler Ben Martineau Ga¨el Donval Robert McLeod Eric R. Hoglund
Ivo Alxneit Ida Hjorth Trond Henninen Luiz Fernando Zagonel Andreas Garmannslund
Francisco de la Pe˜na, Tomas Ostasevicius. Hyperspy. http://hyperspy.org/, 2018.
[10] Haakon Haraldsen Frederik Grønvold and Arne Kjekshus.
On the sulﬁdes, selenides
and tellurides of platinum.
Acta Chemica Scandinavica, 14(9):1879–1893, 1960.
doi:
10.3891/acta.chem.scand.14-1879.
[11] Chengze Liu Fusen Yuan Fuzhou Han Lifeng Zhang Songquan Wu Hengfei Gu, Geping Li.
Considerable knock-on displacement of metal atoms under a low energy electron beam.
Scientiﬁc Reports, 7, 2017. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-00251-3.
78
==PAGE:83==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
[12] I.T. Jolliﬀe. Principle Component Analysis, chapter 1.1 Deﬁnition and derivation of prin-
ciple components. Springer, 2002.
[13] I.T. Jolliﬀe. Principle Component Analysis, chapter 3.7 Inference Based on Sample Prin-
cipal Components. Springer, 2002.
[14] I.T. Jolliﬀe. Principle Component Analysis, chapter 3.5 Singular Value Decomposition.
Springer, 2002.
[15] Naoko I. Kato. Quantitative comparison of high-resolution tem images with image simu-
lations. Ultramicroscopy, 53:191–203, 1994. doi: 10.1016/0304-3991(94)90034-5.
[16] Michael R. Keenan and Paul G. Kotula. Accounting for poisson noise in the multivariate
analysis of tof-sims spectrum images.
SURFACE AND INTERFACE ANALYSIS, 36:
203–212, 2004.
[17] Earl J. Kirkland. Advanced Computing in Electron Microscopy second edition, chapter 6.2
The wave equation for fast electrons. Springer, 2010.
[18] Earl J. Kirkland. Advanced Computing in Electron Microscopy second edition, chapter 6.4
The multislice solution. Springer, 2010.
[19] Christoph Koch. DETERMINATION OF CORE STRUCTURE PERIODICITY AND
POINT DEFECT DENSITY ALONG DISLOCATIONS. Phd thesis, ARIZONA STATE
UNIVERSITY, 2002.
[20] Andre Geim Konstantin Novoselov. Electric ﬁeld eﬀect in atomically thin carbon ﬁlms.
Science, 306(10):666–669, 2004. doi: 10.1126.
[21] S.M. Schwartz J.K. Lomness B.I.Prentizer F.A. Stevie L.A. Giannuzzi, B.W. Kempshall.
Introduction to Focused Ion Beams, chapter 10. FIB Lift-Out Specimen Preparation Tech-
niques. Springer, 2005.
[22] Jacob Madsen. Quantitative Image Simulation and Analysis of Nanoparticles. Phd thesis,
Technical University of Denmark, 2017.
[23] Kin
Fai
Mak,
Changgu
Lee,
James
Hone,
Jie
Shan,
and
Tony
F.
Heinz.
Atomically
thin
mos2:
A
new
direct-gap
semiconductor.
Phys.
Rev.
Lett.,
105:136805,
Sep
2010.
doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.105.136805.
URL
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.105.136805.
[24] Xue Zhou Guangqi Zhang Hongyun Zhang Kenan Zhang Wei Yao Nianpeng Lu Shuzhen
Yang Shilong Wu Tomoki Yoshikawa Koji Miyamoto Taichi Okuda Yang Wu Pu Yu Wen-
hui Duan Mingzhe Yan, Eryin Wang and Shuyun Zhou. High quality atomically thin ptse2
ﬁlms grown by molecular beam epitaxy. 2D materials, 4(4):666–669, 2017.
[25] C. Colliex N. Bonnet, N. Brun. Extracting information from sequences of spatially resolved
eels spectra using multivariate statistical analysis. Ultramicroscopy, 77:97–112, 1999.
[26] No¨el Bonnet Pierre Trebbia.
Eels elemental mapping with unconventional methods i.
theoretical basis: image analysis with multivariate statistics and entropy concepts. Ultra-
microscopy, 34:165–178, 1990.
Page 79 of 102
==PAGE:84==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
[27] Steve Reyntjens. Tem preperation notes. Technical report, FEI Company, 30 May 2006.
[28] M. Malac R.F. Egerton, P. Li. Radiation damage in the tem and sem. Micron, 35:399–409,
2004. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micron.2004.02.003.
[29] Abhay Shivayogimath. Large-scale Fabrication of 2D Materials by Chemical Vapor Depo-
sition. Phd thesis, DTU, 2017.
[30] Daniela K¨unzel Axel Groß3 Simon Kurasch, Jannik C. Meyer and Ute Kaiser. Simula-
tion of bonding eﬀects in hrtem images of light element materials. Beilstein Journal of
Nanotechnology, 2(1):394–404, 2011. doi: 10.3762/bjnano.2.45.
[31] M. BHATTACHARYA B. SATPATI T. GHOSH, M. BARDHAN. Study of inelastic mean
free path of metal nanostructures using energy ﬁltered transmission electron microscopy
imaging. Journal ofMicroscopy, 258:253–258, 2015. doi: 10.1111/jmi.12240.
[32] M. Op de Beeck D. Van Dyck W.M.J. Coene, A. Thust. Maximum-likelihood method for
focus-variation image reconstruction in high resolution transmission electron microscopy.
Ultramicroscopy, 64(1-4):109–135, 1996.
[33] James F. Ziegler. The stopping range of ions in matter (srim). http://www.srim.org/,
2018.
Page 80 of 102
==PAGE:85==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
7.1
Appendix - Simulated ion penetration depths and
trajectories and electron energy distributions
(a) Incidence angle 0◦to the surface nor-
mal.
(b) Incidence angle 0◦to the surface nor-
mal.
(c) Incidence angle 3◦to the surface nor-
mal.
(d) Incidence angle 3◦to the surface nor-
mal.
(e) Incidence angle 38◦to the surface nor-
mal.
(f) Incidence angle 38◦to the surface nor-
mal.
Figure 7.1: Simulated trajectories and resulting ion distributions for Ga ions in a Au target
based on 5×103 trajectories for each angle. Ga ions energy set to 30keV.
Page 81 of 102
==PAGE:86==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Incidence angle 52◦to the surface
normal.
(b) Incidence angle 52◦to the surface
normal.
Figure 7.2: Simulated trajectories and resulting ion distributions for Ga ions in a Au target
based on 5×103 trajectories. Ga ions energy set to 30keV.
Page 82 of 102
==PAGE:87==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Incidence angle 0◦to the surface nor-
mal.
(b) Incidence angle 0◦to the surface nor-
mal.
(c) Incidence angle 3◦to the surface nor-
mal.
(d) Incidence angle 3◦to the surface nor-
mal.
(e) Incidence angle 38◦to the surface nor-
mal.
(f) Incidence angle 38◦to the surface nor-
mal.
Figure 7.3: Simulated trajectories and resulting ion distributions for Ga ions in a Pt target
based on 5×103 trajectories for each angle. Ga ions energy set to 30keV.
Page 83 of 102
==PAGE:88==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Incidence angle 52◦to the surface
normal.
(b) Incidence angle 52◦to the surface
normal.
Figure 7.4: Simulated trajectories and resulting ion distributions for Ga ions in a Pt target
based on 5×103 trajectories. Ga ions energy set to 30keV.
Page 84 of 102
==PAGE:89==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Incidence angle 0◦to the surface nor-
mal.
(b) Incidence angle 0◦to the surface nor-
mal.
(c) Incidence angle 3◦to the surface nor-
mal.
(d) Incidence angle 3◦to the surface nor-
mal.
(e) Incidence angle 38◦to the surface nor-
mal.
(f) Incidence angle 38◦to the surface nor-
mal.
Figure 7.5: Simulated trajectories and resulting ion distributions for Ga ions in a C target
based on 5×103 trajectories for each angle. Ga ions energy set to 30keV.
Page 85 of 102
==PAGE:90==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Incidence angle 52◦to the surface
normal.
(b) Incidence angle 52◦to the surface
normal.
Figure 7.6: Simulated trajectories and resulting ion distributions for Ga ions in a C target
based on 5×103 trajectories. Ga ions energy set to 30keV.
Page 86 of 102
==PAGE:91==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Incidence angle 85◦to the surface
normal. Au target.
(b) Incidence angle 85◦to the surface
normal. Au target.
(c) Incidence angle 85◦to the surface nor-
mal. Pt target.
(d) Incidence angle 85◦to the surface
normal. Pt target.
(e) Incidence angle 85◦to the surface nor-
mal. C target.
(f) Incidence angle 85◦to the surface nor-
mal. C target.
Figure 7.7: Simulated trajectories and resulting ion distributions for Ar ions in a Au/Pt/C
target based on 104 trajectories for each material. Ar ions energy set to 1keV.
Page 87 of 102
==PAGE:92==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Incidence angle 85◦to the surface
normal. Au target.
(b) Incidence angle 85◦to the surface
normal. Au target.
(c) Incidence angle 85◦to the surface nor-
mal. Pt target.
(d) Incidence angle 85◦to the surface
normal. Pt target.
(e) Incidence angle 85◦to the surface nor-
mal. C target.
(f) Incidence angle 85◦to the surface nor-
mal. C target.
Figure 7.8: Simulated trajectories and resulting ion distributions for Ga ions in a Au/Pt/C
target based on 104 trajectories for each material. Ga ions energy set to 2keV.
Page 88 of 102
==PAGE:93==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Incidence angle 0◦to the surface nor-
mal. Au target.
(b) Incidence angle 52◦to the surface
normal. Au target.
(c) Incidence angle 0◦to the surface nor-
mal. Pt target.
(d) Incidence angle 25◦to the surface
normal. Pt target.
(e) Incidence angle 0◦to the surface nor-
mal. C target.
(f) Incidence angle 52◦to the surface nor-
mal. C target.
Figure 7.9: Simulated penetration depth of electrons incident on a Au/Pt/C target based on
105 trajectories for each material. Electrons kinetic energy set to 2keV.
Page 89 of 102
==PAGE:94==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Incidence angle 0◦to the surface nor-
mal. Au target.
(b) Incidence angle 52◦to the surface
normal. Au target.
(c) Incidence angle 0◦to the surface nor-
mal. Pt target.
(d) Incidence angle 52◦to the surface
normal. Pt target.
(e) Incidence angle 0◦to the surface nor-
mal. C target.
(f) Incidence angle 52◦to the surface nor-
mal. C target.
Figure 7.10: Simulated penetration depth of electrons incident on a Au/Pt/C target based on
105 trajectories for each material. Electrons kinetic energy set to 5keV.
Page 90 of 102
==PAGE:95==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
7.2
Appendix - SE images of lift out procedure
Figure 7.11: SE image generated with the electron beam of sample after Pt deposition (Step
1,2).
Page 91 of 102
==PAGE:96==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
Figure 7.12: SE image generated with the electron beam of sample after the rough cut and
rough cleaning (step 3,4).
Page 92 of 102
==PAGE:97==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
Figure 7.13: SE image generated with the electron beam of sample after the undercut (step 5).
Figure 7.14: SE image generated with the ion beam of sample after the attachment to TEM
grid (step 7).
Page 93 of 102
==PAGE:98==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
7.3
Appendix - Additional characterization results
(a) Indexed diﬀraction of sapphire corresponding
to a [110] zone axis from the sample made with
preparation method 3.
Page 94 of 102
==PAGE:99==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Zoomed in Fourier transform of the aligned silicon substrate
with measured angles and distances converted to inter planar spac-
ing.
(b) Calculated diﬀraction pattern with indexing for Silicon on a (110) zone axis.
Figure 7.15
Page 95 of 102
==PAGE:100==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
7.3.1
Additional simulated images of PtS2 on Au
(a) Defocus -12nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.0˚A.
(b) Defocus -16nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.0˚A
(c) Defocus -20nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.0˚A
(d) Defocus -24nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.0˚A
(e) Defocus -12nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.1˚A.
(f) Defocus -16nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.1˚A
(g) Defocus -20nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.1˚A
(h) Defocus -24nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.1˚A
Figure 7.17
Page 96 of 102
==PAGE:101==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Defocus -12nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.15˚A.
(b) Defocus -16nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.15˚A
(c) Defocus -20nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.15˚A
(d) Defocus -24nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.15˚A
(e) Defocus -12nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.2˚A.
(f) Defocus -16nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.2˚A
(g) Defocus -20nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.2˚A
(h) Defocus -24nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.2˚A
Figure 7.18
Page 97 of 102
==PAGE:102==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Defocus -12nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.25˚A.
(b) Defocus -16nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.25˚A
(c) Defocus -20nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.25˚A
(d) Defocus -24nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.25˚A
(e) Defocus -12nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.3˚A.
(f) Defocus -16nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.3˚A
(g) Defocus -20nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.3˚A
(h) Defocus -24nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.3˚A
Figure 7.19
Page 98 of 102
==PAGE:103==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Defocus -12nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.4˚A.
(b) Defocus -16nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.4˚A
(c) Defocus -20nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.4˚A
(d) Defocus -24nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.4˚A
(e) Defocus -12nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.6˚A.
(f) Defocus -16nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.6˚A
(g) Defocus -20nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.6˚A
(h) Defocus -24nm.
PtS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.6˚A
Figure 7.20
Page 99 of 102
==PAGE:104==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
7.3.2
Additional simulated images of MoS2 on Au
(a) Defocus -7nm.
MoS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.0˚A.
(b) Defocus -11nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.0˚A
(c) Defocus -15nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.0˚A
(d) Defocus -19nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.0˚A
(e) Defocus -7nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b di-
rection along beam.
Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.1˚A.
(f) Defocus -11nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.1˚A
(g) Defocus -15nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.1˚A
(h) Defocus -19nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.1˚A
Figure 7.21
Page 100 of 102
==PAGE:105==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Defocus -7nm.
MoS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.2˚A.
(b) Defocus -11nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.2˚A
(c) Defocus -15nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.2˚A
(d) Defocus -19nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.2˚A
(e) Defocus -7nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b di-
rection along beam.
Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.3˚A.
(f) Defocus -11nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.3˚A
(g) Defocus -15nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.3˚A
(h) Defocus -19nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.3˚A
Figure 7.22
Page 101 of 102
==PAGE:106==
2D materials: Sample preparation
and electron microscopy characterization
Anton Bay Andersen
(a) Defocus -7nm.
MoS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.4˚A.
(b) Defocus -11nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.4˚A
(c) Defocus -15nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.4˚A
(d) Defocus -19nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.4˚A
(e) Defocus -7nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b di-
rection along beam.
Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.3˚A.
(f) Defocus -11nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.5˚A
(g) Defocus -15nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.5˚A
(h) Defocus -19nm. MoS2 −→a −−→b
direction along beam. Au to S dis-
tance set to 2.5˚A
Figure 7.23
Page 102 of 102
