==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Active flap control for improved wind farm operation 
 
 
     Burak Turan 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0242 
August 2018 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Title: Active flap control for improved wind farm operation 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0242 
August 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
 
Project Period:  
February - August 2018 
 
ECTS: 35 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisors: 
Helge Aagaard Madsen 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
Athanasios Barlas 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
     
     
 
 
    
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Wind Energy, Technical University of
Denmark for the purpose of meeting the requirements for the Master of Science degree in
wind energy. The master project has been conducted from 28th of February 2018 to the
28th of August 2018. The thesis deals with the potential of ATEFlap control system in
wind farm operations.
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisors Thanasis Barlas and Helge
Aagaard Madsen for their help and guidance throughout the project. Furthermore, I would
like to thank Tuhfe Göcmen for providing a Matlab script in order to analyze the wake
deﬁcit in downstream wakes.
At last, I would like to thank my family for always supporting me in my choices regarding
my education.
s120396: Burak Turan
i
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis deals with deformable Active Trailing Edge Flaps (ATEFlaps) in wind farm
operations. ATEFlaps were utilized on each blade of the DTU 10MW Reference Wind
Turbine. The idea of using ATEFlaps was to alleviate fatigue loads, and eliminate extreme
loads in the blade root with simultaneous optimization of the power output, by using a
dedicated control strategy. The ATEFlap controller is independent of the pitch-regulating
main controller, and it has three main objectives with following strategies:
• Reducing fatigue loads in the blade root in the full load region.
• Reducing extreme loads in the blade root in both partial and full load region.
• Optimizing the Annual Energy Production (AEP) in the partial load region.
Four diﬀerent wake scenarios are initially investigated with the fatigue load controller,
and the most aerodynamically loaded scenario was chosen for further investigation, with
a series of combinations of the ATEFlap control objectives and corresponding strategies
listed above.
The BEM-based aeroelastic code HAWC2 is used in all aeroelastic simulations. Pdap and
Matlab are used to post-process the data.
The last part of the project deals with the downstream wake, emitted by the upstream
turbine equipped with ATEFlaps. Two wind farms are modeled, and the downstream
velocity deﬁcit were calculated using the analytical Gaussian wake deﬁcit model. The
power production of the downstream turbine was then calculated, in order to see the
potential of ATEFlaps in collective use e.g. in wind farms.
The results led to the conclusion that ATEFlaps improves the operation of the turbine it
is mounted on. A reduction in the fatigue loads in the blade root and an increase in the
AEP is observed. However, when ATEFlaps are used in wake exposed turbines without
the AEP optimization objective, the obtained load alleviations is a matter of trade oﬀwith
the power production.
The wake analysis revealed that turbines equipped with ATEFlaps are creating a fraction
of more wake deﬁcit in downstream direction. This extra deﬁcit has a negative impact on
the power production of the downstream turbine. Assessing the two wind farm models, no
notable overall AEP is obtained. However, in both wind farm models, an overall reduction
of the loads in the blade root were observed.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
ii
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Learning Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Analysis Tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
HAWC2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
Simulation Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Deformable Active Trailing Edge Flaps (ATEFlaps)
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Implementation of ATEFlaps in HAWC2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Dynamic Wake Meandering Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.1
Modeling the Velocity Deﬁcit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.2
Modeling the Wake Meandering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.3
Modeling the Rotor Induced Turbulent Eﬀects
. . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
DTU 10MW Reference Wind Turbine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Design Load Basis in Accordance with IEC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5.1
Wind Turbine Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5.2
Design Load Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5.3
Annual Energy Production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Controller Tuning of ATEFlaps
14
3.1
DTU 10MW RWT Main Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Fatigue Load Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Extreme Load Controller
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
AEP Optimization Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Wake Eﬀects on Downstream Turbine
22
5
Fatigue Load Reduction with ATEFlaps
24
6
Extreme Load Reduction with ATEFlaps
29
6.1
Deactivating The Fatigue Load Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7
AEP Improvement with Optimal Flap Tracking
34
7.1
Parametric Sweep for Optimal Flap Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7.2
AEP Optimization in 3D Downstream Half Wake Operation . . . . . . . . .
37
8
Baseline with ATEFlaps
42
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
9
Wake Analysis Using Gaussian Wake Deﬁcit
44
9.1
Gaussian Wake Deﬁcit Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
9.2
Veriﬁcation of the Analytical Wake Deﬁcit Model using HAWC2
. . . . . .
47
9.3
Wake Analysis: Case 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
9.3.1
Wake Deﬁcit and Power Loss in Downstream Turbine
. . . . . . . .
49
9.4
Wake Analysis: Case 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
9.4.1
Wake Deﬁcit and Power Loss in Downstream Turbine
. . . . . . . .
53
9.5
Comparison: Case 1 vs Case 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
10 Wake Analysis Using HAWC2
56
10.1 Wake Analysis with HAWC2: Case 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
10.2 Wake Analysis with HAWC2: Case 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
11 Conclusion
60
11.1 Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
11.1.1 Maximum Gain Using ATEFlaps in Wind Farms . . . . . . . . . . .
62
11.1.2 Suggestion to Automatic Controller Calibration . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
11.2 Evaluation of Learning Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Bibliography
65
A IEC 61400-1 Design Load Cases
67
B Supplementary Plots
69
B.1
Fitted Gain Scheduling for the Fatigue Load Controller
. . . . . . . . . . .
69
B.2
Wake Analysis Case 1: Weighted Thrust Coeﬀ. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
B.3
Wake Analysis Case 2: Weighted Thrust Coeﬀ. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
B.4
Wake Analysis Case 1: Thrust Coeﬀ. along Blade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
B.5
Wake Analysis Case 2: Thrust Coeﬀ. along Blade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
C MATLAB codes
78
C.1
Create htc. Files from Masterﬁle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
C.2
Initializing Design Load Cases in HAWC2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
C.3
AEP Calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
C.4
Function to Import HAWC2 Files to MATLAB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
C.5
Legendre-Gauss Quadrature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
C.5.1
Function to Legendre-Gauss Quadrature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
C.6
Analytical Wake Deﬁcit Model: User Input
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
C.6.1
Gau_s.m
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
C.6.2
get_dUeq.m
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
C.6.3
get_dU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
iv
==PAGE:7==
Introduction 1
The ﬁeld of wind energy has in the last couple of decades been a high focus area with an
intense investigation and signiﬁcant developing rate. Green energy in general is recognized
as a highly attractive phenomenon for countries worldwide, especially when the present
researches on climate changes and its negative impact on our planet are taken into
consideration. The usual approach towards ﬁghting climate changes is to supply a bigger
portion of the energy demand through renewable energy sources, wind energy being one of
the more popular types. The researchers and the market are in an attempt to improve the
wind turbines in order to reduce the cost of energy (CoE) of wind farms, thus making the
industry more attractive for investors. A simpliﬁed CoE is expressed in following equation:
CoE =
ECR · CC
AEP

+
OMC + LRC
AEP
+ LUC

(1.1)
Where the AEP is the annual energy production, ECR is the ﬁxed electrical charge rate,
CC is the capital cost of the turbine, OMC is the operational and maintenance cost, LCR
is the levelized replacement cost and the LUC is the land use cost. In terms of decreasing
the CoE with an engineering approach, increasing the AEP is of the highest priority.
Increasing the AEP can be accomplished by increasing the power output of the turbine or
by increasing the lifetime of the turbine. The ﬁrst option can be realized by expanding
the rotor area, and hereby the rated power output of the wind turbine. This will however
reﬂect on the capital cost in form of extra material cost as a trade-oﬀ. Another approach is
assuming that none of the existing turbines are aerodynamically optimal, in the sense that
it operates signiﬁcantly below Betz limit. The operational performance of the wind turbines
could be enhanced with more sophisticated control strategies, e.g. by extracting more
power from the wind when the turbine is operating below rated power, or by alleviating
fatigue loads acting on turbine components and hereby extending the lifetime, which
contributes positively to the CoE. The latter option is widely used in up to date turbines
in form of collective- and individual blade pitching (active regulation), or stall regulation
(passive regulation). The active regulation is known to be the more sophisticated of
these methods. In Hansen et al. [1] a description of a pitch-regulated full load controller
adapted to the DTU 10MW Reference Wind Turbine is explained. The paper explains the
basics of optimizing the power production with simultaneous load reduction in the turbine
components. The majority of the existing wind turbines are equipped with pitch regulated
control systems. The industry however, demands more sophisticated load controls in order
to minimize the CoE, thus increasing the potential ﬁnancial beneﬁts with investments in
the wind turbine industry.
1
==PAGE:8==
1. Introduction
A paper by Barlas et al. [2] based on aerospace research investigates and evaluates, among
other control systems, the Active Trailing Edge Flaps (ATEFlaps). These deformable
ﬂaps are located on the trailing edge of each rotor blade and operates independently of the
pitch-regulating full load controller, working as an external supportive technology with its
own control strategy or strategies. Further investigations on this subject is carried out in
the papers Barlas et al. [3, 4, 5], Markou et al. [6] and Pettas [7], validating the potential
of this control system.
The existing literature primarily validates the positive impact of ATEFlaps on the turbine
it is implemented on, but the investigation of how ATEFlaps are contributing to the
downstream wake deﬁcit created by the upstream turbine is yet to be addressed. The
motivation of this thesis is therefore not limited to the eﬀect of the ATEFlaps on the
turbine it is mounted on, but does also include the eﬀects on the downstream turbines, in
order to evaluate its performs in collective operations in wind farms.
1.1
Learning Objectives
Based on the considerations made, this report aims to investigate the performance of
ATEFlaps, furthermore a wake analysis study will be carried out with the purpose of
investigating the wake deﬁcit caused by ATEFlaps and how it impacts on the operation of
the downstream turbine.
Following, a more comprehensive list of learning objectives for this project are listed:
• Understand the operation of ATEFlaps in wind turbines.
• Understand the wake emitted by a upstream wind turbine.
• Investigate the time response of DTU 10MW RWT in ambient conditions and in
wake operations without the ATEFlap control system.
• Investigate the fatigue loads in the blade root with a dedicated control strategy using
ATEFlaps.
• Investigate the extreme loads in the blade root using ATEFlaps, both as sole control
objective and combined with the fatigue load controller.
• Investigate the AEP using ATEFlaps, both as sole control objective and combined
with the fatigue load controller and the extreme load controller.
• Implement simple tuning methods for each control objective and study the best
control strategy for each controller in an iterative process of calculations throughout
the project.
• Implement a simple analytical wake deﬁcit model in an attempt to analyze the wake
deﬁcit emitted by upstream turbines equipped with ATEFlaps.
The majority of the calculations will be carried out using the aeroelastic tool HAWC2.
Furthermore, Matlab and Pdap (Python Data Analyzing Program) will be used to
pre-process and post-process the data.
2
==PAGE:9==
Background 2
2.1
Analysis Tools
In this chapter the numerical tools used in the aeroelastic simulations are described along
with the pre- and post-processing tools to handle the data. Furthermore, a detailed
description of the simulation setup is presented.
2.1.1
HAWC2
HAWC2 also known as Horizontal Axis Wind turbine simulation Code 2nd generation is
an aeroelastic code intended for calculations of a wind turbine response in the time domain.
The code is developed in DTU - Wind Energy Department between the years 2003-2007
and is generally used for design and veriﬁcation purposes.
HAWC2 is a two piece code in terms of simulating horizontal axis wind turbines, the ﬁrst
part being the structural Finite Element Method (FEM) based on a multibody formulation.
It divides the turbine into individual bodies and uses the Timoshenko beam elements to
describe them. The second part of the code consists of the aerodynamic part following
the formulation of Blade Element Momentum method (BEM), this model is capable of
calculating the dynamic inﬂow, skew inﬂow, shear eﬀect on induction, eﬀect from large
blade deﬂections, tip loss, dynamic stall with diﬀerent models including ATEFlaps and
upstream emitted wakes using the Dynamic Wake Meander model (DWM). Once the
turbine is speciﬁed with all its properties, HAWC2 generates a wind ﬁeld replicating the
conditions formulated in the IEC standard 61400-1: Wind turbines - Part 1: Design
requirements [8] and it solves the equation of motion for the system in time using a
Newmark scheme. The essence of the Blade Element Momentum method is explained by
Hansen in [9], and further details about the HAWC2 software can be provided from their
web-page and in the user manual [10, 11].
Data ﬁles for DTU 10MW RWT compatible with HAWC2 are provided by HAWC2
including the operational, structural, aerodynamic and control properties.
In order to establish the simulation in HAWC2, the mathematical software Matlab and
the text editor Notepad++ is used as pre-processing tools. Matlab is also used as a
post-processing tool along with the Python Data Analysis Program (Pdap).
3
==PAGE:10==
2. Background
2.1.2
Simulation Setup
Define input and 
output in 
Masterfile
Generate .htc 
files using the 
Masterfile
Run all the .htc 
files in HAWC2
HAWC2 
simulation 
completed
Import the 
output to data 
analsyis program
The output is 
ready for 
analysis
Pre-processing
Post-processing
Figure 2.1: Illustration of pre and post-processing of the output data shown in simple steps.
First step of the pre-processing part is to alter the master ﬁle and include the required
parameters in order to specify the desired simulation, the required user input parameters
in the masterﬁle are listed below:
• Include the turbine data provided by HAWC2 governing the operational, structural,
aerodynamic and control properties.
• Specify the wind and turbulence. HAWC2 has built-in turbulence options in terms
with the IEC standards [8].
• The simulation time for each .htc ﬁle.
• Deﬁne the output sensors.
The text editor Notepad++ is utilized to alter the masterﬁle.
The .htc ﬁles can now be generated based on the masterﬁle using a compatible Matlab
script for code. The .htc ﬁles contains basically the same information speciﬁed in the
masterﬁle, but there is an .htc ﬁle for each wind speed and each seed of that wind speed.
We run the .htc ﬁles in HAWC2 with another Matlab script, this script automates the
HAWC2 operation so that each .htc ﬁle does not have to be initiated manually but all
the .htc ﬁles are run in one batch. The Matlab scripts mentioned above are provided
by supervisor Thanasis Barlas and can be found in Appendix C.1 and C.2 respectively.
When the simulation is completed, HAWC2 provides the output ﬁles ready to import into a
data analysis software. Both Pdap and Matlab has been used to analyze the output data.
In Pdap the built-in feature Full standard report is utilized in almost every simulation,
the feature generates a report containing statistics, extreme values and fatigue loads using
the output sensors. The sensors can also be monitored individually. In Matlab mainly
4
==PAGE:11==
2. Background
the AEP is calculated using the output data from HAWC2. The output ﬁles are imported
into Matlab utilizing a standardized Matlab function called ReadHawc2.m and can be
found in Appendix C.4.
2.2
Deformable Active Trailing Edge Flaps (ATEFlaps)
Using active ﬂap system for control purposes is not a new engineering approach, but the
advanced use and the objective of the ﬂaps in this context is new. In older generation
wind turbines these types of ﬂaps was only used in active stall controlling, exclusively to
regulate and brake the rotor without an eye for the energy output, but with a new set of
control strategies the possibilities are much wider.
Figure 2.2: Trailing edge ﬂap connected to the strain gauge measuring the blade root bending
moment.
The ATEFlap model is an external control system which is used to regulate the lift in
wind turbine blades.
Cl = (α, β)
(2.1)
The lift coeﬃcient Cl is a function of the angle of attack α, the ATEFlap includes this
new parameter into the equation in form of the deformable ﬂap angle β. The mechanical
function of ATEFlap is strictly based on the lateral deﬂection of the ﬂap in both directions.
The angle of attack varies constantly due to the changing wind and turbulence. When
the angle of attack is changing, the lift coeﬃcient varies as well and the turbine is no
longer operating at designed lift, here the ATEFlaps becomes handy by giving us the
option to regulate the lift. However, the respond of the ﬂaps is solely based on the utilized
control strategy. The control of the ﬂaps are independent of the main control system of
the turbine.
Leonardo Bergami gives an comprehensive description of the ATEFlaps aerodynamic model
in his textbook [12] including the input to the model in form of steady- lift, drag and
moment coeﬃcients. In ﬁgure 2.3 the steady lift are presented as a function of angle
of attack α and the ﬂap angle β. The steady lift is deﬁned as the weighted sum of the
attached lift force and the separated lift force.
5
==PAGE:12==
2. Background
The ﬁgure is an excellent illustration of how the β angle can be used to manipulate the
aerodynamic forces (lift, drag and moments). In this speciﬁc illustration, the ﬂaps have 20
degrees of deﬂection limit, and the positive direction of the deﬂection clearly increases the
Cl while the negative direction of deﬂection decreases this value.
Figure 2.3: Illustration of the steady lift coeﬃcient as a function of angle of attack (α) and the
ATEFlap angle (β) [12].
The ATEFlap controller has one input, which is the ﬂapwise blade root bending moment.
The blade root moment is measured using a strain gauge, a strain gauge is a sensor which
converts a mechanical change in the blade root into electrical resistance, this signal is sent
to the ﬂaps, which gives the output parameter as a uniform trailing edge ﬂap deﬂection.
The ﬂaps are not automatically responding to every bending in the blade root, they are
coupled to a controller with speciﬁc settings. The investigated ATEFlaps in this report
has 3 control objectives:
• Fatigue loads in the blade root (in ﬂapwise direction).
• Extreme loads in the blade root (in ﬂapwise direction).
• AEP optimization.
Note that these three controller objectives can be set with diﬀerent strategies. An example
of a control strategy is activating the fatigue load controller only in the full load region and
activating the AEP optimization controller in the partial load region in order to prevent
an interaction between the two controller objectives. The tuning of the controller in terms
of diﬀerent objectives is described in details in chapter 3.
The investigated ATEFlap has a length of 25.9m positioned from 56.1m to 82.0m on the
blade and it has a maximum deﬂection limit of ±10 degrees. The ﬂap position on the
6
==PAGE:13==
2. Background
reference wind turbine DTU 10MW is illustrated in ﬁgure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: The position of the ﬂap on the DTU 10MW RWT blade.
2.2.1
Implementation of ATEFlaps in HAWC2
The implementation of ATEFlap aerodynamic model in the BEM-based aero-elastic tool
HAWC2 is carried out by Leonardo Bergami [13].
The ﬁrst part of the implementation is the pre processor algorithm consisting of 2 input
data ﬁles; the Clean Airfoil which contains the aerodynamic data in form of Cl, Cd and
Cm as a function of angle of attack for an airfoil without ATEFlaps. The second data is
the Flap Delta-steady containing the steady variation of Cl, Cd and Cm as a function of
the ﬂap deﬂection in diﬀerent angle of attacks (cf. ﬁgure 2.3).
The pre processor generates an output ﬁle in .ds format, this will be used as input by the
ATEFlap aerodynamic model in HAWC2. Next step is the altering of the masterﬁle, here it
is required to deﬁne the ﬂap as any of the other components in the wind turbine. In order
to utilize the ﬂaps it is mandatory to substitute current stall model with ATEFlap dynamic
stall model and include the .ds ﬁle along with a deﬁnition of the ﬂap with respect to the
length and position along the blade in spanwise direction. The ﬂap is deﬁned automatically
in all the blades of the rotor and cannot be utilized in only one blade. The command for
ATEFlaps dynamic stall model in HAWC2 is prescribed as dynstall_ateflap and it is
assigned number 3 in the stall model order. The ATEFlap dynamic stall model can be
utilized even if there is no ﬂaps involved, thus it is used in all simulations in this study in
order to establish consistency in the results.
Furthermore, the implementation of ATEFlap contains a servo model in order to include
the mechanical response of the ﬂaps. The servo model is speciﬁed under the Dynamic
Link Library interface and it uses the instant ﬂap deﬂection calculated in the time step
as input. The output is the ﬂap signal, which is ﬁltered with a 1.st order low pass ﬁlter
and used as input in the aerodynamic calculation, this is causing a minor time delay. In
our simulations, the ﬂap actuator time constant is kept at 0.1s and the ﬂap deﬂection is
limited to ±10 degrees.
Another speciﬁed DLL is the controller of the ATEFlap. The controller can use any
output of HAWC2 as input parameter and adjust the ﬂap response based on this selected
7
==PAGE:14==
2. Background
parameter.
2.3
Dynamic Wake Meandering Model
Wake is a phenomenon causing engineering problems when it comes to wind turbines.
A turbine standing alone is facing only the ambient wind and the ambient turbulent
intensity. This turbine is not exposed to any wake but the turbine itself generates a wake
deﬁcit in downstream direction as it is extracting the momentum of the ambient wind
and converts it into electrical power. The wake deﬁcit describes the decrease in wind
velocity in downstream direction after the momentum in the ambient wind is harvested
by the upstream turbine. In wind farms, the downstream located turbines are exposed
to upstream generated wakes, ﬁgure 2.5 illustrates a wind farm with 3 turbines all with
diﬀerent operational conditions. The upstream turbine is facing the ambient wind and
turbulence, the second turbine operates in full wake condition with a inner spacing of
x number of rotor diameter D to turbine one, and the last turbine is operating in half
wake with an inner spacing and an angular oﬀset of D/2. Rotors operating in half wake
conditions tent to be higher loaded in terms of fatigue. This is due to the constant variation
of forces acting on the blades as the blades rotates in and out of the wake zone continuously
exhausting the material.
           Ufree
           
Uwake
Figure 2.5: Illustration of a wind farm with multiple wake sources.
The traditional aeroelastic model is suﬃcient enough to predict the dynamic response
and the power production of turbines operating in the ambient wind, but turbines in
downstream wakes has always been hard to predict as the BEM theory with traditional
wake prediction only focus on either the loads or the power production. Contrary the
traditional models the DWM model can predict both the loads and the power production
8
==PAGE:15==
2. Background
simultaneously. It makes it possible to analyze the signiﬁcance of wake deﬁcits in wind
farms by having the feature of modeling not just one but several wake sources. This
decipher the possibility of a comprehensive investigation regarding the chain eﬀects of
the wake. With a better description of the wake, the DWM model gives rise to a unique
opportunity to develop tailor-made control strategies using ATEFlap.
The model describes the wake as a passive tracer driven by large-scale turbulence structures.
The model contains three elements, which altogether describes the wake characteristic:
• Velocity deﬁcit in downstream direction.
• Downstream wake meandering process.
• The added wake turbulence.
2.3.1
Modeling the Velocity Deﬁcit
The main driver for the wake deﬁcit is the wake turbulence mixing with normal turbulence,
it is formulated in the moving meandering of the wake. The majority of the mixing causing
the deﬁcit occurs in the far wake region, but the pressure ﬁeld around the turbine in the
near wake region plays a critical role in the development of the deﬁcit. The deﬁcit is
expressed using the Navier-Stokes equation in 2.2 neglecting the pressure terms in the near
wake region as it is not the main driver of the deﬁcit.
U ∂U
∂x + V ∂U
∂r = νT
r
∂
∂r
h
r ∂U
∂r
i
(2.2)
U and V describes the mean axial and radial velocities, νT is the eddy viscosity and includes
the ambient turbulent intensity, which is a method proposed by Ainslie and is described in
his wake model [14].
The total eddy viscosity is expressed in following equation:
νT = F2k2b(U0 −Udef.min) + F1νTA
(2.3)
Where k2 is a constant for the ﬂow ﬁeld, b is the wake half width, F1 and F2 is ﬁlter
functions depending on the downstream position x and νTA is the viscosity depending on
the ambient turbulence intensity.
Besides the momentum equation in 2.2 the ﬂow continuity must also be meet:
1
r
∂
∂r(rV ) + ∂U
∂x = 0
(2.4)
2.3.2
Modeling the Wake Meandering
The wake meandering model is based on the description of the large-scale turbulence
structure acting as a transport media for the wake, and deﬁning the cut-oﬀfrequency for
when the structure is considered as large-scale. The meandering is thought as a cascade of
9
==PAGE:16==
2. Background
wake deﬁcits, each emitted at a consecutive time instant. The ﬁeld chosen as the transport
media is the Mann turbulence model [15].
The wake momentum for the large-scale lateral (y-directional) and vertical (z-directional)
turbulence velocities are not signiﬁcant compared to the momentum in the wind direction,
thus this can be neglected. However, the lateral and vertical wake displacements are
important as it is describing the position of the wake in time in the large-scale turbulence
ﬁeld in downstream direction.
The wake displacements in the lateral and vertical velocities v and w respectively, are
expressed in following equations:
dy
dt = vc(U[T −ti], y, z)
(2.5)
dz
dt = wc(U[T −ti], y, z)
(2.6)
Where T is the time interval seen in ﬁgure 2.6 and ti is the time where the velocity deﬁcit
ﬁrst occurs. The methodology of the meandering model can be found in Larsen et al.
[16, 17] and in Madsen et al. [18].
           Ufree
ti
t1
t2
t3
y
z
x
Figure 2.6: The wake dynamics as cascade elements in downstream direction. The wake is
generated at time ti and continuously ﬂows in downstream direction with a displacement.
2.3.3
Modeling the Rotor Induced Turbulent Eﬀects
The last element in the model is the rotor induced turbulent eﬀects, it is deﬁned as the
small-scale turbulence in the DWM model with eddy sizes up to one rotor diameter. The
added turbulent is a summation of mechanical generated turbulence caused by the tip
vortices, blade root vortices, blade bound vortices and the wake generated shear.
10
==PAGE:17==
2. Background
As a ﬁnal step, the resulting velocity ﬁeld in the downstream ﬂow ﬁeld is calculated. It is
a summation of the unsteady velocity from the wake meandering, wake added turbulence
and the ambient turbulence. The validation of the model is presented in Madsen et al. [18]
with both numerical models and experimental data.
2.4
DTU 10MW Reference Wind Turbine
All the aeroelastic calculations in this report are performed based on the DTU 10MW
Reference Wind Turbine. DTU 10MW RTW is a product of the increasing interest of
upscaling wind turbines throughout 1970’ies to the present date, it was developed as part of
the Light Rotor project initiated by DTU in cooperation with Vestas. One of the purposes
of designing a new wind turbine from scratch was to create a reference for future designs,
so that the performance of new rotors could be compared to the reference, but the main
reason for designing a completely new turbine was to understand the interaction within
the entire system (structural dynamics of the blades, tower dynamics and the drive train).
The key parameters for the turbine are speciﬁed in table 2.1, the aerodynamics, structural
layout, the control and the aeroelastic characteristics along with the design methods are
further speciﬁed in details in [19].
Table 2.1: Key parameters for the DTU 10MW RWT [19].
Parameter
DTU 10MW RWT
Wind Regime
IEC Class 1A
Control
Variable Speed Collective Pitch
Cut in wind speed
4 m/s
Cut out wind speed
25 m/s
Rated wind speed
11.4 m/s
Rated power
10MW
Number of blades
3
Hub Height
119 m
Rotor Diameter
178.3 m
Hub Diameter
5.6 m
Drivetrain
Medium Speed, Multiple- Stage Gearbox
Minimum Rotor Speed
6.0 RPM
Maximum Rotor Speed
9.6 RPM
Maximum Generator Speed
480 RPM
Gearbox Ratio
50
Maximum Tip Speed
90.0 m/s
The main controller has three features working separately in three diﬀerent control regions:
It varies the rotor speed in order to track optimal power below rated, this is speciﬁed as
control region 1. It uses collective pitch to regulate power above rated, this is speciﬁed as
control region 3, and then there is a transition region speciﬁed as control region 2 where it
has a switching mechanism in order to establish a smooth transition between below/above
rated power. The main controller is developed in the wind energy department of DTU,
the working mechanism is further described in chapter 3 and the development process for
11
==PAGE:18==
2. Background
a pitch-regulated controller along with the source code can be viewed in [20].
It should be noted that a single DTU 10MW RWT operating in ambient wind conditions
is subjected as baseline in this report.
2.5
Design Load Basis in Accordance with IEC
The manufacturer of the wind turbine is compelled to evaluate and assess the design in
accordance with a standard deﬁning the minimum design requirements. There is a variety
of existing standards among manufacturing countries, however the most recognized and
used standard is provided by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). In
extension with this report, the DTU 10MW RWT is subjected to the design requirements
presented in the IEC [8]. This standard includes wind conditions and load cases in terms
of identifying Ultimate loads (U) and Fatigue loads (F). The manufacturer is obligated
to make sure that the turbine design can withstand these loads during the lifetime of the
turbine, which is speciﬁed as minimum 20 years by the IEC.
2.5.1
Wind Turbine Classiﬁcation
The wind site which the turbine is expected to be located is deﬁned through classes as
shown in table 2.7. The presented deﬁnitions in the table do not represent any speciﬁc
wind site but are intended to represent many diﬀerent sites. Vref is the reference wind
speed, which is approximately 5 times higher than the mean wind speed in the site, it is
used to determine the wind distribution for the fatigue load and AEP calculations. Iref is
the turbulence intensity, and the letter A, B and C denotes the level of turbulence. The
value S should be speciﬁed by the designer in order to customize the classiﬁcation if the
turbine is operating in unconventional conditions e.g. in hurricanes or oﬀ-shore. Note that
all the parameters apply at hub height.
Figure 2.7: Classiﬁcation of wind turbines deﬁned in the standard IEC 61400-1 3rd edition [8].
The DTU 10MW RWT is classiﬁed as IA.
2.5.2
Design Load Cases
The standard includes a set of Design Load Cases covering the conditions the wind turbine
may experience. In the present work the load cases DLC11 and DLC12 are simulated.
12
==PAGE:19==
2. Background
• DLC11 - Normal production with normal turbulence model - it is used to analyze
ultimate loads based on extrapolation of data.
• DLC12 - Equivalent to DLC11, but used for fatigue load analysis.
All the DLCs in the standard can be viewed in appendix A.
According to the standard using DLC11 or DLC12, each wind speed should have 6 seeds
with diﬀerent turbulence intensities, and each seed has to be simulated for 10 minutes
in order to obtain reliable results. Furthermore, a yaw-misalignment of ±10 degrees for
each seed should be calculated. However, in the present work only 3 seeds for each wind
speed is used and no yaw-misalignment are included due to the heavy computational time.
The cases are simulated in windspeeds between 4-26m/s with 2m/s steps. Each case is
simulated for 700 seconds disregarding the ﬁrst 100 seconds because it is considered to be
transient.
The method for calculation of ultimate and fatigue loads are documented in the standard,
a simpliﬁed description can also be viewed in Andersen et al. [21].
2.5.3
Annual Energy Production
The annual energy production describes the expected energy output throughout the lifetime
of the turbine. The AEP is a important piece in the revenue calculations, a high AEP
aﬀects the revenue in a positive way and the revenue is the ultimate measure of a turbines
sustainability. There is no standardization regarding the AEP in the IEC standard, there
is only references to other requirements. The AEP is calculated using following equation:
AEP =
K
X
i=1
Pi · Vi · 8760
(2.7)
The P is the power output as a function of the windspeed, the V is the probability of i’th
windspeed to occur. The power is calculated with HAWC2 and the windspeed probability
is determined using the Weibull distribution in equation 2.8. The calculation is performed
using the Matlab code provided by supervisor Thanasis Barlas, it can be found in
Appendix C.3.
θ = exp

−

V −step
2
2u
√π
2
−exp

−

V + step
2
2u
√π
2
(2.8)
13
==PAGE:20==
Controller Tuning of
ATEFlaps 3
In this chapter, the main controller of the DTU 10MW RWT and the ATEFlap controller
are explained and described. Furthermore, the methodology of tuning the ATEFlap with
respect to diﬀerent control objectives are described.
3.1
DTU 10MW RWT Main Controller
The main controller of DTU 10MW Reference Wind Turbine is a pitch-regulating PI
controller. The control regions are deﬁned in following descriptions:
• The partial load region (region 1) - In this region the turbine is operating below
rated power and the controller is tracking for optimal power. It uses the rotor speed
as input parameter and the generator torque or the generator power as the feedback
term. In order to reach the optimal tip speed ratio, the output parameter is used to
correlate the rotor speed since the power is a function of the tip speed ratio Cp(θ, λ).
• The transition region (region 2) - In this region, the rated rotor speed is reached
and the generator torque is used to preserve the rotor speed at rated, notice that
both in region 1 and region 2 the pitch is kept at optimum.
• Full load region (region 3) - In this region, the rated power is reached. The
controller is using the collective pitching mechanism in order to regulate the rotor
speed, and it uses the generator torque to regulate the power in order to make sure
it is not exceeding the rated value.
The drive-trains and block diagrams for the controller can be found in [1, 20, 22].
14
==PAGE:21==
3. Controller Tuning of ATEFlaps
Figure 3.1: The behaviour of the rotor speed, power and the pitch in diﬀerent load regions with a
pitch-regulating controller [23].
The main controller is not edited in this report, the ATEFlap controller are implemented
as an addition to the main controller. In following sections the methodology of tuning the
ATEFlap with respect to diﬀerent control objectives are described.
3.2
Fatigue Load Controller
The fatigue load controller is a proportional derivative (PD) controller. It is a single input
controller with the blade root bending moment (ﬂapwise) as input, the value is high pass
ﬁltered in order to avoid any ﬂap response on low frequency loads. The gain scheduling is
a proportional term based on low pass ﬁltered windspeed. The control strategy is adapted
thus it always operates at the full load region where the power is above rated. A block
diagram for the fatigue load controller is shown in ﬁgure 3.2. The grid status indicates the
turbine status, if it is 0, then the turbine is out of operation and the ﬂap angle is ﬁxed.
The controller operates between 12-26m/s, outside these limit, the predeﬁned gain is kept
at constant. The only deﬁned parameter for the fatigue controller in this report is the
proportional gain along with the oﬀset.
 
Figure 3.2: The block diagram of the fatigue controller [7].
15
==PAGE:22==
3. Controller Tuning of ATEFlaps
A suitable gain scheduling for the controller is derived using a rather simple method, the
process is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.3.
Run case 
without 
ATEFlap
Find range of 
blade root 
loads (MxBR)
Make gain 
scheduling 
using simple 
method
Re-run the 
case in 
HAWC2
Done
Optimize variable 
manually
Is the flap 
response 
satisfying?
No
Yes
Figure 3.3: The tuning process of the ATEFlaps with fatigue load reduction as objective.
Step 1 is calculating the cases without ATEFlap, this part is executed in chapter 5. Step 2
16
==PAGE:23==
3. Controller Tuning of ATEFlaps
is analyzing the blade root moment of these cases. First, the average of all 3 seeds per
wind speed is found, then the range of this average is determined in order to utilize it in
equation 3.1. A typical time-series of the signal from the ﬂapwise blade root are presented
in ﬁgure 3.4:
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time [s]
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
Flapwis blade root moment [kNm]
104
Figure 3.4: Time-series of the ﬂapwise blade root bending moment in 16m/s of a wake operation
7D downstream.
The loads considered are not multiplied by any safety factor indicated by the IEC standard.
This is simply due to the fact that we want the controller to react on the real-time loads.
Proportional gains for every windspeed is obtained by using following equation:
δmax = Kp × ∆MxBR
(3.1)
∆MxBR = MxBR
2
(3.2)
Where δmax is the maximum deﬂection of the ﬂaps and ∆MxBR is the absolute range of
the ﬂapwise blade root bending moment divided by 2. The latter is used in order to get
the ﬂap to cover the widest range of load spectrum occurring in the blade root. Using
the following relation, the proportional controller gain Kp for each wind speed can be
determined:
Kp =
δmax
∆MxBR
(3.3)
In the present work, wind speeds from 16 to 22m/s is analyzed, loads in general close to
rated wind speed are deliberately excluded because these loads do not scale the same as
above rated due to the transition region.
Proportional gains for all wind speeds between 16-22m/s are calculated, these values are
then ﬁtted in order to determine a gain scheduling. Since the loading of the blade root is
various for every case, the gain scheduling also varies from case to case.
17
==PAGE:24==
3. Controller Tuning of ATEFlaps
Table 3.1: Proportional controller gains at diﬀerent wind speeds for a turbine in 7D downstream
in full wake operation.
Wind Speed
Unit
Kp
16m/s
[kNm/deg]
8.9368E-4
18m/s
[kNm/deg]
8.6485E-4
20m/s
[kNm/deg]
7.6353E-4
22m/s
[kNm/deg]
7.4505E-4
Figure 3.5: Fitted gain scheduling derived for the fatigue load controller in a turbine operating
7D downstream in full wake.
The initial gain scheduling for diﬀerent wake scenarios are presented in table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Derived gain scheduling for all wake operations.
Wake scenario
1.st order gain
Oﬀset
No wake
5.8E-5
2.0E-3
3D downstream full wake
2.8E-5
1.3E-3
3D downstream half wake
2.5E-5
1.3E-3
7D downstream full wake
2.7E-5
1.3E-3
7D downstream half wake
3.0E-5
1.4E-3
This simple method are not exactly intended for a feedback controller, but it should
indicate good initial results and it should reveal if the ﬂaps are saturated or unsaturated
so that new gains can be set manually. The rest of the tuning process is completed in
chapter 5, where the wake scenarios are simulated using initial gain schedules from table
3.2. If the ﬂap response is insuﬃcient, the gain scheduling is correlated manually until a
desired ﬂap response is obtained.
18
==PAGE:25==
3. Controller Tuning of ATEFlaps
The ﬁt of the initial gain schedules for the fatigue load controller can be viewed in Appendix
B.1.
3.3
Extreme Load Controller
The control approach in order to alleviate extreme loads are based on a load threshold.
When this threshold is breached the ﬂaps are instantaneously deﬂected in the negative
direction, thus applying an instant drop in the lift. An instant decrease in the lift alleviates
the extreme peaks of the loads. The block diagram of the controller is presented in ﬁgure
3.6. First, the grid status and the ﬁltered wind speed is checked, if the turbine is out of
operation, then a static ﬂap angle is assigned. If the turbine is in operation the MxBR loads
are checked, if the load threshold is breached a correction to the ﬂap angle is calculated, if
not then the ﬂap angle remains 0.
Figure 3.6: Block diagram for extreme load alleviating cut oﬀcontroller [7].
The extreme load controller is set to operate in all control regions and it can be enabled
simultaneously with the fatigue load- and AEP controllers.
The extreme load study with diﬀerent thresholds can be found in chapter 6.
3.4
AEP Optimization Controller
The ATEFlap control system is divided into 2 control regions, namely region 1 where it
operates below 10m/s trying to optimize the AEP by tracking the optimum ﬂap angle,
and region 2 where it operates above 12m/s (or rated wsp) in order to alleviate loads. The
ATEFlaps in terms of AEP and fatigue load control does not operate in the transition
region, only the extreme load controller has the strategy to operate within that region and
that is only if the load threshold is breached.
In the process of optimizing the AEP, we are only interested in region 1 as in the wind
speeds above 10m/s the power production is probably already at rated depending on the
operational conditions. The block diagram for this controller is presented in ﬁgure 3.7.
19
==PAGE:26==
3. Controller Tuning of ATEFlaps
When the ﬁltered wind speed is between the speciﬁed limits, a ﬂap angle is calculated as
the output value, outside the speciﬁed wind speeds the controller applies a steady ﬂap
angle.
 
Figure 3.7: Block diagram for AEP optimizing ﬂap controller [7].
In ﬁgure 3.8 power curves for the baseline and for 3D downstream half wake operations
are illustrated. The power loss in region 1 in the wake operation is signiﬁcant, which is
the main purpose of using the AEP control objective in wake operations. However, in
the present work the AEP control objective will also be utilized in the baseline, so the
potential of this control strategy can be investigated.
Figure 3.8: Mean power curve as a function of the wind speed for the baseline and for 3D
downstream half wake operation.
The method of determining a suitable gain scheduling for the AEP controller is based
on tracking the optimal beta angle (ﬂap angle). A parametric sweep is carried out with
initially qualiﬁed beta angles inspired by the studies of Pettas [7]. In order to track the
optimal beta a low pass ﬁlter is utilized, the reason for why low pass ﬁltered wind speeds
are used instead of real measured wind speeds is simply because the high-frequency signals
are desired to be avoided. Including the high frequencies impair the power production as
these frequencies only contribute as external noise.
20
==PAGE:27==
3. Controller Tuning of ATEFlaps
The following equation is used to determine the controller gains:
δ = a0 + a1V + a2V 2
(3.4)
Where a0 is the oﬀset for AEP optimal beta tracking based on the ﬁltered wind speed, a1
is the 1st order gain and a2 is the 2nd order gain.
The parametric sweep is carried out in chapter 7.
21
==PAGE:28==
Wake Effects on
Downstream Turbine 4
In this chapter, an initial study of the wake eﬀects on DTU 10MW RWT with diﬀerent
inner spacing and angular oﬀsets is carried out. As mentioned previously, four turbine
parameters are taken into account in the evaluation of the wind turbine operations, the
ﬂapwise fatigue loads in the blade root, the maximum ﬂapwise loads in the blade root, the
minimum blade-tower clearance, and the AEP.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1: (a) Power spectral density (PSD) of ﬂapwise blade root moment at 12m/s in no wake,
3D downstream full wake and 3D downstream half wake condition. b) PSD of ﬂapwise blade root
moment in no wake, 7D downstream full wake and 7D downstream half wake conditions. Note that
there is no active ﬂap system.
A Fast Fourier Transformation is performed using the signals measured in the blade
root, in order to characterize the dominating frequencies, which yields the Power Spectral
Density showing the energy variations as function of the frequency. 1P is the rotational
frequency of the rotor and is typically the dominating one. Figure 4.1 indicates that the
detectable energy in 3D downstream wake has both several and stronger energy variations
22
==PAGE:29==
4. Wake Eﬀects on Downstream Turbine
than those in 7D downstream wake. The results can be explained in terms of wake induced
turbulence and ambient wind mixing in the early far wake region (3D downstream), creating
strong but inconsistent wind exciting the 1P frequency. Deeper in the far wake region
(7D downstream) the wind is recovered and has a more uniform proﬁle, decreasing the
detectable variations.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.6: Comparison between 4 diﬀerent wake operation scenarios and the baseline operating in
ambient wind: (a) Flapwise fatigue, (b) ﬂapwise blade root bending moment, (c) the towerclearance
and (d) the annual energy production.
The comparison is done using the performance of the baseline as the reference frame. The
normalized values show that in general the turbines operating closer to the wake source
performs worse than those farther away. In all the cases this trend is complied except for
one, the minimum tower clearance at 7D downstream with no angular oﬀset seems to be
lower than all other cases. One should expect that the minimum tower clearance would be
associated with the maximum blade root moment, but it is not the case in this context, as
the half wake operation in 3D downstream has higher blade root moment than the full
wake operation in 3D downstream but it still has much lower minimum tower clearance,
hence it raises the conclusion that the minimum tower clearance is inﬂuenced by angular
oﬀset rather than inner spacing.
23
==PAGE:30==
Fatigue Load Reduction
with ATEFlaps 5
Table 5.1: A comparison of fatigue loads in the blade root between turbines equipped with ATEFlap
fatigue control and turbines without any ﬂap control.
Fatigue[kNm]
No wake
3D full wake
3D half wake
7D full wake
7D half wake
No ATEFlap
19060
21290
21860
20590
20490
ATEFlap
14700
18240
20760
18470
18430
Diﬀ. [%]
-23%
-14%
-5%
-10%
-10%
Fatigue load reductions using ATEFlaps are presented in table 5.1. Note that the initial
controller gains presented in table 3.2 are used. To determine if the turbine is getting the
maximum yield of the control objective, the ﬂap response will be validated. First, we do
look at the ﬂap functionality analyzing the ﬂap statistics. The purpose is to determine if
the ﬂap is operating within the speciﬁed deﬂection angle of ± 10 degrees:
Figure 5.1: Flap statistics for 7D downstream full wake scenario.
In ﬁgure 5.1 the ﬂap statistics of the minimum, maximum and mean ﬂap angles are plotted.
The controller is activated after 12m/s as speciﬁed in the settings. The range of operating
ﬂap angles is also satisfying as there is no overshoot in the deﬂection so the ﬂaps are within
the limit of ± 10 degrees.
24
==PAGE:31==
5. Fatigue Load Reduction with ATEFlaps
Next, the time series of the ﬂap angle activity is analyzed using the ﬂapwise blade root
moment. Ideally, the ﬂap should reach its max/min deﬂection every time the blade root
moment peaks. The ﬂap time series of 7D full wake and 3D half wake scenarios are
compared to the ﬂap time series of no wake scenario, since the no wake load reduction is
greater than any other case, it is obvious to make a comparison in order to point out any
possible errors occurring in the ﬂap operation in the wake scenarios.
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time [s]
-2.2
-2
-1.8
-1.6
-1.4
-1.2
-1
-0.8
-0.6
MxBR [kNm]
104
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Flap response [deg]
(a)
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time [s]
-2.6
-2.4
-2.2
-2
-1.8
-1.6
-1.4
-1.2
-1
-0.8
-0.6
MxBR [kNm]
104
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Flap response [deg]
(b)
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time [s]
-2.6
-2.4
-2.2
-2
-1.8
-1.6
-1.4
-1.2
-1
-0.8
-0.6
MxBR [kNm]
104
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Flap response [deg]
(c)
Figure 5.5: Time-series of the ﬂap response to ﬂapwise blade root bending moment for (a) no
wake at 16 m/s (b) 7D downstream full wake at 16 m/s and (c) 3D downstream half wake 16 m/s.
The ﬂap response in the wake scenarios in ﬁgure 5.5 shows that the ﬂaps do not reach
25
==PAGE:32==
5. Fatigue Load Reduction with ATEFlaps
their max/min limit as the bending moments are peaking, on the contrary, the ﬂaps in
the no wake scenario are reacting to the loads by using the deﬂection range eﬀectively.
The ﬂap response is poorly executed in 3D downstream half wake scenario, the low load
reduction of 5% also indicates this matter. The reason for suboptimal ﬂap operation in the
wake operations is due to the unsaturated ﬂap angle, as a consequence of this the Cl is not
decreasing as desired and the loads are not alleviated as intended. It is primarily in 14- and
16m/s the ﬂaps are unsaturated, in higher wind speeds the ﬂaps are mostly saturated and
they respond well to the loads. To saturate the ﬂaps, the gains will be manually increased
until the 10 degrees of ﬂap range is used eﬀectively, then the gain scheduling will be oﬀset
to all wind speeds to make sure that the ﬂaps are used to its full extent in every wake case.
The ﬁnal controller gains are obtained in a parametric sweep, where the gain scheduling
are changed manually in an iterative process until the ﬂap response is determined to be
suﬃcient. The ﬁnal gains are presented in table 5.2.
Table 5.2: Re-calculated gain scheduling for all wake conditions.
Wake scenario
1.order gain
Oﬀset
No wake
N/A
N/A
3D downstream full wake
1.8E-5
2.7E-3
3D downstream half wake
2.5E-5
2.7E-3
7D downstream full wake
1.7E-5
2.8E-3
7D downstream half wake
3.0E-5
1.4E-3
The ﬁnal fatigue load alleviations obtained using ATEFlaps are listed in table 5.3, the
baseline is not re-calculated as the initial ﬂap response was satisfying. 7D half wake
scenario is calculated with initial controller parameters from table 3.2, as higher fatigue
load alleviations could not be obtained with diﬀerent controller gains.
Table 5.3: Updated fatigue loads in the blade root (MxBR) for turbines equipped with ATEFlap
fatigue control compared to turbines without any ﬂap control.
Fatigue[kNm]
No wake
3D full wake
3D half wake
7D full wake
7D half wake
No ATEFlap
19060
21290
21860
20590
20490
ATEFlap
-
18050
20720
18400
18430
Diﬀ. [%]
-
-15%
-5%
-11%
-10%
A fraction of extra load reductions are achieved with re-calculated gains. Analyzing the
ﬂap time-series, the ﬂaps are almost fully saturated in every wind speed responding to
almost every load. There are few spans in the time series where the controller is disabling
due to the wind speed being below 12m/s however, a solution to alleviate loads below
12m/s will be investigated in the following sections.
The updated fatigue load reductions indicate that the load alleviations are highly dependent
on the size of the loads. Higher loads are simply more diﬃcult to alleviate due to the
26
==PAGE:33==
5. Fatigue Load Reduction with ATEFlaps
deﬂection limit of the ﬂaps. Even though the ﬂaps are saturated and responding to the
loads, the reduction is restricted to the ﬂap deﬂection limit.
Equation 2.1 explains why this speciﬁc set of ﬂaps cannot alleviate the loads any further.
The deﬂection angle β of the ﬂaps are limited to 10 degrees, which restricts the regulation
of the lift. This relation can be seen in ﬁgure 5.6 where the lift coeﬃcient is plotted as a
function of the angle of attack in a turbine operating in ambient conditions (ﬁgure 5.6a)
without ATEFlaps. The lift coeﬃcient is deviating from the design value as the angle of
attack is changing due to stochastic oscillations in the wind. An increased Cl gives rise to
greater loads reﬂecting in the fatigue, this reduces the lifetime of the turbine. Figure 5.6b
is exactly the same scenario except this time the ATEFlaps are initialized. The positive
eﬀect of the ATEFlaps can be seen with clarity, as the Cl decreases as a function of the
ﬂap angle β.
The two cases seen in ﬁgure 5.6 and 5.7 shows why the blade loads in the wake scenarios
are larger. The range of angle of attack is wider, which causes a bigger increase in the lift
coeﬃcient. The plots indicates that a wider deﬂection angle of the ﬂaps would decrease
the loads further.
A second explanation for why the loads are not alleviated any further, especially in the
wake conditions, could be the fact that the fatigue controller disables at 12m/s, but in the
time-series the wind speed drops below 12m/s on regular basis due to the wake deﬁcit,
thus there is time intervals where there is no response to the loads at all. This assertion is
going to be tested in the next chapter.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.6: The lift coeﬃcient as a function of angle of attack at 16m/s for blade 1 at R=72.5m
(a) without active ﬂaps and (b) with active ﬂaps. Note that this is a turbine operating in ambient
conditions (no wake).
27
==PAGE:34==
5. Fatigue Load Reduction with ATEFlaps
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.7: The lift coeﬃcient as a function of angle of attack at 16m/s for blade 1 at R=72.5m
(a) without active ﬂaps and (b) with active ﬂaps. Note that this turbine operates in 3D downstream
in half wake.
28
==PAGE:35==
Extreme Load Reduction
with ATEFlaps 6
The previous study showed that the wake deﬁcits caused high loads below 12m/s, but
the fatigue controller is not equipped to respond on these extreme loads. However, the
ATEFlap can be programmed to operate speciﬁcally to eliminate these extreme peaks
occurring in the blade root. A reduction in extreme loads should decrease the tower
clearance and fatigue loads as well, however in theory the AEP should degrade in return
as a trade-oﬀdue to the relation Cp(θ, λ).
In this chapter, the turbine operating in 3D downstream half wake is investigated. The
extreme loads are tried to be reduced, and the eﬀects of such a reduction on the tower
clearance, fatigue and AEP is studied. In table 6.1 the tower clearances for all wake cases
are presented for turbines without ATEFlaps versus turbines with ATEFlaps with only
fatigue control activated.
Table 6.1: Blade-tower clearances for all investigated wake scenarios for turbines without ATEFlaps
versus turbines with ATEFlaps with only fatigue alleviation as control objective.
Tower C. [m]
No wake
3D full wake
3D half wake
7D full wake
7D half wake
No ATEFlap
11.4
10.1
10.6
9.78
11.2
ATEFlap
11.3
9.97
10.3
9.63
11.2
The turbines with fatigue controls have slightly lower tower clearances. This diﬀerence is
initially assumed to be without importance as the results are really close in reality. As
mentioned before, the turbine 7D downstream in full wake cannot go unnoticed with such
low tower clearance compared to the other cases. If this has to be assessed then the results
could be justiﬁed by emphasizing the bigger wake meandering occurring in 7D downstream
from the wake source. According to the wake studies, the farther away the turbine is
located from the wake source, the bigger is the wake meandering and the smaller is the
wake deﬁcit contrary the cases where the turbine has only 3D inner spacing from the wake
source. In longer distances from the wake source, the wind has more time to recover and
this gives rise to the right mix of wind speed and turbulence to make this types of extreme
tower clearances.
Even though the tower clearance in the turbine 3D downstream in half wake does not
appear to be the most extreme, it faces the greatest fatigue loads due to the constant
instability because the wake only hits one side of the turbine all the time. Therefore, only
the case which the turbine is in 3D downstream in half wake is approached with extreme
29
==PAGE:36==
6. Extreme Load Reduction with ATEFlaps
load alleviations.
First we do have to understand why the extreme loads are so extensive. Even if the ﬂaps
currently only are set to reduce fatigue loads, they do basically react on the blade root
bending moments, which raises the question of why it is not alleviating the extreme loads
as well. When looking at the time-series of blade root bending moments and corresponding
ﬂap deﬂection in ﬁgure 6.3a and 6.3b, it is noticed that the maximum loading in the blade
root occurs approximately at 450 seconds into the times-series and it is also noticed that
at that point the ﬂaps are inactive with 0 degrees of deﬂection. The ﬂaps are inactive
because the fatigue controller are set to enable at 12m/s. Figure 6.3c shows that all the
extreme peaks occur below 12m/s, which leads to the conclusion that if the ﬂaps were
active at that point, then the extreme loads would be alleviated and probably resulting in
further reductions in MxBR fatigue loads.
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time [s]
-4
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
MxBR [kNm]
104
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Flap angle [deg]
(a)
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time [s]
-4
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
MxBR [kNm]
104
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
LP Windspeed [m/s]
(b)
Figure 6.3: (a) Flapwise blade root moment at 14m/s in 3D half wake with corresponding ﬂap
response. (b) The low pass ﬁltered windspeed over the ﬂapwise bending moment, note that the cut
oﬀlimit for the fatigue controller is marked throughout the time-story.
In order to respond to the extreme loads, the controller is set to deﬂect in negative direction
when the blades are exposed to a certain amount of ﬂapwise blade root loading. In this
speciﬁc case, the maximum blade root moment is 36653[kNm], a load threshold is set and
when this load threshold is breached and the blades are loaded above this threshold, the
ﬂaps will deﬂect to its limitation of 10 degrees even if the wind speed is below 12m/s.
Two values are utilized as load thresholds, initially 33000[kNm] is used, then it is brought
30
==PAGE:37==
6. Extreme Load Reduction with ATEFlaps
down to 30000[kNm]. In following calculations the extreme load controller is enabled
simultaneously with the fatigue load controller.
In ﬁgure 6.4 the statistics of extreme loads for ﬂapwise blade root bending moment is
plotted for every windspeed. The black dots indicates the case with only fatigue load
control enabled and the blue and red plots presents the cases with additional extreme load
control responding on a load threshold of 30.000[kNm] and 33.000[kNm] respectively.
Figure 6.4: Statistics: mean values of the extreme loads in the blade root ﬂapwise direction for
every wind speed.
In every wind speed there are three dots presenting the 3 seeds. The maximum load for
the case without extreme load control occurred in 14m/s in seed 2 with 36810[kNm] −
initially the active ﬂaps were set to deﬂect to maximum when the blades were loaded
33.000[kNm], but in a second try to alleviate loads any further the threshold were brought
down to 30.000[kNm], which resulted in higher load alleviations.
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time [s]
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
MxBR [kNm]
104
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Flap angle [deg]
Figure 6.5: 3D half wake operation: Combination of fatigue and extreme load control, the extreme
load controller is activated if the load threshold of 30.000[kNm] in the blade root is breached.
In ﬁgure 6.5 the time-series of a load case in 14m/s is presented. Note that a combination
of fatigue and extreme load controllers are utilized. Comparing this ﬂap time-series to
the time-series of only fatigue load control in ﬁgure 6.3a, it is observed that the ﬂaps are
responding to the extreme loads occurring below 12m/s. The ﬂaps are only deﬂecting at the
negative direction in order to decrease the lift, which is also observable in the time-series.
31
==PAGE:38==
6. Extreme Load Reduction with ATEFlaps
Note that the extreme load controller only respond to loads above 30.000kNm, which
indicates that loads below 12m/s less than 30.000kNm are not in the control objective.
In order to make the control more optimal, the switch oﬀwind speed of the fatigue load
controller can be reduced further, thus the ﬂap will respond to loads in the transition
region. However, the switch oﬀwind speed for the fatigue load controller needs a case
speciﬁc assessment, as the turbine in the transition region still operates below rated power
most of the time. In order to maintain a good strategy, the controller has to be disabled
when the turbine operates below rated power, or else it can result in unnecessary power
loss in the transition region which in general is a suboptimal control strategy.
The results in terms of the investigated parameters are presented in table 6.2. The obtained
results are compared to the baseline turbine operating in ambient conditions (no wake).
Table 6.2: Comparison between a turbine operating in 3D downstream half wake with the baseline.
ATEFlap
Tower C.
[m]
Max MxBR
[kNm]
Fatigue MxBR
[kNm]
Baseline
none
11.4
34611
19060
3D Half wake
none
10.6
36810
21860
Diﬀ. [%]
-
-7%
6%
15%
3D Half wake
Fatigue
10.3
36675
20720
Diﬀ. [%]
-
-10%
6%
9%
3D Half wake
Fatigue & Extreme
11
34351
19890
Diﬀ. [%]
-
-4%
-1%
4%
The results indicates that using a combination of fatigue and extreme load controllers in a
wake exposed turbine, the loads are decreasing signiﬁcantly. The maximum loads in the
blade root becomes 1% lower than the baseline. The fatigue in the blade root is only 4%
higher than the baseline, however it is still signiﬁcantly lower than the same turbine in 3D
downstream in half wake operation without any ﬂap control system.
Even though the ATEFlaps is reducing the blade root moments signiﬁcantly, it has a
negative impact on the power production. The AEP of the turbine operating in 3D
downstream half wake with a combination of fatigue and extreme load alleviation are
compared to the same case with no ﬂap control system. The results are presented in table
6.3. The results implies that any load alleviation with the purpose of extending the life of
the turbine cannot be done without making a trade-oﬀin return elsewhere in the system
e.g. the design or in this case in the power production. However, it should be noted that
the reduction in the power production is considerable low when the extent of the load
alleviations are taken into account.
32
==PAGE:39==
6. Extreme Load Reduction with ATEFlaps
Table 6.3: The AEP of DTU 10MW RWT when operating in 3D downstream in half wake without
ATEFlap compared to the same downstream turbine with ATEFlap. Note that the extreme load
threshold is 30[MNm].
ATEFlap
None
Fatigue
Fatigue & Extreme
AEP[MWh]
37462
37454
37411
Diﬀ. [%]
-
0.02%
0.14%
6.1
Deactivating The Fatigue Load Controller
In this chapter, the sole potential of the extreme load controller is investigated. The load
alleviations in previous chapter is achieved while both the fatigue load controller and the
extreme load controller were activated simultaneously. The control strategy of the extreme
load controller is programmed, thus when the threshold of 30.000kNm in the blade root
is breached, the controller responds with a negative deﬂection. It is observed in previous
chapter that this threshold is primarily breached when low pass ﬁltered wind speed is
below 12m/s.
It is currently known from the studies in this report, that the extreme load controller
improve the fatigue load reduction, but there is no information about how the fatigue
controller is aﬀecting the extreme load reduction. In following calculations the fatigue
load controller is switched oﬀ, so that the potential of the extreme load controller can be
analyzed.
Table 6.4: Blade root loading of a turbine in 3D half wake equipped with ATEFlap. Note that all
the loads are compared to the same turbine without any ATEFlap control.
ATEFlap
None
Fatigue
Extreme
Fatigue & Extreme
Max MxBR [kNm]
36810
36675
34435
34351
Diﬀ. [%]
-
-0.4%
-6%
-7%
Fatigue (MxBR) [kNm]
21860
20720
21220
19890
Diﬀ. [%]
-
-5%
-3%
-9%
The results of the calculations are presented in table 6.4. In previous section the results
were compared to the baseline, but in order to establish a more fair comparison basis, all
cases with ATEFlaps are compared to a turbine operating in same conditions without
ATEFlaps. The results are solidly indicating that a combination with the extreme load
controller and the fatigue load controller are improving the load reduction. The collective
use of the controllers alleviates 9% in fatigue loads in the blade root, when we only activate
the fatigue control there is an alleviation of 5%, and at last, when the extreme load
controller is activated solo the alleviation is only 3%.
33
==PAGE:40==
AEP Improvement with
Optimal Flap Tracking 7
7.1
Parametric Sweep for Optimal Flap Tracking
In order to track the optimal ﬂap angle a parametric sweep is utilized. The baseline turbine
without any wake operation is used to minimize the computational time. It is known from
studies carried out by Pettas [7] that the optimal power operation is obtained within a
gain scheduling between -5 to 10 degrees (ﬂap angle).
In this chapter 6 diﬀerent calculations with 6 diﬀerent gain schedules are carried out with
a cut in wind speed of 4m/s and deactivation of the AEP control at 10m/s. Most of the
schedules are almost linear, but a quadratic regression is used in order to captivate all
information.
In table 7.1 the gain scheduling and corresponding controller gains are listed. In table 7.2
the AEP’s obtained in the parametric sweep are compared to the baseline turbine without
any ﬂap control. The schedules and the gains in these two tables are deliberately sorted
when listed in the tables, beginning from the worst performing controller tuning parameters
to the best performing, this is done in order to make the tables more manageable.
Table 7.1: The schedules and corresponding controller gains used in the parametric sweep.
#
Gain Scheduling [deg]
Oﬀset
1st order gain
2nd order gain
1
[-5 5 5]
-34
9.4
0.56
2
[-5 5 10]
-26
6.4
0.28
3
[-5 0 5]
-12
1.7
-4.3E-17
4
[0 5 5]
-14
4.7
-0.28
5
[-5 0 10]
-3.9
-1.4
0.28
6
[0 5 10]
-6.7
1.7
-3.7E-17
Table 7.2: Parametric sweep using the gain schedules in table 7.1.
Gain scheduling #
none
1
2
3
4
5
6
AEP[MWh]
48057
48062
48096
48132
48170
48187
48209
Diﬀ. [%]
-
0.01%
0.08%
0.16%
0.24%
0.27%
0.32%
The results indicate that the highest gain in the power production is obtained with gain
34
==PAGE:41==
7. AEP Improvement with Optimal Flap Tracking
scheduling #6 ([0 5 10] degrees). The power production is improved by 0.32% in the
baseline, this corresponds to 152[MWh]. It is notable that no matter which controller
settings are used, the power production in the turbine with ATEFlaps has higher power
production than the baseline, this indicates the potential in this control strategy along
with the indication that the reference turbine is distant from being optimal.
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
5
10
Power [MW]
With optimal beta tracking
Without optimal beta tracking
0
5
10
15
20
25
Wind Speed [m/s]
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
Power [MW]
 Power [MW]
Figure 7.1: The power curve as a function of the windspeed with and without using the AEP
optimization control.
In order to verify the improvement in the power production, in ﬁgure 7.1 the power curve
of the baseline without ATEFlaps is presented along with the power curve of the same
turbine using ATEFlaps with the AEP gain scheduling #6 from table 7.1. The gain in the
power along the wind speed is slightly visible to the naked eye, another detail to notice
is the sharp switch oﬀof the AEP controller when it reaches the wind speed threshold
of 10m/s, this is instantly causing some loss in power. A gradual transition instead of a
direct switch oﬀmight be worth investigating if it counters the sudden loss of power. Such
a regulation of the switching between operational regimes can be realized by utilizing a
ratio based on the full load indicator of the controller. However, this is not carried out in
this report.
In ﬁgure 7.2 a box plot of the ﬂap response is plotted with the gain scheduling [0 5 10]
degrees, showing the max, min, mean and standard deviation of the ﬂap angle in 4,6,8 and
10m/s. The purpose of the plot is to determine if the ﬂap response is following this gain
scheduling.
35
==PAGE:42==
7. AEP Improvement with Optimal Flap Tracking
Figure 7.2: Box plot of the ﬂap response in the baseline turbine with AEP optimization, showing
the max value, min value, mean value and standard deviation.
According to the box plot, the ﬂap response is following the gain scheduling suﬃcient -
although there is more deviation at 10m/s than desirable.
The deviation seen in the statistics in the box plot, speciﬁcally in 10m/s is possibly caused
due to the statistics being plotted as a function of the measured wind speed, but as
mentioned before, the ﬂaps are set to respond on the low pass ﬁltered wind speed.
36
==PAGE:43==
7. AEP Improvement with Optimal Flap Tracking
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time [s]
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
8.5
9
9.5
10
10.5
Measured wsp [m/s]
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
8.5
9
9.5
Flap angle [deg]
(a)
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time [s]
7
7.5
8
8.5
9
9.5
Low pass filtered wsp [m/s]
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
8.5
9
9.5
Flap angle [deg]
(b)
Figure 7.3: The ﬂap response in 8m/s plotted over (a) the measured wind speed and (b) the low
pass ﬁltered wind speed.
As stated in chapter 3.4 the LP ﬁltered wind speed are used to avoid high frequency signals,
as these signals does not contribute to the power production, but it only contributes as
external noise. In ﬁgure 7.3 it is seen that the ﬂap is following the ﬁltered wind speed
almost to perfection, while the measured wind speed is ﬁlled with sudden oscillations,
which mostly is external noise. Furthermore, the LP ﬁltered wind speed has a phase,
which means that it has a real time delay compared to the measured wind speed, this
also contributes to the error. The time delay is slightly visible to the naked eye in the
time-series 7.3a.
7.2
AEP Optimization in 3D Downstream Half Wake
Operation
The controller tuning parameters, which provides the best AEP improvement in the
parametric sweep, can now be utilized on DTU 10MW RWT operating in 3D downstream
half wake. It should be noted that all three control objectives are included with following
strategies;
• The fatigue load control is enabled at 12m/s and above.
• The extreme load control is only activated when/if the ﬂapwise blade root bending
moment exceeds the load threshold of 30.000[kNm].
37
==PAGE:44==
7. AEP Improvement with Optimal Flap Tracking
• The AEP control switches oﬀat 10m/s or when power reaches rated value.
Assessing the operational strategies of the ﬂap controllers, it is not expected that the
fatigue load controller and the AEP controller will interact at any point of the operational
phase, however it is a possibility that the extreme load controller and the AEP controller
is active at the same time as extreme loads can occur below rated wind speeds.
Figure 7.4 is a box plot of the ﬂap response, showing how well the ﬂap is following the gain
scheduling. The wind speed seen in the x-axis is the ambient wind speed, but it should be
taken into account that the ambient wind speed is not applying to a turbine operating in
3D downstream half wake, instead a much lower wind speed is measured due to the wake
deﬁcit. The deﬁcit becomes bigger as the wind speed is increasing, thus the ambient wind
at 10m/s is measured as 6.5m/s when the turbine is facing upstream generated wake from
a distance of 3D downstream with an angular oﬀset of D/2. Figure 7.5 veriﬁes that when
the wake induced wind is scaled, the ﬂaps is following the same gain scheduling as the
turbine operating in ambient conditions.
Figure 7.4: Box plot of the ﬂap response in the 3D downstream half wake operation for diﬀerent
wind speeds, showing the max value, min value, mean value and the standard deviation.
Table 7.3 is an update of table 6.3 including the AEP results when all 3 control strategies
are active simultaneously during the operational phase.
38
==PAGE:45==
7. AEP Improvement with Optimal Flap Tracking
Table 7.3: The AEP, the maximum MxBR and the blade root fatigue loads without ATEFlaps
are compared to the same downstream turbine with ATEFlaps when all 3 ﬂap control strategies are
active.
ATEFlap
None
Fatigue
Fatigue and Extreme
Fatigue, Extreme and AEP
AEP [MWH]
37462
37454
37411
37489
Diﬀ. [%]
-
-0.02%
-0.14%
0.07%
Max MxBR [kNm]
36810
36675
34351
34080
Diﬀ. [%]
-
-0.4%
-7%
-7%
Fatigue (MxBR) [kNm]
21860
20720
19890
20490
Diﬀ. [%]
-
-5%
-9%
-6%
Analysis of previous obtained results indicates that when fatigue and extreme load
controllers are active, the AEP is decreasing in return as a trade-oﬀfor alleviated loads in
the blade root, but the lost margin in the AEP can be regained utilizing the AEP control
strategy.
Figure 7.5 shows that the ﬂap respond to measured and ﬁltered wind speeds are not as
good as the turbine in ambient conditions. This is highly due to greater loads the turbine
is exposed to along with a higher instability caused by the half wake. This also indicates
that the controller can be tuned more eﬃcient.
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time [s]
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Measured wsp [m/s]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Flap angle [deg]
(a)
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time [s]
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Low pass filtered wsp [m/s]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Flap angle [deg]
(b)
Figure 7.5: The ﬂap response in 8m/s plotted over (a) the measured wind speed and (b) the low
pass ﬁltered wind speed.
39
==PAGE:46==
7. AEP Improvement with Optimal Flap Tracking
As all three control strategies are activated simultaneously, it is almost inevitable that they
operate across each other. In ﬁgure 7.6 the ﬂap response is plotted along with the ﬁltered
wind speed at 10m/s. From the beginning (100s) to 200 seconds into the time-series, there
is a sudden rise in the wind speed indicating some gust or strong turbulence. This causes
a breach in the extreme load threshold activating the extreme load control. As stated
previously that any kind of load alleviation has a trade-oﬀin return as a negative AEP
output, which probably also is the case here, thus it is concluded that the AEP control
strategy is optimum when it is activated solo and the same applies to the load controllers.
The load controllers obtain larger fatigue alleviations when they are activated without the
AEP controller. The presented results in table 7.3 supports this statement.
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time [s]
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
Low pass filtered wsp [m/s]
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
Flap angle [deg]
Figure 7.6: Flap response in 10m/s: The extreme load control and AEP control are interacting
with each other. The extreme load control has the priority as soon as the load threshold is breached.
It is noted in the time-series that the AEP controller is deactivated long before the extreme
load controller is activated, and also after the deactivation of the extreme load controller it
remains so. The AEP controller is enabled because of the high wind speeds exceeding the
controller switch oﬀlimit at 10m/s. In ﬁgure 7.7 the extreme load controller is deactivated
in order to isolate the behaviour of the AEP controller. The time-series indicates that
the AEP controller is not only deactivating as the 10m/s cut oﬀis exceeded, but it also
switches oﬀas the power reaches rated value.
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time [s]
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Low pass filtered wsp [m/s]
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Power [MW]
Flap angle [deg]
Figure 7.7: Time-series of the AEP controlled ﬂap response on top of the ﬁltered wind speed and
the generated power. Note that the extreme load controller is deactivated.
It is seen that during the turbulence where the wind speed is over 10m/s, the generated
40
==PAGE:47==
7. AEP Improvement with Optimal Flap Tracking
electrical power exceeds the rated power value, which brings us down to the conclusion
that the wind speed threshold of 10m/s is suitable for DTU 10MW RWT as the power
reaches rated value rapidly after 10m/s. This is evident in order to make sure that the
control strategies does not interfere and impair the objective of each other.
41
==PAGE:48==
Baseline with ATEFlaps 8
As a ﬁnal step in the investigation of ATEFlaps performance, the baseline turbine (DTU
10MW RWT) is equipped with ATEFlaps with all control objectives activated. The suitable
controller gains obtained in the previous chapters are utilized. The gains are presented in
table 8.1.
Table 8.1: Controller gains for diﬀerent control objectives.
1.order
Oﬀset
Fatigue load controller
5.80E-05
2.00E-03
MxBR Threshold
Extreme load controller
30.000[kNm]
1.order
2.order
Oﬀset
AEP optimization
1.7
-3.7e-17
-6.7
The controllers are following the same strategies as described in the beginning of chapter
7.2.
4 comparable parameters are calculated; The AEP, MxBR fatigue loads, maximum MxBR,
and the blade-tower clearance. The results of the simulations are presented in table 8.2.
Table 8.2: Results for the baseline with ATEFlaps compared to the baseline without ﬂap control.
Baseline
AEP
[MWh]
Max MxBR
[kNm]
MxBR Fatigue
[kNm]
Tower Clearance
[m]
No ATEFlaps
48057
34611
19060
11.4
ATEFlaps
48252
34719
15460
10.6
Diﬀ. [%]
0.41%
0.31%
-19%
-7%
The results show a clear improvement of the operation when the baseline is equipped
with ATEFlaps. There is an improvement of 0.4 % in the annual energy production.
Furthermore, there is 19 % reduction in the fatigue load in the blade root. Minimum
blade-tower clearance is impaired by 0.8m related to the slight increase in maximum blade
42
==PAGE:49==
8. Baseline with ATEFlaps
root moment with 0.31 %. The results indicates that the impact of ATEFlaps are positive
on the concerning turbine, but the impact of the technology on downstream wakes preserves
its uncertainty. This is especially critical in wind farms, where downstream located turbines
are highly dependant of the upstream generated wakes. This matter will be investigated in
the following sections.
43
==PAGE:50==
Wake Analysis Using
Gaussian Wake Deﬁcit 9
9.1
Gaussian Wake Deﬁcit Model
A relatively new and simple analytical method proposed by Majid Bastankhah and Fernando
Porté-Agel [24] is utilized to determine the velocity deﬁcit in an upstream generated wake.
The model uses a Gaussian distribution in the far wake region to describe the proﬁle of
the velocity deﬁcit, furthermore the conservation of mass and momentum is applied to
determine the distribution of the velocity. The traditional way of describing the velocity
distribution in the wake, also known as the top-hat was ﬁrst proposed by Jensen in 1983
[25], this is substituted with a velocity deﬁcit distribution seen in ﬁgure 9.1.
Two diﬀerent cases with 2 scenarios each will be investigated using the Gaussian wake
deﬁcit model. In this context, the case is deﬁned as one of the modelled wind farms as
seen in ﬁgure 9.6 and 9.14. The scenarios is deﬁned within the case, describing if the
upstream turbine is equipped with ATEFlaps or not. The purpose of utilizing the model is
to calculate the power production of the downstream turbine when the upstream turbine
is equipped with ATEFlaps. The essence of the investigation is an attempt to identify the
potential of ATEFlaps in collective use e.g. in clusters or in wind farms. Note that all
three control objectives of ATEFlaps are activated simultaneously with the same strategies
as stated in chapter 7.2.
Figure 9.1: The Gaussian distribution of the wake velocity [24].
44
==PAGE:51==
9. Wake Analysis Using Gaussian Wake Deﬁcit
The iterative process illustrated in ﬁgure 9.2 is followed in order to calculate the power
production of the downstream turbine.
Find CT in 
upstream 
turbine
Utilize wake 
deficit method
Calculate 
downstream 
velocity deficit
Use power 
equation on 
dowstream 
turbine
Figure 9.2: The iterative process of calculating the power production of downstream turbine
inﬂuenced by the wake.
Initially, the thrust coeﬃcient of the upstream turbine is calculated using HAWC2. The
CT is calculated in a time-series of 700 seconds on 10 radial positions on the blade with
8 azimuth angles per blade position (see ﬁgure 9.3), making it 80 diﬀerent CT values for
each windspeed varying from 4-26m/s in 2m/s intervals.
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
Figure 9.3: Positions of the 10 CT values calculated on the turbine blade including the 8 azimuth
angles.
In order to proceed to next step, one averaged thrust coeﬃcient in each wind speed for
45
==PAGE:52==
9. Wake Analysis Using Gaussian Wake Deﬁcit
the entire turbine is required. This is necessary to derive the downstream velocity ﬁeld.
Therefore, the average of CT in function of CT (t, r, ψ) for each windspeed is calculated
until one weighted average applicable for the entire turbine is obtained.
First, the average in time are calculated for all 80 CT values, then the average in 8 azimuth
angles are calculated, leaving us with 10 averaged CT values along the blade. At last the
weighted average of the remaining 10 thrust coeﬃcients along the blade is calculated using
the Legendre-Gauss Quadrature [26] leaving us with one weighted mean value per wind
speed. The implementation of the Legendre-Gauss Quadrature is done in Matlab, the
script can be viewed in Appendix C.5. In ﬁgure 9.4 the 4th degree polynomial ﬁt and the
weighted ﬁt of the CT values for the baseline turbine in 8m/s are plotted along with the
corresponding averages, note that only the weighted average is utilized in the wake deﬁcit
model. Weighted averages for all wind speeds in both cases can be found in Appendix B.2
and B.3.
Figure 9.4: The raw data of the thrust coeﬃcient for the baseline turbine in 8m/s along with a
4th degree polynomial ﬁt, ﬁtted average, the weighted ﬁt and the weighted average.
Next the Gaussian deﬁcit method is utilized. The wake deﬁcit in the model is expressed
with the following equation:
∆U
U∞
= 1
2
s
1 −2 A0
AW
CT
(9.1)
Where AW (x = 0) = Aa, Aa being the cross sectional area of the wake right after the
expansion. The Gaussian wake deﬁcit method is utilized and the rotor equivalent wake
deﬁcit in m/s is calculated. The Matlab script for the Gaussian wake deﬁcit model is
provided by Tuhfe Göcmen and can be found in Appendix C.6.
As the last part in the process the generated power of the downstream turbine is calculated
using equation 9.2, the equation is likewise implemented in the same code as the wake
deﬁcit model and can be viewed in the Appendix.
46
==PAGE:53==
9. Wake Analysis Using Gaussian Wake Deﬁcit
P = Cp · 1
2ρV 3 · A
(9.2)
This method can also be used to calculate the thrust of the downstream turbine. The
calculated thrust can be used to simulate the wake ﬁeld of new downstream turbines in
the wind farm. The value corresponds to the average thrust calculated in HAWC2 in order
to initialize the Gaussian wake deﬁcit model in the ﬁrst place. The method is signiﬁcantly
less time consuming in terms of computation compared to CFD and BEM. However, the
disadvantage with the Gaussian method is that it does not include the aerodynamic loading
of the turbine components.
9.2
Veriﬁcation of the Analytical Wake Deﬁcit Model
using HAWC2
Before utilizing the wake model, a validation of the model is carried out using HAWC2.
The wake deﬁcit caused by the baseline without ATEFlaps is calculated by using both
the Gaussian wake deﬁcit method and HAWC2. In HAWC2, the wake imposed velocity
downstream is by standard calculated at the hub position, but the hub of the downstream
turbine is a ﬁxed position and it is facing something close to a full wake. Therefore, a
wind speed at an arbitrary position on the blade is needed as the blade rotates in and out
of the wake area which results in a more precise modeling. In this case the wind speed at
75m of the blade length is calculated.
5
10
15
20
25
0
10
20
U [m/s]
HAWC2
Wake model
5
10
15
20
25
Free Wind Speed [m/s]
0
5
10
dU [m/s]
HAWC2
Wake model
Figure 9.5: Wake deﬁcit comparison between HAWC2 and the Gaussian wake deﬁcit model. The
wake deﬁcit is calculated at 3D downstream in half wake.
47
==PAGE:54==
9. Wake Analysis Using Gaussian Wake Deﬁcit
Figure 9.5 shows the wake imposed velocity U, and the deﬁcit of these velocities dU. Both
plots are depending on the ambient wind speed. There is a satisfying uniform pattern,
but the model in HAWC2 has slightly higher wake deﬁcits below and around rated wind
speeds.
The shear eﬀects in the ambient wind is neglected in the Gaussian wake deﬁcit model,
which makes perfectly sense in terms with the lower wake deﬁcit obtained using this
method. Adding the shear to the ambient wind, the rotor averaged wind speed would
lower and the thrust coeﬃcient of the upstream turbine would increase, which will result in
higher wake deﬁcits downstream. Taking this fact into account, the Gaussian wake deﬁcit
model is decided to be reliable.
9.3
Wake Analysis: Case 1
The wake deﬁcit model is carried out in two diﬀerent clusters of wind turbines, which is
presumed to be wind farms. The ﬁrst case is describing two turbines where the upstream
turbine is facing ambient conditions and the second turbine is located 3D downstream
with an angular oﬀset of D/2 (see ﬁgure 9.6).
Each case has two scenarios, one where the upstream turbine is equipped with ATEFlaps
and one where the upstream turbine has no ﬂap control. The purpose is to calculate
the deﬁcit in the downstream velocity and hereby calculate the power production of the
downstream turbine. It is expected that the ﬂap operation will drain the downstream
velocity creating a greater wake deﬁcit than the turbine without ﬂap control.
WT1 - Baseline
WT2 - 3D half wake
Figure 9.6: Case 1 - Turbines in a wind farm with a inner spacing of 3D length and an angular
oﬀset of D/2.
The thrust coeﬃcients along the rotor blade for WT1 with and without ATEFlaps can
be viewed in ﬁgure 9.11. In wind speeds up to 10m/s the turbine with ATEFlaps are
following a trend where it increases the thrust towards the blade tip, it makes sense that
the thrust is increasing in lower wind speeds as the ﬂaps are set to optimize the power with
a switch oﬀat 10m/s, this is also observable when looking at the thrust with ATEFlaps
in 12m/s, the thrust diﬀerence is deceased and it is all of a sudden more similar to the
thrust generated by the turbine without ATEFlaps. The reason for why the thrust is only
48
==PAGE:55==
9. Wake Analysis Using Gaussian Wake Deﬁcit
increasing towards the blade tip can be explained with the fact that the ﬂaps are located
on the blade from 56 to 82 m, the increasing thrust occurs at the same range, indicating
that the ﬂaps are working eﬀectively. Thrust coeﬃcients for the remaining wind speeds
can be found in Appendix B.4.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 9.11: The thrust coeﬃcients at diﬀerent radial positions on the blade for the baseline
turbine operating in ambient conditions.
9.3.1
Wake Deﬁcit and Power Loss in Downstream Turbine
The wake induced velocities caused by WT1 are calculated for each wind speed and
presented in ﬁgure 9.12. The diﬀerence in the deﬁcits are small, but it is following an
important pattern. Almost in all wind speeds the downstream velocity deﬁcit caused by
WT1 with ATEFlaps are higher than these caused by WT1 without ATEFlaps, this little
diﬀerence is causing a power loss in the production as seen in ﬁgure 9.13. Note that both
scenarios has signiﬁcant wake deﬁcits in comparison to the ambient wind speeds, explaining
the decreased power production in wake imposed turbines compared to the baseline (see
ﬁgure 9.13).
49
==PAGE:56==
9. Wake Analysis Using Gaussian Wake Deﬁcit
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Ambient wind speed [m/s]
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
dU [m/s]
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
dU diff. [m/s]
No ATEFlaps
With ATEFlaps
Difference in dU
Figure 9.12: Case 1 - The wake deﬁcits of the two scenarios along with the diﬀerence between
them.
Figure 9.13 shows the power production of WT2 in both scenarios, the power of the baseline
operating in ambient wind is also plotted as a reference value. The power production of
the downstream turbine in both scenarios has lower energy production than the baseline,
this is expected as this matter is stated previously in ﬁgure 4.6a that turbines operating
in wakes has much lower power productions than identical turbines operating in ambient
conditions. Also note that the baseline operating in ambient wind obtains rated power
production around rated wind speed, but both turbines operating in wake reaches the rated
power at 14m/s in ambient conditions, which corresponds to 12.8m/s in the downstream
velocity ﬁeld. The x-axis in the ﬁgure is showing the ambient wind speed and not the wake
imposed wind velocity.
The result of the comparison between the two scenarios is also as expected, the power loss
is higher in the scenario where the upstream turbine is equipped with ATEFlaps. The
diﬀerence in power occurs between 4 to 12m/s. The maximum diﬀerence occurs at 10m/s
with a peak of 80 kW.
50
==PAGE:57==
9. Wake Analysis Using Gaussian Wake Deﬁcit
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
5
10
Power [MW]
ATEFlaps on upstream WT
No ATEFlaps on upstream WT
P, Baseline (free wind)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Wind Speed [m/s]
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Power [MW]
 Power [MW]
Figure 9.13: Case 1 - The power curve of a 3D downstream turbine with an angular oﬀset of
D/2, when the upstream turbine is equipped with and without ATEFlaps. Note that the upstream
turbine is facing free wind.
9.4
Wake Analysis: Case 2
Case 2 is a extended version of case 1 where WT2 is calculated in HAWC2 including WT1
as the wake source. The thrust coeﬃcients from WT2 is then utilized in the wake model
and the power production of WT3 is calculated. Figure 9.14 illustrates case 2, the turbines
are spaced equally with a inner spacing of 3D length and an angular oﬀset of D/2.
51
==PAGE:58==
9. Wake Analysis Using Gaussian Wake Deﬁcit
WT1 - Baseline
WT2 - 3D half wake
WT3 – 3D half wake 
Figure 9.14: Case 2 - Turbines in a wind farm with a inner spacing of 3D length and an angular
oﬀset of D/2.
The thrust coeﬃcients over the blade for WT2 with ATEFlap and without ATEFlap are
presented in ﬁgure 9.19. Similar to case 1 the thrust is increasing towards the blade tip
where the ﬂaps are located. It should be noted that the thrust in general is much lower in
case 2 compared to case 1 due to the wake. The wake is especially impairing the thrust in
mid-blade area, this implies that the ﬂap operation is actually needed in that part of the
blade. It can be concluded based on this data that more ﬂaps along the blade, especially
over the mid-blade area could improve the turbine operation in wakes below rated wind
speeds. The thrust coeﬃcients of remaining wind speeds can be found in Appendix B.5.
52
==PAGE:59==
9. Wake Analysis Using Gaussian Wake Deﬁcit
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 9.19: The thrust coeﬃcients at diﬀerent radial positions on the blade for a turbine in 3D
downstream half wake operation.
9.4.1
Wake Deﬁcit and Power Loss in Downstream Turbine
The velocity deﬁcit WT3 is facing is relative large in both scenarios, but when the scenarios
are compared internally, then the diﬀerence in the velocity deﬁcits are small. However, it
still follows the important pattern, where the wake deﬁcit is a fraction bigger when the
upstream WT2 is equipped with ATEFlaps, which explains the power loss illustrated in
ﬁgure 9.21.
53
==PAGE:60==
9. Wake Analysis Using Gaussian Wake Deﬁcit
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Ambient wind speed [m/s]
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
dU [m/s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
dU diff. [m/s]
No ATEFlaps
With ATEFlaps
Difference in dU
Figure 9.20: Case 2 - The wake deﬁcits of the two scenarios along with the diﬀerence between
them.
The power production of WT3 in both scenarios are plotted in ﬁgure 9.21 along with
the baseline. Similar to case 1 there is detectable power loss in WT3 when the upstream
turbine (WT2) is equipped with ATEFlaps. The power loss peaks at 10m/s with 60 kW
and the duration of the loss occurs between 4 and 14m/s. Note that the x-axis in the
ﬁgure is showing the ambient wind speed and not the wake imposed wind velocity.
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
5
10
Power [MW]
ATEFlaps on upstream WT
No ATEFlaps on upstream WT
P, Baseline (free wind)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Wind Speed [m/s]
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Power [MW]
 Power [MW]
Figure 9.21: Case 2 - The power curve of a 3D downstream turbine with an angular oﬀset of
D/2, when the upstream turbine is equipped with and without ATEFlaps. Note that the upstream
turbine is operating in half wake 3D downstream.
54
==PAGE:61==
9. Wake Analysis Using Gaussian Wake Deﬁcit
It is assessed that the Gaussian wake deﬁcit method is eﬀective due to the short
computational time. Furthermore, the thrust obtained in the calculations can be used
to simulate new downstream turbines in the wind farm. Comparing the results from the
model to the results obtained in HAWC2, it was observed that in HAWC2 the deﬁcits were
higher. Nevertheless, the precision of the model is acceptable based on the fact that the
shear eﬀects were neglected in the Gaussian model.
9.5
Comparison: Case 1 vs Case 2
It is observed that case 1 has a higher peak of power loss, but in case 2 the power loss
duration is prolonged compared to case 1, which is illustrated in ﬁgure 9.13 and 9.21.
This prolonged duration of power loss in case 2 is due to the higher wake deﬁcit in the
downstream velocity ﬁeld in case 2. This causes longer time for WT3 to reach rated wind
speed and rated power. This also means that the AEP controller is activated in a longer
time period in the upstream turbine, which contributes to the power loss in the downstream
turbine. To make these two cases comparable a mathematical alteration is performed. A
trapezoidal integration is carried out.
Jloss1 =
Z
Ploss1(t)dt
(9.3)
Jloss2 =
Z
Ploss2(t)dt
(9.4)
The results from the calculations above yields the generated energy which are comparable
with each other. The results yields that case 1 has an energy loss of 212 kJ and case 2 has
an energy loss of 286 kJ.
55
==PAGE:62==
Wake Analysis Using
HAWC2 10
As stated previously, the Gaussian wake deﬁcit model takes only interest in the power
production and the thrust in downstream turbine. The blade root moments are high interest
subjects in this report due to the purpose as input parameter in ATEFlaps. The Gaussian
model however, does not account for the aerodynamic loading of the single components of
the turbine. Therefore, in order to analyze the loads in downstream turbines, exposed to
wakes emitted by ATEFlaps equipped turbines, the same cases in chapter 9.3 and 9.4 are
re-calculated using HAWC2. The obtained results using HAWC2 will not be evaluated in
a comparison with the Gaussian wake deﬁcit model due to the neglected shear eﬀects in
the Gaussian model resulting in lower wake deﬁcits, which makes a comparison irrelevant.
10.1
Wake Analysis with HAWC2: Case 1
In order to calculate the cases in HAWC2, the operational data of the wake source speciﬁed
in the masterﬁle is changed based on the simulated case and scenario.
WT1 - Baseline
WT2 - 3D half wake
Figure 10.1: Case 1 - Turbines in a wind farm with a inner spacing of 3D length and an angular
oﬀset of D/2.
The main essence of the calculations in this chapter is to determine the overall gain of the
modelled wind farms in terms with the investigated parameters. First, the gain of the
upstream turbine when using ATEFlap control system is presented in table 10.1. In table
56
==PAGE:63==
10. Wake Analysis Using HAWC2
10.2 the presented results is obtained for the downstream turbine, when the upstream
turbine has ATEFlaps and no ATEFlaps.
The results indicates an overall loss in power when ATEFlap is utilized in the wake emitting
upstream turbine. However, there is a signiﬁcant overall reduction in the blade root fatigue
loads.
Table 10.1: A comparison between WT1 with and without ATEFlaps. It is used as a reference
frame for the evaluation of the performance of downstream turbine.
WT1
AEP
[MWh]
Max MxBR
[kNm]
MxBR Fatigue
[kNm]
WT1 no ATEFlaps
48057
34611
19060
WT1 ATEFlaps
48252
34719
15460
Diﬀ. [%]
0.41%
0.31%
-19%
Table 10.2: A comparison between the operations of WT2, when the upstream turbine WT1 is
equipped with ATEFlaps in one scenario, and when it has no ﬂap control in the other scenario.
WT2
AEP
[MWh]
Max MxBR
[kNm]
MxBR Fatigue
[kNm]
WT1 no ATEFlaps
37462
36810
21860
WT1 ATEFlaps
37177
36884
21940
Diﬀ. [%]
-0.76%
0.20%
0.37%
10.2
Wake Analysis with HAWC2: Case 2
It is stated in above section, that the overall gain of each wind farm is assessed, this
statement applied well for case 1 as it consisted of only two turbines, but in case 2 the
overall gain is characterized as the gain achieved in WT2 minus the potential loss in WT3.
57
==PAGE:64==
10. Wake Analysis Using HAWC2
WT1 - Baseline
WT2 - 3D half wake
WT3 – 3D half wake 
Figure 10.2: Turbines in a wind farm with a inner spacing of 3D length and an angular oﬀset of
D/2.
The results for WT2 with and without ATEFlap control is presented in table 10.3. The
turbine operation is improved in every investigated parameter. In table 10.4 the results
of WT3 is presented. It can be observed that there is an overall gain in all parameters.
However, the gain in power is minimal, whereas the gain in load alleviation is signiﬁcant.
Table 10.3: A comparison between WT2 with and without ATEFlaps. It is used as a reference
frame for the evaluation of the performance of downstream turbine.
WT2
AEP
[MWh]
Max MxBR
[kNm]
MxBR Fatigue
[kNm]
WT2 no ATEFlaps
37462
36810
21860
WT2 ATEFlaps
37489
34080
20490
Diﬀ. [%]
0.072%
-7.42%
-6%
Table 10.4: A comparison between the operations of WT3, when the upstream turbine WT2 is
equipped with ATEFlaps in one scenario, and when it has no ﬂap control in the other scenario.
WT3
AEP
[MWh]
Max MxBR
[kNm]
MxBR Fatigue
[kNm]
WT2 no ATEFlaps
37027
38022
23140
WT2 ATEFlaps
37005
38564
23110
Diﬀ. [%]
-0.059%
1.43%
-0.1%
Evaluating both cases, it is observed that in case 1 there is a little decrease in the overall
58
==PAGE:65==
10. Wake Analysis Using HAWC2
power production, but in the other hand there is a signiﬁcant overall reduction in the
MxBR fatigue loads. In case two the overall power production is improved with a fraction,
and at the same time there is a signiﬁcant load alleviation in the blade root.
It comes down to the conclusion that ATEFlap control system does not always contribute
to the overall gain, therefore an investigation in wind farms is required in order to spot
turbines where ATEFlap contributes to the overall power production. If the ambition
of the wind farm operator is to extend the lifetime of the wind farm, then based on the
obtained results in this chapter, every turbine in the wind farm should be equipped with
ATEFlaps.
59
==PAGE:66==
Conclusion 11
The conclusion includes a presentation of results along with an analysis of the two main
subjects, which is addressed in this report. Regarding the ﬁrst part of the report, the
conclusion includes an assessment of the ATEFlaps performance, based on the operational
improvement of the ATEFlap equipped turbine. For the second part of the report, an
evaluation of ATEFlap is carried out, in terms of the ATEFlap impact on the downstream
turbine.
• The ﬁrst part of the report is split into three parts containing the three control objectives
of the ATEFlap as target.
Fatigue load control with ATEFlap: ATEFlap is utilized in 5 diﬀerent turbine
operations with the fatigue load alleviation as its sole objective. The MxBR fatigue
loads are alleviated as following; the baseline with 23%, the 3D half wake with 15%, the
3D full wake with 5%, the 7D half wake with 11%, and the 7D half wake with 10%.
The calculations made after this section are performed on the 3D half wake case, because
it was the case where the turbine was most loaded. Using this case would have higher
probability of revealing the potential of ATEFlaps.
Fatigue & Extreme load control with ATEFlap: Using only the extreme load control
in 3D half wake, an alleviation of 3% in MxBR fatigue loads and an alleviation of 6% in
maximum MxBR are achieved. Combining the fatigue and extreme load objectives, an
alleviation of 9% in MxBR fatigue loads and an alleviation of 7% in maximum MxBR are
achieved.
Fatigue, Extreme & AEP control with ATEFlap: Combining all three control
objectives with diﬀerent control strategies each, an alleviation of 6% in MxBR fatigue
loads, an alleviation of 7% in maximum MxBR and an AEP optimization of 0.07% is
achieved.
Baseline with ATEFlap: Using ATEFlap in baseline turbine with all control objectives
included, an AEP optimization of 0.41% is achieved, furthermore, a load alleviation of
19% in MxBR fatigue loads are obtained. The tower clearance is impaired by 7% and the
maximum MxBR is increased by 0.3%.
Based on the operational performance of the ATEFlap equipped turbines, it is observed
that there is an improvement in the turbine operation in every simulated case, in terms of
the investigated parameters. The operational performance is generally improved in 3 of
the 4 investigated parameters; Maximum MxBR, MxBR fatigue loads, and AEP. However,
the blade-tower clearance is not among the improved parameters. Even though there is a
60
==PAGE:67==
11. Conclusion
general decrease in tower clearance, no extreme cases are observed.
• The second part of the report deals with turbines exposed to wakes, emitted by
upstream turbines equipped with ATEFlaps. Two cases are assessed, Case 1) A turbine 3D
downstream in half wake with only one wake source, and Case 2) a turbine 3D downstream
in half wake with two wake sources, but only the nearest turbine is equipped with ATEFlaps.
Case 1: The downstream turbine is exposed to power loss from 4m/s to 12m/s before it
reaches rated power. This indicates that the ATEFlap creates a greater wake deﬁcit in
the wake than a turbine without ﬂap control. However, the deﬁcit is really small. The
loss in AEP is 0.76%, the increase in MxBR fatigue loads is 0.37% and the maximum
MxBR is almost equal in both scenarios of the case. In summary, the gain in AEP in the
upstream turbine with ATEFlaps are slightly smaller than the loss in the downstream
turbine, which results in an overall loss in AEP. The gain-loss rate in maximum MxBR is
approximately matching each other, but there is an overall alleviation of MxBR fatigue
loads with 3520kNm.
Case 2: In Case 2, the downstream turbine is exposed to power loss from 4m/s to 14m/s
before it reaches rated power, the prolonged duration of power loss compared to case 1 is
caused by the extra wake source. The loss in AEP is 0.059%, the increase in maximum
MxBR is 1.42% and the MxBR fatigue loads are unchanged. In summary, there is a
fraction of an overall gain in the AEP when subtracting the AEP loss in the downstream
turbine from the gain in the upstream turbine. There is an overall alleviation in max
MxBR with 2188kNm and there is an overall alleviation of MxBR fatigue with 1400kNm.
Based on the obtained results in the two wind farm models, an overall gain in fatigue loads
in the blade root in Case 1 is achieved, on the contrary a slightly loss in AEP is observed.
In case 2 an overall gain in both extreme and fatigue loads is achieved, and an insigniﬁcant
fraction of overall AEP is gained.
With respect to the investigated parameters in the wind turbine operation,
it is proven in this report that the ATEFlap improves the operation of the
turbine it is mounted on.
Regarding the wake eﬀects of the ATEFlap, an
overall gain in load alleviation is achieved. However, in the two investigated
wind farm models, no notable overall gain in AEP or for that matter no
notable overall loss is observed either. Ultimately it indicates that there are no
signiﬁcant advantages of using ATEFlaps in wind farms with AEP as objective,
but there is a clear advantage in using ATEFlaps in wind farms to alleviate
the aerodynamic loads in the blade root.
61
==PAGE:68==
11. Conclusion
11.1
Future Work
11.1.1
Maximum Gain Using ATEFlaps in Wind Farms
Although it is proven that an overall gain of AEP is achievable using ATEFlaps in wind
farms, it is also concluded that not all turbines equipped with ATEFlaps contributes to
the overall AEP. This matter can be hard to assess in wind farms as wind farms comes in
diﬀerent sizes and diﬀerent layouts. Therefore, a speciﬁc suggestion to a future project
is proposed. An initial investigation in a wind farm is required in order to point out
the turbines which is contributing to the overall power production using ATEFlaps. In
addition, a more sophisticated ATEFlap control system should be developed in form of
collective operation. Every ATEFlap is thought to be synchronized and connected to each
other through a mainframe, in this way the control system will not only satisfy the turbine
operation it is implemented on, but it will calibrate itself after other turbines in the wind
farm and operate to contribute to the overall gain. The methodology should be applicable
to all kind of wind farms.
11.1.2
Suggestion to Automatic Controller Calibration
In this report, the tuning of the ATEFlap has been done manually for every wake scenario
using the explained methodologies in chapter 3. A further investigation can be carried out
in order to implement a controller automation, to make the ﬂap control more eﬃcient. The
idea is to improve the controller by making it self-adjusting to diﬀerent turbulent cases
instead of using one ﬁxed gain scheduling in time. Such system can be realized by using
an anemometer to continuously measure the turbulence intensity at hub height, and based
on the collected turbulence data, the controller can calculate the new gain scheduling and
calibrate the controller automatically to follow the new scheduling. The goal is to eliminate
the lost time for ineﬃcient control, which happens when the ambient conditions changes
and the controller keeps following the strategy set for a diﬀerent turbulence intensity. This
suggestion may need comprehensive work, but if it should succeed, then the outcome is
expected to reﬂect on the AEP and the load reduction positively.
62
==PAGE:69==
11. Conclusion
11.2
Evaluation of Learning Objectives
The deﬁned learning objectives in section 1.1 will now be evaluated:
1. Understand the operation of ATEFlaps in wind turbines.
• The ATEFlap control system is described in chapter 2.2 including a brief
description of the aerodynamic model, controller objectives and technical
information. Furthermore, the implementation of ATEFlap in the aeroelastic
tool HAWC2 is described in chapter 2.2.1.
2. Understand the wake emitted by a upstream wind turbine.
• A common explanation of the upstream emitted wake is described in chapter 2.3.
Furthermore, the modeling of the wake using the Dynamic Wake Meandering
approach is presented in section 2.3.1-2.3.3. The same wake model is utilized in
HAWC2 simulations throughout the report.
3. Investigate the time response of DTU 10MW RWT in ambient conditions and in
wake operations without the ATEFlap control system.
• The time response of the reference turbine in ambient wind and in diﬀerent
wake operations without ATEFlap is analyzed and documented in chapter 4.
4. Investigate the fatigue loads in the blade root with a dedicated control strategy using
ATEFlaps.
• The fatigue loads in the blade root for DTU 10MW RWT in 4 diﬀerent wake
conditions using ATEFlaps are investigated and documented in chapter 5. In
addition, the reference turbine in ambient wind is investigated as well.
5. Investigate the extreme loads in the blade root using ATEFlaps, both as sole control
objective and combined with the fatigue load controller.
• The extreme loads for a turbine in 3D half wake is investigated using ATEFlaps
in chapter 6.
First, the extreme and fatigue load controllers are utilized
simultaneously, but in chapter 6.1 the extreme loads in the blade root are
investigated using only the extreme load controller.
6. Investigate the AEP using ATEFlaps, both as sole control objective and combined
with the fatigue load controller and the extreme load controller.
• In chapter 7 the ATEFlap with only AEP optimization is investigated with a
parametric sweep on the baseline turbine. Furthermore, the ATEFlaps with all
three control objectives enabled are utilized on a turbine in 3D downstream half
wake, this investigation is documented in chapter 7.2.
7. Implement simple tuning methods of each control objective and study the best control
strategy for each controller in an iterative process of calculations throughout the
project.
• In chapter 3 the controller strategies along with the tuning methods for all three
ATEFlap control objectives are described. The best control strategy for each
objective are analyzed through the chapters 5-7 for the fatigue load controller,
the extreme load controller and the AEP optimization controller respectively.
The ﬁnal strategies for each control objective are described in chapter 7.2.
8. Implement a simple analytical wake deﬁcit model in an attempt to analyze the wake
deﬁcit emitted by upstream turbines equipped with ATEFlaps.
63
==PAGE:70==
11. Conclusion
• An analytical wake deﬁcit model is successfully implemented in chapter 9.1. The
wake deﬁcit is calculated, and based on this wake deﬁcit the power production
of the downstream turbine is calculated. The wake deﬁcit is also calculated in
HAWC2 in order to simulate the loads in the downstream turbine.
Based on the deﬁned points above, it can be concluded that the learning objectives are
fulﬁlled.
64
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1] Morten H. Hansen, Anca Hansen, Torben J. Larsen, Stig Øye, Poul Sørensen and Peter
Fuglsang, Control design for a pitch-regulated, variable speed wind turbine, Department
of Wind Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, 2005.
[2] T.K. Barlas, Review of state of the art in smart rotor control research for wind turbines
Prog. Aerosp. Sci., vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 1–27, 2010.
[3] Thanasis Barlas, Frederik Zahle, Niels N. Sørensen, Mac Gaunaa, and Leonardo
Bergami, Simulations of a rotor with active deformable trailing edge ﬂaps in half-wake
inﬂow: Comparison of EllipSys 3D with HAWC2, EWEA 2012 - European Wind Energy
Conference & Exhibition - Copenhagen, Denmark, 2012.
[4] Thanasis Barlas, Vasilis Pettas, Drew Gertz and Helge A Madsen, Extreme load
alleviation using industrial implementation of active trailing edge ﬂaps in a full design
load basis, Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 753(4):042001, 2016.
[5] Vasileios Pettas, Thanasis Barlas, Drew Gertz and Helge A Madsen, Power performance
optimization and loads alleviation with active ﬂaps using individual ﬂap control, Journal
of Physics: Conference Series, 749(1):012010, 2016.
[6] Helen Markou, Peter Bjørn Andersen and Gunner Chr. Larsen, Potential load reductions
on megawatt turbines exposed to wakes using individual-pitch wake compensator and
trailing-edge ﬂaps, Wind Energy, 14(7):841-857, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., 2011.
[7] Vasileios Pettas, Investigation of ATEﬂap potential in load alleviation and maximizing
energy yield for large wind turbine rotors Technical University of Denmark, 4000
Roskilde, Denmark, June 2016.
[8] IEC, Wind turbines - Part 1: Design requirements, IEC 61400-1:2005(E).
[9] Martin O.L. Hansen, Aerodynamics of Wind Turbines, Second Edition, Earthscan,
2008.
[10] HAWC2 tools, Department of Wind Energy, Technical University of Denmark,
http://www.hawc2.dk/.
[11] Torben Juul Larsen, Anders M. Hansen How 2 HAWC2, the user’s manual, Risø-
R-1597(ver. 4-6)(EN), Risø-National Laboratory, Technical University of Denmark,
Roskilde, Denmark, July 2015.
[12] Leonardo Bergami, Smart Rotor Modeling: Aero-Servo-Elastic Modeling of a Smart
Rotor with Adaptive Trailing Edge Flaps, Springer, 2014.
[13] Bergami, L., Gaunaa, M., Poulsen, N. K., & Buhl, T. (2013). Adaptive Trailing Edge
Flaps for Active Load Alleviation in a Smart Rotor Conﬁguration. DTU Wind Energy.
(DTU Wind Energy PhD; No. 0020(EN)), August 2013.
65
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
[14] Ainslie J., Wake modelling and the prediction of turbulence properties., Proceedings of
the 8th British wind energy association conference, Cambridge; p.19-21, 1986.
[15] J. Mann, The spatial structure of neutral atmospheric surface-layer turbulence, Journal
of Fluid Mechanics, 273:141-68, 1994.
[16] Gunner C. Larsen, Helge Aa. Madsen, Kenneth Thomsen, Torben J. Larsen, Wake
meandering: a pragmatic approach, Wind Energy 11(4):377-95, 2008.
[17] Larsen, Gunner Chr.; Aagaard Madsen , Helge; Bingöl, Ferhat; Mann, Jakob; Ott,
Søren; Sørensen, J.N.; Okulov, V.; Troldborg, N.; Nielsen, Morten; Thomsen, Kenneth;
Larsen, Torben J.; Mikkelsen, R., Dynamic wake meandering modeling, Risø National
Laboratory, Roskilde, Denmark. Forskningscenter Risoe. Risoe-R, no. 1607(EN), 2007.
[18] H. Aa. Madsen, G. C. Larsen, T. J. Larsen and N. Troldborg, Calibration and
Validation of the Dynamic Wake Meandering Model for Implementation in an Aeroelastic
Code, Journal Solar Energy Eng 132(4):041014, 2010.
[19] C. Bak; F. Zahle; R. Bitsche; T. Kim; A. Yde; L.C. Henriksen; P.B. Andersen; A.
Natarajan, M.H. Hansen; “Design and performance of a 10 MW wind turbine”, J. Wind
Energy, 2013.
[20] Morten Hartvig Hansen and Lars Christian Henriksen, Basic DTU Wind Energy
controller, DTU Wind Energy E-0028, January 2013.
[21] Martin Egelund Andersen, Jaafar El Sadek Hussein, Anders Kjaer Lomholt and Burak
Turan, Loads-Aerodynamics and Controls Report 5, 46320, Final design, Department
of Wind Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, 2017.
[22] Mahmood Mirzaei, Basics of Wind Turbine Control Loads-Aerodynamics and Controls,
46320. Department of Wind Energy, Technical University of Denmark, 2017.
[23] Mahmood Mirzaei, Morten Hartvig Hansen, Carlo Tibaldi and Torben J. Larsen,
Controller tuning Loads-Aerodynamics and Controls 46320. Department of Wind
Energy, Technical University of Denmark, 2017.
[24] Majid Bastankhah and Fernando Porté-Agel, A new analytical model for wind-turbine
wakes Renewable Energy: Vol. 70, Pages 116-123, October 2014.
[25] Jensen N., A note on wind generator interaction. Technical report Ris-M-2411 Roskilde,
Denmark: Risø National Laboratory, 1983.
[26] Milton Abramowitz and Irene A. Stegun, Handbook of Mathematical Functions With
Formulas, Graphs, and Mathematical Tables Chapter 24.4, P. 887, United States
Department of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards, December 1972.
[27] Tuhfe Göcmen, Paul van der Laan, Pierre-Elouan Réthoré, Alfredo Peña Diaz, Gunnar
Chr. Larsen and Søren Ott, Wind turbine wake models developed at the technical
unversity of Denmark: A review, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews: Volume
60, Pages 752-769, July 2016.
66
==PAGE:73==
IEC 61400-1 Design Load
Cases A
Figure A.1: The Design Load Cases speciﬁed in the IEC standard [8].
67
==PAGE:74==
A. IEC 61400-1 Design Load Cases
Figure A.2: Abbreviations used in table A.1.
68
==PAGE:75==
Supplementary Plots B
B.1
Fitted Gain Scheduling for the Fatigue Load Controller
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure B.5: Initial gain schedules for the fatigue load controller in (a) ambient conditions, (b)
3D downstream full wake, (c) 3D downstream half wake and (d) 7D downstream half wake.
69
==PAGE:76==
B. Supplementary Plots
B.2
Wake Analysis Case 1: Weighted Thrust Coeﬀ.
70
==PAGE:77==
B. Supplementary Plots
71
==PAGE:78==
B. Supplementary Plots
72
==PAGE:79==
B. Supplementary Plots
B.3
Wake Analysis Case 2: Weighted Thrust Coeﬀ.
73
==PAGE:80==
B. Supplementary Plots
74
==PAGE:81==
B. Supplementary Plots
75
==PAGE:82==
B. Supplementary Plots
B.4
Wake Analysis Case 1: Thrust Coeﬀ. along Blade
76
==PAGE:83==
B. Supplementary Plots
B.5
Wake Analysis Case 2: Thrust Coeﬀ. along Blade
77
==PAGE:84==
MATLAB codes C
C.1
Create htc. Files from Masterﬁle
1 function create_htc_files_from_master(exchangefile,masterfile)
2 %% Read exchange file
3 [~,~,raw]=xlsread(exchangefile);
4 [n1,n2]=size(raw);
5 Nfiles=0;
6 for i=2:n1
7
if ~isnan(raw{i,1})
8
Nfiles=Nfiles+1;
9
else
10
break
11
end
12 end
13 Ntags=n2;
14 % Convert to text
15 txt=cell(Nfiles,Ntags);
16 for j=1:Ntags
17
for k=1:Nfiles
18
if isnan(raw{k+1,j})
19
txt{k,j}=’ ’;
20
elseif isnumeric(raw{k+1,j})
21
txt{k,j}=num2str(raw{k+1,j});
22
else
23
txt{k,j}=raw{k+1,j};
24
end
25
end
26 end
27 %% Read masterfile
28 fd=fopen(masterfile);
29 txtf=textscan(fd,’%s’,’Delimiter’,’\n’);
30 fclose(fd);
31 lines=txtf{1};
32 Nlines=length(lines);
33 %% Exchange tags in masterfile
34 linesfiles=cell(Nlines,Nfiles);
35 for i=1:Nlines
36
for k=1:Nfiles
37
linesfiles{i,k}=lines{i};
38
end
39 end
40 for i=1:Nlines
41
for j=1:Ntags
42
i1=strfind(lines{i},raw{1,j});
43
if ~isempty(i1)
44
for k=1:Nfiles
45
linesfiles{i,k}=strrep(linesfiles{i,k},raw{1,j},txt{k,j});
46
end
47
end
48
end
49 end
50 %% Write files
51 for j=1:Ntags
78
==PAGE:85==
C. MATLAB codes
52
if strcmp(raw{1,j},’[Case id.]’)
53
jcaseid=j;
54
end
55 end
56 [htcfolder,~,~]=fileparts(exchangefile);
57 for k=1:Nfiles
58
filename=fullfile(htcfolder,[raw{k+1,jcaseid},’.htc’]);
59
fd=fopen(filename,’w’);
60
for i=1:Nlines
61
fprintf(fd,’%s \n’,linesfiles{i,k});
62
end
63
fclose(fd);
64 end
C.2
Initializing Design Load Cases in HAWC2
1 %% clearing
2 clear all; close all; clc
3
4 %% user input
5
6 V = 4:2:26;
7 nr_seeds = 3;
8
9 %% processing
10
11 for i = 1:length(V)
12
for j = 1:nr_seeds
13
case_name{i,j} = [’dlc12_wsp’,sprintf(’%02d’,V(i)),’_wdir000_s’,num2str(j),’0’,
sprintf(’%02d’,i)];
14
htc_name{i,j} = case_name{i,j};
15
16
dos([’hawc2MB.exe ./htc/dlc12_iec61400-1ed3/’,htc_name{i,j},’.htc’]);
17
18
% import results into workspace
19
[sig,Freq,Time,Flag,Binary]=ReadHawc2([’./res/dlc12_iec61400-1ed3/’,htc_name{i,j
}]);
20
21
% save all data in .mat
22
save([’results_’,case_name{i,j},’.mat’],’sig’);
23
24
end
25 end
C.3
AEP Calculation
1 %% clearing
2 clear all; close all; clc
3
4 %% input
5
6 deltat = 0.01;
7 t_output = 100;
8 t_start = 400;
9 k=2;
10 Vref=50;
11 V = 4:2:26;
12 nr_seeds = 3;
13
14 %% processing
15
16 % starting index
79
==PAGE:86==
C. MATLAB codes
17 t_idx = round((t_start-t_output)/deltat);
18
19 % Rayleigh parameters
20 Vav=0.2*Vref;
21 A=(2*(Vav))/sqrt(pi);
22
23 % wind speed probability (at mid points)
24 for i=1:length(V)-1
25 f(i)=exp(-(V(i)/A)^k)-exp(-(V(i+1)/A)^k);
26 end
27
28 for i = 1:length(V)
29
30
for j=1:nr_seeds
31
32
% load data
33
load([’results_dlc12_wsp’,sprintf(’%02d’,V(i)),’_wdir000_s’,num2str(j),’0’,sprintf(’
%02d’,i),’.mat’]);
34
data{i,j}=sig;
35
36
% average power
37
P_av_all(i,j) = mean(data{i,j}(t_idx:end,100));
38
39
% minimum Mx
40
Mx_min_all(i,j) = min(data{i,j}(t_idx:end,26));
41
42
% minimum Mx
43
TTDist_min_all(i,j) = min(data{i,j}(t_idx:end,108));
44
45
end
46
47
P_av(i) = mean(P_av_all(i,:));
48
Mx_min(i) = min(Mx_min_all(i,:));
49
TTDist_min(i) = min(TTDist_min_all(i,:));
50
51 end
52
53 % average power (at midpoints)
54 for i=1:length(V)-1
55 P_av_c(i)=0.5*(P_av(i)+P_av(i+1));
56 end
57
58 % AEP
59 AEP=sum(P_av_c.*f)*8760
60
61 % ultimate Mx
62 min_Mx_av = min(Mx_min)
63
64 % ultimate TTDist
65 min_TTDist_av = min(TTDist_min)
C.4
Function to Import HAWC2 Files to MATLAB
1 function [sig,Freq,Time,Flag,Binary] = ReadHawc2(FileName)
2 % Reads HAWC2 binary and ascii results file
3 % ------------------------------------------------------------------------
4 % [sig,Freq,Time,Flag,Binary] = ReadHAWC2(FileName);
5 % filename should be without extension
6 % e.g. FileName = ’..\res\test’
7 % output:
8 % sig:
all data in file
9 % Freq:
sampling frequency
10 % Time:
total simulation time in file
11 % Flag:
0 if file do not exist, 1 if reading scucceed,
80
==PAGE:87==
C. MATLAB codes
12 %
2 if some data but not for full time span
13 % Binary:
1 if fils is in binary format, 0 if ascii
14 % ------------------------------------------------------------------------
15 % Made by Bjarne Skovmose Kallese
16 % 24/9-2008
17 % modified 18/12-2008: file error handelig added
18 % modified 26/2-2009: error msg for empty date file
19 % ------------------------------------------------------------------------
20 %% reading scale factors from *.sel file
21 fid = fopen([FileName,’.sel’], ’r’);
22 if fid == -1
23
Flag = 0;
24
disp(’
’)
25
disp(’==============================================================’)
26
disp([’file "’,FileName,’" could not be found’])
27
disp(’--------------------------------------------------------------’)
28
sig = [];Freq = 0;Time=0;Binary=[];
29
return
30 end
31 fgets(fid); fgets(fid); fgets(fid); % skip 3 lines
32 fgets(fid); fgets(fid); fgets(fid); % skip 3 lines
33 fgets(fid); fgets(fid); % skip 2 lines
34 tline = fscanf(fid,’%f’); % read line number 9
35 N = tline(1);
36 Nch = tline(2);
37 Time = tline(3);
38 FileType = fscanf(fid,’%s’);
39 fclose(fid);
40 Freq = N/Time;
41
42 %% Binary data
43 if FileType(1:6) == ’BINARY’
44
Binary = 1;
45
fid = fopen([FileName,’.dat’], ’r’);
46
sig = fread(fid,[N,Nch],’int16’);
47
if isempty(sig)
48
Flag = 0;
49
disp(’
’)
50
disp(’==============================================================’)
51
disp([’no data in file "’,FileName,’.dat"’])
52
disp(’--------------------------------------------------------------’)
53
sig = [];Freq = 0;Time=0;Binary=[];
54
return
55
end
56
ScaleFactor = dlmread([FileName,’.sel’],’’,[9+Nch+5 0 9+2*Nch+4 0]);
57
sig = sig*diag(ScaleFactor);
58
fclose(fid);
59
Flag = 1;
60
61 %% ascii data
62 elseif FileType(1:5) == ’ASCII’
63
Binary = 0;
64
sig = dlmread([FileName,’.dat’]);
65
if isempty(sig)
66
Flag = 0;
67
disp(’
’)
68
disp(’==============================================================’)
69
disp([’no data in file "’,FileName,’.dat"’])
70
disp(’--------------------------------------------------------------’)
71
sig = [];Freq = 0;Time=0;Binary=[];
72
return
73
end
74
if length(sig(:,1)) < N
75
Time = length(sig(:,1))/Freq;
76
Flag = 2;
77
disp(’
’)
81
==PAGE:88==
C. MATLAB codes
78
disp(’==============================================================’)
79
disp([’not full data in file "’,FileName,’.dat"’])
80
disp(’--------------------------------------------------------------’)
81
return
82
end
83
Flag = 1;
84
85 %% error
86 else
87
disp(’unknown file type’)
88
Flag = 0;
89 end
C.5
Legendre-Gauss Quadrature
1 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
2 %%%%%%%%%%Weigthed CT using Legendre-Gauss Quarature%%%%%%%%%%%%
3 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
4 % clean up
5 clear all; close all; clc;
6
7 % 4th degree polynomial of CT_wsp04 versus corresponding radius
8 r = 1:1:85;
9 for i = 1:length(r)
10 y(i) = -3.4462e-07*r(i)^4 + 6.5011e-05*r(i)^3 - 0.0039898*r(i)^2 ...
11
+ 0.097849*r(i) - 0.23502;
12 end
13
14 % calculate normal average
15 y_mean = mean(y);
16
17 % Legendre-Gauss Quadrature nodes and weights
18 [x,w]=lgwt(4,r(1),r(85));
19
20 % evaluate function at nodes
21 for i = 1:length(x)
22 y_nodes(i) =
-3.4462e-07*x(i)^4 + 6.5011e-05*x(i)^3 ...
23 - 0.0039898*x(i)^2 + 0.097849*x(i) - 0.23502;
24 end
25
26 % calcute weighted function outputs
27 y_weighted = y_nodes.*(4*w’/(r(end)-r(1)));
28
29 % calculate weighted average
30 y_weighted_mean = mean(y_weighted)
31
32 %Raw CT data
33 CT_wsp08 = [0.262501778943685 0.582274842436648 0.856068882581539...
34
0.871780267450534 0.838702866482380 0.854231814089298...
35
0.873882529258626 0.881536066660555 0.883567248609551...
36
0.973171106666364]
37 r_raw = [8.49000000000000 17 23.7000000000000 33.8400000000000...
38
41.9800000000000 50.2600000000000 58.3800000000000...
39
68.4500000000000 77.0500000000000 84.9000000000000]
40
41 % plots
42 plot(r,y,’k.-’,(r(1)+r(end))/2,y_mean,’ko’,x,y_weighted, ...
43
’r.-’,(r(1)+r(end))/2,y_weighted_mean,’ro’);
44 %hold on
45 %plot(r_raw,CT_wsp08);
46 xlabel (’radial position [m]’);
47 ylabel (’Ct [-]’);
48 legend(’fitted Ct-r’,’normal average’,’weighted Ct-r’,...
49
’weighted average’,’Location’,’Best’);
82
==PAGE:89==
C. MATLAB codes
50 title(’No flap control, 4m/s’);
C.5.1
Function to Legendre-Gauss Quadrature
1 function [x,w]=lgwt(N,a,b)
2
3 % lgwt.m
4 %
5 % This script is for computing definite integrals using Legendre-Gauss
6 % Quadrature. Computes the Legendre-Gauss nodes and weights
on an interval
7 % [a,b] with truncation order N
8 %
9 % Suppose you have a continuous function f(x) which is defined on [a,b]
10 % which you can evaluate at any x in [a,b]. Simply evaluate it at all of
11 % the values contained in the x vector to obtain a vector f. Then compute
12 % the definite integral using sum(f.*w);
13 %
14 % Written by Greg von Winckel - 02/25/2004
15 N=N-1;
16 N1=N+1; N2=N+2;
17
18 xu=linspace(-1,1,N1)’;
19
20 % Initial guess
21 y=cos((2*(0:N)’+1)*pi/(2*N+2))+(0.27/N1)*sin(pi*xu*N/N2);
22
23 % Legendre-Gauss Vandermonde Matrix
24 L=zeros(N1,N2);
25
26 % Derivative of LGVM
27 Lp=zeros(N1,N2);
28
29 % Compute the zeros of the N+1 Legendre Polynomial
30 % using the recursion relation and the Newton-Raphson method
31
32 y0=2;
33
34 % Iterate until new points are uniformly within epsilon of old points
35 while max(abs(y-y0))>eps
36
37
38
L(:,1)=1;
39
Lp(:,1)=0;
40
41
L(:,2)=y;
42
Lp(:,2)=1;
43
44
for k=2:N1
45
L(:,k+1)=( (2*k-1)*y.*L(:,k)-(k-1)*L(:,k-1) )/k;
46
end
47
48
Lp=(N2)*( L(:,N1)-y.*L(:,N2) )./(1-y.^2);
49
50
y0=y;
51
y=y0-L(:,N2)./Lp;
52
53 end
54
55 % Linear map from[-1,1] to [a,b]
56 x=(a*(1-y)+b*(1+y))/2;
57
58 % Compute the weights
59 w=(b-a)./((1-y.^2).*Lp.^2)*(N2/N1)^2;
83
==PAGE:90==
C. MATLAB codes
C.6
Analytical Wake Deﬁcit Model: User Input
1 %%
2 clear all; close all; clc;
3
4 %% user input
5 %Case 1: Wake deficit of Baseline
6 Xpos = [0 3*178]’;
7 Ypos = [0 178/2]’;
8 z_g = [0 0]’;
9 DT = [178 178]’;
10 Uc_c = [4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26]’;
11 Pc_c = [2.3e5 1.3e6 3.3e6 6.7e6 10e6 10e6 10e6 10e6 10e6 10e6 10e6 10e6]’; %Baseline
Power[W]
12 CTc_c = [0.7087 0.7914 0.7407 0.7308 0.6025 0.3608 0.2668 0.2086 0.1649 0.1334 0.1189
0.1030]’;
%Thrust coefficient for upstream turbine
13 WS = [6 6]’;
14 WD = [270 270]’;
15 ks = 0.029; %0.4 initial ksi %ksi factor, multiply with TI: (0.1505 , 0.1178 , 0.1015 ,
0.0917 , 0.0852 , 0.0805 , 0.0770 , 0.0743 , 0.0721 , 0.0703 , 0.0688 , 0.0676)
starting from lowest wsp.
16 Ng = 4;
17 rho = [1.225 1.225]’;
18 WS_CI = [4 4]’;
19 WS_CO = [26 26]’;
20 CT_idle = [0.053 0.053]’;
21 WakeSummation = ’linear’;
22
23 %% processing
24
25 for kk = 1:2
% 2 turbine case
26
P_c(kk,:,:) = [Uc_c, Pc_c];
27
CT_c(kk,:,:) = [Uc_c, CTc_c];
28 end
29
30 [P, T, U, dU] = gau_s(Xpos,Ypos,z_g,DT,P_c,CT_c,WS,WD,ks,Ng,rho,WS_CI,WS_CO,CT_idle,
WakeSummation);
C.6.1
Gau_s.m
1 %% ######################################################################
2 % gau_s(x_g,y_g,z_g,DT,P_c,CT_c,WS,WD,RW,Ng,rho,WS_CI,WS_CO,CT_idle, WakeSummation) :
SINGLE FLOW CASE
3 % ----------------------------------------------------------------------
4 % INPUTS:
5 % ----------
6 % Xpos : X-position of the turbines in the global coordinates (1D array: x1,x2)
7 % Ypos : Y-position of the turbines in the global coordinates (1D array: y1,y2)
8 % z_g : Vertical Distance between turbines in the global coordinates
9 % DT : Turbines diameter
10 % P_% : Power curves (tabulated)
11 % CT_% : Thrust coefficient curves (tabulated)
12 % WS : Undisturbed rotor averaged (equivalent) wind speed [m/s]
13 % WD : Undisturbed wind direction at hub height [deg.]
14 %
#Note Meteorological coordinates (N=0,E=90,S=180,W=270)
15 % ks : Wake (linear) expansion coefficient [-]
16 % Ng : Polynomial order for Gauss-Legendre quadrature integration in both radial and
angular positions
17 % rho : Air density at which the power curve is valid [kg/m^3]
18 % WS_CI : Cut in wind speed [m/s] for each turbine
19 % WS_CO : Cut out wind speed [m/s] for each turbine
20 % CT_idle : Thrust coefficient whwn turbine is not working [-] for each turbine (
previous value CT_idle = 0.053)
84
==PAGE:91==
C. MATLAB codes
21 % WakeSummation : ’linear’ or ’quadratic’ or ’maximum_deficit’ --> the method to
aggregate the multiple wakes in a row of turbines
22 %
23 %
24 % OUTPUTS:
25 % ----------
26 % P : Power production of the wind turbines (nWT,1) [W]
27 % T : Thrust force of the wind turbines (nWT,1) [N]
28 % U : Rotor averaged (equivalent) Wind speed at the downstream turbines (nWT,1) [m/s]-
29 % dU : the rotor equivalent wake deficit [m/s]
30
31 function [P, T, U, dU] = gau_s(Xpos,Ypos,z_g,DT,P_c,CT_c,WS,WD,ks,Ng,rho,WS_CI,WS_CO,
CT_idle, WakeSummation)
32
33
n = size(DT,1);
34
dU = zeros(n,1);
35
x_l = nan(n,n);
36
y_l = nan(n,n);
37
nDownstream = nan(n,1);
38
for i = 1:n % upstream turbine ID
39
for
j = 1:n % current turbine ID
40
x_l(i,j) = cosd(WD(i))*(Ypos(i)-Ypos(j)) + sind(WD(i))*(Xpos(i)-Xpos(j)); %
Xdist
41
y_l(i,j) = -sind(WD(i))*(Ypos(i)-Ypos(j))+cosd(WD(i))*(Xpos(i)-Xpos(j)); %
Ydist
42
end
43
44
nDownstream(i) = nnz(x_l(i,:)<0); % counts the number of turbines in front of
turbine
45
end
46
[~, idT] = sort(nDownstream,1); % Indexes of ordered turbines from most upstream
turbine
47 %
U = WS; %
Initializes the rotor averaged (equivalent) velocity
48
49
% Initilizing the first upstream turbine
50
upT = idT(1);
51
U = WS;
52
def_eq(upT) = 0;
53
% Computes the rotor averaged (equivalent) velocity deficit
54
for
j = 2:n % turbines’ loop
55
cWT = idT(j);
56
dUeq_norm = zeros(n,1);
57
for jj = j-1:-1:1 % loop on the upstream turbines
58
uWT = idT(jj);
59
x = x_l(uWT,cWT);
60
y = y_l(uWT,cWT);
61
z = z_g(cWT);
62
D = DT(cWT);
63
if ((U(uWT) >= WS_CI(uWT)) && (U(uWT) <= WS_CO(uWT)))
64
CT = interp1(CT_c(uWT,:,1),CT_c(uWT,:,2),U(uWT));
65
else
66
CT = CT_idle(uWT);
67
end
68
ks_u = ks(uWT); % for dynamic ks case
69
dUeq_norm(jj) = get_dUeq(x,y,z,DT,D,CT,ks_u,Ng);
70
def_eq(jj) = U(jj).*dUeq_norm(jj);
71
end
72
if strcmp(WakeSummation,’maximum_deficit’)
73
[dU(cWT),I] = nanmin(def_eq(:)); % Wake summation --> Maximum deficit
74
dU(isnan(dU)) = 0;
75
U(cWT) = max(0, (U(I) + dU(cWT)));
76
elseif strcmp(WakeSummation,’quadratic’)
77
[def1_gauss,~] = sumsqr(def_eq(:)); % Wake summation --> quadratic
78
dU(cWT) = def1_gauss^0.5;
79
U(cWT) = U(upT) - dU(cWT);
80
elseif strcmp(WakeSummation,’linear’)
85
==PAGE:92==
C. MATLAB codes
81
dU(cWT) = abs(nansum(def_eq(:))); % Wake summation --> Linear
82
dU(isnan(dU)) = 0;
83
[idx] = find(def_eq);
84
if isempty(idx) || all(isnan(idx)) % no-wake condition
85
U_uUp =
WS(cWT);
86
else
87
U_uUp = U(idx(1)); % wind speed at the first upstream, wake creating
turbine
88
end
89
U(cWT) = nanmax(0, (U_uUp - dU(cWT)));
90
end
91
end
92
% Calculates the power and thrust
93
P = zeros(n,1);
94
T = zeros(n,1);
95
for k = 1:n
96
if ((U(k) >= WS_CI(k)) && (U(k) <= WS_CO(k)))
97
P(k) = interp1(P_c(k,:,1),P_c(k,:,2),U(k));
98
CT = interp1(CT_c(k,:,1),CT_c(k,:,2),U(k));
99
else
100
P(k) = 0;
101
CT = CT_idle(k);
102
end
103
T(k) = CT.*0.5.*rho(k).*U(k).*U(k).*pi.*DT(k).*DT(k)./4;
104
end
105 end
C.6.2
get_dUeq.m
1 %% ######################################################################
2 % get_dUeq(n,x,y,z,DT,D,CT,ks,Ng) : Computes the rotor averaged (equivalent/effective)
wake velocity deficit at
3 % different turbine locations and diameters
4 % ----------------------------------------------------------------------%
5 % INPUTS:
6 % ----------
7 % x : Distance between turbines in the stream-wise direction
8 % y : Distance between turbines in the cross-flow direction
9 % z : Distance between turbines in the vertical direction
10 % DT : Wake operating turbines diamater
11 % D : Wake generating turbine diameter
12 % ks : Wake (linear) expansion coefficient [-]
13 % CT : Outputs WindTurbine object’s thrust coefficient
14 % Ng : Polynomial order for Gauss-Legendre quadrature integration in both radial and
angular positions
15 % OUTPUTS
16 % ----------
17 % dUeq_norm : Wake velocity deficit at a location normalized by inflow velocity
18
19
20 function [dUeq_norm] = get_dUeq(x,y,z,DT,D,CT,ks,Ng)
21
% Gauss-Legendre quadrature points and weights
22
switch Ng
23
case 4
24
root(1) = -0.3399810435848563;
25
root(2) = 0.3399810435848563;
26
root(3) = -0.8611363115940526;
27
root(4) = 0.8611363115940526;
28
29
weight(1) = 0.6521451548625461;
30
weight(2) = 0.6521451548625461;
31
weight(3) = 0.3478548451374538;
32
weight(4) = 0.3478548451374538;
86
==PAGE:93==
C. MATLAB codes
33
case 5
34
root(1) = 0.0000000000000000;
35
root(2) = -0.5384693101056831;
36
root(3) = 0.5384693101056831;
37
root(4) = -0.9061798459386640;
38
root(5) = 0.9061798459386640;
39
40
weight(1) = 0.5688888888888889;
41
weight(2) = 0.4786286704993665;
42
weight(3) = 0.4786286704993665;
43
weight(4) = 0.2369268850561891;
44
weight(5) = 0.2369268850561891;
45
case 6
46
root(1) = 0.6612093864662645;
47
root(2) = -0.6612093864662645;
48
root(3) = -0.2386191860831969;
49
root(4) = 0.2386191860831969;
50
root(5) = -0.9324695142031521;
51
root(6) = 0.9324695142031521;
52
53
weight(1) = 0.3607615730481386;
54
weight(2) = 0.3607615730481386;
55
weight(3) = 0.4679139345726910;
56
weight(4) = 0.4679139345726910;
57
weight(5) = 0.1713244923791704;
58
weight(6) = 0.1713244923791704;
59
case 7
60
root(1) = 0.0000000000000000;
61
root(2) = 0.4058451513773972;
62
root(3) = -0.4058451513773972;
63
root(4) = -0.7415311855993945;
64
root(5) = 0.7415311855993945;
65
root(6) = -0.9491079123427585;
66
root(7) = 0.9491079123427585;
67
68
weight(1) = 0.4179591836734694;
69
weight(2) = 0.3818300505051189;
70
weight(3) = 0.3818300505051189;
71
weight(4) = 0.2797053914892766;
72
weight(5) = 0.2797053914892766;
73
weight(6) = 0.1294849661688697;
74
weight(7) = 0.1294849661688697;
75
case 8
76
root(1) = -0.960289856497536;
77
root(2) = -0.796666477413627;
78
root(3) = -0.525532409916329;
79
root(4) = -0.183434642495650;
80
root(5) = 0.183434642495650;
81
root(6) = 0.525532409916329;
82
root(7) = 0.796666477413627;
83
root(8) = 0.960289856497536;
84
85
weight(1) = 0.101228536290374;
86
weight(2) = 0.222381034453375;
87
weight(3) = 0.313706645877888;
88
weight(4) = 0.362683783378363;
89
weight(5) = 0.362683783378363;
90
weight(6) = 0.313706645877888;
91
weight(7) = 0.222381034453375;
92
weight(8) = 0.101228536290374;
93
end
94
95
RT = DT./2;
96
r_R
= (y.^2 + z.^2).^(0.5); % Location of the turbines in wake coordinates
97
th_R = mod(atan2(z,y),2.*pi);
98
87
==PAGE:94==
C. MATLAB codes
99
n = length(x);
100
dUeq_norm = nan(n,1);
101
102
for i = 1:n
103
dUeq_norm(i) = 0;
104
if (x(i) > 0)
105
% Location of evaluation points in the local rotor coordinates
106
r_pr
= RT(i).*(root+1)./2; % uniform in [0, RT]
107 %
!th_pr = pi*(root+1d0)
!uniform in [0,2*pi]
108
th_pr = pi.*(root+1)-pi./2; % uniform in [-pi/2,3/2*pi]
109
% Location of evaluation points in wake coordinates
110
% Evaluation of wake and sum of quadrature
111
for j = 1: Ng
112
for k = 1: Ng
113
x_e = x(i);
114
tm1 = (r_R(i)).^2;
115
tm2 = (r_pr(k)).^2;
116
tm3 = 2.*r_R(i).*r_pr(k).*cos(th_R(i) - th_pr(j));
117
r_e = (tm1+tm2+tm3).^0.5;
118
dU_norm = get_dU(x_e,r_e,D,CT,ks);
119
tm4 = weight(j).*weight(k).*dU_norm(1).*(root(k)+1)./4;
120
dUeq_norm(i) = dUeq_norm(i)+tm4;
121
end
122
end
123
end
124
end
125
126 end
C.6.3
get_dU
1 %% #####################################################################
2 % get_dU(x,r,D,CT,RW) : Computes wake velocity deficit at a downstream location
3 % ---------------------------------------------------------------------
4 % INPUTS:
5 % x : Distance between turbines in the stream-wise direction
6 % r : Radial distance between the turbine and the location
7 % D : Wind turbine diameter
8 % CT : Outputs WindTurbine object’s thrust coefficient
9 % RW :
Wake radius at a downstream location (calculated at the previous step
10 % OUTPUTS:
11 % dU_norm :
Wake velocity deficit at a location normalized by rotor averaged (
equivalent, effective) inflow velocity
12
13 function [dU_norm] = get_dU(x,r,D,CT,ks)
14 n = length(x);
15 tm0 = nan(n);
16 dU_norm = nan(n);
17 tm10 = nan(n);
18 tm20 = nan(n);
19 a = (1-(sqrt(1-CT)))/2; % axial velocity deficit at rotor disc
20 k = sqrt((1-a)/(1-2*a)); % Near wake expansion ratio: k = D0/D from momentum balance,
notated with \epsilon in the paper
21 RW = nan(n,1);
22 % Loop over the downstream locations
23
for i = 1:n
24 % Linear wake expansion:
25 % RW is defined as the sigma of the Gaussian wake deficit, eqn [15]
26
RW(i) = 0.2*k*D + ks*x(i);
27
end
28
29
for ii = 1:n
30
tm0(ii) = (RW(ii)/D).^2;
88
==PAGE:95==
C. MATLAB codes
31
if x(ii) <= 2*D || (CT/(8.*tm0(ii))) >= 1 % Null wake radius for locations in
front of the rotor dis% or makes the max. deficit (C(x)) complex
32
dU_norm(ii) = 0;
33
else
34
tm10(ii) = 1 - ((1 - (CT/(8.*tm0(ii)))).^(0.5));
35
tm20(ii) = exp(-(1./(2.*tm0(ii))).*((r(ii)./D).^2));
36
dU_norm(ii) = -1.*tm10(ii).*tm20(ii);
37
end
38
end
39 end
89
