==PAGE:1==
Visualizing High-dimensional
Behavioral Data: The Interplay
Between Social and Geospatial
Trajectories
Athina Tsagkari
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The goal of the Master’s thesis is to explore the interaction between our social
behaviour [31] and our geospatial exploration, by generating visualizations using
the d3.js library [6]. Moreover, to achieve better understanding of this interplay
an analysis is being made. The project is based on the SensibleDTU dataset
[33].
In chapter 2, I will talk about data analysis in digital age and how visualization
can be a useful tool in data analysis and communication. I will present the
evolution of data visualization from the ancient years and last but not least, a
framework on creating a good visualization.
In the third chapter (3), the SensibleDTU dataset will be described along with
the way it was created. Next, I will brieﬂy present static and dynamic networks
and some previous work on community detection. In the last two sections of
this chapter, I will present the method used in order to identify the communities
in the SensibleDTU network and ﬁnally, how these communities were visualized
by Aslak [5].
In the fourth chapter (4), I will describe how I processed the dataset, what
methods I used and how I ﬁltered the groups. Also, some statistics are pro-
vided.
The next chapter (5) is about the design and the implementation of the visual-
ization created using d3.js.
In chapter 6, an analysis on the spacial movements of the groups is made and
some results are provided. Finally, the prediction of the distinct meeting points
of the groups is described.
The visualization can be found here.
https://athinatsag.github.io/thesis/
==PAGE:4==
ii
A video demo on how the visualization works can be found below.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YEYeYvtnDt0&feature=youtu.be
The link for the repository of the visualization.
https://github.com/athinatsag/thesis
The links for the notebooks created for this thesis, can be seen below.
https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/gist/athinatsag/9299eddf7280bdc07073db38286e01d8
https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/gist/athinatsag/0f5bfc750b5807c68d75d0a862ebb850
https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/gist/athinatsag/a172d863919f32ca6ead447c0b0040ed
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors for the valuable help
and support through this whole process. All these months they were always
available to give knowledge, advice and support.
Moreover, I would like to thank my family and my friends for the constant
support they oﬀer all the years of my studies.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Acknowledgements
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Visualizing Data
3
2.1
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Brief History of Data Visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Designing a Visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Communities
11
3.1
SensibleDTU
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Dynamic Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
How the Communities Were Found . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Visualizing Intermittent Communities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Data Preprocessing
21
4.1
Data Sychronization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Groups Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Filtering the Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
Geometric Median and Distances Calculation . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Design & Implementation
29
5.1
The Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
The Final Visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
6
Investigating the Spacial Movements of the Communities
39
6.1
Distinct Meeting Locations and Countries . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2.1
Distinct Locations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2.2
Distinct Countries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2.3
Removed Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.3
Predict Number of Distinct locations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7
Discussion & Conclusion
53
Bibliography
55
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The digital age has brought a huge availability of data. From these data useful
information can be extracted [3] though their, usually, huge size makes this
process hard [29]. A very useful tool which enables data investigation but also
facilitates the communication of the results of an analysis, is data visualization.
Data visualization is mistakenly considered to be a science of modern ages,
however humans use visualizations since the ancient years [12].
Figure 1.1: The oldest map of the city of Babylon 6200 b.C [13].
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
In order to design a good visualization and narrate a story using data several
steps need to be performed which I describe in chapter 2, along with a brief
history of data visualization.
Although there is wide availability of data, many datasets are owned by gov-
ernments and companies which do not allow access to them [29]. Furthermore,
many datasets of those who are available to the public are collected from a single
channel and they capture one part of the whole information. These drawbacks
limit also the results, especially when trying to understand human social net-
works and in order to achieve better understanding of those networks, a dataset
created from multiple channels during a research project called SensibleDTU
was created [31]. This is the dataset I used in this thesis and in chapter 3, I
give more details on the process of collecting the data, whereas I describe some
previous work on this dataset, such as how the communities were found and
visualized. In addition, some theoretical background on networks and commu-
nities’ detection is discussed in this chapter.
The goal of this project is to investigate the interplay between our social be-
haviour and our geospatial exploration by creating an interactive visualization.
The visualization’s description can be found in chapter 5, where I describe the
process of the design and its ﬁnal form as well. The data preparation and the
methods used for preprocessing are described in chapter 4, in which I present
some statistics about the communities.
Finally, the visualization inspired some analysis regarding the meeting locations
of the groups. I describe this analysis about the distinct locations or countries
of group meetings and its results in chapter 6.
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
Visualizing Data
“Visualization designers are melding the skills of computer science, statistics,
artistic design and storytelling” [2].
In this chapter, I will brieﬂy describe data and data analysis in the digital years,
while the focus will be on the most common tool used in exploratory analysis
which is data visualization. Regarding visualization, ﬁrstly, I will present its
evolution and history and secondly, I will describe a framework on how to design
a good visualization.
2.1
Data Analysis
On the contrary to analog age where data collection was expensive and rare
[29], in the recent years there is a huge availability of data. In digital age, the
behaviour of a huge number people is recorded not only from social media but
also from purchases, phone calls , visits on websites and other sources. These
data are collected by businesses and governments as well.
The main characteristics of the data in the digital age as described by Salganik
[29], are the following ten.
==PAGE:12==
4
Visualizing Data
1. Big: Data in digital age are often called big data as their size can be
enormous.
2. Always-on: Data collection many times happens constantly and in real
time.
3. Nonreactive: Frequently data collection captures data from participants
who are not aware of it.
4. Incomplete: Almost always there are missing data.
5. Inaccessible: Often there is no access to data collected by businesses or
governments.
6. Nonrepresentative: They do not represent a speciﬁc sample.
7. Drifting: Big data systems can change by population, behavioural and
system drifts.
8. Algorithmically confounded: Data behaviour can be driven by the way
was engineered.
9. Dirty: Often they can contain junk and spam data.
10. Sensitive: Frequently data can contain sensitive information about the
participants.
Data analysis refers to the procedure where valuable information is extracted
from data [3]. Regarding big data of digital age, if they are collected that easily,
they will need a lot of eﬀort in order to analyze them as they will probably
contain lots of useless information [29].
The three main ﬁelds of data analysis are:
• descriptive statistics
• exploratory data analysis
• conﬁrmatory data analysis
Exploratory data analysis is the attempt to explore the characteristics of a
dataset and to generate ideas for deeper investigation [8]. In exploratory data
analysis many graphical techniques are used such as boxplot, histogram, scatter
plot and more. Data visualization is part of the exploratory data analysis, on
the other hand, there are arguments on how to use data visualization not only
for data investigation but also communication of the data at the same time [15].
Focusing on communicating the results for achieving better communication of
the data visually [17], it is important to
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Brief History of Data Visualization
5
1. understand the context of the data and answer questions such as “who is
the my audience and what I want to communicate them”,
2. choose the most eﬀective way to present the data,
3. identify clutter and eliminate it if exists,
4. attract and guide the attention of the audience,
5. behave like a designer and,
6. tell the story of the data as it will explained more in section 2.3.
2.2
Brief History of Data Visualization
A very common belief is that data visualization is a recently developed science,
however humans visualize data for very long time. In this section the evolution
of data visualization is shortly presented.
Some of the ﬁrst visualizations created in ancient years were attempts to explore
and understand the world we live in, such as the ﬁrst maps or visualizations of
the changing positions of other planets. This interest about astronomy and map
creation continued also during 17th century as some of the most important prob-
lems during this century referred to “physical measurement- of time, distance,
and space- for astronomy, navigation and territorial expansion” [12].
During the next century visualization with the beginning of statistical theory
evolved and new methods for data visualization were developed. William Play-
fair is consider to be one of the most important creators of visualization tools
as he invented some of still widely used graphs such as pie chart [23], line graph
and bar graph [22]. One of the most characteristic visualizations of Playfair is
shown in the ﬁgure 2.1.
During the 19th century, statistical graphs begun to be part of scientiﬁc texts
given the fact that many of the visualization tools were already invented. One
very important visualization of this century was the one created by Dr. John
Snow in 1855 [32]. The visualization was a dot map shown in ﬁgure 2.2, which
illustrates the deaths caused by cholera in London. This visualization gave useful
information about the cause of the outbrake by revealing that many cases were
located in short distance to a pump in Broad Street, leading the to termination
of its usage.
==PAGE:14==
6
Visualizing Data
Figure 2.1: Graph showing the unfair prices of wheat comparing to the weekly
wages [7].
Figure 2.2: Map showing deaths caused by cholera in London, John Snow
1855.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Brief History of Data Visualization
7
Figure 2.3: 3-D visualization showing the population of Sweden by age during
the period 1750-1875, Luigi Perozzo.
This century is referred as the “golden age of statistical graphics” [12] as the
importance of visualizing data became widely recognized and many innovative
tools and methods were implemented. An example from this period is a three
dimensional visualization created by Luigi Perozzo [21] illustrating the popu-
lation of Sweden by age during the period 1750-1875. Luigi’s visualization is
provided in ﬁgure 2.3.
==PAGE:16==
8
Visualizing Data
On the other hand, the years followed i.e. 1900-1950 are deﬁned as the “modern
dark ages of visualization” [12]. During these years there was need for more
formal and precise statistical models, but also these years can be characterized
as the years that the already developed statistical graphs became more popular
for various usage such as commerce, textbooks and science. [12].
By the end of the aforementioned dark period data visualization begun to evolve
again due to computer science leading to the present, where visualizations play
a very important role and are used for a variety of purposes.
Visualizations are not a tool developed in the recent years. It is a science with
a very long and interesting history. In this section, a very small part of this
history was described, as further detail would be outside of this project’s scope.
2.3
Designing a Visualization
Static visualizations are used to describe data and prove a story for a long time.
Recent technology enable us to build interactive and more complex visualiza-
tions which are no longer a tool used to add evidence on a text, but they can
also be storytellers themselves. Although the relationship between data visu-
alization and storytelling is observed by many, the “design space for narrative
visualization” [30] is not investigated in depth.
A recent research gave progress in this investigation by analyzing “case studies of
narrative visualization” [30] and by creating a framework for the design strate-
gies. Using the patterns from these cases, the design features “were organized in
three divisions, genre, visual narrative tactics and narrative structure tactics”
[30].
As for the genres of the visualizations there were identiﬁed the following seven,
“magazine style, annotated chart, partitioned poster, ﬂow chart, comic strip,
slide show, and ﬁlm/video/animation” [30]. The main distinction between the
genres lies in the number of frames in each genre of visualization, as well as,
in the order the elements consisting the visualization are placed. Genres can
be found separately, but also they can be combined in order to produce more
complex and complete visualizations.
The visual narrative tactics division can be divided into the following three
sub-divisions,
• visual structuring, which refers to the methods used to structure the vi-
sualization in order to enable the user to navigate through it
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Designing a Visualization
9
Figure 2.4: The genres of narrative visualization [30].
• highlighting, which is about the methods used in order to attract the user’s
attention
• transition guidance, which is about the methods “for moving within or
between visual scenes without disorienting the viewer” [30].
The narrative structure tactics can be also divided into three categories,
• ordering, which refers to the way the user is able to navigate through the
visualization and to how much freedom there is on the navigation process
• interactivity, which refers to the options given to the user to interact with
the visualization and to how the user is informed about these options
• messaging, which refers to the texts that help the user understand the
observations of the visualization.
[30]
In order to achieve better results to a narrative visualization and to help the user
to understand the story behind it, the key factor is balancing the “author-driven
and reader-driven approaches” which can be seen below.
It is important to have a line path and texts, that the user can follow so that
he/she knows how to navigate through the visualization, but also it is important
to give him/her the opportunity to investigate it interactively.
To conclude, data visualization has a very long history which goes back to
ancient years. The explosion of data availability and technological innovations
==PAGE:18==
10
Visualizing Data
Author-Driven
Reader-Driven
Linear ordering of scenes
No prescribed ordering
Heavy messaging
No messaging
No interactivity
Free interactivity
Table 2.1: Balance the two approaches [30].
lead data visualization to play a very important part in science. The key in
order to create an interactive visualization of high quality is to balance the
author-driven and reader-driven approaches, meaning that the reader will have
the freedom to navigate through it and interact with it, but also it is important
that he is given some instructions and texts.
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
Communities
In this chapter, I will describe the dataset used for this project called Sensible
DTU. Moreover, I will describe brieﬂy the static and dynamic networks and
also, some methods for community detection in networks. The last two sections
talk about previous work in SensibleDTU dataset regarding on the way the
communities in the SensibleDTU’s high-scale network were detected and also
on how these communities were previously visualized.
3.1
SensibleDTU
Firstly in this chapter, I will describe the dataset and the way the data were
collected.
The dataset used for this thesis was created during a research project based at
the Technical University of Denmark in 2012-2013, called SensibleDTU. Sen-
sibleDTU’s goal is to investigate the interactions between the individuals of
large-scale networks as a dynamic process [33].
Human interactions are not using a single channel of communication, however,
many available datasets typically contain data from a single channel. In that
way, there are limitations at the results and also, the data sampling is often
uneven. In order to understand human social networks in depth, the neces-
sity of using multiple channels raises, thus the hypothesis behind SensibleDTU
==PAGE:20==
12
Communities
project is exactly that. Instead of using data from a solid channel such as phone
calls from a large population, a more condensed population was used and the
data collected for each individual were originated from multiple communication
channels such as phone calls, sms texts, social media, location and face-to-face
communication. One more aspect of this data collection was the fact that the
data were collected interactively, factor that enables the change of the way of
data collection, if that was necessary, in order to gain better temporal resolu-
tion. For the realization of this project 200 smartphones were distributed in
2012’s deployment, where the participants were DTU students and staﬀ, while
in 2013’s deployment, 1000 smartphones were given. When handling such kind
of data it is necessary to ensure the privacy of the participants, even if they
are not aware of the possible consequences of sharing their personal data. Sev-
eral actions were performed to ensure the protection of the participants such
as keeping all the Personally Identiﬁable Information attributes separately from
the rest of the data, change the dates and inform thoroughly the participants
about their privacy [33].
To sum up, SensibleDTU is a dataset with high temporal resolution created
during a research project in the Technical University of Denmark. The dataset
consist of data about DTU students and staﬀ, collected from multiple commu-
nication channels.
3.2
Networks
In this section social systems and the ways they can be analyzed using network
science are described. The focus in the section is on the communities that a
static network consist of.
Social systems are deﬁned as the relationships that exist between a group of
people or groups and make them form a coherent whole [1]. A social system
could be for example a family, a group of friends or a group of co-workers.
A social system can be described in the form of a social network. Social networks
are structures that express the relations between the units of a social system by
linking them to each other [34]. A social network is “a set of people with some
pattern of contacts or interactions between them” [19].
The structure of social systems can be analyzed by network science. Newman
[19] deﬁnes networks as a set of items called nodes or vertices, which are con-
nected to each other by edges. In a social networks, nodes are the individuals
that are part of this network while the edges represent the relationships among
them. Networks had been studied in depth in discrete mathematics in the form
of graphs and in social science as well. There are many types of networks. Net-
works can be very complex, they can be directed or they can be weighted. The
recent years, network analysis has changed in the sense that there is raising need
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Networks
13
Figure 3.1: A simple network.
for investigating networks of bigger size and higher complexity due to the fact
that the data collection is extremely higher than in the past as social media and
other technology play a very important part in our lives.
A highly important aspect of networks investigation is the revelation of their
underlying structure by identifying substructures in the complex system [25].
These substructures of a network are called communities. Many deﬁnitions for
the communities were written. For the purpose of this thesis as communities we
deﬁne the “highly connected modules that are weekly connected to each other”
[26] or the “topological groups of nodes with higher internal density of links
compared to null models” [10].
Many methods were created in order to decompose static networks in commu-
nities which will be not mentioned in this thesis [25]. The majority of these
methods were created under the assumption that real life networks remain un-
changed, though real life networks show the exactly opposite behaviour. More
details on real life networks will follow in the next section.
As previously mentioned, social systems are structures of people or groups of
people and the relationships between them. Network science can describe social
systems, while nowdays their complexity is much higher due to the increasing
availability of data. One of the most important tasks of network analysis is the
revelation of the underlying structure that consist the network.
==PAGE:22==
14
Communities
Figure 3.2: Network represestations.
3.3
Dynamic Networks
In the recent days, the need for analyzing dynamic networks has raised.
In
this section, this need is discussed as well as some modelling techniques. Next,
the basic methods for community detection in dynamic methods are described,
followed by a diﬀerent approach tested in SensibleDTU dataset.
Most of the real life social networks are dynamic in the sense that their structure
changes over time [25]. For example, in a network of students in one university
where nodes are students, the edges may change every semester as the students
have diﬀerent courses to attend and diﬀerent study groups. This type of net-
works if they are analyzed as static ones a lot of information will be lost, as
static networks can capture the structure of a system in a speciﬁc moment. The
solution is to introduce dynamics into networks in order to gain the maximum
possible understanding of its structure.
Nowdays, there is a huge variety of
datasets with temporal information are available and they can be investigated
using dynamic networks.
In terms of modelling a dynamic network, when the model complexity increases,
the temporal impact of the network decreases. In ﬁgure 3.2 [25], four modelling
solutions of modelling are illustrated. The left static network captures only an
instance of a dynamic network, while moving to the right dynamics are added
gradually leading to a complex temporal network. Static and weigthed models
are best for revealing more consistent patterns, whereas snapshots and temporal
networks can capture also the dynamics. A temporal network is a network that
its nodes and edges change over time. A snapshot is a static network which is
an illustration of a dynamic network at a speciﬁc time.
The communities in real life networks are intermittent communities i.e “com-
munities that form and resolve” [5] multiple times. The constant change of the
dynamic social networks makes their investigation a hard task. Community de-
tection methods for static methods trying to reveal the hidden structure of a
network. On the other hand, dynamic methods focus on “the tracking of such
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Dynamic Networks
15
local topologies and their mutations” [25].
Network science has managed to create a mathematical framework, which will
not be described as it is outside the scope of this thesis, to investigate the struc-
ture of the social networks in order to achieve better understanding of the social
groups’ behaviour, while recent researches have shown that social groups over-
lap and their dynamics are not random [28]. Many methods exist for dynamic
community discovery. Rossetti [25] classiﬁes these methods as follows.
1. Instant-optimal community detection methods which are two step meth-
ods, where the ﬁrst step is the identiﬁcation of the communities in each
step of time evolution, whereas the second is matching the communities
found each moment. These methods can be used only in snapshots models.
2. Temporal Trade-oﬀcommunity detection algorithms follow iteratively two
steps. The ﬁrst step is to reveal the communities in the initial network
while the second step is community identiﬁcation in each timestamp,
whereas take also into consideration past information.
These methods
can be used with both temporal and snapshot networks.
3. Cross-Time community detection algorithms do not identify communities
in each step of time evolution of the network, instead communities are
detected by using all the states of the network at the same time.
In a recent research [31], it was shown that when working with high resolution
data like the dataset created by SensibleDTU research, there is no need for
community detection using a complex mathematical framework. Instead of using
complex mathematics to describe a network, communities in such networks can
be detected directly by using “time slices which are shorter that the rate at
which the group composition changes” [31]. In this case the network falls apart
and its communities are revealed. An illustration of this property can be seen
in ﬁgure 3.3.
These time slices can deﬁned as snapshots were previously described.
Time
slices are moments in the dynamic network and show its current state. In order
to capture most of the changes in the networks it is important to split the net-
work evolution in more parts than the times the network changes. The temporal
communities that the network consist of, can be found by using any clustering
method across these slices. This approach was tested in Sensible DTU data
and it has been found that there are students who participate in almost every
gathering of a community while there are others who participate brieﬂy. The
==PAGE:24==
16
Communities
Figure 3.3: The three pictures show the network formed by face-to-face meet-
ings in three diﬀerent types of time slices. The left network was
formed by meetings within 24hours, the middle within 1 hour and
the right within 5 minutes. As it is clearly demonstrated in the
three pictures, in the network formed in 5 minutes the communi-
ties can be observed directly [31].
individuals who participate in most of the gatherings can be identiﬁed as the
core of the group. In this analysis, cores are identiﬁed as cores with more than
three students, and it was shown that each individual participates, on average,
in 2 recreational cores and in 2.74±1.85 work cores. Cores can be also identiﬁed
from their communication traces, as for example, the members of a work core
communicate more with each other before a meeting during the weekdays.
The location prediction from the fact that if two individuals are socially related
then they will have location correlation, is diﬃcult [31]. The property of cores
that can be used for a successful prediction, is the one that says that if two core
members are together the third member will probably arrive within an hour. A
comparison of three models has been made. In the ﬁrst model, three individ-
uals were randomly picked and if the two of them were in the same location,
the probability of the thirds member appearance was calculated. In the second
model, a node was randomly chosen and then, BFS (breadth ﬁrst search) steps
were performed. The third model was the cores model. The ﬁrst model couldn’t
predict the arrival of individual at all, the second model was able to predict but
with very low accuracy, while the third model was correct in the 50% of the
cases.
Each individual participates in many cores, so by the daily participation to
cores an instantiation proﬁle can be created (“social trajectory”) and oﬀers a
simpliﬁcation of the complex dynamic social networks. It has been shown that
the location, equivalently the participation in a core, of an individual can be
predicted from a sequence of locations. A comparison of the social and spatial
behaviour was made by calculating the uncorrelated entropy for the social and
geospatial trajectories independently, over a week for three time bins (morn-
ing,evening,night). Low entropy means that a person tends to spend time in
less distinct locations. The results has shown that people tend to be in the same
places with the same people during the weekdays while on weekends they tend
==PAGE:25==
3.4 How the Communities Were Found
17
Figure 3.4: Temporal aspects of geospatial and social predictability of the
cores.
Cores tent to be stable to their meetings’ locations and
they have lower entropy [31].
to be more exploratory location-wise but they are more stable to their social
interactions.
Instead of using static networks to describe a real-life social network, a better
solution is to include its dynamics in the investigation. This can be achieved
using snapshot or temporal networks. There are plenty of methods for commu-
nity detection in dynamic networks which can be classiﬁed in three categories.
A new approach proves that if the dataset from which the network was created
has high resolution the communities can be detected directly.
3.4
How the Communities Were Found
In this section, the method used in order to decompose the SensibleDTU net-
work into communities is described.
For the community identiﬁcation in the SensibleDTU dataset, which communi-
ties are used in this thesis, the complex dataset was represented by multilayer
networks, where the layers represent the time slices, as were previously de-
scribed. As for the nodes, two diﬀerent networks can be deﬁned, where in the
ﬁrst one the nodes represent the physical node of each individual and in the sec-
ond they represent “constraints on ﬂows” [5] and they referred as state nodes.
These layers of a multilayer network can be clustered and then be matched, to
reveal the temporal communities, or the full multilayer networks can be clus-
tered via diﬀerent methods. However, these methods make use of the interlayer
links that are not always known and if they are, they show the dependencies
==PAGE:26==
18
Communities
existing between the entire layer, factor that can hide information about the
dependencies between the nodes [5]. To overcome these problem the approach
followed to identify the temporal communities in the SensibleDTU multilayer
network a method that was designed to be able to reveal “the interlayer de-
pendencies at the node level” [5] was applied. The ﬁrst step performed in this
method is to coupling pairs of nodes by calculating the similarity of each node’s
neighborhood ﬂow coupling so that the communities are revealed in the network.
For this purpose, an adaptation of “the ﬂow-based community detection algo-
rithm Infomap [10] was made and the intermittent communities were detected”
[5].
3.5
Visualizing Intermittent Communities
The complex network of SensibleDTU dataset and its intermittent communities
were visualized and this visualization is descibed in the current section.
The resulting temporal communities from the aforementioned method were visu-
alized “as vertical ‘strips’ of varying width” [5]. The height of each “strip” shows
the daily appearance of each community, while the width shows the temporal
evolution of the community. As the width grows large, the more group partici-
pants are present at this speciﬁc moment, whereas for low width fewer members
participate. This visualization has also an interactive version that reveals which
communities overlap something that cannot be seen in the static version. The
interactive version can be seen at http://ulfaslak.com/research/temporal_
communities/.
In the visualization there is the option to see either the temporal communities
from the network of employees in the university during working hours, or the
communities that constitute the students’ network.
It was showed that the two networks have very diﬀerent structure. The commu-
nities of the employee’s network are more intermittent and their duration is ten
minutes on average. On the other hand, the students network has a bigger va-
riety of groups sizes which can occur from students who participate in the same
lectures, study group or social gatherings. Aslak’s visualization clearly shows
that the method used on SensibleDTU dataset has good results for intermittent
communities detection [5].
In this chapter, the SensibleDTU dataset was described, as well as the way
data were collected in order to achieve high temporal resolution.
The data
were collected from multiple channels of communication whereas the collection
==PAGE:27==
3.5 Visualizing Intermittent Communities
19
Figure 3.5: Visualization of the temporal communities of the SensibleDTU’s
network [5].
was an interactive procedure. This kind of datasets when described using static
networks a lot of information is lost. For that reason, they can be described using
dynamic networks such as snapshots or temporal networks. The communities
of the SensibleDTU dataset were detected using multilayer networks which can
capture the temporal evolution of the social network. These communities are
intermittent because of the network’s dynamic structure.
==PAGE:28==
20
Communities
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4
Data Preprocessing
In this section, I will present the data preprocessing performed on SensibleDTU
dataset in order to improve the data quality and facilitate the visualization
procedure, but also in order to reveal some general patterns in the data. Next,
I will mention the way the data size was reduced and also, the methods used
for the geometric median and the distances calculation.
For the purpose of this project two datasets were available. One containing
all the locations and timestamps of all the individuals-nodes, namely all the
locations and times a node was spotted during one week and one containing
the locations of the centers and timestamps of all the groups as well as a list of
nodes who were active at each location-time. Combining these two datasets the
members of each group were found and stored in separate ﬁles.
4.1
Data Sychronization
Even though the data from SensibleDTU research were collected interactively
in order to avoid uneven data [33], there were some missing data. Not all the
nodes were seen in all the distinct timestamps that exist in dataset because for
example, if someone turns oﬀthe smartphone to save energy there will be no
information about his location during this period of time [33].
==PAGE:30==
22
Data Preprocessing
In order to visualize the data and to be accurate about time, it was necessary to
have locations for all the nodes for every available distinct timestamp. For that
reason three diﬀerent approaches were tested and they will be described below.
i) First method. In the ﬁrst method all the distinct timestamps where all the
nodes were “seen”, were collected. The goal was to have 673 timestamps
and locations for each of the nodes.
The nodes had locations for 518
timestamps on average.
The rest were ﬁlled using the location of the
closest timestamp the node was “seen”.
ii) Second method. In the second method the same 673 timestamps as in
the ﬁrst method were used. The diﬀerence lies to the fact that instead
of taking the location of the closest timestamp the node was "seen", the
location for the missing timestamps were calculated by taking the average
of the locations where the node were at the two closest timestamps, in
order to have smoother transitions from one place to another.
iii) Third method. In the third method, the 673 timestamps were the groups
were “seen” were used instead. The missing timestamps were ﬁlled by ﬁnd
the location of the closest timestamp the node was “seen”. As more than
the 50% of the timestamps the groups were seen, were diﬀerent than the
nodes’ timestamps, the missing locations in this method were much more
than those in the two aforementioned methods.
The three methods were tested by plotting the synchronized data occurred from
each method separately and investigating how they performed in the visualiza-
tion. The data from the ﬁrst and the third method behaved similarly, whereas
the second method created more locations by taking the average of the two clos-
est locations and that made the visualization more complex without adding more
information. Due to the fact that the third method generates many locations
in order to ﬁll the missing data, the chosen method for data synchronization
was the ﬁrst one. Later in the progress, in order to be synchronized with the
meetings locations timestamps the latter timestamps were changed to be the
same with the nodes timestamps.
4.2
Groups Statistics
The SensibleDTU network consist of 1157 communities in total. These com-
munities are overlapping meaning that one individual is a member of multiple
communities. The extend to which these communities overlap is illustrated in
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Groups Statistics
23
Figure 4.1: Histogram of the number of groups each individual belongs to.
Most people belong to few groups, while only a small fraction of
them belong to more than 5 groups simultaneously.
ﬁgure 4.1, where can be seen that roughly all persons are members in more that
one communities.
Moreover, the communities show considerable ﬂuctuation in size, as it can be
seen in ﬁgure 4.2, the majority of the communities, though, consist of two
members, while the biggest community in size has more than 40 members.
The distribution of the number of occurrences, meaning the number of times at
least two of the community members were physically together, is very similar to
the distribution of the number of members in each group. Roughly more than
the 70% of the groups were gathered only two times, while there are groups that
met over 500 times.
==PAGE:32==
24
Data Preprocessing
Figure 4.2: Histogram of the number of members in each group in log axis.
Most of the groups have only two members, whereas the biggest
group has more than 40 members.
Figure 4.3: Histogram of the number of occurrences of each group in log axis.
More than half of the groups’ gatherings occurred only two times,
two of the groups met more than 300 times and the rest vary
between 3 and 300 times.
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Groups Statistics
25
Figure 4.4: Scatter plot showing the relationship between the number of oc-
currences and the number of members. The weak correlation of
0.43 is conﬁrmed visually meaning that larger groups are more
likely to have more occurrences than smaller ones.
The correlation between the number of members and the number of occurrences
for each group is 0.43 which indicates that there is some positive correlation but
not very high, fact that is also veriﬁed by the scatter plot in ﬁgure 4.4.
Furthermore, in order to investigate whether there is a speciﬁc relationship
between how spread a group is and its size or its number of occurrences, some
more correlations were calculated and some plots were created. The correlation
was also calculated and as it is clearly revealed in ﬁgure 4.5, it is very weak, close
to zero. Furthermore, it is revealed that the groups that have many occurrences
are those who are not that spread out i.e their average distance from the groups
geometric median is low. On the other hand, non spread out groups can have
also low number of occurrences, however the groups that are more spread have
only very few occurrences. Regarding the number of members of the groups it
is illustrated, in the bottom right ﬁgure in ﬁgure 4.5, that only small groups
have large average distance from the geometric median while the majority of
the groups and all the big groups in size are not very spread out.
==PAGE:34==
26
Data Preprocessing
4.3
Filtering the Data
The SensibleDTU network consist of 1157 groups many of which consist of only
two nodes or they met very few times. For that reason, all the groups that have
only two or three members were discarded, as well as all the groups that where
physically together less that 20 times. The idea behind that selection is that
if a group consist of very few members it can not be considered community.
Moreover, having groups which met only 20 times comparing to other groups
that met up to 545 times, while also taking into consideration the fact that more
that the 70% of the groups met less than 20 times and if they be discarded the
visualization will be simpliﬁed without loss of information, these groups were
ﬁnally discarded. The remaining groups after the ﬁltering are 111 in total. The
mobility patterns of the discarded groups were also analyzed, even though the
groups were not added to the visualization and they will be described in section
6.2.3.
4.4
Geometric Median and Distances Calculation
In this section I will describe the methods used to calculate the geometric median
and the distances of all points from the geometric median.The geometric me-
dian of a set of points in Euclidean space is deﬁned as “the point that minimizes
the sum of distances from itself to the other points in the set” [11]. Geometric
median was selected to represent the centres of the community in every avail-
able timestamp as it describes the “central tendency of the set” [11] without
taking into consideration possible outliers in the set. For the computation of
the geometric median a python package was used [18]. The geometric median
is formally deﬁned as follows:
argmin
y∈Rn
m
X
i=1
∥xi −y∥2
For the distances of all points from the geometric median[16] as well as for all the
other distances needed to be calculated for this project, the havershine formula
was used. The haversine formula [24] calculates the distance between two points
on a sphere. The distance between two points can be deﬁned as:
d(li, lj) = 2r arcsin
r
sin2 φj −φi
2
+ cos φi cos φj sin2 λj −λi
2
==PAGE:35==
4.4 Geometric Median and Distances Calculation
27
where φ is their latitude and λ is their longitude.
To conclude, in order to achieve correct visualization of the movements three
methods for data synchronization were tested. The chosen method achieves to
have smooth transitions of the data points corresponding to individuals while
is synchronous with the group meetings as well. The statistics for the groups
reveal that the communities overlap, fact which was expected given that the
network is dynamic. The majority of the 1157 groups met less than twenty
times and consist of less than three members.
These groups were discarded
for data reduction. It was also investigated whether there is some correlation
between the number of members a group has and the number of its meetings.
In fact there is some positive correlation but not signiﬁcantly high. Finally,
the methods used for the geometric median and the distances calculation are
described.
==PAGE:36==
28
Data Preprocessing
Figure 4.5: The upper left plot shows the correlation between the number
of times each group was spotted and the median distance from
the geometric median of each group, while the upper right plot
shows the average distance instead. The two bottom plots show
the relationship between number of group members and median or
average distance, respectively.The upper plots indicate that groups
that have high median/average distance from geometric median do
not have many occurrences, which is logical because those groups’
members are spread out more than the others. When examining
the correlation of the aforementioned metric and the number of
members per group we can observe that only groups with few
members (<15) have a large average distance from the geometric
median. This is is shown more clearly in the bottom right plot
where the observations are near the two axes.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 5
Design & Implementation
In this chapter the design and the implementation of the complete visualization
are described.
5.1
The Process
To begin with, in order to achieve better communication of the data visually
as described in chapter 2 some steps need to be performed. The visualization
is very simple in design as it is a tool mainly for data preprocessing and for
revealing patterns for the dataset. The most eﬀective way to present the data I
chose to be the d3.js library which enables creating interactive visualizations.
In order to avoid cluttering many groups have been removed and also, the design
is very minimal. An important factor during the design process was to ﬁnd the
balance between the “author-driven and reader-driven approaches” [30] as they
were described in section 2.3. In order to tell the story of the data in the best
possible way it was important to give to the user some instructions about how
to navigate through the visualization by using text, while giving him also the
chance to investigate the data himself by using interactive tools which will be
described later in this chapter.
==PAGE:38==
30
Design & Implementation
Figure 5.1: The ﬁrst hand-drawing mock-up.
Before starting the implementation of the visualization, a ﬁrst hand-drawing
mock-up was created and can be seen in ﬁgure 5.1. The initial design includes
a map, on top of which the movements of the individuals are plotted, while
the locations a group met are shown too. Below the map, there is a timeline
that shows how spread a group is i.e the median distance of all points at a
speciﬁc timestamp from the geometric median of the group. Finally, it includes
a button that gives the user the option to choose which group is shown in the
visualization.
The ﬁrst step of the visualization was to create the map of Denmark and plotting
the movement of a single individual during one week. The map was created
completely from the beginning using the shape-ﬁle of Denmark and d3.js [6].
The ﬁrst visualization can be seen in the ﬁgure 5.2.
==PAGE:39==
5.1 The Process
31
Figure 5.2: The ﬁrst map.
The visualization achieved to show the mobility of the individual, however the
map was not interactive, there was no option to zoom-in and zoom out and also,
the design was not attractive for the user. For that reason, it was decided to use
an interactive map which enables zooming and moreover, it is global, factor that
is very important as some of the individuals travel to other countries as well.
The interactive map chosen was created by using the open-source JavaScript
library, Leaﬂet [4].
In this interactive map the movements of the same individual were plotted and
as a next step, more individuals were added. Thus, the visualization as can be
seen below 5.3 shows the mobility of a whole group during one week.
The map alone does not oﬀer more than a mini-movie of the movements of a
group’s members around the world. From this movie obviously some patterns
are visible as for example that the individuals tend to move around DTU very
often, but other than that it cannot oﬀer information about any other mobility
patterns.
For that reason, a timeline was added to the intent that the viewer can examine
which are the movement patterns, as well as knowing the exact moment of a
==PAGE:40==
32
Design & Implementation
Figure 5.3: One group plotted in a Leaﬂet map.
Figure 5.4: Brush selector on barplot.
speciﬁc frame. The chosen timeline is a barplot that demonstrates the median
distance of all the individuals from the geometric median i.e the median center
of the group, in one week.
For the viewer there were two interactive options to choose from on how to
investigate the data using the timeline. The ﬁrst option was to use a brush
from the d3.js [6] library for the purpose of giving the viewer the possibility to
choose a speciﬁc area of the barplot and see a movie of the movements of the
group for any days or sequence of days he/she is interested in. The barplot and
the brush selection can be seen in ﬁgure 5.4 where the selected area is from
Saturday the 3rd of January at 12pm until Monday the 5th of January at 12pm.
As can be seen just by adding the barplot automatically the viewer can identify
a pattern by looking the median distances.
For example, from this group’s
barplot it can be seen that the median distances raise during the weekends and
that indicates that this is probably a group of co-workers.
==PAGE:41==
5.1 The Process
33
Figure 5.5: Interactive barplot.
Figure 5.6: Brush selector and vertical line showing the time on the barplot.
The second option that the user had in order to interact with the visualiza-
tion was an identical barplot, as described previously, but what makes the two
barplots diﬀerent is the fact that in the second one there is no option to select an
area by brush. Instead of having a brush selector, in the second barplot the user
was able to mouse over the bars and see the static position of the individuals for
that speciﬁc moment. It can be seen in ﬁgure 5.5 that the user selected a bar
from the barplot which is indicated by changing color to green and represents a
speciﬁc day and time, which is written over the barplot.
Later in the progress the visualization changed and some features were added.
In the brush selector a moving vertical line was added (ﬁgure 5.6). This line
is a very useful tool, as it shows what is the exact moment of the mini-movie
appearing in the map and was emerged from the brush selector.
In the second interactive barplot what was changed is that instead of mouse over
the user can click on the bar he/she is interested in and then there is possibility
==PAGE:42==
34
Design & Implementation
Figure 5.7: Information on mouseover.
to mouse over the circles that represent the individuals and ﬁnd information
about each individual 5.7. This feature was added for three main reasons.
• The ﬁrst reason is to give to the viewer the ability to follow the movements
of a speciﬁc individual that he may be interested in.
• The second reason is to give the option for investigation of nodes that
tend to move together which could lead in detection of smaller groups or
possibly cores.
• The third reason is to give an information that is hidden from the visual-
ization. As it was previously discussed the groups overlap so if for example
the user selects to see two or more groups at the same time and a node
belongs in all the groups plotted, the corresponding circle will have only
the color of the group selected last. To overcome this problem with mouse
over the circles the user can see if a node belongs to other groups also.
Finally, in both types of interaction with the visualization the user had the
option to add on the map the geometric medians of each group. The centers of
each group are represented by rings that change size with respect to the median
distance of all points from the geometric median.
==PAGE:43==
5.2 The Final Visualization
35
5.2
The Final Visualization
In the ﬁnal form of the visualization, at ﬁrst, the user is given some instructions
on how to use the visualization.
The options the user has are the following. First of all, the user can choose from
a number of categories of groups. There are 111 groups and for that reason, it
is not possible to have them all in one category. The way decided to split the
groups to categories is by number of occurrences. Thus, the user has to choose
between the following categories, using a dropdown menu. Those categories can
be found in table 5.1.
#occurrences
#groups
200-250
6
150-200
6
120-150
10
100-120
7
80-100
15
60-80
21
40-60
15
30-40
26
20-30
37
Table 5.1: Categories based on number of occurrences.
When the user chooses a category, the groups that belong in this category appear
over the map. Next to each group there are checkboxes which are unchecked
by default. In order to achieve better understanding of the groups mobility,
the viewer has the possibility to choose one group at a time or any of their
combinations he/she is interested in. In ﬁgure 5.8 many groups are plotted on
the map.
Then, the user can choose either to see a mini-movie for the selected time period
by the brush selector on the bar plot that appears below the map or he can
choose to use the interactive bar plot in which he can click on a bar and see the
static positions of the individuals for the selected timestamp. Also, there is a
third option that shows the locations of the meetings of the selected groups.
Moreover, the user can choose between two speeds for the interactive movie.
The ﬁrst speed is the default speed, while the second is much slower. The slow
motion version enables the user to see exactly the mobility of the nodes for the
chosen time period. The menu of ﬁnal visualization can be seen in ﬁgure 5.9.
==PAGE:44==
36
Design & Implementation
Figure 5.8: Many groups plotted on the map.
1. Groups Movement Animated: By choosing this option the user can see
a mini movie of the movements of the selected groups’ members, for the
selected by the brush period of time, which can be seen in ﬁgure 5.6.
2. Groups Location Interactively: By choosing this option the user can inves-
tigate interactively the data as described in the previous section. More-
over, there is the option to add the meeting points of the groups. In this
case a second interactive barplot appears below the map that indicates
the time of the meetings along with the number of the members present
in the meeting. This is shown in ﬁgure 5.10.
3. Groups Meetings: In this option the locations of the meeting of the selected
groups during one week appear on the map 5.11.
==PAGE:45==
5.2 The Final Visualization
37
Figure 5.9: Final visualization.
==PAGE:46==
38
Design & Implementation
Figure 5.10: Second interactive barplot that shows the locations, the time and
the assemblage of meetings .
Figure 5.11: Meeting locations of nine groups.
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 6
Investigating the Spacial
Movements of the
Communities
In this chapter, I will describe an analysis on the behaviour of the groups’
movements. The locations of the groups’ meetings will be revealed as well as the
relationship between these locations and the other parameters that characterize
the communities. At the end of the chapter, I will talk about predicting the
number of distinct locations a group meets.
To begin with, all the locations where the meetings of the communities occurred
are illustrated in ﬁgure 6.1. A ﬁrst insight into the locations of the meetings is
that the groups were mainly met in Denmark but also there is a considerable
amount of meetings in neighbouring countries, more precisely in Germany and
Czech Republic whereas there are some meetings in other countries too.
==PAGE:48==
40
Investigating the Spacial Movements of the Communities
Figure 6.1: Locations of the meetings of all the groups during one week marked
with black dots.
6.1
Distinct Meeting Locations and Countries
The dataset available for this project contains multiple locations for the commu-
nities’ meetings, though many of these locations correspond to the same physical
locations. As an example, it is possible to have varying locations inside the DTU
campus at Lyngby and even though all these locations are useful to describe the
frequency of visits in a speciﬁc location, they are unnecessary for the purpose
of revealing the general pattern of the meetings’ locations and for that reason,
all the locations that are inside the DTU can be described by a single location.
For the grouping of the locations of meetings the density-based spacial clus-
tering method DBSCAN [20] was applied to each community’s meeting points
separately. The parameter of grouping distance was set to 50 metres which is an
approximation of the size of a large building [9]. The min_samples parameter
which controls the number of samples needed in the neighborhood of a point to
be considered as a core point. This selection was made in order to reveal all
the distinct locations of communities’ meetings even if a location is visited only
once.
DBSCAN clustering results in assigning labels to each meeting point where each
label represents a distinct meeting point of a group. Then the geometric median
of these resulting clusters is calculated and each distinct location is described
by the corresponding geometric median.
Finally, from the coordinates of the geometric medians of the clusters, the coun-
try of each meeting was found so that the patterns of meetings in other countries
can be also revealed.
==PAGE:49==
6.2 Results
41
Figure 6.2: Histogram of the counts of distinct locations groups met. Most of
the groups met in less than 40 distinct locations, while there are
also two groups that met more than 80.
6.2
Results
The aforementioned procedure was implemented for all the meetings of each
group but also for meetings in which more than almost the 50% of the total
members of each group were present. It was found useful to investigate the
latter because when investigating the visualization of the groups’ meetings it
was found that many of the group members meet often in couples but the whole
group is rarely physically together.
In the following sections some patterns
of group mobility will be described.
Moreover, the mobility pattern of the
discarded groups will be analyzed.
6.2.1
Distinct Locations
The distribution of the distinct locations of meetings of all the communities can
be seen in ﬁgure 6.2. It can be seen that very few groups meet in more that
40 distinct meeting points whereas the majority of them meets in less than 10
distinct locations approximately.
==PAGE:50==
42
Investigating the Spacial Movements of the Communities
Figure 6.3: Histogram of the number of distinct meeting locations for groups
with 50% presence of their members in log axis. The majority of
these kind of meetings occurred in less than 10 distinct locations.
The distribution of distinct locations of meetings where more than 50% of the
members are present can be seen in ﬁgure 6.3 and it can be observed that in
this case the majority of groups with more than 50% assemblage meet in less
than 10 distinct locations.
Consequently, it can be said that there is relationship between the percentage of
group members in a meeting and the number of locations where these meetings
occurred. This fact was also noticeable in the visualization of the group meetings
and gave inspiration for further investigation.
Next it was interesting to investigate whether there is a relationship between the
number of distinct locations of meetings and the sizes of the groups or the num-
ber of groups’ occurrences. Both correlations where calculated, revealing that
there is some positive correlation, i.e 0.45, between the number of occurrences
of the groups and the number of distinct meeting points, while the correlation
between the size of the groups and the number of distinct locations is lower, i.e
0.24.
==PAGE:51==
6.2 Results
43
Figure 6.4: The colorbar shows the number of distinct locations per group.
From the colored scatter plot we cannot detect a clear correla-
tion between the number of members in a group and the num-
ber of occurrences or the number of distinct locations. However,
there is a tendency for the groups that have more occurrences to
meet in more distinct locations, fact that was expected consider-
ing the positive correlation between the number of occurrences of
the groups and the number of distinct meeting points.
==PAGE:52==
44
Investigating the Spacial Movements of the Communities
Figure 6.5: Boxplots for the four categories of occurrences.
We observe a
considerable increase in the number of distinct locations for the
subset of groups with more than 100 occurrences.
On the other hand, for meetings with more than 50% assemblage, the corre-
lation between the number of occurrences and the number of distinct meeting
points is much lower, i.e 0.15 whereas the respective correlation with number of
groups members is almost zero.
Furthermore, a comparison between the distributions of four categories of num-
ber of groups occurrences is made. The groups were split in four categories of
similar size which are illustrated in ﬁgure 6.5. As can be seen the distributions
of distinct meeting points for the four categories of occurrences vary signiﬁ-
cantly. The category with greater variety is the one that contains groups with
more than 100 occurrences which also the category with the biggest number of
distinct locations. In this category many of the groups meet in between 20 to 40
diﬀerent places while the majority of the meetings in the other three categories
take place in less than 20 locations. However, the distribution of the aforemen-
tioned category is skewed indicating that despite the bigger variation the 50%
of the the groups in this category meet in less than 20 locations, as the other
three categories.
The same procedure was followed for the group size categories. In this case the
groups were split in three categories as it is shown in ﬁgure 6.6. The majority of
groups in all the categories meets in less than 20 locations though the category
==PAGE:53==
6.2 Results
45
Figure 6.6: Boxplots for the three categories of group size. Most of the groups
in the three categories meets in less than 20 locations though the
category in the middle surpass the other two in the number of
distinct meeting points.
which contains 11 to 25 member surpass the other two categories.
In the ﬁgures below the same plots as previously described can be seen, though
this time the focus is on meetings in which more than 50% of the members
are present. In this case the distributions of the four categories are much more
similar to each other comparing to the simple meetings case.
Regarding the distributions of the three categories group sizes in the case of 50%
assemblage they are also very similar to each other. There are some outliers in
the categories of groups with 3 to 10 and more than 25 members, however the
furthest outlier belongs in the distribution of the category of groups with 11 to
25 participants which shows great level of agreement in the number of meeting
points.
==PAGE:54==
46
Investigating the Spacial Movements of the Communities
Figure 6.7: Boxplots for the four categories of occurrences for group meetings
with 50% assemblage. The four categories are very similar to each
other.
Figure 6.8: Boxplots for the three categories of group size for group meetings
with 50% assemblage. The three categories are vert similar to each
other. The highest number of distinct meeting points is the only
outlier of the middle category.
==PAGE:55==
6.2 Results
47
Figure 6.9: Barplot showing the counts of distinct locations per group. The
majority of the groups met in one country while the other met in
two, three or four distinct countries.
6.2.2
Distinct Countries
In the ﬁgure 6.9 it can be observed that more that 80 groups out of 111 were
meet in one country whereas the rest meet in two countries and very few meet
in three or four countries.
As for the groups that have more than 50% assemblage the diﬀerence in distinct
countries meetings lies on the fact that less groups meet in more than one
countries 6.10.
The correlations between the number of distinct countries and the number of
group members or the number of occurrences of each group in both cases, mean-
ing in the case that some members are meeting and in the case that more than
50% of the group is present, were found to be around 0.14 which is not enough
to indicate a relationship.
==PAGE:56==
48
Investigating the Spacial Movements of the Communities
Figure 6.10: Barplot illustrating the counts of distinct locations per group
with 50% assemblage. Very few groups met in more than one
countries having more than the 50% of their members present.
Finally the countries the groups meet are Denmark, Germany, France, Great
Britain, Switzerland, Czech Republic, Poland and Hungary. The frequency of
meetings in each country is illustrated in table 6.1,.
Country
Percentage of meetings
Denmark
75.69%
France
13.88%
Germany
5.55 %
Czech Republic
2.77%
Switzerland
0.69%
Poland
0.69%
Hungary
0.69%
Table 6.1: Countries where groups meet.
6.2.3
Removed Groups
In this section the mobility patterns of the discarded groups are discussed. These
groups were discarded as described in chapter 4 in order to simplify the visual-
==PAGE:57==
6.3 Predict Number of Distinct locations
49
ization. However it is interesting to take a look at the behaviour of these smaller
and less frequent groups. It was found the 100% of the removed groups were met
in one single location. Each group met only in one location while the country of
this location is one of the following, Denmark, Germany, France, Great Britain
and the Republic of Ireland and their corresponding frequency of meetings can
be seen in the table 6.2.
To conclude, the choice of removing these groups is beneﬁcial for the visual-
ization as it shrinks signiﬁcantly the dataset without loosing any important
information.
Country
Percentage of meetings
Denmark
95.98%
France
3.44%
Germany
0.38 %
Great Britain
0.09%
Ireland
0.09%
Table 6.2: Countries where removed groups meet.
6.3
Predict Number of Distinct locations
In this section the prediction of the number of distinct locations per group is
described.
I tried to model the data in order to predict the number of distinct locations for
a group. The features I used for the predictions are the number of members of
each group, the number of times a group occurred and also, the average median
distance of a member from the geometric median of the group, which is an
indicator of how spread a group is. The resulting importance of the features
can be seen in table 6.3
Feature
Importance
Mean median distance
0.51
Occurrences
0.42
Members
0.07
Table 6.3: Importance of the features of the model.
As can be observed, the most important feature for the model is the average me-
dian distance while the number of occurrences has almost equal importance. The
==PAGE:58==
50
Investigating the Spacial Movements of the Communities
Figure 6.11: Scatter plot showing the true number of distinct locations per
group versus the predicted one. For many of the groups the two
numbers are very close.
number of members a group is not an important parameter for the prediction.
The modelling method chosen was Random Forests [20] and its performance
is illustrated in ﬁgure 6.11 where can it be seen that the model achieved good
results.
To conclude, in order to predict the distinct locations a group will met it is
important to know how spread it is and how many times its members met. The
size of the group is not important.
In this chapter it was shown that the groups meet in multiple countries, whereas
the most common are Denmark, France, Germany and the Czech Republic.
Moreover, the distinct locations and the distinct countries where the groups
meet were found for full group meeting and also for meetings with more than
50% assemblage. It was shown that there is a relationship between the number
of distinct locations and the percentage of assemblage of the group. This fact
was also visible in the visualization and inspired for further analysis. As for the
groups which were discarded, I found that all of them meet in only one location
so the choice of discard them was correct, as the would make the visualization
much more complex while the information they oﬀer would very little. Finally,
==PAGE:59==
6.3 Predict Number of Distinct locations
51
for the prediction of the distinct meeting locations of a groups meetings the
most important parameters are the average median distance of all points from
the geometric median and also, the number of occurrences.
==PAGE:60==
52
Investigating the Spacial Movements of the Communities
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 7
Discussion & Conclusion
Communities in SensibleDTU network overlap as the network is dynamic and
its communities are, consequently, intermittent, while most of the participants
belong in less than ﬁve communities.
The communities vary signiﬁcantly in
size. There are communities with 2 to more than 40 members. On the other
hand, most of the groups occurred less than 200 times while there very few
that met up to 550 times. The weak positive correlation between the number
of occurrences and the size of a group, indicates that larger groups are more
likely to meet more times. The majority of the groups have only two or three
members and occurred less than 20 times. I decided to remove those groups and
use the remaining 111 groups under the assumption that they do not oﬀer much
information and they would make the visualization having much more clutter.
Moreover, the groups that have many occurrences are those who are not that
spread i.e their average distance from the groups geometric median is low. Non
spread out groups can also have varying number of occurrences, however the
groups that are more spread out have only very few occurrences. When exam-
ining the size of the groups and the average median distance it is shown that
only small groups are very spread out from the geometric median.
The analysis on the meetings’ locations has shown that most of the groups met
in less than 40 distinct locations, whereas the distinct locations of meetings
where more than the 50% of the members were present were much less i.e the
majority of these meetings happened in less than 10 distinct locations. Further-
more, there is a positive correlation between the number of occurrences of the
==PAGE:62==
54
Discussion & Conclusion
groups and the number of distinct meeting points, which indicates that groups
that have more occurrences meet in more distinct locations.
Most of the groups meet in only one country in both type of meeting while the
meetings with 50% assemblage have lower percentage of meetings in two, three
or four countries. The most popular country is, of course, Denmark and the
countries that follow are France, Germany and the Czech Republic.
The groups that were discarded met only in one location and this location in
the 96% of these meetings was in Denmark.
Random forests method achieved to predict quite good the number of distinct
locations per group, whereas the most important features of the model are the
mean median distance from the geometric median and the number of occur-
rences of the group.
The visualization created for this project, has managed to show the tendency of
the mobility of the groups but not many results can be directly observed. It can
be a useful tool for an initial investigation of a dataset that can possibly inspire
for further investigation of a noticeable pattern in the mobility. For example in
this thesis it has revealed that when all the members of a group are present in
a meeting the meeting is often close to DTU campus and that gave inspiration
to see how groups assemblage inﬂuence the distinct meeting locations.
The visualization can be used for plotting diﬀerent datasets in order to reveal
general patterns of the mobility, though some modiﬁcations need to be done.
First of all it needs to handle the data in a more automated way as in its current
form it is not generic. It is important also, to connect it with a database in order
to get the data instead of having many diﬀerent ﬁles that make the loading of
the visualization very slow when plotting many groups at the same time.
As for the modelling of the distinct locations more features could have been
added such as entropy or burstiness [14], while also data for more groups are
needed.
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1] Social
Systems
deﬁnition
of
social
system.
https://www.
merriam-webster.com/dictionary/social%20system.
Accessed:
2018-08-11.
[2] Show me.
https://www.economist.com/special-report/2010/02/25/
show-me, 2010.
[3] Data analysis. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_analysis, 2018.
Accessed: 2018-08-13.
[4] Vladimir Agafonkin. Leaﬂet.js. https://leafletjs.com/reference-1.
3.2.html#event-objects, 2017.
[5] Ulf Aslak, Martin Rosvall, and Sune Lehmann. Constrained information
ﬂows in temporal networks reveal intermittent communities. Physical Re-
view E, 97(6):062312, 2018.
[6] Michael Bostock, Vadim Ogievetsky, and Jeﬀrey Heer.
D3 data-driven
documents. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
17(12):2301–2309, December 2011.
[7] Patricia Costigan-Eaves and Michael Macdonald-Ross.
William playfair
(1759-1823). Statistical Science, 5(3):318–326, August 1990.
[8] Nicholas J Cox and Kelvyn Jones. Exploratory data analysis. Quantitative
Geography, London: Routledge, pages 135–143, 1981.
[9] Andrea Cuttone, Sune Lehmann, and Marta C González. Understanding
predictability and exploration in human mobility. EPJ Data Science, 7(1):2,
2018.
==PAGE:64==
56
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[10] Manlio De Domenico, Andrea Lancichinetti, Alex Arenas, and Martin
Rosvall. Identifying modular ﬂows on multilayer networks reveals highly
overlapping organization in interconnected systems.
Physical Review X,
5(1):011027, 2015.
[11] Emre Eftelioglu.
Geometric Median, pages 1–4.
Springer International
Publishing, Cham, 2015.
[12] M. Friendly. A brief history of data visualization. In C. Chen, W. Här-
dle, and A Unwin, editors, Handbook of Computational Statistics: Data
Visualization, volume III. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 2006. (In press).
[13] Michael Friendly and Daniel J Denis. Milestones in the history of thematic
cartography, statistical graphics, and data visualization.
http: // www.
datavis. ca/ milestones , 32:13, 2001.
[14] K-I Goh and A-L Barabási. Burstiness and memory in complex systems.
EPL (Europhysics Letters), 81(4):48002, 2008.
[15] Alyssa A Goodman, Michelle A Borkin, and Thomas P Robitaille. New
thinking on, and with, data visualization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.11300,
2018.
[16] JBS Haldane.
Note on the median of a multivariate distribution.
Biometrika, 35(3-4):414–417, 1948.
[17] Cole Nussbaumer Knaﬂic. Storytelling with data: A data visualization guide
for business professionals. John Wiley & Sons, 2015.
[18] mrwojo.
Geometric median.
https://github.com/mrwojo/geometric_
median, 2016.
[19] Mark EJ Newman. The structure and function of complex networks. SIAM
review, 45(2):167–256, 2003.
[20] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel,
M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Pas-
sos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay. Scikit-
learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
12:2825–2830, 2011.
[21] Luigi Perozzo. Della rappresentazione graphica di una collettivita di indi-
vidui nella successione del tempo. Annali di Statistica, 12:1–16, 1880.
[22] William Playfair. Commercial and political atlas: Representing, by copper-
plate charts, the progress of the commerce, revenues, expenditure, and
debts of england, during the whole of the eighteenth century.
London:
Corry, 1786.
==PAGE:65==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
57
[23] William Playfair. The Statistical Breviary: Shewing, on a Principle Entirely
New, the Resources of Every State and Kingdom in Europe; Illustrated with
Stained Copper-plate Charts the Physical Powers of Each Distinct Nation
with Ease and Perspicuity: to which is Added, a Similar Exhibition of the
Ruling Powers of Hindoostan. T. Bensley, Bolt Court, Fleet Street, 1801.
[24] C Carl Robusto. The cosine-haversine formula. The American Mathemat-
ical Monthly, 64(1):38–40, 1957.
[25] Giulio Rossetti and Rémy Cazabet. Community discovery in dynamic net-
works: a survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 51(2):35, 2018.
[26] Martin Rosvall and Carl T. Bergstrom. An information-theoretic frame-
work for resolving community structure in complex networks. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(18):7327–7331, 2007.
[27] Martin Rosvall and Carl T Bergstrom. An information-theoretic framework
for resolving community structure in complex networks. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 104(18):7327–7331, 2007.
[28] Martin Rosvall, Alcides V Esquivel, Andrea Lancichinetti, Jevin D West,
and Renaud Lambiotte. Memory in network ﬂows and its eﬀects on spread-
ing dynamics and community detection. Nature communications, 5:4630,
2014.
[29] Matthew J Salganik. Bit by bit: social research in the digital age. Princeton
University Press, 2017.
[30] Edward Segel and Jeﬀrey Heer.
Narrative visualization: Telling stories
with data.
IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics,
16(6):1139–1148, 2010.
[31] Vedran Sekara, Arkadiusz Stopczynski, and Sune Lehmann. Fundamental
structures of dynamic social networks. Proceedings of the national academy
of sciences, 113(36):9977–9982, 2016.
[32] John Snow. On the mode of communication of cholera. John Churchill,
1855.
[33] Arkadiusz Stopczynski, Vedran Sekara, Piotr Sapiezynski, Andrea Cuttone,
Mette My Madsen, Jakob Eg Larsen, and Sune Lehmann. Measuring large-
scale social networks with high resolution. PLOS ONE, 9(4):1–24, 04 2014.
[34] Stanley Wasserman. Advances in social network analysis: Research in the
social and behavioral sciences. Sage, 1994.
