==PAGE:1==
Ida Alberte Egdalen 
s121824 
September 2018  
Magnetic Anomalies related to Unexplo-
ded Ordnance - a Ground and Unmanned 
Aerial Vehicle Approach  
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Titel: 
Magnetiske anamolier relateret til UXO – et ground og UAV-baseret tilgang 
 
 
Title:  
Magnetic Anomalies related to Unexploded Unordanace – a Ground and Unmanned 
Aerial Vehicle Approach 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supervisor:  Arne Døssing Andreasen, Senior Reseacher at DTU Space, Dept. Geomagnetism 
Lars William Pedersen, Engineer, at DTU Space, Dept. Geomagnetism 
 
Comment:  
This report is a part of the requirements to achieve Master of Science in Engineering 
(MSc) at Technical University of Denmark.  
The report represents 35 ECTS points.  
==PAGE:4==
Aknowledgements
I would like to express my deep gratitude to my main supervisor, Arne Døssing Andreasen,
for his guidance and encouragements and constructive suggestions to improve this reseach
work. Also a great thanks to my secondary supervisor , Lars William Pedersen, for advising
and assisting on occasional ﬁeld trips. I very much appreciate their commitment to the
project, giving me the opportunity and experience of ﬁeld work and letting me be part of
an inspiring team.
Also a great thanks to Jægerspris Skydestation, for kindly letting us use part of their
ﬁeld site as well as provide us with unexploded ordnance.
I also wish to thank various people for their contribution to this project; Mick E. K. for
his help on collecting airborne data and sharing insight in the processing phase; Mark D.
W. for valuable discussions as well as sharing appreciated insight in terms of interpretation.
Also a sincerely thanks to my fellow student at the oﬃce; Tobias B. and Niels M. S. for
the encourangement and keeping the work moral intact, and most recently Ida K. S. and
Rasmus R. J. for invigorating coﬀee breaks.
Finally, a heartful thanks to my boyfriend and family for the unconditional support and
comfort in times of distress. Thank you for showing belief in me and my work throughout
this whole period.
==PAGE:5==
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
Traditionally, magnetic surveys had most interest for geologist in terms of locating changes
in rock type, associated with ore bodies, faults and other geological structures. The mag-
netic exploration method enables investigation of the contrasts in magnetic susceptibility,
enabling mapping of the spatial magnetic variations occurring from the materials and
minerals in the uppermost part of the crust. This report describes the application of the
magnetic surveying method as a feasible and practical technique to search for magnetic
anomalies of magnetic ’target’ sources e.g. unexploded ordnances, deployed and buried in
sub-surface.
At a test site, unexploded ordnances or various shapes and sizes are deployed, for the
purpose of measuring representative total-intensity magnetic anomalies, related to these
ordnances with a ground- and unmanned aerial vehicle approach.
For the improved understanding of the applied magnetic exploration method, the nature
of geomagnetism and its ﬁeld sources, are brieﬂy described, where also the induced and
remanent magnetisation are introduced. For simpliﬁcation of the analysis of the magnetic
ﬁeld, the potential theory is presented by its most general formulas applicable for the
subject. For proper data processing, applicable methods for data handling for improved
results and interpretation, are described.
For the actually performed magnetic survey described, to be eﬃcient and in a reliable
manner represent the anomalous subsurface conditions, the total magnetic ﬁeld data
assembled by both a ground and a unmanned aerial vehicle approach, is subjected to data
processing including reduction and ﬁltering. The data sampling and the application of
suitable data processing requires in-depth understanding of the basic principles, in order to
permit a high quality interpretation of the magnetic source. The processing scheme applied
to the data, reveal weaknesses in terms of deriving the trend for each survey line, as well
as it demonstrates the necessity of eﬃcient data processing. In addition, isolation and
enhancing techniques are implemented to identify the characteristics of magnetic anomalies
prone by the unexploded ordnances. Considerations are made of applicable error sources
and their eﬀects on data quality and on data interpretation, The observations of anomalies
achieved by ground and aerial vehicle approaches are resembled in terms of quality and
eﬀects from potential error sources applicable, for a conclusion to be made.
==PAGE:7==
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Introduction
1
1
Background and Applied Theory
3
1.1
Nature of Geomagnetism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.1
Earth’s Geomagnetic Field
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.2
Geomagnetic Field Sources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.1.3
Magnetization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Magnetic Potential Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2.1
Magnetic Potential of Point Dipole . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2.2
Magnetic Anomaly of Unit Dipole
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3
Data Acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3.1
Survey Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3.2
Instrumentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.4
Data Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.4.1
Pre-processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.4.2
Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.4.3
Post-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2
Survey Approach
17
2.1
Survey Site and Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2
Data Assemble . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Processing Procedure and Considerations
20
3.1
Pre-processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.1
Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.2
Post-Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Results
29
4.1
Ground Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Magnetic Anomalies - a Ground Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Airborne Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3.1
Continuation ﬁltering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3.2
Magnetic Anomalies - a Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Approach . . . . .
43
4.3.3
2 2/3D modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5
Discussion
46
5.1
Sources of Error
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2
Limitations with Leveling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3
Presence of remanence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.4
Vertical Gradient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
==PAGE:9==
5.5
Constrains in Continuation using FFT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
Conclusion
53
References
55
A UXO Index
58
B Magnetic Signature of Drone
62
C Matlab Code
63
C.1
Pre- Processing Script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
C.1.1
Matlab function: Array sorting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
C.2
Processing Script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
C.2.1
Matlab function: Crossover
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
C.2.2
Matlab function: Trend
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
==PAGE:10==
Introduction
The subject of this report is taking advantage of ancient knowledge and use of magnetic
ﬁelds, especially within marine navigation, the study of paleomagnetism and modern
time ability to measure anomalies in the same magnetic ﬁelds by use of highly developed
technical survey instruments and computational power for associated data processing, all
for the purpose of meeting modern day industry demands of ﬁnding interfering subsurface
objects.
Many scientists and engineers have advanced from the geophysical properties to better
understand the morphology and origin of the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld. In terms of geophysical
exploration, it is the ability to understand and measure the magnetic ﬁeld, which is exploited
to detect objects and materials of deﬁned magnetized characters. Over the last decade,
the interest in performing ’target’ surveying for other purposes than geological research
have increased signiﬁcantly. The information retrieved from geomagnetic surveys are of
importance for many districts in society and industries, including the environmental sector,
the military industry and the oil & gas industry. The gained attention from commercial
industries has stimulated the search for innovative and improved surveying techniques
which at the same time meet low costs as well as eﬀective processing routines, to ease and
improve the interpretation of the resulting magnetic signature maps.
This project aligns with current eﬀorts to develop reliable survey and data acquisition
and processing methods, as it investigates application of a simpliﬁed method of detecting
magnetic anomalies related to Unexploded Ordnance (UXO) via a ground and Unmanned
Aerial Vehicle (UAV). Using unexploded ordnance as magnetic source objects is of interest
as these occur as hazardous and interfering objects for e.g. the military sector and oil &
gas industry. The occurrence of unexploded ordnance can be traced back to the World War
II where millions of explosive devices in all shapes and size, where spread out over large
areas, both oﬀthe coast and in land, for a military purpose. The legacy of these actions,
especially trouble the oﬀ-shore industry today and cost many oil companies a lot of money
and time, to detect and remove these disturbing items in there operational area or potential
bore-hole sights. Thus, the oil industries have a high incitement for granting resources to
improve and manage less expensive solutions to detection of highly magnetic objects i.e.
unexploded ordnances. The interest from the military segment, is mainly due to ’cleaning’
the ground for UXO and other metallic debris in terms of safety for the militants.
To meet the developing needs from various industries, reliable and eﬃcient methods are
requested for necessary surveys and detection. It is in this respect, possible to use established
and well deﬁned procedures that are incorporated in the magnetic exploration scheme based
on the magnetic method. This method characterizes magnetic perturbations or anomalies
of the geomagnetic ﬁeld, related to spatial magnetic property variations of the subsurface.
The characterization and detection of anomalies combined with reduction processing
and image enhancing techniques, ease the associated processing of data and increase the
1
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
quality of interpretation. A readily interpretation serves both the archaeological and
engineering investigations signiﬁcantly, making this method attractive for implementation.
However, the method has its challenges and there is no guarantee for ﬂawless data after
the implementation of the magnetic method.
Practically, it is not feasible to do all
measurements needed to conduct and process a data set without ambiguity. There is
a possibility that the data processing scheme produces artifacts, seriously aﬀecting the
integrity of the data. This research implements and documents the proceedings of the
magnetic method to both ground and airborne data sets, and seeks to identify some of the
diﬃculties and pitfalls, primarily focusing on data acquisition and data processing, over
a test site contaminated by buried unexploded ordnances, eventually leading to distinct
patterns in the the magnetic anomaly map.
2
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1
Background and Applied Theory
1.1
Nature of Geomagnetism
A well understanding of geomagnetism is important as it is extremely powerful and critical
to human kind. It is complex in structure and source, dynamic in time and space and
signiﬁcantly vulnerable at the same time. Geomagnetism refers to the study of the Earth’s
magnetic ﬁeld, and the ﬁeld sources it consist. Each ﬁeld source, would be a major task of
its own, therefore the following sections will only provide a brief introduction to the size,
character, and the physics of geomagnetism, to easier relate to the study described later in
this thesis.
1.1.1
Earth’s Geomagnetic Field
Ultimately, the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld function as a shield, protecting life on Earth, from
powerful and harmful particles from space.
The simplest form of the magnetic ﬁeld
resemble that of a single axial dipole with magnetic poles of opposite signs; the (negative)
magnetic south pole on the northern hemisphere and the (positive) magnetic north pole
on the southern hemisphere. Figure 1.1, illustrate the characteristic ﬁeld lines of the
dominant dipole ﬁeld. Following the terminology in the ﬁgure, then the magnetic south
pole, is called the North Magnetic Pole and vice versa. By convention, the two poles
attract, thus the magnetic ﬁeld lines kick-oﬀfrom the positive pole in the region near the
geographic south pole toward the negative pole at the geographic north pole. The magnetic
poles are where the ﬁeld lines penetrate the Earth’s surface and is tilted approximately
11.5◦from the Earth’s rotational axis. The intensity of this dominant magnetic ﬁeld is
measured in nanotesla (nT), measuring a maximum around 60.000nT near the magnetic
poles and decreases in magnitude with decreasing latitude, reaching around 30.000nT near
the equator.
The terminology commonly used in geomagnetism, and adapted to this thesis, is the
magnetic ﬂux density, B, the magnetic ﬁeld intensity, H, declination, D and inclination
I. The B-ﬁeld is introduced as the magnetic ﬁeld and is associated with the magnetic
ﬁeld strength at any particular region in space, expressed in terms of three independent
components, the geomagnetic elements; total ﬁeld intensity F, the inclination and the
declination. The magnetic ﬁeld intensity, H-ﬁeld, diﬀer from the B-ﬁeld, as this is what the
magnetic ﬁeld strength would measure in a vacuum, i.e. in a non-magnetic environment.
The inclination and declination give information on the orientation of Earths magnetic
ﬁeld lines at the Earth’s surface. While the inclination is the angle from horizontal, the
declination is the angle from the geographic north, i.e. from the Earths rotational axis.
3
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
Figure 1.1 – Illustration of Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld lines
These are the main features and parameters for describing the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld.
To get a sense of what the B-ﬁeld constitute of, the following section will specify some of
the relevant sources.
1.1.2
Geomagnetic Field Sources
The magnetic ﬁeld strength measured at the near-surface on Earth is a superposition
of multiple geomagnetic sources, which origin from both internal and external sources.
Considering the main contributor to the magnetic ﬁeld, originate from the Earth’s interior,
more precise in the ﬂuid iron outer core, referred to as the geodynamo action. In brief,
this action is driven by thermal convection of high electric conduction, generating electric
currents, causing the development of magnetic ﬁeld lines. It is the continuous and vigorous
convection of liquid iron that is responsible for the geodynamo action to be self-sustained
and preserve the energy for the dominant geomagnetic dipole ﬁeld to shield and protect the
environment on Earth. An overview of the diﬀerent ﬁeld sources are illustrated in Figure
1.2.
Considering the magnetic contribution from external ﬁeld sources, these are usually
deﬁned by currents, where the most signiﬁcant ones are the ionospheric and the magne-
tospheric current systems. Above the Earth’s surface, 85km and higher, the interference
between the electrical conducting ionosphere, and the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld lines, causes
measurable disturbances in the magnetic signal measured at Earths surface. These distur-
bances, are referred to as diurnal variations, ranging at 20-50nT (in high latitudes) over a
24 hour period. The diurnal ﬂuctuations are typically well resolved by total magnetic ﬁeld
recordings from magnetic observatories or stationary magnetometers. Disturbances which
are of less resolved and less regularity, happen in the event of a sudden magnetic storm,
where magnetic variations reach up to 500nT stretching from hours to weeks. This is a
4
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
Figure 1.2 – Sketch of the various sources contributing to the near-Earth magnetic ﬁeld [11]
phenomenon due to the interference of solar particle radiation in the magnetosphere moving
into the magnetic ﬁeld lines, reﬂected as intense and irregular disturbances. These events
are diﬃcult to forecast, but a kp-index is introduced to classify the global level of irregular
disturbance of the geomagnetic ﬁeld caused by solar particle radiation. Every 3-hours the
degree of interruption in the magnetic ﬁeld is quantiﬁed and scaled to a kp-index between
’0’ and ’9’, where the index ’0’ indicates no disturbances and index ’9’ indicates a high
magnetic activity meaning magnetic measures are predicted to be unreliable under these
circumstances.
Another contributor, of signiﬁcant character, is the comprehensive magnetic ﬁelds due
to magnetization of rocks and materials of the Earths crust and uppermost parts of the
mantle. In the context of geomagnetic surveying this contributor feed to the study of
geological structures of the subsurface, and more importantly to the geological history of
such structures, due to the physical properties of magnetization. Consequently it also the
magnetization that alleged the magnetic property for a magnetic anomaly map.
1.1.3
Magnetization
Magnetization is a magnetic property of rocks, minerals and other materials, and is a
measure of dipole moments per unit volume.
M = m
V
(1.1)
where m is the magnetic moment of a dipole in units Am2, and V is the volume of the
5
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
material object. The unit of M is A/m. This is closely related to the magnetic ﬁeld B,
together wit the magnetic ﬁeld intensity H:
B = µ0(H + M)
(1.2)
where µ is the magnetic permeability constant in vacuum.
In geomagnetics this
relation is very important to consider, as the magnetization may have great inﬂuence on
the magnetic ﬁeld observation, especially in the context of targeted magnetic surveying.
The net magnetization is actually the vector sum of two components, namely induced
magnetization and remanent magnetization. The induced magnetization, Mi is directly
proportional with the magnetic susceptibility, χ and the magnetic vector ﬁeld intensity, H;
M = χH
(1.3)
and is a temporary magnetization only present under the presence of an ambient ﬁeld.
Figure 1.3a illustrate induced magnetization with- and without the presence of an ambient
ﬁeld. Notice, how the magnetic dipole moments, align in the direction of the ambient ﬁeld.
The magnetic susceptibility, χ is a dimensionless proportionality constant that indicate the
ease of which the dipole moments alter the magnetic ﬁeld and hence the strength of the
magnetization. The magnetic susceptibility varies several orders of magnitude depending
on the material of origin. Materials of lowest magnetic susceptibility are igneous and
sedimentary rocks seen in geological settings with χ < 10−2 in SI units. The magnetic
behavior is strongest for ferrous metals, e.g. iron, steel, nickel and cobolt, where magnetic
susceptibility reach values χ > 200 [1] in SI units or greater (χ ≈500 [2]).
In contrast to induced magnetization is the remanent magnetization, Mr. As the word
implies, materials with remanent magnetization feature a permanent magnetic moment per
unit volume. The direction of remanent magnetic moments are retained in the direction
from the prior state of the inducing magnetic ﬁeld, and "frozen" in position as a memory of
past inducing magnetic ﬁelds. This memory of historical magnetization in large geological
environements is very important and is the foundation of paleomagnetism.
Though,
materials and objects can loose the features of remenent magnetization, if the material is
exposed to temperatures above a certain level. The threshold of what temperature must
not exceed is called the Curie temperature and is roughly around 600◦[7, 223]. In the
context of magnetic anomaly interpretation, remanent magnetization tend to trouble many
scientists, as it is a very diﬃcult parameter to deduct.
The magnetic susceptibility determining the net magnetization in a material is rarely
well-deﬁned for speciﬁc rocks or metallic minerals, thus often provided as a range, based
on prior knowledge of the constituent magnetic mineral or rock. To complicate the eﬀects
of magnetization further, there is a phenomena counteracting the magnetization, called
demagnetization. Until now, the induced magnetization has predominantly been caused by
the inducing ambient ﬁeld, but in fact the net magnetization is also subject to the local
magnetic ﬁeld induced due to the object or material it self. This may either reduce or
change, or both, the direction of the induced magnetization, due to the magnetization
of the object. To accommodate this factor, the eﬀective susceptibility is introduced and
generally expressed by:
keff =
kmat
1 + αkmat
(1.4)
6
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
(a) Induced magnetisation
(b) Remanent magnetisation
Figure 1.3 – A sketch of the two types of magnetization. The blue arrows represent the induced magnetization
and the red ﬁeld lines, the induced ﬁeld. a) left: no ambient ﬁeld, meaning no induced magnetization. right:
ambient ﬁeld, cause alignment of magnetic moments in the direction of the ambient ﬁeld (transparent grey arrow).
The yellow arrows in b) are the magnetic dipole moments, pointing in a ’frozen’ direction, representing remanent
magnetization. The beige arrows, point in the direction equal to the superposition of the induced and remanent
dipole moments.
where kmat is the material susceptibility and α is the self-demagnetization factor [1]. α
is dependent on the aspect ratio of the object, and by following the example of a sphere by
Larry Borrow and Judith E. Rocchio in [1], the α = 4/3π = 12.6 (α = 13.1 [2]).
1.2
Magnetic Potential Theory
Understanding of the magnetic potential theory, is a fundamental in the context of the
magnetic method, as it aim to simplify the analysis of the magnetic ﬁeld. The potential is
a scalar quantity, and is in its simplest form the ’energy’ at a point in space caused by the
ambient ﬁeld. The calculation of the potential ﬁeld allow the calculation of the magnetic
ﬁeld, B as these are strictly related, making the potential ﬁeld a valuable factor in the
study of magnetic ﬁeld anomalies.
First, the dimensions and derivations of a point dipole will be detailed in the below section.
This primarily tend to introduce the mathematical expressions and principles, before
coupled with the perceptive magnetic anomaly proﬁle of a compact (unit) magnetic dipole
body.
7
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
1.2.1
Magnetic Potential of Point Dipole
The magnetic potential is easiest understood for a point dipole. Once the potential of the
point dipole is derived it is possible to extend the equation to a unit dipole. Just to be
clear, a point dipole does not exist, but conceptually the ’point’ dipole, consist of two poles
separated a inﬁnitesimal distance, 2d, apart with opposite strengths, m. See the sketch of
a simple point dipole in Figure 1.4. The magnetic potential at point P, a distance r from
the dipole is then expressed as:
V (r) = −M µ0
4π
 1
r1
−1
r2

(1.5)
where µ0 is the magnetic permeability constant in vacuum, 4π x 10−7 and lengths r1
and r2 are annotated in the Figure 1.4a.
(a) Simple point dipole
(b) Simple unit dipole of compact body
Figure 1.4 – Schematic geometry used for calculating the magnetic potential. a) of a (point) dipole, separated by
an inﬁnitasmale distance and b) the schematic geometry, for calculating the magnetic potential of a unit dipole [2]
More general, the terms r1 and r2 can be written as a function with respect to r, so
r2
1 = r2
 
1 + d2
r2 −2d
r cosϑ
!
(1.6)
r2
2 = r2
 
1 + d2
r2 −2d
r cosϑ
!
(1.7)
where ϑ is the angle with the point, P. The goal is to express the dipole potential by
the distance r, and ϑ alone. First, divide equations (1.7) through by r2, and solving for
1
r1
so that
1
r1
= 1
r
 
1 + 2d2
r2 −2d
r cos(ϑ)
!1/2
(1.8)
and expand with the binomial expansion
(1 + x)b ≈
X
k=0
bn(n −1) · (n −k + 1)
k(k −1) · 1
xk
The second term in the parentheses of equation (1.8) corresponds to x in the binomial
expansion. Likewise b is equal to 1/2. So, the equation for r1 in (1.7) become
8
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
1
r1
= 1
r
"
1 −
2d
2r cosϑ

+
2d
2r
2 3cosϑ −1
2
#
(1.9)
where terms of higher order than (d/r)2 is neglected because d ≪r so the potential of
higher order converges rapidly. The binomial expansion regarding r2 is similar to equation
(1.9), just with r1 substituted with r2 [7, p. 236-237]. To yield the magnetic scalar potential
of this simple dipole, the expressions of
1
r1 and
1
r2 are simply substitute into equation (1.5)
V (r) = −M µ0
4π
cosϑ
r2
↔
V (r) = −M µ0
4π∇
1
r

(1.10)
The equation (1.10) express the potential ﬁeld of the point dipole in terms of the
gradient operator. Now, to achieve the magnetic ﬁeld, B from the scalar potential potential
is by taking the negative gradient of the magnetic potential, so
B(r) = −∇V (r) ↔
(1.11)
= Bx + By + Bz
(1.12)
The magnetic ﬁeld of a dipole is then
Bdipole = M
r3
p
sin2ϑ + 4cos2ϑ
(1.13)
In more general terms, the ﬁeld of a unit body can then be expressed as:
B = µ0
4π
Z
V
M · ∇
1
r

dx
(1.14)
This equation express the magnetic ﬁeld anomaly in terms of volume, magnetization
and distance from source, and is one of the core equations for modelling a magnetic ﬁeld
anomaly proﬁle. The following section aim to address the shape and intensity of magnetic
anomaly proﬁle, for various inclinations of the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld.
1.2.2
Magnetic Anomaly of Unit Dipole
The magnetic ﬁeld at an external point, due to a dipolar magnetized unit object, can be
expressed by equation (1.2.1). Here, M represents the net magnetization per unit volume,
cf. section 1.1.3. In the case of a concentrated magnetized source, in an ambient ﬁeld with
varying inclinations, the induced magnetic ﬁeld may create magnetic anomaly proﬁles like
those shown below in Figure 1.5b. The example of I = 67.5◦is the type of anomaly proﬁle
expected her in Denmark, where inclination I ∼70◦. The distinct magnetic high toward
the south (S) is complimented with a less signiﬁcant magnetic low toward the north (N).
Figure 1.5a illustrate the induced ﬁeld lines due to an arbitrary inclination similar to I
= 67.5◦, where the magnetic vector ﬁelds; Earth’s ﬁeld, Source ﬁeld and Total ﬁeld are
annotated. It is the Total ﬁeld that determine the shape of the anomaly proﬁle.
From Figure 1.5 it is recognized that the characteristics of a magnetic anomaly proﬁle
of a homogeneous magnetized body, is highly dependent on the incident of the ambient
magnetic ﬁeld. Yet there are exceptions since numerous factors, may contribue to a more or
less pronounced anomaly proﬁle. The obvious factors include, i) depth of source aﬀecting
9
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.5 – Total magnetic ﬁeld variation on northern hemisphere (S-N). a) Illustrate the sum of the magnetic
ﬁeld of the magnetic source and the Earth’s ﬁeld[7, p.5] and b) Examples proﬁles of magnetic total intensity
anomalies for the same object at diﬀerent latitudes in the northern hemisphere [10]
the anomaly width, ii) the shape of magnetic source (e.g. sphere, cylinder, ﬂat, long)
determining the spatial variance of magnetic anomaly iii) the size aﬀecting the intensity of
the magnetic response. Sure, these factors are closely related, but in many cases they lead
to great ambiguity, and often complicate the modelling and interpreation of magnetic ﬁeld
anomalies. Also, cf. section 1.1.3, the eﬀect of remanent magnetization and the inﬂuence
of demagnetization have the ’power’ to change the perception of proﬁle anomalies expected
of various types of magnetic items, which lead to an even more uncertain analysis of the
magnetic anomalies.
The two following sections will try to clarify some of the reservations for successful data
acquisition and processing, in order to reduce some of the uncertainties related to magnetic
anomaly proﬁles
1.3
Data Acquisition
The foundation of a successive magnetic anomaly map, require a well considered and
feasible survey design together with appropriate instrumentation depending on purpose
of the survey. There are no governing standards of how to conduct the ultimate survey,
since is depends much on the condition and accessibility of the survey area. Though,
there are certain requirements to be followed, in order to constrain and maximize the
magnetic information echoed in the total magnetic anomaly proﬁle. Some of the requisite
considerations on the design of the survey are described below and section 1.3.2 will describe
the relevant magnetometers used in this work.
1.3.1
Survey Design
Typically the design of the survey is dependent on the magnetic anomalies expected to
measure. Generally, one might believe, that the ideal design is to acquire data at maximum
sampling rate, with a minimum line spacing, as close to the source as possible. However
this is seldom necessary, since a well considered design plan may often provide the right
amount of data, in order to achieve a high quality interpretation of the magnetic survey.
10
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
The criteria necessary to be determined include survey height, line spacing and sampling
rate and apply to both ground and airborne surveying. In the search for ferrous objects in
the subsurface, these criteria are highly determined by depth, size and magnetic properties
of the supposedly magnetic objects.
Typically small line spacing is favored in areas, where the spatial variation is presumably
high, subsequently requiring high spatial resolution. Also a high sampling rate may be
necessary in order to detect reﬁned and narrow anomalies from shallow depths. In the
case where larger line spacing are suﬃcient may be in areas where low spatial variability
is expected and deep sources are targeted. The response of deep sources, outline a more
broad anomaly response, consequently a small line spacing and high sampling would be
excessive in this case. In areas of large magnetic variability, respondent to diﬀerent sources,
it is a balance between setting the line spacing large enough to be able to detect narrow
sources and the setting the appropriate sampling rate to truthfully determine the gradient
of the anomaly proﬁle. Obviously, in any industry, time is money, so being able to survey
a area within a reasonable time frame and collect enough data to avoid ambiguity and
unreliable data is often one the challenges in designing the ideal survey.
The height at which the magnetometer sensor is set to measure is also crucial for the
quality and intensity of magnetic source response. Measurements conducted close to the
magnetic source, are more pronounced in the magnetic proﬁle, in compare to measurements
observed remotely. Though the visibility of a magnetic anomaly, is highly dependent the
magnetic variability of the host medium. A variable which might assist the decision the
rate at which a the magnetic ﬁeld of a magnetized body decay in amplitude with increasing
distance between sensor and source. The magnetic ﬁeld intensity decay with 1/r3 and
may in many cases decide the appropriate survey approach, whether a survey should be
conducted in ground or from air.
often a risk of safety. This is though most related to survey conducted by aircraft.
Unmanned Airborne Vehicle (UAV) are bit more ﬂexible in terms of the ruggedness
of terrain as well as capability to vertically adjust position. However, dependent on the
topography a constant ﬂying height is advantageous, for the reason of easier data processing,
in expense a constant ﬂight height above ground.
1.3.2
Instrumentation
There are two types of magnetometers; a vector magnetometer and a scalar magnetometer.
The vector magnetometer feature the ability to measure the individual vector components
of the magnetic ﬁeld, depending on the orientation in space. For the purpose of this project,
magnetometers of type scalar magnetometer are used, since we are only interested in the
absolute magnetic ﬁeld intensity measured. Two diﬀerent scalar magnetometer are used;
the Overhauser proton magnetometer sensor and the optically pumped magnetometer
sensor, Potassium magnetometer. See Figure 1.6.
The earliest versions of the Overhauser, was developed in 1983. It provides high quality
absolute magnetic measurements , fast sampling rates to ensure accurate spatial resolution
and high absolute accuracy minimizing system noise. See Table 1.1 for speciﬁcations.
In principle it works much like its predecessor, the proton procession magnetometer. It
consist of a coil-wrapped container ﬁlled with a proton-rick ﬂuid and free electrons. Then a
radio-frequency is imposed on the atoms causing the unpaired electrons to spin, eventually
coupling with the protons, due to transfer of energy. It is transfered energy that can be
pick-up to a digital frequency counter, and displayed as a magnetic ﬁeld strength [14].
11
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
The GSMP-35 Potassium Magnetometer is the result of a development since 1980. In
principle a beam of polarized radio-frequency light corresponding to speciﬁc line in the
alkali vapor spectrum irradiates a cell containing i.e. potassium, causing the electron in
that energy level to be energized to a higher energy level. In presence of a magnetic ﬁeld,
the electron will pump to an energy level equivalent to that of the magnetic ﬁeld where the
light is absorbed. However, electrons spontaneously decay to a lower energy state unable
to absorb light, triggering a radio-frequency for the electron to reach a level of state to
absorb light. Hence, the magnetic ﬁeld is measured by varying the radio-frequency signal
and recording the frequency when the electron cell absorbs light [7, p. 278].
Table 1.1 – Technical Speciﬁcations of the Overhauser- and Potassium magnetometer, [5] [4]
GEM GSM-19: Overhauser
GEM GSMP-35: Potassium
Sensitivity
0.022 nT @ 1 Hz
0.0002 nT @ 1 Hz
Resolution
0.01 nT
0.0001 nT
Absolute Accuracy
+/- 0.1 nT
+/- 0.1 nT
Dynamic Range
20.000 to 120.000 nT
15.000 to 120.000 nT
Gradient Tolerance
> 10.000 nT/m
50.000 nT/m
Sampling Rate
60+, 5,3,2,1,0.5,0.2 sec
1,2,5,10,20 Hz
Operating Temperature
−40◦C to +50◦C
−40◦C to +55◦C
1.4
Data Processing
In the ideal case, data processing and reduction will essentially remove both signal and
noise from the data that is not related to the geology of the Earth’s or other magnetic
target source of interest. In practice, the aim is to remove the eﬀect of diurnal variations
and main ﬁeld and minimize the attribute of systematic errors and surveying errors via
levelling as much as possible.
The sequential routine of editing, correcting and processing the geomagnetic data has
been inspired by the article Processing of airborne magnetic data by A.P.J. Luyendyk, [12]
and Tutorial: Geophysical Levelling System, [6]. Figure 1.7 give a simple overview of the
steps concerning processing of magnetic data. The corrections highlighted in green, are
those applied to the processing of the data used in this work, and the correction highlighted
in red is not.
The method for processing magnetic data, described in this section give no guarantee
(a) GSM-19 Overhauser
(b) GSMP-35 Potassium
Figure 1.6 – Scalar magnetometers
12
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
Figure 1.7 – Scheme of the Leveling Process
for a data set with zero errors or artiﬁcial noise as the techniques are very selective and
often the quality of the processed data can often be no better than the quality of the data
it self.
1.4.1
Pre-processing
In the pre-processing phase the focus is to remove any spurious noise and spikes in the
data, possibly caused by cultural inﬂuences such as fences, passing cars, power lines, radio
transmissions etc. The search for extreme outliers and disturbing incidents, is best done by
viewing sections of the raw data in proﬁle-view. Preferably, this practice is done manually
to avoid over-editing.
Diurnal Variation Removal
Next, the exercise is to correct for the temporal variations of the earth’s main ﬁeld, better
known as diurnal variations. This is simply achieved by subtraction of time-synchronized
signal recorded by a base station magnetometer, at a ﬁxed position, close to the survey area.
This rely on the assumption that the temporal variation in the unique ’snap-shot’ recorded
at the base station, is the same ’snap-shot’ at the location of surveying. Furthermore,
the Earth’s main ﬁeld is also needed to be removed, and refer to the far-ﬁeld dipole
ﬁeld measure of the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld, dominated by dynamo actions in the outer
core. If the base station does not provide the signal of the main ﬁeld, the International
Geomagnetic Reference Field (IGRF) is able to provide this information. The IGRF is
a mathematical model, presenting a best-ﬁtting approximation to the ﬁeld by a series of
spherical harmonics, of increasing degree. Every 5 years the model is reconsidered and
adjusted to account for secular variations that has been observed over the previous epoch.
The secular variations concern the drift of motions in the inner core, generating the dipole
ﬁeld, consequently making changes to the mathematical description of magnetic ﬁeld.
Lag and Heading Error
Also the inﬂuence of systematic error; lag and heading error, must be considered. The
13
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
lag error is a consequence of delayed cycle time in the instrument.
This generate a
delay in the ’lock’ of the observation, consequently awarding a timestamp which is it
correspondend to the magnetic observation. The discrepancy between the actual data
recording and time stamp is visible as ’chevron’ patterns in the gridded data. These
patterns are most noticeable, where anomalies have been measured in opposite direction.
The error can be compensated for, by either subtracting or adding. In airborne surveys,
where magnetometers are towed behind the ’lock’-system, measurements are negatively
oﬀset by a couple of seconds or less than a second. Consequently the time stamps of
the entire survey are corrected by subtracting the appropriate oﬀ-set in time, so that the
’chevron’ patterns are smoothed out. The heading error concern a systematic shift in the
data with respect to the direction of travel. This error mostly apply airborne surveys,
since the electrics system of the airborne vehicle, create a magnetic ﬁeld that changes with
direction. Normally this error is compensated for automatically, if not, there are methods
to determined a mean magnetic value correction, depending on survey direction. Now the
data has been signiﬁcantly reduced, and the data is prepared for levelling, described below.
1.4.2
Processing
After the examination of the data and correction of diurnal variations and removing Earth’s
main magnetic ﬁeld, the method of levelling is introduced. The motivation of levelling
is to reduce the trend which most likely appear in magnetic surveys conducted over a
large area, over a long period of time. The reason is the temporal magnetic variations
e.g. diurnal variation, as the survey progresses in time. From the time start to the time
ending, the diurnal variations have left behind its trademark in the data set. Yes, the
diurnal variations were subtracted from the data in the step of pre-processing, but there
are scenarios where the subtraction of diurnal is not eﬃcient.
Polynomial Levelling
The essential tie lines, conducted perpendicular to the primary survey lines, are key to
execute the process of leveling. The transverse lines generate a set of crossovers points,
and any discrepancy at the crossover points represent an error, intersection error. This is
assume that data observation at the intersection of the survey- and tie lines should be equal.
The simplest method to determine the trend is to ﬁt a polynomial to the intersection errors
along a tie and/or line with respect to elapsed time or distance. First, the task is to derive
the trend of the tie, determined by the intersection errors with the survey line. Second
the trend is subtracted from the tie line, and the unlevelled tie, are now be classiﬁed as
levelled. This is done in turn for every tie line, so that eventually every tie line has been
levelled, according to the intersection errors of crossover points. Ultimately, it is now fair
to assume that the levelled tie contain no trend and any discrepancy is attributed to a
trend or discrepancies along the survey line. Therefor the exact same procedure is followed
for survey lines, where the intersection of the levelled tie lines with the survey lines are
inspected. Eventually, the entire magnetic survey should be levelled.
It is allowed to use any algorithm to ﬁt of intersection error in order to handle very
noisy data, but it is a balance of ﬁtting the signiﬁcance in the trend, without over-ﬁtting.
There are many proposals in how to ﬁt the data and in what order ties should be ﬁtted. In
[12], A.P.J.Luyendyk suggest a leveling of the ties in a speciﬁc order of priority, according
to tie line data collected in periods of quit diurnal activity, tie line data collected over
areas of low magnetic gradient and tie line data collected close to the center of the survey
14
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
and then diverge from there. The ﬁtting of tie- and survey lines in this project are via a
linear ﬁt, proceeded in the order the tie and survey lines where conducted. See section
3.1.1 for a in-depth description of the processing method applied on the data of this projekt.
Micro-levelling
In addition to the polynomial levelling, there is data processing tool called micro-
levelling. This technique is not a mandatory part of the magnetic method, as it is a diﬃcult
tool to implement and follow a risk of excluding real anomalies. It is a tool, employed to
remove residual levelling errors, in the case where the conventional levelling, as described
above, has been done inadequately. There errors are usually very small, having a dynamic
range close to zero, but gridding and image processing tend to amplify their presence. The
residuals are assumed to be distributed along side the survey lines, appearing as elongated
stripes in the gridded data image.
Conceptually it is fairly simple, as it apply directional high-pass and low-pass ﬁltering
of the gridded data. In theory the elongated residuals, can be removed from the data grid,
A, as follows: a) low pass ﬁlter the grid A in the direction of the survey lines, such that
the high frequent residuals are damped, and store in grid B. b) High pass ﬁlter the grid
B in the direction perpendicular to the survey lines, such that the low frequent residuals
constrained to the survey line are damped, and store in grid C. To eliminate the residuals,
then subtract grid C from grid A. [9]. The low- and high pass ﬁltering are suitable ﬁlters,
since the residual errors have a distinct spectral signature, therefore able to manipulate via
signal-process, simply by setting a speciﬁc cut-oﬀfrequency. Though, the design of ﬁlters
require a high level of signal-processing skills, as the ﬁlters must detect the majority of the
residual errors, but not exclude the real anomalies of interested in the magnetic survey.
This can be a challenge, and is best achieved by a trial and error by varying the cut-oﬀ
wavelengths and the allowed dynamic range. Both Minty and Luyendyk suggest to start
with a low-pass cut-oﬀwavelength 1-3 times the tie spacing, and a high-pass cut-oﬀtwice
the line spacing.
1.4.3
Post-processing
After careful processing of data, several enhancement and isolation ﬁlter, can assist and
improve the practice of interpretation as these tend to enhance the anomalies or attenuate
others via transformation functions. These transformations either simplify the anomalies or
make anomalie of interest appear more prominent in the expense of others. There are many
types of ﬁltering algorithms, however depending on which magnetic sources (geological or
cultural) wished to intensify, these ﬁlters may be used selectively. To mention a couple of
the most go-to applications you ﬁnd; the computation of vertical and horizontal derivatives
in the x-and y-plane, which quantify the spatial rate of change of the magnetic ﬁeld in either
direction; reduction-to-pole, which convert the magnetic ﬁeld from a magnetic latitude
where the Earths ﬁeld is inclined to the ﬁeld at the magnetic pole where the inclining ﬁeld
is vertical. This allow the anomaly of the causative magnetic body to be centered rather
than being skewed and oﬀset to one side. Another widely used ﬁltering technique is the
downward and upward continuation via Fast Fourier Transform, which reproduce ﬁeld
anomalies below or above the elevation height, which the data is conducted.
15
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
Fast Fourier Transform
Fourier is most often related with signals of periodic behaviors, usually expressed as a
sum of harmonic functions. In principle Fourier discretize the observed signal into discrete
components of various fundamental wavelengths. While this is an eﬃcient tool for signals of
periodic characters, it does not directly apply well to non-periodic signals of functions, such
as magnetic variations in a survey. To handle this issue of non-periodic spatial variations
of magnetic signals, the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) is introduced. The FFT utilizes the
continuity of magnetic signals. In stead of discretizing a signal into discrete components,
the FFT discretize a signal into a continuous set of frequencies, a frequency spectra. These
frequencies can furthermore be expressed in terms of complex numbers, which consist of
a real and a imaginary part. It is the transform into complex numbers that is the key
to FFT, as these complex numbers, allow the signal to be converted along the vertical
axis or horizontal axis. This technique make the FFT an ideal tool for digital-processing,
as the continuity of an anomaly is often wished to be quantiﬁed, since this give valuable
information to the properties and characteristics to the magnetic source in question.
For more details on the mathematics involved in the FFT refer to The Scienties and
Engineers Guide to Digital Signal Processing [13].
Continuation ﬁlters
When performing downward continuation the idea is to bring the plane of measurements
closer to the sources and thus enhance the response from sources at a shallow depth.
However, there is also the possibility of exaggerating the noise appearing in the data. The
appearance of noise in the downward continuated data evidently disturb the appearance
of anomalies, so this technique is commonly used in combination with other ﬁltering
algorithms, for instance a low-pass ﬁlter. The low-pass ﬁlter allow only the wavelengths
below a certain cut-oﬀwavelength to be present in the data, consequently attenuating
many of the high-frequent anomalies. The low-pass ﬁlter is a two-sided ﬁltering technique,
in the matter of ratio between the target anomalies and anomalies of noise. It is a question
of ﬁltering enough of the noise, and still preserve the full anomaly from the target. The
trade-oﬀis similar for high-pass ﬁltering. The aim is to set the cut-oﬀwavelength so
that it does not exclude the high frequencies represented from the anomalous target of a
magnetic source, yet not so high that it is only the noise which appear. These examples
apply for deﬁned magnetic objects in the subsurface i.e. UXO. The cut-oﬀcan be tuned
and adjusted, so that it favors the context of anomalies wished to present. Rule-of-thumb,
the long wavelengths are related to deep magnetic structures of signiﬁcant character or
large spatial coverage e.g. bedrock. And short wave-lengths are related to shallow sources
or subtle character.
On the other hand, Upward continuation raise the plane of measurements to a higher
elevation, subsequently minimizing the eﬀects of shallow sources and noise in the grid,
magnifying the magnetic appearance of deeper sources in return.
Unlike, downward
continuation, upward continuation have almost no side eﬀects, as the ﬁeld is continued
into free space, avoiding the appearance of disturbance originating from ’noisy’ sources
in the shallow depths. [8]. Both the upward- and downward continuation ﬁlter should be
used with care, as they are mathematically limited to a bound set of physical parameters.
16
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 2
Survey Approach
2.1
Survey Site and Design
The test site is located at Jægerspris Skydestation in, Northern Zealand, Denmark and is
part of the Danish National Military Defense force working with training and operation
of national military service. The test site was attractive for several reasons; suﬃcient
topographic terrain within a area of dimensions suitable for the drone or larger UAVs to
maneuver and conduct a survey; withdrawn from roads and other cultural eﬀects. The site
measure an area approximately 150x350 meter in total, with acceptable elevation changes.
In Table 2.1, more details on the survey for the ground approach and airborne approach
are listed.
Table 2.1 – Information of survey area for ground and airborne test survey
Ground
Airborne: Mag2
Airborne: Mag1
Sampling Rate
5Hz
20Hz
20Hz
Speed
∼1.5 m/s
2.5 m/s
2.5 m/s
Survey Area
150 x 300m
50 x 10m
50 x 100m
Line Spacing
2 m
1 m
1 m
Height above Ground Level
∼2 m
∼3 m
∼4.5-5 m
Height above UXOs
∼2.5-3m
∼3.5-4m
∼4.5-5m
Perpendicular to the survey lines, observations along a series of tie lines are conducted.
The spacing of tie lines is pursued to be roughly 20 meter, as a minimum of 4 representative
tie lines were required to derive a mathematical trend along the survey lines. The airborne
approach is conducted with 1 meter line spacing, with transverse tie lines spaced by roughly
20 meter.
A total of 12 UXOs of various shape and sizes are randomly deployed onto the site. A
list of the UXOs are found in appendix A.
2.2
Data Assemble
Ground Approach
The collection of ground based data, was managed by strapping a frame, with magnetometer
and GPS-receiver suspended to the back, and the console appended to the front. The
rod with special attachment points attached to the back frame is regulated, such that the
17
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2. SURVEY APPROACH
(a) Ground survey
(b) Airborne survey
Figure 2.1 – Survey (solid) and tie (dashed) lines of ground and airborne approach. The numbering at the
beginning of each line, refer to the line number. The blue rectangle in a) bound the area of airborne survey. The
blue line in b) denote where the magnetometers have not measure, i.e. lock equal to ’0’. The red points (numbered
from 1-12), are the positions of the deployed UXOs.
magnetometer is located approximately 2 meter above ground. See Figure 2.2a.
Airborne Approach
The collection of data via an airborne approach was successfully achieved by a simple drone
setup. The simple setup was constructed with great help from a associate colleague. The
two major priorities was to keep it lightweight and robust to swaying. After much testing
of various set-ups, we succeeded in creating a simple dual-sensor setup where oscillations
and swaying were kept at a minimum, and stability at a maximum. It is created by 2
wooden rods, 4 pulleys and elastics. The two wooden rods a assembles together, in the
form of a cross. To each of the 4 edges of the wooden cross, a pulley is attached. The
dual sensor conﬁguration, ﬁgured in Figure 2.2c is attached to a set of strings, and the
strings are put through the pulleys. This enable full ﬂexibility throughout the system, as
the dual sensor can move in all three directions in space. However, in order to constrain
the movement, a set of elastics is attached to the center-of-mass of the drone and joint to
a ﬁx point of the string to dampen the drag and pull in one direction, ideally keeping the
dual-sensors directly below the drone at all time. In practice, the swaying and oﬀset was
diﬃcult to avoid, consequently, the dual-sensor was not measuring in a vertical position at
all times. This is seen in Figure 2.2b. The dual-sensor set-up consist of two carbon ﬁber
rods connected to two plastic 3D casings. This dual sensor allow the measuring of the
vertical gradient, as the two magnetometers measure simultaneously. The top sensor, is
referred to as, Mag1, and the bottom sensor, is referred to as, Mag2.
18
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 2. SURVEY APPROACH
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.2 – a) GEM’s Overhauser Magnetometer with GPS sensor (top), console (front), and backpack strapped
around the waist. [http://www.gemsys.ca/rugged-overhauser-magnetometer/]. b) A photography of the simple
dual-sensor drone set-up in action, including the quadro-set up, strings and double sensor attached below the
drone. c) Double sensor setup illustrations. Credit: Ph.D student: Eduardo L.S.S..
The distance between drone and Mag 1 is determined by measuring the magnetic eﬀects,
from the UAV while in operation, with increasing distance. This give a magnetic measure,
reﬂecting the drones magnetic eﬀect with respect to distance below the drone. The test
stand for conducting the magnetic signature is pictured in appendix ??
19
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Processing Procedure and
Considerations
In the previous chapter the practicalities of how the survey was conducted were described.
This chapter will look deeper into how the processing routines were applied to the data as
well as some of the challenges and considerations met as the project progressed. The time
stamps are in Coordinated Universal Time (UCT). Positions are translated to Universal
Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates, but in reference with the positions of the ground
survey. For clearance, the survey of the ﬁeld site prior to the distributed UXOs is referred
to as background, and the ﬁeld contaminated with UXOs, conducted by a ground approach,
will be referred to as ground survey and the survey conducted from a UAV, will be referred
to as airborne survey.
3.1
Pre-processing
The pre-processing phase is initiated by the search and removal of any spikes, which do
not accord to the surrounding data. The only pronounced spikes, in the data showed to be
the signiﬁcant signal represented by the UXOs, so eventually no disturbing peaks where
removed. However in relate to this, the observations conducted at the rare edges of the
survey removed, to exclude e.g. measures related to exchange of equipment or similar.
Lag Error
The correction of lag error is mostly supposed surveys conducted by airborne vehicles. The
proof of lag correction is demonstrated in Figure 3.1, for Mag2. Here an error of -0.75
seconds was necessary. The lag error for Mag1 was -0.4 seconds. Eventually the correction
of lag will bring conformity to the data, so that the each magnetic ﬁeld strength measure
is associated with the correct time stamp, hence also an accurate position.
Once the magnetic ﬁeld data matched with its associated time and position, the data
was then prepared for correction of diurnal variations and removal of the main ﬁeld.
Diurnal Correction
The most substantial step in the processing of magnetic ﬁeld data is the removal of
the main ﬁeld and the ﬂuctuating temporal variations, diurnal variations. For the removal
of diurnal variations to succeed, it is crucial that the time stamp of the diurnal measure
is subtracted from the data with the equivalent time stamp. The main ﬁeld and diurnal
20
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESSING PROCEDURE AND CONSIDERATIONS
variations are actual two separated ﬁeld sources. The main ﬁeld related to that of the
Earths magnetic ﬁeld, predominantly that of the magnetic dipole, and the diurnal variations
relate to the time variant ﬂuctuations in the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld due to interference of
particles in the ionosphere. The main ﬁeld is variant with position, but stable at a ﬁxed
location, so the diurnal variations are standout. The resulting base station measures for
the days of surveying are shown in Figure 3.2. The time of surveying is shown by the more
solid lines and the kp-index is listed in the legend of graph, specifying the kp-index in the
interval of surveying.
On the day of the background survey, in the period of data collection, the ﬂuctuations
reach changes up to 10nT, with a maximum kp-index equal to ’5’, giving rise to concern.
However, as it will be presented later, the removal of diurnal variations eﬀects recover a
the magnetic ﬁeld measures, seemingly correcting the data appropriately. In the period
of ground data collection, there is little sign of ﬂuctuations around noon. Likewise this
is considered corrected. It is however common to suspend a survey is high kp-index are
expected.
On the day of airborne surveying, a magnetometer was placed a short distance from from
the ﬁeld site. See Figure 3.2b show the temporal variations measured at the ﬁeld site, in
Jærgerspris, together with the temporal variations measured at Brorfelde. Naturally, there
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.1 – Scatter plot of raw total magnetic ﬁeld intensity, from the bottom sensor: Mag2. a) Show the data
before lag correction and b) show the data after lag corretion
21
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESSING PROCEDURE AND CONSIDERATIONS
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.2 – Base station measurements of main plus diurnal variations from Brorfelde Observatory a) On the
day of background survey, Feb. 19th (red), ground survey, Feb. 21st (blue) and airborne survey July 9th (yellow).
b) Comparison of base station measurements from July 9th in Brorfelde and Jægerspris. The yellow line indicate
the time of airborne surveying.
is a constant shift, of approximately 167nT. This is to blame the diﬀerence in geologi at
their respective locations, and can be neglected for now. Also the ﬂuctuations seem to
correlated, but the interest is due to the tendency, in either of the base stations. It would
have been preferred to corrected for the diurnal variations and main ﬁeld, from the base
22
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESSING PROCEDURE AND CONSIDERATIONS
station data recording from ﬁeld site. Unfortunately, base station data on site, on the days
of the ground surveys were not attained, so in order to be consistent all data sets were
corrected for temporal variations conducted in Brorfelde. The the diﬀerence in the main
ﬁeld, is accounted for, by adding the diﬀerence in main ﬁeld measure, calculated from the
complex model provided by the international Geomagnetic Reference Field. The diﬀerence
in the main magnetic ﬁeld is 67nT.
3.1.1
Processing
Once the data has been reduced signiﬁcantly due to the removal of diurnal variations and
Earth’s main magnetic ﬁeld, the data now constitute of the magnetic ﬁelds from the crust
of geological origin, as well as magnetic ﬁelds due to distinct susceptible sources, from
human intrusion, e.g. UXOs. The following step dig into the considerations and pitfalls
related to the process of levelling. First the eﬀects of conventional levelling is described,
followed by a short description of micro-levelling.
Tie Line Levelling
The key input of leveling are the crossover points, found at the intersection between
the primary survey lines and the transverse tie lines. To minimize the eﬀect of high
discrepancies in the considerable intersection point, the crossover points from the survey
line and that from the tie line, are constrained to be no more than 0.4m apart. With a 5 Hz
sampling rate and a walking pace of 1.5 m/s the representative point of a intersection of the
tie line and the representative point of an intersection of the survey line can, conceptually,
be maximum 0.6m apart. To only grant the crossoverpints within 0.4m distance, hinder
high discrepancy, but allow enough crossovers to be granted and considered in the the
levelling scheme.
Figure 3.3 – Subplot: Levelling of tie line nr. 4
23
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESSING PROCEDURE AND CONSIDERATIONS
In Figure 3.3, the upper subplot show the magnitude of the considered crossovers from
the survey line. The intersection error, is shown in the second subplot, as the misﬁt. Cf.
section 1.4.2, the misﬁt is the major to derive the trend. The third subplot in Figure 3.3
show the eﬀect of leveling via the trend; the black line is the unlevelled tie, and the red
line is the levelled tie with respect to the Y-direction (Northing).
The trend of misﬁt for each line is deﬁned in turn, and is derived in two steps. First,
the set of intersection errors are ﬁtted with a 1.order polynomial; a linear trend. Though
this allow high misﬁts deﬁne the trend. To prevent high intersection errors to ’weight’
control and undermine the majority of the misﬁt, then the misﬁt to the 1.order polynomial,
is ﬁtted. Furthermore the second trend, is provided only by misﬁts with absolute residuals
lower than 3nT. Any misﬁt above this tolerance are neglected, and not considered in the
second ﬁt, assuring that no signiﬁcant residuals restrain the trend. Especially in areas of
high gradients, the apparent crossover points measured some distance apart, may measure
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent signals, so when subtracted, the intersection error is naturally very
high. This argue for the maximum crossover distance of 0.4 meter, to not let the trend be
inﬂuenced by high gradients. The combination of maximum distance between crossover
points and maximum misﬁt are carefully selected according to the character of this data.
In other cases similar constrains may be selected diﬀerently. Importantly, it is a trade-oﬀ
between constraining the discrepancies in misﬁt as well as accept as many intersections
errors. If too many misﬁt points are disregarded in the trend, there is a possibility for the
linear trend to not content the actual trend.
Survey Line Levelling
Figure 3.4 give an example of two survey lines, trenched to either ends of the survey line, in
the Y-direction. The presented trend is derived similarly to that described in the previous
paragraph. The ﬁt based on just 4-5 misﬁt point. The question to ask is whether the ﬁt is
representative along the whole survey line. The second subplot of Figure 3.4a seem to be
justiﬁed as the ﬁt is close up again the misﬁt points. This does not seem to be the case
in Figure 3.4b where the ﬁt in the middle subplot ﬁt below the misﬁt points. In section
4.1 the results of levelled/processed are presented as contour plots, showing conﬂicting
levelling between the the outer parts of the survey in compare to the central parts of the
survey site.
The histogram in Figure 3.5a show the normalized distribution of the discrepancy in
crossovers between survey lines and unlevelled ties. The intersection error with unlevelled
tie lines is shifted slightly to the negative side, implying that the recordings of the survey
lines in the intersection points are generally higher compared to crossover recordings of tie
lines. Apparently, the levelling of tie lines seem to make up for this this, as the intersection
error between the survey lines and levelled tie lines, are Gaussian distributed symmetrically
around the zero misﬁt. Figure 3.5b show the normalized distribution of misﬁt between
unlevelled ties and levelled ties (blue) and misﬁt between unlevelled survey lines and levelled
survey lines, with respect to levelled tie lines (red). Eventually, the measured of tie lines
are shifted ’upwards’, to account for the negative misﬁt of intersection errors, in return of
a symmetric distribution of the survey lines misﬁt around zero misﬁt. However, the long
’tails’ on either side of survey lines misﬁt give rise to the uncertainty of levelled survey lines,
as the range of misﬁt is signiﬁcantly large, approximately -5nT to 8nT. In cases where the
conventional levelling does not meet the standards, due to misleading residuals induced by
the levelling procedure, then the method of micro-levelling, may compensate for this.
24
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESSING PROCEDURE AND CONSIDERATIONS
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.4 – Subplot: Levelling of survey lines a) nr. 11 and b) nr. 22.
25
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESSING PROCEDURE AND CONSIDERATIONS
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.5 – Histogram of a) intersection error due to unlevelled tie lines, based on 267 crossovers and b)
intersection error due to levelled tie lines.
Micro-levelling
The artiﬁcial anomalies, due to inadequate levelling are characterized by elongated anoma-
lies. The evidence of these residuals are best seen if a source of light is shed at an angle
perpendicular to the survey lines. Figure 3.6 demonstrate this, with light being shed at
various angles. The survey lines are conducted in the direction approximately 5◦from the
Northing axis. If light hit the survey lines, at 95◦angle from the the Northing axis, then
the vertical stripe patterns due tie levelleing residuals, are illuminated.
Figure 3.6 – Surface plots of grid including light eﬀects, created at the position speciﬁed by azimuth angle and
elevation. Elevation angle; 45◦at azimuth angles; 0◦, 5◦and 95◦.
Unfortunately, the technique of micro-levelling did not succeed. Prior to performing
high-pass and low-pass ﬁltering in either directions, the gridded data was rotated so that
the Northing axis was parallel with the path direction of the survey lines, and the horizontal
parallel with the Easting axis. After, a low-pass ﬁlter in the frequency domain was applied
26
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESSING PROCEDURE AND CONSIDERATIONS
to each column in the grid. This is were the real struggle begins, due to edge eﬀects (NaNs)
in the grid. Eventually, the challenging design of an acceptable low- and high ﬁlter to
eliminate the artiﬁcial errors and edge eﬀects, lead to the conclusion that micro-levelling
was to ambitious to try and implement within the time frame.
3.1.2
Post-Processing
Once the data has been reduced and suﬃciently processed by the routines described above,
the post-processing or isolation and enhancing ﬁlters may be applied. The enhancing ﬁlters
relevant for this project work include up- and downward continuation of the magnetic
ﬁeld anomaly map (or grid) and the exercise of modelling anomaly comparable to the true
anomaly of UXO nr. 4.
Continuation
The application of continuation is performed in commercial software, GEOSOFT Oasis
montaj, oﬀering integrated geoscience essentials for easy and eﬀective data processing and
visualization. It provide the possibility of easily performing up- and downward continuation,
from which the calculated vertical gradient can be resolved.
It is common to distinguish between the measured- and calculated vertical gradient.
From the dual sensor magnetometer set-up the vertical gradient is easily derived, simply
by subtracting the two data sets from each other. Under circumstances, where data has
not been conducted simultaneously in two distinctive heights, then the vertical gradient
can be calculated by the aid of continuation ﬁlters. By performing either up- or downward
continuation, of an apparent anomaly ﬁeld map, the vertical gradient can be retrieved
by subtraction. Cf. section 2.2 the magnetometers sensors of the airborne survey are
separated 0.9m. Mag2 measure approximately 3 meter above ground, and Mag1 measure
approximately 4 meter above ground. For the sake of curiosity, it was interesting to
investigate if the calculated vertical gradient correlated with the measured vertical gradient.
The outcome of the this process is presented in section 4.3.1
2 2/3D modelling
The 2 2/3D is performed in GM-SYS Modelling, an an extension of the Oasis montaj
platform. It is a modelling tool developed to create geologic models of the subsurface and
compare the model’s gravity and magnetic response to observed gravity and magnetic
measurements. Modelling is very often a challenging exercise, since the anomaly proﬁle is
subject to ambiguity. To minimize the ambiguity of the model, one can advantageously use
any information available including physical variables and properties. The anomaly proﬁle
correspond to survey line nr. 17 from the airborne survey of Mag2, see Figure 2.1b crossing
UXO nr. 4. UXO nr. 4 is the sea bomb, 0.8m in diameter buried approximately 1.3m
(center point). Assuming that the bomb is made of steel, the anticipated susceptibility is
χ > 200. With an susceptibility, χ = 200, and a demagnetization, α = 13.1 the eﬀective
susceptibility is:
χeff =
200
1 + 13.1 · 200 = 0.0763
(3.1)
Due to limited modelling features, it is not possible to model the true geometric
dimensions of UXO nr. 4. UXO nr. 4 form a hallow sphere i.e. a shell, including 5 solid
trigger points, sticking out from the top of the UXO. Since this is not feasible to ’design’
27
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESSING PROCEDURE AND CONSIDERATIONS
in the 2 2/3D environment, the dimensions of the sphere are approximated to that of a
cylinder. Here, the volume is used as correlation factor i.e. the volume of the hollow sphere
is matched with the volume of modeled cylinder. This obviously add to the uncertainty of
the model magnetic anomaly, regardless of the value of physical parameters. Nevertheless,
the course of action is the same; the physical properties are adjusted until the anomaly of
the modelled anomaly, match the the true anomaly to some satisfaction. An attempt to
model the true anomaly, is presented in section 4.3.3.
28
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 4
Results
This section will focus on presenting the results related to the background, ground and
airborne survey, as well as the 2 2/3D model of an anomaly related to an UXO. Common
for all total magnetic ﬁeld intensity maps, is that they are gridded with a 1x1m grid
spacing. Furthermore the reference to the mean crustal ﬁeld relate to the mean magnetic
ﬁeld anomaly of the the background survey. After the removal of mean crustal ﬁeld, then
the total magnetic ﬁeld maps is categorized as processed.
4.1
Ground Approach
Initially the signatures due to the soils from the host medium and cultural sources, which
constitute the background is described. Thereafter, the magnetic ﬁeld maps of the survey
area after the deployment of UXOs are presented. The ﬁnal section gives the resulting total
magnetic ﬁeld anomaly map, where the data, ideally, consist only of the perturbations
in the uppermost layers of the survey area, following data reduction via processing and
subtraction of the mean crustal ﬁeld.
Background survey
When searching for the location of UXOs, it is commonly assumed that the magnetic
properties, i.e. the magnetic susceptibility, is much larger than the general magnetic
susceptibilities in the host medium. In the case of a rather homogeneous host medium
with rather low susceptibility, the strong magnetic response from buried UXOs will most
likely dominate that of the host medium. This make the detection of magnetic anomalies
completely independent of the host medium. However, in the case of a host medium with
a generally high magnetic susceptibility and high variability, the assumption is no longer
applicable. If this is the case, the contrast in magnetic susceptibility is less signiﬁcant,
eventually complicating the detection of buried UXOs. The majority of the total magnetic
ﬁeld maps in Figure 4.1, will most likely reﬂect that of soils, but it also reveal the magnetic
signatures of cultural sources, potentially increasing the variability in speciﬁc regions of
the ﬁeld site.
Figure 4.1a shows the magnetic signal before removal of any sources. The stripe of
magnetic low along the long center axis of the survey area, is a trademark from the
signiﬁcant magnetic disturbance (up to 10 nT in magnitude) in the diurnal variations,
over a period of 45 minutes. The ﬁgures a) through d) show the eﬀects of data reduction
as the removal of magnetic ﬁeld sources in the data proceeds. Figure 4.1d show the
resulting magnetic footprint of the background, revealing unnatural magnetic features,
29
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
supposedly due to cultural interference. A linear suspicious anomaly is encountered in the
upperwest quadrant around 200m Northing. The contour pattern a negative magnetic
band ((−20) −(−10)nT) to the north and a positive magnetic band (> 5nT) to the
south. The noticable similarity in contour pattern is seen in a background survey described
in [3], hence it is believed that the anomaly originate from a surface drainage system.
This is not unrealistic, as the test site occasionally is used for agriculture. The paper of
[3] investigates the susceptible properties in a straight line passing though the region of
the anomaly, showing a correlation between magnetic susceptibility diﬀerence across the
magnetic anomaly. Based on the study describe in [3], it is believed that the ditch, is
ﬁlled with a mix of soils contagion with fertilizer and low susceptible minerals, from the
agriculture routines. In addition, there are very little eﬀect of the levelling in the direction
of the survey lines, indicating a successful levelling.
30
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.1 – Magnetic ﬁeld maps of the background survey, with contour intervals of 3 nT, of a) raw magnetic
ﬁeld, b) magnetic ﬁeld where diurnal and main ﬁeld is removed, c) the magnetic ﬁeld after levelling and d)
magnetic anomaly including the location of the UXOs, for later reference
31
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Ground survey
Figure 4.2a picture the raw total magnetic ﬁeld i.e. magnetic ﬁeld response including
the main magnetic ﬁeld, the diurnal variation and the response of induced and remanent
magnetization of anomalous objects in the subsurface. The footprint of raw data, reveal a
clear division in the data, with a magnetic low west of the center axis and a magnetic high
east of the center axis. This is caused by the diurnal variations over the time period of
surveying. Once the diurnal variations and main ﬁeld are removed, the magnetic signal
are ’evened’, as seen in Figure 4.2b. The contour plots ﬁgured in c) and d) show the grid
after levelling and after the mean crustal ﬁeld is removed, respectively. Fortunately, clear
anomalies are seen from the majority of the UXOs, marked by the red dots. Unfortunately
the negative side eﬀects from the levelled process are also clear. These undesired side
eﬀects, seen in the survey direction, are localized north of UXO nr. 7 and in minor extent
in the bottom west corner of the grid.
Total Magnetic Field Anomaly Map
Figure 4.3a shows the total magnetic ﬁeld anomaly map, where the processed background
survey in Figure 4.1d is subtracted the processed ground. As anticipated most of the
cultural sources are removed, with the exception of the complicated linear anomaly from
the supposed drainage system ﬁlled with magnetized soils. Also the sections of unfavorable
artifacts from the levelling process are traced. Though, it is seen to clearly outline the
characteristic magnetic dipole signal from the majority of the buried UXOs. To show
the eﬀects of levelling, ignoring the elongated side eﬀects of the deﬁcient levelling, Figure
4.3b pictures the magnetic anomaly map of the magnetic ﬁeld not subject to levelling. As
it shows, stripes of magnetic anomaly diﬀerences in the long axis, giving the impression
of alternating magnetic high anomalies and magnetic low anomalies propagating in the
Easting direction.
A closer look to the magnetic signatures of UXO nr. 4, 5 and 7, seen in Figure 4.4,
reveal contradicting features. UXO nr.7 agree well with the perception of the dominant
signature of a dipole expected on the northern hemisphere, also in consideration to the
actual orientation; angle 80◦E from the geomagnetic north. The expected magnetic signal
from an induced magnetic object, have cf. section 1.2.2, a distinct magnetic high towards
the south and a magnetic negative towards the north. The response of UXO nr. 5 (155mm),
however the response shows diﬀerence signs. This shows an exceptionally high negative pole
towards north and a less pronounced positive pole towards the south. This distribution of
magnetic high and magnetic low, would ﬁt perfectly in the scenario if ﬁeld measurements
were conducted on the southern hemisphere, where anomalies are reversed, from south
to north. This magnetic signature only occur, on the northern hemisphere if remanent
magnetization is present. From comparison of a similar UXO (also 155mm), the argument
for remanent magnetization in UXO nr. 5 is supported. The magnetic ﬁeld anomaly
of UXO nr. 4, have a very weak negative anomaly to the north. From experience, the
magnetic ﬁeld anomaly from this type of UXO (hollow sphere) is tricky to characterize,
due to strong demagnetization.
32
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.2 – Magnetic ﬁeld maps of the ground survey, with contour intervals of 3nT, of a) raw magnetic ﬁeld, b)
magnetic ﬁeld where diurnal and main ﬁeld is removed, c) the magnetic ﬁeld after levelling and d) magnetic
anomaly
33
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3 – Total magnetic anomaly maps, with contour interval of 5nT of a) magnetic ﬁeld after processing
minus the magnetic ﬁeld of the background ﬁeld, b) magnetic ﬁeld minus the magnetic ﬁeld of the background data
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.4 – Zoom of total magnetic anomaly maps, with contour interval of 5nT of a) magnetic ﬁeld after
processing minus the magnetic ﬁeld of the background ﬁeld, b) magnetic ﬁeld minus the magnetic ﬁeld of the
background data
34
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.2
Magnetic Anomalies - a Ground Approach
To sum up; the background survey reveal cultural sources in the host medium, but these do
not seem to aﬀect the magnetic measurements of the ground survey. Most of the magnetic
anomalies related to UXOs are successfully detected and portrayed, as demonstrated in the
magnetic ﬁeld anomaly map presented in Figure 4.3d). Interestingly; the total magnetic
ﬁeld intensity data of the background survey and ground survey seem to not respond equally
to the levelling algorithm applied. The characteristic side eﬀects by insuﬃcient levelling
seen in the processing of the ground survey do not exist in the processing of the background
survey. And the only factor separating these two data from being identical, is the the
deployment of UXOs. To start the evaluation of the results in advance, it is likely that the
levelling algorithm is not robust or qualiﬁed to yield a trend that is insensitive to the large
misﬁt. However, despite of the questionable quality of the levelling, the magnetic ﬁeld
anomaly in fact prove the advantage of levelling, in compare to the valuation of magnetic
ﬁeld anomaly from non-levelled data, presented in Figure 4.3b.
35
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.3
Airborne Approach
First the magnetic ﬁeld maps of the survey conducted by the top sensor, Mag1, are ﬁgured,
followed by magnetic ﬁeld maps of the survey conducted by the bottom sensor, Mag2.
Top sensor: Mag1
Figure 4.5a shows the raw data conducted roughly 5 meter above the magnetic source,
i.e. UXO nr. 4. The contour plots following (Figure 4.5b, c and d) show the reduction
in the data as the processing advance. Here the processed data, should be understood as
the levelled data in Figure 4.5c minus the mean crustal ﬁeld (derived from the background
survey). The magnetic ﬁeld measure of the source, UXO nr. 4, reach a maximum of around
20nT and slowly decreasing as the distance from the magnetic source increases. There is
no signiﬁcant magnetic low coupled to this total magnetic ﬁeld map.
36
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.5 – Magnetic ﬁeld maps with contour interval of 3nT of a) total magnetic ﬁeld, b) magnetic ﬁeld
corrected for diurnal variations and main magnetic ﬁeld, c) magnetic ﬁeld after levelling d) magnetic ﬁeld after
removal of mean crustal ﬁeld with contour interval of 1nT
37
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Bottom sensor: Mag2
Figure 4.6 follow the sequence of processing steps. The overall magnetic signature is
predominantly higher than the overall measure of Mag1. Also the variability is increased,
likely explained by the fact that Mag2 measure at a lower distance to the source i.e.
approximately 4m, thus better able to detect the magnetic contrasts in the subsurface.
Figure 4.7c, zoom-in on the location of the magnetic source, and shows clear evidence of a
more pronounced magnetic signal response from Mag2 compared to Mag1. The contour
lines interval is 1nT. The magnetic low to the left of source, seem to due to the signal
constitute in the background. Figure 4.7a clarify this.
38
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.6 – Magnetic ﬁeld maps with contour interval of 3nT of a) total magnetic ﬁeld, b) magnetic ﬁeld
corrected for diurnal variations and main magnetic ﬁeld, c) magnetic ﬁeld after levelling d) magnetic ﬁeld after
removal of mean crustal ﬁeld with contour interval of 1nT
39
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.7 – Magnetic ﬁeld maps of UXO nr. 4, with contour intervals of 1nT, measured by a) background,
approximately 3 meter from source, b) Mag1, approximately 5 meter from source, and c) Mag2, approximately 4
meter from source,
40
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.3.1
Continuation ﬁltering
Figure 4.8a shows the magnetic anomaly variation observed by Mag1. The area have a
generally positive response in the range around 2 - 4nT, reaching a maximum magnetic
response caused by the magnetic object, UXO nr. 4. For comparison, Figure 4.8b shows
the magnetic ﬁeld map of Mag2 upward continuation to match the elevation height of
Mag1. The magnetic ﬁeld map of the upward continuation of Mag2, causes the map to be
negative, around -4nT east of the deﬁned magnetic source, and positive in the northern
half of the area. It it clear to see that the upward continuation is reﬂected by Mag2.
Figure 4.9a shows the magnetic anomaly variation observed by Mag2. For comparison, the
neighboring picture shows the resulting downward continuation of Mag1, so that it level
with Mag2. Firstly, the anomaly map appears with less variability. Cf. section 1.4.3 the
implementation of downward continuation tend to distort the data. To recover a more
realistic result, low pass ﬁltering is applied to the downward continuated map. Figure 4.9c
shows the result of low pass ﬁltering with a cut-oﬀlength of 5m. A cut-oﬀof 5m was
high enough to reduce the distorting residuals and low enough to keep the target anomaly
without smoothing the data signiﬁcantly.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.8 – Magnetic ﬁeld map of a) Mag1 and b) upward continuated Mag2. x- and y-axis are in units meter,
and colorbar in units nT
Considering the gradient; Figure 4.10a shows the measured gradient, indicating a
generally negative gradient, except near the magnetic source, reaching a positive gradient
in the approximate range 5-13nT. Figure 4.10b shows the gradient calculated from Mag1
and its downward continuation, equivalent to the height of Mag2. This result in generally
zero gradient, except in the area near the source, reaching a positive gradient in the range
5-13nT. Figure 4.10c shows the gradient calculated from Mag2 and its upward continuation,
and show similar tendency as the neighboring ﬁgure.
41
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.9 – Magnetic ﬁeld map of a) Mag2, b) downward continuated Mag1 and c) downward continuated Mag1
combined with low-pass ﬁlte. x- and y-axis are in units meter, and colorbar in units nTr
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.10 – Magnetic ﬁeld anomaly map with units nT/m of a) measured, b) calculated by downward
continuating Mag1 and c) calculated by upward continuation of Mag2. Colorbar in units nT/m
42
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.3.2
Magnetic Anomalies - a Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Approach
The targeted anomaly is well retrieved by a UAV, 4-5m above the the source. The most
reportedly diﬀerence between the magnetic ﬁeld anomaly of Mag1 and Mag2, is that Mag2
manage to detect a higher gradient, while Mag1 mostly manage to detect the more intense
magnetic high. Common for both; it is hard to convince the appearance of a magnetic low.
From experience, the magnetic anomaly related to UXO nr. 4 is a tricky one to interpret,
due to high inﬂuence of demagnetization of a high susceptible, hollow sphere type. An
alternative measure, to the magnetic ﬁeld anomaly, is the vertical magnetic ﬁeld gradient.
The vertical gradient of the magnetic anomaly show promising results, as this map out
the signiﬁcant change of the magnetic object as a function will elevation. This variable
aid the credibility and quality of the magnetic source. Also the airborne data has been
subject to continuation ﬁlters showing semi-results taking into account the limitations with
FFT. However, the magnetic gradient anomaly of the magnetic source, seem to be immune
to these constrains, as the calculated vertical gradient compare well with the measured
vertical gradient.
4.3.3
2 2/3D modelling
Modelling is a challenging exercise. There are many uncertainties related with modelling,
due the ambiguity in the anomaly proﬁle. Fortunately, the modelling of UXO nr. 4, is
possible to some extent, given the position, depth and dimensions of the magnetic object.
The outline of geometrical structure is pictured in the bottom ﬁgure in Figure 4.12.
Figure 4.11b shows the theoretical calculated anomaly, with the input of eﬀective
susceptibility χ = 0.076 alone, resulting in an enormous magnetic ﬁeld response many times
greater than the actual anomaly. The true anomaly is scaled to the calculated anomaly,
explaining the ’ﬂat’ true anomaly. The aim of the model in Figure 4.11b was to tune the
magnetic susceptibility so that the anomaly magnitude coherence with that of the actual
anomaly. This was achieved with χ = 2.15e−5.
As indicated by the error gradient (solid turquoise line), the calculated anomaly is
shifted to the left of the true anomaly, explaining the misﬁt, indicated by the error. Due
to uncertainty in the position of the UXOs there is a possibility that the UXO is actually
buried further to the right, as the anomaly imply.
Figure 4.12 shows the calculated
anomaly proﬁle, in the case where the susceptibility is one order of magnitude higher, but
controlled by remanence magnetization in the direction opposite to the inducing magnetic
ﬁeld. The anomaly greatly resemble that of the anomaly resulting from the induced
susceptibility alone (Figure 4.11b). However, this was expected, since the remanence act
in the direction opposite of the inducing, minimizing the sum of magnetic ﬁeld, despite the
higher susceptibility. It does however act to prove the ambiguity. It was not managed to
recover a modeled anomaly, matching the true anomaly, with the eﬀective susceptibility.
As seen in Figure 4.11a the model with the anticipated eﬀective susceptibility χ = 0.076
result in incredible high induced magnetic ﬁeld, so large that it would not be plausible to
have remanence magnetization to counteract that.
43
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.11 – A screen shot of the modelled magnetic anomaly proﬁle of UXO nr. 4 (line 17) a) A screen shot of
the modelled magnetic anomaly proﬁle with χ = 0.076 and b) with χ = 2.15e−5 and c) with χ = 2e−4 and
remanence Mr = 700A/m, inclination I = −72◦and declination D = −169◦. The black squares represent the true
anomaly, the black solid line represent the calculated anomaly and the red solid line represent the error. The
turquoise solid line show the error gradient in Bz.
44
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.12 – A screen shot of the modelled magnetic anomaly proﬁle of UXO nr. 4 with χ = 2e−4 and
remanence Mr = 700A/m, inclination I = −72◦and declination D = −169◦. The bottom ﬁgures show the outline
of the modeled UXO (hollow sphere). The blue triangles about 4m denote the survey height and the red triangles
at 0m, denote the ground surface. The black squares represent the true anomaly, the black solid line represent the
calculated anomaly and the red solid line represent the error. The turquoise solid line show the error gradient in Bz
45
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 5
Discussion
Both the ground and airborne approach invite to a discussion of the following key elements
in the evaluation of the data quality error sources aﬀecting the reliability of data and
data reduction; insuﬃcient survey-design limiting the potential of the levelling process; the
ambiguity of magnetic anomalies concerning modelling and the vertical gradient as well as
the constrains of FFT thereof.
5.1
Sources of Error
The traces of magnetic discrepancies, due to error sources, are typically subtle and challeng-
ing to expose. However, it is worth to strive to keep the error sources to a minimum, and
important to specify those which are either unavoidable or due to practical circumstances.
The interfering errors, which could potentially have lead to less reliable data of this project,
include:
• Magnetic accessory
• Elevation variation
• Base station location
• Lag error
• Heading error
• Electronics box of drone
Unfortunately, regarding magnetic accessory, a GPS-watch was mistakenly placed in a
pocket of the surveyor, while collecting parts of the ground survey data. This may have
caused a slight change in the observed magnetic response. In addition there may be a
diﬀerence of maximum 10-15cm in sensor height, regarding ground survey, as the survey
was conducted in shifts of 8-10 survey lines. The height diﬀerence may be small, but
mentioned here, as the magnetic measure is dependent on the sensor height; the intensity
of the magnetic measure decrease with one over distance cubed. The potential error from
the GPS watch and the moderate diﬀerence in survey height between survey section, are
for the data processing decided to be ignored. An observation related to these two errors
speciﬁcally; there is a striking coincidence in the stripes of the magnetic ﬁeld anomaly
presented in Figure 4.3b, with the survey periods collected by the diﬀerent people and
surveyors involved. This has not been investigated further, but it gives a thought to reﬂect,
46
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
in terms of the signiﬁcance of error sources.
Another error diﬃcult to eliminate, concerns the removal of diurnal variations. There
is already a uncertainty in the diurnal recordings linked to the kp-index, but a subtle
shift in diurnal variation may likely exist between the survey site, in Jægerspris and the
base station recordings, observed in Brorfelde, ∼50km apart. The diurnal variations are
assumed synchronized in time and magnitude, at the two respective locations, but this
assumption is only justiﬁed, if the kp-index is low. In cases where the kp-index is high,
e.g. on the day of background surveying, the variations can be out of phase and their
amplitude can vary over the distance of the two locations, especially in the lateral direction.
Because of the uncertain diurnal variations, concerning the background, the calculation of
the mean crustal ﬁeld, is likely also subjected to this error. The recognition of this issue,
lead to investigate the mean crustal ﬁeld calculated from the ground survey, with a lower
kp-index, assuming that the magnetic lows and highs of the UXOs would cancel each other
out. The mean crustal ﬁeld calculated from the ground survey was similar in magnitude,
so it was decided to go along with the mean crustal ﬁeld calculated by the background.
The additional sources of error, include the lag and heading error, where the lag error is
reasonable corrected in pre-processing phase. Also the electronics box has posed an error
in the magnetic reading from the airborne approach. This is though not been accounted
for.
Uncertainties
Besied error sources described above, there are also suspected uncertainties related
to the data, which may hinder a deﬁnitive and accurate interpretation of the magnetic
anomalies. These include:
• Position of UXOs
• Position of magnetic sensors
• Susceptibility estimation
The carried GPS-system device used to determine the location of the buried UXO, is
considered extremely accurate, but the uncertainty lies in the ability of measuring the
precise location, exactly above the buried UXO. The UXOs where buried weeks before the
actual GPS measure of the approximate locations of the buried UXOs, marked by wood
sticks. Another error source concerns the uncertainty in the GPS-device built in the drone
for the airborne survey. This add to the uncertainty, whether anomalies are measure at the
respective location deﬁned by the position. The uncertainty in susceptibility estimation
involves the assumed magnetic eﬀective susceptibility of the material, recognizing that the
UXO is steel with susceptibilities ranging from χ ≈200-500.
5.2
Limitations with Leveling
Levelling is an established part of processing magnetic data as it intends to improve the
data quality, easing the interpretation. In the case of the ground based survey, the levelling
is a double sided process. On one hand it does seem to improve the magnetic ﬁeld anomaly
map, if compared with the magnetic ﬁeld anomaly derived from non-levelled data (ignoring
the hypothesis of the plausible error sources). On the other hand, the uncertain trends
47
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
derived by the levelling technique are doubtful, thus worsening the data, by introducing
elongated residuals as a consequence. Theoretically a minimum of three crossovers are
required, in order to ﬁt a linear polynomial in between points. However, in practice, this
lower limit may not be suﬃcient to the levelling algorithm introduced in this work. As
already suggested, the levelling performs poorly to few crossovers in combination with high
misﬁt. The levelling of tie lines, seem to work intentionally, due to plenty of intersection
errors to ﬁt, giving a good indication of the trend mannered by the majority of the residuals.
The case is diﬀerent, when levelling the survey lines. Figure 5.1 gives two examples, where
the trend has clearly gone wrong.
Remembering the undesirable elongated contour structures north of UXO nr. 7 in
Figure 4.2d, it is neighboring lines nr. 14, 15 and 16, that are responsible for these eﬀects.
Attention should be focused on the ﬁt of the residuals, shown in the middle subplot of
either of the three lines. In the case of line nr. 14 (Figure 5.1a) , the 1. polynomial ﬁts a
trend above the misﬁt, resulting in a signiﬁcant 2-4nT increase across the entire magnetic
ﬁeld intensity proﬁle. It might very much be, that the survey line advance with a 2-4nT
’uplift’ in magnitude. However, this is questioned when having a look at the neighboring
line, line nr. 15. Line nr. 15 seen Figure 5.1b) seem more coherent with the misﬁts. Worth
mentioning is the extra crossover point included in the ﬁt. The survey line is levelled
correspondent to the trend, resulting in an ’uplift’ of approximately 4 nT in the north end.
The levelled survey line of line nr. 16 is signiﬁcantly trended, resulting an ’uplift’ of ∼5nT
in the south and an equally decrease to the north. This conﬂicting and alternating increase
and decrease in levelling of neighboring survey lines is believed to result in these elongated
anomalies, near the edges. Not surprisingly, the contrasts are more severe toward the
edges, due to lack of crossover points close to the edge of the survey. By the look of the
survey paths in Figure 2.1a the tie lines are, roughly evenly distributed across the survey.
But perhaps, the issue is in the threshold for a crossover to be considerable, potentially
removing 20% or more, considering a maximum of 6 crossovers.
To investigate the signiﬁcance of this issue concerning few crossovers, causing levelling
to perform poorly along the survey lines, the trend of the background survey was examined.
It was clear that even with 3-4 intersection errors, the trend performed intentionally.
However, the range of misﬁts was also smaller, due to less variability in the magnetic data.
It is possible that the high gradients seen in the ground survey, due to the anomaly of
UXOs, inﬂuence the misﬁt range, accordingly the trend is ’weighted’ towards the high
misﬁts measured.
48
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.1 – Proﬁle of three neighboring lines a) Line nr. 14, b) Line nr. 15 and c) Line nr. 16. The top subplot
shows the magnetic proﬁle of the survey line plotted together with the corresponding crossover of the tie line. The
middle subplot plots the intersection error, including the llinear ﬁt of these residuals. The last subplot shows the
unlevelled line compared with levelled line.
49
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
5.3
Presence of remanence
The ambiguity of magnetic anomalies is a complication factor, as it distress many geological
interpreters.
The presence of remnant magnetization have with out a doubt lead to
many false interpretations. The following two paragraphs, try to address the presence of
remanence.
Remanence related to orientation of UXO
The total magnetic ﬁeld signature mainly acts on the basis of the inclination of the
magnetic ﬁeld. For a sphere/cylindrical object, typical shapes for UXOs, a clear positive
magnetic anomaly is anticipated towards the south and a less signiﬁcant towards the
north, on the northern hemisphere. The anomaly may deviate slightly to the east or
the west, depending on the orientation of the magnetic material, but the relative ratio
between magnetic high/low is unmistakable.
If a magnetic object, contains remnant
magnetization, then the anticipated relation between magnetic high and low, does not
necessarily apply. Figure 5.2, shows the magnetic anomaly of two identical UXO types,
155mm. The diﬀerences are clear. The left map shows a magnetic low down to around
-20nT. The right map shows magnetic low, just north west of the source location, around
-5nT. This ’reverse’ in magnetic high and low is allegedly due to remanence magnetization.
It is guessed that the remnant magnetization is due to the rusty coating of UXO nr. 5.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.2 – Total magnetic ﬁeld anomaly of ground survey, with contour interval 1nT, of a) UXO nr. 5 and b)
UXO nr. 12
Remanence regarded in 2 2/3D modelling
There is no proof that a modelled anomaly is correct, since there are an inﬁnite number
of models that have the same anomaly, although not all are physically plausible. This is
necessary to consider, since it can highly inﬂuence the original perception of a magnetic
anomaly. In extension to the previous section, remnant magnetization may change the
50
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
appearance of a magnetic anomaly. The practical exercise of reproducing the true anomaly,
by tuning the values of magnetic susceptibility and remanence, proved that remanence do
contribute to the ambiguity of modelled magnetic ﬁeld anomalies. The modelled anomaly
calculated with an eﬀective susceptibility of χ = 2.15e−5 is similar to the model with a
susceptibility 10 times larger, χ = 2e−4, but with remnant magnetization operating in the
opposite direction of the induced ﬁeld.
5.4
Vertical Gradient
To clarify the absolute magnitude and appearance of magnetic anomalies, then the vertical
gradient is an excellent tool, especially when data is available in two heights e.g. dual
sensor survey. The vertical gradient is often easier to interpret while the magnetic gradient
is often more explicit compared to the measure of the total magnetic ﬁeld. The vertical
gradient measures, provide higher spatial resolution, beneﬁting the magnetic response
of particularly shallow features, as these will then appear more clear. With the sensors
separated 0.9m apart, the vertical gradient is attained. Figure 5.3a shows the vertical
gradient due to processed data, clearly isolating the gradient signal of the target. What if
the vertical gradient is measured directly from the raw data? The vertical gradient due to
the raw data is ﬁgured in Figure 5.3b.
When measuring the total magnet ﬁeld of a magnetic source remotely, the data is
primarily the dominant dipole signal from the buried magnetic sources e.g. UXO, and the
magnetic sources featuring long wavelengths (low frequency) stretching over long distances,
related to the deep geology. In a relatively small area like that of the airborne ﬁeld site,
there is a very little variability in long wavelengths across the area (50 x 100m), resulting
in very low gradients close to zero. Whereas the strong and high frequency signal from
the susceptible source near the surface, give rise to high gradients. The relatively high
and low frequencies in the processed data are the same in the non-processed data, thus
resulting in vertical gradients of equal magnitude, as seen in Figure 5.3. There is only a
diﬀerence in the surrounding medium. The vertical gradient of the surrounding medium,
is generally below zero for the processed data and generally above zero for the raw data.
Since we are mostly interested in the gradient subject to anomalies of high gradients, then
the surrounding does to aﬀect the interpretation. Therefore there is no remarkable gain in
processing the data beforehand.
5.5
Constrains in Continuation using FFT
Continuation ﬁlters can be used for many purposes regardless the elevation of observation
surface. Remembering that upward-continuation of data elevate the observation surface,
minimizing high frequency components, in return of a magnetic anomaly map of the
long wavelengths anomalies. And downward-continuation, favoring high-frequent anoma-
lies for target anomalies, in expense of additional anomalies from other near-surface sources.
Even though these ﬁlters may seem attractive, the application of these ﬁlters with no
concern of the ﬁlters limitation, may lead to mis-interpretation of the continued magnetic
anomaly map.
Therefore care must be taken when using the continuation ﬁlters for
interpretation.
In theory it is possible to perform down- and upward continuation ﬁlters to any altitude,
as long as it does not ’go through’ the altitude of the magnetic ﬁeld source. By conven-
tion, the risk of passing though the magnetic source is only a possibility when downward
51
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.3 – Vertical magnetic gradient anomaly in units nT/m with contour interval of 1 nT, a) gradient of the
total magnetic ﬁeld of processed data b) gradient of the total magnetic ﬁeld prior to levelling
continuation. The derivation of a magnetic ﬁeld map at any altitude, is however only
possible in the speciﬁc case where the observed data constitute the entire anomaly spectra
of frequencies. Furthermore the constituted anomalies must be mapped in a high degree of
accuracy to avoid the transfer of errors into the ﬁltering process of FFT. In addition, the
mapped survey area must be suﬃciently large to reasonable conduct the variation of the
long wavelengths attributable from the very deep,geological, sources. If these criteria are
not met, then the quality of the upward continued data may be doubtful. The doubt is
reasonable, since parts of the anomaly spectra might not be resolved, subsequently not
included in the mathematical transformation (FFT), meaning it is impossible to match the
predicted anomaly at the continued height, without the full frequency ’palette’ to calculate
the continued anomaly. [7, p.326-328].
The constrains described above, are to some extent recognized in the results section
4.3.1. It is clear that the upward continuation of Mag2 to the same level as Mag1, does
not compare with the actual magnetic ﬁeld anomaly measured at Mag1. Yet the anomaly
of the upward continuation has decreased in amplitude, but the negative anomalies due
52
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
to long wavelength anomalies from the the deep crustal ﬁelds, only detected by Mag2,
seem to ’continue’ in the upward continuation. From the measure of Mag2, the long
wavelengths related to magnetic in the very deep crust are only detected in small scale,
south west of the grid area, seen in Figure 4.8a. The comparison of downward continuation
of Mag1, with the magnetic ﬁeld measure of Mag2 shows the same tendency. The downward
continuation of Mag1 is not able to ’match’ that of the Mag2, simply because the anomaly
measures at Mag1 does simply not cover the frequency spectra necessary to raise the
long wavelength anomalies. This faulty down- and upward continuation is however not
transferred to the computation of vertical gradient of the magnetic object of interest. See
Figure 4.10. Considering just the magnetic source anomaly, then the vertical gradient
calculated either from the upward continuation of Mag2 or the downward continuation of
Mag1 are convincingly similar to the vertical gradient measured by the true magnetic ﬁeld
of Mag1 and Mag2. Based on the these results, the calculated vertical gradient do seem
plausible.
53
==PAGE:63==
Conclusion
During this project eﬀorts has been made towards developing and testing a viable setup
together with data acquisition and processing methods for detecting magnetic anomalies
related to unexploded ordnances (UXO). It was immediately recognized that magnetic
properties serve as powerful parameter in terms of anomaly detection. Understanding of
the fundamental principles of magnetic surveying together with the understanding of basic
magnetic variables and the realization of issues and limitations connected with magnetic
processing of magnetic data, was essential in applying this method.
The processing of magnetic ﬁeld data of the investigated ﬁeld site, showed that the
levelling algorithm did not performed intentionally for data of high magnetic variability in
combination with few crossover points. This was mostly due to the design of the levelling
algorithm not ’weight’ the intersection errors equally, so in that means that the crossovers
points with high intersection errors ruled the trend. Despite the issues concerning level-
ling, the magnetic anomalies related to unexploded ordnances were easily recognized in
the ground-based data. The magnetic anomalies even showed signs of remanence in the
magnetic ﬁeld anomaly map.
The data collected using the dual-sensor setup from the UAV was limited, to a small corner.
However, the one and only magnetic anomaly was clearly detected by both the bottom-
and top-sensor. Using data collected simultaneously in two heights, the vertical gradient of
the magnetic ﬁeld was easily measured. The vertical gradient was used as reference, for
the calculation of the vertical gradient via upward- and forward continuation ﬁlters, with
good results. Though, it was discussed whether the credibility of the continuation ﬁlters
are accurate for interpretation.
Considering the results presented in the extent of this report it is fair to say that the
use of magnetic surveying combined with appropriate data-processing is a promising tool
for detecting magnetic anomalies from objects such as UXO’s. Easy data acquisition –
especially in combination with UAV’s, makes this method a promising tool for detecting
UXO’s in remote and inaccessible areas, which will be greatly beneﬁcial to i.e. oil & gas and
wind energy industries. The method discussed in this project hopefully serve to improve
and gain insight for similar projects, eventually oﬀering state-of-the-art magnetic surveying
with an unmanned aerial vehicle, at a low cost, to help solve the real challenges from the
industry.
Future Work
In terms of future work, the next step would naturally be to perform magnetic surveying,
with a ground and UAV approach oﬀ-shore to investigate the feasibility and quality of
magnetic anomalies under such circumstances. This would enrich the study in magnetic
54
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
explorations as it would open opportunities, from a geophysical and a engineering point
of view. Yet, this could be done simultaneously with alternative magnetic acquisition
techniques, such as electromagnetic induction (EM) method. This would introduce more
data and more information, to better achieve a rich and high quality magnetic anomaly
maps for improved interpretation.
If the detection and qualitative classiﬁcation of magnetic anomalies related to unex-
ploded ordnance are not satisfying, it is possible to quantify some of the physical parameters
and condition of the magnetic steel objects. Diﬀerent schemes exist for determining the
depth, weight and size based on highly accurate magnetic ﬁeld anomaly data. The variables
are described by a possibility value of most likelihood via a linear or iterative process.
Conceptually, this is done via linear or iterative random processes, where a geological
model is determined by an automated process which match the observed magnetic ﬁeld,
within tolerance. This information is valuable for the pursue of retrieving abandoned and
potentially dangerous unexploded ordnance at live site ﬁelds, for the sake of a better and
more safe environment in urban or remote areas.
55
==PAGE:65==
References
56
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
[1] Larry Barrows and Judith E. Rocchio. Magnetic surveying for buried metallic objects.
Groundwater Monitoring and Remediation, 10(3):204–211, 1990.
[2] SD Billings. Discrimination and classiﬁcation of buried unexploded ordnance using
magnetometry. Ieee Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 42(6):1241–1251,
2004.
[3] DK Butler. Implications of magnetic backgrounds for unexploded ordnance detection.
Journal of Applied Geophysics, 54(1-2):111–125, 2003.
[4] GEM Systems, Inc. GSM-35U Introduction Manual, v8.0 edition, 2016.
[5] GEM Systems, Inc. GSM-19 Introduction Manual, v7.0 edition, 2018.
[6] GEOSOFT. montaj geophysics levelling system, processing and enhancing geophysical
data. Technical Report v.6.3, GEOSOFT, 2006.
[7] William J. Hinze, Ralph R.B. Von Frese, and Aﬁf H. Saad. Gravity and magnetic
exploration: Principles, practices, and applications. Gravity and Magnetic Exploration:
Principles, Practices, and Applications, pages 1–512, 2010.
[8] P. R. Milligan and P. J. Gunn. Enhancement and presentation of airborne geophysical
data. Agso Journal of Australian Geology and Geophysics, 17(2):63–75, 1997.
[9] B. R. S. Minty. Simple micro-levelling for aeromagnetic data. Exploration Geophysics,
22(4):591–2, 591–592, 1991.
[10] L.L. Nettleton. Gravity and magnetics for geologists and seismologists. American
Association of Petroleum Geologists – Bulletin, 46(10):1815–1838, 1962.
[11] Nils Olsen and Claudia Stolle. Satellite geomagnetism. Annual Review of Earth and
Planetary Sciences, 40(1):441–465, 2012.
[12] A P J Luyendyk. Processing of airborne magnetic data. 17:31–38, 01 1997.
[13] Ph.D Steven W. Smith. The scientist and engineers guide to digital signal processing.
2011.
[14] G. M. Turner, J. L. Rasson, and C. V. Reeves.
Observation and measurement
techniques. Treatise on Geophysics, 5:93–146, 2007.
57
==PAGE:67==
Appendix A
UXO Index
This Appendix include an overview of the issued Unexploded Ordnance, sorted after the
number. Each number refer to the numbered annotation in designated plots. The white
arrow indicate the direction of geomagnetic north. In the absence of the white arrow in
the image, the compass directs the orientation pointing toward the geomagnetic north.
Figure A.1
Type: 155mm (nr. 1)
Depth (meter)
0.8
Angle (degrees)
75N
Table A.1
Figure A.2
Type: grenade (nr. 2)
Depth (meter)
0.5
Angle (degrees)
N / S
Table A.2
58
==PAGE:68==
APPENDIX A. UXO INDEX
Figure A.3
Type: grenade (nr. 3)
Depth (meter)
0.5
Angle (degrees)
110W
Table A.3
Figure A.4
Type: bomb (nr. 4)
Depth (meter)
1.3
Angle (degrees)
-
Table A.4
59
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX A. UXO INDEX
Figure A.5
Type: 155mm (nr. 5)
Depth (meter)
0.6
Angle (degrees)
130W
Table A.5
Figure A.6
Type: airborne (nr. 6)
Depth (meter)
0.6
Angle (degrees)
50W
Table A.6
Figure A.7
Type: MK40(?) (nr. 7)
Depth (meter)
0.95
Angle (degrees)
80E
Table A.7
Figure A.8
Type: 155mm (nr. 8)
Depth (meter)
0.8
Angle (degrees)
75N
Table A.8
60
==PAGE:70==
APPENDIX A. UXO INDEX
Figure A.9
Type: 2 x 105mm, right (left) (nr. 9 and 10)
Depth (meter)
0.7 (0.65)
Angle (degrees
85N (85NE)
Table A.9
Figure A.10
Type: airborne (nr. 11)
Depth (meter)
0.9
Angle (degrees)
12W
Table A.10
Figure A.11
Type: 155mm (nr. 12)
Depth (meter)
0.75
Angle (degrees)
150W
Table A.11
61
==PAGE:71==
Appendix B
Magnetic Signature of Drone
This Appendix include include the magnetic signature of the drone in the vertical direction.
The measures are conducted at various distances below the center of the drone, and then
ﬁtted to a and exponential power function. This contributed to the decision making in
determining the minimum distance the top magnetometer, was allowed to have to avoid
the the induced magnetic interference of drones electric system.
Figure B.1 – Magnetic signature of simple drone set-up at varying distance below center of drone
(a)
(b)
Figure B.2 – Magnetic signature of simple drone set-up at varying distance below center of drone. The dashed
lines intersecting denote where the approximate magnetic signature 3 meters below the center of the drone.
62
==PAGE:72==
Appendix C
Matlab Code
This Appendix include Matlab functions and scripts that have been applied in this work.
C.1
Pre- Processing Script
1
%% Pre-processing:
2
% convert UCT to serial number
3
[h,m,s] = hms(UCT);
4
time_variometer = datenum(year,month,date,h,m,s);
5
6
ground.base = [time_variometer, F_total];
7
8
% convert time to serial number
9
data(:,1) = date_conv(data(:,1), year, month, date);
10
11
% find index of survey start and end
12
idx_min = find(time_variometer == data(1,1));
13
idx_max = find(time_variometer == data(end,1));
14
15
% from NCDG mean values of main field for 21. Feb 2018
16
main_Brorfelde_avg
= 50261.4;
% nT
17
main_Jaegerspris_avg
= 50328.8;
% nT
18
19
ground.mainBR = main_Brorfelde_avg;
20
ground.mainJP = main_Jaegerspris_avg;
21
22
ground.base_corr = [time_variometer, F_total - main_Brorfelde_avg + main_Jaegerspris_avg];
23
24
% base station data: main and diurnal in Brorfelde incl. damage control
25
data(:,5) = interp1(time_variometer,F_total,data(:,1)) - main_Brorfelde_avg + main_Jaegerspr
26
27
% corrected for diurnal and main
28
data(:,6) = data(:,4) - data(:,5);
29
30
% sort array inti lines w.r.t. gradient of northing coordinate
31
data(:,7) = gradient(data(:,3));
32
33
ground.data = data;
34
35
idx_end = 28700;
36
37
data_tie = data(idx_end:end,:);
38
data(idx_end:end,:) = [];
63
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX C. MATLAB CODE
39
40
ground.data_tie = data_tie;
41
42
[ground_sort] = array_sorting(data(:,7),60,200);
43
ground_sort = ground_sort(~cellfun(@isempty, ground_sort));
44
45
[ground_tie] = array_sorting(gradient(data_tie(:,2)),7,100);
46
ground_tie = ground_tie(~cellfun(@isempty, ground_tie));
47
ground_tie{1} = [];
48
ground_tie = ground_tie(~cellfun(@isempty, ground_tie));
49
50
lines = cell(length(ground_sort),1);
51
ties = cell(length(ground_tie),1);
52
53
for i=1:length(ground_sort)
54
lines{i} = data(ground_sort{i}(1):ground_sort{i}(2),:);
55
lines{i}(:,8) = movmean(lines{i}(:,4),[2 2]);
56
end
57
58
for i=1:length(ground_tie)
59
ties{i} = data_tie(ground_tie{i}(1):ground_tie{i}(2),:);
60
ties{i}(:,8) = movmean(ties{i}(:,4),[2 2]);
61
end
62
63
ties = ties(~cellfun(@isempty, ties));
64
65
%% Structure into cells
66
X_lines = cell(1,length(ground_sort));
67
Y_lines = cell(1,length(ground_sort));
68
mag_lines = cell(1,length(ground_sort));
69
mag = cell(1,length(ground_sort));
70
71
for i=1:length(ground_sort)
72
X_lines{i} = data(ground_sort{i}(1)+10:ground_sort{i}(2)-10,2);
73
Y_lines{i} = data(ground_sort{i}(1)+10:ground_sort{i}(2)-10,3);
74
mag_lines{i} = data(ground_sort{i}(1)+10:ground_sort{i}(2)-10,6);
75
mag{i} = data(ground_sort{i}(1)+10:ground_sort{i}(2)-10,4);
76
end
77
78
X_tie = cell(1,length(ground_tie));
79
Y_tie = cell(1,length(ground_tie));
80
mag_tie = cell(1,length(ground_tie));
81
82
for i=1:length(ground_tie)
83
X_tie{i} = data_tie(ground_tie{i}(1)+10:ground_tie{i}(2)-10,2);
84
Y_tie{i} = data_tie(ground_tie{i}(1)+10:ground_tie{i}(2)-10,3);
85
mag_tie{i} = data_tie(ground_tie{i}(1)+10:ground_tie{i}(2)-10,6);
86
end
87
88
%% Gridding
89
x = vertcat(X_lines{:});
90
y = vertcat(Y_lines{:});
91
mag_raw = vertcat(mag_lines{:});
92
93
dx = 1;
% resolution in units meter
94
dy = dx;
% resolution in units meter
95
96
xq = min(x):dx:max(x);
97
yq = min(y):dy:max(y);
98
99
[Xq,Yq] = meshgrid(xq,yq);
64
==PAGE:74==
APPENDIX C. MATLAB CODE
100
grid_raw = griddata(x,y,vertcat(mag{:}),Xq,Yq,'cubic'); % input; vector
101
grid_raw_ground = griddata(x,y,mag_raw,Xq,Yq,'cubic'); % input; vector
102
103
ground.grid = grid_raw;
104
ground.grid_raw = grid_raw_ground;
105
ground.lines = lines;
106
ground.ties = ties;
107
ground.x_vec_before = x;
108
ground.y_vec_before = y;
109
ground.xtie_vec = vertcat(X_tie{:});
110
ground.ytie_vec = vertcat(Y_tie{:});
111
ground.Xq = Xq;
112
ground.Yq = Yq;
113
ground.z_diurnal_corr = mag_raw;
114
115
ground.xq = xq;
116
ground.yq = yq;
117
118
clearvars baggrund_tie baggrund date year month F_total UCT filename g gg...
119
idx_end time_variometer
65
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX C. MATLAB CODE
C.1.1
Matlab function: Array sorting
1
function [tmp2] = array_sorting(tmp, est_lines,minimum_length)
2
% function which sort data array into lines, dependent on the gradient of
3
% the norther coordinate component
4
% output tmp2 = indices of beginning line and ending line
5
6
% input tmp: gradient of data
7
% input est_lines: estimate of lines, will be corrected later on. Is
8
% defined to set a predefined cell structure
9
%
inout minimum_length = a lower limit for a 'line' to be considered a
10
%
line of interest
11
12
% example:[top] = array_sorting(grad_of_y,60,100);
13
14
15
tmp2 = cell(1,est_lines);
16
count = 0;
17
flag = 0;
18
grad_check = 0;
19
20
for u = 1:length(tmp)-1
21
if u == 1
22
flag = 1;
23
idx1 = u;
24
if tmp(u) > 0
25
grad_check = 1;
26
end
27
end
28
if flag == 2
29
flag = 1;
30
idx1 = u;
31
end
32
if tmp(u) > 0 && flag == 1 && grad_check == 0 || tmp(u) < 0 && ...
33
flag == 1 && grad_check == 1 || u == length(tmp) || ...
34
abs(tmp(u)) > 1 && abs(tmp(u+1)) < 0.5
35
if grad_check == 0
36
grad_check = 1;
37
elseif grad_check == 1
38
grad_check = 0;
39
end
40
idx2 = u;
41
flag = 2;
42
end
43
if flag == 2 && idx2-idx1 > minimum_length
44
count = count + 1;
45
tmp2{count} = [idx1,idx2];
46
end
47
end
48
end
66
==PAGE:76==
APPENDIX C. MATLAB CODE
C.2
Processing Script
1
%% Processing. Part I
2
%% Levelling of tie lines
3
%% 1.1 Locate crossovers for survey lines to level tie lines
4
X_xover = cell(1,length(X_tie));
5
Y_xover = cell(1,length(X_tie));
6
mag_xover = cell(1,length(X_tie));
7
%timesurvey_xover = cell(1,length(X_tie));
8
9
Xtie_xover = cell(1,length(X_tie));
10
Ytie_xover = cell(1,length(X_tie));
11
magtie_xover = cell(1,length(X_tie));
12
%timetie_xover = cell(1,length(X_tie));
13
14
dist_threshold = 0.4;
% in unit meter
15
16
for i = 1:length(X_tie)
17
count = 0;
18
idx = [];
19
20
for ii = 1:length(X_lines)
21
22
A = [X_tie{i} Y_tie{i} mag_tie{i}];
23
B = [X_lines{ii} Y_lines{ii} mag_lines{ii}];
24
25
[rowOfA, rowOfB, minDistance] = crossovers(A,B);
26
27
rowOf(ii,:) = [rowOfA,rowOfB];
28
29
rowOfBlat(ii,1) = B(rowOfB,1);
30
rowOfBlon(ii,1) = B(rowOfB,2);
31
rowOfBnT(ii,1) = B(rowOfB,3);
32
%rowOfBtime(ii,1) = Btime(rowOfB);
33
34
rowA(ii,:) = A(rowOfA,:);
35
36
rowOfAlat(ii,1) = A(rowOfA,1);
37
rowOfAlon(ii,1) = A(rowOfA,2);
38
rowOfAnT(ii,1) = A(rowOfA,3);
39
%rowOfAtime(ii,1) = Atime(rowOfA);
40
41
Distance(ii,1) = minDistance;
42
43
if Distance(ii,1) > dist_threshold
44
count = count + 1;
45
idx(count) = ii;
46
end
47
48
end
49
50
Distance(idx) = [];
51
52
rowOfBlat(idx) = [];
53
rowOfBlon(idx) = [];
54
rowOfBnT(idx) = [];
55
56
rowOfAlat(idx) = [];
57
rowOfAlon(idx) = [];
67
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX C. MATLAB CODE
58
rowOfAnT(idx) = [];
59
60
xover{i} = rowOf;
61
X_xover{i} = rowOfBlat;
62
Y_xover{i} = rowOfBlon;
63
mag_xover{i} = rowOfBnT;
64
65
Xtie_xover{i} = rowOfAlat;
66
Ytie_xover{i} = rowOfAlon;
67
magtie_xover{i} = rowOfAnT;
68
69
end
70
71
misfit = cellfun(@minus,magtie_xover,mag_xover,'UniformOutput',false); %
72
73
ground.misfit = misfit;
74
%% 1.1.2 Compute trend of tie lines to level ties
75
76
residuals = cell(1,length(mag_tie));
77
f1 = cell(1,length(mag_tie));
78
f2 = cell(1,length(mag_tie));
79
levelled_tie = cell(1,length(mag_tie));
80
difference_tie = cell(1,length(mag_tie));
81
82
for t = 1:size(misfit,2)
83
[F1, F2, G, misfitofFit] = level(Xtie_xover{t}, misfit{t});
84
85
residuals{t} = misfitofFit;
86
87
f1{t} =
F1(X_tie{t});
88
f2{t} =
F2(X_tie{t});
89
90
levelled_tie{t} = mag_tie{t}-f2{t};
91
difference_tie{t} = mag_tie{t}-levelled_tie{t};
92
level_stat.G{t} = G;
93
end
94
95
ground.difference_tie = difference_tie;
96
97
%% plotting of leveling
98
99
% % figure('Position',[20 20 900 500])
100
% % for k = 1:length(mag_tie)
101
% %
102
% % subplot(3,1,1)
103
% % plot(X_tie{k},smooth(mag_tie{k},3),'k-','Linewidth',0.8);
104
% % hold on;
105
% % plot(X_xover{k},mag_xover{k},'k^');%,'MarkerSize',6);
106
% % legend('Tie data','Survey Line interection with Tie Line')
107
% % ylabel('[nT]')
108
% % ylim([160 200])
109
% % xlim([min(X_xover{k}) max(X_xover{k})])
110
% % hold off
111
% %
112
% % subplot(3,1,2)
113
% % plot(Xtie_xover{k}, misfit{k},'.','MarkerSize',10);
114
% % hold on;
115
% % %plot(Xtie_xover{k}, F1(Xtie_xover{k}),'k-.','LineWidth',2);
116
% % plot(Xtie_xover{k}, F2(Xtie_xover{k}),':','LineWidth',1,'Color',[0 0.45 0.74]);
117
% % ylabel('[nT]')
118
% % legend('Misfit','1. order polynomial fit');
68
==PAGE:78==
APPENDIX C. MATLAB CODE
119
% % ylim([-5 5])
120
% % xlim([min(X_xover{k}) max(X_xover{k})])
121
% % hold off
122
% %
123
% % hplot=subplot(3,1,3);
124
% % plot(X_tie{k},smooth(mag_tie{k},3),'k-','Linewidth',0.8);
125
% % hold on;
126
% % plot(X_tie{k},smooth(levelled_tie{k},3),'Linewidth',1,'Color',[0.600000023841858 0.20000
127
% % ylim([160 200])
128
% % xlim([min(X_xover{k}) max(X_xover{k})])
129
% % legend('Unlevelled Tie','Levelled Tie')
130
% % hold off
131
% % ylabel('[nT]')
132
% % xlabel('Easting [m]')
133
% % set(findall(gcf,'-property','FontSize'),'FontSize',12)
134
% % saveas(hplot, fullfile('/Users/idaalberte/Dropbox/Thesis Report/pic/results/ground', spr
135
% % end
136
137
%clear all unecessary variables before cont. to levelling of survey lines
138
clearvars -except X_lines Y_lines mag_lines X_tie Y_tie...
139
mag_tie x y xq yq mag Xq Yq UXO data levelled_tie grid_raw_ground ...
140
ground lines tie
141
142
%% 1.2 Locate crossovers for tie lines to level survey lines
143
144
X_xover = cell(1,length(X_lines));
145
Y_xover = cell(1,length(X_lines));
146
mag_xover = cell(1,length(X_lines));
147
148
Xtie_xover = cell(1,length(X_lines));
149
Ytie_xover = cell(1,length(X_lines));
150
magtie_xover = cell(1,length(X_lines));
151
152
dist_threshold = 0.4;
% in unit meter
153
154
for i = 1:length(X_lines)
155
count = 0;
156
idx = [];
157
for ii = 1:length(X_tie)
158
159
if size(X_tie{ii}) == size(levelled_tie{ii})
160
161
A = [X_tie{ii} Y_tie{ii} levelled_tie{ii}];
162
B = [X_lines{i} Y_lines{i} mag_lines{i}];
163
164
[rowOfA, rowOfB, minDistance] = crossovers(A,B);
165
166
rowOf(ii,:) = [rowOfA,rowOfB];
167
168
rowOfBlat(ii,1) = B(rowOfB,1);
169
rowOfBlon(ii,1) = B(rowOfB,2);
170
rowOfBnT(ii,1) = B(rowOfB,3);
171
172
rowOfAlat(ii,1) = A(rowOfA,1);
173
rowOfAlon(ii,1) = A(rowOfA,2);
174
rowOfAnT(ii,1) = A(rowOfA,3);
175
176
Distance(ii,1) = minDistance;
177
178
if Distance(ii,1) > dist_threshold
179
count = count + 1;
69
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX C. MATLAB CODE
180
idx(count) = ii;
181
end
182
Distance(idx) = [];
183
184
rowOfBlat(idx) = [];
185
rowOfBlon(idx) = [];
186
rowOfBnT(idx) = [];
187
188
rowOfAlat(idx) = [];
189
rowOfAlon(idx) = [];
190
rowOfAnT(idx) = [];
191
192
xover{i} = rowOf;
193
194
X_xover{i} = rowOfBlat;
195
Y_xover{i} = rowOfBlon;
196
mag_xover{i} = rowOfBnT;
197
198
Xtie_xover{i} = rowOfAlat;
199
Ytie_xover{i} = rowOfAlon;
200
magtie_xover{i} = rowOfAnT;
201
end
202
end
203
end
204
205
misfit_survey =cellfun(@minus,mag_xover, magtie_xover,'UniformOutput',false);
206
207
ground.misfit_survey = misfit_survey;
208
%% 1.2.2 Compute trend of survey lines
209
210
load('/Users/idaalberte/Desktop/Thesis_JP/Processing/Background/crust.mat');
211
212
f1 = cell(1,length(mag_lines));
213
f2 = cell(1,length(mag_lines));
214
levelled_survey = cell(1,length(mag_lines));
215
difference = cell(1,length(mag_lines));
216
processed_survey = cell(1,length(mag_lines));
217
G = cell(1,length(mag_lines));
218
219
count = 0;
220
for t = 1:size(misfit_survey,2)
221
222
if nnz(misfit_survey{t}) >= 2
223
224
[F1, F2, G, misfitofFit] = level(Y_xover{t}, misfit_survey{t});
225
226
f1{t} =
F1(Y_lines{t});
227
f2{t} =
F2(Y_lines{t});
228
levelled_survey{t} = mag_lines{t}-f2{t};
229
processed_survey{t} = levelled_survey{t}-crust;
230
difference{t} = mag_lines{t}-levelled_survey{t};
231
else
232
count = count +1;
233
empties(count,1) = t;
234
end
235
end
236
237
if exist('empties','var') == 1
238
for j = 1:length(empties)
239
delete = empties(j);
240
X_lines{delete} = [];
70
==PAGE:80==
APPENDIX C. MATLAB CODE
241
Y_lines{delete} = [];
242
mag_lines{delete} = [];
243
end
244
end
245
246
x_edited = vertcat(X_lines{:});
247
y_edited = vertcat(Y_lines{:});
248
249
ground.difference = difference;
250
251
%% plotting of leveling
252
%
253
% figure('Position',[20 20 900 500])
254
% for j = 1:20
255
%
%1:length(mag_lines)
256
%
257
% subplot(3,1,1)
258
% plot(Y_lines{j},smooth(mag_lines{j},3),'k-','Linewidth',0.8);
259
% hold on;
260
% plot(Ytie_xover{j},magtie_xover{j},'k^');%,'MarkerSize',6);
261
% ylim([160 200])
262
% xlim([min(Y_lines{j}) max(Y_lines{j})])
263
% legend('Survey Line data','Tie intersection with Survey Line')
264
% ylabel('Northing [m]')
265
% hold off
266
%
267
% subplot(3,1,2)
268
% plot(Y_xover{j}, misfit_survey{j},'.','MarkerSize',10);
269
% hold on;
270
% %plot(Y_lines{j}, F1(Y_lines{j}),':','LineWidth',1,'Color',[0 0.45 0.74]);
271
% plot(Y_lines{j}, F2(Y_lines{j}),'k:','LineWidth',2);
272
% ylim([-10 10])
273
% xlim([min(Y_lines{j}) max(Y_lines{j})])
274
% ylabel('Northing [m]')
275
% legend('Misfit','1. order polynomial fit');
276
% hold off
277
%
278
% hplot = subplot(3,1,3);
279
% plot(Y_lines{j},smooth(mag_lines{j},3),'k-','Linewidth',0.8)
280
% hold on;
281
% plot(Y_lines{j},smooth(levelled_survey{j},3),'Linewidth',1,'Color',[0.600000023841858 0.20
282
% legend('Unlevelled Line','Levelled Line')
283
% ylim([160 200])
284
% xlim([min(Y_lines{j}) max(Y_lines{j})])
285
% hold off
286
% ylabel('[nT]')
287
% xlabel('Northing [m]')
288
% set(findall(gcf,'-property','FontSize'),'FontSize',12)
289
% pause
290
% %saveas(hplot, fullfile('/Users/idaalberte/Dropbox/Thesis Report/pic/results/ground', spri
291
% end
292
293
294
295
296
%% Gridding
297
levelled_data_vec = vertcat(levelled_survey{:});
298
effect_levelling_vec = vertcat(levelled_survey{:})-vertcat(mag_lines{:});
299
processed_data_vec = vertcat(processed_survey{:});
300
301
grid_levelled_ground = griddata(x_edited,y_edited,levelled_data_vec,Xq,Yq,'natural');
71
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX C. MATLAB CODE
302
grid_processed_ground = griddata(x_edited,y_edited,processed_data_vec,Xq,Yq,'natural');
303
grid_levelleing_effects = griddata(x_edited,y_edited,effect_levelling_vec,Xq,Yq,'natural');
304
305
ground.x = X_lines;
306
ground.y = Y_lines;
307
ground.z = levelled_survey;
308
ground.z_processed = processed_survey;
309
310
ground.xq = xq;
311
ground.yq = yq;
312
313
ground.grid_levelled = grid_levelled_ground;
314
ground.grid_processed = grid_processed_ground;
315
ground.grid_levelleing_effects = grid_levelleing_effects;
316
317
ground.Xq = Xq;
318
ground.Yq = Yq;
319
320
ground.UXO = UXO;
321
322
save('ground.mat','ground');
323
324
% clear all unecessary variables before cont. to levelling of survey lines
325
clearvars -except X_lines Y_lines mag_lines X_tie Y_tie...
326
mag_tie x y xq yq mag Xq Yq grid_raw_ground UXO data ground
72
==PAGE:82==
APPENDIX C. MATLAB CODE
C.2.1
Matlab function: Crossover
1
function [rowOfA, rowOfB, minDistance] = crossovers(A,B)
2
% function which find indices of crossovers of array A (vector) and array B (vector)
3
4
% output rowOfA: indices where there is a crossover with B with minimum distance
5
% output rowOfB: indices hver there is a crossover of A with minimum distance
6
% output minDistance: indices where there is a crossover of minimum distance
7
8
% input A = vector
9
% input B = vector
10
11
F = scatteredInterpolant(A(:,1),A(:,2),(1:size(A,1)).','nearest');
12
B_is_nearest_idx = F(B(:,1:2));
13
%A_closest_to_B = A(B_is_nearest_idx, :);
14
distances = pdist2(A(:,1:2), B(:,1:2)); %pdist2 : pairwise distance between two sets of obse
15
minDistance = min(distances(:));
16
[rowOfA, rowOfB] = find(distances == minDistance);
17
end
73
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX C. MATLAB CODE
C.2.2
Matlab function: Trend
1
function [F1, F2, G, misfitofFit] = level(X, misfit)
2
% function which fit crossovers
3
4
% output F1: first fit to misfit
5
% output F2: second with to misfit to first fit
6
% output G: appropriate goodness-of-fit measures for given inputs
7
% output misfitOfFit: misfit of first fit, F1
8
9
% input X: X values of crossovers
10
% inpu misfit: misfit of crossovers
11
12
F1 =fit(X,misfit,'poly1');
% 1. linear fit on all data misfit
13
14
misfitofFit = misfit-F1(X);
15
idx = find(abs(misfitofFit) < 3);
16
[F2,G] = fit(X(idx),misfit(idx),'poly1'); % 1. linear fit on all data misfit
17
end
74
==PAGE:84==
 
DTU Space, Technical University of Denmark 
Elektrovej, building 328 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
 
www.space.dtu.dk 
 
 
