==PAGE:1==
In-situ Estimation of Impedance in Enclosed
Space using Circular Microphone
Sooyoung Park (s170078)
Master of Science in Engineering
2018
==PAGE:2==
In-situ Estimation of Impedance in Enclosed Space using Circular Microphone
Report written by:
Sooyoung Park (s170078)
Advisor(s):
Jung-Woo Choi, Associate Professor at the Department of Electrical Engineering, KAIST
Efren Fernandez Grande, Associate Professor at the Department of Electrical Engineering, DTU
Antoine Philippe André Richard, Department of Electrical Engineering, DTU
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
1. February. 2018- 17. September. 2018
ECTS:
30
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Sooyoung Park, 2018
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Impedance of wall enclosing a listening room is one of the major factors that determine
the sound quality. Therefore, to improve the acoustic environment of a listening room, it
is important to accurately identify the impedance of the material forming the wall. The
impedance tube technique is a well-known standard method for measuring impedance.
This technique, however, requires a specimen of a wall installed in the impedance tube,
and only the impedance corresponding to normal incidence can be measured. Since
sound can impinge from various directions inside a room, the impedance estimated by
the tube technique cannot represent the actual impedance in a practical situation. In
order to circumvent this problem, various in-situ measurements have been proposed, but
most of conventional techniques have problems such as source singularity or inaccurate
separation of the incident wave and reflected wave. In this research, the impedance is
directly estimated in an enclosed space using a circular equivalent source method, which
can reconstruct a local sound field from the measurement by a microphone array. The
sound pressure and velocity fields on the wall surface are reconstructed by the equivalent
source method, and the surface impedance is estimated from the reconstructed sound
field. The feasibility of the proposed method is validating using 2D sound field simu-
lation, and the conditions for accurate impedance prediction, such as microphone and
equivalent source configurations, are investigated to provide a guideline for successive
acoustic impedance estimation an enclosed space.
i
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This study was completed as a master thesis for dual degree program at the Electrical En-
gineering Department of Technical University of Denmark (DTU) and Korea Advanced
Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST). This M.Sc. thesis is the result of project
carried out in the period from February 2017 to September 2018. It is accountable for
30 ECTS. It was part of the fullfilment of the requirements for a M.Sc. degree in DTU
Electrical Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, September 14, 2018
Sooyoung Park (s170078)
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
The following work is submitted as the final output of my two years of study in M.Sc.
Electrical Engineering program at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) and
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST). I would like to specifically
recognize the following individuals:
• Jung-Woo Choi, KAIST Electrical Engineering
There have been many trial and error during this project. Academic help and
advice has been great help to me to complete the research.
• Efren Fernandez Grande, DTU Electrical Engineering
For his guidance throughout all my master course in Denmark. I was given a lot
of ideas to proceed this project.
• Antoine Philippe André Richard, DTU Electrical Engineering
Many discussions during the research were helpful to proceed the analysis of this
thesis.
• Sooyeon Park, Byeongho Jo, Hyungjun So, Minsung Kang and other Smart Sound
System Laboratory members,
for their general assistance for this project and master course in KAIST.
• Hyunhwan Lee and other KAIST colleagues, and Sumyeong High school colleagues,
for their unconditional support.
• My parents, Seokhyun Park and Jungmi Ko,
for their general support throughout my academic career
• DTU-KAIST dual degree program for providing financial support and opportunity
for this project
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Structure of the thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3
Problem definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Theory
11
2.1
Acoustic impedance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Absorption coefficient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Locally reacting surface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5
Equivalent source method (ESM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.6
Spherical equivalent source method (S-ESM) and circular equivalent source
method (C-ESM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3
Parameter study
41
3.1
Sound field reconstruction in open space
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.2
Sound field reconstruction in closed space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.3
Simulation setting for in-situ estimation in enclosed space . . . . . . . . .
53
3.4
Impedance estimation in enclosed space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4
Conclusion
69
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
Appendices
71
A Finite element method (FEM)
73
A.1 Variational formulation of integral equation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.2 Gaussian quadrature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
A.3 Process of finite element method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
Bibliography
85
Summary in Korean
(한글요약문)
91
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
1.1
Process of improving the acoustic condition of a listening room . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Impedance tube kit [1] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Impedance tube . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Reverberation chamber [2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
In-situ measurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
Problem set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1
One-dimensional tube terminated with acoustic impedance Za . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Incident plane wave with angle θ reflected by a locally reacting surface
. . .
13
2.3
Example of mesh with finite element method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.4
Example of mesh with boundary element method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.5
Schematic of equivalent source method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.6
Sound field of vibrating plate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.7
Approximated sound field using ESM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.8
Interior domain problem where all sources are located outside of boundary .
28
2.9
Exterior domain problem with all sources are located inside of boundary
. .
29
2.10 Bessel function of first kind of orders 0 to 4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.11 Bessel function of second kind of orders 0 to 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.12 Principle of circular equivalent source method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.13 Example of L-curve method using regularization tool [3]
. . . . . . . . . . .
37
2.14 Schematic of impedance estimation using S-ESM (C-ESM) . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.1
Simulation set-up in open space where the center of microphone array matches
the center of the equivalent source circle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.2
Shape of sweet spot using relative pressure field error . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.3
Relationship between the radius of sweet spot and the radius of microphone
array as the frequency relative distance in open space with matched center .
44
ix
==PAGE:12==
x
List of Figures
3.4
Sensitivity curve of circular microphone array . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.5
Relationship between the radius of sweet spot and the radius of microphone
array with different number of microphone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.6
Relationship between the radius of sweet spot and the radius of microphone
array with different number of equivalent sources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.7
Comparison the effect of the number of microphones and the effect of the
equivalent sources in open space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.8
Singular value curve series of GN in open space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.9
Simulation set-up in open space where the center of microphone array does
not match the center of the equivalent source circle . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.10 Relationship between the radius of sweet spot and the radius of microphone
array as the frequency relative distance in open space with different center .
49
3.11 Simulation set-up in closed space (square room with 1.5 m width) . . . . . .
50
3.12 Relationship between the radius of sweet spot and the radius of microphone
array as the frequency relative distance in closed space (square room with
1.5 m width)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.13 The effect of the equivalent sources in closed space
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.14 Singular value curve series of GN in open space and closed space when re = 0.5 52
3.15 Simulation set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
3.16 Simulation set-up for the different number of equivalent sources
. . . . . . .
55
3.17 Relative admittance error with different number of equivalent sources . . . .
56
3.18 Comparison the effect of the number of microphones and the effect of the
equivalent sources in enclosed space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
3.19 Simulation set-up for the different radius of equivalent source circle
. . . . .
57
3.20 Relative admittance error for different radius of equivalent source circle . . .
58
3.21 Relative pressure error for different radius of equivalent source circle . . . . .
58
3.22 Relative pressure derivative error for different radius of equivalent source circle 58
3.23 Restricted sweet spot by equivalent sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
3.24 Simulation set-up for the different distance between the circular microphone
and wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
3.25 Relative admittance error for different distance between the circular micro-
phone and wall, where h ≥10 cm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
3.26 Restricted sweet spot by equivalent sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
==PAGE:13==
List of Figures
xi
3.27 Relative admittance error for different distance between the circular micro-
phone and wall, where h ≤10 cm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
3.28 Singular value curve series of GN in closed space at 1164 Hz for different h .
63
3.29 Simulation set-up for the different radius of the circular microphone array . .
64
3.30 Relative admittance error for different radius of the array (h = 10 cm)
. . .
65
3.31 Relationship between the radius of sweet spot and the radius of microphone
array as the frequency relative distance in enclosed space . . . . . . . . . . .
65
3.32 Principle of the measurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
3.33 Relative γ error for the room with different admittance values . . . . . . . .
68
A.1 Example of one-dimensional acoustic wave . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.2 Example of one-dimensional elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.3 Triangular element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
A.4 Example of coordinate shifting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
==PAGE:14==
List of Tables
2.1
Boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
A.1 List of point xi and wi for different number of points for Gaussian quadrature 77
xii
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The problem of estimating material properties (impedance, absorption coefficient, etc.)
of walls surrounding the listening room is an important problem for acoustic engineers.
Its importance is evident when the listening room improvement process is taken into
account. The process of improving the acoustic condition of a listening room begins
with finding proper acoustic materials that can meet desired sound quality by the lis-
tener. For example to realize a flat frequency response, to reduce stuttering echo, or
to control reverberation of the room should be covered by proper acoustic materials.
Prior to installing proper acoustic materials, the current room condition, i.e., acoustic
properties of walls, should be identified first. Through computer simulations based on
the measured data, the acoustic problem of a room is identified, followed by installation
of new materials at adequate locations. It is necessary to construct an accurate sim-
ulation in order to find the exact origin of the problem. The accurate simulation can
only be achieved by the precise information of the boundary condition. Therefore, it is
important to accurately identify the acoustic impedance of materials constituting the
listening room. However, it is difficult to measure the acoustic properties of materials
installed in a room as it is, so in-situ measurement method that can directly measure
acoustic impedance in a room is required.
1
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
(a) Measurement using spherical microphone ar-
ray in listening room
(b) Computer simulation of acoustic room model
(c) Acoustic treatment using absorbing material
Figure 1.1: Process of improving the acoustic condition of a listening room
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Background
3
1.1
Background
1.1.1
Standard measurement
The following methods have been used as standard methods for characterizing the prop-
erties of materials. The first is the impedance tube method [4, 5], which measures the
normal impedance. Figure 1.2 shows the external shape of impedance tube and Figure
1.3 shows the internal structure. Impedance tube method reconstructs one-dimensional
pressure field in the rigid tube which contains test sample of the material in order to
measure termination impedance (normal incidence impedance).
Figure 1.2: Impedance tube kit [1]
Figure 1.3: Impedance tube
==PAGE:18==
4
1 Introduction
This method has the disadvantage of requiring a test sample of the size appropriate for
the equipment size. Therefore, a portable impedance tube method [6] is proposed, in
which a tube with one side open is used to measure directly against the wall. How-
ever, the common disadvantage of these impedance tube method is that the method
can only measure the impedance at normal incidence. In actual use, sound waves are
incident on the wall in various directions other than normal incidence. Therefore, the
normal incidence impedance of the material forming the wall does not fully express the
characteristics of the material in the real case. Furthermore, for low frequencies, the
impedance tube method requires airtightness between the material and the tube, and
at the same time, the sample must be free to vibrate freely, so accurate results cannot
be obtained. Also, the tube has a high-frequency limit caused by the cutoff frequency
of the tube which is proportional to the inverse of the tube diameter. Moreover, the
effect on the test material of the rigid tube wall is not always negligible. The vibration of
the rigid tube causes friction loss and changes the measured damping characteristics [7] .
The second standard measurement method is the reverberation chamber method [8].
The reverberation chamber method is used for measuring the statistical absorption co-
efficient. Figure 1.4 is an appearance of the reverberation chamber. The reverberation
chamber method measures the sound pressure decay rate on the presence or absence of
the material sample to be measured. This method is a statistical measurement of the ab-
sorption coefficient in a reverberation chamber where various incident waves are formed.
Therefore, unlike the impedance tube method, the absorption coefficient is calculated
considering the incidence in the other direction besides the normal incidence. Therefore,
the characteristics of the actual wall forming the room can be expressed relatively well as
compared with the impedance tube method through this method. However, these stan-
dard methods have the common drawbacks. Common disadvantages of these standard
methods are listed as follows.
• Samples are required for different materials.
• A repetitive operation is required for different materials.
• Additional equipment such as impedance tube or reverberation chambers is re-
quired.
==PAGE:19==
1.1 Background
5
Figure 1.4: Reverberation chamber [2]
==PAGE:20==
6
1 Introduction
1.1.2
In-situ measurement
In order to overcome the disadvantages of the standard measurement method described
above, the in-situ measurement method is proposed which measures directly from the
space where the material is used. A review of the development of various in-situ mea-
surement systems is presented by Brandão et al [9]. The in-situ measurement can be
divided into the open space where single reflection occurs and closed space where mul-
tiple reflections occur. Figure 1.5(a) shows the measurement system in open space and
Figure 1.5(b) shows the measurement system in closed space. Since the reflection is
performed only once in the open space, there is no need to consider the complicated
scattering effect in the closed space. Therefore, open space case is relatively easy to
measure impedance compared with the impedance measurement in the closed space.
(a) Reflection in open space
(b) Reflection in closed space
Figure 1.5: In-situ measurement
The most basic in-situ measurement methods are to use two sensors. These methods
estimate the surface impedance or absorption coefficient by measuring the pressure at
two points [10] or the pressure and velocity at the same point [11]. Alternatively, the
impedance or absorption coefficient of the surface can be derived by comparing the inci-
dent and reflected fields. In 1951, Ingård and Bolt [12] proposed an open space method
which is based on sound pressure measurement of the incident and reflected wave at the
test material. To improve the separation of incoming and reflected sound waves, Mom-
mertz [13] proposed a temporal separation method that uses the difference of impulse
response. This method is to separate direct and reflected waves through post-processing.
Robinson and Xiang [14] improve the temporal separation method using oversampling
the measured response. In addition, methods for spatially separating incident and re-
flected waves were presented [15,16]. Tamura [15] proposed the spatial separation using
==PAGE:21==
1.1 Background
7
a spatial Fourier transform, and Ducourneau et al. [16] proposed the spatial separation
using a directional microphone array. Most of the above methods show high accuracy
at high frequencies. However, there is a problem that if unwanted reflections occur in
a closed space, unwanted reflections cannot be removed. In addition, if non-plane wave
reflection is dominant, the result is not good.
To overcome these difficulties, the in-situ measurements using the sound field [17–20]
are proposed. The method of using the sound field is to reproduce the sound field near
the reflection surface to be estimated. This method consists of measuring the sound
pressure using a microphone array and reproducing the sound pressure that reproduces
the nearly equal pressure with the pressure measured by the microphone array. The
method of measuring the impedance through the reproduced sound field is called acous-
tic field method. Sound field reproduction methods have been studied extensively in
open space. However, these methods cannot be applied directly to closed spaces due to
scattering effect. So these methods have been applied to closed space with some modifi-
cations. The method of reproducing the sound field in the closed space can be roughly
divided into two methods. One is the global reconstruction method that reconstructs
the sound field using the basis function used in the reconstruction and the other is the
local reconstruction method that uses the basis function applied to the specific local area.
Inverse numerical method [19–21] is one of the representative global reconstruction meth-
ods. Numerical methods widely used to reproduce sound fields are finite element method
(FEM) [17], boundary element (BEM) [21,22], and finite difference time domain method
(FDTD) [20]. In the case of FEM and BEM, the closed space is divided into several ele-
ments, and the sound field is reproduced through the relationship between the elements.
In order to obtain an accurate solution, the distance between the nodes should be set to
be smaller than 1/6 of the wavelength by the rule of thumb. Therefore, compact meshing
must be needed. In order to solve the inverse problem of the numerical method, mea-
surement values at the collocation point corresponding to the node position are required.
Using a dense mesh requires a lot of nodes because it requires a lot of information about
these nodes. In addition, due to the use of a dense mesh, the accuracy is high, but it
requires a lot of computation time. A global reconstruction method to secure the disad-
vantage of this computation is plane wave expansion [23, 24]. Plane wave expansion is
==PAGE:22==
8
1 Introduction
a method of finding the contribution of a finite number of plane waves representing the
sound pressure measured by a microphone array. As compared with FEM and BEM, it
requires less computation time because directional sampling is less dense compared to
FEM and BEM. However, this plane wave expansion reproduces the sound field through
a few sampling, so it has relatively low accuracy when compared with FEM and BEM.
Another reason for this low accuracy is source singularity. The source singularity in-
cludes the source in the reconstructed region, which causes source singularity problem
where the sound pressure is infinite near the source.
Therefore, more measurement
points or sampling is required to predict the source singularity that diverges to infinite.
Therefore, in order to avoid such a source singularity problem, a local reconstruction
method that reproduces a region that does not include a source is required. Local re-
construction is possible using near-field acoustic holography (NAH) [25, 26]. NAH is a
method of propagating a hologram plane using a propagator on a hologram plane mea-
sured in open space to reproduce the sound field at that point. Double layer or other
modified method were used to apply this in closed space. These NAH methods have
different characteristics for the different array. The methods of using NAH are local re-
construction methods that avoid source singularity problems and have higher accuracy
than plane wave expansion. There are two representative NAH methods, planar-NAH
(P-NAH) [25] using a planar array and spherical-NAH (S-NAH) [27] using a spherical
microphone array.
In this research, the impedance is measured by using the circular equivalent source
method which is modified by the spherical equivalent source method [28,29] correspond-
ing to the local reconstruction method. The equivalent source method [30] is a method of
reconstructing the sound field using a finite number of equivalent source sets reproducing
the sound pressure measured by a rigid circular microphone. The Spherical equivalent
source method is a method of reconstructing the sound field by using a basis function
which propagates only inside the circle where the equivalent sources are located. The
equivalent source used in this research is covered in Chapter 2: theory. The reason
for using this spherical equivalent source method is that it has a high accuracy com-
pared with S-NAH [29]. Also, it has an advantage of requiring a small array to measure
incident waves in various directions compared to P-NAH.
==PAGE:23==
1.2 Structure of the thesis
9
1.2
Structure of the thesis
This thesis is organized as follows: Chapter 1 provides an introduction of the thesis
and explains motivations and background of research. The technical background of the
impedance estimation and the scope of the considered problem are provided. Chapter 2
presents the relevant theory used in this research. In this chapter, the theory of acous-
tic impedance, absorption coefficient, boundary condition, locally reacting surface and
equivalent source method are provided. Chapter 3 provides the simulation environment
and a parameter study of circular equivalent source method. In Chapter 4, the conclu-
sions of this study are presented. In addition, appendix chapter provides the theory of
FEM used in the simulation.
==PAGE:24==
10
1 Introduction
1.3
Problem definition
The problem tackled in this research is to estimate the impedance of a wall where
multiple reflections occur in a closed space. The elements used to solve this problem
are a point source and a microphone array. For the ease of derivation, the room under
consideration is defined as two-dimensional space, and hence, the walls are expressed by
lines. The microphone array to be used is a circular array, which is a two-dimensional
version of a spherical microphone.
Figure 1.6: Problem set-up
The assumptions used in the defined problem are as follows:
• Known room geometry
• Robin boundary conditions on the surface
• Homogeneous surface
• Locally reacting surface
The reasons for using such assumptions are mentioned in the later part of the chapter
2: theory.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
2.1
Acoustic impedance
The physical meaning of the impedance is the ratio of the two signals that represent the
cause and effect with complex magnitude. For example, electrical impedance is defined
as the ratio of voltage to current: ZE = V/I, where ZE, V , and I are,respectively,
the complex values of electrical impedance, electrical voltage and current. The physical
meaning of electrical impedance is the opposite of the flow of current when the voltage
is applied. In the case of mechanical impedance, it is defined as the ratio of force to
velocity: ZM = F/v, where ZM, F, and v are, respectively, the complex values of
mechanical impedance, force and a vector component of velocity. The physical meaning
of mechanical impedance is how much a structure resists movement when the force
is applied. Specific acoustic impedance is defined as the ratio of pressure to particle
velocity: ZS = P/U where ZS, P, and U are, respectively, the complex values of specific
acoustic impedance, sound pressure and a vector component of particle velocity. The
physical meaning of specific acoustic impedance is the opposite of the acoustic flow when
the acoustic pressure is applied. Acoustic impedance is measured in Rayl which is one of
two units of acoustic impedance: one an MKS unit, the other CGS unit. Rayl in MKS
units corresponds to
1 RaylMKS = 1 N · s
m3 = 1 Pa · s
m
= 1
Kg
s · m2.
(2.1)
Rayl in CGS units corresponds to
1 RaylCGS = 1 dyn · s
cm3
= 1 ba · s
cm
= 1
g
s · cm2.
(2.2)
Acoustic impedance is a vector-like quantity that depends on the particle velocity and
therefore depends on the direction of the particle velocity. For example, when a plane
wave sound field is formed in a long tube with a rigid wall as shown in Figure 2.1,
11
==PAGE:26==
12
2 Theory
low-frequency model approximation, sound field in a tube is approximated as one-
dimensional, can be applied in this tube by assuming the wavelength is long compared
with the cross-sectional dimensions of the tube. Under this assumption, approximated
an one-dimensional sound field ˆp is expressed as
ˆp = p+ej(ωt−kx) + p−ej(ωt+kx),
(2.3)
where ω = 2πf is the angular (or radian) frequency, f is frequency, k = ω/c is the (an-
gular) wavenumber, c is the speed of sound, p+ej(ωt−kx) is a plane wave that propagates
in the x direction with amplitude p+, and p−ej(ωt+kx) is a plane wave that propagates
in a negative x direction with amplitude p−. The one-dimensional version of Eulers
equation of motion is given by
jωρˆux + ∂ˆp
∂x = 0,
(2.4)
where ρ is the density of air, and ˆux is the particle velocity. Using equation (2.4), the
particle velocity of a plane propagating wave is given by
ˆux = −1
jωρ
∂ˆp
∂x = p+
ρc ej(ωt−kx) −p−
ρc ej(ωt+kx) = p+ejωt
ρc
(
e−jkx −Rejkx)
,
(2.5)
where R is reflection coefficient which is a ratio of incident and reflected amplitude:
R = p−/p+. Thus the specific acoustic impedance at a point is given by
Za = ˆp
ˆux
= ρce−jkx + Rejkx
e−jkx −Rejkx.
(2.6)
The boundary condition at x = 0 implies that
ZS = ρc1 + R
1 −R = ˆp (0)
ˆux (0),
(2.7)
where ZS is acoustic surface impedance. A similar analysis can be obliquely extended
to incident plane wave to calculate the angle-dependent impedance as follows:
ZS =
ρc
cosθ
1 + R (θ)
1 −R (θ) = ˆp
ˆun
.
(2.8)
Equation (2.8) [31] shows the acoustic surface impedance is the ratio of sound pres-
sure and normal particle velocity from the surface. Therefore, measuring the acoustic
surface impedance is equivalent to measuring the sound pressure and normal particle
velocity from the surface.
Besides equation (2.4) shows the particle velocity can be
expressed as the derivative of sound pressure. In conclusion, measuring the acoustic
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Acoustic impedance
13
surface impedance is same as measuring the sound pressure and the derivative of sound
pressure.
Figure 2.1: One-dimensional tube terminated with acoustic impedance Za
Figure 2.2: Incident plane wave with angle θ reflected by a locally reacting surface
==PAGE:28==
14
2 Theory
2.2
Absorption coefficient
When the sound reaches the wall and the reflection is made, the acoustic energy is
changed by the action of the viscous and thermal mechanisms. This behavior causes
viscous dissipation and heat dissipation, resulting in a change in total energy. Sound
absorbing materials focused on this research are designed to minimize reflection by dis-
sipating sound energy when reflection occurs.
The absorption coefficient is a value
indicating the ratio of energy absorbed when a sound wave is incident on the surface at
an angle of θ. The absorption coefficient is defined as
α = II −IR
II
= 1 −IR
II
.
(2.9)
where α, II, and IR are, respectively, the absorption coefficient, the one-sided intensity
of incident sound wave, and one-sided intensity of the reflected sound wave. From the
equation (2.9), it can be observed that absorption coefficient of material has a value
from 0 to 1. Accordingly, sound absorbing material dissipates a lot of sound energy, so
it can be considered that a lot of energy is absorbed. Thus sound absorbing material
has a low absorption coefficient close to zero.
When a plane wave encounters a material having acoustic surface impedance as shown in
Figure 2.2 and reflection occurs, the relationship between the acoustic surface impedance
and the absorption coefficient is defined as follows using equation (2.8),
α = 1 −|R|2 = 1 −

ZScosθ −ρc
ZScosθ + ρc

2
.
(2.10)
When the sound reaches the wall and the reflection is made, the acoustic energy dissipa-
tion causes acoustic pressure reduction. The pressure reduction is related to the viscous
loss of the propagating acoustic wave inside the porous absorber. This pressure reduc-
tion is represented by the flow resistance. In the case of the porous sound-absorbing
materials mainly used, the flow resistance is a main factor of sound absorption. This
flow resistance is a value corresponding to the real part of the impedance. As mentioned
above, in the case of the sound absorbing materials mainly used, the flow resistance is
the main factor of the sound absorption. So the absorption coefficient is closely related
to the flow resistance which is the real part of the impedance. This relationship is used
to briefly view the properties of materials with the absorption coefficient.
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Absorption coefficient
15
Both the acoustic surface impedance and absorption coefficient, which are measures used
to improve the sound environment, play an important role in examining the properties
of the material forming the room. Both the acoustic surface impedance and absorption
coefficient depend on the physical properties (flow resistance, porosity, etc.) on the sur-
face where sound waves are reflected. In the case of acoustic surface impedance, physical
properties can be expressed in terms of ZS. For example, a real part of acoustic surface
impedance means flow resistance which is defined as pressure drop per unit thickness.
Also, if the room geometry and all the impedance of each component of the room, it is
possible to reconstruct sound field of the room through numerical methods such as finite
element method (FEM) or boundary element method (BEM). However in case of the
absorption coefficient, the train of logic leading from the flow resistance, porosity, etc.,
of the material to its absorption coefficient is so long, then it is practically impossible to
determine these properties of the material by measuring the absorption coefficient.[32].
Therefore, this research will focus on measuring the acoustic surface impedance.
==PAGE:30==
16
2 Theory
2.3
Locally reacting surface
If the reaction at any point on the surface is only related to the sound pressure at that
point, this surface is called the locally reacting surface [33]. Let U (r′
0) be the speed
at the surface S. Where r′0 is the arbitrary point on the surface S. The speed at the
surface S is generally written as
U (r′
0) =
∫
S A (r′
0|r0) p (r0) dS,
(2.11)
where A (r′0|r0) is the speed that can be occurred at r′0 by the unit sound pressure
applied to r0.
In other words, A (r′0|r0) is the acoustic surface admittance.
If the
surface acts as locally reacting surface, then equation (2.11) can be simplified as
U (r′
0) = A (r′
0) p (r′
0) .
(2.12)
Specifically, the conditions of the locally reacting surface will be examined in this section.
The first case is when the motion of the other part on the surface can be ignored. If the
movement of one point on the surface is not related to the movement of another point,
then the admittance is rewritten as
A (r′
0|r0) = A (r′
0) δ (r′
0 −r0) .
(2.13)
Therefore, when this condition is satisfied, the velocity at the surface where the reflection
occurs is written as
U (r′
0) =
∫
S A (r′
0|r0) p (r0) dS = A (r′
0)p (r′
0) .
(2.14)
The second case is where the admittance of the surface is independent of the angle of
incidence. If the homogeneous surface, admittance is governed only by the position of
the response and the position of the applied sound pressure, the velocity at the surface
is given by
U (r′
0) =
∫
S A (r′
0|r0) p (r0) dS.
(2.15)
If spatial Fourier transform is applied to equation (2.15)
U (k) = A (k) p (k) ,
(2.16)
where k is the vector form of the wavenumber. If the surface’s admittance is independent
of the incident angle, it is independent of the wavenumber and is written as
A (k) = A0.
(2.17)
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Locally reacting surface
17
Therefore, the speed of wave on the surface is calculated as
U (k) = A0p (k) .
(2.18)
Equation (2.18) represents the condition of the locally reacting surface is satisfied.
The third condition is that the propagation speed of the surface wave is slow. As shown
in Figure 2.2, the impedance at the surface is given by
p
U = ρ1c1
cosθt
=
ρ1c1
√
1 −
(
k0
k1
)2sin2θi
,
(2.19)
where U is normal particle velocity, ρ1 is a density of the surface, c1 is the wave propa-
gating speed at the surface, k1 is the wavenumber at the surface, θt is the angle of the
transmitted wave and θi is the incident angle
c1
c0
≪1 ⇒
(k0
k1
)2
sin2θi ≪1.
(2.20)
Thus, the impedance at the surface is independent of the angle of incidence. As a result,
it satisfies the locally reacting surface because it belongs to the second case.
The fourth case is where sudden attenuation occurs at the surface. The wave number
of the air is given by
k0 = ω0
c0
.
(2.21)
On the other hand, the wavenumber on the surface expresses the damping phenomenon,
so it is given by
k1 = β −jα = ω
cp
(
1 −j αλp
2π
)
,
(2.22)
where α is the coefficient of the attenuation, cp is the wave propagating speed at the
surface and λp is the wavelength of the surface wave. The ratio of wavenumber in the
air to the surface is written as

k0
k1

2
=
(cp
c0
)2
1
1 +
(
α λp
2π
)2.
(2.23)
If the attenuation is large enough (α ≫1),
 k0
k1
 becomes 0 in equation (2.19). Depen-
dency on the angle of incidence disappears. As in the third case, as a result, it belongs
to the second case, so it satisfies the locally reacting surface.
==PAGE:32==
18
2 Theory
The last condition is when a normal reaction occurs on the surface (θt = 0). Thus, in
equation (2.19), the dependency on the angle disappears and satisfies the locally reacting
surface.
This research focuses on measuring the impedance of a sound absorbing material to
improve the listening room environment. Therefore, this sound absorbing material has
a characteristic in which the sound pressure is rapidly attenuated on a normal surface.
Therefore, the fourth condition mentioned above corresponds to a case where a sudden
attenuation occurs on the surface, and it is satisfied that the surface of the sound ab-
sorbing material is a locally reacting surface, which is a property that the reaction at the
corresponding point is not affected by the reaction at other points when the reflection
is made do. Therefore, it is assumed that the surface forming the room in the problem
definition satisfies the locally reacting surface.
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Boundary conditions
19
2.4
Boundary conditions
The entire border of an object is called a boundary. In the case of a one-dimensional
object, endpoints of the object corresponding to the boundary. For a two-dimensional
object, the entire edge curve of the object corresponds to the boundary. In the case
of a three-dimensional object, the entire interior or exterior surface of the object corre-
sponds to the boundary. Since all objects are in a three-dimensional shape, the term
one-dimensional object or two-dimensional object means a simplified shape assuming a
three-dimensional shape as a one-dimensional straight line or two-dimensional plane.
Every object on Earth contact with other objects, regardless of the type of medium
(solid, liquid, gas or vacuum) at that boundary. Thus, an arbitrary object is affected
by various forms such as force, moment, and hear from other internal or external ob-
jects through the boundary. When these effects are analyzed mathematically, most of
them are expressed as elliptic differential equations. Usually, there are infinitely many
solutions to satisfy these differential equations. Therefore, in order to find the solution
of the differential equation for the specific space, additional conditions are needed to
represent the boundary of the space. These additional conditions for boundaries of the
specific space are called boundary conditions.
Boundary conditions play a very important role in objects of the same shape. This
is because the behavior varies greatly depending on the boundary conditions. Which
of the influences should be included as a boundary condition depends on the type of
behavior of the object to be analyzed. Different types of boundary conditions can be
applied on the boundary of the space. The selection of boundary conditions is impor-
tant to solving computational problems. This can lead to the divergence of the solution
or the convergence to the wrong solution. This research focuses on the change of the
sound field in a closed space. Thus, the elliptic differential equation that expresses the
sound field is Helmholtz equation. In this section, the boundary conditions used in the
Helmholtz equation will be introduced briefly. In Table 2.1, y is the unknown function,
c0 and c1 are the constant specified by the boundary conditions, and f is known scalar
functions.
==PAGE:34==
20
2 Theory
Table 2.1: Boundary conditions
Name
Form of boundary
Dirichlet
y = f
Neumann
∂y
∂n = f
Robin
c0y + c1
∂y
∂n = f
A boundary condition which specifies the value of the function itself that is used in
the differential equation is the Dirichlet boundary condition. In acoustics, the classical
Dirichlet boundary condition consists of fixing the value of the sound pressure taken at a
specific boundary point. Dirichlet condition is usually used to express open cavity. For
example, setting a homogeneous Dirichlet boundary condition (p = 0) represents open
part of the open tube. A boundary condition which specifies the value of the normal
derivative of the function is Neumann boundary condition. In acoustics, the classical
Neumann boundary condition consists of fixing the value of the normal component of
the particle velocity or normal derivative of sound pressure taken at a specific bound-
ary point. The Neumann boundary condition is usually used to express the boundary
condition of a rigid surface that does not vibrate (uN = 0, ∂p
∂n = 0). A boundary con-
dition which is a weighted combination of Dirichlet boundary conditions and Neumann
boundary conditions is Robin boundary condition. Robin boundary condition is also
called impedance boundary condition. In acoustics, it is mainly used to express bound-
aries with certain acoustic surface impedance. As seen in the impedance section, acoustic
impedance is expressed as the ratio of the sound pressure and normal derivative of sound
pressure at the certain point. Robin boundary condition is given by
γ (r) p (r) = ∂p (r)
∂n ,
(2.24)
where γ is the complex value of the acoustic admittance which is inverse of acoustic
impedance and r is a point of the boundary. If the γ goes to 0, the derivative of the
sound pressure must be zero. That means the normal component of particle velocity
at the boundary is zero. So the field near this surface is satisfying Neumann boundary
condition.
On the other hand, if the γ goes to infinity then the sound pressure at
the boundary point must be zero. So the field near this surface is satisfying Dirichlet
boundary condition.
==PAGE:35==
2.5 Equivalent source method (ESM)
21
2.5
Equivalent source method (ESM)
The condition for calculating an analytic solution of the Helmholtz equation is limited
to the case where the differential equations can be simplified using a boundary condition
such as a rectangular room with a rigid wall or a simple duct system. In the case of com-
plex scattering problems, it is not easy to find an analytic solution if a complex boundary
condition is formed or if the Helmholtz equation cannot be simply transformed through
boundary conditions. Therefore, a numerical method for finding an approximated solu-
tion without solving an analytic solution was proposed. Numerical methods are a way
to approximate a complex whole solution by dividing a complex problem into several
simple problems. Numerical methods are often used to solve complex problems such as
scattering or radiation. Methods such as FEM, BEM, and ESM have been proposed as
numerical techniques, and these methods have their own advantages and disadvantages.
Therefore, if a specific boundary condition exists, the user can select a method to imple-
ment the boundary condition well.
FEM is a method started to solve problems such as complex elasticity and structural
analysis.
This method is a method of approaching a problem having a continuous
domain by dividing it into a small element using a mesh. Usually, triangular or rectan-
gular elements are used in the two-dimensional case. When solving the two-dimensional
Helmholtz equation, weak integral form which performs surface integration using a vari-
ational formulation is used. The weak integral form is solved using the relation between
elements. In the case of FEM, the problem is solved numerically by dividing the closed
domain into a finite number of meshes. In the infinite domain, a large number of el-
ements are required for FEM. A large number of elements cause a lot of computation
time. In order to solve this kind of problem, BEM was proposed. BEM is a method of
solving the problem by dividing the boundary into a finite number of elements using a
mesh. Compared to FEM, the computation time is reduced. As shown in Figure 2.3
and Figure 2.4, the FEM splits the problem for the whole domain, however, the BEM
only splits the problem for the boundary. But there is a non-unique solution at a certain
frequency, and there is a disadvantage that singularity problem occurs at the boundary.
Therefore, ESM is proposed as an alternative to these boundary based methods.
==PAGE:36==
22
2 Theory
Figure 2.3: Example of mesh with finite element method
Figure 2.4: Example of mesh with boundary element method
==PAGE:37==
2.5 Equivalent source method (ESM)
23
ESM has been developed in various fields under various names such as the method of fun-
damental solutions [34] , wave superposition method [35], equivalent source method [35],
source simulation method [36] etc. But apart from the different names, the basic frame-
work of each method is similar. Lee [30] reviewed the equivalent source method that has
been developed in various fields. Each method has a basic framework for restoring radi-
ation or scattering problems with the sum of the sound fields from equivalent sources,
which are auxiliary points. Usually, the equivalent source method is located outside the
acoustic domain. For example, equivalent source method usually places the equivalent
source inside boundary for the exterior problem and outside boundary for the interior
problem. The strength of the equivalent source, which is the auxiliary point, is deter-
mined through various methods that satisfy the boundary condition at the boundary.
This equivalent source method has the following advantages compared with FEM and
BEM. First, the equivalent source method has computational efficiency as compared
with FEM and BEM because it does not need to divide the boundary region into ele-
ments using a mesh. Secondly, non-uniqueness problems and singularities in BEM can
be avoided by locating the equivalent sources at a distance from the boundary. As men-
tioned earlier, in the usual equivalent source method, the equivalent source is located
outside the acoustic domain. Therefore, the distance between the equivalent source and
the measurement point is not zero. For this reason, it is possible to escape the singularity
problem that occurs in BEM. The third advantage is that, in case of equivalent source,
the number of equivalent sources used is not limited to the number of measurement
points because it belongs to the control variable. The number of equivalent sources
has a trade-off relationship with accuracy and computation time as control variables.
Using a large number of equivalent source numbers has high accuracy but requires a lot
of computation time. On the other hand, if a small number of equivalent sources are
used, the loss will occur when the equivalent source is used at a high accuracy, but the
calculation time can also be reduced by reducing the size of the linear system.
However, the accuracy of this equivalent source method is relatively low compared to
FEM and BEM. In case of the equivalent source method, the accuracy is lower because
it is a method of approximating the solution by using a relatively small number of collo-
cation points (Node) when compared with FEM and BEM. However, this difference in
accuracy results in a few percentage difference acceptable for most engineering problems,
==PAGE:38==
24
2 Theory
when a reasonable number of equivalent sources is used. Another disadvantage of ESM
is that the linear algebraic system is ill-conditioned and has a numerical stability prob-
lem. Therefore, the instability problem should be solved by applying the regularization
technique or the robust numerical algorithm in using the equivalent source method.
Basically, ESM has been applied to finding approximate solutions of elliptic differential
equations. In this case, the approximate solution consists of the sum of the fundamental
solutions, and this fundamental solution is defined as the source functions for Helmholtz
equation [37,38]. The problem of acoustic radiation is given by the Helmholtz equation,
(
∇2 + k2)
p = 0 in Ω,
(2.25)
where ∇is the Laplacian, k is the wavenumber which represents a ratio between angular
frequency and sound velocity, Ωis the acoustic domain, and p is the acoustic pressure.
The boundary of the acoustic domain Ωis composed of a combination of three boundary
conditions mentioned in the boundary condition part in Chapter2. The fundamental
solution of the Helmholtz equation (2.25) is expressed by the pressure of the point
source as follows:
p = jωρQG (r|r0) ,
(2.26)
where Q is a volume velocity of an equivalent source, r is the field point, r0 is an equiva-
lent source position, and G (r|r0) is a Greens function which is acoustic transfer function
r0 to r.
In equation (2.26), jωρQ represents a source strength.
The superposition
of fundamental solutions from N point sources approximates the solution of equation
(2.25).
ep =
N
∑
i=1
jωρQiG (r|r0,i),
(2.27)
where ˜p is the approximated solution of equation (2.25), and the subscript is the index of
fundamental solution (point source). In order to find complex amplitude jωρQi, it needs
to be solved the equation that the equation (2.27) satisfies the boundary conditions. ESM
is the method to construct the inverse problem of finding the strength of the equivalent
source to recover the pressure measured by the microphone array.
==PAGE:39==
2.5 Equivalent source method (ESM)
25
Figure 2.5: Schematic of equivalent source method
==PAGE:40==
26
2 Theory
The construction of the inverse problem is the same as in the spherical equivalent source
method, which will discuss later, Figure 2.5 shows a simple process of the equivalent
source method.
An example is to approximate the sound field produced by the speaker with the Equiva-
lent source method as shown in Figure 2.5. The sky blue band in Figure 2.5 means the
area activated in each process. First, the generated sound field was measured using a
microphone array, and the point at which the pressure was measured was represented
by sky blue band around microphone array. The array used in this research uses a rigid
circular microphone array, so black circle in Figure 2.5 represents circular microphone
array. A rigid circle is placed perpendicular to the surface and speaker, and the micro-
phone is located on the surface of a rigid circle. Second, based on the measured pressure
value, the strength of the equivalent source, which has the same sound pressure at the
point, is calculated by solving the inverse problem. In the equivalent source method,
since there is no condition for how many positions of the equivalent source should be
placed, the inverse problem is configured differently depending on how the equivalent
source is arranged. Third, after solving the strength of each equivalent source through
the inverse problem, then each equivalent source is used for reconstructing the sound
field around the microphone array. This constructed method is called the equivalent
source method.
A simple example of the equivalent source method can be applied to approximating
the sound field generated by a vibrating plate as shown in Figure 2.6. If the sound field
created by the vibrating plate as shown in Figure 2.7 is represented by a finite number
of point sources, the sound field of the original vibrating plate can be approximated by
the sum of the sound fields created by 13 equivalent sources as shown in Figure 2.7. As
mentioned earlier, in the equivalent source method, there is no condition for how many
positions of the equivalent source should be placed. Research has been underway on
how to locate the equivalent source in the ESM.
==PAGE:41==
2.5 Equivalent source method (ESM)
27
Figure 2.6: Sound field of vibrating plate
Figure 2.7: Approximated sound field using ESM
==PAGE:42==
28
2 Theory
2.6
Spherical equivalent source method
(S-ESM) and circular equivalent source
method (C-ESM)
2.6.1
Introduction
The spherical equivalent source method (S-ESM) [29] is a method of arranging the equiv-
alent sources used in the equivalent source method to be spherical. It is a method to
reproduce sound field near microphone array from the pressure data measured by micro-
phone array as equivalent source method (ESM). Specifically, S-ESM is a sound field
extrapolation method that uses a spherical microphone to measure and reproduce the
sound field outside of the microphone array through the measured sound field. In the
case of S-ESM, there is a difference in constructing the interior inverse problem com-
pared to equivalent source method. The interior inverse problem uses the basis function
that propagates only inward from spherical equivalent sources in the reconstruction pro-
cess. From this interior inverse problem, the amplitude of the equivalent source can be
calculated. As a result, only the sound field inside the spherical equivalent source is
partially reconstructed.
Figure 2.8: Interior domain problem where all sources are located outside of boundary
==PAGE:43==
2.6 Spherical equivalent source method (S-ESM) and circular equivalent source method (C-ESM)
29
Before looking at the S-ESM, let’s look first at the interior problem.
Two different
kinds of solutions of boundary value problems arise. Each solution is a subset of the
fundamental solution of the Helmholtz equation. The first is called the interior problem.
The interior problem corresponds to placing the source outside the boundary value
surface. This situation is shown in Figure 2.8, which was mentioned earlier. In the
case of the general solution, the solution consists of a combination of Bessel first kind
and second kind. In this case, there is a difference in that there is only one boundary
and the valid region includes the origin. So the pressure at the origin must be finite.
Then the Hankel function is an inadequate solution in this case.
The origin of the
homogeneous differential equation is valid for this case. The Hankel function is infinite
at the origin. The imaginary part of the Hankel function of the second kind diverges
at the origin as shown in Figure 2.11. In order to make finite at the origin, the Bessel
function that is finite at the origin is used as a fundamental solution, not as a Hankel
function. Figure 2.10 shows that the Bessel function is finite at the origin. Then the
solution of an interior problem [39] is given by
pinterior (r, θ, ϕ, ω) =
∞
∑
n=0
n
∑
m=−n
Amn (ω) jn (kr) Y m
n (θ, ϕ) ,
(2.28)
where pinterior is a general solution of the interior problem, n is a degree of spherical
harmonics, m is an order of spherical harmonics, Anm (ω) is the harmonic coefficient
of the interior problem, jn(kr) is the spherical Bessel function of the first kind which
represents in-coming wave, and Y m
n (θ, ϕ) is the spherical harmonics.
Figure 2.9: Exterior domain problem with all sources are located inside of boundary
==PAGE:44==
30
2 Theory
On the other hand, if the boundary completely encloses all the sources, it is called the
exterior problem. It has an infinite region of validity as shown in Figure 2.9. Since it
does not contain origin, it does not need to be finite at origin. Because all sources are in
enclosed boundaries, in-coming waves do not occur from outside the boundary. So the
general solution consists of a fundamental solution that considers only out-going waves.
The solution of an exterior problem [39] is given by
pexterior (r, θ, ϕ, ω) =
∞
∑
n=0
n
∑
m=−n
Bmn (ω) h(2)
n (kr) Y m
n (θ, ϕ) ,
(2.29)
where pexterior is a general solution of the exterior problem, Bnm (ω) is the harmonic
coefficient of the exterior problem and h(2)
n (kr) is the spherical Hankel function of the
second kind which represents the out-going wave. For the S-ESM, the equivalent source
is located on the spherical surface which includes a rigid spherical microphone array
inside. The sound field on microphone array reconstructed from the equivalent sources
is expressed as follows.
p(rm) ≈
L
∑
i=1
pi (rm) =
L
∑
i=1
jωρQiGN (rm|r0,i),
(2.30)
where rm is a position of the mth microphone, r0,i is a position of the ith equivalent
source, L is a total number of equivalent source, i is an index of equivalent sources, Qi
is a strength of the ith equivalent source, and GN (rm|r0,i) is Neumann Greens function.
The reason for using the Neumann Greens function is that the presence of a rigid
sphere inside the reconstruction area must use the Greens function that satisfies the
boundary conditions on a rigid sphere where the particle velocity (the normal derivative
of pressure) is zero. For the convenience, two-dimensional version of S-ESM, Circular
equivalent source method (C-ESM), is used in this research. In the conventional S-ESM,
the arrangement of the spherical equivalent source is located on a surface of the sphere.
However, the arrangement of the circular equivalent source is located on the circle. The
spherical harmonic terms used in the S-ESM are converted to cylindrical harmonics.
Since the existing S-ESM has been changed to two dimensional without big changes, it
satisfies the features of S-ESM as it is.
==PAGE:45==
2.6 Spherical equivalent source method (S-ESM) and circular equivalent source method (C-ESM)
31
Figure 2.10: Bessel function of first kind of orders 0 to 4
Figure 2.11: Bessel function of second kind of orders 0 to 4
==PAGE:46==
32
2 Theory
2.6.2
Neumann Green’s function
Figure 2.12: Principle of circular equivalent source method
The Neumann Greens function used in the circular equivalent source method can be
derived as the point source satisfies the boundary conditions on the rigid edge. For the
convenience of the derivation, the rigid circle centered at the origin of coordinates as
shown in Figure 2.12. In Figure 2.12, black circle represents the rigid circular microphone
array. The rigid circular microphone array consists of flush-mounted microphones on a
rigid circle. The total sound field measured on this rigid circular microphone array is
composed by the incident and the scattered waves. The total sound field can be modeled
analytically. Let assume the ith point source is located at r0,i = (r0,i, ϕ0,i) with volume
velocity Qi. The total sound pressure is a sum of the incident waves pi and scattered
waves by the rigid circle ps. The total sound pressure is given by
pt (r) = pi (r) + ps (r) ,
(2.31)
where r is the field point inside the reconstruction area. The incident sound pressure
which is excited by the ith point source is
pincident (r, r0,i) = jωρQiGF (r|r0,i) = ωρQi
4
H(2)
0
(k |r −r0,i|) ,
(2.32)
where pincident (r|r0,i) is the incident pressure which is excited by the point source located
at r0,i and is measured at field point r, H(2)
0
is cylindrical Hankel function of the second
kind, and GF (r|r0,i) is two-dimensional free field Greens function which represents
==PAGE:47==
2.6 Spherical equivalent source method (S-ESM) and circular equivalent source method (C-ESM)
33
acoustic transfer function r0,i to r. In a cylindrical expansion, the incident pressure
which is associated in the interior problem can be rewritten as general form,
pincident (r, r0,i) =
∞
∑
n=−∞
AnJn (kr) H(2)
n (kr0,i) ejn(ϕ−ϕ0,i),
(2.33)
where An is coefficients of the cylindrical harmonics, Jn is cylindrical Bessel function
of the first kind, and n is an order of cylindrical harmonics. Two-dimensional free-field
Greens function [39] in cylindrical harmonics is
GF (r|r0,i) = −j
4H(2)
0
(k |r −r0,i|) = −j
4
∞
∑
n=−∞
Jn (kr) H(2)
n (kr0,i) ejn(ϕ−ϕ0,i).
(2.34)
From which the An coefficients are obtained as
An = ωρQi
4
.
(2.35)
On the other hand, the scattered pressure ps is generated by the presence of the rigid
circle. So the scattered pressure ps is associated in the exterior problem. The radiation
solution ps can be written as the form of a solution of the exterior problem:
pscatter (r, r0,i) =
∞
∑
n=−∞
BnH(2)
n (kr)ejnϕ,
(2.36)
where Bn is a unknown coefficient of cylindrical harmonics.
In order to determine
Neumann Greens function which satisfies Neumann boundary conditions on the edge
of the circle, the total pressure must satisfy the Neumann boundary conditions. The
particle velocity is zero at the boundary:
∂pincident
∂r

r=a
+ ∂pscatter
∂r

r=a
= 0,
(2.37)
where a is radius of the rigid circle. From this equation, the coefficient of the exterior
scattered pressure Bn is calculated as follows:
Bn = −An
J′n (ka)
H′(2)
n
(ka)
H(2)
n (kr0,i) e−jnϕ,
(2.38)
where J′n is derivative of cylindrical Bessel function of the first kind, and H′(2)
n
is deriva-
tive of cylindrical Hankel function of the second kind. To sum up, the formulas men-
tioned above, the total sound pressure pt is rewritten as follows:
pt (r, r0,i) = ωρQi
4
∞
∑
n=−∞
(
Jn (kr) −Jn
′ (ka) H(2)
n (kr)
H′(2)
n (ka)
)
H(2)
n (kr0,i)ejn(ϕ−ϕ0,i).
(2.39)
==PAGE:48==
34
2 Theory
Finally making use of the Wronskian relation as follows:
Jn (ka) H′(2)
n
(ka) −J′
n (ka) H(2)
n (ka) = −2j
πka.
(2.40)
The pressure on the edge of the circle at rm = (a, ϕm), due to point source at r0,i =
(r0,i, ϕ0,i) is simplified to
pt (rm, r0,i) = ωρQi
2jπka
∞
∑
n=−∞
H(2)
n (kr0,i)
H′(2)
n (ka) ejn(ϕm−ϕ0,i).
(2.41)
Therefore, the two-dimensional Neumann Greens function [39] is calculated as follows:
GN (r|r0,i) = −j
4
∞
∑
n=−∞
(
Jn (kr) −Jn
′ (ka) H(2)
n (kr)
H′(2)
n (ka)
)
H(2)
n (kr0,i)ejn(ϕ−ϕ0,i).
(2.42)
The two-dimensional Neumann Greens function to transfer to the rigid edge is written
as follows:
GN (r|r0,i) = −j
4
∞
∑
n=−∞
H(2)
n (kr0,i)
H′(2)
n (ka) ejn(ϕ−ϕ0,i).
(2.43)
The fundamental idea of this method is using the equation (2.28) as the basis to de-
scribe the complex sound field as a superposition of the sound field made by the finite
equivalent point sources which are located outside the domain of interest. This domain
can be arbitrary shape, unlike the existing method. The equivalent sources can be lo-
cated either inside of the source boundary to be approximated (for example, radiation
problems, sources replaced by a combination of point sources), or outside of the domain
where sound field is reconstructed (for example, reconstructing a sound field over a cer-
tain volume in a free-field or inside an enclosure) [28].
The pressure on the edge of the circle at rm = (a, ϕm), due to a point source atr0,i =
(r0,i, ϕ0,i) is given in equation (2.41). Using equation (2.41), the sound pressure measured
on each flush-mounted microphones on the circle can be express as a superposition of
sound field of the equivalent sources which are located on the circle including the circular
microphone inside. The measured pressure on the circular microphone array is written
as
pt (rm) =
L
∑
i=1
ωρQi
2jπka
∞
∑
n=−∞
H(2)
n (kr0,i)
H′(2)
n (ka) ejn(ϕm−ϕ0,i),
(2.44)
where L is a total number of equivalent sources. In this research, the infinity order of
harmonics in equation (2.44) is truncated from -50 to 50. Therefore, equation (2.44) can
be replaced by matrix form as follows:
pt = GNq,
(2.45)
==PAGE:49==
2.6 Spherical equivalent source method (S-ESM) and circular equivalent source method (C-ESM)
35
where pt is a M ×1 vector with the measured pressures, GN is a M ×L Neumann Green’s
function matrix between all equivalent sources and all flush-mounted microphones, and
q is a L × 1 vector with unknown source strength. The element of q is jωρQi for each
equivalent source, but it is changed to one unknown parameter q for convenience. The
inverse problem of finding the unknown parameter q is written as
min
q
∥q∥n
n subject to pt = GNq
(2.46)
Finding the simplified source strength q vector by solving this inverse problem. The
inverse problem in common ESM is the overdetermined problem. As mentioned in the
Equivalent source method above, the above inverse problem is generally ill-conditioned.
Therefore, instability problems arising from this equivalent source method can be solved
through regularization.
==PAGE:50==
36
2 Theory
2.6.3
Regularization
Regularization is a method to solve the problem of small singular value by adding ap-
propriate values to original singular values. If the singular value is a small value close
to zero, this value will cause divergence in the inverse transformation of the matrix. In
general, when n = 2 in equation (2.46), the general solution [40] is given by
q =
(
GT
NGN
)−1GT
Npt.
(2.47)
In the equation (2.46), instability problem arises in calculating the left inverse of GN.
To overcome this problem, regularized inverse which is based on singular value decom-
position is used. The singular value decomposition of GN is given by
GN = U
∑
VH,
(2.48)
where U and V are unitary matrix, and ∑contains singular values of GN as diagonal
matrix. In this research, instability problem is solved by using Tikhonov regulariza-
tion method among many regularization techniques [41]. Using regularization, equation
(2.46) is rewritten as
ˆq = argmin
q
∥GNq −pt∥2
2 + λ2 ∥q∥2
2 .
(2.49)
The first term of equation (2.49) refers to the measure of how much solution ˆq predicts
noisy data, and this term is called ”goodness-of-fit”. The second term is a measure of
the regularity of the solution. For these two terms, the value that adjusts the balance
is the lambda, the regularization factor. The solution of equation (2.49) is analytic as
follows:
ˆq = G−1
N pt = VF
∑−1UHpt,
(2.50)
where F is a diagonal matrix which contains regularization parameter that makes the
inverse of GN stable. Regularization matrix F is given by
F =


F11
0
0
0
...
0
0
0
FLL


,
(2.51)
Fii =
σ2
i
(σ2
i + λ2),
(2.52)
==PAGE:51==
2.6 Spherical equivalent source method (S-ESM) and circular equivalent source method (C-ESM)
37
where σi is ith singular value of matrix GN, and λ is a regularization parameter. This
regularization parameter λ is a weight factor that regulates the contribution of noisy
eigenvectors with small singular values.
When setting the regularization parameter,
giving small λ or giving large λ will find a solution that has a bias in one term in equation
(2.49). Therefore, it is important to find an appropriate regularization parameter λ.
Figure 2.13: Example of L-curve method using regularization tool [3]
There has been much research [42, 43] about selecting regulation parameter λ. In this
research, the regularization factor is obtained by using the L-curve method which brings
the best result. The L-curve method is a method of finding λ that balances the contri-
bution of the solution norm and the residual norm in equation (2.49). As inferred from
the name, L-curve, it shows the L shape as shown in Figure 2.13. In this case, the flat
part is dominated by the regularization error because the solution norm is small, and the
steep part is the part where the perturbation error is dominant due to the small residual
norm. The optimal parameter is located at the corner of the L-curve and by choosing
this value, this corner represents a balanced solution to the two terms in equation (2.49).
==PAGE:52==
38
2 Theory
2.6.4
Impedance estimation from equivalent sources
In order to solve the instability problem, regularization technique is applied to the inverse
problem. The unknown source strength q can be calculated by solving the regularized
inverse problem. In this section, the process of propagating each equivalent source to
reconstruct the sound field around the microphone array is examined.
As mentioned above, ESM is a method of reproducing the sound field of the recon-
struction area from the equivalent sources. Therefore, the interior Neumann Green’s
function is used to calculate the strength of the equivalent source. It means that a basis
which is transmitted only inside the circle where the equivalent sources are located is
used for reconstructing sound field. The existence of a rigid circular microphone array
inside the reconstruction area makes propagation use the Neumann Green’s function as
in the case of constructing the inverse problem in the circular equivalent source method.
Since there is a rigid circular microphone array in the reconstruction area, the circular
equivalent source method uses Neumann Green’s function when propagating as it does
with constructing inverse problem. Therefore, the sound field is reconstructed using
equation (2.41). This process is written as
pr (r) =
L
∑
i=1
jωρQiGN (r|r0,i) = GNq,
(2.53)
where pr is reconstructed pressure. The derivative of sound pressure naturally can be
obtained by using derivative of Neumann Greens function. The normal derivative of
sound pressure is written as
∂pr
∂n = n · (∇GNq) ,
(2.54)
where
∂pr
∂n is normal derivative of the pressure, n is a unit vector whose direction is
surface normal, and ∇GN is derivative of Neumann Greens function. The pressure and
derivative of the pressure of the reconstruction area were reconstructed using ESM. So,
it is possible to estimate the admittance (impedance) of the wall using these two values.
The complex normal admittance γ at a position r is calculated as
γ (r) = ∂p (r)
∂n /p (r)
(2.55)
Richard [44] have used S-ESM to estimate the impedance in an open space. A brief
description of the process of estimating the impedance using S-ESM is as follows. First,
==PAGE:53==
2.6 Spherical equivalent source method (S-ESM) and circular equivalent source method (C-ESM)
39
the sound field generated by the speaker is measured through the spherical microphone.
The measured sound pressure is represented by a sky blue band in Figure 2.14. Second,
the equivalent sources that reproduce the measured sound pressure on the spherical
microphone are constructed as a spherical shape. Then solving the inverse problem, the
strengths of the corresponding equivalent sources are obtained. If the scattered field
due to multiple reflections is measured with a spherical microphone and the equivalent
sources are constructed using the corresponding data, the influence of the wall can be
expressed as the sum of equivalent sources as shown in Figure 2.14.
Therefore, the
presence of the wall in Figure 2.14 does not affect the sound field propagating from
equivalent sources, so it represents a gray color for the inactivated wall in Figure 2.14.
This is because sound field due to equivalent sources can represent the effect of the
wall. Finally, the admittance (impedance) is calculated from the sound pressure and
differential value for each point corresponding to the wall position from the equivalent
sources. Previous research was the estimation of impedance when a single reflection
was made in an open space.
In this research, an extension of existing research has
been carried out to estimate the impedance using a circular equivalent source method
in two-dimensional closed space where multiple reflections occur.
==PAGE:54==
40
2 Theory
Figure 2.14: Schematic of impedance estimation using S-ESM (C-ESM)
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 3
Parameter study
This chapter provides an analysis of systems that use the circular equivalent source
method to estimate admittance. The in-situ measurement using the circular equivalent
source method reconstructs the acoustic field to obtain the pressure and the derivative
of the pressure at the surface. Therefore, an analysis of the configuration of the measure-
ment system is provided in this chapter. Before analyzing the closed space, the analysis
was carried out from the free-field to observe the influence of various parameters. The
analysis in the free-field was based on how well the sound field around the microphone
array was reconstructed.
3.1
Sound field reconstruction in open space
Figure 3.1: Simulation set-up in open space where the center of microphone array
matches the center of the equivalent source circle
Figure 3.1 shows the simulation environment in open space. The equivalent sources are
circularly distributed with radius re. The radius of the circular microphone array is
a. M is the number of flush-mounted microphones, and L is the number of equivalent
sources. As mentioned earlier, the circular equivalent source method is a method using
41
==PAGE:56==
42
3 Parameter study
a circular microphone array to measure the sound pressure produced by the source, and
then to reconstruct the sound field inside the circlarly distributed equivalent sources.
For error analysis of this method, the sweet spot is defined as the area where the recon-
struction error is small. In this research, the sweet spot is defined as the area where the
reconstruction error is less than 10%. When the sound field reconstruction is performed
through the above method, the sweet spot is formed in a circular shape around the
circular microphone. Figure 3.2 shows the circular shape of the sweet spot. First, if two
centers in the open space are identical, the sound pressure error around the microphone
array is analyzed through the sweet spot. Figure 3.2 shows the relative error of the
sound pressure around the microphone. The relative pressure error used here is given
by
εp = ∥pr −ptrue∥2
∥ptrue∥2
,
(3.1)
where pr is a vector of reconstructed pressure and ptrue is a vector of true pressure.
Figure 3.2: Shape of sweet spot using relative pressure field error
The effect of a radius of circular microphone array a and radius of circularly distributed
equivalent sources re on sweet spot are analyzed under the condition that the number
of microphones and the number of equivalent sources did not affect the result (M =
256, L = 200).
Under different conditions, the radius of sweet spot rsweet is shown
between ka = 0 and ka = 8 in Figure 3.3. The sound field is expressed by the frequency
==PAGE:57==
3.1 Sound field reconstruction in open space
43
relative distance kr in equation (2.28) and equation (2.29). Therefore, Figure 3.3 shows
the relationship between the sweet spot and the radius of the circular microphone array
as the frequency relative distance. An equation (3.2) expressing the relationship between
ka and krsweet was obtained through a rule of thumb while changing variables.
krsweet = 12.22(ka)0.4009
(3.2)
Equation (3.2) which is expressed as a frequency relative distance. This relationship can
be analyzed by the mode bound of the array which is shown in Figure 3.4. Equation
(2.44) consists of a cylindrical harmonic term with a magnitude of 1 and a radial term.
bn (kr) = H(2)
n (kr)
H′(2)
n (ka)
(3.3)
In equation (3.3), the radial term of each order is defined as bn (kr), and bn (kr) repre-
sents the contribution of each order. In Figure 3.4, if ka is small, then the contribution
of a order of 0 is relatively large. As ka increases, the contribution of other orders in-
creases. This contribution may be related to sensitivity. In the case of high frequency
(high ka), the contribution of high order is high. This means that the high contribution
is measured at high frequencies. Therefore, Figure 3.4 shows the sensitivity of the radial
term to ka. Again in Figure 3.4, if ka is small, it shows that a small krsweet value is
formed because only a small number of orders are measured.
If the frequency to be measured, and the radius of the area to be reconstructed are
known, the minimum radius size is obtained through equation (3.2). Equation (3.2)
means that the result is always good when the radius is large, because the assumption
for the equation (3.2) is that M and L are so large that they do not affect the result. As
the radius increases, the interval of spatial sampling on the rigid circle increases. Then
aliasing which reduces accuracy occurs. The aliasing effect, which affects sweet spot, is
analyzed by changing M and L. Figure 3.5 shows the relationship between ka and krsweet
as microphone M changes. In Figure 3.3, a circular microphone array with a radius of
8.4 cm is used and the number of equivalent sources is set to 200 (a = 8.4 cm, L = 200).
When M is small, the krsweet value is saturated. This means that a small sweet spot was
formed due to an error caused by aliasing. Therefore, if the sampling distance increases,
it will have a high sampling rate. Then the aliasing does not occur, so the frequency at
which saturation occurs increases.
==PAGE:58==
44
3 Parameter study
Figure 3.3: Relationship between the radius of sweet spot and the radius of microphone
array as the frequency relative distance in open space with matched center
Figure 3.4: Sensitivity curve of circular microphone array
==PAGE:59==
3.1 Sound field reconstruction in open space
45
Figure 3.5: Relationship between the radius of sweet spot and the radius of microphone
array with different number of microphone
Figure 3.6: Relationship between the radius of sweet spot and the radius of microphone
array with different number of equivalent sources
==PAGE:60==
46
3 Parameter study
In Figure 3.5, a circular microphone array with a radius of 8.4 cm is used and the num-
ber of microphones on the rigid surface is set to 256 (a = 8.4 cm, M = 256). When L
is small, the krsweet value is saturated. When a small number of microphones are used,
saturation occurs equally as aliasing caused by a small M.
This same phenomenon arises from the characteristics of ESM. When constructing an
ESM like equation (2.45), the ESM constructs a thin matrix of GN to create an underde-
termined problem. In this case, the underdetermined problem means that the number
of microphones is greater than the number of equivalent sources. Therefore, if fewer
equivalent source numbers are used, a smaller number of microphones are activated
when solving the inverse problem. For example, if 40 equivalent sources are used, the
maximum number of microphones that are used in the inverse problem is limited to
40. Therefore, using a small number of equivalent source is equivalent to using a small
number of microphones. Therefore, aliasing effect is also caused by L.
Figure 3.7: Comparison the effect of the number of microphones and the effect of the
equivalent sources in open space
Figure 3.7 shows the effect on M, L. Figure 3.7 shows the mapping of the ka values
of aliasing in Figures 3.5 and Figure 3.6 to each number. The two graphs are almost
identical, showing thatM and L are the same parameters that affect aliasing. Therefore,
==PAGE:61==
3.1 Sound field reconstruction in open space
47
the condition for avoiding aliasing effect is obtained by the rule of thumb:
f (ka) = 5.333ka + 26.667,
(3.4)
where f is a function that represents a condition for avoiding aliasing.
(a) Singular value curve of GN
(b) Singular value curve of G−1
N,reg
(c) Singular value curve of GN and GN,reg
(d) Singular value curve of and GN · GN,reg
Figure 3.8: Singular value curve series of GN in open space
The reason why the threshold f(ka) increases linearly as in Equation (3.4) is known that
the higher order contributions can be obtained by using a large number of microphones
or equivalent sources. So bigger sweet spots are formed using higher order contribution.
A more detailed explanation can be stated below using the singular value analysis.
Figure 3.8(a) shows the singular value curves of GN. The simulation condition is same
as in Figure 3.6 except L = 80. It is shown that as ka increases, the number of high
==PAGE:62==
48
3 Parameter study
singular values increases. It means that the number of meaningful eigenvector increases
as ka increases.Therefore, it is possible to improve the sweet spot size rsweet by using
more microphones M or equivalent sources L because the higher order contribution is
increased as mentioned before. In this research, the L-curve method is used for selecting
optimal regularization factor in equation (2.49). The effect of L-curve is shown in Figure
3.8(b). Figure 3.8(b) shows a regularized G−1
N,reg compensated using regularization fac-
tor λ determined by L-curve when solving the inverse problem. For a more convenient
comparison, Figure 3.8(c) shows the singular value of G−1
N,reg. Comparing Figure 3.8(a)
and Figure 3.8(c), the singular values are slightly increased by regularization factor λ
after 35th singular value at ka = 2. This means that there are only 35 useful eigenvectors
at ka = 2 when solving inverse problem. This can be confirmed by Figure 3.8(d). Fig-
ure 3.8(d) shows the singular value of product of GN and G−1
N,reg. Figure 3.8(d) shows
how much the eigenvector contributes to the inverse problem by how close the singular
value is to 1. Therefore Figure 3.8(d) shows that the results in Figure 3.7 are limited by
the number of eigenvectors. So, the λ obtained by the L-curve method determines the
optimal number of eigenvectors used for reconstruction. The number thus determined
can be confirmed by the rule of thumb as in equation (3.4).
To sum up the results in open space, the radius of the sweet spot is determined by
the radius of the circular microphone array and the frequency to be measured. However
The size of the sweet spot is affected by the aliasing error when the number of micro-
phones used and the number of equivalent sources are small. This aliasing error can be
avoided by setting larger M and L values compared to equation (3.4). In addition, the
threshold, equation (3.4), is determined by the regularization factor λ, which is obtained
by the L-curve method.
Figure 3.9 shows the case where the center of the circle composed with equivalent sources
does not match the center of the circular microphone array. The deviation distance is
specified as 1 m, and the description of why the deviation is not more than 1 m is pro-
vided in the next section. The effect on the sweet spot was analyzed using the same
conditions (M = 256, L = 200) as in Figure 3.9. Figure 3.10 shows the result when
centers of two circle are different.
==PAGE:63==
3.1 Sound field reconstruction in open space
49
Figure 3.9: Simulation set-up in open space where the center of microphone array does
not match the center of the equivalent source circle
Figure 3.10: Relationship between the radius of sweet spot and the radius of microphone
array as the frequency relative distance in open space with different center
The fitting curve used in Figure 3.10 is identical to the equation (3.2) used in Figure
3.4. Figure 3.4 and Figure 3.10 show that there is no significant change when centers
of two circles are different. This is because it constitutes an interior problem based
on the measured microphone. The next section will confirm that the change due to
movement is biased to one side of the circle that makes up the interior problem, limiting
the reconstruction area.
==PAGE:64==
50
3 Parameter study
3.2
Sound field reconstruction in closed
space
Figure 3.11: Simulation set-up in closed space (square room with 1.5 m width)
Figure 3.11 shows the simulation environment in closed space. The parameters used are
the same as those mentioned in Figure 3.1, and additionally the admittance γ of the
wall is given as 5.1 + 12.7j. The width of square room used for the parameter study of
the sound field reconstruction in closed space is 1.5 m, the circular microphone array
is located in the center of the room, and the point source is located at 65 cm from the
center of the room. The parameter study of the sweet spot for closed space was analyzed
using the same conditions (M = 256, L = 200) as in Figure 3.9. Figure 3.12 shows the
result of the enclosed case.
Comparing the results in the open space, the relationship between ka and krsweet is
similar, but the size of sweet spot is decreased. The relationship between ka and krsweet
is obtained as
krsweet = 4.28(ka)0.5128
(3.5)
Figure 3.13 shows the effect on L. Figure 3.13 shows that the tendency is relatively
constant even for other radius arrays. Here, the effect on M is not examined, since the
effect of L and M is almost same by characteristics of ESM. The relationship between
==PAGE:65==
3.2 Sound field reconstruction in closed space
51
L and ka is obtained as
h(ka) = 2.812ka + 9.004
(3.6)
Figure 3.12: Relationship between the radius of sweet spot and the radius of microphone
array as the frequency relative distance in closed space (square room with 1.5 m width)
Figure 3.13: The effect of the equivalent sources in closed space
Figure 3.7 and Figure 3.13 show similar tendency to open space in closed space. The
difference in closed space is that the sweet spot is small compared to the open space and
==PAGE:66==
52
3 Parameter study
the sweet spot is converged in the small number of L and M as compared with the open
space. These results can be explained by analyzing singular value curves.
(a) Singular value curve of GN and GN,reg
(b) Singular value curve of GN · G−1
N,reg
Figure 3.14: Singular value curve series of GN in open space and closed space when
re = 0.5
Figures 3.14(a) and 3.14(b) are graphs for GN used in closed space. These figures shows
the similar results that the number of meaningful eigenvector increases as ka increases.
Figures 3.14(a) and 3.14(b) are graphs for GN used in the inverse problem in open
space and closed space. Figure 3.14(b) shows that fewer eigenvectors are used in the
closed space. Therefore, it can be confirmed that small sweet spot is formed by using
a small number of eigenvectors. In other words, it was thought that higher order terms
would be needed to express a complex scattering field, but this is not true in Figure
3.14(b). This is because, a small number of eigenvectors are used compared to the open
space for reconstruction in a closed space by the regularization factor λ determined in
the L-curve as shown in Figure 3.14. Therefore, since a small number of eigenvectors
are used, naturally, the size of sweet spot converges on the number of small L, M. In
conclusion, since the number of effective eigenvectors of regularized GN is reduced by
L-curve compared with that of open space, it converges quickly for L and M. However,
since regularized GN,reg of closed space has a small number of effective eigenvectors, it
forms a smaller size of sweet spot compared to the open space. The reason why the
number of effective eigenvectors of the closed space formed by the L-curve is less than
open space is inferred due to the occurrence of the finite modes in the closed space.
==PAGE:67==
3.3 Simulation setting for in-situ estimation in enclosed space
53
3.3
Simulation setting for in-situ estimation in
enclosed space
Simulations were conducted to evaluate the accuracy of the impedance estimation using
a circularly distributed equivalent sources, with the same source configuration used for
the open space case. The goal of the simulation is to estimate the impedance above
the 40 cm of reconstruction area. The simulation is performed in a rectangular room as
shown in Figure 3.15, and the width of the rectangular room is 1.7 m in width and 1.3 m
in height. The wall used in the simulation consists of a homogeneous admittance γ and
is assumed to be a locally reacting surface as mentioned in the problem definition. The
source used for the measurement is an omni-directional point source, positioned at 65 cm
distance from the center of the reconstruction area. A rigid circular microphone array
of radius a was configured with M = 256 microphones evenly distributed on the rim.
Equivalent sources are distributed on a circle centered at the center of the reconstruction
area, and its radius is denoted as re. The circular microphone array was located at a
distance of h from the wall.
Figure 3.15: Simulation set-up
==PAGE:68==
54
3 Parameter study
In the section 3.3, the influences of measurement parameters (a, h, L, re) on the
impedance estimation error are described.
For this purpose, an admittance error is
defined as
εγ = ∥eγ (rS) −γtrue∥2
∥γtrue∥2
,
(3.7)
where ˜γ is the estimated admittance using circular equivalent source method and γtrue is
a given true value. The simulation was carried out using finite element method (FEM).
==PAGE:69==
3.4 Impedance estimation in enclosed space
55
3.4
Impedance estimation in enclosed space
3.4.1
Number of equivalent sources (L)
Figure 3.16: Simulation set-up for the different number of equivalent sources
The relative admittance γ error given in equation (3.7) in the reconstruction area is
analyzed by varying the number of equivalent sources L. As shown in Figure 3.16, the
equivalent sources are point sources positioned on a circle of radius re=50 cm. with
equal angular distances. The circle is centered in the middle of the reconstruction area.
The radius of the circular microphone a is 8.4 cm, and the distance between the array
and the reconstruction area h is 5 cm. Admittance of the wall γ is set to 5.1 + 12.7j.
Figure 3.17 shows the relative admittance error up to 2600 Hz.
In a range of 1000
Hz to 2000 Hz, the error begins to increase from a curve with a small L as the frequency
increases. In an open space, as L becomes smaller, the measurement is exposed to alias-
ing. L and M are involved with the configuration of equivalent sources, and aliasing
occurs due to the microphone configuration rather than the surrounding environment.
Figure 3.18 shows the relationship between the frequency where spatial aliasing occurs
and the number of equivalent source L using rule of thumb.
==PAGE:70==
56
3 Parameter study
Figure 3.17: Relative admittance error with different number of equivalent sources
Therefore, L and M should have larger values than the equation (3.8) which is obtained
by using rule of thumb:
g (ka) = 2.182ka + 2.267,
(3.8)
where g is a function that represent a condition for avoiding aliasing.
Figure 3.18: Comparison the effect of the number of microphones and the effect of the
equivalent sources in enclosed space
==PAGE:71==
3.4 Impedance estimation in enclosed space
57
3.4.2
Radius of equivalent source circle (re)
Figure 3.19: Simulation set-up for the different radius of equivalent source circle
Figure 3.19 shows the simulation structure for analyzing the effect of a radius of equiv-
alent source circle re. The radius of the array used in the simulation is 8.4 cm, and the
distance between the wall and the array is 5 cm. Also, the number of equivalent sources
L is 20, and the admittance of the wall is 5.1 + 12.7j, which is the same value used in
the previous analysis.
Figure 3.20 shows the result of changing re. The relative admittance error decreases
as the re increases in the entire frequency domain. In addition, when re is greater than
40 cm, the relative admittance error converges. The reason why these results are shown
is analyzed in Figure 3.21 and Figure 3.22. Figure 3.21 is a graph of the relative pressure
error at the surface of the reconstruction area. The relative pressure error is given by,
εp = ∥ep −ptrue∥2
∥ptrue∥2
,
(3.9)
where ˜p is a estimated pressure and ptrue is a true pressure obtained by FEM. Figure
3.22 is a graph of the relative error of the derivative of pressure. This error is defined as
ε ∂p
∂y =
∂ep
∂y −∂p
∂y true

2
∂p
∂y true

2
(3.10)
==PAGE:72==
58
3 Parameter study
Figure 3.20: Relative admittance error for different radius of equivalent source circle
Figure 3.21: Relative pressure error for different radius of equivalent source circle
Figure 3.22: Relative pressure derivative error for different radius of equivalent source
circle
==PAGE:73==
3.4 Impedance estimation in enclosed space
59
In Figure 3.21, the relative error of re = 25 cm and re = 30 cm are too large to show
on the graph. This also applies to Figure 3.22. In the case of re = 35 cm expressed
by the blue line in Figure 3.21, the pressure error is not much different from the other
conditions. However, the error of re = 35 cm in Figure 3.22 is larger than compared
to other conditions. Therefore, it can be seen from Figure 3.21 and Figure 3.22 that
the error of the admittance is greatly affected by the error of the pressure derivative.
Therefore, the phenomenon shown in Figure 3.20 is analyzed through the derivative
of pressure field formed around the array. Figure 3.23(a) to Figure 3.23(d) shows the
relative error to the field formed around the array. Figure 3.23(a) and Figure 3.23(b)
show that sweet spot formation is restricted by the equivalent source location marked
with a black dot because the circular equivalent method is the only way to reconstruct the
equivalent area of the equivalent source circle. The size of the circle is limited. Therefore,
this is the reason why re is no more than 1 m in the Figure 3.9 not to make sweet spot
restricted. This is because the equivalent source is close to the array, then sweet spot is
limited. The circular equivalent source method is a local sound reconstruction technique
that reconstructs the area inside the equivalent source. Therefore is better to place the
re farther away in order to grow the area of the sweet spot.
==PAGE:74==
60
3 Parameter study
(a) Relative
pressure
derivative
error
field
around array with re =25 cm
(b) Relative
pressure
derivative
error
field
around array with re =35 cm
(c) Relative pressure derivative error field around
array with re =40 cm
(d) Relative
pressure
derivative
error
field
around array with re =50 cm
Figure 3.23: Restricted sweet spot by equivalent sources
==PAGE:75==
3.4 Impedance estimation in enclosed space
61
3.4.3
Distance between the circular microphone and
wall(h)
Figure 3.24: Simulation set-up for the different distance between the circular microphone
and wall
This section changed the distance h from the wall. Unlike the open space, the existence
of the wall determines the complexity of the surrounding sound fields according to h. As
shown in Figure 3.24, the point source was placed perpendicular to the reconstruction
area, and the radius of the array used in the simulation a is 8.4 cm. The radius equivalent
source circle re is 50 cm, the number of equivalent sources L is 80, and the admittance of
surface is 5.1 + 12.7j. At this time, if the distance h from the wall surface is more than
10 cm, it can be confirmed that the error increases gradually as shown in Figure 3.25.
This is because if the value of h is too large, the array is placed closer to the equivalent
source circle and then the sweet spot is limited by equivalent sources. Figure 3.26(a) to
3.26(d) show the shape of a sweet spot restricted by an radius of equivalent source circle
(re = 50 cm). Therefore, placing the array too far will result in a large error.
Figure 3.25: Relative admittance error for different distance between the circular micro-
phone and wall, where h ≥10 cm
==PAGE:76==
62
3 Parameter study
(a) Relative pressure derivative error field
around array with h = 10 cm
(b) Relative pressure derivative error field
around array with h = 15 cm
(c) Relative pressure derivative error field
around array with h = 20 cm
(d) Relative pressure derivative error field
around array with h = 25 cm
Figure 3.26: Restricted sweet spot by equivalent sources
Figure 3.27: Relative admittance error for different distance between the circular micro-
phone and wall, where h ≤10 cm
==PAGE:77==
3.4 Impedance estimation in enclosed space
63
Figure 3.27 shows the result when h is set to less than 10 cm. In this case, if the array
is placed too close to the wall, the error is rather large. These results are confirmed by
singular value decomposition in Figure 3.28. Figure 3.28 shows a singular value curve of
GN regularized at 1164 Hz. If h is small, it is confirmed that the less number of singular
values are used meaningfully. This means that if h is set small, higher orders are ignored
to solve the inverse problem. Therefore, the higher order terms are not activated and
the size of the sweet spot is formed small. Since the effect on h can be confirmed by
singular value decomposition, it is very difficult to find the relation between h and rsweet
theoretically. So the relation had to be obtained using a rule of thumb. In the simulation
of the room structure shown in Figure 3.15, it is shown that setting h is 5 cm to 10 cm
brings good result. Therefore, the conclusion of this section is that you should select
h that is neither too close nor too far away. To determine this, however, regularized
singular values must be compared and this process requires measurement.
(a) Singular value curve of GN and GN,reg
(b) Singular value curve of GN · G−1
N,reg
Figure 3.28: Singular value curve series of GN in closed space at 1164 Hz for different h
==PAGE:78==
64
3 Parameter study
3.4.4
Radius of circular microphone array (a)
Figure 3.29: Simulation set-up for the different radius of the circular microphone array
In this section, the effect of changing the radius a of the array is analyzed. The simulation
was performed as shown in Figure 3.29, where the distance h to the wall was 10 cm, the
number of equivalent sources L was 80, the admittance of the wall was 5.1 + 12.7j, and
the radius re of the equivalent source circle was set to 50 cm. The result of changing the
value a is shown in Figure 3.30. In Figure 3.30, it can be seen that the error decreases as
the radius increases in the low-frequency region below 2000 Hz, but it is difficult to grasp
the tendency above 2000 Hz. Thus, as in the open space, frequency relative distances
were used to determine trends. Unlike the open space, in the closed space, the presence
of the wall makes a sweet spot distorted. Therefore, we calculated the sweet spot radius
rsweet through the length of the reconstruction area where the admittance error is 10 %,
as shown in Figure 3.30. Figure 3.31 shows the relationship between the radius of sweet
spot and the radius of circular microphone array as the frequency relative distance. An
equation (3.11) expressing the relationship between krsweet and ka was obtained through
a rule of thumb while changing various variables.
krsweet = 6.006(ka)0.3949
(3.11)
Equation (3.11) shows a similar tendency to equation (3.2), which is the result of the
open space, and equation (3.11) allows us to determine the radius of the array a.
==PAGE:79==
3.4 Impedance estimation in enclosed space
65
Figure 3.30: Relative admittance error for different radius of the array (h = 10 cm)
Figure 3.31: Relationship between the radius of sweet spot and the radius of microphone
array as the frequency relative distance in enclosed space
==PAGE:80==
66
3 Parameter study
3.4.5
Guideline on the system configuration
Circular equivalent source method was used to investigate the relationship between var-
ious parameters and sweet spot size for open space and enclosed space. In the case of
open space, a rule of thumb is used to find the relation to all parameters, but in case
of closed space, the scattered field is found to depend on the geometry of the room. In
the case of a room constructed as shown in Figure 3.15, the following guideline can be
presented by a rule of thumb.
Figure 3.32: Principle of the measurement
The radius of the array is determined by the size of the desired sweet spot, and the
condition is given by
krsweet ≤6.006(ka)0.3949.
(3.12)
The radius of the array is determined by the size of the desired sweet spot, and the
condition is given by
M > 2.182ka + 2.267,
(3.13)
L > 2.182ka + 2.267.
(3.14)
The sweet spot should be larger than the sweet spot so that it is not restricted to the
==PAGE:81==
3.4 Impedance estimation in enclosed space
67
position of the equivalent source. These conditions are given as
re > h + a + rsweet.
(3.15)
Figure 3.33(a) shows the result of estimating the admittance using the same method for
different admittance in the same room. The conditions used were a microphone radius
of 8.4 cm, a distance of 10 cm from the wall, a number of used microphones of 256,
a number of equivalent sources of 256, and a radius of equivalent source circle of 60
cm. Figure 3.33(b), Figure 3.33(c), and Figure 3.33(d) are subset of the Figure 3.33(a).
Figure 3.33(b) shows the worst case of the method. It can be confirmed that a large
error occurs when the admittance of the room is close to zero or a very large value.
These extreme cases are when the pressure or particle velocity on the surface is close to
zero. Therefore, a large relative error is formed by using singular values of pressure and
pressure derivative to calculate surface admittance. Thus, looking at the Figure 3.33(c)
and the Figure 3.33(d), the improved results are seen as the singular values get farther
away. As a result, when measuring the wall of the non-singular admittance value, the
result is about 5 % error up to 1500 Hz.
==PAGE:82==
68
3 Parameter study
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.33: Relative γ error for the room with different admittance values
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 4
Conclusion
The in-situ impedance estimation technique is developed to measure the boundary
condition of the listening room. Unlike the conventional technique of estimating the
impedance from the global sound reconstruction, the proposed technique utilizes a local
reconstruction technique (S-ESM) to estimate the pressure and particle velocity fields
over the local region of interest. The local reconstruction of a sound field can avoid
the source singularity problem of the global reconstruction, which occurs due to recon-
structing the highly singular sound field near the source location. In previous studies
impedance estimation using S-ESM has been attempted in the open space.
This research extends the method to an enclosed space case. The relationship between
the various parameters related with the ESM and microphone configurations are inves-
tigated, and the conditions to estimate impedance (admittance) with high accuracy are
studied. Through the preliminary parameter studies in an open space, it is confirmed
that several artifacts such as aliasing and limitation of reconstruction area can occur
depending on the contribution of high order modes, and configurations of microphones
and equivalent sources. The relations between the radius of an array, radius of a sweet
spot, the number of microphones and the number of equivalent sources are analyzed in
detail.
Based on the investigation in an open space, parameter studies are conducted in an
enclosed space. Since scattering fields are formed in an enclosed space, the characteris-
tics of spatial aliasing and sweet spot are more complicated than the open space case.
Although only the single type of room is studied in here, an attempt to provide a rough
measurement guideline is made from the results of parameter studies. Array size for
securing the desired size of the sweet spot, a condition for avoiding aliasing, and a con-
dition to obtaining the unlimited size of the sweet spot are presented. As a result, it
is demonstrated that, when the admittance is not extreme value, the proposed method
can estimate the admittance with an error less than 5% up to 1500 Hz.
69
==PAGE:84==
70
==PAGE:85==
Appendices
71
==PAGE:86==
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX A
Finite element method
(FEM)
A.1
Variational formulation of integral
equation
A mathematical representation of natural phenomena almost is written in differential
equations involving the rate of change in time and space. These differential equations
are called strong form because the differential equations require too high order deriva-
tives. Solving a problem using this strong form is not always efficient. It may not be a
smooth solution to a specific problem. This is especially the case with complex bound-
ary conditions or complex boundary conditions due to the existence of various boundary
conditions. Integrating boundary conditions to solve a strong form is a difficult task.
This is because the requirements for the continuity of field variables are increasing. To
solve this problem, the problem must be transformed into a weak integral form con-
sisting of low-order derivatives [45]. The weak integral form does not provide an exact
solution due to the education in the requirements of smoothness and a weak imposition
of Neumann boundary conditions. However, the solution of the weak integral form can
provide relatively accurate results through mesh refinement. For this reason, the varia-
tional formulation is widely used in engineering simulation.
The variational formulation is a method of multiplying the differential equation by vir-
tual displacement, then taking the integral over the whole area of the domain, and then
reducing the order of differential equation to half by partial integration. The equation
in which the order of differential equation is reduced by half is called the weak integral
73
==PAGE:88==
74
A Finite element method (FEM)
form. The variational formulation is equivalent to the principle of virtual work in terms
of the physical and corresponds to a mathematical expression for this principle.
An example of a simple variational formulation is provided below. Differential equa-
tions over a domain Ωwith boundary is given by
L(u) = fv in Ω,
(A.1)
C(u) = fs over ∂Ω.
(A.2)
In equation (A.1) and equation (A.2), L and C are the differential operators character-
izing the system, and fv and fs are the associated loading terms. The unknown variable
u can be approximated by the form of a weighted sum as follows
u ≈
N
∑
i=1
uiϕt,i,
(A.3)
where ui is the ith coefficient of the trial functions, ϕt,i is the ith trial functions. The
set of a trial function {ϕt,i} must satisfy all or part of the boundary conditions. The
residual term of the differential equation of the approximated system is written as
R(u) = L(u) −fv,
(A.4)
where R (u) is the residual term. The residual term is only equal to zero for the exact
solution of the given differential equation. To approximate a given differential equation,
the unknown set {ui} should be solved. Equation (A.5) is a classical method of finding
unknown {ui} by multiplying integrable functions to the residual equation and then
solving a strong integral formulation that takes integration over the whole area of the
domain. This process is written as
∫
ΩΨw,iR(ϕt,i, ui)dV = 0,
(A.5)
where Ψw,i is the arbitrary integrable function that represents weighting function of ith
residual term. If equation (A.5) holds for this arbitrary integrable function Ψw,i, set
{ui} that approximates the system differential equation is obtained.
An example of one-dimensional harmonic acoustic wave propagation is shown in Fig-
ure A.1. The differential equation for Figure A.1 is as follows
c2 d
dx(dp
dx) + ω2p = 0.
(A.6)
==PAGE:89==
A.1 Variational formulation of integral equation
75
Figure A.1: Example of one-dimensional acoustic wave
The boundary condition for this example is given by
p(0) = p(L) = 0.
(A.7)
Equation (A.6) is written in strong integral form as follows
∫L
0 ψ(c2 d
dx(dp
dx) + ω2p)dx = 0,
(A.8)
where ψ is the arbitrary weighting function. Since a strong form such as equation (A.8)
requires a higher order differential term, it needs to be transformed into a lower order
differential equation. The partial integration is the method of transforming a strong
form into lower order differential equations. When the order is lowered using partial
integration, it is written as
−
∫L
0 c0
2(dΨ
dx
dp
dx)dx + ω2
∫L
0 (Ψp)dx + c0
2
[
Ψdp
dx
]
0
L
= 0.
(A.9)
If ψ is set to satisfy the boundary condition as equation (A.7), the weighting function
can be set to virtual displacement (Ψ = δp). Thus the Equation (A.8) is rewritten as
−
∫L
0 c0
2(dδˆp
dx
dˆp
dx)dx + ω2
∫L
0 (ˆpδˆp)dx = 0.
(A.10)
By comparing equation (A.8) and equation (A.10), it can be seen that the highest order
of the differential equation is lowered.
==PAGE:90==
76
A Finite element method (FEM)
A.2
Gaussian quadrature
When integrating complex functions or integrating them on a computer, a method of
obtaining approximate values through a numerical integration method is used. This
numerical method is a method of transforming a complex integration process into a nu-
merical form using division and conquest. There are various methods such as Riemann
sum, Trapezoidal rule, Simpson’s rule and so on. One of these numerical integration
methods is the Gaussian quadrature. Generally, in case of numerical integration, it is
necessary to divide a lot of sections in order to reduce the error. Numerical integra-
tion algorithms seek to more precisely approximate with fewer operations. Gaussian
quadrature is one of the ways to make precise approximations with fewer operations.
The Gaussian quadrature takes the strategy of splitting the interval in an optimal way
without evenly dividing it. Most numerical integrations have a view of areas, but Gaus-
sian quadrature has a view that numerical integration is the sum of functions. Thus,
the Gaussian quadrature has a weighted sum of function values at specific points within
the domain of integration [-1, 1]. This Gaussian quadrature is given by
∫1
−1 f(x)dx ≈
n
∑
i=1
wif(xi),
(A.11)
where f is integrand, wi is the ith weight, and xi is the ith point within the domain of
integration. The weight wi and the point xi used Gaussian quadrature can be obtained
analytically. The values of wi and xi are shown in the Table A.1.
==PAGE:91==
A.2 Gaussian quadrature
77
Table A.1: List of point xi and wi for different number of points for Gaussian quadrature
Number of points, n
Points, xi
Weights, wi
1
0
2
2
± 1
√
3
1
3
0
8
9
±
√3
5
5
9
4
±
√
3
7 −2
7
√6
5
18+
√
30
36
±
√
3
7 + 2
7
√6
5
18−
√
30
36
5
0
128
225
±1
3
√
5 −2
√10
7
322+13
√
70
900
±1
3
√
5 + 2
√10
7
322+13
√
70
900
==PAGE:92==
78
A Finite element method (FEM)
A.3
Process of finite element method
The finite element method consists of six steps. First, the order of the differential equa-
tion is reduced by using a weak integral formulation. Second, the problem is divided
into several small problems through meshing. The third step is simplifying the problem
through variables approximation (nodal approximation) and calculation of the elemen-
tary matrices. The fourth step incorporates a problem that was divided into several
small problems by meshing. This process is called assembling. The fifth step is im-
position constraints that consider boundary conditions. The finite element method is
constructed as a process of solving the last problem. In this section, each step will be
examined.
The problem is about solving Helmholtz equation which represents the sound field from
the point source at rs with strength Q in the closed domain Ω. The inhomogeneous
Helmholtz equation is given by
∇2ˆp + k2ˆp = −Qδ(r −rs) in Ω.
(A.12)
The boundary condition of the closed domain is given by
∂ˆp
∂n + ikρ0c0 ˆβˆp = 0 on ∂Ω,
(A.13)
where ˆβ is an admittance. The first step of the finite element method is to transform
the differential equation into a weak integral form. Using the variational formulation,
the above inhomogeneous Helmholtz equation is transformed into a weak integral form
as follows.
W(ˆp, δˆp) =
∫
Ω∇ˆp · ∇δˆpdS−
∫
Ωk2ˆpδˆpdS +
∫
∂Ωikρ0c0 ˆβˆpδˆpdl
−
∫
ΩδˆpQδ(r −rs)dS = 0,
(A.14)
where W (ˆp, δˆp) is a weak integral equation of the given inhomogeneous Helmholtz equa-
tion. In the next step, a problem transformed into weak integral form is divided into
several small problems through meshing. In order to divide the weak integral form into
small problems, the closed domain Ωis divided into triangular or rectangular shapes in
the two-dimensional case. This triangle or rectangle shape is called an element, and the
vertex of an element is called a node. The problem is solved through small elements
==PAGE:93==
A.3 Process of finite element method
79
divided by meshing,
Ω=
∪ne
e=1 Ωe.
(A.15)
In equation (A.15) e is the index of the elements, ne is a total number of element, and
Ωe is domain of eth element.
Figure A.2: Example of one-dimensional elements
The next step is to simplify the small problem. To simplify the problem, a nodal ap-
proximation is applied which expresses all the points on the element as individual nodes.
Therefore, the interpolation technique is used for nodal approximation. In this research,
a triangular mesh is used and the point inside the triangle was obtained by linear inter-
polation from three nodes. This linear interpolation is done through the shape function,
which is an interpolation function. To better understanding of the shape function, the
one-dimensional case shown in Figure A.2 is used as an example. In this case, an inter-
polation is performed from two endpoints. The pressure on the element using the linear
approximation is as follows
p (x) = ax + b,
(A.16)
where a and b are linear coefficients, and x is the point on the element(x ∈Ωe). The
pressure at the two end points x1 and x2 of the element is written as





p(x1e) = p1e = ax1e + b
p(x2e) = p2e = ax2e + b.
(A.17)
In this case, if the length of the element Ωe is defined as he = xe
2 −xe
1, the pressure for
any point x on the element is expressed by linear interpolation as follows
p(x) = (x2e −x
he
)p1
e + (x −x1e
he
)p2
e = N1
e(x)p1
e + N2
e(x)p2
e
=
2
∑
i=1
Ni
e(x)pi
e = Nepe,
(A.18)
where N1 and N2 are shape functions, Ne represents the shape function vector for the
one-dimensional element and pe is a column vector of pressure on the node. Ne and pe
==PAGE:94==
80
A Finite element method (FEM)
vectors are written as
Ne =
[
N1
e(x)
N2
e(x)
]
, pe =


p1e
p2e

.
(A.19)
In this research, a triangular element was used as a two-dimensional element which is
shown in Figure A.3.
Figure A.3: Triangular element
The shape function of a triangular element is given by N1 = ξ1, N2 = ξ2,
N3 =
1 −ξ1 −ξ2, where ξ1 and ξ2 is the local coordinate of the element.
The reason for
expressing the local coordinates (ξ1, ξ2) as above is that using local coordinate is much
simpler than using the global coordinate. In this case, the conversion called mapping is
performed using Jacobian. For two-dimensional case, Jacobian for the surface integral
and line integral is given by
dS = dxdy = |J| dξ1dξ2,
(A.20)
dl =
√
(dx)2 + (dy)2 = |Jl| dξ =


(dx
dξ
)2
+
(dy
dξ
)2

1/2
dξ.
(A.21)
In equation (A.21), dx
dξ ,
dy
dξ are written as
dx
dξ =
[dN
dξ
]
{x} , dy
dξ =
[dN
dξ
]
{y} .
(A.22)
==PAGE:95==
A.3 Process of finite element method
81
Figure A.4: Example of coordinate shifting
Let each term in Equation (A.14), which is a two-dimensional weak integral form, be
defined as K, M, A, and R, then equation (A.14) is rewritten as
W(ˆp, δˆp) = K (ˆp, δˆp) −ω2M (ˆp, δˆp) + iωA(ˆp, δˆp) −R(δˆp) = 0,
(A.23)
where K represents the first term of the equation (A.14), M represents the second term
of the equation (A.14), A represents the third term of the equation (A.14), and R is the
fourth term of the equation (A.14). In this case, each term is divided into element-wise
as follows
K (ˆp, δˆp) =
ne
∑
e=1
Ke (ˆp, δˆp)
(A.24)
with
Ke(ˆp, δˆp) = c0
2
∫
Ωe ∇δˆp · ∇ˆpdS,
(A.25)
and
M (ˆp, δˆp) =
ne
∑
e=1
M e (ˆp, δˆp)
(A.26)
with
M e(ˆp, δˆp) =
∫
Ωe ˆpδˆpdS.
(A.27)
We write
A (ˆp, δˆp) =
ne
∑
e=1
Ae (ˆp, δˆp)
(A.28)
with
Ae (ˆp, δˆp) = ρ0c0
2
∫
∂Ωe ˆβˆpδˆpdl,
(A.29)
and
R (δˆp) =
ne
∑
e=1
Re (δˆp)
(A.30)
==PAGE:96==
82
A Finite element method (FEM)
with
Re(δˆp) =





0
c0Qδˆp
when rs ∈Ωe.
(A.31)
Equation (A.31) holds when the source is located on the node. Using the nodal approx-
imation of ˆp, and δˆp using shape function
ˆp = ⟨N e⟩{ˆpe} , δˆp = ⟨N e⟩{δˆpe} ,
(A.32)
where ⟨⟩represents row vector, and {} represents column vector. Using equation (A.32)
then
Ke (ˆp, δˆp) = ⟨δˆpe⟩[Ke] {ˆpe}
(A.33)
with
[Ke] = c0
2
∫
Ωe [Be]T [Be] |Je| dξ1dξ2,
(A.34)
where
∇ˆp = ∇x ⟨N e⟩{ˆpe} = [Be] {ˆpe} , [Be] = [Je]−1∇ξ ⟨N e⟩.
(A.35)
Here, [] represents the matrix.
Similarly, we write
M e (ˆp, δˆp) = ⟨δˆpe⟩[M e] {ˆpe}
(A.36)
with
[M e] =
∫
Ωe {N e} ⟨N e⟩|Je| dξ1dξ2,
(A.37)
and
Ae (ˆp, δˆp) = ⟨δˆpe⟩[Ae] {ˆpe}
(A.38)
with
[ ˆAe]
= ρ0c0
2
∫
∂Ωe ˆβ {N e} ⟨N e⟩|Jl| dξ.
(A.39)
The integrals are included in the equation (A.34), equation (A.37), and equation (A.39)
The integral is transformed into the numerical integral form using the Gaussian quadra-
ture mentioned above.
The fourth step is to integrate the small problems that were divided into the individual
elements into one problem. Vector ⟨ˆp⟩= ⟨ˆp1, ˆp2, · · · , ˆpnnt⟩, where nnt is the total num-
ber of nodes, is a set of nodal unknown parameters of this problem. The problem of each
==PAGE:97==
A.3 Process of finite element method
83
element is composed of ⟨δˆpe⟩and {ˆpe} which are the nodes represented by the nodes
that make up each element. Therefore, in the process of grouping each element into one
matrix, it is necessary to change the local number of the node to global number in each
element problem, which is done through the localization matrix [Le]. Each row in [Le]
means the local number and each column in [Le] means the global number. Therefore,
the localization matrix [Le] is written as
[Le] =


0
1
. . .
0
0
0
· · ·
1
0
0
0
0
· · ·
1
0


(A.40)
Using equation (A.40), the pressure of local numbering is written as global numbering
form:
{ˆpe} = [Le] {ˆp} .
(A.41)
Using assembling, then equation (A.14) is rewritten as
W = ⟨δˆp⟩
((
[K] −ω2 [M] + iω [A]
)
{ˆp} −{R}
)
= 0,
(A.42)
where
[K] =
∑
e/Ωe∈Ω
[Le]
T [Ke] [Le] , [M] =
∑
e/Ωe∈Ω
[Le]
T [M e] [Le] ,
[A] =
∑
e/Ωe∈∂Ω
[Le]
T [Ae] [Le] , and {R} =
∑
e/Ωe∈Ω
[Le]
T {Re} .
(A.43)
The boundary conditions are already included in equation (A.42). For arbitrary ⟨δˆp⟩,
W is always equal to 0. The final form of the finite element method is written as
(
[K] −ω2 [M] + iω [A]
)
{ˆp} = {R} .
(A.44)
Therefore the solution {ˆp} can be calculated through the inverse problem.
{ˆp} =
(
[K] −ω2 [M] + iω [A]
)−1 {R}
(A.45)
==PAGE:98==
84
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
[1]
Brüel
&
Kjær,
“Impedance
tube
kits,”
2018.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.bksv.com/en/products/transducers/acoustic/Acoustic-
material-testing-kits/transmission-loss-and-impedance-tube-kits-4206
[2]
Centre
de
Transfert
de
Technologie
du
Mans,
“Reverberation
chamber,”
2018. [Online]. Available: http://www.cttm-lemans.com/en/acoustics-vibrations/
realisations/salles-reverberantes.html
[3]
P. C. Hansen, “REGULARIZATION TOOLS: A Matlab package for analysis and
solution of discrete ill-posed problems,” Numerical Algorithms, vol. 6, no. 1, pp.
1–35, mar 1994.
[4]
Acoustics - Determination of sound absorption coefficient and impedance in
impedance tubes - Part 1: Method using standing wave ratio.
ISO Standard 10534-
1:1996.
[5]
Acoustics - Determination of sound absorption coefficient and impedance in
impedance tubes - Part 2: Transfer-function method.
ISO Standard 10534-2:1998.
[6]
R. D. Berendt and H. A. Schmidt, “A Portable Impedance Tube,” The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 1049–1052, jul 1963.
[7]
T. E. Vigran, L. Kelders, W. Lauriks, P. Leclaire, and T. F. Johansen, “Prediction
and measurements of the influence of boundary conditions in a standing wave tube,”
Acust., Acta Acust. (Germany), vol. 83, no. 3, pp. 419–423, 1997.
[8]
Acoustics - Measurement of sound absorption in a reverberation room.
ISO Stan-
dard 354:2003.
85
==PAGE:100==
86
Bibliography
[9]
E. Brandão, A. Lenzi, and S. Paul, “A Review of the In Situ Impedance and Sound
Absorption Measurement Techniques,” Acta Acustica united with Acustica, vol. 101,
no. 3, pp. 443–463, may 2015.
[10] J. F. Allard and B. Sieben, “Measurements of acoustic impedance in a free field
with two microphones and a spectrum analyzer,” The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, vol. 77, no. 4, pp. 1617–1618, apr 1985.
[11] H.-E. De Bree, R. Lanoye, S. De Cock, and J. Van Heck, “In Situ, Broad Band
Method to Determine the Normal and Oblique Reflection Coefficient of Acoustic
Materials,” in SAE 2005 Noise and Vibration Conference and Exhibition, Michigan,
may 2005.
[12] U. Ingård and R. H. Bolt, “A Free Field Method of Measuring the Absorption
Coefficient of Acoustic Materials,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 509–516, sep 1951.
[13] E. Mommertz, “Angle-dependent in-situ measurements of reflection coefficients us-
ing a subtraction technique,” Applied Acoustics, vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 251–263, jan
1995.
[14] P. Robinson and N. Xiang, “On the subtraction method for in-situ reflection and dif-
fusion coefficient measurements,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
vol. 127, no. 3, pp. EL99–EL104, mar 2010.
[15] M. Tamura, “Spatial Fourier transform method of measuring reflection coefficients
at oblique incidence. I: Theory and numerical examples,” The Journal of the Acous-
tical Society of America, vol. 88, no. 5, pp. 2259–2264, nov 1990.
[16] J. Ducourneau, V. Planeau, J. Chatillon, and A. Nejade, “Measurement of sound
absorption coefficients of flat surfaces in a workshop,” Applied Acoustics, vol. 70,
no. 5, pp. 710–721, may 2009.
[17] A. Hrennikoff, “Solution of Problems of Elasticity by the Frame-Work Method,”
ASME J. Appl. Mech, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 169–175, 1941.
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
87
[18] K. Kowalczyk and M. van Walstijn, “Room Acoustics Simulation Using 3-D Com-
pact Explicit FDTD Schemes,” IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language
Processing, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 34–46, jan 2011.
[19] B. Kim and J. Ih, “On the reconstruction of the vibro‐acoustic field over the surface
enclosing an interior space using the boundary element method,” The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 100, no. 5, pp. 3003–3016, nov 1996.
[20] N. Antonello, T. van Waterschoot, M. Moonen, and P. A. Naylor, “Identification
of surface acoustic impedances in a reverberant room using the FDTD method,”
in 2014 14th International Workshop on Acoustic Signal Enhancement (IWAENC).
IEEE, sep 2014, pp. 114–118.
[21] P. Banerjee and R. Butterfield, “Boundary element method in geomechanics, Chap-
ter 16 in Finite elements in geomechanics, Ed. G. Gudehus,” 1975.
[22] P. K. Banerjee and R. Butterfield, Boundary element methods in engineering sci-
ence.
McGraw-Hill Book Co. (UK), 1981.
[23] B. Rafaely, “Plane-wave decomposition of the sound field on a sphere by spherical
convolution,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 116, no. 4, pp.
2149–2157, oct 2004.
[24] T. Nowakowski, N. Bertin, R. Gribonval, J. de Rosny, and L. Daudet, “Mem-
brane shape and boundary conditions estimation using eigenmode decomposition,”
in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP).
IEEE, mar 2016, pp. 3336–3340.
[25] J. D. Maynard, E. G. Williams, and Y. Lee, “Nearfield acoustic holography: I.
Theory of generalized holography and the development of NAH,” The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 78, no. 4, pp. 1395–1413, oct 1985.
[26] E. G. Williams, B. H. Houston, P. C. Herdic, S. T. Raveendra, and B. Gardner,
“Interior near-field acoustical holography in flight,” The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, vol. 108, no. 4, p. 1451, sep 2000.
==PAGE:102==
88
Bibliography
[27] J. E. Hansen and Institution of Electrical Engineers., Spherical near-field antenna
measurements.
P. Peregrinus on behalf of the Institution of Electrical Engineers,
1988.
[28] E. Fernandez-Grande and T. Walton, “Reconstruction of sound fields with a spher-
ical microphone array,” Inter-noise, pp. 1–8, 2014.
[29] E. Fernandez-Grande, “Sound field reconstruction using a spherical microphone
array,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 139, no. 3, pp. 1168–
1178, mar 2016.
[30] S. Lee, “Review: The Use of Equivalent Source Method in Computational Acous-
tics,” Journal of Computational Acoustics, vol. 25, mar 2017.
[31] F. Jacobsen and P. M. Juhl, Fundamentals of general linear acoustics.
WILEY,
2013.
[32] P. M. Morse, R. H. Bolt, and R. L. Brown, “Acoustic Impedance and Sound Ab-
sorption,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 12, no. 2, pp.
217–227, oct 1940.
[33] Y.-H. Kim, Lecture Notes on Acoustics.
CHEONG MOON GAK, 2005.
[34] V. Kupradze and M. Aleksidze, “The method of functional equations for the approx-
imate solution of certain boundary value problems,” USSR Computational Mathe-
matics and Mathematical Physics, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 82–126, jan 1964.
[35] G. H. Koopmann, L. Song, and J. B. Fahnline, “A method for computing acoustic
fields based on the principle of wave superposition,” The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, vol. 86, no. 6, pp. 2433–2438, dec 1989.
[36] M. Ochmann, “The Source Simulation Technique for Acoustic Radiation Problems,”
Acta Acustica united with Acustica, vol. 81, no. 6, pp. 512–527, 1995.
[37] P. S. Kondapalli, D. J. Shippy, and G. Fairweather, “Analysis of acoustic scattering
in fluids and solids by the method of fundamental solutions,” The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, vol. 91, no. 4, pp. 1844–1854, 1992.
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
89
[38] Y. Gounot, R. E. Musafir, and J. G. Slama, “A Comparative Study of Two Variants
of the Equivalent Sources Method in Scattering Problems,” Acta Acustica united
with Acustica, vol. 91, no. 5, pp. 860–872, 2005.
[39] E. G. Williams, Fourier acoustics : sound radiation and nearfield acoustical holog-
raphy.
Academic Press, 1999.
[40] TIKHONOV and A. N, “On the stability of inverse problems,” Dokl. Akad. Nauk
SSSR, vol. 39, pp. 195–198, 1943.
[41] P. C. Hansen, “The truncatedSVD as a method for regularization,” BIT, vol. 27,
no. 4, pp. 534–553, dec 1987.
[42] G. H. Golub, M. Heath, and G. Wahba, “Generalized Cross-Validation as a Method
for Choosing a Good Ridge Parameter,” Technometrics, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 215–223,
may 1979.
[43] P. C. Hansen, “The L-Curve and its Use in the Numerical Treatment of Inverse
Problems,” in Computational Inverse Problems in Electrocardiology, ed. P. John-
ston, Advances in Computational Bioengineering, vol. 4, pp. 119–142, 2000.
[44] A. Richard, E. Fernandez-Grande, J. Brunskog, and C.-H. Jeong, “Estimation of
surface impedance at oblique incidence based on sparse array processing,” The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 141, no. 6, pp. 4115–4125, jun
2017.
[45] N. Atalla, F. Sgard, and J. Hargreaves, Finite element and boundary methods in
structural acoustics and vibration, 2016, vol. 41, no. 1.
==PAGE:104==
90
==PAGE:105==
Summary in Korean
(한글요약문)
방을이루고있는벽면의임피던스는방내부의음향환경을결정하는요인중하나이
다. 청취실의음향환경개선을위해서는청취실벽의임피던스를추정하고, 적절한흡
음재등을설치하는것이필요하다. 전통적인벽면의임피던스를추정하기위한방법으
로는임피던스관을이용한방법등이있다. 하지만, 임피던스관을이용한방법의경우
벽면의시료가필요하며, 음파가반사면에수직으로입사할때의임피던스만추정이가
능하므로, 다중반사로인해여러방향의입사각도가형성되는방의임피던스를추정
한다고보기어렵다. 이문제를해결하기위해청취실에설치된상태에서벽면의임피
던스를직접추정하는현장추정방법들이제안되어왔다.
본연구에서는닫힌공간의국부적인영역에서음장을복원할수있는기법인등
기음원법을사용하여임피던스를현장추정하는방법을제안한다. 제안기법은
원형마이크로폰을사용하여실내의음장을측정한뒤, 등가음원법으로국부적
인벽면에서의음압과입자속도를예측하며, 이로부터닫힌공간에서의벽면의
임피던스를직접추정한다. 2차원모의실험을통해제안방법을검증하였으며,
마이크로폰의배치와마이크로폰어레이의반지름등여러변수변화에따른임피
던스추정오차를분석하여, 정확한임피던스추정을위한필요조건에대해살펴보았다.
임피던스를추정한다는것은벽면에서의음장을재현하는것도동일하므로제안
한방법의검증을위하여열린공간에서음장재현에대해여러변수변화를통해분석
을하였다. 이결과음장재현에서오차는등가음원역문제를푸는과정에서사용되는
고유벡터의갯수와밀접한관련이있으며이는사용되는고차고조파의갯수를의미한
다. 사용되는고유벡터의정규화변수에의해서결정이된다. 이때정규화변수의설정
은L-곡선방법을이용하여최적의값이결정이되며이렇게결정된정규화변수가역
91
==PAGE:106==
92
Summary in Korean
(한글요약문)
문제를푸는과정에서사용되는고유벡터의갯수를결정하게된다. 여러가지변수의변
경은이러한고유벡터의갯수를변화시키게되며고유벡터와여러변수와의관계를경
험법칙을이용하여분석하였다. 닫힌공간에서의음장은방의구조에종속적이므로경
험법칙을통해닫힌공간에서의정확한임피던스추정을위한개략적인조건으로첫째
어레이크기는원하고자하는복원영역의크기와의관계, 둘째에일리어싱을피하기위
한조건, 셋째복원영역을제한하지않는조건을제시하였다.
==PAGE:107==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
