==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
DTU Electrical Engineering
Control system of electric formula
racer
Dominik Maszczyk (s163601)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
PowerLabDK
c/o Center for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Building 329
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3500
powerlab@elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In the following thesis, the author provides a comprehensive description of a process, de-
cision making and final implementation of a master control unit for the electric racing car.
The workload covered is a patronate over design of intelligent sensors/controllers, imple-
mentation of event-based CAN library for real-time system, control motor controllers
over the CANOpen protocol, communication with a battery management system, log-
ging system state and events, implementing safe and reliable boot/shutdown sequence
and finally on the top of it controlling the car under normal operation including adaptive
cooling pumps control, torque vectoring as replacement for mechanical differential and
regenerative braking.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Electrical Engineering at the Technical
University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring a master degree
in Electrical Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, September 24, 2018
Dominik Maszczyk (s163601)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my DTU’s supervisor Nenad Mijatovic for giving me a lot of
trust and understanding, so I could organise my working time in the most suitable way.
There were many perturbations on the way and although stress and unlucky events, I
have never been criticised or nag but rather admired for my work. This gave me the
power to go through the moments where I doubted if my skills and expertise are up to
the task.
In the final stage of work, I needed to move back to Korea, where I am writing these
words right now. The need was not only dictated by KAIST graduation requirements
but I believed that it would help me in finding motivation for writing. All my hopes were
overfilled by Profesor Naehyuck Chang (KAIST’s supervisor) who provided me with a
great working environment and have been the first to review my this thesis. His opinion
was valuable for me, he gave me hope and pointed further direction.
Of course, I would like to thank the whole team working on the car, I believe it was a
great experience for us all. Here I would like to give special acknowledgement to Martin
van der Bijl who kept me company during never-ending days in the laboratory, it was
really nice to have someone to share my thoughts with time to time.
Moreover, I would like to thank my boss (to cover my expenses of living in aboard I
needed to simultaneously work through the whole period of my master studies). I have
been offered position when due to financial reasons I been considered dropping studies.
I felt anxious as it was my first long-term job, however, I was given a lot of recognition
and flexibility which made it possible for me to attend and complete this degree.
Last but not least I would like to thank my family for their never-ending mental
support and never questioning my decisions. You are the root of each and every one of
my little success.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Scope of the thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Theory
9
2.1
Calculations for differential based on steering angle
. . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Regenerative Breaking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Development
11
3.1
Stage 1 - project start . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Stage 2 - arrival of key components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Stage 3 - Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Methods
15
4.1
Master control unit software implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Pedals sensor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Pump control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
Implementation of electrical differential based on steering angle
. . . . .
23
4.5
Regenerative braking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Analysis
27
5.1
Pump control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Regenerative Breaking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
Differential
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4
System performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6
Discussion
33
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
7
Conclusion
35
A : Pump control measurements
37
B : Differential control measurements
41
C : Software documentation
43
C.1 Initialisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
C.2 Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
C.3 Vehicle control - drive
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
C.4 Low level API . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
Bibliography
67
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
An invention of the electric car has closely followed the time when the first electric motor
has been built. The first construction is dated as early as the year 1837 with the golden
age of electric cars in the 1920s.
Since then the market was suddenly overtaken by
the vehicles with internal combustion engines. However, gas shortage in 1960-70s and
increasing environmental awareness lead us to reconcile usage of electric motors.
Ahead of its times, at 1997, Toyota introduced the first mass-produced hybrid con-
struction. Although considered successful the idea has not been closely followed by other
manufacturers until the year 2010. Since this time manufactures sold over 1.9 million
fully electric cars, not to mention hybrid vehicles.
This recent market changes could be also observed in the academia and associated
events. Taking for instance ”Formula Student”, an annual competition of cars build buy
universities students. It has been organised since 1981 and in the time it was mainly
a challenge for mechanical engineers working on internal combustion (IC) based cars,
however, in 2008 new category was introduced making place also for electric vehicles.
After 4 years of development, the gap between electric and internal combustion engine
cars was so narrow that the organisers decided that cars should compete in the same
category.
As a group of passionate students, we decided to pick up the challenge of building
an fully electric racing car. From the engineering point of view, it is a really exciting
field/project. The automotive industry of electric cars is still in the young stage so a
variety of constructions is not fully explored and none of them can be considered as
absolutely superior.
For instance, within electric motors, we are no longer restricted by having only one
engine (it is not feasible for IC cars to have more). One can consider different strategies.
One motor no difference to an IC-based car - mechanical differential needs to be used
Two motors on the same axis drive wheels torque/speed can be accurately controlled,
no need of mechanical differential, accurate traction control can be implemented
without a usage of traction breaks (reduced energy loss), motors can be embedded
into the wheels
Two motors on separate axes 4 wheel drive without the need of drive shaft and the
main differential
Four motors four-wheel drive with accurate control of each wheel, no need for mechan-
ical differentials and motors can be embedded into the wheels
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
Although usage of a higher number of motors gives better controlling ability it comes
within the cost of increased complexity. Once simple throttle control needs additional
computation to estimate the desired torque/speed for each wheel of the vehicle. Which
raise a challenge as well as opportunity to develop novel ways of control.
Moreover, what is making an EV special is the possibility of changing back a kinetic
energy back into electricity. So, in theory, slowing down the vehicle and accelerating it
back can be done with the losses only for motor/s efficiencies (motor and generator). In
opposite to IC where all the energy used for breaking is exchanged into heat.
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Background
3
1.1
Background
Coming from the field of telecommunication, through microwave engineering and electri-
cal systems in satellites in last years I have focused on electric cars. After taking classes
on electric vehicles I had my first practical experience by correcting the wire harness of
converted to an electric off-road car. Afterwards, I worked on the electric conversion of
the car towards the racing application.
Both systems, although interesting, took an approach to use already designed solutions
and did not require additional control units.
In by this thesis, I got engaged in a more ambitious project and took responsibility for
the main control systems.
In the following sections, I will give a brief insight into technical topics relevant to the
final implementation.
1.1.1
CAN
CAN protocol was first used in the car 27 years ago to become international automotive
standard just two years later in 1993.[9, 12]
Following precursors in my implementation, a majority of communication from/to cen-
tral control unit is realised based on Control Area Network (CAN) common, communi-
cation protocol used mostly in automotive applications.
I have used it within so far the most common version of psychical layer described
in ISO11898-2 and popularly called high speed CAN. This standard allows for data
transmission within maximum baud rate up to 1 Mbit/s. To achieve these speeds without
errors the signal reflection needs to be considered. In high speed CAN it is achieved by
terminating ends of the busses with a matched resistor (120Ω). This tends to be the
most noticeable (visible by bare eye) difference over low speed CAN.
CAN Frame
Speaking about the protocol, in CAN, each arbitrary data needs to
be encapsulated into data frames. Each od CAN frames is capable to transmitting a
variable number of bytes (up to 8 per frame) and consist of the following fields:
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
Filed
Number
of bits
Description
Start-of-frame
1
Denotes the start of frame transmission
Identifier
11
A (unique) identifier which also represents the mes-
sage priority
Remote transmis-
sion request
1
Must be dominant for data frames and recessive for
remote request frames
Identifier
extension bit
1
Must be dominant for base frame format with 11-
bit identifiers
Reserved bit
1
Reserved bit.
Data length code
4
Number of bytes of data (0–8 bytes)
Data field
0–64
(0-8 bytes)
Data to be transmitted
(length in bytes dictated by DLC field)
CRC
15
Cyclic redundancy check
CRC delimiter
1
Must be recessive
ACK slot
1
Transmitter sends recessive and any receiver can
assert a dominant
ACK delimiter
1
Must be recessive
End-of-frame
7
Must be recessive
[7]1
It is multi-master asynchronous protocol and for proper operation requires each de-
vice to monitor the bus all the time (also during sending). So due to the fact that 0
is dominant, whenever two messages start to send at the same time the one which first
sends 1 but is reading 0 stops sending immediately (non-destructive bit-wise arbitration).
Effectively, prioritising messages with lower IDs.
What is also worth to point out is that each CAN frame introduces protocol overhead
of about 44bits per frame 2.
1.1.1.1
CANOpen
Just a two years after of CAN becoming a standard Bosh proposed a very first version of
CANOpen.[4] Which is a higher level of abstraction over the CAN (capable of working
with a variety of versions).
The objective of this additional layer is to standardise
the format of the data as the original CAN protocol gives complete flexibility in the
matter. In CANOpen message IDs consist of first 4 bits being a function ID and 7 bits
representing device code (node ID). In this way, the limitations were twisted around, in
1Since CAN version 2.0 messages can be sent with 11 or 29 bit IDs. however, for simplicity I will
just consider usage of 11 bit identifiers (they differ just by the number of bits in this field).
2Although, caring information message ID was included into message overhead calculation as in the
majority of cases it could be reduced to just a few bits, on the other hand, we might expect additional
bits due to bit stuffing(for each 4 bits with the same sign additional one is added)[7]
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Background
5
basic CAN network 2048 messages can be recognised, where CANOpen focuses on per
device ID, therefore, changing limitation to 127 devices on the bus 3.
Communication
object
COB-ID(s) hex
Slave nodes
NMT node control
000
Receive only
Sync
080
Receive only
Emergency
080 + NodeID
Transmit
TimeStamp
100
Receive only
PDO
180 + NodeID
Transmit PDO1
200 + NodeID
Receive PDO1
280 + NodeID
Transmit PDO2
300 + NodeID
Receive PDO2
380 + NodeID
Transmit PDO3
400 + NodeID
Receive PDO3
480 + NodeID
Transmit PDO4
500 + NodeID
Receive PDO4
SDO
580 + NodeID
Transmit
600 + NodeID
Receive
NMT node monitoring
700 + NodeID
Transmit
LSS
7E4
Transmit
7E5
Receive
Table 1.1: CANOpen protocol to IDs mapping[14]
Addressing each device allows a variety of possibilities. It has been a base to establish
protocol allowing to read/write data to a device. This functionality has been called
”servicing data object” (SDO) and follows hierarchical addressing where at first device
is chosen then certain parameter and possibly its sub-index. Although, it introduces an
overhead, for basic parameters setting most likely there is no need for especially high
throughput.
In case that overhead is not tolerable CANOpen allows to map data in the dictionary
into ”process dictionary object” (PDO). These are messages acting in the same way
as raw CAN, being at the same time easily adjustable and having a set of triggering
methods, like:
• value change
• timer overflow
• device internal event
• respond to a request; respond to synchronisation message (SYNC)
3on 7bits 128 devices could have own ID, however, ID equal to zero is used as broadcast channel
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
Intialisation
Boot up
Pre-
Operational
Operational
Stopped
Figure 1.1: Device states de-
scribed in CANOpen specifi-
cation
Beside exchange of data CANOpen protocol describes
a way to control basic device states. By messages referred
as ”Network Management” (NMT) one can read device
state and send commands to change it. The states and
all possible transitions are shown in figure 1.1.
As one can notice to states are restricted to ones im-
portant for communication and parameters setting. After
the device is on, booting sequence can be started then in
a pre-operational state all configuration can be made to
finally turn it into operational mode.
For instance in
connecting to a motor controller, firstly we check com-
munication then turn on pre-charge circuit during boot
sequence then setup all necessary parameters (encoder,
current limitation etc.) subsequently turning the control
loop on.
This is just cover general states but in more complex applications clearly, there are
more states to address, however, in this case, there is no argument against using certain
objects in the dictionary to control sub-states.
Last but not least, there are 4 more functions cover: Emergency (EMC) - responsible
for asynchronous communication of errors, previously mentioned SYNC - to periodically
request device state, time stamp - to synchronise devices clock and layer settings services
(LSS) - to automatically identify multiple devices on the bus.
All these briefly described functions, collectively provide powerful abstraction over
the CAN network standardising way it is used.
[6, 3, 5, 14]
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Scope of the thesis
7
1.2
Scope of the thesis
In my perception, the scope of this thesis was greatly expanding over the time. I started
with a simple question of ”How the torque vectoring/load balancing can be implemented
in an electric car?”. This question, however, could be addressed in two ways, one would
be by theoretical divagations, second by practical implementation details.
Since it was a first time when DTU is participating in Formula Student competition, I
could not work on already working solution from previous years. Therefore, the objective
of the thesis was in great manner implementation oriented and difficulty moved towards
all small design decisions, each base subsystem and cooperation with independent teams.
So I would actually put the twist on the original question: ”How to implement main-
tainable, performant and safe electric car control system in the manner that it would be
additionally able to provide torque vectoring functionality?”.
In the following chapters, I will try to explain my design decisions their advantages,
drawbacks and how they build up a complete system.
==PAGE:18==
8
1 Introduction
1.3
Outline
This thesis consist of 7 chapters. It starts with the general introduction you are reading
now, which outlines topic of the work being done.
In the next chapter, knowing current state of art and being aware of the limitations
I have written theoretical considerations. They are base for the implementation part as
well as a reference point for analysing and discussion.
It has been followed by description of the design process in chapter 3. Which naturally
evolves into methods being implemented in final stadium described in chapter 4. In this
chapter I have placed a comprehensive description of my design choices, used setup and
implementation itself. This part is directly followed by information of how I did test my
system and how well it performs against my theoretical considerations.
Then I let myself describe directions for the future implementation which I hope will
come in handy for future teams taking care of this project.
A whole text is closed with a few closing comments from me, retrospection on the
whole process of building an electric racing car and my part in it.
Beside the mentioned hierarchy, it has been formed to follow two additional nested
level. In each chapter, the following sections are sorted in the way to reflect the propa-
gation of CAN messages in the system.
1. Introduction 
2. Theory
3. Method
4. Analysis
5. Discussion
6. Conclusion
Sense
Transfer 
information 
Compute
Control
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
2.1
Calculations for differential based on
steering angle
Due to the racing character, the vehicle was built with a parallel steering mechanism.
This kind of steering is optimised accordingly to dynamics of the vehicle in high speeds.
During the turn the outer wheel works under presumably higher load, therefore, having
smaller slip angle than a relieved inner wheel. In a well-designed parallel steering system,
these forces should cancel each other therefore we can make the calculations based on two
wheels model with unchanged steering angle.[13] In this model, we can simply calculate
the radius of turn measuring from the rear axle by trigonometric equation 2.1.
R = cot(γ) ∗w
(2.1)
Where:
R rear axis radius (from the middle of the axis to
pivot point)
γ steering angle
w wheelbase
Now moving back to four wheel model, since the radius is directly proportional
to circumference we can calculate the proportions of how fast should wheels rotate in
compare to consider rear wheel from previous model. This can be done by simply adding
half of rear track to calculated radius and divide by itself.
αinner = R −T/2
R
(2.2)
αouter = R + T/2
R
(2.3)
Where:
α wheel proportional travel
T rear track
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Theory
These numbers can be successfully used as multiplicands in the differential system
for either torque or speed control loops.
2.2
Regenerative Breaking
As explained in [10] and confirmed in [11] it is not feasible to use the regenerative
braking for the vehicle driving with the low speed. As the motors would generate a too
small voltage to be converted up and charge the battery. As the result the regenerative
breaking should be a function of vehicle speed.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Development
Stage 1 - project start
The first phase development process was greatly filled up with waiting. I joined the
project in February when the project was still only on paper, teams were formed to
perform certain tasks and we began ordering of necessary parts.
Having experience with similar systems I instantly realised that a National Instru-
ments’ controller we had in-house would be a good choice for the main control unit.
CompactRIO - the family name of the controller, consist a variety of devices within
fast and reliable real-time processor thigh up within FPGA (Field-Programmable Gate
Array) all packaged intro rugged industrial form1.
From the variety of options, I have chosen model cRIO9033 which has a great propor-
tion between the performance and size. It comes with the following relevant parameters:
Processor
Dual Core Intel Atom E3825 (1.33 GHz)
RAM
2GB (DDR3L)
FPGA
Xilinx Kintex-7 7K160T
Extension slots
4
As a consequence, the software needed to be written in LabVIEW (G - language).
LabVIEW has a strong position in the industry being used some great project like Space
X or CERN, moreover, it has been widely adopted also in the automotive industry by
companies as:
Audi
Toyota
Nissan
Honda
Bosh
Continental
Delphi
Visteon
DaimlerChrysler
Autoliv
Land Rover
Jaguar
BMW
Volkswagen
TRW
General Motors
Eaton Corp
Lear Corp
Saab
Ford
Siemens VDO
Breed Technologies
Fiat
Magneti Marelli
Ferrari
Skoda
Suzuki
Valeo
Volvo
...
[2]
With this in mind, although, being unfamiliar with its graphical programming inter-
face at first, I was glad to have opportunity to study it in depth.
1One of the packaging options
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Development
For the first two months I have been studying the topic, learning the LabVIEW usage
and preparing conceptual software implementation, yet not having any device it could
communicate with.
Stage 2 - arrival of key components
In the second week of April, I have been given an early prototype of CAN peripheral
device which simply been sending a repetitive message containing a value of running
counter. As a basic test prototype has been proved to successfully transmit CAN message
in between two Arduinos (development boards used as CAN peripherals). Therefore I
assumed it works correctly, however, I was not capable to read the message by cRIO.
After a few weeks of debugging, I discovered that peripheral transmission speed was off
from desired and send it for revision.
Meanwhile, in the third week of April, the motor controllers arrived. So as soon as
it happened I have made myself connection to interface with them. Although, available
non of libraries was providing full functionality for CANOpen implementation based on
used NI9853 CAN module. As implementing this solution from the ground up would be
far out of scope for this thesis, the decision was made on acquiring additional module
designed implicitly for CANOpen communication (NI9881).
Concurrently, also the BMS arrived so I have made a physical connection and powered
it up, however, the bus voltage was floating showing only electromagnetic noise, therefore,
I decided to wait until responsible team would be able to setup initial configuration of
this device.
Stage 3 - Implementation
In the mid-May just a week after the arrival of the NI9881 module and receiving a
working peripheral prototype, I had both protocols running. I started by implementing
a basic logging feature and tried to control the state of the motor controller.
Although basic communication was set there was still a lot of work to be done, I
dedicated my time to setup configuration of motor controller and write the library(C.4.2)
to be able to control it in convenient, declarative way.
It was a great challenge as
controller documentation was incomplete and momentary misleading.
First of all, I
found the way to set up the parameters, however from there to spin up the motors the
path was not so straightforward. The motor controller uses two parallel state machines,
one which is based on CANOpen standard and second which has been implemented by
the manufacturer (3.1).
==PAGE:23==
3 Development
13
Initialisation
Pre-
operational
Operational
Stopped
Not ready to
switch 
Switch on
disabled 
Ready to
switch on 
Switched on 
Operation
enabled
Quick stop
active
Fault reaction
active
Fault
Figure 3.1: emDrive500 states machines correlation
Although, it is not described in the manual these two state machines are correlated.
After many, many tries I decided to closely follow the steps I found in an unofficial
manual. It turned out to be a successful approach.
In figure 3.1 I have marked by red arrows the only way to boot device into the
operational state. Moreover, what could not be shown in the figure in CANOpen’s pre-
operational state not officially documented parameter2 needed to be set to choose control
mode (torque/speed). This founding allowed me to make a step forward, by being able
to spin the motor. Advancing the testing program lead me to the point where to reduce
protocol overhead I implemented control based on default PDO messages. It has been
able to read motor controller status within an interval of one millisecond, simultaneously
controlling the target speed.
Counting it as success I moved my focus towards communication with other periph-
erals. I got delivered a very first version of the pedal position smart sensor but it has
not been at the time working properly.
• In case of errors random position values were send
• There was no documentation about how errors are encoded (little/big-endian, byte
order)
• The calibration process was way over-complicated (press calibration button for
each limit of control)
• Readings were useless, whenever the motors were on due to high electromagnetic
noise
2Currently available manual does not provide description for objects with addresses starting with
0x3000
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Development
I took my time and tried to debug/improve it with a responsible team. After many
iterations, we finally came up with a solution which did not have any of the above-
mentioned problems.
Willing to integrate all implementations so far and start working on an electrical
differential setup I have tried to control two motors simultaneously. This seemingly small
step turned out to be a problematic in implementation. As the control of motors has
been based on PDO protocol to be capable to control two motors independently on the
same bus the message IDs of at least one motor controller needed to be changed. I have
written the code to do so, however it did not work as desired. Being completely confused
I spend few days debugging the issue. It turned out, although, proper commands have
been issued the controller would just accept them without changing anything. I had a
hard time to believe that the device might malfunction this way yet there was no other
explanation. Therefore, I contacted the manufacturer which right away admit that he is
aware of this software bug and provided instruction and new software version to solve the
issue. However that was not the end of the problems. After the software was uploaded
the device stopped booting so just two and half weeks before competition it needed to
be sent for repair. It has been done within about the week, however, POD protocol
remain unusable. To overcome this problem in place of PDO commands the slower SDO
protocol has been used. Although message frequency needed to be limited, this solution
proved to provide just sufficient performance.
About the time also I have been helping with pump controlling module and worked
on gathering everything into the consistent system which has been comprehensively
described in the next chapter.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4
Methods
We have built an electric car from scratch based on a buggy frame, where all the pipes
are welded together and all the components directly attached to it. Although in this
solution, all the vibrations are transferred to the driver (reducing his comfort) it is a
durable and light solution - the aspects which were the most important due to the racing
character of the vehicle.
Among many available options in our final setup we have used:
• Two EMRAX228 motors where each of them is capable to work within continuous
power of 28 −42kW 1[16]
• Two emDrive500 controllers, implementing CANOpen protocol and being capable
to make full usage of AM motors
• Arduino with CAN shields to act as intelligent sensors/controllers
• Two IWAKI direct drive pumps (RD-40E24-HN1V) for cooling purposes
• National Instruments’ cRIO-9033 as a main control unit
Figure 4.1: Built car on Silverstone race circuit
1exact value depends on motor RPM
==PAGE:26==
16
4 Methods
This result in the system which in a simplified manner has been presented in figure
4.2.
Motor
Controllers
Encoders
& temp. 
sensors 
Motors
CANOpen
CAN
Start signal 
Break light 
Pump Control 
Pedals 
Steering wheel 
LV BMS
Low voltage  
battery
Main  
battery
Pre-charge,
emergency  
cutoff circuit
Master control unit
BMS
High Voltage cables
12 V
5V
Figure 4.2: Architecture overview
To start with in the left corner the breaking light has been shown, it operates on the
12V line and provides two levels of intensity (two sets of LEDs controlled independently).
The control is based directly on CAN message send by pedals controller, providing
additional functionality of lighting up if the connection is lost and blinking if pedals
are sending the error messages. To the right, we can see electrical buzzer (which is
being used as ready to drive signal) and cooling pumps taking the same 12V and being
controlled by a signal in between 0 and 5V. These all have been connected to the system
by CAN adapter in the rear part of the car.
Other CAN module is a low voltage battery management system (LV BMS). It
monitors each battery cell voltage and temperature, forwards this data to master control
unit and cuts of low voltage battery out of circuit in case of any failures (voltage below
operational or too high temperature).
Below the pedals/steering wheel intelligent sensor has been shown. It forwards the
sensors values, provides a calibration interface and sends the errors due to under-travel,
over-travel or sensors miss-match.
Another module is responsible for translating the CAN messages into indicator sta-
tuses on the dashboard and sensing the ignition buttons presses.
Last but not least basic CAN device in the system is the BMS for the main battery,
it monitors the cell state, provides load balancing and based on collected data deciding
decides if the battery can be connected to the circuit.
==PAGE:27==
4.1 Master control unit software implementation
17
The system which is completely independent to digital busses, emergency circuit,
provides analogue circuits responsible for closing pre-charge relays and main contractors
based on a variety of factors. The logic is based on pedals position (if accelerator and
brake pedal are pressed simultaneously the main contractor is opened2), LV BMS and
main BMS.
If there are no safety issues AM system allows the voltage to flow into motor con-
trollers. These devices are the only ones to communicate with the master control unit
(MCU) by CANOpen bus. Beside MCU each controller is directly connected to the
motor by three-phase cable3, to attached resolves and temperature sensors.
4.1
Master control unit software
implementation
From the early beginning, I have been developing the code of master control unit using
event-based programming paradigm. The reasoning of this is asynchronous, real-time
nature of such unit.
Most simple classification of subsystems can be based on communication protocol
being used.
4.1.1
Communication protocols
4.1.1.1
CAN integration
To start with I had to implement a CAN library which would let me service messages
from the code running on the real-time processor. I did it based on one of the provided
examples, however, to meet my needs it required some ground modifications.
Especially functionality which has been missing is the ability to wait for a message
with a certain id, one from an array of ids or just any message.
Reading
To achieve it, I have a functionality deployed on FPGA (Field Programmable
Gate Array) which simply translates input/output messages into the arrays of 8x un-
signed integers.
Read messages are furthermore pushed into the FIFO register.
In
parallel, a consumer process is running which takes messages from the register set it as
an output and raise an interrupt on the real-time processor to notify that data is ready
to be read.
Upon initiation of the device, a programme is run on the real-time processor which
besides the main process spawns an additional one in the background. This one further-
more is responsible for communication with the FPGA so whenever a message arrives it
2Requirement by Formula Student
3actually three separate cables to carry all the load
==PAGE:28==
18
4 Methods
services interrupt by copying it and sends the acknowledge back to FPGA so next one
can be transmitted. Meanwhile, CAN frame is stored in the table indexed by its ID and
two notifications are sent (for the desired frame and for the arrival of any message)4
Now depending on a place in the code read function can be called in one of three
ways:
Read All - function blocks the thread until notification arrives that any message
has been received (or upon timeout) and returns it. Example of usage would be a
logging purpose.
Read Some - for given list of message IDs function behaves similarly to ”Read
All”. However, notification is read and check if contains one of the listed IDs if not
it starts again and return frame upon success (or error upon timeout). Example -
Error handler.
Read ID - waits for notification associated with the certain ID. Example - read
pedal position.
Writing
For sending a message it simply pushes data to FPGA and marks it as ready
to send. FPGA is constantly checking the ready to send status and whenever it becomes
true sends the data.
Thank this architecture CAN messaging part is easy to use, read and modify.
4.1.1.2
CANOpen
For the simplicity and maximum throughput although CANOpen is an abstraction layer
over CAN bus an additional line has been used only for CANOpen communication. It
has been used just to link two motor controllers and NI-9881 module (plugged into
cRIO).
For the usage, CANOpen seemed like the best choice. It provides great flexibility in
the way that all parameters can be accessed the way as they would be stored in memory
registry without any pre-configuration. Furthermore, if setup correctly certain number
of parameters can be accessed without any protocol overhead providing maximum bus
throughput.
As previously mentioned in 1.1.1.1 CANOpen abstraction consists of 6 complemen-
tary sub-protocols.
NMT Network management - Provides unified control over the devices state (Boot
up, Pre-operational, Operational, Stopped)
SDO Service Data Object - verbose protocol by default providing access to all the
parameters of the device, it works based on two messages schema first describing
which data should be sent next then in second sending actual data
4Usage of LabVIEW synchronisation primitive ”Queue”.
==PAGE:29==
4.1 Master control unit software implementation
19
PDO Process Data Object - configurable sets of parameters to send/receive upon
change or after SYNC message
SYNC Synchronisation Object - issue request of device status
TIME Time Stamp Object - is used to synchronise with device clock and it had
no use in this project
EMCY Emergency Object - asynchronously broadcast errors
As it meant to be I implemented one drive control based on NMT, SDO, PDO and
SYNC protocols. Using NMT to control general state, SDO to control all the parameters
before setting the device into operational mode and control device-specific states and
PDO combined with SYNC messages to read device status and send control messages.
However, as it came to controlling two motors simultaneously conflicting messages
ids in PDO and SYNC protocols needed to be changed. Although many tries it was not
possible to change this values. Contacting the manufacturer drop the light on the case
as they were aware that their devices malfunctions and were not able to provide any fix
for the issue.
So for the two motor configuration, I had to implement a workaround by using slower
and not providing all the functionality SDO protocol. Usage of this protocol caused a
drastic drop in channel throughput considering for instance reading of device status:
Data
Data size [byte]
Status word
2
Controller Temperature
1
Motor Temperature
1
Error Code
2
Error Register
1
Torque Actual Value
2
Velocity actual Value
4
Electrical Angle
2
Electric Power
4
Sum
19
Table 4.1: Motor controller status component sizing
As each PDO message can contain up to 8 bytes aforementioned list of parameters
would need to be divided into 3 CAN frames and as an result 46bits ∗3 + 19bytes + ϵ =
290bits + ϵ
5 needs to be send. On the other hand sending the same data with SDO
protocol requires request-respond schema for each value so 46bits ∗18 + 19bytes + 9 ∗
4bytes + ϵ = 1268bits + ϵ
5 needs to be send.
5ϵ has been used to represent stuffed bits
==PAGE:30==
20
4 Methods
Figure 4.3: CANOpen vs CAN
Furthermore, also the target torque off motor controllers needs to be adjusted SDO
messages. In this case, performance drawback is even more visible, if the PDO protocol
could be used torque values could be sent together within one CAN frame (46bits +
4bytes = 78bits), however, within SDO 4 CAN frames needs to be sent (46bits ∗4 +
4bytes + 4bytes ∗2 = 280bits).
4.1.2
Device operation states
Initialise values 
Service
CAN
Vehicle control
Start CANOpen module
Turn on
FPGA
Turn of device
Boot seqence
Control phase
Emergency shutdown
Shutdown
Figure 4.4: Control unit
states overview
The implemented control unit in practice con-
sists of few nested state machines. The most gen-
eral consist of just 3 states responsible for con-
troller booting, operational and shutdown.
In
booting state all initial values are set and inter-
nal modules like FPGA, CAN and CANOpen
are being turned on in parallel to main threads.
Whenever this phase is finished, an error logger
is turn on and the car booting sequence begins.
To start with, the dashboard is updated with batteries charge status and systems
waits for power up button to be pressed. Whenever driver would command turning of
the vehicle button blinks and lights up by internal LED whenever BMS would response
with ready to discharge message. Then the second button is required to be pressed in
order to turn the traction system on (analogical interface to the first button). Whenever
the traction system is first turned on, the controller sends a message to the audio-visual
system so the car plays loud sound alerting the surrounding to take cautions as systems
are charge and it is ready to drive.
In the operational state, many control loops run in parallel to cover desired vehicle
functionality.
• Pedals status is read, updates local pedal status and issue notification that motor
controllers should be updated with new values.
• Upon notification new target torques values are calculated and send to motor
controllers.
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Pedals sensor
21
• Running watchdog, if no pedals update was notified within 500ms set target torques
to zero (an emergency mechanism to slow the motors in case of any temporary fail
of pedals sensor).
• Set pumps to full power for 3s to initiate rotation, then control it accordingly to
further mentioned method.4.3
• Communicate with BMS to keep it in an operational state.
• Read and act upon BMS and low voltage BMS state.
• Log all the information.
4.2
Pedals sensor
A System to measure pedals and steering wheel position is based on Arduino evaluation
board. Which is a simple evaluation setup build upon Atmel ATmega8 with 16MHz
oscillator.
Now considering the sampling rate of this sub-module it has been programmed to use
prescaler for A/D converter with a value of 128. Referring to datasheet basic conversion
takes 13 clock cycles so we should except sampling rate of about 16MHz/128/13 =
9615Hz = 104s [1].
However, in an electric car, there is a considerable electromagnetic noise which needs
to be addressed. To reduce the impact of noise which was significant in the first approach,
the code was modified to calculate an average of 10 successive samples efficiently reducing
the rate to 1, 04ms.
Considering the fact that ATmega8 consist of just one analogue-decimal converter
with multiplexed input the measurement takes approximately 1, 04ms∗numberofsensors
[1]. To satisfy the safety requirements we needed to use two offset sensors for each pedal
(accelerator, brake) and one for the steering wheel. In consequence each measurement
takes at least 1, 04ms ∗5 = 5, 2ms.
This system sense all the information which is:
• pedals position
• steering wheel position
• pedals sensors position miss-match
• pedals, steering wheel over-travel, under-travel and connection loss errors
After the measurement, the information is sent through CAN bus with a baud rate of
500kbit/s (used CAN module was not capable to work with higher baud rates). Pedals
position although being read on 10 bits is averaged and only 8 significant bits are sent.
We assumed that 256 quantization steps are sufficient in this case. It allowed us to
shorten CAN frame to consist of only 4 bytes of data. Now considering timing, the CAN
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Methods
frame (4.5) consists of at least 44 basic bits plus 4 bytes of data in our case. The total
time of sending/receiving would be therefore
76
500kbit/s = 152us.
Figure 4.5: CAN frame structure [7]
Assuming no further improvements we should expect the pedals sub-systems is ca-
pable of sending the pedals, steering wheel position in a time interval of about 5, 2ms
in normal operation. Additionally, if any of the above-mentioned errors occurred the
second CAN frame is sent containing two bytes with bitwise encoded errors extending
the expected interval into 5, 3ms.
4.3
Pump control
In our car, we have used IWAKI RD-40E24-HN1V pumps, which can be controlled by a
signal from 0−5V . Since used Arduino has no dedicated analogue input we made one by
using the PWM signal with a low-pass filter.The subsystem acts simply by controlling
pulse width based on the value received by CAN message from the master control unit.
It also provides basic emergency behaviour in the manner that if no message was sensed
over one second the pumps are turned on to work with full power.
When it comes to choosing the right pump power the simplest approach would be to
simply relay on feedback loop (fig. 4.6(a)). Which, assuming sufficient cooling pump per-
formance, is capable of keeping the motors within preset operational temperature scale
in static conditions. However, considering sudden acceleration this system respond could
be too slow letting the temperature rise above permit limits. To reduce response time
I have used additional feed-forward control (4.6(b)) taking as an input an accelerator
position, which should be proportional to used motor power (heat dispatch).
==PAGE:33==
4.4 Implementation of electrical differential based on steering angle
23
Accelerator
1 
s 
Pump power/Motor temperature
1 
s 
-
+
(a) Pump control in feedback
loop
Accelerator
1 
s 
Pump power
1 
s 
Motor temp.
-
+
+
+
(b) Pump control with feedback loop and feed forward
patch
Figure 4.6: Pump control
The parameters coefficients has been omitted for simplicity
The pump power, therefore, is calculated accordingly to the following equation:
τleft,right =







Ppump = 50%
se T < Tmin
Ppump = 50% + coerce(norm(T) + D) ∗50%
se T ∈< Tmin, Tmax >
Ppump = 100%
se T > Tmax
(4.1)
Where:
Ppump pump power in percentage
T higher on of two motor temperatures
Tmin, Tmax operational temperature limits in this case equal to 40◦C and 60◦C
coerce() returns value limited to < 0, 1 >
norm(T) = coerce(
T−Tmin
Tmax−Tmin)
D acceleration pedal displacement in percentage
4.4
Implementation of electrical differential
based on steering angle
In my implementation I have enriched calculations explained in 2.1. Starting with the
steering wheel, the sensor output is normalised to the measured minimum and maximum
steering wheel angles (±123 deg) so the meaningful value can be shown in remote control
panel as well as saved in logs. Then since it is linearly proportional it is simply converted
to steering angle (±35 deg). To prevent any miss usage all the values are coerced on the
go to be within the ranges.
Having commanded output power (in percentage) basic differential functionality
could be obtained just by multiplying it with a maximum allowed/available torque and
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Methods
proportion on per wheel base. However, it would start failing for power close to 100%,
although total torque will remain under the limit, the outer wheel can go above the limit
by up to (20%). This situation would be especially dangerous if the maximum torque
per wheel base would start to saturate. In this case, the differential would gradually
stop to function effectively by pushing the car out of the desired curve. To avoid this
miss-behaviour I added the code to check if after previous calculation any of the wheels
is about to be set to more than maximum torque and scale both of them accordingly.
τleft,right =



τleft,right = P ∗γleft,right ∗τmax
se m(P, γleft,right) ≤1
τleft,right = P ∗γleft,right ∗τmax/m(P, γleft,right)
se m(P, γleft,right) > 1
(4.2)
Where:
P desired output power (0 −100%)
τmax maximum torque per wheel
τ wheel torque
γ differential disproportion of wheel (γleft + γright = 200%)
m(P, γleft, right) = P ∗max(γleft, γright)
4.5
Regenerative braking
As mentioned in theory chapter (2.2) the regenerative braking cannot be used in low
speeds. Normally this problem would be solved by varying the braking force between
regenerative and friction breaks. However, the car design did not take into the account
the possibility to electrically control the friction breaks. So I implemented an alternative
solution taking into account this technical obstacle and comfort of the driver. Consid-
ering regenerative braking as negative torque system which I have implemented can be
expressed by equation 4.5.
τ =







D
se Vavg ≤10km/h
(Vnorm,10−20 ∗15% + 100%) ∗D −Vnorm,10−20 ∗15%
se Vavg ∈(10km/h, 20km/h >
115% ∗D −15%
se Vavg > 20km/h
Where:
Vavg average velocity of the wheels
Vnorm,10−20 Vavg normalised in range from 10 to 20 (Vnorm,10−20 = (Vavg −10)/10)
D acceleration pedal displacement in percentage
==PAGE:35==
4.5 Regenerative braking
25
tau percentage of used torque (in reference to maximum value)
It follows the simple idea to use a variable portion of pedal displacement for re-
generative braking based on speed. When the user presses the acceleration pedal in a
stationary vehicle the whole available scale is used to control torque giving an expected
instant response. After reaching 10km/h the pedal displacement used for regenerative
braking increases gradually to reach 15% while travelling with speed equal to or higher
than 20km/h.
What else is worth to mention is that as a result for the pedal displacement from
0 −15% we should expect the car to act as it would be controlled in speed mode. The
characteristic would be firstly saturated by low torque however within enough power to
make the car accelerate we should be able to observe a linear correlation between pedal
displacement and speed.
To summarise the expected idealised correlation between torque, pedal displacement
and speed has been shown in figure 4.7.
0%
15%
100%
Acceleometer displacement
0
10
20
50
-15%
0%
100%
Torque
Figure 4.7: Regenerative braking / torque control
==PAGE:36==
26
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 5
Analysis
5.1
Pump control
To check the declared functionality of pump control I have made a test setup where
motor’s thermoresistors can be replaced with matched potentiometers. In this manner,
I could fully control the temperatures sensed in the very beginning of the system and
what is important without any modifications to the final version of the software.
I have captured 10 state transitions to demonstrate the whole spectrum of changes
as follows.
Temperature set to 30°C and varying accelerator displacement
Expected behaviour of pumps output would be to raise proportionally from 2,5V
for pedal in initial position up to 5V whenever it is pressed up to its limit.
Temperature set to 35°C and varying accelerator displacement
Same behaviour as explained above.
Temperature set to 40°C and varying accelerator displacement
Same behaviour as explained above.
Temperature set to 45°C and varying accelerator displacement
Initial pump output should equal to 2, 5V + 2, 5V ∗25% = 3, 125V and saturate
on pedal displacement of 75%.
Temperature set to 50°C and varying accelerator displacement
Initial pump output should equal to 2, 5V + 2, 5V ∗50% = 3, 75V and saturate on
pedal displacement of 50%.
Temperature set to 55°C and varying accelerator displacement
Initial pump output should equal to 2, 5V + 2, 5V ∗75% = 4, 375V and saturate
on pedal displacement of 25%.
Temperature set to 60°C and varying accelerator displacement
Initial pump output should equal to maximum value of 5V and pedal displacement
should not affect this value.
Temperature set to 65°C and varying accelerator displacement
Same behaviour as explained above.
==PAGE:38==
28
5 Analysis
Temperature set to 70°C and varying accelerator displacement
Same behaviour as explained above.
Varying temperature from 30 to 70 degrees and no accelerator displacement
Pump output should vary from 2, 5V and 5V being in direct proportion to tem-
perature changes from 40 to 60 degrees.
Taking for instance measurement for temperature set 50 deg C and pressing accel-
eration pedal. I have had captured severely noisy signal from accelerator sensor and
temperature sensor emulator then prepossessed them in a similar manner as it is done
inside the system1. The sensors output, as well as pumps controlling signal, has been
shown in the figure 5.1.
Time
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Accelerator displacement
30°C
40°C
50°C
60°C
70°C
Temperature
Time
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Pumps duty cycle
Actual response
Ideal response
Figure 5.1: Comparison of actual pump control signal to idealised one based on the same
input data
In the same figure, I have plot theoretical output based on an idealised mathematical
model. As one can notice control output closely follows the desired patch. The only
visible difference is due to the fact that in my system the control signal is intentionally
delayed.
The pumps control signal is updated only once per 100 milliseconds since
temperature change is rather a slow process in this way we can avoid harmful (for
pumps) high-frequency oscillations and save computation power. In this way, we obtain
a simple control system with memory which is even more visible if we just plot input
against output (accelerator/control signal) which has been done in 5.2. In the graph, we
can observe the hysteresis and steps upon control update as we could expect.
I have repeated this process for all above-mentioned cases confirming that this sub-
system works correctly. The figures for all the other cases can be found in appendix A.
To present all the results in the clear graphical way I have combined them into scatter
chart plotting the accelerator against temperature values and colour mapping them by
measured output 5.3(a). To show the validity of data on the right you can see the same
graph with the background coloured based on a mathematical model.
1average of 50 consecutive samples
==PAGE:39==
5.2 Regenerative Breaking
29
0
20
40
60
80
100
acc
50
60
70
80
90
100
pump
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Pumps power
Figure 5.2: Accelerator displacement against pump output (samples sorted based accel-
erator position)
0
20
40
60
80
100
acc
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
temp
(a) Measured controlling signal
(b) With shading based on the model
Figure 5.3: Pumps control summary
5.2
Regenerative Breaking
Due to the fact that the car battery has not been finished, I have been required to make
the measurements on setup powered by a laboratory amplifier. This greatly narrowed
the spectrum in which I could check if the system operates correctly.
As the amplifier did not accept backward current and the car could not be driven
I could not measure actual regenerative breaking. On the other hand limited current
reduced dynamics of the setup and having the wheels freely spinning in the air became
safely issue for high torque/speed.
To prove the validity of the programme I have measured the torque with accompany-
ing speed for the acceleration pedal displacement from 0 to 25%. As mentioned in the
method section 4.5 for first 15% the control system has negative feedback loop effectively
==PAGE:40==
30
5 Analysis
making the speed of the vehicle linearly proportional to the pedal displacement. The
pedal position has been changed by 1% on each second as shown in 5.4(a).
As expected torque output from the system was a reflection of pedal positions as
long as the wheels did not spin and for speeds from 10 −20km/h we can observe linear
dependency between pedal and speed. Then for the speeds above 20km/h there is simple
torque control so the wheels (without load) starts to gain speed in exponential tempo.
To put in the bigger picture let me refer to the theoretical model (4.7). In the figure
5.4(a) I present the measured output using the idealised model as the background.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Time [s]
0%
10%
20%
30%
Acceleometer displacement
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Time [s]
0
20
40
Speed [km/h]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Time [s]
0%
5%
10%
15%
Torque
(a) Test signal for accelerator displacement
(b) Measured correlation against idealised model
Figure 5.4: Torque control summary
Beside above-mentioned dependencies, one can observe that there is the initial value
of torque needed for a wheel to start spinning and around half a value torque to maintain
its angular momentum.
5.3
Differential
To confirm the validity of implemented model I have commit measurements where the
steering wheel was rotated for each 5% displacement of acceleration pedal and where
acceleration pedal was pressed fully for seemingly equally distributed 21 positions of the
steering wheel in its full scale of operation. Detailed measurements results can be found
in appendix B.
Meanwhile, the summarised version can be seen in figure 5.5.
As one can notice in 5.5(b) motor torque difference is linearly proportional to accel-
eration pedal and steering wheel displacement. This relation is clearly maintained for
first ∼80% of pedal travel and it saturates on torque difference equal about 42% in rest
of the scale. It is the desired behaviour of this control. To explain all the values let me
refer to equations 2.2 and 2.1 from the theory section.
==PAGE:41==
5.3 Differential
31
-123
0
123
Steering angle [°]
-50%
-42.18%
0%
42.18%
Torque difference
0%
100%
Accelerator Displacement
(a)
0%
78.91%
100%
Accelerator Displacement
-50%
-42.18%
0%
42.18%
50%
Torque difference
-123°
0°
123°
Steering angle
(b)
Figure 5.5: Relation between acceleration pedal displacement, steering wheel angle and
normalised torque difference
In the vehicle, I have been working on has the maximum steering angle of 36°, wheel-
base 1740mm and track equal to 1270mm. Taking these values together into mentioned
equations results in wheel disproportion:
αinner = 0.7349
αouter = 1.2651
From this point target torque is calculated simply by multiplication with the percent
of pedal displacement and maximum torque. What is reflected in measurements for
first 80% of pedal travel. Behaviour in remaining 20% is a result of limited power and
accompanying safety feature described in 4.4. To make differential functional while using
near full available power desired torque is scaled down to the maximum torque per wheel
is never exceed (equation 4.2). The functionality is simply active if only:
αouter ∗dacc > 1
Where:
dacc acceleration pedal displacement
0%
78.91%
100%
Accelerator Displacement
0%
57.82%
100%
Torque
left motor torque
right motor torque
Figure 5.6: Motors torque compassion for
steering wheel rotated 124° (maximum steer-
ing angle) left
So taking into consideration maximum
steering angle it becomes active for dacc ≈
78.91% which can been seen in figure
5.5(b).
To further confirm this safety function-
ality figure 5.6 consist only of samples
for maximum steering angle independently
showing the torque of two wheels. The outer wheel saturates on maximum torque where
the inner one maintains proportion needed for differential steering.
==PAGE:42==
32
5 Analysis
5.4
System performance
As mentioned due to the malfunctioning motor controller the system performance was
limited. However, as I am going to show in the next figures implemented workaround
performs considerably well and is not a bottleneck in a current state.
Place where the timing is the most important is in between receiving of pedal/steering
wheel status and sending torque control signal to drives.
CAN bus
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Time [ms]
CANOpen bus
Figure 5.7: CAN and CANOpen timing overview
As shown in the figure 5.7 there are messages on the CAN bus which appears within
a constant interval of about 6, 8ms. Each of these messages contains break, accelerator
and steering wheel position and the timing is close to one estimated in method chapter
(4.2) of 5, 2ms.
Each sensors position message is closely followed by four messages on CANOpen bus
which are responsible for accordingly changing target torque values in motor controllers.
As shown in figure 5.8 after receiving it takes just 1.11ms to first respond and second
Pedals status
Target torque for motor A
Target torque for motor B
0.89ms
0.12
ms
1.11 ms
Figure 5.8: Control torque loop timing
respond is sent in 0.89ms after. As in the code, two calls to LabVIEW closed library
responsible for CANOpen communication are issued one after another, it suggests that
in both cases about 0.89ms is taken to just send a message. Therefore I am convinced
that CAN receive code, interrupt issue it service and torque calculations take only about
0.22ms of total time.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
As shown in the previous chapter for a current point in time all measurable characteristics
closely follow expected ones, however, I would like to discuss the current limitations and
how they could be overcome in future implementations.
To start with the main bottleneck of the system right now, it is the time needed to
measure pedals position being higher than 5ms. It could be greatly reduced by changing
an analogue/decimal conversion prescaler which in theory could result in shortening the
time by 64 times (in the cost of precision). Moreover, sampling and sending data could
be pipe-lined so they would happen simultaneously. As the sampling time would no
longer be a problem we would hit the limitation of CAN bus capacity which could be
increased twice by changing to CAN adapter supporting full speed operation (current
one supports only baud rate equal to 500kbit/s). This all could be done, however, the
question is if it is feasible to do so or it will be just a computational overhead? Current
control interval of 6, 8ms is far away beyond humans perception so the engines respond
seems to be immediate.
One could argue if the performance of the differential system would be sufficient as
a mechanical counterpart we are used to having only latency due to an inertia of the
components. However, considering the fact that human being can move their hands only
within the maximum speed of about 3m/s [8] in 6.8ms steering wheel could be only
moved by 7.7degrees. Resulted target torque error should be within 2.7% which in my
perception can be considered neglectable.
What could be improved though is an usage of CAN bus and filtering of the signal.
For example, a pedal sensor could use a simple algorithm to not send unchanged position
data and only send the status message from time to time to confirm that it is running.
It would reduce computational efforts when not needed. Also, simple analogue low pass
filters could be used to cut off the high-frequency part of the electromagnetic interference.
When it comes to computational part if the car would be finally running certain
behaviours can be adjusted. Here, for example, we can consider the dependency between
the acceleration pedal and cooling pumps power.
I designed this control work well,
however, it can be further optimised by taking into account the pumps performance
curve.
If we would think about the differential system, current implementation although
working is simple and based on assumptions which might not always be true. Especially
it does not take into account the possibility of wheels skidding on the road. It should still
outperform basic mechanical solution as it will not increase torque on a sliding wheel.
However, if more sensor would have been used it is possible to further limit torque on
sliding wheel, keeping it in right skidding momentum for the best grip and therefore
==PAGE:44==
34
6 Discussion
helping to keep steering under control.
Moreover, if more pivot sensors would be used, implementing additional assistance
systems like anti-lock braking or ”enhanced traction” seems like really straightforward
tasks within the current setup.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
However short the time-frame was I managed to make a successful implementation which
covers desired functionality, moreover supporting and supervising a few fellow teams.
In the time span of a few months, we built a car only failing within battery connection.
As we learnt from experience designing battery pack is an extremely time-consuming
process especially when we take into consideration the safety constraints. Therefore in
the following years, it is advised to greatly prioritise battery development in such way
that it is the main element in the car and everything is built around it instead of trying
to fit it in a final stage.
Although, failure of the battery associated team I did whatever I could to provide
working main control unit and prove its functionality. Based on measurements I can
claim that the system works as desired, however, I am really looking forward to finally
see the car rolling and test empirically its performance on the track.
The car will be used for another half a year as a testing/development unit and the
system has been well design for this purpose offering possibility to simulate each sub-
module within a remote panel.
When it comes to future development first the most important improvement would
be to use many redundant sensors for an electrical differential system.
The current
solution is really basic, for proper functioning in all condition I would recommend using
additional encoders on non-driven wheels and acceleration/yaw sensor. Based on data
obtained in this way one may accurately estimate vehicle state, considering accelerations,
wheels spin and lateral slips. So elaborate traction assistance algorithms can be used.
The circumstances of the work on my thesis indirectly but forced me to work on a
wide spectrum of tasks. Although interesting, it did not allow me to make these studies
more in-depth on any particular part. I believe I have had built a strong base so the
future students working on the project will since now on be able to isolate each small
subsystem, work on them independently and bring a great number of improvements.
==PAGE:46==
36
==PAGE:47==
APPENDIX A
Pump control measurements
Time
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Accelerator displacement
30°C
40°C
50°C
60°C
70°C
Temperature
Time
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Pumps duty cycle
Actual response
Ideal response
0
20
40
60
80
100
acc
50
60
70
80
90
100
pump
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Pumps power
(a) Temperature set to 30°C and varying accelerator displacement
Time
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Accelerator displacement
30°C
40°C
50°C
60°C
70°C
Temperature
Time
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Pumps duty cycle
Actual response
Ideal response
0
20
40
60
80
100
acc
50
60
70
80
90
100
pump
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Pumps power
(b) Temperature set to 35°C and varying accelerator displacement
Time
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Accelerator displacement
30°C
40°C
50°C
60°C
70°C
Temperature
Time
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Pumps duty cycle
Actual response
Ideal response
0
20
40
60
80
100
acc
50
60
70
80
90
100
pump
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Pumps power
(c) Temperature set to 40°C and varying accelerator displacement
==PAGE:48==
38
A : Pump control measurements
Time
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Accelerator displacement
30°C
40°C
50°C
60°C
70°C
Temperature
Time
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Pumps duty cycle
Actual response
Ideal response
0
20
40
60
80
100
acc
50
60
70
80
90
100
pump
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Pumps power
(a) Temperature set to 45°C and varying accelerator displacement
Time
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Accelerator displacement
30°C
40°C
50°C
60°C
70°C
Temperature
Time
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Pumps duty cycle
Actual response
Ideal response
0
20
40
60
80
100
acc
50
60
70
80
90
100
pump
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Pumps power
(b) Temperature set to 50°C and varying accelerator displacement
Time
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Accelerator displacement
30°C
40°C
50°C
60°C
70°C
Temperature
Time
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Pumps duty cycle
Actual response
Ideal response
0
20
40
60
80
100
acc
50
60
70
80
90
100
pump
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Pumps power
(c) Temperature set to 55°C and varying accelerator displacement
Time
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Accelerator displacement
30°C
40°C
50°C
60°C
70°C
Temperature
Time
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Pumps duty cycle
Actual response
Ideal response
0
20
40
60
80
100
acc
50
60
70
80
90
100
pump
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Pumps power
(d) Temperature set to 60°C and varying accelerator displacement
==PAGE:49==
A : Pump control measurements
39
Time
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Accelerator displacement
30°C
40°C
50°C
60°C
70°C
Temperature
Time
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Pumps duty cycle
Actual response
Ideal response
0
20
40
60
80
100
acc
50
60
70
80
90
100
pump
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Pumps power
(a) Temperature set to 65°C and varying accelerator displacement
Time
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Accelerator displacement
30°C
40°C
50°C
60°C
70°C
Temperature
Time
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Pumps duty cycle
Actual response
Ideal response
0
20
40
60
80
100
acc
50
60
70
80
90
100
pump
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Pumps power
(b) Temperature set to 70°C and varying accelerator displacement
Time
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Accelerator displacement
30°C
40°C
50°C
60°C
70°C
Temperature
Time
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Pumps duty cycle
Actual response
Ideal response
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
temp
50
60
70
80
90
100
pump
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Pumps power
(c) Varying temperature from 30 to 70 degrees and no accelerator displacement
==PAGE:50==
40
==PAGE:51==
APPENDIX B
Differential control measurements
0%
50%
100%
Accelerator
Displacement
-100°
-50°
0°
50°
100°
Steering angle
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Time [s]
105
-400
-200
0
200
400
Torque difference
(a) Turn steering wheel for each 5% of accel-
erator displacement
0%
50%
100%
Accelerator
Displacement
-100°
-50°
0°
50°
100°
Steering angle
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Time [s]
105
-400
-200
0
200
400
Torque difference
(b) Pressing accelerator pedal for each 10%
of steering wheel displacement
==PAGE:52==
42
==PAGE:53==
APPENDIX C
Software documentation
The program is designed to be started by running main.vi (which is happening upon
boot or can be done manually whenever desired).
Initialisation
Operational 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Close
Vehicle control - drive
Figure C.1: main.vi with overview cover
It is a sequence of stages which for simplicity I will call ”Initialisation”, ”Operation”
and ”Closing”.
Out of 3, the last one has no complexity to be explained, its only
function is to close the log file. I have tried to reflect each level of functionality nesting by
the document structure Section->Subsection->Subsection->Paragraph etc. However, to
avoid overwhelmingly deep nest structure I have elevated description of ”Vehicle control
==PAGE:54==
44
C : Software documentation
- drive” from point C.2.3 to separate section. Also I used the last section to describes
low level functions which has been used in the whole project.
C.1
Initialisation
Figure C.2: Turn of simula-
tion when used without con-
trol panel
Upon start internal initial values are set to avoid any
non-deterministic behaviour.
In case the program so
called within open remote control panel the simula-
tion switches are not reset so one can first setup de-
sired modules to validate and turn one the simula-
tion for the rest of them.
This has been done by
sensing LabVIEW’s ”RUN_TIME_ENGINE” environ-
mental value and setting simulation values to false
(C.2).
C.1.1
Initialise sub-modules
Initialise_cRIO I/Os
Whenever setting of basic parameters is done the Ini-
tialise_cRIO.vi is called to boot sub-modules, init the
synchronisation primitives and start logging of system
state (C.3).
In the VI, three notifiers1 are spawned:
• Update motors - motors should be updated with
new data
• Emergency Turn Off - in case of motors should be
stopped immediately
• Shutdown - turning off the controller
Additionally error queue is initialised which would accumulate the errors and similarly
to notifies act like interrupt upon change2.
C.1.1.1
Generate log file
Beside this, I the code calls Generate_log_file_path.vi (C.4) which opens or creates
log file within current date and time as a file name so it is easy to navigate and each
1LabVIEW synchronisation primitive acting in a similar way to interrupts
2This synchronisation primitive act similarly to double linked list which raises interrupt upon any
change
==PAGE:55==
C.1 Initialisation
45
Figure C.3: Initialise_cRIO.vi
Figure C.4: Generate_log_file_path.vi
time the car has been turned on is saved in separate log. Additionally to acquiring the
file handle the code also spawns semaphore to be used within it (the log file cannot be
written simultaneously by multiple threads/processes).
Just after opening the log handle the current state of the device is saved.
Last but not least the Initialise_cRIO.vi call the functions to start communication re-
sponsible sub-modules (CAN Session and CANOpen Session).
C.1.1.2
Initialise CANOpen Session
National Instruments provides a great interface for their CANOpen module so starting
the module is as easy as calling the associated function with proper parameters.
==PAGE:56==
46
C : Software documentation
Figure C.5: Open_CANOpen_Session.vi
C.1.1.3
Initialise CAN
On the other hand to interference with CAN module only very low-level API has been
provided which on FPGA level is able to accept CAN frame to send and return read one.
Therefore the whole interface needed to be built on the top of this API to provide all the
data and usable abstraction from real-time processor level. Implementation would hard
Figure C.6: Open_CAN_Session.vi
to discuss as whole so figure C.6 has been enriched by indexing labels which following
points refers to:
1. As the first step, the queue (linked list) is created to serve as a buffer for messages
to be written to the bus.
2. Then notifiers/interrupts are defined so the interface can be gracefully closed.
3. Array with entity for each message ID is created, as for the point of time it is filled
with zero references to queues capable of containing CAN Frames3 (queue with
the data type set to be a CAN Frame).
4. Initiate notifier/interrupt to be raised every time a new message would come.
5. Encapsulate CAN session object so it can be passed around the code by reference.
3CAN Frame (instead of CAN frame) is used to signal that it refers to the data structure, not
physical signal pattern
==PAGE:57==
C.2 Operation
47
6. Execute the code servicing the CAN messages on FPGA (and passes it to RT
processor).
7. Wait to ensure that the FPGA was fully initiated by the time this function exits.
C.2
Operation
Whenever all values and services are initialised device move into operational state and
logs this change.
This stage defines all the tasks running in parallel during device
operation. To start with the error logging loop is started so in case of any failure, it
would be possible to reason of what has happened. For instant feedback whenever a
remote panel is not connected the diode of cRIO is made to blink within an interval of
1,5s (50% duty cycle), changing its colour to orange for 5s seconds whenever the error
has been encountered.
C.2.1
Shutdowns
Then the shutdown functions are described as follows. Emergency shutdown (C.7) react
Figure C.7: Emergency shutdown
upon notification/interrupt and if the motors are not simulated the ”Quick stop” message
is sent to both of them. Then after possibly avoiding hazardous situation controller
follows up with normal shutdown sequence (C.8).
Figure C.8: Shutdown
During normal shutdown process (C.9) I start with deleting all the notifiers and error
queue so if any thread/process function is waiting for them it would exit immediately.
Then the same needs to be done for next nested level - CAN session which I would
describe in the next subsection. Last but not least the CANOpen communication objects
are released, CANOpen session closed and associated semaphores deleted.
==PAGE:58==
48
C : Software documentation
Figure C.9: Shutdown_Sequence.vi
Figure C.10: Close_CAN_Communication.vi
C.2.1.1
Closing CAN
Closing CAN session is a bit tedious task, analogue to opening process. First of all
the closing notifiers are acquired and close notifications send (point 2). This operation
wound stop the receiving/sending loop. Once again to ensure that this already happened
we are waiting a second. Then function is called to close all the primitives opened during
initialisation process (C.11).
Figure C.11: Close_CAN_Communication_queues.vi
1. CAN Session is cast back to object.
2. Shutdown notifiers are being deleted.
3. The queue used to encapsulate the session is deleted.
4. The queue containing messages to be sent is deleted.
5. Deleting new frame notifier
6. Last but not least iterate over all message IDs and delete associated queues.
==PAGE:59==
C.2 Operation
49
C.2.2
Debugging loops
For the time of development and whenever the program is run within a remotely con-
trolled session. I implemented functionality which helps in debugging of any system
misbehaviour.
One of the important indicators is the live number of interrupts to update motor
values. Also, errors, if any, are shown in pleasant to use list. However, different func-
tionality plays a key role in here.
In the remote session, I have provided visual indicators for subsystems. Moreover, I
have provided bindings so the devices can be using a real data or be simulated.
==PAGE:60==
50
C : Software documentation
Figure C.11: Remote control user interface
Taking for example steering/pedals sensor, it is important to drive to motors in a
controlled manner so while any changes to sensors have been done they might be tested
with motors in simulation mode (the values are updated but motors are not spinning).
On the other hand, one might want to control the motors by remote session. To
make so it is sufficient to just flip the switch responsible for pedals sensor simulation.
Now the pedals indicator is acting as a control so a user might just grab the indicator
needle and change the value in the system.
C.2.3
Vehicle control
The vehicle control consists of two steps. First follows the sequence required to safely
boot the motor controllers (apply high voltage/current). Second to control vehicle while
operational - drive.
C.2.3.1
Boot sequence
Starting code has been shown in figure C.11
Part 1
==PAGE:61==
C.2 Operation
51
Part 2
Part 3
Figure C.11: Vehicle_boot_sequence.vi
it can easily be describe in a few consecutive points:
1. Firstly it tries4 to read state of charge form low voltage and main BMS based on
which dashboard indicators are updated.
2. Wait for ignition button (marked TS - Tractive System) to be pressed and blink
it as acknowledge upon push.
3. Get BMS into load mode (further described in next section) and turn traction
active indicator on upon success.
4. Wait for ready to drive (RTD) button to be pressed.
5. Turn motor controllers into drive mode (further described in section C.2.3.1).
6. In case of success turn on the RTD indicator and send command to audio-visual
subsystem to make ready to drive notification sound.
4within 1s timeout, after which default values are assumed. Error would be not crucial for function-
ing of vehicle so it is ignored
==PAGE:62==
52
C : Software documentation
Part 1
Part 2
Figure C.11: Get_BMS_into_load_mode.vi
Turning on BMS
While contacting with BMS I firstly ensure that BMS is in initial
mode by checking its status. Then BMS is requested to turn on into load mode withing
20ms interval until the pre-charge process is done.
Then BMS is moved to staging
process and active load letter one.
Reasoning behind this sequence has been described in BMS manual [15].
Figure C.12: Boot_motor_controller.vi
Boot motor controller
The code performs up to five tries to get motor controller into
a operational mode (within 200ms delay in between). On each try the same sequence is
repeated corresponding to path marked red in figure 3.1.
1. CANOpen command is send to move into pre-operational state.
2. Set emDrive500 control mode to torque.
3. Set ”Mode of operation” to torque.
4. CANOpen state change into operational.
5. emDrive control word is set to ”Fault reset” -> Shutdown -> Switch on + operation
enable.
==PAGE:63==
C.3 Vehicle control - drive
53
6. Get status word to to ensure proper state (in case of fail, repeat).
Whenever the controllers are finally operational the SDO communication object han-
dle is saved within semaphore which will be used to ensure that it is not used by many
threads in parallel (NI CANOpen library limitation).
For simplicity and to emphasise importance the sub-subsection ”Vehicle control - drive”
has been moved from its logical placement in here to separate section.
C.3
Vehicle control - drive
To start with event of entering the next state is saved into log file and the LED indicator
pattern is changed (v.s.C.2). The vehicle control for its drive mode spawns additional
loops in parallel the the ones already started during initialisation.
C.3.1
Logging
Two of them are simply responsible for logging the device state (figure C.13).
Figure C.13: Logging
Logging has been made in loops with non-deterministic timing where the current
motor, pedal status and the associated control values are saved withing interval of 200ms.
Whereas slow changing signals as pump status is saved on each second and the batteries
state is logged with period of 10s.
C.3.2
Service BMS
Then there are loops to read (and update local value) of low voltage BMS status and
react to its error. As well as one to read main BMS status.
==PAGE:64==
54
C : Software documentation
Figure C.14: Service BMS messages
To keep the BMS in load mode it needs to receive load request at least once per two
seconds5 so, since it is not a cost-full operation, to have an error margin the code was
setup to send this message once per second. Additionally this loop has been used to
actually sense if the BMS is in load mode and turn off the system otherwise (fig. C.15).
Figure C.15: Keep_BMS_in_load_mode_message.vi
C.3.3
Service steering wheel and pedals updates
Pedals service beside simply receiving status messages and issuing messages to motors
had to be enforced for the case when the communication is lost. Especially dangerous
example is if accelerator pedal would be pressed down while communication got lost. In
the most simple approach car would keep accelerating until reaching to speed or it has
been turned off.
5Adjustable value, default used in the setup
==PAGE:65==
C.3 Vehicle control - drive
55
Figure C.16: Steering/pedals sensors service
To counteract this unlikely event a watchdog like functionality has been implemented
(fig. C.16). Whenever within last 500 ms no sensors status has been read their values
are reset to zeros and request for motors update is requested.
C.3.4
Service motor controllers
Figure C.17: Service motor controllers
Motor controller
target torque is updated on each request (notification in ”Update
Motors Notifier”).
Figure C.18: Update_motors_target_values.vi
==PAGE:66==
56
C : Software documentation
It is done in the manner that whenever Update_motors_target_values.vi is called it
waits for notification. Then based current motors status and sensors value the target
torque for each wheel is calculated (C.4.5.1). The communication object semaphore for
one motor controller is obtained, value updated and semaphore released and the same
is repeated for the other controller.
Motor status
is obtained on each 100 ms by the call to Pool_motor_status.vs (fig.
C.19) which works in very similar manner to the way the target values are updated.
Figure C.19: Pool_motor_status.vi
C.3.5
Service Pumps
Last but not least during the drive mode the pumps are controlled by the code shown
in figure C.20.
Figure C.20: Pumps service
What is happening in the code is that pumps are set to full power for first 3s (initialise
spin) and the loop is started which updates pumps duty cycle based speed and motor
temperatures on each 100ms. The update is done by call to Control_Pump_Power-
_(acc_and_temp).vi which simply calculates desired duty cycle and sends the message
to pump controller (VIs further described in C.4.3).
==PAGE:67==
C.4 Low level API
57
Figure C.21: Control_Pump_Power_(acc_and_temp).vi
C.4
Low level API
C.4.1
Logging
In quiet few places I have been using a special functions to log data, especially logging
application state has been used through the whole application. I have written 5 logging
functions where all of them follows the same pattern.
The semaphore for log file
(a) Log_State.vi
(b) Log_Error.vi
(c) Log_Motor.vi
(d) Log_Pump.vi
is acquired, then the data is save to TDMS file along with current time-stamp and
semaphore is released. What is probably worth to mention is the split into few calls for
TDMS write. The reason for it is that on single write only the array containing one type
of data can be written, if one would try for instance write 8bit value along with 64bit
one both would be saved as 64 numbers. To avoid this but also possibly limit the calls
values has been grouped into arrays of the same type. For instance in Log_Betteries.vi
first time-stamp is saved (it has corresponding type in TDMS format), then the array
==PAGE:68==
58
C : Software documentation
(e) Log_Batteries.vi
Figure C.21: Logging functions
of 8bit values from low voltage BMS, soon after follows Boolean array from BMS status
and last but not least two 32-bit values from battery status.
The same procedure has been followed has been followed in all the files including
Log_Motors.vi where it has been implemented in separate file to avoid duplication -
Motor_to_TDMS.vi (fig. C.22).
==PAGE:69==
C.4 Low level API
59
Figure C.22: Motor_to_TDMS.vi
C.4.2
SDO wrappers
CANOpen SDO object are accessed by their address and field number. Although, it
is clear enough to machine, the user might have problem to understand for example
why we are sending 15 to address 0x6040. To make the code readable and possible to
use/develop without manual I had been writing the wrapping functions for SDO objects.
Lets take for example node ID which resides in SDO address 0x100B. To make it
accessible I have written simple getter Get_Node_ID.vi and setter Set_Node_ID.vi
(fig. C.23). I have wrote it for all used parameters and then encapsulated it into two
(a) Get_Node_ID.vi
(b) Set_node_ID.vi
Figure C.23: Node ID getter/setter
polymorphic VI. Therefore accessing each parameter is as simple as taking Get_SDO.vi
or Set_SDO.vi and choosing the name of parameter from the list.This said I have also
wrote a bit more complex setters/getters. For example Set_Controlword.vi (fig. C.24)
allows user to choose control world by its name instead of binary notation.
==PAGE:70==
60
C : Software documentation
Figure C.24: Set_Controlword.vi
Whereas Set_PDO_receive_mapping.vi goes a few steps further providing validation
of send data, raising errors (sum data mapping per PDO channel cannot be bigger than
64 bits) and sets PDO channel mapping based on variable length array (changes values
in multiple SDOs).
Figure C.25: Set_PDO_receive_mapping.vi
Another interesting example would be Set_PDOs_COB_IDs.vi where values are
calculated on the fly to update PDOs COB IDs (fig. C.26).
Figure C.26: Set_PDOs_COB_IDs.vi
There are also functions which further encapsulates above mentioned complex imple-
mentations such as Set_PDOs_mapping.vi or Set_into_drive_mode.vi (fig C.27,C.28).
==PAGE:71==
C.4 Low level API
61
Figure C.27: Set_PDOs_mapping.vi
Figure C.28: Set_into_drive_mode.vi
C.4.3
CAN message wrapping
In the same manner as SDO also the CAN messages has been wrapped. However, due
to smaller quantity of them I have chosen to more freely adapt them to the places they
are called. Therefore there is no one polymorphic VI containing the list of functionality.
Instead functions has to be called directly by their VIs. This is minor disadvantage,
however it greatly simplifies usage.
Simplest CAN message wrapping can be seen in Set_Pump_Power.vi (fig. C.29).
Figure C.29: Set_Pump_Power.vi
Other wrappings are clearly adjusted to use cases like Get_pedal_status.vi (fig.
C.30).
==PAGE:72==
62
C : Software documentation
Figure C.30: Get_pedal_status.vi
The code except of sending the message contains all the functionality from the con-
taining control loop. So the update motors notification is send, watchdog value is up-
dated and possible error added to queue to be serviced.
There is quiet few more examples but I believe that they are self explanatory.
C.4.4
Read CAN message
To make CAN message wrapping possible a few CAN read messages needed to be im-
plemented. The implementation has been wrapped into polymorphic VI which resolves
to one of three functions based on connected data.
Figure C.31:
Error genera-
tion upon CAN read timeout
The ”Read CAN” functions accepts message ID to
be send as single value, array of IDs or be omit-
ted which corresponds to VIs call Read_single_CAN.vi,
Read_Array_CAN.vi and Read_All_CAN.vi.
All of
them exits upon message arrival or due to timeout (with
error - fig. C.31).
C.4.4.1
Read single CAN ID
Figure C.32: Read_single_CAN.vi
==PAGE:73==
C.4 Low level API
63
Figure
C.33:
Ele-
ment_in_queue.vi
Function ”Queue status”
returns error in case if
reference is not valid and
number of elements otherwise.
The code firstly deference the CAN session pointer, then
from array of read queues the one with desired ID is taken
and checked if it contains an item (firstly checking if the
queue exist fig. C.33). This initial check is done to the
fact that I do not want to miss a message which can prior
to this function call but was not served yet.
If the queue does not contain a message the remaining
timeout is calculated as difference of current time-stamp
and the time when function was initially called. Then
within timeout wait for new CAN frame notification is called and loop is repeated when-
ever message comes.
There is also additional functionality encoded, if the initial timeout is set to be -1
the read function never times out.
C.4.4.2
Read array of CAN IDs
Figure C.34: Read_Array_CAN.vi
Read array functions similarly to previous example, the CAN session is referenced and
array of IDs is iterated checking if corresponding queues already contains messages (exit
on first found).
If no message has been found it waits for notification in the same manner as read
single. Upon notification the message ID is decoded from it. If it is one of the desired
ones an initial array of IDs is shuffled such that the just arrived ID appears as first one
and the function loop back to the first check.
==PAGE:74==
64
C : Software documentation
C.4.4.3
Read all CAN messages
Figure C.35: Read_All_CAN.vi
This VI simply check if there is no message in queue array, waits for new CAN frame
notification and returns message to come.
C.4.5
Calculation utilities
C.4.5.1
Differential disproportion
Figure C.36: Calculate_differential_torque_disproportion.vi
In point 1, case when steering wheel angle is equal to zero is addressed separately as
used equation (2.1) does not have solution in the point (cot(0)). In the case simply 1
is returned for both outputs. Otherwise the steering wheel position is checked to fall
withing its operational limits (−124 ◦, 124 ◦). If not error is returned (point 3), position
is coerced and calculations are continued.
Point 4 simply follows equations 2.1 and 2.2.
Figure C.37: Calculate_torque_per_wheel.vi
==PAGE:75==
C.4 Low level API
65
Figure C.38: Normalise.vi
Simply takes maximum, value
and minimum as an input and
returns normalised value from
0 to 1 saturating on these
values (additionally giving
Boolean indicators when
saturates)
Calculate_torque_per_wheel.vi encapsulates calcula-
tions for differential adding desired scaling in respect to
accelerator position, vehicle speed and controls behaviour
in case of torque saturation.
In point 1 the average of wheels speeds is calculated
and transformed from rpm into km/h. Then speed and ac-
celerator values are normalised (and coerced) within their
limits (point 2). As the speed value is coerced within 10-
20km/h the equation 4.5 is simply calculated in point
4 resulting in desired torque percentage (negative value
corresponds to regenerative breaking). Up to point 5 val-
ues are transformed accordingly to equation 4.2 providing
safety solution in case of torque saturation. Last but not
least torque percentage is multiplied within its maximum allowed value and right wheel
is multiplied by -1 so it rotates in the same direction as left one.
C.4.5.2
Pump power
Figure C.39: Calculate_Pump_Power.vi
The calculations simply follows equation 4.1 described in 4.3 section.
==PAGE:76==
66
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[1]
8-bit Atmel with 8KBytes InSystem Programmable Flash. url: https://www.
mouser.com/datasheet/2/268/Atmel-2486-8-bit-AVR-microcontroller-
ATmega8_L_dat-1315266.pdf.
[2]
Accelerating automotive test development. https://www.slideshare.net/thorstenmayer/
accelerating-automotive-test-development-may-2008. Accessed: 2018-09-
10.
[3]
H. Boterenbrood. “CANopen, high-level protocol for CAN-bus”. In: (March 2000).
url: https://www.nikhef.nl/pub/departments/ct/po/doc/CANopen30.pdf.
[4]
CANopen history. https : / / www . can - cia . org / can - knowledge / canopen /
canopen-history/. Accessed: 2018-09-10.
[5]
CANopen Introduction. http://www.canopensolutions.com/. Accessed: 2018-
09-10.
[6]
CANopen – The standardized embedded network. https://www.can-cia.org/
canopen/. Accessed: 2018-09-10.
[7]
Robert I. Davis et al. “Controller Area Network (CAN) schedulability analysis: Re-
futed, revisited and revised”. In: Real-Time Systems 35.3 (April 2007), pages 239–
272. issn: 1573-1383. doi: 10.1007/s11241-007-9012-7. url: https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11241-007-9012-7.
[8]
Kurt M. DeGoede et al. “How Quickly Can Healthy Adults Move Their Hands to
Intercept an Approaching Object? Age and Gender Effects”. In: The Journals of
Gerontology: Series A 56.9 (2001), pages M584–M588. doi: 10.1093/gerona/56.9.
M584. eprint: /oup/backfile/content_public/journal/biomedgerontology/
56/9/10.1093_gerona_56.9.m584/1/m584.pdf. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1093/gerona/56.9.M584.
[9]
S. Köngeterand Daimler AG Dr. M. Schreiner L. Donat. “Introduction of CAN FD
into the next generation of vehicle E/E architectures”. In: IEEE ICC (2017). Ac-
cessed: 2018-09-10.
[10]
P. Fajri, S. Heydari, and N. Lotfi. “Optimum low speed control of regenerative
braking for electric vehicles”. In: 2017 IEEE 6th International Conference on Re-
newable Energy Research and Applications (ICRERA). November 2017, pages 875–
879. doi: 10.1109/ICRERA.2017.8191185.
==PAGE:78==
68
Bibliography
[11]
J. Guo, J. Wang, and B. Cao. “Regenerative braking strategy for electric vehicles”.
In: 2009 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium. June 2009, pages 864–868. doi:
10.1109/IVS.2009.5164393.
[12]
ISO 11898:1993. https://www.iso.org/standard/20380.html. Accessed: 2018-
09-10.
[13]
Reza N. Jazar. “Steering Dynamics”. In: Vehicle Dynamics: Theory and Application.
New York, NY: Springer New York, 2014, pages 387–495. isbn: 978-1-4614-8544-5.
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-8544-5_7. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-
4614-8544-5_7.
[14]
U. Koppe. Identifier Usage in CANopen Networks. January 2003. url: http://
www.microcontrol.net/download/appnotes/td-03011e.pdf.
[15]
USER MANUAL n-BMS. Version enriched due to our questions, possibly not
published. LiTHIUM BALANCE A/S. LiTHIUM BALANCE A/S
Hassellunden 13
2765 Smørum, Denmark, June 2018.
[16]
User’s Manual for Advanced Axial Flux Synchronous Motors and Generators. EM-
RAX innovative e-motors. url: http://emrax.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/
01/emrax_228_technical_data_4.5.pdf.
