==PAGE:1==
 
One-Button Active Self-Tracking  
Data Interaction and Visualization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mikkel Baand Rasmussen 
==PAGE:2==
 
1 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of applied Mathematics and computer Science  
2800 Kgs Lyngby, Denmark  
==PAGE:3==
 
2 
Abstract english  
In this theses I have developed a prototype dashboard visualization of active and passive self-
tracking data. The dashboard is developed for visualizing general subjective incident for 
example for feelings, pain or thoughts. The visualization is based on a timestamp and 
location. The active self-tracking data is combined with passive self-tracking. The passive 
registered data is the person's location during the period of registration.   
There have been several experiments evaluating the prototype. These experiments are carried 
out to evaluate the dashboard for usability and the ability to detect patterns in the registered 
data.    
For proof-of-concept, a test person has registered his pollen allergy incident. The data has 
been visualized and presented to the test person. The test person has evaluated the data in the 
visualization and has comment the result, with great success even though the test person only 
registered active part of the data. In addition to the test person dataset, a test dataset with both 
passive and active tracking has been generated and visualized. 
  
Abstrakt dansk  
I dette speciale har jeg udviklet et dashboard prototype til visualisering af aktive og passive 
self-tracking data. Dashboardet er udviklet til visualisering af generelle subjektive hændelser, 
fx følelser, smerter eller tanker. Visualiseringen er baseret på et tidsstemple og lokation. De 
aktive self-tracking data kombineres med passiv self-tracking. De passive data, er personens 
registrerede lokation i perioden. 
Der er lavet flere eksperimenter, der evaluerer prototypen. Disse eksperimenter er lavet til at 
evaluere dashboardet for brugervenlighed og muligheden for at finde mønstre i de 
registrerede data. 
For ”prof of concept” har en testperson registreret sin pollenallergi i en periode. Den 
opsamlede data er blevet visualiseret og præsenteret for testpersonen. Testpersonen har 
vurderet dataene i visualiseringen og har kommenteret resultatet, med stor succes, selvom 
testperson kun har registreret den aktive del af dataene. Ud over testpersonens datasættet er et 
testdatasæt med både passiv og aktiv registrering opsamlet og visualiseret. 
 
 
 
 
  
==PAGE:4==
 
3 
Preface 
The Project was completed as a master thesis at the Department of Applied Mathematics and 
Computer Science at Technical University of Denmark (DTU).  
The project has been completed in the period September 17. April – 17. September 2018. (30 
ECTS)  
Jakob Eg Larsen and Per Bækgaard has been supervisor for the project. 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________ 
17-09-2018 
==PAGE:5==
 
4 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to thank my supervisor Jakob Eg Larsen and Per Bækgaard for great supervion 
thru the period. They have both contributed with discussion and knowledge about the subject. 
In addition I would like to thank test persons for involving in this theses. Especially Henrik 
Rasmussen who has registered important data for this project.  
Also thanks to family for coaching and support.  
 
    
   
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
5 
Table of contents 
 
1 
Introduction 
7 
1.1 
Motivation and goal 
8 
2 
Related work 
9 
2.1 
Sampling methods 
9 
2.2 
PTSD Study 
9 
3 
Analysis 
10 
3.1 
Requirements Specification 
10 
3.2 
User 
11 
3.3 
Use cases 
11 
3.4 
The Stage-Based Model of Personal Informatics Systems 
12 
3.4.1 
Preparation Stage 
12 
3.4.2 
Collection Stage 
13 
3.4.3 
Integration Stage 
13 
3.4.4 
Reflective Stage 
14 
3.4.5 
Action stage 
14 
4 
Design 
15 
4.1 
Iteration process 
15 
4.2 
Interaction and Navigation 
16 
4.2.1 
Timeline 
16 
4.2.2 
Map 
17 
4.2.3 
Weekly  
19 
4.2.4 
Clock 
20 
4.2.5 
Change over time 
20 
4.2.6 
Future improvements 
21 
5 
Implementation 
22 
5.1 
Moves 
23 
5.1.1 
Data / selection 
23 
5.1.2 
Transformation 
23 
5.2 
Nomie 
25 
5.2.1 
Data / selection 
25 
5.2.2 
Transformation 
26 
5.2.3 
Converting coordinates to distance 
26 
5.2.4 
Data mining 
28 
==PAGE:7==
 
6 
5.2.5 
Cluster Algorithm 
28 
5.2.6 
DBSCAN 
29 
5.2.7 
Find center of gravity 
30 
5.2.8 
Generating New File 
31 
5.3 
Patterns 
31 
5.3.1 
Selection of visualization tool 
31 
5.3.2 
Visualization - D3.js 
32 
5.3.3 
Timeline 
32 
5.3.4 
Clock 
32 
5.3.5 
Map 
33 
5.3.6 
Zoom 
33 
5.4 
Working method 
34 
6 
Experiments / test 
36 
6.1 
Funktions test 
36 
6.2 
Experiments Method 
36 
6.2.1 
1. Usability test with own generated test data 
36 
6.2.2 
2. Test with allergy test person 
38 
6.3 
Experiment 2- Analysis of allergy 
39 
6.4 
Overview of the data 
40 
6.5 
Demo of visualization with passive data 
42 
7 
Conclusion 
44 
8 
Bibliography 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
7 
1 Introduction 
As the smartphone has become a natural part of our life, the use of the phone has evolved. 
The original function of the phone has been become secondary, with the introduction of new 
devices such as smart-watches and smart wristband. 
These devices can monitor the different aspect of your life. Most common are the different 
activity like traces of your daily movement and sporting activities such as running and 
cycling. This means that the number of personal data types possible to monitor have risen 
dramatically in recent years. 
This trend has created a new word "quantified self" - the ability to monitor, track and evaluate 
the different aspect of yourself based on quantitative data.  
Many aspects of our behavior can be tracked automatically without us being aware of it. This 
is called “passive tracking” and can be very useful in many situations like motion monitoring, 
heart rate and the use of mobile apps. 
Even though more advanced algorithms have been developed to automatically register 
different events, there are still a need for tools that can support a manual registration of an 
event. These, “active registrations” are still highly relevant when capturing subjective data 
like mood, emotion or pain. For these types of registrations, it is imperative that they can be 
done with a single click. 
In this thesis I have developed a tool for analyzing and visualize these types of subjective 
data with a strong focus on the ease of registration. These active registrations will be 
combined and matched with passive registrations from the same person to enhance the 
understanding of the behavior and occurrence of the subjective events actively registered. 
A central part of the visualization is the location. Visualization will be based on timestamp 
and GPS location.  
In this thesis, I have focused on the continuous improvement of both the visualization and 
user interface, using my own generated data and feedback loops with smaller group of test 
subjects.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
8 
1.1 Motivation and goal 
The goal of this thesis is to develop a visualization tool to find and expose patterns in 
collected data from a user. The visualization tool should be suitable for visualizing subjective 
data that could be registered with a single click on a smartphone, one-button device or other 
smart device.  
The tool must be developed to be suitable for a wide range data and cater for personal 
registrations of subjective events. The tool should not be directed to specific diseases but 
rather be a tool to visualize subjective observations, such as mood, emotion or pain.  
The main source of the data is time and location. Unlike other projects I know, I have 
emphasized that visualization is based on location and how it can be presented and included 
as an important parameter.  
It is essential that the tool is user friendly. To ensure a great user interface I have been 
generating test data from a subject, during a 6-week period. Throughout the period I have 
been making continuous improvements on both visualization and user interface based on user 
tests and feedback sessions.  Finally, it is essential that the tool also is interactive and can 
expose the data in a sensemaking way for the user. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
9 
2 Related work 
2.1 Sampling methods 
The essential goal of this project is to gain knowledge about subjective events. This 
knowledge may be relevant in many contexts, especially in psychiatry but also elsewhere 
such as physical disorders. Examples of this could be migraine attacks or other pain, mental 
issue such as anxiety disorder, PTSD, etc. Treatment of these diseases has always been 
relevant to quantify the symptoms. Throughout the time there are several methods used for 
this. The traditional way of self-reported data, either by conversational therapy paper diaries 
etc. However, this method has many disadvantages, including inaccurate representations due 
to recall bias. (Alain Moren u.d.) 
Different method has been developed for addressing the challenge to collect subjective data 
from users. Experience sampling methods (ESM) (Larson 1983) and (EMA) (STONE u.d.) is 
a research methodology where participant report events such as feelings pain or mood close 
to the time where the event occur.   
An improved method of ESM / EMA is that events are recorded quickly and electronically 
from the user registering their subjective experience when it happens using a one-button 
device. This method has been used in a case study on PTSD patients (Jakob Eg Larsen 9 Mar 
2017) 
2.2 PTSD Study  
A danish veteran suffering from PTSD has been equipped with a one-button wearable self-
tracking device for registration of his subjective PTSD symptoms. The data generated during 
the period was used for psychotherapeutic treatment. It was found that this quantitative data 
provided valuable help to both the patient and the therapist.  
 
In this thesis, one dimension will be added compared to the PTSD case. A location will be 
added both in the active one-button registration and location will be passively registered 
through the observed period to add additional value to the active registration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
 
10 
3 Analysis  
3.1 Requirements Specification  
To develop the right visualization, it is crucial to make clear what the purpose of the 
visualization is and what it is expected to be able to demonstrate. Keywords for the tool are to 
understand coherence and patterns. These patterns and contexts are based on location and 
time.  
To develop a tool for analyzing these patterns, there are some assumptions about which 
patterns may occur that have been necessary to take: 
- 
Location. Does the location have a bearing on the occurrence of events   
- 
Time  
- 
Months 
- 
Weekday   
- 
Time   
- 
Period 
- 
General development   
Location 
Parameter is selected because many events are affected by the location, such as the home 
environment, workplace, near forest or water etc. At the same time, it also makes it easier to 
memorize actions when tool e.g is used for dialog with a therapist.  
 
Month 
Is the event affected by the time of season.  
Weekday  
Is the event affected by weekends, working day. 
Time  
Is the event affected by the time of day. (morning/day/evening/night )  
 
In addition to the functional requirements, I set a number of nonfunctional requirements 
UX requirements  
- 
Ease of use  
- 
Intuitively  
- 
Easy to understand  
- 
Clear presentation  
- 
Interaction  
 
==PAGE:12==
 
11 
3.2 User 
It is necessary for registering data, that the user has a device for actively registering events. 
Furthermore, if passive data is included, the user needs to have an active phone with a 
relevant application installed. 
The user interface is intended to help the person who detects events as a tool to see and 
understand patterns in the recorded events. In addition to this, it should also be a good 
dialogue tool, for example, a professional therapist or medical care. The tool must, therefore, 
be simple and easy to understand and the data analyzed without a major introduction to the 
program. The system is intended for users who are familiar with computer work and a limited 
technical understanding of IT  
 
There is no requirement for prior technical understanding of symptoms to be registered, but a 
professional understanding may in many cases be advisable. 
 
If an action plan is to be prepared for how to act forward in relation to the analysis, 
professional help might be necessary. 
3.3 Use cases 
From the agile mindset, a number of use cases is formulated according to the model "user-
need-value". (Ibanez u.d.) This is to exemplify a number of different users, their needs and 
goals. These use cases I will use to keep my goals in mind and demonstrate the versatility in 
the product.  
• As a PTSD patient, I want a tool to identify patterns in my symptoms for future 
prospects to avoid these situations.  
• As a pollen allergist, I want to predict when I get symptoms of my allergy so that I 
can take preventive pills forward.  
• As a migraine patient, I want to see when the migraine is the worst in order to take 
pills preventively.  
• As a mentally ill patient, I want to quantify my illness to my treatment as a dialogue 
tool.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
 
12 
3.4 The Stage-Based Model of Personal Informatics Systems 
 
Image 1 Stage-Based Mode 
Stage-Based Model of Personal Infomatics System (Ian Li u.d.) is good for identifying the 
steps needed to achieve the self-understanding that is the purpose of any given self-tracking 
system including my own visualization. At the same time, it helps to identify the barriers that 
may be associated with the use of the system during the process. 
 
This model is divided into 5 stages based on the user's point of view. It is an iterative process 
towards the desired goal, meaning what it might be necessary to keep collecting data again 
after reflection and action has been taken.  
 
In the following I will review the 5 phases and how they have been applied in the thesis.  
 
3.4.1 Preparation Stage 
At first, it is necessary to decide what purpose and insight is desired. Hereafter the it can be 
determined what to register and how. Having a clear goal for the registration the motivation 
will increase and can limit some of the barriers that may arise in the process. The tools to be 
used for registration must be acquired and learned. In this thesis, two applications have been 
used for generating the necessary data. The first one is, Nomie (https://nomie.app/ u.d.) and is 
used for active event registration. The second one is, Moves (https://www.moves-app.com/ 
u.d.), which is used for passive registration and detect the current location. 
 
Nomie  
Nomie is a an application to actively track events with a single-button interface. In the 
application you simply create a button of your choice. When you press your tracking button 
Image 3 Nomie 
interface 
Image 2Moves 
interface 
==PAGE:14==
 
13 
in Nomie the exact time and GPS location is registered and saved locally on your 
smartphone.  
Moves  
Moves is a mobile application for activity tracking. The application registers your daily 
activity passively in the background while your mobile is turned on and you are “signed in” 
on Moves. Moves give you a complete overview of your activity of bicycling running etc. 
Furthermore, it tracks your GPS location throughout your day.  
To get the best result of the visualization, you must passively register your location all the 
time. For people who are concerned about privacy, this could be a problematic barrier even 
though the data is only available for you. In fact, this has also been a challenge in terms of 
collecting test data, more of this problem later. 
Using two independent applications is not an optimal solution. It would be possible to 
develop one single app that could gather all the necessary data in one app. 
 
3.4.2 Collection Stage 
The practical registration is done by launching the Nomie application and pressing the button 
indicating an incidence.  
For the passive part of the registration of your location you don't need to do anything but 
wearing your mobile at you and have it turned on.  
 
It could be relevant in many cases that the data is recorded via, for example, a smartwatch or 
other easier accessible devices. It would be smart for users with special needs and 
preferences. For example, one could imagine in cases where PTSD patients had to do the 
tracking. PTSD patients must register their seizures, they will just be in a depressed situation 
when registration is to take place. One could also imagine older people who had difficulty 
managing a smartphone. Of Course, you must make sure your smartphone is nearby you at all 
time and has not run out of battery. These are examples of how the actual record of the events 
could have some potential barriers.    
3.4.3 Integration Stage 
This stage is about getting to the reflection stage. The benefits of registering the events 
digitally are many, one of them is to make integration easier compared to traditional pen and 
paper.  
 
For this prototype, the focus has not been on the integration stage as the user, often will see 
this stage as something the system automatically handles. The data collected by Moves could 
be downloaded from Moves website and are available in most common filetypes. For my 
purpose, csv was a great format. During the thesis, Facebook which owns Moves, decided to 
close the service on July 31, 2018. 
 
In Nomie it is possible to send an email with a CSV file containing the registered data.  
 
Each file must be run through a Python script and imported to the website. Theoretically, the 
data could be recorded directly to a database for the website. It would be possible to make a 
login system for the website so the user can get easy access to the data.  
==PAGE:15==
 
14 
 
For the user's point of view, this stage should be handled automatically by the system 
3.4.4 Reflective Stage 
At this stage, the collected data must be visualized in a way that gives the user a better 
understanding of the person's behavioral patterns. This is the topic the following chapters will 
cover.  
3.4.5 Action stage 
It is not a goal for the system to provide concrete recommendations for behavioral changes. It 
is up to the user to use the information in the way that makes sense to the user. It may be 
desirable that the user change behavior, but this thesis will not cover specific actions for the 
users. It is thus up to users to interpret the data and take the necessary action. It can however 
been necessary to discuss the data with professionals, who can guide the user to take the right 
action. This could, for example, be the case if you want to use the system in relation to PTSD 
patients.  
 
  
 
 
==PAGE:16==
 
15 
4 Design 
4.1 Iteration process 
As a start on the assignment I made a number of mockups on paper that could be discussed 
with supervisor and other stakeholders. The overall layout was determined and an example of 
one of my drawings is shown in Image 4. Although mockups are not intentional for 
interactive design (Klein 2014), some drawings were made that could generally how to show 
ideas of the overall visualization. It is difficult to express interactivity in mockups and was 
therefore quickly replaced by prototype development. Designing interface was an iterative 
process where input from feedback session and user testing was done through the process. In 
this chapter I explain some examples of the changes and 
considerations what has led to the final prototype.    
The initial idea has been to make a dashboard view where all the 
dimensions are shown. It is difficult to test the interaction before 
there is a working prototype. The iterative process has mostly taken 
place in the individual quadrants and their visualizations. Some of 
these improvement and iterations is shown in this chapter. 
First iteration  
On the first iteration, I focused on combining the passive registered 
data of my location indicated with green dots with the indication of 
the registered incidence indicated with red dots.  One of my first 
findings was the size of the dot, at first how do I size the dots 
relatively to each other and the map. Secondarily it was a 
challenge to size dots when zooming the map. It make sense to 
make a lot of experiments and make some readings about that 
issue. Additional it was a great way to get some experience 
managing D3   
Timeline: 
  
 
Another example of iteration is the time slider. The first version of the time slider had no 
indication of number of events. That made it more difficult to choose interesting timeslot.   
 
 
Image 4 Example of mokup 
Image 5 First version of map and two types 
of event 
==PAGE:17==
 
16 
4.2 Interaction and Navigation 
The overall goal is to understand the relationships and patterns in the data. This is done by 
allowing the user to dive into the data by selecting different dimensions and keep them 
constant and show the relation to each other. As previously mentioned in the specification, 
there are 4 dimensions specified:  
 
- 
Location  
- 
Weekday / month / year  
- 
Time of day / 24 hours  
- 
Change over time for the selected period 
 
This will be 4 dimensions in the visualization. These 4 dimensions 
I will put in a single screen/ dashboard so that you can always 
have an overview of all the dimensions you have chosen. These 4 
dimensions will be 4 quadrants on the screen see Image 6. In addition to the 4 dimensions, 
there is a slider at the top where you can choose the time interval that will be visualized and 
executed in the other dimension. 
In the following section I will refer to the image shown in Image 6 and mark the current part 
of the visualization.  
4.2.1 Timeline 
To compare and understand data over time, I have integrated a timeline that is 
located at the top of the page. This is implemented as a slider where it is possible 
to choose the period for which you want to see data. The slider also makes it 
possible to set a fixed time frequency for example a week and see how this 
frequency looks at other periods of the time interval. This feature makes it easy 
to compare intervals throughout the entire period, thus gaining an understanding 
of how data has evolved.  
To make it easier for the user to choose "interesting periods", a smaller graph of 
the total number of events per day is integrated into the slider. The main goal of 
this is to make an “Overview plus Detail” (Tidwell 2011)(p. 296) navigation.     
This makes it easy to get an overview of how many events happen when, and thus easy to 
zoom in to the range where you can see more or fewer events. This timeline is independent of 
which areas / days you select in the rest of the interface.   
  
   
 
Image 8 Time slider with timeslot selected. 
Image 6 Overall layout 
Image 7 Place of timeline 
==PAGE:18==
 
17 
In the picture, you can see an overview of the events of the whole period. The gray area 
marked is the area that is "selected". 
4.2.2 Map  
Visualization of events on the map 
It is important to get an intuitive impression of the relationship between the 
different clusters and their amounts of events associated with them at first 
glance. The amount of events related to the specific location is reflected by 
the size of the circles.  
In my previous version, the relationship between clusters' number of events 
was linear with the cluster's radius, which means that the area increases 
with the square of the radius. However, it turned out that this gave a false 
impression of the relationship between the number of events and the size of 
the circles. The size of the circles is now linearly dependent on area instead 
of radius, as this provides the best intuition for the number of events. It also complies the 
rewarding standards for visualization (paldhous u.d.). 
To clarify the exact location, I have made it possible to 
zoom the map, it is important to mention that the circles 
maintain their linear aspect ratio through the zoom area.  
Even though the size of the circles is correct, it is still 
difficult to figure out the exact size relative to each 
other, so it is possible to see the exact number with a 
tooltip. Tooltip is effective for particular fact that aren’t 
presented in the overview. (Tidwell 2011)  
The maximum size of a circle, which will also be the starting size, is predefined. This is 
predefined according to the size that fits the layout and the maximum amount of event of all 
clusters. It means as well that the circles size will fit to any given dataset with different 
amount of data. When you tap into a dimension in the tool you will see that the size of the 
circle becomes smaller. Here too, they maintain the linear aspect ratio with the original size. 
It means if you choose another dimension for example decrease time period in the slider the 
circle will change size according to the linear relation to the amount of event for the 
differents circles and disappear if you choose a period with no event in the specific point .    
Each circle is a bit transparent. 
At first it gives a visual effect of the concentration of clusters that have been gathered in 
various places, in addition to this, it also ensures that you can see all the circles even though 
they are superimposed. 
 
Image 9 map part of 
layout 
Image 10 Selected location on map 
==PAGE:19==
 
18 
 
Image 11 Zooming in map. 
Passive tracking  
Different ways of visualizing the 
passive data have been tried. One 
way is to visualize the data by 
using a dot density map. The 
challenge in this type of map is 
that the data is gathered in a very 
small area. The way to solve this is 
by spreading points in a "random" 
area. The result of this is seen on 
Image 12. Each dot indicates 2 hours. This creates an dot density map 
witch is show an intuitively where things clump or cluster. (axismaps 
u.d.)    
Another way to visualize the passive data is with a gradient here is no 
random value added to the data. Each circle still represents 2 hours and 
has a degree of transparency. When more dots overlap the transparency 
will decrease and you get an impression of how long you have been in 
different places.  
The third way I have tried is a combination. Here I add a random value and the dots have an 
gradient depending on how many dots occur at the same place. See Image 13 
 The white dots are also influenced by the dimension you select. Eather the timespan or 
weekday.  
In my prototype I have chosen to use solution two shown in Image 14. 
 
Image 12 Experiment with small dot spreading the points randomly around 
center (same dataset) 
Image 13 Experiment with 
gradient and large dots 
==PAGE:20==
 
19 
 
Image 14 Passive tracking indicated by white dots 
4.2.3 Weekly  
The second quadrant consists of a bar chart. The bar chart shows how many 
events that are spread over the different days of the week in the selected 
period. If you want to see the exact number of events in one day, it is 
possible to with a tooltip like in the map view.  
 
It is intended that this quadrant can show data on different time frequencies 
such as week, monthly, year to to make it more general, for this prototype 
only weekly basis is available. 
 
One could imagine it is interesting to visualize PTSD cases on a weekly basis, 
where as allergy cases could be visualized on a monthly basis.  
 
At Image 16 is an example of a graph shown, a new dimension is selected (location and/or 
timeslot) and the graph change according to the newly selected data. The y-axis values 
remain constant and are made based on the maximum number of occurrences that take place 
on a weekday. This makes it easier to compare when other dimensions are selected and 
compared. 
 
If you want to look at a specific weekday you simply press at the bar chart on a specific day 
in the week 
 
Image 16 Interaction in  weekday graph. 
 
Image 15 Weekday 
part of layout 
==PAGE:21==
 
20 
4.2.4 Clock  
 Time of day can also be an essential factor for the event, does the event 
happens in the morning daytime or the evening, etc. Therefore, you should 
easily have an overview of what times the event occurs. This is visualized by a 
circle that shows 24 hours a day. A pie chart is chosen because it makes 
associations with time. The circle is divided so that every hour has its equal 
slice equivalent to one hour. If there is an interval where events occur, this will 
be highlighted in red. It thus seems that a gradient of red indicates the number 
of events. The maximum number of incidences is indicated by 100% red. 
Other number are graded according to the maximum in the current selected 
data (location/ day/interval)  
 
Image 18 Clock visualization 
4.2.5 Change over time  
When the page is loaded, the graph shows the same as the top slider - the 
trend over time, the number of events per day. Unlike the top slider, this 
will change depending on which dimension that is chosen. It means that 
it is possible to see the developments over time at a selected location or 
selected weekday as shown in Image 20. The y-axis is kept constant. 
   
 
 
Image 17 Place of clock graph 
Image 19 Place of development 
==PAGE:22==
 
21 
 
Image 20 Change over time 
4.2.6 Future improvements 
In the current prototype, you can only select one item in each dimension (Location / Day). It 
could be interesting to experiment with a functionality where you could select multiple points 
in the same dimension. It would increase complexity in use, but at the same time it would 
give slightly more flexibility in exploring and understanding of the contexts of the data. 
A possible improvement would be to compare the number of events with the time spent in the 
same place. It would be possible to measure a proportionality event density and provide a 
more accurate number or visual indication.  
In the current prototype, it is not clear how developments are in the event of a chosen 
weekday. It could be displayed in a better way, for example, by displaying only the days in 
the x-axis to be represented in the graph.  
It could be displayed more clearly which dimension is chosen.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:23==
 
22 
5 Implementation 
In this section, I will explain how I technically developed my solutions. The chapter is highly 
structured according to the KDD (Knowledge Discovery in Databases) model (Usama 
Fayyad 1996), which is a model explaining how to get from the raw data to achieved 
knowledge from the data collected. The model largely corresponds to the Stage-Based Model 
I have used during the analysis, but unlike the Stage-Based Model, the KKD model is from 
the developer's point of view. The following section is based on the individual steps in the 
KDD model. Overall, the technical implementation consisted of two elements:  the data 
processing and the development of the specific visualization. The data processing has been 
developed in Python. The development of the interface has occurred in D3.JS with javascript, 
HTML, and CSS. 
  
 
Image 21 KKD model 
In the Image 22 and Image 28 are showed the steps the data is going through, from the raw 
data collected from Moves (Image 22) and Nomie (Image 28) and the way they are being 
handled and transformed in Python. After processing in Python, the new CSV file will be 
processed and visualized using D3. 
 
==PAGE:24==
 
23 
5.1 Moves  
 
Image 22 CSV data from Moves and further steps 
 
5.1.1 Data / selection  
It is possible to import a CSV file with data shown in Image 22 A. I want to use the data to 
find out where I have been at what time. For this, I can use Start, End, and Latitude and 
Longitude. Start and end date indicate the amount of time I have been at the given location 
indicated by Latitude and Longitude. 
5.1.2 Transformation 
I'm interested in generating a dataset where I can find out where I've been at any time. It 
appears from the file that there is a timeslot where no location is specified. The timespan 
from one end time to the next start time no location is known. 
This is because Moves only register where you have stayed for a certain period. Missing 
locations might be times where I have been in transit but could be where there is no power on 
the smartphone or GPS is turned off. 
As I'm interested in a dataset where I can find out where I've been at any time, I assume that 
the last known location is the most accurate location I can specify. 
I have calculated that in the period from 2018-16/05 to 2018-30/7 corresponding to 71 days, a 
location is known 83% of the time. Thus, approximately 17% of location estimated by 
determining position based on last known location. 
As seen in Image 22 C, I have made a table with a date as the index and the location as the 
variable, date corresponds to the start date in the original table. I now assume that this 
location is the best guess until the next start time. 
Additionally, I add the last end time to a new fictional record as the last start date, so I have a 
location at the last time stamp too. 
==PAGE:25==
 
24 
In order to have this data in a more convenient format, the data is, so times are specified with 
a constant time interval. I choose a time interval of two hours and have experimented with 
different time intervals. Image 24 to Image 25 graphically show how the map looks 
depending on the chosen timeframe. Constant transparency of 90% is selected it gives an 
effect off more or less brightness depending of time staying at locations. Shown in the Image 
24 - Image 25. Many areas become obscure or disappear completely when choosing a high 
range.  
Given a low time interval, there will be a high probability that all locations will appear on the 
map. This is shown in Image 25 (10 min interval). Setting down the range causes 
inappropriately many1 items to be generated on the map, which gives an undesirable delay 
and performance problems that are reflected by a "chopping" zoom function. Conversely, a 
high time interval will not show all locations in data sets. 
For the understanding, of the relationship between the passive and the active data, the places 
you have spent shorter time, are less important. Therefore it make sense to set a higher 
interval where fewer places are displayed. 
In A graph shows the period staying in the same place, the dataset is sorted in order of how 
long time there has been registered the same location. This graph gives an overview of the 
dataset and how long is spent on locations.  
 
 
                                                 
1  A quick calculation gives 10224 points (10 min) vs 340 points (5 ours)     
Image 23 2 hour 
Image 24 5 hour 
==PAGE:26==
 
25 
 
The data has been resamplet by using the function   
pandas.Series.asfreq. In order to get a more clean dataset the first 
data has been rounded, the rest of the resampled data will follow 
this rounded date. Before creating the new csv file, the day of 
week is found and added to the dataset. The date format is 
changed to the same format as the Nomie dataset.  A new file as 
seen in   
5.2 Nomie 
 
Image 28 CSV data from Moves and further steps. 
 
5.2.1 Data / selection  
As part of preprocessing, I select the data that I need for my further analysis. Regarding the 
Nomie file I am interested in ISO 8601 (iso u.d.)  date, day, latitude and longitude. The offset 
is an expression of whether time is shifted in relation to summer / winter time, this has not 
been taken into account in my prototype. Latitude and longitude are specified in decimal 
digits places which is also the normal standard when processing locations in the IT programs.  
Image 25 10 min 
Image 26 1 hour 
Image 27 Duration on each location 
(orginal data) 
==PAGE:27==
 
26 
5.2.2 Transformation 
In the transformation stage, the data must be converted to a format that can be analyzed.  
In my visualization, I want to understand and find patterns in the locations of events. I can 
use google map to get an idea of how the points are placed on a map. Image 5 shows an area 
of Zealand where events are plotted. The right part of Image 29 is zoomed in so that you can 
see that there are many events gathered within a small area.   
 
 
 
Image 29 Raw dataset from Nomie shown in Goole maps, example of potential clusters. 
I'm interested in looking for events whose location is highly connected because they are in 
the same small area, for example in a store or apartment. This means that I need to find a 
method of clustering these points together, thus considering them as the same location. On 
Image 29, registrations are shown in an apartment.  
The different locations is both an indication that the registrations have taken place at various 
locations in the apartment and an error in the location's measurement. I know for sure that all 
registrations have been made in the apartment, although some registrations appear to be 
outside.     
5.2.3 Converting coordinates to distance 
The location is determined by a longitude and a latitude that gives the exact location of the 
event. What is almost as important as the location of the events, is the distance between them. 
Since the earth is not flat combined with the way in which the coordinates are given, the 
distances cannot be calculated directly from the longitude and latitude without doing some 
calculation. 
==PAGE:28==
 
27 
 
Image 30 Image of lat and longitude2 
The distance between two latitudes is constant across the globe, whereas longitude depends 
on latitude. If you approach either the North Pole or the South Pole, a longitude will be 
considerably smaller compared to looking at coordinates near the equator. This means that 
the relationship between latitude and longitude is not linear. 
In practice, this means that one latitude is approximate 111,096 kilometers and one longitude 
is 60 kilometers in Denmark's latitudes.  
To eliminate this nonlinear relationship, the coordinates must be converted to real distances 
before calculating how the clusters should be divided. 
For this purpose, the "haversine formula3" is used, which precisely calculates the distance 
between two points indicated by longitude and latitude. To convert GPS locations to a 
coordinate system, I do not calculate distances between the points, but the distance to the x 
and y-axis of my new coordinate system. The y-axis zero point I will define as the equator, 
and the x-axis will be the distance to the prime meridian. The formula is based on an 
assumption that the earth is perfectly round, although this is of course not entirely correct. 
Below is the formula I use to calculate the perpendicular distance measured in kilometers to 
the respective equator and prime median. 
 
a = sin²(Δφ/2) + cos φ1 ⋅ cos φ2 ⋅ sin²(Δλ/2) 
c = 2 ⋅ atan2( √a, √(1−a) ) 
d = R ⋅ c 
 
Below (Image 31) you can see how I used the formula in Python. f11 is latitude and f12 
longitude. Note that when I calculate the distance, I always keep the opposite axis constant as 
it is the distance to the x and y axis. Note that the distance of latitude is constant across the 
globe. When I calculate the distance for longitude, this is calculated to the state at the same 
latitude. 
 
                                                 
2 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geographic_coordinate_system 
3 https://www.igismap.com/haversine-formula-calculate-geographic-distance-earth/ 
==PAGE:29==
 
28 
 
Image 31 Python. Distance greenwich / equator 
To get an idea of how the points lies, they can be plotted in Python. This already gives an 
insight into how the clusters might be divided. 
 
 
Image 32  Lattitude and longitude converted to distance 
As expected the point in this graph  (Image 32) have the same pattern as in google map 
shown in Image 29.  
This method means that the distances will be calculated correctly across the globe and thus be 
clustered together as they should in relation to their spaced distances.  
Now the points are in the format we want. It is therefore time to find a cluster algorithm that 
can divide the points into the different clusters. 
5.2.4 Data mining 
I am now interested in identifying collected datapoints that I want to define as the same 
location. As seen in Image 29 and Image 32, there will be a lot of points registered within a 
small area that I would consider as a one location. This is a classic machine learning problem, 
in the category of unsupervised learning.  
5.2.5 Cluster Algorithm  
There are several cluster algorithms that can be used to solve this problem. They each have 
their advantages and disadvantages. I have made a list of some of the different algorithms that 
could be an option.4 
                                                 
4 https://towardsdatascience.com/an-introduction-to-clustering-algorithms-in-python-123438574097 
==PAGE:30==
 
29 
 
Algorithm  
Advantages  
Disadvantages  
DBSCAN 
- 
Automatic Detection 
of Outliers  
- 
Finds automatic 
appropriate number 
of cluster 
- 
Optimum Value of 
distance is non trivial 
to find  
K - mean 
- 
Easy to implement  
- 
Fast 
- 
Find center 
automatically  
 
- 
A specific number of 
clusters must be 
specified.  
- 
Need a random 
starting center point. 
Which makes it 
inconsistent.   
Mean shifting  
- 
Do not need to 
specify the number 
of cluster  
- 
Not good at handling 
noise 
- 
Distance value is non 
trivial to find   
 
5.2.6 DBSCAN 
I have chosen to use DBSCAN. This is chosen mainly because of DBSCAN's two significant 
forces. DBSCAN can detect the number of clusters, and it has excellent properties for 
identifying outliers. What normal will be classified as outliers or noise is relevant data in this 
case. Each record is an expression of an event that is important to be included in the overall 
analysis. Therefore, an outlier cannot be considered as noise in this case, but more closely 
regarded as a cluster itself.   
The challenge of choosing a distance between dots or events in DBSCAN is to make the 
distance big enough to collect the points that belong together but at the same time be so small 
that it is not going to take points that do not belong to the current cluster. The Disadvantages 
of DBSCAN is that sometimes point between two obvious clusters can make the two 
separated cluster to one cluster. 
==PAGE:31==
 
30 
 
Image 33 Example of problems in DBSCAN  
This challenge is illustrated in Image 33.  It is illustrated by showing two cases. On the left 
scenario, you will see an apartment where there is a close concentration of events. Below a 
large shopping mall which also triggers events. The density in the south place is much lower 
where the events are spread over a larger area. The bruises indicate events that are registered, 
and the red marks show where the clustered has its center. On the left (Image 33), all 
datapoint has been clustered as expected. On the right(Image 33), a new point has been added 
to indicate the problem. This new point makes a connection between the two original clusters 
and makes all datapoint become one cluster. 
With these tests I have chosen a distance between the points of 100 m. This distance is a 
compromise between pros and cons. I have run several trials with different distances. When 
running DBSCAN, it gives a total number of 11 clusters. On Image 34 you can see how the 
data points are divided into different clusters indicate in different colors.   
  
 
Image 34 Clustering using DBSCAN. Same color = same cluster 
5.2.7 Find center of gravity 
After the points are divided into an appropriate number of clusters, there must be a point that 
represents each cluster. DBSCAN does not find the center of gravity. Because of that, this 
center should be calculated separately. It is done by calculating the average of all items 
==PAGE:32==
 
31 
clustered together. Subsequently, I add a variable to each event to indicate to which cluster it 
belongs.  
I have experimented with different ways of calculating the average, theoretically, the average 
should be calculated based on the distance in kilometers as I get a linear relationship between 
latitude and longitude. In practice, it has been found that the error of calculating back to 
latitude and longitude to kilometers is more significant than if I take the average of the 
longitude and latitude.  
Calculating the gravity center from latitude and longitude causes the center of gravity to shift 
slightly in relation to the real center. However, the average will naturally be between the 
points and thus be a good and representative picture of the cluster. 
 
 
Image 35 Calculating the center of a cluster 
Image 35 shows how to find the center of gravity in Python. The concept is collecting all 
points belonging to the same cluster in the "dots" variable for each time the outer loop is 
running. I collect points belonging to a cluster. Each time I have found all the points 
belonging to cluster, I can calculate the average of these. 
5.2.8 Generating New File  
Before I prepare to generate the new edited CSV file, I'll create a few additional variables that 
will make it easier to continue managing in D35. This implies a variable for which hour the 
event occurs, and for which minute it occurs. This is done simply by using the trim string in 
the string for ISO date.  
I end up with a new CSV file that is ready to be read in d3.js. In the new file, I have the 
following parameters as seen Image 22 (D).  
  
5.3 Patterns  
Now the edited data must be visualized, and data pattern displayed. Data shows on a web 
application where I have used D3 for data driven documents.  
5.3.1 Selection of visualization tool  
In the last decades, the amount of data it is possible to record has increased dramatically, it 
applies to both personal data commercial data, etc. The same is the interest in analyzing and 
understanding all of the data. This has naturally resulted in a large number of tools that can be 
used to analyze and visualize data. Tools that include: d3.js, google chart, R, Weka, chart.js, 
Tableau, Highcharts and many more. The choice has been d3.js because it is web-based, it 
has an incredibly high degree of customization, and, opportunities for map visualization are 
                                                 
5 For D3 see later 
==PAGE:33==
 
32 
outstanding. D3.js is hard to learn, but when you can use it, it's incredibly efficient and can be 
customized exactly as you want and there are a lot of examples of d3 visualizations online 
where you can be inspired.6  
 
 
 
Image 36 Example of different visualization in D3 
5.3.2 Visualization - D3.js  
D3 or data-driven documents is a javascript library to develop dynamic interactive 
visuaization for webbrowser. The concept of D3 is that you bind your data with DOM 
elements. As soon as data is linked to a DOM element, the element can change based on data. 
5.3.3 Timeline  
To get an overview of the events, I sum up the number of events for each day. This is 
implemented by making one for loop from the first to the last day of the dataset. In the loop, I 
move one day forward each time the loop has run. I use D3’s filter function to filter all data 
from which is not in the desired range. For the feature to handle a whole day at a time, I have 
made a function that takes ISO date as input and returns the same day at 00:00:00 to ensure 
that it is 24 hours a day that will be processed together. To count the number of registrations, 
I make a .length to sum up the number of record events that are retrieved.   
5.3.4 Clock  
To specify what time of day the events typically occur, I’ve made a pie chart. It is 
implemented by counting the number of events by the variable “hour”. The color for each 
hour is graduated in relation to the maximum number of events within the selected period, 
location and day of the week. Graduation takes place using a scale ranging from 0 to the 
maximum number of events occurring within one hour. See picture Image 37. 
                                                 
6 https://d3js.org/ 
==PAGE:34==
 
33 
 
Image 37 Implementing clock 
5.3.5   Map 
D3.js is good at managing maps, which is reflected in the number of projections available in 
d3. The projection is relevant to project the planet’s spherical shape on a 2D space. As 
mentioned earlier, this is not a trivial task. Throughout the time, many projections have been 
made. When a projection is evaluated, it is evaluated based on a compromise of 3 parameters: 
area, angle, length. I have chosen to use the project called Albers Projection. Albers 
Projection is a projection that is true to the area. 
 
Image 38 Kodestump der viser embeding af albersProjection i et ønsket scalaforhold. 
When looking at a small area, the importance of the projection is of less importance. 
In the prototype, I have chosen to include only a Danish map. It would be easy to implement 
another map of another area, for example, the rest of the world. This would require an import 
of another Geojson or TopoJson file consisting of the desired map.  
5.3.6 Zoom  
To enable zooming on the map, a number of features are used to handle this. Firstly, I have 
added a svg.call (zoom_handler) that has a d3.zoom () function. Zoom is called the 
zoom_action feature shown in Image 39 
 
Image 39 D3 for Zoom function 
==PAGE:35==
 
34 
Feature holds the actual map and dot correspond to the events on the map. 
D3.event.transform makes sure to transform these SVGs according to the d3.event. In 
d3.event.transform.k I get a value for the zoomed factor. The zoom factor can be used to 
customize the size of the circles, so they change when zooming in or out on the map. I also 
make sure that the tooltip is not visible while zooming. 
5.4 Working method 
In my work on implementing the visualization, I have organized the project with minor 
milestones with the use of a task management program, Trello. (https://trello.com/) Trello is a 
very effective tool for organizing projects. When the prototype is tested, new improvements 
are typically found to be implemented, those improvement suggestions can easily be 
managed and added in Trello board. 
 
Image 40 Screen Dump of my trello board for managing the implementation   
 
In my trello7 board (see Image 40) I have 4 columns. "To do", "Igang" "Finished" "backlog" 
(Backlog cannot be seen in the image). The assignments are presented in order of priority so 
that the most important tasks are at the top. The assignments get a value that is an expression 
of how complex and how long the assignment is expected to take. The column backlog 
contains the tasks that could be good to implement in the long term. The priority tasks are 
found in the "To do" list. "Doing " are the current tasks I'm working on. "Done" are the 
completed tasks. 
If you work in a team with more participants, you will typically also have an additional 
column of tests, so that a person other than the one who developed the functionality could test 
it. 
Since I have tested the function myself this state is left on the board. Trello is an excellent 
way to structure the implementation and working agile. 
As I have done a user test continuously, I have discovered possible improvements that should 
be implemented, which are put on "To do" or "backlog". 
Performance  
                                                 
7 https://trello.com/ 
==PAGE:36==
 
35 
Although it may be difficult to make a clean and optimal code in a new programming 
language, I have kept optimizing the code so that it is both easy to maintain and that the code 
is executed quickly. Inefficient code can also affect the user experience, for example, if the 
interface does not respond quickly. One of the critical places is the zoom function in the map, 
in one of the earlier tests I have experienced a certain delay. To overcome this issue I have 
found that maintaining the original points and updating these gives a more fluid motion by 
the zoom function on the map, as opposed to my original code where I created all points 
again.      
 
 
 
==PAGE:37==
 
36 
6 Experiments / test  
6.1 Funktions test 
 
The system has continuously been functioning tested, which has been done by generating test 
data and determining if the system responds as expected and curves graphs maps reflect the 
generated data. Errors are found and corrected during the test.    
6.2 Experiments Method 
During the project several experiments have been made. These experiments can generally be 
divided into two categories. 
1. User test using own generated test data. 
2. Use the tool for a realistic scenery, with collected data from the test person with allergy. 
6.2.1  1. Usability test with own generated test data  
Through the project, fictional data has been recorded continuously, which aims to test 
functionality and user-friendliness in the system. The test has been done by me and in 
dialogue with several test subjects. This is primarily done by ensuring the system's usability 
and finding inconveniences in the interaction. 
The test has consisted of a "think aloud test (N u.d.)where the test person should explain what 
the graphs shows and how to interact with the system. 
During the tests, specific questions have been prepared and from this question, it is evaluated 
how fast and easy a test person could solve the task that requires interaction with the system.   
Note that it is the visualization without the passive registered data that has been tested.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:38==
 
37 
 
 
Age:  
Sex  
It knowledge 
Person 1  
60-65 
Female 
User level   
Person 2  
30-35 
Female  
User level 
Person 3  
25-30 
M 
High Level  
Think aloud 
Quick understanding 
of the 4 quadrants + 
slider.   
 
Excellent and quick 
understanding of the 
four quadrants.  
Good understanding 
of quadrants. 
Misunderstood the 
size of circles.  
How to Interact  
Knowledge of 
Interaction. Should 
be guided 
Natural to tap graph 
and map. Zoom 
function was natural 
to use without 
guidance.   
Nice interaction 
except the slider 
function.  
Is there anything 
unclear  
The possibility of 
zooming the map. 
Interact with the 
slider not clear. 
Relationships 
between quadrants a 
little unclear when 
selecting dimension.   
The use of sliders. 
That you can move 
the entire range.  
Question about 
number of events  
General good 
understanding  
Naturally finding 
answers to questions.  
Easy to find  
Getting back to start  Did find clear all 
button. Was not 
intuative that 
dimension could be 
deselected by 
pressing on them 
again.  
Could deselect by 
pressing the 
dimension again. 
Clear function not 
implemented at test 
time.   
Clear function not 
implemented at test 
time.   
Error handling  
No error  
No error  
No error  
How many 
instructions are 
needed 
Some instruction for 
interaction was 
nessesary  
Interaction between 
week and map not 
clear.  
Interaction with 
slider. And number 
of events on map.  
How well do the 
person recognize 
patterns  
When interaction 
was explained. 
Finding patterns was 
ok.   
General ok  
Good, when 
interaction 
explained.  
==PAGE:39==
 
38 
Information You 
Miss  
 
Missing updated 
headlines when new 
dimensions is 
selected  
The testperson 
missed the  option to 
select date in slider.  
Suggestion Applying   
 
 
 
6.2.2 2. Test with allergy test person 
The other type of test is a real case scenario where a test subject has registered an allergy for 
seven weeks. I want to investigate if the developed tool, could show patterns in the data. In 
addition to testing the practical application for finding patterns in data, I would like to test the 
system's ease of use and interaction at the same time. 
 
 
Age:  
Sex 
It Knowledge  
Person 4 (allergic test person)  
30-35 
M 
Uses High Level  
Think aloud  
Quick Understanding of All Quadrants  
How to Interact  
Was not aware it was possible to interact.  
Is there anything unclear  
It was not clear for the testperson the slider could be 
used.  
Question about number of events   Easy to find patterns  
Getting back to start  
Was concerned what will happen when "Clear all" 
button  was pressed 
Error handling  
No error 
How many instructions are 
needed 
Basic instruction for interaction  
How well do the person 
recognize patterns  
Perfect  
==PAGE:40==
 
39 
What patterns can you recognize 
- 
Could see that the numbers of incident was 
decreasing doing the period  
- 
Could see that the pills works for 24 hours.  
- 
Could recognize the allergic effect in the 
morning.   
- 
Could recognize and remember the places he 
had been  
- 
Was surprised what the allergic effect was 
significant on wednesdays.   
- 
Most incident was registret at home and at work  
Can you take action 
 
The illness is well treated and pill are taken when 
necessary.   
The data was interesting to see, but it works well to 
take pills when needed.  
Information you miss  
It was not obvious you could interact with the graphs.  
Would be interesting to see the raw dataset.  
Proposal uses  
Coffee consumption 
 
 
 
6.3 Experiment 2- Analysis of allergy  
 In the following section, I will go through the visualization and analyze the patterns the data 
shows about the test person allergy reaction through the period the test person has collected 
data. As shown in Table 2, the test person could recognize many patterns in the data set when 
he was subjected to a user test. I will review the result of the collected data. The test person 
did not want to share the passive location data for the period, so test data only includes active 
allergy registration, which there is located. 
==PAGE:41==
 
40 
6.4  Overview of the data  
 
Image 41 The overview picture 
The first picture of the data that are presented when the page is loaded is shown in Image 41. 
At the top of the screen, the slider shows that there are events throughout the whole period, 
but that there is a higher concentration at the start of the period. This is probably because the 
pollen season gradually decreases during the period. The map reveals that the events are 
distributed over Jutland, Fyn, and Zealand where the test person has been during the period. 
There is clearly a higher concentration of incidents in the Copenhagen area, which is 
probably due to the fact that the person has stayed relatively more in these areas. 
The events are spread over all weekdays, but with a little more cases on weekends and 
Wednesdays. 
The allergy symptoms usually occur in the morning between 6 and 9 and increase again a bit 
in the evening after 16:00. 
 
 
Image 42 To browser is loaded next to each other 
==PAGE:42==
 
41 
One way to compare selected dimensions is to open two windows next to each other, which is 
done in Image 42. In this case, Wednesday is selected on the left window and Sunday is 
chosen on the right. Now it is seen, on the right, that no events are registered in Copenhagen 
on Sundays. On the left side, events are often seen both at home and at work on Wednesdays 
where a large part of the total events take place. Regarding the time of the day, the earliest 
allergic reactions occur in general earlier on working days (Including Wednesdays) than 
Sundays. 
 
 
Image 43 Two equal periods selected 
In this case (Image 43) two equal periods are selected. One at the beginning of the period 
(left) and one at the end of the period (right) As mentioned before, there more events at the 
beginning of the period compared to the end. In the second half of the period, events are 
spread evenly over almost every weekday. In the first period, there are days with up to two 
events per day happen while there is also a shorter time between the events.    
 
Image 44 Two different locations selected 
In Image 44, the entire period has been selected and two different locations are chosen. On 
the left is selected workplace and on the right is selected the home (marked with the blue 
dot). Not surprisingly, the events usually take place either early in the morning or the evening 
as seen on the right side of the figure. Looking at workplace events are all on weekdays, but 
at home, there is a single event on weekends. 
==PAGE:43==
 
42 
6.5  Demo of visualization with passive data  
The test person's registered data included only the active part of the data collection.  For 
showing how the passive data can help to gain a better understanding of the active recorded 
data my own generated test data is shown as an example. Events are recorded using Nomie 
and the is "randomly"8 in the period from 15. of June to 31 of July. A total of 134 event are 
registered doing the period. For passive registration, the location is known 83 % of the time 
and resampled to 2 hours.  The interactive visualization  is online for test purpose on the link: 
http://mikkelbra.com/project/2.html ( http://mikkelbra.com/project/1.html dot density map ) 
 
 
Image 45 Overview of passive and active data 
 
In Image 45 the data is shown where no dimensions have been selected. Graduated white dots 
represent the passive data on the map. The gradient of white indicates the time I have been in 
that place. The map shows that there is a high degree of correlation between how long I have 
been somewhere and how many events which are registered in the specific location. There 
are many locations I have been in which no events are registered. Few events are shown 
where it seems that I have not been located. 
 
                                                 
8 Randomly means that events is registered in order to represent a subjective incident.     
==PAGE:44==
 
43 
 
Image 46 No event is selected 
Image 46 is an example of a scenario where no events have been recorded in a period. The 
period is from 23 to the 25 of July. On the map 3. dots pop up and show I have stayed at 3. 
different locations in Zealand during this time period. All graphs are empty as there are no 
events to show on any of the graphs. 
 
Image 47 Two different weekdays selected 
Image 47 show where two different weekdays has been selected. To the left is selected 
Tuesday to the right is Saturday selected. It is shown which places are registered passively 
and where events are tracked these days actively.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
 
44 
7 Conclusion  
The technological development has made it possible to gather a large number of personal 
data, related to health, sports and personal development. It has provided a natural need for 
tools to understand and interpret this data. In this thesis, I have developed a tool for 
visualizing active and passive data.  
 
The active registered data is subjective events registered by the user, using one-button 
registration. In addition to traditional ESM and EMA, I have combined active one-button 
registrations with passive location registration. It is done to allow for comparison and 
viewing relationships between events and passive location registrations. 
 
In addition to providing a knowledge about the location, the developed dashboard can also 
combine this knowledge with other dimensions, such as times and periods. This combination 
helps to provide an understanding of the patterns in data. The dashboard is designed to be a 
generalized tool that can visualize data for different purposes and amounts of collected data. 
For example, axes in the coordinate system will be adapted to the given data (time horizon 
and number) and will therefore be applicable in other size of periods, number of registrations 
and areas relevant to the registration of subjective events such as PTSD, mood, pain, feelings 
and allergy.  
 
The dashboard and visualization have been tested for usability with own fictional data and 
finally tested on an allergy patient who has registered data through a test period of 6 weeks. 
Through the usability test, I can conclude that when a small introduction to the interaction, 
test subjects can easily find and understand the visualization in the test data.  
 
The allergy patient gained new knowledge and recognized patterns in the visualization. 
Furthermore events on a map help the user to recall situations about the events, for an allergy 
patient this is not useful information, but in other cases this could be valuable information. 
Even though the patient got new knowledge, he could not use it to change behavior/take 
action. 
 
 
       
 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
 
45 
8 Bibliography 
Alain Moren, Marta Valenciano. https://wiki.ecdc.europa.eu/fem/w/wiki/information-
measurement-bias. u.d. 
axismaps. https://www.axismaps.com/guide/univariate/dot-density/. u.d. 
https://nomie.app/. u.d. 
https://www.moves-app.com/. u.d. 
Ian Li, Anind Dey, Jodi Forlizzi. »A Stage-Based Model of Personal Informatics Systems.« 
u.d. 
Ibanez, Lazaro. https://medium.com/@LazaroIbanez/agile-development-user-stories-are-the-
new-requirements-document-c105947c9291. u.d. 
iso. https://www.iso.org/standard/40874.html. u.d. 
Jakob Eg Larsen, Kasper Eskelund, Thomas Blomseth Christiansen. »Active Self-Tracking of 
Subjective Experience with a One-Button Wearable: A Case Study in Military 
PTSD.« 9 Mar 2017. 
Klein, Laura. UX for lean startups. O'reilly, 2014. 
Larson, R., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. » The experience sampling method. New Directions for 
Methodology of Social and Behavioral Science, 15, 41- 56.) .« 1983. 
N. https://www.nngroup.com/articles/thinking-aloud-the-1-usability-tool/. u.d. 
paldhous. http://paldhous.github.io/ucb/2016/dataviz/week2.html. u.d. 
STONE, JOSHUA M. SMYTH and ARTHUR A. »ECOLOGICAL MOMENTARY 
ASSESSMENT RESEARCH.« u.d. 
Tidwell, Jeniffer. Designing interfaces. 2011. 
Usama Fayyad, Gregory Piatetsky-Shapiro, and Padhraic Smyth. »From Data Mining to 
knowledge Discovery in Databases.« 1996. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
 
46 
Image table  
Image 1 Stage-Based Mode ..................................................................................................... 12 
Image 2Moves interface ........................................................................................................... 12 
Image 3 Nomie interface .......................................................................................................... 12 
Image 4 Example of mokup ..................................................................................................... 15 
Image 5 First version of map and two types of event .............................................................. 15 
Image 6 Overall layout............................................................................................................. 16 
Image 7 Place of timeline ........................................................................................................ 16 
Image 8 Time slider with timeslot selected. ............................................................................ 16 
Image 9 map part of layout ...................................................................................................... 17 
Image 10 Selected location on map ......................................................................................... 17 
Image 11 Zooming in map. ...................................................................................................... 18 
Image 12 Experiment with small dot spreading the points randomly around center (same 
dataset) ..................................................................................................................................... 18 
Image 13 Experiment with gradient and large dots ................................................................. 18 
Image 14 Passive tracking indicated by white dots ................................................................. 19 
Image 15 Weekday part of layout ............................................................................................ 19 
Image 16 Interaction in  weekday graph. ................................................................................. 19 
Image 17 Place of clock graph ................................................................................................. 20 
Image 18 Clock visualization................................................................................................... 20 
Image 19 Place of development ............................................................................................... 20 
Image 20 Change over time ..................................................................................................... 21 
Image 21 KKD model .............................................................................................................. 22 
Image 22 CSV data from Moves and further steps .................................................................. 23 
Image 23 2 hour ....................................................................................................................... 24 
Image 24 5 hour ....................................................................................................................... 24 
Image 25 10 min ...................................................................................................................... 25 
Image 26 1 hour ....................................................................................................................... 25 
Image 27 Duration on each location (orginal data) ................................................................. 25 
Image 28 CSV data from Moves and further steps. ................................................................. 25 
Image 29 Raw dataset from Nomie shown in Goole maps, example of potential clusters. ..... 26 
Image 30 Image of lat and longitude ....................................................................................... 27 
Image 31 Python. Distance greenwich / equator ..................................................................... 28 
Image 32  Lattitude and longitude converted to distance ........................................................ 28 
Image 33 Example of problems in DBSCAN .......................................................................... 30 
Image 34 Clustering using DBSCAN. Same color = same cluster .......................................... 30 
Image 35 Calculating the center of a cluster ............................................................................ 31 
Image 36 Example of different visualization in D3 ................................................................. 32 
Image 37 Implementing clock ................................................................................................. 33 
Image 38 Kodestump der viser embeding af albersProjection i et ønsket scalaforhold. ......... 33 
Image 39 D3 for Zoom function .............................................................................................. 33 
Image 40 Screen Dump of my trello board for managing the implementation ....................... 34 
Image 41 The overview picture ............................................................................................... 40 
Image 42 To browser is loaded next to each other .................................................................. 40 
Image 43 Two equal periods selected ...................................................................................... 41 
Image 44 Two different locations selected .............................................................................. 41 
==PAGE:48==
 
47 
Image 45 Overview of passive and active data ........................................................................ 42 
Image 46 No event is selected ................................................................................................. 43 
Image 47 Two different weekdays selected ............................................................................. 43 
 
 
 
