==PAGE:1==
Shoulder Surﬁng Protection for
Mobile Devices
Marcus Vinther Tanghøj
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The main focus of cyber-security is logical access control which aims to protect
digital assets from being compromised. This leaves physical access control often
being considered fulﬁlled. However, in the modern workspace where you have
non-employees coming and going inside the oﬃce space, it is simple not the
case.
When looking into the amount of people working from a phone or a
laptop in a public space, the problem only becomes larger. This means that
data conﬁdentiality is not being ensured with our current approach at working
anywhere at any time. This thesis will introduce and develop an application that
allows for having a Sensor Enhanced Access Control(SEAC) model aimed at a
smartphone. The aim is to use this application in mobile devices that uses the
frontfacing camera to detect faces. Such an application will enable detection and
protection from Shoulder Surﬁng. When a foreign subject approaches the text
will start to blend in with the background in coordination with the distance
of the observed subject.
This will ensure that the user will still be able to
read the text while making it to hard or impossible to "Shoulder Surf" the
text. The system will be able to distinguish between who is present and who
is approaching. A proof of concept for ubuntu has previously been developed,
and presented at IDA’s headquaters at the Culture Night of Copenhagen by
Dimitrios Iatrou [1]. This thesis seeks to improve this concept and bring it to
mobile device. It is important that the ﬁnal solution will be available for others
to import without any hazel such that this can be a security feature for all.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁllment with the requirements
for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering specializing in Computer Security.
The thesis deals with the issue of Shoulder Surﬁng towards smartphones by
using face detection and text manipulation. I have gathered relevant research
on the defense against Shoulder Surﬁng, text readability and face detection
and then linked all subjects to create an iOS system. This demonstrates how
protection against Shoulder Surﬁng can be done without extra technology to
establish security in a public space.
The motivation for this thesis, partially comes from the situational knowledge
of being exposed to Shoulder Surﬁng in the wild, but also from the urge to solve
a bigger problem by using the tools that is available today and not tomorrow.
I will arrive at the conclusion that I can achieve to solve the problems without
needing to do any physical modiﬁcation of my smartphone.
The thesis begins with an introductory chapter, that outlines the problem con-
nected to Shoulder Surﬁng against smartphones and proposes and present what
the ﬁnal solution will include. I will then proceed to provide the relevant the-
ory for the problem and my solution. This is focused on Shoulder Surﬁng and
how to defense against it, readability of text and face detection. I will go on
to the an analysis of the problems needed to solved given the current theory.
As the problem is broken down to smaller parts I will present what I see as the
correct solution in the design chapter. I will account for my solution as an iOS
application that utilizes hardware which exists in any modern smartphone. I
will then proceed to do a thorough evaluation of how I reached my solution,
what it is, and presentation of the user tests that have been done. Finally I will
==PAGE:6==
iv
evaluate and conclude on the ﬁnal product, I conclude, that I solved the high
level problems of camouﬂage text when a Shoulder Surfer approaches, ensuring
text conﬁdentiality, integrity and availability through deniability.
Lyngby, September 19, 2018
Marcus Vinther Tanghøj
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my two supervisors Dr. Christian Damsgaard Jensen and
Associate Professor Per Bækgaard for making this project possible and for the
excellent communication, guidance and advice throughout the entire project
period. I would also give them a special thank you for allways! Letting me leave
with more energy than had before our meetings.
And of course a special thank you goes to all of those who have particapated in
my user tests.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
My Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
The Scope of thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Related Work
7
2.1
Shoulder Surﬁng
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Readability of Texts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Face detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1
Measuring the distance to a face . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Current software solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.1
BlackBerry Privacy Shade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.2
DetectGazeNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Analysis
17
3.1
Face detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Ensuring Conﬁdentiality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Notifying the user
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4
Design & Implementation
25
4.1
The User Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.1
Face detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.2
Treatment of shoulder surﬁng activity . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Evaluation
33
5.1
Pilot Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.1.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.1.2
Method of Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.1.3
Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.1.4.1
Major sources of error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Standard Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2.2
Method of Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2.3
Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2.4
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2.4.1
Major sources of errors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3
Reﬁned Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.3.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3.2
Method of testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3.3
Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3.4
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3.4.1
Major sources of errors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.4
Final Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.4.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.4.2
Method of Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.4.3
Experiments and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.4.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Conclusion
55
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A Appendix
59
A.1 Shoulder Surﬁng Protector code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.2 Text used for Pilot Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.3 Screenshot and text used in Standard Testing . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.4 Screenshots text used in Speciﬁed reading tests . . . . . . . . . .
88
A.5 Test reults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
A.5.1
Pilot Tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
ix
Bibliography
103
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
According to Oxfords dictionary of English [2] Shoulder Surﬁng is deﬁned as:
The practice of spying on the user of a cash-dispensing machine or
other electronic device in order to obtain their personal identiﬁcation
number, password, etc.
This situation is sadly a more common experience with the rise of smartphones.
While shoulder surﬁng is not conﬁned to only exist when trying to lure the
pin before stealing a credit card or a phone, it is actually more common as it
happens for people with no ill intentions in mind (see 2).
One could ask the question, why are people so stupid to let this happen? While
in some cases people being careless is surely a factor, but the fact is that it
comes down to how the shoulder surfers have a lower risk tolerance than the
victim. A scenario that many probably can relate to is having some urgent work
which has to be done while being in a public space. With the advancement of
smartphones it has only become easier to take work with you into public space,
while allowing anyone to tag along. While one could quickly say that what they
are looking at in public space from work is nothing of interest for outsiders, the
fact is that they are probably not aware how they are exposing sensitive data.
In a study commissioned by 3M we see that 67% of working professionals had
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
worked with sensitive data outside the trust zone of the oﬃce space over the
past year[3].
In another study we see that this is also the case when people use their smart-
phones for private conversations and is leaking information, some of which is
considered sensitive according to the EU’s GDPR article 9 (See [4]).
While one could argue that a wide spread use of privacy ﬁlters [5] or having
them built into devices such as with HP Sure View Integrated Privacy Screen
[6] would ﬁx this issue. The fact is that it is not installed in almost any of the
devices that are used today. And it is clear that the willingness or awareness of
installing these ﬁlters is not there as of now. And even if this was the case, the
current privacy ﬁlters solutions do not protect you from attackers from behind.
As shown in ﬁgure 1-A
Figure 1-A: A Privacy screen protector will only protect against shoulder surf-
ing when the attacker is more than 30◦away from the screen [5].
With Shoulder Surfer Protector I initially aim to:
Allowing for people to read anything on their phone in a public space without
worrying if they are suddenly going to expose sensitive data.
For a novel solution, we would like to have the properties of the PPDR model
as the go to framework: Predict, Prevent, Detect and Respond.
Predicting the most likely attacks is in this case done in the design of our
solution. As we need to identify what kind of attacks our solutions should be
==PAGE:15==
3
designed to defend. Due to the clear deﬁnition of what the attack is, I will not
dwell to much into this part of the framework in the rest of the report.
Prevention of the the attack is the ﬁrst priority from being able to read what
is on th screen, if that is not possible then the text should be so diﬃcult to read
that it would deter the attacker from keep trying to read what is on the screen.
Detecting the attack is crucial to have any sort of working protection that is
going to turn oﬀwhen it is not needed.
Responding by rapidly addressing the incident to nullify or minimize any loss
of information. We seek to implement a response that will allow the user to
keep reading while it is not possible for the attacker to read the text.
Figure 1-B: Predict, Prevent, Detect
and Response model.
The usage of the PPDR model is seen
as a circular model, with four faces
that keeps re-initiating as shown in
ﬁgure 1-B. As long as we are not look-
ing into issues where an attacker is ei-
ther having parts or most of their faces
covered, the prediction part is going to
stay static, allowing us to focus on the
other three.
One could argue, that a minimum
level protection should be enabled as
soon as Shoulder Surﬁng Protector is
being activated, such that it will not
only rely on its ability to detect Shoul-
der Surﬁng but also has a basic layer
of protection when being outside of a
trusted zone.
The ideal anti shoulder surﬁng solution should rely on detecting a threat ap-
proaching and then protect what is shown on the screen in a manner that allows
for the user too keep on with what they are doing without feeling interrupted.
This leaves us with having most focus on detecting the threat and responding
accordingly.
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
1.1
My Solution
As mentioned earlier people uses their smartphones all the time, at any give
location. The smart phone is not only an entertainment device but an extension
of the user himself. Allowing for private conversation with family and loved ones
or working while taking public transportation. Even though, one could argue
that these things have always had its ways sneaking into the public, there is no
doubt that with the availability of powerful portable devices such as laptops,
tablets and smartphones, the amount of sensitive data that is being exposed
has increased rapidly over the recent years. It could be argued that the solution
would be a behavioral change, even if we ignore how hard it is to change the
behavior and if it can happen, it will happen.
And with that in mind, we also need to consider that there is going to be
situations where there is a need to use portable devices for sensitive work in a
public space. Hence, we still need to ﬁnd a solution to the problem.
Users must continue to be able to use their devices in public without constantly
exposing themselves of shoulder surﬁng. My solution it thought to be like an
anti virus towards prevention of Shoulder Surﬁng attacks, running in the back-
ground constantly scanning for threats. It should then detect how far away the
threat is and respond accordingly.
I present my solution, called Shoulder Surﬁng Protector, being able to solve the
above mentioned. Shoulder Surﬁng Protector is in its current form designed as
an application for iOS1. Shoulder Surﬁng Protector is meant to be easily im-
plemented into existing code, allowing to watch over any given text ﬁeld that
Shoulder Surﬁng Protector should defend.
Shoulder Surﬁng Protector uses the front camera of the phone as its eyes. By
using face detection on the captured frames, Shoulder Surﬁng Protector then
detects whether there is more than one face inside the frame. As soon as there
has been detected more than one person inside of the frame, Shoulder Surﬁng
Protector evaluates how far away the second largest face is and then camouﬂages
the text accordingly to the distance of the shoulder surfer.
Shoulder Surﬁng Protector is designed to be easy to turn on and oﬀ, such that
it is not interfering when the user is located inside of a safe zone.
Shoulder Surﬁng Protector will increment its camouﬂaging of text as the at-
tacker gets closer to the user. This allows the user to keep on reading without
being interrupted and not having to use further eﬀort reading the text. At a
distance of 52.5 cm we have more than halved the readability while having close
1Shoulder Surﬁng Protector has been developed for iOS (since that is the phone I own),
but it could just as well have been developed for Android, it would then just need to use
another framework than Apples Vision.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 The Scope of thesis
5
to a normal reading experience for the user. At this distance the words that
was read was mostly short well know words, while longer or lesser used words
was miss read or not read at all.
1.2
The Scope of thesis
The scope of this thesis is test if we can use face recognition on smart phones
front cameras to protect users against shoulder surﬁng. The protection is done in
such a way that text will be camouﬂaged depending on the distance towards the
shoulder surfer. By using this method we end up having text that is readable up
close but unreadable far away. My solution have been veriﬁed by doing several
user experiments.
1.3
Thesis Structure
This thesis will continue with the following chapters and structure:
State of the art Explains the theory needed to support our solution.
The relevant theory within Shoulder Surﬁng, readability of texts and other
areas will be examined.
Problem analysis I will break down the problem and examine possible
solutions to each subproblems. I will consider pros and cons of diﬀerent
solutions, before ultimately deciding on the overall idea of how to protect
against Shoulder Surf.
Design & Implementation Based on the theory, I will present a design
chapter, detailing a solution and how it has been implemented, in the form
of an iOS application.
Evaluation The evaluation chapter examines my implemented solution as
an iOS application, and ultimately conﬁrms if it can be used for protection
against Shoulder Surﬁng in its current state, by a series of test.
And I will ﬁnally evaluate my application through the PPDR model.
Conclusion Lastly I will conclude on my results and learnings, and elab-
orate on my ideas for future work.
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction
1.4
Summary
The ever growing presence of devices used for private communication at any
given time and location, raises the need for protection when staying in a public
areas. We know that the regular user do not
I propose a solution to defend against shoulder surﬁng called Shoulder Surﬁng
Protector. This solution makes use of a smartphones front camera and face
detection to see if the user is being exposed to shoulder surﬁng. Since Shoulder
Surﬁng Protector makes use of the front camera, it is a purely software based
solution allowing it to be installed on any phone that has a front facing camera
installed.
This makes Shoulder Surﬁng Protector an easy alternative to the
existing physical privacy screen protectors.
Shoulder Surﬁng Protector was developed through an ongoing process with user
tests. The user tests focused on manipulating the appearance of text, in way
that made it impossible to shoulder surﬁng.
I will present data and related work to back up my claims.
Finally I will evaluate the pros and cons of Shoulder Surﬁng Protector, and
what future work that lies ahead for Shoulder Surﬁng Protector.
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Related Work
2.1
Shoulder Surﬁng
Most of the research done about shoulder surﬁng focus on avoiding attacks
against reading a PIN password (with a main focus on smart phones, which
is mentioned in [7]) [8, 9, 10, 11], while this issue is more than real, there is
still little research done around software methods trying to straight out prevent
shoulder surﬁng.
The most popular method to prevent any sort of shoulder surﬁng by todays
standards is the use of a Privacy Screen Protector, such as the ones made by
3M [5]. A Privacy Screen Protector is a physical attachment that needs to be
installed and is bought separately from the device. This also limits the user
to almost always have it activated, and not allow it to be taken oﬀwhen the
person is inside of a safe zone.
While these implementations work really well against shoulder surﬁng from the
sides, they will not protect you if the attacker is looking from behind, see ﬁgure
1-A. This makes them almost useless when using public transportation where
people is looking from all angels.
For example, when sitting in an airplane,
people is mostly sitting behind you, and as soon as they stand up, they will
have no trouble looking at the screen.
Recently, software solutions has also started to enter the market, which I will
==PAGE:20==
8
Related Work
comment on later in section 2.4.
As of today, there is around 23,600 articles about shoulder surﬁng (according to
Google scholar 1) The main part of this research has been published after 2007,
which is the same year Apple released the ﬁrst iPhone [12], and from here the
age of smartphones as we know it today, took oﬀ. It is then no surprise that the
main part of the research found has focused on attacks against smart phones,
where the main focus seems to be how to protect unlock-measures such as PIN
numbers, passwords and Google unlock patterns [11, 13, 14, 9] and [15]. These
solutions might work for protecting the PIN or the Google unlock pattern, but
they do not try to protect the entire screen.
Also, while unlocking methods will quickly become irrelevant as they are easily
lured by an observation attack, even more advanced PIN entry methods as
shown in [16] and [17] is still prone to attacks like [18] shows.
One of the few data collections of real life shoulder Surﬁng is done by Eiband
et al.[7]. Their survey concluded that 94% of their participants either had been
a victim or an attacker in Shoulder Surﬁng incidents. They also concluded how
89.7% of all shoulder surﬁng were done against smartphones and 68.4% of the
time it happened while using public transportation. Their survey showed that
a wide range of private and sensitive data such as sexuality, sex life, plans and
work life, were exposed (around 46%). In 5.9% of the cases it was even reported
that credentials such as PINs, unlock patterns and passwords were observed.
Their survey also noted that in only 7% of the cases the victim of shoulder
surﬁng were aware that they were being watched. This is why it is important
that the protection should be lightweight and hassle-free since the user will not
use it if gets too complicated (see, [19] and [20]).
This only proves how shoulder surﬁng is a real thing which happens on a daily
basis. We also see that more than 50% of the exposed data can be classiﬁed as
sensitive data [21], such as work, sexuality, passwords and more.
In another real life study of 800 working professionals commissioned by 3M2.
We are also presented with a larger survey telling us that while 47% of the
participants uses a VPN, 38% uses disk encryption and 19% uses two-factor
authentication as a protection against data breaches, only 13% uses a computer
privacy ﬁler and while 70% of the same participants companies had no explicit
policy which permitted them from working in public places. When combining
this with the what kind of informations they were accessing in a public place
1https://scholar.google.dk/scholar?hl=da&as_sdt=0%2C5&q=shoulder+surfing+&btnG=
Accessed 2018/07/07
2The major producer of privacy screen protectors, which should be kept in mind while
reading the study
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Readability of Texts
9
26% showed credit card numbers, 15.34% showed medical information, 23.94%
showed social security numbers, 33.17% was Private H.R. information etc. This
only adds to the idea of the need for an easy automatic way of protecting against
shoulder surﬁng is needed.
2.2
Readability of Texts
As seen in an older research of readability, we are shown how diﬀerent fonts can
aﬀect readability of text in a newspaper [22].
This is among others later backed up by [23, 24, 25]. Here we are introduced
to why it is easier to read lowercase letters rather than only uppercase letters.
They also show why some fonts are easier to read at a certain time instead of
others.
Finding the correct procedure to measure readability in a case like ours does
not seem to be set in stone. When looking at research which takes a look at
readability of text, we can see that even where most article’s testing setup are
close to similar they do deviate a bit from research to research.
In [26] the participants were asked to proofread text while being timed.
In
the research by Bernard et al.
[27], they base their accuracy measurements
on Gujars, but they diﬀered somewhat from the previous methods by having
the participants ﬁnding letters omission or misspelled words. This was done to
prevent the ability to skim the text. Furthermore, the participants were placed
at a ﬁxed distance from the text while they were reading.
Another study [28], tested the readability of text placed on a textured back-
ground was measured. While performing the text they have measured the read-
ability by timing the participants, from when they started read till they either
ﬁnd a speciﬁc amount of misspelled words or by ﬁnding the “magic” misspelled
word.
2.3
Face detection
There is already a large amount of frameworks being used to produce face de-
tection. I will only talk shortly about a few of them. Some of the most popular
choices are OpenFace ([29]), OpenBR [30] and of course OpenCV ([31])
OpenCV might be the most precise and the most used one of the three, and is
possible to have it running on a modern smartphone, but the lack speed in their
==PAGE:22==
10
Related Work
implementation might become an issue.
OpenBR is a biometric framework, which has specialized in recognizing faces
and then determine other metrics like age and gender. While OpenCV also has
these abilities, it is a lot easier to use the direct solutions provided by OpenBR.
OpenFace makes use of Deep Neural networks for its implementation of face
detection. It uses more than one pre-trained model from OpenCV.
Since one of my goals for this application is to keep the code as easy to implement
as possible, I looked into the methods that were native for Swift. Apple provides
the Vision Framework [32] from where it possible to do face detection and face
landmark detection.
According to research done by Sahnawaj at Softvision [33] it does seem like
Apple’s Vision Framework might not have the best error rate while looking at
face detection, but has the lead in speed for processing time. Also, since we
are doing this on a smartphone, processing and energy sources are limited. At
the same time we are interested in knowing when someone is looking over our
shoulder. Because of this, I search for a method allowing us to perform these
tasks in a real time environment.
2.3.1
Measuring the distance to a face
One of the more popular ways to measure the face to screen distance is presented
in [34]. The method presented is quite popular due to the interpupillary distance
vary very little from person to person [35, 36].
By using the interpupillary
distance it is possible to convert the values into real world distance units.
Another way to measure the distance between the phone and a face, is by
looking at the horizontal length of the detected face region as shown in [37].
This is a simple method which involves less operations than ﬁrst tracing the
face landmarks.
A ﬁnal thing to keep in mind is that we need to be able to block the shoulder
surﬁng attack before the shoulder surfer is able to recognize a word. It is diﬃcult
to get an exact time of how fast a person can recognize words. However, from
some of the research I have found, it seems likely that about 150-250 ms should
be enough[38, 39, 40]. Hence, we need our solution to be able to react around
this time ratio.
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Current software solutions
11
2.4
Current software solutions
I will look at the following software solutions from the perspective of the PPDR
mention in chapter 1 but as I argue there, the prediction face is more or less the
same, and because of this I will ignore it in this section
2.4.1
BlackBerry Privacy Shade
One of the current solutions to avoid shoulder surﬁng is BlackBerrys “BlackBerry
Privacy Shade” [41, 42]. This solution allows the user to dim most of the screen
and then choose to have a small area with a normal vision. By doing so the user
will then be able to control what part of the content that can be subjected to
shoulder surﬁng, see ﬁgure 2-A.
Figure 2-A: The user can drag a ﬁeld (Either a bar, as seen on the left ﬁgure,
or a loop as seen on the right ﬁgure) around on the screen, which
makes that part of the screen visible, thus protecting the rest of
the screen from shoulder surﬁng
==PAGE:24==
12
Related Work
Below, I will be rating (on a Likert scale [43] from 1-5) how good BlackBerry
Privacy Shade preforms on the classical cybersecurity features prevent, detect
and respond.
Prevent BlackBerry Privacy Shade does a descent job at preventing shoulder surf-
ing. Since it only prevents shoulder surﬁng on some parts of the screen,
and thereby make what you read as open for an attack as before. By hav-
ing such a solutions it only helps preventing from quick glances and not
from a situation where the attacker has enough time to follow the ﬂow of a
conversation. From this, I will say that it deserve a 3 out of 5 grade, since
it is useful, but only when preventing shoulder surﬁng where the attacker
has very little time to watch the screen.
Detect When looking at Detect we see that the application do not in any way try
to detect whether there is an attacker close up or from how far away or
where an attacker might be looking. since it fails at this, it will get a grafe
of 1 out of 5.
Respond In order to respond it is necessary to have identiﬁed what to respond to,
and since the application do not detect anything I do not see how it can
respond, because of this i grade it 1 out of 5.
2.4.2
DetectGazeNet
The two Google researchers Hee Jung Ryu and Florian Schroﬀpresented “Screen
Protector with Eﬃcient and Robust Mobile Vision” at the thirty-ﬁrst conference
on neural information [44], later called DetectGazeNet. This solution uses the
front camera to detect shoulder surfers, it also manages to do gaze detection.
While researches have not published a lot of information on how their application
works, their results show their solution to be more than capable of doing proper
detection.
Prevent DetectGazeNet relies solely on its face and gaze detection for preventing
shoulder surﬁng. They believe, that by using a “quick, robust, and ac-
curate gaze detection mobile model” it is enough to ensure a continued
consumation of conﬁdential content while protecting it in a crowded space
such as the subway or an elevator.
So, if we rate it on a Likert scale it will not get more than 1 out of 5, since
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Current software solutions
13
they do not focus on this in the ﬁrst place. However, there is of course a
huge Astrix that says look at their detection and respond.
Detect The detection part is where DetectGazeNet really shines. Not only does
it enable to see if there is any shoulder surfers in the area, but also tracks
whether the shoulder is actually looking at the screen by using an AI based
gaze detection.
We are not given many details about the project, but from the demo and
the numbers that is presented, it seems to be quite fast. Having face detec-
tion being done in 115 ms, face recognition in 47 ms and gaze detections
in 2ms per frame on average. A big part of the speed of this detection is
due to it being run locally, rather than being processed in the cloud.
When taking the demo video and the given data into account it looks like
the solution is more than capable to recognize shoulder surfers and detect
them before their eyes will have ﬁxated on something (see section 2.2 for
more info on gaze ﬁxation). Based on this, I will rate it 5 out 5, for de-
tecting what it has to detect and doing it in a timely fashion before the
attacker is able to observe anything.
Respond The response works by having display switching away from what the user
was doing to the front cameras view, see ﬁgure 2-B.
While this response defends the user against shoulder surﬁng, it also
removes the ability to keep on working.
While the defense from De-
tectGazeNet is strong, I ﬁnd the solution to be disruptive and not very
user friendly, if the intent is too keep working.
The rating is therefore 3 out 5.
==PAGE:26==
14
Related Work
Figure 2-B: DetectGazeNet responding to a shoulder surfer
2.5
Summary
I have looked into the main research around shoulder surﬁng. From this, I ﬁnd
that even though the main part of the research has been done on smartphones,
almost none of it has been actually trying to prevent shoulder surﬁng for more
than just a PIN entry. The main protection on the market is a physical protec-
tion ﬁlter, however, this will only help when the shoulder surfer is siting next
to you and not behind you.
Furthermore, there are several studies on the readability of text. Most look
into how easy or hard it is to read one font instead of another. There have
also been research about reading text on texturized backgrounds. While these
experiments is in some ways similar to what I want to accomplish, this method
has to be left out for future work, see 6.1, as I ﬁrst found this research halfway
through the thesis.
Another big part of the research was placed in ﬁnding a proper way to measure
readability. In my case the idea about ﬁnding speciﬁc words whether they are
misspelled or “magic” is not enough, since I will need to ﬁnd the reading limits
of my participants. Also, when they are at their reading limit, I want to know
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Summary
15
how much they are able to read and how complex words they are able to read
are and ﬁnally, how fast they are able to read each word. To achieve this I will
measure how much of the text they are reading correctly and how fast they do
it. This is eﬀectively done by having the participants reading the text out loud,
while I notice each correct word that have been read correctly out loud.
By doing so I will be able to see when my participants are able to read an entire
text, some parts of the text, only a few words or nothing. I will then measure
the percentage of correct words read per second, in order to allow for diﬀerent
pieces of texts to be measured up against each other. This is done as I will not
able to use the same piece oﬀtexts again and again, as the participants will be
able to remember the text they just read, and thereby easily be able to guess
the words.
A small list of face detection frameworks have been elaborated, I ended up with
apples own face detection framework, for having easy access to their machine
learning chips in future devices. However, the ability to make it easily imple-
mented into another application was also importing in my choice, as this will
make it easier to spread the solution.
Finally I walked through the strength’s and weaknesses’ of what already exists
in the few software based applications for shoulder surﬁng protection out there.
==PAGE:28==
16
Related Work
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Analysis
The aim for this thesis is to ensure conﬁdentiality while reading sensitive data,
as well as regular data, when located in places where it would otherwise be
considered unsafe to do so.
It is easy to imagine a scenario where a company is not interested in having
their internal information leaked out into the public space, but is still interested
in having their employees working during transit. These two things will often
contradict each other due to the amount of people in public transportation as
seen in ﬁgure 3-A and since shoulder surﬁng will be inevitable to occur in these
scenarios, it is important that the necessary safety measure has been taking into
consideration.
While company secrets are important to hide, it is also the case that regular
users and their private life is in danger. As seen in section 2.1 we hear Eiband
and his colleagues describe scenarios, that most people will ﬁnd too private
to share with random persons standing next to you in the train.
A smaller
subset of people is trying to combat this by using polarized privacy ﬁlters, but
as these ﬁlters are not available in your smart phone from the start and the are
somewhat tricky to install, they are rarely used. Furthermore this solution will
only prevent people from the sides to look at your screen and not people from
behind. While the screen is visible when looking straight at screen, the colors
will be darkened, this does not makes it suitable for certain tasks.
==PAGE:30==
18
Analysis
Figure 3-A: A common scenario of shoulder surﬁng
And since most people are not aware of exposing themself to the risk of shoulder
surﬁng, we could either start to try raising awareness and hope for peoples
behavior to change for the better, or we could try to make a software solution
which can easily be implemented into current active software.
This solution needs to be easy to enable by the user, and should require as little
interaction as possible. It should be as small of a disruption as possible. And
should be possible to disable when the user is placed into a trusted area as for
example the users home.
3.1
Face detection
If we want to make use of face detection through a smartphone we are mostly
limited by the hardware inside of the phones.
With current face detection
software/frameworks it is possible to detect more than one face with almost any
decent smartphone from the last 5 years, and even before that.
When taking a look at the kind of hardware that is installed in smartphones
today, it is most obvious to use the front camera as the eyes of the phone. If
we want to have a more precise way to keep track of shoulder surfers around
us, we could take use of hardware such as an IR camera to achieve better 3D
detection. The ones that exists in the most popular smartphones (Apples iPhone
X and newer Samsung ﬂagship phones) is sadly locked to the manufactures.
Even if it was unlocked, it would still only be available on a small subset of
all smartphones on the market, making it useless for large scale deployment.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Ensuring Conﬁdentiality
19
Hence, if the approach needs to be available in a large scale, we will keep using
the standard front facing camera and wait until other kind hardware becomes
widely available in smartphones.
Another thing which should be taking into account is the limited computing
resources available on smartphones. This only becomes more important when
taking older smartphones into consideration as well as battery life.
While I
will have battery life in my mind when producing the Anti Shoulder Surﬁng
application, it will however not have a big focus in this ﬁrst iteration.
The same goes for cross platform availability. Even when wide spread availability
being a big deal, it is not important for this iteration. And by focusing on writing
native code we can also avoid minor bugs and performance issues.
Finally, this thesis will go into the cases where an attacker has partly or fully
covered his or her face. For the simple reason of this being a big project all by
it self.
3.2
Ensuring Conﬁdentiality
To achieve privacy or conﬁdentiality in our solution, we will explore how to
camouﬂage text. 1 The camouﬂaging of text should be possible to use by only
using software and the hardware that is already installed on the phone.
To
ensure conﬁdentiality we need the text to be readable up close, but not on a
distance.
Possible solution for making a software based defense against shoulder surﬁng,
is to use the front camera to see if there is anyone else inside of the frame.
This allow us to implement our software on almost any modern smart phone,
if we take the iPhone as measuring point (since Apple is often not the ﬁrst to
implement features, but holds the biggest share of the smartphone market.), the
front facing camera has been a part of smart phones since 2010 [45]. By tracking
faces, we will also have the ability to estimate the distance of the shoulder
surfers, and adjust the intensity of how much the text should be hidden.
What we want to achieve is having the ability to camouﬂage our text in a way
allowing us to read text up close without any issues, but at the same time
making it impossible to read text from a distance. If we take the most simple
way to make text harder to read we just must move it further away from the
observer, as pictured as the blue function on ﬁgure 3-B.
If we then try to just make the font smaller we will make the text harder to
read on a distance, but also up close, we have simply just achieved the same
thing by shifting the function downwards as depicted as the red graph in ﬁgure
1For simplicity I am only focusing on hiding text in this thesis.
==PAGE:32==
20
Analysis
Figure 3-B: As the distance increases, the readability will drop
3-B.
What we want to accomplish is having a function of camouﬂaging the text in
such a way that we still have a high level of readability, but as soon as the
distance increases the readability should drop to zero as fast as possible, as
depicted as the cyan graph in ﬁgure 3-B.
A more fancy way to achieve this could be to hide the text in plain sight so
to speak. One way could involve having the text shown in patterns as seen in
Shinobu Ishihara color blind tests [46]. By then arranging the colored noise
to be placed in a way that when using a pair of colored glasses will allow us
to read the text. This will be done by having the glasses implimented with a
subtractive eﬀect (as described in [47]) on the surrounding colors. We will then
end up having text that will be hidden for all other than the person wearing the
correct glasses, see ﬁgure 3-C. While there might be some cases where this could
be useful, I still see this problem as being too similar to the privacy protection
ﬁlter (see [5]).
Here, we are still forced to have another piece of equipment
for this to work. Moreover if this get widespread there would only be a small
amount of colors available for everyone, which will then make this camouﬂaging
technique close to useless.
If we then go into the realm of using the front camera to detect shoulder surfers
and thereby camouﬂaging the text on demand as described in section 3.1. we
can then begin to look at the following solutions.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Ensuring Conﬁdentiality
21
(-i) The text is hidden by being sur-
rounded with colored noise
(-ii) The text is then visible by us-
ing the correct subtractive colored
glasses
Figure 3-C: An oversimpliﬁed illustration of hiding text next by having colored
noise surrounding it
One simple way to achieve this would be by dimming the displays brightness,
thus making it harder to see the display. It could then be tuned in way, where
the display turns oﬀas soon as there is a shoulder surfer present.
Another solution could be to have the background color and text fade into the
same color until it becomes unreadable as illustrated in ﬁgure 3-D. This is the
method that was used in Dimitri’s thesis [48], and has also been shown in Scharﬀ
& Ahumada article [28] to be an eﬀective way of making text harder to read.
Figure 3-D: The background color of the fading until it reaches the same color
as the text (starting from let to right), and thereby decreasing the
readability of the text
==PAGE:34==
22
Analysis
3.3
Notifying the user
One major aspect is is how the user should be notiﬁed if being watched, and if
possible from where the user are being watched.
The simplest approach is by just letting the camouﬂaging happen. This will
notify the user that someone is watching, but in its basic form it will not notify
the user from where the shoulder surfer is looking.
If we try to look at a trick from Gamiﬁcation in ﬁrst person shooter computer
games, it is common to show the player from which direction they are being
shot from by having the border of the screen glow in a color. The border of the
screen will then glow more intense the closer the attacker is.
So if we implement this we would have a way of notifying the user of an attack
and from where the attack comes from.
A more sophisticated method could involve having the text placed on a 2D
Figure 3-E: When an attacker is looking from the right, the right border of
the screen will then glow in red color to warn the user.
plan in a 3D room. The 2D plan would then rotate away from the shoulder
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Notifying the user
23
surfer. By rotating the phone away from the shoulder surfer, the text would
then rotate back in place for reading see ﬁgure 3-F.
(-i) When no attacker is present the
text is shown as normal
(-ii) When attacker is present(in this
case looking from the right) the
plane will then rotate towards the
attacker until the phone has been
rotated away from the attacker
Figure 3-F: A simpliﬁed illustration of ti is possible to notify the user oﬀan
attack and where it comes from by using 3D animations
==PAGE:36==
24
Analysis
3.4
Summary
After having broken the problem of how to achieving face detection with modern
day smartphones into smaller sections, I deem that it would be enough to just
focus on using standard front facing cameras, and not looking into specialized
hardware. There already exists frameworks in place for both major smartphone
platforms, that provide fast and reliable face detection (see section 2.4). For
making the experience as smooth as possible and reliable, I have chosen to
focus on using platform native frameworks (in this case for iOS).
To keep focus on the main task on hand (detecting if there is a shoulder surfer,
if so camouﬂage the text) I have chosen to stay with a simple way to notify the
user. This means that I will let the manipulation of the text be the notiﬁcation
for the user.
Things I have chosen not to focus on is: Edge cases of face detection - faces that
is covered or partly covered. Having cross platform availability. Advanced user
notiﬁcations of where the attack is coming from.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4
Design & Implementation
I will now elaborate on the speciﬁc component design, needed for Shoulder
Surﬁng Protection. Based on the theory mentioned in chapter 2, the need of
having a way to hide text in plain sight as an alternative to status quo, with
either no protection or the need of using a physical protection, whcih today still
has a limited functionality.
I will go into details on the speciﬁc requirements for a solution that meets the
need of an electronic screen protector, and by doing so holding i against its
adversaries.
In brief, Shoulder Surﬁng Protector is a proof of concept application for iOS.
It showcases how it can hide text from shoulder surfers while still keeping the
text readable for the user of the smartphone. It realizes this by using the front
camera to see if there is more than one face in the frame. It will then be using
face detection to determine if there is a shoulder surfers face and judging how
far away the shoulder surfer is located. Then, it will take action to ensure that
the shoulder surfer is not able to read the text, by merging the background
color close to the text’s color. This prevents the text from being readable at a
distance, but still being readable up close.
At an early state we took the decision to design Shoulder Surﬁng Protector as
a proof of concept application, due to the fact that it would be harder to tap
==PAGE:38==
26
Design & Implementation
into existing e-mail application or browsers. The motivation behind this choice
is that if you want to have a rapid spreading of software based shoulder surﬁng
protection, it should not wait for custom built applications, but be implemented
in existing software.
While this project is developed as a standalone application, the idea is that it
should be easy to take the code and implement it in any applications wishing to
include an extra layer of privacy protection. That is why I ﬁrmly believe that
developing Shoulder Surﬁng Protector is a perfect way to introduce my method
of shoulder surﬁng protection.
The choice for developing the application for Apples iOS platform, was taking
mostly from which hardware that was easy to come by, since the phone I use
myself is an ihpone. With that in mind, there is nothing else stopping a de-
velopment of the solution for Android or desktop OS as shown in section 2.4.
With Apple’s recent company direction in being the most privacy focused tech
giants in silicon valley1, and their company direction in having more advanced
front facing camera technology (see [49]) implemented in their smartphones, it
only gave further motivation to use an iphone for this project, as Shoulder Surf-
ing Protector could be picked up and implemented on a system level to further
improve privacy on their platform.
Another reason was, that some of the competing frameworks do not posses the
ability to work on a live video feed. This was a crucial part of the design for
Shoulder Surﬁng Protector, by having a fast an easy framework that would work
well on both video as well as still pictures. Simply put, it was way easier for me
to implement the Vision Framework for having real-time face detection running.
4.1
The User Interface
Even though User Interface (UI) is always important to think about when de-
signing an application, Shoulder Surﬁng Protector’s main goal is to be a show-
case of a concept. This allows me to keep the design simple and with little need
for user interaction. To have a goal of how the application should look and feel
I designed a wireframe (see ﬁgure 4-A) for a layout of the applications design
and functions. For the wireframe it should be noted, that the actions shown on
the right side should taken by the application itself, and not with a push, as the
interactive version, can let one to believe.
Shoulder Surﬁng Protector, will need to have a text ﬁeld, which will change
colors when Privacy mode is turned on. This will notify the user that Shoulder
1I know that it is still up to debate whether they actually are doing it or not.
==PAGE:39==
4.1 The User Interface
27
Surﬁng protection is turned on in this exact text ﬁeld. From here, the application
will be looking for shoulder surfers, when a shoulder surfer comes into sight, it
will start manipulating the text or background colors, such that it is unreadable
for the shoulder surfer at any given distance. Finally, if the Shoulder Surfer gets
too close, it should render the text completely unreadable, e.g. by making the
text the exact same color as the bacground.
In the ﬁnal versions of Shoulder Surﬁng Protector, there is a text ﬁeld that
shows the number of faces that has been spotted inside of the frame. This was
implemented to let the users have an idea of how much of a danger they were
in. This is meant as a simple nudge towards the user, such they can take on
new security adjustments that they otherwise wouldn’t have done.
==PAGE:40==
28
Design & Implementation
Figure 4-A: Wireframe over the main features of Shoulder Surfer Protector,
an interactive version can be found at https://xd.adobe.com/
view/bbe0c8e1-b954-489c-6695-614585dfbd36-cdd1/.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Components
29
4.2
Components
In the following section, I will start with a quick summary of how the application
should function, and then proceed into the components that is vital for Shoulder
Surﬁng Protector.
Figure 4-B: A simple state dia-
gram of how the ar-
chitecture should be
for a shoulder surf-
ing protections appli-
cation
To implement Shoulder Surﬁng Protec-
tor, the architecture of the application
should follow the steps shown in the state
diagram 4-B.
As soon as the user turns on the switch
to enter privacy mode, Shoulder Surﬁng
Protector should change the colors of the
text ﬁeld that is being watched, and then
run face detection on a live stream of pho-
tos. As soon as Shoulder Surﬁng Protec-
tor ﬁnds more than one face in the frame,
it shall measure the distance to the sec-
ond face and then render the text harder
to read accordingly to the measured dis-
tance of the Shoulder surfer. As soon as
the shoulder surfer comes too close the
text should then be rendered unreadable.
Most of the challenges in designing this
application was having an easy way of
using face detection on a live stream of
photos, while making it possible to de-
termine who is the user and who is the
shoulder surfer.
To determine distance
and manipulate text colors, the applica-
tion will need to have the front camera
always turned on, without it switching to
the camera view. Finally, it should also
be easy to implement in any given iOS
application.
4.2.1
Face detection
A big part of the face detection code come
from the demo provided by Willjay90’s
==PAGE:42==
30
Design & Implementation
demo code published to Github.com [50].
It makes use of Apple’s vision frame, which is essentially a computer vision
framework, that performs face and face landmark detection, text detection,
barcode recognition, image registration, and general feature tracking (for more
details see chapter 2.3). This framework was implementet in Shoulder Surﬁng
Protector and, would be able to make use of the optimized machine learning
hardware chips, which Apple has started shipping in their A11 processor since
September 20172.
This allows the framework to use a more energy-eﬃcient
method of doing face recognition. Even though I do not posses the hardware
necessary to make use of this, I still see it as an important factor to build upon
a framework that has an incentive of getting new updates and performance
enhancements.
The vision framework is able to keep a low margin of error while using a lower
resolution of video frames.
By using a lower video frame size, the software
will have a lower processing time and in the end save energy. For the testing
performed in chapter 5, I ended up using a resolution of 360x480 pixels.
Another big advantage of using Apple’s vision framework, is having the ability
to get face landmark features at an instant. This is useful for getting metrics on
persons face captured inside of the frame. This is really exciting for two reasons.
First, is allows for having some easy metrics which can be translated into how far
away the subject is. Here, the most common choice is using the distance between
the eyes, but the vision framework allows for more face landmark choices than
the eyes alone, such as a metrics for the face height and face width. This is
being used in the ﬁnal version of Shoulder Surﬁng Protector to determine the
distance this is essence done in the same manner as mention in section 2.3.1,
but has to be reproduced since we use another camera system.
The second reason is that by having these face landmarks it allows for tracking
if the shoulder surfer is actually looking at the screen, this could be from using
metrics of the eye or the combination between the outline of the jaw and nose.
The awareness part of Shoulder Surﬁng Protector is not a part of the design
schedule, but I found it worth to mention as an advantage of using the vision
framework.
4.2.2
Treatment of shoulder surﬁng activity
When looking at ﬁgure 4-B, as soon as Shoulder Surﬁng Protector enters its
privacy mode, it will immediately start looking for faces inside the camera frame,
by using face detection. One way to detect who is the user and who is the
shoulder surfer, could be by looking at which face enters the frame ﬁrst, and
2see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apple_A11
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Summary
31
which face enters the frame last. While the Vision Framework, is able to handle
multiple face detections in real time, it will raise other concerns such as: what
happens if there are two faces inside the frame as soon as the application is
running?
The approach I found to be most simple was to ﬁrst check if there are more
than one face detected inside the picture frame. As soon as there were more
than one face inside the frame, Shoulder Surﬁng Protector needed to ﬁgure out
which face is the biggest (hence the face located closest to the phone). By then
looking at the size of the shoulder surfer’s face, and using real world distance
measurements from experiments, it would then be possible to say how far away
the shoulder surfer is located to the smartphone, and we can then manipulate
the text accordingly.
The next question that rises is what to as soon as there is more than two faces?
By collecting all face sizes inside of an array, we can start by removing the
largest face in the array, since it should be our own face. In the case where
the largest face is not our own face, it means that the shoulder surfer is located
closer to the screen than the user and the problem will now be entirely diﬀerent
than the one we are trying to solve. This should only occur very rarely, and
the user should know by himself that something is wrong. Now, after having
removed our own face from the array we have an array ﬁlled with potential
shoulder surfers, but since we rely on a protection that makes the text harder to
read the the shoulder surfer being furthest away is also furthest away from the
text. Hence, it is safe to assume that if we protect against the closest shoulder
surfer, we will automatically protect against all of the other shoulder surfers.
Therefore, by taking the maximum value from the array of potential shoulder
surfers we will now have the size of the closest shoulder surfers face.
To ensure that the users would experience a soft transition between the text
being rendered in a normal manner till the protected state against shoulder
surﬁng, it was necessary to use short transitioning animations between each
rendition of the text. While Apples UIView frameworks allows for animations
on the background colors in a text ﬁeld, these animations would not apply for
the text colors. Since animations just consist of small changes in each frame,
I sat up nine diﬀerent switch cases to make a “custom” transition for the texts
colors based on the shoulder surfers distance to the phone.
4.3
Summary
The problems being outlined in the chapter 3, has been solved and implemented
in the applications Shoulder Surﬁng Protector.
Since i wish to ease the use of shoulder surﬁng protection as much as possible, I
==PAGE:44==
32
Design & Implementation
ﬁnd that making a real life demo is by far the best way to get the message into
the open.
The face detection frameworks allowed me to create a simple solution, which
works seamlessly, without the need of any hardware installation. This helps
to truly extend the vision of importance of having protection against shoul-
der surﬁng to any smartphone that has a camera and CPU power to do face
detection.
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5
Evaluation
This papers’ evaluation of Shoulder Surﬁng Protector will eﬀectively consist of
the user experiments that have been preformed while designing the application
and lastly tests on the ﬁnal product itself. The main focus in the tests were
to ﬁnd color combination which would defect shoulder surﬁng. Since I did not
have the time needed to test a large range of diﬀerent color combinations, the
tests’ main focus have been to outperform standard black and white text, since
it is the most common rendered format. However, I did make sure to ﬁt in
experiments which also looked into how readable green contrasts would be, due
to the more concentrated amount of green receptors in the center of the eye [51]
The main target was to develop an application that would be able to camouﬂage
a text ﬁeld allowing users conﬁdentiality while using their phone in a public
area. The solution should only be software based, thus allowing it to reach a far
wider audience than the current physical privacy protection ﬁlters. The solution
should also solve the current problems that the privacy protection ﬁlters has of
not being able to protect against shoulder surfers from behind. In the following,
I will go through user tests trying to back up my solution for the problems
described above.
All test has been preformed on an Apple iPhone 7, at full screen brightness. A
picture of the tools used to perform the tests can be found in the appendix 1-A.
==PAGE:46==
34
Evaluation
5.1
Pilot Testing
To have a foundation for my tests I started with a few pilot tests on a small.
I wanted to have a baseline for the standard reading distance when reading on
a phone with 6/6 vision. Additionally, I would like to see if my initial thought
on camouﬂaging text, by just changing the contrast on the font and background
color, would have any impact at all.
5.1.1
Participants
For the pilot experiments there were used four participants, (two males and two
females). the participants were all in the age 25-29 years. All participants had
6/6 vision 1 or corrected 6/6 vision. All participants were used to read on a
smartphone using the Operating Systems standard font size.
5.1.2
Method of Testing
This pilot test consisted of six small experiments.
At ﬁrst, the participants would be asked to place the smartphone in their optimal
reading distance. The smartphone would then be moved, to a distance where
the text would not be readable anymore. The distance would be measured with
a ruler, where one end would be places next to the persons eye and the other
end at the middle of the screen.
Then, each experiment would have the text shown in diﬀerent color formats.
The ﬁrst experiment would consist of a normal rendered text with black letters
on white background, while the second would consist of white rendered text on
black background.
Additionally each experiment would consist of a new passage of text for each
distance. Hence, the participants would not read the same text twice and would
therefore not be able guess or remember the words they try to read.
The text chosen for the experiments was an article from the danish newspaper
[52] with an average reading diﬃculty level2. The text was then divided into six
smaller passages. This was done to make it able to ﬁt inside the smartphones
screen, but also to provide a shorter piece of text, that would still be long enough
to be adequate for evaluating if the text was readable or not.
120/20 vision in American
2With a Lix count of 43, it was considered to be of average readability.
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Pilot Testing
35
5.1.3
Experiments
The text that was used and the results can bee found in the appendix A.2 and
A.5.1. In the following, I will use shorten names for the values such that the
alpha value for text is noted as αT and for background is noted as αB.
Experiment 1:
Experiment conﬁgurations White background, with black text.
Values αT = 255 RGBT = 0, 0, 0 αB = 255 RGBB = 255, 255, 255
Thoughts Having a baseline with standard black rendered text on white
background, to be able to compare other test results with a standard setup.
Experiment 2:
Experiment conﬁgurations White background, transparent black text.
Values αT = 68 RGBT = 0, 0, 0 αB = 0 RGBB = 255, 255, 255
Thoughts By changing the alpha value and changing the black text low-
ering its contrast towards the background, we want to test how it will
aﬀect the readability of the text.
Experiment 3:
Experiment conﬁgurations Black background, transparent white text.
Values αT = 64 RGBT = 255, 255, 255 αB = 255 RGBB = 0, 0, 0
Thoughts How would it aﬀect readability if we change the setup to a
opposite color conﬁguration as in Experiment 2.
Experiment 4:
Experiment conﬁgurations Black background, White text
Values αT = 255 RGBT = 255, 255, 255 αB = 255 RGBB = 0, 0, 0
Transparent black/very dark background, transparent text,
Thoughts How would it aﬀect readability by having an opposite color
conﬁguration as in Experiment 1.
Experiment 5:
Experiment conﬁgurations Black background, White text
Values αT = 64 RGBT = 0, 0, 0 αB = 64 RGBB = 0, 0, 0 3
Transparent Black/very dark background, transparent text,
Thoughts How would it aﬀect readability by having two dark colors close
in contrast.
3Due to the way alpha values work in iOS, I will not end up with the same color.
==PAGE:48==
36
Evaluation
Experiment 6, 7 and 8:
Experiment conﬁgurations Green background on green text with slightly
diﬀerent values for each test,
Values Exp. 6 αT = 64 RGBT = 0, 255, 0 αB = 64 RGBB = 0, 255, 0
Values Exp. 7 αT = 255 RGBT = 0, 255, 0 αB = 64 RGBB = 0, 255, 0
Values Exp. 8 αT = 255 RGBT = 0, 200, 0 αB = 64 RGBB = 0, 255, 0
Thoughts How would it aﬀect readability by having two very similar
green colors.
This is an interesting experiment due to and increased
amount green receptors in the eye.
5.1.4
Summary
With the setup and the results achieved in the pilot testing, it is very hard to
make accurate and exact conclusions. However, it is possible to conclude that
there was a diﬀerence between reading a normal rendered black text on a white
background versus two very similar colors for text and background.
5.1.4.1
Major sources of error
These test were not meant to be perfect but to have present an idea of what
seemed feasible for testing.
Therefore, I will only brieﬂy touch on potential
sources of errors.
Some sources of errors could be: The measurements were taking without the face
or phone being hold in a ﬁxed position. It also became clear that I would have a
problem with the variance in each text section and their diﬃculty. Therefore, I
would need to ﬁnd a way to makes it possible to compare each experiment with
each other.
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Standard Testing
37
5.2
Standard Testing
After the pilot tests (see section 5.1), I got an estimation of how close people
was holding their phone for what they considered an optimal viewing distance.
I also had a basic idea of how far away the phone should be before the text
was unreadable. Furthermore, the main idea of challenging the readability by
rendering the text and background also seemed to work.
To make sure that the following experiments would have a more scientiﬁc ap-
proach, I designed a more static setup.
To make sure we have the same angle and distance for each round of test, I used
a chinrest for the participants’ heads. This should give me a stable measuring
point for all experiments. The chinrest would then be placed on a long sheet
of paper with previously measured markings for the smartphone to be located
at (see ﬁgure 5-A). The smartphone would then be placed on an angled stand
allowing it to be placed still and always stay in the same angle for each distance4.
Figure 5-A: A sketch of the setup for user tests as seen from above
5.2.1
Participants
For the standardized experiments the participants consisted of (three males and
four females) in the age group of 22 to 30 . All participants either had 6/6 vision
or corrected 6/6 vision. All participants were used to read on a smartphone and
all privately used iOS with the system standard font size on a daily basis.
4The angle between the eyes for the participant to the phone would of course change slightly
at each step.
==PAGE:50==
38
Evaluation
5.2.2
Method of Testing
The main focus for this round of tests consisted was to have an idea how the dis-
tance, color contrast and fonts types5 aﬀects readability. I wished to achieve this
by expanding on the knowledge gained in my pilot testing, previously described
in section 5.1.
I want to see how readability is being aﬀected over diﬀerent distances. This
is a crucial metric when considering how to protect against shoulder surﬁng.
This will give me a deeper understanding of how the decay of readability over a
distance is linked to how the text is represented. It is also necessary to be able
to compare diﬀerent experiments to each other which will be much more easy
with this more steady experiment setup used now.
When looking into how contrast is aﬀecting the readability, my goal is to ﬁnd
a contrast/color combination, that allows for having high readability on a close
distance and a low readability on a long distance, as described in section 3.2
and shown in ﬁgure 3-B. The experiments will be conducted over predetermined
distances as mentioned above in order to try and obtain the best contrast/color
combination.
The main reason for testing how the font rendering aﬀects readability comes
from the pilot test result. Here, it became clear that over diﬀerent distances
before the text becomes unreadable, the participants was able to recognize short
and common words while not being able to recognize longer and uncommon
words. This is due to the research of recognizing known words as shapes rather
than reading the letters inside the text (as shown in [53, 24]). The experiments
will again be conducted over various predetermined distances.
To sum it all up, the Standard Testing consists of eight diﬀerent experiments,
each conducted at four diﬀerent distances, resulting in a total of 32 experiments
per participant.
For each experiment and distance, the text will be a new section from a longer
article, such that the participant will have no knowledge of the article snippet
prior to reading the text.
For each experiment, the number of errors and reading time was noted across
all distances. This was necessary as each section would not consist of the same
length and diﬃculty. By doing so it becomes possible to measure the number
of words read correctly per second for each distance allowing. Hence, it ﬁnally
allows me to compare experiments against one another.
5At ﬁrst I had planned more experiments with fonts, but I had to discard them due to
time constraints
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Standard Testing
39
5.2.3
Experiments
Both screen shots of the experiments, and a non modiﬁed version of the experi-
ments have been attached in the appendix A.4. Due to the fact that an α-value
only modiﬁes the RGB-values based on the underlying layer color, I have chosen
to exclude the alpha values, and purely rely on RGB onwards. All values in the
bottom half of the application shown in each screenshot can hence be ingored.
I will once again write values for text as RGBT and values for background as
RGBB.
Experiment 1:
Experiment conﬁgurations White background, with black text.
Values RGBT = 0, 0, 0
RGBB = 255, 255, 255
Thoughts Idea is to have a baseline with standard black rendered text
on white background, used to compare with other test results.
Experiment 2:
Experiment conﬁgurations White background, with black text. The
text is rendered in all uppercase letters.
Values RGBT = 0, 0, 0
RGBB = 255, 255, 255
Thoughts I want to see how much of an impact on readability a change in
font type is going to mean. I will look into the diﬀerence between reading
a normal rendered text6 and an all uppercase rendered text.
Experiment 3:
Experiment conﬁgurations Dark background with a slightly darker
text.
Values RGBT = 48, 48, 48
RGBB = 64, 64, 64
Thoughts To see how big an impact slight diﬀerences in contrast between
a dark background and a dark text have on the readability.
Experiment 4:
Experiment conﬁgurations Dark background with quite darker text.
Values RGBT = 0, 0, 0
RGBB = 64, 64, 64
6Normal rendered text being both lowercase and uppercase letters
==PAGE:52==
40
Evaluation
Thoughts How much of an impact will it have to increase the contrast
between the text and the background, by making the text completely
black.
Experiment 5:
Experiment conﬁgurations Dark background with brighter text.
Values RGBT = 0, 255, 0
RGBB = 64, 64, 64
Thoughts How much of an impact will it have to increase the contrast in
the other direction, by making the text brighter.
Experiment 6:
Experiment conﬁgurations Bright green background with slightly darker
green text.
Values RGBT = 112, 254, 124
RGBB = 191, 253, 191
Thoughts With the same arguments as in the pilot testing, I will again
look into how the contrast in green colors aﬀects readability.
Experiment 7:
Experiment conﬁgurations Bright green background with a total green
text.
Values RGBT = 0, 255, 0
RGBB = 191, 253, 191
Thoughts How much of an impact will it have to increase the contrast
between the text and the background, by marking the text completely
Green.
Experiment 8:
Experiment conﬁgurations Another shade of green background and
slightly modiﬁed green text.
Values RGBT = 0, 199, 0
RGBB = 164, 197, 157
Thoughts How much of an impact will it have to use a more complex
version of a green background with a green text.
5.2.4
Results
Overall ﬁndings, I found the two experiments with the closest contrast, were
faster to drop in readability than those with a bigger diﬀerence in contrast. It is
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Standard Testing
41
not clear whether the green colors have an advantage over the grey/black colors.
Furthermore, it is not possible to conclude if the color combinations makes for
a linear or an exponential function as shown in ﬁgure 3-B.
When looking at the overall results (see ﬁgure 5-B), It looks like there is a
distance in between 30 cm and 60 cm that is more optimal for reading than
30 cm, since the readability only falls a small amount or even rises in most of
the experiments between 30 and 60 cm. This also correlates well with what is
considered as having the optimal reading distance for a book at 40 cm and a
computer screen at 60 cm [54]. This only calls for having new tests with more
distance points for each color combination.
Figure 5-B
Even though experiment 6 looks like we have the model we want, the overall
results shows that it will be tough to conclude anything else than the two best
models could be suited for a round of further testing. This is due to them being
closest to having a exponential decay which I hope to ﬁnd in the testing sessions.
5.2.4.1
Major sources of errors
One thing that quickly became clear, was how the approach each participant
chose going into the tests was quite diﬀerent. Some would quickly give up when
it became hard to read, while others took their time and slowly tried to be able
to read a few new words the more they looked. This quickly resulted in some
==PAGE:54==
42
Evaluation
participants having bigger loss of data entry points than others, even though
they had somewhat similar scores in easier experiments.
Another major source of error was the condition in which the experiments took
place. This was both due to diﬀerent test locations, and diﬀerent times of the
day. It resulted in having diﬀerent lighting conditions, which had a clear eﬀect.
It was not always possible to equalize these conditions by using blinds if the sun
was to strong or tuning on lights on when the sun went down.
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Reﬁned Testing
43
5.3
Reﬁned Testing
I chose to take take the two most viable candidates from the Standard Testing
(see ﬁgure 5-C) to expand my tests on due to their rapid drop in readability over
changes in the distance and Experiment 6 even seemed to follow a decreasing
exponential regression.
The next round of experiments will have twice as many measurements than the
Standard Testing did, beginning at 30 cm and ending at 82.5 cm as shown in
ﬁgure 5-D.
Figure 5-C: The two most viable candidates for camouﬂaging text, Experi-
ment 3 and Experiment 6, with the standard text as a baseline
plotted as well Eexperiment 1)
==PAGE:56==
44
Evaluation
Figure 5-D: A sketch of the reﬁned setup, for user testing, as seen from above
5.3.1
Participants
For the rounds of reﬁned testing the participants consisted of (three males and
four females) in the age group of 19 to 27 years. All participants either had 6/6
vision or corrected 6/6 vision. All participants were used to read on a smart-
phone and all participants used an iOS smartphone with the system standard
font size on a daily basis.
5.3.2
Method of testing
The main focus for this round of experiments, is to see if we can come closer to
having a color combination that lead to an exponential decay of readability, by
introducing more data points per experiment.
The same assumption as mentioned in section 5.2.2 is still viable. However, I
will not be looking into experiments where font type is changing.
The test will consist three diﬀerent experiments, each conducted at eight dif-
ferent distances resulting in a total of 32 experiments. For each experiment,
the number of word errors and reading time was noted across all distances (the
same way as in Standard Testing).
5.3.3
Experiments
Experiment 10:
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Reﬁned Testing
45
Experiment conﬁgurations Dark background with a slightly darker
text.
Values RGBT = 48, 48, 48
RGBB = 64, 64, 64
Thoughts To see how slight diﬀerences in contrast between a dark back-
ground and text impacts the readability.
Experiment 11:
Experiment conﬁgurations White background, with black text.
Values RGBT = 0, 0, 0
RGBB = 255, 255, 255
Thoughts Having a baseline with standard black rendered text on white
background, on which to compare other test results with.
Experiment 12:
Experiment conﬁgurations Bright green background with slightly darker
green text.
Values RGBT = 112, 254, 124
RGBB = 191, 253, 191
Thoughts With the same arguments as in the pilot testing, I will again
look into how the contrast in green colors aﬀects readability.
5.3.4
Results
In ﬁgure 5-E-i we see a clear diﬀerence in readability from experiment 11, exper-
iment 10 and experiment 12. While experiment 11 keeps decreasing in a linear
manner, both experiment 10 and 12 has a sharp fall in readability. It is also
clear that both experiment 10 and 12 reaches a level of being unreadable around
67.5 cm and 57.5 cm while experiment 10 is still readable without any errors up
to 82.5 cm.
For experiment 10 we see its R2 values for a linear function is higher than the
R2 for its exponential decaying function (see ﬁgure 5-F-i). However, with the
enormous error rates it is not really possible to conclude whether it belongs to
as an exponential decaying function or a linear function. It is clear though, that
it is close to impossible to read at a distance of 67.5 cm. It should also be noted
that this combination of colors were the option that all participants preferred
compared to color scheme of experiment 12.
The best option on of color combinations to achieve the optimal function as
showed in ﬁgure 3-B would be to use experiment 12. It is also the one that
gains the biggest advantage of removing the closest data point (30 cm) 5-G-ii.
It is also the function with the lowest error rates of the two experiments. All
==PAGE:58==
46
Evaluation
in all, these settings seems to prove very good. However, a big down side with
experiment 12 is that all participants found the colors highly uncomfortable to
read.
Judging from experiment 12, I would say that it is possible to have a color/-
contrast combination which allows for a quick decay in readability while having
readable text up close. Further testing might be able to detect a slightly dif-
ferent color combination which can achieve the same results as experiment 12,
while not being unpleasant to read.
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Reﬁned Testing
47
(-i) All results shown
(-ii) All results shown where the distance at 30 cm has been removed from the plot
Figure 5-E
==PAGE:60==
48
Evaluation
(-i) All results shown
(-ii) All results shown where the distance at 30 cm has been removed from the plot
Figure 5-F
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Reﬁned Testing
49
(-i) All results shown
(-ii) All results shown where the distance at 30 cm has been removed from the plot
Figure 5-G
==PAGE:62==
50
Evaluation
5.3.4.1
Major sources of errors
Due to having almost the same setup as in the Standardized test, we will natu-
rally be having some of the same error sources.
I have made sure to preform all of the Reﬁned Tests at the same location, but
since each test took well over an hour, it was impossible to have the same amount
of daylight in the room.
I tried to get my participants to make sure they were trying a little harder
before giving up on the hard color combinations, but it still proved diﬃcult for
some, and thereby still resulted in a loss of data points for some participants.
This might also be due to having some text section with a clearly higher lix
count than other texts showed at the same distance. To adjust for this I suggest
having more experiments at the same distance with the same color/contrast
combination, but with diﬀerent text, each with a diﬀerent lix count.
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Final Testing
51
5.4
Final Testing
After having an idea of how the contrasts works, from both the Standard test,
and the Reﬁned tests. I now ﬁnd it possible to make a proper implantation of
Shoulder Surﬁng Protector. The experiments will take place in a more relaxed
setup than before, since it was not necessary to have the user to sit in ﬁxed
position with a chinrest.
5.4.1
Participants
For the ﬁnal experiments the participants consisted of two males and one female
in the age group of 26 to 29 . All participants either had 6/6 vision or corrected
6/6 vision. All participants were used to read on a smartphone and all privately
used iOS with the system standard font size on a daily basis.
5.4.2
Method of Testing
Measuring the distance and face percent in the picture. One person is sitting
in a chair looking at the phone. The phone is placed in a static setting, so the
angle and distance doesn’t move to the person closest to the phone.
Another person shoulder surfs from behind.
We want to see how much the
persons face ﬁlls in the camera’s picture space at diﬀerent distances. Hence, a
third person measures the distance to the phone from the shoulder surfer, and
watches the developer console in the Xcode application7, for which values has
it is printing out of the shoulder surfer’s percent in the camera screen. For the
distances 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100 and 110 cm. the third person takes notes on
how much the shoulder surfer’s face ﬁlls in the pictures.
5.4.3
Experiments and results
The ﬁnal experiments were quite simple, and will because of this not listed in
the same level of detail as before.
It also therefore possible to combine the
experiment section with the result section.
The ﬁnal testing will be a test of this ﬁnal implantation. This means that it will
be preformed in a more lifelike scenario, such that the only thing that is ﬁxed
7The primary IDE for developing application to iOS, developed by apple, and used to write
Shoulder Surﬁng Protector
==PAGE:64==
52
Evaluation
will be location of the smartphone and the the person that acts as the user will
sit static in a chair in front of the smartphone. These experiments would then
be repeated with each participant in each position, to make sure that the values
From the test results in experiment 3, we noticed that the text becomes unread-
able around 62.5-70 cm. Our results showed that a shoulder surfer would ﬁll
roughly 31% of the camera picture. We set this percentage to the same settings
as experiment 3 (that is RGBT (64, 64, 64) and RGBB(0, 0, 0)), it would then
match our ﬁndings in section 5.2.4 and 5.3.4. At all of the other distances we
kept the background at RGB(0, 0, 0) but changed the text color. When the
shoulder surfer goes further away from the phone, the RGBT -values would then
be lowered all the way down to RGBT (32, 32, 32). This will make the text more
black, and hence easier to read. Ideally this will be much more readable for the
smartphone user, since the shoulder surfer is now further away from the phone,
he/she shouldn’t be able to read anything. When the shoulder surfer goes closer
to the phone, the RGBT -values will increase all the way up to 62,62,62. At this
point, the text is almost identical to the background, and is close to unread-
able even for the user. This scenario will only happen if the shoulder surfers
head almost next the users head. In which case something is obviously amiss.
Here, the user seriously needs to protect his text information, and hence the
text becomes tough, or almost impossible to read.
5.4.4
Summary
We have successfully translated the percentage values from the face detection
into units of distance to a given shoulder surfer. We have then measured the
steps allowing us to implement a slowly transitioning shoulder surﬁng protecting
into Shoulder Surﬁng Protector.
5.5
Summary
I have successfully implemented a solution which takes the design requirements
from chapter 4 into account. The solution is successful to protect a given text
ﬁeld from a shoulder surfer behind the smartphone user.
I ended up by using the solution found in experiment 3 and 10, resulting in a
protection scheme greyscale colors. While The solution found Experiment 6 and
12 had the best numbers, the usability of the color choice were simply to poor,
and was not chosen for this reason alone.
==PAGE:65==
5.5 Summary
53
We have found that by using diﬀerent color combinations one can ensure that the
readability will drop allot faster than if we just used a regular color combination.
While the optimal combination in my experiments were not a user favorite, it
is deﬁnitely possible other combinations could be.
For a ﬁnal implementation of Shoulder Surﬁng Protector (see ﬁgure 5-H) I have
cleaned up the UI and implemented the results of the experiments, to have a
working protection against shoulder surfers.
Figure 5-H: The ﬁnal iteration of Shoulder Surﬁng Protector
One major weakness with Shoulder Surﬁng Protector is the current cameras in
smart. Their frame is not wide enough to properly watch a users sides. The
best solution for this would be if smartphones will come with a pre-installed
“ﬁsheye” lens, or placing an after market lens on top of the current camera. It
could also be possible to combine Shoulder Surﬁng Protector with the current
privacy screen protectors, such that they would protect the users from the sides,
while Shoulder Surﬁng Protector would protect the user from attacks over the
shoulder.
==PAGE:66==
54
Evaluation
Finally I wish to evaluate Shoulder Surﬁng Protector by the PPDR model in
the same way I did with the current software solutions.
Prevent Shoulder Surﬁng Protector relies as of this moment only on its face de-
tection for preventing shoulder surﬁng. This could quickly be changed by
taking the default values shown at line 402 in A.1. If that was the case
I would raise the prevention factor to a 3 out of 5, since it would have
standard defense set in place.
However I also wish the most pleasant reading experience for my users,
and have chosen to let it stay with a white text on a black background
for this reason alone. So, if we rate Shoulder Surﬁng Protector prevention
ability on a Likert scale it will not get more than 1 out of 5, since Shoul-
der Surﬁng Protector do not provide any standard protection in the ﬁrst
place. However, there is still option of letting it have a default protection
as standard, in that case I would be willing to raise the rating to a 3 out
of 5.
Detect The detection part is a big part of Shoulder Surﬁng Protector. It is more
than capable of doing it under the 150-250 ms mentioned in section 2.3.1
by having a processing time of around 60 ms. It also has the ability to
detect shoulders when there is more than two faces in the frame.
However Shoulder Surﬁng Protector do not have an ability to detect the
shoulder surfers gaze. Because of this I will give it a rating of 4 out of 5
Respond I have shown that the by using the results from the standard and reﬁned
testing, I am able let the user keep on reading the content shown on
the smartphone, while at the same time blocking the shoulder surfers
readability.
I ﬁnd that this solution to be the least disruptive and still eﬀective. Hence
it is also the most user friendly
The rating for Shoulder Surﬁng Protector response is therefore 5 out 5.
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
We have learned, that the presence of shoulder surﬁng is a serious issue and
maybe a larger problem than most people anticipates. With the ever growing
presence of having mobile devices with us at any given time and location, we
are exposing ourself to become victims of shoulder surﬁng. We know that the
information which can be obtained from shoulder surﬁng, has a high probability
of being information of a private characteristic.
I found that the current solutions against shoulder surﬁng all had some problems
of their own. The hardware solutions had limitation of always being enabled,
the software based solutions had either limitations in their detection method or
their method of responding.
To solve this problem I proposed a solution which would ﬁnd a color combination
between the font and background. This color combination should then allow the
user to be able to read the text up close while preventing the shoulder surfer
from being able read the text.
This color combination was then combined with a software solution that would
allow the smartphone to detect shoulder surfers, their distance to the user’s
phone and defend accordingly.
By various experiments, I was able to ﬁnd two viable candidates for a color
combination which could help in the defense against shoulder surfers. Sadly,
==PAGE:68==
56
Conclusion
the most viable of the two color combinations, was at the same time the most
user annyoing color scheme to read of the two color combinations.
I have successfully created a software based shoulder surﬁng protection.
I
achieved this by combining the ﬁnal color combination candidate, with face
detection. Finally, I have done ﬁnal testings to verify that my solution was able
to defend against a shoulder, while allowing the smartphone user to still be able
to read the text.
6.1
Future work
One of the main things that could improved in my solution would be to perform
more test on the ﬁnal two chosen color combinations. This is both done as an
attempt to get the reading error rates down to a reasonable level, but also to have
a deeper understanding of how readability is aﬀected by the color combinations.
This should not only be achieved by having more participants, but also having
diﬀerent text section for each distance.
With the response of the most viable candidate being the most uncomfortable
to read, it would obvious to make further research into what the ideal color
combination would be. This would then also need to have wider color pallet
than what has been looked into in this project.
An obvious next step from here, would be to see how much of an aﬀect textured
backgrounds would bring to the experiments. The successful results mentioned
in chapter 2 would make a setup as show in ﬁgure 6-A very interesting to test
out.
The limitation of the camera’s ﬁeld of view is probably the biggest hindrance
for the application’s ability to detect shoulder surfers. Hence, performing live
experiments with an attached “ﬁsh eye” lens would be interesting, as it would
most likely be able to catch more of the sorroundings than a normal iphone
camera would.
An implementation of one or more notiﬁcation methods mentioned in section 3.3
would be very interesting to incorporate in the application. It would without a
doubt raise new dilemmas, but probably also increase how the user feels about
the software to the better. This will of course happen, as notiﬁcations most
likely will make it easier for the user to realise how the software is protecting
them.
==PAGE:69==
6.1 Future work
57
Figure 6-A: Visualization of of how the setup will look
==PAGE:70==
58
Conclusion
Finally, I have not taken a deeper look into the energy usage or the performance
of Shoulder Surﬁng Protector. It would be interesting to see how many pictures
taken per second and at what their quality should be, in order to still obtain
a reliable protection. One could also take a deeper look into the performance
level and energy usage diﬀerences between the diﬀerent frameworks mentioned
in chapter 2.
==PAGE:71==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Shoulder Surﬁng Protector code
Listing A.1: ViewController.swift
1
//
2
//
ViewController . s w i f t
3
//
ShoudlerSurfing
4
//
5
//
Created by Marcus
Vinther
Tanghoj on
26/03/2018.
6
//
Copyright
2018 Marcus
Vinther
Tanghoj .
All
r i g h t s
reserved .
7
//
8
9
import
UIKit
10
import AVFoundation
11
import
Vision
12
13
c l a s s
ViewController :
UIViewController
{
14
15
16
@IBOutlet weak var
TextFieldFaceCounter :
UITextField !
17
@IBOutlet weak var
TextFieldToFade :
UITextView !
18
@IBOutlet weak var
SwitchPrivacymode :
UISwitch !
19
20
21
var
ss = ShoulderSurfingLib ()
22
l e t
context = CIContext ()
23
var
starttime = DispatchTime . now ()
==PAGE:72==
60
Appendix
24
// var
prevtime :
UInt64 = 0
25
var
timestamp = [ UInt64 ] ( )
26
var
privacyCehck = f a l s e
27
var
faceDetectionRequest :
VNRequest !
28
// We know that
the medium
preset
f o r
video
g i v e s
us a
r e s o l u t i o n
of
360 x480
29
var
videoDiagonalMedium = (360.0
∗
360.0 + 480.0
∗
480.0) .
squareRoot ()
30
private enum SessionSetupResult
{
31
case
success
32
case
notAuthorized
33
case
c o n f i g u r a t i o n F a i l e d
34
}
35
36
private
var
d e v ic e P o s i t i o n :
AVCaptureDevice . Position = . back
37
38
private
l e t
s e s s i o n = AVCaptureSession ()
39
private
var
isSessionRunning = f a l s e
40
41
private
l e t
sessionQueue = DispatchQueue ( l a b e l :
" s e s s i o n
queue"
,
a t t r i b u t e s :
[ ] ,
target :
n i l )
// Communicate with
the
s e s s i o n
and
other
s e s s i o n
o b j e c t s
on
t h i s
queue .
−Willjay90
42
43
private
var
setupResult :
SessionSetupResult = . s u c ce s s
44
45
private
var
videoDeviceInput :
AVCaptureDeviceInput !
46
47
private
var
videoDataOutput :
AVCaptureVideoDataOutput !
48
private
var
videoDataOutputQueue = DispatchQueue ( l a b e l :
"
VideoDataOutputQueue" )
49
50
private
var
requests = [ VNRequest ] ( )
51
52
private
func
c o n f i g u r e S e s s i o n ()
{
53
i f
s e l f . setupResult
!=
. success
{
54
return
55
}
56
57
s e s s i o n . beginConfiguration ()
58
s e s s i o n . s e s s i o n P r e s e t = . medium
59
60
// Add video
input . −Willjay90
61
do {
62
var
defaultVideoDevice :
AVCaptureDevice?
63
64
i f
l e t
frontCameraDevice = AVCaptureDevice . d e f a u l t ( .
builtInWideAngleCamera ,
f o r :
AVMediaType . video ,
p o s i t i o n :
.
f r o n t )
{
65
defaultVideoDevice = frontCameraDevice
66
}
67
68
l e t
videoDeviceInput = try
AVCaptureDeviceInput ( device :
defaultVideoDevice ! )
69
70
i f
s e s s i o n . canAddInput ( videoDeviceInput )
{
==PAGE:73==
A.1 Shoulder Surﬁng Protector code
61
71
s e s s i o n . addInput ( videoDeviceInput )
72
s e l f . videoDeviceInput = videoDeviceInput
73
}
74
75
e l s e
{
76
print ( "Could
not add
video
device
input
to
the
s e s s i o n " )
77
setupResult = . c o n f i g u r a t i o n F a i l e d
78
s e s s i o n . commitConfiguration ()
79
return
80
}
81
82
}
83
catch
{
84
print ( "Could
not
create
video
device
input :
\( e r r o r ) " )
85
setupResult = . c o n f i g u r a t i o n F a i l e d
86
s e s s i o n . commitConfiguration ( )
87
return
88
}
89
90
// add output −Willjay90
91
videoDataOutput = AVCaptureVideoDataOutput ( )
92
videoDataOutput . v i d e o S e t t i ng s = [ (
kCVPixelBufferPixelFormatTypeKey
as
String ) :
Int (
kCVPixelFormatType_32BGRA) ]
93
94
95
i f
s e s s i o n . canAddOutput ( videoDataOutput )
{
96
videoDataOutput . alwaysDiscardsLateVideoFrames = true
97
videoDataOutput . setSampleBufferDelegate ( s e l f ,
queue :
videoDataOutputQueue )
98
s e s s i o n . addOutput ( videoDataOutput )
99
}
100
e l s e
{
101
print ( "Could
not add metadata
output
to
the
s e s s i o n " )
102
setupResult = . c o n f i g u r a t i o n F a i l e d
103
s e s s i o n . commitConfiguration ( )
104
return
105
}
106
107
s e s s i o n . commitConfiguration ()
108
109
}
110
111
112
o v e r r i de
func
didReceiveMemoryWarning ( )
{
113
super . didReceiveMemoryWarning ( )
114
//
Dispose
of
any
r e s o u r c e s
that
can be
recreated . −Marcus
115
}
116
117
o v e r r i de
func
viewDidLoad ()
{
118
119
ss . watchThisTextField ( TextField :
TextFieldToFade )
120
super . viewDidLoad ()
121
faceDetectionRequest = VNDetectFaceRectanglesRequest (
==PAGE:74==
62
Appendix
completionHandler :
s e l f . handleFaces )
//
Default −Willjay90
122
setupVision ()
123
/∗
124
Check
video
authorization
status .
Video
access
i s
required
and audio
125
access
i s
optional .
I f
audio
access
i s
denied ,
audio
i s
not
recorded
126
during
movie
recording .
127
−Willjay90
128
∗/
129
switch
AVCaptureDevice . authorizationStatus ( f o r :
AVMediaType
. video ) {
130
case
. authorized :
131
// The user
has
previously
granted
access
to
the
camera
. −Willjay90
132
break
133
134
case
. notDetermined :
135
/∗
136
The user
has
not
yet
been
presented
with
the
option
to
grant
137
video
access . We suspend
the
s e s s i o n
queue
to
delay
s e s s i o n
138
setup
u n t i l
the
access
request
has
completed .
139
−Willjay90
140
∗/
141
sessionQueue . suspend ()
142
AVCaptureDevice . requestAccess ( f o r :
AVMediaType . video ,
completionHandler :
{
[ unowned
s e l f ]
granted
in
143
i f
! granted
{
144
s e l f . setupResult = . notAuthorized
145
}
146
s e l f . sessionQueue . resume ( )
147
})
148
149
150
d e f a u l t :
151
// The user
has
previously
denied
access .
−Willjay90
152
setupResult = . notAuthorized
153
}
154
155
/∗
156
Setup
the
capture
s e s s i o n .
157
In
general
i t
i s
not
s a f e
to
mutate an AVCaptureSession
or
any
of
i t s
158
inputs ,
outputs ,
or
connections
from
multiple
threads
at
the same time .
159
160
Why not do
a l l
of
t h i s
on the main queue ?
161
Because
AVCaptureSession . startRunning ( )
i s
a
blocking
c a l l
which can
162
take
a
long
time . We dispatch
s e s s i o n
setup
to
the
sessionQueue
so
163
that
the main queue
isn ’ t
blocked ,
which
keeps
the UI
responsive .
==PAGE:75==
A.1 Shoulder Surﬁng Protector code
63
164
−Willjay90
165
∗/
166
167
sessionQueue . async {
[ unowned
s e l f ]
in
168
s e l f . c o n f i g u r e S e s s i o n ()
169
}
170
}
171
}
172
173
174
175
176
extension
ViewController
{
177
private
func
addObservers ()
{
178
/∗
179
Observe
the
previewView ’ s
r e g i o n O f I n t e r e s t
to
update
the
AVCaptureMetadataOutput ’ s
180
r e c t O f I n t e r e s t
when the
user
f i n i s h e s
r e s i z i n g
the
region
of
i n t e r e s t .
181
−Willjay90
182
∗/
183
N oti fic ati onC ent er . d e f a u l t . addObserver ( s e l f ,
s e l e c t o r : #
s e l e c t o r ( sessionRuntimeError ) , name :
N o t i f i c a t i o n .Name( "
AVCaptureSessionRuntimeErrorNotification " ) ,
object :
s e s s i o n )
184
185
/∗
186
A s e s s i o n
can
only
run when the app
i s
f u l l
screen .
I t
w i l l
be
interrupted
187
in
a multi−app
layout ,
introduced
in
iOS 9 ,
see
a l s o
the
documentation
of
188
AVCaptureSessionInterruptionReason . Add observers
to
handle
these
s e s s i o n
189
i n t e r r u p t i o n s
and show a
preview
i s
paused
message .
See
the
documentation
190
of
AVCaptureSessionWasInterruptedNotification
f o r
other
i n t e r r u p t i o n
reasons .
191
∗/
192
/∗
193
−Marcus
194
Modified
to do such and such .
195
∗/
196
197
N oti fic ati onC ent er . d e f a u l t . addObserver ( s e l f ,
s e l e c t o r : #
s e l e c t o r ( sessionWasInterrupted ) , name :
N o t i f i c a t i o n .Name( "
AVCaptureSessionWasInterruptedNotification " ) ,
object :
s e s s i o n )
198
N oti fic ati onC ent er . d e f a u l t . addObserver ( s e l f ,
s e l e c t o r : #
s e l e c t o r ( sessionInterruptionEnded ) , name :
N o t i f i c a t i o n .Name( "
AVCaptureSessionInterruptionEndedNotification " ) ,
object :
s e s s i o n )
199
}
200
201
private
func
removeObservers ()
{
202
N oti fic ati onC ent er . d e f a u l t . removeObserver ( s e l f )
203
}
204
==PAGE:76==
64
Appendix
205
@objc
func
sessionRuntimeError (_ n o t i f i c a t i o n :
N o t i f i c a t i o n )
{
206
guard
l e t
errorValue = n o t i f i c a t i o n . u s e r I n f o ? [
AVCaptureSessionErrorKey ]
as ? NSError
e l s e
{
return
}
207
208
l e t
e r r o r = AVError ( _nsError :
errorValue )
209
print ( "Capture
s e s s i o n
runtime
e r r o r :
\( e r r o r ) " )
210
211
/∗
212
Automatically
try
to
r e s t a r t
the
s e s s i o n
running
i f
media
s e r v i c e s
were
213
r e s e t
and the
l a s t
s t a r t
running
succeeded .
Otherwise ,
enable
the
user
214
to
try
to
resume
the
s e s s i o n
running .
215
−Willjay90
216
∗/
217
i f
e r r o r . code == . mediaServicesWereReset
{
218
sessionQueue . async {
[ unowned
s e l f ]
in
219
i f
s e l f . isSessionRunning
{
220
s e l f . s e s s i o n . startRunning ()
221
s e l f . isSessionRunning = s e l f . s e s s i o n . isRunning
222
}
223
}
224
}
225
}
226
227
@objc
func
sessionWasInterrupted (_ n o t i f i c a t i o n :
N o t i f i c a t i o n )
{
228
/∗
229
In some
s c e n a r i o s
we want to
enable
the
user
to
resume
the
s e s s i o n
running .
230
For example ,
i f
music
playback
i s
i n i t i a t e d
via
c o n t r o l
center
while
231
using AVCamBarcode ,
then
the
user
can
l e t
AVCamBarcode
resume
232
the
s e s s i o n
running ,
which
w i l l
stop
music
playback .
Note
that
stopping
233
music
playback
in
c o n t r o l
center
w i l l
not
automatically
resume
the
s e s s i o n
234
running .
Also
note
that
i t
i s
not
always
p o s s i b l e
to
resume ,
see
‘ resumeInterruptedSession (_: ) ‘ .
235
−Willjay90
236
∗/
237
i f
l e t
userInfoValue = n o t i f i c a t i o n . u s e r I n f o ? [
AVCaptureSessionInterruptionReasonKey ]
as
AnyObject ? ,
l e t
reasonIntegerValue = userInfoValue . integerValue ,
l e t
reason =
AVCaptureSession . InterruptionReason ( rawValue :
reasonIntegerValue )
{
238
print ( "Capture
s e s s i o n
was
interrupted
with
reason
\(
reason ) " )
239
}
240
}
241
242
@objc
func
sessionInterruptionEnded (_ n o t i f i c a t i o n :
N o t i f i c a t i o n )
{
243
print ( "Capture
s e s s i o n
i n t e r r u p t i o n
ended" )
==PAGE:77==
A.1 Shoulder Surﬁng Protector code
65
244
}
245
}
246
247
248
// helping
fucntion
to do simplemath −Marcus
249
extension
Array where Element :
Numeric {
250
/// Returns
the
t o t a l
sum of
a l l
elements
in
the
array
251
var
t o t a l :
Element {
return
reduce (0 , +) }
252
}
253
254
extension
Array where Element :
BinaryInteger
{
255
/// Returns
the
average
of
a l l
elements
in
the
array
256
var
average :
Double {
257
return
isEmpty ? 0
:
Double ( Int ( t o t a l ) )
/ Double ( count )
258
}
259
}
260
261
extension
Array where Element :
FloatingPoint
{
262
/// Returns
the
average
of
a l l
elements
in
the
array
263
var
average :
Element {
264
return
isEmpty ? 0
:
t o t a l
/ Element ( count )
265
}
266
}
267
268
extension
ViewController
{
269
270
271
func
setupVision ()
{
272
273
starttime = DispatchTime . now ()
274
s e l f . requests = [ faceDetectionRequest ]
275
276
}
277
278
func
calculateTimestamps ()
{
279
/∗
280
Calculates
the
average
processin g
time
f o r
f a c e d e t e c t i o n .
281
The
startimer
i s
being
s e t
in
the
setupVision ()
function
282
−Marcus
283
∗/
284
l e t
endtime = DispatchTime . now ()
285
l e t
t i m e d i f f = endtime . uptimeNanoseconds −s e l f . starttime .
uptimeNanoseconds
286
s e l f . starttime = endtime
287
s e l f . timestamp . append ( t i m e d i f f )
288
289
// Gets an
average
of
the
p ro e c e s s i n g
times −Marcus
290
i f ( s e l f . timestamp . count > 100) {
291
print ( s e l f . timestamp . average /1000000 , " ms"
)
292
}
293
i f (
s e l f . timestamp . count > 300
)
{
294
295
s e l f . timestamp . remove ( at :
0)
296
}
297
}
==PAGE:78==
66
Appendix
298
299
func
facePctSize ( facebounds : CGRect) −> Int
{
300
/∗
301
Calculates how much of
a
percentage
the
f a c e d i a g n a l
f i l l s
compared
to
the
s i z e
of
the
frame . −Marcus
302
∗/
303
l e t
FaceDiagonal = ( facebounds . height
∗
facebounds . height +
facebounds . width ∗
facebounds . width ) . squareRoot ()
304
l e t
facepercentage = Int (( Double ( FaceDiagonal )
/
s e l f .
videoDiagonalMedium ) ∗100
)
305
return
facepercentage
306
}
307
308
func
handleFaces ( request :
VNRequest ,
e r r o r :
Error ?)
{
309
DispatchQueue . main . async {
310
// perform
a l l
the UI updates on the main queue
−
Willjay90
311
guard
l e t
r e s u l t s = request . r e s u l t s
as ?
[
VNFaceObservation ]
e l s e
{
return
}
312
s e l f . TextFieldFaceCounter . text = String ( r e s u l t s . count )
313
314
315
//
Search
FaceDetection −Marcus
316
317
var
textColorValue = Float (1)
318
var
backgroundColorValue = Float (0)
319
320
i f
s e l f . SwitchPrivacymode . isOn {
321
// s e l f . calculateTimestamps ( )
// Outcomment to
measure
processingtime −Marcus
322
323
// makes
sure
the
user
knows
that
privacy mode has
been
activated −Marcus
324
i f
s e l f . privacyCehck == f a l s e
{
325
UIView . animate ( withDuration :
3 ,
animations :
{
326
s e l f . ss . updateBackgroundColor ( alphaValue :
1 , R:
0 , G:
0 , B:
0
)
327
s e l f . ss . updateTextColor ( alphaValue :
1 , R:
1 , G:
1 , B:
1)
328
s e l f . privacyCehck = true
329
} ,
completion :
n i l )
330
}
331
332
var
facesArray = [ 0 ]
333
334
f o r
face
in
r e s u l t s
{
335
336
l e t
transform = CGAffineTransform ( scaleX :
1 , y :
−1) . translatedBy (x :
0 , y : −s e l f . view . frame . height )
337
338
l e t
t r a n s l a t e = CGAffineTransform . i d e n t i t y .
scaledBy ( x :
s e l f . view . frame . width ,
y :
s e l f . view . frame . height )
339
340
// The
coordinates
are
normalized
to
the
dimensions
of
the
processed
image ,
with
the
o r i g i n
at
the
image
==PAGE:79==
A.1 Shoulder Surﬁng Protector code
67
’ s
lower−l e f t
corner . −Marcus
341
l e t
facebounds = f a c e . boundingBox . applying (
t r a n s l a t e ) . applying ( transform )
342
facesArray . append ( s e l f . facePctSize ( facebounds :
facebounds ) )
343
}
344
345
i f
r e s u l t s . count >= 2 {
346
347
// Find
your own f a c e .
I t
should
be
the
b i g g e s t
of
the
found
f a c e s −Marcus
348
l e t
ownFace = facesArray . max( )
349
350
// Remove your own f ac e . We need
to
f i n d
the
b i g g e s t
of
the
r e s t
of
the
f a c e s . −Marcus
351
facesArray . remove ( at :
facesArray . index ( of :
ownFace ! ) ! )
352
353
// The
c l o s e s t
of
the
r e s t
of
the
f a c e s −Marcus
354
l e t
closesFaceOfRestOfFaces = facesArray . max( ) !
355
print ( closesFaceOfRestOfFaces )
356
357
//
Switches
c o l o r s
depending on the
measured
values
of
face
detection . −Marcus
358
switch
closesFaceOfRestOfFaces
{
359
case
0:
360
textColorValue = 1.0
361
backgroundColorValue = 0.0
362
363
case
1.. <16:
364
textColorValue = (28/255)
365
backgroundColorValue = (64/255)
366
367
case
16.. <19:
368
textColorValue = (32/255)
369
backgroundColorValue = (64/255)
370
371
case
19.. <23:
372
textColorValue = (36/255)
373
backgroundColorValue = (64/255)
374
375
case
23.. <27:
376
textColorValue = (40/255)
377
backgroundColorValue = (64/255)
378
379
case
27.. <31:
380
textColorValue = (44/255)
381
backgroundColorValue = (64/255)
382
383
case
31.. <37:
384
textColorValue = (48/255)
385
backgroundColorValue = (64/255)
386
387
case
37.. <40:
388
textColorValue = (52/255)
==PAGE:80==
68
Appendix
389
backgroundColorValue = (64/255)
390
391
case
40.. <50:
392
textColorValue = (56/255)
393
backgroundColorValue = (64/255)
394
395
case
50.. <60:
396
textColorValue = (60/255)
397
backgroundColorValue = (64/255)
398
399
d e f a u l t :
400
401
textColorValue = 0.0
402
backgroundColorValue = (64/255)
403
404
}
405
UIView . animate ( withDuration :
1 ,
animations :
{
406
s e l f . ss . updateBackgroundColor ( alphaValue :
1 , R:
backgroundColorValue
, G:
backgroundColorValue
, B:
backgroundColorValue
)
407
s e l f . ss . updateTextColor ( alphaValue :
1 , R:
textColorValue , G:
textColorValue , B:
textColorValue )
408
} ,
completion :
n i l )
409
// END:
Of
switch
cases
410
}
411
}
412
e l s e {
413
s e l f . privacyCehck = f a l s e
414
UIView . animate ( withDuration :
1 ,
animations :
{
415
s e l f . ss . updateBackgroundColor ( alphaValue :
1 , R:
1 , G:
1 , B:
1
)
416
s e l f . ss . updateTextColor ( alphaValue :
1 , R:
0 , G:
0 , B:
0)
417
} ,
completion :
n i l )
418
}
419
}
420
}
421
}
422
423
extension
ViewController :
AVCaptureVideoDataOutputSampleBufferDelegate{
424
// MARK: −AVCaptureVideoDataOutputSampleBufferDelegate
−
Willjay90
425
func
captureOutput (_ output :
AVCaptureOutput ,
didOutput
sampleBuffer :
CMSampleBuffer ,
from
connection :
AVCaptureConnection )
{
426
guard
l e t
p i x e l B u f f e r = CMSampleBufferGetImageBuffer (
sampleBuffer ) ,
427
l e t
e x i f O r i e n t a t i o n = CGImagePropertyOrientation (
rawValue :
exifOrientationFromDeviceOrientation ( ) )
e l s e
{
return
}
428
var
requestOptions :
[ VNImageOption
: Any ] = [ : ]
429
430
i f
l e t
cameraIntrinsicData = CMGetAttachment( sampleBuffer ,
kCMSampleBufferAttachmentKey_CameraIntrinsicMatrix ,
n i l )
{
==PAGE:81==
A.1 Shoulder Surﬁng Protector code
69
431
requestOptions = [ . c a m e r a I n t r i n s i c s
:
cameraIntrinsicData ]
432
}
433
434
l e t
imageRequestHandler = VNImageRequestHandler (
cvPixelBuffer :
pixelBuffer ,
o r i e n t a t i o n :
exif Orien tatio n ,
options :
requestOptions )
435
436
do {
437
try
imageRequestHandler . perform ( requests )
438
}
439
440
catch
{
441
print ( e r r o r )
442
}
443
}
444
}
445
446
extension
ViewController
{
447
448
private
func
a v a i l a b l e S e s s i o n P r e s e t s () −> [ String ]
{
449
l e t
a l l S e s s i o n P r e s e t s = [ AVCaptureSession . Preset . photo ,
450
AVCaptureSession . Preset . low ,
451
AVCaptureSession . Preset . medium ,
452
AVCaptureSession . Preset . high ,
453
AVCaptureSession . Preset . cif352x288
,
454
AVCaptureSession . Preset . vga640x480
,
455
AVCaptureSession . Preset . hd1280x720
,
456
AVCaptureSession . Preset .
iFrame960x540 ,
457
AVCaptureSession . Preset .
iFrame1280x720 ,
458
AVCaptureSession . Preset .
hd1920x1080 ,
459
AVCaptureSession . Preset .
hd4K3840x2160 ]
460
461
var
a v a i l a b l e S e s s i o n P r e s e t s = [ String ] ( )
462
f o r
s e s s i o n P r e s e t
in
a l l S e s s i o n P r e s e t s
{
463
i f
s e s s i o n . canSetSessionPreset ( s e s s i o n P r e s e t )
{
464
a v a i l a b l e S e s s i o n P r e s e t s . append ( s e s s i o n P r e s e t .
rawValue )
465
}
466
}
467
468
return
a v a i l a b l e S e s s i o n P r e s e t s
469
}
470
471
func
exifOrientationFromDeviceOrientation () −> UInt32 {
472
enum DeviceOrientation :
UInt32 {
473
case
top0ColLeft = 1
474
case
top0ColRight = 2
==PAGE:82==
70
Appendix
475
case
bottom0ColRight = 3
476
case
bottom0ColLeft = 4
477
case
left0ColTop = 5
478
case
right0ColTop = 6
479
case
right0ColBottom = 7
480
case
left0ColBottom = 8
481
}
482
var
e x i f O r i e n t a t i o n :
DeviceOrientation
483
484
switch
UIDevice . current . o r i e n t a t i o n
{
485
case
. portraitUpsideDown :
486
e x i f O r i e n t a t i o n = . left0ColBottom
487
case
. landscapeLeft :
488
e x i f O r i e n t a t i o n = d e v ic e P o s i t i o n == . f r o n t
?
.
bottom0ColRight
:
. top0ColLeft
489
case
. landscapeRight :
490
e x i f O r i e n t a t i o n = d e v ic e P o s i t i o n == . f r o n t
?
.
top0ColLeft
:
. bottom0ColRight
491
d e f a u l t :
492
e x i f O r i e n t a t i o n = . right0ColTop
493
}
494
return
e x i f O r i e n t a t i o n . rawValue
495
}
496
}
497
498
extension
ViewController
{
499
/∗
500
I n i t a i l i z i n g
the
a p p l i c a t i o n
and
asking
f o r
permissions
to
use
the
camera .
501
−Willjay90
502
∗/
503
o v e r r i d e
func
viewWillAppear (_ animated :
Bool )
{
504
super . viewWillAppear ( animated )
505
506
sessionQueue . async {
[ unowned
s e l f ]
in
507
switch
s e l f . setupResult
{
508
case
. success :
509
// Only
setup
observers
and
s t a r t
the
s e s s i o n
running
i f
setup
succeeded .
−Willjay90
510
s e l f . addObservers ()
511
s e l f . s e s s i o n . startRunning ( )
512
s e l f . isSessionRunning = s e l f . s e s s i o n . isRunning
513
514
case
. notAuthorized :
515
DispatchQueue . main . async {
[ unowned
s e l f ]
in
516
l e t
message = NSLocalizedString ( "AVCamBarcode
doesn ’ t
have
permission
to
use
the
camera ,
pl ease
change
privacy
s e t t i n g s " , comment :
" Alert
message when the
user
has
denied
access
to
the
camera" )
517
l e t
a l e r t C o n t r o l l e r = UIAlertController (
t i t l e :
" AppleFaceDetection " ,
message :
message ,
p r e f e r r e d S t y l e :
. a l e r t )
518
a l e r t C o n t r o l l e r . addAction ( UIAlertAction ( t i t l e :
NSLocalizedString ( "OK" , comment :
" Alert OK button " ) ,
s t y l e :
.
cancel ,
handler :
n i l ) )
==PAGE:83==
A.1 Shoulder Surﬁng Protector code
71
519
a l e r t C o n t r o l l e r . addAction ( UIAlertAction ( t i t l e :
NSLocalizedString ( " S e t t i n g s " , comment :
" Alert
button
to
open
S e t t i n g s " ) ,
s t y l e :
. ‘ default ‘ ,
handler :
{
action
in
520
UIApplication . shared . open (URL( s t r i n g :
UIApplicationOpenSettingsURLString ) ! ,
options :
[ : ] ,
completionHandler :
n i l )
521
}) )
522
523
s e l f . present ( a l e r t C o n t r o l l e r ,
animated :
true ,
completion :
n i l )
524
}
525
526
case
. c o n f i g u r a t i o n F a i l e d :
527
DispatchQueue . main . async {
[ unowned
s e l f ]
in
528
l e t
message = NSLocalizedString ( "Unable
to
capture
media" , comment :
" Alert
message when something
goes
wrong
during
capture
s e s s i o n
c o n f i g u r a t i o n " )
529
l e t
a l e r t C o n t r o l l e r = UIAlertController ( t i t l e :
" AppleFaceDetection " ,
message :
message ,
p r e f e r r e d S t y l e :
. a l e r t )
530
a l e r t C o n t r o l l e r . addAction ( UIAlertAction ( t i t l e :
NSLocalizedString ( "OK" , comment :
" Alert OK button " ) ,
s t y l e :
.
cancel ,
handler :
n i l ) )
531
532
s e l f . present ( a l e r t C o n t r o l l e r ,
animated :
true ,
completion :
n i l )
533
}
534
}
535
}
536
}
537
538
o v e r r i de
func
viewWillDisappear (_ animated :
Bool )
{
539
/∗
540
Stops
s e s s i o n s
and remove
the
observers .
541
−Willjay90
542
∗/
543
sessionQueue . async {
[ unowned
s e l f ]
in
544
i f
s e l f . setupResult == . s u cc e s s
{
545
s e l f . s e s s i o n . stopRunning ()
546
s e l f . isSessionRunning = s e l f . s e s s i o n . isRunning
547
s e l f . removeObservers ( )
548
}
549
}
550
551
super . viewWillDisappear ( animated )
552
}
553
}
Listing A.2: ShoulderSurﬁngLib.swift
1
//
2
//
ShoulderSurfingLib . s w i f t
3
//
ShoudlerSurfing
4
//
5
//
Created by Marcus
Vinther
Tanghoj on
29/03/2018.
6
//
Copyright
c
2018 Marcus
Vinther
Tanghoj .
All
r i g h t s
reserved .
==PAGE:84==
72
Appendix
7
//
8
//
9
//Watches a
text
f i e l d .
10
// Will
update
the
text ,
and background
c o l o r s
on the
inputs
given
to
each
function .
11
//
///////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
12
13
14
15
import
Foundation
16
import
UIKit
17
18
19
c l a s s
ShoulderSurfingLib
{
20
21
22
var
t e x t F i e l d = UITextView ()
23
24
func
runButton ( value :
UIButton ) −> Void {
25
26
return
27
}
28
29
func
updateBackgroundColor ( alphaValue :
Float , R:
Float
, G:
Float , B:
Float ) −> Void {
30
31
s e l f . t e x t F i e l d . backgroundColor = UIColor ( displayP3Red :
CGFloat (R) ,
green :
CGFloat (G) ,
blue :
CGFloat (B) ,
alpha :
CGFloat
( alphaValue ) )
32
}
33
34
func
updateTextColor ( alphaValue :
Float , R:
Float , G:
Float , B:
Float ) −> Void {
35
36
s e l f . t e x t F i e l d . textColor = UIColor ( displayP3Red :
CGFloat (R)
,
green :
CGFloat (G) ,
blue :
CGFloat (B) ,
alpha :
CGFloat (
alphaValue ) )
37
}
38
39
func
watchThisTextField ( TextField :
UITextView ) −> Void {
40
s e l f . t e x t F i e l d = TextField
41
42
}
43
44
45
46
}
==PAGE:85==
A.2 Text used for Pilot Testing
73
A.2
Text used for Pilot Testing
==PAGE:86==
1. 
Det har været en sløj uge for kryptovalutaen 
bitcoin, der nu nærmer sig et niveau, hvor den 
rammer et såkaldt dødskryds. Det skriver 
erhvervsmediet Bloomberg News. 
Et dødskryds er et investeringsteknisk term 
for, når den gennemsnitlige pris for de sidste 
50 dages handel krydser den gennemsnitlige 
pris for de sidste 200 dage.  
2 
Det bliver tolket som et tegn på, at retningen 
for et aktiv nu er alvorligt nedadgående. 
»Det vil være det første dødskryds for bitcoin 
siden 2015«, skriver erhvervsmediet 
Bloomberg News. 
3 
Bitcoin var ellers på vej til at holde sig over 
9.000 dollar for anden uge i streg, men 
torsdag og fredag bød på skidt nyt for 
valutaen. 
Koreanske myndigheder rykkede ind på 
Upbit, et af de største bitcoinmarkeder i 
verden. Det bragte frygten for, at markedet for 
kryptovalutaer vil blive reguleret, tilbage. 
4 
For en uge siden kostede en bitcoin 9.943 
dollar, men torsdag begyndte den at falde. 
Lørdag formiddag koster en bitcoin 8.292 
dollar ifølge netsiden coinmarketcap.com, der 
følger priserne på kryptovalutaer. 
 
 
 
 
5 
Det er et fald på 17 procent på en uge. Siden 
toppen i december, hvor flere måneders 
bitcoin-mani havde drevet valutaen op og op, 
er værdien faldet med 58 procent. 
I takt med at bitcoin steg og steg i 2017, blev 
der sat fokus på, at stigningerne havde alle 
kendetegn ved finansielle bobler. 
6 
Der kom også fokus på, at bitcoin er et yndet 
værktøj for kriminelle verden over, da 
transaktioner med valutaen er anonyme. 
»Boblen inden for kryptovalutaer er bristet«, 
sagde analytiker ved 
børsmæglervirksomheden Eugene Investment 
& Securities i Sydkorea Yeol-mae Kim til 
Bloomberg i februar. 
7 
Oven på sine voldsomme stigninger i 2017 
begyndte en lang række regeringer i specielt 
Asien samtidigt at tale om, at kryptovalutaen 
skulle reguleres. Det stækkede fra starten af 
året prisen. 
8 
I denne uge var bitcoin ligeledes presset af, at 
den verdenskendte investor Warren Buffett 
har udtalt sig negativt om bitcoin og kaldt 
kryptovalutaen for en boble. 
Hans mangeårige partner Charlie Munger 
kaldte i samme ombæring kryptovalutaen for 
»værdiløst, kunstigt guld«. 
 
==PAGE:87==
A.3 Screenshot and text used in Standard Testing
75
A.3
Screenshot and text used in Standard Test-
ing
==PAGE:88==
76
Appendix
==PAGE:89==
A.3 Screenshot and text used in Standard Testing
77
==PAGE:90==
78
Appendix
==PAGE:91==
A.3 Screenshot and text used in Standard Testing
79
==PAGE:92==
80
Appendix
==PAGE:93==
A.3 Screenshot and text used in Standard Testing
81
==PAGE:94==
82
Appendix
==PAGE:95==
A.3 Screenshot and text used in Standard Testing
83
==PAGE:96==
1-1 
Det er de senere år blevet en hobby for 
meningsdannere at tæve løs på 68’erne. 
’Marxistfar’ og ’feministmor’ er yndede 
fjendebilleder, og lang er listen over deres 
svigt, egoisme og ufortjente medvind i livet. 
Det er, som om 68’erne til deres dødsdag skal 
tvinges i forsvarsposition for ungdomsoprøret, 
de nye familieformer og kønsroller. 
1-2 
Jeg læser ofte disse beskyldninger og 
genkender ingenting. Det er ikke, fordi jeg vil 
korrigere andres barndomserindringer, for vi 
har alle en barndom, som er unik og mindes 
forskelligt. Når jeg fortæller, at min mor et 
par gange blev forhindret i at hente mig i 
børnehaven og sendte en taxa, erindrer jeg det 
som eksotisk og luksus,  
1-3 
mens andre taxa- og nøglebørn måske vil 
sætte fingeren lige præcis dér og råbe 
ravnemor. 
Men det er problematisk, at kun de 
selvudnævnt svigtede taler om ’arven fra 68’. 
For dermed bliver billedet af 68’erne som 
nogle forfærdeligt egoistiske mennesker og 
dårlige forældre, der svigtede alt og alle og 
helt ufortjent sidder på magten i dag, stående i 
al eftertid. 
1-4 
Det må efterhånden være på tide, at nogen – 
og det kunne jo være mig – fortæller lidt om, 
hvad vi, der var og er børn af 68’ere, kan lære 
af deres måde at stifte familie, elske, arbejde 
og leve på. 
JEG ER datter af et kollektiv. Både fysisk og 
mentalt.  
 
2-1 
Jeg har selvfølgelig én far og én mor, men 
havde en stor flok voksne omkring mig. Der 
var altid nogen hjemme i min tidlige 
barndom, og mine forældres skilsmisse 
husker jeg ikke, for far flyttede bare over i et 
andet kollektiv få hundrede meter væk. 
2-2 
Når min søster og jeg var vrede på de voksne 
og løb hjemmefra, tog vi vores dyner og 
sovedyr og gik hjem til den anden forælder. 
Det var ret udramatisk og overstået på et par 
timer. De voksne lyttede, og vi holdt jævnligt 
børnemøder, hvor vi børn kunne brokke os. 
2-3 
Fortrænger jeg alle de triste episoder og 
romantiserer det, jeg husker? Det kan man 
aldrig vide med sikkerhed. Men jeg tror det 
ikke. 
Jeg er nu selv 40 år og mor – fraskilt og 
nygift. Datter af to navnkundige 68’ere, 
afdøde Suzanne Giese og spillevende Claus 
Clausen.  
2-4 
Men faktisk er jeg barn af mindst fire 68’ere, 
da min stedmor og stedfar har præget mig lige 
så meget som mine biologiske forældre. 
Måske er jeg tilmed datter af et helt miljø af 
68’ere, da mine forældres mange venner 
fungerede som en slags udvidet familie. Man 
kan godt sige, at jeg voksede op i en slags 
epicenter for 68. 
 
 
==PAGE:97==
3-1 
Jeg er på næsten alle parametre blevet præcis 
den kvinde, som mine forældre har opdraget 
mig til. De ønskede, at jeg skulle have det 
sjovt, brænde for noget, prøve mig selv af, 
være selvstændig, rejse, have skiftende 
kærligheds- og sexpartnere og ikke mindst et 
spændende arbejde. Ikke nødvendigvis ’en 
karriere’. 
3-2 
Det var faktisk slet ikke et ord, vi brugte i min 
opvækst, men jeg skulle finde noget at 
brænde for og tage en uddannelse, så jeg 
kunne forsørge mig selv og ikke være 
afhængig af hverken stat eller partner. 
3-3 
De har aldrig opdraget mig til at stifte en fast 
kernefamilie, købe fast ejendom, indbetale 
fast til en pensionsordning eller bide et fast 
lortejob i mig. De opfordrede mig derimod til 
at tage rigeligt med sabbatår og smage på 
livet. 
3-4 
Jeg husker mit eget ungdomsoprør som 
begrænset til dengang, hvor jeg som 12-13-
årig ville døbes og konfirmeres og bad 
aftenbøn. Dér var de fandeme bekymrede. Og 
så var der dengang, hvor jeg kom hjem fra en 
legeaftale hos min veninde Clara, hvis far hed 
Ebbe Kløvedal Reich, og var pænt skæv,  
4-1 
fordi Ebbe syntes, at det var bedre, at han 
lærte os at ryge hash (og passede på os), end 
at det skete ude på Staden med fremmede. 
Der talte min mor med meget store bogstaver. 
Min tredje – og indtil videre sidste erfaring 
med et hjemligt forældreoprør – var,  
4-2 
da jeg var kæreste med den samme søde, unge 
mand fra Amager i hele fire år som teenager, 
og mine forældre mente, at jeg var blevet 
småborgerlig, fordi jeg dyrkede tosomheden. 
De accepterede dog, at det var min måde at 
elske på. 
4-3 
Når jeg tænker tilbage på min opvækst og det 
miljø, som jeg er efterkommer af, er jeg 
overbevist om, at de havde fat i den lange 
ende. Listen er lang over ting, som vi kunne 
lære af i de efterfølgende generationer, men 
lad os her slå ned på fire forhold. 
4-4 
I. Familien 
Den måde, som vi i min generation er 
forældre på, er helt gal. Jeg ser mine 
jævnaldrende opføre sig som tjenestefolk for 
deres børn. Med tjenestefolk tænker jeg på 
dette overdrevne behov for altid at tilgodese 
og opfylde ethvert af barnets behov og 
ønsker.  
5-1 
Derfor står den på smagløse all inclusive -
ferier og smagsfattig spaghetti-kødsovs, som 
vi spiser ’for børnenes skyld’. 
Jeg tænker også på alle dem, der køber 
forældrekøbslejligheder med køkkenalrum og 
altan, der står klar, når børnene vil hjemmefra. 
Eller holder bryllupsagtige 
konfirmationsfester for teenagere, der vælter 
sig i designertasker og Apple-produkter.  
 
 
==PAGE:98==
5-2 
Eller de forældre, som pakker tasken for de 
halv- og helvoksne børn, der skal på Roskilde 
Festival eller kører ned og henter dem, hvis 
det regner. Det er også dem, der tramper rundt 
med børn på 11 år og 60 kilo i en tung 
ladcykel i modvind op ad Langebro i stedet 
for at give ungen en cykel eller et rejsekort. 
5-3 
Vi er den mest frygtsomme 
forældregeneration nogensinde. Prøv at 
overveje, hvor sjældent man ser et barn alene 
på gaden – altså uden en voksen. Det sker 
stort set aldrig. Børn går ikke engang i 
kiosken alene mere. Forældrene er altid med i 
gården eller på legepladsen, og en del af dem 
kravler tilmed rundt på klatrestativet for at 
sikre sig, at puslingen ikke falder og slår sig. 
5-4 
Vores børn er så meget ønskebørn, at vi vil 
skærme dem mod verden og nogensinde at 
opleve ’de andre’. 
MINE 68’ER-FORÆLDRE sendte mig 
derimod alene i skole fra 1. klasse. Det gav en 
kæmpe frihed som barn at lære byen og 
bussystemet at kende. Jeg fik at vide, at hvis 
jeg ville gå til blokfløjte eller håndbold, måtte 
jeg selv finde derhen.  
6-1 
Så det gjorde jeg. Og hele København blev 
min barndoms gade. Ferier var i nogens 
sommerhus, med tog til en home exchange i 
Italien, eller man blev hjemme. 
I dag flyver vi vores børn verden rundt. Som 
en kollega forklarede, da han annoncerede 
familiens juleplaner: »Det er bare så længe 
siden, at mine børn har været i New York«.  
 
6-2 
De er seks og otte år. Vi opfostrer en 
generation af storbyshoppere og resortbørn, 
som kun kender til opvarmede børnepools og 
tror, at der ser præcis ens ud i Marokko, 
Grækenland og på Mallorca; en pool, en 
buffet og rigeligt med uv-sikrede badedyr. 
6-3 
Men helt ærligt – var der ikke noget meget 
fint ved 68-generationens måde at holde ferie 
på? Man så nogle kirker og museer, sov på en 
opredning eller måske på et vandrerhjem og 
lavede ting, som de voksne også fik noget ud 
af. 
6-4 
68’ERNE diskuterede verden, politik og 
samfundet med os børn. Vi så TV-Avisen 
sammen, læste med i avisen og hørte 
radioavis til morgenmaden. Hvorfra skal børn 
i dag lære, at verden også er et voldsomt og 
uretfærdigt sted, hvis de ikke taler om de ting 
med deres voksne? 
7-1 
Jeg ser ofte opslag på Facebook om, hvordan 
man beskytter sine børn mod dårligt nyt, når 
der er sket et terrorangreb. Men er det en god 
idé at sende dem så blåøjede og uvidende ud i 
verden? Det kan da ikke være skadeligt at 
lære og vide, at der også findes dårlige 
mennesker, ondskab, vold og krig, så de lærer 
at aflæse mennesker og situationer. 
 
 
==PAGE:99==
7-2 
Børn har også godt af at opleve, at der er ting 
i livet, som er vigtige for deres forældre – ud 
over børnene. At far og mor har venner, som 
er vigtige, og et arbejde, som de brænder for. 
Det skaber robuste børn at lære, at de ikke er 
familiens – eller verdens – centrum. 
Jeg var ofte med mine forældre til fest, til 
politiske møder, demonstrationer og 
receptioner.  
7-3 
Og det var sjovt. Det var sjovt at få lov at stå i 
bar og servere en lunken hof til festerne i 
kollektivet i stedet for at blive sendt væk til 
pasning. Jeg har oplevet mine forældre 
fjollede og fulde og har danset med dem og 
sovet under et bord, når jeg ikke kunne mere. 
7-4 
Men der er i det hele taget ingen, der tør holde 
private fester mere. Vi bor for dyrt, vores 
gulve er lige blevet afhøvlet, eller møblerne er 
nye. Vi har også mindre sex end vores 
forældre. 
Vores forældregeneration har opdelt 
familietid og fritid. Alt voksen-sjovt skal ske, 
når børnene bliver passet, og vi kan kun slå os 
løs, når vi er ’børnefri’, som det hedder.  
8-1 
Skilsmissefamiliernes børnefri-system har 
nemlig spredt sig til kernefamilierne, og det 
altopofrende forældreskab har overtaget. Til 
gengæld lavede mine forældre en kæmpe 
bommert ved at indføre demokratisk 
ligestilling i deres skilsmisse og tage ét barn 
hver, hvilket resulterede i, at min søster og jeg 
kun så hinanden hver anden weekend. I dag 
ved vi godt, at man aldrig skiller søskende i 
en skilsmisse. 
8-2 
Men vi bliver skilt endnu oftere end 68-
generationen. Vi er stressede og deprimerede, 
og vores børn har diagnoser i hoved og røv. 
Så hvordan synes vi selv, det går? 
II. Arbejde 
Da min far fyldte 70 år, rejste Troels Kløvedal 
sig op og sagde sådan her til ham: 
8-3 
»Da vi mødte hinanden for 50 år siden, talte 
vi om vores drømme. Du ville lave bøger, og 
jeg ville sejle verden rundt. Og det har vi 
gjort«. 
Der er en stor skønhed i at udleve sine 
drømme. Det er virkelig noget, som 68’erne 
har været gode til.  
8-4 
Min far har engang sagt til en avis – måske 
Information – at »ingen anden generation har 
bollet og festet så meget som os«. Det tror jeg 
er rigtigt. 68’erne har røget, drukket, elsket og 
kørt i livet uden sikkerhedssele. 
Det er selvfølgelig nemt at få ondt i røven 
over. Personligt synes jeg, at det er et 
eksempel til efterlevelse. 68’erne var blottede 
for protestantisk nyttemoral.  
 
==PAGE:100==
88
Appendix
A.4
Screenshots text used in Speciﬁed reading
tests
==PAGE:101==
A.4 Screenshots text used in Speciﬁed reading tests
89
==PAGE:102==
90
Appendix
==PAGE:103==
A.4 Screenshots text used in Speciﬁed reading tests
91
==PAGE:104==
92
Appendix
==PAGE:105==
A.4 Screenshots text used in Speciﬁed reading tests
93
==PAGE:106==
10-1 
De har aldrig gået i fitnesscenter. Eller spist 
fiskeolie. Eller fået silikonebryster og lagt 
filter på deres billeder for enten at ligne et 
nuttet kæledyr eller en fræk pornomodel. De 
har heller ikke gidet knokle livet væk eller 
været styret af en indre funktionær med 
svedige håndflader over, hvor pengene til 
huslejen skulle komme fra. 
10-2 
Forældregenerationen sidder heller ikke med 
snotten i en smartphone i døgndrift, og rigtig 
mange af dem læser stadig kun rolige 
papiraviser, hører P1 og er aldrig kommet på 
de sociale medier. De ringer til deres venner, 
når de vil tale sammen. Eller arrangerer en 
middag på en hverdagsaften. Igen viser 
68’erne vejen, mens vi andre sidder og sender 
likes og notifikationer til hinanden digitalt og 
ikke har overskud eller tid til at mødes i livet. 
10-3 
Mange chefer har forsøgt at belære mig om, at 
ingen har lovet, at det at gå på arbejde 
nødvendigvis betyder at have det sjovt. Jeg er 
helt uenig. Det har jeg med hjemmefra. 
Derfor blev jeg ikke et karrieremenneske. Pyt. 
Til gengæld virker mange i mit netværk 
udbrændte.  
10-4 
Da DR’s ’Arvingerne’ kørte, blev der gjort 
meget grin med Jesper Christensens karakter, 
Thomas. Han var en ægte 68’er, flipperen, der 
aldrig blev voksen, men lærte sine børn at 
spille musik og nyde en solnedgang grundigt. 
Han boede i en rodet skurvogn og bollede, røg 
og var glad, og det skulle der gøres grin med. 
 
 
10-5 
Jeg har lige hørt, at en tæt veninde har været 
sygemeldt i seks uger med lammende stress. 
Faktisk hørte jeg kun om det, fordi en anden 
veninde sladrede. I min generation holder vi 
nemlig nederlagene tæt ind til kroppen. Min 
mor ville have taget den med basisgruppen, 
min far med sin mandegruppe. I dag tager vi 
den med en dyr terapeut. 
10-6 
Måske er jeg naiv, men jeg kan simpelthen 
ikke huske nogensinde at have hørt hverken 
mine forældre eller nogen af deres 
jævnaldrende 68’er-venner sige, at de var 
stressede. For dem var arbejdet mere flydende 
og altruistisk. Det handlede ikke om løntrin, 
tryghed eller magt, men om at gøre noget 
vigtigt og være glad i det. 
10-7 
Men hvad er der egentlig galt med at nyde 
livet og ikke skulle fremad og opad hele 
tiden? På min gravsten må der gerne stå: ’Hun 
dansede, elskede og skrev’. 
Samfundskonjunkturerne gør, at en del 68’ere 
i dag lever en o.k. velhavende alderdom. Men 
der er også alle de andre – deres generations 
prækariat – som ikke har sparet op, ikke har 
fast ejendom og nu er fattige 
folkepensionister og nødt til at læse.  
10-8 
Den hedonistiske livsstil har kostet, 
økonomisk og helbredsmæssigt. Alligevel ser 
man mest dødsangst hos de yngre 
generationer, der laver strækøvelser og 
vinterbader uafbrudt. Men hvordan kan man 
skabe forandring, når man mest er optaget af 
ikke at fejle og dø? 
 
==PAGE:107==
11-1 
III. Sex og krop 
I nogle år boede jeg som barn i 
kvindekollektiv med min mor. Her boede 
fraskilte kvinder med børn, og jeg husker, at 
der var en del mænd ind og ud af huset. Som 
regel opdagede vi børn, hvad der var på 
færde, når vi børstede tænder, og de tomme 
æsker til pessarerne lå fremme på 
badeværelset.  
11-2 
’Ad!’, tænker du måske, men hvorfor er det 
egentlig dårligt for et barn at lære, at forældre 
har et sexliv? Jeg tænker ofte, at mit eget 
rimeligt afslappede forhold til det seksuelle 
må være tillært i en tidlig alder. 
Som barn mødte jeg ofte en lukket dør til min 
mors soveværelse og en besked om, at »vi 
boller lige lidt«. Nå, okay.  
11-3 
Ærligt talt tror jeg ikke, at jeg er blevet 
traumatiseret af at blive talt med om sex. At 
begge mine forældre opfordrede mig til at 
undersøge det seksuelle og have det sjovt med 
det undervejs. At sex ikke altid behøvede at 
være ensbetydende med kærlighed. Jo, det var 
pinligt, da min mor satte røde blomster på 
spisebordet ved den første menstruations 
ankomst og ringede til kvinderne i familien og 
erklærede, at »Ditte er blevet en kvinde, 
hurra«.  
11-4 
Eller dengang jeg skulle på interrail og fik en 
gigantisk pose kondomer med. 
Men er det bedre, at børn og unge ikke aner, 
hvad der foregår, og bliver forskrækkede ved 
synet af blod i underbukserne eller kommer 
hjem med en kønssygdom? 
11-5 
DER ER megen snak om såkaldt ’fjerde 
bølge’-feminister i disse år, men faktisk kom 
vi aldrig videre end 60’ernes og 70’ernes 
seksuelle frigørelse, som især handlede om 
kvindens frigørelse fra hjemmets pligter. Der 
tog 68’erne et kæmpe hop fremad med 
revolutionen omkring prævention, abort og fri 
sex.  
11-6 
Men i dag taler vi igen om det problematiske 
i, at en kvinde selv kan vælge, hvornår hun vil 
være mor, og abort er stadig forbudt mange 
steder, bl.a. på Færøerne. 
Sex blev aldrig fri – kun for mænd. Vel har 
Tinder gjort det nemmere at swipe sig til et 
hurtigt knald, men kvinder skal stadig agere 
yndige og uskyldige i kønsrolleteaterstykket 
og have været i seng med færrest muligt. 
Jægeren er manden, kvinden er Bambi. 
11-7 
Det værste, man kan være som kvinde, er 
luder. Dels helt konkret sådan én, der tager 
penge for sex, dels sådan én, der har skiftende 
partnere. Idealet vedbliver at være den 
monogame, heteroseksuelle tosomhed og 
kærlighed. 
Med den fart, som 68’erne havde på den 
seksuelle revolution, skulle man ellers tro, at 
deres børn i dag, 50 år senere, levede i 
sexkollektiver, indgik åbne parforhold og fik 
børn med vores venner på kryds og tværs.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:108==
11-8 
Det er der selvfølgelig et mindretal, der gør, 
men de fleste sidder og keder sig i hver vores 
fireværelses med udlængsel, monoton 
onsdagssex og bekostelig parterapi. 
De begrænsninger, som 68’erne drømte om at 
nedbryde ved frisættelse af den kvindelige 
seksualitet og orgasme, har slået fejl. Kvinder 
i dag er ikke blevet bedre til at åbne munden 
og fortælle deres partnere, hvordan de får 
mest ud af at knalde. 
12-1 
På en måde er det paradoksalt, at vi stadig 
jagter det monogame parforhold, når vi ikke 
længere er afhængige af hinanden økonomisk 
eller socialt, men sagtens kunne nøjes med en 
vifte af elskere og elskerinder, opdrage 
delebørnene kollektivt og så ellers dyrke 
vores livslange nære venskaber. 
12-2 
MEN ANKLAGEN om at være en luder 
hænger over hovedet på alle kvinder – både 
online og i sexlivet. Bare se på hævnporno. 
Den skamløse 68’er-ideal-kvinde ville aldrig 
kunne rammes af hævnporno. Hævnporno 
kræver nemlig, at nogen skammer sig over sin 
nøgenhed, sin krop og sin seksualitet. Og 
kvinder i dag skammer sig over deres sexlyst. 
12-3 
Tænk, hvis unge kvinder ligesom unge mænd 
bare kunne sige, ’se, hvor fucking fræk jeg er 
i den video på nettet, hvor jeg råknepper fire 
mænd!’. Det sker ikke, så længe kvinders 
sexliv stadig er så tæt forbundet med skam. 
Til gengæld har #MeToo-bevægelsen for 
første gang givet mikrofonen til ofre for 
seksuelle krænkelser og en fælles stemme, så 
de ikke behøver at stå alene med deres 
erfaring, men kan tage den kollektivt. 
12-4 
Men tilbage til kroppen. Der er stort set ingen 
bare bryster på strandene eller i parkerne 
mere, og hvis der er, er de understøttet af 
silikone. Den ikkeperfekte og den 
ikkeseksuelle kvindekrop er forsvundet til 
fordel for korsetter, stram-op-undertøj, 
røvblegning, tvangsmotionisme, selvskade og 
selvhad. 
12-5 
I MIN barndom var jeg omringet af halv- og 
helnøgne voksne med skæve bryster og små 
tissemænd og lærte, at nøgenhed er ufarligt og 
almindeligt. Tænk at vokse op som teenager i 
dag og aldrig have set sine forældres kroppe, 
højst i stramt lycratøj på vej til fitnesscentret, 
og tilmed høre på de voksnes endeløse forsøg 
med slanke- og sundhedskure.  
12-6 
I stedet for at vi fortæller vores børn, at deres 
krop er fin og stærk og genial. Ligesom mors. 
Så nutidens nysgerrige teenagere ser 
pornofilm med kæmpepikke og barbiefisser. 
Ikke at der er noget i vejen med porno, 
diversiteten er bare til at overse, og det er et 
virkelig dårligt sted at opleve seksualitet 
første gang, fordi det er så forløjet og 
manipuleret. 
12-7 
IV. Vi, der kom efter 68 
Lige nu foregår der en kamp om 68-
generationens eftermæle. Jeg kan selvfølgelig 
have været en af de heldige, og det spiller helt 
sikkert ind, at jeg først blev født, da det 
værste flipperi var overstået. Men jeg nægter 
at købe den for tiden populære 
forfaldsfortælling om 68’erne som destruktive 
egoister. 
 
==PAGE:109==
12-8 
Grundlæggende tror jeg, at vi, der er voksne 
og forældre i dag, kunne lære meget af 
68’ernes måde at indrette sig på. Vi kunne jo 
starte med at stole på, at vores børn ikke 
ender som pædofili-ofre, hvis vi sender dem i 
Føtex med en indkøbsliste. 
 
==PAGE:110==
98
Appendix
A.5
Test reults
A.5.1
Pilot Tests
==PAGE:111==
A.5 Test reults
99
Figure 1-A: Chinrest on the left, placed on the roll of paper, with pre-marked
meassurements, the iPhone and the two identical smartphone
holders.
==PAGE:112==
100
Appendix
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
Person
Readable
Unreadable
Readable
Unreadable
Readable
Unreadable
Person 1
40cm (5/5)
130 (1/5)
30 (5/5)
105 (1/5)
20 cm (3/5)
75 (1/5)
Person 2
30 cm (5/5)
120 cm (1/5)
30 (5/5)
110 (1/5)
30 cm (3/5)
80 (1/5
Person 3
45 cm (5/5)
110 (1/5)
40 cm (5/5)
85(1/5)
40 cm (2/5)
60 cm (1/5)
Mean
38,33333333
120
33,33
100
20
71,66666667
Experiment 4
Experiment 5
Experiment 6
Person
Readable
Unreadable
Readable
Unreadable
Readable
Unreadable
Person 1
35 cm (5/5)
90 cm (1/5)
30 (5/5)
95 (1/5)
20 cm (3/5)
95 cm (1/5)
Person 2
30 cm (5/5)
90 cm (1/5)
25 (5/5)
90 cm (1/5)
30cm
70 cm
Person 3
50 cm (4/5)
90 cm (1/5)
40 cm (3/5)
90 cm (1/5)
-
-
Mean
38,33333333
90
31,66666667
91,66666667
25
82,5
Experiment 7
Experiment 8
Person
Readable
Unreadable
Readable
Unreadable
Person 1
27 cm (4/5)
60 cm (1/5)
45 cm(5/5)
90 cm(1/5)
Person 2
30 cm
65 cm
40 cm
100 cm
Person 3
55 cm (2/5)
80 cm (1/5)
45 cm(5/5)
100 cm(1/5)
Mean
37,33333333
68,33333333
43,33333333
96,66666667
==PAGE:113==
A.5 Test reults
101
Words read correctly per second
Test. dist (cm)
Pers. 1
Pers. 2
Pers. 3
Pers. 4
Pers. 5
Pers. 6
Pers. 7
Mean
Experiment 1
30
2.2
1.9
2.5
2.9
1.6
2.2
2.1
2.2
60
2.4
2.8
2.7
3.5
2.4
3.1
2.5
2.8
90
0.5
1.5
1.5
2.8
1.7
1.5
1.3
1.6
120
0.1
0.3
1.0
2.3
1.3
0.4
0.6
0.9
Experiment 2
30
3.0
2.7
3.4
2.8
3.2
2.6
2.6
2.9
60
1.9
2.7
2.6
3.5
2.7
3.2
2.2
2.7
90
0.6
1.6
1.7
3.3
1.3
1.3
1.1
1.6
120
0.1
0.4
1.4
3.1
0.9
0.3
0.6
1.0
Experiment 3
30
2.3
2.3
2.6
3.1
1.5
1.9
1.1
2.1
60
1.3
2.5
1.3
3.6
0.1
0.4
-
1.5
90
0.0
-
0.2
0.6
-
-
-
0.3
120
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Experiment 4
30
2.7
2.7
2.7
2.7
2.7
3.0
2.3
2.7
60
1.8
2.4
3.4
3.4
2.0
1.9
1.8
2.4
90
0.3
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.4
0.4
0.2
0.5
120
0.0
-
0.1
0.0
-
-
-
0.1
Experiment 5
30
2.1
2.0
2.4
2.3
2.3
2.3
1.9
2.2
60
2.1
3.1
2.9
3.9
2.6
2.9
2.4
2.8
90
0.1
1.1
1.1
2.3
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.9
120
-
-
0.1
0.2
-
-
-
0.2
Experiment 6
30
1.4
2.5
2.6
3.3
1.7
2.2
1.8
2.2
60
0.2
1.3
0.8
1.0
0.3
0.4
0.2
0.6
90
-
0.4
0.1
0.1
-
0.1
-
0.2
120
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Experiment 7
30
2.9
2.7
3.0
3.6
2.9
3.6
2.9
3.1
60
1.2
2.6
2.7
3.1
2.0
2.4
1.6
2.2
90
0.1
1.3
1.4
1.7
0.5
0.3
0.4
0.8
120
-
0.0
0.1
0.2
-
-
-
0.1
Experiment 8
30
2.4
2.0
3.0
2.4
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.4
60
1.3
2.3
2.1
2.7
2.2
2.0
1.2
2.0
90
0.2
1.5
1.1
2.3
0.4
0.5
0.2
0.9
120
-
-
0.1
0.5
-
0.2
-
0.2
Table A.1: Testing
==PAGE:114==
102
Appendix
Words read correctly per second
Experiment - dist (cm)
Person 1
Person 2
Person 3
Person 4
Person 5
Mean
Experiment 1
30
1,7
2,5
2,2
2,1
1,8
2,1
37.5
2,3
2,6
2,2
1,9
1,2
2,0
45
2,1
2,8
2,2
2,0
1,1
2,0
52.5
1,1
2,3
1,6
1,6
0,8
1,5
60
1,3
2,7
1,6
1,4
0,4
1,5
67.5
0,6
2,1
0,6
0,8
0,2
0,9
75
0,3
0,8
0,4
0,4
0,1
0,4
82.5
-
0,7
-
0,2
-
0,2
Experiment 2
30
2,2
3,0
2,6
2,6
2,8
2,6
37.5
2,8
2,9
2,5
2,7
2,5
2,7
45
2,8
2,8
2,6
2,4
1,4
2,4
52.5
2,5
2,8
2,7
2,7
2,7
2,7
60
2,0
2,1
1,9
1,9
1,7
1,9
67.5
2,3
2,7
2,4
2,0
2,0
2,3
75
2,0
2,2
2,2
1,5
1,5
1,9
82.5
1,3
2,2
2,0
1,0
1,1
1,5
Experiment 3
30
1,4
2,5
2,0
1,5
0,8
1,7
37.5
1,2
2,4
2,0
1,8
0,9
1,7
45
0,7
2,7
1,8
1,3
0,6
1,4
52.5
0,4
1,9
0,8
0,5
0,2
0,8
60
-
1,7
0,9
-
0,1
0,5
67.5
-
1,1
0,2
-
0,1
0,3
75
-
0,8
0,1
-
-
0,2
82.5
-
0,4
0,2
-
-
0,1
Table A.2: Final test results
-
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
[1] D. Iatrou, “Poster presented at Kulturnatten i København, Ingeniørforenin-
gen i Danmark (IDA).”
[2] Oxford Dictionaries, “shoulder surﬁng | Deﬁnition of shoulder surﬁng
in English by Oxford Dictionaries,”
2018. [Online]. Available:
https:
//en.oxforddictionaries.com/deﬁnition/shoulder{_}surﬁng
[3] H.
H.
Thompson,
“Visual
Data
Breach
Risk
Assessment
Study,”
Commissioned
by
3M,
the
maker
of
privacy
ﬁl-
ters,
2010.
[Online].
Available:
http://solutions.3m.com/
3MContentRetrievalAPI/BlobServlet?lmd=1291398659000{&}assetId=
1273672752407{&}assetType=MMM{_}Image{&}blobAttribute=
ImageFile
[4] “Art. 9 GDPR – Processing of special categories of personal data
| General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).” [Online]. Available:
https://gdpr-info.eu/art-9-gdpr/
[5] 3M, “Privacy and Screen Protectors | 3M United States.” [Online].
Available: https://www.3m.com/3M/en{_}US/privacy-screen-protectors-
us/
[6] HP, “HP Sure View,” HP Technical white paper, 2016.
[7] M. Eiband, M. Khamis, E. von Zezschwitz, H. Hussmann, and F. Alt,
“Understanding Shoulder Surﬁng in the Wild,” in Proceedings of the 2017
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’17. New
York, New York, USA: ACM Press, 2017, pp. 4254–4265.
==PAGE:116==
104
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[8] M. Kumar, T. Garﬁnkel, D. Boneh, and T. Winograd, “Reducing shoulder-
surﬁng by using gaze-based password entry,” in Proceedings of the 3rd sym-
posium on Usable privacy and security - SOUPS ’07, 2007.
[9] F. Schaub, R. Deyhle, M. W. o. t. t. international conference on . . . ,
and undeﬁned 2012, “Password entry usability and shoulder surﬁng
susceptibility on diﬀerent smartphone platforms,” dl.acm.org. [Online].
Available: https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2406384
[10] A.
Buriro,
B.
Crispo,
and
Y.
Zhauniarovich,
“Please
hold
on:
Unobtrusive user authentication using smartphone’s built-in sensors,”
in
2017
IEEE
International
Conference
on
Identity,
Security
and
Behavior Analysis (ISBA).
IEEE, feb 2017, pp. 1–8. [Online]. Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7947684/
[11] E. Von Zezschwitz, A. De Luca, P. Janssen, and H. Hussmann, “Easy
to Draw, but Hard to Trace?
On of the Observability of Grid-based
(Un)lock
Patterns.”
[Online].
Available:
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/
viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.713.7620{&}rep=rep1{&}type=pdf
[12] N. Kerris and S. Downling, “Apple Reinvents the Phone with iPhone
- Apple,” 2007. [Online]. Available:
https://www.apple.com/newsroom/
2007/01/09Apple-Reinvents-the-Phone-with-iPhone/
[13] F.
Tari
and
S.
H.
Holden,
“A
Comparison
of
Perceived
and
Real
Shoulder-surﬁng
Risks
between
Alphanumeric
and
Graphical
Passwords.”
[Online].
Available:
http://cups.cs.cmu.edu/soups/2006/
proceedings/p56{_}tari.pdf
[14] S. Wiedenbeck, J. Waters, L. Sobrado, and J.-C. Birget, “Design and Eval-
uation of a Shoulder-Surﬁng Resistant Graphical Password Scheme.”
[15] T.
Kwon,
S.
N.
(ICCE),
.
I.
I.
C.
On,
and
undeﬁned
2014,
“SwitchPIN: Securing smartphone PIN entry with switchable keypads,”
ieeexplore.ieee.org. [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/
document/6775892/
[16] E. von Zezschwitz,
A. De Luca,
B. Brunkow,
and H. Hussmann,
“SwiPIN,”
in Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’15.
New York, New
York,
USA: ACM Press,
2015,
pp. 1403–1406. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2702123.2702212
[17] V. Roth, K. Richter, and R. Freidinger, “A PIN-entry method resilient
against shoulder surﬁng,” in Proceedings of the 11th ACM conference
on Computer and communications security - CCS ’04.
New York,
New
York,
USA:
ACM
Press,
2004,
p.
236.
[Online].
Available:
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=1030083.1030116
==PAGE:117==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
105
[18] T. Kwon, S. Shin, and S. Na, “Covert attentional shoulder surﬁng: Hu-
man adversaries are more powerful than expected,” IEEE Transactions on
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, 2014.
[19] S.
Garﬁnkel
and
H.
R.
Lipford,
“Usable
Security:
History,
Themes,
and Challenges,”
Synthesis Lectures on Information Secu-
rity,
Privacy,
and
Trust,
vol.
5,
no.
2,
pp.
1–124,
sep
2014.
[Online]. Available:
http://www.morganclaypool.com/doi/abs/10.2200/
S00594ED1V01Y201408SPT011
[20] A. Adams and M. A. Sasse, “USERS ARE NOT THE ENEMY.” [Online].
Available: http://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/20247/2/CACMFINAL.pdf
[21] Council of European Union, “REGULATION (EU) no 679/2016 - On
the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of
personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing
Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation),” 2016. [Online].
Available: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj
[22] M. A. Tinker and D. G. Paterson, “Readability of mixed type forms.”
Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 631–637, 1946. [Online].
Available: http://doi.apa.org/getdoi.cfm?doi=10.1037/h0058928
[23] J. Farley, “Typography: Readability and Legibility (Part 1) — SitePoint.”
[Online]. Available:
https://www.sitepoint.com/typography-readability-
and-legibility-part-1/
[24] K. Larson, “The science of word recognition - Typography | Microsoft
Docs.” [Online]. Available: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/typography/
develop/word-recognition
[25] N. Hojjati, B. M. C. E. Technology, and undeﬁned 2014, “The Eﬀects of
Font Type and Spacing of Text for Online Readability and Performance.”
ERIC. [Online]. Available: https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ1105535
[26] A. U. Gujar, B. L. Harrison, and K. P. Fishkin, “A Comparative
Evaluation of Display Technologies for Reading,”
Proceedings of the
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, vol. 42, no. 6,
pp. 527–531, oct 1998. [Online]. Available: http://journals.sagepub.com/
doi/10.1177/154193129804200601
[27] M. L. Bernard, B. S. Chaparro, M. M. Mills, and C. G. Halcomb,
“Comparing the eﬀects of text size and format on the readibility of
computer-displayed Times New Roman and Arial text,” International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 823–835, dec
2003. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1071581903001216
==PAGE:118==
106
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[28] L. F. V. Scharﬀand A. J. Ahumada, “Predicting the readability of trans-
parent text,” Journal of Vision, 2002.
[29] Tadas Baltrušaitis, Amir Zadeh, Yao Chong Lim and L.-P. Morency,
“OpenFace.” [Online]. Available: https://cmusatyalab.github.io/openface/
[30] K. Josh, T. M., O. Charles, K. Brendan, K. Scott, and B. Austin,
“OpenBR | Home.” [Online]. Available: http://openbiometrics.org/
[31] I. Intel Corporation, Willow Garage, “OpenCV.” [Online]. Available:
https://opencv.org
[32] Apple Developer, “Vision | Apple Developer Documentation.” [Online].
Available: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/vision
[33] Sahnawaj,
“Softvision - Face Detection with Vision - Core Image
& OpenCV.” [Online]. Available: https://www.softvision.com/blog/face-
detection-vision-core-image-opencv/
[34] Z.
Li,
W.
Chen,
Z.
Li,
K.
B.
A.-H.
. . . ,
S.
N.
(MSN,
and
undeﬁned 2016, “Look into My Eyes:
Fine-grained Detection of Face-
screen Distance on Smartphones,” ieeexplore.ieee.org. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/7950242/
[35] M. Schimmel, P. Christou, O. Houstis, F. R. Herrmann, S. Kiliaridis, and
F. Müller, “Distances between facial landmarks can be measured accurately
with a new digital 3-dimensional video system,” American Journal of Or-
thodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics, 2010.
[36] Wikipedia,
“Pupillary
distance.”
[Online].
Available:
https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interpupillary{_}distance
[37] S.-H. Hong, J.-W. Lee, R. K. Lama, and G.-R. Kwon, “Real-time face
detection and phone-to-face distance measuring for speech recognition
for multi-modal interface in mobile device,”
Multimedia Tools and
Applications, vol. 75, no. 12, pp. 6717–6735, 2016. [Online]. Available:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s11042-015-2580-y
[38] O. Hauk, M. Davis, M. Ford, F. Pulvermüller, and W. Marslen-Wilson,
“The time course of visual word recognition as revealed by linear
regression analysis of ERP data,”
NeuroImage, vol. 30, no. 4, pp.
1383–1400, may 2006. [Online]. Available:
https://www-sciencedirect-
com.proxy.ﬁndit.dtu.dk/science/article/pii/S1053811905024663
[39] S. C. Sereno and K. Rayner, “Measuring word recognition in reading:
eye
movements
and
event-related
potentials,”
Trends
in
Cognitive
Sciences, vol. 7, no. 11, pp. 489–493, nov 2003. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364661303002596
==PAGE:119==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
107
[40] S.
Sereno,
K.
Rayner,
M.
P.
Neuroreport,
and
undeﬁned
1998,
“Establishing
a
time-line
of
word
recognition:
evidence
from
eye
movements and event-related potentials,”
journals.lww.com. [Online].
Available:
https://journals.lww.com/neuroreport/Abstract/1998/07130/
Establishing{_}a{_}time{_}line{_}of{_}word{_}recognition{_}.9.aspx
[41] BlackBerry,
“About
BlackBerry
Privacy
Shade.”
[Online].
Available:
http://help.blackberry.com/en/privacy-shade/latest/help/
eim1488382536296.html
[42] ——,
“BlackBerry
Privacy
Shade
–
Apps
i
Google
Play.”
[Online].
Available:
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=
com.blackberry.privacyﬁlter
[43] R. Likert, “Likert scale - Wikipedia The Free Encyclopedia,”
2018.
[Online]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Likert{_}scale
[44] J. R. HEE and S. Florian, “Electronic Screen Protector with Eﬃcient
and Robust Mobile Vision,” in NIPS | 2017, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://nips.cc/Conferences/2017/Schedule?showEvent=9757
[45] Apple, “Apple Presents iPhone 4 - Apple,” 2010. [Online]. Available:
https://www.apple.com/newsroom/2010/06/07Apple-Presents-iPhone-4/
[46] S.
Ishihara,
“Tests
for
colour-blindness,”
1960.
[Online].
Available:
http://fargblind.se/IshiharaFargblindhetstest.pdf
[47] C. Poynton, “Poyntons color FAQ,” 1997. [Online]. Available:
http:
//poynton.ca/PDFs/ColorFAQ.pdf
[48] D.
Iatrou,
“Context
Aware
Access
Control,”
Ph.D.
disserta-
tion,
Technical
University
of
Denmark,
2017.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
http://www2.imm.dtu.dk/pubdb/views/edoc{_}download.php/
7038/pdf/imm7038.pdf
[49] Apple, “About Face ID advanced technology - Apple Support.” [Online].
Available: https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT208108
[50] W.
a.
W.
Chieh,
“GitHub
-
Willjay90/AppleFaceDetection:
Face
Detection
with
CoreML.”
[Online].
Available:
https://github.com/
Willjay90/AppleFaceDetection
[51] C. R. Bjarkam, Neuro Anatomi, 1st ed.
Copenhagen: Munksgaard Dan-
mark, 2009.
[52] Ritzau,
“Bitcoin
suser
nedad
og
nærmer
sig
dødskryds
efter
rærlig
uge
-
politiken.dk,”
2018.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
https://politiken.dk/oekonomi/art6508695/Bitcoin-suser-nedad-og-
n{\T1\ae}rmer-sig-d{\T1\o}dskryds-efter-r{\T1\ae}rlig-uge
==PAGE:120==
108
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[53] A. F. Monk and C. Hulme, “Errors in proofreading:
Evidence for
the use of word shape in word recognition,”
Memory & Cognition,
vol.
11,
no.
1,
pp.
16–23,
jan
1983.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//www.springerlink.com/index/10.3758/BF03197657
[54] A. Jacobsen, “Optician at Thiele Eyelaser Clinic Hellerup,” Hellerup, Tech.
Rep., 2018.
