==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark &
Politecnico di Milano
Panotan Exopolysaccharide - Based Hydrogel for
Skeletal Muscle Tissue Engineering Application
Farinaz Riyahi Khorasgani
Supervisor:
Prof. Alireza Dolatshahi Pirouz
Co-Supervisor: Prof. Marco Rasponi
A Thesis submitted for the degree of
Master of Engineering at Politecnico di Milano
Academic Year 2017-2018
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Dedicated to my family
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgement
My ﬁrst gratitude goes to my advisors, professor Dolatshahi Pirouz and
professor Rasponi, for their teachings and guidance during this work of
thesis. They showed great willingness and patience with me. Their in-
valuable suggestions steered me in the right direction whenever I needed
it.
I would also like to thank all the teachers of Politecnico di Milano, who
transmitted their knowledge to me with passion and motivation. With-
out their teachings and input, this work could not have been successfully
conducted. I would also like to thank professor Costantino for her great
support during my studies.
I must express my very profound gratitude to my parents and other
family members.
A great thanks to my family for providing me with
unfailing support and continuous encouragement throughout my years of
study and through the process of writing this thesis. This accomplishment
would not have been possible without them.
Finally, I would like to thank all my friends. A special thanks goes
to Vahid Niknezhad, Ashish Thakur, ﬁroz babu and Mehdi Mehrali for
all their help and guidance during my thesis project. Also, I am really
thankful to my friends Nayere and Mahboubeh, for their support and en-
couragement.
III
==PAGE:5==
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
In a recent study beyond this thesis, Panotan Exopolysacharide, secreted
from Pantoea sp. BCCS 001 GH was extracted from nectarine fruit and
used as a naturally derived polymer.
The polymer closely mimics the
Polysaccharide structure of the native extracellular matrix (ECM) in the
body. To this end, it has been shown that Methacrylated Panotan Ex-
opolysacharide (PAMA) can be used to form a hydrogel by UV crosslinking.
Speciﬁcally, PAMA-based hydrogels with diﬀerent degrees of methacryla-
tion and polymeric concentrations were synthesized and characterized in
term of their chemical, degradability, physical and mechanical properties.
In order to fabricate a scaﬀold that better resembles the ECM of skeletal
muscle tissue in terms of elasticity and bioactivity to promote cellular pro-
liferation and diﬀerentiation these PAMA-based hydrogels were modiﬁed
with Gelin-s (Thiol-modiﬁed gelatin).
In the present master project, we encapsulated the C2C12 myoblast cell
line within the PAMA-based hydrogel. Furthermore, the cellular viabil-
ity, alignment and diﬀerentiation of C2C12 myoblast into myotubes within
these hydrogels were investigated by culturing the systems in diﬀerent
mediums, diﬀerentiation media (Dm) and growth media (Gm). According
to our results, the hydrogel supports cellular alignment and diﬀerentiation
of C2C12’s into myotubes, especially when exposed to diﬀerentiation media.
Finally, we used a photolitography technique to gain better control over
the physical properties of the cellular microenvironment. In this regard,
our results demonstrated a higher myotube alignment with better mor-
phological quality within microchannel patterned hydrogels as compared
to their non-patterned counterparts.
V
==PAGE:7==
==PAGE:8==
Contents
1
Introduction
3
1.1
General introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Outline of this thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
A general overview of skeletal muscle structure and func-
tions
7
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Skeletal muscle characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Molecular biology of the skeletal muscle tissue . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.1
Myogenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.2
Embryonic development of muscles . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.3
Skeletal muscle repair mechanism . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.4
Bimechnaical and electrical stimulation
. . . . . . .
15
2.4
Current strategies for skeletal muscle repair . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.1
Muscle ﬂap surgery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.2
Stem cell therapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4.3
Muscle tissue engineering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5
Skeletal muscle repair by muscle tissue engineering . . . . .
17
2.5.1
Cell sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5.2
Scaﬀold - based skeletal muscle tissue engineering . .
19
2.5.3
Crosslinking mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5.4
Compressive properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.6
Hydrogel micropatterning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.7
Challenges and opportunities in skeletal muscle tissue en-
gineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Materials and methods
27
3.1
Conventional monolayer cell culture
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.1.1
Cell culturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.1.2
Cell passaging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
3D cell encapsulation in non-patterned hydrogel . . . . . . .
28
VII
==PAGE:9==
3.3
3D cell encapsulation in micropatterned hydrogels
. . . . .
29
3.4
Quantitative ﬂuorescence assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4.1
Live and dead assay for cell viability . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4.2
Fluorescence staining procedure for F-actin . . . . .
33
3.4.3
Immunostaining procedure for myosin heavy chain .
35
3.5
Statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Results
37
4.1
Cell viability, orientation, distribution, and diﬀerentiation
in engineered muscle networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.1
Cell viability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.2
Quantiﬁcation of cellular alignment in non-patterned
cell-laden 3D hydrogels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.1.3
Quantitative analysis of cell conﬂuency in non-patter-
ned cell-laden 3D hydrogels . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1.4
Quantiﬁcation of cellular alignment in micropatterned
cell-laden 3D hydrogels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.1.5
Myosin heavy chains area coverage in non-patterned
samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.1.6
Myotube morphology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.1.7
Myotube morphology in micropatterned cell-laden
3D hydrogels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Discussion
49
6
Conclusions
53
Bibliography
55
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
General introduction
Skeletal muscles in association with skeletal systems act an integral role
in force generation and facilitating the voluntary movements that are ini-
tiated by signals from motor neurons. Due to pain and complex disorders
of the human skeletal muscles, a variety of biomedical techniques have
been developed for the purpose of improving skeletal muscle’s function.
Although skeletal muscle can naturally be regenerated in response to mi-
nor injuries, in more severe damage such as volumetric muscle loss (WML)
caused by traumatic injury, congenital defects, and tumor ablation or func-
tional damage due to a variety of myopathies, such self repair is deﬁcient
in its ability to restore signiﬁcant tissue [1]. Up to now, only few recon-
structive techniques exist to provide functional and aesthetic restoration of
lost muscle tissues, including free autologous muscle tissue transfer from
local or distant sites. However, this technique as a common treatment,
is associated with poor engraftment of the transferred muscle as well as
signiﬁcant donor site morbidity, causing muscle impairment [2]. New thera-
peutic strategies based on regenerative medicine, especially skeletal muscle
tissue engineering, will provide new treatment modalities for patients with
muscle impairment. However, the engineering of skeletal muscle tissue in
the laboratory remains still a scientiﬁc challenge to solve.
The key factor in regeneration of skeletal muscle tissue in vitro is using
appropriate cell sources, scaﬀolds, and chemical and physical signals. The
appropriate cell types are seeded onto a bio-compatible scaﬀold, occasion-
ally incorporating with physical and chemical signals in order to trigger
the cell diﬀerentiation.
==PAGE:13==
Introduction
1.2
Outline of this thesis
The aim of this study was to represent a major step forward in vitro engi-
neered skeletal muscle tissue by designing a novel functional polysaccharide-
based hydrogel. The hydrogel has desirable mechanical, structural, physico-
chemical, and biological properties to create a scaﬀold of interest. New
advances in vitro engineered muscle tissue is critical in helping patients
suﬀering from VML or muscle impairment, developing models for detailed
physiological study or pharmaceutical testing and, possibly providing a
future food source. The following will show the outline of this thesis work:
• 2nd chapter: A general overview of skeletal muscle structure and
functions, molecular biology of the skeletal muscle, embryonic de-
velopment of muscles, cell muscle repair mechanism and biophysical
stimulation, is given in this chapter. Moreover, some basic aspect
of tissue engineering will be discussed in this chapter. The topics
include: material aspect of scaﬀolds, strategies for the development
of a three-dimensional (3D) skeletal muscle tissue, cell sources and
their importance in skeletal muscle tissue engineering and, challenges
of skeletal muscle tissue engineering.
• 3th chapter: In order to engineer human muscle tissue, suﬃcient num-
ber of cells are needed to proliferate in vitro, and be encapsulated
within hydrogel. A description of the process of cell encapsulation
and cellular study in terms of cellular viability, orientation and dif-
ferentiation of C2C12 myoblast cell into mature myotube type were
provided in this chapter.
– Live and dead staining for studying cell viability.
– Fluorescence-based staining, In this study, Phaloidin and Hoesc-
hst stains conjugated to ﬂuorescent tags are used to visualize the
distribution of ﬁlamentous actin (F-actin) and nuclear DNA to
see the cellular spreading and overall shape as well as analyzing
cell’s orientation in the ﬁxed samples.
– We examined myotube formation and morphology by Immunos-
taining against Myosin heavy chain protein.
• 4th chapter: Results, in terms of data and images, are presented in
this chapter.
• 5th chapter: Critical analysis of the result will be presented here
to investigate and compare thoroughly the eﬀect of diﬀerent micro-
envirnment on cellular alignment and myotube formation.
4
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1
• 6th chapter: Conclusion and outlook are discussed here.
.
Figure 1.1: Schematic representing the outlined procedure of this study. Panotan
Exopolysacharide, composed of disaccharides repetitive units secreted from Pantoea
sp, used as a naturally derived polymer for the formation of the hydrogel.
The
chemical modiﬁcation of the polymer by substituting some of the hydroxyl groups
with methacrylate pendant groups (yellow) on its backbone. Adding Gelin-S (thiol-
modiﬁed gelatin) to provide cell-binding sites (blue), which direct cellular behavior
through enhancing cell attachment and viability. Cross linking between polymer chains
mediated by photocrosslinking mechanism. Culturing cell laden hydrogel in vitro to
study cellular diﬀerentiation process and using Photolithography method to engineer
muscle tissue with highly aligned myotube formation (designed by Ashish Thakur).
5
==PAGE:15==
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2
A general overview of
skeletal muscle structure
and functions
2.1
Introduction
Skeletal muscle tissue is a specialized contractile tissue comprised from a
series of muscle ﬁber bundles and is responsible for all voluntary movements
in body as well as maintaining the posture and balance of the human body.
2.2
Skeletal muscle characterization
Muscle tissue is one of the four major tissue types in mammalian bodies.
Each muscle is made up of muscle ﬁber, connective tissue, nerve tissue and
vascular tissue. All muscle ﬁbers are specialized cells that give the tissue
its unique properties. Within human muscle tissue, there are three distinct
groups of muscle tissue according to their structure and function: skeletal
muscle, cardiac muscle, and smooth muscle (ﬁg 2.1).
==PAGE:17==
A general overview of skeletal muscle structure and functions
Figure 2.1: Types of muscle tissue. Human muscle tissues consist of three diﬀerent
muscle types with diﬀerent cellular structure and function.
Skeletal muscle type
consists of multinuclated muscle ﬁbers which are packed into regular parallel bundles.
Smooth muscle is composed of uninucleated elongated spindle-shaped cells. Cardiac
muscle is made up of uninucleated muscle ﬁbers that are branched but connected.
Skeletal muscle tissue is the most abundant and regenerative tissue of
the human body’s tissues [3]. Skeletal muscle tissue in association with
skeletal system has the vital role of providing movement as a result of the
repeated contraction and relaxation. Skeletal muscles can be functionally
compromised due to injuries, genetic, metabolic and neuromuscular dis-
eases such as various dystrophies, diabetes, or Huntington’s disease [4].
Skeletal muscles contain multiple bundles of muscle cells (also called mus-
cle ﬁbers) and are surrounded by a connective tissue sheath known as the
Endomysium.
This sheath acts an important role in the physiology of
muscle contraction because it includes blood vessels (capillaries), nerves
and lymphatics, also electrically insulates the individual muscle cells from
each other (ﬁg 2.2).
Myocyte as a muscle cell, are developed by diﬀerentiation of Myoblasts
which are derived from the Mesoderm. Muscle cells seen under the light
microscope are long, tubular and striated with plentiful Mitochondria and
many nuclei squeezed along the membranes [5]. This is because they are
formed from the fusion of embryonic myocyte while the embryo is devel-
oping.
Also, the myocyte striation is due to the regular alternation of
the contractile proteins such as Actin and Myosin heavy chain proteins,
along with the structural proteins that couple the contractile proteins to
the connective tissues (ﬁg 2.2).
8
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2
Figure 2.2: The structure of skeletal muscle tissue. (a) Each skeletal muscle tissue is
made up of muscle ﬁber, connective tissue, nerve tissue and vascular tissue. Skeletal
muscles contain multiple bundles of muscle cells ( muscle ﬁbers) that are surrounded
by a connective tissue sheath known as the Endomysium within muscle fascicle. (b)
Myoﬁbrils, shaped like long cylinders which run parallel to each other along the full
length of the muscle ﬁber.
A myoﬁbril contains millions of repeating contractile
subunits called sarcomeres. (c) The Sarcomere (contractive unit), the region from
one Z-line to the next Z-line, composed of diﬀerent proteins such as Actin ﬁlments
and Myosin ﬁlaments.
Skeletal muscle cells contain smaller units, myoﬁbrils, shaped like long
cylinders which run parallel to each other along the full length of the muscle
ﬁber. A myoﬁbril contains millions of repeating contractile subunits called
sarcomeres that are responsible for muscle contraction (ﬁg 2.2). Sarcom-
9
==PAGE:19==
A general overview of skeletal muscle structure and functions
eres are formed by two transverse ﬁlament systems: the thick (Myosin)
and the thin (Actin) protein ﬁlaments, and other proteins. Diﬀerent pro-
teins in sarcomere act to regulate muscle contraction and tension transition
between sarcomeres as well as structural roles.
When muscle contraction occurs, the globular head of Myosin ﬁlaments
interact with the Actin ﬁlaments and slide against each other along two
other muscle proteins, Tropomyosin and Troponin.
Filament length in
sarcomere is an important indicator for counteractive capability of muscle.
The force generation by each sarcomere is proportional to the amount of
overlap between Myosin and Actin ﬁlaments [6] (ﬁg 2.2).
2.3
Molecular biology of the skeletal muscle tis-
sue
Muscle damage following a variety of injuries, muscular diseases and ag-
ing process can disrupt the sarcomeric organization, membrane integrity,
excitation-contraction coupling , calcium homeostasis ([7] ; [8]), metabolic
pathways and a variety of neuromuscular transmission which lead to mus-
cular weakness, degeneration of muscle ﬁbers and impairing the muscle
function. For example, Duchene Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) and Spinal
Muscular Atrophy (SMA) are two commonly seen myopathies resulting in
severe muscle loss and dysfunction.
DMD is a genetic muscular disorder caused by the absence or malfunc-
tion of Dystrophin. Dystrophin is a protein that helps keeping muscle ﬁber
strength by linking Actin ﬁlaments to the extracellular matrix [9].
In the past several years, signiﬁcant progress has been made in in-
vestigating the basic cellular and molecular mechanisms responsible for
skeletal muscle formation and regeneration. This knowledge might help in
the development of novel therapies such as cell therapy and muscle tissue
engineering to treat muscle impairment.
2.3.1
Myogenesis
A myocyte as a long and tubular muscle cell develops from myoblast, an
early muscle cell, to form muscle tissue in a process known as myogenesis
[10], coordinated by several cell cycle regulatory factors. Myogenesis , the
process that guarantees muscular tissue formation, occurs during embry-
onic development and continues throughout a mammalian’s life (regenera-
tion after injury). During early embryonic muscle development, myoblasts
originate from the Somites. The migration of these cells and formation
10
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2
of myoblasts are dependent upon the expression of the Tyrosine Kinase
receptor (RTK), c-met, which are in turn regulated by some transcription
factors such as, paired box protein 3 (Pax-3) [11]. Following the formation
of myoblasts, these cells are stimulated to proliferate in the presence of
several cell cycle regulatory factors which are expressed in a regular se-
quence. Proliferating myoblast expresses some members of the myogenic
basic Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH)1 protein family : myogenic determination
protein 1 (MyoD), myogenic factor 5 (Myf-5) [12]. MyoD and Myf-5 act
in speciﬁcation of myoblasts [13].
Before cell fusion and terminal diﬀerentiation in to myotubes, my-
oblasts undergo the alignment and then myoblast fusion occurs in two
distinct phases which is aided by a variety of proteins.
In the initial phase, embryonic myoblasts fuse with each other to form
nascent myotubes which are referred to as embryonic or early myoblasts.
The formation of these primary myotubes with a small number of nuclei
is initiated and regulated by myogenin (myogenic basic Helix-Loop-Helix
(bHLH)1 protein) and the myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) synergisti-
cally and ends when the myotubes become innervated and begin contract-
ing [12]. The number of ﬁbres in an adult muscle depends on the number
of primary myotubes ﬁrst formed and these ﬁbers serve as a scaﬀold for
the secondary myoﬁbers formed by the fusion of fetal myoblasts [14].
During the second phase, secondary myotubes form by the adhesion of
myoblasts, that are referred to as fetal or late myoblasts, to the parallel
apposition of the membranes of primary myotubes and the subsequent fu-
sion of additional myoblasts along the length of the primary myotube [15].
These secondary myotubes, containing numerous nuclei, require further
cell fusion and expression of contractile proteins in order to predominate
in mature skeletal muscle.
In addition to various cell surface and secreted molecules, calcium ion
acts as a critical signal in promoting myoblast fusion [16] and maintaining
satellite cells in their quiescent, proliferation, or diﬀerentiation into func-
tional muscle states [17]. At low calcium concentrations, myoblasts align,
but fuse only when extracellular calcium concentrations are increased ([16];
[18]; [19]).
Serum response factor (SRF) (a homodimeric DNA-binding protein)
also plays a central role during myogenesis by regulating the expression of
the skeletal α-actin gene [20]. The expression of the skeletal α-actin gene
is in turn regulated by the androgen receptor, which means steroids can
regulate myogenesis [21].
11
==PAGE:21==
A general overview of skeletal muscle structure and functions
2.3.2
Embryonic development of muscles
Skeletal muscle development is a tightly regulated process involving the
speciﬁcation of mesodermal precursors into myoblasts and subsequent dif-
ferentiation and fusion of these cells into multinucleated myotubes coor-
dinated by multiple signaling pathways. Muscle regeneration after injury
has similarities to muscle development during embryogenesis. Thus, some
knowledge about skeletal muscle development would help to understand
the events involved in muscle repair. Development of skeletal muscle in
vertebrates begins during early embryonic stages and continues through-
out their life. With the exception of some craniofacial muscles, all skeletal
muscles are derived from mesodermal precursor cells, which originate from
the somites (transient embryonic structures that originate from the parax-
ial mesoderm) [22]. When the embryo develops, somites through the inﬂu-
ence of signaling molecules, such as Sonic Hedgehog (Shh), Wnt, and BMP
emanating from the notochord, neural tube, surface ectoderm, and lateral
plate mesoderm [23], develop into distinct dermatomes: Dermomyotome
and sclerotomes ([24] ; [25]).
Figure 2.3: A schematic representation of embryonic myogenesis. It represents that
muscle progenitor cells derived from somites proliferate as myoblast and diﬀerentiated
in to myotube. During this process, diﬀerent signaling pathways control the expression
of muscle genes. The paired-homeobox family of transcription factors Pax3 and Pax7
are important for the activation of myogenic determination genes in muscle progenitor
cells. When myogenesis continues, Pax3/Pax7 expression decreases and Myf5/ MyoD
expression increases signiﬁcantly.
Cells in the dorsolateral half of the somite, Dermomyotome, will later
undergo division to form both the dermatome (giving rise to skin precursor
cells) and myotome (contributing to the skeletal muscle tissue) (ﬁg 2.3).
The majority of skeletal muscles are derived by the delamination and
12
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2
migration of muscle progenitor cells (MPCs) which intercalate into the
primary myotome, into positions within the developing embryo where they
eventually form mature muscles ([26] ; [27] ; [28]).
Some of embryonic myogenic progenitors initially express the transcrip-
tion factors Pax3 and Pax7, but lose their expression during progressive
specialization through the expression of the MyoD-family of bHLH tran-
scription factors (MRFs), which include Myf5, MyoD, myogenin and MRF4
([29] ; [30]) (ﬁg 2.3). A subset of the myogenic progenitors which does not
proceed through this specialization, retains Pax3/Pax7 expression and re-
mains quiescent in the maturing and adult skeletal muscle. These muscle-
speciﬁc stem cells are called muscle satellite cells ([30] ; [31]).
Myogenesis during development can be separated into two phases: an
early embryonic or primary phase (E10.5-E12.5 in mouse, E3-7 in chicken)
and a later fetal or secondary phase (E14.5-17.5 in mouse, E8+ in chicken)
([32] ; [33]).
Multiple intracellular signaling pathways, induced biochemically by dif-
ferent signaling molecules, are involved to instruct myogenesis during em-
bryonic development and in postnatal life ([34] ; [14] ; [29]).
In fact,
interaction of the signaling molecules with some speciﬁc receptors on the
cell’s surface regulate expression of some speciﬁc factor and chromatin-
remodeling factors during myogenesis. In addition to Shh and Wnt sig-
nals, insulin signaling molecule has been shown to act with Wnt signaling
to promote myogenesis and myoblast fusion [35], while ﬁbroblast growth
factor (FGF)-dependent signal promotes myoblast proliferation and block-
ing diﬀerentiation ([36] ; [37]). Furthermore, some types of FGF activate
p38 α/β MAPK pathway in skeletal muscle stem cells (satellite cells) to
promote self-renewal of these cells which is crucial for maintenance and
repair of skeletal muscle [38].
The primary myogenic regulatory factors (MRFs) including Myf5 and
MyoD, are required to establish muscle progenitor cell identity in the
somite [39]. Mice lacking both muscle regulatory factors (MRFs) will un-
dergo only limited embryonic myogenesis, which is directed by Mrf4 ([40] ;
[41]). The secondary MRFs, Myogenin and MRF4 which their expression
is evenly distributed throughout the myotome ([39] ; [23]), are not im-
portant in primary myogenesis, but are rather critical factors in terminal
muscle diﬀerentiation [32] (ﬁg 2.3). In the embryo, myogenin controls the
terminal diﬀerentiation of myoblasts into myocytes ([42] ; [43] ; [44]).
After sequential formation of primary and secondary muscle ﬁbers, the
Z-disc of the sarcomere, repeating contractile units, will line up forming a
mature muscle ﬁber.
13
==PAGE:23==
A general overview of skeletal muscle structure and functions
2.3.3
Skeletal muscle repair mechanism
Skeletal muscle regeneration as a highly synchronized process, relies on
the sequential activation of various cellular and molecular responses. The
current understanding of cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in
myogenic diﬀerentiation of muscle stem cells throughout the life are im-
portant in order to develop new therapeutic strategies for pathological
muscle conditions. The activation of quiescent population of satellite stem
cells, native precursors of skeletal muscle cell, gives the skeletal muscle cell
the ability to regenerate itself which it does on a daily basis as well as in
response to injury and pathological state [45].
Skeletal muscle repair process following damage undergoes a sequential
series of events which is classically divided in to three interrelated and
time dependent phases, namely, the degeneration phase with the initial
inﬂammatory response (1 to 3 days), the regeneration phase with activation
and proliferation of satellite cells (3 to 4 weeks), and the remodeling phase
with maturation of the regenerated myoﬁbers (3 to 6 months), ([46] ; [47]).
The initial phase characterized with the rupture and necrosis of the
myoﬁbers due to the injury followed with the activation of mononuclear in-
ﬂammatory cells residing within the muscle and myogenic cells in response
to some factors which is released by raptured myoﬁbers [48]. Various in-
ﬂammatory mediators secreted by inﬂammatory cells such as cytokine,
growth factors phase including tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), Fibrob-
last Growth Factor (FGF), Insulin like Growth Factor (IGF), Interleukin-
1β (IL-1β) and IL-6 participate in the initial phase [49]. The corporation
of these soluble factors inﬂuence the behavior of quiescent satellite stem
cell during remodeling phase.
In the second phase, the skeletal muscle begins to rebuild itself with
new, healthy muscle ﬁbers as well as the formation of a connective tissue
scar by ﬁbrin and ﬁbronectin [50]. This phase is characterized with the ac-
tivation of myogenic reserve cells, satellite cells. The activation of satellite
cell including diﬀerentiation of committed satellite cells into myoblasts and
the proliferation of undiﬀerentiated stem satellite cells for future needs of
regeneration [51].
At least two types of macrophage populations are involved in these two
stages, the classically activated M1 phenotype and the alternative activated
M2 phenotype [52]. The classically activated M1s, which are activated in
the very early stages of repair, are responsible for phagocytosis of ruptured
ﬁbers as well as promoting myoblast proliferation [53] and recruitment
and activation of muscle progenitor cells including satellite cell [50]. After
macrophages M1 reach their concentration peak, they are replaced with
14
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2
alternative activated M2 type. The alternative activated M2 contributes
to the proliferation and diﬀerentiation of satellite cell-derived myoblasts
by expression of diverse factors including bHLH proteins which lead to the
formation of new muscle ﬁbers [46].
During the last phase, maturation of regenerating myoﬁbres is medi-
ated by formation of a mature contractile apparatus. The scar tissue is
remodeled, and the muscle starts to regain its contractile function [54].
2.3.4
Bimechnaical and electrical stimulation
Cells are sensitive to physical and mechanical changes in their environment
as well as biochemical cues. Some physical and mechanical cues such as the
3D structure of the scaﬀold, substrate’s stiﬀness, and electrical stimulation
can aﬀect the cellular fate [55]. Electrical impulse stimulation from the
central nervous system via the motoneurons is the most important physical
cue in vivo to enhance the development and maturation of skeletal muscles
[56]. Physiological electrical impulses can be modulated in vitro, by tuning
some parameters of electrical pulse stimulation (EPS), such as voltage
amplitude, pulse width, and frequency in vitro to be used as a physical
cue in tissue engineering [57].
Mechanical forces is an other important
factor that aﬀects on the regulation of embryo development and tissue
morphogenesis, especially in muscle skeletal tissues [58]. A visible example
of the eﬀect of mechanical stimulation, such as strain and stress, on the
skeletal muscle development mediated by muscle hypertrophy is physical
exercise [59].
The reaction to mechanical stimuli such as cyclic strain,
however, depends strongly on the amplitude and frequency of the stimuli
[60].
The mechanical stimuli of the tissue facilitate the actin and myosin
alignment and the creation of ECM which are important keys in the for-
mation of functional skeletal muscle [61]. However, the mechanisms in-
volved in converting mechanical stimulation into the molecular events that
regulate skeletal muscle development and maturation have not yet been
identiﬁed clearly [62].
2.4
Current strategies for skeletal muscle repair
In adult muscles, Satellite Cells (SC) are found in a quiescent state and
the absolute number of SC is a function of species, age, muscle location,
and muscle type [63]. Activated SC gives rise to skeletal muscle to have
complete and spontaneous regeneration of lost tissue in response to mi-
nor injuries. In contrast, after severe injuries, the endogenous population
15
==PAGE:25==
A general overview of skeletal muscle structure and functions
of SCs is insuﬃcient to facilitate the complete muscle healing and often
result in the formation of thick ﬁbrotic tissue instead that prevents the
fusion of myoﬁbers and consequently, impairs muscle function. Although
researchers have extensively investigated various conventional and novel
therapeutic approaches to improve muscle healing, there is still no eﬀec-
tive method to treat volumetric muscle loss (VML). VML is the severe
traumatic or surgical loss of skeletal muscle which may results in func-
tional impairment. The conventional surgical procedures, such as muscle
ﬂap surgery and autologous muscle transposition, cause signiﬁcant donor
site morbidity while only resulting in limited functional recovery [1].
Due to the complications associated with the current VML surgeries,
there is intense interest in investing better treatment options for VML.
In the past decade, the new regenerative therapeutic approaches have
emerged as a promising alternative to traditional VML surgical procedures
by using cell transplantation such as stem cells and myoblast, and muscle
tissue engineering in order to address skeletal muscle loss or damage.
2.4.1
Muscle ﬂap surgery
The most common procedure that is currently used to treat VML is muscle
ﬂap surgery in which a piece of autologous tissue with intact blood and
nerve supply from a donor site is transferred into the patient’s injury site
[64]. Typically, this tissue is rotated from an adjacent donor site directly
into the injury site (ﬁg 2.4). Muscle ﬂap procedures are severely limited
in terms of the amount of tissue that can be taken and rarely result in full
functional recovery. Donor site morbidity, which refers to any complication
in the patient’s donor site as it heals, is also a signiﬁcant concern with these
procedures [65].
Figure 2.4: Lateral gastrocnemius muscle ﬂap [66]
16
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 2
.
2.4.2
Stem cell therapy
Satellite cells are located between the basal lamina and the plasma mem-
brane that surrounds each mature individual muscle ﬁber. They generate
large numbers of myogenic progenitor cells upon muscle injury but their
number and functionality decline in association with age ([67]; [68]; [69]).
In early clinical trials, the intramuscular injection of autologous cultured
myoblasts was proven to be a safe but ineﬀective cell transplantation. The
extent of manipulation generally determines the loss in regenerative po-
tential that occurs before reinjection.
2.4.3
Muscle tissue engineering
Skeletal muscle tissue engineering (SMTE) is an emerging ﬁeld that aims to
design a therapeutic tissue implants in order to regenerate volumetric mus-
cle loss and other muscular pathologies by a combination of appropriate
cell sources, biomaterial scaﬀolds, and growth factors [70]. SMTE combats
the limitations of conventional treatments of skeletal muscle diseases which
are associated with the dearth of availability of tissues for transplantation
as well as the donor site morbidity, immune rejection and pathogen trans-
fer. A well-designed three-dimensional scaﬀold is a key factor in SMTE
which can be composed of diﬀerent synthetic and natural origin polymers,
decellularized extracellular matrix (ECM) or any combination of these ma-
terial. According to the cell type, appropriate biophysical and biochemical
cues can be used in order to mimic native cellular arrangement of skeletal
muscle tissue. SMTE is still in the earliest stages of research and more
eﬀorts are needed to overcome several limitations or challenges to enhance
clinical applicability of tissue engineering.
2.5
Skeletal muscle repair by muscle tissue engi-
neering
2.5.1
Cell sources
Achieving success in the development of skeletal muscle tissue in vitro
depends on diﬀerent critical experimental conditions, including using of
proper cell sources to populate an instructive scaﬀold through the incor-
poration of appropriate chemical or physical-stimulating signals to trigger
the cell diﬀerentiation ([71] ; [72]). Cells applicable to tissue engineering,
17
==PAGE:27==
A general overview of skeletal muscle structure and functions
generally based on their origin, can be classiﬁed into autologous (individ-
uals’ own), allogenic (same species, diﬀerent individual) and xenogeneic
(animal origin) cell types [73]. Application of each of these cell types have
been limited to diﬀerent conditions, autologous cells in situation where
the patient has genetically healthy muscle, the allogenic cells in condition
where the muscle cells are damaged as a result of mutations so that pre-
vent their potential use as a proper cell source (e.g., Duchenne’s muscular
dystrophy [DMD]) [74] , and xenogeneic cells due to high possible risk of
immunological rejection in patient, have no clinical application at present.
It is essential to select the appropriate cell source utilized in skeletal muscle
tissue engineering, either autologous or allogeneic, based on the consider-
ation of several factors such as accessibility of the cell source, myogenicity
in vitro with high eﬃciency to maintain diﬀerentiation over extended pe-
riods of time, susceptibility to genetic manipulation, and ﬁnally in vivo
diﬀerentiation to favor the reconstruction of damaged skeletal muscle tis-
sue function [74]. In recent years, diﬀerent research groups used diﬀerent
sources of cells either autologous or allogeneic for skeletal muscle tissue de-
velopment in vitro including: primary, MPCs myogenetic progenitor cells,
and diﬀerent stem cell sources including satellite cells , embryonic stem
cell, iPS, induced pluripotent stem cells , ES cells, MSCs mesenchymal
stem cells, amniotic ﬂuid stem cells AFS [74]. Amongst all the mentioned
cell types autologous human cells including primary and satellite cells are
highly desirable for muscle tissue engineering purposes, as they don’t suﬀer
from immune rejection problems in vivo, and also can easily be harvested
by muscle biopsies and be cultivated in vitro.
However, the use of primary human cells have some limitations in
regard to the required surgical intervention for cell collection, their low
propensity for expansion and maintenance of the diﬀerentiated phenotype
especially when a patient is aged or has been severely diseased. The use
of satellite cells has recently gained attention, as they are the native pre-
cursors with high myogenic potential to skeletal muscle tissue. Moreover,
they show the same characteristics and function as the donor muscle [75].
however, their availability is rather limited due to diﬃculties in isolation
and puriﬁcation [65].
In most of biomedical studies, C2C12 cell lines have been used to in-
vestigate diﬀerent aspects of myogenesis as well as cellular and molecu-
lar biology of muscle in vitro.
The C2C12 cells are myoblast cells de-
rived from mouse satellite cells, which diﬀerentiate into multinucleated
myotubes under low-serum condition. The morphological characterization
of C2C12 cells change to elongated, multinucleated myotubes by diﬀeren-
18
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 2
tiation progress [65].
2.5.2
Scaﬀold - based skeletal muscle tissue engineering
In skeletal muscle tissue engineering, cellular microenvironment appears
as a crucial component to enhance cell adhesion, migration, proliferation,
cell alignment, and diﬀerentiation in to myotube speciﬁcation in vitro. De-
signing a scaﬀold with optimal characteristics which is populated with cells
and signalling molecules is one of the main components to properly develop
a microenevirnment. However, it can be diﬃcult to mimic the native cel-
lular microenvironment that can drive cells into the desired phenotypes.
The scaﬀold should meet a number of speciﬁc and functional properties in
terms of biocompatibility, biodegradability, and mechanical properties.
Over the past decade, a variety of synthetic and natural material as well
as manufactured technologies have been developed to fabricate polymeric
scaﬀolds with complex 3D architectures able to mimic the natural ECM.
Some technologies such as, electrospinning, soft and photo lithography
microfabrication [76] have been used to induce cellular alignment within
3D environment similar to the native skeletal muscle tissues.
Hydrogels, water swollen polymers, represent an attractive class of bio-
materials in the ﬁelds of tissue engineering and regenerative medicine due
to their hydrophilic polymeric networks [77], biocompatibility [78], simi-
lar mechanical properties to the ECM of native soft tissue. Hydrogels are
also really easy to manufacture and ﬁctionalize chemically [79]. However,
hydrogels usually have relatively poor mechanical properties with rapid
degradation behavior in vivo. Thus, various crosslinknig mechanisms can
be used to improve their properties, including mechanical, physical, and bi-
ologic ones. Natural and synthetic polymers with hydrophilic groups can
be used to prepare hydrogels through physical or chemical crosslinking
mechanism. Some hydrogels made from natural origin polymers possess
less controllable mechanical properties and less predictable degradation
proﬁle [80]. However, natural polymers contribute important properties
including biocompatibility, biodegradability and biologically recognizable
residues that support cellular activity [81].
2.5.3
Crosslinking mechanism
The hydrogel networks can be fabricated through diﬀerent physical or
chemical crosslinking mechanisms [82].
In physically crosslinked hydro-
gels, the formation of reversible physical bonds between diﬀerent polymer
chains can be mediated by diﬀerent interactions such as ionic, hydropho-
19
==PAGE:29==
A general overview of skeletal muscle structure and functions
bic interaction and hydrogen bonds [83]. On the other hand, in chem-
ically crosslinked hydrogels, the formation of permanent chemical bonds
between the diﬀerent polymer chains is mediated by addition of diﬀerent
crosslinkers. Crosslinking agents are molecules with at least two reactive
functional groups which mediate the formation of covalent bonds between
polymeric chains [84]. Particularly, photo-crosslinking as a type of chem-
ical crosslinkig mechanism, is mediated by ultraviolet (UV) irradiation
and the addition of a chemical photoinitiator (PI) as a crosslinking agent.
Linking a photo sensitive functional group to a polymer, enables it to form
crosslinks upon irradiation with light such as UV light.
The advantages of this approach include easy and fast formation of
hydrogels at low cost in comparison with other chemical methods as well
as achieving a more homogeneous cellular distribution within the hydrogel
[85]. However, this technique requires a photosensitizer and UV irradia-
tion, which could also cause a local rise of temperature, therefore damaging
encapsulated cells [86].
Figure 2.5:
Representative schematic of chemical modiﬁcation of Panotan Ex-
opolysacharide.
Panotan Exopolysacharid macromers containing several hydroxyl
groups were reacted with methacrylic Anhydride (MA) to substitute some of the
hydroxyl groups with methacrylate pendant groups at PH=8.0 and room tempera-
ture.
In this work Panotan Exopolysacharide, composed of repeating disac-
charide units of glucose and galactose secreted from Pantoea sp. BCCS 001
GH bacteria was extracted by Vahid Niknezhad. Panotan Exopolysachari-
de has been proposed as a potential candidate for the formation of hydro-
gel, due to the presence of several hydroxyl (OH) group on its backbone.
Methacrylated Panotan Exopolysacharide, with two diﬀerent degrees of
methacrylation, was prepared by substituting hydroxyl group with methac-
20
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 2
Figure 2.6: The hydrogel is recovered from sol to gel phase using UV irradiation with
wave length of 365 nm.
rylic anhydride group on Panotan Exopolysacharide backbone (ﬁg 2.5).
After methacrylation process is complete, modiﬁed polymer is dialyzed
with membrane ﬁltering tubes for 3-4 days to remove remaining unreacted
MA and its byproducts which have cytotoxic eﬀect on the cells.
The hydrogel network can be formed from methacrylated Panotan Ex-
opolysacharide (PAMA) via UV crosslinkig.
The formation of covalent
bonds between polymer chains by photocrosslinking mechanism improves
mechanical stability of hydrogel.
However, the hydrogel present low cell viability in vitro. To overcome
this drawback, Gelin-S (Thiol-modiﬁed gelatin ) has been used in order to
provide some basic cell attachment sites for encapsulated cells ([87] ; [88]).
2.5.4
Compressive properties
Hydrogels have been used in various biomedical applications such as tissue
scaﬀolding and carrier for drug delivery and cellular delivery [89]. In these
applications, one of the main limitations with using hydrogels is their weak
mechanical properties.
In tissue engineering, some mechanical properties such as scaﬀold’s
stiﬀness, appear important for high contractile tissue such as skeletal mus-
cle tissue. A PAMA21-based hydrogels with 21% degree of methacrylation
at diﬀerent concentration will be presented, whose mechanical properties
were characterized by applying repetitive compression cycle. The hydro-
gels were compressed to a strain level of 70% and then, unloaded back
to 0 strain for 5 repeated cycles. The compressive properties of hydrogel
were compared on the basis of recovery, total energy dissipation, ultimate
stress, compressive modulus and strain at breaking (ﬁg 2.7). All mechan-
ical tests were done by Vahid Ninknezhad, a phd guest at DTU, at room
temperature with a humidity level of 60%.
21
==PAGE:31==
A general overview of skeletal muscle structure and functions
Figure 2.7: (a) Characterizing compressive properties of the PAMA21-based hydrogel
by applying unconﬁned cyclic compression test. (b) Representative stress-strain curves
of the 1st (red) and 5th (blue) loading cycles in uniaxial compression for PAMA21-
based hydrogel with diﬀerent polymeric concentration (2%, 3 % and 4 %).
The
hydrogels were compressed to a strain level of 70% and then, unloaded back to 0
strain.
(c) The energy lost during the cycle can be calculated by measuring the
area between the stress-strain curves. Decreasing in polymer concentration results
in a decrease of energy dissipation between the cycles.
For hydrogel with higher
polymer concentration the recovery was about 96 %. (d) Evaluation of the stress
state at constant 70 % strain level. (e) Ultimate stress and compressive modulus.
The ultimate stress and compressive module is decreased with decreasing in polymer
concentration. (f) Breaking point of PAMA21-based hydrogel. The hydrogel is highly
elastic at lower polymeric concentration. Breaking point occurs at higher strain with
decreasing in polymeric concentration. The data are expressed as mean ± SD ( Data
was generated by Vahid Niknezhad)
22
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 2
Hydrogel with potential application in skeletal muscle tissue engineer-
ing should be recovered to the initial state with minimum dissipated energy.
The energy dissipation during cycle can be calculated by measuring the
area between the loading and unloading curves. The PAMA21-based hy-
drogels with 2% polymeric concentration reversibly deform with minimum
energy dissipation during the cycle in comparison to hydrogels with higher
polymeric concentration (ﬁg 2.7). The scaﬀold’s stiﬀness can eﬀect on cell
proliferation, spreading, gene expression of anchorage-dependent cell such
as C2C12 myoblast. The increase in the concentration of polymer lead to
the formation of hydrogels with higher compressive modulus. It might be
because of the formation of tight interaction between the chains induced
by crosslinking (ﬁg 2.7).
Figure 2.8: Characterizing compressive properties of the modiﬁed PAMA21-based
hydrogel with 1.5% gelin-s at 1.5% polymeric concentration. The data are expressed
as mean ± SD ( Data was generated by Vahid Niknezhad).
According to the compressive properties data, PAMA21-based hydrogel
with lower polymeric concentration was oﬀered as a proper candidate for
applications in skeletal muscle tissue engineering.
Furthermore, in order to have optimal gelation time, 1.5% polymeric
concentration was considered as a proper concentration for preparing the
23
==PAGE:33==
A general overview of skeletal muscle structure and functions
PAMA21 -based hydrogel. It was hypothesized that a scaﬀold with com-
pressive modulus analogous to the native one would improve the cellu-
lar behavior of the C2C12 encapsulating within hydrogel. Therefore, our
PAMA21-based hydrogels were modiﬁed with Gelin-s for achieving proper
mechanical stiﬀness as well as optimal cellular viability. Moreover, some
critical mechanical properties were characterized by applying repetitive
compression cycle by Vahid Niknezhad (ﬁg 2.8).
2.6
Hydrogel micropatterning
Despite of the numerous advantages of hydrogels, it has some major dis-
advantage regarding fabrication of cell/gel tissue constructs with arbitrary
3D geometry due to their thickness and extensive swelling capability. In
this regard, scientists have developed diﬀerent micropatterning methods to
facilitate the formation of desired tissue organization in vitro [90]. Photo
lithographic patterning techniques can be used to fabricate cell encapsu-
lating hydrogel by providing control over gel thickness as well as micro and
macroscopic 3D architecture of hydrogel [91]. Photo lithographic pattern-
ing approaches can be used to direct cellular orientation, diﬀerentiation,
gene expression and signaling in predeﬁned spatially discrete locations in
3D [92]. By photolithography method, C2C12 cells can be encapsulated
easily and homogeneously within the hydrogel scaﬀolds, mimicking a com-
parable 3D environment with native skeletal muscle tissues. In such tech-
nique, photochemical crosslinking approach are used to transfer micropat-
terns from the photomask into the cell encapsulated hydrogel.
Skeletal muscle cell’s precursors such as myoblasts can be cultured and
diﬀerentiated in vitro; Additionally, these cells can also be diﬀerentiated
into unfuctional type of myotubes [93]. Therefore, photo lithographic pat-
terning techniques are used to guide the myoblasts to form highly organized
structure similar to the natural skeletal muscle morphology.
2.7
Challenges and opportunities in skeletal mus-
cle tissue engineering
Skeletal muscle tissue engineering is perceived as a promising alternative
to the conventional therapies to overcome many of the complication in the
treatment of VLM. To date, it has not proceeded to clinical practice due
to several limitations or challenges in development of a functional skeletal
muscle tissue.
First, detecting of proper myogenic progenitor cells and
scaﬀold which are not only implantable inside the patient, but also have
24
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 2
the capability of organizing a high density of uniformly aligned myoﬁbers.
Second, inadequate vascularization of skeletal muscle tissue with thickness
more than 2 mm in vitro [94] which limits proper oxygen diﬀusion and mass
transport (nutrients and waste product) in construct. Third, lack of the
eﬃcient strategies to enhance neurogenesis in order to fabricate functional
tissue with adequate neuromuscular junctions with nerve cells [75]. Forth,
limited knowledge on the eﬀect of multiple environmental factors (e.g.,
matrix composition and stiﬀness ([3] ; [4]), soluble factors ([95] ; [10] ;
[96]) and various types of biophysical stimuli (e.g., mechanical stretch ([2]
; [97] ; [1] ; [74]), electrical stimulation ([98] ; [99]), neuromotor pulse
([100] ; [75]) on the proliferation, growth, diﬀerentiation, and maturation
of myogenic cells.
25
==PAGE:35==
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 3
Materials and methods
3.1
Conventional monolayer cell culture
All cell culture works were carried out using a cell line class safety cabi-
net under sterilized conditions. Cells were incubated in a humidiﬁed 5%
(v/v) CO2 atmosphere at 37◦C in the incubator for both subculture and
experimentation.
3.1.1
Cell culturing
Mouse C2C12 myoblast cell lines obtained from Aalborg university (Den-
mark), were used in all processing experiments.
C2C12 myoblasts were
subcultured by using two dimensional (2D) cell culturing technique.
We thawed a 1 ml aliquot of the cell solution containing 1 million cells
as quickly as possible in water bath at 37◦C. The cells were transferred
to warm media in a 15 mL conical tube and mixed gently. 500 µl cell
solution were plated in a 40 mL cell culture ﬂask (Thermo ScientiﬁcTM)
and prewarmed Growth medium (GM) (consisting of Dulbeco’s Modiﬁed
Eagle Media-high glucose (DMEM,Sigma) and supplemented with 10%
Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS,Geyer) and 1% penicillin (Sigma)) were added
then placed in the incubator.
3.1.2
Cell passaging
The C2C12 cells were grown in the incubator at 37◦C with humidiﬁed 5
% (v/v) CO2 atmosphere until a conﬂuency of 60% was reached (very few
of cell-to-cell contact). It is important to prevent cells of becoming fully
conﬂuent because cells will begin to fuse and get multinucleated and dif-
ferentiated upon cell-cell contact. To passage the cell culture, we removed
and discarded culture medium and rinsed it twice with pre-warmed PBS.
==PAGE:37==
Materials and methods
For a 175 cm2 cell culture Flask, we added 3 mL of pre-warmed 0.25%
(w/v) trypsin (Sigma). The ﬂask was then incubated in humidiﬁed 5 %
(v/v) CO2 atmosphere at 37◦C for 5 minutes so that cells took on a rounde
morphology under microscopic examination. Then we added 9 mL of Dul-
beco’s Modiﬁed Eagle Media-high glucose (DMEM) supplemented with
10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) and 1% pencillin (High Serum Growth
Media) to the ﬂask, and collected the cells by gently pipetting and the
contents were transferred to a sterile 15 ml centrifuge tube. The cell sus-
pension was pelleted by centrifuge for 6 minutes at 1200 rpm. Cell density
and cell viability were determined by using the automatic cell counter
(Chemometec) then a volume of cell solution containing 500000 Cells with
24 mL of growth media were seeded into the culture ﬂasks for the planned
experimental procedure.
Determination of cell number
To determine the cellular density and viability for subsequent seeding of
cells, the Countess Automated machine (Chemometec) was used. Follow-
ing manufacturer’s protocol, 10µl of suspended cell solution in the original
solution containing cell and 1 ml of growth media were mixed with 190µl
of fresh Growth media. The NucleoCassetteTM (chemometec) was loaded
with sample, we then inserted the NucleoCassetteTM into the machine for
automated counting. The value of viable cell then was multiplied by a
factor of 20 to give the total number of cell in original solution containing
cell and 1 ml of growth media.
3.2
3D cell encapsulation in non-patterned hy-
drogel
Exopolysaccharide (EPS) secretion from Pantoea sp. BCCS 001 GH was
extracted (Babol university). Applying chemical functionalization of the
Panotan Exopolysaccharide with Methacrylic anhydride (Sigma) in order
to provide a photo crosslinakble hydrogel.
Methacrylated Panaton Ex-
opolysacharide (PAMA) with 2 degrees of methacrylation (37% and 21 %)
were synthesized and characterized by Vahid Niknezhad at DTU.
The degree of methacrylation was evaluated by using Proton nuclear
magnetic resonance (H-NMR). The degree of methacrylation is deﬁned as
the amount of methacryloyl groups per one PAMA disaccharide repeat
unit and was calculated by comparing the average integrated intensity of
the methyl protons peak of the methacrylate group with the methylene
28
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 3
groups in PAMA [85].
PAMA with 37 % degree of methacrylation was not dissolved in PBS
well due to strong hydrophobic interactions between methacrlated groups,
therefor PAMA21 with 21% degree of methacryltion was chosen as a proper
degree for functionalization of the polymer.
As hydrogels were needed to be encapsulated with the cells, all subse-
quent steps were performed in a sterile cabinet. 1.5% (w/v) of PAMA21
with 0.5% (w/v) of 2-Hydroxy-2-methyl propiophenone 98% (Hydrophilic
photo-initiator, Sigma) were dissolved in Gelin-S solution (Sigma) to form
a prepolymer solution. Adding 100 µl of C2C12 cells suspended in medium
with 8 million/mL cell concentration to 300µ prepolymer solution, result-
ing in 2 million/mL C2C12 cell concentration in a ﬁnal prepolymer solution.
Silicon mold (2.5cm×2cm) containing 8 small wells (with a diameter of
3 mm) assembled on to a glass substrate (ﬁg 3.1). 10 µl of the prepolymer
containing cell solution were loaded in each silicon well (used as a mold)
gently by micro pipet. Then, exposing the assembly to 7mW
cm2 of 365 nm
UV light (optimized irradiation of UV source according to minimal cellular
damage and proper mechanical stiﬀness of hydrogel scaﬀold (optimized
by Vahid Niknezhad by trial and error)) to allow polymer crosslinking
(ﬁg 3.1).
After 60 seconds of polymer crosslinking by 7mW
cm2 of 365 nm
UV light, the samples were washed with prewarmed PBS to remove any
remaining photoinitiator and free radicals. Then, it was cultured with 3 mL
of Growth media solution with 6% additional Penicillin. These constructs
were incubated in a humidiﬁed 5% (v/v) CO2 atmosphere at 37◦C. Media
was replenished at day 1, 3 and 5.
Moreover, to evaluate the eﬀect of diﬀerent culture media on cellular
progression, we changed the media with an equal volume of diﬀerentia-
tion media (containing in Dulbeco’s Modiﬁed Eagle Media-high glucose
(DMEM) supplemented with 2% horse serum and 1% penicillin) at the
end of day 3 and 5 (ﬁg 3.1).
3.3
3D cell encapsulation in micropatterned hy-
drogels
Three-dimensional micro tissues were generated and engineered to control
cell-cell interaction, guide C2C12 cells alignment and allow C2C12 cells to
diﬀerentiate into highly aligned myotube cells type. To this aim, periodic
linear micro-topographical features were fabricated on PAMA substrate.
Patterning of the hydrogel was achieved by using a two dimensional
photomask (designed at DTU) with low plating density of microgrooves
29
==PAGE:39==
Materials and methods
Figure 3.1: Schematic of the 3D cell encapsulation within non-patterend hydrogel
(control). Silicon mold with 8 small wells assembled on to a glass substrate. Each
well has been loaded with cell-laden PAMA21 polymer, then exposing the assembly
to UV-light for polymer crosslinking.
Washing sample with pre-warmed PBS and
culturing with Growth media (Gm) in the incubator.
to achieve the greatest degree of alignment, and so that the cellular pro-
gression could be easily observed. The used micropattern on photomask
was characterized by it’s geometrical parameters: groove length= 6000 µl,
ridge width = 150 µl,and groove distance = 400 µm (ﬁg 3.2).
Figure 3.2: Schematic illustration of micropattern. (a) Geometry of fabricated mi-
cropattern on photomask. The micropatterns are characterized by their geometrical
parameters: groove length= 6000 µl , ridge width = 150 µl , groove distance =
400 µm. (b) Geometry of fabricated micropattern on photomask under optical mi-
croscopy. Scale bar represents 0.33 mm.
We sonicated 5.5 cm × 1.5 cm glass cover slips (VWR) in 70% ethanol
30
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3
solution for 5 minutes. Repeating this step twice using fresh 70% ethanol
solution, then sonicated them in deionized water for 5 minutes.
Clean
glass cover slips were soaked in a 5% (v/v) solution of 3-(trimethoxysilyl)
propyl methacrylate (TMSPMA) 98% (Sigma-Aldrich) in 99,9% Toluene
(Sigma-Aldrich) over night at 60◦C. Washing with two 70% ethanol rinses
and two deionized water rinses. Each treated glass cover slip had been cut
into 2 cm × 1.5 cm pieces.
Next, the treated cover slips were coated by Poly(2-hydroxyethyl meth-
acrylate) (pHEMA) solution then they were baked at 100◦C. In fact, the
treated cover slips were ﬁctionalized with TMSPMA to improve hydrogel
attachment to the surface trough reactions of methacrylate groups under
UV irradiation, and coated with pHEMA to inhabit cell attachment in non
UV exposed area.
Before starting microfabrication process, microscope
glass cover slips had been sterilized by UV radiation for 20 minutes.
The 100 µl of prepared hydrogel solution (it was prepared as was de-
scribed in section 3.2) was dropped on the hydrophobic glass slide (Thermo
Scientiﬁc) then was sandwiched with the treated cover slip. The hydropho-
bic glass slide was used to enhance favour detachment of crosslinked hydro-
gel. A photomask was placed against the treated glass cover slip and held
in place by its own weight during treatment. The assembly was exposed to
7mW
cm2 of 365 nm UV light under the UV chamber (EFSEN engineering A.S
) for 60s to crosslink the hydrogel. At the end, the uncrosslinked hydro-
gel (i.e. that not exposed to UV light) was washed with prewarmed PBS
solution then 3 mL Growth media solution with 6% additional Penicillin
were added to it. The 3D photopatterned constructs were incubated in a
humidiﬁed 5% (v/v) CO2 atmosphere at 37◦C (ﬁg 3.3).
31
==PAGE:41==
Materials and methods
Figure 3.3: Schematic of the 3D cell encapsulation in micropatterned hydrogel. The
prepared cell-laden hydrogel solution was dropped on the hydrophobic surface. The
dropped hydrogel solution was sandwiched with the glass treated cover slip. A pho-
tomask with high aspect ratio was placed against the treated glass cover slip, then
the assembly was exposed to the UV radiation. Washing the uncrosslinked hydrogel
which was not exposed to UV-light with pre-warmed PBS and culturing the samples
with Growth media(Gm) in the incubator.
3.4
Quantitative ﬂuorescence assessment
3.4.1
Live and dead assay for cell viability
The viability of encapsulated C2C12 myoblast within the hydrogel was
determined by using live and dead staining procedures.
The live and dead assay is able to deferentially label live and dead
cells in one step procedure. A nonﬂuoresent calcein, permeate through
the membrane of live cell and upon hydrolysis by intracellular esterase,
become strongly ﬂuorescent and viable cell appears in green color. DNA
binding dye is impermeable trough the viable cell’s membranes but is able
to diﬀuse thought the damaged cell membrane and by binding to DNA
becomes ﬂuorescent then dead cells appear in red color.
Brieﬂy, 1 % (v/v) calcein, 1% (v/v) Ethidium Homodimer-1 (EthD-1)
(Sigma) was diluted in PBS. The cell-laden hydrogel, with and without
Gelin-s, were rinsed twice with pre-warmed PBS, immersed in the diluted
live and dead staining solution for 10 min at 37◦C temperature and then
washed with PBS for 5 min.
The control samples consisted of 8 loaded silicon wells with cell laden
hydrogel. On day number 1, 3, 7 and 14, two of the loaded silicon wells
were analyzed, and by day 14, all the control samples were examined. The
whole examining process was repeated 3 times, so in overall 24 loaded
32
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 3
silicon wells with cell laden hydrogel were analyzed. In each experiment
and live and dead cells were visualized with a Confocal microscopy (CLSM,
Zeiss LSM 700, Germany) using a water immersion objective.
Several digital images were obtained using ZEN software 2012 at diﬀer-
ent magniﬁcation. Counting analysis was performed using ImageJ software
on a total of 24 images with 10x magniﬁcation. Cell viability was analyzed
at day 1, 3, 7 and 14 of culturing.
3.4.2
Fluorescence staining procedure for F-actin
Actin ﬁlament is one of the most abundant proteins found in cytoskeleton
which plays an important role in myogenesis.
The myogenesis requires
cellular changes such as morphological change, cell migration, cell-ECM
adhesion, cell-cell adhesion and fusion of the myoblasts ([101] ; [102]).
Actin ﬁlaments can be visualized easily with Phalloidin, a molecule able
to bind F-actin and prevent it’s depolymerization, when is conjugated to a
ﬂuorophore. C2C12 cell PAMA21 hydrogel constructs after washing 3 times
with prewarmed PBS were ﬁxed with 4% (v/v) paraformaldehyde for 15
min then were permeabilized with 0.1% (v/v) Triton X-100 diluted in PBS
at room temperature. Following blocking of potential nonspeciﬁc binding
sites with 1% (w/v) bovine serum albumin to prevent nonspeciﬁc antibody
binding for 30 min in room temperature. The sample was incubated with
Phalloidin (1/40 diluted in 0.1% (w/v) BSA (Sigma)) at 37◦C in dark,
and washed with PBS three times for 1 minute. Suﬃcient Hoechst stain
for nuclei (5µl hoechst stain in 10 ml PBS) was added to cover the sample
for 15 min at 37◦C in dark.
A total of 8 samples of the control and 8 samples of the micropatterned
were stained. On day number 1, 3, 5 and 7 two samples of control and
micropatterned were analyzed (one sample cultured in Gm and one in dif-
ferentiation media). The whole examining process was repeated 3 times, so
in overall 48 samples of control and micropatterned were analyzed. Then,
cellular structure including F-actin and nuclei was visualized with a Confo-
cal microscopy (CLSM, Zeiss LSM 700, Germany) using a water immersion
objective. Digital images were obtained using ZEN software 2012.
Several digital images were obtained using ZEN software 2012 at dif-
ferent magniﬁcation. Quantitative analysis of cell conﬂuency and cellular
alignment analysis were performed using ImageJ software. The analysis
was performed on a total of 48 images with 20x magniﬁcation.
For control samples, by assuming an elliptical shape for the nuclear
shape, the degree of alignment was deﬁned as the angle formed by the
semi major axis of elliptical nuclei with a reference direction ( vertical
33
==PAGE:43==
Materials and methods
axis of the 2D reference frame). The reference direction coincides with
an inertial direction in the lab frame. The angle was considered zero for
circular nuclei [103] (ﬁg 3.4).
Figure 3.4: Schematic of analysis of cell alignment in non-patterned hydrogel (con-
trol). By assuming an elliptical shape as the nuclear shape, the degree of the nuclear
alignment of hoescht stained nuclei was deﬁned as the angle formed by the semi major
axis of elliptical nuclei with the vertical axis of reference frame.
For micro-patterned samples, by considering an elliptical shape as the
nuclear shape, the degree of the nuclear alignment of hoescht stained nuclei
was deﬁned as the angle formed by the semi major axis of elliptical nuclei
with the major axis of rectangular prefabricated pattern within hydrogel
(ﬁg 3.5). The distribution of cellular orientation for both samples (control
and micropaterned samples) was estimated on a scale of 0◦to 180◦for
diﬀerent culturing days.
34
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 3
Figure 3.5: Schematic of analysis of cell alignment in micropatterned hydrogel. By
considering an elliptical shape as the nuclear shape, the degree of the nuclear align-
ment of hoescht stained nuclei was deﬁned as the angle formed by the semi major
axis of elliptical nuclei with the major axis of rectangular prefabricated pattern within
hydrogel.
3.4.3
Immunostaining procedure for myosin heavy chain
Immunostaining is a technique for labeling a speciﬁc protein, which is
mediated by speciﬁc antibody that has been tagged with a visible label,
typically a ﬂuorescent dye.
At speciﬁc time points, cells were ﬁxed for 15 minutes with 4% (v/v)
formaldehyde (Sigma) at 37◦C after twice washing with prewarmed PBS.
Then samples were rinsed twice with PBS and cell’s membranes were per-
meabilized for 5 minutes with 0.1% (v/v) of Triton X-100 in PBS (Sigma)
at room temperature. Following blocking of potential nonspeciﬁc binding
sites with 1% (v/v) bovine serum albumin to prevent nonspeciﬁc antibody
binding, and simultaneously apply hoechst (1:1000 in PBS,Sigma), nucleus
indicator, for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. In next step,
samples were incubated with diluted mouse derived primary antibodies
against myosin heavy chain (1:500 diluted in PBS + bovine serum albumin
1% (w/v), Sigma) for 90 minutes at room temperature in the dark, then
samples were washed twice with PBS. Staining samples by secondary got
derived anti-mouse IgG1 antibodies with AlexaFluor 555 labeled (1/200
diluted in PBS + Bovine Serum Albumin 0.2% (w/v), Sigma) at room
temperature for 90 minutes then samples were washed with PBS. Washing
the samples twice with PBS and keep in PBS at 4◦C.
A total of 6 samples of the control and 6 samples of the micropat-
terned were stained. On day number 1, 5 and 7 two samples of control
and micropatterned were analyzed (one sample cultured in Gm and one
35
==PAGE:45==
Materials and methods
in diﬀerentiation media). The whole examining process was repeated 3
times, so in overall 36 samples of control and micropatterned were ana-
lyzed. Then, myogenic diﬀerentiation indicator, mysoin heavy chain, was
visualized with a Confocal microscopy (CLSM, Zeiss LSM 700, Germany)
using a water immersion objective. Digital images were obtained using
ZEN software 2012.
Several digital images were obtained using ZEN software 2012 at dif-
ferent magniﬁcation.
Quantitative analysis of mysoin heavy chain area
analysis and myotube morphology were performed using ImageJ software.
The analysis was performed on a total of 36 images with 20x magniﬁcation.
3.5
Statistics
All data are represented as mean ± SEM and statistical comparison be-
tween two groups was performed using Graph-Pad Prism Version 7 (Graph-
Pad Software, USA).
36
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 4
Results
4.1
Cell viability, orientation, distribution, and
diﬀerentiation in engineered muscle networks
4.1.1
Cell viability
Cell viability studies were carried out on the encapsulated hydrogel with
C2C12 Myoblast (with and without Gelin-s) by live and dead staining pro-
cedure, as it has been described in section 3.4.1. Then, live and dead cells
were visualized with the Confocal microscopy (CLSM, Zeiss LSM 700, Ger-
many) using a water objective. Digital images were obtained using ZEN
software 2012. Counting analysis was performed using ImageJ software.
For samples stained with live/dead assay, the viability was quantiﬁed
as the number of live cells (green)/total cells (red+green) (ﬁg 4.1).
==PAGE:47==
Results
Figure 4.1: Viability assay of encapsulated cell within control sample without Gelin-
s.(a) The ﬂuorescence images at 10x magniﬁcation representing the cell viability within
control samples by using live and dead assay at day 1, 3, 7 and 14 of culturing. Alive
cells stained in green while dead cells stained in red color. (b) Total cell counting
in the ﬁeld of view. (c) Live cell counting. (d) The percentage of cell viability was
quantiﬁed as the number of live cells/total cells. The cell viability is reducing in time.
The data are expressed as mean ± SD.
After 24 hours, the diﬀerences in cell viability between hydrogels with
and without Gelin-s shows 4% higher viability for the hydrogel with Gelin-
s. At day 3 of culturing, the cell viability for hydrogel without Gelin-s is
reduced below 80% (ﬁg 4.1) while in the case of hydrogel with Gelin-s, the
cell viability is decreased but it is still above 80% (ﬁg 4.2).
4.1.2
Quantiﬁcation of cellular alignment in non-patterned
cell-laden 3D hydrogels
In order to examine the cellular orientation within non-patterned substrate
(control samples), samples were ﬂuorescently stained with Alexa Fluor 488
Phalloidin dye for F-actin and hoechst dye for nuclei at day 1, 3, 5 and
7 of cell culturing, as discussed in section 3.4.2. Fluorescence images at
diﬀerent magniﬁcations were obtained to visualize the cellular orientation
and then images at 20x magniﬁcation were analyzed for the quantiﬁcation
of cellular alignment by ImageJ software was described in section 3.4.2
(ﬁg 4.3).
38
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 4
Figure 4.2: (a) Schematic of mixing Gelin-s solution with PAMA-based hydrogel
solution to provide cell-binding sites (blue) after exposing to UV light (designed by
Ashish Thakur). (b) The ﬂuorescence images at 10x magniﬁcation representing the
cell viability within control samples with Gelin-s by using live and dead assay at day
1 and 3 of culturing.
(c) Total cell counting in the ﬁeld of view.
(d) Live cell
counting. (e) The percentage of cell viability was quantiﬁed as the number of live
cells/total cells. The cell viability is reducing in time but not signiﬁcantly. At day
3 of culturing, the cell viability is above 80 % while in samples without Gelin-s the
viability is decreased to below 80%. The data are expressed as mean ± SD.
39
==PAGE:49==
Results
For encapsulated cells within the control samples, the cellular orienta-
tion was randomly distributed from 0◦to 180◦on day 1 (ﬁg 4.3). Cellular
alignment becomes more apparent with time and changing media from
growth media into diﬀerentiation media.
At day 3, the cells appeared in a more elongated shape and low percent-
age of the C2C12 myoblasts started to fuse into multinucleated myotubes.
In some parts of hydrogel with higher cellular density, the probability of
myotube’s formation was higher in comparison to other area especially on
the boundary. At the end of day 3, the cell density is high enough to see
the inﬂuence of culture conditions on the cellular behavior, in both samples
cultured in diﬀerentiation and growth media (ﬁg 4.3).
After 5 days, the majority of myoblasts were fused in to multinucleated
myotubes and more than 25% of myotubes were aligned in the range of
135◦to 155◦. This alignment was more evident in samples cultured in the
diﬀerentiation media. For samples cultured in diﬀerentiation media, 34%
of myotubes were aligned in the range of 135◦to 155◦, while for samples
cultured in growth media, only 26% of myotubes were aligned in this range
(ﬁg 4.3).
At the end of day 7, more than 45% of the myotubes were positioned
in the range of 125◦to 165◦. Similar to the day 5, cellular alignment is
more evident in samples cultured in diﬀerentiation media at day 7. For
samples cultured in diﬀerentiation media, 60% of myotubes were aligned
in the range of 125◦to 165◦while for sample cultured in growth media,
only 49% of myotubes were aligned in this range (ﬁg 4.3).
4.1.3
Quantitative analysis of cell conﬂuency in non-patter-
ned cell-laden 3D hydrogels
The cell spreading is induced by F-actin polymerization. In order to eval-
uate the ability of our hydrogel to facilitate cell spreading, the cell con-
ﬂuency, percentage of area covered by adherent cell, was estimated with
quantiﬁcation of F-actin surface coverage. The samples were ﬂuorescently
stained with Alexa Fluor 488 Phalloidin dye for F-actin and hoechst dye
for nuclei, as discussed in section 3.4.2. Fluorescence images at diﬀerent
magniﬁcations were obtained to visualize the F-actin and then images at
20x magniﬁcation were analyzed by ImageJ software for the estimation of
F-actin surface coverage as an indicator of cell conﬂuency at day 1, 3, 5,
and 7 of culture in diﬀerent media (Gm and Dm) (ﬁg 4.4).
40
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 4
Figure 4.3: Analysis of cell alignment in non-patterned hydrogel (control). (a) By
assuming an elliptical shape as the nuclear shape, the degree of the nuclear alignment
of hoescht stained nuclei was deﬁned as the angle formed by the semi major axis
of elliptical nuclei with the vertical axis of reference frame. (b) Quantiﬁcation of
the cellular alignment showing randomly distribution of cell alignment on the day
1 and gradually cellular alignment becomes more apparent with time and changing
media from growth media (red color) into diﬀerentiation media (blue color). Samples
cultured in diﬀerentiation media had 60% of myotubes aligned in the range of 125◦
to 165◦on day 7
41
==PAGE:51==
Results
Figure 4.4: Fluorescence microscopy images of F-actin were stained with Phalloidin
(red) and cell nuclei were counterstained with hoescht (blue) within samples cultur-
ing in growth media and diﬀerentiation media at day 1, 3, 5 and 7 of culturing.
Quantitative analysis of the images at magniﬁcation 20x represents increasing of cell
conﬂunecy in time and changing media from Gm in to Dm. This diﬀerence in cell
conﬂuency for samples culturing in Gm and Dm is more evident at day 5 of culture.
The data are expressed as mean ± SD. Scale bar represents 20 µm.
Initial C2C12 cell spreading was observed after 24 hours of culturing.
However, the F-actin surface coverage was negligible at day 1. We found
that the F-actin surface coverage dramatically increased between day 5
and 7 of culture. This increasing is more evident for samples cultured in
Dm (ﬁg 4.4)
4.1.4
Quantiﬁcation of cellular alignment in micropatterned
cell-laden 3D hydrogels
Formation of unidirectionally aligned myotubes within the hydrogel was
studied by ﬂuorescent staining technique with Alexa Fluor 488 Phalloidin
dye for F-actin and hoechst dye for nuclei at day 1, 3, 5 and 7 of cell
culture, as was discussed in section 3.4.2. Thus, similar to section 4.1.2,
42
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 4
Figure 4.5: Topographical eﬀects on controlling of cellular orientation within samples
culturing in diﬀerent mediums (Dm and Gm) at day 1, 3, 5 and 7 of culture. After
day 3, samples were cultured in two diﬀerent culturing medium (Dm and Gm). Flu-
orescence images were obtained by staining with Phalloidin dye for F-actin (red) and
hoechst dye for nuclei (blue) at 20x magniﬁcation. Scale bar represents 20 µm.
ﬂuorescence images at diﬀerent magniﬁcations were obtained to visualize
the cellular orientation and then images at 20x magniﬁcation were analyzed
for quantiﬁcation of cellular alignment by ImageJ software as was described
in 3.4.2 (ﬁg 4.5).
For both culturing media, Gm and Dm, the global cellular alignment
in the micro-patterned hydrogels was directed along the long axis of pat-
tern and signiﬁcant cellular alignment was observed during the time of cell
culture. After 24 hours of culture, more than 35% of C2C12 myoblasts
became more actively elongated along the major axis of the rectangular
micro-constructs within hydrogel, while the cellular orientation was dis-
tributed randomly in the control samples. At day 3 of culture, 50% of cells
were elongated along the major axis of prefabricated pattern within hy-
drogel. The alignment was largely limited to the myoblasts in area of the
micropatterned hydrogel with higher cellular density (ﬁg: 4.6). At day 5
of culture, cells appeared in very aligned and elongated morphology along
the major axis of the rectangular micro-constructs. 56% of cellular nuclei
were elongated along the long axis of prefabricated pattern within hydrogel
43
==PAGE:53==
Results
cultured in the growth media, while the cellular alignment was 15% more
for samples cultured in the diﬀerentiation media (ﬁg: 4.6).
At day 7 of culture, elongated myoﬁbers completely cover the micropat-
terend hydrogel. More than 80% of myoﬁbers were elongated along the long
axis of prefabricated pattern within hydrogel. There was no signiﬁcant dif-
ference between the samples cultured in growth media and diﬀerentiated
media with respect to cellular alignment (ﬁg: 4.6).
4.1.5
Myosin heavy chains area coverage in non-patterned
samples
One of the major components of the sarcomere, myosin heavy chain pro-
tein (MyHC), were analyzed as a marker of myogenesis. We found that the
percentage of total area covered by MyHC-positive cells increased between
days 5 and 7 of culture (ﬁg 4.7). This result indicates that the diﬀerenti-
ation of C2C12 myoblasts into myotubes mostly occurred during the ﬁrst
7 days of culture. Interestingly, the myotubes area coverage for control
samples culturing in diﬀerentiation media was greater than that in con-
trol samples culturing in growth media at day 5. After 7 days of culture,
there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in MyHCs area coverage for both control
conditions (ﬁg 4.7).
4.1.6
Myotube morphology
Myotube morphology in non-patterned cell-laden 3D hydrogels
To further assess myotube formation, we measured and compared the my-
otube morphology (diameter, length and aspect ratio) within non-patterned
hydrogel (control samples) cultured in diﬀerent culture medium. The con-
trol samples were immuno-ﬂuorescently stained against myosin heavy chain
protein, an indicator of myotube formation, at day 5 and 7 of cell culture, as
discussed in section 3.4.3. Immuno-ﬂuorescence images at diﬀerent magni-
ﬁcations were obtained to visualize the myosin heavy chain protein. Then,
morphological properties of 15 myotubes at 20x magniﬁcation were ana-
lyzed using ImageJ software. As we expected, the mean diameter of the
myotubes in non-patterned sample cultured in diﬀerentiation media was
larger than the same value in the sample cultured in growth media at
day 5 (12.99 ± 2.27 µm and 12.44 ± 1.05 µm respectively) but still the
diﬀerences is not signiﬁcant. By day 7 of culturing, the mean diameter
of myotube decreased in both non-patterned samples cultured in diﬀeren-
tiation and growth media. However, the mean diameter of myotubes in
control sample cultured in diﬀerentiation is still larger than that in control
44
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 4
Figure 4.6: Analysis of cell alignment in micropatterned hydrogel. (a) By consider-
ing an elliptical shape as the nuclear shape, the degree of the nuclear alignment of
hoescht stained nuclei was deﬁned as the angle formed by the semi major axis of
elliptical nuclei with the long axis of prefabricated pattern within hydrogel. (b) For
the quantiﬁcation of cellular alignment, the degree of alignment was deﬁned as the
mean percentage of aligned cell nuclei directed along the major axis of the rectan-
gular microconstructs (within 10◦of preferred nuclear orientation). The degree of
cellular alignment within micropatterned hydrogel were signiﬁcantly more than the
corresponding value in the control sample.
The cellular alignment becomes more
apparent in time and by changing media from Gm to Dm.
45
==PAGE:55==
Results
Figure 4.7: Fluorescence microscopy images of myosin heavy chain (MyHC)-positive
myotubes (red) and cell nuclei were counterstained with Hoescht (blue) within samples
cultured in Gm and Dm at day 5 and 7 of culture. Quantitative image analysis of
MyHC in time in diﬀerent mediums, Gm or Dm, to study myogenic diﬀerentiation
in engineered skeletal muscle constructs. The MyHC expression were more evident
during time and by changing culture medium from growth media to diﬀerentiating
media. The data are expressed as mean ± SD. Scale bar represents 20 µm.
46
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 4
sample cultured in growth media (12.32 ± 2.08 µm and 11.66 ± 1.44 µm
respectively) (ﬁg 4.8).
Figure 4.8: Representative ﬂuorescence images of myosin heavy chain protein (red
color) within control sample at day 5 and 7 of culturing. Using morphological prop-
erties of 15 myotubes at 20x magniﬁcation. (a) Myotube diameter as a function of
time. Decrease of myotube’s diameter in time for both sample culturing in Dm and
Gm. (b) Myotube length as a function of time. Increase of myotube length in time.
(c) Aspect ratio of myotubes.
The data are expressed as mean ± SD. Scale bar
represents 20 µm.
The myotube length increased until day 7 of culture, with the mean
myotube length in non-patterned samples cultured in diﬀerentiation media
larger than that in non-patterned sample cultured in growth media ( 305.78
± 72.14 µm and 265.39 ± 98.52 µm respectively). Due to increases in
myotube length and decreases in myotube diameter from day 5, the aspect
ratio increased for both control samples cultured in Dm and Gm at day 7
of culture ( 25.04 ± 5.61 µm and 23.60 ± 10.53 µm respectively (ﬁg 4.8).
4.1.7
Myotube morphology in micropatterned cell-laden 3D
hydrogels
To assess how the microfabricated topography within the hydrogel altered
myotube morphology, we collected 10 myotubes in three ﬂuorescent images
at 20x magniﬁcation. Then, the diameter and length of each myotube were
measured by ImageJ software.
The mean diameter of the myotubes in the micropatterned sample cul-
tured in diﬀerentiation media was larger than that in micropatterend sam-
47
==PAGE:57==
Results
Figure 4.9: Representative Fluorescence images of myosin heavy chain protein (red
color) within micropatterned sample at day 5 and 7 of culturing. Using morphological
properties of 15 myotubes at 20x magniﬁcation. (a) Myotube diameter as a function
of time. Increasing of myotube’s diameter in time for both sample culturing in Dm
and Gm. (b) Myotube length as a function of time. It remained constant for day 5
and 7 of culturing for both culturing medium. (c) Aspect ratio of myotubes. The
data are expressed as mean ± SD. Scale bar represents 20 µm.
ple cultured in growth media at day 5 (12.92 ± 2.19 µm and 12.09 ± 1.03
µm). By day 7 of culturing, the mean diameter of myotubes were increased
in sample cultured in both diﬀerentiation media and growth media (13.56
± 1.42 µm and 13.52 ± 0.72 µm respectively) (ﬁg 4.9). This result can be
ascribed to a better pre-alignment of myoblasts within the gel enhancing
their lateral fusion [92].
No signiﬁcant diﬀerences in myotubes lengths between the micropat-
terned samples cultured in diﬀerentiation media and cultured in growth
media were found from day 5 to day 7 of culture (321.06 ± 4.30 µm and
312.65 ± 10.69 µm at day 7 respectively) (ﬁg 4.9). Consequently, the as-
pect ratio of myotubes decreased from day 5 of culture due to increase in
myotube diameter and constant myotube length during time (ﬁg 4.9).
48
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 5
Discussion
The formation of highly organized myotubes plays a crucial role in the gen-
eration of contractile force ([104]). Thus, ﬁnding a proper biomaterial that
can eﬀectively support myoblasts to organize into highly aligned myotubes
is fundamental to replicate the biological function of skeletal muscle tissue
in vitro.
This study provides novel biological cues on a recently established and
characterized functional hydrogel with high potential, Methacrylated Pan-
otan Exopolysacharide (PAMA21), for the generation of skeletal muscle
tissue networks consisting of densely packed and highly aligned myotubes.
We prepared a set of cell-laden (PAMA21 + Gelin-s hydrogels) with a
compressive modulus in the range of 12.97 kPa ± 4.2. To investigate the
eﬀectiveness of the hydrogels on myotube formation, diﬀerent analyses in
term of cell viability, cellular alignment and diﬀerentiation were done.
Furthermore, in this study we identiﬁed the eﬀect of diﬀerent culture
medias, diﬀerentiation media and growth media, on cellular alignment, dif-
ferentiation and myotube morphology within the hydrogel. We also used
a photolithography-based method to pattern cell-laden hydrogels, thus as-
sessing how diﬀerent microenviornments alter the behavior and fate of
myoblasts in terms of their alignment, elongation, and diﬀerentiation in to
myotubes.
The comparative data of cell viability indicates that Gelin-s may serve
as an essential agent for improving cell viability within our hydrogels.
Gelin-s, thiol-modiﬁed gelatin, improves cellular viability by providing cell
attachment sites.
Firstly, results demonstrate that the cellular alignment within control
sample started after day 3 and this alignment were more evident over time
==PAGE:59==
Discussion
and by changing culture medium from growth media to diﬀerentiating me-
dia. In addition, the myotubes formation in control sample was studied
by Immunostaining against myosin protein. The myotube formation was
analyzed in term of surface coverage and morphology (diameter,length and
aspect ratio) at day 5 and 7 of culture. A major ﬁnding was that diﬀer-
entiation of myoblasts occurred in samples cultured in growth media at
day 5 and 7 of culture, probably because a high cellular density inﬂuences
the cell-cell contact, inducing cell fusion and myogenesis ([105]). However,
the surface coverage by myotubes is higher in control samples cultured in
diﬀerentiation media. The diﬀerences in surface coverage by myotube is
more visible at day 5 of culture. Importantly, the myotube in the sam-
ples cultured in diﬀerentiation media are of a better quality than those in
sample cultured in growth media. Indeed, the myogenesis in the samples
cultured in growth media may be ascribed to the cellular fusion induced
by cell-cell contact, while the myogenesis in the samples cultured in diﬀer-
entiation media is mainly due to to the composition of the culture medium
itself.
Secondly, cellular alignment within micropatterned sample was evident
after 24 hours of culture, while myoblasts were distributed randomly in con-
trol sample. This alignment is a result of cellular response to physical sig-
nals in their microenviornment such as surface topography and substrate
stiﬀness ([106] ; [103]).
Similarly, this alignment was also more visible
during time and by changing culture medium from growth media to dif-
ferentiating media. Interestingly, the used micropatterning technique was
also found to improve myotube morphology such as diameter and length
as well as cellular alignment during time. By comparing the results, we
founded that myotube diameter was decreased in control samples at day 7
of culture, while it increased in the micropatterend samples (ﬁg 5.1).
50
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 5
Figure 5.1: Comparison of the myotube diameters in the control samples and mi-
cropatterend samples at day 7 of culture. The myotube diameter was decreased in
control samples at day 7 of culture, while it increased in the micropatterend sam-
ples.The data are expressed as mean ± SD.
51
==PAGE:61==
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 6
Conclusions
In summary, we used a PAMA21-based hydrogel cross-linked with UV ir-
radiation as a substrate for skeletal muscle tissue engineering. Our results
suggest this hydrogel leads to the formation of densely packed and highly
aligned myotubes from C2C12 myoblast cell lines in diﬀerent cultured me-
dia (Dm and Gm). In addition, we used a Photolithography technique to
improve myotube alignment and morphology by fabricating topographical
features, parallel grooves, within our hydrogels.
Altogether, the repre-
sented PAMA-based hydrogel in this study sounds promising to be used
as a scaﬀold for the skeletal muscle tissue engineering.
==PAGE:63==
==PAGE:64==
Bibliography
[1] E. Alsberg, E. E. Hill, and D. J. Mooney. Craniofacial tissue engi-
neering, 2001.
[2] C.A. Diedwardo, P. Petrosko, T.O. Acarturk, P.A. Dimilia, W.A.
Laframboise, and P.C. Johnson. Muscle tissue engineering. Clinics
in Plastic Surgery, 1999.
[3] F S Tedesco, A Dellavalle, J Diaz-Manera, G Messina, and G Cossu.
Repairing skeletal muscle: regenerative potential of skeletal muscle
stem cells. J Clin Invest, 2010.
[4] Lingjun Rao, Ying Qian, Alastair Khodabukus, Thomas Ribar, and
Nenad Bursac.
Engineering human pluripotent stem cells into a
functional skeletal muscle tissue. Nature Communications, 2018.
[5] Geoﬀrey M Cooper. The Cell: A Molecular Approach 2nd Edition.
2000.
[6] Coen A.C. Ottenheijm, Henk Granzier, and Siegfried Labeit. The
sarcomeric protein nebulin: Another multifunctio giant in charge of
muscle strength optimization, 2012.
[7] Louise J. Beaton, Mark A. Tarnopolsky, and Stuart M. Phillips.
Contraction-induced muscle damage in humans following calcium
channel blocker administration. Journal of Physiology, 2002.
[8] Ioannis G. Fatouros and Athanasios Z. Jamurtas. Insights into the
molecular etiology of exercise-induced inﬂammation: Opportunities
for optimizing performance, 2016.
[9] Eric P. Hoﬀman, Robert H. Brown, and Louis M. Kunkel.
Dys-
trophin: The protein product of the duchenne muscular dystrophy
locus. Cell, 1987.
55
==PAGE:65==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[10] Kenneth Saladin. Anatomy & Physiology: The Unity of Form and
Function. Anatomy & Physiology: The Unity of Form and Function,
2014.
[11] Friedhelm Bladt, Dieter Riethmacher, Stefan Isenmann, Adriano
Aguzzi, and Carmen Birchmeier.
Essential role for the c-met re-
ceptor in the migration of myogenic precursor cells into the limb
bud. Nature, 1995.
[12] Marita A. Wallace, David C. Hughes, and Keith Baar. mTORC1
in the Control of Myogenesis and Adult Skeletal Muscle Mass.
Molecules to Medicine with mTOR, pages 37–56, jan 2016.
[13] J. Lu, R. Webb, J. A. Richardson, and E. N. Olson. MyoR: A muscle-
restricted basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that antagonizes
the actions of MyoD. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences, 1999.
[14] C. Florian Bentzinger, Julia Von Maltzahn, and Michael A. Rudnicki.
Extrinsic regulation of satellite cell speciﬁcation, 2010.
[15] M J Duxson and Y Usson. Cellular insertion of primary and sec-
ondary myotubes in embryonic rat muscles.
Development (Cam-
bridge, England), 1989.
[16] A. Shainberg, G. Yagil, and D. Yaﬀe. Control of myogenesis in vitro
by Ca2+concentration in nutrittonal medium.
Experimental Cell
Research, 1969.
[17] Michelle K. Tu, Jacqueline B. Levin, Andrew M. Hamilton, and
Laura N. Borodinsky. Calcium signaling in skeletal muscle devel-
opment, maintenance and regeneration, 2016.
[18] Ronald J. Przybylski, Robert G. MacBride, and Albert C. Kirby.
Calcium regulation of skeletal myogenesis. I. Cell content critical
to myotube formation. In Vitro Cellular & Developmental Biology,
1989.
[19] Bret B. Friday, Valerie Horsley, and Grace K. Pavlath. Calcineurin
activity is required for the initiation of skeletal muscle diﬀerentiation.
Journal of Cell Biology, 2000.
[20] Lei Wei, Wei Zhou, Jeﬀrey D. Croissant, Finn Erik Johansen, Ron
Prywes, Ashok Balasubramanyam, and Robert J. Schwartz. RhoA
56
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 6
signaling via serum response factor plays an obligatory role in myo-
genic diﬀerentiation. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 1998.
[21] Spiros
Vlahopoulos,
Warren
E.
Zimmer,
Guido
Jenster,
Narasimhaswamy S. Belaguli, Steven P. Balk, Albert O. Brinkmann,
Rainer B. Lanz, Vassilis C. Zoumpourlis, and Robert J. Schwartz.
Recruitment of the androgen receptor via serum response factor
facilitates expression of a myogenic gene.
Journal of Biological
Chemistry, 2005.
[22] Bodo Christ and Charles P. Ordahl. Early stages of chick somite
development, 1995.
[23] J. Manuel Hern´andez-Hern´andez, Estela G. Garc´ıa-Gonz´alez, Car-
oline E. Brun, and Michael A. Rudnicki. The myogenic regulatory
factors, determinants of muscle development, cell identity and regen-
eration. Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology, 72:10–18, dec
2017.
[24] Ava E. Brent, Ronen Schweitzer, and Cliﬀord J. Tabin. A somitic
compartment of tendon progenitors. Cell, 2003.
[25] William James Scott William James Larsen, Lawrence S. Sherman,
S. Steven Potter. Chapter 5. Mesoderm formation / segmentation.
Human Embryology, 3rd Edition, 2001.
[26] R. Ben-Yair.
Lineage analysis of the avian dermomyotome sheet
reveals the existence of single cells with both dermal and muscle
progenitor fates. Development, 2005.
[27] J´erˆome Gros, Marie Manceau, Virginie Thom´e, and Christophe Mar-
celle. A common somitic origin for embryonic muscle progenitors and
satellite cells. Nature, 2005.
[28] Marie Manceau, J´erˆome Gros, Kathleen Savage, Virginie Thom´e,
Alexandra McPherron, Bruce Paterson, and Christophe Marcelle.
Myostatin promotes the terminal diﬀerentiation of embryonic muscle
progenitors. Genes and Development, 2008.
[29] C. Florian Bentzinger, Yu Xin Wang, and Michael A. Rudnicki.
Building muscle: molecular regulation of myogenesis., 2012.
[30] Nicolas A Dumont, Yu Xin Wang, and Michael A Rudnicki. Intrinsic
and extrinsic mechanisms regulating satellite cell function. Develop-
ment (Cambridge, England), 2015.
57
==PAGE:67==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[31] Alexander Mauro. Satellite cell of skeletal muscle ﬁbers. The Journal
of biophysical and biochemical cytology, 1961.
[32] Stefano Biressi, Mario Molinaro, and Giulio Cossu. Cellular hetero-
geneity during vertebrate skeletal muscle development, 2007.
[33] Frank E. Stockdale. Myogenic cell lineages, 1992.
[34] Shihuan Kuang, Mark A. Gillespie, and Michael A. Rudnicki. Niche
Regulation of Muscle Satellite Cell Self-Renewal and Diﬀerentiation,
2008.
[35] S.B.P. Charg´e and M.A. Rudnicki. Cellular and molecular regulation
of muscle regeneration. Physiological Reviews, 2004.
[36] N Itoh, T Mima, and T Mikawa. Loss of ﬁbroblast growth factor
receptors is necessary for terminal diﬀerentiation of embryonic limb
muscle. Development (Cambridge, England), 1996.
[37] D J Milasincic, M R Calera, S R Farmer, and P F Pilch. Stimulation
of C2C12 myoblast growth by basic ﬁbroblast growth factor and
insulin-like growth factor 1 can occur via mitogen-activated protein
kinase-dependent and -independent pathways. Molecular and cellular
biology, 1996.
[38] Bradley Pawlikowski, Thomas Orion Vogler, Katherine Gadek, and
Bradley B. Olwin. Regulation of skeletal muscle stem cells by ﬁbrob-
last growth factors, 2017.
[39] William M. Wood, Shervin Etemad, Masakazu Yamamoto, and
David J. Goldhamer. MyoD-expressing progenitors are essential for
skeletal myogenesis and satellite cell development.
Developmental
Biology, 2013.
[40] Lina Kassar-Duchossoy, Barbara Gayraud-Morel, Danielle Gom`es,
Didier Rocancourt,
Margaret Buckingham,
Vasily Shinin,
and
Shahragim Tajbakhsh. Mrf4 determines skeletal muscle identity in
Myf5:Myod double-mutant mice. Nature, 2004.
[41] Lina Kassar-Duchossoy, Ellen Giacone, Barbara Gayraud-Morel,
Aur´elie
Jory,
Danielle
Gom`es,
and
Shahragim
Tajbakhsh.
Pax3/Pax7 mark a novel population of primitive myogenic cells dur-
ing development. Genes and Development, 2005.
58
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 6
[42] Paul Hasty, Allan Bradley, Julia H. Morris, Diane G. Edmondson,
Judith M. Venuti, Eric N. Olson, and William H. Klein.
Muscle
deﬁciency and neonatal death in mice with a targeted mutation in
the myogenin gene. Nature, 1993.
[43] Yoko Nabeshima, Kazunori Hanaoka, Michiko Hayasaka, Eisaku Es-
uml, Shaowei Li, Ikuya Nonaka, and Yo Ichi Nabeshima. Myogenin
gene disruption results in perinatal lethality because of severe muscle
defect. Nature, 1993.
[44] Judith M. Venuti, Julia Hsi Morris, Jay L. Vivian, Eric N. Olson,
and William H. Klein. Myogenin is required for late but not early
aspects of myogenesis during mouse development. Journal of Cell
Biology, 1995.
[45] Amy J. Wagers and Irina M. Conboy. Cellular and molecular signa-
tures of muscle regeneration: Current concepts and controversies in
adult myogenesis, 2005.
[46] J. G. Tidball and S. A. Villalta. Regulatory interactions between
muscle and the immune system during muscle regeneration. Am J
Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol, 2010.
[47] Thomas Laumonier and Jacques Menetrey.
Muscle injuries and
strategies for improving their repair. Journal of Experimental Or-
thopaedics, 2016.
[48] J. M. McClung, J. M. Davis, and J. A. Carson. Ovarian hormone
status and skeletal muscle inﬂammation during recovery from disuse
in rats. Experimental Physiology, 2007.
[49] a. Anwar, A A Zahid, K J Scheidegger, M Brink, and P Delafontaine.
Tumor necrosis factor-alpha regulates insulin-like growth factor-1
and insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3 expression in vas-
cular smooth muscle. Circulation, 2002.
[50] James G Tidball. Inﬂammatory processes in muscle injury and re-
pair.
American journal of physiology. Regulatory, integrative and
comparative physiology, 2005.
[51] Tero A.H. J¨arvinen, Markku J¨arvinen, and Hannu Kalimo. Regen-
eration of injured skeletal muscle after the injury, 2013.
[52] Alberto Mantovani, Antonio Sica, and Massimo Locati. Macrophage
polarization comes of age, 2005.
59
==PAGE:69==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[53] Ludovic Arnold, Adeline Henry, Fran¸coise Poron, Yasmine Baba-
Amer, Nico van Rooijen, Anne Plonquet, Romain K. Gherardi, and
B´en´edicte Chazaud. Inﬂammatory monocytes recruited after skeletal
muscle injury switch into antiinﬂammatory macrophages to support
myogenesis. The Journal of Experimental Medicine, 2007.
[54] Stefano Schiaﬃno and Terence Partridge. Skeletal Muscle Repair and
Regeneration. 2008.
[55] G Cittadella Vigodarzere and S Mantero. Skeletal muscle tissue en-
gineering: strategies for volumetric constructs. Front Physiol, 2014.
[56] J J Ross, M J Duxson, and A J Harris. Neural determination of mus-
cle ﬁbre numbers in embryonic rat lumbrical muscles. Development,
1987.
[57] Akira Ito, Yasunori Yamamoto, Masanori Sato, Kazushi Ikeda,
Masahiro Yamamoto, Hideaki Fujita, Eiji Nagamori, Yoshinori
Kawabe, and Masamichi Kamihira. Induction of functional tissue-
engineered skeletal muscle constructs by deﬁned electrical stimula-
tion. Scientiﬁc Reports, 2014.
[58] Dennis Discher, Cheng Dong, Jeﬀrey J. Fredberg, Farshid Guilak,
Donald Ingber, Paul Janmey, Roger D. Kamm, Geert W. Schmid-
Sch¨onbein, and Sheldon Weinbaum. Biomechanics: Cell research and
applications for the next decade. Annals of Biomedical Engineering,
2009.
[59] Simon W Jones, Roger J Hill, Philip A Krasney, Barbara O’Conner,
Nicholas Peirce, and Paul L Greenhaﬀ. Disuse atrophy and exercise
rehabilitation in humans profoundly aﬀects the expression of genes
associated with the regulation of skeletal muscle mass. FASEB jour-
nal : oﬃcial publication of the Federation of American Societies for
Experimental Biology, 2004.
[60] Wylie W. Ahmed, Tobias Wolfram, Alexandra M. Goldyn, Kristina
Bruellhoﬀ, Borja Arag¨u´es Rioja, Martin M¨oller, Joachim P. Spatz,
Taher A. Saif, J¨urgen Groll, and Ralf Kemkemer. Myoblast mor-
phology and organization on biochemically micro-patterned hydrogel
coatings under cyclic mechanical strain. Biomaterials, 2010.
[61] Neill J. Turner and Stephen F. Badylak. Regeneration of skeletal
muscle, 2012.
60
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 6
[62] Troy Alan Hornberger, Kunal Balu Sukhija, and Shu Chien. Regu-
lation of mTOR by mechanically induced signaling events in skeletal
muscle, 2006.
[63] Robert S. Hikida. Aging Changes in Satellite Cells and Their Func-
tions. Current Aging Sciencee, 2011.
[64] Daniel Howard, Lee D. Buttery, Kevin M. Shakesheﬀ, and Scott J.
Roberts.
Tissue engineering: Strategies, stem cells and scaﬀolds,
2008.
[65] Molly N Pantelic and Lisa M Larkin. Stem Cells for Skeletal Muscle
Tissue Engineering. Tissue engineering. Part B, Reviews, 2018.
[66] Adam M Feintisch and Ramazi Datiashvili. Interesting Case Series
Lower Extremity Reconstruction. Feintisch and Datiashvili. Lower
Extremity Reconstruction., 2013.
[67] Gabi Shefer, Daniel P. Van de Mark, Joshua B. Richardson, and Zi-
pora Yablonka-Reuveni. Satellite-cell pool size does matter: Deﬁning
the myogenic potency of aging skeletal muscle. Developmental Biol-
ogy, 2006.
[68] Charlotte A. Collins, Peter S. Zammit, Ana P´erez Ruiz, Jennifer E.
Morgan, and Terence A. Partridge. A Population of Myogenic Stem
Cells That Survives Skeletal Muscle Aging. Stem Cells, 2007.
[69] Kenneth Day, Gabi Shefer, Andrew Shearer, and Zipora Yablonka-
Reuveni. The depletion of skeletal muscle satellite cells with age is
concomitant with reduced capacity of single progenitors to produce
reserve progeny. Developmental Biology, 2010.
[70] R Langer and J P Vacanti. Tissue engineering. Science, 1993.
[71] Jonathan M Fishman, Paolo De Coppi, Martin J Elliott, Anthony
Atala, Martin A Birchall, and Paolo Macchiarini. Airway tissue en-
gineering. Expert Opinion on Biological Therapy, 2011.
[72] Peggy Lange, Jonathan M. Fishman, Martin J. Elliott, Paolo De
Coppi, and Martin A. Birchall.
What can regenerative medicine
oﬀer for infants with laryngotracheal agenesis?, 2011.
[73] G.H.-F. Yam, G.P. Williams, M. Setiawan, N.Z.B.M. Yusoﬀ, X.-W.
Lee, H.M. Htoon, L. Zhou, M. Fuest, and J.S. Mehta. Nerve regener-
ation by human corneal stromal keratocytes and stromal ﬁbroblasts.
Scientiﬁc Reports, 2017.
61
==PAGE:71==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[74] Jonathan Mark Fishman, Athanasios Tyraskis, Panagiotis Magh-
soudlou, Luca Urbani, Giorgia Totonelli, Martin A. Birchall, and
Paolo De Coppi. Skeletal Muscle Tissue Engineering: Which Cell to
Use? Tissue Engineering Part B: Reviews, 2013.
[75] Merel Koning, Martin C. Harmsen, Marja J. A. van Luyn, and Paul
M. N. Werker. Current opportunities and challenges in skeletal mus-
cle tissue engineering. Journal of Tissue Engineering and Regenera-
tive Medicine, 2009.
[76] Kevin D. Costa, Eun Jung Lee, and Jeﬀrey W. Holmes.
Creat-
ing Alignment and Anisotropy in Engineered Heart Tissue: Role of
Boundary Conditions in a Model Three-Dimensional Culture Sys-
tem. Tissue Engineering, 2003.
[77] Jason A. Burdick and Glenn D. Prestwich. Hyaluronic acid hydrogels
for biomedical applications. Advanced Materials, 2011.
[78] Sujata K. Bhatia. Biomaterials for clinical applications. 2010.
[79] M. C. Cushing and K. S. Anseth. MATERIALS SCIENCE: Hydrogel
Cell Cultures. Science, 2007.
[80] Yao Fu, Kedi Xu, Xiaoxiang Zheng, Alan J. Giacomin, Adam W.
Mix, and Weiyuan J. Kao. 3D cell entrapment in crosslinked thio-
lated gelatin-poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate hydrogels. Biomateri-
als, 2012.
[81] J. Garc´ıa, E. Ruiz-Dur´antez, and N.E. Valderruten. Interpenetrat-
ing polymer networks hydrogels of chitosan and poly(2-hydroxyethyl
methacrylate) for controlled release of quetiapine.
Reactive and
Functional Polymers, 117:52–59, aug 2017.
[82] W. E. Hennink and C. F. van Nostrum. Novel crosslinking methods
to design hydrogels, 2012.
[83] Junmin Zhu and Roger E. Marchant. Design properties of hydrogel
tissue-engineering scaﬀolds, 2011.
[84] J Berger, M Reist, J.M. Mayer, O Felt, N.A. Peppas, and R Gurny.
Structure and interactions in covalently and ionically crosslinked chi-
tosan hydrogels for biomedical applications.
European Journal of
Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics, 2004.
62
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 6
[85] Silvia M. Mihaila, Akhilesh K. Gaharwar, Rui L. Reis, Alexan-
dra P. Marques, Manuela E. Gomes, and Ali Khademhosseini. Pho-
tocrosslinkable kappa-carrageenan hydrogels for tissue engineering
applications. Advanced Healthcare Materials, 2013.
[86] Jan  Lukaszczyk, Monika ´Smiga, et al. Evaluation of oligo(ethylene
glycol) dimethacrylates eﬀects on the properties of new biodegrad-
able bone cement compositions. Macromolecular Bioscience, 2005.
[87] Zheng Shu Xiao, Shama Ahmad, Yanchun Liu, and Glenn D. Prest-
wich.
Synthesis and evaluation of injectable, in situ crosslinkable
synthetic extracellular matrices for tissue engineering.
Journal of
Biomedical Materials Research - Part A, 2006.
[88] Xiao Zheng Shu, Yanchun Liu, Fabio Palumbo, and Glenn D. Prest-
wich. Disulﬁde-crosslinked hyaluronan-gelatin hydrogel ﬁlms: A co-
valent mimic of the extracellular matrix for in vitro cell growth.
Biomaterials, 2003.
[89] Matthew Parlato, Sarah Reichert, Neal Barney, and William L. Mur-
phy. Poly(ethylene glycol) hydrogels with adaptable mechanical and
degradation properties for use in biomedical applications. Macro-
molecular Bioscience, 2014.
[90] Sudhir Khetan and Jason A. Burdick. Patterning hydrogels in three
dimensions towards controlling cellular interactions, 2011.
[91] B Starly, R Chang, and W Sun. UV-Photolithography fabrication of
poly-ethylene glycol hydrogels encapsulated with hepatocytes. Pro-
ceedings of the 17th Annual Solid Freeform Fabrication Symposium,
University of Texas at Austin, 2006.
[92]
[93] Yi Zhao, Hansong Zeng, Jin Nam, and Sudha Agarwal.
Fabrica-
tion of skeletal muscle constructs by topographic activation of cell
alignment. Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 2009.
[94] Craig K. Griﬃth, Cheryl Miller, Richard C.A. Sainson, Jay W.
Calvert, Noo Li Jeon, Christopher C.W. Hughes, and Steven C.
George. Diﬀusion Limits of an in Vitro Thick Prevascularized Tissue.
Tissue Engineering, 2005.
63
==PAGE:73==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[95] Mirella Meregalli, Andrea Farini, Clementina Sitzia, and Yvan Tor-
rente. Advancements in stem cells treatment of skeletal muscle wast-
ing, 2014.
[96] Julie Harker, Kim J. Reid, Geertruida E. Bekkering, Eliane Kellen,
Malgorzata M. Bala, Rob Riemsma, Gill Worthy, Kate Misso, and
Jos Kleijnen. Epidemiology of chronic pain in Denmark and Sweden,
2012.
[97] C T Vangsness Jr., P R Kurzweil, J R Lieberman, C T Vangsness
Jr, P R Kurzweil, and J R Lieberman. Restoring articular cartilage
in the knee. American Journal of Orthopedics (Chatham, Nj), 2004.
[98] Matthew A. Wagner, William H. Marks, and Sujata K. Bhatia. Hy-
drogel Encapsulation to Improve Cell Viability during Syringe Needle
Flow. Journal of Long-Term Eﬀects of Medical Implants, 2014.
[99] F. S. Kamelger, R. Marksteiner, E. Margreiter, G. Klima, G. Wech-
selberger, S. Hering, and H. Piza.
A comparative study of three
diﬀerent biomaterials in the engineering of skeletal muscle using a
rat animal model. Biomaterials, 2004.
[100] Brian C. Syverud, Keith W. VanDusen, and Lisa M. Larkin. Growth
factors for skeletal muscle tissue engineering, 2016.
[101] Ji Hoon Kim, Peng Jin, Rui Duan, and Elizabeth H. Chen. Mecha-
nisms of myoblast fusion during muscle development, 2015.
[102] Colleen M. Guerin and Sunita G. Kramer. Cytoskeletal remodeling
during myotube assembly and guidance: Coordinating the actin and
microtubule networks, 2009.
[103] Joseph L. Charest, Andr´es J. Garc´ıa, and William P. King.
My-
oblast alignment and diﬀerentiation on cell culture substrates with
microscale topography and model chemistries. Biomaterials, 2007.
[104] I. B. Bischofs and U. S. Schwarz. Cell organization in soft media due
to active mechanosensing. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 2003.
[105] Kanako Tanaka, Kaori Sato, Tomomi Yoshida, Toshio Fukuda, Kenji
Hanamura, Nobuhiko Kojima, Tomoaki Shirao, Takashi Yanagawa,
and Hideomi Watanabe. Evidence for cell density aﬀecting C2C12
myogenesis: Possible regulation of myogenesis by cell-cell communi-
cation. Muscle and Nerve, 2011.
64
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 6
[106] Dennis E. Discher, Paul Janmey, and Yu Li Wang. Tissue cells feel
and respond to the stiﬀness of their substrate, 2005.
[107] C. W. Smith, J. G. Klaasmeyer, J. B. Edeal, T. L. Woods, and S. J.
Jones. Eﬀects of serum deprivation, insulin and dexamethasone on
polysome percentages in C2C12 myoblasts and diﬀerentiating my-
oblasts. Tissue and Cell, 1999.
[108] Courtney a Powell, Beth L Smiley, John Mills, and Herman H Van-
denburgh. Mechanical stimulation improves tissue-engineered human
skeletal muscle.
American journal of physiology. Cell physiology,
2002.
[109] Mikel H. Snow. Myogenic cell formation in regenerating rat skele-
tal muscle injured by mincing II. An autoradiographic study. The
Anatomical Record, 1977.
[110] Fr´ed´eric Relaix,
Didier Montarras,
St´ephane Zaﬀran,
Barbara
Gayraud-Morel, Didier Rocancourt, Shahragim Tajbakhsh, Ahmed
Mansouri, Ana Cumano, and Margaret Buckingham. Pax3 and Pax7
have distinct and overlapping functions in adult muscle progenitor
cells. Journal of Cell Biology, 2006.
[111] J. Schienda, K. A. Engleka, S. Jun, M. S. Hansen, J. A. Epstein,
C. J. Tabin, L. M. Kunkel, and G. Kardon. Somitic origin of limb
muscle satellite and side population cells. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 2006.
[112] Fr´ed´eric Relaix, Didier Rocancourt, Ahmed Mansouri, and Margaret
Buckingham. A Pax3/Pax7-dependent population of skeletal muscle
progenitor cells. Nature, 2005.
[113] Charles E. Murry, Robert W. Wiseman, Stephen M. Schwartz, and
Stephen D. Hauschka. Skeletal myoblast transplantation for repair
of myocardial necrosis. Journal of Clinical Investigation, 1996.
[114] M G Havenith, R Visser, J M Schrijvers-van Schendel, and F T
Bosman. Muscle ﬁber typing in routinely processed skeletal muscle
with monoclonal antibodies. Histochemistry, 1990.
[115] Giulio Cossu, Stefano C Previtali, Sara Napolitano, et al.
Intra-
arterial transplantation of HLA-matched donor mesoangioblasts in
Duchenne muscular dystrophy. EMBO Molecular Medicine, 2016.
65
==PAGE:75==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[116] Vicente Andr´es and Kenneth Walsh. Myogenin expression, cell cycle
withdrawal, and phenotypic diﬀerentiation are temporally separable
events that precede cell fusion upon myogenesis.
Journal of Cell
Biology, 1996.
[117] Alastair Khodabukus, Neel Prabhu, Jason Wang, and Nenad Bur-
sac. In Vitro Tissue-Engineered Skeletal Muscle Models for Studying
Muscle Physiology and Disease, 2018.
[118] Georgina E. Hollway and Peter D. Currie. Myotome meanderings.
Cellular morphogenesis and the making of muscle, 2003.
[119] Takeshi Endo.
Molecular mechanisms of skeletal muscle develop-
ment, regeneration, and osteogenic conversion, 2015.
[120] J. M. Rosiak and P. Ula´nski. Synthesis of hydrogels by irradiation
of polymers in aqueous solution. Radiation Physics and Chemistry,
1999.
[121] Min D. Tang, Andrew P. Golden, and Joe Tien. Molding of Three-
Dimensional Microstructures of Gels.
Journal of the American
Chemical Society, 2003.
[122] Esmaiel Jabbari and Samyra Nozari. Swelling behavior of acrylic acid
hydrogels prepared by γ-radiation crosslinking of polyacrylic acid in
aqueous solution. European Polymer Journal, 2000.
[123] Pinar Zorlutuna,
Nasim Annabi,
Gulden Camci-Unal,
Mehdi
Nikkhah, Jae Min Cha, Jason W. Nichol, Amir Manbachi, Hojae
Bae, Shaochen Chen, and Ali Khademhosseini. Microfabricated bio-
materials for engineering 3D tissues, 2012.
[124] Aurore L’honor´e, Jean-Fran¸cois Ouimette, et al. Pitx2 deﬁnes alter-
nate pathways acting through MyoD during limb and somitic myo-
genesis. Development (Cambridge, England), 2010.
[125] J Harker, K J Reid, G E Bekkering, E Kellen, M M Bala, R Riemsma,
G Worthy, K Misso, and J Kleijnen. Epidemiology of Chronic Pain
in Denmark and Sweden. Pain Res Treat, 2012.
[126] A. D. Bach, J. Stern-Straeter, J. P. Beier, H. Bannasch, and G. B.
Stark. Engineering of muscle tissue, 2003.
[127] Hiroshi Mizuno, Morikuni Tobita, and A. Cagri Uysal. Concise re-
view: Adipose-derived stem cells as a novel tool for future regenera-
tive medicine, 2012.
66
==PAGE:76==
[128] Timothy J. Hinterberger, David A. Sassoon, Simon J. Rhodes, and
Stephen F. Konieczny. Expression of the muscle regulatory factor
MRF4 during somite and skeletal myoﬁber development. Develop-
mental Biology, 1991.
[129] David Sassoon, Lyons G, Wright WE, Lin V, Lassar A, Weintraub
H, and Buckingham M. Expression of two myogenic regulator factors
myogenin and MyoD1 during mouse embryogensis. Nature, 1989.
[130] A. D. Bach, A. Arkudas, J. Tjiawi, E. Polykandriotis, U. Kneser,
R. E. Horch, and J. P. Beier. A new approach to tissue engineering
of vascularized skeletal muscle. Journal of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, 2006.
[131] Regis Doyonnas, Mark a LaBarge, Alessandra Sacco, Carol Charlton,
and Helen M Blau. Hematopoietic contribution to skeletal muscle
regeneration by myelomonocytic precursors. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 2004.
[132] Paul F. Petrasek, Shervanthi Homer-Vanniasinkam, and Paul M.
Walker. Determinants of ischemic injury to skeletal muscle. Journal
of Vascular Surgery, 1994.
[133] Jacob P. Mertens, Kristoﬀer B. Sugg, Jonah D. Lee, and Lisa M.
Larkin. Engineering muscle constructs for the creation of functional
engineered musculoskeletal tissue. Regenerative Medicine, 2014.
[134] S. Tajbakhsh.
Skeletal muscle stem cells in developmental versus
regenerative myogenesis. In Journal of Internal Medicine, 2009.
[135] Ilona S. Skerjanc, Helen Petropoulos, Alan G. Ridgeway, and Sharon
Wilton. Myocyte enhancer factor 2C and Nkx2-5 up-regulate each
other’s expression and initiate cardiomyogenesis in P19 cells. Journal
of Biological Chemistry, 1998.
[136] Charles N. Pagel and Terence A. Partridge. Chapter 12 The molec-
ular and cellular biology of skeletal muscle myogenesis: Practical
applications. Principles of Medical Biology, 11:229–259, jan 1998.
67
