==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Hydrogen Fueling Methods
Overall effi  ciency comparison between the MC method and the 
Lookup tables method for the optimization of hydrogen fueling, 
using dynamic simulations
Chronis Giannis Chochlidakis
September 2018
==PAGE:2==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Hydrogen Fueling Methods
Overall efficiency comparison between the MC method
and the Lookup tables method for the optimiza-
tion of hydrogen fueling, using dynamic simulations
Author
Chronis
-
Giannis
Chochlidakis
(s161057)
Supervisors
Erasmus
Damgaard
Rothuizen,
Researcher at DTU Mekanik
Qingfeng Li,
Professor at DTU Energi
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:3==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé
Building 404
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone (+45) 45 25 19 60
www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The need of global reduction of CO2 emissions is followed by the need of a zero-
emissions transportation sector. This results in a rise in numbers of BEVs and FCEVs
roaming the streets with the latter having projections of sales that go as far as more
than tenfold up than what they measure today. FCEVs, are more promising for high-
range automotive applications and the infrastructure for them is already underway in
many countries. Thus, the need for a fast, reliable and safe hydrogen fueling method
to be used in the aforementioned infrastructure arises.
This thesis concerns the two hydrogen fueling methods described in SAE-TIR
J2601 fueling protocols for light duty gaseous hydrogen surface vehicles. It tackles
the topic of their overall efficiency and performance comparison that is lacking in the
existing literature. This is achieved via dynamic simulations in an already existing
hydrogen fueling station system model library, in the Dymola software environment.
The MC method was implemented from scratch in the aforementioned station model
by following its description in the SAE protocol. Different simulations are performed
in an effort to evaluate the performance of the two different fueling methods under
various parameter changes such as ambient temperature, initial vehicle storage tank
pressure, communications or non communications fueling etc. The efficiency is evalu-
ated according to fueling time, State of Charge levels, total energy consumption and
total exergy destruction.
The results of the different simulations reveal the superiority of the lesser-used in
hydrogen stations MC method in terms of fueling times for each simulated scenarios.
The MC method proves up to 32.7% faster in certain simulations. It achieves SOC
levels that do not have major differences with the Lookup tables method (less than
1%), resulting in similar mass dispensed and mileage capacity for the FCEV. This
rapid, same SOC level, fueling comes at the cost of slightly more energy consump-
tion from the station in all three scenarios studied for energy/exergy analysis. The
energy consumption for the MC method can reach up to 6.9% more than that of the
Lookup tables method in cold and mild ambient temperature environments, but the
MC method is found to consume less energy when fueling in warmer environments.
Moreover, due to the higher pressure losses that the MC method yields (resulting
from the faster fueling), it struggles at delivering many consecutive fuelings, with
the studied station’s storage tanks setup, when these storage tanks are not restored
==PAGE:5==
ii
Abstract
from a compressor. The MC method is capable of performing only 5 consecutive
fuelings until a 50% SOC level is reached in the vehicle’s tank, where the Lookup
tables method’s slower fueling allows it for 7 consecutive, higher SOC level fuelings.
==PAGE:6==
Preface
This thesis is submitted as fulfillment of the requirements for the Masters degree in
Sustainable Energy, study line of Hydrogen and Fuel Cells.
This thesis was completed in a collaboration between the section of Thermal En-
ergy at the Department of Mechanical Engineering and the Department of Energy
Conversion and Storage, at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
The work in this project was conducted as part of the ”EUDP17-II: HyScale”
project [10] that aims to develop and demonstrate a new, 3rd generation 70MPa
fueling tank station product for rapid fueling of wide range of hydrogen vehicles, in
cooperation with NEL hydrogen A/S.
Kongens Lyngby, 04-09-2018
==PAGE:7==
iv
==PAGE:8==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to express my deep gratitude to my supervisor, Eras-
mus Damgaard Rothuizen, for his invaluable help and support throughout the project.
I would like to thank also Claus Due Sinding from Nel Hydrogen for some really
constructive conversations on real-life station storage tank dimensioning as well as
Steve Mathison of Honda RD for his insight on the MC method.
Lastly, a big thank you to my flatmates Stavros and Antonis for accompanying
me in this 2-year journey, Lorenzos for putting up with me during studying sessions,
Simone for her thorough proofreading and the rest of my friends for their support.
Special thanks to my family that have supported in any way possible and especially
to my father, Haris Chochlidakis for pushing me into the hydrogen world in the first
place.
==PAGE:9==
vi
==PAGE:10==
Nomenclature
α
A parameter used to compensate for non-linearity in the
PRR during the fill, [−]
β
A parameter which is multiplied by tfinal to allow toler-
ance on pressure, [−]
∆P
A pressure difference, [MPa]
Subscripts of ∆P:
offset
An offset pressure added to Pramp to determine the
Pcontrol
tol high
A pressure difference added to Pramp to define Plimit high
tol low
A pressure difference added to Pramp to define Plimit low
∆tcold
The difference between the fueling time and tmin cold, [s]
A
Area (used in Section 2.3), [m2]
a, b, c, d
Coefficients utilized in the tfinal equation, [−]
AB, BC, GC, JC
Five constants utilized in the MC Equation, [−]
E
Total energy (used in Section 2.3), [J]
F
Force (used in Section 2.3), [N]
cv cold
Specific heat capacity of hydrogen at constant volume
used in the cold case CHSS, [
J
kg·K ]
h
Enthalpy, [J]
Subscripts of [h]:
ave
The mass average of the dispenser outlet enthalpy calcu-
lated from the start of the fueling time
i
Same term as the [have] used in the MC method descrip-
tion example in Section 2.2.2
˙m
Mass flow, [kg/s]
m
Mass, [kg]
Subscripts of m:
==PAGE:11==
viii
Nomenclature
1
Initial mass used in the MC method description example
in Section 2.2.2
2
Final mass used the MC method description example in
Section
2.2.2
final cold
The mass corresponding to 100% SOC of the 1kg Type
III vessel used in the MC Method),
MAT
Mass Average Temperature of the fuel delivery, [K]
Subscripts of MAT:
0
The Mass Average Temperature of the fuel delivery calcu-
lated from the start of the main fueling time
30
The Mass Average Temperature of the fuel delivery calcu-
lated after a total of 30 seconds of mass flow have elapsed
C
The Mass Average Temperature of the fuel delivery uti-
lized as the control input for the tfinal equation
exp
The expected Mass Average Temperature of the fuel de-
livery
MC
Total heat capacity as described in [4], [J/K]
Subscripts of MC:
cold
A parameter representing a lumped heat capacity of the
cold case CHSS. Used to calculate Tcold
MT
The CHSS measured temperature communicated via
IrDA, [K]
P
Pressure, [MPa]
Subscripts of P:
control
The dispenser’s outlet pressure which the dispenser con-
trol targets throughout the fill
final
The final pressure used in the derivation of the tfinal equa-
tion coefficients
limit high
The upper boundary of the pressure corridor which
Pstation must stay within
limit low
The lower boundary of the pressure corridor which Pstation
must stay within
limit
An upper limit on pressure for communication fills to pro-
vide protection against a fault in MT
min
The initial pressure used in the derivation of the tfinal
coefficients
ramp
The pressure upon which the PRR is based
==PAGE:12==
Nomenclature
ix
station
Fueling pressure as measured by station at the dispenser
outlet
target
The target end of fill pressure
trans
A pressure midpoint between the initial pressure and the
final pressure. It determines the weighting of MAT0 and
MAT30 in the MATC equation
Q
Heat (used in the MC method description example in Sec-
tion 2.2.2 indicating the heat transferred from the gas to
the CHSS and also the general physical quantity of heat
used in Section 2.3), [J]
RR
Ramp rate (pressure), [MPa/min]
Subscripts of RR:
max
The maximum calculated pressure ramp rate throughout
the fill
min
The minimum calculated pressure ramp rate throughout
the fill
SOCtarget
The end of fill target SOC, used in calculating Ptarget
expressed in percentage, [%]
T
Temperature, [K]
Subscripts of T:
adiabatic
The adiabatic temperature inside the tank that is used
used in the MC Method calculations (used in the MC
method description example in Section 2.2.2)
amb
The temperature of the ambient surrounding the fueling
station
cold
The MC Method cold case gas temperature
final
Estimation of the final temperature inside the tank that
is used to derive the pressure target for the fueling (used
in the MC method description example in Section 2.2.2)
fuel
The temperature of the fuel delivery measured at the dis-
penser outlet
initial cold
The initial gas temperature in the cold case CHSS
t
Time, [s]
Subscripts of t:
final
The time required to fill from Pmin to Pfinal under hot
case conditions. Input to the PRR equation
min cold
A parameter used in MC equation representing the time
elapsed after which ∆tcold is calculated
==PAGE:13==
x
Nomenclature
U
Internal energy, [J]
Subscripts of U:
adiabatic cold
The MC Method cold case adiabatic internal energy
initial cold
The MC Method cold case initial internal energy
u
Specific internal energy, [J/kg]
Subscripts of u:
1
Initial specific internal energy used in the MC method
description example in Section 2.2.2
2
Final specific internal energy used in the MC method de-
scription example in Section 2.2.2
adiabatic cold
The MC Method cold case adiabatic specific internal en-
ergy
initial cold
The MC Method cold case specific initial internal energy
Abbreviations
APRR
Average Pressure Ramp Rate
BEV
Battery Electric Vehicle
CD
Cold Dispenser or Cold Dispensing fueling
CHSS
Compressed Hydrogen Storage System
FCEV
Fuel Cell Electric Vehicle
IrDA
Infrared Data Association
NWP
Nominal Working Pressure
SAE
Society of Automotive Engineers
SOC
State Of Charge
STP
Standard conditions (temperature and pressure)
SUV
Sport Utility Vehicle
==PAGE:14==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Nomenclature
vii
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
x
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
State of the Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Thesis statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theoretical background and Methodology
5
2.1
General information on hydrogen fueling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Hydrogen Fueling Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Fueling Thermodynamics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
MC method overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
Methodology of modeling the MC method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Dymola Fueling Station Model
23
3.1
Dymola software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Simulation system model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Simulation Model Component Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Results
29
4.1
Simulation scenarios description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Simulation results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Energy and Exergy Analysis of the system using the two different fu-
eling methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Discussion
57
5.1
Summary of findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
==PAGE:15==
xii
Contents
6
Conclusion
61
6.1
Recommendations for further work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
References
63
A Appendix
67
A.1 Base Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.2 Hot Case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
A.3 Cold Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In this chapter, general information about hydrogen fuel cell vehicles and hydrogen
fueling will be introduced along with the motivation for this Master thesis project.
Moreover, previous work in the area of hydrogen fueling will be presented as well as
a description of the project.
1.1
Motivation
Air pollution is a major contributor to the climate change and the cause of almost 5.5
million deaths per year [3]. With a percentage that varies from 50 to 90% depending
on the area, that pollution comes from the tailpipe emissions of the transportation
sector (cars, trucks, buses, ships etc.)[31].
Many European countries have agreed on the banning of diesel and gasoline vehicles,
some of them starting as soon as 2030 [2]. This has led to a major turn towards clean
transportation, both in the private and public sector with two technologies leading
the way: the battery electric vehicles (BEVs) and fuel cell electric vehicles (FCEVs).
Hydrogen is considered by many the energy carrier of the near future, as more and
more renewables are penetrating the grid creating the need of large scale energy stor-
age [15]. Hydrogen produced by clean-renewable energy sources is going to be one of
the solutions powering the carbon-free transportation sector of the future.
Hydrogen fuel cell powered electric vehicles have been around for quite some time
now since their commercialization in 2013 and a lot more since they were firstly
proposed as a concept in late 1980’s.
Hydrogen powered transportation has zero
emissions of environmentally harmful products and expands further than FCEVs to
other commercial automotive applications such as SUVs [5], trucks [21], buses [32],
trains [8], forklifts [24] and many others like as drones [11] and even vessels [23]. All
the aforementioned applications use hydrogen to create electricity for their electric
motors through a fuel cell. This hydrogen is most of the times stored in gaseous state
in pressurized hydrogen tanks thus creating the need of their refill after the hydrogen
is depleted. For FCEVs, this is done in hydrogen fueling stations.
The FCEVs market is growing slowly but steadily [33] with California leading the
race, having more than half of the total 6500 vehicles deployed globally as it is shown
in Figure 1.1, followed by Japan and Europe.
The FCEVs sales are projected to
==PAGE:17==
2
1 Introduction
surpass 71500 [1] as shown in Figure 1.2 and while FCEV manufacturing companies
such as Toyota are pushing towards increasing the driving range of the new FCEV
generation (in 2020) to 700-750 km in a single fueling [22], the demand of hydrogen
fueling stations that provide fast an reliable fueling will eventually rise.
Figure 1.1: Hydrogen Fuel Cell Vehicles Sold by Year-End 2017: Regional Share
(data: Information Trends)[14].
Figure 1.2: Projected global fuel cell vehicle unit sales between 2015 and 2020 [1].
Hydrogen, when in a gaseous state, can ignite even in low concentrations in the
atmospheric air (4% vol in air) by reacting with oxygen. It is a gas that needs to
be handled with care to ensure safety and comfort (short fueling duration) during
fueling. The process of hydrogen fueling is a rather complex one compared with the
fueling of conventional vehicles, as the fuel being handled is gaseous and not liquid as
==PAGE:18==
1.2 State of the Art
3
most conventional fuels. Liquefying hydrogen is a rather energy consuming process as
it has to be cooled beneath -253◦C and be stored in pressurized, thermally insulated
containers. Liquid hydrogen is used rarely, mostly for transportation of the hydrogen
itself and fueling with it has been a concept so far. On the other hand, highly pressur-
ized gaseous hydrogen is commonly used for fueling FCEVs. This fueling must follow
a certain procedure for the hydrogen to reach from station storage to the FCEV tank.
High pressures, fueling speed and temperature development due to compression and
Joule-Thomson effect are factors that have to be thoroughly investigated to ensure a
safe but fast fueling. This led the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) in collabo-
ration with FCEVs manufacturers and Wegner Engineering [27] to create a protocol
that described the fueling procedure of a hydrogen light duty vehicle in 2010 called
SAE-TIR J2601 [4]. This protocol was created after numerous tests of hydrogen tanks
fuelings as well as computer simulations.
Currently, two methods of hydrogen fueling are proposed by SAE. These are the
”Lookup tables” method and the ”MC formula method” (or ”MC method” for short)
[4], both of which are being described in Section 2.2.
The Lookup tables is the most common and is currently used almost exclusively by
station manufacturers as it is fast, reliable, safe and proven. It uses parameters (such
as ambient temperature, vehicle’s initial pressure, station pre-cooling capacity etc.)
to determine an average pressure ramp rate (APRR) which will be followed through-
out the entire fueling process. The MC method on the other hand, takes advantage
of active measurements of the fuel’s pre-cooling temperature as well as thermody-
namic properties of the vehicle’s storage tank (or compressed hydrogen storage sys-
tem, CHSS) to actively regulate the fueling speed through a variable pressure ramp
rate throughout the fill utilizing a series of formulae and empirical coefficients. This
allows for, according to the literature and field tests [25], faster fills than the Lookup
tables method.
1.2
State of the Art
The thermodynamics behind the hydrogen fueling procedure have been studied quite
extensively in numerous studies.
Comprehensive studies on compressed hydrogen
fueling have been made by Dicken and Mérida [9] studying the temperature develop-
ment inside a compressed hydrogen tank that is being refueled with thermocouples
and also by Bourgeois et al. evaluating a 0D model for real time temperature esti-
mation during the fueling [6]. Further, the effects of variable mass flows and cylinder
geometries have on the temperature development were studied by Q. Li et all [17],
using computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations. Lastly, Hosseini et al. have
analyzed the process of fueling thermodynamically, using energy and exergy analysis
models [13].
Optimization studies of various parameters of the fueling have been performed, vary-
ing from optimization on the fueling requirements and how the fueling protocol’s
==PAGE:19==
4
1 Introduction
temperature safety boundaries can be pushed further by Bourgeois et al. [7], to sta-
tion optimization and energy consumption optimization studies by Rothuizen et al.
utilizing dynamic simulations [28, 26].
The fueling methods themselves have also been studied, albeit in a lesser amount of
publications, with Maus et al. studying first the effects of different parameters that
led to the protocol development in 2010 [20] and Schneider et al. in 2010 talking
about the Lookup tables method implementation, and in 2014, its validation [29, 30].
The MC formula fueling method has not been thoroughly studied since its proposal
in 2010 by Harty et al. (funded by Honda) [12], its implementation in the J2601
protocol in 2012 [18] and its field validation study later in 2015 by the same group
of people, Mathison et al. [19]. During the time that this this project was being
conducted, only one study has been released comparing the two fueling methods (the
Lookup table method and the MC method) in terms of fueling duration and State of
Charge levels (SOC) by Krishna et al. in 2017 [25], using the H2SCOPE model.
1.3
Thesis statement
The thermodynamics of the hydrogen fueling process have been thoroughly studied
in numerous articles since 2007 [13, 6, 16, 9, 35]. The Lookup tables method itself
and its implementation has also been studied [29] and validated [30]. As for the MC
method, although it was proposed by Honda and implemented in the SAE J2601 as
an alternative method exists for almost 7 years now, there are but a few reported
studies about the method itself [12] and its application [18].
Moreover, only one
study exists that compare and evaluate the two fueling methods [25]. This, combined
with the seemingly advanced complexity of its implementation compared with the
rather simpler Lookup tables method, present an obstacle in its adoption by station
manufacturers.
In this project, the MC method will be implemented in an already existing and vali-
dated hydrogen fueling system model [27] in the Dymola software and compared with
the Lookup tables method from a system’s perspective to evaluate the advantages
and disadvantages that exist among the two methods in different fueling scenarios.
Essentially, by modelling the two fueling methods in a hydrogen fueling system model,
this project will try to answer the following question:
Which fueling method should be followed from an overall efficiency perspective by
future fueling stations?
In more detail, the questions below will be answered:
• Which fueling method is faster under different fueling scenarios?
• Which fueling method is more energy consuming/is more energy efficient?
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2
Theoretical
background and
Methodology
In this chapter, the main theory behind the hydrogen fueling procedure will be described.
This includes the different methods of hydrogen fueling and how they function. Fur-
thermore, general thermodynamic theory behind hydrogen fueling will be presented.
Lastly, a detailed description of the methodology will be given, emphasizing in the
description of the function and the implementation of the various subroutines of the
MC method.
2.1
General information on hydrogen fueling
Gas hydrogen fueling is a process that essentially contains the movement of the gas
to a target volume (tank). There are two ways of this to happen: Either by direct
compression of the gas to a tank using a compressor or by having the gas moved
from tank(s) with higher pressure to the target tank which is on lower pressure.
Furthermore, hydrogen fueling station can use either process by utilizing either on-site
hydrogen production via electrolyzers, or delivered hydrogen in low pressure storage
tubes (most common). Figure 2.1 shows a simplistic overview of the aforementioned
processes and system variations.
==PAGE:21==
6
2 Theoretical background and Methodology
Figure 2.1: Overview of a simple fueling system.
From a system perspective, the most effective is fueling by pressure leveling instead
of direct compression due to the higher mass flow rates that can be achieved without
being limited by the compressor’s capacity [27]. However, this process - especially
when handling hydrogen - is governed by complex thermodynamics that makes its
safe handling a top priority. The stored hydrogen in the vehicle’s tank should be at
high pressures, typically either 35 or 70MPa. This is because, as mentioned above,
the hydrogen is in gaseous state in order to compensate for the large volume that is
needed to store it due to its very low density of only 0.089kg/m3 (STP). Therefore,
commercial FCEVs’ compressed hydrogen storage systems (CHSS) use typically 2-
10kg capacity tanks with a volume ranging from 0.0497m3 to 0.2486m3.
Furthermore, there are many factors that need to be taken under consideration when
filling up a hydrogen tank. When the hydrogen is forced and compressed into a tank,
its temperature is rising mostly due to the heat of compression but also due to the
Joule-Thomson effect in a lesser degree [9]. This temperature cannot exceed 85◦C for
safety reasons that have to do with the materials of the FCEVs’ CHSS and thus the
fueling if the hydrogen was treated in room temperatures would be extremely slow.
That is why for a user friendly fueling experience the hydrogen needs to be pre-cooled
to allow for a faster fueling. Moreover, since there are many different types and sizes
of vehicle tanks, a rate of pressure increase or pressure ramp rate should be used
to fuel the vehicle with a controlled temperature increment without exceeding the
pressure limits of the tank set by the manufacturer.
The need of a user friendly experience of a fast and safe hydrogen fueling has led
the SAE into standardizing the fueling procedure according to parameters like the
vehicle tank type and capacity, ambient temperature, station’s precooling capacity etc.
There are two standardized fueling methods as described in Chapter 1, the Lookup
tables method and the MC method.
==PAGE:22==
2.2 Hydrogen Fueling Methods
7
2.2
Hydrogen Fueling Methods
The MC method and Lookup table method are available for implementation by hy-
drogen fueling station manufacturers at their stations. Despite the implementation
of the MC method into the SAE J2601 standard shortly after the Lookup tables
method, only the latter is widely used in hydrogen fueling stations due to the fact
that its proven and simple to implement. The MC method, although both are tested
by computer simulations and field testing [25, 19], has not been implemented by
many station manufacturers probably due to its complexity over the rather simplistic
Lookup tables method. A description of the two methods will be given in this section,
focusing on the least used MC method, which is the main focus of this project.
2.2.1
Lookup tables method
The first method described in the ”Fueling Protocols for Light Duty Gaseous Hydro-
gen Surface Vehicles” surface vehicle standard, journal number J2601, is the Lookup
tables method.
This method describes in detail the ways a hydrogen tank should be refueled accord-
ing to its nominal working pressure (H35 for 35MPa or H70 for 70MPa) and the
station’s cooling capacity (4 cooling capacity categories symbolized with ”T”). The
information of the way a vehicle’s tank should be fueled is stored in lookup tables
that determine the APRR that should be used as well as the target pressure the tank
should reach based on parameters like the ambient temperature, the tank’s initial
pressure, the presence of IrDA communications with the tank and if the dispenser is
cooled before the fueling or not. An example of a lookup table can be seen in Figure
2.2. An APRR is chosen according to the input data and is held constant until the
end of the main fueling. The end of the fueling can be determined either by a target
pressure or an SOC level. If communication fueling is applied, the fueling stops when
the SOC calculated by the vehicle’s measured temperature and pressure is 100%, if
no communications apply then it stops according to a target pressure from Lookup
tables. Close to the end of the fueling, a new APRR might be chosen for the ”Top-Off
phase” of the tank although this is a detail applied in real life situations for initial
CHSS pressures below 5MPa and it is not going to be examined in this study.
==PAGE:23==
8
2 Theoretical background and Methodology
Figure 2.2: Sample fueling table, 4-7 kg volume category / H70-T40 with commu-
nications.
==PAGE:24==
2.2 Hydrogen Fueling Methods
9
The target pressure is the pressure that is required for the tank to have in order
to reach maximum capacity in certain conditions. This capacity is often called state
of charge (SOC) and it is the actual density of the gas inside the tank compared to
the density of the gas at NWP and 15◦C:
SOC(%) =
ρ(T, p)
ρ(15◦C, NWP)
(2.1)
For a common fueling of a 70MPa tank the target density is 40.2kg/m3 that
corresponds to 100% SOC. Any density above that means that the tank is over-filled
and densities below that result in an under-filled tank. As seen in Figure 2.3 the target
density for a 100% SOC must not exceed the over-pressure or overheating boundaries.
In reality, due to various pressure losses between station and vehicle, temperature
reading inaccuracies or mis-estimations the SOC levels never reach 100%. However,
there is a chance that these levels might exceed 100% in faulty communication fueling
conditions where the ambient temperature is so low that allows higher pressure targets
without compromising high temperature development, according to SAE J2601.
Figure 2.3: Hydrogen storage fueling window according to SAE J2601 [27].
.
This is in short how the Lookup tables method works, a method that is used in
most hydrogen stations worldwide for almost as long as hydrogen fueling stations
became commercial.
==PAGE:25==
10
2 Theoretical background and Methodology
2.2.2
MC formula method (MC method)
The second method described in SAE J2601 is the MC method. This is an alternative
- also standardized - way to refuel a hydrogen tank. This method was initially devel-
oped by Honda and later on, adapted to the conditions and boundaries of the SAE
J2601 in which it was also incorporated [25]. It uses the thermodynamic properties
of the vehicle’s CHSS to dynamically calculate the PRR that determines the fueling
speed as well as the target pressures that should be reached for the fueling to be
terminated. It is verified by simulations and also by field testing for its validity [25,
19].
The MC method’s calculation of the PRR is depended on the temperature mea-
surements of the pre-cooled fuel measured at the dispenser’s outlet, thus built upon
the station’s cooling capacity without however dividing the stations in categories
according to that cooling capacity. It calculates the PRR for the entire allowable
pre-cooling range of -17.5◦C to -40◦C. MC method uses a set of formulae and empiri-
cal coefficients (derived by computer simulations) that depend on parameters like the
CHSS’s initial pressure, ambient temperature, tank capacity and measured tempera-
ture of the incoming fuel to calculate the PRR and the target pressures-limits at any
given time.
Fueling part
The MC formula initially uses the temperature measurement of the pre-cooled
fuel to calculate the mass average temperature (MAT, Eq 2.10) and the mass average
enthalpy (have, Eq 2.12) at the dispenser. It is having a 30 seconds time window
where it does not use this measurement for the calculation of MAT as it uses an
expected MAT (set by the station manufacturer according to the station’s cooling
capacity) to compensate for the equalization of the temperature of the gas inside
the dispenser’s possibly warmer components components (piping, hose etc.) and the
cooled gas coming from the station’s cooler. This happens because, as it will be also
explained later, the MC method could fuel slower than needed in the first 30 seconds
of the fueling if the actual (higher) temperature was used in the calculation of MAT,
without really the need to.
The fueling of the MC method is controlled by the PRR and the target pressure/-
pressure limit. Utilizing the calculated MAT, an estimation of the total fueling time
(tfinal, Eq 2.13) is then calculated which is used to derive the PRR needed to com-
plete the fueling in that time. However, because the MAT is dynamically calculated
in every second, so is the tfinal and subsequently the PRR. If the dispenser’s cooling
was not actively measured then the tfinal would give a constant PRR same with the
Lookup tables method [25]. In the following Figure 2.4, the difference of actively
calculating a tfinal and a PRR with a constant APRR (as the Lookup tables use)
can be seen graphically. The change of the tfinal estimation can result in a higher or
lower PRR.
==PAGE:26==
2.2 Hydrogen Fueling Methods
11
Figure 2.4: Illustration of the effect of tfinal on the Pressure Ramp Rate.
.
The have (or hi in the example below) that was calculated is used for the deter-
mination of the estimation of the final temperature (Tfinal) inside the tank that is
used to derive the pressure target for the fueling. This Tfinal is the product of the
so-called MC formula. The MC formula is essentially an analytical method based
on a lumped heat capacity model that uses the thermodynamic characteristics of the
CHSS to determine the so-called ”MC” parameter that describes the calculated ca-
pability of heat absorption by the CHSS (measured in kJ/K). By calculating the
MC parameter (Eq. 2.14) an estimation of final temperature (Tfinal) can be derived
which is used to determine the pressure targets/limits (more detail in Section 2.5.7).
As it is shown in Figure 2.5, if a control volume is defined then the heat that is
transferred from the gas to the CHSS can be expressed as the difference in the initial
and final internal energy m2u2 and m1u1 subtracted from the mass average enthalpy
that is added in the volume, as it follows [4]:
Q =
∫m2
m1
hidm −(m2u2 −m1u1)
(2.2)
==PAGE:27==
12
2 Theoretical background and Methodology
Figure 2.5: Illustration of control volume for the MC method [4].
.
This heat can also be expressed as the difference in the adiabatic internal energy
and the final internal energy of the volume and subsequently in terms of temperature:
Q = m2(uadiabatic −u2) = m2Cv(Tadiabatic −Tfinal)
(2.3)
and
uadiabatic =
m1u1 +
∫m2
m1 hidm
m2
(2.4)
If the volume is defined, then the MC parameter can be defined and the transferred
heat can be expressed in terms of temperature:
Q = MC(Tadiabatic −Tfinal)
(2.5)
and by combining Eq. 2.2 and Eq. 2.5, the final equation for the Tfinal can be
derived, as shown in Chapter 2.5 Eq. 2.15. The derivation of MC is described in
Chapter 2.5 Eq. 2.14.
==PAGE:28==
2.3 Fueling Thermodynamics
13
2.3
Fueling Thermodynamics
All the components of the model used for the simulations follow the first law of ther-
modynamics, Newton’s second law, mass conservation and energy balance in the form
of momentum and mass balance. These basic laws/statements will be given below,
however, a more in-depth analysis of the equations followed by each component indi-
vidually are out of the scope of this project and can be found in ”A Thermodynamic
Analysis of Fuelling Hydrogen Vehicles for Personal Transportation [27]”.
A simplified first law of thermodynamics is shown below in Eq.2.6 where the gravita-
tional potential energy is neglected due to no height difference between the compo-
nents and the kinetic energy is included in the enthalpy:
dE
dt = Q −W + d(m · u)
dt
+
∑
( ˙m · h)in −
∑
( ˙m · h)out
(2.6)
where E is the energy, Q is heat, W is work, m is mass, u is specific internal energy
and h is enthalpy.
For the steady state of the quasi-static models used, the change of energy equals
to zero ( dE
dt = 0).
Newton’s second law is used for expressing the change in momentum through the
change of pressure as shown below in Eq.2.7:
∑
F = A1
P1
dt −A2
P2
dt
(2.7)
where F is force, A is area and p is pressure.
Knowing that A1 = A2 and that P = F/A then Eq.2.7 becomes:
dP = P1 −P2
(2.8)
The mass balance equation used in the models is derived from the first law of
thermodynamics and it is shown below in Eq2.9:
dm
dt =
∑
˙min −
∑
˙mout
(2.9)
All these equations are present in most models. In components without volume
(i.e the Reduction Valve), the internal energy is not included. However, work and
heat contributions are included, but may not be present for the component.
(Note: All the symbols used for the description of the basic thermodynamic equa-
tions above are accompanied by a definition of the symbols and are also included in the
Nomenclature, however, they are only used here and confusion with similar symbols
used in later sections should be avoided.)
==PAGE:29==
14
2 Theoretical background and Methodology
2.4
MC method overview
The MC Formula – based method of hydrogen fueling is essentially a dynamically cal-
culated way of fueling that can follow the same safety precautions set by SAE J2601
while delivering hydrogen by calculating essential parameters in every second of the
process. This ability separates this method from the existing and widely used in com-
mercial stations table-based fueling method that uses pre-calculated values from the
start of the process until the end, essentially pre-determining in that way the fueling
time. The MC method calculates each second the estimated fueling time and in that
way proceeds in the derivation of fueling parameters such as the mass average tem-
perature, MC formula based temperature (will be explained later), target pressure,
pressure limits and subsequently the pressure ramp rate dynamically. In this way,
the fueling procedure is optimized and differs for each different case achieving shorter
fueling times according to literature [25] as it will be showcased later in Chapter 4.
The MC method utilizes the Pressure Class of the tank that is going to be refu-
eled (either H35 or H70), the tank’s capacity category (CHSS category), its initial
temperature and pressure as well as the ambient temperature as inputs and then
through calculations and pre-defined parameter choices based on the input, the PRR
and target pressure are calculated and updated every second of the process. These
calculations and parameters determination are taking place in a well-defined – albeit
more complicated than the Lookup tables method – procedure that is described in
SAE J2601.
This process is a combination of 5 different main calculation routines and 2 security-
based routines which consist the MC method fueling. Each subroutine plays a signif-
icant role in the final output of the process. These routines are described in the form
flow charts in SAE J2601 Appendix I, and further explained with their respective
equations and calculations later in Appendix J. A simplified flowchart of the MC
method as it was applied in Dymola is presented below in Figure 2.6. An important
note should be stated here: The SAE routines’ flowchart is presented according to
the priority of the routines. In other words, they are arranged in order of execution.
This is not the case in Dymola as the nature of the software itself is non-linear which
allows it to run all the routines simultaneously, therefore, the routines in Figure 2.6
in Section 2.5.1 are depicted in parallel to stress out that point.
2.5
Methodology of modeling the MC method
In this section, a detailed description of the routines that take part in the MC
method’s calculations will be presented. This description is a more simplified one
than the purely technical description found in SAE J2601, and aims at explaining the
routines’ function, inputs and outputs in the way that they were implemented into
the system model.
==PAGE:30==
2.5 Methodology of modeling the MC method
15
2.5.1
MC method routines
The routines described in SAE J2601 represent a detailed walk-through to whoever
wants to develop a station software running the MC fueling method for hydrogen
fueling stations. Therefore, there are segments of this description which are essential
for security and practical checks on a real station, however, they do not affect a
process simulation model that aims at validating the performance of the method. As
a result, only the essential segments of this process that consist the calculations of
the MC method will be explained in detail and the rest will have just a reference. An
overview of these routines can be seen in Figure2.6:
Figure 2.6: Process Overview flow chart.
2.5.2
Initialization Routine
This part of the process is separated in the SAE J2601 in two subroutines: The PRR
initialization subroutine and the End Pressure Control subroutine. For the sake of
simplicity, they have been merged into the main script in Dymola as it does not affect
its functionality. Both subroutines are initializing parameters and variables that are
going to be used later on in other routines. There is also the passing on of critical
parameters such as the ambient temperature (Tamb), station parameters such as the
initial pressure ramp and temperature of the incoming fuel (Tfuel).
2.5.3
Mass Average Temperature (MAT) routine
This is an important routine for the MC method as it is here where the active mea-
surement of the temperature of the incoming fuel takes place. Taking advantage of
this temperature measurement at the dispenser, the method can calculate the mass
==PAGE:31==
16
2 Theoretical background and Methodology
average temperature and enthalpy which are variables used later for the determina-
tion of the pressure ramp rate and target pressure during the fill. There are 3 MATs
calculated during the fill and one pre-set MAT.
1. During the first 30 seconds of the fill, the MAT used is set to a value of tem-
perature between 237.15K and 255.65K regardless of the actual pre-cooling
temperature of the fill and it is up to the station manufacturer to set the value.
This is called MATexpected and is used as a ”proxy” for MAT during the first
30 seconds which is the cooldown time of the fill. This happens to compensate
for the first 30 seconds of the fuel where the MAT can be significantly warmer
than in the end of fill (especially when there have been no previous fuelings
so components like the hose, nozzle etc. are in ambient temperature) causing
a slower initial fill (if the Tfuel was used in the calculation from the start) as
a slower PRR would be calculated. Thus, setting the MAT to MATexpected
for the first 30 seconds (important to mention that the 255.65K upper limit
is the warmest Tfuel allowable by SAE in a T20 station) can compensate for
this allowing the fuel temperature to cool down enough to be safely used in
the calculations without compromising the fueling speed. This 30 seconds rule
is validated by SAE as it is the maximum time that even in the warmest of
conditions, the components have acquired the incoming fuel’s temperature.
2. The first calculated MAT used is the MAT30 which is essentially the calculation
of the mass average temperature after 30 seconds have elapsed during the fill.
The general equation of the MATs is given in Equation 2.10. This is calculated
until the control pressure reaches a transitional pressure (Ptrans) which is a
midpoint between the initial pressure and the final pressure. This MAT30 is
used later for the determination of the MATC.
MAT(i) =
∑t
1(m(t) −m(t−1)) · 0.5 · (Tfuel(t) −Tfuel(t−1))
∑t
1(m(t) −m(t−1))
(2.10)
3. The second calculated MAT is the MAT0 which is the MAT calculated since the
beginning of the fueling. This is used later in the calculations for the derivation
of MATC along with MAT30. Note that the first 30 seconds of this calculation
are the ones by-passed by the MATexpected.
4. The last calculated MAT is the MATC and is the MAT that is used in every
second of the fueling and it can have 3 different values: If time<30 seconds
then MATC = MATexpected. After 30 seconds and until Pcontrol <= Ptrans
then MATC = MAT30. The last case where Pcontrol > Ptrans MATC becomes
a weighted average between MAT30 and MAT0 with the weighted factor being
the Ptrans as it is shown in Equation 2.11.
MATC = MAT30 · (Pfinal −Pcontrol
Pfinal−Ptrans
) + MAT0 · (Pfinal −Pcontrol
Pfinal−Ptrans
)
(2.11)
==PAGE:32==
2.5 Methodology of modeling the MC method
17
As for the routine itself, it utilizes the mass flow, fuel temperature and station pressure
to calculate all the MATs as well as the mass average enthalpy have as it follows:
have(t) =
∑t
1(m(t) −m(t−1)) · 0.5 · (hfuel(t) −hfuel(t−1))
∑t
1(m(t) −m(t−1))
(2.12)
An overview of this routine can be seen in the Figure 2.7 below:
Figure 2.7: Mass Average Temperature routine flowchart.
2.5.4
Final time (tfinal) routine
tfinal is essentially an estimation/calculation of the time needed to fill the CHSS
from the minimum pressure (Pmin) to the final pressure (Pfinal) without exceeding
the 85◦C gas temperature within the hot case [4] in a certain timestep throughout the
fill. It is a variable calculated in each second of the process’ calculations by utilizing
the MATC and 4 pre-determined coefficients (a,b,c,d) which have been derived by
simulations (the same simulations were used for other coefficients in the Lookup tables
fueling method) for each case of initial pressures, hot or cold cases and vessel types.
The general equation of the tfinal is:
tfinal = α · β · [a · MATc3 + b · MATc2 + c · MATc + d]
(2.13)
The α and β coefficients’ function is to extend the tfinal to account for enthalpy
changes by the variations of the ramp rate (α) and allow for a margin in which the
==PAGE:33==
18
2 Theoretical background and Methodology
pressure corridor can be defined (β).
The tfinal value is later used for the calculation of the PRR. The role that tfinal
plays in the calculation of the PRR is important as it indirectly proportional to the
fill time. This means that the largest estimation of tfinal in a timestep, the slower
the pressure ramp will be in that timestep and vice-versa. Moreover, since tfinal is
heavily depended on the mass average temperature as explained in 2.5.3, the MC
method’s calculations dependence on the pre-cooling capacity of the station and the
accuracy of the MAT calculations can be stressed out, as it was mentioned in the
method’s description in Section 2.2.2.
An overview of the tfinal routine can be seen in Figure 2.8:
Figure 2.8: tfinal routine flowchart.
2.5.5
Cold Temperature (Tcold) routine
Tcold is the final output of the so-called in SAE J2601 “MC method calculations”, or
the MC subroutine for the sake of avoiding confusion with the general MC fueling
method. It is the cold case final temperature of the gas which in combination with
a target density (essentially an SOCtarget) a target pressure can be calculated. It is
important to note that this routine is executed only if the target pressure is calculated
via the MC calculations and not by the ending pressure tables method (more details
in Section 2.5.7 below).
Before the Tcold is calculated though there is the calculation of the MC variable,
the core variable of the homonymous method. Its calculation is based on a lumped
heat capacity model which uses the characteristics of the CHSS under examination,
as it was explained in Section 2.2.2. This variable essentially characterizes each differ-
ent CHSS with different initial conditions-parameters and quantifies its capability to
absorb the heat that is created inside it during the fueling process and it is expressed
in kJ/K. Combining the MC variable (which is calculated every second throughout
the fill) and the measurements/calculations of the mass flow and enthalpy, a final
temperature at the end of fill can be derived, Tcold in this case, which can be utilized
for the determination of a target pressure.
For the calculation of MC – or in the simulations MCcold (because of the cold case
assumptions [4]) – the uadiabatic cold must be calculated as well as the Tadiabatic cold
for the derivation of the cv cold. Then the MCcold is calculated as it follows:
==PAGE:34==
2.5 Methodology of modeling the MC method
19
MCcold = AC + BC · ln
√
Uadiabatic cold
Uinitial cold
+ GC · (1 −exp −KC · ∆tcold)JC
(2.14)
This calculation utilizes the ∆tcold (time difference between current fueling time
and the first 30 seconds of the fueling defined as tmin cold) and the pre-determined coef-
ficients AC BC GC and JC. These coefficients are derived by running the MC method
fueling protocol in simulations with a 70MPa CHSS in the cold case [4]. In short, they
are derived by plotting the MC results against Uadiabatic/Uinitial and MC against ∆t
for 24 simulations that were conducted by SAE and calculating the best fit. These
are the coefficients of the best fitting equations that represent better the correlation
between the MC variable and the two independent parameters (Uadiabatic/Uinitial and
∆t).
Tcold is calculated right after the MC variable calculation as it follows and it is used
later, as mentioned before, to determine the end of fill pressure target:
Tcold = mfinal cold · cv cold · Tadiabatic cold + MCcoldTinitial cold
MCcold + mfinal cold · cv cold
(2.15)
Parameters such as Tinitial cold and mfinal cold are defined in the initialization
routine and variables like Tadiabatic cold and cv cold are calculated inside this routine.
An overview of this routine can be seen in Figure 2.9:
Figure 2.9: Tcold routine flowchart.
==PAGE:35==
20
2 Theoretical background and Methodology
2.5.6
Pressure Ramp Rate (PRR) routine
In this routine the PRR, Pramp and Pcontrol are calculated. In this routine, a restric-
tion to the pressure ramp rate is set by the station manufacturer up to 10% below and
above the hot case PRR (HPRR) which is the highest pressure ramp rate allowable
by SAE J2601. In this routine, some other calculations also take place such as the α
and β used for the tfinal calculation through the use RRmin and RRmax (minimum
and maximum ramp rate calculated throughout the fill). After applying restrictions
to the PRR (using the PRR cap factor) the PRR is calculated as it follows:
PRR =
Pfinal −Pramp
tfinal · ( Pfinal−Pinitial
Pfinal−Pmin ) −t
(2.16)
Subsequently the Pramp is calculated by simply adding its change (PRR) to its pre-
vious value:
Pramp(next timestep) = Pramp(current timestep) + PRR
(2.17)
or by defining simply that the change in Pramp is the PRR:
PRR = dPramp
dt
(2.18)
The next calculation is that of the control pressure Pcontrol (the pressure controlled
in the dispenser) by adding a ∆Poffset to the Pramp.
That offset is set by the
manufacturer to avoid overshooting the pressure corridor after a non-fueling (storage
tank switch, leak check etc.) event and it can vary from 0-7MPa [4].
Pcontrol = Pramp + ∆Poffset
(2.19)
Right after the control pressure, the limits of the pressure corridor are calculated
according to the high and low pressure tolerance levels set in the initialization routine:
Plimit high = Pramp + ∆Ptol high
(2.20)
and
Plimit high = max(Pinitial, Pramp −∆Ptol low)
(2.21)
That concludes the calculations inside this routine and the model is ready to calculate
the pressure targets and pressure limits. An overview of this process can be seen in
Figure 2.10:
==PAGE:36==
2.5 Methodology of modeling the MC method
21
Figure 2.10: PRR routine flowchart.
2.5.7
Target Pressure and Pressure Limits (Ptarget and
Plimit high/low) routine
This routine is divided into two sub-routines. One calculating the target pressures
and limits using pre-determined ending pressure tables and one using the MC method.
In the first case as its name states, the routine uses lookup-tables to determine the
ending pressure and pressure limits utilizing the CHSS vessel capacity, the MATC
variable, the measured temperature (if communications apply) and SOCtarget. In the
second case, the routine utilizes the Tcold that was calculated via the MC method (thus
the characterization “target pressures using the MC method”), CHSS pressure class,
MT instead of Tcold if communications apply and SOCtarget to calculate the target
pressure. This SOCtarget is determined from the station manufacturer, according
to SAE [4], and can vary between the fairly acceptable range of 95-100%. In this
project, the SOCtarget was chosen to be 99% in all the MC method simulations. In
the equation that follows an example of this calculation is presented for a 70MPa
CHSS without communications:
Ptarget non−comm = 0.2782 · Tcold −4.7145 · 10−5 · T 2
cold −6.18
(2.22)
The pressure limit for communications is calculated based on 115% SOCtarget for
each vessel pressure class. There is an extra safety limit for when communications
are faulty during the fill utilizing the Tcold but that is a safety threshold for real life
==PAGE:37==
22
2 Theoretical background and Methodology
station software.
An overview of this process can be seen in Figure 2.11:
Figure 2.11: Ending Pressure and Pressure Limits routine flowchart.
2.5.8
End of Fill Security Check routine
In this simple routine, a series of security checks (in the form of true-false variables)
are being performed to ensure the termination of the fueling process when the target
pressure has been achieved or if any of the security thresholds of pressure, temperature
and mass flow have been violated.
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 3
Dymola Fueling
Station Model
In this chapter, a short introduction in the Dymola software will be given and the
fueling simulation system upon which the MC method is applied will be described.
3.1
Dymola software
Before the system model is described, some useful information about the software,
which the model has been developed with, will be presented.
Dymola is an object oriented dynamic modelling software. It has been developed
before the similar Modelica software, a C++ based modeling language that serves
the same purposes.
Dymola is running the Modelica language since 2002 where
dynamic models such as the components used in this project can be exchanged and
re-used multiple times with a simple drag-and-drop system. This language is optimal
for modelling complex systems such as a hydrogen fueling system, as its non top-to-
bottom solving approach and its many model libraries minimize the simulation times
and provide a more user friendly environment than other languages serving the same
purposes (i.e Matlab). It should be noted, that it is a harder language to learn for
programming beginners than others due to the lack of informative debugging.
3.2
Simulation system model
Note: A detailed description of both the simulation system and the thermodynamics
behind hydrogen fueling can be found in ”A Thermodynamic Analysis of Fuelling Hy-
drogen Vehicles for Personal Transportation [27]” as the scope of this project is to
implement and evaluate the MC fueling method rather than to go in deep detail about
the aforementioned matters.
The fueling simulations took place in an existing model of a cascade fueling system.
Cascade fueling is a commonly used and proven system for commercial fueling stations
albeit there are other system configurations that can be applied, they are however
==PAGE:39==
24
3 Dymola Fueling Station Model
outside the scope of this study.
This fictional cascade system contains components that represent different processes
of hydrogen fueling. In Figure 3.1 there is a schematic representation of the system
used as it is used also in Dymola and following that there is a description of the
components that were used in the model. The connections between the components
in this figure are the ones used in Dymola for information (red and green connectors)
or mass transfer (black connectors). The components in the dotted green rectangle
are the ones that were used in a later development stage of the model to study the
system from an energy perspective (Section 4.3).
It is important to mention that a new component was created for this study, the
”MC method calculations” component which contains essentially the MC method’s
subroutines as they are described in Chapter 2.5. A more in-depth description of
the components, their operation in the model and the equations behind them can be
found in [27].
==PAGE:40==
3.2 Simulation system model
25
Figure 3.1: Depiction of the fueling system model in the way that is also used in
Dymola.
.
==PAGE:41==
26
3 Dymola Fueling Station Model
3.3
Simulation Model Component Description
Storage Vessels. This is the component of all the pressurized hydro-
gen storage vessels in the station tank. The storage tanks of the station include
a low-pressure tank of 100 m3 at 20MPa of pressure which primarily serves as
the bank from where the higher pressure banks of the system are refilled from
with the help of the compressor, when the fueling is over. The high-pressure
tanks of the cascade system consist of three tanks, one of 1 m3 at 40MPa, an-
other of 0.75 m3 at 70MPa and a last one of 0.5 m3 at 100MPa. This system
is a typical low-energy consumption system chosen from the literature but can
also be found in real life stations [27].
Compressed hydrogen storage system (vehicle). This component
is similar to the Storage Vessel component and it functions in the same way. It
is differentiated to showcase its purpose as the vehicle’s storage tank that is
being refueled. It has a capacity of 0.129 m3 at 70MPa of nominal pressure
(around 5.2kg of H2 capacity).
Heat transfer model. This is the component that contains the model
for the heat transfer in the storage tanks. This model has sub-models according
to the different materials of the tanks (steel, alumina, composite, thermoplastic
liner) and its formulation is based on conduction through a wall. This compo-
nent is connected to all storage tanks.
Switch flows. This is a component that has no physical impact on
the fueling (no pressure losses or thermal conduction) as its purpose is only to
direct the flow to the correct direction.
Volume Mixer. This component contains the model that allows one
stream to break into two or two streams to meet in one in a small volume with
negligible heat transfer.
Reduction valve. This is the valve that regulates the pressure differ-
ence between the storage banks and the flow towards the vehicle’s CHSS in such
==PAGE:42==
3.3 Simulation Model Component Description
27
way to maintain the pressure ramp rate that is dictated by the Pressure ramp
rate component. That means that it has to compensate for all the pressure
losses between the Pressure ramp rate component and itself in order for the
PRR to be kept and the fueling to be carried out normally.
Pressure loss.
This is the component with the model for various
pressure losses in the system.
These pressure losses are modelled either by
equation from manufacturers or general pressure loss equations and are divided
into three categories: pressure losses from valves, pressure losses from filter and
mass flow meters and lastly tube and length equivalent pressure losses. It is
important to clarify that there are also pressure losses incorporated in other
components like the reduction valve or the Pressure ramp rate component.
Heat exchanger.
This component contains a simple heat balance
model which calculates the cooling capacity needed for the hydrogen to reach
the pre-set desired temperature.
Pressure ramp rate. This is the component where the pressure ramp
rate is set and the reduction valve must maintain. Depending on the fueling
method chosen, this ramp rate is either an average pressure ramp rate as it is
chosen from the tables for the Lookup table method, or dictated from the MC
method calculations component if the MC method is chosen.
MC method calculations. This component represents essentially
the station’s software and is responsible among others for dictating the pressure
ramp rate of the MC method to the Pressure ramp rate component. It contains
all the routines/calculations of the MC method described in Chapter 2.5 as well
as some general and specific station manufacturer inputs such as CHSS capacity,
cold dispensing, expected mass average temperature etc.
Control panel. This component contains a model that sets the num-
ber of storage tanks used, their pressure and the pressure difference that the
reduction valve should have in order to make a bank switch.
Compressor. This is the component that contains the compressor model
used to transfer mass from the large low-pressure storage tank to the high
pressure ones of the cascade system. The compressor starts to work as soon as
==PAGE:43==
28
3 Dymola Fueling Station Model
there is a bank switch, restoring the pressure to the bank that stopped having
high enough pressure to refuel.
Hydrogen fueling station. This is the component that contains
the tables for the Lookup table method and chooses the appropriate fueling
protocol to be followed. Also the ambient temperature and pressure are set
here.
Two variations of this model were used for the different simulations: At first, a
simpler version of the model was used to study purely the fueling performance of
the two fueling methods and how each one manages the procedure exclusively from
a storage-tanks-to-vehicle point of view. This model contained all the components
shown in Figure 3.1 except the low pressure storage bank, the compressor and the
first heat exchanger and flow switch, that serve for the fueling of the cascade system
storage system as it happens in a real life station (to get the station ready for the next
fueling). In a later stage, the model was developed further, adding the aforementioned
components thus giving the ability to study the system from an energy and exergy
aspect utilizing a more realistic fueling system model.
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 4
Results
In this chapter the results of the simulations performed in the developed model in
Dymola will be presented.
These simulations were performed for various ambient
temperatures scenarios and the results compare the two fueling methods in regards to
fueling times, state of charge and energy efficiency (energy-exergy analysis).
4.1
Simulation scenarios description
For the comparison of the MC method and the Lookup table method described in
Chapter 2.2, different simulation scenarios were performed.
These scenarios were
chosen in an effort to cover normal and extreme fueling conditions for a more global
assessment of the two methods.
The simulations of which the results will be presented are divided into the following
scenarios based on ambient temperature:
1. Base Case scenario: 25◦C ambient temperature, 5MPa CHSS initial pressure.
2. Hot Case scenarios: 45 ◦C ambient temperature, 5MPa CHSS initial pressure.
3. Cold Case scenarios: -30◦C ambient temperature, 5MPa CHSS initial pressure.
All three scenarios have been run assuming communications fueling, implying that
there is accurate data transfer with infrared sensors between the vehicle’s CHSS and
the station’s nozzle about the pressure and temperature development inside the CHSS.
This allows faster fuelings with both methods [4] as higher target pressures can be
reached by knowing the pressure inside the tank without compromising the safety
limitations.
This assumption is a valid one as all FCEV car manufacturers have
infrared sensors implemented on their cars since 2014. In addition, for the sake of
simplicity of the model, some technical assumptions are made:
==PAGE:45==
30
4 Results
1. All the fueling simulation start from a CHSS initial pressure of 5MPa and do
not require top-off fueling [4].
2. In the simulations, there are no non-fueling events like leak checks, pause be-
tween bank switches etc. According to [25], MC method is recovers faster from
a non-fueling event as it adjusts the PRR accordingly.
3. There is no ”fallback procedure” simulated in this project [4]. The protocol’s
process where the pressure ramp rate changes in a certain manner when the
cooling capacity changes drastically (complete change in the cooling capacity
category, i.e. from T40 fueling to T30) is not simulated as the station is assumed
to keep its initial cooling capacity throughout the fueling procedure.
Additionally, two sets of simulations were performed, one for the determining the
number of fuelings that a station can perform without compressor work using the
two different fueling methods and one for the energy analysis of the fuelings using the
two methods utilizing a further developed version of the station model. The results
of said simulations will be also presented in this chapter.
Besides the three aforementioned simulation scenarios, another two simulations
(cases) were performed for each scenario, variating the CHSS initial pressure (20MPa
and 60MPa) which are presented in Appendix A. Lastly, additional simulations were
performed changing parameters such communication fueling, cold dispensing, pres-
sure target determination using ending pressure tables instead of MC method’s formu-
las etc. A list of all the simulations performed for this project are listed in Appendix
A. In this chapter, the graphs from the first case of each fueling scenario (5MPa
initial CHSS pressure) will be presented as it is most common to fuel a vehicle when
it is near empty. The results of the rest of the cases with their respective tables and
graphs can be seen in the the Appendix A. All the above mentioned simulations were
taken place in the model system that is shown in Figure 4.1.
==PAGE:46==
4.1 Simulation scenarios description
31
Figure 4.1: Simulation system model used for the study of refueling times.
==PAGE:47==
32
4 Results
Before the simulation results are presented, it is important to showcase a particular
scenario result, that was inspired by the study ”Impact of hydrogen SAE J2601 fueling
methods on fueling time of light-duty fuel cell electric vehicles [25]” and is used as
a means of confirmation of the correct implementation of the MC method into the
model. The result in figure 4.2 is very similar to the one in the aforementioned study.
Deviations from the result of the simulation in this case performed in this project
are due to lack of information about specific parameters of the simulations, different
software etc.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
time (s)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Refueling collective graph for MC method
Station pressure (MPa)
CHSS pressure (MPa)
CHSS temperature (°C)
Station temperature (°C)
Mass flow (g/min)
Pressure Ramp Rate (MPa/min)
Figure 4.2: Base Case collective graph for MC method: confirmation case. Y-axis
units depend on the curve examined (see legend).
In Figure 4.2 above, there is a lot of important information regarding the fueling
procedure. The temperature curve (red dotted line for CHSS temperature) showcase
the rise of the CHSS’s temperature during the fueling due to the heat of compres-
sion (measured at the Vehicle’s CHSS component as shown in Figure 4.1). As it is
expected, this temperature does not exceed the 85◦C limit set by the protocol. The
incoming fuel temperature curve (light blue dotted line, measured at the station’s out-
let Pressure Loss 3 as seen in Figure 4.1) shows the cooling that the fuel is subdued
to by the station’s heat exchanger as the temperature measured at the dispenser’s
outlet is dropping from ambient temperature to -34◦C, which is the station’s cooling
capacity (set in HEX fueling, Figure 4.1). Moreover, the mass flow to the vehicle (or-
ange dotted line) has an initial increase until around the 60 second mark, and then
it decreases as the fueling slows down. This variations are dictated by the variable
pressure ramp rate (thin black line, calculated at the MC method component and
regulated bu the Reduction Valve as seen in Figure 4.1) which starts high at around
==PAGE:48==
4.2 Simulation results
33
28MPa/min the first 30 seconds of the fueling as the method has not yet applied
the active temperature measurements of the station’s cooling in its calculations (as
explained in Section 2.2.2), then drops to around 23MPa/min for more than one
minute time by utilizing the station’s measured temperature of th incoming fuel and
then drops as the fueling is close to finishing. Lastly, the station pressure (measured
at the station’s outlet Pressure Loss 3 as seen in Figure 4.1) and the CHSS pressure
are steadily rising with a difference that is due to the pressure losses between station
and vehicle’s CHSS (measured at the Vehicle’s CHSS component, Figure 4.1), until
the station pressure reaches the calculated target pressure where the fueling is ter-
minated. The aforementioned pressure losses between the station and the CHSS are
steadily decreasing due to the decreasing mass flow as the fueling proceeds.
4.2
Simulation results
4.2.1
Base Case scenario
The simulations in the Base Case were performed in an ambient temperature of 25◦C
which is a relatively normal fueling temperature considering the protocol’s limits of
-40 to 50 degrees Celsius. Moreover, the cooling capacity of this case is considered to
be the best available (cooling capacity of T40 meaning that the temperature outlet of
the heat exchanger is in the range of -40 to -33◦C). The following two figures present
collective information graphs in this scenario for the two methods.
==PAGE:49==
34
4 Results
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
time (s)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Refueling collective graph for MC method
Station pressure (MPa)
Pressure limit (MPa)
CHSS pressure (MPa)
Pressure target (MPa)
CHSS temperature (°C)
Station temperature (°C)
Mass flow (g/min)
Pressure Ramp Rate (MPa/min)
Storage Banks Pressure (MPa)
Figure 4.3: Base Case collective graph for MC method: 25◦C ambient tempera-
ture, 5MPa CHSS initial pressure. Y-axis units depend on the curve
examined (see legend).
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
time (s)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Refueling collective graph for Lookup Tables method
Station pressure (MPa)
Pressure limit (MPa)
CHSS pressure (MPa)
Pressure target (MPa)
CHSS temperature (°C)
Station temperature (°C)
Mass flow (g/min)
Pressure Ramp Rate (MPa/min)
Storage Banks Pressure (MPa)
Figure 4.4: Base Case collective graph for Lookup Tables method: 25◦C ambient
temperature, 5MPa CHSS initial pressure. Y-axis units depend on the
curve examined (see legend).
==PAGE:50==
4.2 Simulation results
35
The results in Figures 4.3, 4.4, have a cooling capacity of a standard -38◦C and
the fueling is considered to start from a dispenser on ambient temperature, thus the
drop in the temperature of the fuel in the first 30 seconds of the fueling. As it is seen
in both graphs for each method, there is a difference in fueling time between the two
methods. The MC method achieves a shorter fueling duration by utilizing a variable
PRR.
From the collective graph in Figure 4.3 as well as in the Pressure Ramp and PRR com-
parison graph in Figure 4.6, one can observe that the MC method’s PRR is steady in
the first 30 seconds of the fueling. After that, it variates, in contrast with the Lookup
tables method’s constant APRR throughout the fill, as seen in the Lookup tables
collective graph shown in Figure 4.4 and in the Pressure Ramp and PRR comparison
graph in Figure 4.6. This variation in the MC method’s PRR comes in accordance
with the different MATs that are being utilized in different stages of the fueling, as
explained in Section 2.2.2.
In Figure 4.7, the path that the MATC - which is the MAT that is eventually used
for calculating the PRR - can be seen (red dotted line). MATC in the first 30 seconds
of the procedure, utilizes the MATexp (grey dotted line) as it moves along it. After
those initial 30 seconds, MATC is following the MAT30’s path (orange line) that is
derived by the active measurement of the precooling temperature. After a transition
pressure is reached, it converges to MAT0 (black line), which is calculated since the
beginning of the fueling.
Therefore, after the active measurements of the cooling
temperature take effect, the PRR is increased speeding up the fueling.
Lastly, as the pressure in the CHSS increases (Figure 4.3), the MC method drops
gradually its PRR until the end of the fueling, reaching the pressure target that was
calculated throughout the fill (magenta dotted line). This leads to a pressure devel-
opment as it is seen in Figures 4.3 and 4.5 (left) that is fluctuating more than that
of the Lookup tables method, having a steeper increase, reaching the pressure target
faster.
The constant PRR of 18.5MPa (APRR) throughout the fill derived from the proto-
cols tables for the Lookup tables method is causing the fueling to reach the pressure
target more than one minute (70 seconds or) later than the MC method. This makes
the MC method 32.7% faster.
The black dotted line indicates the pressure in the storage tanks (measured at the
component of Storage Tank 1,2 and 3 as seen in Figure 4.1). The level that this
pressure is dropping to shows the utilization of the different pressure storage banks
by the MC method.
The difference in the pressure development between the station pressure and the
CHSS pressure is due to the pressure losses between the dispenser and the CHSS.
In the case of the MC method, these losses are larger as shown in Figure 4.5 (left)
as the ”gap” between the station pressure and the CHSS pressure is larger than the
one for the Lookup tables method (steeper slope of the blue curve in comparison
with the smoother magenta curve) as seen in Figure 4.6. This is expected as the MC
method’s larger PRR in most of the fueling duration has as a result a significantly
==PAGE:51==
36
4 Results
larger mass flow into the CHSS as it is shown in Figure 4.5 (right). This is translated
to larger pressure losses as the mass flow is directly proportional to the velocity and
the velocity is directly proportional to pressure losses [27].
0
20
40
60
80
100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressures comparison graph
Station pressure MC (MPa)
CHSS pressure MC (MPa)
Pressure target MC (MPa)
Station pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
CHSS pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
Pressure target Lookup Tables (MPa)
0
20
40
60
80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Mass flow (g/s)
Mass flows comparison graph
Mass flow MC
Mass flow Lookup Tables
Figure 4.5: (left) Base Case pressures development graph, y-axis in MPa - (right)
mass flows comparison graph.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressure Ramp and PRR comparison graph
Pressure Ramp Rate MC (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp MC (MPa)
Pressure Ramp Rate Lookup Tables (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp Lookup Tables (MPa)
Figure 4.6: Base Case pressure ramp and pressure ramp rate comparison graph.
Y-axis units depend on the curve examined (see legend).
==PAGE:52==
4.2 Simulation results
37
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
time (s)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
Temperature (°C)
Mass Average Temperatures graph
MAT30
MAT0
MATc
MATexp
Figure 4.7: Base Case Mass Average Temperature graph.
As shown in the Table 4.1 and as mentioned earlier, the MC method surpasses
the Lookup tables method in terms of fueling speed. Furthermore, the MC method
reaches, in this case, a marginally higher SOC level as its calculated pressure target is
higher than the pressure target of the Lookup table method. This happens because in
the Base Case simulation, the Lookup tables method terminates due to reaching its
pressure target and not its target SOC which is higher than the MC method’s (99%
pre-set SOC target for MC method vs. 100% default SOC target for the Lookup
tables method).
This SOC difference in favour of the MC method translates to
a small amount of more mass in the vehicle’s tank which allows for more mileage
according to a conservative hydrogen to range calculation [34].
Table 4.1: Method efficiency data comparison for the Base Case.
MC method
Lookup Tables method
Fueling Duration (s)
178.97
248.97
State of Charge (%)
98.74
98.39
Mass Dispensed (kg)
5.12
5.10
Theoretical Mileage (km)
497
495
In the other simulated cases of different CHSS initial pressures, the same trend
is followed by most of the results.
The MC method is, in every case performing
==PAGE:53==
38
4 Results
faster fuelings than the Lookup tables method especially in a non-communication
fueling case. Lookup tables method outweigh the MC method only in final SOC as
the first, whenever it terminates fueling by SOC criteria, it is always higher than the
MC method’s pre-set SOC target of 99% [4]. As a result of the higher SOC level of
the Lookup table method, this is also accompanied with higher mass dispensed and
theoretical mileage. The results of the rest of the cases of this scenario can be seen
in Appendix A.1.
4.2.2
Hot Case scenario
The simulations of the Hot Case were performed in an extreme case of 45◦C which is
only achievable in certain places on the planet and it is 5◦C shy of the protocol’s limit
in fueling (the protocol does not allow fueling when ambient temperature is above
50◦C). Furthermore, this case is also worsened by the fact that the cooling capacity
is set to T30 (-33 to -26◦C) which slows the fueling as the hydrogen is not cooled
as much as in the previous case. Figure 4.8 and 4.9 present collective information
graphs in this scenario for the two methods.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
800
time (s)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Refueling collective graph for MC method
Station pressure (MPa)
Pressure limit (MPa)
CHSS pressure (MPa)
Pressure target (MPa)
CHSS temperature (°C)
Station temperature (°C)
Mass flow (g/min)
Pressure Ramp Rate (MPa/min)
Storage Banks Pressure (MPa)
Figure 4.8: Hot Case collective graph for MC method: 45◦C ambient temperature,
5MPa CHSS initial pressure. Y-axis units depend on the curve exam-
ined (see legend).
==PAGE:54==
4.2 Simulation results
39
0
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 600 650 700 750 800 850 900 9501000
time (s)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Refueling collective graph for Lookup Tables method
Station pressure (MPa)
Pressure limit (MPa)
CHSS pressure (MPa)
Pressure target (MPa)
CHSS temperature (°C)
Station temperature (°C)
Mass flow (g/min)
Pressure Ramp Rate (MPa/min)
Storage Banks Pressure (MPa)
Figure 4.9: Hot Case collective graph for Lookup Tables method: 45◦C ambient
temperature, 5MPa CHSS initial pressure. Y-axis units depend on the
curve examined (see legend).
In both Figure 4.8 and 4.9, the fueling proceeds in a similar manner with the Base
Case (as seen in Figures 4.3, 4.4) however, one can immediately notice the longer fuel-
ing times for both methods compared to the Base Case. This happens for two reasons:
Firstly, due to the Hot Case’s significantly higher ambient temperature (45◦C) both
methods have a much lower pressure ramp rate to avoid overheating inside the tank.
The protocol tables for the Lookup table method dictate an APRR of 4.4MPa/min
where the MC method’s calculations vary its PRR from 6.3 to 4.1MPa/min. Sec-
ondly, the other cause of the low pressure ramp rates (and, as a result, the longer fill
times) is the poorer cooling capacity of the station at -28◦C (T30 station category).
This sets another obstacle to the fueling as it forces the pressure ramp rates to be even
lower for both methods. Utilizing the active cooling temperature however, the MC
method calculates and applies higher PRR in most of the fueling duration, achieving
higher mass flows than the Lookup tables method. In addition, the MC method’s
actively calculated pressure target allows for higher end-of-fill pressure in this case.
As it is seen in Figure 4.10 below, both methods refuel in a significantly longer
time than in the Base Case (Figure 4.5), which is expected due to the higher temper-
atures and worse cooling capacity, as it was explained before. By observing Figure
4.11, one can see that the MC method achieves a faster fueling time than the Lookup
tables similarly to the the Base Case by utilizing a variable PRR that is larger in the
vast majority of the duration of the fueling. Again, the PRR follows the transition
==PAGE:55==
40
4 Results
of the MATC as seen in Figure 4.12 from MATexp to MAT30 and later converging
with MAT0 making its variations rather small as the cooling capacity is worse than
in Base Case.
The pressure losses between station and CHSS are almost negligible in both meth-
ods as it is seen in Figure 4.10 (left) as the mass flows are significantly low (compared
to the Base Case) as shown in Figure 4.10 (right). Moreover, the calculated pressure
target of the MC method, as it was explained before, is higher than the pre-determined
Lookup tables pressure target, allowing the MC method to achieve higher end-of-fill
pressure.
0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressures comparison graph
Station pressure MC (MPa)
CHSS pressure MC (MPa)
Pressure target MC (MPa)
Station pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
CHSS pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
Pressure target Lookup Tables (MPa)
0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Mass flow (g/s)
Mass flows comparison graph
Mass flow MC
Mass flow Lookup Tables
Figure 4.10: (left) Hot case pressures development graph, y-axis in MPa - (right)
mass flows comparison graph.
==PAGE:56==
4.2 Simulation results
41
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressure Ramp and PRR comparison graph
Pressure Ramp Rate MC (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp MC (MPa)
Pressure Ramp Rate Lookup Tables (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp Lookup Tables (MPa)
Figure 4.11: Hot Case pressure ramp and pressure ramp rate comparison graph.
Y-axis units depend on the curve exam-ined (see legend).
0
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 600 650 700 750 800
time (s)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
Temperature (°C)
Mass Average Temperatures graph
MAT30
MAT0
MATc
MATexp
Figure 4.12: Hot case Mass Average Temperature graph.
==PAGE:57==
42
4 Results
As shown in Table 4.2, the MC method fuels almost 4 minutes faster (232.7 seconds
or 25.2%) than the Lookup table method reaching a higher SOC level just shy of
the SOCtarget of 99% compared to the Lookup tables method of 97.9%, due to the
relatively low pressure losses. The difference is not large but this stresses out the
MC method’s efficiency of fueling in around the same SOC levels as the Lookup
table method albeit more rapidly. Moreover, due to the higher SOC level of the MC
method, this is also accompanied with slightly higher mass dispensed and theoretical
mileage.
Table 4.2: Method efficiency data comparison for the Hot Case.
MC method
Lookup Tables method
Fueling Duration (s)
807.79
1040.49
State of Charge (%)
98.98
97.90
Mass Dispensed (kg)
5.13
5.08
Theoretical Mileage (km)
498
492
As for the rest of the cases for this scenario, similarly to the Base Case, the two
methods are performing as expected: MC method is significantly faster in all the
different CHSS initial pressure cases, achieving slightly less SOC levels due to the
SOC target that is pre-set as was explained in Base Case. The rest of the simulations
for this scenario can be seen in Appendix A.
4.2.3
Cold Case scenario
The simulations in this case were also performed in an extreme case of ambient tem-
perature, this time on the other end of the scale at -30◦C only 10 degrees before the
protocols coldest fueling limit. This case has an optimal cooling capacity of -40◦C, as
the ambient temperature also promotes it. The combination of low ambient temper-
ature and excellent cooling capacity makes both methods fuel faster than the Base
Case by utilizing cold dispensing (CD), as the components of the station are assumed
to be as cold as the ambient temperature, allowing for even higher pressure ramp
rates. The following Figure 4.13 and 4.14 presents the collective information graphs
in this scenario for the two methods. The combination of low ambient temperature,
cold dispensing and optimal cooling capacity, result in higher pressure ramp rates for
both methods compared to the Base Case (Figures 4.3, 4.4) with significantly higher
mass flows as there is not any concern on exceeding the overheating limits.
==PAGE:58==
4.2 Simulation results
43
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
time (s)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Refueling collective graph for MC method
Station pressure (MPa)
Pressure limit (MPa)
CHSS pressure (MPa)
Pressure target (MPa)
CHSS temperature (°C)
Station temperature (°C)
Mass flow (g/min)
Pressure Ramp Rate (MPa/min)
Storage Banks Pressure (MPa)
Figure 4.13: Cold case collective graph for MC method: -30◦C ambient tempera-
ture, 5MPa CHSS initial pressure. Y-axis units depend on the curve
exam-ined (see legend).
==PAGE:59==
44
4 Results
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
time (s)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Refueling collective graph for Lookup tables method
Station pressure (MPa)
Pressure limit (MPa)
CHSS pressure (MPa)
100% SOC Pressure (MPa)
CHSS temperature (°C)
Station temperature (°C)
Mass flow (g/min)
Pressure Ramp Rate (MPa/min)
Storage Banks Pressure (MPa)
Figure 4.14: Cold case collective graph for Lookup Tables method: -30◦C ambient
temperature, 5MPa CHSS initial pressure. Y-axis units depend on the
curve exam-ined (see legend).
As it is seen in Figure 4.15, the MC method fuels again faster than the Lookup
tables method, as in the Base and Hot Case. This is due to the calculated PRR
which is higher than the Lookup tables’ APPR. In this case however, also the MC
method’s PRR can be called an APRR as it does not need to change throughout the
fueling due to the excellent cooling capacity. The cold ambient temperature enables
the MC method to utilize the maximum PRR that the protocol allows it to have of
32 MPa/min in contrast with the Lookup table method’s APRR of 28.5 MPa/min,
as seen in Figure 4.16. The MC method’s PRR does not variate as the MATC does
not fluctuate before starting to converge with MAT30 and when it starts to do so, the
PRR is already at the maximum, so it cannot increase any further, as seen in Figure
4.17.
The pressure losses between station and CHSS, as shown in Figure 4.10 (left),
higher than in the Base Case seen in Figure 4.5 (left) for both methods, because of
the high mass flow rates utilized, shown in 4.10 (right).
==PAGE:60==
4.2 Simulation results
45
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressures comparison graph
Station pressure MC (MPa)
CHSS pressure MC (MPa)
Pressure target MC (MPa)
Station pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
CHSS pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
100% SOC Pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Mass flow (g/s)
Mass flows comparison graph
Mass flow MC
Mass flow Lookup Tables
Figure 4.15: (left) Cold case pressures development graph, y-axis in MPa - (right)
mass flows comparison graph.
==PAGE:61==
46
4 Results
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressure Ramp and PRR comparison graph
Pressure Ramp Rate MC (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp MC (MPa)
Pressure Ramp Rate Lookup Tables (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp Lookup Tables (MPa)
Figure 4.16: Cold Case pressure ramp and pressure ramp rate comparison graph.
Y-axis units depend on the curve exam-ined (see legend).
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
time (s)
-39
-38
-37
-36
-35
-34
-33
-32
-31
-30
Temperature (°C)
Mass Average Temperatures graph
MAT30
MAT0
MATc
MATexp
Figure 4.17: Cold case Mass Average Temperature graph.
==PAGE:62==
4.3 Energy and Exergy Analysis of the system using the two different fueling methods
47
Table 4.3: Method efficiency data comparison for Cold Case.
MC method
Lookup Tables method
Fueling Duration (s)
135.40
151.90
State of Charge (%)
97.58
98.23
Mass Dispensed (kg)
5.06
5.09
Theoretical Mileage (km)
491
494
As shown in Table 4.3, the MC method fuels 16.5 seconds (11.5%) faster than the
Lookup table method reaching however a lower SOC level of of 97.58% compared to
the Lookup tables method of 98.23%. This translates also to less mass dispensed and
less theoretical range for the car due to the MC method SOCtarget mechanics.
The rest of the cases in this scenario behave again as expected with the MC fueling
faster albeit with lower SOC levels due to its lower pre-set SOC target limit of. What
is important to mention here is that in the case of 60MPa of initial CHSS pressure,
no method proceeds to fueling. For the MC method, as the SOC in that pressure
and ambient temperature is 101%, makes the method to calculate a target pressure
of 57.8MPa. This is of course lower than the already existing pressure in the tank,
resulting in termination of the fueling before it even starts as the preset SOCtarget
of 99% is reached regardless. Similar case with the Lookup tables method, as its
calculated SOC is larger than 100%, which is its target SOC limit for communications
fueling termination.
4.3
Energy and Exergy Analysis of the system using the
two different fueling methods
Following the efficiency evaluation of the two fueling methods studying purely the
fueling part, the need to study the two methods in terms of energy efficiency by
studying the energy consumption and exergy destruction arose. The fueling station
model was developed further, adding a series of components that brought it closer
to real-life station designs. These components included a compressor, an additional
heat exchanger (HEX compressor) and a low pressure storage tank (Large Storage
Bank). A simple depiction of this model can be seen in Figure 4.18. These additions
served the purpose of topping up the cascade system’s high pressure storage banks
to bring their pressure back to the original levels, reading them up for the fueling of
the next FCEV. By studying this more realistic system from an energy and exergy
perspective, the differences that the two fueling methods have from that aspect can
be observed. This analysis has been performed for each fueling scenario in an effort to
==PAGE:63==
48
4 Results
cover potential energy consumption and exergy destruction variations that different
ambient temperatures can cause.
==PAGE:64==
4.3 Energy and Exergy Analysis of the system using the two different fueling methods
49
Figure 4.18: Simulation system model used for energy and exergy analysis.
==PAGE:65==
50
4 Results
4.3.1
Energy consumption
Regarding the energy consumption of the system, the only components that require
energy (electricity) to operate are the compressor and the two heat exchangers of
the system. When talking about the energy consumption of a fueling station, if no
on-site hydrogen production is utilized, then it is only about those components. The
Table 4.4 below, summarizes the energy consumption of those components after one
fueling, for all the different scenarios, using a different fueling method each time (MC
method and Lookup Tables or L.T method).
Table 4.4: Energy consumption of the different energy consuming components in
each fueling scenario, values given in [kWh].
Scenario - Method
Compressor
HEXcompressor
HEXfueling
Total
Base Case - MC
2.41
0.54
0.82
3.77
Base case - L.T.
2.20
0.50
0.82
3.52
Hot Case - MC
2.16
1.25
0.85
4.26
Hot Case - L.T.
2.23
1.45
0.88
4.56
Cold Case - MC
1.96
0.15
0.05
2.15
Cold Case - L.T.
1.92
0.14
0.05
2.11
As it is observed from the previous Table 4.4, in all the scenarios the most energy
consuming component is the compressor which is expected, as it tops up the high
pressure tanks pumping hydrogen from the low pressure storage bank. Furthermore,
as it is expected, the colder the ambient temperature is, the energy consumption of
the system is lower. This is due to the less energy demand to cool the hydrogen in
the heat exchangers.
Investigating the fueling method for each scenario, utilizing the MC method seems
to be more energy efficient in the Hot Case as the system consumes less energy than by
running with the Lookup tables method. This is mainly due to the more compressor
work that is required in using the Lookup tables method, as the utilization of the
100MPa tank is higher than using the MC method.
In the Base and Cold Case though, the opposite happens. This is expected as the
higher mass flows that the MC method uses results to more pressure losses and
subsequently the compressor and its heat exchanger must work more to cover the
higher pressure lost in the storage tanks due to these pressure losses.
The faster
fueling that the MC method provides can be a double-edged sword: In mild and
cold ambient conditions, it works against it (energy consumption-wise) as it makes
the station use more energy. In the hot ambient conditions on the contrary where
the fueling times are significantly higher for both methods and the pressure losses
significantly lower, the MC method consumes less energy than the Lookup tables
method by having less energy consumption by the compressor and its heat exchanger.
==PAGE:66==
4.3 Energy and Exergy Analysis of the system using the two different fueling methods
51
Table 4.5: Overall fueling duration and total energy consumption of the two differ-
ent methods for each scenario. Values of the overall duration are given
in [seconds] and values for the energy consumption in [kWh].
Scenario - Method
Overall duration
Energy Consumption
Base Case - MC
449.87
3.77
Base case - L.T.
470.35
3.52
Hot Case - MC
915.87
4.26
Hot Case - L.T.
1053.11
4.56
Cold Case - MC
319.92
2.15
Cold Case - L.T.
407.81
2.11
In Table 4.5, the difference between the MC method and the Lookup table method
in terms of overall fueling duration and total energy consumption can be seen. Overall
fueling duration takes into account the fueling time plus the time that it is required
for the compressor to refill the three high pressure storage tanks from the low pressure
storage bank up to their initial conditions (their original pressure that they had before
the fueling) to be ready for the next fueling. The process of the filling of the storage
tanks from the compressor starts immediately when a storage tank is switched during
the fueling. Consequently, the overall duration is affected by the speed of the fueling,
as the sooner that there is a storage tank switch, the sooner the compressor will begin
to fill that storage tank up. In all the scenarios, the MC method yields a lower overall
fueling duration than the Lookup tables method (from 13.2% less time in the Hot
Case up to 24.2% less in the Cold Case).
4.3.2
Exergy Analysis
Regarding the exergy analysis of the system, the exergy destruction of each compo-
nent is taken into consideration providing a complete image of the most inefficient
components of the system and their contribution to the total exergy destruction of
the system for each fueling method in each scenario like in the previous section.
In the Table 4.6 below, the data of exergy destruction of each component is pre-
sented for the Base Case.
==PAGE:67==
52
4 Results
Table 4.6: Exergy destruction in all the components in the two different fueling
methods for the Base Case scenario.
Fueling Component
MC method
Lookup tables method
[kWh]([%])
[kWh]([%])
Large storage Bank
0.16 (3.7)
0.16(4.0)
Storage Tank 1
0.17 (3.9)
0.23(5.7)
Storage Tank 2
0.56 (12.9)
0.48 (12.0)
Storage Tank 3
0.48 (11.0)
0.40 (10.0)
Vehicle’s CHSS
0.64 (14.7)
0.63 (15.7)
Compressor
0.29 (6.6)
0.28 (7.0)
HEX (compressor)
0.35 (8.0)
0.31 (7.7)
HEX (fueling)
0.40 (9.2)
0.40 (10.0)
Reduction Valve
0.70 (16.0)
0.72 (18.0)
Pressure Loss 1
≈0 (0.0)
≈0 (0.0)
Pressure Loss 2
0.04 (0.9)
0.03 (0.8)
Pressure Loss 3
0.10 (2.3)
0.06 (1.5)
Pressure Loss 4
0.04 (0.9)
0.02 (0.5)
Pressure Loss 5
0.36 (8.3)
0.22 (5.5)
Volume Mixer 1
0.02 (0.5)
0.03 (0.8)
Volume Mixer 2
0.04 (0.9)
0.02 (0.5)
Volume Mixer 3
0.01 (0.2)
0.01 (0.3))
Total
4.36 (100)
4.00 (100)
From a system point of view, one can point out that the MC method has more to-
tal exergy destruction than the Lookup tables method, around 8.6% more in this case.
This is normal and it is expected as the MC method’s mass flow rates are higher in all
of the scenarios than those of the Lookup tables method due to higher pressure ramp
rates, a fact that leads to higher pressure losses in the system that cause larger exergy
destruction. These higher pressure losses affect most of the components as they result
to larger pressure drops in the storage tanks, more compressor work to compensate for
that and thus more cooling work from the heat exchangers. Looking at the table, all
five pressure loss of the Lookup tables method have lower exergy destruction values
than the MC method which confirm the above statement. The exergy destruction in
the storage tanks and the large storage bank covers a significant amount of the total
exergy destruction for both methods (more than 30%). The vehicle’s CHSS’s exergy
destruction is around the same for both methods (slightly higher for the MC method
as the more rapid discharge of hydrogen inside the tank results in a slightly larger
temperature development). The reduction valve yields a substantial percentage of
the total exergy destruction for both methods (16% for MC method and 18% for
Lookup tables method), with that of the Lookup tables being higher due to the lower
overall pressure losses of the system which translates to higher pressure reduction
by the reduction valve. Lastly, the exergy destruction of the volume mixers are al-
==PAGE:68==
4.3 Energy and Exergy Analysis of the system using the two different fueling methods
53
most insignificant taking up to 1.6% of the total exergy destruction for both methods.
In Table 4.7 below, the data of exergy destruction of each component is presented
for the Hot Case.
Table 4.7: Exergy destruction in all the components in the two different fueling
methods for the Hot Case scenario.
Fueling Component
MC method
Lookup tables method
[kWh]([%])
[kWh]([%])
Large storage Bank
0.18 (4.4)
0.18 (4.8)
Storage Tank 1
0.19 (4.8)
0.19 (5.0)
Storage Tank 2
0.32 (8.1)
0.24 (6.3)
Storage Tank 3
0.30 (7.6)
0.11 (3.0)
Vehicle’s CHSS
0.65 (16.4)
0.64 (17.1)
Compressor
0.27 (6.8)
0.28 (7.4)
HEX (compressor)
0.36 (9.0)
0.39 (9.8)
HEX (fueling)
0.61 (15.2)
0.64 (17.1)
Reduction Valve
0.77 (19.2)
0.76 (20.4)
Pressure Loss 1
≈0 (0.0)
≈0 (0.0)
Pressure Loss 2
0.01 (0.1)
0.01 (0.1)
Pressure Loss 3
0.01 (0.1)
0.01 (0.1)
Pressure Loss 4
0.02 (0.3)
0.01 (0.1)
Pressure Loss 5
0.04 (1.1)
0.03 (0.7)
Volume Mixer 1
0.04 (1.1)
0.04 (1.2)
Volume Mixer 2
0.10 (2.4)
0.16 (4.2)
Volume Mixer 3
0.13 (3.3)
0.10 (2.6)
Total
4.00 (100)
3.79 (100)
Observing Table 4.7 and considering the remarks form the Base Case, no alarming
occurrences are noticed with the exergy destruction following the same path as in the
Base Case. The total exergy destruction is higher for the MC method once more
overall due to the higher pressure losses that the MC method results in compared to
the Lookup table method. The values are however are less in most of the components
than those in the Base Case due to the significantly lower pressure ramp rates thus
mass flow rates for both methods.
In the Table 4.8 below, the data of exergy destruction of each component is pre-
sented for the Cold Case.
==PAGE:69==
54
4 Results
Fueling Component
MC method
Lookup tables method
[kWh]([%])
[kWh]([%])
Large storage Bank
0.15 (4.5)
0.15 (4.6)
Storage Tank 1
0.17 (5.1)
0.18 (5.5)
Storage Tank 2
0.56 (16.7)
0.56 (17.2)
Storage Tank 3
0.41 (12.2)
0.37 (11.3)
Vehicle’s CHSS
0.51 (15.2)
0.51 (15.6)
Compressor
0.24 (7.2)
0.24 (7.4)
HEX (compressor)
0.13 (3.9)
0.13 (4.0)
HEX (fueling)
0.01 (0.3)
0.01 (0.3)
Reduction Valve
0.59 (17.6)
0.60 (18.4)
Pressure Loss 1
≈0 (0.0)
≈0 (0.0)
Pressure Loss 2
0.04 (1.2)
0.03 (0.9)
Pressure Loss 3
0.10 (3.0)
0.09 (2.8)
Pressure Loss 4
0.04 (1.2)
0.03 (0.9)
Pressure Loss 5
0.36 (10.7)
0.32 (9.8)
Volume Mixer 1
≈0 (0.0)
≈0 (0.0)
Volume Mixer 2
0.02 (0.6)
0.02 (0.6)
Volume Mixer 3
0.02 (0.6)
0.01 (0.3)
Total
3.35 (100)
3.26 (100)
Table 4.8: Exergy destruction in all the components in the two different fueling
methods for the Cold Case scenario.
The above table for the Cold Case showcases how the total exergy destruction of
the system is affected by low ambient temperatures as this case yields the lowest total
exergy destruction values of all three cases. Investigating further on that, one can
observe that there is not a large difference in the values of the storage bank/tanks
and vehicle’s CHSS as well as not a big difference is noted in the pressure losses from
the Base Case. This happens because the pressure losses in this case are comparable
to the Base Case because of the relatively high mass flow rates used by both meth-
ods. The largest difference by far for both methods are in the heat exchangers. Due
to the low ambient temperature the heat exchangers’ work is minimized, reducing
drastically their exergy destruction. The total exergy destruction of the system using
the MC method is again higher than when using the Lookup tables method. This
difference is mostly observed in components like the highest pressure storage tank and
in pressure losses. The MC method utilizes more hydrogen from the highest pressure
storage tank during the fueling so the exergy destruction on that component is larger.
Due to the higher mass flow that derives from the MC method’s higher pressure ramp
rate, the pressure losses are also higher resulting in more exergy destruction in the
pressure losses components. Interesting to mention that the reduction valve has less
exergy destruction in the MC method as overall pressure losses in said method are
more, so the valve has to reduce the pressure less due to these pressure losses.
==PAGE:70==
4.3 Energy and Exergy Analysis of the system using the two different fueling methods
55
4.3.3
Consecutive fuelings
Following the simulations for the study of the energy consumption/exergy destruction
of the system, a question arose that was proved interesting to answer: In case of a
faulty/non-operating compressor, which method can refuel the most cars up to a
50% SOC in this current station capcity setup utilizing only the cascade system?
Simulations were run on consecutive fuelings without the compressor topping up the
storage tanks in between them for the Base Case. The results are presented in the
following Figure 4.19:
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Number of consecutive refuelings
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
State of Charge (%)
Number of consecutive fuelings w/o compressor - MC method
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Number of consecutive refuelings
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
State of Charge (%)
Number of consecutive fuelings w/o compressor - Lookup tables method
Figure 4.19: Consecutive fuelings without compressor operation until SOC is more
than 50% for both methods.
As it is clear from the above Figure 4.19, the MC method’s faster but higher
pressure loss fueling can provide 5 fuelings before not being able to deliver enough
hydrogen in the rate that it is operating with, for a higher than 50% SOC in the vehicle.
The slower fueling of the Lookup tables method comes on top in this comparison, by
being able to fuel 7 cars consecutively, due to less pressure losses. Furthermore, it
provides fuelings with higher SOC levels per fueling than the MC method does.
==PAGE:71==
56
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
This chapter presents a recap of the work in this project as well as a summary of
the findings presented in the Results Chapter 4. An analysis and discussion of those
results and their effects on the comparison of the MC method and the Lookup tables
method follows.
5.1
Summary of findings
This study aimed at the understanding and correct implementation of the MC fueling
method to a hydrogen fueling station system model in order to compare the method’s
efficiency versus the already widely used Lookup table method of the SAE’s hydrogen
fueling protocol. Based on literature review, not many studies are dedicated in study-
ing this method and even fewer exist that compare it with the Lookup tables method.
In this project, this gap in literature was tried to be filled from a system perspective.
This was achieved by comparing the two methods in respect with fueling times in dif-
ferent ambient temperature scenarios variating different parameters for each scenario
such as initial CHSS pressure, communications fueling , cold dispensing etc., but also
in respect with energy consumption/exergy destruction for each different scenario.
This was made possible by implementing the MC fueling method into an already
existing hydrogen fueling system model, following the guidelines of the method accord-
ing to SAE J2601. The implementation led to a model that could switch between the
two fueling methods for different simulations. Implementing the MC fueling method
in the model was a challenging task, as the method itself is a rather complicated
one compared to the simple Lookup tables method, with a description in the protocol
that is not easily understandable. A new component was developed for the model, the
”MC calculations”, which - as its name states - contained all the necessary equations,
parameters and variables for the calculations of the method. This model was opti-
mized after many failed attempts and when it was ready, a simulation was run based
on data from [25]. The results were very similar to the literature, with minor offsets
mainly due to the lack of detailed information from said literature. This served as
a confirmation of the model which was then ready to simulate this study’s scenarios
and cases.
==PAGE:73==
58
5 Discussion
Regarding the fueling times, the MC method proved faster in each and every sce-
nario and each scenario’s cases, as it benefits from higher pressure ramp rates that
variate according to the measured pre-cooling capacity of the station. This allows for
calculated pressure ramp rates that are higher than same-conditions Lookup tables
method pressure ramp rates in every case.
In the Base Case, a very common real-world case scenario, the difference in fuel-
ing time was 32.7% in favor of the MC method, which translates to a more than
a minute less fueling time in a typical 4-minute hydrogen fueling with the Lookup
tables method. MC method performs even faster fueling in non-communications sim-
ulations in this scenario. Furthermore, it reaches the same levels of SOC with the
Lookup tables method for each case of the scenario, with only marginal differences
in favor of the Lookup tables method due to the different target SOC mechanics of
the latter.
Same trend is followed in a less favourable for hydrogen fueling scenario, the Hot
Case. In this case, the high ambient temperatures combined with less than the Base
Case’s cooling capacity result in significantly longer fueling times than the Base Case
for both methods. The difference between the two methods in terms of fueling time
however, are still high with the MC method fueling 25.2% faster than the Lookup
tables method in an overall more than 17 minutes long fueling (using the Lookup
tables method). The SOC levels are again the in the same levels, with Lookup ta-
bles method having a slight advantage in respect to that, for different cases of initial
CHSS pressures (higher than the standard 5MPa initial CHSS pressure showcased in
the Results).
For a more fast fueling favourable scenario, the Cold Case, fueling times are signifi-
cantly less for both methods as they utilize also faster pressure ramp rates through
the cold dispensing option. Even in the faster fueling times of the Cold Case, the MC
method proves faster by 23.3%, in an already fast, under 3 minutes, fueling duration.
SOC levels in this scenario’s cases lean slightly towards the Lookup tables method
more as it was explained in Cold Case, Section 4.2.3, with both methods resulting in
not fueling the CHSS in the 60MPa initial CHSS pressure case, as the SOC target
set is already achieved in this pressure.
Concluding on the comparison between the two methods in regards to the fueling
times, the MC method comes on top, yielding faster fueling times for each scenario’s
case, albeit with a slight disadvantage in SOC levels.
Regarding the energy consumption of the system using each fueling method, there
are no significant differences between the two methods as the energy consumption de-
pends mainly on which method is utilizing more hydrogen from the higher pressure
storage banks as well as which methods has higher pressure losses in the system. The
method that yields more pressure losses is mainly the MC method as the higher pres-
sure ramp rates translate to higher mass flows thus more pressure losses.
For the Base Case, the MC method consumes 6.9% more energy than the Lookup
tables method due to mainly more compressor work. For the Hot Case, it is the
opposite picture, with the Lookup tables method consuming 6.8% again due to the
==PAGE:74==
5.1 Summary of findings
59
more compressor work but also this time due to the more cooling work from the heat
exchanger after the compressor. This happens for the following reason: The model’s
compressor starts refilling the first (40MPa) high pressure storage tank as soon as the
fueling proceeds in a switch to the higher pressure storage tank. As soon as the first
tank is refilled, the compressor proceeds with refilling the next one, and so on. In a
slow fueling scenario like the Hot Case and especially for the slower filling Lookup
table method, the fueling of i.e the 100MPa tank, starts before the fueling procedure
is over as the previous storage tank (i.e the 700MPa one) has already been refilled.
This leads to higher pressure demand as the fueling is lowering the tanks pressure
and the compressor is trying to refill it in the same time, leading to more energy
consumption.
One can argue that this is not how a real life compressor in a fueling station works,
however, to avoid even more complex coding, this simple solution is applied for in
the model and is valid for both methods. The MC method’s faster fills, make the
compressor not having to deal with a tank that is emptying up the same time it is
trying to refill it.
In the Cold Case, the MC method has 1.9% more energy consumption than the
Lookup tables method that the lower SOC causes due to the higher utilization of the
highest storage tank which translates to less compressor work.
Concluding on the energy consumption part, it is safe to say that the MC method
provides same if not, for hotter ambient temperatures cases, more energy efficient
fuelings with less overall fueling times which further empowers its perks as a fast and
energy efficient method.
From an exergy destruction perspective, the MC method is slightly less efficient
than the Lookup tables method in two out of the three scenarios.
In the Base Case, the difference in total exergy destruction is 8.6% more for the MC
method, mainly due to the the higher pressure losses due to the higher mass flow rates
and more utilization of the higher pressure storage tanks (the 70 and 100MPa ones).
Same trend is followed in the Hot Case with the MC method having a 5.4% more
total exergy destruction than the Lookup table method, again due to higher pressure
losses and the higher than the Base case utilization of the he 70 and 100MPa stor-
age tanks. In the Cold Case, the MC tables method is again the one with the more
total exergy destruction with a 2.72% difference mainly due to the higher usage of
the 100MPa storage tank and more compressor work as it yeilds more pressure losses
that the higher pressure storage tanks must cover for the preservation of the higher
pressure ramp rate.
Overall, the two methods do not have many differences in terms of exergy destruction,
as each time, the higher exergy destruction is dictated by the method that utilizes
more the higher pressure storage tanks and the one that has the more pressure losses.
Following the energy and exergy analysis, an interesting study of the number
of consecutive fuelings that a station can perform without the use of the compressor
(assuming a faulty compressor) to bring back the storage tanks pressure to their initial
==PAGE:75==
60
5 Discussion
levels was conducted. Here, the Lookup tables method was the clear winner, as it
performed 2 more consecutive fuelings until a satisfactory 50% SOC level was reached
than the MC method, yielding higher SOC levels for each refueling compared to the
MC method. This could indicate that faster is not always better and a station having
both methods in its operating software could switch to the Lookup table method in
case of a faulty compressor and high demand for fuelings.
==PAGE:76==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
This chapter presents the effort to give a final conclusion of the work behind this project.
The concluding remarks based on the findings from the results will be described as well
as some recommendations for further work for the studied MC fueling method and its
implementation to hydrogen fueling stations.
6.0.1
Concluding remarks
As an overall conclusion to the comparison of the two methods, the MC methods
was found to be as efficient as the currently used Lookup tables method in terms
of energy efficiency. Rather small differences exist regarding energy consumption in
favour of the Lookup tables method (up to 6.9%) when a station is operating at
normal (25◦C) and colder than normal environments, but the MC method seems to
have the advantage on energy efficiency in warmer environments, with a 6.8% less
energy consumption than the Lookup tables method.
The aforementioned same energy efficiency is paired with significantly faster fueling
times for the MC method both in terms of pure fueling duration and also overall
fueling time at the station (fueling plus restoring the storage banks to their initial
state) that can reach up to 32.7% faster fuelings for the MC method (pure fueling
time).
Fueling manufacturers should definitely consider implementing this method to their
stations, for better customer satisfaction with a minimal cost in terms of energy (only
if not operating in warmer than normal environments). Its implementation maybe be
tricky due to its complexity compared to the Lookup tables method but it is worth
it according to the findings of this study.
6.1
Recommendations for further work
From a model perspective, the simulation model that was used can be optimized to
be more realistic by implementing the fallback procedure in its calculations as an
option as well as pauses to simulate non-fueling events (such as bank switches or leak
checks) to approach the reality in a higher level.
Furthermore, based on this study an economic analysis can be conducted taking into
account also the customer satisfaction in monetary terms that faster fuelings provide
==PAGE:77==
62
6 Conclusion
for an economic efficiency comparison of the two fueling methods.
Moreover, SAE should conduct more simulations and field test for the optimization of
the calculation of the target pressure in the MC method as higher pressure losses in
different stations can compromise SOC levels due to the already high mass flow rates.
In addition, new MC method coefficients should be introduced to cover the demand
of fast fueling heavy-duty FCEVs like trucks and buses given the significantly larger
CHSSs that they carry.
Lastly, the MC method could be described in more detail with more examples in the
SAE J2601 protocol to make it easier to implement by station manufacturers that
rest in the use of the reliable and proven Lookup table method rather than wanting
to utilize the MC method for the optimization of the hydrogen fueling procedure.
==PAGE:78==
References
[1]
Statista 2018. Projected global fuel cell vehicle unit sales between 2015 and 2020.
2018. url: https://www.statista.com/statistics/644545/global-sales-
of-fuel-cell-vehicles/ (visited on July 23, 2018) (cited on page 2).
[2]
Frank Ahrens. 2017: The Year Europe Got Serious About Killing The In-
ternal Combustion Engine. 2017. url: https://www.forbes.com/sites/
frankahrens/2017/12/22/2017-the-year-europe-got-serious-about-
killing- the- internal- combustion- engine/ (visited on August 1, 2018)
(cited on page 1).
[3]
Jonathan Amos. Polluted air causes 5.5 million deaths a year new research says.
2016. url: https://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-35568249
(visited on August 1, 2018) (cited on page 1).
[4]
Society of Automotive Engineers. Fueling Protocols for Light Duty Gaseous
Hydrogen Surface Vehicles. December 2016. url: https://doi.org/10.4271/
J2601_201612 (cited on pages viii, 3, 11, 12, 17–21, 29, 30, 38, 71, 74).
[5]
Mercedes - Benz. The new Mercedes - Benz GLC F-CELL. 2018. url: https:
/ / www . mercedes - benz . com / en / mercedes - benz / vehicles / passenger -
cars/glc/the-new-glc-f-cell/ (visited on May 25, 2018) (cited on page 1).
[6]
Thomas Bourgeois et al. “Evaluating the temperature inside a tank during a
filling with highly-pressurized gas”. In: international journal of hydrogen energy
40.35 (2015), pages 11748–11755 (cited on pages 3, 4).
[7]
T Bourgeois et al. “Optimization of hydrogen vehicle refuelling requirements”.
In: International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 42.19 (2017), pages 13789–13809
(cited on page 4).
[8]
Samuel Miller Christopher English. Coradia iLint hydrogen train receives ap-
proval for commercial operation in German railway networks. 2018. url: https:
/ / www . alstom . com / press - releases - news / 2018 / 7 / coradia - ilint -
hydrogen- train- receives- approval- for- commercial- operation- in-
german-railway-networks (visited on August 1, 2018) (cited on page 1).
[9]
CJB Dicken and W Merida. “Measured effects of filling time and initial mass
on the temperature distribution within a hydrogen cylinder during refuelling”.
In: Journal of Power Sources 165.1 (2007), pages 324–336 (cited on pages 3, 4,
6).
==PAGE:79==
64
References
[10]
Energiforskning.dk. HyScale. 2018. url: https://energiforskning.dk/da/
project/hyscale (visited on August 20, 2018) (cited on page iii).
[11]
Intelligent Energy. Fuel Cell Power For UAVs. 2018. url: http://www.intelligent-
energy.com/our-products/uavs/ (visited on May 25, 2018) (cited on page 1).
[12]
R Harty, S Mathison, and N Gupta. “Improving Hydrogen Tank Refueling
Performance through the Use of an Advanced Fueling Algorithm—The MC
Method,”” in: Proceedings of the national hydrogen association conference, May
4th 2010. 2010 (cited on page 4).
[13]
M Hosseini et al. “Thermodynamic analysis of filling compressed gaseous hy-
drogen storage tanks”. In: international journal of hydrogen energy 37.6 (2012),
pages 5063–5071 (cited on pages 3, 4).
[14]
Mark Kane. There Are 6,500 Hydrogen Fuel Cell Cars Worldwide (Half In
California). 2018. url: https://insideevs.com/there- is- only- 6500-
hydrogen-fuel-cell-cars-in-the-world-half-in-california-report/
(visited on July 23, 2018) (cited on page 2).
[15]
Mikkel Rykær Kraglund. “Alkaline membrane water electrolysis with non-noble
catalysts”. In: Energy 13 (1988), pages 141–150 (cited on page 1).
[16]
Jacob William Leachman et al. “Fundamental equations of state for parahydro-
gen, normal hydrogen, and orthohydrogen”. In: Journal of Physical and Chem-
ical Reference Data 38.3 (2009), pages 721–748 (cited on page 4).
[17]
Qianfeng Li et al. “Effects of geometry and inconstant mass flow rate on tem-
peratures within a pressurized hydrogen cylinder during refueling”. In: Inter-
national Journal of Hydrogen Energy 37.7 (2012), pages 6043–6052 (cited on
page 3).
[18]
Steven Mathison et al. Application of MC method-based H2 fueling. Technical
report. SAE Technical Paper, 2012 (cited on page 4).
[19]
Steven Mathison et al. “Field validation of the MC default fill hydrogen fueling
protocol”. In: SAE International Journal of Alternative Powertrains 4.1 (2015),
pages 130–144 (cited on pages 4, 7, 10).
[20]
Steffen Maus et al. “Filling procedure for vehicles with compressed hydrogen
tanks”. In: International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 33.17 (2008), pages 4612–
4621 (cited on page 4).
[21]
Nikola Motor. Nikola One. 2018. url: https://nikolamotor.com/one (visited
on May 25, 2018) (cited on page 1).
[22]
Maki Shiraki Naomi Tajitsu. Toyota plans to expand production, shrink cost of
hydrogen fuel cell vehicles. 2018. url: https://www.reuters.com/article/us-
toyota-hydrogen/toyota-plans-to-expand-production-shrink-cost-of-
hydrogen-fuel-cell-vehicles-idUSKBN1KG0Y0 (visited on July 26, 2018)
(cited on page 2).
==PAGE:80==
References
65
[23]
Energy Observer. Energy Observer. 2018. url: http://www.energy-observer.
org/#actu (visited on May 25, 2018) (cited on page 1).
[24]
Plug Power. SERIES 1000 FUEL CELLS. 2018. url: http://www.plugpower.
com/products/gendrive/series-1000/ (visited on May 25, 2018) (cited on
page 1).
[25]
Krishna Reddi et al. “Impact of hydrogen SAE J2601 fueling methods on fu-
eling time of light-duty fuel cell electric vehicles”. In: International Journal of
Hydrogen Energy 42.26 (2017), pages 16675–16685 (cited on pages 3, 4, 7, 10,
14, 30, 32, 57).
[26]
E Rothuizen and Masoud Rokni. “Optimization of the overall energy consump-
tion in cascade fueling stations for hydrogen vehicles”. In: International Journal
of Hydrogen Energy 39.1 (2014), pages 582–592 (cited on page 4).
[27]
Erasmus Damgaard Rothuizen. “Hydrogen Fuelling Stations: A Thermodynamic
Analysis of Fuelling Hydrogen Vehicles for Personal Transportation”. PhD the-
sis. Technical University of Denmark. Department of Mechanical Engineering,
2013 (cited on pages 3, 4, 6, 9, 13, 23, 24, 26, 36).
[28]
E Rothuizen et al. “Optimization of hydrogen vehicle refueling via dynamic sim-
ulation”. In: International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 38.11 (2013), pages 4221–
4231 (cited on page 4).
[29]
Jesse Schneider et al. “The Implementation of SAE J2601: Hydrogen Fuelling
Protocol Guideline for Demonstration Projects”. In: Report Nr.: Schriften des
Forschungszentrums Jülich/Energy and Environment (2010) (cited on page 4).
[30]
Jesse Schneider et al. “Validation and sensitivity studies for SAE J2601, the
light duty vehicle hydrogen fueling standard”. In: SAE International Journal of
Alternative Powertrains 3.2 (2014), pages 257–309 (cited on page 4).
[31]
Meghan E. Smith. What percentage of air pollution is due to cars? url: https:
/ / auto. howstuffworks. com/ percentage- of- air- pollution- due- to-
cars.htm#mkcpgn=kaw1 (visited on August 1, 2018) (cited on page 1).
[32]
Solaris. Urbino electric. 2018. url: https : / / www . solarisbus . com / en /
vehicles/alternative-drives/urbino-electric (visited on May 25, 2018)
(cited on page 1).
[33]
Retail Environments Staff. Global sales of hydrogen fuel cell vehicles near 6,500.
2018. url: http : / / insights . retailenvironments . org / 2018 / 02 / 09 /
global- sales- hydrogen- fuel- cell- vehicles- near- 6500/ (visited on
May 25, 2018) (cited on page 1).
[34]
Laurie Winkless. Are Hydrogen Fuel Cell Cars Becoming... Normal? 2016. url:
https : / / www . forbes . com / sites / lauriewinkless / 2016 / 06 / 01 / are -
hydrogen-fuel-cell-cars-becoming-normal/#30fb2413683a (visited on
July 26, 2018) (cited on page 37).
==PAGE:81==
66
References
[35]
Jiann C Yang. “A thermodynamic analysis of refueling of a hydrogen tank”. In:
international journal of hydrogen energy 34.16 (2009), pages 6712–6721 (cited
on page 4).
==PAGE:82==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
In this Appendix A the results of the rest of the simulations performed during this
study will be presented and described shortly. The aforementioned simulations are
the same for each scenario and include different cases of initial pressures on the
vehicle’s CHSS, non-communications fueling with two different simulations for the
MC method (one utilizing the MC calculations and MC target pressure tables for
the determination of the non-communications target pressure) and cold dispenser
simulation (only for the Base Case). The results include collective graphs for MC
and Lookup tables method, pressure ramp rates comparison graph and pressures
development and mass flows comparisons graphs for all the different initial CHSS
pressure cases and CD case of the Base Case scenario and lastly pressures development
and mass flows comparisons graphs only for all non-communications cases. These
simulations are performed with model without the compressor, studying only fueling
time and end of fill pressures. A detailed table containing all the parameters of all
the different simulations can be seen in Table A.1. Furthermore, the data for the
simulations performed for the energy/exergy analysis are presented in Table A.2;
==PAGE:83==
68
A Appendix
Table A.1: Fueling simulations data.
==PAGE:84==
A.1 Base Case
69
Table A.2: Energy/Exergy simulations data.
A.1
Base Case
In this scenario, the presented results are for the following cases:
1. Base Case 2: 25◦Cambient temperature, 20MPa CHSS initial pressure.
2. Base Case 2: 25◦Cambient temperature, 60MPa CHSS initial pressure.
3. Base Case CD: 25◦Cambient temperature, 5MPa CHSS initial pressure, cold
dispensing.
4. Base Case non-communications: 25◦Cambient temperature, 5MPa CHSS initial
pressure, non communications fueling (two different simulations for the MC
method).
A.1.1
Base Case 2
The Figures A.1, A.2 below present collective information for both methods for the
Base Case 2 scenario. Both methods follow a similar pattern as in Base Case with no
alarming occurrences.
==PAGE:85==
70
A Appendix
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
time (s)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Refueling collective graph for MC method
Station pressure (MPa)
Pressure limit (MPa)
CHSS pressure (MPa)
Pressure target (MPa)
CHSS temperature (°C)
Station temperature (°C)
Mass flow (g/min)
Pressure Ramp Rate (MPa/min)
Storage Banks Pressure (MPa)
Figure A.1: Base Case 2 collective graph for MC method: 25◦C ambient tempera-
ture, 20MPa CHSS initial pressure.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
time (s)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Refueling collective graph for Lookup tables method
Station pressure (MPa)
Pressure limit (MPa)
CHSS pressure (MPa)
100% SOC Pressure (MPa)
CHSS temperature (°C)
Station temperature (°C)
Mass flow (g/min)
Pressure Ramp Rate (MPa/min)
Storage Banks Pressure (MPa)
Figure A.2: Base case 2 collective graph for Lookup Tables method: 25◦C ambient
temperature, 20MPa CHSS initial pressure.
In the Figures A.1 and A.1, no differences are observed when compared to the
==PAGE:86==
A.1 Base Case
71
already described Base Case as it is expected.
The fueling this time starts from
20MPa CHSS initial pressure and proceeds regularly until it hits the pressure target
for the MC method and the pressure that corresponds to 100% SOC (calculated by
CHSS temperature and station pressure instead of CHSS pressure according to the
protocol [4]) where the fueling is complete.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
time (s)
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressures comparison graph
Station pressure MC (MPa)
CHSS pressure MC (MPa)
Pressure target MC (MPa)
Station pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
CHSS pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
100% SOC Pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
0
20
40
60
80
100 120 140 160 180
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Mass flow (g/s)
Mass flows comparison graph
Mass flow MC
Mass flow Lookup Tables
Figure A.3: (left) Base Case 2 pressures development graph and (right) mass flows
comparison graph.
==PAGE:87==
72
A Appendix
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
time (s)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressure Ramp and PRR comparison graph
Pressure Ramp Rate MC (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp MC (MPa)
Pressure Ramp Rate Lookup Tables (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp Lookup Tables (MPa)
Figure A.4: Base Case 2 pressure ramp and pressure ramp rate comparison graph.
No alarming remarks are observed in the pressures development comparison graph
in Figure A.3 (left), the mass flows comparison graph in Figure A.3 (right) or the
pressure ramps and ramp rates comparison graph in A.4.
MC method
Lookup Tables method
Fueling Duration (s)
152.20
195.53
State of Charge (%)
98.83
98.95
Table A.3: Method efficiency data comparison table for the Base Case 2.
As seen in Table A.3, SOCs for both methods are very close, with the MC method
yielding less fueling time by 24.9% (43.33 seconds).
A.1.2
Base Case 3
The Figures A.5, A.6 below present collective information for both methods for the
Base Case 3 scenario. Both methods follow a similar pattern as in Base Case 2 with
no alarming occurrences.
==PAGE:88==
A.1 Base Case
73
0
20
time (s)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Refueling collective graph for MC method
Station pressure (MPa)
Pressure limit (MPa)
CHSS pressure (MPa)
Pressure target (MPa)
CHSS temperature (°C)
Station temperature (°C)
Mass flow (g/min)
Pressure Ramp Rate (MPa/min)
Storage Banks Pressure (MPa)
Figure A.5: Base case 3 collective graph for MC method: 25◦C ambient tempera-
ture, 60MPa CHSS initial pressure.
0
20
40
time (s)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Refueling collective graph for Lookup tables method
Station pressure (MPa)
Pressure limit (MPa)
CHSS pressure (MPa)
100% SOC Pressure (MPa)
CHSS temperature (°C)
Station temperature (°C)
Mass flow (g/min)
Pressure Ramp Rate (MPa/min)
Storage Banks Pressure (MPa)
Figure A.6: Base case 3 collective graph for Lookup Tables method: 25◦C ambient
temperature, 60MPa CHSS initial pressure.
==PAGE:89==
74
A Appendix
In the Figures A.5 and A.5, no differences are observed when compared to the
already described Base Case as it is expected.
The fueling this time starts from
60MPa CHSS initial pressure and proceeds regularly but for a significantly shorter
time, until it hits the pressure target for the MC method and the pressure that
corresponds to 100% SOC (calculated by CHSS temperature and station pressure
instead of CHSS pressure according to the protocol [4]) where the fueling is complete.
0
20
40
time (s)
60
70
Pressures comparison graph
Station pressure MC (MPa)
CHSS pressure MC (MPa)
Pressure target MC (MPa)
Station pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
CHSS pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
100% SOC Pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
0
20
40
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Mass flow (g/s)
Mass flows comparison graph
Mass flow MC
Mass flow Lookup Tables
Figure A.7: (left) Base case 3 pressures development graph and (right) mass flows
comparison graph.
==PAGE:90==
A.1 Base Case
75
0
20
40
time (s)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressure Ramp and PRR comparison graph
Pressure Ramp Rate MC (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp MC (MPa)
Pressure Ramp Rate Lookup Tables (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp Lookup Tables (MPa)
Figure A.8: Base case 3 pressure ramp and pressure ramp rate comparison graph.
Not any noteworthy occurrences for the Base Case 3 in Figures A.7 (left and right)
and A.8.
MC method
Lookup Tables method
Fueling Duration (s)
35.06
48.40
State of Charge (%)
98.46
98.91
Table A.4: Method efficiency data comparison table for the Base Case 3.
In Table A.4 one can observe a really fast fueling which is more like a tank top
up for both methods, with similar SOC levels and only a 13.34 seconds difference in
favour of the faster filling MC method.
A.1.3
Base Case CD
The Figures A.9, A.10 below present collective information for both methods for the
Base Case CD scenario. This is a similar scenario to the Base Case only this time,
the two methods are filling up the CHSS with the CD option active. This allows for
higher PRRs for both methods as the components of the station are theoretically cool
from a previous fueling. Both methods follow a similar pattern as in Base Case with
no alarming occurrences.
==PAGE:91==
76
A Appendix
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
time (s)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Refueling collective graph for Lookup tables method
Station pressure (MPa)
Pressure limit (MPa)
CHSS pressure (MPa)
Pressure target (MPa)
CHSS temperature (°C)
Station temperature (°C)
Mass flow (g/min)
Pressure Ramp Rate (MPa/min)
Storage Banks Pressure (MPa)
Figure A.9: Base case CD collective graph for MC method: 25◦C ambient temper-
ature, 5MPa CHSS initial pressure, CD fueling.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
time (s)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Refueling collective graph for Lookup tables method
Station pressure (MPa)
Pressure limit (MPa)
CHSS pressure (MPa)
100% SOC Pressure (MPa)
CHSS temperature (°C)
Station temperature (°C)
Mass flow (g/min)
Pressure Ramp Rate (MPa/min)
Storage Banks Pressure (MPa)
Figure A.10: Base case CD collective graph for Lookup Tables method: 25◦C am-
bient temperature, 5MPa CHSS initial pressure, CD fueling.
As it is seen in Figures A.9 and A.10, the station temperature is constant since the
==PAGE:92==
A.1 Base Case
77
beginning and does not drop as in previous non CD cases. This allows for faster fuel-
ings for both methods utilizing higher PRRs as seen in Figure A.12 which translates
to larger mass flows as seen in Figure A.11 (right).
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressures comparison graph
Station pressure MC (MPa)
CHSS pressure MC (MPa)
Pressure target MC (MPa)
Station pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
CHSS pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
100% SOC Pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Mass flow (g/s)
Mass flows comparison graph
Mass flow MC
Mass flow Lookup Tables
Figure A.11: (left) Base case CD pressures development graph and (right) mass
flows comparison graph.
==PAGE:93==
78
A Appendix
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressure Ramp and PRR comparison graph
Pressure Ramp Rate MC (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp MC (MPa)
Pressure Ramp Rate Lookup Tables (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp Lookup Tables (MPa)
Figure A.12: Base case CD pressure ramp and pressure ramp rate comparison
graph.
MC method
Lookup Tables method
Fueling Duration (s)
146.34
186.13
State of Charge (%)
97.89
98.67
Table A.5: Method efficiency data comparison table for the Base Case CD.
From Table A.5, one can observe the 39.79 (23.9%) seconds difference that the
MC method has over the Lookup tables method in an already fast fueling for both
methods. SOC levels are similar, with Lookup tables method having a slight edge.
A.1.4
Base Case non-communications
The following Figures A.13, A.14 present information for both methods for the Base
Case non-communication fueling scenario where the MC method utilizes the MC
calculations for calculating a target pressure. On the contrary, Figures A.15, A.16
below present information for both methods for the Base Case non-communication
fueling scenario where the MC method utilizes the MC tables for determining the
pressure target.
==PAGE:94==
A.1 Base Case
79
0
20
40
60
80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressures comparison graph
Station pressure MC (MPa)
CHSS pressure MC (MPa)
Pressure target MC (MPa)
Station pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
CHSS pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
Pressure target Lookup Tables (MPa)
0
20
40
60
80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Mass flow (g/s)
Mass flows comparison graph
Mass flow MC
Mass flow Lookup Tables
Figure A.13: (left) Base case non-communications pressures development graph for
MC calculations target pressures and (right) mass flows comparison
graph.
==PAGE:95==
80
A Appendix
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressure Ramp and PRR comparison graph
Pressure Ramp Rate MC (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp MC (MPa)
Pressure Ramp Rate Lookup Tables (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp Lookup Tables (MPa)
Figure A.14: (left) Base case non-communications pressures development graph for
MC tables target pressures and (right) mass flows comparison graph.
==PAGE:96==
A.1 Base Case
81
0
20
40
60
80
100 120 140 160 180 200 220
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressures comparison graph
Station pressure MC (MPa)
CHSS pressure MC (MPa)
Pressure target MC (MPa)
Station pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
CHSS pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
Pressure target Lookup Tables (MPa)
0
20
40
60
80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Mass flow (g/s)
Mass flows comparison graph
Mass flow MC
Mass flow Lookup Tables
Figure A.15: (left) Base case non-communications pressures development graph for
MC tables target pressures and (right) mass flows comparison graph.
==PAGE:97==
82
A Appendix
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressure Ramp and PRR comparison graph
Pressure Ramp Rate MC (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp MC (MPa)
Pressure Ramp Rate Lookup Tables (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp Lookup Tables (MPa)
Figure A.16: Base case non-communications pressure ramp and pressure ramp rate
comparison graph using MC tables target pressures.
MC
method
(calculations)
MC
method
(tables)
Lookup
Ta-
bles method
Fueling Duration (s)
156.39
154.40
227.56
State Of Charge (%)
93.08
92.51
93.49
Table A.6: Method efficiency data comparison table for the Base Case non-
communications.
==PAGE:98==
A.2 Hot Case
83
MC method
Lookup Tables method
Fueling Duration (s)
178.97
248.97
State of Charge (%)
98.74
98.96
Table A.7: Method efficiency data comparison table for the Hot Case communica-
tions fueling.
As it is seen in the data summary Tables A.6, A.7, both methods are faster than
in the Base Case, but that comes in a cost of SOC as they achieve up to almost 5.6%
less SOC than in the Base Case communications fueling, due to non-communications
fueling.
The MC method has two ways that the fueling terminates, either with
calculations of the pressure target or from a pre-set pressure target from a lookup
table. The two ways do not have significant differences in fueling duration or SOC. It
is important to notice that even in a non-communication fueling, the MC method is
still faster than the Lookup tables method by up to 38.3% (73.16 seconds) achieving
same levels of SOC.
A.2
Hot Case
In this scenario, the presented results are for the following cases:
1. Hot Case 2: 45◦Cambient temperature, 20MPa CHSS initial pressure.
2. Hot Case 3: 45◦Cambient temperature, 60MPa CHSS initial pressure.
3. Hot Case non-communications: 45◦Cambient temperature, 5MPa CHSS initial
pressure, non communications fueling (two different simulations for the MC
method).
A.2.1
Hot Case 2
In the following Figures A.17, A.18 collective information about the Hot Case 2
fueling can be seen and Figures A.19 and A.20 present some comparative information
about the two methods. Nothing out of the ordinary, the fueling proceeds in the same
pattern as in the Hot Case.
==PAGE:99==
84
A Appendix
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
time (s)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Refueling collective graph for MC method
Station pressure (MPa)
Pressure limit (MPa)
CHSS pressure (MPa)
Pressure target (MPa)
CHSS temperature (°C)
Station temperature (°C)
Mass flow (g/min)
Pressure Ramp Rate (MPa/min)
Storage Banks Pressure (MPa)
Figure A.17: Hot Case 2 collective graph for MC method: 45◦C ambient tempera-
ture, 20MPa CHSS initial pressure.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
800
time (s)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Refueling collective graph for Lookup tables method
Station pressure (MPa)
Pressure limit (MPa)
CHSS pressure (MPa)
100% SOC Pressure (MPa)
CHSS temperature (°C)
Station temperature (°C)
Mass flow (g/min)
Pressure Ramp Rate (MPa/min)
Storage Banks Pressure (MPa)
Figure A.18: Hot Case 2 collective graph for Lookup Tables method: 45◦C ambient
temperature, 20MPa CHSS initial pressure.
==PAGE:100==
A.2 Hot Case
85
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
time (s)
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressures comparison graph
Station pressure MC (MPa)
CHSS pressure MC (MPa)
Pressure target MC (MPa)
Station pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
CHSS pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
100% SOC Pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Mass flow (g/s)
Mass flows comparison graph
Mass flow MC
Mass flow Lookup Tables
Figure A.19: (left) Hot Case 2 pressures development graph and (right) mass flows
comparison graph.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressure Ramp and PRR comparison graph
Pressure Ramp Rate MC (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp MC (MPa)
Pressure Ramp Rate Lookup Tables (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp Lookup Tables (MPa)
Figure A.20: Hot Case 2 pressure ramp and pressure ramp rate comparison graph.
==PAGE:101==
86
A Appendix
MC method
Lookup Tables method
Fueling Duration (s)
665.78
848.85
State of Charge (%)
98.98
99.30
Table A.8: Method efficiency data comparison table for the Hot Case 2.
As it is seen in Table A.8, the two methods proceed in a relatively long fueling
again, as in the Hot Case, due to the high ambient temperature that does not allow
them for high pressure ramp rates. Both achieve a high SOC due to the lower than
normal pressure losses that are a result of the low mass flows with the MC method
redfueling the CHSS 25.2% (183.07 seconds) faster than the Lookup table method.
A.2.2
Hot Case 3
Same pattern is followed in the Hot Case 3 as the Hot Case 2, as it is observed from
Figures A.21, A.22, A.23 and A.24.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
time (s)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Refueling collective graph for MC method
Station pressure (MPa)
Pressure limit (MPa)
CHSS pressure (MPa)
Pressure target (MPa)
CHSS temperature (°C)
Station temperature (°C)
Mass flow (g/min)
Pressure Ramp Rate (MPa/min)
Storage Banks Pressure (MPa)
Figure A.21: Hot Case 3 collective graph for MC method: 45◦C ambient tempera-
ture, 60MPa CHSS initial pressure.
==PAGE:102==
A.2 Hot Case
87
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
time (s)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Refueling collective graph for Lookup tables method
Station pressure (MPa)
Pressure limit (MPa)
CHSS pressure (MPa)
100% SOC Pressure (MPa)
CHSS temperature (°C)
Station temperature (°C)
Mass flow (g/min)
Pressure Ramp Rate (MPa/min)
Storage Banks Pressure (MPa)
Figure A.22: Hot Case 3 collective graph for Lookup Tables method: 45◦C ambient
temperature, 60MPa CHSS initial pressure.
0
20 40 60 80 100120140160180200220240
time (s)
60
70
80
Pressures comparison graph
Station pressure MC (MPa)
CHSS pressure MC (MPa)
Pressure target MC (MPa)
Station pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
CHSS pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
100% SOC Pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
0
20 40 60 80 100120140160180200220240
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Mass flow (g/s)
Mass flows comparison graph
Mass flow MC
Mass flow Lookup Tables
Figure A.23: (left) Hot Case 3 pressures development graph and (right) mass flows
comparison graph.
==PAGE:103==
88
A Appendix
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressure Ramp and PRR comparison graph
Pressure Ramp Rate MC (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp MC (MPa)
Pressure Ramp Rate Lookup Tables (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp Lookup Tables (MPa)
Figure A.24: Hot Case 3 pressure ramp and pressure ramp rate comparison graph.
MC method
Lookup Tables method
Fueling Duration (s)
205.71
259.63
State of Charge (%)
98.98
99.30
Table A.9: Method efficiency data comparison table for the Hot Case 3.
From Table A.13, one can observe that the SOC levels are similar to the Hot Case
2, where in regards to the fueling time, the MC method outweighs the Lookup table
method by 23.2% (53.92).
A.2.3
Hot Case non-communications
The following Figures A.25, A.28 present information for both methods for the Hot
Case non-communication fueling scenario where the MC method utilizes the MC
calculations for calculating a target pressure. On the contrary, Figures A.27, A.16
below present information for both methods for the Hot Case non-communication
fueling scenario where the MC method utilizes the MC tables for determining the
pressure target.
==PAGE:104==
A.2 Hot Case
89
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressures comparison graph
Station pressure MC (MPa)
CHSS pressure MC (MPa)
Pressure target MC (MPa)
Station pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
CHSS pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
Pressure target Lookup Tables (MPa)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Mass flow (g/s)
Mass flows comparison graph
Mass flow MC
Mass flow Lookup Tables
Figure A.25: (left) Hot Case non-communications pressures development graph for
MC calculations target pressures and (right) mass flows comparison
graph.
==PAGE:105==
90
A Appendix
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressure Ramp and PRR comparison graph
Pressure Ramp Rate MC (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp MC (MPa)
Pressure Ramp Rate Lookup Tables (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp Lookup Tables (MPa)
Figure A.26: (left)Hot Case non-communications pressures development graph for
MC tables target pressures and (right) mass flows comparison graph.
==PAGE:106==
A.2 Hot Case
91
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressures comparison graph
Station pressure MC (MPa)
CHSS pressure MC (MPa)
Pressure target MC (MPa)
Station pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
CHSS pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
Pressure target Lookup Tables (MPa)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Mass flow (g/s)
Mass flows comparison graph
Mass flow MC
Mass flow Lookup Tables
Figure A.27: (left) Hot Case non-communications pressures development graph for
MC tables target pressures and (right) mass flows comparison graph.
==PAGE:107==
92
A Appendix
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressure Ramp and PRR comparison graph
Pressure Ramp Rate MC (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp MC (MPa)
Pressure Ramp Rate Lookup Tables (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp Lookup Tables (MPa)
Figure A.28: Hot Case non-communications pressure ramp and pressure ramp rate
comparison graph using MC calculations for target pressure.
MC
method
(calculations)
MC
method
(tables)
Lookup
Ta-
bles method
Fueling Duration (s)
687.23
732.08
983.23
State Of Charge (%)
91.09
94.25
94.50
Table A.10: Method efficiency data comparison table for the Hot Case non-
communications.
==PAGE:108==
A.3 Cold Case
93
MC method
Lookup Tables method
Fueling Duration (s)
807.79
1040.49
State of Charge (%)
97.98
97.90
Table A.11: Method efficiency data comparison table for the Hot Case communica-
tions fueling.
As it is seen from Tables A.10, A.11, the two methods fuel faster for non-communications
in the Hot Case than with communications, both reaching however significantly lower
SOC levels that are in the range of up to 6.9% less for the MC method and 3.4% for
the Lookup tables method. An interesting remark in this case is that the MC method
fills at a higher SOC level by utilizing the MC target pressure tables rather than the
MC calculated target pressure. Lastly, both MC method simulations provide faster
fueling than the Lookup tables method.
A.3
Cold Case
In Cold Case scenario, the presented results are for the following cases:
1. Cold Case 2: -30◦Cambient temperature, 20MPa CHSS initial pressure.
2. Cold Case 3: -30◦Cambient temperature, 60MPa CHSS initial pressure.
3. Cold Case non-communications: -30◦Cambient temperature, 5MPa CHSS ini-
tial pressure, non communications fueling (two different simulations for the MC
method).
A.3.1
Cold Case 2
The Figures A.29, A.29 below present collective information for both methods for the
Cold Case 2 scenario. Both methods follow a similar pattern as in Cold Case with
no alarming occurrences.
==PAGE:109==
94
A Appendix
0
20
40
60
80
time (s)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Refueling collective graph for MC method
Station pressure (MPa)
Pressure limit (MPa)
CHSS pressure (MPa)
Pressure target (MPa)
CHSS temperature (°C)
Station temperature (°C)
Mass flow (g/min)
Pressure Ramp Rate (MPa/min)
Storage Banks Pressure (MPa)
Figure A.29: Cold Case 2 collective graph for MC method: -30◦C ambient temper-
ature, 20MPa CHSS initial pressure.
0
20
40
60
80
100
time (s)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Refueling collective graph for Lookup tables method
Station pressure (MPa)
Pressure limit (MPa)
CHSS pressure (MPa)
100% SOC Pressure (MPa)
CHSS temperature (°C)
Station temperature (°C)
Mass flow (g/min)
Pressure Ramp Rate (MPa/min)
Storage Banks Pressure (MPa)
Figure A.30: Cold Case 2 collective graph for Lookup Tables method: -30◦C ambi-
ent temperature, 20MPa CHSS initial pressure.
==PAGE:110==
A.3 Cold Case
95
0
20
40
60
80
100
time (s)
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressures comparison graph
Station pressure MC (MPa)
CHSS pressure MC (MPa)
Pressure target MC (MPa)
Station pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
CHSS pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
100% SOC Pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
0
20
40
60
80
100
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Mass flow (g/s)
Mass flows comparison graph
Mass flow MC
Mass flow Lookup Tables
Figure A.31: (left) Cold Case 2 pressures development graph and (right) mass flows
comparison graph.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressure Ramp and PRR comparison graph
Pressure Ramp Rate MC (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp MC (MPa)
Pressure Ramp Rate Lookup Tables (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp Lookup Tables (MPa)
Figure A.32: Cold Case 2 pressure ramp and pressure ramp rate comparison graph.
==PAGE:111==
96
A Appendix
MC method
Lookup Tables method
Fueling Duration (s)
97.24
109.53
State of Charge (%)
97.33
98.06
Table A.12: Method efficiency data comparison table for the Cold Case 2.
As it is observed in Table A.12, both methods provide a fast fueling due to the
cold ambient conditions and CD fueling, with similar SOC levels. Fueling times are
also similar, with MC method having the slight edge, with 12.29 seconds (12.29%)
less fueling time.
A.3.2
Cold Case 3
In the Cold Case 3, none method proceeds in fueling as the SOC of the CHSS on
60MPa initial pressure and -30◦C, is already at 101.57%. This fact aborts the fueling
before it starts for both methods.
MC method
Lookup Tables method
Fueling Duration (s)
no fueling
no fueling
State of Charge (%)
101.57
101.57
Table A.13: Method efficiency data comparison table for the Cold Case 3.
A.3.3
Cold Case non-communications
The following Figures A.33, A.34 present information for both methods for the Cold
Case non-communication fueling scenario where the MC method utilizes the MC
calculations for calculating a target pressure. On the contrary, Figures A.35, A.36
below present information for both methods for the Cold Case non-communication
fueling scenario where the MC method utilizes the MC tables for determining the
pressure target.
==PAGE:112==
A.3 Cold Case
97
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressures comparison graph
Station pressure MC (MPa)
CHSS pressure MC (MPa)
Pressure target MC (MPa)
Station pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
CHSS pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
Pressure target Lookup Tables (MPa)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Mass flow (g/s)
Mass flows comparison graph
Mass flow MC
Mass flow Lookup Tables
Figure A.33: (left) Cold Case non-communications pressures development graph for
MC calculations target pressures and (right) mass flows comparison
graph.
==PAGE:113==
98
A Appendix
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressure Ramp and PRR comparison graph
Pressure Ramp Rate MC (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp MC (MPa)
Pressure Ramp Rate Lookup Tables (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp Lookup Tables (MPa)
Figure A.34: (left)Cold Case non-communications pressures development graph for
MC tables target pressures and (right) mass flows comparison graph.
==PAGE:114==
A.3 Cold Case
99
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressures comparison graph
Station pressure MC (MPa)
CHSS pressure MC (MPa)
Pressure target MC (MPa)
Station pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
CHSS pressure Lookup Tables (MPa)
Pressure target Lookup Tables (MPa)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Mass flow (g/s)
Mass flows comparison graph
Mass flow MC
Mass flow Lookup Tables
Figure A.35: (left) Cold Case non-communications pressures development graph for
MC tables target pressures and (right) mass flows comparison graph.
==PAGE:115==
100
A Appendix
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pressure Ramp and PRR comparison graph
Pressure Ramp Rate MC (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp MC (MPa)
Pressure Ramp Rate Lookup Tables (MPa/min)
Pressure Ramp Lookup Tables (MPa)
Figure A.36: Hot Case non-communications pressure ramp and pressure ramp rate
comparison graph using MC calculations for target pressure.
MC
method
(calculations)
MC
method
(tables)
Lookup
Ta-
bles method
Fueling Duration (s)
124.86
123.69
138.50
State Of Charge (%)
92.37
91.77
92.45
Table A.14: Method efficiency data comparison table for the Cold Case non-
communications fueling.
==PAGE:116==
A.3 Cold Case
101
MC method
Lookup Tables method
Fueling Duration (s)
135.40
151.90
State of Charge (%)
97.58
98.23
Table A.15: Method efficiency data comparison table for the Cold Case communi-
cations fueling.
As it is seen in Tables A.14, A.15, the non-communications fueling is faster for both
methods, achieving however lower SOC levels as in the rest of the non-communications
cases. Both methods reach similar SOC levels with MC being only up to 14.81 seconds
(11.3%) faster than the Lookup tables method.
==PAGE:117==
102
==PAGE:118==
==PAGE:119==
==PAGE:120==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Thermal Energy
Technical University of Denmark 
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 4131
Fax  (+45) 4588 4325
www.mek.dtu.dk
