==PAGE:1==
Development of a Pre-Catalyst System for Low
Temperature Selective Catalytic Reduction of NO
Kjartan Bjarnov Kaas-Larsen
s134501
November 15, 2018
Master thesis, 30 ECTS points
Supervisors
Assoc. Professor Susanne Mossin
Professor Rasmus Fehrmann
==PAGE:2==
2
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis has been submitted in candidacy for the M.Sc. degree in chemical engineering
from the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The work herein has been carried out at
the Department of Chemistry at the Centre for Catalysis and Sustainable Chemistry (CSC)
under the supervision of Professor Rasmus Fehrmann and Associate Professor Susanne
Mossin.
First and foremost I would like to thank my two supervisors for having given me the
opportunity to work on this project, and for good supervision with interesting discussions
and suggestions during the project. Great thanks also to Ph.D. Fellow David Nielsen, who
have been a great help throughout the project and a strong support for analyzing and
understanding obtained results. I would also like to thank Researcher Peter Jakobsen for
his preceding work, help to perform high-resolution FTIR analysis, and general discussions
during the project period.
I would further like to thank Ph.D. Fellow Rubén Santiago from Universidad Autonoma
de Madrid in Spain for a productive lab-collaboration and interesting discussions during
his external stay at DTU. Furthermore, I would like to thank Postdoc Leonhard Schill for
always helping out with the equipment and for sharing out his vast knowledge of deNOx
catalysis.
Finally, I would like to thank all the people at CSC for helping out solving everyday-
problems and contributing to an enjoyable and professional atmosphere.
Kjartan Bjarnov Kaas-Larsen
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
15-November-2018
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Nitrogen oxides, NOx, are undesired by-products formed during combustion processes ei-
ther directly from the fuel or from nitrogen in the air, which can be oxidized at high
temperatures. NOx in the atmosphere can form acid rain, contribute to smog formation,
and cause ozone layer depletion. In addition, exposure to NOx can lead to severe health
problems. Harmful eects of nitrogen oxides have led to strict emission regulations in most
rst world countries. The emission standards are currently obliged primarily by low-NOx
burners, selective catalytic reduction (SCR) of nitrogen oxides, or a combination of these.
The commercial catalysts used for the SCR of nitrogen oxides exhibits high activity and
relatively high selectivity towards N2, however, the selectivity has yet to reach truly sat-
isfactory values. Furthermore, the catalysts are particularly sensitive to deactivation by
alkali-species, which are present in high amounts in ue gas from biomass combustion.
This supports the interest in developing more ecient catalyst systems for the removal of
NOx.
Previous work has shown that ionic liquids (ILs) are promising absorbers and can selec-
tively absorb dierent ue gas constituents including NO. The IL [bmim][NO3] has shown
promising results for NO absorption, as high capacity has been reported. In his Ph.D.
thesis from 2017, Peter Jakobsen demonstrated that [bmim][NO3] can be utilized to oxi-
dize NO into nitric acid in the presence of water and methanol. The work presented here
has focused on replicating these results in the attempt to develop a novel pre-catalytic
system to NO removal. The aim is to either oxidize NO into NO2 to take advantage of the
benets of fast SCR catalysis or synthesize nitric acid allowing production of value-added
chemicals from ue gasses.
In the present work, it has been demonstrated that methanol has a promoting eect on
NO conversion, also in the empty reactor system at ambient temperature. Utilization of
ILs is severely limited by high viscosities, which hinders mass transfer over the IL surface.
To overcome the mass transfer limitations [bmim][NO3] was supported by either calcined
Silica 100 particles or hollow-sphere silica particles (synthesized by Peter Jakobsen) to
form a supported ionic liquid phase (SILP). Introducing the SILP slightly increased NO
conversion in the reactor, however, no signicant eect was observed.
By introducing
pure nitric acid to the reactor, a signicant increase in NO conversion was observed. This
indicates that the lack of conversion with [bmim][NO3] and water/methanol is due to slow
formation of nitric acid, which also reveals a potential for NO oxidizing if the formation
of nitric acid can be increased. Additionally, water did not seem to aect the conversion
to any signicant, which is very positive as the presence of water usually inhibits the NO
conversion over several catalysts.
NO conversion has been quantied by UV-vis spectrophotometry, where the formation of
nitric acid by removal of NO2 has been observed, however without any signicant increase
==PAGE:6==
iv
in NO removal compared to the background oxidation. High-resolution FTIR spectroscopy
has been used to analyze the euent ue gas, revealing no methanol, or compounds with
C−H bonds, in the euent gas. This proves methanol undergoes complete oxidation to
CO2, although it is unknown whether this has occurred in the reactor or in the meantime
between collecting the gas sample and the IR measurement has been performed. No NO
was observed in FTIR, which is caused by oxidation into NO2 or HNO3 in the collected
volume.
Finally, TGA analysis of used SILP materials has shown that the IL in several cases had
been removed from the support material after use in the reactor. The mechanism of the
IL removal is not known, however, it is proved that the SILP material can be used for at
least 48 hours when the water content in the NO gas is below saturation.
==PAGE:7==
Resumé (Danish)
Nitrogenoxider, NOx, er uønskede biprodukter, der dannes under forbrænding enten direk-
te fra brændstoet, eller fra nitrogen i luften, som kan oxideres ved høje temperaturer. Ved
udledning til atmosfæren kan NOx gasser både danne syreregn, medvirke til dannelsen af
smog og skabe huller i ozonlaget. De kritiske følgevirkninger fra nitrogenoxider har medført
strenge regler til udledning, som i dag primært styres ved hjælp af Low-NOx brændere,
selektiv katalytisk reduktion (SCR) af nitrogenoxider, eller en kombination af disse. Kom-
mercielle SCR-katalysatorer er særligt følsomme overfor deaktiverende alkalimetal specier,
som i høj grad ndes i biomasse. Dette understøtter interessen i at udvikle mere eektive
katalysatorsystemer til fjernelse af NOx gasser.
Tidligere studier har vist at nogle ioniske væsker (ILs) selektivt kan absorbere skadelige
røggaskomponenter, herunder NOx specier. Den ioniske væske [bmim][NO3] har udvist høj
kapacitet for NO molekyler, og Peter Jakobsen viste i hans Ph.D. afhandling fra 2017
at denne ioniske væske kan oxidere NO til salpetersyre under tilstedeværelse af vand og
metanol. Dette projekt har primært omhandlet at replikere disse resultater i forsøget på
at udvikle et alternativt pre-katalytisk system til NO fjernelse, som enten kan oxidere NO
til NO2 for at drage nytte af fordelene ved fast SCR katalyse, eller fremstille salpetersyre
og dermed gøre et aaldsprodukt værdiskabende.
Det er i dette projekt lykkedes at vise, at metanol har en klar eekt på omdannelsen
af NO i et reaktorsystem ved stuetemperatur, også uden tilstedeværelse af ionisk væske.
Den praktiske anvendelse af ionisk væske teknologi hindres markant af en høj viskositet,
der vanskeliggør masseoverførslen i grænselaget mellem gas og væske. Ved at suspendere
den ioniske væske på kalcineret Silica 100 partikler og hule silica kugler i nanostørrelse
(hollow-sphere silica, syntetiseret af Peter Jakobsen) kan en tynd IL lm opnåes, som øger
overadearealet og letter masseoverførslen. Dette koncept kaldes supported ionic liquid pha-
se eller bare SILP. Ved at tilføre SILP materialerne til reaktoren blev en marginalt højere
NO omdannelse opnået. Ved at tilføre ren salpetersyre til NO gassen lykkedes det at øge
omdannelsen af NO markant, hvilket tyder på at udfordringerne i forhold til at øge NO
omdannelsen skyldes mangelfuld omdannelse af NO til salpetersyre i den ioniske væske.
Samtidig viser dette dog også, at der er et potentiale i at kunne oxidere NO ved hjælp
af ionisk væske teknologi, hvis det lykkes at øge omdannelsen af salpetersyre i systemet.
Omdannelsen af NO er testet ved en lang række forskellige luftfugtigheder uden den sto-
re ændring i omdannelsen af NO, hvilket er meget positivt idet en fugtig gas typisk er
hæmmende for en lang række deNOx katalysatorer.
Omdannelse af NO er blevet kvanticeret ved hjælp af UV-vis spektroskopi, hvor det og-
så har været muligt at se NO2 blive omdannet til salpetersyre, dog uden nogen markant
omdannelse af NO i forhold til baggrundsoxidationen. Yderligere er det ved hjælp af højop-
løselig IR spektroskopi blevet vist at metanol i reaktoren undergår komplet oxidation til
==PAGE:8==
vi
CO2, hvilket dog kan have fundet sted i tidsrummet fra gasprøven er udtaget til IR må-
lingen er foretaget. Der blev heller ikke observeret NO ved analyse med IR spektroskopi,
hvilket betyder NO er blevet oxideret i det indsamlede volumen da omdannelsen ikke var
komplet i reaktoren.
Til slut har TGA analyser af det brugte SILP-materiale vist at den ioniske væske i ere
tilfælde er blevet fjernet fra supportmaterialet. Det er ikke lykkedes at vise hvordan dette
er sket, men det er vist at den ioniske væske er stabil på supportmaterialet i mindst 48
timer når indholdet af vand i NO gassen er under mætningspunktet.
==PAGE:9==
Project Motivation
During NO absorption experiments using ionic liquids within this group, it was found that
methanol residues from impregnation of a [bmim][NO3] SILP highly aected the absorption
of NO. It was found that methanol promoted oxidation of NO into higher oxidation species
of nitrogen.
During Peter Jakobsen's Ph.D. dissertation the NO conversion with [bmim][NO3] and
methanol was investigated. By injecting a mixture of methanol and water to a gas contain-
ing NO steady-state conversions of NO up to 70% was reported. A signicant promoting
eect of methanol was reported as low as 80ppm in the gas phase for a gas containing
3000ppm NO. The NO oxidation was proposed to be catalytic caused by the nitrate ion
oxidizing NO into NO2, followed by nitrous acid oxidized to nitric acid. The specic eect
of adding methanol was not understood, but the oxidation of NO did not occur without
methanol added to the system.
The purpose of this project is rst and foremost to reproduce the results obtained by Peter
Jakobsen, to prove the concept of oxidizing NO using SILP technology.
In the longer
turn, the aim is to be capable of controlling the formation of NO2 and HNO3. Ideally,
this would form a pre-catalyst system allowing the formation of the value-added chemical
nitric acid, and a commercial SCR catalyst system could be placed after the SILP-reactor
for a complete NO removal. Partly oxidizing NO into NO2 would allow the SCR catalyst
to benet from the fast SCR mechanism.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
List of Abbreviations
AAILs
Amino acid ionic liquids
APH
Air pre-heater
BAT
Best available technique
[bmim][NO3]
1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium nitrate
CLM
Charge lever moment
DES
Deep eutectic solvents
EC
European Council
ECAs
Emission Control Areas
ENIL
Encapsulated Ionic Liquid
ESP
Electrostatic precipitator
FBC
Fluidized bed combustion
FGD
Flue gas desulphurisation
GHSV
Gas hourly space velocity
HC-SCR
Hydrocarbon selective catalytic reduction
HS
Hollow sphere
HS-SILP
Hollow sphere supported ionic liquid-phase
HOMO
Highest occupied molecular orbital
IL
Ionic liquid
IMO
International Maritime Organization
LNG
Liqueed Natural Gas
LUMO
Lowest un-occupied molecular orbital
MFC
Mass ow controller
MO
Molecular orbital
NOx
Nitrogen oxides
PC
Pulverized combustion
PG-SE
Pulse-gradient spin-echo
PM
Particulate matter
QSRP
Quantitative structure-property relationships
RH
Relative humidity
RTIL
Room temperature ionic liquid
sccm
Standard cubic centimeter per minute
SCR
Selective catalytic reduction
SILP
Supported ionic liquid-phase
SNCR
Selective non-catalytic reduction
SOx
Sulfur oxides
UV-vis
Ultraviolet-Visible
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
iii
Resumé (Danish)
v
Project Motivation
vii
List of Abbreviations
ix
I
Project Background
1
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Historical Emission of NOx
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.1
Formation of NOx
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Harmful Eects of NOx
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Legislation of NOx Emission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
NOx Abatement
11
2.1
Current Technologies for NOx Abatement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.1
Low-NOx Burners
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.2
Selective Non-Catalytic Reduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.3
Selective Catalytic Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.4
Fast SCR and Competing Reactions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1.5
Placement of SCR Unit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.1.6
Deactivation of SCR Catalysts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2
Alternative Technologies for NOx Abatement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.1
Hydrocarbon SCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.2
Zeolite Based SCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.3
NO Oxidation for Fast SCR Catalysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.4
Absorption and Oxidation in Ionic Liquids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Oxidation of NO in Ionic Liquids
21
3.1
Ionic Liquids
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.1
Properties of Ionic Liquids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.2
Gas Absorption in ILs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.3
Supported Ionic Liquid Phase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
NO Absorption and Oxidation in SILPs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
II
Experimental
29
4
Analytical Techniques
31
4.1
Ultraviolet-Visible Spectrophotometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.1
Electronic Transitions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1.2
The Analyzing Method Used
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.1.3
Spectral Analysis of NO, NO2, HNO3 and HONO
. . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Spectral Deconvolution in Matlab
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2.1
main_peakt.m Script for Multi-Spectral Analysis . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Humidity in Reactor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3.1
Example of Humidity Calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.2
Humidity.m script for Controlling Humidity and Alcohol in Reactor .
38
4.3.3
Capillary Condensation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Experimental
41
5.1
Synthesis of SiO2-SILP Material
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Hollow Sphere Silica as SILP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3
Experimental Setup & Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3.1
Gas Hourly Space Velocity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.4
Establishment of Standard Curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
III
Results & Discussion
47
6
Background Oxidation & Contribution of Support Material
49
6.1
Oxidation at Various Flow Rates and NO Concentrations
. . . . . . . . . .
49
6.1.1
Oxygen Inuence on Background Oxidation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2
Support Material Contribution to NO Conversion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7
NO Oxidation in SILP Materials
55
7.1
NO Oxidation Using MeOH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.1.1
Fluctuating Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.2
NO Oxidation Using EtOH
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.3
Water Content Inuence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.4
Oxygen Content Inuence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.5
Improved Oxidation Using HNO3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.6
Introducing a Cold Trap to the System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
8
Analysis of Euent Gas, SILP, and Possible Reactions
65
8.1
Spectral Analysis With H2O and MeOH in the System
. . . . . . . . . . .
65
8.2
IR Spectroscopy of Euent Gas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
8.3
Initial NO Conversions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
8.4
TGA of Used SILP Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
8.4.1
Adding Droplets of MeOH Over 42 Hours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
8.4.2
IL distribution Coecients on Dierent Support Materials . . . . . .
72
8.5
Eect of MeOH on NO Conversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
8.5.1
Potential Radical Formation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
8.5.2
NO2 as Catalyst for MeOH Oxidation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
9
Concluding Remarks and Outlook
77
==PAGE:15==
CONTENTS
xiii
Bibliography
79
A Supplementary Experimental Data
91
A.1 NO Conversion With Covered Tubes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
B Technical Schematics, Drawings and Pictures
93
C Matlab Scripts
99
C.1 main_peakt.m Script for Spectral Deconvolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
C.2 humidity.m Script for Calculating Humidity in Gas Stream
. . . . . . . . . 101
D Additional Tables
103
D.1 Steam Pressure Table for Saturated Water Vapor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
D.2 Absorption Cross Sections for Selected Compounds
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
==PAGE:16==
xiv
CONTENTS
==PAGE:17==
Part I
Project Background
==PAGE:18==
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 1
Introduction
A cold evening in December 1952, a fog enveloped the city of London. The following day
the fog transformed into a brown-yellowish smog with a distinct acid smell [1]. The smog
episode lasted for 5 days, leaving a substantial amount of new respiratory illnesses and
cardiovascular cases among the surviving population, and an estimated 12000 people died
from the smog [2]. A couple of years earlier, in 1943 during World War II, a similar incident
occurred in Los Angeles. Low visibility, a smell of bleach, and stung eyes were reported.
At rst, rumors had it that the city was under a chemical attack, however, the city was
facing the rst experience of smog formation [3].
SOx and NOx gasses are two of the most prominent local pollutants, which both con-
tribute to acid rain and smog formation, and cause severe health problems [4, 5]. The
smog formation over London in 1952 was mainly caused by burning of coal, which emitted
sulfurous gas and particulate matter. The temperature inversion trapped the smog, and
on the worst day the SO2 concentration and total suspended matter reached 1.34 ppm
and 4.5 mg m=3 respectively [1]. In Los Angeles the smog formation was caused by huge
NOx emissions from the rapidly expanding city, which reacted with hydrocarbons to form
smog [3]. These incidents initiated a lot of research on air pollution, leading to more strict
legislation, quickly reducing SOx emissions signicant in rst world countries. The NOx
emissions have been more dicult to reduce. A heavy rise in vehicles leads to a massive
increase in NOx emissions in London from 1970 to the 1990's, escalating with the latest
reported smog episode over London in 1991 [6].
SOx in ue gases exclusively originate from sulfur content in the fuel [7]. Contrary, NOx
emissions are mainly caused by oxidation of nitrogen in the air due to high combustion
temperatures [8]. Therefore, NOx formed by combustion at high temperatures are also
denoted as thermal NOx. Thermal formation of NOx is inevitable when nitrogen is present
during the combustion. Thus, it is of utmost importance to nd ecient methods for NOx
abatement.
1.1
Historical Emission of NOx
With the transformation to an industrial economy in the mid-18th to early 19th century the
number of power plants, factories, and cars increased considerably in rst world countries,
increasing anthropogenic NOx emissions signicant. From a near zero man made emission
of NOx, the emission peaked in 1990 with annual NOx emissions of 59.54 Tg which is
==PAGE:20==
4
Introduction
illustrated in Figure 1.1 [9]. Volcanoes, wildres, and lightning contribute to NOx found
in the atmosphere, and approximately 25% of present atmospheric NOx is believed to
originate from natural sources [10].
Figure 1.1: Global NOx emissions caused by anthropogenic eects. Adapted from [9].
Since the 1990's NOx emission has decreased on a global scale. According to the Interna-
tional Energy Agency, NOx emissions have decreased by approximately 11% from 2000 to
2016. Over the same period CO2 emissions increased by approximately 6% [11].
1.1.1
Formation of NOx
Nitrogen oxides can be formed as fuel NOx by oxidation of nitrogen present in the fuel.
At lower temperatures formation of NOx mainly originate from fuel NOx [12]. At higher
temperatures most NOx formation is caused by oxidation of nitrogen present in the air,
which is divided into thermal NOx and prompt NOx due to dierent mechanisms being
dominating at dierent temperatures as seen in Figure 1.2. The values of NOx formation
in Figure 1.2 are obtained by combustion of brown coal, bituminous coal, oil and natural
gas to achieve dierent combustion temperatures [13, 14].
Figure 1.2: Formation of NOx at dierent combustion temperatures. Adapted from [13].
==PAGE:21==
1.1 Historical Emission of NOx
5
Fuel NOx
Fuel NOx is the formation of nitrogen oxides by nitrogen-containing compounds present in
the fuel. In general, coal contains 1-2wt.% nitrogen [15], which can form NOx. Nitrogen
compounds in fuel are almost completely converted to NOx in lean fuel to air mixtures in
a 0.6 to 1.0 ratio, while the formation of NOx decrease as the fuel to air ratio increases due
to the lack of oxygen present [16]. The formation of NOx from nitrogen present in the fuel
does not change signicant for dierent types of nitrogen species [16].
Thermal NOx
Thermal NOx is formed at high temperatures, generally above 1300 K, and is formed during
a combustion process by oxidation of N2. Combustion of coal in air gives a ame at 1900 ◦C,
therefore most formation of nitrogen oxides is caused by thermal NOx as seen in Figure
1.2. About 95% is emitted as NO, while the rest is emitted as NO2 [14, 17].
N2 + O2 −−⇀
↽−−2 NO ∆H◦
298 = 180.6 kJ mol−1
( 1.1)
The overall reaction for thermal formation of NO is seen in Reaction 1.1. The overall
reaction follows the Zeldovich mechanism, which is initiated by the high temperatures as
seen in Reaction 1.2 to 1.4 [18].
O2 −−⇀
↽−−2 O·
( 1.2)
N2 + O· −−⇀
↽−−NO + N·
( 1.3)
N· + O2 −−⇀
↽−−NO + O·
( 1.4)
The oxygen radical formed in Reaction 1.4 can continue to form NO by reaction with N2.
Prompt NOx
Prompt NOx is formed by the reaction of hydrocarbon fragments with atmospheric nitro-
gen to yield products such as HCN. The nitrogen then oxidizes along with the fuel and
becomes NOx during combustion, just like fuel NOx [19]. These reactions occur at low
ame temperatures written in Reaction 1.5 to 1.8.
·CH + N2 −−⇀
↽−−HCN + N·
( 1.5)
N· + O2 −−⇀
↽−−NO + O·
( 1.6)
HCN + ·OH −−⇀
↽−−·CN + H2O
( 1.7)
·CN + O2 −−⇀
↽−−NO + CO
( 1.8)
Several mechanisms have been proposed for prompt NOx formation and additional reac-
tions to the hereby mentioned might also occur [14, 19, 20].
==PAGE:22==
6
Introduction
1.2
Harmful Eects of NOx
It is well documented that NOx has harmful eects on the human health. This is mainly
related to impacts on the respiratory system causing inammation of the airways at high
levels. Long term exposure can decrease lung function, increase the risk of respiratory
conditions and increases the response to allergens [21]. NOx can be inhaled as gas in the
atmosphere when breathing, but NOx can also nd way to the human body by adsorption
to ne and ultrane particulate matter (PM). PM can also be inhaled from the air, and
is very dangerous due to the ability of PM to deposit on the alveoli in the respiratory
system [22]. Most of the health-related issues by NOx is related to NO2. Unfortunately,
NO can be oxidised by oxygen in the air to form NO2, however, several other reactions
can occur, e.g. formation of the greenhouse gas (GHG) N2O as seen in Reaction 1.9 and
1.10 [18]. N2O is a potent GHG, about 298 times stronger than CO2 with a lifetime in
the atmosphere of 140 years [23].
2 NO + O2 −−⇀
↽−−2 NO2 ∆H◦
298 = −113 kJ mol−1
( 1.9)
3 NO −−⇀
↽−−2 N2O + NO2
( 1.10)
In Denmark it is estimated that 3400 people die prematurely each year due to air pollution,
which is mainly related to NO2 gases [24]. Prematurely death in Denmark is dened as an
estimated loss of more than 10.6 years of living.
Air pollution is a global problem as NOx gases can travel far in the atmosphere before
chemical transformation to other nitrogen species. It is estimated that 75% of premature
deaths due to air pollution in Denmark are caused by emissions outside of Denmark, while
Danish emissions count for 25% [25]. At the same time a 'NO2 pollution gradient' have
been reported with higher concentrations of NO2 in the southern part of Denmark, due to
NOx emissions in countries south of the border [25].
In addition to the concerns regarding NOx and health, NOx gases also participate in
harmful reactions such as smog formation, the formation of acid rain, and ozone layer
depletion.
Town Smog Formation
As mentioned in the beginning of this chapter, astounding incidents of smog formation in
cities have been reported in London and Los Angeles. Despite having genuinely reduced
its notorious air pollution, a dense wave of smog is daily observed in the cities in the
Northeastern part of China [26].
The smog is formed by a variety of reactions, which
include photochemistry and ozone formation/depletion:
2 NO + O2 −−→2 NO2
( 1.11)
NO2 + hv −−→NO + O·
( 1.12)
==PAGE:23==
1.2 Harmful Eects of NOx
7
O· + O2 −−→O3
( 1.13)
O3 + HydroCarbon + NO2 −−→Smog
( 1.14)
Ozone, which is formed in Reaction 1.13, is an important molecule in the upper strato-
sphere where it acts as a lter for the ultraviolet sunlight. However, in the troposphere
ozone is a pollutant causing respiratory and eye problems [21].
The cities suering from smog formation are typically situated in valleys or near mountain
ranges which produce temperature inversion layers, however, as seen in London in 1952,
low temperatures can be the factor for smog formation. In normal atmospheric condi-
tions, temperature will decrease with altitude, allowing the warmer pollutants to rise and
disperse.
Acid Rain Formation
Rain is naturally slightly acidic because some of the carbon dioxide present in the atmo-
sphere dissolve in the raindrops to produce H+ ions. This process only produces H+ ions
at very low concentrations in the rainwater. However, NO2 and SO2 reacting with water
in the atmosphere, as seen in Reaction 1.15 to 1.17, can produce signicant higher H+
concentrations by formation of nitric acid and sulphuric acid [27].
H2O(l) + CO2(g) −−→H+(aq) + HCO −
3 (aq)
( 1.15)
2 NO2(g) + H2O(l) −−→HNO2(aq) + HNO3(aq)
( 1.16)
2 SO2(g) + 2 H2O(l) + O2(g) −−→2 H2SO4(aq)
( 1.17)
Acid rain is an environmental issue, and the damage is a worldwide problem as NOx can
be transferred over far distances in the atmosphere. Acid rain can damage lakes, put the
forests under stress, and cause deteriorating of buildings and statues [28].
Ozone Layer Depletion
Despite forming ozone near ground level, NOx deplete the ozone layer in the stratosphere.
The ozone layer acts as an important lter for the shorter wavelength and highly hazardous
ultraviolet radiation from the sun, reducing the amount of UVB radiation reaching the
surface of the earth, protecting life and plants. High levels of UVB radiation cause non-
melanoma skin cancer and plays a major role in malignant melanoma development. UVB
radiation does also aect the ecosystem by reducing plant growth and reduce phytoplankton
==PAGE:24==
8
Introduction
production [29]. The reactions causing ozone layer depletion from NOx are seen in Reaction
1.18 to Reaction 1.20.
NO + O3 −−→NO2 + O2
( 1.18)
O2 + hv −−→2 O·
( 1.19)
NO2 + O· −−→NO + O2
( 1.20)
1.3
Legislation of NOx Emission
As the health and environmental impacts of exposure to NOx is evident, legislation on
emissions is implemented in many rst world countries. Concerns regarding air quality
are not new, however, legistation have have been long in the making. Some of the rst
complaints of air quality are dated back to the 13th century when coal was rst used in
London [30]. Probably the rst national law to prevent air pollution, and hereby indirectly
NOx pollution, was the Railways Clauses Consolidation Act of 1845 (United Kingdom),
which required railway locomotives to consume, as far as practicable, their own smoke.
30 years later the rst Public Health Act was introduced in the UK, where a section
contained smoke abatement, from which legislation to the present day has been based
[30]. Despite these early regulations, no strict legislation was introduced in the UK until
the Clean Air Act of 1956, which introduced smoke control areas, controlled chimney
heights and prohibited dark smoke from chimneys [30]. The rst federal law addressing
environmental problems in the United States was passed the year before with the Air
Pollution Control Act of 1955. However, this act had no control or regulatory measures, it
simply acknowledged the existence of air pollution problems and authorized the Secretary
of Health, Education and Welfare to conduct research and provide technical assistance to
State and local government agencies [31]. Several years had to pass in the United States
before the rst federal legislation to actually control and limit air pollution was established
with the Clean Air Act of 1963 [32].
In 1970 the European Council (EC) introduced the rst directive regarding air pollution,
and since then EC directives have been basis for air pollution and emission limits in Europe.
The current air quality directive is the Directive 2008/50/EC, which was adopted on 21
May 2008 [33]. The NOx limitations in air measurements are seen in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1: NOx limit values in air.
Hourly limit valuea Annual limit valuea Annual critical levelb
200 µg m=3 c
40 µg m=3
30 µg m=3
a For the protection of human health (NO2).
b For the protection of vegetation and natural ecosystems (NOx).
c Not to be exceeded more than 18 times in any calendar year.
==PAGE:25==
1.3 Legislation of NOx Emission
9
To oblige the NOx limit values, strict legislation of emission from vehicles and power plants
have been introduced. In Denmark, road transportation accounted for 72% of the total
NOx emissions in 2012 [24]. The trend is similar in the rest of the world, therefore, NOx
reduction and emission control in vehicles have been a top priority. In January 2000 the
Euro 3 standard for diesel passenger cars was introduced in Europe, with emission limits
of 500 mg km=1 for new vehicles. In September 2014 the legislation was tightened with the
Euro 6 regulation, limiting the NOx emissions of new diesel vehicles to 80 mg km=1 [34].
Despite the more strict legislation regarding NOx emission from vehicles, a report released
in April 2018 concluded NOx limit values in air was exceedet at 1066 locations in Denmark
[25].
The shipping industry also accounts for huge NOx emissions.
January 1st, 2016, the
International Maritime Organization's (IMO) new Tier III requirements took eect in the
Emission Control Areas (ECAs) including the North American, US Caribbean and most
of the European waters. The Tier III requirements are based on the engine size as well
as production year of the engine. Roughly, the new emission standards in the shipping
industry require 75% reduction of NOx emissions compared to the emissions in year 2000
[35]. Implementing SCR catalyst systems or changing fuel to liqueed natural gas (LNG)
are estimated to be the only technologies to reduce NOx emissions from the shipping
industry up to 90% [35].
On the 28th of April 2017 the EU states approved plans for stricter limits on pollutants from
combustion plants, which will apply to all large combustion plants in the European Union
(approximately 2900 plants) and will have to be met by 2021. The new plans were widely
applauded by environmental groups as the decision imposes stricter limits on emissions of
pollutants like nitrogen oxide, sulfur dioxide, mercury and particulate matter from large
combustion plants in Europe. The limits are dened as the best available techniques (BAT)
conclusions and are additions to the Directive 2010/75/EU [36, 37]. A brief summary of
the NOx limits to be obliged for new coal and biomass combustion plants are depicted in
Table 1.2. The values for biomass plants may be exceeded for fuel with potassium content
above 2000 mg kg=1 (dry) and/or sodium content above 300 mg kg=1 (dry). Full data for
BAT-conclusions can be found in [36]. For existing plants, the upper NOx emissions limits,
in general, are 50-100% higher, but there are several exceptions where higher emissions may
be allowed.
Table 1.2: BAT-associated emission levels for NOx emission to air from new combustion
plants burning coal and biomass. Adapted from [36].
Thermal input of plant [MW]
Yearly average [mg·Nm−3]
Daily average [mg·Nm−3]
Coal
Biomass
Coal
Biomass
< 100
100-150
70-150
155-200
120-200
100-300
50-100
50-140
80-130
100-200
≥300
-
40-140
-
65-150
≥300, FBCa boiler
50-85
-
80-125
-
≥300, PCb boiler
65-85
-
80-125
-
a FBC: Fluidized bed combustion.
b PC: Pulverized combusion.
==PAGE:26==
10
Introduction
As the health and environmental impacts of NOx emissions are evident, many rst world
countries, including all members of the European Union, have implemented strict regulation
of NOx emissions from vehicles and combustion plants, as well as legislation of maximal
NOx content in the atmosphere. The next chapter will treat NOx abatement, and dierent
techniques to reduce NOx emissions.
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 2
NOx Abatement
Due to health and environmental concerns regarding NOx emissions, described in Chapter
1, it is of utmost importance to nd solutions for NOx abatement in power and waste
incineration plants. This chapter is dedicated to review the current technologies of NOx
abatement and to introduce alternative techniques such as zeolites and supported ionic
liquids.
2.1
Current Technologies for NOx Abatement
Technologies for NOx abatement can be divided into primary and secondary techniques.
Primary techniques are applied to reduce emissions at source to avoid formation of NOx.
Secondary techniques treat the formed NOx in the ue gases and are also termed post-
combustion treatment or abatement. Low-NOx burners are the most common primary
technique for reducing NOx emissions.
Current technologies for post-combustion NOx
abatement can be divided into selective non-catalytic reduction of NO, and selective cat-
alytic reduction. As discussed in Section 1.1 nitric oxide (NO) is the predominant NOx
species from a combustion process, thus, NOx abatement must be targeted at NO to be
ecient.
2.1.1
Low-NOx Burners
Low-NOx burners are boilers designed to reduce the formation of thermal NOx, prompt
NOx and fuel NOx. As mentioned in Chapter 1 formation of NOx depend on the combus-
tion temperature, the amount of oxygen present during the combustion, and the nitrogen
content in the fuel. Low-NOx burners are based on the principles of staged air combustion,
ue gas recirculation and staged fuel combustion. For most new low-NOx burners all three
NOx reduction techniques are combined [38]. The staged air combustion technique creates
two distinct combustion zones, one with low oxygen concentrations and therefore excess
fuel, the other with excess oxygen. The zone with low oxygen allows the formation of N2
rather than NO, while the combustion process is completed in the second zone [39]. A
drawback is, that the low oxygen content can lead to the formation of large carbon monox-
ide concentrations if the secondary air intake is not correctly positioned. Flue gases can be
recirculated into the combustion chamber, either with the combustion air or with the fuel.
By reinjection and dilution, the ue gases reduce the ame temperature and oxygen con-
centrations, which in turn reduces the formation of thermal and prompt NOx. Staged fuel
==PAGE:28==
12
NOx Abatement
combustion, or re-burning, is the third main principle in low-NOx burners. The principle
is to reduce NOx that are already formed by creating three combustion zones: a primary,
as secondary, and a post-combustion zone. 80-85% of the fuel is injected into the primary
zone, where the combustion takes place, in excess of air causing thermal NOx to form.
The remaining fuel is injected into the secondary combustion zone together with the ue
gas released from the primary combustion zone. This generates a reducing environment,
as hydrocarbon radicals produced in this zone reduce thermal NOx into N2 [40].
Low-NOx burners can be used for combustion of gases, liquids, and solid fuels; however, it
can be necessary to pulverize solid fuel prior to the inlet into the combustion chamber [41].
In Appendix B Figure B.1 and B.2 technical schematics of Low-NOx burners for pulverized
coal and oil/natural gas is found.
2.1.2
Selective Non-Catalytic Reduction
NOx chemistry has been investigated since the 1950's, before legislation of NOx abatement
was considered. The early studies were fundamental and based on ammonia oxidation with
NO at high temperatures, thus reducing the NO [42]. This gave rise to later developments
of selective non-catalytic reduction (SNCR) processes with ammonia, urea, and isocyanic
acid as reducing agents. Being catalyst-free, the SNCR deNOx process is simple and easy
to install on existing plants, therefore it is widely applied in the industry [43]. Due to price,
safety, and convenient transportation, urea has been prioritized as a reductant in SNCR
deNOx processes [44]. Disadvantages of SNCR includes requirement of high temperatures
(above 600 ◦C), while temperatures above 750 ◦C reduces selectivity and formation of the
potent GHG N2O starts [43]. Several mechanisms have been proposed for SNCR of NOx
species, and Rota et al.
have proposed a model with 31 species and 171 reactions to
describe the SNCR deNOx process based on urea [45]. SNCR processes can theoretically
achieve eciencies above 90%, however, results in real applications are often reported at
30-40% [18]. These results are not good enough to oblige the requirements of emission
standards itself, and a catalytic reactor is usually required to obtain satisfactory results
[18, 43].
2.1.3
Selective Catalytic Reduction
Due to the limitations in the SNCR of NOx species it is relevant to introduce a catalyst
to the system to improve eciency and selectivity while reducing temperature. Despite
ammonia being a strong pollutant, ammonia was quickly identied as the most promising
method for the reduction of NOx species [46]. The main reaction for the selective catalytic
reduction (SCR) process of NO is identically regardless of the catalyst and is seen in
Reaction 2.1.
4 NO + 4 NH3 + O2 −−→4 N2 + 6 H2O
( 2.1)
Under equimolar concentrations of NH3 and NO, with a few percent oxygen present and
temperatures between 300 ◦C and 400 ◦C, Reaction 2.1 accounts for the overall reaction in
SCR catalysis [14, 47].
Several catalysts have shown potential for reduction of NO with NH3, however, a low
selectivity of many materials have narrowed the eld of suitable catalysts. Noble metal
==PAGE:29==
2.1 Current Technologies for NOx Abatement
13
catalysts are very eective, but unfortunately simultaneously a very active NH3 oxidation
catalyst [48]. One of the most promising catalysts for SCR is the Vanadium-Tungsten-
Titanium based (VWT) catalyst [47, 49, 50]. The advantages of the VWT catalyst includes
a relatively wide temperature window (200-450 ◦C [51]), robust and durable performance,
and resistance to sulfur exposure [52]. The chemical structure of the VWT catalyst is
V2O5−WO3/TiO2, where the vanadium is responsible for the catalytic reduction of NO
(but also the undesired oxidation of SO2 and NH3 at elevated temperatures), and the
tungsten is employed to increase the acidity, activity, and thermal stability of the catalyst
[47, 53]. Typically, the content of V2O5 is 1-5 wt.%, where lower vanadium content is
desired for sulfur-rich fuel, while the WO3 content is 5-10 wt.% [47]. The TiO2 (anatase)
acts as porous support material and are preferred over AlO2 since TiO2 is only weakly
and reversibly sulfated in the presence of SO2 and oxygen, contrary to AlO2. For low-
temperature applications (below 200 ◦C) copper-exchanged zeolites have shown promising
catalysts with high SCR activity [54, 55].
Reaction 2.1 describes the main reaction for the SCR process the best, but there is no doubt
several other reactions take place. As for the SNCR process, several mechanisms have been
proposed, and there are still ongoing discussions whether it is one or the other mechanism
which describe the process the best [17, 56, 57]. Adsorption-desorption experiments have
been used to investigate how reactants behave on the surface of the catalyst.
Studies
have shown that ammonium adsorbs strongly to the surface on V2O5/TiO2, pure V2O5,
and TiO2 [58, 59, 60]. Figure 8.8 shows the dierent adsorption sites on a V2O5/TiO2
catalyst. The majority of NH3 is adsorbed on vanadyl sites through a Lewis interaction
or at Brønsted acidic sites. Furthermore, NH3 can also be adsorbed on the TiO2 carrier,
but only on Lewis sites due to the chemical nature of the carrier [61]. In dry conditions
NH3 predominately adsorb as Lewis coordinated ammonia, but in wet conditions, the
Brønsted/Lewis ratio can be shifted to 1:1 [17, 62].
Figure 2.1: Dierent ammonia adsorption sites on a V2O5/TiO2 catalyst. a) Lewis co-
ordinated ammonia to Ti atom, b) Lewis bonded NH3 at vanadyl site, c)
NH3 coordinated to a Brønsted site. Adapted from Busca et al. [17].
It is widely accepted that the SCR mechanism is an Eley-Rideal mechanism, where the
ammonia adsorbed to the surface of the catalyst reacts with NO from the gas phase or
from a weakly bond state [17, 18, 47, 56, 62].
In 1994 Topsøe et al.
investigated the
SCR reaction using FTIR in a ow cell and with reaction conditions similar to a working
==PAGE:30==
14
NOx Abatement
catalyst. The results lead to the conclusion that both V−OH and V−−O sites played an
important role, which resulted in the proposed mechanism in Figure 2.2. This mechanism
is widely supported; however, it is also criticized due to the fact that Topsøe et al. was
not able to follow the precise behavior of Lewis coordinated NH3 and the fact that the
stoichiometry of the proposed mechanism is not complete [17, 58].
Figure 2.2: Proposed Eley-Rideal mechanism for the SCR reaction by Topsøe et al. Blue
species are reactants, red species are products, and black species are inter-
mediates. Adapted from [57].
2.1.4
Fast SCR and Competing Reactions
Presence of both NO and NO2 allows for Reaction 2.2 to take place. This reaction is
signicant faster than the main reaction (Reaction 2.1) and is therefore often mentioned
as fast SCR [58]. The rate enhancement of fast SCR is most pronounced at temperatures
lower than 300 ◦C [49].
2 NO + 2 NO2 + 4 NH3 −−→4 N2 + 6 H2O
( 2.2)
The fast SCR reaction can be achieved by introducing a strong oxidation catalyst upstream
of the SCR catalyst to increase the fraction of NO2 in the exhaust gas. It is important the
molar ratio of NO2:NO does not exceed 1, as the reduction of NO2 seen in Reaction 2.3
is slower than the regular SCR reaction. This reaction has also been proposed to decrease
N2 selectivity, leading to formation of the potent GHG N2O [63].
8 NH3 + 6 NO2 −−→7 N2 + 12 H2O
( 2.3)
If the SCR reaction is performed at elevated temperatures, unwanted side reactions will
take place. These are either merely consuming NH3 or, even worse, producing additional
NOx as seen in Reaction 2.4 and Reaction 2.5. The oxidation of NH3 will compete with
the SCR reaction and decrease activity [63].
4 NH3 + 3 O2 −−→2 N2 + 6 H2O
( 2.4)
4 NH3 + 5 O2 −−→4 NO + 6 H2O
( 2.5)
==PAGE:31==
2.1 Current Technologies for NOx Abatement
15
Other unwanted reactions under the fast SCR is oxidation of SO2, which can form NH4HSO4
and H2SO4 under reaction with water and ammonia. Both products cause fouling and cor-
rosion and are therefore undesirable [56].
In 2017 Arnarson et al. proposed a complete reaction mechanism for both standard and
fast SCR of nitrogen oxides as seen in Figure 2.3 [64]. The mechanism is not yet widely
international acknowledged despite being based on correct stoichiometry (17 citations,
November 2018, Web of Science).
Figure 2.3: Proposed SCR mechanism by Arnarson et al. The black circle represents the
fast SCR reaction, the blue circle represents the NO-activation cycle and the
standard SCR reaction is the sum of the black and blue cycles. Reactants
are marked in red, products in green [64].
2.1.5
Placement of SCR Unit
The SCR unit can be placed three dierent locations giving rise to the high dust, low dust
and tail end congurations as seen in Figure 2.4.
In the high dust conguration, the SCR unit is placed immediately after the boiler. The
advantage of this position is that the catalyst bed does not have to be heated, and a
relatively inexpensive cold electrostatic precipitator (ESP) can be installed. The ESP is
used for dust removal. Deposition of NH4HSO4 on the air pre-heater (APH) is limited
because it is adsorbed onto the y ash. Having the SCR placed next to the boiler have
some severe disadvantages. As the name high dust indicates, the particle density is very
==PAGE:32==
16
NOx Abatement
Figure 2.4: Design options for SCR. Adapted from [65].
high at this position (1 to 30 g m=3 [66]), and due to catalyst poisons in the ue gas, a
relatively short catalyst lifetime is achieved at this position. Catalyst poisoning will be
briey reviewed in Section 2.1.6. Despite these disadvantages, the high dust position is the
most commonly used [67].
In the low dust conguration, a more expensive hot ESP is placed between the boiler and
the SCR unit. The obvious advantage of this position is the strongly reduced amount
of particulates, which typically is below 0.1 g m=3 in the ue gas [66]. Monoliths with a
higher cell density can be used in this position, thus lowering the space requirement in the
SCR unit. Apart from the more expensive hot ESP, deposition of NH4HSO4 on the APH
is among the disadvantages for the low dust conguration. Additionally, the catalyst can
be poisoned by a layer of very ne particles passing the ESP [66].
In the tail end conguration, the SCR unit is placed after the ue gas desulphurization
unit (FGD), and right before the smokestack. Being placed after both ESP and FGD units
the ue gas is almost free of poisons, leading to a longer catalyst lifetime. The major
disadvantage is the need for reheating the ue gas before it enters the SCR unit. Tail end
placement is typically used in municipal waste incinerators because of the very challenging
ue gas composition, thus, a low-temperature deNOx method is needed [68].
2.1.6
Deactivation of SCR Catalysts
As for all other catalyst systems, the SCR catalyst can be deactivated/poisoned. This is a
major problem for biomass-red plants and waste incineration plants. The deactivation is
mostly due to potassium, which is present in higher amounts in biomass compared to e.g.
fossil fuels. The main mode of deactivation is neutralization of the catalysts acid sites by
submicron aerosols containing mostly KCl and K2SO4 formed in the combustion process
[69].
==PAGE:33==
2.1 Current Technologies for NOx Abatement
17
Table 2.1: NOx emissions and potassium content of various fuels.
Wood pellet
Straw
Fuel oil
Natural gas
NOx emission [mg/MJ]
130-300a
130-300a
75a
50-100a
Potassium content [wt.% dry matter]
0.1a
1a
<0.01b
<0.01b
a Data from [70].
b Data from [71].
As seen in Table 2.1, biomass emissions of NOx are 2-4 times higher compared to fuel
oil and natural gas, and potassium content is vast in biomass compared to fuel oil and
natural gas. Jensen-Holm et al. have investigated the deactivation of SCR catalyst of
dierent fuels by model simulation.
They found that after 10,000 operating hours the
deactivation of SCR catalyst was 99% using straw as fuel and 25-60% using wood chips as
fuel. It is crucial to reduce the catalyst poisoning from biomass red plants. In comparison
the catalyst poisoning is 5% using heavy fuel oil after 10,000 operating hours [72]. The
deactivation of the SCR catalyst as a function of the operating time is depicted in Figure
2.5.
Figure 2.5: Expected deactivation of SCR catalyst for combustion of dierent fuels.
Adapted from Jensen-Holm et al. [72].
The expected deactivation of SCR catalyst for dierent fuels by Jensen-Holm et al. is
proportional to the potassium content, however, the mechanism by which potassium deac-
tivates the catalyst is not fully understood [58]. It is known that all alkali metals contribute
to catalyst deactivation, however, potassium and sodium represent 99% of the alkali con-
tent in the fuel. Being the most abundant and most poisonous compound, it is relevant to
focus on potassium poisoning of the SCR catalyst [73, 58]. Although the mechanisms for
catalyst deactivation is not being fully understood, a clear trend is found, as the degree of
catalyst poisoning correlates with the basicity of the formed alkali hydroxides in the order:
CsOH > RbOH > KOH > NaOH > LiOH [69].
==PAGE:34==
18
NOx Abatement
2.2
Alternative Technologies for NOx Abatement
Alternative technologies for NOx abatement are investigated at several research institutes
to avoid the problems with catalyst poisoning and to reduce costs of the catalyst. Some
technologies are based on an SCR catalyst system running at lower temperatures, thus
reducing the need for heating ue gas before entering the SCR at tail end SCR catalysis
[69]. Other research is focused on making the catalyst resistant for poisoning, e.g. by
a surface of the catalyst which is repelling the poisonous alkali metals [69]. These are
improvements to the existing NH3−SCR system, and this section is devoted to a brief
review of present research for a novel SCR system.
2.2.1
Hydrocarbon SCR
To eliminate ammonia slip and formation of NH4HSO4, hydrocarbon SCR (HC-SCR)
have been proposed to reduce NOx emissions. The most frequently investigated type of
catalyst is Ag/Al2O3, and several hydrocarbons, including alcohols, have been investigated
as reducing agents. Rao et al. have reported a benecial eect of alkali metals on HC-SCR,
as they reported the alkali substantially suppressed the accumulation of sulfur compounds
over the surface and had a promotional eect on NOx removal using methane as reducing
agent [74]. Sulfur deactivates the Ag/Al2O3 catalysts, and SO2 levels as low as 25 ppm
reduce the activity with EtOH as reducing agent by more than 50% [73]. Chansai et al.
reported a potential solution to this problem, by introducing a regenerable Ag/SiO2 SOx
trap. The SOx trap almost eliminated SOx, and NO conversions of 90% using HC-SCR was
reported at intermediate temperatures [75]. Despite Rao et al. reporting a positive eect of
alkali metals, other groups have reported the opposite. Severe alkali poisoning, combined
with expensive reductants, worsening of atom economy and additional CO2 emissions,
is among the problems directing most research to focus on low-temperature NH3−SCR
instead of HC-SCR [73].
2.2.2
Zeolite Based SCR
Dierent catalysts based on zeolites have been proven to be very active, and as early as in
1991 Sato et al. showed that a copper-exchanged ZSM-5 zeolite exhibited great potential
for HC-SCR with ethene [76]. Later other zeolites have been investigated using ammonia as
reducing agent, showing high potential for NOx removal in alkali-rich environments, since a
lower catalyst deactivation was observed for zeolites exposed to alkali metals compared to
conventional V2O5−WO3/TiO2 catalyst [77]. Other advantages include high selectivity of
the copper or iron-exchanged zeolites, however, as for other supports containing alumina,
the catalysts suer from severe deactivation due to sulphation.
2.2.3
NO Oxidation for Fast SCR Catalysis
As mentioned in Section 2.1.4, a faster SCR reaction can be obtained at lower temperatures
compared to conventional SCR with a NO2:NO ratio of 1 in the ue gas. This has led some
scientic work to focus on partial oxidation of NO, to obtain the fast SCR mechanism. It
is important to remember, that several reactions concurrently occur over the catalyst, thus
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Alternative Technologies for NOx Abatement
19
a partial NO oxidation leading to a NO2:NO ratio lower than 1 can still increase the rate
of NOx removal.
In 2014 the group of Gimenez-Manogil reported a CuO/ceria-zirconia catalyst for NO
oxidation to NO2 with a high activity at mild temperatures - they reported 54% conversion
of NO to NO2 at 348 ◦C [78].
Despite the conversion being somewhat lower than for
a Pt/Al2O3, they argued that the dierence was low enough to use this catalyst and
benet of the lower price of a catalyst without noble metals. Same year Loiland et Lobo
reported NO oxidation being catalyzed by chabazite zeolites in the proton (H+), sodium
(Na+) and siliceous forms by microporous carbons and by the metal-organic framework
at temperatures between 298 K and 423 K [79]. For all microporous materials tested by
Loiland et Lobo, the catalytic rates decrease with increasing temperature.
Liu et al. have put a lot of eort into investigating the oxidation of NO from ue gasses
with UV light as a coactivator. Common in these experiments is the oxidation of NO is
driven by radical reactions, which are activated by the UV light. Using a heat coactivated
ozone system the group reported a removal eciency of NO of up to 91.2% [80]. Using UV
photolysis of aqueous hypochlorite, the group obtained full NO removal in a gas containing
400 ppm NO at 318 K and high light intensity with optimal hypochlorite concentration
(0.2 mol L=1). At more realistic conditions the removal eciency was 70% to 90% [81].
The very same group performed simultaneous absorption-oxidation of nitric oxide and
sulfur dioxide using ammonium persulfate activated by UV light and heat. The highest
simultaneously removal eciency reported was 96.1% and 100% respectively [82]. They
proved radicals of SO 
4
and OH was the key-oxidizers for NO.
Radicals of OH as an oxidizer of NO have attracted interest from various sides. The radicals
can easily be obtained by hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), which is rather unstable. Hao et al.
proposed an oxidation process in 2016 pumping evaporated H2O2 to a UV catalysis reactor
with the ue gas. Using a UV lamp with an energy density of 0.06 W cm=3 a removal
eciency of 87.8% was reported using a H2O2:NO ratio of 8 [83]. In May 2018 Yang et
al. investigated the Fenton oxidation of nitric oxide by magnetite. Magnetite materials
were used for catalytic decomposition of H2O2 by Fe2+ reacting with the H2O2 to form
·OH. A removal eciency of 73% was reported at 160 ◦C, and the ratio of H2O2:NO was
approximately 16 [84]. Using La1-xCaxFeO3 as radical initiator for H2O2 Wu and Xiong
reported a removal eciency of NO of 95%. H2O2:NO ratio was 28, but despite a poor
atom eciency Wu and Xiong comment this is an improvement from several articles in
the literature using a H2O2:NO ratio of over 500 to obtain similar results [85]. Despite the
high eciency regarding oxidation of NO using hydrogen peroxide, the poor atom eciency
combined with the relatively hazardous oxidizing agent, leave this technology unt for NO
oxidation in large scale.
2.2.4
Absorption and Oxidation in Ionic Liquids
Previous work has shown that ionic liquids (ILs) are promising absorbers and can selectively
absorb ue gas constituents as CO2, SO2 and NO. Chen et al. have reported a molar
capacity of 4.52 mol NO per mol IL by bubbling a gas containing NO through an azole-
based IL [44]. Using the metallic functional ionic liquid [bmim]2FeCl4 absorption of NO
in a simulated ue gas was carried out by Sun et al.
Absorption up to 0.8 mol NO
==PAGE:36==
20
NOx Abatement
captured per mol IL was reported, and at cyclic absorption-desorption experiments, a
capacity of 0.3 mol NO per mol IL was reported with no loss of capacity over 4 cycles
[86]. Using environmentally friendly deep eutectic solvents (DES), the very same group
reported capacities of 4.25 mol NO per mol DES [87].
At this institute, ionic liquids have also gathered a lot of interest, and absorption of NO,
and other ue gas components, have been demonstrated over various supported ionic liquid
phase (SILP) materials [88, 89]. More interesting regarding the deNOx process, is that it
has been found, that nitrogen oxides, including NO, can be oxidized in ILs [90]. Further-
more, it has been shown that alcohols can promote the oxidation of NO in ILs [54]. This
thesis will build upon the previous ndings of oxidation of nitric oxide in ILs and focus on
making reproducible results for oxidation of NO in SILP materials. As an introduction,
the next chapter will be used to review ionic liquids, the proposed mechanism and the
previously obtained results for absorption and oxidation of nitrogen oxides in ILs.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3
Oxidation of NO in Ionic Liquids
Ionic liquids (ILs) have shown great potential as an absorbent for NO, with reported
capacities of up to 4.52 mol NO absorbed per mol IL. Recently, Peter Jakobsen in his
Ph.D. dissertation showed that at low-temperature methanol could promote the oxidation
of NO in ILs composed of [bmim][NO3] [54]. This chapter is dedicated to a review of ILs
and how they can be used for oxidation of NO.
3.1
Ionic Liquids
Ionic liquids are salts, which are liquid below 100 ◦C, thus consisting solely of ions. One
of the most interesting characteristics of the ILs is that they practically have no vapor
pressure below the temperature of its thermal decomposition [91]. Consisting solely of
ions, as the regular salt NaCl found in most households, ILs exhibit ionic conductivity.
Aqueous solutions of salts are not classied as ILs, as they do not consist solely of ions.
The rst IL, ethylammonium nitrate ([C2NH3][NO3]) with a melting point of mp=12 ◦C,
was reported by Paul Walden in 1914, who at that time probably never realized ILs would
become a major scientic area almost 100 years after his discovery. In the year 2000 less
than 1000 publications with key-words related to ILs was released, however, a search on
SciFinder and DTU FindIt reveals more than 11 000 publications related to ILs was re-
leased in 2017 [54, 92]. The rst burst of interest in ILs took place in the 1970's and the
early 1980's with the discovery of chloroaluminates formed by combining quaternary hete-
rocyclic cations with aluminum chloride. These ILs were developed as battery electrolytes,
but further development led to use as a catalytic active solvent in Friedel-Craft alkylation
[93]. The next breakthrough was made by Wilkes in the 1990's by replacing aluminum
chloride with other anions such as [BF4] and [PF6] to create air and water stable ILs
[94]. To make cheaper and non-toxic ILs focus have been on developing halogen-free ILs,
which are common today [92].
ILs have both been labeled as green solvents due to the low vapor pressure, which makes it
possible to re-use the solvent, and as designer solvents due to the almost endless combina-
tions of compositions in ILs, which opens for the opportunity to ne-tune the properties of
the IL [95]. As insights into the nature of ILs become deeper, some fundamental viewpoints
are now slightly dierent from the original concepts. For example, the physiochemical prop-
erties of ILs are now recognized as ranging broadly from the often quoted "non-volatile,
non-ammable, and air and water stable" to those that are distinctly volatile, ammable,
==PAGE:38==
22
Oxidation of NO in Ionic Liquids
and unstable [92]. In 2016 the group of Fehrmann reported decomposition in dierent
amino acid ionic liquids (AAILs) based on weight loss and loss in activity of the AAILs
after exposure to 80 ◦C atmospheric air [89]. Based on NMR analysis of the decomposed
ionic liquids they proposed the decomposition to originate from decarboxylation of the
anion in the IL.
3.1.1
Properties of Ionic Liquids
ILs are often referred to as compounds with no vapor pressure. This is not exactly true, but
since the vapor pressure at 25 ◦C usually is below 1 Pa, the vapor pressure is negligible [96].
The ILs do not evaporate, and therefore do not contribute to air pollution as conventional
solvents.
Many ILs are liquid at room temperature (RTILs) and the negligible vapor
pressure allows usage over a wide temperature range, as the ILs will decompose at high
temperatures instead of evaporating. Furthermore, ILs are non-ammable, making them
ideal for use as solvents.
Because of the low vapor pressure, ILs do not boil, and therefore it is not useful to dene
a boiling point as the upper thermal limit for use.
Instead, the upper thermal limit
before the IL decompose is used to dene the working range for the IL. The decomposition
point, where the IL break down into smaller compounds, is often referred to as Tonset or
Tdecomp. Thermal stability measurements are carried out by thermogravimetric analysis
(TGA), usually with a heating rate of 10 ◦C min=1 [97]. In the TGA analysis the weight
of the IL is monitored during heating, thus the decomposition temperature is found at
the temperature which the IL break down to volatile components and lose mass. In fact,
Tonset or Tdecomp is calculated by interception of the baseline with zero weight loss and
the tangent of the mass of the IL over temperature. Decomposition actually starts at a
lower temperature, therefore this is also sometimes referred to as the short-term thermal
stability. For the lower thermal boundary, the glass transition temperature, or the melting
point from the crystal structure, is used. In general, the melting point tends to decrease as
the size of the ions in the IL increase, as the melting point is related to the lattice energy,
which depends on the sum of ionic radii. However, this is a very generalizing rule as several
exceptions are known, e.g. the melting point of [C9min][BF4] is 190.5 K, while the similar
IL with a smaller cation [C3min][BF4] have a melting point of 175.1 K [98]. ILs are often
highly viscous, which will be reviewed later in this section.
For molecular liquids, quantitative structure-property relationships (QSPRs) have been
studied for a wide range of physical properties.
The reason behind the popularity of
QSPR is in its simplicity, as it combines several well-dened descriptors in either a linear
or nonlinear fashion to achieve the least deviation for a particular property, e.g. viscosity,
from experimental data. The tting procedure usually comprises a training set that has
an extensive series of experimental data and a validation set that includes experimental
data excluded from the original t. A shortage of experimental data combined with the
large number of reported ILs leaves incomplete characterization of the physical properties
for many ILs [99]. A comprehensive database of ILs available at no cost to the public has
been developed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology. The database,
ILThermo, gather information on experimental data of ILs, including numerical values of
chemical and physical properties, measurement methods, sample purity, the uncertainty
of property values, as well as many other signicant measurement details. ILThermo can
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Ionic Liquids
23
be a useful tool and are under constant development, but the dataset is far too sparse
to support the level of sophistication employed in QSPR treatments of molecular liquids
except in special cases [99, 100].
IL Structure
The structure of the ILs plays a key role in the interesting properties depart from conven-
tional solvents. Composed of an equal number of paired/coordinated ions the Coulombic
nature impose a degree of order in the short-range scale, but amphiphilic combinations of
polar and non-polar components can lead to dierent types of correlation on longer scales.
At least one of the ions in the IL are often relatively large and bulky. This is necessary to
keep a high degree of disorder, a low ion density and a high degree of asymmetry, which
all together make crystal packing unfavorable, and lead to stable salts in the liquid phase
[101]. In Figure 3.1 chemical structure for common IL cations and anions are depicted.
Figure 3.1: Chemical structure of various IL cations (red) and anions (blue).
One of the most striking ndings regarding the structure of ILs has been that they can
display remarkable structural heterogeneity. Self-aggregation eects between alkyl tails
can lead to strongly ordered local environments even for alkyl chains as short as butyl
[101].
Structural heterogeneity underlies all the aspects of the chemical physics of ILs, including
solvation, dynamics, and transport.
It remains a very vibrant area of theoretical and
experimental study. For example, understanding the role of the anion-cation interactions
in modulating side-chain aggregation and controlling the nature of the nonpolar domains
has important applications in industrial separations chemistry including gas separation
and carbon capture, and in IL-based catalytic systems [102].
==PAGE:40==
24
Oxidation of NO in Ionic Liquids
Viscosity and Transport in ILs
The viscosity and conductivity of ILs depend strongly on the values of the glass transi-
tion temperature, Tg [102]. For a homologous series of [Cn−mim][BF4] ILs, the Tg values
increase as the alkyl chain length increases from butyl to decyl, while the corresponding
fragility parameters decrease over the same range [98]. Shirota et al. have made a compre-
hensive study, showing that the fragility of the IL depends strongly on the anion [103]. In
2008 Li et al. sought to connect the observed viscosities to the ion structure, by introduc-
ing a new property termed the charge lever moment (CLM) of the ILs [99]. The CLM is
based on ionic moments of inertia and asymmetry of the ion. The CLM contain detailed
information about the distribution of charge and mass in the ion, addressing both to the
degree to which Coulomb interactions with neighboring atoms can induce torque about a
given axis and the rate of the dynamic response. This is considerably more detailed than
the previous model using the charge arm, as each ion in the IL contains three CLMs, one
for each Cartesian axis. Li et al. found the CLM can be used to interpret the relative
viscosities of structurally analogous ILs, however, the correlation breaks down for highly
exible ions.
Self-diusion in uids can be determined using the pulse-gradient spin-echo (PG-SE) NMR
method. In most cases the 1H or 19F NMR signals can be used to uniquely measure the
self-diusion of both cation and anion in ILs [104]. The group of Watanabe has made
an impressive study of the physiochemical properties of ILs. By comparing the single-
particle self-diusion coecients using PG-SE NMR studies with the bulk conductivity,
the group estimated the eective fraction of ions that undergo diusive transport as single
ions relative to those ions that diuse as aggregates. These ndings have led to a general
acceptance of the theory that cations and anions may aggregate into clusters that at least
are metastable [105, 106, 107, 108]. This may be a consequence of the polar/nonpolar
domain in heterogeneous ILs [99].
ILs are highly viscous, typically in the range 40-800 mPa s at room temperature [109]. In
comparison the viscosity of water is 1.002 mPa s at 20 ◦C. For [bmim][NO3], which will be
used in this study, Peter Jakobsen reported a viscosity of 250 mPa s by extrapolation [54].
3.1.2
Gas Absorption in ILs
Brennecke et al. were the rst to report high solubility of gases in ILs, when they reported
a high capacity of CO2 in 1999 [110]. Their reporting formed the basis for investigating
possible sorbents for a wide variety of gases. Absorption of CO2, NO, SO2, and H2S are
among the investigated gases [89, 111, 112].
The absorption into the IL can occur in form of chemisorption and physisorption.
In
chemisorption, a chemical bond is formed between the gas component and the IL. Phy-
sisorption can to some extent be considered a strong form of dissolution eect, and the
capacity of physisorption increases signicantly when the partial pressure of the gas in-
creases. Chemisorption is the most desired mechanism of gas absorption, as the interaction
between IL and gas is stronger, making separation possible at lower partial pressure. In-
creasing the partial pressure is undesirable, as it requires a lot of energy.
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Ionic Liquids
25
A major drawback of absorption/oxidation of gases in ILs is related to the high viscosity
of ILs. The high viscosity leads to low diusion coecients for several gasses including
NO. Compared to water the diusion coecients for gases are in general 10 times lower in
ILs [113]. What is even worse, is, that studies have found the viscosity of the IL increase
signicantly under absorption of dierent gases, and therefore it can be dicult to reach
the potential of the absorption capacity in ILs [114]. To overcome this barrier two simple
solutions can be found; either lowering the viscosity or increase the surface area of the
IL. Lowering the viscosity can be obtained by ne-tuning the IL, however, all ILs have
high viscosity compared to water and therefore this may not be enough to overcome the
diusion barrier. Recently, the group of Brennecke has used tetraglyme as an additive to
dierent ILs to reduce the viscosity of the IL while absorbing CO2 [115]. Recalling the
denition, ILs are solely composed of paired ions, and therefore the experiments conducted
by Brennecke et al. cannot be dened as gas absorption in pure ILs. Sun et al. have also
investigated pseudo-ILs, by absorbing nitric oxide in deep eutectic solvents (DES), partly
composed by ILs. Absorption capacities of NO were reported as high as 4.5 mol NO per
mol DES [87].
Another option to increase the diusion of gasses to the IL is to use a support material
with a high surface area as a carrier for the IL. This is reviewed in Section 3.1.3.
3.1.3
Supported Ionic Liquid Phase
The high viscosity limits the mass transfer diusion over the IL, which is especially chal-
lenging for fast chemical reactions where absorption/desorption occur in the diusion layer
over the IL. In an ideal system of fast chemical reactions, a thin lm of IL would carry out
the absorption of the ue gas. Such a lm can be immobilized by physisorption, tethering,
or covalent bonding of ILs on a highly porous material to obtain a larger surface area for
the absorption [113]. The concept of the supported ionic liquid phase (SILP) is illustrated
in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Schematic overview of a SILP particle. From [88].
The SILP concept was rst introduced by Mehnert et al. in 2002 as a supported ionic liquid
catalyst [116]. In this early SILP study, an Rh catalyst was suspended in the IL anchored
on the support, which was used in a slurry type reaction for hydroformylation. Partial
dissolution of the IL into the liquid phase led to leaching of the Rh catalyst, meaning
==PAGE:42==
26
Oxidation of NO in Ionic Liquids
that this SILP formulation was not ideal for liquid phase reactions. In 2003 Riisager et
al. introduced the SILP concept for heterogeneous gas phase reactions. Again, the use
was SILP particles with suspended Rh catalyst in the IL, but the reaction carried out was
hydroformylation of propene in a continuous gas ow [117].
SILP can be synthesized on practically all sorts of porous materials from particles to
monoliths. The general procedure is to dissolve the IL in a relevant solvent, often water or
MeOH, and introduce the support material to the dissolved IL prior to gentle evaporation
of the solvent to ensure evenly dispersed IL on the support. The resulting SILP appears
completely dry. It has been proposed by Wasserscheid and Steinrück that when using the
SILP concept, the mass transfer limitations over the IL surface become negligible [109].
Reducing the mass transfer limitations over the IL would overcome the biggest obstacles
for gas absorption in ILs, and this does not compromise the IL by using additives to the
IL.
The amount of IL on the support material can be determined by the liquid loading and
the pore-lling degree. The liquid loading, ϵl, is the amount of IL on the SILP determined
by mass as seen in Eq. 3.1.1, where mIL is the mass of the IL, and msupport is the mass of
support material prior to coating with IL.
ϵl =
mIL
mIL + msupport
(Eq. 3.1.1)
The pore-lling degree, αpore, is the amount of initial pore-volume in the support material
taken up by the IL as seen in Eq. 3.1.2, where VIL is the volume of the IL, and Vpore,0 is
the total initial pore volume of the support material.
αpore =
VIL
Vpore,0
(Eq. 3.1.2)
It is most common to indicate the IL loading by the liquid loading.
3.2
NO Absorption and Oxidation in SILPs
Early experiments in this group reported that some SILP formulations not only had a
high NO capacity but also had signicant oxidative capabilities, willingly oxidizing NO to
higher NOx species [54]. It was found that the oxidative eect was due to alcohol residuals
in the SILP material from the impregnation process of the SILP. To investigate the eect
of an alcohol promoted NO oxidation in SILP materials, Peter Jakobsen added dierent
alcohols to SILP materials coated with [bmim][NO3].
Figure 3.3: The ionic liquid, [bmim][NO3], used for alcohol promoted oxidation of NO.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 NO Absorption and Oxidation in SILPs
27
The results were promising with NO conversions up to 72% reported. In the spring 2018,
Alexander W. Liljegren tried to reproduce the experiments to verify the results and improve
the setup. The proof of concept by oxidizing NO using alcohols was veried, however, sig-
nicant lower conversions compared to Peter Jakobsen were reported. Beside [bmim][NO3],
also [Ch][NO3] was used as IL, with same NO conversions, indicating the anion is the active
specie in the SILP. Alexander Liljegren reported a considerably background oxidation of
NO to NO2 of approximately 30% in the empty reactor for a gas ow rate at 150 mL min=1
containing 3000 ppm NO at 30 ◦C [118].
Conversion of NO was based on UV-vis analysis and indicated no to low amounts of NO2
in the euent gas, but both nitric acid (HNO3) and nitrous acid (HONO) were present
in the euent gas. From these data, it was proposed the conversion of NO was caused
by oxidation to NO2, which subsequently was oxidized to HNO3 due to the vast excess of
water in the system. The alcohol in the system was assumed to be a catalytic promoter.
In Figure 3.4 the proposed mechanism for catalytic removal of NO using [bmim][NO3] is
depicted.
Figure 3.4: Proposed catalytic cycle for the absorption and oxidation of NO to HNO3 by
[bmim][NO3]. Blue species are reactants, red species are products and black
species are intermediates. From [54].
In this thesis, a thorough investigation of alcohol promoted NO oxidation in SILP ma-
terials will be performed. The methanol promoted oxidation of NO will be investigated
in an empty reactor and with pure support material as well, to account for the specic
contribution to conversion caused by the IL.
==PAGE:44==
28
Oxidation of NO in Ionic Liquids
==PAGE:45==
Part II
Experimental
==PAGE:46==
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
Analytical Techniques
In order to analyze the conversion of NO in the SILP-reactor Ultraviolet-Visible spec-
trophotometry (UV-vis) was used to quantify NO conversion. This technique also allowed
to observe the formation of new compounds in the euent gas. To calculate NO conver-
sion from the captured UV-vis spectra, spectral deconvolution was performed in Matlab,
using a script developed to call the function Peakfit.m. Another Matlab function,
Humidity.m, was developed to calculate the needed concentration of alcohols and the
rate of addition to obtaining the desired humidity and amount of alcohol in the gas phase.
This chapter is dedicated to a review of UV-vis spectroscopy and the Matlab functions
used in the work carried out herein.
4.1
Ultraviolet-Visible Spectrophotometry
To quantify the conversion of NO, UV-vis spectrophotometry was used. UV-vis is an ana-
lytical method that measures the absorption of light in the ultraviolet and visible region of
the electromagnetic spectrum (200-800 nm). The principle of UV-vis spectrophotometry is
seen in Figure 4.1. A light source sends light of various wavelengths to a monochromator,
which disperses light into its component wavelengths and selects a narrow band of wave-
lengths to pass through a cuvette (an optically transparent container) with the sample and
into the detector. The sample can be both liquid and gaseous.
Figure 4.1: Simplied overview of a UV-vis analyzer.
The detector measures the intensity of the light passing through the sample, and the
absorbance is calculated as the logarithm of the intensity passing the blank, I0 over the
intensity passing the sample, I, as seen in Eq. 4.1.1.
A = log10
I0
I

(Eq. 4.1.1)
==PAGE:48==
32
Analytical Techniques
UV-vis spectrophotometry is a strong analytical tool to perform quantitative analysis of a
compound in a known liquid solution or gaseous mixture by using the Lambert-Beer law
seen in Eq. 4.1.2.
A = ϵ (x, λ) · b · C(x)
(Eq. 4.1.2)
Where ϵ (x, λ) is the extinction coecient of the analyte x at the wavelength λ, b is the
pathlength of the cuvette and C(x) is the concentration of analyte x. A drawback of us-
ing the Lambert-Beer law to quantify an analyte is that absorbances are additive. Thus,
it is dicult to quantify the analyte if other compounds in the solution absorb light at
the same wavelength. In theory UV-vis spectrophotometry can be used to qualify com-
pounds in a solution, however, several compounds will absorb light at identical wavelengths
complicating the analysis a lot.
As seen in Eq. 4.1.1, an absorbance of 2 is equivalent to only 1% of the light passing
the blank also passing the sample.
The empirical Lambert-Beer law is not considered
applicable for absorbances above 2, as the uncertainty is increasing due to the very low
amount of light passing the cuvette [119].
Another method to perform quantitative analysis using a UV-vis spectrophotometer is by
the integral (area) of the peaks in the spectral data. As the concentration rarely is linearly
proportional to the area of the signal peaks a standard curve obtained by known concen-
trations is applied. This method is used in this thesis. As the extinction coecient diers
from dierent compounds the absorption/area from one compound at low concentrations
in a sample might be higher than the absorption/area of another compound found at a
lower concentration in the sample.
4.1.1
Electronic Transitions
The absorbance observed is caused by the ultraviolet or visible radiation interacting with a
molecule to cause an electronic transition promoting an electron from the ground state to a
high energy state. The electron transition can either be a π to π∗or n (non-bonding) to π∗
transition. σ to σ∗transitions are not allowed in UV-vis spectrophotometry, as the energy
barrier is too large, thus photons at lower wavelengths outside of the UV-vis region would
be required. An overview of possible electron transitions is seen in Figure 4.2. Depending
on the molecule and the exact molecular orbital (MO) splitting, transitions to both rst
and second excited state is achievable [120].
The energy dierence between the ground state and the excited state is equal to the energy
of the photon. The energy of a photon is given by:
E = hc
λ
(Eq. 4.1.3)
Where E is the energy of the photon, h is the Planck constant, c is the speed of light in
vacuum and λ is the wavelength of the photon. As h and c are both constants, photon
energy changes in inverse relation to the wavelength λ [122].
Nitric oxide is a relatively simple diatomic molecule with MO splitting as seen in Figure
4.3. Photons in the ultraviolet region can cause electron transitions of the π orbital to the
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Ultraviolet-Visible Spectrophotometry
33
Figure 4.2: Overview of possible electron transitions, only π to π∗and n to π∗transitions
are allowed in UV-vis spectrophotometry. Adapted from [121].
π∗orbital, which is the lowest unoccupied orbital (LUMO) [120]. An UV-vis spectrum of
NO with balance N2 is seen in Figure 4.4. The absorption at 204nm, 214nm, and 226nm is
the result of electronic transitions from the ground state to the lowest rst excited state (π
to π∗transition). The three principal bands observed are the result of diering vibrational
transitions occurring during the electronic transitions [120]. The vibrational ne structure
can be observed for gasses, however, it will disappear in solutions due to interactions with
neighboring atoms.
Figure 4.3: MO diagram for nitric oxide. Adapted from [123].
Below 200nm, the common substituents of air such as oxygen, nitrogen, carbon dioxide,
and water begin to absorb light, and thus this region is typically not used for UV-vis
spectral analysis [120].
==PAGE:50==
34
Analytical Techniques
4.1.2
The Analyzing Method Used
A Thermo Scientic Evolution 220 UV-Visible Spectrophotometer was used to measure the
UV-vis absorption of the gas. The lamp in the spectrophotometer was a xenon ash lamp,
with a wavelength range from 190 to 1100nm, however, the highest accuracy is from 200-
800nm. A Czerny-Turner monochromator disperses the light and selects a narrow band
of wavelengths to pass through the sample. The gas sample was led through a 100mm
quartz cuvette. The detector in the spectrophotometer is a dual silicon photodiode. The
photodiode is a semiconductor device that converts light into an electrical current. The
current is generated when photons are absorbed in the photodiode.
All samples were obtained from 200 to 600nm, with a data interval of 0.1nm, resulting of
a scan speed for one spectrum of 86 seconds.
4.1.3
Spectral Analysis of NO, NO2, HNO3 and HONO
As mentioned above NO has three signicant and sharp peaks at 204nm, 214nm, and
226nm respectively. NO2 has two broad peaks with a maximum at approximately 400nm
and 200nm respectively.
In Figure 4.4 NO gas with balance N2 (black) and NO with
balance air (red) is depicted to illustrate the oxidation of NO into NO2 with the presence
of air.
Figure 4.4: UV-vis spectral data of euent gas.
Black: NO in balance N2 through
bypass pipe. Red: NO in balance air through bypass pipe. Blue: NO in
balance air through reactor with HS-SILP and 375ppm MeOH in gas phase.
Nitric acid, HNO3, have a broad peak with a maximum absorbance around 200nm very
similar to NO2, though nitric acid has a signicantly greater absorption cross section
leading to higher absorption values.
The group of Berland has shown that the water
content in HNO3 aects the maximum absorbance wavelength of HNO3, with increasing
amounts of water leading to a redshift of the maximum absorbance [124]. The blue line
in Figure 4.4 is a data set of NO with balance air through the reactor with HS-SILP
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Spectral Deconvolution in Matlab
35
and 375ppm MeOH in the gas phase. The large peak around 207nm originates from a
combination of absorbance of NO2 and HNO3. As the blue and red line have a similar
absorbance at 400nm, the amount of NO2 is similar as well. The blue line in Figure 4.4
do also have 5 absorption peaks between 300nm and 380nm. These peaks originate from
nitrous acid (HONO) and are caused by vibrational coupling [125]. A sixth peak has been
reported at 386nm, however, it is only seen at higher concentrations [125].
4.2
Spectral Deconvolution in Matlab
The concentration of NO in the gas phase is quantied by spectral deconvolution of UV-vis
spectra. NO has three sharp peaks at 204, 214 and 226 nm respectively, while NO2 and
HNO3 have a broader band with center around 200 and 215 nm respectively [120, 124].
Spectral deconvolution of the UV-vis spectra was performed with the Matlab script
Peakfit.m (Version 9.0, January 2018), developed by Thomas O'Haver, Professor Emer-
itus at the University of Maryland at College Park. Peakfit.m can be downloaded from
MathWorks' ocial File Exchange database, and a complete description of the script is
found in reference [126]. An example of spectral deconvolution using Peakfit.m is seen
in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Deconvolution of a UV-vis spectrum using Peakt.m. Gas stream containing
2000ppm NO (balance N2) at a owrate of 200 mL min=1.
Spectral deconvolution was performed in the 200-243nm spectral range. Input arguments
to Peakfit.m are the number of peaks to search for, the type of peaks (Gaussian used
for all peaks), estimated location of center of peak, estimated broadness of peak and
number of trials for the script to nd optimal cumulative spectrum.
A typical call of
input arguments for deconvolution of the 3 NO peaks and the broad peak caused by NO2
and/or HNO3 is » peakfit(signal,0,0,4,[1 1 1 1],[1 1 1 1],10,[204.8
1.22 214.9 1.48 226.3 1.29 215.9 50],0).
As the broad NO2/HNO3 might shift apex, slight changes might be needed for each anal-
==PAGE:52==
36
Analytical Techniques
ysis. An example of the output is seen in Figure 4.5. The position, height, width and the
area of each peak are determined and saved in a vector. The area of the NO peaks is used
to quantify the NO conversion based on the standard curve.
4.2.1
main_peakt.m Script for Multi-Spectral Analysis
To speed up the process of calculating the NO conversion from the area of the peaks found
by Peakfit.m, the script main_peakfit.m was developed. main_peakfit.m is found
in Appendix C.1.
As the addition of alcohol solution might not be perfectly constant due to the surface
tension of the liquid minor deviations in the obtained spectral data might occur at steady
state. As a result 3 to 10 dierent data sets was exported for each steady state, and the
conversion is reported as an average. The script main_peakfit.m is designed to search a
dened folder for all .xlsx les, perform the spectral deconvolution of each le and save the
results in a vector. An average of the conversion based on the standard curve is calculated
together with the standard deviation.
4.3
Humidity in Reactor
The water content in the gas phase is believed to aect the oxidation of NO. Furthermore,
NO absorption and diusion in water is a reversible process, thus, it is preferable to keep
water in the gas phase. As the full mechanism of the oxidation is still unknown the desired
water content in the gas phase is still not imposed, and it is desired to investigate how the
water content aects the NO conversion.
In this thesis, humid air is considered an ideal gas, which is a good approximation below
a pressure of 10 bar [127]. The humidity is dened as the content of water vapor in the
air.
The vapor pressure of saturated air depends on the temperature as air at higher
temperatures can obtain more water. A table of water content in saturated air at dierent
temperatures is seen in Appendix D.1. As the maximum water content depends on the
temperature it is relevant to refer to the humidity as the relative humidity (RH) as seen in
Eq. 4.3.4.
ψ = p
p∗· 100%
(Eq. 4.3.4)
Where ψ is the relative humidity, p is the partial pressure of water in the air and p∗is
the partial pressure of water at saturation. The room temperature, 24 ◦C, is chosen to
calculate the relative humidity, despite the fact that the reactor temperature might be
higher, as the tubes after the reactor is room temperature. Thus, water might condense in
the tubes after the reactor if the dew point is reached during the cooling of the gas.
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Humidity in Reactor
37
4.3.1
Example of Humidity Calculations
The amount of water to add to the system to reach the desired humidity was calculated
using equation Eq. 4.3.5.
vwater = ψ · Xs · vair
ρH2O
(Eq. 4.3.5)
Where vwater is the water ow, ψ is the desired relative humidity, Xs is the water content
at saturation, vair is the gas ow and ρH2O is the density of water.
If the gas ow in the reactor is 200 mL min=1, and the desired relative humidity in the gas
phase is 10% at 24 ◦C, the water ow to inject can be calculated as follows:
vwater = 0.1 · 21.75 g m−3 · 200 mL min−1 · 10−6 m3 mL−1 · 60 min h−1
0.997 g mL−1
= 0.0262 mL h−1
(Eq. 4.3.6)
Stoiciometry of the Reaction
In Section 3.2 a proposed reaction mechanism was introduced and is depicted in Figure
3.4. The overall proposed reaction is seen in Reaction 4.1.
4 NO + 3 O2 + 2 H2O −−→4 HNO3
( 4.1)
Thus, 1 water molecule is needed for conversion of two NO molecules. For most experiments
conducted in the work herein the gas had a concentration of 2000ppm NO (equal to 0.2%),
and a owrate of 200 mL min=1. NO has a density of ρNO = 1.249 g L−1, and a molar mass
of MNO = 30.006 g mol−1, thus the molar ow of NO in the gas stream can be calculated:
¯nNO = 200 mL min−1 ·
1 L
1000 mL · 0.2% · 1.249 g L−1
30.006 g mol−1
· 60 min h−1 = 9.992 × 10−3 mol h−1
(Eq. 4.3.7)
In Eq.
4.3.6 the amount of water for a relative humidity of 10% was calculated to
0.0262 mL h=1.
The density of water is ρH2O = 0.997 g mL−1, and the molar mass is
MH2O = 18.015 g mol−1. Thus, the molar ow of water molecules in the gas stream can be
determined:
¯nH2O = 0.0262 mL h−1 · 0.997 g mL−1 · 18.015 g mol−1 = 14.499 × 10−3 mol h−1
(Eq. 4.3.8)
As seen by comparing Eq. 4.3.7 with Eq. 4.3.8 a NO:H2O ratio of 0.69 is obtained at a
relative humidity of 10%, thus, there is almost a factor 3 of water in the system compared
to the needed amount for the proposed reaction mechanism.
==PAGE:54==
38
Analytical Techniques
4.3.2
Humidity.m script for Controlling Humidity and Alcohol in Reac-
tor
Alcohol is added to the system by aqueous solution added by a syringe pump.
Thus,
the alcohol/water mixture to reach the desired humidity is also dependent on the desired
amount of alcohol in the gas phase. To ensure correct humidity and alcohol content the
alcohol/water mixture was designed individually for each experiment.
To simplify the
process by designing the mixtures, a Matlab script named humidity.m was developed.
Based on Eq. 4.3.5 the amount of water to reach desired humidity was calculated. Further-
more, the amount of alcohol to add to reach desired alcohol concentration was calculated,
and the ow of the alcohol/water mixture to add is the sum of the amount of water to
add to the system and the amount of alcohol to add to the system. Thus, humidity is only
based on the amount of water in the system, and it is assumed that the alcohol does not
aect humidity. This is a reasonable assumption as the amount of alcohol compared to
water is relatively low. Furthermore, the volume change by mixing water and alcohol is
neglected, as the volume change is less than 2% at the relevant concentrations [128].
The full humidity.m script is found in Appendix C.2. The input arguments of the script
is » humidity(psi, flow, ppm, Vol), where 'psi' is the desired relative humidity
(%), 'ow' is the air/NO ow (mL min=1), 'ppm' is the desired amount of MeOH in the
gas phase (ppm) and 'Vol' is the desired total volume of the nal mixture (mL).
The output of humidity.m is 'FlowTot' which is the ow of the alcohol/water mixture
added to the reactor (mL h=1), 'C_MeOH' which is the methanol concentration of the
mixture (mol L=1), 'V_MeOH' which is the volume of methanol to add in the total volume
of the solution (mL), and 'm_MeOH' which is the mass of methanol in the total volume
to reach desired concentrations (g).
4.3.3
Capillary Condensation
In a porous medium, the void can become lled with condensed liquid from the vapor phase
below the saturation vapor pressure. This phenomenon is called capillary condensation,
and occur as a curved surface gives rise to a pressure dierential equivalent to 2γ/r. This
process can be described by the Kelvin equation seen in Eq. 4.3.9 [129].
p = p∗exp
2HγVm
RT

(Eq. 4.3.9)
Where p is the equilibrium vapor pressure, p∗is the saturation vapor pressure, H is the
mean curvature of meniscus, γ is the liquid/vapor surface tension, Vm is the liquid molar
volume, R is the ideal gas constant and T is the temperature. As capillary condensation
only is a variable of the equilibrium pressure and the mean curvature of meniscus (all
other factors are constants), this can be described as a function as seen in Figure 4.6. For
simplicity the vapor pressure is described as relative humidity.
Silica 100 has an average pore diameter of 10 nm, resulting in a capillary radius at 5 nm.
Thus, capillary condensation in the silica pores at 24 ◦C is expected to occur at a relative
humidity of 80%. As the relative humidity in the reactor is only calculated as the amount
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Humidity in Reactor
39
Figure 4.6: Capillary condensation in pores as a function of pore size and humidity,
calculated at 25 ◦C.
of water in the gas phase, with no correction for MeOH added, capillary condensation in
the reactor system might occur at a lower relative humidity.
==PAGE:56==
40
Analytical Techniques
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5
Experimental
5.1
Synthesis of SiO2-SILP Material
8.0 g silica gel 100 (Merck, particle size 63 µm to 200 µm) was calcined for 5 hours at 500 ◦C
with a ramping time of 5 ◦C min=1. After calcination, the silica particles was cooled to room
temperature and weighed 7.8 g. The particles were kept under Paralm overnight. Prior
to impregnation, the calcined silica particles were dried in an oven at 100 ◦C for 1 hour to
remove water absorbed from the air. In a 250 mL round bottom ask 3.354 g [bmim][NO3]
(IOLITEC, >98%) was dissolved in 100 mL MeOH. The calcined silica particles were added
to the IL solution and left stirring at room temperature for 1 hour.
Evaporation was
conducted on a rotary evaporator, at 875 mbar at room temperature for the rst hour,
followed by 6 hours at 52 ◦C and 575 mbar to yield a completely dry white powder. A total
of 10.942 g SILP was obtained, resulting in an IL loading of ϵl=28.7%.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.1: (a): Impregnation of calcined SiO2 with [bmim][NO3] dissolved in MeOH.
(b): Dry SILP after evaporation of MeOH.
To verify the IL loading of the SILP material, and determine the thermal stability, TGA
analysis was carried out as seen in Figure 5.2. A mass loss of 3.6% is observed up to 100 ◦C,
probably caused by water absorbed from the air. At 290 ◦C the [bmim][NO3] decompose
resulting in a weight loss of 28%, which is equivalent to the IL loading.
==PAGE:58==
42
Experimental
Figure 5.2: TGA analysis of 30wt.% SiO2-SILP composed of calcined Silica 100 parti-
cles impregnated with [bmim][NO3]. Analysis carried out with temperature
increase of 10 ◦C min=1 in N2.
5.2
Hollow Sphere Silica as SILP
Part of the NO oxidation experiments were carried out using hollow sphere silica particles
as support for the ionic liquid (HS-SILP). The HS-SILP particles were synthesized by Peter
Jakobsen and impregnated with [bmim][Br]. Prior to use for NO conversion, the SILP was
left under a gas ow of 150 mL min=1 containing 2000ppm NO, 16.8% O2, and balance
N2, in order to ion exchange the bromine ions with nitrate ions (NO 
3 ). water was added
during the ion exchange at 0.25 mL h=1. To verify the hollow sphere silica particles were
intact, a fraction of the HS-SILP material was calcined at 600◦C for 12 hours in order to
remove the IL. BET analysis was carried out on a sample of the un-used HS-SILP and the
calcined material. Results are seen in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Nitrogen physiosorption data for the pure HS particles and for the HS-SILP
before and after calcination at 600 ◦C for 12 hours.
Sample
BET-Area [m2 g=1]
Porosity [cm3 g=1]
Mean Pore Size [nm]
HSa
895
0.98
14.7
HS-SILPa
450
0.69
11.2
Un-used HS-SILPb
56
0.21
14.7
Calcined HS-SILPb
92
0.26
11.4
a Reported by Peter Jakobsen [54].
b Measured after calcination of HS-SILP.
After calcination of the HS-SILP, the mean pore size was 11.4 nm, which is similar to the
HS-SILP prior to calcination reported by Peter Jakobsen, and 3.3 nm less than for the pure
HS particles. For the un-used material, the mean pore size was 14.7 nm, which is the same
as reported by Peter Jakobsen in the newly synthesized HS particles. Furthermore, the
surface area and porosity were signicantly reduced for both the calcined HS-SILP and the
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Hollow Sphere Silica as SILP
43
un-used HS-SILP compared to the data reported by Peter Jakobsen. This could indicate
decomposition of the HS particles or that they are collapsed/slumped. To investigate what
happened to the HS particles a TEM image was acquired, which is seen in Figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3: TEM picture of hollow sphere silica particles after calcination at 600◦C for
12 hours to remove ionic liquid.
The TEM image of the calcined HS-SILP revealed perfect hollow sphere particles with
an outer diameter of 20 nm as before impregnation with IL. As the particles visually seem
intact, the changes in surface area and porosity could be caused by small structural changes
collapsing the pores, or non-volatile matter stuck to the particles. A non-volatile matter
could be IL residues caused by decomposition of the IL.
A TGA analysis of the unused HS-SILP was performed in order to verify the IL loading on
the material and to observe if the decomposition point had changed. The TGA analysis
is seen in Figure 5.4. A weight loss of 13% is observed up to 120 ◦C, which is believed
to be caused by water and other compounds absorbed from the air. At 245 ◦C the IL is
decomposing. As this IL is composed of [bmim][Br], and the bromine ion leads to lower
thermal stability compared to the nitrate ion, this is expected. At 350 ◦C almost all IL is
decomposed, and a relatively stable mass of the HS support is obtained. The amount of
IL decomposed on the material equals a loading of 30%.
Despite the BET analysis indicating changes in the support material, it was chosen to use
the HS-SILP material for NO oxidation as the TGA analysis revealed an IL loading of
30wt.% was present on the HS particles.
==PAGE:60==
44
Experimental
Figure 5.4: TGA analysis of HS-SILP composed of hollow sphere silica particles impreg-
nated with [bmim][Br]. Analysis carried out with temperature increase of
10 ◦C min=1 in N2.
5.3
Experimental Setup & Procedure
The experimental setup was built as depicted in Figure 5.5 in order to perform continuous
ow experiments with a predetermined water/alcohol solution into the gaseous phase. The
ow rates of the gases were controlled using MKS Instruments GM50A mass ow controllers
(MFC). The working range for the MFC used to control air was up to 500 standard cubic
centimeter per minute (sccm), while the MFC for NO had a working range up to 100sccm.
The GM50A MFC's are metal sealed allowing use with corrosive gases, however, a 3-way
valve allowed to ush the NO MFC with air after each experiment to avoid NO residues
trapped in the MFC when it was not in use. For later experiments, the setup was rebuild
introducing nitrogen to the system in order to dilute the gas for reducing the oxygen
content. An MKS Instruments GE50A MFC, which is an elastomer sealed MFC, was used
for controlling the N2 ow. This MFC has formerly been used for air, and could not close
properly. Thus, a shut valve was placed directly after the MFC. The controller worked
properly in the range from 15-100sccm.
The top of the reactor was tted with a 3-way valve allowing gas and/or a liquid solution
of water/alcohol to enter the reactor. The ow of liquid solution into the reactor was
controlled using an NE-300 Syringe Pump. Prior to the reactor inlet, another 3-way valve
was placed allowing a bypass of the gas. The bottom of the reactor was tted with a
3-way valve. One led into a gas cuvette inside a Thermo Scientic Evolution 220 UV-
Visible Spectrophotometer prior to a frit placed in strong KOH solution, while the other
exit led directly to the same KOH solution. Pictures of the reactor column and the full
experimental setup is found in Appendix B Figure B.3.
Between all experiments, the top and bottom of the reactor were cleaned and dried in an
oven at 130 ◦C. The cuvette was cleansed with water and ethanol. The plastic tube leading
the gas from reactor to the UV-vis spectrophotometer was cleansed with water between all
experiments followed by drying using pressurized air. When changing the SILP material
==PAGE:61==
5.4 Establishment of Standard Curve
45
Figure 5.5: Schematic overview of the experimental setup used to add water/alcohol into
the gaseous phase.
inside the reactor the quartz wool was removed, and the reactor was cleaned with water
and ethanol. The glassware was stored in an oven for at least 4 hours at 130 ◦C after
cleaning.
Steady state was observed 4-36 hours after the experiments were started, mainly depending
on the water content in the experiments, and if the water mixture was added at the
beginning of the experiments. For experiments with a grand excess of water (more than
200% relative humidity), it is questionable whether the steady state is obtained, or the
reported state was just a relatively stable plateau. The conversion was calculated as an
average of the 10 latest measured UV-vis spectra, usually resulting in standard deviations
below 2.
5.3.1
Gas Hourly Space Velocity
The inner diameter of the reactor was 1.2 cm, and the reactor was stued with 1.0-1.5 cm
SILP material equivalent to 1.1-1.7 cm3 SILP material. For most experiments a NO gas
ow of 200 mL min=1 was used, resulting in a gas hourly space velocity (GHSV) in the
range of 7000-11 000 h=1. In general, comparable GHSV's have been used throughout this
work to avoid an extra dimension to aect the NO conversion.
5.4
Establishment of Standard Curve
As mentioned earlier NO gas absorbs light at 204, 214 and 226nm, resulting in 3 sharp
peaks. The area of the peaks is relative to the NO concentration in the gas as illustrated
in Figure 5.6, where UV-vis of a ow containing 500, 2000 and 4000ppm NO is depicted.
==PAGE:62==
46
Experimental
Figure 5.6: UV-vis analysis of NO with a ow of 200 mL min=1 with NO concentrations
at 500ppm, 2000ppm and 4000ppm, balance N2.
By spectral deconvolution of NO ow at dierent concentrations, a standard curve can be
obtained by the area under each peak as seen in Figure 5.7. The curve for the peak at
226nm has a slightly better R2 value compared to the other peaks, however, the R2 value
of all standard curves was above 0.997 using a 3rd order polynomial t. Due to the tail
to the left of the peak at 204nm (see Figure 5.6) this peak is not ideal for use. The NO
peaks at 214nm and 226nm seem perfect for determining NO content, however, the peak
at 226nm have the lowest residual error in the Peakfit.m script, and as the standard
curve based on this peak also have a slightly better R2 value the NO peak at 226nm is
used for determining the NO conversion.
Figure 5.7: Standard curve of NO calculated with a owrate of 200 mL min=1, balance
N2.
==PAGE:63==
Part III
Results & Discussion
==PAGE:64==
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 6
Background Oxidation &
Contribution of Support Material
Oxidation of NO into NO2 from oxygen in the system contribute to the observed NO
removal. Therefore, the NO oxidation in the empty reactor system is investigated for dry
gas, gas with water present, and gas both containing water and methanol. Furthermore,
the support material without IL might contribute to the oxidation, which also is reviewed
in this chapter.
6.1
Oxidation at Various Flow Rates and NO Concentrations
By analyzing a dry gas stream through the empty reactor with dierent ow rates and
dierent NO concentrations an overview of the background oxidation was obtained as
depicted in Figure 6.1. A clear trend is observed, as lower ow rates of the gas lead to
longer retention time in the reactor/system, causing a higher NO conversion. Furthermore,
high NO concentrations lead to higher NO conversions - also percentage based.
Figure 6.1: Background oxidation of NO in empty reactor at various ow rates for a gas
containing from 500 to 3000ppm NO.
O2 content: 20.0%, 18.9%, 16.8% and 14.7% from lowest NO concentration
to highest. Experiments conducted at 30 ◦C.
==PAGE:66==
50
Background Oxidation & Contribution of Support Material
After replacing a leaking shut-valve and perform proper calibration of the MFC's, the
oxidation seen in Figure 6.1 decreased, however, the exact same trends were observed. At
2000ppm NO and a ow of 200 mL min=1 the NO conversion was reduced to 20%. Above
Figure is depicted as it cover the full ow range for several dierent NO concentrations, as
the full range were only examined for 2000ppm NO after tightening and calibration.
Oxidation of NO is known to be promoted by UV light. As a minor part of the tubes
were composed of clear plastic, and the reactor was composed of quartz, light may aect
the NO oxidation. Therefore, all clear parts were covered in foil, and the NO conversion
was measured with and without covered tubes.
It was found that covering tubes had
no signicant impact on NO conversion as slightly higher conversions were obtained after
covering the system. Due to these results, the foil was removed from the system. Relevant
data for NO conversion with covered tubes is found in Appendix A Figure A.1.
In Figure 6.2 the UV-vis data for the background oxidation in an empty reactor with
3000ppm NO at dierent ow rates is depicted. For decreasing ow-rates more NO2 is
formed, which is observed by the very broad peak with center at 380nm, and the peak in
the low wavelength region of the spectrum, which seems to peak approximately at 190nm.
Unfortunately, it is very dicult to quantify NO2 with a UV-vis spectrophotometer by
these two peaks as the broad peak with center at 380nm have relatively high variations
and does neither t a Gaussian nor Lorentzian function well. The other peak caused by
NO2 (with center around 190nm) is overlapping with absorbances caused by nitric acid,
therefore this peak can neither be used for NO2 quantication.
Figure 6.2: UV-vis spectral analysis of dry gas containing 3000ppm NO (15.75% O2,
balance N2) at dierent ow rates. Experiments conducted at 30 ◦C.
Given that the amount of NO2 formed in the system is not quantied, it is not possible
to close the nitrogen balance and thereby document that the removed NO is oxidized to
NO2. This is a recurrent issue, as it becomes even more interesting to close the nitrogen
balance in the reactor with the SILP material where several dierent reactions occur.
It is of interest to perform the oxidation of NO at relatively high concentrations and
==PAGE:67==
6.1 Oxidation at Various Flow Rates and NO Concentrations
51
moderate ow rates, but at the same time, a very low background oxidation in the system
is desired. As a compromise of these factors, a NO concentration of 2000ppm and a ow
of 200 mL min=1 was chosen as the standard conditions for experiments carried out.
6.1.1
Oxygen Inuence on Background Oxidation
To oxidize NO to NO2 oxygen must be present in the system. Therefore, it is of interest
to know how the O2 concentration aects the NO conversion. As most experiments in
this thesis are carried out with 10% relative humidity the eect of water in the gas phase
is investigated as well, and the eect of 400ppm MeOH in an empty reactor with 10%
relative humidity has also been determined. In Figure 6.3 it is seen that the conversion
of NO from a dry gas in an empty reactor is linearly proportional to the O2 content. By
adding water to the gas phase equivalent to a 10% relative humidity the NO conversion
increased slightly, and by adding 400ppm MeOH in the gas phase at 10% relative humidity
the NO conversion increased slightly more.
Figure 6.3: Background oxidation of NO in an empty reactor as a function of the oxygen
content in the gas phase with 400ppm MeOH and 10% relative humidity. Gas
ow is 200 mL min=1. Experiment conducted at room temperature.
Whether the removal of NO with water and MeOH present in the system is caused by the
formation of NO2, HNO3 or a third compound is very interesting. In Figure 6.4 the UV-vis
spectrum for the analysis with 16.8% O2 is seen.
As seen in Figure 6.4 it is very dicult to see the data for the dry gas, as it is almost
completely overlapping with the gas containing a 10% relative humidity.
However, by
adding 400ppm MeOH with water equivalent to a relative humidity of 10% a decrease
of NO2 in the system is observed based on the broad peak caused by NO2 with center at
380nm. Simultaneously, absorption between 200-240nm, which both can be caused by NO2
and HNO3, is increased, and the center of the peak seems to be moved to 210nm. This
could indicate the formation of HNO3, however, it is quite interesting that the formation
of HNO3 is not observed without MeOH in the system. In order to prove the increased
==PAGE:68==
52
Background Oxidation & Contribution of Support Material
Figure 6.4: UV-vis spectra for dry NO gas, NO gas with 10% relative humidity and
NO gas with 10% relative humidity and 400ppm MeOH. Gas composition:
2000ppm NO, 16.8% O2, balance N2.
Flow: 200 mL min=1.
Experiment
conducted at room temperature.
peak with center at 210nm is not caused directly by MeOH in the system a gas containing
21% O2 (balance N2 was led through the reactor with a ow rate of 200 mL min=1 while
adding H2O/MeOH to a relative humidity of 10% and 400ppm MeOH in the gas phase.
For this experiment no absorption was observed for the full observed region, proving the
absorption at 210nm is caused by a combination of NO and MeOH in the system.
6.2
Support Material Contribution to NO Conversion
The support material can aect NO conversion either by a direct contribution from active
sites, by increasing the collision frequency, or simply by increasing the retention time in
the system. Between the frit in the reactor and the SILP material 2-4mm quartz wool
was placed. Therefore, NO conversion was investigated for a reactor with quartz wool,
when adding water and MeOH to the gas phase, and for a reactor with quartz wool and
calcinated silica 100. Results are seen in Figure 6.5.
As seen in Figure 6.5 the NO conversion slightly increases by introducing quartz wool
and silica 100 with quartz wool to the reactor with a dry gas containing 2000ppm NO
through the system. Using a syringe pump, the water was added to the system at a rate of
0.026 mL h=1 resulting in a relative humidity of 10%. By adding water to the system, the
NO conversion slightly increased with quartz wool in the reactor, however, the opposite
was observed with calcinated Silica 100 in the reactor. Keeping a relative humidity of
10% and adding 400ppm MeOH to the gas phase increased the NO conversion to 33.4%
and 34.7% for quartz wool and Silica 100 respectively. A brief experiment was performed
adding water equivalent to 230% relative humidity and 600ppm MeOH to the reactor with
quartz wool. NO conversion was calculated to 26%, indicating that either water, MeOH
or the combination have a strong inuence on the NO conversion.
==PAGE:69==
6.2 Support Material Contribution to NO Conversion
53
Figure 6.5: NO conversion in empty reactor and in reactor with either quartz wool or
quarts wool and silica 100 for dry gas, gas with 10% relative humidity, and
10% relative humidity and 400ppm MeOH in gas stream. Gas composition:
2000ppm NO, 16.8% O2, balance N2.
Flow: 200 mL min=1.
Experiment
conducted at room temperature.
By comparing Figure 6.1 with Figure 6.5 it is seen that for a gas composed of 2000ppm NO
(16.8% O2, balance N2) slightly dierent NO conversions in the empty reactor is reported
with a gas ow of 200 mL min=1 (17% and 15% respectively). This is believed to be caused
by changes in the tubing when adding a third MFC because the piping was simplied with
shorter pipe length and fewer joints, however, the temperature dierence between room
temperature and 30 ◦C could also inuence the conversion. The background oxidation in
the empty reactor was measured on regular basis and was always between 15-20%. As
the background conversion was not completely steady, and 3% dierence was consequently
measured in the two reactors used, the relevant background conversion will be stated for
each experiment throughout this thesis.
In this chapter, the background oxidation of NO in the empty reactor has been investigated
as a function of NO content, ow rate, and O2 content.
Based on these data a NO
concentration of 2000ppm and a ow rate of 200 mL min=1 was chosen as the standard
conditions for oxidizing NO. As the water content and the methanol content in the reactor
seem to aect NO conversion a lot, these factors will also be investigated in the following
chapter when introducing the SILP materials to the reactor.
==PAGE:70==
54
Background Oxidation & Contribution of Support Material
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 7
NO Oxidation in SILP Materials
In this chapter, the NO conversions with SiO2-SILP and HS-SILP is investigated. NO
conversion has been investigated by varying the amount of methanol, water, and oxygen
in the system, and even by adding nitric acid with the injection pump. Furthermore, NO
conversion has been carried out with ethanol to investigate the eect by another alcohol
in the system. At last, a cold trap was introduced to the system with the aim to condense
water, NO2, nitric acid, and nitrous acid before the UV-vis analyzer.
7.1
NO Oxidation Using MeOH
In Section 6.2 the oxidation of NO in the empty reactor was proven to increase by adding
a MeOH solution to the reactor. Therefore, the NO conversion using the SiO2-SILP and
HS-SILP was investigated by adding dierent amounts of MeOH to the gas phase. As seen
in Figure 7.1 the NO conversion with a dry gas and no MeOH was 15% for both SILP
materials, which corresponds to the conversion in the empty reactor. Thus, it is evident
that the SILP material itself does not oxidize NO in dry conditions.
For the SiO2-SILP the NO conversion increased by 7% after adding 150ppm MeOH and
water to a relative humidity of 110% to the reactor. Increasing the MeOH content to
250ppm in the gas phase lead to a total NO conversion of 28%. No signicant increase
was observed by increasing the MeOH content further, however, the highest NO conversion
of 30% was observed by adding 375ppm MeOH. For the HS-SILP the NO conversion was
higher at 150ppm MeOH in the gas phase compared to the SiO2-SILP, however, a total
NO conversion of 27% seems to be the maximum achievable for the HS-SILP.
Compared to the NO conversion for the empty reactor seen in Section 6.2 the conversion
decreased by introducing the SILP materials to the reactor. A signicant dierence between
the empty reactor measurements and these are the water content. For all above experiments
condensate was observed in the reactor and tubes after the reactor, except for the dry SILP
and the HS-SILP with a relative humidity of 55%. For experiments with condensation the
SILP material appeared moist, however, in some cases only the top of the SILP material
appeared moist, while the rest appeared to be dry.
==PAGE:72==
56
NO Oxidation in SILP Materials
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.1: NO conversion in SiO2-SILP (a) and HS-SILP (b) when adding a mixture
of water/methanol to the reactor. Relative humidity and MeOH concentra-
tion in the gas phase is found in graphs. Gas composition: 2000ppm NO,
16.8% O2, balance N2. Flow: 200 mL min=1, GHSV=7000 h=1 for both SILP
materials. Experiment conducted at 30 ◦C.
In Figure 7.2a a picture of the SiO2-SILP used with 600ppm MeOH and 150% relative
humidity is seen. When adding water to 75% relative humidity droplets condenses above
the reactor, and in some cases also beneath the reactor. When condensation was observed
the SILP appeared moist. The pH of the condensate was measured to 2 using indicator
paper, clearly indicating the presence of acid, most likely formation of nitric acid.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.2: (a) SiO2-SILP after adding 600ppm MeOH and water equivalent to 150%
relative humidity using injection pump. (b) pH measurement of condensation
in reactor with SiO2-SILP and 600ppm MeOH and water equivalent to 150%
relative humidity.
==PAGE:73==
7.2 NO Oxidation Using EtOH
57
7.1.1
Fluctuating Results
All results presented above are reproducible results obtained at steady state measurements.
At relative high water contents (above 75% relative humidity) the time between the start
of experiments and the steady state could be up to 24 hours, and at high water content,
the conversion at the "steady state" (based on steady UV-vis spectra) could vary up to
4% in some cases. In other cases a non-steady state could be observed for up to 24 hours
based on dierent amounts on nitric acid in the euent gas, however, the conversion of
NO could be constant, indicating an equilibrium between NO2, nitric acid, and nitrous
acid was ongoing. One very interesting result, which is excluded in Figure 7.1b as it could
not be reproduced, was obtained. By adding 375ppm MeOH with water equivalent to
95% relative humidity, the conversion in a 2000ppm NO gas owing at 200 mL min=1 was
calculated to 38% using the HS-SILP. As this result could not be reproduced, and 27%
was obtained in two subsequent experiments, it is excluded from the presented results in
gures.
7.2
NO Oxidation Using EtOH
Previous work by Peter Jakobsen found that when not considering allyl alcohol the maxi-
mum conversion based on alcohol added followed the trend: MeOH > EtOH > t-butOH>
ProOH > ButOH, which is consistent with the order of the boiling points of the alcohols.
To verify that the type of alcohol has an inuence on the NO conversion 4 experiments
adding ethanol (EtOH) to the reactor was conducted. These were carried out with the
same humidity and amount of alcohol in the gas phase as 4 selected experiments carried
out using the SiO2-SILP. As seen in Figure 7.3 the SILP material generally perform best by
adding MeOH to the system, however, at 1000ppm alcohol added, and a relative humidity
of 85%, the EtOH experiment perform slightly better.
Figure 7.3: Comparison of NO conversion in SiO2-SILP with MeOH and EtOH added to
the gas phase. Gas composition: 2000ppm NO, 16.8% O2, balance N2. Flow:
200 mL min=1, GHSV=7000 h=1. Experiment conducted at 30 ◦C.
==PAGE:74==
58
NO Oxidation in SILP Materials
For all experiments condensate with pH=2 was observed after the frit in the reactor or in the
tube between the reactor and UV-vis analyzer. As the EtOH in 3 out of the 4 experiments
performed less ecient compared to MeOH it was believed that the ndings regarding
eciency-order of dierent alcohols by Peter Jakobsen was correct, and no need to continue
screening for dierent alcohols was needed. However, the conclusions by Peter Jakobsen
was based on maximum conversion, which was obtained within the rst 10 minutes, while
these results are based on steady-state measurements in continues ow experiments.
7.3
Water Content Inuence
It has been proven that a lot of promising SCR catalysts are inhibited by the presence of
water [73, 58, 130]. Unfortunately, ue gases contain water, and typically above 2.5% [73].
As the NO conversion in the empty reactor was higher when adding MeOH compared to
the SILP materials, either the SILP materials have a negative eect on the NO conversion
or the amount of water in the gas phase has an impact of NO conversion. As the addition
of too much water by the injection pump would lead to condensate in the system, and
thereby led to gas diusion over the liquid phase, it is believed the optimal water content
added is found below the point of saturation of water in the gas phase. As the amount of
water the ue gas can obtain is depending on the temperature, it was chosen to state the
amount of water as the relative humidity.
For both SiO2-SILP and HS-SILP the NO conversion was observed by varying the wa-
ter content between 10-115% relative humidity with a constant MeOH concentration of
400ppm in the gas phase as seen in Figure 7.4. For all results in Figure 7.4 the back-
ground conversion of dry SILP material with no water and no MeOH is subtracted as the
experiments were conducted in two dierent reactors with slightly dierent background
oxidation.
As seen in Figure 7.4 there is no signicant dierence between the NO conversion of the
two dierent SILP materials. A NO conversion of 11% is observed with a humidity of
10% and 25%, and the highest NO conversion was observed at a relative humidity of 75%.
Condense in the reactor was observed for experiments with a relative humidity of 75%
and higher. The steady state occurred after 4-6 hours for the experiments with 10 and
25% relative humidity, however, for the rest of the experiments, it took at least 12 hours
to reach a complete steady state. For the experiment at 115% relative humidity it took
26 hours to reach a steady state based on the UV-vis analysis of the gas stream after the
reactor, however, the NO conversion was stable after 6 hours at the same level as for the
steady state. This will be discussed further in the following chapter.
One additional experiment was conducted adding pure MeOH to the system with a dry gas
containing 2000ppm NO and 18.8% O2. Absolute to change in NO conversion was observed
compared to the background oxidation with the SILP material, proving the presence of
water is necessary for the improved NO conversion to occur. However, a huge increase in
HNO3 formation was observed when adding MeOH compared to adding water, which will
be reviewed in Section 8.1.
As the NO conversion did not seem to dier much when changing the humidity, and to
avoid condensation in the reactor and tubing, it was decided to keep a water content
==PAGE:75==
7.3 Water Content Inuence
59
Figure 7.4: Comparison of NO conversion in SiO2-SILP and HS-SILP with 400ppm
MeOH is added to the gas phase at various humidity. NO oxidation for dry
SILP materials is subtracted from these data. Gas composition: 2000ppm
NO, 16.8% O2, balance N2. Flow: 200 mL min=1, GHSV=7000 h=1 for SiO2
and GHSV=11 000 h=1 for HS-SILP. Experiment conducted at room temper-
ature.
equivalent to 10% relative humidity at room temperature.
At 24 ◦C this is a factor 3
higher than the amount of water needed for full conversion of NO from a 2000ppm gas
stream, assuming the proposed mechanism in Reaction 4.1 is valid. These calculations can
be found in Section 4.3.
The MeOH content in the gas phase was once again investigated with the HS-SILP, this
time with a constant relative humidity of 10%. These results are seen in Figure 7.5. Notice
that the oxygen content for this experiment is 20.6 %, as a 10% NO bottle was used instead
of the 1% NO bottle used for all other experiments.
As seen in Figure 7.5 the trend is more MeOH leads to a higher NO conversion, however, the
trend seems to top at a conversion of 17%, and no improvement is observed by increasing the
MeOH content from 500 to 800ppm. The trend is not clear, as the conversion with 240ppm
MeOH is lower than for 160ppm MeOH, and the same is observed between 320ppm and
400ppm MeOH. It is not clear why these dierences are observed. However, the due to the
10% NO bottle used for this experiment a NO ow of 4 mL min=1 instead of 40 mL min=1
was required, and the MFC might not be precise at this low ow-rate. The higher NO
conversions in this experiment compared to similar humidity and MeOH amounts used in
other experiments might be ascribed to the increased oxygen content.
By looking at the turn over number (TON) of NO to the amount of MeOH added, it is
interesting that the 4% conversion when adding 80ppm MeOH leads to a TON=1. By
adding 160ppm MeOH a TON=1.3 is observed, however, for the rest of the experiments
the TON is decreasing. At 500ppm MeOH added, where the highest conversion of 16.6%
is observed, a TON=0.66 is observed. Once again it is necessary to keep in mind similar
results were obtained with an empty reactor with quartz wool, thus this eect might not
==PAGE:76==
60
NO Oxidation in SILP Materials
Figure 7.5: NO conversion with HS-SILP with a relative humidity of 10% and various
amounts of MeOH in the gas phase.
Background oxidation for dry SILP
material is subtracted from these data.
Gas composition: 2000ppm NO,
20.6% O2, balance N2. Flow: 200 mL min=1, GHSV=11 000 h=1. Experiment
conducted at room temperature.
be caused by the SILP.
An additional experiment with 400ppm MeOH and a relative humidity of 10% was car-
ried out while the reactor with the HS-SILP was covered in two plastic bags containing
ice/water. The reactor was kept at 0 ◦C overnight to ensure stable temperature in the SILP
material. This did not aect the NO conversion at all, indicating no signicant change in
thermodynamic state at 0 ◦C and 24 ◦C.
7.4
Oxygen Content Inuence
In Section 6.1.1 it was shown that the background conversion in the empty reactor increase
linear to the oxygen content in the gas phase. As all steady-state experiments have been
carried out at 16.8% oxygen in the gas, is it not known whether the eect of the SILP-
materials is higher at lower oxygen content. Therefore the conversion of the HS-SILP was
measured at dierent oxygen concentrations while adding 400ppm MeOH and water to
10% relative humidity as seen in Figure 7.6.
Using the HS-SILP no signicant increase in NO conversion was observed with 16.8% O2
compared to the empty reactor when adding MeOH, however, at lower oxygen concentra-
tions the HS-SILP appear to increase the conversion. Later results in Section 8.4 indicates
that the IL for this sample is removed, thus, the increased conversion could be caused by
the hollow spheres increasing the collision rate between NO and oxygen molecules.
At the end of the project period above mentioned experiment was also conducted using
a fresh sample of the SiO2-SILP, in order to investigate conversion at lower oxygen levels
between the SILP material and the pure support. The results are not depicted here, as the
==PAGE:77==
7.5 Improved Oxidation Using HNO3
61
Figure 7.6: NO conversion in empty reactor (black squares) and HS-SILP (red circles)
with a relative humidity of 10% and 400ppm MeOH in the gas phase at vari-
ous O2 concentrations with 2000ppm NO, balance N2. Flow: 200 mL min=1,
GHSV=11 000 h=1. Experiment conducted at room temperature.
background conversion was 10% above previously measured conversions. Furthermore, the
conversion when adding MeOH to the empty reactor was higher than for previous experi-
ments, where reproducible results were obtained. Thus it is not believed these results are
reliable, however, the trends observed are believed to be correct. For the obtained results
using SiO2-SILP the increase in conversion compared to the empty reactor was highest at
higher oxygen contents. Compared to calcined Silica 100 particles the SiO2-SILP had a
positive eect on NO conversion, which also appeared more signicant at higher oxygen
concentrations. It is not known what caused the higher background conversion. Irregular
zero-calibration could aect the performance of the MFCs leading to wrong results, how-
ever performing a zero-calibration did not seem to aect the ow-rate. Inadequate cleaning
of the reactor and/or 3-way valves could also aect the conversion.
Compared to the empty reactor, introducing the SILP material do not increase NO con-
version without MeOH and water present. With water and methanol a slight increase in
conversion is observed.
7.5
Improved Oxidation Using HNO3
The nitrate ion is important as it is the anion of the IL and an essential part in the
suggested reaction mechanism.
Furthermore, it is a relatively active compound and is
known to oxidize NO to NO2 in the redox reaction seen in Reaction 7.1.
2 NO −
3
+ NO + 2 H+ −−→3 NO2 + H2O
( 7.1)
As seen in Reaction 7.1 two nitrate ions can oxidize one NO molecule, however, the for-
==PAGE:78==
62
NO Oxidation in SILP Materials
mation of NO2 might lead to more nitrate ions due to the water in the reactor, leading to
a more complicated stochiometry. To test the eect of nitric acid for NO removal 0.860g
calcined Silica 100 was incipient wetness impregnated with 0.347g 68% nitric acid. The
supported HNO3 was placed in the reactor and a gas stream containing 2000ppm NO
and 16.8% oxygen, with a relative humidity of 10%, was led through the reactor with
200 mL min=1. The rst 2 minutes after placing the supported HNO3 in the reactor 97%
NO removal was obtained. The conversion rapidly decreased, and after 3 hours no nitric
acid was observed in the outlet gas, and no improved NO conversion compared to the
empty reactor was observed. In Appendix A Figure A.2 obtained UV-vis data is depicted.
The experiment with HNO3 on calcined Silica 100 particles prove that nitric acid can
promote oxidation of NO. However, the amount of HNO3 on the calcined Silica 100 would
have been sucient for complete NO removal in 310 days at employed conditions, proving
the nitric acid is ushed out of the reactor with the gas. Removal of nitric acid is also
observed in the UV-vis data in Appendix A Figure A.2, where the HNO3 peak is massive
the rst 90 minutes until the major part is ushed out of the system.
As the nitrate ion is the anion in [bmim][NO3], consumption of NO 
3
in NO removal would
require formation of nitrate ions (or at least new anions) in order to stabilize and maintain
the functionality of the IL. In presence of water, NO2 is known to be oxidized to HNO3,
thereby forming more nitrate ions. However, if the formation of nitric acid is the rate-
limiting step, the IL might slowly be consumed. To stabilize the IL, and in an attempt to
increase NO oxidation, HNO3 was added to a MeOH solution, and 1.2g fresh SiO2-SILP
was placed in the reactor. The MeOH/HNO3/water solution was added with a ow rate
leading to 400ppm MeOH, 1000ppm HNO3 and 10% relative humidity in the gas phase.
A gas containing 2000ppm NO was led over the reactor with a ow rate of 200 mL min=1.
In Figure 7.7 the conversions are seen as a function of the oxygen content and compared
to calcined Silica 100 particles under the same conditions.
As seen in Figure 7.7 the eect by adding nitric acid to the reactor with the MeOH solution
is highest for the calcined Silica 100 particles, and the eect is lower for the SiO2-SILP. This
indicates that the IL inhibits the NO conversion with HNO3, which most likely is caused
by diusion limitations over the IL. It is not clear why a drop in conversion compared to
the relative linear trend is observed at the O2 content of 10.5%. Nor is it clear why a linear
decrease in conversion is observed for the SILP when reducing the O2 content, while the
conversion appears to be constant for the calcined Silica 100 particles.
7.6
Introducing a Cold Trap to the System
Quantication of NO is hampered as several compounds such as HNO3, HONO and NO2
appear in the obtained UV-vis spectra. As absorbances are additive, and the quantication
is carried out using spectral deconvolution, this does not aect the quantication of NO,
however, it is impossible to close the nitrogen balance for the system. The NO2 amount
could be quantied by UV-vis using the broad peak with center at 400nm, however, this
peak does neither follow a Gaussian nor Lorentzian shape well, and there is great uncer-
tainty using this peak. To close the nitrogen balance it was proposed to introduce a cold
trap after the reactor in order to condense water, HNO3 and HONO. It was uncertain
whether it was possible to condense NO2 using ice, or if a mixture of dry ice and acetone
==PAGE:79==
7.6 Introducing a Cold Trap to the System
63
Figure 7.7: NO conversion with calcined Silica 100 particles (black squares) and SiO2-
SILP (red circles) with a relative humidity of 10%, 400ppm MeOH and
1000ppm HNO3 in the gas phase at various O2 concentrations with 2000ppm
NO, balance N2. Flow: 200 mL min=1, GHSV=7000 h=1. Experiment con-
ducted at room temperature.
was needed. The cold trap was introduced by a bubble ask with a quartz frit placed in
an ice bath after the reactor as seen in Appendix B Figure B.5.
As seen in Table 7.1 the volume of the ask increased the background oxidation signicant
from 15.8% to 43.0%. By adding a water/MeOH solution to a relative humidity of 10% and
400ppm MeOH in the gas phase the NO conversion increased signicantly, but over time
stabilized to a lower conversion. After a couple of hours condensation was observed in the
bubble ask, and at steady state, the glass pipe in the middle of the ask was completely
covered with droplets of liquid as seen in Appendix B Figure B.4.
Table 7.1: NO conversion after adding a bubble ask in an ice bath
Dry gas, no MeOH
10% relative humidity, 400ppm MeOH in gas phase
SILP
SILP+Flask
0min
5min
15min
30min
60min
180min
360min
4560min
15.8%
43.0%
62.9%
69.8%
66.3%
66.0%
64.7%
64.2%
55.3%
58.7%
The huge increase in NO conversion can be ascribed to the increased volume from the
bubble ask, as the increase in conversion by adding MeOH is 15%. Increasing the oxidation
by adding the cold trap is inevitable, as the increased volume extend the retention time
of the gas in the system. Unfortunately, the intentions of condensing HNO3, HONO, and
NO2 in the ask did not succeed. In Figure 7.8 the obtained UV-vis spectrum at the steady
state is depicted, and it is clear to see both NO, HNO3, HONO and NO2 in the spectra.
As the intentions of removing other compounds than NO from the gas phase did not
succeed, it was chosen not to perform mass spectroscopy on the condensate, as the results
could not be used to close the nitrogen balance. However, an interesting conclusion can be
drawn, as the NO background conversion increased to 43%, proving the NO conversion is
==PAGE:80==
64
NO Oxidation in SILP Materials
Figure 7.8: UV-vis spectra of outlet gas from reactor placed at room temperature af-
ter passing a cold trap at steady state.
Gas composition: 2000ppm NO,
16.8% O2, balance N2. Relative humidity: 10% at room temperature. Flow:
200 mL min=1.
easily obtained in a volume with oxygen present.
The results obtained by introducing the two dierent SILP materials to the reactor with
MeOH have been disappointing, as the results for NO conversion with SILP materials
have been the same as in the empty reactor when adding MeOH. One exception is at
decreased oxygen levels, where the SILP material has a positive eect on the conversion,
which denitely should be investigated further, as this is a more realistic scenario for ue
gas compositions. In the next chapter, a more thorough analysis of the UV-vis spectra
will be carried out focusing on the NO conversion immediately after adding MeOH to the
system. Furthermore, the eect of water in the system will be discussed, The SILP will be
analyzed after use, and an IR analysis of the gas after the reactor will be performed.
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 8
Analysis of Euent Gas, SILP,
and Possible Reactions
In the previous chapter, the results of NO conversion using SiO2-SILP and HS-SILP was
presented and discussed. These results were not as expected, as no signicant NO con-
version was observed for both SILP materials with MeOH compared to the empty reactor
with MeOH, except for the study at reduced oxygen content. In this chapter, the obtained
UV-vis spectra will be investigated further, and an IR analysis of the euent gas will be
discussed.
8.1
Spectral Analysis With H2O and MeOH in the System
In Section 4.1.3 the identication of NO, NO2, HNO3 and HONO using an UV-vis spec-
trophotometer are discussed with references. In wet conditions NO2 will form nitrous acid
and nitric acid as seen in Reaction 8.1. This reaction is rst order to NO2 concentrations
and also increases with surface area density and surface water content [131]. In 2014 Zha
et al. found the conversion rate of Reaction 8.1 to increase with a factor 3 at sea surface
compared to land surface due to higher humidity in the air over the sea [132].
2 NO2 + H2O −−→HONO + HNO3
( 8.1)
Reaction 8.1 is expected to occur in the reactor when adding water. In Figure 8.1 the
obtained UV-vis spectra of the HS-SILP is depicted for a gas composed of 2000ppm NO
with dierent water and MeOH contents. By comparing the dry gas to the gas with 10%
and 150% relative humidity a decrease of NO2 is observed based on the broad peak centered
at 400nm. At 200nm an increase in absorbance is observed, caused by the formation of
nitric acid. It is interesting how the absorbance at 200nm is the same for 10% and 150%
relative humidity, despite the decrease in NO2 being dierent (NO conversion is the same
for both cases). This can not be explained by the extinction coecient, as the absorption
cross section for HNO3 at 200nm is a factor 10 compared to the absorption cross section
for NO2 at 400nm. Thus, the dierence observed at 400nm should be more distinct at
200nm [133]. In Appendix D.2 Table D.2 the absorption cross sections for NO2 and HNO3
at dierent wavelengths are found.
By adding 400ppm MeOH with water equivalent to a relative humidity of 10%, a decrease
in NO2 is observed, and a huge increase of HNO3 is observed as well. The decrease of NO2
is greater in water compared to the methanol/water, thus the additional amount of nitric
==PAGE:82==
66
Analysis of Euent Gas, SILP, and Possible Reactions
Figure 8.1: UV-vis analysis of outlet gas from reactor with HS-SILP placed at dier-
ent water/MeOH concentrations. All spectra are steady state at room tem-
perature.
Gas composition: 2000ppm NO, 16.8% O2, balance N2.
Flow:
200 mL min=1, GHSV=7000 h=1.
acid must originate from the additional NO conversion promoted by the alcohol in the gas
phase. Despite an increase in nitric acid, no nitrous acid is observed.
By adding pure MeOH to the HS-SILP no decrease of NO2 is observed, however, a signi-
cant increase of, what is believed to be, HNO3 is observed. The increase of HNO3 is not as
great as for the mixture of methanol and water. As no change in NO2 is observed, and no
conversion of NO is measured, it is interesting that nitric acid is observed by adding pure
methanol. As the absorption cross section for nitric acid is a factor 10 compared to NO2,
low conversion of NO2 to HNO3 would appear signicant in the absorbance for nitric acid,
but dicult to observe for NO2.
An interesting observation is the center of the nitric acid peak. By adding pure water the
peak is centered at 200nm, however, when introducing MeOH to the system the center
redshifts and is located at 210nm. Berland et al. have proved that high H2O:HNO3 ratios
can lead to a redshift of the HNO3 peak, and the addition of MeOH could increase this
eect further [124].
Another cause of this observed redshift, which also would explain
the increase of absorbance at 210nm with no decrease at 400 nm and no signicant NO
conversion, could be the formation of formic acid from MeOH added to the system. The
dimer of formic acid absorbs light in the same region as HNO3, with center at 210nm [134].
However, the absorption cross section of formic acid is only a factor 0.5 of the cross-section
of nitric acid at 210nm, thus, this theory can be eliminated. Absorption cross sections of
formic acid can be found in Appendix D.2 Table D.2.
Despite the analysis of the compounds in the gas phase not being unambiguous, it is clear
that MeOH has a promoting eect of the formation of nitric acid in the system. To better
understand which reactions occur in the reactor it was chosen to perform IR analysis on
the gas after the reactor.
==PAGE:83==
8.2 IR Spectroscopy of Euent Gas
67
8.2
IR Spectroscopy of Euent Gas
Almost any compound having covalent bonds absorbs various frequencies of electromag-
netic radiation in the infrared (IR) region of the electromagnetic spectrum. This region lies
at wavelengths longer than those associated with visible light, thus containing less energy.
In IR spectroscopy we observe the absorption of infrared radiation when a vibration results
in a change in the dipole moment [135]. In Appendix B Figure B.6 an overview of dierent
stretching and bending mechanisms are found.
It is clearly observed that the addition of MeOH to the system promotes the formation of
HNO3. However, the mechanism is not known, nor is it known if MeOH act as a reactant
or simply by promoting the reaction. It was chosen to perform a gas phase FTIR of the
euent gas, in order to search for C-H bonds, and analyze nitrogen species. Therefore,
steady state was reached in the reactor with HS-SILP while adding a water/MeOH mixture
to the NO gas. NO conversions of 25% were obtained at steady state and obtained UV-vis
spectra behaved as expected. A volume as seen in Appendix B Figure B.7 was used to
collect the gas after the reactor, and approximately 20 minutes after collection gas phase
IR analysis was performed. The gas in the ask had a slightly yellow color indicating the
formation of NO2.
Figure 8.2: High resolution FTIR gas phase spectrum of steady state euent gas after
passing reactor with HS-SILP while adding 400ppm MeOH and water to a
relative humidity of 10% to a NOx gas. Gas composition: 2000ppm NO,
16.8% O2, balance N2. Flow: 200 mL min=1.
Figure 8.2 shows the high-resolution gas-phase FTIR spectrum obtained for the euent
gas, showing the ro-vibrational transitions.
The strong signals at 4000-3500 cm=1 and
2100-1250 cm=1 are from water which has coupled rotational contributions in these ranges,
however, on the low-energy side of the spectrum, the couplings from water can be observed
to lower than 2750 cm=1. The other intense signal at 2390-2290 cm=1 is caused by CO2.
Methanol has a characteristic peak at 2950 cm=1 and 3650 cm=1 as seen in the reference
spectrum in Appendix B Figure B.8. The low-energy peak is impossible to identify, as
it is located in the huge peak of water. By a zoom in at 2800-3000 cm=1 no methanol is
observed, thus the absorbance in this region is believed to originate from weak couplings
==PAGE:84==
68
Analysis of Euent Gas, SILP, and Possible Reactions
of water to water molecules.
In Figure 8.3 a zoom of the relevant area containing NOx species is performed, and the
regions where signals of NO, NO2, and HNO3 would be found according to literature are
labelled [136, 137]. No NO residues are found in the FTIR spectrum, as no peak is found at
1875 cm=1 (the peak at 1869 cm=1 is caused by water). Neither is HNO3 observed, despite
the UV-vis spectrum obtained clearly showed the formation of nitric acid in the euent
gas. Nitric acid is believed to have been condensed on the walls of the glass volume in
the 20 minutes between the removal of the gas to the IR spectrum was obtained. NO2 is
clearly observed by the two peaks around 1617 cm=1. Between the two peaks, caused by
ro-vibrational absorbance, the real vibrational absorbance would be located, however, as
the NO2 molecule is diatomic and linear no change in dipole moment occur by symmetric
stretching, thus no signal is observed due to the selection rules requiring a change in dipole
moment.
As no N2O peak is observed at 2223 cm=1 all NO must have been oxidized.
Despite only 25% NO conversion was obtained in the reactor it is reasonable to believe
the full NO conversion is caused by autooxidation in the meantime of obtaining the gas
sample and recording the FTIR spectrum.
Figure 8.3: Zoom in on relevant area for NOx species in the high resolution FTIR sprec-
trum in Figure 8.2.
8.3
Initial NO Conversions
It has been observed, that immediately after adding a mixture of MeOH and water to the
reactor a huge increase in NO conversion and HNO3-formation occur. This may partly
be ascribed to absorption of NO in the added liquid, as the system must react to new
conditions, and an equilibrium must be reached. 3 droplets of a 0.58M MeOH solution
was added to the HS-SILP material while a gas composed of 2000ppm NO, 16.8% O2,
balance N2 was led through the reactor at a ow rate of 100 mL min=1. UV-vis analysis
was performed, and in Figure 8.4 selected spectra are depicted. The steady state measure-
ment was obtained 23.5 hours after the 3 droplets were added. At the steady state, the
MeOH/water solution was added with a rate of 0.13 mL h=1, resulting in 300ppm MeOH
in the gas phase, and 70% relative humidity at 30 ◦C.
Immediately upon adding the MeOH solution a huge increase of nitric acid is observed, as
well as the formation of nitrous acid. The rst 6 minutes absorbance above 2 are observed,
==PAGE:85==
8.3 Initial NO Conversions
69
Figure 8.4: UV-vis analysis after adding 3 droplets of a 0.58M MeOH solution to HS-
SILP material.
Gas composition: 2000ppm NO, 16.8% O2, balance N2.
Flow: 100 mL min=1, GHSV=14 000 h=1.
At steady state 300ppm MeOH
was present in the gas phase, and the relative humidity was 70%. Experi-
ments conducted at 30 ◦C.
equivalent to less than 1% of the light is passing the cuvette. At the same time, 6 distinct
peaks caused by nitrous acid is observed between 310nm and 380nm. Over time the amount
of both nitric acid and nitrous acid in the vapor phase decrease. The background oxidation
in the empty reactor with this ow is 30%, however, after adding the MeOH solution no
NO2 is observed by the UV-vis analysis. Neither NO2 nor nitrous acid is observed at the
steady state.
The NO conversion was calculated at dierent points after adding the 3 droplets as seen
in Table 8.1. Immediately upon adding the MeOH solution NO conversions above 70%
are observed, however, these high conversions are transient, and after a couple of minutes
the conversion decrease. At the steady state 38.8% NO conversion is observed, which is
approximately 9% more than the background conversion in the empty reactor with the
same ow rate and composition.
Table 8.1: NO conversion after adding 3 droplets of a 0.58M MeOH solu-
tion to HS-SILP materiala.
0min
2min
6min
10min
15min
21min
31min
Steady state
72.5%
73.1%
70.0%
65.6%
64.2%
61.1%
56.4%
38.8%
a Gas composition: 2000ppm NO, 16.8% O2, balance N2. Flow: 100 mL min=1.
At steady state 300ppm MeOH was present in the gas phase, and the relative
humidity was 70%. Experiments conducted at 30 ◦C.
These results prove that MeOH promote the conversion of NO, and at single point measure-
ments NO conversions above 70% are observed. These very high reported initial conversions
might simply be caused by NO absorption in the liquid until complete saturation. Fur-
==PAGE:86==
70
Analysis of Euent Gas, SILP, and Possible Reactions
thermore, the very high absorbances induce great uncertainties to the reported results in
Table 8.1. Nonetheless, it has not been possible to maintain these high conversions and at
steady state conversions with SILP material and MeOH in the system have been the same
as experiments with pure support material and MeOH. This proves the promoting eect
of MeOH, however, at the same time, this indicates the SILP materials have no signicant
inuence on NO conversion.
8.4
TGA of Used SILP Materials
To better understand why no signicant dierence in NO conversion using SILP materials
and pure SiO2 is observed, TGA analysis was carried out on the SiO2-SILP used for 13 days
and the latest used HS-SILP used for 21 days. As seen in Figure 8.5 no IL is present in both
used materials. For both used support materials a decrease in weight of approximately 7%
is observed until 100 ◦C, followed by a linear decrease of a few percents until 600 ◦C.
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.5: TGA analysis of fresh and used SiO2-SILP (a) and fresh and used HS-SILP
(b). Both carried out in N2 with a ramping time of 10 ◦C min=1.
Despite the IL being highly soluble in MeOH, the removal of IL on the support material is
unexpected. In order to search for trends in the removal of IL from support, TGA analysis
was performed on all used SiO2-SILP samples as seen in Figure 8.6.
The SILP used for 2 and 3 days still contain 30wt.% IL, while no IL is present at the SILP
used for 13 days. It appears like no IL is present in the sample used for 5 days, however,
the weight loss from 100 ◦C to 600 ◦C is greater compared to the sample used 13 days.
Based on Figure 8.6 the loss of IL appears to be between 3 and 5 days usage. It would be
a courageous conclusion only to attribute the weight loss to the usage time of the SILP, as
the 4 dierent samples have been exposed to dierent operating conditions. The SILP used
for 13 days has been used with up to 175% relative humidity, and has twice been heated
to 130 ◦C to regenerate the SILP. The rest of the SILP samples has not been heated and
has been used with humidity up to 175%, 115%, and 10% respectively in decreasing order
of operation time. As the IL remain intact for the two samples used up to 115% relative
humidity, it is believed the water content also aect the removal of IL from the support
material.
==PAGE:87==
8.4 TGA of Used SILP Materials
71
Figure 8.6: TGA analysis of fresh and 3 dierent samples of used SiO2-SILP. Analysis
carried out in N2 with a ramping time of 10 ◦C min=1.
8.4.1
Adding Droplets of MeOH Over 42 Hours
To investigate if the IL removal could be caused by the presence of liquid pressing the IL
out of the support material 0.8g SiO2-SILP was placed in the reactor and 3 droplets of a
5.8M MeOH solution was added using a Pasteur pipette. A nitrogen ow of 115 mL min=1
was added to the reactor. Over the next 42 hours, 3 droplets were added 8 times to observe
whether or not the presence of a liquid could drag the IL out of the reactor. After 42 hours
no change in weigh of the SILP was observed, and as seen in Figure 8.7 the IL remained
intact on the support material.
Figure 8.7: TGA curve of fresh SiO2-SILP (black) and SiO2-SILP exposed to droplets of
MeOH over 42 hours (red).
Above results indicated that the removal is not caused by the gas ow pressing the IL out of
the support material - at least not at a gas ow of 115 mL min=1. Either presence of oxygen
is needed, a higher humidity than the dry gas tested here, more time or a combination of
==PAGE:88==
72
Analysis of Euent Gas, SILP, and Possible Reactions
these three factors is needed for removal of the IL.
8.4.2
IL distribution Coecients on Dierent Support Materials
Concurrently to these experiments Rubén Santiago performed similar experiments during
his external stay at DTU, using encapsulated ionic liquid (ENIL) in hollow sphere carbon
particles. Similar trends to those reported in the work herein were reported, however, the
NO conversion using support material without IL and a dry gas containing NO led to very
high conversions. This is expected to be caused by the huge amount of micropores, as
Loiland et Lobo reported similar results in zeolites with high amounts of micropores in
dry conditions [79]. After 2 weeks of testing ENIL materials for NO oxidation at similar
conditions, Rubén Santiago observed no loss of the IL based on performed TGA analysis
of the used ENIL.
Micropores in the material might be essential for the adsorption of IL on the support
material, as the group of Palomar has found a clear association between the amount of
micro- and mesopores and the distribution coecient for dierent imidazolium-based ILs
[138].
The deployed denitions of micro-, meso-, and macropores followed the IUPAC
denitions with a diameter of micropores less than 2 nm. In Figure 8.8 the distribution
coecient for [omim][PF6] is seen against the surface area and against pore volume for
dierent materials.
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.8: (a) Plot of apparent distribution coecient Kd for [omim][PF6] adsorption
against the BET surface of adsorbents; and (b) available pore volume of
adsorbents divided on micropore, mesopore and macropore. From [138].
As seen in Figure 8.8b the trend of micropores increasing the adsorption coecient of the
IL is not perfect, and the mesopores (size: 2-50 nm) also seems to aect the adsorption.
In fact, the group of Palomar found a linear trend between the distribution coecient and
the support material for for pores up to 8 nm independent of the type of support material.
Of course the pore volume is not the only factor to consider regarding the distribution
coecient, as the hydroscopic character and molecular volume of the IL also aects the
distribution coecient. Increasing the hydroscopic character of an IL imply a higher anity
==PAGE:89==
8.5 Eect of MeOH on NO Conversion
73
to a non-polar support (e.g. activated carbon), and increasing the molecular volume of the
IL generally increases the distribution coecient as well [138].
As the ENIL particles have an outer diameter of 600 nm they are much larger than the
HS-SILP particles, and the inner volume is signicant greater than the pore size in the
Silica 100. Depending on the type of partial void lling this could allow a "bulk-like"
lling, allowing more stability of IL inside the capsules. The stability of larger droplets of
IL in the void lling will be a compromise against the benets of a larger surface area per
gram IL.
How and why the IL has been removed from the SiO2-SILP and HS-SILP is unknown, but
it is vital to retain the IL on the support material to utilize the positive eect from the
IL on NO conversion. Above mentioned results could indicate the need to look for new
support materials with a higher distribution of micropores. A disadvantage of reducing
the pore volume is that the capillary condensation eect, described in Section 4.3.3, will
occur at lower humidity in the reactor.
8.5
Eect of MeOH on NO Conversion
The improved eect on NO conversion when adding MeOH was only observed when adding
in a solution with water. By adding pure MeOH to the reactor no improvement in NO
conversion was observed, however, an increase in HNO3 was observed as seen in Figure
8.1. As the nitric acid has been proven to oxidize NO (as seen in Section 7.5) the lack of
improved conversion is believed to be caused by the limiting access to water molecules, as
the only water is impurities and absorbed molecules from the air by the methanol. This
point is supported by the fact that the amount of HNO3 is greater when adding 400ppm
MeOH and water to 10% RH compared to 1200ppm pure MeOH in dry gas.
How the methanol promotes the NO oxidation/formation of nitric acid is more dicult
to prove.
It is observed, that when the reactor is running while adding a mixture of
MeOH/water, almost no NO2 is observed in the obtained UV-vis spectra. By adding pure
water no decrease in NO2 (nor increase in HNO3) is observed, which could indicate that
the methanol somehow promotes the formation of nitric acid in water as seen in Reaction
8.2. This formation has previously been discussed in Section 1.2.
2 NO2(g) + H2O(l) −−→HONO(aq) + HNO3(aq)
( 8.2)
If above is the occurring reaction nitrous acid (HONO) should be observed, however, that
is neither the case while adding pure methanol or methanol with relatively low amounts
of water. Nitrous acid is rather unstable, and the absence of signal in the UV-vis analyzer
could be caused to decomposition, e.g. in the gas phase as seen Reaction 8.3.
2 HNO2(g) −−→NO2(g) + NO(g) + H2O(l)
( 8.3)
The nitrous acid could also be absent as it is proposed to be part of the reaction mechanism
seen in Section 3.2, where two molecules of nitrous acid react with 4 nitrous ions (NO 
2 ).
At the end of the proposed reaction cycle, nitric acid is formed, which is observed by UV-
vis. There are denitely competing reactions, and to oxidize nitrous acid to nitric acid
==PAGE:90==
74
Analysis of Euent Gas, SILP, and Possible Reactions
instead of decomposition as seen in Reaction 8.3 is essential in order to increase the NO
conversion/conversion rate.
8.5.1
Potential Radical Formation
As no C-H bonds were observed in IR analysis of euent gas methanol must have been
oxidized to CO2. Despite not proven, it is believed that the increased NO conversion when
adding MeOH could be caused by radical formation initiated by methanol, thus oxidizing
methanol to CO2. In the 1990's a lot of research was carried out to investigate the methanol
oxidation in presence of NO [139, 140, 141, 142]. Despite the extensive past eorts, impor-
tant aspects of methanol chemistry are still unresolved, including the importance of the
two fuel-derived radicals hydroxymethyl (·CH2OH) and methoxy (CH3O·) [143].
Most research regarding methanol oxidation and its interaction with NO has been carried
out at elevated temperatures as temperatures above 700K are reported necessary to form
radicals of MeOH [143]. In 2006 Xiao et al. performed an interesting study where NO2-
catalyzed deep oxidation of methanol was carried out, concluding the radical formation of
MeOH was promoted under the presence of NO [144]. An interesting nding, they did not
comment further on, is that they cooled and saturated a simulated ue gas with MeOH at
0 ◦C, equivalent to 4.6% MeOH in the gas phase, but they did only observe 4.24% MeOH
in the gas by IR after attempting to perform NO oxidation at 298K [144]. Neither CO2 nor
CO was observed, however, trace amounts of methylal (CH3OCH2OCH3) was observed,
indicating following reaction had occurred.
2 CH3OH + CH2O −−→CH3OCH2OCH3 + H2O
( 8.4)
Above could indicate that radical formation occur, however, at very slow rate, at room
temperature. Radicals of methanol are generally formed from hydrogen abstraction reac-
tions between methanol and species from the O/H radical pool, mainly as seen in Reaction
8.5 to 8.7 [143].
CH3OH + ·OH −−→·CH2OH + H2O
( 8.5)
CH3OH + ·OH −−→CH3O· + H2O
( 8.6)
·CH2OH + O2 −−→CH2O + HO ·
2
( 8.7)
8.5.1.1
Initiating and Increasing Radical Formation
In the atmosphere, photodissociation is an important source of radical formation as seen
in Section 1.2.
To initiate radical formation in the reactor, this mechanism could be
mimicked by introducing a light source sending photons within the ultraviolet range to the
SILP bed. This might be an eective source for radical formation in order to investigate
the importance of radicals. However, from an industrial and commercial point of view
introducing a light source might not be applicable.
==PAGE:91==
8.5 Eect of MeOH on NO Conversion
75
NO removal using radicals formed by hydrogen peroxide has been discussed previously in
this thesis, with a high H2O2:NO ratio as the limiting factor. In 1996 Zamansky et al.
tested mixtures of methanol and hydrogen peroxide for NO oxidation, though at temper-
atures above 650K [145]. Equimolar mixtures of hydrogen peroxide and methanol were
used, and one of the main conclusions were: "The eciency of methanol in NO oxidation
is about the same or higher as that of H2O2. However, H2O2/CH3OH mixtures are more
ecient in NO oxidation than each component individually due to the more easy formation
of OH radicals from H2O2." [145]. Due to the high temperatures, the eect is not neces-
sarily as signicant for this setup, however, as the radical formation of H2O2 requires less
energy compared to MeOH, it might be interesting to introduce a H2O2/CH3OH mixture
to the reactor.
8.5.2
NO2 as Catalyst for MeOH Oxidation
Finally, the work by Xiao et al. indicated that NO2 may play a role in methanol oxida-
tion [144]. To better understand the details of the mechanism, ve possible reactions of
methanol decomposition was established as seen in Reaction 8.8 to 8.12.
CH3OH + O2 −−→·CH2OH + HO ·
2
( 8.8)
CH3OH + ·NO −−→·CH2OH + HNO
( 8.9)
CH3OH + ·NO −−→CH3O· + HNO
( 8.10)
CH3OH + ·NO2 −−→·CH2OH + HONO
( 8.11)
CH3OH + ·NO2 −−→CH3O· + HONO
( 8.12)
Quantum chemical methods was used to calculate possible reaction pathways for Reaction
8.9 to 8.12, and the experimental enthalpy changes was found to 48.1, 54.4, 19.7 and
25.9 kcal
mol respectively, indicating Reaction 8.11 and 8.12 are most possible initial steps for
the hydrogen abstraction of methanol in the CH3OH−O2−NOx system [144].The reaction
between NO2 and MeOH might also occur in the tested system, as huge amounts of nitrous
acid (HONO) is observed when adding a droplet of MeOH/water mixture to the reactor.
Nitrous acid has also been observed during high NO conversions, usually while adding
more methanol to the reactor.
It is important to state that the formation of radicals is not proven in the reactor.
==PAGE:92==
76
Analysis of Euent Gas, SILP, and Possible Reactions
==PAGE:93==
Chapter 9
Concluding Remarks and Outlook
The objective of this work has been to develop a novel pre-catalyst system for low tempera-
ture selective catalytic reduction (SCR) of NO. This was to be achieved through optimiza-
tion of previous work carried out in this group, in which NO was absorbed and oxidized
into NO2 and/or HNO3 in an ionic liquid (IL) by the presence of water, methanol, and
oxygen.
Although great improvements have been made in the development of low-temperature SCR
catalysts, the temperature requirements are still too high for implementation in tail-end
deNOx. Furthermore, catalyst poisoning from alkali-species, which are present in huge
amounts in ue gas from biomass combustion, is severe. By partly oxidizing NO to NO2
the benets of the fast SCR mechanism can be achieved, and controlled formation of nitric
acid will allow the production of value-added chemicals from ue gases.
The background conversion of NO in an empty reactor system at ambient temperatures
depends both on the NO and oxygen concentration as well as the retention time in the
system. A rst-order dependence on the oxygen concentration was observed. By adding
a mixture of water/methanol to the empty reactor system an increase of NO conversion
was observed contemporary with the formation of nitric acid. By only adding water to the
empty reactor no formation of nitric acid was observed, and no increase in NO conversion
compared to the empty reactor was obtained.
High viscosities of ionic liquids (ILs) decrease mass transfer over the gas/IL boundary
layer. To overcome these obstacles a supported ionic liquid phase (SILP) was formed by
introducing [bmim][NO3] to calcinated Silica 100 particles or hollow sphere silica particles
synthesized by Peter Jakobsen. Introducing the SILP materials to the reactor system while
adding a water/methanol mixture did not increase conversion to any signicant degree
compared to the conversion in the empty reactor with water/methanol. Dierent water
concentrations were investigated, and water was not found to have a signicant inuence on
NO conversion. The proposed mechanism for NO conversion using [bmim][NO3] includes
the formation of nitric acid, which is known to oxidize NO. By adding nitric acid to the
water/methanol solution, which is injected to the NO gas, a signicant increase in NO
conversion was observed, indicating a potential for NO removal if the formation of nitric
acid by the IL could be increased.
Euent gas has been analyzed using UV-vis spectrophotometry to quantify the NO con-
version and analyze the formation of compounds. Addition of a water/methanol mixture
==PAGE:94==
78
Concluding Remarks and Outlook
led to the formation of nitric acid from the NO2 formed by background oxidation, how-
ever, no signicant increase in NO conversion compared to the background oxidation was
observed. By adding an excess of water/methanol, the formation of nitrous acid was ob-
served. The euent gas has been analyzed with high-resolution gas-phase FTIR, revealing
no methanol residues or C-H bonds. This proves that methanol undergoes full oxidation
to CO2, however, it is unknown whether the full oxidation has occurred in the reactor,
or in the collected volume in the 20 minutes between the gas sample was collected to the
IR measurement was performed. Neither NO was observed, proving the full oxidation in
the volume, despite only 25% NO conversion was obtained in the reactor. At last TGA
analysis of the used SILP materials revealed that for several experiments the IL had been
removed from the support material. It has not been possible to prove the mechanism of
the removal, however, it was seen that the IL remained on the support for at least 48 hours
of usage.
Careful considerations regarding the further development of this system are needed, and
several obstacles must be faced. First, it is crucial to retain the IL on the SILP material in
order to obtain consistent results. It may be necessary to look for other support materials to
retain the IL, preferable with micropores, however, capillary condensation in unlled pores
must be considered. Additionally, a quantication method for analyzing the formation of
NO2, nitric acid, and nitrous acid would be important in order to close the nitrogen balance
and better understand the reactions in the reactor. The methanol denitely promotes the
NO oxidation, however, further work needs to be carried out in order to understand how
this promoting eect is caused and to optimize the eect.
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[1] Y. R. Rodriguez, Great Smog of London, Encyclopedia of Toxicology: Third Edi-
tion, vol. 2, pp. 796797, 2014.
[2] B. J. Polivka, The Great London Smog of 1952, American Journal of Nursing, vol.
118, no. 4, pp. 5761, 2018.
[3] A. Davidson, Photochemical oxidant air pollution: A historical perspective, Studies
in Environmental Science, vol. 72, no. C, pp. 393405, 1998.
[4] Y. Iizuka, R. Uemura, K. Fujita, S. Hattori, O. Seki, C. Miyamoto, T. Suzuki,
N. Yoshida, H. Motoyama, and S. Matoba, A 60 Year Record of Atmospheric
Aerosol Depositions Preserved in a High-Accumulation Dome Ice Core, Southeast
Greenland, Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, vol. 123, no. 1, pp. 574
589, 2018.
[5] G. N stase, A. Serban, A. F. N stase, G. Dragomir, and A. I. Brezeanu, Air quality,
primary air pollutants and ambient concentrations inventory for Romania, Atmo-
spheric Environment, vol. 184, no. April, pp. 292303, 2018.
[6] J. S. Bower, G. F. J. Broughton, J. R. Stedman, and M. L. Williams, A Winter NO2
Smog Episode in the U.K, Atmospheric Environment, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 461475,
1994.
[7] J. M. Ye, A New SOx Simulation Model of Coal Combustion, Applied Mechanics
and Materials, vol. 543, pp. 854857, 2014.
[8] G. A. Ban-Weiss, J. Y. Chen, B. A. Buchholz, and R. W. Dibble, A numerical
investigation into the anomalous slight NOx increase when burning biodiesel; A new
(old) theory, Fuel Processing Technology, vol. 88, no. 7, pp. 659667, 2007.
[9] J. F. Lamarque, T. C. Bond, V. Eyring, C. Granier, A. Heil, Z. Klimont, D. Lee,
C. Liousse, A. Mieville, B. Owen, M. G. Schultz, D. Shindell, S. J. Smith, E. Ste-
hfest, J. Van Aardenne, O. R. Cooper, M. Kainuma, N. Mahowald, J. R. McConnell,
V. Naik, K. Riahi, and D. P. Van Vuuren, Historical (1850-2000) gridded anthro-
pogenic and biomass burning emissions of reactive gases and aerosols: Methodology
and application, Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, vol. 10, no. 15, pp. 70177039,
2010.
[10] R. Delmas, D. Serca, and C. Jambert, Global inventory of NOx sources, Nutrient
cycling in agroecosystems, vol. 48, no. 1-2, pp. 5160, 1997.
[11] International Energy Agency (IEA), World Energy Outlook 2017, 2017.
[12] F. Garin, Mechanism of NOx decomposition, Applied Catalysis A: General, vol.
222, pp. 183219, 2001.
==PAGE:96==
80
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[13] I. Y. Sigal, The Development and Aims of Investigation to Study the Conditions of
Formation of Nitrogen Oxides in Furnace Processes, Thermal Engineering, vol. 30,
no. 9, pp. 499505, 1983.
[14] H. Bosch and F. Janssen, Formation and Control of Nitrogen Oxides, Catalysis
Today, vol. 2, pp. 369379, 1988.
[15] L. R. Radovic and H. H. Schobert, Energy and Fuels in Society, 1st ed. McGraw-Hill,
1992.
[16] S. Tang, S. W. Churchill, and N. Lior, The Formation of Thermal and Fuel NOx
for Radiantly Stabilized Combustion, Symposium (International) on Combustion,
vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 7380, 1981.
[17] G. Busca, L. Lietti, G. Ramis, and F. Berti, Chemical and mechanistic aspects of
the selective catalytic reduction of NOx by ammonia over oxide catalysts : A review,
Applied Catalysis B: Environmental, vol. 18, no. 1-2, pp. 136, 1998.
[18] S. Roy, M. S. Hegde, and G. Madras, Catalysis for NOx abatement, Applied Energy,
vol. 86, no. 11, pp. 22832297, 2009.
[19] Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Nitrogen oxides (NOx), why and how
they are controlled, Epa-456/F-99-006R, no. November, p. 48, 1999.
[20] J. Bashtani, S. Seddighi, and I. Bahrabadi-Jovein, Control of nitrogen oxide forma-
tion in power generation using modied reaction kinetics and mixing, Energy, vol.
145, no. 2, pp. 567581, 2018.
[21] European Environment Agency, European Union emission inventory report 1990
2015 under the UNECE Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution
(LRTAP), 2017, no. 9.
[22] J. Fenger and J. C. Tjell, Air Pollution - From a Local to a Global Perspective.
Polyteknisk Forlag, 2009.
[23] Climate
Change
Connection,
CO2
equivalents,
2016.
[Online].
Available:
https://climatechangeconnection.org/emissions/co2-equivalents/ [Accessed:
2018-
11-09]
[24] Miljø og Fødevareministeriet, Ren luft til danskerne, Tech. Rep., 2014.
[25] S. S. Jensen, J. Brandt, J. H. Christensen, C. Geels, M. Ketzel, M. S. Plejdrup,
and O. Nielsen, Kortlægning af luftforureningens helbreds- og miljøeekter i Region
Hovedstaden, Aarhus Universitet, Institut for Miljøvidenskab, Tech. Rep. 254, 2018.
[26] F. Huang, R. Chen, Y. Shen, H. Kan, and X. Kuang, The Impact of the 2013
Eastern China Smog on Outpatient Visits for Coronary Heart Disease in Shanhai,
China, International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, vol. 13,
no. 7, p. 627, 2016.
[27] S. S. Zumdahl and S. A. Zumdahl, Chemistry, 8th ed.
Cengage Learning, 2010.
[28] J. A. Fay, D. Golomb, and J. Gruhl, Controlling Acid Rain, Energy Laboratory
Report No. MIT-EL 83-004, no. April, pp. 215232, 1983.
==PAGE:97==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
81
[29] United Nations Environment Programme, Environmental eects of ozone depletion
and its interactions with climate change: 2014 assessment, 2014, vol. 24, no. 4.
[30] A. Kessel, Air, the Environment and Public Health.
Cambridge University Press,
2005.
[31] T. Tang, B. O'Loughlin, M. Roberts, and E. Dancausse, An Overview of Federal Air
Quality Legislation as Related to Federally-Assisted Highway and Transit Programs,
US Department of transportation, Tech. Rep., 2003.
[32] A. C. Stern, History of Air Pollution Legislation in the United States, Journal of
the Air Pollution Control Association, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4461, 1982.
[33] The European Parliament, Directive 2008/50/EC, Ocial Journal of the European
Union, vol. L 152/1, 2008.
[34] The European Parliament, Regulation (EC) No 715/2007, Ocial Journal of the
European Union, vol. L 171/1, 2007.
[35] K. Andersson, F. Baldi, S. Brynolf, F. J. Lindgren, L. Granhag, and E. Svensson,
Shipping and the Environment: Improving Environmental Performance in Marine
Transportation, 1st ed.
Springer, 2016.
[36] The European Commision, Commission implementing decision (EU) 2017/1442,
Ocial Journal of the European Union, vol. L 212/1, 2017.
[37] The European Parliament, Directive 2010/75/EU, Ocial Journal of the European
Union, vol. L 334/17, 2010.
[38] M. Flamme, Low NOx Combustion Technologies for High Temperature Applica-
tions, Energy Conversion and Management, vol. 42, no. 15-17, pp. 19191935, 2001.
[39] L. Nagle and D. Probert, A Two-Stage Burner, Applied Energy, vol. 41, pp. 309
313, 1992.
[40] T. Nussbaumer, Combustion and Co-combustion of Biomass: Fundamentals, Tech-
nologies, and Primary Measures for Emission Reduction, Energy and Fuels, vol. 17,
no. 6, pp. 15101521, 2003.
[41] R. Kurose, H. Makino, and A. Suzuki, Numerical Analysis of Pulverized Coal Com-
bustion Characteristics Using Advanced Low-NOx Burner, Fuel, vol. 83, no. 6, pp.
693703, 2004.
[42] D. R. Poole and W. M. Graven, Kinetics of the Reaction of Ammonia and Nitric
Oxide in the Region of Spontaneous, Journal of the American Chemical Society,
vol. 83, no. 2, pp. 283286, 1961.
[43] H. Chen, D. Z. Chen, S. Fan, L. Hong, and D. Wang, SNCR De-NOx within a mod-
erate temperature range using urea-spiked hydrazine hydrate as reductant, Chemo-
sphere, vol. 161, pp. 208218, 2016.
[44] K. Chen, G. Shi, X. Zhou, H. Li, and C. Wang, Highly Ecient Nitric Oxide Cap-
ture by Azole-Based Ionic Liquids through Multiple-Site Absorption, Angewandte
Chemie - International Edition, vol. 55, no. 46, pp. 14 36414 368, 2016.
==PAGE:98==
82
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[45] R. Rota, D. Antos, É. F. Zanoelo, and M. Morbidelli, Experimental and modeling
analysis of the NOxOUT process, Chemical Engineering Science, vol. 57, no. 1, pp.
2738, 2002.
[46] H. Meier and G. Gut, Kinetics of the selective catalytic reduction of nitric oxide
with ammonia on a platinum catalyst, Chemical Engineering Science, vol. 33, no. 1,
pp. 123131, 1978.
[47] P. Forzatti, Present status and perspectives in de-NOx SCR catalysis, Applied
Catalysis A: General, vol. 222, no. 1-2, pp. 221236, 2001.
[48] B. Bahrami, V. G. Komvokis, M. S. Ziebarth, O. S. Alexeev, and M. D. Amiridis,
NH3 decomposition and oxidation over noble metal-based FCC CO combustion
promoters, Applied Catalysis B: Environmental, vol. 130-131, pp. 2535, 2013.
[49] M. Koebel, G. Madia, F. Raimondi, and A. Wokaun, Enhanced reoxidation of vana-
dia by NO2 in the fast SCR reaction, Journal of Catalysis, vol. 209, no. 1, pp.
159165, 2002.
[50] M. V. Twigg, I. Nova, and E. Tronconi, Urea-SCR Technology for deNOx After
Treatment of Diesel Exhausts, Johnson Matthey Technology Review, vol. 59, no. 3,
pp. 221232, 2015.
[51] V. Narkhede, D. Kumar, R. M. Cursetji, and T. A. Sidiquie, Low Temperature
Selective Catalytic Reduction of NOx over Vanadium-Based Catalysts, SAE Inter-
national Journal, vol. 8(1), no. January, 2015.
[52] S. Froehlich, M. Reichinger, and G. Maletz, VWT - SCR Catalyst to Meet BS-IV
Emission Standards and Beyond, SAE Technical papers, vol. 5, 2013.
[53] L. Lietti, I. Nova, G. Ramis, L. Dall'Acqua, G. Busca, E. Giamello, P. Forzatti, and
F. Bregani, Characterization and Reactivity of V2O5MoO3/TiO2 De-NOx SCR
Catalysts, Journal of Catalysis, vol. 187, no. 2, pp. 419435, 1999.
[54] P. W. Jakobsen, R. Fehrmann, A. D. Jensen, and S. Mossin, Low Temperature
DeNOx Technologies for Power and Waste Incineration Plants, Ph.D. dissertation,
Technical University of Denmark (DTU), 2017.
[55] K. A. Lomachenko, E. Borfecchia, C. Negri, G. Berlier, C. Lamberti, P. Beato,
H. Falsig, and S. Bordiga, The Cu-CHA deNOx Catalyst in Action: Temperature-
Dependent NH3-Assisted Selective Catalytic Reduction Monitored by Operando XAS
and XES, Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 138, no. 37, pp. 12 025
12 028, 2016.
[56] V. I. Pârvulescu, P. Grange, and B. Delmon, Catalytic removal of NO, Catalysis
Today, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 233316, 1998.
[57] N. Y. Topsøe, Mechanism of the Selective Catalytic Reduction of Nitric Oxide by
Ammonia Elucidated by in Situ On-Line Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy,
Science, vol. 265, no. 5176, pp. 12171219, 1994.
[58] S. B. Kristensen, A. Riisager, R. Fehrmann, and J. N. Jensen, DeNOx catalysts for
biomass combustion, Ph.D. dissertation, Technical University of Denmark (DTU),
2013.
==PAGE:99==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
83
[59] N. Y. Topsoe, H. Topsoe, and J. A. Dumesic, Vanadia/Titania Catalysts for Selec-
tive Catalytic Reduction (SCR) of Nitric-Oxide by Ammonia, Journal of Catalysis,
vol. 151, no. 1, pp. 226240, 1995.
[60] L. Lietti, J. L. Alemany, P. Forzatti, G. Busca, G. Ramis, E. Giamello, and F. Bre-
gani, Reactivity of V2O5-WO3/TiO2 catalysts in the selective catalytic reduction
of nitric oxide by ammonia, Catalysis Today, vol. 29, no. 1-4, pp. 143148, 1996.
[61] G. Busca, H. Saussey, O. Saur, J. C. Lavalley, and V. Lorenzelli, FT-IR charac-
terization of the surface acidity of dierent titanium dioxide anatase preparations,
Applied Catalysis, vol. 14, no. C, pp. 245260, 1985.
[62] S. L. Hu and T. M. Apple, 15N NMR study of the adsorption of NO and NH3
on titania-supported vanadia catalysts, Journal of Catalysis, vol. 158, no. 1, pp.
199204, 1996.
[63] G. Madia, M. Koebel, M. Elsener, and A. Wokaun, Side Reactions in the Selective
Catalytic Reduction of NOx with Various NO2 Fractions, Industrial & Engineering
Chemistry Research, vol. 41, no. 16, pp. 40084015, 2002.
[64] L. Arnarson, H. Falsig, S. B. Rasmussen, J. V. Lauritsen, and P. G. Moses, A
Complete Reaction Mechanism for Standard and Fast Selective Catalytic Reduction
of Nitrogen Oxides on Low Coverage VOx/TiO2(001) catalysts, Journal of Catalysis,
vol. 346, pp. 188197, 2017.
[65] ICAC, Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR) Control of NOx Emissions, 2009.
[66] R. M. Heck, Catalytic abatement of nitrogen oxides-stationary applications, Catal-
ysis Today, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 519523, 1999.
[67] F. Janssen and R. Meijer, Quality control of DeNOx catalysts: Performance testing,
surface analysis and characterization of DeNOx catalysts, Catalysis Today, vol. 16,
no. 2, pp. 157185, 1993.
[68] M. Goemans, P. Clarysse, J. Joann, P. D. Clercq, S. Lenaerts, K. Matthys, and
K. Boels, Catalytic NOx reduction with simultaneous dioxin and furan oxidation,
Chemosphere, vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 489497, 2003.
[69] L. Schill and R. Fehrmann, Strategies of Coping with Deactivation of NH3-SCR
Catalysts Due to Biomass Firing, Catalysts, vol. 8, no. 4, 2018.
[70] M. T. Hansen and A. R. Jein, English Handbook for Wood Pellet Combustion, 2009.
[71] H. C. Delalibera, N. Campolina, P. W. Neto, and R. Ralisch, Performance of a diesel
engine fueled with a preheated blend of soybean oil and petrodiesel, Engenharia
Agrícola, vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 10581067, 2012.
[72] H. Jensen-Holm, F. Castellino, and N. T. White, SCR DeNOx catalyst considera-
tions when using biomass in power generation, Power Plant Air Pollutant Control
"MEGA" Symposium, no. 2012, pp. 127, 2012.
[73] L. Schill, R. Fehrmann, and A. D. Jensen, Alternative catalysts and technologies for
NOx removal from biomass- and waste- red plants, Ph.D. dissertation, Technical
University of Denmark (DTU), 2014.
==PAGE:100==
84
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[74] K. N. Rao and H. P. Ha, SO2 promoted alkali metal doped Ag/Al2O3 catalysts for
CH4-SCR of NOx, Applied Catalysis A: General, vol. 433-434, pp. 162169, 2012.
[75] S. Chansai, R. Burch, and C. Hardacre, Controlling the sulfur poisoning of
Ag/Al2O3 catalysts for the hydrocarbon SCR reaction by using a regenerable SOx
trap, Topics in Catalysis, vol. 56, no. 1-8, pp. 243248, 2013.
[76] S. Sato, Y. Yu-u, H. Yahiro, N. Mizuno, and M. Iwamoto, Cu-ZSM-5 zeolite as highly
active catalyst for removal of nitrogen monoxide from emission of diesel engines,
Applied Catalysis, vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 37, 1991.
[77] S. S. R. Putluru, S. B. Kristensen, J. Due-Hansen, A. Riisager, and R. Fehrmann,
Alternative alkali resistant deNOx catalysts, Catalysis Today, vol. 184, no. 1, pp.
192196, 2012.
[78] J. Giménez-Mañogil, A. Bueno-López, and A. García-García, Preparation, charac-
terisation and testing of CuO/Ce0.8Zr0.2O2 catalysts for NO oxidation to NO2 and
mild temperature diesel soot combustion, Applied Catalysis B: Environmental, vol.
152-153, pp. 99107, 2014.
[79] J. A. Loiland and R. F. Lobo, Low temperature catalytic NO oxidation over micro-
porous materials, Journal of Catalysis, vol. 311, pp. 412423, 2014.
[80] Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Yin, J. Pan, and J. Zhang, Oxidation Removal of Nitric Oxide
from Flue Gas Using an Ultraviolet Light and Heat Coactivated Oxone System,
Energy & Fuels, vol. 32, pp. 19992008, 2018.
[81] Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Liu, and Q. Wang, Oxidation Removal of Nitric Oxide from
Flue Gas Using UV Photolysis of Aqueous Hypochlorite, Environmental Science
and Technology, vol. 51, no. 20, pp. 11 95011 959, 2017.
[82] Y. Liu, Y. Wang, W. Xu, W. Yang, Z. Pan, and Q. Wang, Simultaneous absorp-
tionoxidation of nitric oxide and sulfur dioxide using ammonium persulfate synergis-
tically activated by UV-light and heat, Chemical Engineering Research and Design,
vol. 130, pp. 321333, 2018.
[83] R. Hao, Y. Zhao, B. Yuan, S. Zhou, and S. Yang, Establishment of a novel advanced
oxidation process for economical and eective removal of SO2 and NO, Journal of
Hazardous Materials, vol. 318, pp. 224232, 2016.
[84] S. Yang, Y. Xiong, Y. Ge, and S. Zhang, Heterogeneous Fenton oxidation of nitric
oxide by magnetite: Kinetics and mechanism, Materials Letters, vol. 218, pp. 257
261, 2018.
[85] B. Wu and Y. Xiong, A novel low-temperature NO removal approach with •OH from
catalytic decomposition of H2O2 over La1−xCaxFeO3 oxides, Journal of Chemical
Technology and Biotechnology, vol. 93, no. 1, pp. 4353, 2018.
[86] Y. Sun, S. Ren, Y. Hou, K. Zhang, and W. Wu, Absorption of nitric oxide in
simulated ue gas by a metallic functional ionic liquid, Fuel Processing Technology,
vol. 178, no. February, pp. 712, 2018.
==PAGE:101==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
85
[87] Y. Sun, G. Wei, X. Tantai, Z. Huang, H. Yang, and L. Zhang, Highly Ecient
Nitric Oxide Absorption by Environmentally Friendly Deep Eutectic Solvents Based
on 1,3-Dimethylthiourea, Energy and Fuels, vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 12 43912 445, 2017.
[88] H. Kolding,
P. Thomassen,
S. Mossin,
S. Kegnaes,
A. Riisager,
J. Rogez,
G. Mikaelian, and R. Fehrmann, Absorption of Flue-Gas Components by Ionic Liq-
uids, ECS Transactions, vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 97108, 2014.
[89] P. K. Kaas-Larsen, P. Thomassen, L. Schill, S. Mossin, A. Riisager, and R. Fehrmann,
Selective Reversible Absorption of the Industrial O-Gas Components CO2 and NOx
by Ionic Liquids, ECS Transactions, vol. 75, no. 15, pp. 316, 2016.
[90] A. J. Kunov-Kruse, P. L. Thomassen, A. Riisager, S. Mossin, and R. Fehrmann, Ab-
sorption and Oxidation of Nitrogen Oxide in Ionic Liquids, Chemistry - A European
Journal, vol. 22, no. 33, pp. 11 74511 755, 2016.
[91] J. F. Wishart and E. W. Castner, The physical chemistry of ionic liquids, Journal
of Physical Chemistry B, vol. 111, no. 18, pp. 46394640, 2007.
[92] Z. Lei, B. Chen, Y. M. Koo, and D. R. Macfarlane, Introduction: Ionic Liquids,
Chemical Reviews, vol. 117, no. 10, pp. 66336635, 2017.
[93] Y. Xiao and S. V. Malhotra, Friedel-crafts acylation reactions in pyridinium based
ionic liquids, Journal of Organometallic Chemistry, vol. 690, no. 15, pp. 36093613,
2005.
[94] J. S. Wilkes and M. J. Zarawotko, Air and water stable 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium
based ionic liquids, J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun., no. 13, pp. 965967, 1992.
[95] R. Giernoth, Task-specic ionic liquids, Angewandte Chemie - International Edi-
tion, vol. 49, no. 16, pp. 28342839, 2010.
[96] A. F. Ferreira, P. N. Simões, and A. G. M. Ferreira, Quaternary phosphonium-based
ionic liquids: Thermal stability and heat capacity of the liquid phase, Journal of
Chemical Thermodynamics, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 1627, 2012.
[97] C. Maton, N. De Vos, and C. V. Stevens, Ionic liquid thermal stabilities: Decom-
position mechanisms and analysis tools, Chemical Society Reviews, vol. 42, no. 13,
pp. 59635977, 2013.
[98] J. Leys, M. Wübbenhorst, C. P. Menon, R. Rajesh, J. Thoen, C. Glorieux, P. Nock-
emann, B. Thijs, K. Binnemans, and S. Longuemart, Temperature dependence of
the electrical conductivity of imidazolium ionic liquids, Journal of Chemical Physics,
vol. 128, no. 6, 2008.
[99] H. Li, M. Ibrahim, I. Agberemi, M. N. Kobrak, H. Li, M. Ibrahim, I. Agberemi,
and M. N. Kobrak, The relationship between ionic structure and viscosity in room-
temperature ionic liquids The relationship between ionic structure and viscosity in
room-temperature, The Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 129, p. 124507, 2008.
[100] A. Varnek, N. Kireeva, I. V. Tetko, I. I. Baskin, and V. P. Solov'ev, Exhaustive
QSPR studies of a large diverse set of ionic liquids: How accurately can we predict
melting points? Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, vol. 47, no. 3, pp.
11111122, 2007.
==PAGE:102==
86
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[101] A. Perera and R. Mazighi, Simple and complex forms of disorder in ionic liquids,
Journal of Molecular Liquids, vol. 210, pp. 243251, 2015.
[102] E. W. Castner and J. F. Wishart, Spotlight on ionic liquids, Journal of Chemical
Physics, vol. 132, no. 12, 2010.
[103] H. Shirota, J. F. Wishart, and E. W. Castner, Intermolecular interactions and dy-
namics of room temperature ionic liquids that have silyl- and siloxy-substituted imi-
dazolium cations, Journal of Physical Chemistry B, vol. 111, no. 18, pp. 48194829,
2007.
[104] A. Noda, K. Hayamizu, and M. Watanabe, Pulsed-gradient spin-echo 1H and
19F NMR ionic diusion coecient, viscosity, and ionic conductivity of non-
chloroaluminate room-temperature ionic liquids, Journal of Physical Chemistry B,
vol. 105, no. 20, pp. 46034610, 2001.
[105] H. Tokuda, K. Hayamizu, K. Ishii, Md. A. B. H. Susan, and M. Watanabe, Physico-
chemical properties and structures of room temperature ionic liquids. 1. Variation of
anionic species, Journal of Physical Chemistry B, vol. 108, no. 42, pp. 16 59316 600,
2004.
[106] H. Tokuda, K. Hayamizu, K. Ishii, Md. A. B. H. Susan, and M. Watanabe, Physic-
ochemical properties and structures of room temperature ionic liquids. 2. variation
of alkyl chain length in imidazolium cation, Journal of Physical Chemistry B, vol.
109, no. 13, pp. 61036110, 2005.
[107] H. Tokuda, K. Ishii, Md. A. B. H. Susan, S. Tsuzuki, K. Hayamizu, and M. Watan-
abe, Physicochemical properties and structures of room-temperature ionic liquids.
3. Variation of cationic structures, Journal of Physical Chemistry B, vol. 110, no. 6,
pp. 28332839, 2006.
[108] H. Tokuda, S. Tsuzuki, Md. A. B. H. Susan, K. Hayamizu, and M. Watanabe, How
ionic are room-temperature ionic liquids? An indicator of the physicochemical prop-
erties, Journal of Physical Chemistry B, vol. 110, no. 39, pp. 19 59319 600, 2006.
[109] H. P. Steinrück and P. Wasserscheid, Ionic liquids in Catalysis, Catalysis Letters,
vol. 145, no. 1, pp. 380397, 2015.
[110] L. A. Blanchard, D. Hancu, E. J. Beckman, and J. F. Brennecke, Green processing
using ionic liquids and CO2, Nature, vol. 399, no. May, pp. 2829, 1999.
[111] S. Shunmugavel, S. Kegnæs, J. Due-Hansen, T. A. Gretasdottir, A. Riisager, and
R. Fehrmann, Selective Gas Absorption by Ionic Liquids, ECS Transactions,
vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 117126, 2010.
[112] Z. Lei, C. Dai, and B. Chen, Gas solubility in ionic liquids, Chemical Reviews, vol.
114, no. 2, pp. 12891326, 2014.
[113] A. Riisager, R. Fehrmann, M. Haumann, B. S. K. Gorle, and P. Wasserscheid, Sta-
bility and kinetic studies of supported ionic liquid phase catalysts for hydroformy-
lation of propene, Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research, vol. 44, no. 26,
pp. 98539859, 2005.
==PAGE:103==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
87
[114] S. Ren, Y. Hou, W. Wn, Q. Liu, Y. Xiao, and X. Chen, Properties of ionic liquids
absorbing SO2 and the mechanism of the absorption, Journal of Physical Chemistry
B, vol. 114, no. 6, pp. 21752179, 2010.
[115] J. J. Fillion, J. E. Bennett, and J. F. Brennecke, The Viscosity and Density of Ionic
Liquid + Tetraglyme Mixtures and the Eect of Tetraglyme on CO2 Solubility,
Journal of Chemical and Engineering Data, vol. 62, no. 2, pp. 608622, 2017.
[116] C. P. Mehnert, R. A. Cook, N. C. Dispenziere, and M. Afeworki, Supported ionic liq-
uid catalysis - A new concept for homogeneous hydroformylation catalysis, Journal
of the American Chemical Society, vol. 124, no. 44, pp. 12 93212 933, 2002.
[117] A. Riisager, P. Wasserscheid, R. Van Hal, and R. Fehrmann, Continuous xed-bed
gas-phase hydroformylation using supported ionic liquid-phase (SILP) Rh catalysts,
Journal of Catalysis, vol. 219, no. 2, pp. 452455, 2003.
[118] A. W. Liljegren, S. Mossin, and R. Fehrmann, Development of a Low-Temperature
Nitric Oxide Oxidation Catalyst.
B.Sc. Thesis, Technical University of Denmark
(DTU), 2018.
[119] T. Owen, Fundamentals of UV-visible Spectroscopy, 1st ed.
Hewlet-Packard, 1996.
[120] P. Harris, Simultaneous Determination of SO2 and NOx Concentrations by Ultravio-
let Spectrophotometry, Technical Paper - ISA Analysis Division Spring Symposium,
New Orleans, LA, no. April, 1997.
[121] D. L. Pavia, G. M. Lampman, G. S. Kriz, and J. R. Vyvyan, Introduction to Spec-
troscopy, 5th ed.
Brooks/Cole, 2014.
[122] P. Atkins and J. de Paula, Atkins' Physical Chemistry, 9th ed.
Oxford University
Press, 2010.
[123] L. B. Maia and J. J. G. Moura, Detection of Nitric Oxide by Electron Paramagnetic
Resonance Spectroscopy: Spin-trapping with Iron-Dithiocarbamates, Methods in
Molecular Biology, vol. 1424, pp. 81102, 2016.
[124] B. S. Berland, K. L. Foster, M. A. Tolbert, and S. M. George, UV absorption Spectra
of H2O/HNO3 lms, Geophysical Research Letters, vol. 23, no. 20, pp. 27572760,
1996.
[125] M. das Gracas Gomes, S. da S.S. Borges, L. G. F. Lopes, and D. W. Franco, UV-
visible Spectrum of Nitrous Acid in Solution: pKa Determination and Analytical
Applications, Analytica Chimica Acta, vol. 282, no. 1, pp. 8185, 1993.
[126] T.
C.
O'Haver,
Matlab/Octave
Peak
Fitters.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//terpconnect.umd.edu/~toh/spectrum/InteractivePeakFitter.htm [Accessed: 2018-
11-08]
[127] K. H. Clement, P. Fangel, A. D. Jensen, and K. Thomsen, Kemiske Enhedsopera-
tioner, 5th ed.
Polyteknisk Forlag, 2009.
[128] R. E. Washburn, The Measurement of Change in Volume on Solution, Journal of
Chemical Education, vol. 6, no. 6, p. 1144, 1929.
==PAGE:104==
88
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[129] P. Atkins and J. de Paula, Atkins' Physical Chemistry, 9th ed.
Oxford University
Press, 2010.
[130] Mohsen Ghafari and John D. Atkinson, Catalytic NO Oxidation in the Presence
of Moisture Using Porous Polymers and Activated Carbon, Environmental Science
and Technology, vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 51895196, 2016.
[131] B. J. Finlayson-Pitts, L. M. Wingen, A. L. Sumner, D. Syomin, and K. A. Ramazan,
The Heterogeneous Hydrolysis of NO2 in Laboratory Systems and in Outdoor
and Indoor Atmospheres: An Integrated Mechanism, Physical Chemistry Chemi-
cal Physics, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 223242, 2003.
[132] Q. Zha, L. Xue, T. Wang, Z. Xu, C. Yeung, P. K. K. Louie, and C. W. Y. Luk,
Large Conversion Rates of NO2 to HNO2 Observed in Air Masses from the South
China Sea: Evidence of Strong Production at Sea Surface? Geophysical Research
Letters, vol. 41, no. 21, pp. 77107715, 2014.
[133] R. Graham and H. S. Johnson, Photochemistry of NOx and HNOx Compounds,
Canadian Journal of Chemistry, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 14151423, 1974.
[134] D. L. Singleton, G. Paraskevopoulos, and R. S. Irwin, UV absorption cross-sections
of the monomer and dimer of formic acid, Journal of Photochemistry, vol. 37, no. 2,
pp. 209216, 1987.
[135] P. Atkins, T. Overton, J. Rourke, M. Weller, and F. Armstrong, Shriver & Atkins'
Inorganic Chemistry, 5th ed.
Oxford University Press, 2010.
[136] M. Mochida and B. J. Finlayson-Pitts, FTIR Studies of the Reaction of Gaseous
NO with HNO3 on Porous Glass: Implications for Conversion of HNO3 to Photo-
chemically Active NOx in the Atmosphere, Journal of Physical Chemistry A, vol.
104, no. 43, pp. 97059711, 2000.
[137] M. Mochida and B. J. Finlayson-Pitts, FTIR Study of N2O3 on Porous Glass at
Room Temperature, Journal of Physical Chemistry A, vol. 104, no. 34, pp. 8038
8044, 2000.
[138] J. Lemus, J. Palomar, F. Heras, M. A. Gilarranz, and J. J. Rodriguez, Developing
Criteria for the Recovery of Ionic Liquids From Aqueous Phase by Adsorption with
Activated Carbon, Separation and Purication Technology, vol. 97, pp. 1119, 2012.
[139] K. Hjuler, P. Glarborg, and K. Dam-Johansen, Mutually Promoted Thermal Oxida-
tion of Nitric Oxide and Organic Compounds, Industrial and Engineering Chemistry
Research, vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 18821888, 1995.
[140] T. S. Norton and F. L. Dryer, The Flow Reactor Oxidation of C1-C4 Alcohols and
MTBE, Symposium (International) on Combustion, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 179185,
1991.
[141] R. K. Lyon, J. A. Cole, J. C. Kramlich, and S. L. Chen, The Selective Reduction of
SO3 to SO2 and the Oxidation of NO to NO2 by Methanol, Combustion and Flame,
vol. 81, no. 1, pp. 3039, 1990.
==PAGE:105==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
89
[142] P. H. Taylor, L. Cheng, and B. Dellinger, The Inuence of Nitric Oxide on the
Oxidation of Methanol and Ethanol, Combustion and Flame, vol. 115, no. 4, pp.
561567, 1998.
[143] P. L. Rasmussen, K. H. Wassard, K. Dam-Johansen, and P. Glarborg, Methanol Ox-
idation in a Flow Reactor: Implications for the Branching Ratio of the CH3OH+OH
Reaction, International Journal of Chemical Kinetics, vol. 40, no. 7, pp. 423441,
2008.
[144] C. X. Xiao, N. Yan, M. Zou, S. C. Hou, Y. Kou, W. Liu, and S. Zhang, NO2-
Catalyzed Deep Oxidation of Methanol: Experimental and Theoretical Studies,
Journal of Molecular Catalysis A: Chemical, vol. 252, no. 1-2, pp. 202211, 2006.
[145] V. M. Zamansky, L. Ho, P. M. Maly, and W. R. Seeker, Oxidation of NO to NO2
by Hydrogen Peroxide and its Mixtures with Methanol in Natural Gas and Coal
Combustion Gases, Combustion Science and Technology, vol. 120, pp. 255272, 1996.
[146] Thermax Babcock & Wilcox Energy Solutions, Low NOx Combustion Sys-
tems, Tech. Rep., 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://www.tbwes.com/products/
low-nox-combustion-systems/
[147] Icopal, Tabeller og diagrammer, Icopal Håndbog, no. 9, p. 14, 2012.
==PAGE:106==
90
BIBLIOGRAPHY
==PAGE:107==
Appendix A
Supplementary Experimental Data
A.1
NO Conversion With Covered Tubes
Figure A.1: NO conversion at dierent gas ows with and without foil to cover the tubes
for light. Gas containing 3000 ppm NO, balance air. There is no signicant
dierence in the background oxidation when the tubes is covered.
==PAGE:108==
92
Supplementary Experimental Data
Figure A.2: NO conversion with calcinated Silica 100 impregnated with 30 wt.% HNO3
(68%).
Gas composition: 2000ppm NO, 16.8% O2, balance N2.
Flow:
200 mL min=1. After 3 hours no HNO3 was left on the particles, and no
improved NO conversion was observed.
==PAGE:109==
Appendix B
Technical Schematics, Drawings
and Pictures
Figure B.1: Schematic drawing of DRB-XCL R⃝Low-NOx pulverized coal burner from
B&W [146].
==PAGE:110==
94
Technical Schematics, Drawings and Pictures
Figure B.2: Schematic drawing of XCL-S R⃝Low-NOx oil and gas burner from B&W
[146].
(a)
(b)
Figure B.3: (a) Picture of reactor with SILP material
(b) Picture of the experimental setup.
==PAGE:111==
95
Figure B.4: Condensate in bubble ask placed in ice bath after reactor.
Figure B.5: Schematic overview of the experimental setup after introducing a cold trap
consisting of a bubble ask placed in an ice bath between the reactor and
UV-vis analyzer.
==PAGE:112==
96
Technical Schematics, Drawings and Pictures
(a)
(b)
Figure B.6: (a) Illustration of the counting procedure for displacements of the atoms in
a nonlinear molecule. From [135].
(b) The stretches and bends of a linear molecule such as CO2. From [135].
Figure B.7: Volume used to collect gas for IR experiment.
==PAGE:113==
97
Figure B.8: IR reference spectrum of methanol.
==PAGE:114==
98
Technical Schematics, Drawings and Pictures
==PAGE:115==
Appendix C
Matlab Scripts
C.1
main_peakt.m Script for Spectral Deconvolution
1
c l e a r
a l l
2
c l c
3 %%
4 % Automating
File
Import
5 % Select
f o l d e r
containing
data
i n t e r a c t i v e l y
6
Location = 'C:\ Users \ kjartan \Dropbox ( Personal ) \ Public \10.
semester \Master
t h e s i s \UV vis
data \ . . . ' ;
7 % I d e n t i f y
where to
search
f or
f i l e s
8 % Store
the name of
a l l
. xls
f i l e s
as a vector D
9 D = dir ( [ Location ,
' \∗. xlsx ' ] ) ;
10 % Extract
the
f i l e
names
11
filenames = {D( : ) . name } . ' ;
12
13 % Creating a loop
to
c a l c u l a t e
conversion
f or
each
f i l e ,
and save
in a
14 % vector
to
c a l c u l a t e
average
conversion
15
data = c e l l ( length (D) ,1) ;
16
f o r
i i = length (D) : −1:1
17
fullname = [ Location
f i l e s e p D( i i ) . name ] ;
18
[~ ,
~ , raw ] = xlsread ( fullname )
19
raw = raw ( : , 1 : 2 ) ;
20
s i g n a l = reshape ( [ raw { : } ] , s i z e ( raw ) ) ; % Create output
variable
21
22 %Save
r e s u l t s
in
matrix
23
res = pe akfit ( signal , 0 , 0 , 4 , [ 1
1 1
1 ] , [ 1
1 1 1 ] , 1 0 , [ 2 0 5 . 5
2.12
215.7
2.2
226.8
2.0
211.9
50] ,0) ; %Adjust input
v a r i a b l e s
f or
deconvolution
24
25 %Define
area
of NO peak based on the matrix
' res '
26
area226 = res (4 ,5) ;
%May change due to
s h i f t i n g
in
broad NO2/
HNO3 peak?
27
28 %Calculate
conversion
f o r
each peak
29 C_NO = 2000; %Define
i n l e t
concentration
of NO in ppm
==PAGE:116==
100
Matlab Scripts
30
31 %Define
standard
curve and c a l c u l a t e
conversion
f or
each peak (
saves
as
32 %vector )
33 C_NO226 = −5.96303+5667.49144∗area226 ^1+105.71967∗area226
^2+16569.29272∗area226 ^3; %1 pct NO std
curve
obtained 26
september
2018. 3rd
order
polynomial , NOT forced
through
origo
34
conv226 ( i i ) = ((C_NO −C_NO226) /C_NO) ∗100
35
36
end
37
38 %Calculate
average
conversion and standard
deviation
39
AverageConversion226nm = mean( conv226 )
40
StdDev226nm = std ( conv226 )
==PAGE:117==
C.2 humidity.m Script for Calculating Humidity in Gas Stream
101
C.2
humidity.m Script for Calculating Humidity in Gas Stream
1
function
[ ] = humidity ( psi ,
flow , ppm,
Vol )
2
3 C_NO = 2000; %Concentration NO [ppm]
in
gas
( used to
c a l c u l a t e
mol NO per minute )
4
5 % Constants used
f o r
concentration and density :
6
rho_NO = 1.249; %Density
of NO gas
[ g/L]
7 rho_MeOH = 0.792; %Density
of MeOH [ g/mL]
8 M_NO = 30.01; %Molar mass of NO [ g/mol ]
9 M_MeOH = 32.04; %Molar mass of MeOH [ g/mol ]
10
11 %Calculating
humidity
12
X24 = 21.75; %Water content
fo r
vapour
saturation
at 24
Celsius
[
g/m^3]
13
X30 = 30.33; %Water content
fo r
vapour
saturation
at 30
Celsius
[
g/m^3]
14
v = psi ∗X24∗( flow ∗10^(−6) ∗60) /0.997; %Water flow
to
reach
desired
humidity based on the
temperature
[mL/hour ]
15
16
NO_flow = (( flow /100) ∗(C_NO∗10^(−7) ) ∗rho_NO) /M_NO; %Flow of NO [
mol/min ]
17
18
MeOH_flow = (NO_flow/C_NO) ∗ppm∗60; %Mol MeOH in
gas stream to
reach
desired ppm concentration
[ mol/hour ]
19
MeOH_fl = MeOH_flow∗M_MeOH/rho_MeOH %mL MeOH in
gas stream
[mL/
hour ]
20
21
FlowTot = v+MeOH_fl ; %Flow of MeOH s o l l u t i o n
( under assumption
of
no change
in volume
f or
solution )
[mL/hour ]
22
23 %Calculate amount of MeOH to add to
' Vol '
of
water to
obtain
desired
24 %concentration
25 C_MeOH = (MeOH_flow/FlowTot ) ∗1000; %MeOH concentration
[ mol/L]
26 n_MeOH = (C_MeOH/1000) ∗Vol ; %mol MeOH per 10mL
27 m_MeOH = n_MeOH∗M_MeOH; %Mass MeOH in 10mL [ g ]
28 V_MeOH = m_MeOH/rho_MeOH; %Volume MeOH in 10mL [mL]
29
30
FlowTot = FlowTot
31 C_MeOH = C_MeOH
32 V_MeOH = V_MeOH
33 m_MeOH = m_MeOH
34
end
==PAGE:118==
102
Matlab Scripts
==PAGE:119==
Appendix D
Additional Tables
D.1
Steam Pressure Table for Saturated Water Vapor
Table D.1: Steam pressure table for saturated water vapora.
Adapted from [147].
Temperature [◦C]
Water content

g m−3
Partial pressure [Pa]
-5
3.246
401.7
0
4.843
610.5
5
6.795
872.3
10
9.396
1228
15
12.82
1705
18
15.36
2063
19
16.29
2197
20
17.28
2338
21
18.32
2487
22
19.41
2643
23
20.55
2809
24
21.75
2983
25
23.02
3167
30
30.33
4243
40
51.04
7376
50
82.70
12334
60
129.50
19916
70
196.70
31157
80
290.70
47343
a Within the temperature range 0 to 80 ◦C the partial pressure of water
at saturation can be found as ps = exp
 23.5771 −
  4042.9
T
+ 235.57

,
where ps is the vapor pressure of water at saturation in Pascal and T
is the temperature in Celsius [147].
==PAGE:120==
104
Additional Tables
D.2
Absorption Cross Sections for Selected Compounds
Table D.2: Absorption cross sections, σ, for NO2, HNO3 and
CH2O2.
Wavelength [nm]
NO2
a 
cm2
HNO3
a 
cm2
CH2O2
b 
cm2
195
3.64 × 10=19
9.10 × 10=18
2.74 × 10=19
200
3.19 × 10=19
5.50 × 10=18
3.46 × 10=19
205
4.27 × 10=19
2.55 × 10=18
3.74 × 10=19
210
4.52 × 10=19
9.70 × 10=19
3.55 × 10=19
215
4.65 × 10=19
3.28 × 10=19
2.94 × 10=19
220
4.38 × 10=19
1.44 × 10=19
2.18 × 10=19
225
3.71 × 10=19
8.51 × 10=20
1.41 × 10=19
230
2.52 × 10=19
5.63 × 10=20
0.78 × 10=19
...
...
...
...
380
6.52 × 10=19
-
-
385
6.45 × 10=19
-
-
390
6.51 × 10=19
-
-
395
6.08 × 10=19
-
-
400
6.68 × 10=19
-
-
405
6.52 × 10=19
-
-
410
6.59 × 10=19
-
-
a Adapted from Graham et al. [133].
b Adapted from Singleton et al. [134]. Values are for the dimer of formic
acid.
==PAGE:121==
