==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering (Mathematical Modelling and Computation)
Cryptanalysis of block ciphers
A statistical analysis of the Yoyo attack
on reduced 5-round AES
Tommaso Ricci (s155663)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
c
To Elin and Tuva,
the light of my life.
==PAGE:4==
d
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The paper “Yoyo Tricks with AES” from ASIACRYPT 2017 [Son17] presents
a new distinguishing attack that exploits differential properties that trail
back and forward through reduced round versions of AES. A 5-round AES
distinguisher with computational cost of 226.8 encryptions or decryptions is
described.
The present work focuses on this 5-round attack doing a statistical evaluation
of the differential properties. The statistics led us to modify said attack, and
the new version here presented that successfully distinguishes 5-round AES
with probability 0.53 and the calculation of at most 225.61 computations of
equivalent encryptions/ decryptions on average, is studied and analysed. Our
main contribution lies in the feasibility of employment of the algorithm in a
random oracle set up, with a low false positive chance of 2−17.3 and similar
cost as the original paper, adding to the existing attack also the versatility of
being usable on real life situations.
Experimental validation has been conducted and successfully confirms the
predicted results.
==PAGE:6==
ii
==PAGE:7==
Summary
This M.Sc. thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment
of the requirements for acquiring a Master degree in Mathematical Modelling
and Computation. In this final project the author was supervised by Professor
Andrey Bogdano of the DTU Compute department.
This work concerns security of the so-called block ciphers, and it is organised
as follows.
Chapter 1 is general introduction to the field of cryptology. Basic terms
and concepts are introduced, and motivation for this work is provided. Block
ciphers and Data Encryption Standard (DES) are introduced to the reader
with a short description.
Chapter 2 introduces the reader to the Advanced Encryption Standard
(AES) that replaced DES as the most employed cipher worldwide. A brief
explanation of its functioning and a view over its internal operations follows,
with an eye on how the state matrix is transformed step by step. A state of
the art overview about the attacks to AES existing at present day concludes
the chapter.
Chapter 3 replicates the main passages of the original work of Sondre
Rønjom, Navid Ghaedi Bardeh, Tor Helleseth “Yoyo Tricks with AES” [Son17]
that first treated the differential trailing properties supporting the yoyo attacks
to reduced round versions of AES. Here AES is described with the superbox
representation, then the main tool used in the attack –the yoyo swap, for
creating yoyo pairs– is defined, the main yoyo properties are shown and
explained, and finally the attacks in [Son17] are.
Chapter 4 states the new attack of our contribution, the quality of its
results and its costs, and states the improvements achieved compared to the
already existing yoyo attacks.
Chapter 5 is a probabilistic analysis at the base of the construction of
our attack. Probabilities of different events are estimated and studied, and
the structural behaviour of yoyo pairs through several iterations of encryption
is calculated and theoretically predicted. In conclusion theoretical support for
the attack proposed in the previous before is presented.
Chapter 6 deals with the practical C implementation of the attack, and
reports a statistical evidence of the goodness of the expected results.
==PAGE:8==
iv
Summary
Chapter 7 summarises the results of the present work.
Kongens Lyngby, November 23, 2018
Tommaso Ricci (s155663)
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I came in Denmark in July 2015 without a precise picture of what I would
do, who I would meet, and who I will become. Despite not having a plan,
these three years turned out to be wonderful. In my journey I met the most
amazing people that helped me going through the difficulties and the stress,
and were with me in the moments of joy.
First of all I want to thank Tattini, Nacho, Eduard, Borja, Gherardo,
Boris, Mette, Alex, Moritz, Elias, Erik, Giulia that I shared my life with in
this cold place.
Thank you to Maria, Claudia, Frederik, Davide and all the rest fellow DTU
students, that shared the pain and the long study nights in library drinking
coffee with me.
I am grateful I had wonderful coworker everywhere I worked: thank you
to Erik, and the BAR7 crew. Thanks to Lea and Philip and all the amazing
Bevi and Mangia people.
Many thanks also to all my friends that are distant away, but never stopped
supporting and loving me. Thank you to Lapo, Steli, Beatrice, Otta, Sara,
Cate, ChiaraeFrancesco, AndreSaba, Costi, Bernardo, Nuno, Maristella, Sara,
Virgy, Guido, Lorenzo, Filippo, Piotr, Simonaldi, Pepo, Pezza, Pietrorosso,
Otta, Maiky, Bobi, and everybody else.
I want to express my appreciation to Andrea Vincenzo, Alessadndro, Lorenzo
Be., Lorenzo Bu., Fulvio who more than once gave me necessary advice to help
solve my limitless issue during my studies. The biggest thank you to Leo, that
is always my life saver.
Thank you Andrey and thank you Elmar for introducing me to the beautiful
world of Cryptology and for the several opportunities you gave me in these
years. I will be always grateful.
Grazie to all my family: to Francesco, Sara, Gigi, and Pancio. A hearthfull
thank to Ginevra and Orazio, still a big part of my life.
Grazie Babbo e Mamma per tutto quello che avete sempre fatto per me.
Per avermi supportato nelle mie scelte e per non farmi mancare mai nulla. Vi
voglio tanto bene.
==PAGE:10==
vi
Acknowledgements
A special, special thanks go to my piccole Elin and Tuva that bore me
beyond human possibility. I would be lost without you.
You are my joy. Vi amo tanto.
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Summary
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Advanced Encryption Standard
5
2.1
History
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
AES algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Encryption and decryption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Attacks on AES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Yoyo game
15
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Yoyo for SPN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Yoyo game for AES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Attacks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Implementation of the distinguisher
29
4.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
The algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Statistical analysis
33
5.1
Presenting the results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3
Overview and comparisons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Experimental validation
45
6.1
Extension to 5AES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7
Conclusions and discussion
53
==PAGE:12==
viii
Contents
A Appendix A
55
Bibliography
57
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER1
Introduction
Cryptology , i.e., the science on ciphers, has applied since the very
beginning some mathematical methods, mainly the elements of
probability theory and statistics. Mechanical and electromechanical
ciphering devices, introduced to practice in the twenties of our
century, broadened considerably the field of applications of mathematics
in cryptology.
M. Rejewski1, 1977
Cryptology (from the Greek the study of what is hidden) is ultimately the
study of pursuing secure communications between parties or to find weaknesses
in them. While in past times the need for encrypted messages was limited
to very specific times and contexts, for example in military and war, or
in diplomatic communications [Sin99], with modern era technology many
aspects of our daily life are touched by security related issues. Cryptographers
and cryptoanalysts have literally changed the course of history with their
discoveries, often receiving little acknowledgement for their effortful contributions.
In current time the applications are vast.
Private mobile communication
have always worked over encrypted transmissions. File security on personal
devices, every protected Wi-Fi connection, and most importantly almost
every exchange of data on the internet happens in an encrypted way: video
streaming, emails, bank security, credit cards tansactions, login information
to services. Cipher protocols are involved in a different way also in electronic
ID identification, in public transportation cards. Cryptology has implications
and permeates so many aspects of our daily lives, to keep us safe and protected,
to an extent that we are not even aware of most of the time if it wasn’t for
the few topics that have the attention of the media around the globe being in
the spotlight of the news for months the news (Bitcoins), or for some echo to
the science of cryptology that appear on movies.
Recent inventions such as the blockchain algorithm, at the base of the most
popular cryptocurrencies, are cryptology related subjects that have an high
promisingly potential to change how things are done nowadays.
1the Polish cryptographer that broke Enigma security before WW2
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
The last two centuries have seen a raise of the techniques involved in
securing the communications, and a real science is born around it.
The
study of ciphers at modern times makes use of sophisticated mathematical
tools, incredibly vast computational power and energy consumption, and
cryptographic applications involve numbers and calculations that are among
the biggest in size in real world situations, together with simulation problems.
A cipher is a function that takes a text as input, the plaintext, and
transform it into a different text, the ciphertext, following a deterministic
set of rules.
The transformation performed by a cipher is not always the same.
A
secret key, a numerical string, is involved in the encryption and decryption
operations. The same cipher with different keys will generate different ciphertexts.
Figure 1.1: How conceptually encryption works: a message, the plaintext,
is transformed by an encryption function into an encrypted
message, the ciphertext. The function needs to be provided with
a key, that must be kept secret or the security of the encryption
would be compromised.
Cryptology is divided in two main branches: the science of creating secure
ciphers (cryptography), and the the attempt to break them (cryptanalysis)
Cryptanalysts make use of several different approaches to find holes and
patterns in ciphers, to exploit them and break the security of a cryptosystem.
A first step on threatening a cipher is a distinguishing attack: a good cipher
should behave on data as a (pseudo)random permutation on the data space.
If it does not, as it shows some apparent pattern or rule, its safety might be
compromised.
A distinguisher is an algorithm that finds some of these patterns, and can
recognise a non random behaviour of the cryptosystem. If it fails to detect
such perks, and the encrypted data look random, the cipher is secure.
A
cipher is secure if an attacker is not recognising the difference between the
cipher and a random permutation.
In practise a distinguishing attack works with the adversary that operates
the distinguisher, and an oracle, whose function is to receive a text to be
encrypted or decrypted, and to give the answer to the adversary. The oracle
can be set to follow a specific cipher with a fixed key for all the encryptions,
or it can generate random data (random oracle).
==PAGE:15==
1 Introduction
3
Figure 1.2: Insecure encryption of an image as a result of Electronic
Codebook (ECB) mode encoding. After the encryption of large
amount of data, a pattern is clearly visible with naked eye
(Source Wikipedia)..
The distinguisher keep sending requests of enc/decryption to the oracle, receiving
back answers until it reaches its goal: detecting the mode the oracle is operating,
random or cipher.
To evaluate the quality of a distinguishing attack in literature is defined
the advantage of a distinguisher: the rate of successfully recognising the oracle
usage of a cipher minus the rate of a false positive –i.e. mistakenly recognising
it, even if actually in presence of a random oracle.
Advantage = P(success|non-random oracle) −P(success|random oracle)
In this work we will focus on the family of symmetric key ciphers (opposed
to public key ones), the oldest and most used in history. Their main characteristic
of such family is the need of a identical shared secret piece of information – the
key– that two or more parties have to know for allowing the communications,
and have to keep secret for maintaining the security of them. Despite being
usually very efficient and fast in computational time, the need for a shared
key that the parties have to be in possession of is the main drawback of this
kind of ciphers, because it requires to be exchanged beforehand in a secure
way, protected from the sight and knowledge of anyone else.
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
Block ciphers are symmetric key algorithms that have been vastly used
in commercial cryptology since their invention, in the last century.
Block
cipher protocols work with chunks of bits of a fixed size (the blocks) that are
processed through the composition and iteration of several layers, or rounds,
of relatively simple operations, such as affine functions and substitutions, in
order to achieve a suitable level of security.
Block ciphers are often used in connection with other techniques to ensures
the highest standards of secrecy and security, in a fast way compared with
other procedures.
For three decades the most popular block cipher in use has been the Data
Encryption System (DES). Developed at IBM in the 1970s, the algorithm was
submitted to the National Bureau of Standards (NBS) of the United States,
that decided in 1976 to adopt it as the standard for secure encryptions from
that moment.
DES uses a 64 bits key size and performs over 64 bits state blocks.
The
relatively small key size has been its most critical problem in terms of security,
allowing in the years, with the advent of computers with bigger and bigger
computational power, the existence of serious threats.
For this reason in
1995 a new version of DES (the triple DES), with bigger key size have been
proposed, but failed to address other security issue and soon arrived the need
for a completely different scheme of encryption, to be secure against present
and hopefully future attacks for many years. For this reason the Advanced
Encryption Standard (AES) was released in 2001.
Our work focuses on a distinguishing attack of a reduced version of AES,
described for the first time in [Son17]. Our contribution consists in an extension
of the authors work, and the proposal of a distinguisher of a 5-round reduced
AES that performs with 0.53 rate of success, false positive occurrence of 2−17.3
and computational cost of 225.61 on average.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER2
Advanced
Encryption
Standard
2.1
History
Around the end of the last century, security reasons pushed for the search
of a worthy successor of DES, that until then had covered a predominant
role in studies and applications.
DES has a relatively small key size and
it became not secure from attacks like brute-force that could pose a real
threat to the security of the cipher. The U.S. National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) listed a number of requirements for replacing the old
algorithm and for the definition of the new standard, the Advanced Encryption
Standard (AES), that should be faster and more secure than its predecessor.
Demands in design and usability [Lar11] were set: the new cipher should fulfil
to be a safe single block cipher (at least as safe as the triple-DES), open and
freely usable, flexible in design, and it should support 128, 192 and 256 bits
key sizes.
NIST in 1997 opened a public contest for the choice of the algorithm, and
21 proposals, very divergent in concepts, design, security, performance, were
submitted from cryptographers all around the world. Months of testing and
discussion followed, during which designers and analysts deeply studied and
tested the proposals, trying to find issues and vulnerabilities.
In October of 2000 NIST announced the winner. The algorithm chosen to
be the AES is Rijndael, developed by the Belgian cryptographers Vincent
Rijmen and Joan Daemen [NIS00].
In the following sections it will be presented and described the AES algorithm
in its final form.
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Advanced Encryption Standard
2.2
AES algorithm
AES is structured as a substitution-permutation network (SPN). Such
network consists in the concatenation of several layers of permutation and
substitution operations. In some of these layers the encryption key is included,
usually in the form of a bit-wise XOR addition of the state block with a
sub-key derived form the full key following specific rules.
Each plaintext
block is processed through every layer in sequence, and the final result is the
ciphertext block. Decryption is done by reversing the order of the layers and
inverting the operations in each one of them.
Each layer taken singularly does not constitute a particular challenge for
an attacker, however alternating the operations along several rounds can make
very difficult managing to break a cipher. Diffusion and confusion as theorized
by C. Shannon [Sha45] –two main aspects of the resistance to attacks of a
cipher– are guaranteed by this alternance. Confusion means that the value of
every bit in a ciphertext depends on many bits of the key, thus the dependency
is not obviously comprehensible. Diffusion means that changing the value of
a single bit in the plaintext, generates a change in value in the ciphertext for
at least half of its bits.
AES is a family of SPN block ciphers working with 128 bits state blocks
usually arranged in 4x4 matrices with each column drawn from F4
q , q = 28,
so to be practically and visually easier to work with.
The ciphers are composed of a certain amount of transformation rounds, the
amount of which depends on the key size in use. Each round consists in four
different concatenated operations applied to the state matrix:
- ShiftRows (SR) – shifting cyclically each row of the matrix;
- SubBytes (SB)– a nonlinear substitution where each byte is replaced
by a different one (according to a substitution table called S-box);
- MixColumns (MC) – a linear operation performed on the columns of
the matrix;
- AddRoundKey (AK) – each byte is mixed with specific values derived
from the secret key.
All the single operations of AES are invertible, fact that permits the
decryption of a message just reverting the order. Hereby, it follows a precise
description of them.
2.2.1
ShiftRows
This linear layer operates by cycling every row to the left of a different
amount of steps. The first row stays the same (0 steps), the second row shifts
==PAGE:19==
2.2 AES algorithm
7
Figure 2.1: Encryption scheme of SP network with n rounds.
to the left of one position, the third of two positions, and the fourth of three
positions. ShiftRows is a source of diffusion of the algorithm.
The inverse operation InvShiftRows (SR−1) works in the same manner, but
cycling towards right.
2.2.2
SubBytes
Each byte of the state is transformed into another byte following the AES
S-box. The S-box is a 8bit substitution table such that for every byte value
in input, it gives a different byte value in output. From a general perspective,
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Advanced Encryption Standard
Figure 2.2: ShiftRows operation. Each row cycles to the left an amount of
positions equal to the row position minus 1.
SubBytes is a fixed non linear permutation on the whole byte space Fq. It is
the main confusion source.
For the inverse InvSubBytes (SB−1) the substitution table simply reverses
the order of input and output values.
2.2.3
MixColumns
MixColumns operates indipendently on each column, multiplying a fixed
matrix M with size 4x4 of entries over Fq, by each column, following the usual
matrix by vector multiplication. One must keep in mind that the operations
between bytes (sum and multiplication) work differently from the real numbers
ones. MixColumns, together with ShiftRows, adds diffusion.
The inverse InvMixColumns (MC−1) has the same structure given by the
matrix by column multiplication, with M −1 instead of M.
2.2.4
AddRoundKey
Every round of the encryption uses a sub key, a 128 bits vector (the size
of the block). This sub key is derived from the secret key following a key
schedule, and it is XORed to the state block at the end of the round. The
key schedule function is different depending on the key length of AES in use.
This layer is the only one that depends on the secret key, and it cannot be
computed in a deterministic way, without knowledge of the key.
The XOR operation is an involution i.e. it is its own inverse, since XORing
two times the same value cancels out. Or in other words the bitwise sum and
the bitwise difference are the same operation since they are performed in F2.
Thus InvAddRoundKey (AK−1) is exactly the same as AK.
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Encryption and decryption
9
Figure 2.3: MixColumns operation. The columns are multiplied on the left
by the matrix M.
2.3
Encryption and decryption
The main practical difference in the three versions of AES is the number
of consecutive rounds to be performed:
- key size = 128 −→10 rounds
- key size = 192 −→12 rounds
- key size = 256 −→14 rounds
The encryption phase, for reasons of symmetry, begins with an extra
AK operation (called pre-whitening) before the first round, and the last
round lacks the MixColumn step.
As shown later, this shrewdness allows
the decryption procedure to have the same exact algebraic shape as the
encryption.
Given a plaintext state s ∈F16
q
(q = 28), the encryption of s is fully
described by:
ENC(s) = AK ◦SB ◦SR ◦(AK ◦MC ◦SB ◦SR)m ◦AK(s)
where m = 9, 11, 13 in AES-128, AES-192, AES-256, respectively.
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Advanced Encryption Standard
Figure 2.4: AddRoundKey operation. The 16 bytes of the sub key –derived
from the key schedule– are XORed to the state matrix.
Figure 2.5: The AES-128 encryption scheme. 10 rounds are performed on
the state matrix. Before the first round an extra whitening AK
is done, and the 10th round lacks MC. Every round information
about the secret key is provided to the process through the key
schedule .
The decryption just consists of inverting the order of the operations carried
out on the encryption phase:
DEC(s) = AK−1◦(SR−1◦SB−1◦MC−1◦AK−1)m◦SR−1◦SB−1◦AK−1(s)
Notice that since SR is performed on the structure on the state matrix, while
SB only changes the value of each single byte, they clearly commute. AK is
an involution, thus AK−1 = AK. Moreover, for linearity of MC−1:
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Attacks on AES
11
AK ◦MC−1(s) = MC−1(s) ⊕k
(2.3.1)
= MC−1(s ⊕MC−1(k))
(2.3.2)
where k is the specific sub key of that round.
Thus if we see g
AK as the
operation of XORing the new subkey ˜k defined by MC−1(k), it is possible to
represent the composition of the two operations as MC−1◦AK(s), practically
reversing the order of the two.
It follows that the decryption formula can be rearranged and rewritten as
DEC(s) = g
AK ◦SB−1 ◦SR−1 ◦(g
AK ◦MC−1 ◦SB−1 ◦SR−1)m ◦g
AK(s)
Hence the decryption algorithm has exactly the same structure of the
encryption, and this symmetry property means versatility of the algorithm,
elegance, and a simplification in the implementation phase.
2.4
Attacks on AES
At present time, 18 years after its release, the security of the AES is still
not threatened, and it seems unlikely things will change soon [Lar11]. Despite
AES-192 and AES-256 have shown weaknesses that lower significantly the
time of theoretical attacks [Ale94] compared to an exhaustive research on the
whole key space –still being too high for practical purposes–, so far secret-key
attacks on full AES-128 manage to lower the complexity just few degrees from
a brute force.
Probably at current time the best attack on AES-128 is still the Biclique
attack by Bogdanov, Khovratovich, Rechberger (2011) which complexity is
reported in table 2.1. These complexities are impractical, meaning that at
the current time the theoretical cost is too high to be performed successfully
on a real world attack.
Thanks to its design, AES is theoretically protected against some of the
most fruitful cryptoanalytic techniques against block cipher such as differential
and linear attacks [Lar11]. Nevertheless, several instances of successful attacks
of reduced versions of the algorithm, such as AES truncated after a certain
number of rounds, have been discovered in the recent past, and can be
implemented with practical complexities.
Data
Time
Memory
(Reference)
288
2126.18
28
([And11])
Table 2.1: Complexity of Biclique secret-key recovery attack on AES-128.
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Advanced Encryption Standard
Further on, a brief introduction to the main attacks on reduced round versions
of AES is given. This work focuses mainly on a result on 5-round AES, so in
table 2.2 and 2.3 the best known secret-key attacks for this version are listed.
In the next sections a practical secret key distinguisher attack to AES
reduced down to 5 rounds will be presented.
Attack
Data
Time
Memory
(Reference)
Meet in the middle
8 CP
264
256
[Der13]
Integral
232 CP
225.4
25
[Gra18]
Partial Sum
28 CP
238
small
[Tun12]
Impossible Differential
231.5 CP
233 + 238
238
[Eli01]
Mixture Differential
233.6 CP
233.3
234
[Gra18]
Boomerang
239 ACC
239
233
[Bir05]
Yoyo Game
211.3 ACC
231
small
[Son17]
Table 2.2: Current cryptanalysis complexity of 5-round reduced AES in
a secret-key recovery attack.
Data complexity is measured as
Chosen Plaintexts (CP), Chosen Ciphertexts (CC), or Adaptive
Chosen Ciphertexts (ACC). Data complexity is reported in total
encryptions/decryptions or equivalent operations. Memory cost
represents the number of plaintexts/ciphertexts stored.
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Attacks on AES
13
Attack
Data
Time
Memory
(Reference)
Integral
2128 CC
2128
small
[Gra18]
Impossible Differential
298.2 CP
2107
small
[Eli01]
Yoyo Game
211.3 ACC
231
small
[Son17]
Table 2.3: Current cryptanalysis complexity of 5-round reduced AES in a
secret-key distinguisher attack. Data complexity is measured as
Chosen Plaintexts (CP), Chosen Ciphertexts (CC), or Adaptive
Chosen Ciphertexts (ACC). Data complexity is reported in total
encryptions/decryptions or equivalent operations. Memory cost
represents the number of plaintexts/ciphertexts stored.
==PAGE:26==
14
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER3
Yoyo game
3.1
Introduction
In this section the work of S. Rønjom, N. G. Bardeh and T. Helleseth
Yoyo Tricks With AES [Son17] will be described. On their paper the authors
explain a 5-round AES differential cryptanalysis, and two different 5-round
AES attacks, with claimed computational cost of 226.8 for the distinguisher.
The attacks exploit certain properties of the differences between states, that
propagate through several rounds of encryption.
All the main features of their work will be presented in this section. Following
the same structure of [Son17], a general case is covered at first: a broader
perspective on the Substitution Permutation Network (SPN), that is a product
block ciphers family AES belongs to.
Further on the exposition will be treating the peculiarities of AES in particular.
Finally the original attacks will be explained at the end of this section.
3.2
Yoyo for SPN
A SP-network can be written in the form
F(x) = L ◦S ◦· · · ◦L ◦S(x), x ∈Fn
q
where the symbols S identify S-box transformations and the symbols L represent
linear functions. Each element in Fq is called a word (usually q = 28, so that
the words are Bytes), and a vector of n words is also called a state.
Definition 3.2.1. Let s ∈Fn
q be a state.
The Hamming Weight of s, denoted by HW(s), is the number of nonzero words
in it.
The Zero Pattern of s is a binary vector locating the zero words of the state,
and it is defined as
ν(s) = (z1, z2, . . . zn) ∈Fn
2 ,
νi =
{
1 if si = 0
0 if si ̸= 0
(i = 1, . . . , n)
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Yoyo game
The zero pattern will mostly be used to identify the zeros of a difference
(XOR) between two states –i.e. ν(a⊕b) is 1 in correspondence of the positions
where a and b have equal words– thus it will be referred as zero difference
pattern of two states.
Definition 3.2.2. For a pair of states a, b ∈Fn
q , given a binary vector υ ∈Fn
2
of length n, a Yoyo swap of pattern υ between the two states is a function
ρυ that generates a new pair of states by exchanging words between a and b
accordingly to the values in υ, as follows:
ρυ(a, b) = a′
s.t. a′
i =
{
ai if υi = 1
bi if υi = 0
(i = 1, . . . , n)
ρυ(b, a) = b′
s.t. b′
i =
{
bi if υi = 1
ai if υi = 0
(i = 1, . . . , n)
The new pair (a′, b′) is called a yoyo pair.
Notice that each word in the pair (a, b) after the swap ends up either in
a′ or in b′. Thus all the words in the first pair, as a set, are the same as the
words in the swapped pair. Therefore a ⊕b = a′ ⊕b′.
With different choices of υ, 2n different yoyo swaps can be created, but the
actual amount of different unordered yoyo pairs {a′, b′} is (at most) 2n−1.
Hereby a list of remarkable properties is presented. As before, S and L
stand for substitution and linear layers, while (a′, b′) = ρυ(a, b). For more
detailed explanation and proofs see [Son17].
Lemma 3.2.3. [Important properties]
- ν(a ⊕b) = ν(S(a) ⊕S(b))
- S(a) ⊕S(b) = S(a′) ⊕S(b′)
- L ◦S (a) ⊕L ◦S (b) = L ◦S (a′) ⊕L ◦S (b′)
- ν(S ◦L(a) ⊕S ◦L(b)) = ν(S ◦L(a′) ⊕S ◦L(b′))
Finally, the following statement holds.
Theorem 3.2.4. Let ˆG2 = S ◦L ◦S be the consecutive application of two
substitutions and one linear layer. Then
ν( ˆG2(a) ⊕ˆG2(b)) = ν( ˆG2(a′) ⊕ˆG2(b′))
The last result can be used as a distinguisher for 2 SP-rounds G2 = L ◦
S ◦L ◦S. To simplify the exposition the key additions are left out, since only
differences between states are considered, and also the last L layer is taken
out of the explanation, since it does not constitute any practical challenge.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Yoyo for SPN
17
One must just remember to apply a final L operation on top of the given
analysis when dealing with actual numbers.
The result, that holds for ˆG2 = S ◦L ◦S, can be extended to cover the full 2
SP-rounds
G2 = L ◦ˆG2
Theorem 3.2.5. [Yoyo game for 2 SP-rounds]
Given p1, p2 ∈Fn
q plaintext pairs, c1 = ˆG2(p1) and c2 = ˆG2(p2) their images
through 2 SP-rounds. Let (c′
1, c′
2) be the yoyo pair generated from (c1, c2) with
ρυ for any υ ∈Fn
2 , and p′
1 = ˆG−1
2 (c′
1), p′
2 = ˆG−1
2 (c′
2) the retroimages through
ˆG2. Then
ν(p′
1 ⊕p′
2) = ν(p1 ⊕p2)
In other words, one can select an initial pair of plaintexts with a chosen
zero difference pattern; if the two ciphertexts resulting from the encryption
of this pair are yoyo swapped (with any swapping pattern υ), and later
decrypted back with the inverse operation, theorem 3.2.5 affirms that this
newly generated pair of decrypted plaintexts shares the same zero difference
pattern of the starting pair of plaintexts.
Figure 3.1: Yoyo game for 2 SP-rounds.
This constitutes itself a secret key distinguisher for 2 SP-rounds that
performs with probability 1.
It requires a random pair of plaintexts and
a single pair of adaptively chosen ciphertexts.
Notice that, thanks to the symmetry of the S ◦L ◦S scheme, the same
result holds on the side of the encrypted texts, i.e. if the starting pair is made
by ciphertexts.
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Yoyo game
3.3
Yoyo game for AES
In this section the differential property that holds deterministically for
SPN will be extended to cover an AES version made of four round functions
and later used to build a distinguisher attack that exploits five rounds of AES
with practical computational cost. In order to display how the yoyo swaps
introduced for SPNs can be used to achieve such task, first some further
consideration about the AES round function is needed.
3.3.1
Superbox representation
The 128 bits AES state block can be viewed as an element in F4
m (m =
q4 = 232), composed of 4 words – the four columns of the state matrix– of 4
bytes each. Two generic full rounds of AES can be described by
(AK ◦MC ◦SB ◦SR) ◦(AK ◦MC ◦SB ◦SR)
Since the yoyo attack will consider only differences of states, and AK is
invariant under differences (XORing the same sub key two times cancels out),
then as long as differences are the object of study it is possible to clean
the representation omitting for the moment all the AKs and leaving only
the meaningful operations for a clearer view of the situation. Furthermore,
since SB and SR clearly commute (SB is performed on the values of each
bytes, while SR just changes their arrangement) we can swap the two. By
rearranging the remaining operations it is possible to end up with a description
that looks like this:
MC ◦SR ◦(SB ◦MC ◦SB) ◦SR
Due to the presence of SubBytes, the transformation SB ◦MC ◦SB is
non linear, and it can actually be performed by processing the 4 words of
the state through 4 different parallel super-boxes independently from each
other. In terms of the SPN notation, these three operations all together form
a single S substitution layer. The initial SR does not constitute a practical
issue, since it is just a starting key-independent deterministic operation, that
can be practically performed on the data performed at the beginning of the
encryption.
Combining a bigger amount of AES rounds, every final MC ◦SR can be
grouped with the starting SR of the following round, and all together SR ◦
MC ◦SR (or a part of it), being a linear transformation, can be noted as L.
Hence, 2 generic rounds of AES can be viewed as a single SP round L ◦S.
4 rounds of AES are the concatenation of two consecutive 2 rounds:
MC ◦SR ◦(SB ◦MC ◦SB) ◦(SR ◦MC ◦SR) ◦(SB ◦MC ◦SB) ◦SR
=
MC ◦SR ◦S ◦L ◦S ◦SR
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Yoyo game for AES
19
For deeper exposition of the superbox representation, read [J D06].
3.3.2
5-rounds AES
The superbox representation allows to see every 4 rounds of AES as 2
SP-rounds (with small adjustments) for which the instructions of a distinguisher
that works with probability 1 are known from the section before.
The AES-128 (10 rounds) is fully described by
AES-128 =
AK ◦SB ◦SR ◦(AK ◦MC ◦SB ◦SR)9 ◦AK
thus a version of AES-128 downsized to 4 rounds is defined as
4AES =
AK ◦SB ◦SR ◦(AK ◦MC ◦SB ◦SR)3 ◦AK
For the same reasons as in the SP section, it is possible to swap the order
of some operation, and the starting and ending linear layers can be omitted as
well as AK that does not affect differences. Thus the 4AES can be rewritten
as
(
AK ◦
MC ◦
SR ◦SB)◦(AK ◦MC ◦SB ◦SR)2 ◦(AK ◦MC ◦SB ◦
SR)◦
AK
=
SB ◦(AK ◦MC ◦SB ◦SR)2 ◦AK ◦MC ◦SB
= \
4AES
With the suitable adaptations the distinguisher explained in theorem 3.2.5
directly apply to \
4AES (and can be extended to cover the full 4AES).
The four words of the state matrix belonging to F4
m, (m = 232) from now
on will be called equivalently as words or columns.
Definition 3.3.1. For any state a ∈F4
m its zero pattern is
ν(a) = (α1, α2, α3, α4) ∈F4
2
with αi = 1 if the ith word of a is 0, and 0 otherwise (i = 1, 2, 3, 4).
Definition 3.3.2. For a pair of states a = (a1, a2, a3, a4), b = (b1, b2, b3, b4),
ai, bj ∈F4
m
(i, j = 1, 2, 3, 4), for a binary vector υ ∈F4
2, a yoyo swap ρυ
between the two states generates two new states defined by
ρυ(a, b) = (d1, d2, d3, d4) where di =
{
ai if υi = 1
bi if υi = 0.
ρυ(b, a) = (e1, e2, e3, e4) where ei =
{
bi if υi = 1
ai if υi = 0.
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Yoyo game
Notice that for a given υ, for any i = 1, 2, 3, 4, the non-ordered pair {ai, bi}
is equal to {ρυ(a, b)i, ρυ(b, a)i}.
For any result given here it will always be implied the use of the same key
for the subsequent applications of any AES version.
Theorem 3.3.3. [Yoyo property]
Let p1, p2 ∈F4
m, and c1 = \
4AES(p1), c2 = \
4AES(p2) their images through
\
4AES. For any υ ∈F4
2, be c′
1 = ρυ(c1, c2), c′
2 = ρυ(c2, c1) a new pair of
states generated by a yoyo swap, and be p′
1 = \
4AES
−1(c′
1), p′
2 = \
4AES
−1(c′
2)
their decrypted values.
Then it holds
ν(p1 ⊕p2) = ν(p′
1 ⊕p′
2).
The practical meaning is that if p1 and p2 happen to have the same word
in a particular position then the same happens to p′
1 and p′
2.
Proof of the theorem is given in [Son17] S.3.2.
In other words, mocking the same procedure as for the SP layout, given a
pair of states with a difference with a zero pattern ν ∈F4
2, passing this pair
through \
4AES, swapping any column(s), and then back through \
4AES
−1,
leaves us with a pair of plaintexts that has the difference with the same zero
pattern of the starting one.
The same is true in the opposite direction: starting from the ciphertext side,
applying first \
4AES
−1, yoyo swapping, and then \
4AES we find the same zero
pattern of the difference we started with.
It is worth to notice again that this is a deterministic property, i.e. it
holds with probability 1. Notice also that in order to extend the property to
4 full rounds of AES, one can just apply the layers that were cut off before.
In the case of an adversary (that does not know the value of the secret key),
the property still holds, since as we said before AK does not affect differences.
The theorem 3.3.3 is the main tool to construct the distinguisher for a 5
rounds AES version.
5AES = AK ◦SB ◦SR ◦(AK ◦MC ◦SB ◦SR)4 ◦AK
= AK ◦SR ◦\
4AES ◦SR ◦AK ◦MC ◦SB ◦SR ◦AK
In a similar way as before, we can cancel out some non essential layers to
achieve more clarity, remembering to add those operation when implementing:
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Yoyo game for AES
21
\
5AES = 
AK ◦
SR ◦\
4AES ◦SR ◦AK ◦MC ◦SB ◦
SR ◦
AK =
= \
4AES ◦SR ◦AK ◦MC ◦SB =
= \
4AES ◦Q
calling the composition of four starting layers as Q.
Let now (p1, p2) be a pair of plaintexts in input to \
5AES, and (c1, c2) be
the output. It is possible to follow the internal path of the pair of states,
through every single operation.
The exact numerical values of the states
are not known because some operations are key-dependent, and they are
determined by the secret key value. Nevertheless it is possible to track down
certain properties of them. The (p1, p2) pair encrypts partially to a pair of
unknown intermediate states just before the application of \
4AES, –say (a, b).
Property 3.3.3 holds around \
4AES and tells us that if we do any yoyo swap
between c1 and c2, the new pair (c′
1, c′
2) decrypts partially –after
\
4AES−1–
to a pair of intermediate states (a′, b′) having the same zero pattern of the
difference as a and b. Synthetically, given
· (p1, p2) a plaintext pair
· c1 = \
5AES(p1),
c2 = \
5AES(p2)
· a = SR ◦AK ◦MC ◦SB (p1),
b = SR ◦AK ◦MC ◦SB (p2)
· c′
1 = ρυ(c1, c2),
c′
2 = ρυ(c2, c1)
· a′ =
\
4AES−1 (c′
1),
b′ =
\
4AES−1 (c′
2)
then for 3.3.3
ν(a ⊕b) = ν(a′ ⊕b′).
As said, one cannot know the exact values of a, b, nor a′,b′, since they
are all internal intermediate states of the encryption process of \
5AES, and
the knowledge of the secret key is necessary to calculate them.
However,
the information about their zero difference pattern, can be used to build a
distinguisher that requires only the knowledge of the plaintexts and ciphertexts
values of c1 = \
5AES(p1), c2 = \
5AES(p2), c′
1 = \
5AES(p′
1), c′
2 = \
5AES(p′
2).
Unfortunately, differently from \
4AES, in this case no certain trait of the
plain/ciphertext pairs (that we know) propagates through the encryptions.
What is possible to be done is to employ a probabilistic tool that can give
some useful information. As described more in detail in [Son17] S.3.3, our
goal is to identify pairs of plaintexts, which partial encryptions just before
\
4AES have a specific zero difference pattern, and manage to recognise if this
same zero pattern –belonging also to the difference of the partially decrypted
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Yoyo game
Figure 3.2: representation of the Theorem 3.3.3 for the intermediate states..
states after the yoyo swap– somehow affects the decrypted plaintexts.
More precisely an adversary wants to pick pairs of plaintext that have a
zero difference pattern of weight 2 (two columns out of four of the difference
are all zero bytes) after the first Q layers. Pairs with this property are called
good pairs. In order to achieve this, first let’s point out some features of the
AES operations:
• MC ◦SB operate independently on each column (SB−1 ◦MC−1 too),
thus also the difference of an output pair can be computed independently
for every column. Moreover, if two states in input have the difference
with a zero column, the difference of the outputs has a zero column in
the same position.
• AK, as said before, does not affect differences;
• SR operates alongside the rows of the state matrix in a way that each
byte of a column of the input, is spread out to a different column of the
output matrix. The same is true for differences (for linearity), and also
for the inverse SR−1;
The easiest way to come up with a pair of intermediate states a, b with
HW(ν(a ⊕b)) = 2 is to pick a pair of plaintexts (p1, p2) such that (p1 ⊕p2) has
3 zero columns. Passing (p1, p2) through Q might give the desired result. In
fact, the first AK ◦MC ◦SB layers operate independently on each word, and
the zero words of the difference are still zero after them (cfr. [Son17]). Up
until this point there is still only one active word, and the byte values in the
difference are to be assumed random, since they are key-dependent.
The final SR spreads the 4 bytes of the active column, one to each column of
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Yoyo game for AES
23
(a⊕b), and every other byte there is 0. Thus each column of (a⊕b) has three
zeros, and one random byte. If two of these random bytes happen to be zero
too, then the two words they belong to are all zeros, and the zero pattern has
HW(ν(a ⊕b)) = 2.
Lemma 3.3.4. The probability that (p1, p2) is a good pair – i.e. the Hamming
Weight of ν(Q(p1 ⊕Q(p2))) = 2 – is
Pr =
(4
2
)
q−2
Lets state here few necessary remarks needed for accomplishing the attack
–for proof and extended explanations, [Son17].
The matrix in MC has been chosen to be MDS (maximum distance
separable, for its diffusion properties ([Sha45]). A consequence of this regards
the branch number of the MC matrix:
Lemma 3.3.5. [Diffusion of MC]
For any x ∈Fm, x ̸= 0,
HW(MC(x)) + HW(x) ≥5
Lemma 3.3.5 implies that, if a column of a state in input has at least two
zero bytes, then the output column has at most one zero byte. Furthermore
the number of zero bytes in the input column is 4 if and only if the output
column has all zeros too. The same applies in the other direction, for MC−1.
Notice that linearity implies that 3.3.5 holds not only for states, but also for
differences between two states.
Lemma 3.3.6. .
Given a random state s = (s1, s2, s3, s4), then the probability that any column
in MC(s) = (c1, c2, c3, c4) has at least two bytes equal to zero is
πB =
(4
2
)
· 4 · q−2
To summarise, we must focus on pairs of states that are partially decrypted
4 rounds, say (a′, b′), just before being processed by the last Q−1. At this stage,
if the starting plaintext pair (p1, p2) was a good one, then 3.3.3 ensures that
the intermediate pair (a′, b′) has a difference with two zero columns. After
the application of SR−1 each byte of each zero-column is spread on a different
column of SR−1(a) ⊕SR−1(b), so each column has at least two zeroes. For
3.3.5 and the following considerations, we know that any column in the output
difference of (MC ◦SB)−1 cannot have more than one single zero byte unless
the input difference column was all zeroes and if that is the situation also the
output is a zero column.
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Yoyo game
Each column of SR−1(a) ⊕SR−1(b) has two non-zero elements. They can
be assumed to have a random value drawn from Fq. The probability that
both of them are zero in a column is then q−2. This is also the probability
that a column after AK ◦MC ◦SB has at least two zero bytes, because that
happens if (and only if) it is the image of a zero column.
This fact holds independently for each column, thus:
Property 3.3.7. Given a starting good pair (p1, p2), then the difference
(p′
1 ⊕p′
2) possesses any column with at least two zeroes with probability
πG = 4 · q−2
When this happens the same column has actually only zero bytes, so the
probability that any column in (p′
1 ⊕p′
2) has 4 zeros is actually the same, πG,
because those are the same event.
The probability that a bad pair has 2 or 3 zeros in any column at the
output of Q−1 can be approximated very well with πB itself.
In πB are
actually counted also the cases in which a column has four zeros too, but the
chance of such event is very low: 4q−4 = 2−30. For practical purposes πB is
close enough to the actual value.
Notice that AK−1 is still not influential in this analysis.
The last property needed for the attacks is the following.
Theorem 3.3.8. A yoyo swap between a good pair of plaintexts generates a
new good pair.
A yoyo swap between a bad pair of plaintexts generates a new bad pair.
This is due to the fact that for (a, b), a = (a1, a2, a3, a4), b = (b1, b2, b3, b4)
being a good pair means that the difference after Q has a certain zero pattern.
Any yoyo swap does not affect the zero difference pattern after Q. Actually
it is possible to exchange a word of a and b with the correspondent two of
another good pair, say (e, f) and the resulting pair would still be a good
one. Each column of the good pairs is drawn from a different subset of the
space of the possible column pairs, that produce the good pattern after Q,
indipendently from the other columns. For more about this, and proofs, read
[Son17] S.3.3.
Here it suffices to know that every time some words are swapped between
plaintexts that form a good (bad) pair, what remains is again a good (bad)
pair.
The proposed attacks are heavily based on 3.3.8, together with the opposed
probabilities in 3.3.6 and 3.3.7.
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Attacks
25
3.4
Attacks
3.4.1
The distinguisher
The pseudo code for a distinguisher is explained in [Son17] S.3.3 and it is
replicated in Algorithm 1 using the current notation.
The algorithm starts with creating an initial pair of plaintexts with the same
values on 3 columns. Then it encrypts both plaintexts, performs a yoyo swap,
and decrypts them. The resulting pair is tested for having simultaneously two
zeros in a column of the difference. If it does not, the pair is yoyo swapped
again, to get a new pair of plaintexts to iterate the process “encryption,
decryption, test” another time, and so on. Otherwise it is discarded.
Every time a pair is discarded a new initial one is generated the same way as
the first one.
If an initial pair never fail the tests before reaching a maximum amount of
iterations (213.4), the algorithm returns a success and stops. Otherwise after
having discarded 211.4 initial pairs without any success, the algorithm stops
and returns a fail.
3.4.2
The implemented attack
The authors proposed also a slightly different version of the attack in form
of C code, made publicly available on GitHub[son17].
Comparing it with the distinguisher, the attack uses a different test to discard
pairs: instead of throwing away pairs that at some point have at least 2 zeros
in a column of the difference, it does it when there are 2 or 3 zeros, but not
4.
The only other difference consists in the lack of a maximum number of initial
pairs generated: the code runs until a pair returns a success, and never stops
as long as this condition is not met.
The idea behind both the attacks is based on generating random initial
pairs until a good one is created, which has a higher probability of passing
all the tests compared to a completely random one, because it exploits the
trailing of the zero difference pattern forward and backwards 4 rounds of
AES.
Both attacks are visualised in graph 3.4.2, and a detailed analysis of the
attacks’ functioning, and their probabilities is the topic of the next section.
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Yoyo game
Algorithm 1: yoyo distinguisher on \
5AES
Data:
Result: Distinguisher successful or not
input
: MaxItarations = 211.4;
Poolsize = 213.4
output : 1 if AES distinguished successfully, -1 otherwise
initialization:
i ←MaxIterations;
p ←PoolSize;
BadPair ←0, pair ←0, cost ←0;
loop:
while pair < p do
pair ←+ = 1;
p0 ←random plaintext;
p1 ←p0 with a column changed to random values ;
iteration ←0 ;
while iteration < i do
iteration ←+ = 1, cost ←+ = 4;
c0 ←ENC(p0),
c1 ←ENC(p1) // oracle calls for encryption;
c0 ←ρυ(c0, c1),
c1 ←ρυ(c1, c0) // yoyo swap ;
p0 ←DEC(c0),
p1 ←DEC(c1) // oracle calls for decryption;
j ←0 ;
for j = 1 to 4 do
if HW (ν( [ p0 XOR p1 ]col j)) >= 2 then
;
end
BadPair ←1;
break;
end
if BadPair = 1 then
break;
end
p0 ←ρυ(p0, p1),
p1 ←ρυ(p1, p0) // yoyo swap ;
end
if BadPair = 0 then
return 1
end
end
return 0
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Attacks
27
Figure 3.3: The attack starts from an initial pair of plaintexts, and if the
test is passed keeps generating new ones with the yoyo swap.
==PAGE:40==
28
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER4
Implementation
of the
distinguisher
4.1
Motivation
The two attacks of [Son17] shown in the previous section present few minor
inaccuracies that we tried to address. The C implemented attack performs
very well with practical computational costs, if employed against an oracle
that uses 5-round AES. However if tested against a random permutation oracle
it fails to stop, running indefinitely. On the other hand the distinguishing
attack explained in the pseudo-code 1 works both with 5-round AES and
random permutation, although its performance can be improved with small
changes.
These reasons led to the implementation of a new distinguishing attack. It
performs with 0.53 rate of successfully distinguishing the use of \
5AES for
the encryptions/decryptions and virtually 0 false positives when a random
permutation is used instead. The maximum computational cost is around
225.61, but it is smaller in the event of a success. The memory cost for the
attack is low, while the data needed is 225.61 adaptively chosen plain/ciphertexts
at most.
4.2
The algorithm
The idea behind the attack is the same as the previous attacks: pairs of
plaintext are generated and tested repeatedly until a good one is detected.
The algorithm briefly explained works this way: it starts creating a pool of
213 initial random plaintext pairs with one column different. A pair from the
pool is encrypted and the resulting ciphertexts are yoyo-swapped in all the
possible ways –7 different swaps. Each of these seven yoyo pairs of ciphertexts
==PAGE:42==
30
4 Implementation of the distinguisher
is decrypted and tested: if the pair difference does not have a column
with 2 or 3 zeros then the test is passed. If all seven pass, the last
tested pair is yoyo swapped to create a new pair of plaintext for starting a
new iteration encryption−→swaps−→decryptions−→tests.
If 213 iterations are performed and all the tests are passed (7 · 213 total tests
are passed), the algorithm returns a success.
If instead a failing test ever happens in this process, all the pairs are discarded,
the whole cycle stops, and the algorithm continue with picking a new initial
pair from the pool as long as there are pairs in the initial pool to choose from.
When there are no left, the algorithm stops and returns fail.
Figure 4.1: The attack starts from an initial pair of plaintexts, and if the
test is passed keeps generating new ones with the yoyo swap.
Definition 4.2.1. [The distinguisher] Given P initial pool of plaintext
with |P| = n ∈N, given i ∈N iterations,
the distinguisher is successful if a pair of plaintexts survives all
the t = 7 · i tests.
For our practical implementation the values
i = 213 and |P| = n = 213
have been chosen. The next section shows in detail a probabilistic analysis
that led to these choices for our attack.
The criterion to stop the attack with a success is when at lest a pair survives
all i iterations, and the achieved results are as follows.
The theoretic probability of a successful distinguishing is ≈0.53.
Using a random permutation for the encryptions/decryptions instead of the
AES algorithm, all pairs in the pool behave randomly as in 3.3.6.
The
==PAGE:43==
4.2 The algorithm
31
Algorithm 2: yoyo distinguisher on \
5AES
Result: Distinguisher successful or not
input
: MaxItarations = 213;
Poolsize = 213
output : 1 if the distinguisher is successful
i ←MaxIterations;
p ←PoolSize;
BadPair ←0, pair ←0, cost ←0;
while pair < p do
pair ←+ = 1;
p0 ←random plaintext;
p1 ←p0 with a column changed to random values ;
iteration ←0 ;
while iteration < i do
iteration ←+ = 1;
c0 ←ENC(p0),
c1 ←ENC(p1) // oracle encryptions;
cost ←+ = 2;
sw ←0;
for sw = 1 to 7 do
c0 ←ρυsw(c0, c1),
c1 ←ρυsw(c1, c0) // all yoyo swaps ;
p0 ←DEC(c0),
p1 ←DEC(c1) // oracle decryptions;
cost ←+ = 2;
j ←0 ;
for j = 1 to 4 do
if HW (ν( [ p0 XOR p1 ]col j)) = 2 or 3 then
BadPair ←1 // tests;
break;
end
end
if BadPair = 1 then
break;
end
if BadPair = 1 then
break;
end
end
c0 ←ρυ(p0, p1),
c1 ←ρυ(p1, p0) // yoyo swap ;
end
if BadPair = 0 then
return 1
else
return 0
end
end
end
==PAGE:44==
32
4 Implementation of the distinguisher
evaluation of the occurrence of a false positive when a random permutation
is used is ≈2−17.3
On the cost evaluation, although the highest achievable computational cost
is 213 ·216 ·4 = 231 encryption/decryptions, the average cost is 225.61 for a non
success, i.e. not detecting a behaviour different from a random permutation,
and lower for a distinguish.
The oracle is set to answer to the calls with either the results of \
5AES
encryption/decryption with a fixed random key, or with the application of a
pseudo random permutation (in the experiments for this purpose it has been
used a version of AES with 7 rounds). A successful algorithm in the first case
is the positive outcome. In the second case it is a false positive.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER5
Statistical
analysis
5.1
Presenting the results
The proposed attack described in the previous section and listed in 2 is a
distinguisher for a 5-round reduced AES version.
It works with very low memory cost, and 225.61 adaptively chosen plaintexts
or ciphertexts. The total computational cost is in practise less than 225.61
encryptions or decryptions, that is the maximum theoretical cost on average.
The rate of success is approximately 0.53 when the distinguisher is tested with
an oracle that answers with 5-round AES. If a random oracle is used instead,
the occurrence of a false positive is very low, around 2−17.3.
These results represent an improvement compared to the existing attacks
proposed in [Son17]. The distinguisher defined there uses a maximum amount
of 226.8 adaptively chosen ciphertexts or plaintexts, and a maximum of 226.8
encryptions and decryptions. Despite the rate of success close to 1, it behaves
poorly against a random oracle: the chance of success is very high. In practise
a success is the outcome of the distinguisher in both cases either if tested
with 5-round AES or with a random permutation. Hence the chance of a false
positive is also close to 1.
In comparison with the C code of the authors of [Son17], in our distinguisher
several improvements are appreciable. our implemented attack is a little faster
and uses less data. 236.82 for random before stopping with success.
5.2
Statistics
5.2.1
\
5AES oracle
Here the behaviour of the yoyo game applied to \
5AES will be analysed,
studying the probabilities of different events. The results will support the
==PAGE:46==
34
5 Statistical analysis
choices made for our distinguisher 2.
Let be (p1, p2) a generic pair of plaintexts from the pool (not a good one),
and (c1, c2) the same pair encrypted by \
5AES.
Lets call (c′
1, c′
2) the pair
resulting from a generic yoyo game, and (p′
1, p′
2) its decryption.
Recalling section 2, the probability that the difference (p′
1 ⊕p′
2) has a column
with at least 2 zeros is πB = 4 · 6 · q−2 (from 3.3.6).
For 3.3.3, if the test is passed i.e. the condition of “not having two or three
zeroes in any column” is met, one can use a different swap (from all the seven
possible yoyo swaps) just before the decryption, that leads to a different pair of
decrypted plaintexts for which the same independent probability πB describes
the occurrence of the same differential case. And if this new pair pass the
test as well, another swap can be used, and so on.
There is an high chance that all 7 pairs of plaintexts have passed the test.
To keep testing new different pairs of plaintexts, due to 3.3.8, one can choose
any of the (p′
1, p′
2) pairs, then yoyo swap them to generate a new pair of (bad)
plaintexts, and then repeat the same encryption −→swaps −→decryptions
procedure for creating another group of seven pairs of decrypted plaintexts
each one of which have the same independent probability πB of not passing
the tests. And so on, from a single initial pair form the pool, each iteration
a new group of seven pairs of decrypted plaintexts can be generated with
the yoyo swaps, and 7 independent tests can be performed, each one with
probability πG of failure.
On average every π−1
G
new pairs of decrypted plaintext, one is expected to
have a column with 2 or 3 zeros, and fail the test. Notice that πG includes
also the event of a column of all zeros, however the chance of that is so small
that πG approximates well enough the remaining cases only.
Lemma 5.2.1. A bad pair of plaintexts taken from the initial pool generates
pairs of plaintexts that fail the test with (independent) probability
πB =
(4
2
)
· 4 · q−2
On the other hand, if the initial pair is a good one instead, then every new
decrypted plaintext generated with a the yoyo swaps has a probability of πG
of having 4 zeros in a column, as well as every successive iterated test, and
more importantly has probability 0 of failing the test: a column with exactly
2 or 3 zeros in that difference never occurs. If more than two zeros are present,
then it must be all four of the bytes. So the probability of such event is 0.
Lemma 5.2.2. A good pair of plaintexts taken from the initial pool generates
pairs of plaintexts that fail the test with probability 0
The adversary can pick a pair from the pool and iterate this procedure
as long as the tests are passed. The nature of the pair is unknown a priori,
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Statistics
35
however if at some point a single test is failed the adversary discovers the
initial pair was bad.
Keep in mind that the goal is not to identify bad pairs, whose behaviour on
the test is actually the same as any generic pair if a random oracle is used. The
goal here is to identify a good pair. If the adversary manages to accomplish
such task, since the yoyo property 3.3.3 holds only for good pairs and only
when \
5AES is used, then the distinguisher has worked successfully.
The key is to perform an amount of tests big enough so to have a high level
of confidence all bad initial pairs fail at least one of them at some point.
For the Independence of the successive tests, and since every iteration 7
tests are performed, we have
Lemma 5.2.3. For a chosen amount of iterations i ∈N, given a bad initial
pair of plaintexts, the probability of surviving –i.e. each one of the 7 · i = t
newly yoyo swap generated pairs pass the test– is
ΠB = (1 −πB)t
while for a good initial pair the probability of surviving is simply 1.
In synthesis, it is not possible to know in a deterministic way if a starting
pair of plaintext is good or bad, since the definition is based on intermediate
states that are key dependant. However a bad one eventually will fail the test
after a certain amount of iterations, and thus revealing its nature.
The bad survival probability ΠB decreases fast with the growth of i as shown
in picture 5.2.1 so that fewer and fewer bad pairs survive all i iterations, and
this fact permits to recognise and discard all of them with a high chance.
Given a set of n ∈N initial bad plaintext pairs, the probability that
a certain number k of them survives all t tests, is given by the binomial
distribution formula
B(k, n, ΠB) =
(n
k
)
Πk
B(1 −ΠB)n−k
For a set of good pairs, the distribution of probability can be written in the
same form. However in practise the probability is 1 for k = n, and 0 for any
other k .
Ideally none of the bad pairs should survive, or it would be mistaken for a
good one. The probability of this happening is
B(0, n, ΠB) =
(n
0
)
ΠB
0(1 −ΠB)n
= (1 −ΠB)n
Since ΠB decreases with the growth of t, this probability depends on n and t.
Increasing the number of consecutive tests it is more likely to have zero bad
==PAGE:48==
36
5 Statistical analysis
Figure 5.1: The probability of survival πB of an initial bad pair of plaintexts
decreases rapidly when the number of tests increases.
survivors, but starting with a bigger initial pool of pairs raises the possibility
than at least one of them manages to survive.
If the adversary picks a pool P of initial pairs (a, b) all having three equal
columns between them, 3.3.4 says that the number of good ones in P is
expected to be
|P|
(4
2
)
q−2
It suffices constructing a large enough initial pool, such that it is expected to
contain some good pairs, among the majority of bad ones.
The probability of having at least a good pair in a initial pool of size n is
given by
1 −(1 −Pr)n = 1 −(1 −
(4
2
)
q−2)n
Increasing the size of P it is possible to achieve a fairly good probability to
have at least a good pair to be present in it, as shown in 5.2.1.
Example 5.2.4. If the initial pool contains n = 213 pairs of plaintext the
probability that at least one of them is good is
1 −(1 −6 · q−2)213 ≈0.53
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Statistics
37
Figure 5.2: For a fixed pool size (n = 215) the probability of any bad pair
not surviving depends on the amount of tests to be performed.
For what have been said, if the pool is big enough to contain at least a
good pair, the distinguisher will be successful. Thus this value represents also
the probability of a success.
Notice that the size of the pool does not not affect the cost for a success:
the first good pair to be tested survives all the iterations and stops the
algorithm. If the pool was bigger nothing would changed, the algorithm would
have stopped at the same moment nevertheless.
5.2.2
Random oracle
The quality of a probabilistic distinguisher, and its usefulness for practical
purposes (e.g. for a key recovery attacks), depends mostly on the computational
cost needed to be paid for running the implementation and on the accuracy of
the results. The higher the rate of success in detecting a behaviour contrasting
with a random permutation, the better. And the event of a false positive –i.e.
misinterpret the behaviour of a permutation as if it is not random, despite
being it– has to be very low. In literature 1% is a threshold for the maximum
occurrence of false positives. The advantage of a distinguisher is defined as
the difference between the success ratio minus the false positive ratio.
Advantage = P(success| \
5AES) −P(false positive|random oracle)
==PAGE:50==
38
5 Statistical analysis
Figure 5.3: the probability of at least a good pair in the initial pool increases
with the size of it.
Now the definition of good and bad pairs does not apply anymore: all the
pairs behave randomly. The behaviour of any pair with a random oracle is the
same as a bad pair with with a \
5AES oracle, thus the cases can be described
by the same probabilities.
First the cost point of view. It has been shown that the cost of a successful
distinguishing of \
5AES is not really affected by the maximum number of
iterations. It is affected on the size of the pool only in the sense that if the
pool is too small, a success might not happen at all, but a bigger size of the
pool does not change the computational cost for getting a success.
With a random oracle things are different. It is known that a pair of plaintexts
fails once every π−1
B
≈2731 tests on average, or equivalently every π−1
B /7 ≈
390 iterations (3.3.6). Let’s assume that no pair survives all i iterations, that
is the ideal case, then the algorithm stops only after having tested all pairs
in pool. Hence the total amount of iterations performed by the algorithm is
on average n
π−1
B
7 . Every iteration the pair is encrypted once and decrypted 7
times, for a total amount of 16 single plaintext enc/decryptions.
Lemma 5.2.5. The total number of encryptions/decryptions performed for
running the distinguisher against a random oracle is on average
n16
7 π−1
B
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Statistics
39
This number is linearly depending only on the pool size. A bigger pool
requires the distinguisher to run more computations.
Also in this case a
different choice of the maximum number of iterations is not influencing the
final computational cost.
Let’s focus now on avoiding false positives. We need to keep such event
(i.e. a pair passing all t tests when a random oracle does the encryptions)
under 1% or lower, while maintaining the effectiveness of dinguishing the
application of \
5AES fairly high.
A pair has a certain probability πB of fail every single test, and is discarded
as soon as a test is not passed. Thus the amount of operations needed to
discard that exact pair is the same, independently from the maximum number
of iterations that could be done in theory. A discarded pair will not do the
remaining iterations.
If the tests are enough such that all pairs will fail at same point, that is what is
required not to have a false positive, it does not matter how big that number
is. When a test fails, whether it is after 2770 tests (the average) or at 5000
or at 15000, the iterations will stop immediately indipendently from the fact
that the maximum is set to 25000 or 1000000, the pair is discarded and a new
initial pair from the pool is picked. Since it is desirable that no pair survives,
the maximum number of iterations must be bigger than the highest number
of iterations reached by any pair. If this circumstance is secured, having a
even bigger i is not producing any new computation on top of what has been
done already. Hence it seems to be the best to set a high number of maximum
iterations, since it only improves the quality of the results.
The figure 5.2.1 addresses this problem as well, and gives an idea of how
big the number of tests must be.
Every pair is independent from each other, hence the probability that no pair
from the pool manages to survive t tests, or in other words
Lemma 5.2.6. The probability of not having a false positive, is
(1 −ΠB)n = (1 −(1 −πB)t)n
(iterations i = t/7)
Figure 5.2.2 shows the probability change of an occurrence of a false
positive over the number of iterations, for 4 different sizes of the pool
Example 5.2.7. For example the size of the pool can be set to be |P| =
Pr−1 = 215/3 ≈10800, such that it contains on average one good pair. The
maximum number of tests can be chosen to be t = π−1
B = 213/3 ≈2730 divided
on i ≈390 iterations, thus the probability that an initial bad pair of plaintexts
pass the t tests would be
ΠB = (1 −πB)π−1
B ≈0.37
==PAGE:52==
40
5 Statistical analysis
Figure 5.4: the probability of a false positive against the max number of
iterations. Each different line represent a different size of the
initial pool.
In this example the result would be that the good pairs of plaintexts –if present
in the pool– will pass all i iterations with certainty, although there is no way
to distinguish them from the ≈3900 bad ones that never fail any test as well.
Increasing the number of tests t with more iterations will give a desired low
chance: a bigger value of i is needed.
Example 5.2.8. If the amount of maximum iterations is i = 213 (and t =
7 · 213), the probability of pair leading to a false positive is
ΠB = (1 −πB)7·213
(5.2.1)
≈2−30.3
(5.2.2)
5.3
Overview and comparisons
The quality of the distingusher is based on the reliability of the result, and
on the computational cost. Usually it is a problem of trade-off between these
two factors. It has been said that the reliability of the yoyo distinguisher
is partly guaranteed by the choice of a large i: the maximum number of
iterations has to be big so to prevent false positives, while it is not really
affecting the chances of a success, nor the computational cost in any case. It
has also been said that the key for a successful \
5AES distinguishing is a big
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Overview and comparisons
41
Figure 5.5:
the probability of a false positive against the increase in size
of the pool. Each different line represent a different amount of
max iterations.
pool size.
On the other hand the computational cost for running the algorithm against
random oracle increases linearly with the size of the pool.
The trade-off between probability of success, and cost for avoiding false positives
is the main factor to consider for the choice of the variables of the distinguisher.
Setting both the number of iterations and the pool size to 213 (thus t =
7 · 213) seems a good choice since
Lemma 5.3.1. If i = 213 and n = 213, the probability of a successful
distinguishing of \
5AES is
P(success) = 1 −(1 −Pr)213
≈0.53
the probability of a false positive is
P(false positive) = 1 −(1 −(1 −πB)213)213
≈2−17.3
==PAGE:54==
42
5 Statistical analysis
and the computational costs is on average
cost = 16
7 213 · π−1
B
≈225.61
encryptions or decryptions. For a success the average cost is lower than this,
that is the maximum achievable.
In practical uses, one can change ad hoc the variables to have resulting
different probabilities. For example the distinguisher can be used for a key
recovery attack, that involves its deployment a large amount of times, most
of which for random oracles (all the wrong key guesses). Only a few times
the oracle will be following AES for the enc/decryptions. The computational
cost for a non success is thus an important factor to consider, because it can
have a significant impact on the overall speed of the attack. For our purpose,
the choice made in 5.3.1 seems just fine.
However if a higher rate of success is needed, it can be achieved with roughly
the same computational time, at the expense of a longer running time for the
random permutation setup, in which the algorithm will need to perform more
computations.
As indication, in 5.3 and 5.3 it is shown the trade-off problem, as probability
of success over the cost for failing.
Compared to the attacks in [Son17] our distinguisher is a little faster to
get achieve a success.
While the number of tests needed to be performed
is roughly the same, our distinguisher does 7 tests every iteration, for an
average cost of 16/7 enc/decryptions per test, and the attacks in [Son17] only
perform one single test very iteration (4 enc/decryptions per test). For the
same reason also the data cost is lowered: each encryption or decryption is
made on a different pair of adaptively chosen plaintexts or ciphertexts. Having
to do less oracle calls, requires less chosen plaintexts, thus the saving in data
cost has the same proportion as the computational one.
Regarding the quality of the results our contribution establishes an improvement:
our distinguisher has a rate of success of 0.53 and a false positive close to 0.
The paper’s [Son17] proposals present some minor inaccuracies that imply
some unwanted outcome, in particular in a random oracle setup. The distinguisher
in the listed algorithm has a high success probability (virtually 1), however
it is not made to work properly with a random oracle because has a false
positive rate close to 1 as well (as the numbers in example 5.2.7).
The C code implemented attack despite having similar success rate and similar
speed, performs poorly in the random case too. There is no fixed size of the
initial pool: when a pair is discarded, a new one is generated ad libitum,
and the algorithm continues running as long as no pair gets to the end of
the iterations (indicating mistakenly for a successful distinguishing of AES).
On average this happens every 233.82 initial pairs tested. Thus not only the
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Overview and comparisons
43
Figure 5.6: The probability of success for AES5 over the increment in cost
for the random permutation.
The curve shows the trade-off
of how it is possible to achieve a very high percentage of a
successful distinguish, close to 1, at the expenses of a higher
running cost for the random case. The highlighted point on the
curve approximates the position of the distinguisher that have
been used in the experiments.
computational cost for terminating the algorithm is very expensive, but also
the result is not the wished one. With enough time and power, also the code
has a rate of false positive of 1.
A comparison of the costs and performance is reported in table 5.1.
version
success
false positive
cost
original algorithm
1
1
226.8
our contribution
0.53
2−17.3
225.61
Table 5.1: Comparison of cost and performance between the original
algorithm and our contribution.
In the next chapter an experimental validation of the theory will be conducted.
==PAGE:56==
44
5 Statistical analysis
Figure 5.7: The probability of success for AES5 over the increment in cost
for the random permutation, with a logarithmic scale of the
cost axis.
The highlighted point on the curve approximates
the position of the distinguisher that have been used in the
experiments.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER6
Experimental
validation
The algorithm 3 has been implemented in C language, using a modified
ad hoc version of the AES algorithm of OpenSSL Crypto1 to achieve the
reduction down to 5 rounds of encryption and decryption. The code has been
compiled with GCC using a shared memory multiprocessing option, provided
by OpenMP, to parallelize the processes over multiple cores.
The experiments have been ran on the Dtu High-Performance Computing
cluster on a machines of the Central DTU HPC Cluster.
The cluster contains several different hardware components:
• 45 x Huawei XH620 V3 nodes – 2x Intel Xeon Processor 2660v3 (10
cores, 2.60GHz, 25MB L3 Cache), 128 GB memory, FDR-Infiniband.
In total: 900 Cores, 5,76 TB RAM.
• 42 x IBM NeXtScale nx360 M4 nodes – 2x Intel Xeon Processor
E5-2680 v2 (10 cores, 2.80GHz, 25MB L3 Cache), 128 GB memory,
Scientific Linux 6.4, QDR Infiniband interconnect.
In total: 840 Cores, 5,25 TB RAM.
• 64 x HP ProLiant SL2x170z G6 nodes – 2x Intel Xeon Processor
X5550 (quad-core, 2.66 GHz, 8MB L3 Cache), 24 GB memory, Scientific
Linux 6.4, QDR Infiniband interconnect.
In total: 512 Cores, 1,5 TB RAM.
• 4 x HP ProLiant SL390s G7 nodes (GPGPU) – 2x Intel Xeon
Processor X5650 (six-core, 2.66GHz, 12MB L3 Cache), 2x Tesla S2050
GPUs, 48 GB memory, Scientific Linux 6.4, QDR Infiniband interconnect/
In total: 48 Cores, 192 GB RAM.
Two hundred thousand different experiments have been tested. At the
beginning of each experiment a random secret key was generated and used
along the whole experiment.
1 https://github.com/openssl/openssl/tree/master/crypto
==PAGE:58==
46
6 Experimental validation
In the first half of the experiments, every time the algorithm asks for an
encryption or decryption, the oracle have answered with 5AES encryptions
and decryptions.
In the second half, the oracle answered the calls with a
pseudo-random permutation, the behaviour of which have been simulated
with 7 rounds of AES.
Success of distinguishing 5AES
Mode: 5AES
Tests launched on: Tue Nov 1 09:54:01 2018
Pool size:
8192 (213)
Iterations:
8192 (213)
Tests:
57344
Experiments:
100000
Elapsed time:
57h 11m 29s
Success:
51903 (53.04%)
Average cost
-for success:
224.97
-for fail:
225.61
False positives for random permutation
Mode: 7AES
Tests launched on: Tue Nov 1 09:54:22 2018
Pool size:
8192 (213)
Iterations:
8192 (213)
Tests:
57344
Experiments:
100000
Elapsed time:
77h 10m 21s
Success:
0 (0.00%)
Average cost
-for success:
0
-for fail:
225.63
Several further experiments have been done to confirm the theoretical
analysis. Figures 6 6 6 6 show different aspects of the experimental validation.
The implementation of the distinguisher attack gives experimental results
coherent with the predictions. The total computational cost is roughly 224.97
encryptions/decryptions on average for the oracle set to 5AES and 225.63 for
the random oracle (theoretical: 225.61)
The lower cost for a practical success compared to the theoretical value is
due to the fact that the theory rely on the average amount of initial pairs to
generate, in order to have a good one, and there is a limit on this number,
==PAGE:59==
6.1 Extension to 5AES
47
Figure 6.1: The statistics of the number of successes in the experiments with
different values of the pool size and a fixed value for i = 213. The
green line represents the theoretical expectation.
that is the pool size. All the experiments that would find a good pair after
more than 213 initial pairs, contribute to the cost in theory, but in practise
their iterations are truncated after reaching the last pair of the pool, when the
experiment stops without distinguishing. Then all the extra iterations that
are not computed, are not added to the actual cost.
6.1
Extension to 5AES
As a reminder, for a correct implementation for the real world use, the head
and tail deterministic layers that were kept out of the analysis previously, for
simplifying the exposition, must be inserted again.
The experiments have actually been conducted using an extended version of
the algorithm 2, that takes into account those cut out layers.
As it was presented, algorithm 2 exploits properties of intermediate states of
\
5AES. To extend the procedure such that it covers the full 5AES, in practise
the adversary needs to apply manually back and forward a layer of SR−1 to
a state each time before sending it to the oracle for an encryption and after
receiving it encrypted from the oracle oracle. And a SR operation has to be
==PAGE:60==
48
6 Experimental validation
Figure 6.2: The statistics of the occurrences of false positives in the
experiments for different values of the maximum number of
iterations and a fixed value for the pool size n = 213.
The
red line represents the theoretical expectation.
done at the two ends of a decryption, before and after every oracle call for
decryption (figure 6.1).
The main distinguishing property as in 3.3.3 extended from \
4AES to the
full 4AES is stated as example of the different operations to perform, and the
extended 5AES distinguisher algorithm description is provided in appendix
(3).
Theorem 6.1.1. Let p1, p2 ∈F4
m, and c1 = 4AES(p1), c2 = 4AES(p2) their
images through 4AES.
Let a = SR(p1), b = SR(p2), e = SR−1(c1), f = SR−1(c2).
For any υ ∈F4
2, be e′ = ρυ(e, f), f ′ = ρυ(f, e) a new pair of states generated
by a yoyo swap, and be c′
1 = SR(e′), c′
2 = SR(f).
After the decryption, be p′
1 = 4AES−1(c′
1), p′
2 = 4AES−1(c′
2) their decrypted
values, and a′ = SR(p′
1), b′ = SR(p′
2).
Then it holds
ν(a′ ⊕b′) = ν(a ⊕b)
In front of every SR on the plaintext side (and after every SR−1 there is
actually a AK, that again, does not affect the property. It changes the values
of a and b, but it is ineffective of their difference
==PAGE:61==
6.1 Extension to 5AES
49
Figure 6.3: In blue the statistics of the successes in the experiments for
different values of the pool size and a fixed value for i = 213.
In red the average computational cost of the experiments, that
remain pretty constant, indipendently by the change of n.
==PAGE:62==
50
6 Experimental validation
Figure 6.4: In blue the statistics of the occurrences of false positives in the
experiments for different values of the maximum number of tests
and a fixed value for the pool size n = 213. In red the average
computational cost of the experiments. The figure shows clearly
a smaller cost for small values of t due to the fact that many
experiments stop with a success before have completed the total
iterations. Increasing t leads to a decrease of the false positives
events, and together with a stabilisation of the cost around the
mean theoretical value.
==PAGE:63==
6.1 Extension to 5AES
51
Figure 6.5: The attack starts from an initial pair of intermediate states,
and goes back and forward through SR and SR−1 layers, to
extend the algorithm to a full 5AES. If the test is passed keeps
generating new pairs with the yoyo swap.
==PAGE:64==
52
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER7
Conclusions and
discussion
The yoyo game for distinguishing 5-round AES is entirely based on [Son17].
In their study the authors proposed two similar attacks that have a rate of
success close to 1 with a total computational cost of 226.8 on average and same
amount of adaptively chosen plain/ciphertexts.
However minor inaccuracies are present in the use of the distinguisher with a
random oracle. In this setup the two attacks fail their intent because they both
have a wrong chance of success close to 1, and one attack (the implemented
one) becomes also very slow to run.
These experimental inconsistencies pushed towards a more realistic statistical
model leading here to the usage of a slightly different approach that permits
to improve the behaviour under several points of view.
Our contribution makes the attack running in less time, on average 225.61
enc/decryptions are needed and the same amount of adaptively chosen plain/
ciphertexts. Moreover the behaviour of the distinguisher is correct in the case
of a random oracle too, fact that allows the employment of the algorithm for
a real world necessity, keeping the event of a false positive approximately at
2−17.3, with an average computational cost of 226.51 encryptions or decryptions.
Our small contribution might be useful in further study of the yoyo proprieties
applied to AES. The potentiality of these discoveries seem to be way bigger
and deeper than the use that has been done here.
As a matter of fact
the authors of [Son17] proposed already in the same paper an impossible
differential distinguisher for 6-round AES version. Our opinion is the employment
of the yoyo distinguisher for a key recovery attack for extended versions of
AES is surely feasible.
Improvements and continuation are most likely a possibility.
==PAGE:66==
54
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIXA
Appendix A
==PAGE:68==
56
A Appendix A
Algorithm 3: yoyo distinguisher on 5−round AES
Data:
Result: Distinguisher successful or not
input
: MaxItarations = 216;
Poolsize = 214
output : 1 if the distinguisher is successful
initialization:
i ←MaxIterations;
p ←PoolSize;
BadPair ←0, pair ←0, cost ←0;
loop:
while pair < p do
pair ←+ = 1;
p0 ←random plaintext;
p1 ←p0 with a column changed to random values ;
iteration ←0 ;
while iteration < i do
iteration ←+ = 1, cost ←+ = 4;
p0 ←SR−1(p0),
p1 ←SR−1(p1) // cut out layer
c0 ←ENC(p0),
c1 ←ENC(p1) // oracle calls for encryption;
c0 ←SR−1(c0),
c1 ←SR−1(c1) // cut out layer ;
c0 ←ρυ(c0, c1),
c1 ←ρυ(c1, c0) // yoyo swap ;
c0 ←SR(c0),
c1 ←SR(c1) // cut out layer ;
p0 ←DEC(c0) , p1 ←DEC(c1) // oracle calls for decryption;
p0 ←SR(p0),
p1 ←SR(p1) // cut out layer;
j ←0 ;
for j = 1 to 4 do
if HW (ν( [ p0 XOR p1 ]col j)) = 2 or 3 then
BadPair ←1;
break;
end
end
if BadPair = 1 then
break;
end
end
if BadPair = 0 then
return 1
else
return 0
end
end
end
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[Ale94]
Dmitry Khovratovich Alex Biryukov. Related-key Cryptanalysis of
the Full AES-192 and AES-256. 2Cryptology ePrint Archive: Report
2009/317. 1994.
[And11]
Christian Rechberger Andrey Bogdanov Dmitry Khovratovich. Biclique
Cryptanalysis of the Full AES. International Conference on the
Theory, Application of Cryptology, and Information Security, 2011.
url: https://eprint.iacr.org/2011/449.pdf.
[Bir05]
Alex Biryukov. The Boomerang Attack on 5 and 6-round Reduced
AES. Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Advanced
Encryption Standard AES’04. 2005.
[Der13]
Patrick Derbez. Meet-in-the-middle attacks on AES. Ecole Normale
Supérieure de Paris - ENS Paris, 2013. url: https://tel.archives-
ouvertes.fr/tel-00918146.
[Eli01]
Nathan Keller Eli Biham. Cryptanalysis of Reduced Variants of
Rijndael. unpublished. 2001. url: http://csrc.nist.gov/archive/
aes/round2/conf3/papers/35-ebiham.pdf.
[Gra18]
Lorenzo Grassi. Mixture Differential Cryptanalysis: a New Approach
to Distinguishers and Attacks on round-reduced AES. IACR Transactions
on Symmetric Cryptology, 2018. url: https://eprint.iacr.org/
2017/832.pdf.
[J D06]
V. Rijmen J. Daemen. Understanding Two-Round Differentials in
AES. Security and Cryptography for Networks: 5th International
Conference. 2006.
[Lar11]
Matthew Robshaw Lars Knudsen. The Block Cipher Companion.
Springer, 2011. isbn: 978-3-642-17342-4.
[NIS00]
NIST. Commerce Department Announces Winner of Global Information
Security Competition. 2000.
[Sha45]
Claude Shannon. A Mathematical Theory of CryptographyA Mathematical
Theory of Cryptography. Memo MM 45-110-02. Bell System Technical
Memo, Sept. 1, 1945, 1945.
[Sin99]
Simon Singh. The Code Book. Fourth Estate, 1999. isbn: 978-1-85702-879-9.
==PAGE:70==
58
Bibliography
[Son17]
Tor Helleseth Sondre Rønjom Navid Ghaedi Bardeh. Yoyo Tricks
with AES. IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive. Internet Engineering
Task Force, 2017. url: https://eprint.iacr.org/2017/980.pdf.
[son17]
sondrer. 2017. url: https://github.com/sondrer/YoyoTricksAES.
[Tun12]
Michael Tunstall. Improved “Partial Sums”-based Square Attack
on AES. International Conference on Security and Cryptography
- SECRYPT 2012, 2012.
