==PAGE:1==
Homomorphic Encryption for
Fingerprint veriﬁcation
Henrik Kawa
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Biometric data is unique to each individual and according to EU’s General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), it classiﬁes as sensitive data. When it is
classiﬁed as sensitive data, there is a requirement to protect the data.
This thesis aims to benchmark a FingerCode based ﬁngerprint veriﬁcation sys-
tem and a Minutiae based ﬁngerprint veriﬁcation system against each other
when applying homomorphic encryption.
There are existing works which apply homomorphic encryption to Minutiae-
based ﬁngerprint and FingerCode, and those are discussed in this work and
used for inspiration. This work will diﬀer from them, as the focus will be on
the performance of the encryption, how they compare and what is the trade-oﬀ
between them.
The Biometric performance for Minutiae based system and the FingerCode was
evaluated using False Match Rate (FMR) and False Non-Match Rate (FNMR).
The FMR and FNMR were 1.46% and 73.00% for the FingerCode system, and
0.95% and 75.75% for the Minutiae based system.
During the work it was
proved that by applying homomorphic encryption to the systems, the biometric
performance remained unaﬀected.
The encryption scheme implemented in this thesis are Paillier and Damgård,
Geisler and Krøigaard (DGK). Paillier is a well known homomorphic encryption
scheme that is based on Composite Degree Residuosity Classes.
DGK is a
homomorphic encryption scheme which security is based on k bit RSA modulus.
==PAGE:4==
ii
By applying the encryption schemes on the biometric ﬁngerprint systems the
times for FingerCode veriﬁcation were 0.3598 seconds using DGK and 0.6728
seconds using Paillier. For Minutiae based veriﬁcation the times were 615.53
seconds using Paillier and 69.42 seconds using DGK.
Regarding the ﬁle size of the templates, FingerCode increased from 3KB to
662KB using Paillier and 498KB using DGK. For Minutiae based the ﬁle size
increase from 3.9KB to 60.6KB using Paillier and 45.2KB using DGK.
This investigation indicate that DGK is a better homomorphic encryption scheme
than Paillier for biometric ﬁngerprint systems. Both systems can be used, but
regarding speed FingerCode seem to be the best choice.
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Biometriske data er unikke for hver enkelt person, og ifølge EU’s generelle da-
tabeskyttelsesforordning (GDPR) klassiﬁceres det som person følsomme data.
Når det er klassiﬁceret som person følsomme data, er der et krav at dataene
beskyttes.
Denne afhandling har til formål at benchmark et FingerCode-baseret ﬁngeraftryk-
veriﬁkationssystem og et Minutiae-baseret ﬁngeraftryk-veriﬁkationssystem mod
hinanden, når der anvendes homomorﬁsk kryptering.
Der ﬁndes eksisterende artikler, der anvender homomorﬁsk kryptering til Minutiae-
baseret ﬁngeraftryk og FingerCode, som diskuteres i dette værk og bruges til
inspiration. Dette arbejde vil afvige fra dem, da fokus vil være på krypteringens
udførelse, hvordan er sammenlignen og afvejningen mellem dem.
Den biometriske performance for minutia-baserede systemet og FingerCode blev
evalueret ved beug af False Match Rate (FMR) og False Non-Match Rate (FN-
MR). FMR og FNMR var 1, 46% og 73, 00% for FingerCode-systemet, og 0, 95%
og 75, 75% for Minutiae-baserede system. Under arbejdet blev det konstateret,
at ved at anvende homomorﬁsk kryptering til systemerne forblev den biometri-
ske ydeevne upåvirket.
Krypterings metoder implementeret i denne afhandling er Paillier og Damgård,
Geisler og Krøigaard (DGK). Paillier er et velkendt homomorphic krypterings
metode baseret på Composite Degree Residuity Classes. DGK er et homomorp-
hic krypterings metode, der er baseret på k bit RSA modul.
==PAGE:6==
iv
Ved at anvende krypterings metoderne på de biometriske ﬁngeraftrykssystemer
var tiderne for FingerCode-veriﬁkation 0, 359 sekunder ved hjælp af DGK og
0, 6728 sekunder ved brug af Paillier. I Muntiae baseret veriﬁkation var tiderne
615.53 sekunder ved hjælp af Paillier og 69, 42 sekunder ved hjælp af DGK.
Med hensyn til ﬁlstørrelsen på skabeloner stig FingerCode fra 3 KB til 662 KB
ved hjælp af Paillier og 498 KB ved hjælp af DGK. For Minutiae baseret på
ﬁlstørrelse stige fra 3, 9 KB til 60, 6 KB ved hjælp af Paillier og 45, 2 KB ved
hjælp af DGK.
Denne undersøgelse viser, at DGK er et bedre homomorﬁsk krypterings metode
end Paillier for biometriske ﬁngeraftryk systemer. Begge systemer kan bruges,
men med hensyn til hastighed virker FingerCode at være det bedste valg.
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute and C Center for Research in Se-
curity and Privacy (CRISP) in fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring an
M.Sc. in Engineering. The author of this thesis is a student of the Digital Media
Engineering study at DTU. This thesis was supervised by Professor Christian
D. Jensen, Professor Christoph Busch and Ph.D. Jascha Kolberg.
The thesis deals with homomorphic encryption for ﬁngerprint veriﬁcation and
evaluate the performance of diﬀerent homomorphic encryption schemes.
The thesis consists of introduction, project goals, preliminaries, related work,
experimental environment, implementation, results, discussion, conclusion and
an appendix.
Lyngby, 06-January-2019
Henrik Kawa
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thanks Christian D. Jensen, Christoph Busch and Jascha Kolberg
for giving me the opportunity to do a master thesis in Darmstadt, giving me
inspiration and support.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Original research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
Feature extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.2
Implementation of Minutiae and FingerCode
. . . . . . .
3
1.2.3
Multiparty computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.4
Homomorphic encryption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.5
Additional security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.6
Applying homomorphic encryption . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.7
Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.8
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Changes to the research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.1
Additional security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Thesis overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Preliminaries
9
2.1
Mathematics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Biometric system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Minutiae-based ﬁngerprint recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
FingerCode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
2.5
Distance metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5.1
Squared Euclidean distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5.2
Modiﬁed Hausdorﬀdistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.6
Prime generator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.7
Multiparty computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.8
Homomorphic Encryption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.8.1
Paillier encryption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.8.2
DGK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.9
FMR and FNMR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.10 Database
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Related Work
29
4
implementation and performance
31
4.1
Experimental environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.1
Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.2
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1.3
Timer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Paillier encryption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.1
Parameters requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.2
Encryption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2.3
Decryption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2.4
Homomorphic properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2.5
Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
DGK encryption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.1
Parameters requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.2
Generating the parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3.3
Homomorphic properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.4
Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.5
FingerCode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.5.1
Template
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.5.2
Biometric performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.5.3
Homomorphic encryption performance . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.6
Minutiae-based recognition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.6.1
Template
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.6.2
Biometric performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.6.3
Homomorphic encryption performance . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5
Comparison and benchmark
51
5.1
Biometric performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.2
Applying homomorphic encryption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Conclusion
55
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
==PAGE:13==
CONTENTS
xi
Bibliography
57
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Biometric systems are systems for the purpose of doing biometric recognition of
individuals, based on their biometric characteristics [ISO12]. Biometric charac-
teristics are the biological and behavioural characteristics of an individual, and
these characteristics have to be distinguishing, repeatable biometric features
such that they can be extracted for the purpose of biometric recognition. It
have to be repeatable because without that property, an individual would not
be able to be biometric recognised.
The use of biometric systems can make it simple and convenient for users, and
with the advances of biometric recognition, the use of biometric systems have
become more frequent. For instance, the use of biometric recognition for mobile
phones enables the user to unlock the phone with the use of biometric charac-
teristics such as ﬁngerprint and face [PCS18].
One of the earlier usage of biometric recognition was in the ﬁeld of forensics.
In 1983 the UK Home Ministry Oﬃce accepted the fact of no individual shares
the same ﬁngerprint [MMJP09] and thereafter many law enforcement wanted
to use the potential of ﬁngerprint recognition to identify oﬀenders.
A given biometric characteristic is unique for each person and, compared to tra-
ditional token based or knowledge based methods, have very limited possibility
to renew ones biometric characteristic, if it have been comprised. Therefore it
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
is very important to protect biometric information. Token based methods are
identiﬁcation methods based on, for example keys or ID cards, while knowledge
based methods are for example a password or a PIN code.
1.1
Motivation
An amount of biometric systems are handling the biometric data locally. When
done locally there is only one-party handling the biometric data, thus mitigating
the risk of biometric data getting leaked compared to a system that is used by
multiple subjects. The problem is that because biometric characteristics are
unique for each individual, it is diﬃcult or impossible to renew.
That is a
disadvantage when compared to a regular password. With passwords it is easy
to just regenerate a new one. With ﬁngerprints you have up to the amount of
ﬁngers available. Therefore, the interest to maintain the privacy of the biometric
data is high and in the General Data Protection Regulation 2016/679 [Eur16]
the European Union classiﬁed biometric data as sensitive data. Meaning, actions
must be made to protect the data from any unauthorised access or usage.
A method to get a high level of privacy is homomorphic encryption. Homomor-
phic encryption can protect the biometric data and fulﬁl all of the requirements
for template protection deﬁned in ISO/IEC IS 24745 [ISO11]: Unlinkability, re-
newability, and irreversibility. Homomorphic encryption gives the capability to
do computation on ciphertexts. This means that with the use of the encryption,
it is possible to do additions or multiplications in the encrypted domain.
Since biometric recognition can be used on behavioural and biological char-
acteristics, the focus in this thesis project will be to investigate the eﬀect of
homomorphic encryption on ﬁngerprints.
1.2
Original research questions
Security preserving privacy and eﬃciency in biometric are topics that are con-
stantly researched. When biometric systems are used in a multi-party environ-
ment you need a diﬀerent security approach to mitigate the risks that follows.
Currently one method to mitigate the risks is the use of homomorphic encryp-
tion. Therefore, the topic of the thesis will be about homomorphic encryption
for ﬁnger veriﬁcation. Thus the main question that should be answered is:
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Original research questions
3
How do Minutiae-based and FingerCode ﬁnger veriﬁcation systems benchmark
against each other when applying homomorphic encryption to both systems?
Minutiae-based and FingerCode are explained later.
1.2.1
Feature extraction
With focus on ﬁnger veriﬁcation one of the sub-questions should be about the
two methods of creating a biometric template for ﬁngerprints. This will help
with the understanding of the two methods that are the base of the thesis.
What is the Minutiae-based system and what is the FingerCode based system,
and what is the diﬀerence between them?
To answer this question, a research on the two types of biometric templates for
ﬁngerprint should be done with the use of literature. This should give a detailed
description on the two types of templates and describe the diﬀerence between
them in achieving biometric recognition.
1.2.2
Implementation of Minutiae and FingerCode
Having researched about Minutiae-based comparison and FingerCode, the next
step is to implement them. If there are multiple versions of Minutiae or Fin-
gerCode, then the version to be implemented will depend on the results from
section 1.2.1. The implementation of these two methods will make it possible to
create a baseline in order to do a comparison between an unencrypted system
and an encrypted system. Thus the question is:
What is the performance for a biometric system that is using minutiae or
FingerCode for ﬁngerprint veriﬁcation?
When implemented, these methods will be evaluated based on test criteria, e.g.
run time, False Match Rate (FMR), and False Non-Match Rate (FNMR). The
dataset used for these test criteria, will depend on which method is implemented.
Each method may be optimised based on a certain dataset.
Therefore, the
dataset used in this thesis will be those which the method are optimised for.
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
1.2.3
Multiparty computation
When working with security regarding multiple entities, it can be a good idea to
look at one of cryptology subtopic; multiparty computation. It is an area that
focuses on methods that allows multiple parties to jointly compute a function
without revealing their inputs. While that is the goal of the multiparty com-
putation, they have some deﬁnitions for the adversaries. Depending on which
deﬁnition for the adversaries is used, the level of security and use of security
protocols varies.
What are semi-honest (passive) and malicious (active) security?
The answering of this question should give an insight to what type of issues
the topic of multiparty computation tries to solve and give awareness of the
problems. The answers should come from a literature research.
1.2.4
Homomorphic encryption
One way to do secure multiparty computations is by using homomorphic encryp-
tion. Homomorphic encryption can be a solution to multiparty computations.
There are multiple encryption schemes that classiﬁes as homomorphic encryp-
tion. The interest is to ﬁnd the state of art homomorphic encryption schemes
in order to mitigate the risks of compromising biometric templates. Minutiae
and FingerCode might be stored diﬀerently and may result in diﬀerent use of
homomorphic encryption scheme, to get the best result. Therefore, the question
to be answered is the following:
What are the state of art homomorphic encryption schemes?
And which ones seems best for minutiae and FingerCode?
To answer this, a research on the varies homomorphic encryption should be done.
From the research, an overview for current state of the arts encryption schemes
should be made. The overview should state the advantages and disadvantages
of the schemes including how the schemes perform with regards to unlinkability,
renewability, and irreversibility. Hence give a clear view of which scheme ﬁts
this thesis.
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Original research questions
5
1.2.5
Additional security
In some of the related works [BG11, BBC+10], oblivious transfer and garbled
circuit are implemented in order to mitigate some of the risks in multiparty
computation. Hence in the search of knowledge on multiparty, the discovery
of additional method to increase the level of privacy might happen. Therefore
leading to the question:
What method in addition to homomorphic encryption can improve the
security in multiparty computation?
To answer this question, literature research on methods that mitigate the issues
presented by multiparty computation should be conducted. The result should
give an overview of existing methods to secure multiparty computation, listing
the results of using the speciﬁc method. At minimum, give a description of the
latest versions of oblivious transfer and garbled circuit.
1.2.6
Applying homomorphic encryption
After getting the baseline on the unencrypted biometric systems using minutiae
and FingerCode, it is time to implement the encrypted versions to do the bench-
mark. Based on the ﬁndings in section 1.2.3 and 1.2.5, the encryption methods
to be applied will vary. However the interesting things are:
How will the encrypted biometric system compare to the unencrypted?
To answer this question, the encryption chosen will be applied on biometric
templates that are either using minutiae or FingerCode. These systems will
then be benchmarked based on the same test criteria as in section 1.2.2.
1.2.7
Evaluation
After the implementation of the systems and the benchmarks, it should be
evaluated in order to weight this approach compared to other works completed
in this research area.
==PAGE:20==
6
Introduction
How does the approach taken in the thesis compare to other works and what
does it do diﬀerently?
The answering of this question will be based on criteria that will be speciﬁed
and compared to other works that is done in the same research area.
1.2.8
Future work
A typical drawback of a homomorphic encryption scheme, is the increase of run
time. It is of interest to reduce this drawback of the homomorphic encryption
schemes. Therefore:
How can we speed up the veriﬁcation process in the encrypted domain?
To answer this, a suggestions should be evaluated and benchmarked against the
previous implementation in order to investigate whether the changes made are
an improvement or not.
1.3
Changes to the research questions
During the execution of the project, new knowledge have been acquired and
therefore resulting in changes to some of the research questions. These changes
are done because they either narrow the scope of the tasks of this project and
thus enforcing the focus on the topics that are more relevant. Slight changes to
the end goals of this thesis for a more realistic and an interesting result.
The research questions not mentioned in this section, will remain unchanged.
Each question that have been changed or modiﬁed, will have it own subsection
with its corresponding title it had in section 1.2.
1.3.1
Additional security
This question will not be answered in this thesis as the focus have been primarily
on homomorphic encryption. The questions stated in section 1.2.5 are more
within the topic of secure multiparty computation. Therefore it was determined
==PAGE:21==
1.4 Thesis overview
7
to be outside of the scope of this thesis. Even if it is a interesting topic to
try and combine homomorphic encryption with methods from secure multiparty
computation to create a more secure product or expand on its secure capabilities.
1.3.2
Future work
Instead of looking for ways of improving the speed of the veriﬁcation process
in the encrypted domain, the focus will be to investigate the performance of
the encryption system on criteria such as space enlargement and run time for
the varies processes such as encrypt, decrypt, key generation, comparison score,
addition and multiplication. Hence the new question would be:
How will the various encryption systems compare to each other and which,
based on the criteria mentioned, is the best for biometric system?
1.4
Thesis overview
This section will elaborate on the structure of the thesis. Chapter 2 will intro-
duce the elements used in this thesis, so it should be easier to understand the
other chapters. This will include:
• mathematics and the notation used in this work.
• The basics of a general biometric system.
• Minutiae-based ﬁngerprint recognition, which is one of the two biometric
template method used in this thesis.
• FingerCode which is the other biometric template method.
• Prime generator, which is required for the homomorphic encryption sys-
tems.
• What is passive and active security within secure multiparty computa-
tions.
• False Match Rate (FMR) and False-Non Match Rate (FNMR)
• Descrption of the ﬁngerprint database.
==PAGE:22==
8
Introduction
Chapter 3 will be about the related work. Chapter 4 will focus on homomorphic
encryption. Chapter 5 will be about the FingerCode implementation and per-
formance. Chapter 6 will do the same for minutiae-based ﬁngerprint. Chapter
7 will focus on the comparison and benchmark between the various created sys-
tems. Chapter 8 will discuss the result and answers that the thesis have shown.
Chapter 9 will be a self-evaluation of the project.
It should be noted that, throughout this thesis when reference to a chapter,
section or subsection, the ﬁrst number will indicate the chapter, the next number
the section and the third number the subsection. For instance, 1.2.1.
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2
Preliminaries
This section deals with the elements that will be used in this thesis. It will
discuss the notations, deﬁnitions and biometric knowledge on a basic level. Some
biometric knowledge will be expanded on in later chapters.
2.1
Mathematics
The symbol Z⋉will denote the set of whole numbers 0, 1, ..., n and their negative
counterparts −1, −2, ..., −n up till n. The symbol Z∗
n will denote the set of whole
numbers. From now on, all whole numbers and their negative counterparts, is
denoted as integers.
When it is stated that an integer a should divide an integer b, then there must
be an integer c such that ca = b.
The greatest divisor for two integers a and b is the largest integer c which divide
both a and b, and is denoted as gcd(a, b) = c. gcd(a, 0) = a and gcd(a, b) =
gcd(b, a) by the deﬁnition.
gcd(a, b) always return a positive integer, unless
gcd(0, 0) = 0.
The least common multiple of integers a and b, is the smallest integer c which
==PAGE:24==
10
Preliminaries
is a divisor of a and b. This is also denoted as lcm(a, b). If both a and b are
positive integers then
lcm(a, b) =
ab
gcd(a, b)
Given a set A then all elements within A will be denoted by curly brackets e.g.,
A = {a1, a2, ..., an}
a ∈A means that the element a belong to the set A.
A vertical bar "|" inside curly brackets, should be understood as for which. For
instance,
{a ∈A|1 < a < 5}
this denote the subset of positive elements in A which are above 1 and below 5.
With encryption comes modular arithmetic. It is also known as clock arithmetic,
because of its behaviour. Let m be a positive integer and if an integer exceed
or is equal to m, then m will be subtracted from the integer until it is below m.
for instance if m = 24, then 32 mod 24 = 8 mod 24. It can be said that a is
congruent to b modulo m, if a ≡b mod m while m divides b −a.
Furthermore in modular arithmetic, if a integer is raised to the power of −1
(e.g. A−1). Then it should be replace with its modular inverse. In arithmetic,
a number times its inverse will result in 1, meaning A · A−1 = 1. in modular
arithmetic, the modular inverse is a value which A · A−1 mod B = 1. If B is a
prime, then it is possible to compute A−1 by using Fermat’s little theorem: Let
B be a prime and let A ∈Z∗
p. Then AB−1 mod B = 1 or AB−2 mod B = A−1.
For instance if B = 37 and A = 7 then;
737−1
mod 37 = 1
737−2
mod 37 = 16
7 · 16
mod 37 = 1
The symbol ⊙will denote the Hadamard product which is a elementwise prod-
uct:
a11
a12
a13
a21
a22
a23

⊙
b11
b12
b13
b21
b22
b23

=
a11b12
a12b12
a13b13
a21b21
a22b22
a23b23

==PAGE:25==
2.2 Biometric system
11
2.2
Biometric system
Biometric system is a system with purpose of doing biometric recognition on
a individual’s behavioural and biological characteristics, also called biometric
characteristics. There are two type of systems; veriﬁcation and identiﬁcation
[ISO12].
Veriﬁcation is the system that does a 1:1 comparison. With this system the
individual will present his biometric characteristics and user ID. The system
that capture it, extract its features and compared it to the biometric template
that is stored in the biometric system’s database. The system will take the cap-
tured biometric characteristics and the individual’s reference ID for the stored
template on the database in order to make a 1:1 comparison. Depending on the
result of the comparison the system will either accept or reject the individual.
Identiﬁcation is the system that does a 1:N comparison. Meaning, this type
of system only captures the biometric characteristics from the individual. The
system will take the captured data and compare it to all of the templates in the
database. If there is a match between the captured data and a template on the
database, the system will accept the individual, otherwise reject the individual.
See ﬁgure 2.1 for a simpliﬁcation of a veriﬁcation and identiﬁcation system.
Figure 2.1: A simpliﬁcation of the system types within biometric systems.
In ﬁgure 2.2, the components of a general biometric system can be seen. Each
component contribute to create a biometric system which have the general func-
tionality. In the ﬁgure it can be seen which subsystems are used in regard to
==PAGE:26==
12
Preliminaries
three use cases; enrolment, veriﬁcation and identiﬁcation. Veriﬁcation and iden-
tiﬁcation are explained in the beginning of this section. Enrolment is the phase
where a new individual is registered into the system with his own biometric sam-
ple such that it can be stored in the database for later use doing comparison.
Figure 2.2: A ﬁgure visualising the component of a general biometric system.
Taken from [Bio11].
Data capture subsystem is the part of the system where an individual makes
a presentation of his biometric characteristics to a sensor which captures the
individual biometric sample and sends it to the signal processing subsystem.
Signal processing subsystem is the part of the biometric system which re-
ceives the captured biometric sample from the data capture subsystem. When
the sample is received, then the signal processing may do segmentation, feature
extraction, quality control and image enhancement.
• The segmentation is a process that remove unnecessary information, i.e
locating the signal of the subject’s biometric characteristics within the
captured biometric sample.
• Feature extraction is a process that deriving the individual’s repeatable
and distinctive measures (biometric features) that is needed from the cap-
tured biometric sample when creating a biometric reference.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Biometric system
13
• Quality control evaluate the suitability of the captured biometric sample.
In the case of a low quality measurement, this process may ask for a re-
capture.
• Image enhancement is a process that tries to improve the quality and clar-
ity of the captured biometric sample. This process may be applied before
the feature extraction, to increase the quality of the biometric reference
created from the feature extraction process.
After all or some of these process have been applied to the biometric sample,
features is created. These features is then send to the comparison subsystem,
unless the purpose is enrolment, then the signal processing subsystem will cre-
ate a reference. Sometimes the enrolment process requires features from several
presentations of the individual’s biometric characteristics. Sometimes the ref-
erence comprises just the features, in which case the reference may be called a
“template”. Sometimes the reference comprises just the sample, in which case
feature extraction from the reference may occur immediately before comparison
[Bio11].
Data storage subsystem is the part of the biometric system where the biomet-
ric references created in the signal processing subsystem are stored. Depending
on the system implemented, each reference might contain some information of
the enrolled subject or the enrolment process.
Comparison subsystem is the system component which compare the received
features from signal processing subsystem to the references or reference received
from the data storage subsystem, depending on if it is a veriﬁcation or identiﬁ-
cation transaction.
Decision subsystem is the last component shown in the ﬁgure (ﬁgure 2.2). It
is the subsystem which, uses the comparison score or scores from the comparison
subsystem and based on its threshold and decision policy, provide a decision for
the veriﬁcation or identiﬁcation transaction.
Transmission subsystem is not shown in the ﬁgure, but it is the subsystem
that is responsible for transmitting the samples, features, and/or references
between diﬀerent subsystems. The ISO [Bio11] also state that: It is advisable
that cryptographic techniques be used to protect the authenticity, integrity, and
conﬁdentiality of stored and transmitted biometric data.
The last two items are not shown in the ﬁgure like the transmission subsystem,
are mention for a complete explanation of a general biometric system.
Administration subsystem governs the overall policy, implementation and
==PAGE:28==
14
Preliminaries
usage of the biometric system, in accordance to the requirements the system
needs to satisﬁes.
Interface: A biometric system may have an interface to an external applica-
tion or system with the use of Application Programming Interface, Hardware
Interface or Protocol Interface.
2.3
Minutiae-based ﬁngerprint recognition
A ﬁngerprint is the impression left behind by the friction ridges of ﬁngertip on
a surface. The details of a ﬁngerprint are made of ridges and valleys and the
uniqueness of a ﬁngerprint comes from the interleaving of the ridges and valleys
[MMJP09]. In ﬁgure 2.3 is the white area that is between the black lines the
valleys and the black lines are the ridges. The width of the ridges typically vary
from 100 µm to 300 µm.
Figure 2.3: A ﬁngerprint showing the ridges and valleys.
There are three levels of which the details of a ﬁngerprint can be described:
Level 1 is the global features of the ﬁngerprint. This level describes iden-
tify singularities, which are regions that consist of a group of ridges that runs
smoothly in parallel but exhibit one or more regions where the pattern assume
distinctive shapes. Henry [Hen00] classiﬁed these pattern into four typologies:
loop, tented arch, arch, whorl.
Maltoni et al.
[MMJP09] compared to Henry mentions three typologies for
singularities: Loop, delta and whorl. see ﬁgure 2.4 for a visualisation of the
mentioned typologies.
This level is where the core point of the ﬁngerprint is determined and Henry
[Hen00] deﬁne the core point as the northernmost point of the innermost ridge
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Minutiae-based ﬁngerprint recognition
15
Figure 2.4: The diﬀerent typologies of global ﬁngerprint patterns according to
Henry [Hen00].
line. Without a loop or whorl in the ﬁngerprint, it is hard to deﬁne a core
[MMJP09].
Level 2 is the local feature of the ﬁngerprint. This level focus on the features
called minutiae in the ﬁngerprint. Regarding ﬁngerprint, minutiae are the dis-
tinctive patterns which the ridge can create. see ﬁgure 2.5 for a visualisation of
the diﬀerent types of minutiae for ﬁngerprint. The seven most common minutiae
types are [MMJP09]:
• Ridge ending
• Bifurcation
• Lake
• independent ridge
• point or island
• Spur
• Crossover
This level of features are the most common used for automatic ﬁngerprint match-
ing. But the type of minutiae used in each implementation varies. For instance
Maltoni et al.[MMJP09] mention American National Standards Institute pro-
poses a minutiae taxonomy based on four classes: ridge ending, bifurcations,
compound (trifurcation or crossovers), and type undetermined, and the FBI
minutiae-coordinate considers only ridge endings and bifurcations.
At level 3, the features of the ﬁngerprint’s ridges is expanded. At this level the
details to be aware of is the following attributes of the ridges:
==PAGE:30==
16
Preliminaries
Figure 2.5
• Width
• Shape
• Pores
• Incipient ridges
• Breaks
• Creases
• Scars
These attributes are not commonly used in biometric systems as recognition
on level 3 of ﬁngerprint demands high resolution data for reliabl feature detec-
tion. For pores, Ashbaugh [Ash99] claims that 20-40 pores may be suﬃcient for
reliably identifying a person.
2.4
FingerCode
Jain et al.
[JPHP00] have presented an other method for ﬁngerprint repre-
sentation called FingerCode. This alternative biometric representation, creates
a biometric template which is relative short and the code has a ﬁxed length.
Therefore, the comparison process computes the Euclidean distance between
two biometric templates. The Euclidean distance will be explained later.
Compared to minutiae-based methods, FingerCode relies on using the textures
extracted from a ﬁngerprint image. For characteristics FingerCode uses both
local ridge, global ﬂow of ridge, and valley structures to maintain a high recog-
nition accuracy.
According to Jain et al. [JPHP00], there are four main steps for the feature
extraction algorithm:
1. Determine a reference point and region of interest for the ﬁngerprint image.
==PAGE:31==
2.4 FingerCode
17
Figure 2.6: System diagram of FingerCode. Taken from their paper [JPHP00].
==PAGE:32==
18
Preliminaries
2. Tessellate the region of interest around the reference point.
3. Filter the region of interest in eight diﬀerent directions using a bank of
Gabor ﬁlters ( the Gabor ﬁlters are explained later in this section).
4. Compute the average absolute deviation from the mean (AAD) of grey
values in individual sectors in ﬁltered images to deﬁne the feature vector
or the FingerCode.
FingerCode need one reference point in order for it to work. Furthermore, Fin-
gerCode allow for multiple reference points to capture multiple representations.
While multiple representation gives extra processing and storage cost, it will
give a robust ﬁngerprint comparison when the extraction algorithm fails to de-
tect a reference point. Jain et al. [JPHP00] have deﬁned the reference point of
a ﬁngerprint as the point of maximum curvature of the concave ridges in the
ﬁngerprint image.
When a reference point is determined, then it is time to tessellate the region
of interest. This is created based on three parameter; b is the width of each
band in pixels, k is the number of sectors considered in each band and B is the
number of concentric bands considered around the reference point for feature
extraction [JPHP00]. These parameters are vary based on the image size. For
an image of 508 × 480 pixels, Jain et al. used b = 20, B = 5 and k = 16.
Subsequently the region of interest is divided into sectors, then each sector is
normalised making the sectors ready for the Gabor ﬁltering. The reason of the
normalisation is to remove the eﬀects of sensor noise and grey level deformation
(pressure depending image diﬀerences) due to ﬁnger pressure diﬀerences. The
equation for normalisation used for FingerCode can be seen in equation (2.1).
I(x, y) denote the grey value at the pixel (x, y). Mi and Vi are the estimation of
the mean and variance of sector Si respectively. Ni(x, y) denotes the normalised
grey-level value at pixel (x, y) [JPHP00].
Ni(x, y) =



M0 +
q
V0×(I(x,y)−Mi)2)
Vi
,
if I(x, y) > Mi
M0 −
q
V0×(I(x,y)−Mi)2)
Vi
,
otherwise
(2.1)
Gabor ﬁlterbanks is a bandpass ﬁlter technique which gives the capability of
extracting speciﬁc information and if properly tuned it can also remove noise,
preserve the true ridge and valley structures, and provide information contained
in a particular orientation in the image [JPHP00]. The equation used for the
FingerCode is an symmetric Gabor ﬁlter with the following form in the spatial
space and can be seen at equation 2.2. f is the frequency of the sinusoidal plane
==PAGE:33==
2.5 Distance metrics
19
wave along the direction θ from the x-axis. δx′ and δy′ are the space constants
of the Gaussian envelope along x′ and y′ axes, respectively [JPH99].
G(x, y; f, θ) = exp
(
−1
2
"
x′2
δ2
x′ + y′2
δ2
y′
#)
cos(2πfx′)
(2.2)
x′ = x sin(θ) + y cos(θ)
(2.3)
y′ = x cos(θ) −y sin(θ)
(2.4)
With the result from every rotation of the Gabor ﬁlter it is then possible to
compare the templates with the use of Euclidean distance. For this thesis the
squared Euclidean distance will be used and the formula can be seen at 2.5:
d2(p, q) = (q1 −p1)2 + (q2 −p2)2 + ... + (qn −pn)2
(2.5)
2.5
Distance metrics
This section will explain the methods used to compute the comparison score be-
tween two ﬁngerprint templates. The ﬁrst part will be about squared Euclidean
distance and modiﬁed Hausdorﬀdistance. Both of these distance metrics are
chosen because they can be also be computed in the encrypted domain given
the homomorphic properties of the encryption schemes chosen in this thesis.
2.5.1
Squared Euclidean distance
As stated in section 2.4, FingerCode is a feature extraction method which cre-
ates ﬁngerprint templates that enables the computation of the comparison score
between two templates using the Euclidean distance. With the homomorphic
properties of Paillier and DGK, it is possible to compute the squared Euclidean
distance in the encrypted domain. The way to compute the distance outside
the encrypted domain is stated in equation 2.5.
The method to compute the squared Euclidean distance in the encrypted domain
==PAGE:34==
20
Preliminaries
is shown in equation 2.6.
Enc(
d
X
i=1
p2
i ) · Enc(
d
X
i=1
q2
i ) ·
d
Y
i=1
Enc(qi)−2pi
(2.6)
This formula was used by Zekeriya et. al for face recognition [ZFG+09]. Since
it is computation done in the encrypted domain, the last part of the equation,
with the pi-product, can be rewritten such that it is the modular inverse raised
to the power of a positive integer:
d
Y
i=1
Enc(qi)−2pi =
d
Y
i=1
Enc((qi)−1)2pi
2.5.2
Modiﬁed Hausdorﬀdistance
For the Minutiae based biometric system, modiﬁed Hausdorﬀdistance will be
used [DJ94].
Algorithm 1: Modiﬁed Hausdorﬀdistance
Result: Return the modiﬁed Hausdorﬀdistance
Data: A,B
Let Acol be the column length of matrix A
Let Bcol be the column length of matrix B
Let Arow be the row length of matrix A
Let Em,n be a matrix of ones of size m by n.
for i := 0 to m do
C = EBcol,1A[i]
D = (C −B) ⊙(C −B)
D = DEArow,1
end
Let F be a m by 1 matrix that contains the minimum number
calculated in the for loop from D.
Let d be the average value from the matrix F.
Return d.
In algorithm 1 is the method on how to calculate a modiﬁed Hausdorﬀdistance.
To get the correct modiﬁed Hausdorﬀdistance, it is a must to apply algorithm
1 on (A, B) and (B, A), and then use the distance which is of highest value.
==PAGE:35==
2.6 Prime generator
21
Usually there would be a square root applied to values of D after the hadamard
product, ⊙. But, to keep most of the computation in the encrypted domain this
was excluded and kept the distance values squared.
2.6
Prime generator
With the encryption scheme from Damgård et al. [DGK08] using a RSA mod-
ulus n = pq and with primes being used often in varies public-key encryption
scheme, a prime generator will be implemented. To be eﬃcient at generating a
prime integer, probabilistic prime number generator using Miller-Rabin prime
number test, is the method which will be implemented. Since it is a proba-
bilistic prime number generator, there is a chance for it to return a number
which is composite. To reduce the probability of this occurring, it is needed to
do x iterations on the Miller-Rabin primality test to reduce the probability of
the test returning a composite. According to [MVOV01] the error-probability
of Miller-Rabin is usually smaller than (1/4)t in practice, but is ﬂawed as it
does not take the distribution of the primes into account. The probability that
the prime number generator return a composite number can be approximated.
The probability of the number returned is composite, the bit length of the prime
number and the iteration parameter will be denoted as pk,t, k and t respectively.
Some of the upper bounds of pk,t are:
1. pk,1
<
k242−
√
k
for
k ≥2.
2. pk,t
<
k3/22tt−1/242−
√
tk
for
(t = 2, k ≥88)
or
(3 ≤t ≤k
9, k ≥
21).
3. pk,t
<
7
20k2−5t + 1
7k15/42−k/2−2t +12k2−k/4−3t
for
k
9 ≤t ≤k
4, k ≥
21.
4. pk,t
<
1
7k15/42−k/2−2t
for
t ≥k
4, k ≥21.
According to these formula then if k = 1024 and t = 54 then 2 in the list of
upper bounds for pk,t gives p1024,54 ≤1
2
400, which should suﬃce when generating
a key of 1024 bit length. [MVOV01] also state:
if a random k-bit odd integer n is divisible by a small prime, it is
less computationally expensive to rule out the candidate n by trial
division than by using the Miller-Rabin test.
==PAGE:36==
22
Preliminaries
Meaning a trial by division with low primes will increase the eﬃciency of gen-
erating a prime using Miller-Rabin. The amount of odd integers n not ruled
out by trial by division is given by equation 2.7 or 2.8 if you apply Mertens’s
theorem on the previous one.
Y
3≤p≤B
(1 −1
p)
(2.7)
1.12
ln B
(2.8)
By using equation 2.8 with B = 1000, it state that around 16% are not ruled
out by the trial by division. Hence reducing the amount of composite numbers
sent to Miller-Rabin primality test, and run time given Miller-Rabin is more
costly to compute.
Algorithm 2: Miller-Rabin primality test.
Result: Return if m is a probable prime or not a prime
Let m −1 = 2st, t odd
Choose random integer b such that 0 < b < m
Compute y := bt mod m
if y ≡1 mod m then
return “m prime”
end
for i := 0 to s-1 do
if y ≡−1 mod m then
return "m prime"
else
y := y2 mod m
end
end
return "m composite"
2.7
Multiparty computation
Multiparty computation is a ﬁeld of study within cryptography, and more spe-
ciﬁc, a study on methods which purpose is to keep each participant’s input
private and secure in a joint computation. This ﬁeld of study has it application
in situations where learning of a participants’ inputs are unwanted. One of the
earlier works in this ﬁeld is by Yao published in 1982, and it deals with the
==PAGE:37==
2.7 Multiparty computation
23
problem of two millionaires wanting to know who is richer, without learning
anymore about each others’ wealth [Yao82].
Other applications could be online auctions and biometric. The online auction
could be the case of the highest bidder not wanting others to know his maximum
amount that he is willing to pay for an item. The knowledge of this could lead
to either the auctioneer or others bidders to raise bid just below the maximum
amount in order to make the highest bidder lose as much money as possible. In
the case of the auctioneer the motivation could be to increase their earnings as
they typically earn a percentage of the amount the item was sold for.
For biometric it could be about keeping the biometric information a secret as
it is sensitive data and the biometric characteristics are hard, if not impossible
to renew compared to password. Meaning this topic is relevant for this thesis
and is the motivation for this section to have an explanation of multiparty
computation.
Protocol 3: Protocol for secure addition from [NCD14].
articipants are P1, P2, P3, input for Pi is xi ∈Zp, where p is a ﬁxed
prime agreed upon in advance.
1 Each Pi chooses his secret xi, two random integers ri,1,ri,2 ∈Zp and sets
ri,3 = xi −ri,1 −ri,2 mod p.
2 Each Pi sends privately ri,2, ri,3 to P1, ri,1, ri,3 to P2, and ri,1, ri,2 to
P3. This should result in P1, holds r1,2, r1,3, r2,2, r2,3 and r3,2, r3,3.
3 Each Pi computes sℓ= r1,ℓ+ r2,ℓ+ r3,ℓmod p for ℓ̸= i and announces
sℓto all parties. Meaning each Pi compute and announces two values.
4 All parties computes v = s1 + s2 + s3 mod p
In protocol 3, is a method for three participants to do secure addition between
each other. Meaning that no participants learns the other participants’ inputs.
When working with security protocol such as protocol 3, or some of the cryp-
tosystem mentioned in later sections, it is important to beware of the types of
adversaries existing in the topic of multiparty computation:
Semi-honest or passive security is the adversary model, where the
adversaries follows the speciﬁcations of the protocol. However the ad-
versaries will gather all the information received during the execution
of the protocol. While making a system that provide security against
this type of adversary, it is not providing a strong security in real sit-
uations. It is however, a good starting points for making a system for
higher level of security. [NCD14].
==PAGE:38==
24
Preliminaries
Malicious or active security is the adversary model, where the
adversaries tries to deviate from the protocol and actively do actions
in order to compromise the system and gather conﬁdential information
[NCD14].
2.8
Homomorphic Encryption
In cryptology, encryption schemes have the purpose of preventing unauthorised
access by making the content unintelligible. There are two main categories for
encryption schemes; symmetric and asymmetric schemes.
Symmetric schemes are those cryptosystem, where the same key is needed in
order to encrypt and decrypt the content. Meaning all parties involved in this
system needs to be trusted.
The public key schemes, also known as asymmetric, are the ones which have
two keys; the secret key and the public key. The public key is the key used to
encrypt message and that key is published, thus is accessible for anyone. The
knowledge of the public key should not make it possible to compute the secret
key. The secret key is only known to the party which receives the encrypted
messages and is the only key capable of decrypting the messages [Knu17].
For this thesis, the focus will be on public key encryption scheme and more
speciﬁc homomorphic encryption scheme. Homomorphic encryption is used to
describe an encryption scheme which has a special feature, that is the capability
of doing mathematical operations in the encrypted domain. Some well known
encryption scheme are; ElGamal [Elg85] and Paillier [Pai99]. For this project
the focus will be on using the encryption schemes from Damgård, Geisler and
Krøigård (DGK), and Paillier.
These scheme have additive homomorphic properties, meaning they are partially
homomorphic encryption scheme and not fully. The reason for using partially
instead of fully is the run time. Torres et. al. studied the eﬀectiveness of fully
homomorphic encryption by applying it to an iris veriﬁcation system, using ham-
ming distance. It took them 10.4 minutes to compare two biometric templates
in the encrypted domain. The process consisted of key generation, encryption,
Hamming distance computation, decryption, and threshold comparison to get
the results: granted or denied. The Hamming took 6.5 minutes and the equip-
ment used for the experiment was an Intel Core i7-3630QM at 2.40 GHz with
a 16-GB memory, and the implementation was done in Java [TBS14]. It is a
long time for doing a veriﬁcation using Hamming distance and is not realistic
==PAGE:39==
2.8 Homomorphic Encryption
25
for real world usage.
Blanton and Gasti were able to do a comparison between two iris in 0.15 seconds.
The equipment used for the experiment were an Intel Core 2 Duo 2.13 GHz
machine running Linux (kernel 2.6.35) with 3-GB of RAM, gcc version 4.4.5,
and the implementation was done in C. The security used in the implementation
were DGK, garbled circuit and oblivious transfer. For more details see [BG11].
With the two cases stated above, it can be observed that there is a large diﬀer-
ence in run time. Even with the clear diﬀerence in computation resources and
choice of programming language. Given the large diﬀerence in run time, this
thesis will focus on partially homomorphic encryption scheme.
2.8.1
Paillier encryption
Pascal Paillier came with a paper in 1999 which purposed a new public-key
encryption scheme based on on composite residuosity classes [Pai99]. At the
writing of his work, Paillier mentioned two major species of trapdoor techniques
that were in used. The ﬁrst technique were conjugates to the polynomial-time
extraction of roots of polynomials over a ﬁnite ﬁeld with the intractability of
factoring large numbers [Pai99]. This technique are used, for instance in RSA
[RSA78] and an elliptic curve versions of RSA, KMOV [KMOV91]. The other
technique were the combination of the homomorphic properties of the modular
exponentiation, and the intractability of extracting discrete logarithms over ﬁ-
nite groups [Pai99]. This technique were for instance used in a scheme like El
Gamal [Elg85].
In [Pai99], Paillier purposed a new trapdoor technique which is based on com-
posite residuosity classes, and more speciﬁc hard to factor number n = pq where
p and q are two large prime numbers. With this new trapdoor technique, Paillier
have made an encryption scheme which have become well known and used, even
within biometric [BC08, PPRU14].
2.8.2
DGK
The homomorphic encryption scheme from Damgård, Geisler and Krøigård
[DGK08, DGK09], is an encryption scheme which has good performance com-
pared to other schemes in the same category [ICNL16, BBC+10], especially
when the plaintext is small. For the rest of this paper, the encryption scheme
==PAGE:40==
26
Preliminaries
from Damgård, Geisler and Krøigård will be referred to as DGK. The DGK en-
cryption scheme is published in [DGK08] and applied to online auctions within
the paper.
With the use of DGK scheme on 16 bits integers and security similar to 1024
RSA, it took 0.28 sec for Damgård et. al to do secure comparison. That time
included all computation and communication needed to do the comparison.
Some time after [DGK08] they discovered a vulnerability in the DGK scheme
and therefore made a correction, [DGK09], to keep the encryption scheme secure.
The method to generate the keys parameters are diﬀerent from Paillier en-
cryption because it is an other scheme. An interesting diﬀerence compared to
Paillier, is the decryption of the ciphertexts. Because, the decryption of a ci-
phertext yield a value that is uniquely for the encrypted message. Meaning it is
required to have the knowledge of which unique value correspond to the original
value.
2.9
FMR and FNMR
False match rate (FMR) and false non match rate (FNMR) are two performance
indicators, which will be used to compare the biometric recognition performance
between the systems. FMR is the percentage of impostors attempts which are
falsely determined to be a match with a template of another object. FNMR is the
percentage of genuine attempts which are falsely determined to be a mismatch
to a template of the same object. The FMR and FNMR can be calculated with
the following:
FMR =
False positive
True negative + False positive100
(2.9)
FNMR =
False negative
True positive + False negative100
(2.10)
2.10
Database
The ﬁngerprints used in this thesis are from Fingerprint Veriﬁcation Com-
petition 2006, will be referred to as FVC2006, which contain four databases
==PAGE:41==
2.10 Database
27
[CFFM07]. Each database have utilise a diﬀerent capture technology. Speciﬁ-
cation of the databases can be seen in table 2.1 and the virtual representation
of each image can be seen in ﬁgure 2.7.
Technology
Image
Resolution
DB1
Electric Field Sensor (AuthenTec)
96 × 96
250 dpi
DB2
Optical Sensor (BiometriKa)
400 × 560
569 dpi
DB3
Thermal Sweeping Sensor (Atmel)
400 × 500
500 dpi
DB4
Synthetic Generator (SFinGe v3.0)
288 × 384
About 500 dpi
Table 2.1: A description of the databases from FVC2006 [CFFM07].
For this thesis the database DB2 will be used for every ﬁngerprint template
utilised, such that the diﬀerent in performance can be related to the methods
used. DB2 contain two sets of ﬁngerprints; DB2_A and DB2_B. DB2_A con-
tain 140 ﬁngers each with 12 samples, giving a total of 1, 680 ﬁngerprints. While
DB2_B contains 10 ﬁngers with 12 samples eachs, giving a total of 120 ﬁnger-
prints. Throughout this thesis DB2_A will be the testing set and DB2_B will
be the training set.
Figure 2.7: The 1_1.bmp images from DB1, DB2, DB3 and DB4 from left to
right, respectively.
A thing to notice in this database, db2, is that the ﬁngerprint quality can vary,
which can be seen in ﬁgure 2.8 and 2.9. On the ﬁgure to the left, is a ﬁngerprint
of lesser quality. A ﬁngerprint of such quality may inﬂuence the outcome of a
ﬁngerprint’s template extraction algorithm, when comparing it to a ﬁngerprint
of a better quality, the one to the right.
==PAGE:42==
28
Preliminaries
Figure 2.8: First ﬁgure
Figure 2.9: Secound ﬁgure
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 3
Related Work
In [SSNO12] Siamak et al present a ﬁngerprint recognition protocol based on
minutiae-based comparison. It is a method to compare ﬁngerprint based on the
minutiae existing on the ﬁnger. It is rather discriminable given its strict analogy
with the way forensic experts compare ﬁngerprints. Therefore it accepted as a
proof of identify in the courts of law in many countries [MMJP09].
The paper [JPHP00] from Jain et al. present a diﬀerent way, than the Minutiae-
based comparison, to do biometric recognition on ﬁngerprints. This method
uses the texture of a ﬁngerprint to create a biometric template that is called
FingerCode. Even this method is not as discriminative as the minutiae-based
methods, it allows for a ﬁxed length feature vector. The implementation of the
representation and comparison schemes in the paper assume that the reference
point can be determined with a acceptable accuracy.
The paper [ICNL16] from Im et al. is about privacy-preserving on palm print
recognition using homomorphic encryption. They are using a samsung phone
and a computer for setting up a two party system. The phone is using its camera
to capture the biometric data of the palm. With the implementation of a Paillier
scheme, a somewhat homomorphic encryption (SHE), they create a biometric
system that can do a biometric veriﬁcation in 18.25 seconds.
==PAGE:44==
30
Related Work
In [MRY16], Yasuda et al.
use a somewhat homomorphic encryption from
[NLV11]. That is based on the ring learning with errors (ring-LWE) and secure
Hamming distance calculating for biometric recognition. What they contributed
with their paper is a packing method that reduce both the encryption data size
and the performance in several computations. They made it with focus on the
Hamming, and the Euclidean distances on encrypted data.
For fully homomorphic encryption Torres et al. [TBS14] implemented a system
based on iris recognition with use of the fully homomorphic encryption from
Gentry et al. [BGV12]. This system is relying on Hamming distance to compare
the biometric data.
The problem with fully homomorphic encryption is the
increased complexity and computation requirement. Compared to Yasuda et al.
[MRY16] time of 12.43 ms, this system requires total time of 10.4 minutes for
comparing two biometric templates.
A diﬀerent approach from Barni et al. in [BBC+10] is to include garbled cir-
cuit and oblivious transfer as they are tackling the problem in a multi-party
settings. They include both methods in order to increase the privacy of the
biometric data. Hence no party reveals any data except the outcome of the
comparison. Garbled circuit is a method that allows a party to securely evaluate
any function that is represented as a boolean circuit and the method originate
from [Yao86]. Oblivious transfer is a method for the receiver to learn of one the
inputs from the sender, without the sender knowing which input the receiver
received. For oblivous transfer they used the improved version from [NP01] and
for homomorphic encryption scheme they used Paillier [Pai99]. With this im-
plementation on FingerCode, Barni et al. reached a time of 16 seconds for one
biometric recognition done oﬄine.
In a later work [BG11] Blanton and Gasti did an implementation of a biometric
system much like [BBC+10] for iris, FingerCode and minutiae-based compari-
son. In this work Blanton and Gasti are capable of doing an iris comparison in
0.15 second with online communication. For ﬁngerprint recognition, they are
at 1 ms for FingerCode and 1 second per record for minutiae pairings. Com-
pared to the other work [BBC+10], Blanton and Gasti utilize Damgård et al.
additive homomorphic encryption from [GK, DGK08] and use some methods
to reduce the overhead in the system, thus reducing the time needed to do the
computations.
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4
implementation and
performance
This chapter will describe the experimental setup and experimental work com-
pleted during this thesis. The ﬁrst section will describe the experimental en-
vironment with focus on computational resources and programming languages.
The second section will describe the experimental work done on homomorphic
encryption. the third and fourth section will describe the experimental work
done on FingerCode and Minutiae-based respectively.
The last section will
present the result side by side to give a comparison between the systems. This
will be followed by the discussion chapter.
4.1
Experimental environment
4.1.1
Hardware
All run time measurement stated in this thesis, are executed on the following
system:
==PAGE:46==
32
implementation and performance
CPU
intel R
⃝CoreTMi5-5257U CPU @ 2.70GHz
RAM
8GB DDR3 @ 1867MHz
OS
macOS 10.14.2
Hard drive
251GB APPLE SSD SM0256G
Table 4.1: The hardware component list. Some components, such as the GPU,
are excluded from the as their inﬂuence on the run time are negli-
gible.
4.1.2
Software
All programming language used during this experiment are Python 3 with a
minimum version of 3.6, because it was a requirement for one of the libraries
used for encryption. Java for using an open-source code to extract minutiae
templates from the dataset and Python 2 to create FingerCode templates.
All own implemented code are written in Python 3 because: 1) It is one of the
programming languages which the writer is experienced with. 2) Do not need
to import libraries to work with integers of large sizes.
A disadvantage is that Python is dynamically typed language and run through
an interpreter. While a language like C++ is a statically typed language and is
pre-complied. Therefore, in the search of best run time possible, Python may
not be the best programming language to use. However, since all the biometric
systems and encryption schemes are implemented in Python 3. It is durable to
compare the performance of each system against each others.
4.1.3
Timer
The work of this thesis relies on the time it takes to execute various code,
operations, etc. Therefore, this subsection will deal with the method used to
document the run times.
To measure time it takes for some code to be executed, Python’s time library
will be used. Using this library for Python version 3.6, means that there are
two options:
time.perf_counter()
Return the value (in fractional seconds) of a performance counter,
i.e. a clock with the highest available resolution to measure a short
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Paillier encryption
33
duration. It does include time elapsed during sleep and is system-
wide. The reference point of the returned value is undeﬁned, so that
only the diﬀerence between the results of consecutive calls is valid.
New in version 3.3
time.process_time()
Return the value (in fractional seconds) of the sum of the system
and user CPU time of the current process. It does not include time
elapsed during sleep. It is process-wide by deﬁnition. The reference
point of the returned value is undeﬁned, so that only the diﬀerence
between the results of consecutive calls is valid.
New in version 3.3.
The description of these functions from Python’s time library are taken as is from
the documentation [Pyt].
The signiﬁcation diﬀerence between pref_counter
and process_time is that perf_counter include time elapsed during sleep and
is system-wide. While process_time does not include time elapsed during sleep
and is process-wide. Meaning the time diﬀerence between these two method can
be substantial. for instance, testing these two methods on generating the de-
cryption map for the DGK encryption scheme with a plaintext space of 131, 101
showed a clear diﬀerence. With the use of process_time the median run time
were 0.28125 seconds, while pref_counter were 30.72360 seconds. Since the use
of process_time did not give a true indication of how much time elapsed when
testing the run time of DGK generate decryption map and others, the time
function used in this thesis will be pref_counter.
The measurement of time elapsed for executing code varies from measurement to
measurement. Therefore, when stating the run time for a process or operation,
the run time will be based upon the median of multiple measurements.
4.2
Paillier encryption
4.2.1
Parameters requirements
Generating the parameters for Paillier ﬁrstly requires an predetermined bit-
length k. When the k is chosen, two large primes of bit-length k/2 are selected
for p and q. This result in n getting a size of k, because n = pq and therefore
the product of the two large primes. Then λ = lcm(p −1, q −1) is computed.
==PAGE:48==
34
implementation and performance
Afterwards g ∈Z∗
n2 is randomly selected such that it of order divisible by n. This
is be ensured by u = L(gλ mod n2)−1 mod n exists, where L(x) = x−1
n
[Pai99].
For a step by step approach to generate the key parameters, see algorithm 4.
Algorithm 4: Key generation for Paillier encryption scheme.
Data: k, the wanted bit-length of n.
Result: The public key (n, g) and the private key (λ, u)
1 Randomly select two k/2 bit-length primes, p and q, such that
gcd(pq, (p −1)(q −1)) = 1.
2 Compute n = pq and λ = lcm(p −1, q −1).
3 Randomly select g ∈Z∗
n2 and ensure u = L(gλ mod n2)−1 mod n exists for
the selected g value.
4 return n, g, λ, u
4.2.2
Encryption
To encrypt a message, m, using Paillier encryption scheme, m must be a integer
(i.e.
m ∈Z∗
n) and 0 ≤m < n.
The method to encrypt using the Paillier
encryption scheme is:
c = gmrn
mod n2
(4.1)
The constants n and g are from the public key. r is a randomly selected value
where r ∈Z∗
n2 and gcd(r, n) = 1.
4.2.3
Decryption
To decrypt a ciphertext, c, the private key from algorithm 4 is required. With
the private key, the ciphertext can be decrypted with the following:
m = L(cλ
mod n2)u
mod n
(4.2)
4.2.4
Homomorphic properties
Paillier have additive homomorphic properties with the functions m 7→gmrn
mod n2, the one mentioned and used in this thesis, and m 7→gm+nr mod n2
which is in paper [Pai99], but not mentioned or used. This result in Paillier
encryption scheme having the following identities [Pai99]:
==PAGE:49==
4.3 DGK encryption
35
Dec(Enc(m1)Enc(m2)
mod n2) = m1 + m2
mod n
Dec(Enc(m)k
mod n2) = m1 + k
mod n
Dec(Enc(m1)gm2
mod n2) = m1 + m2
mod n
Dec(Enc(m1)m2
mod n2) = m1m2
mod n
Dec(Enc(m2)m1
mod n2) = m1m2
mod n
4.2.5
Performance
In the table below (4.2) are the run times for the various operations, that the
encryption scheme is capable of.
Key Size
1024 bit-length
2048 bit-length
Key generation
0.17 sec
1.07 sec
Encrypt
1.61 × 10−2 sec
0.11 sec
Decryption
1.64 × 10−2 sec
0.11 sec
Addition
1.49 × 10−5 sec
4.96 × 10−5 sec
Multiplication
1.32 × 10−5 sec
4.53 × 10−5 sec
Table 4.2: This table state the time it takes for each operation to be executed.
In the table it can be seen that the time it takes to encrypt and decrypt in
Paillier’s encryption scheme is roughly the same, while it is apparently faster
to do multiplication than addition. For a keysize of 1024 bit multiplication is
faster by a factor of 1.1287 and by a factor of 1.095% for 2048 bit key size.
4.3
DGK encryption
4.3.1
Parameters requirements
To generate the keys for the DGK scheme, three input parameters are needed:
k, t and ℓ. The condition for these input parameters is k > t > ℓ.
The parameter k is the bit length for the Rivest-Shamir-Adleman (RSA) mod-
ulus n and the RSA modulus is calculated by n = pq, where p and q are primes
of k/2 bit size.
==PAGE:50==
36
implementation and performance
The parameter t is an ’information theoretic’ security parameter, that is ap-
proximately the logarithm of the size of the subgroup of Z∗
n. Hence t needs to
be an integer which is large enough so an exhaustive search for the order of the
subgroup and other generic attacks are not feasible. Therefore, t need to be an
integer which is large enough such that 2t/2 exponentiation is not feasible.
The parameter ℓcan be any positive integer below t, however the smaller the
size of ℓis, the faster is the DGK scheme. The reason for this can be seen in
their paper [DGK08]. At the start of the protocol, C sends one message to A
and B, where each message have a size of O(ℓlog ℓ+ k). To do a comparison
A and B sends a message to each other, where both message have a size of
O(ℓk). For the computational complexity, both A and B need to do O(l(t+log ℓ)
multiplications mod n. As seen in [DGK08], the processing time for the protocol
is rather depending on ℓand k. An important thing to notice when selecting ℓ
is that the plaintext space for DGK is Zu and u is the next prime after ℓ+ 2.
Meaning the size of ℓis depending on the application of which DGK scheme will
be applied to.
With k, t and ℓchosen, it is possible to get the rest of the parameters to generate
the keys. The prime u is the next prime after ℓ+ 2, vp and vq are two random
t-bit primes. The primes p and q must be chosen such that they satisfy the
following conditions:
• p and q must be of k/2-bit size.
• u should divide both p −1 and q −1.
• vp should divide p −1.
• vq should divide q −1.
When the prime pair p and q have been selected then n = pq can be computed.
The g and h are random elements chosen from Z∗
n, with the condition that g
have to be of order uvpvq and h to be of order vqvp.
4.3.2
Generating the parameters
For generating the parameters, especially g and h, the approach from Mihai
Todor’s SeComLib [Tod17] was used. A problem with the implementation of
the DGK scheme were how to eﬃciently generate g and h, and Todor’s method
==PAGE:51==
4.3 DGK encryption
37
to generate those two parameter was the best found method during the writing
of the thesis, because it was computational eﬃcient.
The approach relies on algorithm 4.83, 4.80 and 2.121 from the Handbook of Ap-
plied Cryptography [MVOV01]. The used algorithms can be seen in algorithms
5 and 6.
Algorithm 5: Selecting an element of maximum order in Z∗
n, where n = pq.
Algorithm 4.83 from [MVOV01].
Data: two distinct odd primes, p, q, and the factorizations of p −1 and q −1.
Result: an element α of maximum order lcm(p −1, q −1) in Z∗
n, where n = pq
1 Use Algorithm 6 (4.80 in the book) with G = Z∗
p and p −1 to ﬁnd a generator a
of Z∗
p.
2 Use Algorithm 6 (4.80 in the book) with G = Z∗
q and q −1 to ﬁnd a generator b
of Z∗
q.
3 Use Gauss’s algorithm (Algorithm 2.121 in the book) to ﬁnd an integer
α, 1 ≤α ≤n −1, satisfying α ≡(mod p) and α ≡b (mod q)
4 return α
To utilise algorithm 5, it is clear to see that the factorisations of p−1 and q−1 are
required. Therefore, generating the p −1, q −1 and their factorisations are the
ﬁrst objective. Instead of trying to factorise p −1 and q −1, an other approach
is used, assuming it does not eﬀect the security assumptions of the encryption
scheme. The other approach calculates p and q as follows: p = 2prvpu + 1,
p −1 = 2prvpu, q = 2qrvqu + 1, q −1 = qrvqu, where p and q are primes. The
factor of 2 is required for p −1 and q −1 to make it an even number, because
the product of three primes are odds. Thus this approach relies on generating
the parameters pr, qr, vp, vq and u ﬁrst. How to generate vp, vq and u should
be clear enough from the description in section 4.3.1. pr and qr are random
primes, and are of a size which will result in p = 2prvpu + 1 and q = 2qrvqu + 1
to be of k/2 bit-length primes.
==PAGE:52==
38
implementation and performance
Algorithm 6: Finding a generator of a cyclic group.
Algorithm 4.80 from
[MVOV01].
Data: a cyclic group G of order n, and the prime factorization
n = pe1
1 pe2
2 ...pkek.
Result: a generator α og G.
1 Choose a random element α in G.
2 for i := 0 to k do
Compute b ←αn/pi
If b = 1 then go to step 1.
end
3 return α
With p−1 and q−1 generated, it is possible to compute g, h. h must be of order
vpvq mod p and q, and g must be of order vpvqu mod p and q, as mentioned in
section 4.3.1. This means the following conditions have to be met:
• hvq ̸= 1
• hvp ̸= 1
• hvpvq = 1
• h ∈Z∗
n →gcd(h, n) = 1
• h > 1
• gvq ̸= 1
• gvp ̸= 1
• gu ̸= 1
• guvpvq = 1
• g ∈Z∗
n →gcd(g, n) = 1
• g > 1
By having the factorisations of p −1 and q −1, and the order conditions for
g and h: It should be possible to have g = g2prqru
r
(mod n) and h = h2prqr
r
(mod n). Thus generating gr and hr of order lcm(p −1, q −1) = (p −1)(q −
1)/gcd(p −1, q −1) = 2qrprvpvqu in Z∗
n utilising algorithm 5. In the ﬁrst step
of the algorithm, hrp and grp are found. These are two random integers which
satisﬁes the following conditions:
• hrp ̸= 1
• gcd(hrp, p) = 1
• hvpu2
rp
mod p ̸= 1
• hpru2
rp
mod p ̸= 1
• hprvp2
rp
mod p ̸= 1
• hprvpu
rp
mod p ̸= 1
• grp ̸= 1
• gcd(grp, p) = 1
==PAGE:53==
4.3 DGK encryption
39
• gvpu2
rp
mod p ̸= 1
• gpru2
rp
mod p ̸= 1
• gprvp2
rp
mod p ̸= 1
• gprvpu
rp
mod p ̸= 1
The purpose of step 1 is to ﬁnd a generator a of Z∗
p and since the purpose of
step 2 is to ﬁnd a generator b of Z∗
q. The method is the same, ﬁnd hrq and
grq, where the diﬀerence is Z∗
q. Meaning every occurrence of pr, vp and p in the
conditions from step 1 should be changed to qr, vq and q respectively.
Algorithm 7: Gauss’s algorithm (2.121) from [MVOV01].
The solution x to the simultaneous congruences in the Chinese remainder
theorem (Fact 2.120) may be computed as x = Σk
i=1aiNiMi mod n, where
Ni = n/ni and Mi = N −1
i
mod ni. These computations can be performed in
O((lgn)2) bit operations.
With hrp, grp, grq and hrq computed, it is possible to compute gr and hr using
algorithm 7.
hr = (hrpq(q−1
mod p) + hrqp(p−1
mod q))
mod n
gr = (grpq(q−1
mod p) + grqp(p−1
mod q))
mod n
By computing gr and hr, it is easy to compute g and h by:
g = g2prqru
r
(mod n)
h = h2prqr
r
(mod n)
As stated previous in this subsection.
Thus the method to compute all the
parameters needed for the DGK scheme have been shown.
4.3.3
Homomorphic properties
The homomorphic properties for DGK are the same as for Pailier homomorphic
cryptosystem [Pai99]. Hence the homomorphic properties for DGK cryptosys-
tem are:
Dec(Enc(m1)Enc(m2)
mod n) = (m1 + m2)
mod n
Dec(Enc(m1)gm2
mod n) = (m1 + m2)
mod n
Dec(Enc(m1)m2
mod n) = (m1m2)
mod n
Dec(Enc(m2)m1
mod n) = (m1m2)
mod n
Dec(Enc(m)k
mod n) = (mk)
mod n
==PAGE:54==
40
implementation and performance
4.4
Performance
In table 4.3 the run times for the DGK scheme can be seen. The table contain
the it took for the DGK to generate the keys, generate the decryption map,
encrypting an integer, decrypting an integer, do addition on two encrypted
integeres and multiplication on two encrypted integers, depending on the key
size and plaintext space.
Keysize
1024
1024
1024
Plaintext space
360
131.101
1.048.583
Keygeneration
15.16 sec
10.61 sec
9.98 sec
Generate
de-
cryption map
0.17 sec
20.86 sec
187.58 sec
Encrypting
3.63 × 10−2 sec
3.76 × 10−2 sec
3.62 × 10−2 sec
Decrypting
3.15 × 10−4
3.04 × 10−4
9.16 × 10−4
Addition
4.14 × 10−6
4.17 × 10−6
4.26 × 10−6
Multiplication
4.32 × 10−6
4.35 × 10−6
4.54 × 10−6
Key size
2048
2048
2048
Plaintext space
360
131.101
1.048.583
Key generation
194.46 sec
249.29 sec
380.52 sec
Generate
de-
cryption map
0.38 sec
60.36 sec
964.49 sec
Encrypting
4.09 × 10−2 sec
3.81 × 10−2 sec
5.58 × 10−2 sec
Decrypting
9.16 × 10−4
8.96 × 10−4
1.76 × 10−3
Addition
1.53 × 10−5
1.48 × 10−5
3.14 × 10−5
Multiplication
1.32 × 10−5
1.38 × 10−5
2.75 × 10−5
Table 4.3: A table containing the run time for the operations in DGK imple-
mentation.
An interesting thing to notice is the increase in time it takes to generate the
keys, when the plaintext space is decreased.
This indicate it is increasingly
diﬃcult to ﬁnd the parameters which satisﬁes the requirements when the size of
the plaintext space increases. Both the key generation and the generation of the
decryption map, are the two processes that takes time. These two process needs
to be executed only one time in order to get the encryption scheme working.
Therefore, the execution time for key generation and decryption map generation
(with the worst time of 205 seconds and 492.7 seconds respectively) is not as
critical as the other processes in the table.
When measuring the run time for key generation a large variation was observed.
For instance, measuring ten runs of the key generation for DGK with plaintext
==PAGE:55==
4.5 FingerCode
41
space of 131.101 and key size of 2048 gave the following times in seconds with
two decimals: 629.90, 470.62, 292.35, 290.43, 220.22, 109.74, 93.47, 60.99, 60.58
and 23.42. These run time clearly show the eﬀect of a process depending on
repeatedly selecting random integers that must certain requirements. While the
generation of the decryption map is more consistent. Here here are ten runs
given in seconds for DGK with 2048 bit key size, 131.101 plaintext space, and
ﬁve decimals for a comparison: 0.34375 ,0.296875, 0.296875, 0.28125, 0.28125,
0.28125, 0.28125, 0.28125, 0.28125 and 0.25000.
As stated in section 2.8.2 the decryption of a ciphertext yield a value which
is uniquely for the value encrypted. Meaning the times stated for decryption
in the table 4.3 are the time it takes to decrypt the ciphertext and use the de-
crypted value to receive the real value of the encrypted message from the Python
dictionary. This method is signiﬁcantly faster than systematically encrypt and
decrypt a value to check if it yields the same unique value. The worst case
scenario would be the time it takes to generate the decryption map. Meaning
it could take up to 492.79 seconds instead of 1.22 × 10−3.
Usage of the decryption map requires the storage of its information, but if it is
stored together with the private-key then the security of the scheme should not
be eﬀected. Because, if the map is stored with the private key with the same
level of protection. Then the map does not make a diﬀerence if the encryption
scheme have been comprised, as the map can be generate with the knowledge of
the private key. Thus making it favourable to create and use a decryption map
to gain a large time reduction when wanting to know the encrypted value.
Observing the times for addition and multiplication in table 4.3, it can be seen
the times are relatively close. It can be seen that with the increase of the key
size the diﬀerence between addition and multiplication are varies. For the key
size of 1024 addition is faster than multiplication by a factor of 1.0435, 1.0431
and 1.0649 for the lowest to the highest plaintext space respectively. For key
size of 2048 multiplication is faster by a factor of 1.160, 1.0740 and 1.143.
4.5
FingerCode
This chapter is be about the methods applied on the ﬁngerprint to create bio-
metric systems for FingerCode. There will be two versions of the system; one
with encryption and one with no encryption. The two versions of the system is
needed in order to validate that the biometric performance of the system will
not be aﬀected by applying homomorphic encryption.
==PAGE:56==
42
implementation and performance
4.5.1
Template
To extract the FingerCode templates from the ﬁngerprints present the database
DB2 [CFFM07], the implementation from easonlius on Github is used [eas16].
The implementation is based on Jain et al. work [JPHP00] and was developed
in Python 2. The implementation has been modiﬁed such that the extractor
takes most of ﬁngerprint when creating the templates, making it so the input
the template is based on, is as identical as possible between FingerCode and
Minutiae. An other modiﬁcation done to the implementation is the placement
of the reference point. This was done because the reliability of the reference
point detector in the implementation was mediocre for the ﬁngerprints presents
in the database. The paper which the implementation is made on, mentions
MSU_DBI and NIST 9 as databases. Therefore, the extractor was tested on
the NIST 9 dataset in order to see its performance on one of the dataset was
implemented for.
Out of the 4000 images taken from NIST 9, the FingerCode extracted 1866
templates giving a success rate of 46.65%.
During the extraction process it
was noticed that the FingerCode extractor sometimes detected the writing near
the ﬁngerprint as the core and created a template based on that. See ﬁgure
4.1 for an occurrence of this. Furthermore, the FingerCode extractor did not
detect a core point in some of the ﬁngerprint images and was another reason
for why the success rate was not 100%. Lastly, the implementation sometimes
throws a ZeroDivisionError when normalising the image. The implementation
was modiﬁed such that instead of detecting a core point, the core point was
set to be the center of the image. This was done to reach a 100% template
creation rate and because of the ﬁngerprints in images from DB2 are more or
less consistently centred. Another modiﬁcation were to the size of the sectors,
for the extractor takes as much of the ﬁngerprint as input data to approximate
the same level of data as the Minutiae-based system.
When extractor is used on images, the FingerCode template is stored in a text
ﬁle as a string. In that text ﬁle are 8 lists stored, one for each Gabor ﬁlter
rotation and in each list is there 80 data points. An example of this is:
[N1,1, N1,2, · · · , N1,80][N2,1, · · · ] · · · [· · · , N8,80]
To have a FingerCode encrypted system and preserve its privacy using squared
Euclidean distance, a modiﬁcation is made when enrolling the FingerCode tem-
plate. The modiﬁcation is that each value in the list are duplicated and squared,
==PAGE:57==
4.5 FingerCode
43
Figure 4.1: In this picture, it is visible that the FingerCode extractor some-
times detects the writing as the core of the ﬁnger.
meaning the templates for the encrypted systems instead are:
[N 2
1,1, N1,1, N 2
1,2, N1,2, · · · , N1,80][N 2
2,1, · · · ] · · · [· · · , N 2
8,80, N8,80]
This is done in order to negate the need to decrypt some of the values in the
templates from the database when computing the squared Euclidean distance.
This modiﬁcation does result in larger template size, but done in order to keep
the privacy of the users’ biometric data.
4.5.2
Biometric performance
In ﬁgure 4.2 are the curves for FMR and FNMR for the smaller dataset B. On
the horizontal axis is the threshold and there it can be seen that the range for
the threshold. It is for this reason that the plaintext space for DGK is u =
1, 048, 583, the smallest prime with the bit-length of 220, because the maximum
threshold value is 1, 005, 519.
The FMR and FNMR for the training set, DB2_B, is computed such that
the comparison for the genuine and imposters are calculated. As mentioned in
section 2.10 the training set have 10 ﬁngers, each with having 12 samples.
==PAGE:58==
44
implementation and performance
Figure 4.2: A plot of the FMR and FNMR for Fingercode on dataset B.
For the genuine scores, the ﬁrst sample of a ﬁnger is compared to all the other
samples of the identical ﬁnger and then continue with the second sample of the
ﬁnger to all the remaining samples. This will result in having 66 comparisons
scores for a ﬁnger, and this is repeated for all 10 ﬁngers of DB2_B, yielding in
total 660 genuine comparisons.
For the impostors scores, all the samples of a ﬁnger are compared to the sixth
sample of all the other ﬁngers. Yielding 108 comparisons for each ﬁnger and
1080 in total.
Doing the same for the testing set, DB2_A, will yield 9240 genuine comparisons
and 233520 impostor comparisons.
The threshold value is selected such that the FMR = 1% on the training set and
afterwards the threshold is applied on the testing set comparison scores. Thus,
enabling an evaluation of the FMR and FNMR of the testing set.
Looking at the curves for FMR and FNMR in the ﬁgure 4.2, it can be observed
that the biometric performance is not particularly good. Because, the threshold
where the FMR is close to 1% is 139780 and it result in a corresponding FNMR
at 73.79%. This means that if you only wants 1% of the impostors to gain access,
then 73.79% of the genuine users will be rejected. Applying the same threshold
on the test dataset, the DB2 A, the FMR is 1.48% and FNMR is 73.00%.
==PAGE:59==
4.5 FingerCode
45
Figure 4.3: FMR and FNMR for
the Paillier system.
Figure 4.4: FMR and FNMR for
the DGK system.
The ﬁgures 4.3, 4.4 are the FMR and FNMR for the Paillier and DGK respec-
tively. Comparing them to ﬁgure 4.2 they are identical and the same for the
distance scores. Meaning, the biometric performance between the unencrypted,
Paillier and DGK systems are the same, and the encryption schemes applied are
not aﬀecting the biometric performance.
4.5.3
Homomorphic encryption performance
The system consist of three entities; a client, authentication server and a database.
The client have the following permissions:
• Create template from presenta-
tion of biometric characteristics.
• Request an encrypted biometric
template from the database.
• Request public keys from au-
thentication server.
• Compute distance between two
templates.
The database have permission to send encrypted templates related to the re-
ceived ID. The authentication server have permissions to encrypt data, decrypt
data, compare distance to the threshold, accept and reject user. A visualisation
of the system can be seen in ﬁgure 4.5, were the steps needed for a veriﬁcation
transaction are shown.
Using the squared Euclidean distance mentioned in subsection 2.5.1 and step
by step process in ﬁgure 4.5. The following times for Paillier and DGK was
measured:
In the table 4.4 it can be observed that at a key size of 1024 bit-length, DGK
==PAGE:60==
46
implementation and performance
Figure 4.5: Step by step visualisation of a veriﬁcation transaction.
Key size
-
1024
2048
1024
2048
Scheme
-
Paillier
Paillier
DGK
DGK
Veriﬁcation
-
0.2614 sec
0.6728 sec
0.2502 sec
0.3598 sec
File size
3KB
326KB
662KB
166KB
498 KB
Table 4.4: The run time for the veriﬁcation transaction for FingerCode with
homomorphic encryption applied. The times shown are in seconds
and are the median of 100 runs. The ﬁle size is the average ﬁle size
of the templates created from the traning set, DB2_B.
==PAGE:61==
4.6 Minutiae-based recognition
47
have a veriﬁcation run time that is faster than Paillier by a factor of 1.0448. at
2048 bit-length DGK faster by a factor of 1.8700 . So at a lower key size the
run time between Paillier and DGK is close, but at higher key size, DGK takes
almost half time of Paillier to do a veriﬁcation for FingerCode.
Looking at the ﬁle size DGK also have an advantage of requiring smaller storage
resources.
At the case where DGK was faster by a factor of 1.0448% than
Paillier, DGK takes 50.92% of the space compared to Paillier. At key size 2048
DGK takes 75.23% of the space than the Paillier equivalent. So for FingerCode
DGK have the faster run time and require less space than Paillier.
4.6
Minutiae-based recognition
This section will be about the methods applied on ﬁngerprint recognition to
create biometric system for Minutiae-based recognition. As the methods ap-
plied to the biometric system are the same as the FingerCode, except that the
biometric recognition is based on Minutiae points and the distance metric used
is modiﬁed Hausdorﬀdistance. The structure of this section will be the same
as the Finger Code section 4.5.
4.6.1
Template
For minutiae points extractor SourceAFIS 3.1.1 for Java by Robert Važan is
used [Vaz18].
The code is not optimised for a speciﬁc ﬁngerprint database,
however he does mention NIST, Neurotech, FVC2000, FVC2002, and FVC2004
as sample databases that should be accessible if users have none. As mentioned
in section 2.10, the database used is FVC2006 DB2.
The extracted Minutiae data templates are stored in JSON format. An example
of the structure used for storing the information can be seen in listing 4.1.
Width and height contain the value of the ﬁngerprint image’s size in pixel count;
horizontal and vertical respectively. Given the DB2, width will contain the value
of 400 and height 560. minutiae holds all the Minutiae points detected in a list.
Each element in the list is a Python dictionary with the following keys: x, y,
direction and type. x and y contain the pixel coordinate for the Minutia point.
Direction holds the orientation of the Minutia point given in radians and type
state no matter if it is a ridge ending or bifurcation Minutia point.
Listing 4.1: An example of the json ﬁle structure for minutiae templates
==PAGE:62==
48
implementation and performance
1
{"width": "pixelWidth"
2
"height": "pixelHeight",
3
"minutiae":[
4
{"x": "xLocation", "y": "yLocation", "direction"
: "orientation", "type": "minutiaType"},...,
5
{"x": "xLocation", "y": "yLocation", "direction"
: "orientation", "type": "minutiaType"}
6
]
7
}
It should be noticed that the extractor, SourceAFIS, only detect ridge ending
and bifurcations and the length of the template varies depending on the amount
of minutiae detected.
The type of Minutiae detected by SourceAFIS should
suﬃce as Maltoni et. al. [MMJP09] states that the FBI minutiae-coordinate
model only considers ridge endings and bifurcations.
It should also be noted that SourceAFIS have a dpi option when creating tem-
plates. This option was selected to be 500 such that it correspond to the reso-
lution which the ﬁngerprint in DB2 were captured with.
4.6.2
Biometric performance
Figure 4.6: A plot showing the FMR and FNMR for the unencrypted
Minutiae-based biometric system.
==PAGE:63==
4.6 Minutiae-based recognition
49
Figure 4.6 show the FMR and FNMR for the training set data, DB2_B. Like in
ﬁgure 4.2, the horizontal axis is the threshold and the vertical is the percentage.
Selecting a threshold value of 2745 gives a FMR of 1.02% and a FNMR of
75.30%. Applying this threshold on the testing set, DB2_A, gives at FMR of
0.96% and FNMR of 75.75%. This means the biometric performance of the
Minutiae-based system is such that 0.96% of the impostors could gain access,
while 75.75% of the geniune will be rejected. It should be noted that this system
does not include the information of the direction of each minutia point.
Due to time constraints, the FMR and FNMR of the Paillier and DGK is not
computed.
A reason why can be seen in table 4.5, were the run time for a
veriﬁcation transaction is large. It should be noted that in order to validate that
the biometric performance is the same for unencrypted system and the encrypted
systems without the use of the FMR and FNMR values, templates were chosen
at random. The comparison score between these were computed and checked to
see if they matched the unencrypted system. The comparison scores from each
system were identical to each other and based on this, it was assumed that the
biometric performance were unaﬀected by applying homomorphic encryption.
An veriﬁcation transaction for the Minutiae based system can be seen in ﬁgure
4.7. The permission for each entity stays the same as for FingerCode. Compared
to the FingerCode, the largest diﬀerence is the distribution of computing the
comparison score for the templates.
4.6.3
Homomorphic encryption performance
Key size
-
1024
2048
1024
2048
Scheme
-
Paillier
Paillier
DGK
DGK
Veriﬁcation
-
97.86 sec
615.53 sec
52.79 sec
69.42 sec
File size
3.9 KB
30.7KB
60.6KB
15.4KB
45.2KB
Table 4.5: The run time for the veriﬁcation transaction for Minutiae-based
system with homomorphic encryption applied. The times shown
are in seconds and are the median of 10 runs.
The ﬁle size are
the average size from the templates created from the training set,
DB2_B.
Observing table 4.5, there is a clear diﬀerence in term of time. At a key size
of 1024 bit-length, DGK faster by a factor of 1.8537 than the Paillier and as
for 2048 bit-length DGK is faster by a factor of 8.8671. An interesting thing
to observe here is the time diﬀerence between 1024 bit-length Paillier and 2048
bit-length DGK. Because in subsection 4.2.4 and subsection 4.3.3, the homo-
==PAGE:64==
50
implementation and performance
Figure 4.7: A visualisation of a veriﬁcation transaction for the minutiae-based
system.
morphic properties for Paillier encryption scheme and DGK encryption scheme
are respectively listed. And in those lists, Paillier have
mod n2 and DGK have
mod n, a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in terms of bit-length size of the encrypted value.
However even if 1024 Paillier and 2048 DGK have similar bit-length size for
their encrypted values, DGK is faster by a factor of 1.4097 than the Paillier.
File size wise, it can be seen in the table that at 1024 key size, DGK takes
50.16% of the space which the Paillier uses and at key size 2048 DGK takes
74.59% of space.
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 5
Comparison and benchmark
The previous Chapter 4, described in which hardware and software environment
the experiment were run, the implementations of the biometric system, the bio-
metric performance of the systems, and homomorphic encryption performance
separately. In this Chapter each system will be benchmarked against each other
and the diﬀerence them will be discussed.
5.1
Biometric performance
In table 5.1 the biometric performance numbers for the FingerCode system and
the Minutiae-based system are shown.
Systems
FMR
FNMR
FingerCode train set
1.02%
73.79%
FingerCode test set
1.46%
73.00%
Minutiae train set
1.02%
75.30%
Minutiae test set
0.95%
75.75%
Table 5.1: The biometric performance of the FingerCode and Minutiae sys-
tems.
==PAGE:66==
52
Comparison and benchmark
In the table it can be observed that the Minutiae-based ﬁngerprint recognition
system have a lower biometric performance than the FingerCode recognition
system.
As mentioned previously, the Minutiae-based system does not take
the direction of the Minutiae points in to consideration when computing the
comparison score between two templates. Another thing is that the amount of
Minutiae points detected varies quite a bit. Taking the whole DB2 dataset in
to regards, the template with the fewest Minutiae points detected is 49_1 from
DB2_A with 15 Minutiae points detected. From both DB2_A and DB2_B the
largest amount of Minutiae points detected in a ﬁngerprint is 100.
The biometric performance is not near the state of art, but do not matter in this
thesis. Because the focus of thesis is to show that by applying homomorphic
encryption on the biometric system, the biometric performance is not aﬀected by
it. For FingerCode it was possible to create the same FMR and FNMR values
on the training set. For Minutiae due to time constraints, the same random
templates were selected from the encrypted system and the unencrypted system
to validate that the comparison score is the same.
5.2
Applying homomorphic encryption
In table 5.2 are the homomorphic encryption performance values for both the
FingerCode and Minutiae systems.
Key size
-
1024
2048
1024
2048
Scheme
-
Paillier
Paillier
DGK
DGK
Veriﬁcation
-
0.2614 sec
0.6728 sec
0.2502 sec
0.3598 sec
File size
3KB
326KB
662KB
166KB
498 KB
Key size
-
1024
2048
1024
2048
Scheme
-
Paillier
Paillier
DGK
DGK
Veriﬁcation
-
97.86 sec
615.53 sec
52.79 sec
69.42 sec
File size
3.9 KB
30.7KB
60.6KB
15.4KB
45.2KB
Table 5.2: A combination of the tables 4.4 and 4.5. The upper table is for the
FingerCode and the lower is for Minutiae.
Observing table 5.2 it clear that FingerCode, regarding all the encryption schemes
and key sizes, have run times for veriﬁcation that are many times faster than the
Minutiae systems. Using the FingerCode systems, the veriﬁcation transaction
takes a fraction of a second, while Minutiae takes from just under a minute to
around ten minutes. It is doubtful getting people to use a product that uses
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Applying homomorphic encryption
53
biometric security and demands a wait time of 615 second to accept or reject.
What is of interest here is the diﬀerence in term of speed between Paillier and
DGK.
The speed improvement in the FingerCode system using DGK instead of Paillier
is not as clear as it is for the case of the Minutiae system. In the FingerCode, a
part of the comparison score is pre-computed when creating the template due to
privacy, and thus reducing the amount of computation required. Therefore, it
can be a reasonable explanation for the lower gain from using DGK for Finger-
Code. Looking at table 5.3, the run time for each operation for the encryption
schemes are stated.
Keysize
1024
1024
1024
Plaintext space
360
131.101
1.048.583
Keygeneration
15.16 sec
10.61 sec
9.98 sec
Generate decryption map
0.17 sec
20.86 sec
187.58 sec
Encrypting
3.63 × 10−2 sec
3.76 × 10−2 sec
3.62 × 10−2 sec
Decrypting
3.15 × 10−4
3.04 × 10−4
9.16 × 10−4
Addition
4.14 × 10−6
4.17 × 10−6
4.26 × 10−6
Multiplication
4.32 × 10−6
4.35 × 10−6
4.54 × 10−6
Key size
2048
2048
2048
Plaintext space
360
131.101
1.048.583
Key generation
194.46 sec
249.29 sec
380.52 sec
Generate decryption map
0.38 sec
60.36 sec
964.49 sec
Encrypting
4.09 × 10−2 sec
3.81 × 10−2 sec
5.58 × 10−2 sec
Decrypting
9.16 × 10−4
8.96 × 10−4
1.76 × 10−3
Addition
1.53 × 10−5
1.48 × 10−5
3.14 × 10−5
Multiplication
1.32 × 10−5
1.38 × 10−5
2.75 × 10−5
Key Size
1024 bit-length
2048 bit-length
Key generation
0.17 sec
1.07 sec
Encrypt
1.61 × 10−2 sec
0.11 sec
Decryption
1.64 × 10−2 sec
0.11 sec
Addition
1.49 × 10−5 sec
4.96 × 10−5 sec
Multiplication
1.32 × 10−5 sec
4.53 × 10−5 sec
Table 5.3: The ﬁrst two tables are for DGK and the last one is for Paillier.
Observing the table and looking at the time it takes to compute an addition and
a multiplication for 2048 DGK with largest plaintext space and 2048 Paillier.
DGK’s multiplication is faster by a factor of 1.6497 and addition is 1.5806.
So mathematical operations wise, DGK have a preferable advantage to Paillier
regarding run time. Generation of keys and decryption map, DGK is a lot slower
than Paillier, but as it only needs to be performed once. The time taken is not
==PAGE:68==
54
Comparison and benchmark
critical. DGK when compared to Paillier regarding their scheme only, DGK
have the advantages of run times.
There is a larger time diﬀerence for the Minutiae-based system than the Fin-
gerCode. Because, the Minutiae-based system uses a distance metric that have
more computations with modiﬁed Hausdorﬀdistance than squared Euclidean
distance for FingerCode.
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
The main task of this thesis were to investigate: How do Minutiae-based and
FingerCode ﬁnger veriﬁcation systems benchmark against each other when ap-
plying homomorphic encryption to the systems? It were done by implementing
the two encryption schemes Paillier and DGK.
Applying these schemes to the FingerCode and the Minutiae-based system
showed that the biometric performance was not aﬀected and it gave some inter-
esting results. While the FingerCode system clearly had the best times for the
veriﬁcation transaction . The Minutiae-based system show a massive diﬀerence
in term of computation speed between Paillier and DGK.
By testing the encryption schemes and applying them on FingerCode and Minutiae-
based recognition systems, the advantages and disadvantages of the encryption
schemes were observed. One of the disadvantage of homomorphic encryption
scheme is the cost of increased run time and depending on the distance met-
ric used, the cost can be quite high. The worst case being the minutiae-based
system using Paillier and the best case being FingerCode using DGK.
Another trade-oﬀfor using homomorphic encryption is the increased size of the
biometric template and depending on the encryption scheme, the size increase
vary. Here the worst case being FingerCode using Paillier and the best case
being Minutiae using DGK.
==PAGE:70==
56
Conclusion
The advantages of using homomorphic encryption scheme on the biometric sys-
tems, are the increased level of privacy and the protection of the users’ biometric
data. Another advantage speciﬁc for the homomorphic encryption scheme is the
ability to do computations in the encrypted domain and thus reducing the need
to decrypt sensitive information to do the computations.
During the thesis it was also observed that DGK had clear advantage over
Paillier, especially when the plaintext space of the DGK scheme is small.
6.1
Future work
In this thesis homomorphic encryption were used to create a privacy preserving
systems, as they were designed for passive security. It could be interesting to
evaluate a system using homomorphic encryption for active security.
Another thing would be to include other homomorphic encryption shemes such
as Okamoto–Uchiyama, Benaloh and Boneh–Goh–Nissim. The addition of these
schemes could give a more comprehensive overview of partially homomorphic
encryption and how they perform on biometric ﬁngerprint systems.
The Minutiae-based system could also be further improve such that it takes the
direction of each minutia point into account. Thus, function similar to other
Minutiae-based systems and give a run time indication for such systems.
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[Ash99]
David R Ashbaugh. Quantitative-qualitative friction ridge analysis.
CRC Press, 1999.
[BBC+10]
Mauro Barni, Tiziano Bianchi, Dario Catalano, Mario Di Rai-
mondo, Ruggero Donida Labati, Pierluigi Failla, Dario Fiore, Ric-
cardo Lazzeretti, Vincenzo Piuri, Fabio Scotti, and Alessandro Piva.
Privacy-preserving ﬁngercode authentication. In Proceedings of the
12th ACM Workshop on Multimedia and Security, MM&#38;Sec
’10, pages 231–240, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.
[BC08]
Julien Bringer and Hervé Chabanne. An authentication protocol
with encrypted biometric data. In Serge Vaudenay, editor, Progress
in Cryptology – AFRICACRYPT 2008, pages 109–124, Berlin, Hei-
delberg, 2008. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[BG11]
Marina Blanton and Paolo Gasti.
Secure and eﬃcient protocols
for iris and ﬁngerprint identiﬁcation. In Vijay Atluri and Claudia
Diaz, editors, Computer Security – ESORICS 2011, pages 190–209,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[BGV12]
Zvika Brakerski, Craig Gentry, and Vinod Vaikuntanathan. (lev-
eled) fully homomorphic encryption without bootstrapping. In Pro-
ceedings of the 3rd Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science
Conference, ITCS ’12, pages 309–325, New York, NY, USA, 2012.
ACM.
[Bio11]
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 37 Biometrics. Information technology – bio-
metric data interchange formats – part 1: Framework. Technical
report, ISO, 2011.
==PAGE:72==
58
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[CFFM07] R. Cappelli, M. Ferrara, A. Franco, and D. Maltoni. Fingerprint
veriﬁcation competition 2006. Biometric Technology Today, 15(7-
8):7–9, 8 2007.
[DGK08]
Ivan Damgard, Martin Geisler, and Mikkel Kroigard. Homomorphic
encryption and secure comparison. Int. J. Appl. Cryptol., 1(1):22–
31, February 2008.
[DGK09]
Ivan Damgard, Martin Geisler, and Mikkel Kroigard.
A correc-
tion to &#39;eﬃcient and secure comparison for on&#45;line auc-
tions&#39;. Int. J. Appl. Cryptol., 1(4):323–324, August 2009.
[DJ94]
M. P. Dubuisson and A. K. Jain. A modiﬁed hausdorﬀdistance for
object matching. In Proceedings of 12th International Conference
on Pattern Recognition, volume 1, pages 566–568 vol.1, Oct 1994.
[eas16]
easonlius.
ﬁngercode.
https://github.com/easonlius/
fingercode, 2016.
[Elg85]
T. Elgamal.
A public key cryptosystem and a signature scheme
based on discrete logarithms. IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, 31(4):469–472, July 1985.
[Eur16]
European Parliament. EU Regulation 2016/679 on the Protection
of Individuals With Regard to the Processing of Personal Data and
on the Free Movement of Such Data (General Data Protection Reg-
ulation), 2016.
[GK]
Martin Geisler and Mikkel Krøigaard. A correction to “eﬃcient and
secure comparison for on-line auctions”.
[Hen00]
E. R. Henry. Classiﬁcation and uses of ﬁnger prints, 1900.
[ICNL16]
J. Im, J. Choi, D. Nyang, and M. Lee. Privacy-preserving palm
print authentication using homomorphic encryption. In 2016 IEEE
14th Intl Conf on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing,
14th Intl Conf on Pervasive Intelligence and Computing, 2nd Intl
Conf on Big Data Intelligence and Computing and Cyber Science
and Technology Congress(DASC/PiCom/DataCom/CyberSciTech),
pages 878–881, Aug 2016.
[ISO11]
ISO/IEC JTC1 SC27 Security Techniques. ISO/IEC 24745:2011.
Information Technology - Security Techniques - Biometric Infor-
mation Protection. International Organization for Standardization,
2011.
[ISO12]
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 37 Biometrics. ISO/IEC 2382-37:2012. Infor-
mation technology – Vocabulary – Part 37: Biometrics. Interna-
tional Organization for Standardization, 2012.
==PAGE:73==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
59
[JPH99]
A. K. Jain, S. Prabhakar, and Lin Hong. A multichannel approach
to ﬁngerprint classiﬁcation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, 21(4):348–359, April 1999.
[JPHP00]
A. K. Jain, S. Prabhakar, L. Hong, and S. Pankanti. Filterbank-
based ﬁngerprint matching. IEEE Transactions on Image Process-
ing, 9(5):846–859, May 2000.
[KMOV91] Kenji Koyama, Ueli M Maurer, Tatsuaki Okamoto, and Scott A
Vanstone. New public-key schemes based on elliptic curves over the
ring z_n, 1991.
[Knu17]
Lars R. Knudsen. Cryptology i, 2017.
[MMJP09] Davide Maltoni, Dario Maio, Anil K Jain, and Salil Prabhakar.
Handbook of Fingerprint Recognition. Springer London, 2009.
[MRY16]
Avradip Mandal, Arnab Roy, and Masaya Yasuda. Comprehensive
and improved secure biometric system using homomorphic encryp-
tion. Lecture Notes in Computer Science — 2016, Volume 9481,
pages 183–198, 2016.
[MVOV01] A. J Menezes, Paul C Van Oorschot, and Scott A Vanstone. Hand-
book of applied cryptography. CRC, 2001.
[NCD14]
Jesper Buus Nielsen, Roland Cramer, and Ivan Damgård. Secure
multiparty computation and secret sharing an information theoretic
approach, 2014.
[NLV11]
Michael Naehrig, Kristin Lauter, and Vinod Vaikuntanathan. Can
homomorphic encryption be practical?
In Proceedings of the 3rd
ACM Workshop on Cloud Computing Security Workshop, CCSW
’11, pages 113–124, New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
[NP01]
Moni Naor and Benny Pinkas. Eﬃcient oblivious transfer protocols.
In Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’01, pages 448–457, Philadelphia, PA,
USA, 2001. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.
[Pai99]
Pascal Paillier. Public-key cryptosystems based on composite degree
residuosity classes. In Jacques Stern, editor, Advances in Cryptol-
ogy — EUROCRYPT ’99, pages 223–238, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1999.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[PCS18]
Krishna Prof. Chandra and Rachana SH. Face recognition in face-
book and iphone x - a review.
International Journal of Recent
Trends in Engineering & Research (IJRTER), 4:165–170, 2018.
==PAGE:74==
60
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[PPRU14]
G. M. Penn, G. Pötzelsberger, M. Rohde, and A. Uhl. Customi-
sation of paillier homomorphic encryption for eﬃcient binary bio-
metric feature vector matching. In 2014 International Conference
of the Biometrics Special Interest Group (BIOSIG), pages 1–6, Sep.
2014.
[Pyt]
Python Software Foundation. 16.3. time — Time access and con-
versions - Python 3.6.8 documentation.
[RSA78]
R. L. Rivest, A. Shamir, and L. Adleman. A method for obtaining
digital signatures and public-key cryptosystems. Communications
of the ACM, 21:120–126, 1978.
[SSNO12]
Siamak F. Shahandashti, Reihaneh Safavi-Naini, and Philip Ogun-
bona. Private ﬁngerprint matching. In Willy Susilo, Yi Mu, and
Jennifer Seberry, editors, Information Security and Privacy, pages
426–433, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[TBS14]
Wilson Abel Alberto Torres, Nandita Bhattacharjee, and Bala Srini-
vasan. Eﬀectiveness of fully homomorphic encryption to preserve the
privacy of biometric data. In Proceedings of the 16th International
Conference on Information Integration and Web-based Applications
&#38; Services, iiWAS ’14, pages 152–158, New York, NY, USA,
2014. ACM.
[Tod17]
Mihai Todor.
Secomlib.
https://github.com/mihaitodor/
SeComLib, 2017.
[Vaz18]
Robert
Vazan.
sourceaﬁs-java.
https://bitbucket.org/
robertvazan/sourceafis-java/src, 2018.
[Yao82]
Andrew C. Yao. Protocols for secure computations. In Proceedings
of the 23rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Sci-
ence, SFCS ’82, pages 160–164, Washington, DC, USA, 1982. IEEE
Computer Society.
[Yao86]
A. C. Yao. How to generate and exchange secrets. In 27th Annual
Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (sfcs 1986), pages
162–167, Oct 1986.
[ZFG+09]
Erkin Zekeriya, Martin Franz, Jorge Guajardo, Stefan Katzen-
beisser, Inald Lagendijk, and Tomas Toft. Privacy-preserving face
recognition. volume 5672, pages 235–253, 08 2009.
