==PAGE:1==
Explorative Life Cycle Assessment of
Windows
Master Thesis 2018
Authors:
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629
Michael Reymann, s133605
Supervisors:
Morten Ryberg, DTU
Morten Birkved, SDU
Jakob T. Rørbech, VELUX Group
==PAGE:2==
Title page
ENGLISH TITLE
Explorative Life-Cycle Assessment of Windows
DANISH TITLE
Eksplorativ livscyklusvurdering af vinduer
PROJECT TYPE
Master thesis
CREDITS
30 ECTS
PROJECT PERIOD
August 1st 2018 - January 1st 2019
UNIVERSITY
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
AUTHORS
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629
Michael Reymann, s133605
FIELD OF STUDY
Architectural Engineering, MSc
SUPERVISORS
Assistant Professor Morten Ryberg, DTU
Professor Morten Birkved, SDU
Product Sustainability Expert Jakob T. Rørbech, VELUX Group
COMPANY
VELUX Group, Ådalsvej 99, DK-2970 Hørsholm, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Abstract
Buildings separate themselves from other products, by having a very long lifetime, thus the
consequences of the decisions we make, when we construct the buildings, should be long-
term, taking future circumstances into account. In Denmark, the optimisation of building
energy eﬃcient buildings has been highly prioritised and has been accomplished through strict
legislation. Recent studies indicate that stricter demands towards the energy consumption, po-
tentially could lead to a burden shift between life cycle stages as high-performance components
are needed to accomplish the low energy consumption. The shift occurs as high-performance
components often require more materials, resulting in a higher embodied energy, which is not
payed back through the saved operational energy. This study is a case study of double and
triple glazed skylight windows, assessing the saved operational energy, gained by better insu-
lating properties in a triple glazed window, with the increased embodied impacts related to
the higher material demand. Life cycle assessments (LCAs) often apply a static energy grid
to account for the impacts generated throughout the investigated objects lifetime. Investi-
gating building components with long expected service lives and a continuous yearly energy
usage, the application of a static energy grid distorts the actual impacts due to a neglection
of the expected decarbonisation of the energy grid. This study implements a dynamic grid
to account for future changes in the energy supply, to be able to quantify the environmental
impacts related to the energy consumption. The environmental impacts caused throughout
the life cycle of double and triple glazed skylight windows were quantiﬁed using the software
SimaPro and applying the ecoinvent 3.4 database. A total of 30 scenarios was investigated
with 5 diﬀerent energy grid forecast models, 3 calculations of the energy consumption for dou-
ble and triple glazed windows, respectively. The energy consumption was calculated using the
energy balance (Eref) and two reference buildings modelled in Be18 (new build and renovation
project). To understand how the normative choices, inﬂuence the impacts a sensitivity and
uncertainty analysis was performed. The endpoint scores indicated that a threshold regard-
ing the optimisation of the energy eﬃciency has been reached as the double glazed window
has lower aggregated impacts for two of the three areas of protections namely human health
and resources. Whereas, the triple glazed window performed better in ecosystems due to an
increased impact on land use as the future fossil free grids are highly dependent on biomass.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Resume
Bygninger adskiller sig fra andre produkter ved at have en meget lang levetid, og kon-
sekvenserne af de beslutninger, vi træﬀer, når vi bygger bygningerne, skal være langsigtede
og tage hensyn til fremtidige omstændigheder. I Danmark har optimeringen af bygningers
energieﬀektivitet været højt prioriteret og er blevet gennemført ved striks lovgivning. Nye
studier viser, at striksere krav til energiforbruget potentielt kan føre til en byrdeforskydning
mellem livscyklusstadier, da mere energi eﬀektive komponenter er nødvendige for at opnå det
lave energiforbrug. Skiftet opstår, da de optimerede komponenter ofte kræver ﬂere materialer,
hvilket resulterer i en højere indlejret energi, som ikke betales tilbage gennem den sparede
driftsenergi. Denne undersøgelse er et casestudie af 2- og 3-lags ovenlysvinduer, der vurderer
den sparede driftsenergi, der opnås ved bedre isolerende egenskaber i et 3-lags vindue med de
øgede indlejrede pårvirkninger forårsaget af den øgede materialemængde. Miljøpåvirkninger
kvantiﬁceret gennem livscyklusvurderinger (LCA) anvender ofte en statisk energiforsyning til
det årlige energiforbrug. Miljøpåvirkninger af bygningskomponenter med en lang forventet
levetid og et kontinuerligt årligt energiforbrug bliver forvrænget ved anvendelse af en statisk
energiforsyning, da der ikke tages højde for den forventede decarbonisering af energiforsynin-
gen. For at tage højde for fremtidige ændringer i energiforsyningen anvendes en dynamisk
fjernvarmeforsyning, hvilket kvantiﬁcerer de miljømæssige påvirkninger fra energiforbruget
bedst muligt.
Miljøpåvirkningerne af ovenlysvinduerne vil blive kvantiﬁceret ved hjælp af
LCA softwaren SimaPro samt anvendelse af ecoinvent 3.4-databasen. I alt bliver 30 scenarier
undersøgt bestående af henholdsvis 5 forskellige prognoser for den fremtidige energiforsyning
og 3 beregninger af energiforbruget for 2- og 3-lagsvinduer. Energiforbruget blev beregnet ved
hjælp af energibalancen (Eref) og to referencebygninger modelleret i Be18 (et nybyggeri og et
renovationsprojekt). For at forstå, hvordan de normative valg påvirker miljøbelastningerne,
blev en følsomheds- og usikkerhedsanalyse udført. Endpoint scorene indikerede, at der muligvis
er nået en grænse for energieﬀektivitetsoptimeringen, da 2-lagsvinduet har lavere aggregerede
miljøbelastninger for to af de tre beskyttelsesområder, henholdsvis human health og resources.
3-lagsvinduet performer bedre i ecosystems på grund af en øget indvirkning på land use, da
den fremtidige fossilfrie energi er stærkt afhængig af biomasse.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Preface
This master thesis is the ﬁnal part of two civil engineering degrees in Architectural Engineering
at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The thesis is written in collaboration with
VELUX and the departments of Building and Management at DTU. The thesis contains the
results of 5 months of research in the ﬁeld of explorative LCA of skylight windows.
The thesis was written as a collaboration between both students. The students are equally
responsible for each section and the work load was evenly distributed.
We would like to thank
Morten Ryberg, main supervisor.
Morten Birkved, co-supervisor.
Jakob Rørbech, company supervisor at VELUX Group
iv
==PAGE:6==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Project Plan
Title
Explorative Life-Cycle Assessment of Windows
ECTS 30
Project Description
The project deals with an environmental optimisation of a window’s life-cycle. The LCA will
include environmental eﬀects induced by producing the window, as well as the environmental
impact caused by generation of indoor heating to compensate for heat losses during the use
of the window. The potential trade-oﬀbetween impacts from the materials used for improved
insulation properties and the impacts from heat consumption, will be addressed, considering
that the Danish energy grid will become greener in the future. The energy consumption in the
use phase will be based on the Danish Energy Agency’s predictions of possible future energy
grid mix.
Previous studies on windows show that the two parameters contributing the most to the
environmental impacts during the life cycle of the window, are the energy consumption due to
heat losses through the window and the production of glass for the window panes. Therefore,
this study will investigate these aspects by studying a VELUX window type GGL with 2 and 3
layers of glass respectively in the context of a residential building both for a renovation project
and a new built house.
Figure 1: The timeline for the thesis illustrated via a Gantt chart.
Learning Objectives
Besides the overarching learning objectives stated to be fulﬁlled for a master thesis at DTU,
the following learning objectives will also be considered in this thesis:
• Explain the relevance of an LCA and the essentiality of using dynamic energy simulations
compared to static simulations.
• Become familiar with the diﬀerent tools and current knowledge used to assemble an
LCA.
• Using explorative LCA to depict diﬀerent district heat scenarios in the future based on
forecasting environmental impacts caused by diﬀerent energy supply technologies.
v
==PAGE:7==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Project Plan - Revised
Title
Explorative Life-Cycle Assessment of Windows
ECTS 30
Project Description
The project deals with an environmental optimisation of a window’s life-cycle. The LCA will
include environmental eﬀects induced by producing the window, as well as the environmental
impact caused by generation of indoor heating to compensate for heat losses during the use
of the window. The potential trade-oﬀbetween impacts from the materials used for improved
insulation properties and the impacts from heat consumption, will be addressed, considering
that the Danish energy grid will become greener in the future. The energy consumption in the
use phase will be based on the Danish Energy Agency’s predictions of possible future energy
grid mix.
Previous studies on windows show that the two parameters contributing the most to the
environmental impacts during the life cycle of the window, are the energy consumption due to
heat losses through the window and the production of glass for the window panes. Therefore,
this study will investigate these aspects by studying a VELUX window type GGL with 2 and 3
layers of glass respectively in the context of a residential building both for a renovation project
and a new built house.
Figure 2: The revised timeline for the thesis illustrated via a Gantt chart.
Green colours indicate that the timeline was complied with, whereas, red colours indicate that
more time were needed to complete the objective.
Learning Objectives
Besides the overarching learning objectives stated to be fulﬁlled for a master thesis at DTU,
the following learning objectives will also be considered in this thesis:
• Explain the relevance of an LCA and the essentially of using dynamic energy simulations
compared to static simulations.
• Become familiar with the diﬀerent tools and current knowledge used to assemble an
LCA.
• Using explorative LCA to depict diﬀerent district heat scenarios in the future based on
forecasting environmental impacts caused by diﬀerent energy supply technologies.
vi
==PAGE:8==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Auto-Evaluation of Project Process
The thesis was completed on time by generally complying with the timeline in the Gantt chart.
However, some of the objectives were not completed on the estimated time, due to a delay
in the impact assessment analysis caused by unclear results generated by a sensitivity and
uncertainty analysis. The delay of the impact assessment lead to more time being needed to
write the thesis in the end. Hence, ﬁnalizing/graphics and thesis writing had to be combined
the last three weeks of writing. Even though the thesis writing was extended, the thesis was
ﬁnalised on time, as a buﬀer was already planed into the schedule from the beginning. A
calendar was created to make sure we were on time and to create an overview of working days
the following week, since we wrote down which days to meet, which days we had meetings etc.
a week in advance.
Figure 3: The work calendar organising meetings internally and externally.
The calendar was generated to organise the thesis writing days. The calendar also shows the
diﬀerent supervisor meetings we had during the thesis writing and other appointments. It
generated clearance as to which days we could meet and write and helped us to follow the
project plan combined with the Gantt chart, as we knew exactly how many days, we had to
write and when to prepare counselling.
blank
vii
==PAGE:9==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Thesis Introduction
In 2015, the countries of the world adopted the UN "2030 Sustainable Development Agenda"
and the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The goals are mutually dependent and
balance the three dimensions of sustainable development - economic, social, and environmental
(The Ministry of Foreign Aﬀairs 2018). In March 2017, the Danish Government adopted a
plan of action which will function as the framework for governmental initiatives in accordance
with the 17 SDGs. As part of complying with the 7th Goal "Aﬀordable and Clean Energy"
and the 13th Goal "Climate Action" the plan of action dictates a national goal of 50 per-
cent of the energy consumption to be covered by renewable energy by 2030 (The Ministry of
Foreign Aﬀairs 2017). In order to accomplish this, the energy and district heating grid is set
to become fossil free by 2035. The plan of action also states that Denmark leads the way in
designing energy eﬃcient buildings in line with the 12th Goal "Responsible Consumption and
Production".
Buildings are estimated to account for 40% of the total energy consumption, hence, the great
incentive to lower the impacts related to the building industry in order to meet the 13th
SDG "Climate Action". The focus in the building industry has been to build energy eﬃcient
buildings, encouraging well-insulated buildings with low energy consumption during operation.
Through legislation this has been accomplished to a great extent, for which reason it is now
relevant to raise the question of whether a burden shift between life cycle stages is now an
issue. The performance optimised products, also described as "low energy" building compo-
nents, often require an increased amount of material, leading to a bigger footprint related to
the production of the components.
This study is a case study on double and triple glazed skylight windows and aims at quan-
tifying the environmental impacts through an explorative LCA. The environmental impacts
caused throughout the window’s lifetime will be quantiﬁed using the LCA software SimaPro
and applying the ecoinvent 3.4 database. Previous studies of windows have primarily focused
on optimising the materials and the thermal properties, however, conclusions of these studies
have all been drawn on the basis of a static energy grid composition, not accounting for fu-
ture developments in the energy supply. This study accounts for the changes in the district
heating composition by modelling the district heating grid dynamically.
Foreseeing future
circumstances is complicated and increases the uncertainty, however, by modelling multiple
forecasts of the energy supply, this study tries to account for as many outcomes as possible,
not to neglect contingent impacts. The grid will be modelled based on the predictions made
by the Danish Energy Agency (Danish Energy Agency 2014).
The study for the skylight windows has been performed in cooperation with the window man-
ufacturing company, VELUX. Hence, the data regarding the window inventory i.e. materials
and quantities was obtained as primary data and is considered to be accurate. As windows
are part of a system - the entire building, it can be discussed, how the annual heat consump-
tion should be determined. To quantify the energy consumption of the skylight windows, the
windows have been implemented in a reference house. The reference house is created by the
Danish Building Research Institute (SBi), and the thermal properties for the house are in
accordance with the building regulations 2018 (BR18) for a low energy building. Furthermore,
a renovation project has been simulated by modelling the reference house with thermal prop-
erties complying with the building regulations of 1977. The reference houses will be modelled
in the energy calculation program, Be18. The results obtained will be compared to an energy
balance method used in the industry called Eref.
viii
==PAGE:10==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
The thesis is comprised by the main article including theory, method, results, discussion, and
conclusion, and a section containing supplying information (SI) which serves the purpose of
supporting the arguments and conclusions drawn throughout the thesis. The ﬁnal thesis should
be examined as a whole.
blank
ix
==PAGE:11==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Scope and Assumptions
This study seeks to identify the environmental impacts related to the entire lifetime of dou-
ble and triple glazed skylight windows. The analysis will be carried out through a life cycle
assessment (LCA), with a cradle to grave perspective, taking all impacts from raw material
extraction, to the disposal of the windows into account.
The LCAs will be performed as
separate footprints of double and triple glazed windows. The same assumptions and system
boundaries will be applied to both systems, enabling the footprints to be comparable. The
windows will be applied in a reference house from SBi. The insulating properties of the house
will be modelled as 1) a Low Energy BR2018 house and 2) a renovation project, which com-
plies with the building regulations from 1977. The energy supply will be based on the Danish
district heating grid and will be modelled dynamically.
The key assumptions and methodological choices can be divided into the following categories:
- Geographical scope The window production is located in Europe, and the application
of the window is assumed to be in Denmark. Thus, the Danish energy grid composition is
applied to the annual heat supply. The disposal is expected to occur in Denmark.
- Technological scope This thesis does not include the technological development expected
to aﬀect the power plants nor the manufacturers in the future. Thus, the technological scope is
2018 and assumed static. The unit processes for manufacturing represent an average European
technology technique.
- Temporal scope The climate is assumed static and based on the Danish reference year,
DRY. The user behaviour i.e. desired indoor temperature etc., aﬀecting the energy consump-
tion is not expected to change within the 40 years. The thesis integrates the temporal changes
in the district heating grid composition throughout the expected lifetime.
- Service life: 40 years The same service life is considered for both windows.
- Energy consumption The energy consumption was calculated using Be18. It was assumed
to be the diﬀerence in the total energy balance for a reference house with and without the
skylight window. The Be18 models only account for the energy needed to heat the buildings
during heating season, since natural ventilation was assumed adequate in order to remove the
excessive heat generated in the cooling season.
- The energy supply calculations The district heating grid composition is based on the
grid composition of 2016 and the Danish Energy Agency’s forecast analysis for 2035 and 2050.
The composition development was assumed linear between the three ﬁxpoints.
x
==PAGE:12==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Limitations
The methodological choices and assumptions regarding the window inventory, life cycle, ser-
vice life, etc. govern what the results can be used for. This chapter seeks to clarify what this
study cannot be used for. This study seeks to identify the most eco-eﬃcient solution, it is,
however, important to note that this study cannot state whether the solutions are actually
environmentally sustainable. An LCA can tell you which product system is better for the en-
vironment, it cannot tell you if better is "good enough" (Bjørn, Owsianiak, Molin, et al. 2017).
Furthermore, this study cannot conclude whether a product is sustainable, as a sustainability
assessment requires a holistic approach with a combination of social, environmental, and eco-
nomic considerations. As this study only quantiﬁes the environmental aspect, a sustainability
assessment cannot be based solely on the conclusions drawn in this study.
The thesis investigates the environmental diﬀerences between double and triple glazed sky-
light windows, and the ﬁndings cannot be applied for regular facade windows without further
investigation.
The conclusions of this study are limited to Danish applications as the mathematical models
apply the Danish climate, and the energy consumption depends on the geographical location
of the buildings.
The calculation of the energy consumption was based on a reference house, hence the envi-
ronmental impacts of the windows are only directly applicable for this speciﬁc house, since
diﬀerent buildings have diﬀerent needs and require diﬀerent solutions. The reference house
is, however, considered, to represent a typical standard house, complying with BR18 for low
energy buildings (LEB), and the results are considered to represent most standard new build
residential buildings.
This study uses district heating as an indoor heating source, thus conclusions are limited to
buildings using district heating only, since the environmental impacts induced with an electri-
cal grid diﬀer from a DHG.
xi
==PAGE:13==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Table of Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Tendencies in the Building Industry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Windows as a Research Field
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Component Optimisation through LCA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Objectives of this Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Method
5
2.1
Life Cycle Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Energy Consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Scenario Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Uncertainty and Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Results
11
3.1
Results of Scenarios 1 and 16 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Results for Diﬀerent Energy Grid Compositions and Heat Consumption Calcu-
lations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Contribution Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Orientation of the Window
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
Energy Consumption Modelled with a Dynamic Grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.6
Uncertainty and Sensitivity Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Discussion
20
4.1
Comparing Double and Triple Glazed Windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Building Regulations Causing Over Optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Explorative LCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
The Case Study in an Industry Perspective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.5
Limitations and Further Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Conclusion
24
Supporting Information
1
A
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
B
The Danish Energy Supply
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
C
Scenario Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
D
Window Inventory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
E
Reference House from SBi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
F
Heat Consumption Calculation Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
G
District Heating Grid Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
H
Dynamic District Heating Grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
I
Representativeness of Scopes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
J
Midpoint-Endpoint Conversion Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
K
Midpoint and Endpoint Scores
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
L
Midpoint and Endpoint Impact Scores for Scenario 5 (Fossil)
. . . . . . . . . .
19
M
Contribution Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
M.1
Process Contribution Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
M.2
Life Cycle Stages Contribution Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
M.3
District Heating Grid - Process Contribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
xii
==PAGE:14==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
N
Static vs Dynamic Energy Supply . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
O
Impact Assessment Method Sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
P
Process Sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
Q
Uncertainty Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
R
EPD Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
S
Window Product Sheets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
blank
xiii
==PAGE:15==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
1
Introduction
1.1
Tendencies in the Building Industry
Buildings are estimated to account for 40% of the total energy consumption in Denmark and
the rest of the world (European Parliament and European Council 2012), hence, the impor-
tance of focusing on building energy eﬃcient buildings. In 2012, EU’s Energy Union established
an Energy Eﬃciency Directive of which the purpose was to support the EU energy eﬃciency
goals of a 20% reduction in 2020 and a 27% reduction in 2030. The directive seeks to stipulate
the use of energy more eﬃciently at all stages of the energy chain, from production to ﬁnal
consumption (Ministry of Climate 2016).
The building regulations enhance the quality of the buildings in terms of choosing energy-
eﬃcient and functional solutions. This is accomplished through requirements for the build-
ing’s interior design, structure, ﬁre safety, indoor climate, technical installations, and energy
consumption. Denmark has the strictest requirements in the world for energy demand in new
buildings (The Danish Government 2009), and as a part of the green transition, the require-
ments for the energy consumption have sharpened rapidly over the last decade, presented in
Table 1.1.
Table 1.1: Energy consumption prescribed by the building regulations (BR) 2010, 2015 and
2018 low energy buildings (LEB) for new build residential buildings (BR 2010, BR 2015, BR18
2018)
This tendency shows that restrictions towards the building’s annual energy consumption tight-
ens to lower the environmental burdens of the buildings, primarily focusing on decreasing the
CO2 emissions. On the contrary, restrictions regarding the environmental burden of the pro-
duction of building materials are not regulated - as long as the building components comply
with general requirements such as strength and load bearing capacity, indoor environment,
insulating properties, ﬁre safety, etc. (BR18 2018).
In general, the use phase of a building is considered to be the biggest contributor of envi-
ronmental impacts, looking at the total life cycle of conventional buildings (Cabeza et al.
2014). Early studies have shown that 20% of the environmental burdens is induced during
the construction of the building while 80% is related to the operation of the building (Cabeza
et al. 2014). Recent studies show that the distribution is changing towards 40% embodied
energy and 60% operational energy (Birgisdóttir and Madsen 2017, Vilches et al. 2017). The
continued eﬀort in reducing the operational energy in the buildings has led to an increased
signiﬁcance of the production stage, as the embodied impacts have gained importance in the
aggregated environmental impacts of the building.
The development is mainly due to two things: more energy eﬃcient buildings during operation
and higher embodied energy in the building components. The buildings are more energy eﬃ-
cient due to technological progress and a more strict building regulation in terms of insulating
properties, energy eﬃciency, etc. However, this often results in a higher embodied energy in
the building components, as high-performance components often have a higher environmen-
1
==PAGE:16==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
tal burden than regular building components as more material is required, etc. (Sohn et al.
2017). One example is the increased insulation power demanded in outer walls, requiring more
insulation material, resulting in an increased embodied energy for the outer wall component.
1.2
Windows as a Research Field
As windows are one of the building components with the highest environmental impact per
m2 (Zhao et al. 2014) and 10-25% of a buildings exposed surface is windows (Salazar 2013), it
has naturally been subject to many studies, and attempts to optimise in terms of performance
and materials.
Furthermore, windows are among the fastest developing building envelope
technologies today (Baldinelli et al. 2014), thus, the importance of studies investigating the
environmental burden of windows ensuring that the development is headed in the right direc-
tion.
Windows are a complex building component as it is multifunctional. Window’s main purpose
is to allow daylight to enter the building and at the same time allow the occupants to look
outside. The windows aﬀect the building’s energy balance, by causing heat losses through the
window and allowing heat gains through solar radiation. Therefore, the application context
of the window is important to consider, as the building’s needs determine the performance of
the window. E.g. a house might need solar gain, however, too many windows might cause
overheating in the building.
During heating season, most windows have heat losses through the window which must be
compensated for through heating. To minimise this, the Danish building regulations dictate
how much heat loss (Eref) a window is allowed to have during the heating season. Eref is de-
ﬁned as the window’s energy contribution to the building’s total heat balance. The equation
for Eref can be found in SI F. The regulations are constantly sharpened, and the requirements
in 2018 for skylight windows dictate a heat loss of 0 kWh/m2/year (Danish Energy Agency
2018).
Table 1.2: Eref values for skylight windows.
According to Table 1.2, skylights must have a heat gain, rather than a loss in low energy
buildings (LEB), meaning that a window should contribute to a lower heat consumption in
the building.
1.3
Component Optimisation through LCA
Life cycle assessment (LCA) is a tool to assess the potential environmental impacts and re-
sources used throughout a product’s life cycle (ISO 14040 2008a). An LCA is a comprehensive,
systemic approach to environmentally evaluate the performance of a system. An LCA assesses
the entire life cycle, including raw material extraction, manufacturing, use, and disposal.
Hence, LCA is often considered to use a "cradle to grave" approach to evaluate environmental
impacts (Cabeza et al. 2014). As a result of the increased environmental awareness, the inter-
est has increased in the building industry to incorporate LCA methods into decision making
blank
2
==PAGE:17==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
for selection of environmentally preferable solutions (Cabeza et al. 2014). The application of
LCA in the construction industry can be classiﬁed into ﬁve main purposes:
• decision support in product and process development
• marketing purposes (e.g. Eco-labelling)
• development and selection of indicators used in monitoring of environmental performance
of products or plants
• selection of suppliers or subcontractors
• strategic planning (e.g. Environmental Declarations for green buildings schemes such as
DGNB, LEED, BREAM, etc.)
(Owsianiak, Bjørn, Laurent, et al. 2017)
This study will utilise the LCA method to assess the environmental impacts of the life cycle of
double and triple glazed skylight windows. Both windows contain the same materials, however,
more material, in particular glass, is necessary, in a triple glazed window. The extra layer of
glass provides the window with improved insulation properties which in the use phase will
lower the impacts related to the operational energy.
The operational energy is a crucial contributor to the environmental impacts and needs to be
carefully modelled, with as much accuracy as possible. This study includes the operational
energy of a single window, however, a window is part of a system i.e. the entire building,
and therefore it can be discussed how the energy consumption of a single window should
be determined. Therefore, diﬀerent methods of calculating the energy consumption will be
introduced in this study. The diﬀerent methods used can be found in SI F.
Explorative LCA
In Denmark, we have received a signiﬁcantly greater share of renewable energy over the last
10-15 years (Ministry of Climate 2016). A comprehensive description of the developments in
the Danish energy supply can be found in SI B. The Danish electricity and heating supply are
set to become fossil free by 2035 as requested by the Danish government. These changes in
the Danish grid mix are reﬂected in the analysis "Future Energy Scenarios" produced by the
Danish Energy Agency (Danish Energy Agency 2014), as four of the scenarios will use solely
renewable energy sources after 2035.
Currently, it is generally accepted to assume a static power grid for the energy supply, when
modelling energy consumption during the service life of a building (Rasmussen and Birgisdóttir
2016, Cabeza et al. 2014). However, a static energy grid generates results assuming the energy
supply will not change in the future. The very long service life of buildings diﬀerentiates the
studies from other LCA applications (Goldstein and Rasmussen 2017). Modelling environ-
mental product performances for building components requires assumptions which stretches
far into the future, and the vast amount of uncertainties complicates the forecasts of future
changing practice (Rasmussen and Birgisdóttir 2016). For building components, a time de-
pendant grid mix composition is essential, when estimating the payback time of the embodied
energy through saved energy during operation. The impacts occurring throughout the service
life are important to account for as accurately as possible, as these will highly aﬀect the results
and the conclusions of the study (Collinge et al. 2013). The handbook "Life Cycle Assessment
- Theory and Practice", states that for systems with a long expected lifetime, using technolo-
gies providing an annual input of energy, a static grid should not be applied (Goldstein and
blank
3
==PAGE:18==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Rasmussen 2017). This advocates the importance of including a changing grid composition
by modelling a dynamic grid for the energy supply. This is accomplished by applying the
scenarios predicted by the Danish Energy Agency of the future grid composition.
1.4
Objectives of this Study
Diﬀerent aspects of a window’s environmental impacts have been studied, and many attempts
to optimise the materials and properties of the window, have been carried out in earlier studies.
These studies seek to improve the environmental performance of the materials, to improve the
thermal performance or a combination of both. A literature review can be found in SI A, and
a concise summation of these previous ﬁndings shows:
• The type of frame material has a signiﬁcant impact on the embodied energy, and multiple
studies show that wooden frames perform up to six times better than aluminium frames
(Asif, Davidson, et al. 2002, Asif, Muneer, et al. 2005).
• Investigating multiple impact categories is important as burden shifts might occur when
choosing diﬀerent materials/window types (Salazar and Sowlati 2008).
• The main contribution towards most of the impact categories occurs during the use phase
to compensate for heat loss through the windows. The energy grid used to compensate
for this will therefore highly aﬀect the results (Owsianiak, Bjørn, Bugge, et al. 2018,
Syrrakou et al. 2006).
• Static energy grids have been used to estimate the optimal solution, when comparing
diﬀerent window types. However, the use of a dynamic energy grid could provide diﬀerent
outcomes of these studies (Owsianiak, Bjørn, Bugge, et al. 2018, Sohn et al. 2017).
This study aims to perform an explorative LCA of skylight windows. The study will investi-
gate the potential trade-oﬀthat may occur, when reduced environmental impacts from better
insulating properties are achieved by using a triple glazed window, instead of a double glazed
window, as this increases the demand for materials in the production phase of the window.
This study will utilise a dynamic district heating grid composition, when assessing the envi-
ronmental impacts from generation of indoor heating, to compensate for heat losses through
the window during the use stage. This study seeks to answer the following:
Are the building regulations pushing towards an over-optimisation, as the additional embodied
energy in LEB components will not be compensated for through saved operational energy, when
taking the future decarbonisation of the energy supply into account?
blank
4
==PAGE:19==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
2
Method
2.1
Life Cycle Assessment
The LCA was conducted in accordance with the requirements of the Danish and European
standards ISO 14040 and ISO 14044 (Danish Standards 2008, ISO 14040 2008b) and the guide-
lines of the ILCD Handbook (European Commission – Joint Research Centre – Institute for
Environment and Sustainability 2010). The functional unit is deﬁned as "Allow daylight into
a building, through a window with an area of 1.6m2 with a light transmittance of at least 0.7,
placed in the roof of a residential building, at an angle of 45◦for 40 years". This LCA is per-
formed as individual environmental footprints of a double and triple glazed skylight window,
respectively. The footprints can be compared, as the same functional unit, system boundaries,
etc. has been applied to both systems.
The decision context is situation C1 (accounting) as this study is purely of a descriptive na-
ture, documenting current inventory and production procedures based on retrospective data.
Attributional LCI modelling framework will be applied, in accordance with the ILCD recom-
mendations for decision context C1 (Bjørn, Owsianiak, Laurent, et al. 2017). This study uses
cut-oﬀallocation, meaning that recycled materials are "burden-free", and only the impacts
related to the recycling process and associated transportation are attributed to the second
system. However, the primary user does not beneﬁt from producing the recyclable materials
either (Bjørn, Moltesen, et al. 2017).
Figure 2.1 shows the system boundaries for this study. The analysis includes all life cycle
stages from cradle to grave. The product systems include all processes which are required to
deliver the function of the windows, including upstream (extraction and production of raw
materials and manufacturing), use stage and downstream (disposal and end of life). Upstream
processes include extraction of resources, such as mining of metal ores, sawmill activities, ex-
traction of crude oil and production of materials such as aluminium and wood proﬁles used
in the production of the window pane and frame. Assembled windows are then transported
to retailers and then later distributed to residential buildings. The use phase includes re-
placement of the window pane and the generation of indoor heating compensating for heat
loss/gain through the window. Maintenance such as washing the window is excluded in this
study, as it highly depends on the end-user, and the window manufacturing company has very
little control and data regarding this. End of life involves disassembly, transportation to waste
handling facility, and disposal of the materials. Steel and aluminium are assumed recycled.
Glass from a demolition project often end up as landﬁll, as the recycling process of window
glass is both expensive and complicated (Ministry of Environment 2017). Hence, the disposal
of glass is modelled as landﬁll. Wood is incinerated, and plastics and cardboard are disposed
as a combination of landﬁll and incineration.
5
==PAGE:20==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Figure 2.1: System boundaries for the case study of skylight windows.
The stippled line
encloses the foreground system which includes the production and the use of the windows.
The arrows indicate mass- and energy ﬂows.
Figure 2.2 depicts the temporal scope of the system. The window is produced in year 0 (2018)
and in year 20 (2038) the window pane is replaced, and 70% of the packaging material is used
again, afterwards the original window pane and the 70% packaging material are discarded.
The disposal of the entire window takes place in year 40 (2058). The window has a service life
of 40 years with an annual impact related to the heat consumption.
Figure 2.2: The temporal scope illustrates which years the processes occur.
Short arrows
indicate an intermittent process, whereas the long arrow indicates a continuous process.
The service lives of the windows and the panes are based on an average estimation formulated
by the Danish Building Research Institute’s (SBi) and other industry stakeholders (Heinz and
Hansen 2009).
blank
6
==PAGE:21==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Data Collection
Data regarding the window materials and masses is based on data sheets from the window
manufacturing company, which can be found in SI S. The data sheets contain the materials
and speciﬁcations of masses for production and packaging in manufacturing and replacement
of the window pane. This data has been used to model the production of the windows in the
foreground system.
The dimensions and thermal properties for the reference house used to model the energy
consumption were collected from the SBi reference house "basic one family house" (SBi 2018).
The thermal properties for the new build and renovation project, are found in SI E Table E.1,
and the dimensions are found in Figure E.1. Data concerning the renovation project (1980’s
standard house) was determined using the building regulations of 1977 (BR 1977).
Data for the DHG mix composition for 2017 and 2018 was not yet available, hence data of
2016 was used (Danish Energy Agency 2017). The forecasts of the DHG composition for 2035
and 2050 were estimated by the Danish Energy Agency and consist of ﬁve diﬀerent energy
scenarios (Danish Energy Agency 2014). The tables containing the grid compositions can be
found in SI H Tables H.1 and H.2.
LCI Data
The life cycle inventory (LCI) data in the foreground system regarding manufacturing was
collected ﬁrst hand from the window manufacturing company. Hence, the representativeness
of this data is considered very high, as this is primary data representing current production
and practise. The background system has been modelled with average processes in accordance
with the ILCD recommendations (Bjørn, Owsianiak, Laurent, et al. 2017). All processes have
been modelled with the ecoinvent 3.4 database. The inventory and the unit processes used to
model the inventory can be found in SI D, and the geographical, technological and temporal
representativeness can be found in SI I.
It has been necessary to assume that technology for production and the handling of end of life
will not change within the 40 years, although this might not be temporal representative. I.e.
the pane, which is replaced after 20 years, will be produced with the same technology as used
today. It is considered out of scope for this project, to predict such technology innovations.
The heat consumption in the use stage has been modelled with forecasts, hence a high time-
related representativeness. The technology of the energy sources, however, lack time-related
representativeness as it has not been possible to predict technology innovations.
Danish applications and European production have been chosen to be the geographical scope
of the study. A Danish DHG composition has been applied to model the provision of heat.
The unit processes used to model the DHG can be found in SI G Table G.1.
The heat
consumption is also based on calculations taking the Danish climate and geographical location
into account. The upstream processes modelled to represent the productions of the materials,
i.e. glass, aluminium, etc., for the manufacturing of the window are generated with data from
the European market, representing the actual situation.
Life Cycle Impact Assessment
In the life cycle impact assessment (LCIA), the inventory (LCI) is analysed for environmental
impacts. This study uses the impact assessment method ReCiPe midpoint Hierarchist (H)
(Goedkoop et al. 2008), to characterise the potential impacts emitted by the elementary ﬂows.
This method quantiﬁes 18 diﬀerent potential impact categories which can then be compared
blank
7
==PAGE:22==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
across the diﬀerent scenarios. However, to assess the environmental importance of the potential
midpoint impacts, the midpoint categories are converted into endpoint scores indicating three
areas of protection. The impact of one midpoint category can then be assessed, when looking
at how much it inﬂuences the area of protection. In this study, the midpoint results obtained
were converted to endpoint scores by multiplying the results with midpoint-endpoint factors
utilising the Hierarchical approach. The conversion factors used can be found in appendix J
Table J.1. This approach converted the 18 impact categories into 22 impact categories which
could then be aggregated into the three areas of protection: human health (DALY), ecosystems
(species.yr) and resources (USD2013). The conversion factor for fossil resource scarcity is not
yet devised, since a full cause-eﬀect pathway is not yet understood (Huijbregts, Steinmann,
et al. 2017). An average between crude oil and coal conversion factors was used in this study.
2.2
Energy Consumption
This study seeks to identify the most fair way to calculate the energy balance of the window,
and will therefore investigate diﬀerent approaches: 1) Analyse the heat consumption, when
the window is put into the context of a reference house designed by SBi, 2) Use the heat
balance, Eref value, which is a ﬁxed value for the speciﬁc window. The value indicates the
annual energy consumption of the window, based on simple window parameters, U- and g-
values. Eref is generally accepted in the building industry as an expression of the performance
of the window, regarding heat losses through the window during heating season (BR18 2018).
It should, however, be noted that Eref does not consider context, as it is based on a reference
scenario for orientation, location, etc. Therefore, this study seeks to identify if the context
of the window plays a role in terms of the insulation properties for the rest of the building,
through the reference house. The energy consumption will be determined by the following
methods:
• A basic one family house from SBi modelled as a new build house according to BR18
for a low energy building (SBi 2018).
• A basic one family house from SBi modelled as a renovation project according to building
regulations 1977 (BR 1977).
• Using the energy balance, Eref, as an average energy balance for the window.
SI F contains speciﬁcations on the calculation methods for the energy consumption.
This study only accounts for the generation of indoor heating during the heating season.
Furthermore, it is assumed that potential overheat occurring in the summer is removed with
natural ventilation.
2.3
Scenario Overview
This study will assess double and triple glazed skylight windows. The heat consumption of the
windows in the use phase will be calculated in the context of a new build house, a renovation
project and with Eref. The provision of district heating will be modelled according to ﬁve
diﬀerent forecasts of the future energy grid. A total of 30 scenarios will be analysed and are
presented in Table 2.1. An extended description of the scenario overview is found in SI C.
blank
8
==PAGE:23==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Table 2.1: The scenario overview shows the 30 scenarios.
The "x" indicates the included
window type, calculation method and DHG scenario.
2.4
Uncertainty and Sensitivity Analysis
In order to assess the robustness of the conclusions drawn in this study, an uncertainty and
sensitivity analysis has been performed. As recommended in the LCA Handbook (Hauschild
et al. 2017), the sensitivity and uncertainty analysis will address which LCI data must be fo-
cused on improving, as data which is both sensitive and uncertain will highly aﬀect the results
and conclusions of the analysis.
A comprehensive uncertainty evaluation of an LCA consists of assessing parameter, scenario
and model uncertainties (Huijbregts, Gilijamse, et al. 2003). This paper contains 30 scenarios
as a result of ﬁve diﬀerent scenarios for the future energy grid composition, and three dif-
ferent model calculations of the heat consumption. As scenario uncertainties are quantiﬁed
by resampling diﬀerent scenarios, and model uncertainties are quantiﬁed by diﬀerent model
formulations (Huijbregts, Gilijamse, et al. 2003), the 30 scenarios will be utilised to assess
the model and scenario uncertainties. E.g. will the diﬀerent calculation methods for the heat
consumption inﬂuence the conclusions.
An important model uncertainty identiﬁed in this
study is the model for calculating the heat consumption, as it is not possible to include all
potentially relevant aspects of the real world within these models. Assumptions regarding heat
consumption in the use stage are inherently uncertain, as it is a continuous variable depending
on outdoor climate, orientation, etc. The service life of the window is an uncertain discrete
variable, as it diﬀers depending on the application of the window. The two most important
parameter uncertainties identiﬁed were heat consumption and service life.
A sensitivity analysis was carried out by assessing the sensitivity of impact scores to parameter
uncertainties by calculating normalised sensitivity coeﬃcients (Scoef) according to the following
equation:
Scoef = ∆IS
IS0
/∆ak
ak,0
ak,0 is the input parameter, IS0 is the impact score calculated for ak,0, ∆ak is the diﬀerence
in the input parameter and ak. ∆IS is the diﬀerence in the impact score and the calculated
impact score for ak.
Primary data provided by the window manufacturing company is not considered uncertain and
is therefore not assessed further. However, the unit processes used to model the production
will be assessed in order to determine if the choice of unit processes are sensitive to the impact
scores.
Sensitivity of impact scores to unit processes was found using an alternative unit
process presented in Table P.1 in SI P and calculating the percent deviation. The following
blank
9
==PAGE:24==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
equation was applied:
P coef = ∆IS
IS0
IS0 is the impact score, and ∆IS is the diﬀerence of the impact score and the impact score
calculated for the alternative unit process.
A parameter is considered important if it contributed more than |Scoef| ≥0.5 to the output
uncertainty, and a unit process is considered important if |P coef| ≥0.01. The uncertainty
of the remaining background processes is based on the uncertainty information in the LCI
database.
Monte Carlo Analysis
The uncertainty analysis will be carried out with statistical distributions of parameter values
as input to Monte Carlo analysis. Monte Carlo simulation is a technique to quantify output
uncertainty. It propagates known parameter uncertainties into an uncertainty distribution of
the output variable (Huijbregts, Gilijamse, et al. 2003). The parameters analysed are the
ones which were found important in the sensitivity analysis, for any of the considered impact
categories.
To perform the Monte Carlo simulation, each sensitive input parameter has been speciﬁed
a log-normal uncertainty distribution. The uncertainty in many processes and parameters
follows a skewed distribution, and therefore a log-normal uncertainty distribution was chosen
to represent uncertainty in parameter values. Log-normal distributions capture a large value
range and avoids negative values. It is generally desired to avoid negative values, as natural
processes are never negative. The accuracy of a Monte Carlo analysis increases as the number
of iterations becomes larger, and therefore the analysis applies 10,000 iterations in the results
presented in this study.
The uncertainty analysis will be performed for the footprint of the window and for the diﬀerence
between the two footprints for double and triple glazed windows. The uncertainty analysis for
the diﬀerence between the results can be utilised in order to conclude whether double or triple
glazed windows can be preferred for a certain area of protection or impact category. Every
iteration applies the same parameters for the energy grid, heat consumption, and service life to
the double and triple glazed windows, enabling them to be compared. This method is feasible
as the same future energy grid composition, heat consumption method, etc. should be applied
to both systems, if they are to be compared.
blank
10
==PAGE:25==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
3
Results
The results of the LCAs of double and triple glazed skylight windows include 30 diﬀerent accu-
mulated results. In order to organise the presentation of the results, two default scenarios have
been selected. The default scenarios contain the energy composition grid 1 (wind), and the
calculation of the heat consumption is based on the new build reference house. Thus, scenario
1 for the double glazed window and scenario 16 for the triple glazed window are presented,
unless otherwise stated. See scenario overview in Table 2.1.
Table 3.1 summarizes the performance of the triple glazed window compared to the double
glazed window for each of the impact categories, presenting the new build project, the reno-
vation project, and the Eref method.
Table 3.1: The percent deviation of the triple glazed window compared to the double glazed
window. The percentages depict the performance diﬀerences for the various impact categories,
where red colours illustrate an increased impact, and green colours a decreased impact for the
triple glazed window.
Table 3.1 shows that the diﬀerence in impact scores between double and triple glazed windows
are generally more distinct for the renovation project and when the Eref method has been
applied to calculate the heat consumption. Nevertheless, regardless of the calculation method
for the energy consumption, the diﬀerent impact scores favour the same design solution.
3.1
Results of Scenarios 1 and 16
LCAs were performed for double and triple glazed windows for scenarios 1 and 16. The results
were calculated for midpoint scores, and the complete table can be seen in SI K. After 40
years of service, the aggregated scores for 12 out of 18 midpoint scores are lower for the triple
glazed window compared to the double glazed window. Figure 3.1 illustrates the four selected
midpoint scores which contribute the most to the endpoint scores, human health, ecosystems,
and resources. The impact categories global warming and ﬁne particulate matter formation
11
==PAGE:26==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
contribute the most to human health, land use contributes the most to impacts on ecosystems,
and fossil resource scarcity contributes the most to impacts on resources.
Figure 3.1: Aggregated midpoint scores for global warming potential (GWP), ﬁne particulate
matter formation (FPMF), land use (LU) and fossil resource scarcity (FRS) for scenarios 1
and 16. The scenarios are based on DHG 1 (wind), and the energy consumption is calculated
in the new build reference house.
The results show that the double glazed window has a lower impact score for global warm-
ing potential (GWP), ﬁne particulate matter formation (FPMF), and fossil resource scarcity
(FRS), whereas the triple glazed window has lower impact score for land use (LU).
In year 0, the double glazed window has a GWP of 76 kg CO2-eq caused by the production of
the window, whereas the triple glazed window has a GWP of 95 kg CO2-eq. The environmen-
tal impacts during the use phase are caused by an annual heat consumption and a replacement
of the window pane in year 20. In year 40 the windows are disassembled, and impacts related
to the disposal are allocated to the window.
blank
12
==PAGE:27==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
3.2
Results for Diﬀerent Energy Grid Compositions and Heat
Consumption Calculations
The results for the GWP for the LCA of skylight windows with double and triple glazed are
presented in Figure 3.2. The graphs show the four fossil free heat supply scenarios for each of
heat consumption calculations. The results are shown for the accumulated GWP.
Figure 3.2: Accumulated global warming potential (GWP) of double and triple glazed skylight
windows.
Figure 3.2 indicates that the accumulated GWP for the double glazed window is lower com-
pared to the triple glazed window independent of the application. Figure 3.2 also shows that
the four fossil free scenarios for the future energy grid composition have relatively similar im-
pact scores for the same window and application.
The results for the DHG scenario 5 (fossil) are presented in SI L. When the fossil grid com-
position is applied for the heat supply, the results for the GWP show that the accumulated
scores for the double glazed window are signiﬁcantly higher than the triple glazed window,
for all heat consumption calculation methods. The four fossil free grid supplies and the fossil
dependent supply are categorised, since they represent two diﬀerent directions of the future
energy grid, resulting in completely diﬀerent recommendations. This study will mainly focus
on the results for the four fossil free scenarios, as these comply with the goals set by the
government.
blank
13
==PAGE:28==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Endpoints for the damage categories human health, ecosystems and resources were calculated
from the midpoints, using the midpoint-endpoint factors found in SI J Table J.1. The results
of the three endpoint scores are shown in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Accumulated endpoint scores for the new build project, the renovation project,
and the Eref calculation method.
The results show that the double glazed window has lower impacts for human health and re-
sources, whereas the triple glazed window has a lower impact score for ecosystems independent
of the application and the applied DHG.
3.3
Contribution Analysis
The top three contributing unit processes to the midpoint and endpoint scores were identiﬁed
and presented in SI M Table M.1. The analysis was performed for scenario 1, and showed that
the production of glass, aluminium and wood are the three materials which aﬀect the damage
categories the most, and for the generation of district heating from natural gas and biomass
are the unit processes which contribute the most.
A contribution analysis of the life cycle stages has been performed and is presented in SI M
Figure M.1 for all midpoint scores. The distribution of the potential impacts for the midpoint
scores, indicates which life cycle stages contribute the most to the environmental footprint
of a skylight window. Figure 3.4 shows the production, the use phase separated into heat
consumption and replacement and the end of life (EoL) of the windows for GWP, FPMF, LU,
blank
14
==PAGE:29==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
and FRS. The analysis was performed for double and triple glazed skylight windows for the
three applications.
Figure 3.4: Midpoint contribution analysis of the life cycle stages. The three applications:
new build project, renovation project, and Eref are all presented. Negative values originate
from saved operational energy. The total impact scores are presented on the right-hand side
of the bars.
The calculation of the heat consumption for the windows, using the heat balance calculation
(Eref) and using the modelled renovation reference house, results in a negative heat consump-
tion, indicating that the application of the window will decrease the heat consumption of the
building. The double glazed window has lower environmental impacts related to the produc-
tion and replacement, however, the triple glazed window has lower impacts related to the heat
consumption. For all four midpoint indicators, the EoL phase contributes the least.
The impact results for GWP, FPMF, and FRS are highly aﬀected by the production and
replacement of the window pane, whereas LU is primarily aﬀected by the heat consumption.
Hence, for GWP, FPMF, and FRS the double glazed window has lower accumulated impact
scores whereas, the triple glazed window has lower accumulated impact scores related to LU.
Comparing GWP, FPMF, and FRS there is an indication of burden shifts between the life
cycle stages, from use stage to the production stage, when applying a triple glazed window
as an alternative to the double glazed window. Furthermore, a burden shift between impact
categories occurs when optimising GWP, FPMF, and FRS towards higher impacts in LU.
blank
15
==PAGE:30==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
3.4
Orientation of the Window
To assess whether the orientation of the window will be subject to change in the conclusions
drawn in this study, diﬀerent orientations were applied. Double and triple glazed windows
were placed oriented south and north, respectively, and the results were compared with the
weighted orientation used in this study. The distribution for the weighted orientation can
be found in SI E Table E.2. The energy supply composition is DHG 1 (wind), however, the
same conclusions can be drawn with the other fossil free DHGs. Figure 3.5 shows the global
warming potential for the diﬀerent orientations with the application of a new build project
and a renovation project.
Figure 3.5: Accumulated GWP of north, south and weighted orientations in the reference
houses.
The graphs indicate that for the same orientation, a double glazed window has a lower GWP
with the exception of north oriented skylight windows applied in a renovation project. The
graphs also show that windows placed towards the south, generally have a lower accumulated
global warming potential. For the new build project, the diﬀerences in GWP for double and
triple glazed windows are the same regardless of orientation. The renovation project, however,
shows that the orientation of the window inﬂuences the results signiﬁcantly. The diﬀerence
in GWP for south oriented windows increases compared to the diﬀerence in the weighted
windows. Double and triple glazed window oriented north have similar aggregated impacts.
3.5
Energy Consumption Modelled with a Dynamic Grid
As part of the LCA, the energy supply was analysed separately in order to assess the impor-
tance of modelling energy consumption considering the future changes in the grid composition.
The development of the midpoint scores over the 40 years can be found in SI M. Figure M.2
shows that 1 MJ produced district heating in Denmark for some impact categories will change
signiﬁcantly over the time span of 40 years, hence the importance of including a dynamic
energy supply grid when modelling life cycles stretching far into the future.
In order to assess the eﬀect of modelling with a dynamic grid composition, the accumulated
environmental impacts of 40 years were analysed with a dynamic grid composition compared
blank
16
==PAGE:31==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
to a static grid composition. SI N contains accumulated midpoint- and endpoint scores for
double and triple glazed windows. Figure 3.6 shows the scores for GWP.
Figure 3.6: Accumulated GWP of double and triple glazed windows modelled with a dynamic
energy supply (DES) and a static energy supply (SES). The colours illustrate the same heat
consumption modelled with a static grid (solid line) and a dynamic grid (stippled line).
As Figure 3.6 illustrates, the heat consumption modelled with a static grid composition gener-
ates higher global warming potentials than the corresponding dynamic grid composition. This
also includes the case in which the window has a negative heat consumption exaggerating the
potential savings. For the double glazed window in the new build house, the aggregated GWP
for the window is 53% higher for a static grid composition than that of a dynamic grid com-
position. For triple glazed windows using the Eref method are the GWP 49% higher modelled
with a static grid compared to the system with the dynamic grid.
Comparing the aggregated results for double and triple glazed windows, opposite conclusions
can be drawn depending on the application of a static or dynamic heat supply. The results
show that the aggregated GWP of the double glazed window is lower compared to the triple
glazed window if the heat consumption is modelled with a dynamic grid composition, whereas,
the triple glazed window has lower impacts if the static heat supply is applied.
Studying the damage category human health (SI N Figure N.1), applying a static grid re-
sults in similar impacts for double and triple glazed windows, whereas, the diﬀerence in the
aggregated results increases when using a dynamic grid favouring the double glazed window.
For ecosystems, it can be observed that potential impacts are neglected for the static grid
composition, as the potential impacts are greater using the dynamic grid composition. For
resources, the static grid favours the triple glazed window, whereas, the dynamic grid favours
the double glazed window.
3.6
Uncertainty and Sensitivity Results
A unit process was found to be sensitive if one of the 18 impact scores deviated more than
one percent from the ﬁnal result. All the sensitive processes found in the triple glazed Eref
project were used in the Monte Carlo simulation as Eref was found to be the most sensitive
blank
17
==PAGE:32==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
application. The sensitive processes can be found in SI P Table P.7.
SI P Table P.2 shows the Scoef, for all parameter variations, for all impact categories.
A
parameter was considered sensitive if the Scoef was smaller than -0.5 or greater than 0.5 for
any of the impact categories.
The service life- and the heat consumption parameter both
showed to be sensitive and are included in the Monte Carlo simulation.
The uncertainty analysis was performed for scenario 1, in order to assess the robustness of
the footprint. Figure 3.7 shows the uncertainty of the life cycle stages for the three areas of
protection: human health, ecosystems, and resources.
Figure 3.7: Uncertainty analysis for the life cycle stages for scenario 1. The 95% conﬁdence
interval is given between the red dots, and the mean is given by the black dot.
Figure 3.7 reveals that the uncertainty is largest for manufacturing and the heat consumption.
For ecosystems and human health, the 2.5 percentiles are negative, which is caused by a major
uncertainty in the impact category water consumption. The unit process causing the high
uncertainty for water consumption were not located, and it seem to be a general problem as
the uncertainty occurs throughout every life cycle stage, containing diﬀerent unit processes.
The uncertainty of the midpoint impact categories for the life cycle stages can be found in
SI Q Figure Q.1. The midpoint scores are converted to endpoint units, revealing both which
midpoints contribute the most to the endpoints, and which have the largest uncertainty range.
For the uncertainty analysis for the protection area, human health, the two main contributors
are FPMF and GWP, however, the most uncertain impact category is water consumption.
Studying ecosystems, the most contributing impact category is land use and the most uncertain
impact categories are land use, and water consumption. The uncertainty analysis for resources
shows that the primary contributor and the most uncertain impact category is fossil resource
depletion.
The uncertainty of the diﬀerences in the endpoint scores for the double and triple glazed
windows was assessed in Figure 3.8. Studying the areas of protection, the scores where the
95% conﬁdence interval is above zero, the triple glazed window is the preferred solution and for
the impact scores where the interval is below zero the double glazed window is the preferred
solution. The diﬀerences were found using the following equation:
Windowdiﬀ= Windowdouble −Windowtriple
blank
18
==PAGE:33==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Figure 3.8: Uncertainty analysis for the areas of protection. The 95% conﬁdence interval is
given between the red dots, and the mean is given by the black dot. Negative values indicate a
higher impact score for the triple glazed window, and positive values indicate a higher impact
score for the double glazed window.
Figure 3.8 shows that for resources the 95% conﬁdence interval indicates that the double
glazed window is the preferred solution. However, for human health and ecosystems the 95%
conﬁdence interval stretches across zero, meaning that for some iterations the double glazed
window had a lower impact, and for others the triple glazed window performed best. Studying
the midpoint impact scores converted to endpoint scores in SI Q Figure Q.2 and Q.3, the
uncertainty is mainly caused by the impact category water consumption. Studying FPMF
and GWP, the double glazed window has a lower impact in the entire 95% conﬁdence interval.
For ecosystems, LU is above zero for the entire 95% conﬁdence interval, indicating that the
triple glazed window is always better for this impact category. Studying resources, the most
contributing impact category, fossil resource depletion, favours the double glazed window in
the entire 95% of the conﬁdence interval.
To investigate the sensitivity related to the life cycle impact assessment method, a sensitivity
analysis was conducted. The analysis compared the chosen method, ReCiPe 2016 (H), with an
impact assessment method often used in the building industry, CML2000. The two methods
are not directly comparable due to diﬀerent methodology however, both assessments indi-
cate results which lead to the same recommendations, increasing the reliability of the chosen
method. The analysis can be found in SI O.
blank
19
==PAGE:34==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
4
Discussion
This discussion will include a comparison of the environmental impacts of double and triple
glazed skylight windows across 18 impact categories and 3 damage categories. The discussion
will address the potential trade-oﬀs between life cycle stages and impact categories. Further-
more, a discussion of the explorative aspect of the LCA will be addressed and beneﬁts will be
emphasised. Lastly, the case study will be put into an industry perspective, where other case
studies will be addressed together with the initiatives, which we see in society today.
4.1
Comparing Double and Triple Glazed Windows
Windows are a complex building component as they have multiple functions.
The energy
consumption, which can be allocated to the window, depends on a balance of solar gains and
heat losses through the window. Therefore, the application of the window governs the recom-
mendations regarding the window design.
Studying the application context, the diﬀerence in impact scores for double and triple glazed
windows are more distinct, when looking at the renovation project than the new build project.
This is due to the renovation project generally beneﬁtting more from solar gains and a high
insulation power when implementing a window, whereas the new build house is already well
insulated. This is illustrated by the accumulated global warming potentials for the three cal-
culation methods in Figure 3.2 and the endpoint scores in Figure 3.3.
The window orientation inﬂuences the heat consumption, nevertheless, the same conclusions
for the comparison of double and triple glazed windows can be drawn independent of orienta-
tion, when studying the new build project. However, when studying the renovation project,
the orientation is more important. The GWP for double and triple glazed windows oriented
north are similar, whereas the impact diﬀerence in the south oriented windows are more dis-
tinct. This is because, the building in the renovation project is draughty, and will beneﬁt
from a solar gain. The lack of solar radiation for the north faced window entails that the
thermal heat conduction loss becomes the dominant factor regarding the energy consumption
and the window will beneﬁt from a low thermal transmittance (U-value). The results for the
south faced windows in the renovation project show that the building beneﬁts from a higher
solar energy transmittance (g-value). The results justify using weighted orientation for energy
consumption calculations such as the energy balance (Eref) for the windows, when comparing
diﬀerent window solutions in new build projects, however, when comparing design solutions
for a renovation project, the beneﬁts from insulating properties and solar gains are more im-
portant.
Depending on the observed midpoint impact category, diﬀerent conclusions can be drawn for
the recommended design. This can be seen when looking at the various midpoint scores found
in Table 3.1. However, as midpoint scores are not normalised and weighted, the importance of
the potential midpoint impacts is not yet quantiﬁed. Some impact categories indicate a poten-
tial burden shift between life cycle stages as a trade-oﬀoccur between reduced environmental
impacts from better insulating properties in a triple glazed window, as the increased demand
for material in the production and replacement of the window is higher than the saved energy
for heating. The analysis showed that for impact categories, which are primarily dominated
by the production of the window, such as GWP and FRS, the double glazed window is the
preferable solution, whereas for the impact categories, which are primarily aﬀected by the heat
consumption, such as LU, the triple glazed window is preferred.
20
==PAGE:35==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
As seen in SI K Table K.2, the midpoint score for the windows contributing the most to the
endpoint score for ecosystems, is land use. The unit process contributing the most to land use
impacts is the biomass heat production as seen in SI M.3 Table M.4. Biomass production for
district heating is forecasted to increase in the future. As the double glazed window consumes
more heat, and the heat grid composition has an increasing dependence on biomass, the ag-
gregated ecosystem score for the double glazed window is higher than that of the triple glazed
window. The study showed that in consequence of the grid relying more on fossil free fuels,
a trade-oﬀbetween less impacts in the areas of protection for human health and resources
causes higher impacts in the area of protection ecosystem.
In the industry, EPDs (Environmental Product Declarations) are used as an indication of the
environmental performance of products. However, they do not account for land use which in
the case study of skylight windows showed to be the most contributing midpoint impact cate-
gory to the damage category ecosystems. Thus, the case study suggests that there is a possible
neglection of burden shifts towards land use, when using EPDs to make informed decisions.
EPD results (SI R) were generated for the double and triple glazed windows, showing that a
recommendation based on these results will not account for the land use impacts.
4.2
Building Regulations Causing Over Optimisation
This case study investigates the environmental impacts of double and triple glazed skylight
windows and addresses the potential over-optimisation of the energy eﬃciency of the products.
The accumulated environmental impacts indicate that a threshold might have been reached
for the optimisation of the energy eﬃciency as for some impact categories the extra embodied
impacts is not payed back by saved operational energy for triple glazed window.
Figure 3.4 depicts a contribution analysis for the life cycle stages of a window, showing the
importance of focusing on the production stage and the use stage. For a window applied in
a new build project, the production of a double glazed window accounts for 39% of the total
GWP, and the provision of heat accounts for 41%. For a triple glazed window, the distribution
is 46% production and only 25% originates from the heat consumption. This substantiates the
claim that the continued eﬀort in performance optimisation and energy eﬃciency in the use
phase for building components has led to a change in the signiﬁcance of the life cycle stages from
the use phase towards the construction phase. This tendency is driven by regulations, since
the building codes regulate the buildings through restrictions towards the building’s energy
performance. In order to comply with the legislation high energy performance components
are required, neglecting the aspect of the embodied energy in the building components, which
there are currently no restrictions towards.
A previous study on insulation material was conducted assessing the same thesis as this case
study. The study investigated the outer walls in Danish residential buildings and found that the
additional environmental burdens caused by using more insulation material will not necessarily
be compensated for by a decreased heat consumption (Sohn et al. 2017). Thus, the case studies
for skylight windows and insulation material both suggest that additional regulations related
to the energy consumption of buildings are ill-advised, and that regulation should consider the
embodied energy in the buildings and not only the energy consumption.
blank
21
==PAGE:36==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
4.3
Explorative LCA
Most LCAs performed today use static energy grid compositions and technologies. However,
the energy grid changes have proved to be of importance, especially if the product analysed
has a long expected lifetime and has an annual energy consumption during the service life. SI
N contains an analysis of accumulated midpoint and endpoint impacts revealing very diﬀerent
result outcomes for the same system, modelled with static and dynamic grid compositions.
Figure 3.6 compares GWP for a static energy grid with a dynamic energy grid. The results
indicate, that the triple glazed window performs better than the double glazed window, when
using a static grid, as opposed to the double glazed window performing better than the triple
glazed window, when using a dynamic grid. Hence, the conclusion drawn from this analysis
diﬀers depending on the method chosen. This underlines the importance of accounting for
future changes when deciding between diﬀerent design solutions with long expected lifetimes.
Studying the impact category land use the analysis reveals a possible neglection of potential
impacts as a model with a static grid composition, indicates lower impacts than the corre-
sponding model with a dynamic grid composition.
The direction of the forecasts for the energy grid compositions are very important as the
recommendations are governed by the grid chosen. The forecasts from the Danish Energy
Agency represent a fossil dependent direction and fossil free directions. The design solution
regarding the preferable window was highly dependent on the energy grid direction. A fossil
dependent grid composition simulates a future, where the government goals regarding CO2 re-
ductions will not be reached. To comply with the goals the energy supply is changing towards
a decarbonisation, depending more on biomasses. Therefore, a static grid- or fossil dependent
grid composition will exaggerate impacts related to human health and resources and neglect
potential impacts related to the ecosystem.
The case study on insulation material was performed for with a model also accounting for a
changing composition in the heat supply. The case study showed that a static grid would incite
using more insulation material than a dynamic system (Sohn et al. 2017). Hence, both stud-
ies for skylight windows and insulation indicate that diﬀerent design recommendations might
occur for an LCA calculating energy consumption with the provision of a static energy supply
rather than a dynamic LCA accounting for future changes in the energy grid composition.
4.4
The Case Study in an Industry Perspective
Even though the building regulations are still developing towards a more strict demand for the
energy consumption in the buildings, see Table 1.1, the industry is not completely unaware
of the potential burden shift from operational- to embodied energy. SBi’s report "Buildings
embodied energy and environmental impacts" argues that the operational energy in new build-
ings has reached a level of eﬃciency which is so low that we now need to focus on the embodied
energy in the buildings in order to accommodate the environmental challenges we are facing
(Birgisdóttir and Madsen 2017).
The organisation for the Danish Construction Industry and the organisation for Danish Energy
recommended in June 2017 that from 2025, LCAs should be performed for all new buildings,
and as a reaction to the results, requirements for the LCA scores should be introduced in 2030
(Andersen 2017b). Furthermore, the building industry has taken the initiative to incorporate
an optional sustainability class in the building regulations the purpose of which is to facilitate
sustainability initiatives and increase the Danish export of building products and counselling.
The idea originates from the optional low energy classes, which accelerated developments of
blank
22
==PAGE:37==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
products and solutions for low energy buildings (LEB) and increased Danish export (Andersen
2017a). The optional sustainability class is set to contain an LCA accounting for the impacts
on the environment to produce the building materials and the buildings’ energy consump-
tion throughout their lifetime (Mortensen et al. 2018). This initiative is inarguable a step in
the right direction, however, as LCAs can be a quite comprehensive and a time-consuming
task, it is recommended by the advisory board that the LCAs should only be performed for
the major parts of the building and the impact indicators be limited to primary energy and
CO2-emissions.
4.5
Limitations and Further Studies
This study investigates the environmental burdens related to the windows in a Danish ap-
plication context. The energy consumption will diﬀerentiate depending on the geographical
location, since, the mathematical models used by Eref and Be18 are speciﬁc for the Danish
climate. Furthermore, as the energy supply is based on Danish district heating with a Danish
grid composition the provision of heat is limited to represent Danish application. The energy
supply will vary in other geographical locations, as other countries might not have district
heating but rather electrical or gas. It is therefore recommended to use a location speciﬁc
energy supply to estimate the most suitable solution.
This study applies district heating as the provision of heat, however, only 64% of Danish res-
idential buildings (Dansk Fjernvarme 2017) have district heating, and it could therefore be
relevant to apply other types of heat supply, e.g. electrical, gas etc. to see if this will lead
to other conclusions. Electrical heating supply is relevant to investigate, as the low heating
demand in new build buildings allows the buildings to be heated solely on electrical heating.
Technological developments were not included in this study, however, the technological ad-
vancements within the energy sector and the window manufacturing industry are expected to
optimise the extraction of raw materials, heat generation, material production, window manu-
facturing etc. The optimisation is expected to decrease the associated environmental burdens,
hence, the relevance of including this aspect in a future study.
The calculation of the energy consumption was based on a reference house, hence the envi-
ronmental impacts of the windows are only directly applicable for this speciﬁc house, since
diﬀerent buildings have diﬀerent needs and require diﬀerent solutions. The reference house
is, however, considered, to represent a typical standard house, complying with BR18 for LEB
and BR77. However, calculating the energy consumption of the windows applied in multiple
building solutions would increase the validity of the conclusions. Furthermore, multiple design
solutions would increase the precision of the recommendations.
This study investigated environmental burdens associated with skylight windows, thus, the
study is not directly applicable for facade windows. The angle of a facade window allows
less solar radiation to pass through the window and shade factors generated by surrounding
objects, are likely to be higher as well. The decreased solar gain for facade windows, could
lead to a greater signiﬁcance of the insulating properties in a facade window, compared to that
of a skylight window in preference to the triple glazed window.
Furthermore, this study solely focuses on the environmental sustainability and a holistic ap-
proach capturing the economic- and social sustainability could add value to the recommenda-
tions. Economic considerations could be based on recommendations generated with a life cycle
costing (LCC) analysis. The social aspect of the holistic analysis could include an investigation
of the consequences on daylight by choosing one design over another.
blank
23
==PAGE:38==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
5
Conclusion
The life cycle assessments (LCA) of the skylight windows showed that the two primary con-
tributors to the environmental impacts, were the manufacturing and the heat consumption. In
the new build project, the manufacturing and replacement of the triple glazed skylight window
accounted for 71%, and the heat consumption only accounted for 25%. This ﬁnding substan-
tiates the claim that the continued eﬀort in performance optimisation and energy eﬃciency in
the use phase for building components has led to a change in the signiﬁcance of the life cycle
stages from the use phase towards the construction phase.
The LCA was modelled with a dynamic grid composition for the heat consumption which
showed to be important as the results for the static grid composition for some impact categories
led to the opposite recommendations and other impacts were neglected. As the energy supply
is changing towards a decarbonisation of the energy supply, depending more on biomasses, a
static grid composition exaggerated impacts related to human health and resources and ne-
glected potential impacts related to the ecosystem.
The study showed that generally the diﬀerence between the footprints both for midpoint- and
endpoint scores for the double and triple glazed windows were larger for the renovation project
than the new build project, as the diﬀerence in the saved/consumed energy from implement-
ing a skylight window is larger for a renovation project, than that for a new build house.
However, the same recommendations were concluded regardless of the heat consumption cal-
culation method.
The orientation of the window changed the overall heat consumption of the building signiﬁ-
cantly as expected. For a new build house, the double glazed window had less global warming
potential compared to the triple glazed window regardless of orientation. However, studying
the renovation project, a double glazed window had signiﬁcantly smaller global warming po-
tential when oriented south, whereas the north facing windows had similar impacts for both
windows.
To validate the results obtained through the LCAs, a sensitivity and uncertainty analysis
was conducted. The results of this analysis were however distorted, due to high uncertain-
ties in the impact category water consumption, caused by multiple unit processes within the
ecoinvent 3.4 database. Nevertheless, the analysis demonstrated that some impact categories
always favoured one window over the other.
For the midpoint impacts scores, the double
glazed window had less impacts in global warming potential and ﬁne particulate matter for-
mation, whereas the triple glazed window always had lower impacts in land use and human
non-carcinogenic toxicity. For the damage area resources, the doubled glazed window always
had less impacts than the triple glazed window.
The initiatives towards buildings taken to accomplish the climate goals focus on the building’s
energy eﬃciency, and new buildings today have a very low energy consumption. The building
regulations consider only the energy performance and not the embodied energy in the building,
which could possibly provoke over-optimisation. Today, new buildings might have reached a
threshold of performance optimising the energy consumption in the buildings, as there is a risk
of inducing more environmental impacts through the embodied energy, than from the saved
operational energy.
24
==PAGE:39==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
References
Andersen, U. (2017a). “Building materials have a higher environmental burden than the heat
consumption”. In: url: https://goo.gl/zS3J8P.
— (2017b). Minister: Sustainability can be accommodated in the building regulations. url:
https://goo.gl/cmCso6.
Asif, M., A. Davidson, and T. Muneer (2002). “Life Cycle of Window Materials-A Comparative
Assessment”. In: . . . http://www. cibse. org/pdfs/Masif. . . . Pp. 1–13. url: http://ohv.
parks.ca.gov/pages/1054/files/uk%20window%20frame%20lca.pdf.
Asif, M., T. Muneer, and J. Kubie (2005). “Technical note Sustainability analysis of window
frames”. In: Carbon 1, pp. 71–88.
Baldinelli, G., F. Asdrubali, C. Baldassarri, F. Bianchi, F. D’Alessandro, S. Schiavoni, and
C. Basilicata (2014). “Energy and environmental performance optimization of a wooden
window: A holistic approach”. In: Energy and Buildings 79, pp. 114–131. issn: 03787788.
doi: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2014.05.010. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.
2014.05.010.
Birgisdóttir, H. and S. S. Madsen (2017). Buildings embodied energy and environmtal impacts,
pp. 1–65. isbn: 9788793585058.
Bjørn, A., A. Moltesen, A. Laurent, M. Owsianiak, A. Corona, M. Birkved, and M. Z. Hauschild
(2017). Life Cycle Assessment: Theory and Practice - Chapter 9 Life Cycle Inventory
Analysis, pp. 1–1216. isbn: 9783319564753. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-56475-3.
Bjørn, A., M. Owsianiak, A. Laurent, S. I. Olsen, A. Corona, and M. Z. Hauschild (2017). Life
Cycle Assessment: Theory and Practice - Chapter 8 Scope Deﬁnition, pp. 1–1216. isbn:
9783319564753. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-56475-3.
Bjørn, A., M. Owsianiak, C. Molin, and A. Laurant (2017). “Life Cycle Assessment: Theory
and Practice - Chapter 2 Main Characterics of LCA”. In: Life Cycle Assessment: Theory
and Practice, pp. 1–1216. issn: 10881980. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-56475-3.
Blengini, G. A. and T. D. Carlo (2010). “Energy-saving policies and low-energy residential
buildings: An LCA case study to support decision makers in piedmont (Italy)”. In: In-
ternational Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 15.7, pp. 652–665. issn: 09483349. doi:
10.1007/s11367-010-0190-5.
BR (1977). BR1977. isbn: 8750321641.
— (2010). BR2010. url: https://sbi.dk/anvisninger/Pages/Anv230-Anvisning-om-
Bygningsreglement-2010-udgave-4.aspx.
— (2015). BR2015. url: https : / / sbi . dk / anvisninger / Pages / 258 - Anvisning - om -
Bygningsreglement-2015-BR15-3.aspx#/7-Energiforbrug.
25
==PAGE:40==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
BR (2018). BR18 LEB. url: http://bygningsreglementet.dk/Ovrige-bestemmelser/25/
Krav/473_484.
BR18 (2018). Executive order on building regulations 2018 (BR18). Tech. rep.
Cabeza, L. F., L. Rincón, V. Vilariño, G. Pérez, and A. Castell (2014). “Life cycle assess-
ment (LCA) and life cycle energy analysis (LCEA) of buildings and the building sector: A
review”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 29, pp. 394–416. issn: 13640321.
doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2013.08.037. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2013.
08.037.
Citherlet, S., F. Di Guglielmo, and J. B. Gay (2000). “Window and advanced glazing systems
life cycle assessment”. In: Energy and Buildings 32.3, pp. 225–234. issn: 03787788. doi:
10.1016/S0378-7788(98)00073-5.
Collinge, W. O., A. E. Landis, A. K. Jones, L. A. Schaefer, and M. M. Bilec (2013). “Dy-
namic life cycle assessment: Framework and application to an institutional building”. In:
International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 18.3, pp. 538–552. issn: 09483349. doi:
10.1007/s11367-012-0528-2.
Danish Energy Agency (2014). “Energiscenarier frem mod 2020, 2035 og 2050 (Energy scenarios
towards 2020, 2035, and 2050)”. In: p. 5. doi: ISBN:978-87-93071-64-3. url: https:
//ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/EnergiKlimapolitik/energiscenarier_-_analyse_
2014_web.pdf.
— (2015). Uafhængig af fossile brændsler. url: http://nyenergi.nu/#anc-tidslinje/1972.
— (2017). “Energy Statistic 2016”. In: Energistatistik.
— (2018). Ovenlysvinduer. url: https://goo.gl/ZnYZVQ.
Danish Standards (2008). “Miljøledelse – Livscyklusvurdering – Krav og vejledning Environ-
mental management – Life cycle assessment – Requirements and guidelines”. In: 4. adgave.
Dansk Fjernvarme (2017). Facts About District Heating. url: https://www.danskfjernvarme.
dk/presse/fakta-om-fjernvarme.
European Commission – Joint Research Centre – Institute for Environment and Sustainability
(2010). International Reference Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) Handbook – General guide
for Life Cycle Assessment – Detailed guidance, p. 417. isbn: 978-92-79-19092-6. doi: 10.
2788/38479. url: http://lct.jrc.ec.europa.eu/pdf-directory/ILCD-Handbook-
General-guide-for-LCA-DETAIL-online-12March2010.pdf.
European Parliament and European Council (2012). “Directive 2012/27/EU”. In: Oﬃcial Jour-
nal of the European Union L315/1.October, pp. 1–56. issn: 2012. doi: 10.3000/19770677.
L{\_}2012.315.eng.
blank
26
==PAGE:41==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Goedkoop, M. J., R. Heijungs, M. Huijbregts, A. D. Schryver, J. Struijs, and R. v. Zelm (2008).
“harmonised category indicators at the midpoint and the endpoint level ReCiPe 2008”. In:
June 2016. issn: 02105233. doi: 10.2307/40184439.
Goldstein, B. and F. N. Rasmussen (2017). “Life Cycle Assessment: Theory and Practice -
Chapter 28 LCA of Buildings and the Built Environment”. In: Life Cycle Assessment:
Theory and Practice, pp. 1–1216. issn: 10881980. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-56475-3.
Hammer, C. (2011). “Krav og konsekvenser”. In: url: http://www.vinduesindustrien.dk/
fileadmin/documents/brochurer/Krav_og_konsekvenser-4_NET.pdf.
Hauschild, M. Z., A. Bonou, and S. I. Olsen (2017). “Life Cycle Assessment: Theory and
Practice - Chapter 12 Life Cycle Interpretation”. In: Life Cycle Assessment: Theory and
Practice, pp. 1–1216. issn: 10881980. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-56475-3.
Heinz, S. and M. H. Hansen (2009). Life Times of Building Components. url: http://www.
levetider.dk.
Huijbregts, M. A. J., W. Gilijamse, A. M. J. Ragas, and L. Reijnders (2003). “Evaluating Un-
certainty in Environmental Life-Cycle Assessment . A Case Study Comparing Two Insula-
tion Options for a Dutch One-Family Dwelling Evaluating Uncertainty in Environmental
Life-Cycle Assessment . A Case Study Comparing Two Insulation Options for”. In: 37.11,
pp. 2600–2608. doi: 10.1021/es020971.
Huijbregts, M. A. J., Z. J. N. Steinmann, et al. (2017). “ReCiPe 2016 v1.1 A harmonized life cy-
cle impact assessment method at midpoint and endpoint level Report I: Characterization”.
In: issn: 2016-0104. doi: 10.1007/s11367-016-1246-y. url: www.rivm.nl/en.
ISO 14040 (2008a). “Miljøledelse : Livscyklusvurdering : Principper og struktur : DS/EN ISO
14040 = Environmental management - Life cycle assessment - Principles and framework -
DS/EN ISO 14040”. In: p. 20.
— (2008b). “Miljøledelse : Livscyklusvurdering : Principper og struktur : DS/EN ISO 14040
= Environmental management - Life cycle assessment - Principles and framework - DS/EN
ISO 14040”. In: 2. udgave, p. 20.
Jensen, M. B., C. Merlin, and A. Schmidt (2017). “Miljøvaredeklaration - Trævindue med
aluminiumsproﬁl og kuldebrosafbryder (3-lags glas)”. In: 14025.2017.
Ministry of Climate (2016). Energieﬀektivitet. url: https://efkm.dk/energi-og-raastoffer/
energieffektivitet/.
Ministry of Environment (2017). Waste Prevention in Construction. 1919. isbn: 0003-2700.
doi: 10.1038/sj.bmt.1705056. url: https://www2.mst.dk/Udgiv/publikationer/
2017/02/978-87-93529-66-3.pdf.
Mortensen, L., K. Kanafani, and S. Aggerholm (2018). Voluntary sustainability class in the
building regulations - Request from the Construction Industry. url: https://www.innobyg.
dk/media/75595/frivillig-baeredygtighedsklasse-br-18_final-rapport.pdf.
blank
27
==PAGE:42==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Nielsen, F. (2016). “Dansk energipolitik gennem 40 år”. In: url: http://des-hjemmeside.
dk/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/Dansk-energipolitik-i-40-%C3%A5r.pdf.
Owsianiak, M., A. Bjørn, H. B. Bugge, S. M. Carvalho, L. Jebahar, Jon Rasmussen, C. M.
White, and S. I. Olsen (2018). Illustrative Case Study: Life Cycle Assessment of Four
Window Alternatives. isbn: 978-3-319-56474-6. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-56475-3. url:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-56475-3.
Owsianiak, M., A. Bjørn, A. Laurent, C. Molin, and M. W. Ryberg (2017). “Life Cycle As-
sessment: Theory and Practice - Chapter 4 LCA Applications”. In: Life Cycle Assessment:
Theory and Practice, pp. 1–1216. issn: 10881980. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-56475-3.
Rasmussen, F. N. and H. Birgisdóttir (2016). “Life cycle embodied and operational energy use
in a typical, new Danish single-family house”. In: CLIMA 2016 - proceedings of the 12th
REHVA World Congress 5. url: http://vbn.aau.dk/files/233778874/paper_753.pdf.
Rationel (2015). Miniguide til Energivinduer. url: https://www.rationel.dk/guides/
fordele/energi.
Recio, Jose Maria Baldasano, René Parra Narváez, and Pedro Jiménez Guerrero (2005). “Es-
timate of energy consumption and CO2 emission associated with the production, use nad
ﬁnal disposal of PVC, aluminium and wooden windows”. In:
RIVM (2017). Characterisation and Normalisation Factors. url: https://www.rivm.nl/en/
Topics/L/Life_Cycle_Assessment_LCA/Downloads.
Salazar, J. (2013). “Life cycle assessment (LCA) of windows and window materials”. In:
Eco-Eﬃcient Construction and Building Materials: Life Cycle Assessment (LCA), Eco-
Labelling and Case Studies, pp. 502–527. isbn: 9780857097675. doi: 10.1533/9780857097729.
3.502.
Salazar, J. and T. Sowlati (2008). “Life cycle assessment of windows for the North American
residential market: Case study”. In: Scandinavian Journal of Forest Research 23.2, pp. 121–
132. issn: 02827581. doi: 10.1080/02827580801906981.
SBi (2018). SBi Reference House - Low Energy Building. url: http://eksempelsamling.
bygningsreglementet.dk/enfamhus_tyve_basishus.
Sohn, J. L., P. P. Kalbar, G. T. Banta, and M. Birkved (2017). “Life-cycle based dynamic
assessment of mineral wool insulation in a Danish residential building application”. In:
Journal of Cleaner Production 142, pp. 3243–3253. issn: 09596526. doi: 10.1016/j.
jclepro.2016.10.145. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.10.145.
Syrrakou, E., S. Papaefthimiou, and P. Yianoulis (2006). “Eco-eﬃciency evaluation of a smart
window prototype”. In: Science of the Total Environment 359.1-3, pp. 267–282. issn:
00489697. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2005.10.023.
The Danish Government (2009). “Strategi for reduktion af energiforbruget i bygninger”. In:
issn: 1932-6203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002147.
blank
28
==PAGE:43==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
The Ministry of Foreign Aﬀairs (2017). “Handlingsplan for FN ’ s verdensmål”. In:
— (2018). Verdensmålene for bæredygtig udvikling. url: http://um.dk/da/danida/strategi%
20og%20prioriteter/verdensmaal/.
Vilches, A., A. Garcia-Martinez, and B. Sanchez-Montañes (2017). “Life cycle assessment
(LCA) of building refurbishment: A literature review”. In: Energy and Buildings 135,
pp. 286–301. issn: 03787788. doi: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2016.11.042.
Weir, G. and T. Muneer (1998). “Energy and environmental impact analysis of double-glazed
windows”. In: Energy Conversion and Management 39.3-4, pp. 243–256. issn: 01968904.
doi: 10 . 1016 / S0196 - 8904(96 ) 00191 - 4. url: http : / / www . sciencedirect . com /
science/article/pii/S0196890496001914.
Zhao, C. Z., Q. Jiang, P. Zhao, and L. P. Ma (2014). “Selection of Building External Windows
in Diﬀerent Climatic Zones Based on LCA”. In: Materials Science Forum 787, pp. 184–
194. issn: 1662-9752. doi: 10.4028/www.scientific.net/MSF.787.184. url: https:
//www.scientific.net/MSF.787.184.
blank
29
==PAGE:44==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Supporting Information
1
==PAGE:45==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
A
Literature Review
Previously, many LCA studies performed on windows focused on an environmental evaluation
of the materials.
The objective has been to enable selection of environmentally preferred
materials by identifying sources of the most signiﬁcant impacts. Previous studies found that a
window’s environmental performance during production was highly dependent on the glazing
unit, the aluminium used to strengthen the construction, and the frame material (Citherlet
et al. 2000).
Several LCAs of windows have focused on investigating the environmental impacts of diﬀerent
frame materials. A study compared the embodied energy of aluminium, PVC, timber, and
aluminium-clad timber frames. The study found that the aluminium frame had twice the
embodied energy compared to the PVC frame, and the PVC frame had a three times higher
embodied energy than the timber frames (Asif, Davidson, et al. 2002). A study conﬁrmed
this ﬁnding as the aluminium frame had a 6 times higher embodied energy than a wooden
frame (Asif, Muneer, et al. 2005). Another study compared aluminium-clad wood, PVC and
ﬁberglass frame materials, looking at 15 impact categories, and found that the PVC frame
had the highest global warming potential, however, the aluminium-clad wood frame had the
highest aquatic ecotoxicity level (Salazar and Sowlati 2008). This indicates an importance of
looking at multiple impact categories when considering the environmental burden of products.
FORCE Technology has made EPDs for the production of four windows with diﬀerent frame
materials: wood, PVC, aluminium, and wood/aluminium (Jensen et al. 2017). Figure A.1
illustrates that the aluminium window has a 3 times higher global warming potential than
that of PVC or wooden framed windows.
Figure A.1: Illustrates the global warming potential (GWP) of the production for four diﬀerent
window frames
One of the earliest studies conducted for windows compared the use of diﬀerent inert gases
to ﬁll the cavity between the glazing units. The compared gasses were argon, krypton and
xenon. The study found that argon was the most preferable solution in terms of environmental
impacts, even though this gas resulted in a greater heat loss (Weir and Muneer 1998).
The choice of materials also eﬀect the window’s thermal performance as the heat losses de-
pend on the insulating properties of the materials. Some LCA studies account only for the
materials used (the embodied energy) in the manufacturing process, while other studies have
shown that the generation of indoor heating compensating for heat losses through the window
during heating season is the main contributor to the environmental impact of the windows
(Owsianiak, Bjørn, Bugge, et al. 2018, Baldinelli et al. 2014, Blengini and Carlo 2010, Salazar
2013). This is due to the long-expected lifetime of the windows, and the heat consumption is
a continuous annual impact throughout the lifetime of the window.
blank
2
==PAGE:46==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
One study investigated the environmental impacts induced to compensate for heat losses
through the window. It was found that up to 90% of the impacts for climate change, freshwater
eutrophication and resource depletion occurred during the use phase. Furthermore, the study
also found that the impact categories stratospheric ozone depletion and ionising radiation were
mostly aﬀected during the manufacturing stage (Owsianiak, Bjørn, Bugge, et al. 2018).
Technological advanced windows such as electrochromic windows are available today. These
windows can alter the optical properties when exposed to direct sunlight by using an elec-
trochromic ﬁlm. A study conducted showed that the window was able to improve the thermal
properties of a building in cooling dominated areas and was found to compensate for the energy
used to manufacture the window after 1.1 years of operation. Furthermore, the study found
that double glazing units had an estimated payback time of 0.2 years. The windows were
compared with single glazing units, which are the dominant window type in Greece (Syrrakou
et al. 2006).
A study investigated the energy usage from cradle to grave for diﬀerent types of windows.
The diﬀerent types were PVC, aluminium, and wooden framed windows. The wooden frame
window had two diﬀerent variants-one double glazed and one single glazed, since single glazed
wooden windows are widely used in Spain. The study found that the PVC windows had the
smallest energy usage from cradle to grave with 1780 kWh. The study also found that the
double glazed wooden windows (2045 kWh) performed 30% better than the single glazed win-
dows (2633 kWh) (Recio et al. 2005).
The list of studies concluding that the use stage is the most contributing to the total environ-
mental footprint of a window is long, however, these studies have all been carried out with a
static energy grid, assuming that the Danish energy supply will not change signiﬁcantly within
the lifetime of the window.
A study reviewed the use of increased insulation material in the building envelope in order
to decrease heat consumption during operation. The study used a dynamic district heat pro-
duction model which was modelled according to the political projections of the future district
heating grid mix. The study found that the energy savings caused by increasing the insula-
tion level in Danish residential buildings did not compensate for the climate change potentials
induced by manufacturing the insulation. The study also showed that had a static heat grid
production been used to model the heat consumption, the payback time would have been
40 years, making the increased amount of insulation the most plausible solution (Sohn et al.
2017).
blank
3
==PAGE:47==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
B
The Danish Energy Supply
The Danish energy supply is in constant development, and the grid mix composition has
changed drastically as a result of political, economic, and environmental considerations. In
1972, Denmark was fully dependant on oil for electricity, heat, and transport, and 92% of the
Danish energy was produced from imported oil. After the energy crisis in 1973, Denmark was
forced to rethink its energy policy, and in 1978 a major energy transition took place aiming at
a self-suﬃcient energy supply. Heat and power plants were converted from producing energy
with oil to coal. Furthermore, wind turbines were introduced as an energy source, and in
1984 Danish oil consumption was reduced by 40% compared to 1972. The North Sea natural
gas project began in 1984, and a combination of oil and gas from the North Sea resulted in
Denmark being self-suﬃcient in 1997 (Danish Energy Agency 2015). In 1990, the government
presented "Energi 2000" being the world’s ﬁrst CO2 reduction plan pushing further change
towards renewable energy resources (Nielsen 2016). The reduction of oil and gas production
led to Denmark no longer being self-suﬃcient in 2013, and in 2015 Denmark only produced
89% of its energy consumption (Danish Energy Agency 2015).
Figure B.1: Gross Energy Composition [PJ] (Nielsen 2016)
In Denmark, we have obtained a signiﬁcantly greater share of renewable energy over the last
10-15 years (Ministry of Climate 2016). The Danish energy and heating grid are set to become
fossil free by 2035 as requested by the Danish government. These changes in the Danish grid
mix are reﬂected in the energy scenarios produced by the Danish Energy Agency (Danish
Energy Agency 2014), as four of the scenarios use solely renewable energy sources after 2035.
Reaching the current goals set by the government will require large adjustments in the cur-
rent energy production sector and will be highly dependent on subsidies. The four scenarios
predicted by the Danish Energy Agency are not a ﬁnal solution, but rather an indication of
possible grid combinations to reach the goals for 2035 and 2050 (Danish Energy Agency 2014).
blank
4
==PAGE:48==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
C
Scenario Overview
The scenario overview shows the 30 diﬀerent scenarios. The 30 scenarios consist of double and
triple glazed windows, combined with 5 diﬀerent forecast energy supply models and 3 methods
of calculating the heat consumption. Throughout the thesis, the scenarios will be mentioned,
and their diﬀerent compositions appear from Table C.1. The standard scenarios generally used
in the thesis are scenarios 1 and 16. From the table it is observed that scenarios 1 and 16
are double and triple glazed windows in a new build project using the wind district heating
grid (DHG). If results are depicted without speciﬁcations on energy consumption calculation
method or DHG, the default scenarios, are illustrated.
Table C.1: Scenario Overview
The double and triple glazed windows are the same type and model, and the data originates
from the same window company. The primary diﬀerence is the amount of materials, especially
glass. The windows’ inventories can be seen in SI D Table D.1.
The amount of heat consumption which can be allocated to the window is object to discussion.
There is not a single accepted way, and therefore this study will calculate the heat consump-
tion with diﬀerent methods. A reference house, "basic one family house" (SBi 2018) from
the Danish Building Research Institute’s (SBi), has been modelled in the energy calculation
program Be18, in order to calculate the heat consumption in a new build house and a potential
renovation project. The dimensions and thermal properties for the reference house are found
in SI E Table E.1, and the dimensions are found in Figure E.1.
The ﬁve forecasts of the DHG composition for 2035 and 2050 were estimated by the Danish
Energy Agency and consist of ﬁve diﬀerent energy scenarios (Danish Energy Agency 2014).
The tables can be found in SI H Table H.1 and H.2.
blank
5
==PAGE:49==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
D
Window Inventory
The masses, areas and volumes observed in Table D.1 were found in the window’s product
sheets. The product sheets can be found in SI S. The unit processes were obtained from the
ecoinvent 3.4 database.
The geographical scope for the material production is situated in
Europe, hence the inventories are modelled for Rest of Europe (RER), which use average Eu-
ropean technology techniques. The disposal will most likely be in Denmark since the windows
are assumed to have Danish application. However, no suitable end of life processes was found
with a Danish geographical scope, thus the processes vary between Switzerland and RER.
Table D.1: Inventory unit process for the double and triple glazed windows.
Table D.2: The yearly energy consumption in MJ for double and triple glazed skylight windows
with the diﬀerent heat consumption calculations. Negative values indicate a decreased energy
consumption for the building.
blank
6
==PAGE:50==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
E
Reference House from SBi
The reference house used in this study was collected from the Danish Building Research
Institute’s (SBi) reference house "basic one family house" (SBi 2018). The house is 149.6 m2
and consists of a living room, a kitchen, four rooms, a utility room, and two bathrooms. The
ﬂoor plan is presented in Figure E.1.
Figure E.1: Floor plan of the reference house.
The reference house is a basic one family house complying with the energy performance require-
ments for low energy buildings in 2018. Table E.1 contains the thermal properties (U-values)
which have been used to model the reference house for the new build project, and the thermal
properties which have been used to model the renovation project. The renovation project has
been modelled with the same ﬂoor plan as the basic one family house, however U-values, linear
thermal transmittance and the amount of glazing area have been adjusted according to the
building regulations of 1977. The glazing area has been reduced to 15% of ﬂoor area, as this
was a rule of thumb in the building regulations from 1977 (BR 1977).
Table E.1: U-values and linear thermal transmittances for the renovation house and for the
new build low energy building (BR 1977, BR 2018).
The distribution of the window’s orientations in the reference house has been modelled ac-
cording to the distributions found in Table E.2.
Table E.2: The distribution of the orientation of the windows for the reference houses.
blank
7
==PAGE:51==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
F
Heat Consumption Calculation Methods
Be18
Be18 is a calculation program, used in the industry, to document that a building complies with
the energy regulations, and to calculate energy consumption in buildings. The reference house
was modelled in Be18 with and without a skylight window, to estimate the heat consumption.
The energy impact caused by the window is assumed to be the diﬀerence in heat consumption
between those two calculations.
Ewindow = Eref.house+window −Eref.house
[kWh per. year]
In the calculation of the reference house with a skylight window, an area of 1.6 square meter
roof was replaced with a window of the same size.
The reference house for the new build scenario was modelled according to the BR18 for a low
energy building. The thermal properties were found using both Eksempelsamlingen for SBi’s
reference house (SBi 2018) and BR18 (BR 2018. The values appear from Table E.1. The
building was heated using district heating and cooled by mechanical ventilation which infused
fresh air at a rate of 0.3 l/s m2 and additionally had an inﬁltration rate of 0.07 l/s m2. The
mechanical ventilation utilises heat recovery with an eﬃciency of 85%.
The reference house for the renovation scenario was modelled according to the building regula-
tions of 1977, by changing the thermal properties i.e. the heat transfer coeﬃcients (U-values)
and the linear thermal transmittance for the building components. The values are found in
Table E.1. The building was heated using district heating and cooled by natural ventilation
which infused fresh air at a rate of 0.3 l/s m2.
The facade windows for the reference houses were distributed in accordance to the distribution
used in Eref showed in SI E Table E.2.
Eref
Eref is calculated as the balance between solar gain and heat loss through the window during
heating season.
Figure F.1: Eref (Rationel 2015)
The value can either be a positive or negative contribution depending on the properties of the
window. The calculation of a window’s energy performance (Eref) is based on the window’s
insulating properties (U-value) and the percent of solar heat, which the window allows to pass
into the building through the window (g-value). Eref for the skylight window is determined by
the following formula: (Hammer 2011)
blank
8
==PAGE:52==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Eref = 345 · gg · fg −90.36 · Uw
[kWh/m2 pr. year]
gg is the solar transmittance of the glazing
fg is the fraction of glass
Uw is the heat transfer coeﬃcient for the entire window.
The average eﬀect of the window is calculated with the orientation percentage presented in
Table E.2, in the Danish reference year DRY. 90.36 is the diﬀerence between outdoor and
indoor temperatures multiplied by the number of heating hours, while 345 is the average solar
radiation for the weighted orientations (Hammer 2011).
blank
9
==PAGE:53==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
G
District Heating Grid Processes
Table G.1 shows the processes used to represent the energy sources in the district heating grid.
They have been selected to best possibly represent the actual energy grid composition, while
at the same time representing the geographical scope: Denmark. This was not possible for all
the energy sources, hence the geothermal, excessive heat, heat pumps and solar energy sources
use processes with a Swiss geographical speciﬁcation. Swiss processes were found to be good
representatives for Danish processes, due to similarities in the infrastructure and technology
level in the two countries.
Some energy sources lack a direct process to represent it. The biomass process was originally
divided into three diﬀerent types of biomasses: straw, wood and bio oil, however, due to
insuﬃcient processes being available, they were all represented with a wood burning boiler.
This could lead to inaccurate representations of the energy sources as the diﬀerent boilers
could have diﬀerent eﬃciencies and caloriﬁc values.
Table G.1: Unit processes representing the energy sources.
blank
10
==PAGE:54==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
H
Dynamic District Heating Grid
The district heating grid compositions are based on the forecast analysis "Energy Scenarios
Towards 2020, 2035, and 2050." developed by the Danish Energy Agency (Danish Energy
Agency 2014). The percentage for each of the energy sources were found via the capacities
found in Tables H.1 and H.2. The percentage distribution for the energy sources in the years
between the ﬁx points, were calculated via linear interpolation. Since the expected lifetimes
of the windows are 40 years, the forecasts stretch to 2058. The grid mix composition from
2050 to 2058 is assumed to be static. To simplify the dynamic model in SimaPro, composition
values were derived every ﬁfth year and set to be identical within the ﬁve year intervals, i.e.
the grid compositions from 2023 to 2027 use the grid composition from 2023.
Table H.1: Capacities for central district heating in 2016. Unit: MW. (Danish Energy Agency
2017)
blank
11
==PAGE:55==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Table H.2: Forecast capacities for central district heating in years 2035 and 2050. Unit: MW.
(Danish Energy Agency 2014)
The development of environmental impacts of the heat supply was analysed for 1 MJ produced
district heat according to the wind forecast (DHG 1) of the energy supply. Table H.3 presents
the midpoint impact scores for 1 MJ produced district heating calculated according to the
Danish Energy Agency’s wind forecast presented in Tables H.1 and H.2.
blank
12
==PAGE:56==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Table H.3: The yearly environmental impacts for 1 MJ consumed district heating power for
the Danish district heating network according to DHG 1 (wind).
The environmental impacts for the midpoints change throughout the temporal scope of 40
years.
The analysis indicated developments from a decrease of 82% for mineral resource
scarcity to an increase of 260% of ionizing radiation, while other impact indicators are more
steady. Table H.4 presents the change from year 1 to year 40 for all midpoint impacts.
Table H.4: Percentage development of environmental impacts for 1 MJ consumed district
heating power for the Danish district heating network according to DHG 1 (wind) from year
1 to year 40. The green colour indicates the impact categories decreasing over time, opposed
to the red colours indicating an increase over time.
blank
13
==PAGE:57==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
I
Representativeness of Scopes
Table I.1 shows the process representativeness of the geographical, technological, and temporal
scopes. The representativeness is colour graded with green: high, yellow: medium, and red:
low. The geographical representativeness was set to medium since the exact location in Europe
was unknown and since the manufacturer’s material acquisition was also unknown. The end of
life scenario phase will most likely occur in Denmark, however no waste processes were found
for Denmark, hence the geographical representation is set to low and medium. Processes using
CH - the Swiss geographical scope were set to the same representativeness as Europe, however,
it can be argued that the representativeness is actually higher, since the Swiss infrastructure
and technology levels are closer to the Danish compared to the European average. Processes
representing the energy sources were found with a Danish speciﬁcation for the geographical
scope for half of the processes, thereof, the high representativeness.
Most processes were found to have a technology level of 3, however, some processes did not
describe the technology level and were marked with a "-". With no technology level described,
the representativeness was set to low. The technological representativeness decreases during
the lifetime of the windows, since the technology used is expected to change and thereby
the representativeness in 20 and 40 years, respectively, will be outdated. The technological
and temporal representativeness of the energy sources for the DHG were set to high but will
decrease over time.
All processes were extrapolated from the year seen in the temporal column in Table G.1 to
year 2017 with an end date of 31/12/2017. Even though the data sets were extrapolated, the
representativeness was found medium if the year extrapolated from was more than 10 years
ago and low if it was more than 20 years ago. Since the replacement of the window occurs 20
years from now, the temporal representativeness is set to low and the technological level is set
to medium. The end of life scenario occurs 40 years from now, hence the low representativeness
of the technological and temporal scopes.
The processes describing the waste for steel and aluminium was set to high, since the processes
were empty, and no impacts relate to these. This is highly representative for the waste scenario,
given that the materials are expected to be recycled and the impacts should be accounted for
in the ﬁrst life cycle.
blank
14
==PAGE:58==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Table I.1: The representativeness of the geographical, technological, and temporal scopes of
each process. The representativeness is colour graded as green: high, yellow: medium, red:
low.
blank
15
==PAGE:59==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
J
Midpoint-Endpoint Conversion Factors
The results were ﬁrst obtained for 18 diﬀerent midpoint indicators which were then converted
into three damage assessments. Converting midpoints to endpoints will simplify the under-
standing of the LCIA results since the three areas of protection are easier to relate to. However,
a simpliﬁcation of the results will increase the uncertainty since some of the data is lost in
the conversion process. The loss of data is associated with the complexity of converting the
impacts e.g. converting global warming potential to loss of human lives. Hence, subjectiv-
ity regarding the importance of the various midpoint categories could aﬀect the magnitude
through conversion.
Table J.1: Conversion factors from midpoint to endpoint for the ReCiPe 2016 method (RIVM
2017).
blank
16
==PAGE:60==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
K
Midpoint and Endpoint Scores
The midpoint scores for the double and triple glazed windows are presented in Table K.1. The
table shows the impact scores for the manufacturing of the window parts and the provision of
heat. The total impacts depicted is the aggregated score for the potential impacts.
Table K.1: Midpoint scores for default scenarios 1 and 16.
blank
17
==PAGE:61==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Table K.2: Endpoint scores for default scenarios 1 and 16.
blank
18
==PAGE:62==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
L
Midpoint and Endpoint Impact Scores for Scenario 5 (Fossil)
This section contains the midpoint and endpoint impact scores for double and triple glazed
windows modelled with a forecast of a fossil grid composition for the energy supply. The
results are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the results for the four fossil free forecast scenarios, and
are therefore presented separately.
Table L.1: Midpoint scores for scenarios 5 and 20.
blank
19
==PAGE:63==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Table L.2: Endpoint scores for scenarios 5 and 20
Figure L.1 shows the accumulated results for GWP by using the fossil scenario for each energy
consumption calculation method. The results show that the double glazed window increasingly
exceeds the triple glazed window’s GWP impacts when DHG 5 is applied. Furthermore, it is
observed that the GWP impacts are twice as high, compared to the other four DHG scenarios.
The Danish Energy Agency states that this scenario is highly unlikely since the current energy
policy favours a decarbonisation of the grid and was created to illustrate the most cost eﬀective
DHG. This maintains a misrepresentation comparison if applied with the other four scenarios,
as the other four are plausible scenarios, and will be accomplished based on diﬀerent conditions.
blank
20
==PAGE:64==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Figure L.1: GWP for double and triple glazed windows using DHG 5 (fossil).
blank
21
==PAGE:65==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Figure L.2: Accumulated endpoint scores for the fossil scenario.
Figure L.2 shows that the triple glazed window performs better in all endpoint scores regardless
of calculation method. This illustrates, that increasing the insulation properties would be
beneﬁcial in countries relying more on fossil energy sources.
blank
22
==PAGE:66==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
M
Contribution Analysis
M.1
Process Contribution Analysis
The top three contributing unit processes to the midpoint and endpoint scores were identiﬁed
and presented in Tables M.1 and M.2.
Table M.1: Contribution of the unit processes to the impact categories. The analysed system
is scenario 1.
blank
23
==PAGE:67==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Table M.2: Contribution of the unit processes to the damage categories. The analysed system
is scenario 1.
The analysis shows that the production of glass, aluminium, and wood are the three materials
which aﬀect the damage categories the most, and the generation of district heating from natural
gas and biomass are the unit processes used to generate indoor heating which contribute the
most.
blank
24
==PAGE:68==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
M.2
Life Cycle Stages Contribution Analysis
A contribution analysis of the life cycle stages has been performed in order to access the
contribution of the stages to the diﬀerent impact categories. Table M.3 shows the percentage
distribution for scenarios 1 and 16. The analysis is performed in order to access which impact
categories are aﬀected most by the diﬀerent stages and to avoid burden shifting between life
cycle stages.
Comparing the percentage distribution between the double and triple glazed windows it can
be observed that the percentage contribution in the production of the window is higher for
the triple glazed window for almost all impact categories whereas the percentage contribution
related to heat consumption in the use phase is lower for the triple glazed window for all
impact categories. Hence, choosing triple glazed instead of the double glazed windows will
cause a burden shift from some impacts in the use phase, to higher impacts in the production
phase.
Table M.3: Contribution of Life Cycle Stages
Generally, it can be concluded that for the impact categories which are primarily aﬀected by
the production phase, the double glazed window is the most preferable solution, whereas for
the impact categories where the use phase-more speciﬁcally the heat consumption is the most
dominant contributor, the triple glazed window is the preferable solution.
blank
25
==PAGE:69==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Figure M.1 illustrates the distribution of the life cycle stages for all 18 midpoint impact
categories. All models are analysed with the wind heat grid composition, however, all three
calculation methods for the heat consumption are illustrated.
Figure M.1: Contribution analysis of life cycle stages for midpoint scores.
blank
26
==PAGE:70==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
M.3
District Heating Grid - Process Contribution
To identify which energy sources contribute the most to the diﬀerent impact categories, a
process contribution for the diﬀerent energy sources used in the district heating grid was
performed. I.e. one MJ heat produced by waste compared to one MJ produced by coal, oil
etc. The process contribution can be seen in Table M.4. It was found that a decarbonisation of
the energy grid, developing towards a grid composition which is more dependent on biomass,
will increase the damage towards ecosystems.
The contribution analysis showed that the
process used for biomass was the cause as it had a high impact on land use which is the
midpoint impact score contributing the most to the endpoint score ecosystems.
Table M.4: The process contribution for one MJ produced by each energy source. The top
part shows the midpoint impact categories, and the bottom part shows the midpoint-endpoint
contribution.
blank
27
==PAGE:71==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Figure M.2: Environmental impacts of 1 MJ produced district heating according to DHG 1.
Figure M.2 shows the impact development of 1 MJ during 40 years. The ﬁgure depicts that
GWP, FPMF, and FRS decrease, whereas land use is increasing. Increased usage of biomass as
an energy source increases land use, and greatly aﬀects the double glazed windows’ performance
for land use due to the higher energy consumption compared to the triple glazed window. The
decreasing GWP leads to a lower impact for the double glazed window compared to the triple
glazed window.
blank
28
==PAGE:72==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
N
Static vs Dynamic Energy Supply
This chapter contains midpoint and endpoint scores generated with a static energy grid com-
position compared with scores generated with a dynamic grid composition, accounting for
future changes in the district heating supply.
Figure N.1: Accumulated scores for the four midpoint scores calculated with static (SES) and
dynamic (DES) energy supplies.
The four accumulated midpoint scores show that for global warming potential (GWP), ﬁne
blank
29
==PAGE:73==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
particulate matter formation (FPMF), and fossil resource scarcity (FRS), a static grid compo-
sition will generate higher potential impacts than the corresponding dynamic grid composition.
For land use (LU), the static grid composition generates lower potential scores. Furthermore,
the recommendations regarding the preferred design (double or triple glazing) depends on the
modelling of the energy supply, as opposite recommendations for GWP and FRS occur for
static or dynamic grid composition.
Figure N.2: Accumulated scores for the three endpoint scores calculated with static (SES) and
dynamic (DES) energy supplies.
The three accumulated endpoint scores show that for the damage areas, human health and
resource, a static grid composition will generate higher potential impacts than the correspond-
ing dynamic grid composition. For ecosystems, the static grid composition generates lower
potential scores. Opposite recommendations regarding the preferred design (double or triple
glazing) occur for human health and resources when comparing scores for static and dynamic
grid compositions.
blank
30
==PAGE:74==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
O
Impact Assessment Method Sensitivity
To account for the uncertainty related to the impact assessment method, a comparison of
two methods has been conducted. By comparing the midpoint scores for ReCiPe 2016 (H)
and CML2000 it was possible to estimate if the same recommendation could be drawn when
observing if the same window was the preferred solution for same impact categories across the
two methods. The impact scores are presented in Table O.1.
Table O.1: Impact scores generated with the impact assessment methods ReCiPe Midpoint
(H) and CML2000 for scenarios 1 and 16.
The ReCiPe 2016 method is a new version of ReCiPe 2008, and it was created by RIVM,
Radboud University, Norwegian University of Science and Technology and PRé Consultants.
CML-IA is developed by the Center of Environmental Science (CML) of Leiden University
in The Netherlands and last updated in 2013. CML was chosen as the comparable LCIA
method, since CML is a method often used in the building industry. The two methods are not
directly comparable due to temporal and methodological diﬀerences. Furthermore, the impact
assessment methods do not assess the same impact categories, making it hard to compare the
impact scores directly. However, for the three highlighted impact categories in Table O.1 the
same category and unit have been applied. For global warming potential, the impact scores
only diﬀerentiate 2%, however, comparing acidiﬁcation, the scores vary between 16-18%, and
for ozone depletion, ReCiPe generates impact scores which are almost 10 times larger. Due to
signiﬁcant methodological diﬀerences, the results of ReCiPe and CML should not be compared
directly, however, the two impact assessment methods lead to the same conclusions for the
three comparable impacts categories - lower impacts for the double glazed window for global
warming potential and acidiﬁcation and higher impacts related to the ozone depletion.
blank
31
==PAGE:75==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
P
Process Sensitivity
A sensitivity analysis is of vital importance for an LCA, in order to estimate the accuracy of
the obtained results. If some of the processes are found sensitive, they should be included in
an uncertainty analysis to assess the overall uncertainty of the results. The process sensitiv-
ity for this LCA investigates the impacts associated with the geographical scope of material
acquisition and processing of these materials. The geographical location were changed from
using RER to GLO. The geographical scope were changed due to uncertainty concerning the
speciﬁc processes as seen in Table P.1. E.g. were the aluminium bought from a European
manufacturer or bought from the global market. The end of life scenarios are uncertain and
in most cases outside of the LCA practitioners leverage, hence diﬀerent plausible end of life
scenarios were sensitivity tested as seen in Table P.1.
Table P.1: Processes used for the sensitivity analysis. The table shows the processes used to
model the windows, and the alternative processes used to check the process sensitivity.
This study is based on the assumption that the materials are produced in Europe, however, this
analysis regarding geographical production shows that for some midpoint categories such as
blank
32
==PAGE:76==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
IR, FPMF and WC, the global unit processes generate rather diﬀerent impacts, and comparing
the aggregated endpoint scores, the impacts are up to 6% higher for the aggregated endpoint
results if produced on the global market instead of being Europe speciﬁc.
Table P.2: The Scoef when changing the energy consumption by 10% and by varying the
lifetime with 10 years.
blank
33
==PAGE:77==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
The sensitive processes are highlighted in Tables P.3, P.4, P.5, and P.6. Tables P.3 and P.4 are
for the new build project. Fewer sensitive processes are observed compared to the processes for
the Eref calculation method found in Tables P.5 and P.6. The reason being that the new build
project has a much higher energy consumption, hence the manufacturing stage becomes less
signiﬁcant. Since the data for the material quantities were acquired directly from the window
manufacturing company, these quantities were considered precise.
Table P.3: Process sensitivity for a double glazed window using scenario 1. A 1% cutoﬀwas
used to determine the process sensitivity for each impact category.
Table P.4: Process sensitivity for a triple glazed window using scenario 16. A 1% cutoﬀwas
used to determine the process sensitivity for each impact category.
Table P.5: Process sensitivity for a double glazed window using scenario 6. A 1% cutoﬀwas
used to determine the process sensitivity for each impact category.
Table P.6: Process sensitivity for a triple glazed window using scenario 21. A 1% cutoﬀwas
used to determine the process sensitivity for each impact category.
blank
34
==PAGE:78==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Table P.7: The sensitive processes used in the Monte Carlo simulation. The sensitive processes
were based on the triple glazed window using the Eref calculation method.
blank
35
==PAGE:79==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Q
Uncertainty Analysis
The uncertainty for the potential midpoint impact categories converted to endpoint scores for
a double glazed window are shown in Figure Q.1.
Figure Q.1: The uncertainty of the diﬀerent life cycle stages for scenario 1.
blank
36
==PAGE:80==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Figures Q.2, Q.3, and Q.4 show the uncertainty of the diﬀerence between double and triple
glazed windows for all endpoint categories. The diﬀerence between the double and triple glazed
window is given by the double glazed window subtracted by the triple glazed window. This
means that zero in the ﬁgures implies identical impacts for the two windows. Positive impacts
indicate that the triple glazed window performs best, whereas negative impacts indicate that
the double glazed window performs best. The endpoint categories are divided into the three
areas of protection with Figure Q.2 showing the human health, Q.3 showing the ecosystem,
and Q.4 showing the resources. The uncertainty is calculated for the 95% conﬁdence interval,
indicating the most probable result range for the diﬀerent impact categories.
Figure Q.2: The uncertainty of the diﬀerence between double and triple glazed windows for
each of the impact categories contributing to human health. The 95% conﬁdence interval is
given between the red dots, and the mean is given by the black dot. FPMF: ﬁne particulate
matter formation, GWP: global warming potential human health, HCT: human carcinogenic
toxicity, HnCT: human non-carcinogenic toxicity, IR: ionizing radiation, OFHh: ozone forma-
tion human health, SOD: stratospheric ozone depletion, WCHh: water consumption human
health.
blank
37
==PAGE:81==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Figure Q.3: The uncertainty of the diﬀerence between double and triple glazed windows for
each of the impact categories contributing to ecosystems. The 95% conﬁdence interval is given
between the red dots, and the mean is given by the black dot. FWEC: freshwater ecotoxicity,
FWEU: freshwater eutrophication, GWPFE: global warming potential freshwater ecotoxicity,
GWPTE: global warming potential terrestrial ecosystems, LU: land Use, MEC: marine eco-
toxicity, MEU: marine eutrophication, OFTEC: ozone formation terrestrial ecosystems, TA:
terrestrial acidiﬁcation, TE: terrestrial eutrophication, WCAE: water consumption aquatic
ecosystems, WCTE: water consumption terrestrial ecosystems.
blank
38
==PAGE:82==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Figure Q.4: The uncertainty of the diﬀerence between double and triple glazed windows for
both resource related impact categories. The 95% conﬁdence interval is given between the
red dots, and the mean is given by the black dot. FRS: fossil resource scarcity, MRS: mineral
resource scarcity.
blank
39
==PAGE:83==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Huge uncertainties regarding the impact category water consumption are observed in both
human health and ecosystems. To determine the source of the uncertainties, various Monte
Carlo simulations were conducted. First an uncertainty analysis only including the uncertain-
ties already existing in the ecoinvent 3.4 database was performed. The results can be seen in
Figure Q.5, showing the uncertainties for scenario 1. It is observed that the water consump-
tion uncertainty originates from the default uncertainties in unit processes in the ecoinvent 3.4
database. To pinpoint which unit process caused the uncertainties, Monte Carlo simulations
were conducted for diﬀerent unit processes separately. However, after analysing ﬁve diﬀerent
unit processes; aluminium, glass, cardboard, and coal and biomass for district heating, it was
determined that more than one unit process was responsible for these uncertainties, and one
exact process was not located. The responsible process will most likely be included in both
aluminium, cardboard and the glass process. The results for the unit process uncertainties
can be seen in Figure Q.6.
Figure Q.5: The uncertainty of the double glazed windows in scenario 1. The uncertainty
is based solely on uncertainties within the ecoinvent 3.4 database. The 95% conﬁdence in-
terval is given between the red dots, and the mean is given by the black dot. FPMF: ﬁne
particulate matter formation, GWP: global warming potential human health, HCT: human
carcinogenic toxicity, HnCT: human non-carcinogenic toxicity, IR: ionizing radiation, OFHh:
ozone formation human health, SOD: stratospheric ozone depletion, WCHh: water consump-
tion human health, FWEC: freshwater ecotoxicity, FWEU: freshwater eutrophication, GW-
PFE: global warming potential Freshwater ecotoxicity, GWPTE: global warming potential
terrestrial ecosystems, LU: land use, MEC: marine ecotoxicity, MEU: marine eutrophication,
OFTEC: ozone formation terrestrial ecosystems, TA: terrestrial acidiﬁcation, TE: terrestrial
eutrophication, WCAE: water consumption aquatic ecosystems, WCTE: water consumption
terrestrial ecosystems, FRS: fossil resource scarcity, MRS: mineral resource scarcity.
blank
40
==PAGE:84==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
Figure Q.6: The uncertainty for the unit processes coal, biomass, aluminium, cardboard, and
glass. The 95% conﬁdence interval is given between the red dots, and the mean is given by
the black dot. The abbreviations are based on the same ones used in Q.5.
blank
41
==PAGE:85==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
R
EPD Results
This chapter contains the results for the case study performed in accordance with the life
cycle impact assessment method recommended in the framework of the environmental product
declaration (EPD).
Figure R.1: The results using the EPD calculation method.
Figure R.2: The label for the diﬀerent product stages used in the EPD results.
blank
42
==PAGE:86==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
S
Window Product Sheets
blank
43
==PAGE:87==
Lise Horup Sørensen, s133629 and Michael Reymann, s133605
Master Thesis, 2018
blank
44
