==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Vaccine formulations in microcontainers
for oral delivery
Master Thesis
Submitted 01-01-2019
Author
Jenny Simony Jensen
s134902
Supervisors
Line Hagner Nielsen
Anja Boisen
==PAGE:2==
Title
Vaccine formulations in microcontainers for oral delivery
Author
Jenny Simony Jensen (s134902)
Supervisors
Line Hagner Nielsen (lihan@nanotech.dtu.dk)
Anja Boisen (anja.boisen@nanotech.dtu.dk)
Project period
August 1st 2018 to January 1st 2019
ECTS
30
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Micro- and Nanotechnology
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master thesis is part of the requirements for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
Biotechnology from the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) corresponding 30 ECTS points.
This thesis was performed at the center of Intelligent Drug Delivery and Sensing Using Micro-
containers and Nanomechanics (IDUN) at the Department of Micro- and Nanotechnology, DTU.
The thesis was conducted from August 2018 to January 2019. Experimental work was carried out
at Department of Micro- and Nanotechnology, DTU, Department of Pharmacy at University of
Copenhagen (KU), and Department of Drug Design and Pharmacology, KU.
Acknowledgement
I would like to express my gratitude to all people contributing and involved in this project. First,
my two supervisors Professor Anja Boisen and assistant professor Line Hagner Nielsen. Line has
especially provided great supervision and support throughout the whole project. I would like to
thank two phD students Mette Dalskov Mosgaard and Stine Egebro Hansen who have been of
great support in the lab, for general practicalities and always being open to answer questions or
suggestions for optimization. I would also like to show appreciation for the help received at KU
from Saskia Bucciarelli and Jacob Rune Jørgensen in assisting in Small X-ray Scattering studies.
Lastly, I would like to thank my family and especially Peter Grønborg for patience and personal
support in the goal of ﬁnishing my degree.
i
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Vaccines have made an immense impact on global health by substantially reducing the mortality
caused by infectious diseases. Today, most vaccines require cold chain distribution administered
through injections that needs trained health care personnel and facilities. This poses limitations
to the distribution of vaccines worldwide, especially in developing countries, and it is therefore of
interest to create inexpensive methods for production and distribution of future vaccines. Great
potential is seen in temperature stable oral subunit vaccines giving high patient compliance and
simplify logistics and eliminate the need for repeated health care visits.
In this project a vaccine formulation was produced by spray drying pre-cursors for cubosomes
that formed a particulate vaccine upon hydration. Kolliphor 407 was added to cubosomes and
the stabilizing eﬀect in aqueous reconstitution and dispersion was evaluated. Creating a vaccine
formulation the model antigen ovalbumin (OVA) and adjuvant Quil-A were added and the form-
ulation was characterized in vitro. Formulations were loaded into SU-8 microcontainers and the
new aqueous acrylic polymer Aqua-Polish E was spray coated onto the microcontainer cavity as a
pH sensitive lid. The morphology and thickness of the coating was measured and the possibility
of a targeted release in the small intestine was evaluated through in vitro release studies.
The addition of 6 % Kolliphor 407 showed higher yield in the spray drying process and easier
reconstitution. Particle size distribution showed a tendency to increase when cubosomes were
added 6 % Kolliphor and decreased compared to control cubosomes when added Kolliphor, OVA,
and Quil-A. When creating a spray coating mixture, an aqueous AquaPolish E solution was not
obtainable with only water and isopropanol (IPA) was added in order to dilute particles in the
mixture. A ﬁnal spray coating solution contained AquaPolish E 1 % with 50 % MQ water and
50 % IPA. In vitro release studies demonstrated that the coating was able to withstand pH 4.7
for 60 min and release within 30 min in pH 6.6 when evaluated qualitatively with Scanning
Electron Microscopy (SEM). Release studies showed a release of 60 % OVA within 60 min in
pH 4.7 indicating an insuﬃcient coating. Measuring ﬂuorescence of Nile red labelled cubosomes
showed a release of 10 % release within 30 min in pH 4.7 out of 15 % release in total. A cleaning
step performed between the coating programs was introduced but did not change the dissolution
signiﬁcantly. Higher consistency in thickness and release needs to be obtained through further
optimization of the spray coating process. In conclusion, this study found that at this point a
pH-sensitive lid with AquaPolish E is not obtainable for a targeted release in the small intestine.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgement
i
Abstract
ii
Abbreviations
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Gastrointestinal Tract
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Small Intestine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Intestinal mucus layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Vaccines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Ovalbumin and Quil-A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
Oral delivery of vaccines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.7
Particulate system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.8
Cubosomes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.9
Spray drying
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.10 Small-angle X-ray scattering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.11 Time-Of-Flight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.12 Dynamic light scattering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.13 Microcontainers for oral vaccine delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.13.1 SU-8 microcontainers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.14 Loading of SU-8 microcontainers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.15 Spray coating of microcontainers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.15.1 Polymers used for spray coating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.16 Scanning Electron Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.17 Microdissolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2
Hypothesis
20
3
Aim
20
4
Materials
21
4.1
Other materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
iii
==PAGE:6==
5
Methods
21
5.1
Sample preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.1.1
Preparation of cubosomes for spray drying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.1.2
Spray drying and harvesting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.3
Reconstitution and powder grading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.4
Preparation of cubosomes containing OVA, Quil A and Nile red . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Characterization of cubosomes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2.1
Characterization of cubosomes with Small-angle X-ray Scattering . . . . . .
23
5.2.2
Particle size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3
Filling procedure and spray coating of SU-8 microcontainers . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3.1
Loading of SU-8 Microcontainers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3.2
Spray coating of AquaPolish E in water
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3.3
Optimization of AquaPolish E solution and thickness . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3.4
Final coating on loaded SU-8 microcontainers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.4
In vitro release from microcontainers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.4.1
Qualitative release of cubosomes without coating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.4.2
Qualitative release of cubosomes with optimized coating . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.4.3
Release of OVA using µDiss proﬁler
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.4.4
Release of Nile red labelled cubosomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.5
After optimization of thickness and OVA release . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.6
Statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6
Results and discussion
30
6.1
Production of cubosomes and reconstitution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.2
Characterization of particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.2.1
Particle size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.3
Loading of SU-8 microcontainers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.4
Spray coating of AquaPolish E
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.4.1
Optimization and thickness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.4.2
Spray coating of SU-8 microcontainers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.5
Qualitative release studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.6
In vitro release of cubosomes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.7
Concluding optimization and evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7
Conclusion
48
iv
==PAGE:7==
8
Future perspectives
49
9
References
50
v
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations have been used throughout this report:
APC
Antigen presenting cell
CD
Cluster of diﬀerentiation
CM
Centimeter
cryo-TEM
Cryogenic transmission electron microscopy
CTL
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes
DC
Dendritic cell
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
FLLs
Fluorescently labelled lipids
GALT
Gut-associated lymphoid tissue
GI
Gastrointestinal
GMO
Glyceryl monooleate
h
Hours
HPLC
High-performance liquid chromatography
IDUN
Intelligent Drug Delivery and Sensing Using Microcontainers and Nanomechanics
IPA
Isopropanol
kN
Kilonewton
KU
University of Copenhagen
M
Meter
M-cells
Microfold-cells
Min
Minutes
MQ
Milli-Q
MUC
Mucin gene familiy
nm
Nanometer
PCL
Polycaprolactone
PDI
Polydispersity index
PLGA
Poly(lactic-co-glycolic) acid
PRR
Pathogen recognition receptor
vi
==PAGE:9==
rpm
rounds per minute
SAXS
Small Angle X-ray Scattering
SD
Standard deviation
sec
seconds
TOF
Time-Of-Flight
UV
Ultraviolet
vii
==PAGE:10==
1
|
Introduction
Worldwide vaccines have substantially reduced the morbidity and mortality caused by infectious
diseases and remains the most cost-eﬀective and successful medical intervention for human health
[1]. Today, most vaccines are administered by injection which requires trained personnel [2]. As
this poses limitations to the distribution of vaccines due to costs and logistics, it is of great interest
to develop inexpensive methods for production and distribution of vaccines in the future [3].
Great potential is seen in changing the route of administration by creating orally delivered vaccines.
This would provide vaccines with high patient compliance that simplify logistics and eliminate the
need for repeated health care visits [4]. Economically, this could minimize the need for trained
health care personnel which would further reduce the cost of vaccine programs since training
and mobilization of health care workers can account for up to 25 % of the cost of introducing a
new vaccine [5]. This could especially have an enormous impact in developing nations who need
improvement of vaccine aﬀordability and accessibility do to limited resources and lack of health
care personnel and facilities [6].
Despite several beneﬁts, oral delivery of vaccines pose major challenges such as a harsh environment
in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract through pH changes together with chemical and enzymatic
degradation [2].
This result in the need of higher doses but also a protection that limits the
elimination/dilution of the vaccine in the GI tract.
Current internationally licensed oral vaccines are predominantly live-attenuated and new vaccines
have a hard time getting approved by regulatory authorities due to unwanted side eﬀects [7].
Consequently, modern vaccines are developed with subunit antigens which highly improves the
safety but results in decreased immunogenicity [2].
Subunit vaccines tend to use proteins or
peptides as antigens, which are easily degraded in the GI tract [7]. This serve the need for an
oral drug delivery system that makes it possible to protect the vaccine from degradation in the
GI tract but whilst inducing a strong immune response.
1
==PAGE:11==
1.1
Gastrointestinal Tract
For oral intake of food or drugs the GI tract is involved and consist of the mouth, throat, stomach
and the upper and lower intestine (Figure 1). The main function of the GI tract is to digest food
which can subsequently be absorbed as nutrients and at the same time provide an eﬃcient barrier
against toxic materials (e.g. peptides, viruses and bacteria) [8].
For orally delivered drugs several challenges appear as the drug is exposed to a very harsh
environment throughout the GI tract [9]. First, drugs have a high risk of being degraded by
a variety of digestive enzymes present in the stomach and small intestine. Second, the pH value
varies from highly acidic in the stomach (pH 1-3) to around pH 6 in the duodenum and along the
jejunum and ileum (pH up to 8) [10]. Also, the pH is highly dependent on the food intake. In the
stomach the pH can vary from 1 to 3 in fasted state and reach up to 6 in fed state [11]. Exposure
to these varying pH values can result in hydrolysis, oxidation, deamidation, and simply lead to
deactivation of the drug [9].
Figure 1: Schematic of the gastrointestinal tract which includes the mouth, throat, stomach and the
upper (Pharynx, Esophagus and stomach) and lower intestine (small and large intestine) [12].
2
==PAGE:12==
1.2
Small Intestine
When drugs are administered orally, absorption mainly occurs in the small intestine [11]. This
organ is a complex tube that can be divided into three components with diﬀerent absorptive
capabilities. The ﬁrst part is the duodenum which is 25-30 cm long. The passage of the drug
is therefore short and relatively quick leading to a poor net absorption [13]. The second part is
the jejunum which is 3 m long. Unlike the duodenum, the jejunum is characterized by a highly
active peristalsis that favors absorption. The third and last part is the ileum, which is also 3 m
long. The ileum provides similar absorption capabilities as the jejunum [13]. The surface of the
intestine is arranged into crypts and villi. Villi increase the internal surface area of the intestinal
walls which provides a greater surface area for absorption. The overall surface of the intestine
leads up to 300 m2[14].
The surface area over the intestine of each villus is covered with epithelial cells known as enterocytes
connected by junctions. These forms the surface of the small intestine and colon that are further
arranged in microvilli (Figure 2) [15]. Absorption mainly takes place across the enterocyte barrier
which is specialized to absorb digested nutrients. Less abundant cells to ﬁnd are the phagocytotic
microfold-cells (M-cells) present in Peyer’s patches, enteroendocrine cells and Paneth cells [11].
These cells represent the main components of the gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT). GALT
will absorb nutrients and compounds from the lumen [16]. For small molecules absorption takes
place across the epithelia, as previously mentioned. However, larger molecules such as proteins
and peptides need M-cells for transport through the intestinal membrane. M-cells are mostly
found in the jejunum and ileum, thereby presenting a good target for oral delivery [17].
Figure 2: Illustration of the small intestinal wall where villi are covered by epithelial cells that are further
arranged in microvilli.
3
==PAGE:13==
1.3
Intestinal mucus layer
Mucus is another fundamental part of the GI tract, acting as a mechanical and physical barrier.
It is a complex hydro-gel consisting of proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, salts, antibodies, bacteria,
and cellular debris [13]. The mucus represents the ﬁrst line of defence, protecting the epithelium
from pathogens, toxins, and digestive enzymes [10]. The main protein components of mucus is
mucins of which there are at least twenty proteins encoded in the mucin gene family (MUC), and
can be either secreted or cell-bound. In the GI tract most commonly found genes are MUC2,
MUC5AC, and MUC6 [15].
Protection of the large intestine which harbors an enormous amount of bacteria is a great challenge.
The viscosity of mucus is balanced to trap foreign particles and pathogen by forming polyvalent
adhesive interactions. In this way, the mucus is able to prevent uptake by the epithelium but still
enables exchange of nutrients [18].
The thickness of mucus varies a lot throughout the GI tract. The mucus remains thickest in the
stomach, ranging from 40 µm to 450 µm and ranching from 100 µm to 160 µm in the colon.
Within the small intestine variation is also seen. Turn over time of intestinal mucus layers varies
in the literature and is estimated from 47 min to 270 min [19]. An overview of the thickness for
diﬀerent parts of the small intestine can be seen in Table 1 [20].
Table 1: Thickness of the mucus layer for diﬀerent parts of the small intestine [20].
Mucus layer
Duodenum
Jejenum
Ileum
Loose adherent
154 ± 39 µm
108 ± 5 µm
447 ± 47 µm
Firmly adherent
16 ± 3 µm
15 ± 2 µm
29 ± 8 µm
Total mucus layer
170 ± 38 µm
123 ± 4 µm
476 ± 47 µm
Two mucus layers cover the epithelial cells in the GI-tract. One ﬁrmly adherent mucus layer and
one loose adherent layer. These two mucus layers are built around the gel-forming mucin, MUC2.
MUC2 is a highly glycosylated protein that is produced and secreted by the specialized intestinal
goblet cells [21]. The thin layer within the small intestine, especially on M-cells, are believed to
be an optimal target for oral drug delivery [15]. However, as the mucosal tissue acts as a barrier
it restricts the penetration of for example vaccines. Vaccine components do however seem to have
the possibility to enter the intestinal mucosa at sites like the tips of villi where enterocytes are
extruded, across or between enterocytes, or by specialized epithelial tissue composed of M-cells
[18].
4
==PAGE:14==
1.4
Vaccines
Vaccination is the deliberate employment of the adaptive immune system to induce a state
of protection against an infection.
There are three general categories of active vaccines: live
attenuated, inactivated, and subunit vaccines [22].
A live attenuated vaccine contains microorganisms that can replicate in the host or infect cells.
This usually induce robust and long-lived immunity by even a single vaccination, but they also
hold a much larger potential for causing serious infections in immunocompromised individuals
[23]. A subunit or inactivated vaccine is an immunogen that cannot be replicated in the host.
The absence of inﬂammation makes them much less immunogenic compared to live vaccines [22].
Subunit antigens are not very reactogenic, which is an advantage in terms of local and systemic
adverse eﬀects, but are at a disadvantage when it comes to stimulating potent, long lasting immune
responses. Therefore, subunit vaccines are often co-administered with potent adjuvants to activate
and modulate eﬀective immune responses [24].
Traditionally, live attenuated vaccines and inactivated prophylactic vaccines were the goal as the
humoral immune response was in general very eﬀective. However, in the present day regulatory
environment licensing of complex pathogen or toxin based vaccines is diﬃcult and this along with
the side eﬀect proﬁles of such vaccines, has resulted in a shift towards subunit vaccines [25].
Microbial components present in subunit vaccines are proteins and peptides. The vaccine includes
an antigen which is a substance that has the ability to induce an immune response once they
are absorbed and presented by the antigen presenting cells (APCs). The antigen include parts of
or substances produced by viruses or microorganisms. A great advantage of subunit vaccines is
that they can be designed speciﬁcally for any given disease and will not be as sensitive as other
vaccines making them easy to produce and up-scale [1].
The possibility of inducing protective immunity without having side eﬀects is of great interest
and makes subunit vaccines the ideal way of inducing immune response [26]. However, challenges
in the development of subunit vaccines are often poorly immunogenicity and short in vivo half-
lives. Improving the immune response of the vaccines are therefore needed and is often solved by
immunostimulatory agents such as adjuvants [6]. Adjuvants are immunomodulators that have the
ability to increase the eﬃcacy of vaccines by stimulating the immune response of the host. The
addition of adjuvants to vaccine formulations serves to improve, accelerate and prolong the immune
5
==PAGE:15==
response towards the active ingredients of the vaccine [27]. Several modern vaccines often require
an adjuvant to activate the immune system and provoke the desired immune response through
activation of dendritic cells (DCs). This serves as a great delivery system allowing proper delivery
of antigens to APCs [1], [25].
1.5
Ovalbumin and Quil-A
Ovalbumin (OVA) is often used as a model antigen for subunit vaccines [2]. OVA is the major
protein from egg white, representing 54 % (m/m) of the total protein content, which is comprised
of a complex mixture of proteins such as ovotransferrin, ovomucoid, and lysozyme [28]. OVA has
shown to induce a T-cell dependent immune response and represents a preferred model antigen for
immune studies, due to the fact that it is easily obtained, inexpensive, and presents a non-toxic
behavior [29].
Quil-A is a saponin adjuvant used in a wide array of veterinary vaccines, as well as in immuno-
logical research into human and veterinary applications [30]. Quil-A adjuvant contains the water-
extractable fraction of saponins from the South-American tree, Quillaja saponaria Molina. These
saponins are surfactant type molecules and belong to the group of triterpenoid saponins, that have
a common triterpenoid backbone structure (hydrophilic sugar - lipophilic aglycone - hydrophilic
sugar) [31].
Quil-A induces a T cell antigen dependent response and a Cluster of Diﬀerentiation (CD)8+
cytotoxic lymphocyte response (CTL) [32]. However, the use in humans has been limited due to
toxicity and inconsistency between batches [33]. This has been done with High-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) where more than 60 individual components have been characterized
[34]. One fraction called QS-21 is known for low toxicity and is the only fraction evaluated in
humans [35]. As mentioned, Quil-A has the ability to stimulate a strong CD8+ CTL response
which is crucial for protection against intracellular infections as they mediate killing of infected
or transformed cells [31]. Saponin adjuvants interact with lipid particles, creating pores in cell
membranes. This is an important mechanism for immune activation as Quil-A may have the
ability to allow the vaccine to enter the cytosol of APCs. This creates a cross-presentation of the
antigen and hence the stimulation of CD8+ CTL responses [36].
6
==PAGE:16==
1.6
Oral delivery of vaccines
The route of administration is an important factor to consider for vaccines that aim to target and
activate DCs, because it can aﬀect the eﬀectiveness of the induced T cell response and thereby
the vaccine itself [37]. The oral delivery of therapeutic drugs represents the golden standard of
administration due to the opportunity for self-administration, improved patient compliance, and
the ease of distribution [38].
All current oral vaccines exist as live attenuated, but subunit vaccines are desirable since they
provide better safety [39]. Oral administration of subunit vaccines is however challenging as the
antigen doses are generally required to be 10-100 times higher than the necessary dose for injected
vaccines. Also, protein antigens lack the ability to survive the chemical and enzymatic attack in
the GI-tracts and thereby crossing of the biological barriers [4]. In order for antigens to be able
to travel safely through the stomach and intestine, a protective layer is needed. For this, micro-
and nanoparticles are good potential carriers and is essential in the ability to induce uptake of
the M-cells.
1.7
Particulate system
Particulate systems are found in many applications involving physical and/or chemical trans-
formations. Therefore, it is becoming more critical to understand how particles are produced and
transported as well as how they move and interact with surroundings. Micro- and nanoparticles
can be used in delivery systems and are promising due to low toxicity and side eﬀects [25]. These
particles serve as a delivery system which main function is to control the delivery and presentation
of the antigens to APCs. The particulate delivery system mimics nature in the sense that they
have similar dimensions to pathogens (size and shape) that are naturally targeted to uptake by
APCs, such as DCs, macrophages, and B-cells [1]. In vaccines, antigens delivery to APCs with
particle formulations have been shown to be much more eﬀective than delivery of soluble antigens
[40]. Many diﬀerent chemical and physical properties of the particles can eﬀect their ability to
deliver antigen to APCs and thereby simulate an immune response. These include size, surface
and the incorporation of antigens in the particles [25],[41].
7
==PAGE:17==
Optimal particle size varies a lot in the literature. However, it is known that particles in the size
range of 20-200 nm enter the lymphatic system as opposed to particles in the size range of 200-500
nm that must be carried into the lymphatic system by APCs [42]. As mentioned, physical barriers
such as the mucus must be overcome in order to allow intestinal absorption of the drug in oral
delivery. The size of the particles can be engineered to avoid the mucoadhesion and instead diﬀuse
through the mucus if they are suﬃciently small [10]. Here, particle sizes up to 500 nm have been
reported to be able to diﬀuse through the mucus, being absorbed in signiﬁcant amounts in the
small intestine and could serve as a potential way for drug absorption [43],[44].
Several particle formulation classes have been developed for vaccine delivery [4].
Two overall
categories are lipid particles and non-lipid particles [39]. Non-lipid based particles include virus-
like particles and polymer particles such as chitosan and Poly(lactic-co-glycolic) acid (PLGA).
PLGA is a biodegradable and bio-compatible synthetic polymer that has shown great characteristics
in vaccine development. This is due to a high loading capacity and a high ability to protect
encapsulated antigens from harsh environment in vivo [25]. Chitosan is derived by deacetylation
of chitin and is able to act as a potential carrier for oral drug delivery. Chitosan is a cationic
derivative and has shown mucoadhesivity that has been proved to enhance the absorption of drugs
a neutral pH [45].
Lipid particles include emulsions, liposomes, and liquid crystal particles such as hexosomes and
cubosomes. They have gained substantial interest due to their size-dependent and drug loading
properties. The ability to incorporate drugs into these lipid-based particles oﬀers a new prototype
in drug delivery that could be used in drug targeting. Thus, they show great promise for reaching
the goal of controlled and site speciﬁc drug delivery and hence have attracted wide attention from
researchers [46].
8
==PAGE:18==
1.8
Cubosomes
The ﬁrst study that reported particles of bicontinuous cubic phases was in 1979 [47]. Since then
the term cubosomes has been used to describe nanoparticles in the range of 10-500 nm forming a
square shaped particle with grid-like structures generated from pores (Figure 3).
In general, molecules such as polymers or lipids are amphiphilic, having both polar and non-
polar components. The hydrophobic end is referred to as the tail where the hydrophilic end is
referred to as the head [48]. In polar solvents a principal driving force for self-assembly is called
the hydrophobic eﬀect. This eﬀect refers to the interaction between the non-polar hydrocarbon
tail of the amphiphiles and surrounding water [48]. The self-assembly turns into thermodynamic
stable liquid crystalline phases, one of them being the bicontinous cubic phase consisting of two
hydrophillic regions, separated by a lipid layer [49], [50].
Figure 3: Cubosomes illustrated in the cubic phase. The cubic structure shows pores where hydrophobic
and hydrophilic drugs can be encapsulated [51].
There are diﬀerent types of cubic phases and some lipids will exhibit cubic phases when in contact
with water because they are polar lipids with poor water solubility. Such lipids are monoglycerides
showing a strong cubic phase [52].
One lipid called glyceryl monooleate (GMO) has a high
concentration of monoolein and represents the most commonly used lipid for cubosome formation
[53]. GMO consists mainly of glycerides of oleic acid and is both hydrophilic and hydrophobic
(hydroxyl groups in the head and hydrocarbon chains in the tail) (Figure 4) [54].
9
==PAGE:19==
Figure 4: Example of a glyceryl monooleate with a hydroxyl head and hydrocarbon chain tail [54].
GMO is preferred in cubosome formation due to the biodegradability and high biocompatability
with the cubosomes. However, when GMO is combined with water a bulk cubic gel is formed,
demanding mechanical or ultrasonic energy for dispersion into particles.
In order to prevent
this a hydrotope solubilising the hydrophobic compound could be added such as ethanol [55].
Dissolving monoolein in ethanol will produce concentrated liquid precursors with the ability to
form spontaneous cubosomes upon dilution without the need of external forces. A common used
commercial GMO is Dimodan MO 90/D [2].
For working with microcontainers in pharmaceutical applications, a powder form is desirable.
The powder form of the vaccine formulation can be advantageous in terms of stability of the
antigen but also working around the need for a cold chain storage which is needed for traditional
vaccines [2]. Precursor powder cubosomes have been generated from the GMO-ethanol mixture
but only working when combined with a polymer that encapsulates GMO. This provides a
powder with a controllable particle size where agglomeration is prevented [52]. Polymers such
as Kolliphor/poloxamer 407 and dextran are often used in this process [2].
Dextran is a high molecular weight branched polymer produced by a variety of bacteria. It has
been used in many diﬀerent drug delivery applications such as oral tablet excipients and as a
drug stabilizer. Dextran is mucoadhesive and can act as a mucus permeation enhancer in drug
delivery [39]. Dextran has been associated with strong humoral immune responses when given
together with adjuvants in a chemically modiﬁed form [56]. Polymers used for stabilization can be
Kolliphor 407 located at the surface of the cubic phase or within the bilateral structure working
as a solubilization agent that increases bioavailability [53].
10
==PAGE:20==
1.9
Spray drying
Spray drying is a process for producing bio-pharmaceutical formulations with unique particle
characteristics. It represents the most common powder generating method where a highly dispersed
liquid rapidly transforms into droplets that are dried in individual particles by atomizing into hot
dry medium in a drying chamber [57].
Spray drying is a one step technique that is easily scalable in production and has low cost. This
makes it an ideal technique during vaccine and nanoparticle production [52]. The process consists
of three steps: atomization, dehydration and powder collection. First, the protein solution feed
is sprayed by an atomizer into a drying chamber. Here, the dehydration takes place in matter
of seconds aided by the large surface area of the droplets and hot air. Lastly, the dry particles
are carried into a cyclone and settled in the product collector [57]. An example of a spray drying
set-up with monoolein-ethanol mixture added to an aqueous solution of dextran/OVA/Quil-A is
shown in Figure 5 [58].
Figure 5: Example of a spray drying set-up where monoolein-ethanol mixture is added to an aqueous
solution of dextran/OVA/Quil-A. The solution is collected by a tube and atomized into a drying chamber.
Here, the solution will be dried by addition of hot air and the dry particles will be transferred to a cyclone
and collected [58].
11
==PAGE:21==
Spray drying of cubosomes has proven to provide stability and holds great promise to circumvent
the need for cold-chain storage, which is necessary for the majority of available vaccine formulations
present today [59]. The use of monoolein-ethanol-dextran mixture has proven to provide good
encapsulation and helps stabilize the spontaneously formed cubosomes [52]. Dispersed precursor
cubosomes made with GMO are in the range of 100-500 nm and the powder form is about 1.3 µm
[2].
Diﬀerent parameters on the spray dryer include inlet air temperature, outlet air temperature,
aspirator, pump, atomizer, and nozzle. The outlet temperature is a dominating factor in controlling
the drying rate and important particle characteristics such as particle shape and moisture content
[52]. The parameter settings together with the ratio of materials can provide diﬀerent particle
sizes [57].
1.10
Small-angle X-ray scattering
A range of techniques have been applied to the characterization of dispersed inverse cubic particles.
Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) is one of the most popular techniques, as it provide infor-
mation on internal nanostructure and particle morphology [60]. The SAXS experiment involves
probing the liquid crystal structure with a well-collimated X-ray beam of wavelength, through
the sample and measuring the variation of the intensity of scattered x-rays as a function of
the scattering angle.
The incoming waves are reﬂected at parallel lattice planes deﬁned by
the particular structure present in the sample. This will result in peaks with speciﬁc positions
providing information about the size of the lattice (Figure 6) [48].
Figure 6: SAXS q vs. intensity plots for commonly encountered cubosome mesophases. The numbers
above peaks refer to peak ratios used to identify the phase type, space group, and lattice dimensions [60].
12
==PAGE:22==
SAXS provides excellent information and is one of the best ways for determining the lattice
structure of cubic particles, but it also has limitations. The amphiphiles used to make cubosomes
and many other liquid crystals are mostly organic molecules showing low scattering intensity
as the they consist of atoms with weak electron density. Also, the low particle concentration
in common dispersions create further lowered signal intensity. Another limitation is the lack of
information about the single particle structure.
This can be diﬃcult in mixtures of diﬀerent
particle morphologies and SAXS may not give the correct identiﬁcation of all particles present.
For this, an alternative to SAXS could be another popular characterization technique cryogenic
transmission electron microscopy (cryo-TEM) [48], [61].
Cryo-TEM allows direct visualization of particles dispersed in medium including single particles.
In this way giving identiﬁcation of co-existing particle types with diﬀerent structures. Studies with
cryo-TEM have shown that cubosomes often co-exist with vesicles and commonly have vesicles
attached to their surface. A major disadvantage of cryo-TEM is the inability to study dynamic
changes in particle morphology or structure on relatively short time frames [60].
1.11
Time-Of-Flight
Time-of-ﬂight (TOF) is in general the time that an object e.g. particle, needs to travel through a
medium. The method can help measure velocity through a given medium. With an aerodynamic
particle sizer a TOF aerosol spectrometer is used for measuring an aerosol’s aerodynamic particle
size distribution (Figure 7). In this way an average size of dry particles can be estimated. The
instrument operates by measuring the velocity of particles in an accelerating gas stream [62].
The particles are sampled into an outer inlet and inner inlet. The remaining gas is ﬁltered and
returned as sheath air. The inner nozzle provides the pressure drop needed to draw sheath air
through the ﬁlter, ﬂowmeter, and valve, and it focuses the particles into the center of the outer
nozzle. The outer nozzle provides gas acceleration. When the particles passes through the nozzles
it produces two light scattering pulses that are timed. Smaller particles cross the laser beams at a
higher velocity than the larger particles. The particles accelerate at a rate that depends on their
aerodynamic diameter, thus estimating the average particle size. [63], [62].
13
==PAGE:23==
Figure 7: Schematic diagram of an aerodynamic particle sizer. Particles are sampled into the inner and
outer inlet. Gas is ﬁltered and returned as sheath air. Particles passing through the nozzle provides light
scattering pulses timed corresponding to the particle size [62].
1.12
Dynamic light scattering
The particles size can be measured using dynamic light scattering (DLS). DLS has allowed high
throughput approaches to be employed to assess the response of size distribution to a large
number of variables [48].
DLS represents a noninvasive technique that can be used to assess
the monodispersity of circular particles, which is an indicator of homogeneity. A monodisperse
sample (composed of either a monomeric or a single-size oligomeric particle population) is often
an indicator of good crystallization propensity. The dispersion polydispersity index (PDI) can be
measured giving the width of the molecular weight distributions indicating the homogeneity of
the particle [64].
1.13
Microcontainers for oral vaccine delivery
As previously described, many barriers to oral delivery including the acidity of the GI environment,
enzymes and the mucus layer makes it diﬃcult for nanoparticles and other drugs to withstand the
harsh environment and low pH in the stomach [65]. This creates a high risk of drug degradation and
prevention is crucial in order to create an optimal oral delivery. Here, micro fabrication of devices
being able to serve as delivery vesicles can be the solution. These microdevices are designed with
precise shapes and sizes to provide protection against drug degradation and unidirectional drug
release [66]. A suggested device for this purpose is microcontainers. Microcontainers are micro
fabricated polymeric cylinders in micro size range that are closed at one end and open at the
other end. The microcontainers will provide protection against drugs from outside environment
once administered into the body and provide a directional release with only one opening, making
a better control of the release compared to nanoparticles releasing from all angles [67].
14
==PAGE:24==
1.13.1
SU-8 microcontainers
An example of microcontainers with the oral drug delivery ability are SU-8 microcontainers. SU-
8 is often used for manufacturing of microdevices as it represents stable mechanical, chemical
and thermal properties [68]. SU-8 is an epoxy resin-based polymer suitable for the creation of
coated patterns on surfaces and encapsulation of biomolecules [69]. Commercial SU-8 formulations
comprise a monomer, containing 8 epoxy moieties, a solvent such as cyclopentanone and a
photoacid initiator such as triarylsulfonium hexaﬂuoroantimonate. On exposure to ultraviolet
(UV) radiation, a photoacid is produced that protonates the epoxy moieties, which then react with
neutral epoxy groups on heating, resulting in a cross-linked polymer network of high mechanical
strength and thermal stability [70].
When fabricating SU-8 microcontainers, the material is spin coated onto polished silicon wafers.
The silicon wafer can have an additional layer such as teﬂon in order ease the removal of micro-
containers. By photolithography a light photomask with a pattern is marked with SU-8 and the
microcontainers are created [71]. The created SU-8 microcontainers can now provide protection
against enzymatic or acidic drug degradation in the GI tract for unstable or fragile molecules [66].
It has been shown that microcontainers are able to increase drug absorption by interacting with
intestinal mucus [67]. As the drug exist at only one site the drug concentration at the interface
of the opening and the epithelial surface increases, which in turn improves the drug permeation
and bioavailability [70],[72]. In vivo studies with SU-8 microcontainers in mice have shown to
be promising in both size, shape and loading capacity, making them suitable as an oral vaccine
delivery system in the future [73].
Figure 8: Image by Scanning Electron Microscopy showing a single empty SU-8 Microcontainer [2].
15
==PAGE:25==
1.14
Loading of SU-8 microcontainers
The SU-8 microcontainers can be loaded by diﬀerent methods such as inject printing or im-
pregnation [66]. Inject printing has been found successful for drug ﬁlling of microdevices but is
very time consuming, and impregnation requires solubility of the drug which is not possible for
all drugs [74]. Previously, it has been the norm to ﬁll the polymeric microcontainers manually
where the powder is deposited on the microcontainers and compacted with a spatula and the
residual amount of drug between the containers are blown away by pressurized air. This results
in considerable waste of drug and is not optimal for sticky powders such as spray dried lipid-
based nanoparticles [75]. An improved method for loading powder into microcontainers is powder
embossing.
This is achieved by clamping a shadow mask between arrays of microcontainers
followed by embossing of the desired powder formulation into the cavities of the microcontainers.
This technique presents a simple homogeneous and reproducible method for drug loading into
SU-8 microcontainers [58], [75].
1.15
Spray coating of microcontainers
Microcontainers provide the opportunity of controlling the release of drug through exiting only
one way [70]. This is important, since an early release could result in severe side eﬀects or simply
loss of drug and its purpose. In order to make sure the drug is released in a speciﬁc region of
the GI tract, the open end of the microcontainers are often covered by polymers allowing release
at a certain point [76].
The release of drug can be triggered depending on many parameters
such as time, oxidation potential, enzymes or pH. Since pH is an important factor in the GI tract,
this is often the parameter of choice when designing a controlled release from microcontainers [77].
Diﬀerent techniques adding polymers onto the microcontainer openings are available such as the
coating pan method where the coating is applied during stirring [78]. Another method is a dipping
technique, where a sample is dipped into the polymer solution [79]. These techniques are very
manual and do not provide controlled and precise layers of coating.
Spray coating is present
a versatile technique for the deposition of thin polymer ﬁlms on both ﬂat and pre-structured
substrates [80]. An ultrasonic spray coating instrument can be utilized in the formation of thin
polymer ﬁlms. Here, a polymer solution is pumped and nebulized into a ﬁne mist through a
small oriﬁce by applying a pressure of nitrogen gas, while mechanical vibrations are produced by
a piezoelectric transducer inside the ultrasonic nozzle [81]. The droplets of the polymer solution
are directed towards a substrate placed on a hot plate which can be temperature controlled. The
ultrasonic spray coating provides simplicity, good transfer eﬃciency, economical, precise coating
16
==PAGE:26==
on planar and non-planar surfaces, generation of small droplets in the micrometer range, and good
reproducibility (Figure 9) [76].
Figure 9: Image of an ultrasonic spray system that can be utilized in formation of thin polymer ﬁlm.
For spray coating microcontainers a chip is placed on the preheated plate and a spray coating program is
performed with polymer solution of choice [82].
1.15.1
Polymers used for spray coating
Enteric ﬁlm coating is a process involving deposition of a thin uniform ﬁlm on the surface of
an oral solid dosage form.
It is intended to protect acid sensitive drugs from the pH of the
stomach and can be achieved with polymers soluble at pH values above 5.5 [83]. An example
of such a polymer is Eudragit L100 which is often used in oral drug delivery systems, due to its
pH-sensitive properties. Eudragit L100 consists of methacrylic acid and methyl methacrylate and
starts to dissolve at pH 6. Eudragit has shown the ability to withstand the low pH in the stomach,
making it a good coating material for oral drug delivery [77]. However, aqueous based coating
systems have increasingly become the system of choice when compared to the organic solvent
based systems due to reduced ﬂammability, toxicity concerns over environmental pollution and
higher cost of solvents [84].
AquaPolish E is an optimized, one-step aqueous based acrylic acid copolymer. It can be used to
provide enteric coating, strengthen friable cores or to decrease incompatibilities between the active
ingredients and gastric resistant ﬁlm coating for oral tablets and capsules [83]. The AquaPolish
E ﬁlm is pH-sensitive and dissolve at pH above 5.5. The ﬁlm contains a plasticizer, Polyethylene
Glycol. Plasticizers provide ﬂexibility and improve the durability of the polymers. The plasticizer
will lower the glass transition temperature for the plastic, making it softer.
This reduce the
17
==PAGE:27==
risk of cracking once the coating has dried. Studies have not yet shown any results regarding
coated microcontainers. However, the theoretical abilities and purpose for the coating could have
a chance of being able to be transferred to spray coating of microcontainers [85].
1.16
Scanning Electron Microscopy
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) can be used to visualize microcontainers down to micrometer
range. An electron gun at potential of 1-30 kV will generate monochromatic electrons focused
towards a set of coils by condenser lenses and an aperture. The electron beam is swept across the
surface of a specimen, while an objective lens focuses the beam. Image quality and resolution can
be altered by varying the accelerating voltage of the electron source, the diameter of the beam,
the size of any aperture used, the height of the specimen from the focusing lens and the scan speed
[86]. The quality of loading, morphology of coating and quantitative release of microcontainers
can be studied by SEM [87].
1.17
Microdissolution
Microdissolution testing is an essential tool for evaluating the performance of a drug in vitro. In
this method, the drug release of a speciﬁc compound in a delivery systems is characterized by
recording the evolution of the drug concentration in a liquid with optical probes. The method
relies on spectrophotometric analysis and can absorb light in the UV range of 200-720 nm [88].
With microdissolution in situ UV measurements can be made for evaluation of various eﬀects
on solubility and dissolution proﬁles.
The probes are located inside temperature and stirring
controlled sample vessels. An UV probe is attached to a mirror and submerged into medium
where light is emitted from the probe and light is absorbed (Figure 10). When the concentration
of the analyte increase, the irradiance of the light beam decreases. It is an important determinant
of the in vivo performance and also essential for quality control purposes.
However, it can
be diﬃcult to predict oral bioavailability based on in vitro dissolution as the environment and
processes occurring in the GI-tract are very complex and, therefore, diﬃcult to mimic precisely.
Nevertheless, dissolution tests remain important and can provide at least indications towards the
in vivo performance [89].
18
==PAGE:28==
Figure 10: Image of a µDiss proﬁler containing probes attached to mirrors that submerge into medium
where light is emitted and absorbed. A dissolution proﬁle can be used for evaluation of in vitro performance
[90].
19
==PAGE:29==
2
|
Hypothesis
For this project the hypothesis are as followed:
• Kolliphor 407 added to spray dried cubosomes will have a stabilizing eﬀect giving easier
aqueous reconstitution and dispersion.
• AquaPolish E is a new alternative as pH-sensitive coating loaded SU-8 microcontainers,
creating a target-speciﬁc drug release in the small intestine.
3
|
Aim
The aim of this project was to compare spray dried cubosome formulations and evaluate the eﬀect
of adding Kolliphor 407. In order to create an oral vaccine formulation, a model antigen OVA
and adjuvant Quil-A was added and characterized. The particles with and without conﬁnement
in microcontainers were studied in vitro. Furthermore, the aim was to spray coat the new acrylic
polymer, AquaPolish E onto SU-8 microcontainers as a pH-sensitive lid, where the possibility of
a targeted release in the small intestine was evaluated through in vitro release studies.
20
==PAGE:30==
4
|
Materials
Dimodan R⃝MO 90/D was donated by Danisco, (Grindsted, Denmark). Dextran (from Leuconostoc
spp., 40 kDa), Kolliphor P 407, ovalbumin (Grade VII, from chicken egg white), maleic acid,
isopropanol, Phosphate buﬀered saline tablets, Potassium phosphate monobasic and Triethylcitrat
were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, Mo, USA). Nile red was purchased from Termo
Fischer Scientiﬁc.
Quil-A was obtained from Brenntag Biosector (Frederikssund, Denmark),
AquaPolish E was provided by BioGrund GmbH by Germany and Milli-Q water (Merch Millipore,
Darmstad, Germany) was used throughout the study. All other chemicals were of analytical grade
and used as received.
4.1
Other materials
SU-8 microcontainers manufactured on silicon wafers divided into 1.3x1.3 cm squares containing
625 microcontainers in total were provided by the group of Associate professor Stephan S. Keller
from the IDUN research centre, DTU Nanotech (Lyngby, Denmark).
5
|
Methods
5.1
Sample preparation
5.1.1
Preparation of cubosomes for spray drying
Cubosomes were prepared using Dimodan MO 90/D dissolved in 96 % ethanol (5.33 mg/mL) and
stirred until fully dissolved. Dextran from Leuconostoc spp. was dissolved in Milli-Q water (2.63
mg/mL) and while stirring, the dimodan/ethanol solution was slowly added to the Dextran/water
solution and stirred for additional 15 min [2].
For one formulation, the cubosomes were made as described above referred to as "dimodan/dextran
Cubosomes" and for three other formulations dimodan and dextran were added 1:1 and Kolliphor
(Poloxamer 407) was added in 3 %, 6 % and 9 % relative to dimodan. Kolliphor 407 was mixed in
water (0.06 mg/mL, 0.13 mg/mL and 0.2 mg/mL, respectively) and added to the dextran/water
solution before mixed with dimodan/ethanol 1:3 (v/v). One formulation was made using only
dimodan and Kolliphor 407 in order to evaluate the impact of dextran.
21
==PAGE:31==
5.1.2
Spray drying and harvesting
The spray dryer used was a Büchi B-290 mini spray dryer (Büchi Labortechnik AG, Flawil,
Switzerland) in an open-loop conﬁguration with a B-296 dehumidiﬁer (Büchi Labortechnik AG,
Flawil, Switcherland). The same parameters were used for all cubosome formulations (Table 2).
Table 2: Spray drying parameters applied for spray drying of cubosomes
Inlet air
Aspirator
Pump
Atomizer
Nozzle
100◦C
80 %
15 % (4.5 mL/min)
40 mm
1.5 mm
The spray dried cubosome powder was collected from the cyclone and collection vessel and stored
in a dry environment at room temperature.
5.1.3
Reconstitution and powder grading
The powder was harvested and transferred to a scintillation vial and weighed. 10 mg powder was
reconstituted in 0.5 mL Milli-Q water where the reconstitution quality was graded together with
the powder quality. The remaining powder was dried for 24 h at 80◦C. The vial with the dried
powder was weighed as quickly as possible after being taken out of the oven to ensure accurate
results and another reconstitution and powder quality was evaluated and compared. The grading
system was based on a scale described in Table 3
Table 3: Grading scheme for powder and reconstitution quality.
Powder grading
1
Bad powder, clumpy and static
2
Small amount of staticity, small or close to no clumps
3
No staticity and ﬂour-like powder
Reconstitution grading
1
Clear and transparent liquid. Large visible particles.
2
Cloudy with some aggregation apparent (can still contain visible particles)
3
Homogeneous milky dispersion, no visible particles
The spray drying data was used to calculate yield together with an evaluation of the capability
to disperse and the powder quality itself. Based on the collected data only the best formulations
were further investigate.
22
==PAGE:32==
5.1.4
Preparation of cubosomes containing OVA, Quil A and Nile red
Cubosomes containing Kolliphor 407 (0.13 mg/mL) 6% in water relative to dimodan were prepared
as described in Section 5.1.1.
OVA and Quil-A was added to the dimodan/Kolliphor/water
solution 0.52 mg/mL and 0.035 mg/mL, respectively. The solution was spray dried and harvested
as described in Section 5.1.2.
Dimodan/dextran cubosomes and cubosomes containing Kolliphor 407 (0.13 mg/mL) 6 % in
water relative to dimodan were prepared as described in Section 5.1.1. Nile red was added to
both solutions (0.003 mg/mL) in the dimodan/ethanol solution. The equipment used throughout
the solution making process and spray drying was covered in foil in order to avoid sunlight. All
formulations used in this project is provided in Table 4.
Table 4: Spray dried cubosome formulations
Formulations
Dimodan/dextran
Dimodan/dextran Kolliphor 407 3%
Dimodan/dextran Kolliphor 407 6%
Dimodan/dextran Kolliphor 407 9%
Dimodan/Kolliphor 407
Dimodan/dextran Kolliphor 407 6% + OVA + Quil-A
Dimodan/dextran + Nile red
Dimodan/dextran Kolliphor 407 6% + Nile red
5.2
Characterization of cubosomes
5.2.1
Characterization of cubosomes with Small-angle X-ray Scattering
The structure of hydrated particles dispersed in 10 mM phosphate buﬀer was investigated by SAXS
at the Department of Drug Design and Pharmacology at University of Copenhagen. Dimodan-
/dextran cubosomes and cubosomes containing Kolliphor 407 3 %, 6 % with and without OVA
and Quil-A, and 9 % were examined. All samples were reconstituted 1 % relative to dimodan with
phosphate buﬀer pH 7.4 and mixed using vortex. The wavelength of the X-rays were 1.54 Å, the
sample-detector distance was 581 mm, the temperature was 23◦C and the total measurement time
for each sample was 10 min. Diﬀraction patterns were converted to intensity vs. q-value plots
to identify relative peak position for determination of the space group of the dominant internal
structure of the samples [91].
23
==PAGE:33==
5.2.2
Particle size
The particle size of dry dimodan/dextran cubosomes and cubosomes containing Kolliphor 407
6 % with and without OVA and Quil-A were investigated with TOF using a TSI Aerodynamic
Particle Sizer at the Department of Pharmacy at University of Copenhagen. The pressure was set
at 2 bar, the rotation rate was 7, the ﬂow of air was 6 L/min and the inches of water was set at
200. Over 500 particles were counted per sample and all samples were made in triplicates.
The particle size in liquid for dimodan/dextran cubosomes and cubosomes containing Kolliphor
407 6 % with and without OVA and Quil-A, was measured using a Zetasizer Nano ZS from
Malvern Instrument. Cubosome powder was reconstituted in Milli-Q (MQ) water 0.2 mg/mL and
immediately measured in the zetasizer. Each sample was measured in triplicates. All parameter
settings is deﬁned in Table 5.
Table 5: Parameters used for dynamic light scattering for measuring particle size in liquid.
Parameters
Value
Absorption
0.01
Temperature
25◦C
Refractive index
1590
Viscosity
0.8872
Equilibration time
120 sec
Angle of detection
173◦C
5.3
Filling procedure and spray coating of SU-8 microcontainers
5.3.1
Loading of SU-8 Microcontainers
The method used to load the SU-8 microcontainers with drug was powder embossing [75]. The chip
of microcontainers was held and a shadow mask with the same dimensions as the microcontainer
chip was placed and aligned with the microcontainer cavities. The cubosome powder was placed
in a ﬁtting amount on the metal plate and gently pressed and shaped to the plate. A metal
disk was placed upon the mask and the system was turned around and placed in the center of a
bonding press. The bonding press manually forced the compound together with a force up to 2
kilonewton (kN) and kept the pressure for a couple of sec. before release. The shadow mask was
removed and the loaded chip was examined in an optical microscope followed by SEM. The chip
with microcontainers was weighed before and after ﬁlling to determine the amount of drug ﬁlled
into the microcontainers. An estimate of one single microcontainer was measured and calculated
within the drug ﬁlling when microcontainers were lost during the loading.
24
==PAGE:34==
5.3.2
Spray coating of AquaPolish E in water
A pH-sensitive lid was spray coated onto the microcontainer cavity. The polymer solution 1 %
AquaPolish E in MQ water was prepared prior to the coating. The solution was coated on clear
silicon wafers containing SU-8 divided into 1.3x1.3 cm squares and performed by spraying with
an ExactaCoat Ultrasonic Spray system (Sonotek, USA) with an accumist nozzle. The height (z)
of the nozzle was selected together with the spraying area (x-y). All conditions and instrumental
parameters applied is deﬁned in Table 6. The ﬂat silicon chips with SU-8 were sprayed with
diﬀerent parameters and visually evaluated in an optical microscope.
Table 6: Parameters used for spray coating with AquaPolish E 1% in water
Parameters
Values
Infusion rate (mL/min)
0.1
Heat plate temperature (◦C)
40
50
60
Generator power (W)
2.2
Z
25
50
Pressure (kPa)
0.020
0.038
Loops
10
Total number of layers
20
5.3.3
Optimization of AquaPolish E solution and thickness
For optimization the AquaPolish E 1 % solution was mixed with isopropanol (IPA) in order to get
an optimal solution for spray coating. Optimization parameters and amounts are shown in Table 7.
Table 7: AquaPolish E 1 % in relation to selected amounts of isopropanol and MQ water
Batch no.
Isopropanol % (v/v)
Milli-Q water % (v/v)
1
0
100
2
25
75
3
40
60
4
50
50
5
60
40
6
100
0
25
==PAGE:35==
Furthermore, a solution containing AquaPolish E 1 % in water and 1 % Triethylcitrat was made in
order to evaluate the eﬀect of adding a plasticizer. After evaluation of the optimized AquaPolish
E 1 % solutions containing the organic solvent IPA the batch of 50:50 IPA:MQ water was spray
coated according to Section 5.3.2 and the parameters used can be seen in Table 6.
The clear silicon wafers containing SU-8 were spray coated on half of the chips and the coating
thickness was measured by contact proﬁlometry (Alpha-Step IQ Stylus Proﬁlometer, KLA-Tencor
Corporation, Milpitas, USA) [87]. Each chip was measured three times: Once in the middle and
once in each end of the chip.
5.3.4
Final coating on loaded SU-8 microcontainers
SU-8 microcontainer chips were loaded according to Section 5.3.1 and spray coated with the
parameters listed in Table 8.
Table 8:
Final parameters used for spray coating with optimized AquaPolish E 1 % solution 50:50
isopropanol:Milli-Q water.
Parameters
Values
Infusion rate (mL/min)
0.1
Heat plate temperature (◦C)
40
Generator power (W)
2.2
Z
25
Pressure (kPa)
0.038
Loops
25
Total number of layers
50
26
==PAGE:36==
5.4
In vitro release from microcontainers
5.4.1
Qualitative release of cubosomes without coating
A qualitative experiment was designed in order to test the cubosomes’ ability to disperse without
coating (Figure 11). SU-8 microcontainers were ﬁlled as described in Section 5.3.1 with dimodan-
/dextran cubosomes and cubosomes containing Kolliphor 407 6 %.
All chips were placed in
scintillation vials and taped to the bottom using carbon tape. The scintillation vials were ﬁlled
with 10 mM maleic acid buﬀer of pH 6.6 simulating the environment of the intestine and placed in
a water bath at 37◦C with stirring of 100 rounds per minute (rpm). The microcontainer chips were
taken out after 30, 60 and 90 min and studied in an optical microscope followed by a table-top
SEM.
Figure 11: Experimental design of a release study for cubosomes ﬁlled in SU8-microcontainers without
coating.
5.4.2
Qualitative release of cubosomes with optimized coating
SU-8 microcontainers were ﬁlled, coated and placed in scintillation vials taped to the bottom using
carbon tape. The scintillation vials were ﬁlled with 2 mM maleic acid buﬀer solution of pH 4.7
simulating the environment of the stomach and placed in a water bath at 37◦C with 100 rpm. The
microcontainer chips were taken out after 60 min and studied in an optical microscope followed by
a table-top SEM. The microcontainers chips were put into new scintillation vials and ﬁlled with
10 mM maleic acid buﬀer solution of pH 6.6 simulating the environment of the intestine. The
buﬀer was changed every 15 min to simulate the sink conditions of the intestine for 30 min. The
microcontainers were again studied in an optical microscope followed by imaging with SEM and
evaluated visually for the removal of lids and powder (Figure 12).
27
==PAGE:37==
Figure 12: Experimental design of a release study for cubosomes ﬁlled in SU8-microcontainers with
AquaPolish E 1 % 50:50 isopropanol:Milli-Q water.
5.4.3
Release of OVA using µDiss proﬁler
The release of OVA from cubosomes with and without AquaPolish E coating (Section 5.3.4) was
investigated on a µDiss proﬁler (pION INC, Woburn, MA). In both release studies, the channels
were calibrated with their own OVA standard curve prior to the experiments. For the calibration
curves, an OVA stock solution (500 µg/mL) was added to 10 mL 10 mM phosphate buﬀer pH
6.6 and 10 mL 2 mM phosphate buﬀer pH 4.7 in order to achieve a range of deﬁned standard
concentrations, and the UV spectrum of each standard was recorded.
The experiments were performed at 37◦C using a stirring rate of 200 rpm and 20 mm path length
in situ UV probes on a µDiss proﬁler. The data was evaluated using Au Pro software aﬃliated
with the µDiss. The chips with microcontainers was attached to cylindrical magnetic stirring bars
with carbon tape and placed in the bottom of sample vials. The chips were covered with 10 mL
2 mM pH 4.7 phosphate buﬀer for 60 min. A chip was taken out of the experiment and studied
in SEM in order to evaluate the coating. The buﬀer was changed for the remaining chips to 10
mM pH 6.6 phosphate buﬀer for 3 h and the in situ UV probes detected the absorbance. Both
sets of experiments were performed in triplicates [2].
28
==PAGE:38==
5.4.4
Release of Nile red labelled cubosomes
The release of Nile red labelled dimodan/dextran cubosomes and cubosomes containing Kolliphor
407 6 % (Section 5.1.4) were investigated measuring ﬂuorescence on a Varioskan LUX Multimode
Microplate Reader (Termo Fischer Scientiﬁc).
Microcontainer chips containing Nile red ﬁlled
cubosomes were placed in scintillation vials and taped to the bottom using carbon tape. The
scintillation vials were ﬁlled with 2 mM maleic acid buﬀer solution of pH 4.7 and placed in a
water bath at 37◦C with 120 rpm. After 30 min a sample was taken and the buﬀer was changed
to 10 mM maleic acid buﬀer solution of pH 6.6. Samples where taken at 15, 30, 45, 60 and 120
min and covered in foil. The amount of sample was replaced with fresh buﬀer solution. A Nile
red cubosome stock solution was made with Nile red containing dimodan/dextran cubosomes and
cubosomes containing Kolliphor 407 6 % and diluted at 0, 50, 100, 150, 200, 250, 300, 350, 400,
450, and 500 µg/mL in 10 mM maleic acid buﬀer pH 6.6.
All samples were placed in a black well-plate and the ﬂuorescence was measured at 530 nm
excitation and 590 nm emission [92]. The data for the release studies are expressed in % of the
total load of OVA or Nile red present in the cubosomes.
5.5
After optimization of thickness and OVA release
In order to obtain consistency the thickness of the AquaPolish E 1 % coating described in Section
5.3.4 was evaluated and optimized. The thickness was measured as described in Section 5.3.3.
Number of layers tested were 40, 50 and 60 and a cleaning step was introduced. Here, all tubings
were washed with MQ water before being reﬁlled with coating solution. The cleaning step was
performed after every coating program. The release of OVA was repeated as described in 5.4.3.
5.6
Statistics
The data is reported in mean ± standard deviation (SD). Graphs were analyzed in GraphPad
Prism version 8.00 (GraphPad Soft- ware Inc., CA, USA).
29
==PAGE:39==
6
|
Results and discussion
6.1
Production of cubosomes and reconstitution
Diﬀerent formulations of dimodan/dextran cubosomes were produced by spray drying. Dimodan
was used to form particles with the addition of dextran stabilizing the cubic structure creating
cubosomes.
Kolliphor 407 was added in order to compare the spray dried dimodan/dextran
cubosomes with the cubosomes also containing a stabilizer. One formulation was made of only
dimodan and Kolliphor 407 as a control in order to evaluate the dextran. Prior to spray drying
the model antigen OVA and adjuvant Quil-A were added to one formulation containing dimodan/
dextran/Kolliphor for further investigating the impact of a vaccine model and the release of OVA.
Lastly, a cubosome formulation containing Nile red was made for a release study monitoring the
ﬂuorescence.
The yield is dependent on the ratio of the components used in the liquid solution prior to spray
drying. Dimodan/dextran cubosomes had a relative yield of 59 % (Table 9). The cubosomes
containing diﬀerent amounts of Kolliphor 407 had relatively higher yields, with Kolliphor 407 6 %
being the highest at 69 %. The yield of spray dried cubosomes are normally observed around 62 %
[52]. The formulation without dextran showed no powder when spray dried indicating that dextran
is crucial for the formation of cubosome powders. This has been observed in several studies as
dextran encapsulates the dimodan creating particles and also acts as a mucus permeation enhancer
in drug delivery giving a strong immune response [39], [93], [52].
Table 9:
Measurements of the dry cubosome powder amounts.
The relative yield of the diﬀerent
formulations were calculated based on the actual yields divided by the theoretical yields.
Formulations
Theoretical yield (mg)
Yield (mg)
Relative yield (%)
Dimodan/dextran
1333.04
790.13
59
Kolliphor 407 3 %
676.22
423.55
63
Kolliphor 407 6 %
2058.16
1420.96
69
Kolliphor 407 9 %
696.30
448.28
64
Dimodan/Kolliphor 407
352.96
-
-
Kolliphor 407 6 % +
OVA + Quil-A
1538.57
1018.89
66
Dimodan/dextran +
Nile red
1333.88
878.47
66
Kolliphor 407 6 % +
Nile red
1372.51
941.79
68
30
==PAGE:40==
There exist very little literature on the area of Kolliphor 407 being used for cubosome formation via
spray drying. However, Kolliphor 407 is a stabilizing agent increasing solubility and bioavailability.
Kolliphor 407 has been observed to give higher stability when added to cubosomes. This could
explain the higher relative yield for the formulations containing Kolliphor 407 [94].
The powder quality together with the reconstitution capacity for dimodan/dextran cubosomes
and cubosomes containing Kolliphor 407 were graded before and after being dried in an oven for
24 h at 80◦C.
Table 10: Powder and reconstitution grading. Each sample was evaluated on a scale from 1-3. Speciﬁc
requirements can be seen in Table 3.
Before oven
After oven
Formulation
Powder grade
Reconstitution
grade
Powder grade
Reconstitution
grade
Dimodan/dextran
2
1
2-3
3
Kolliphor 407 3 %
2
2
2-3
3
Kolliphor 407 6 %
2
2
2-3
3
Kolliphor 407 9 %
2
2
2-3
3
The diﬀerent formulations were almost similar in visual powder quality. After being dried the
powder showed a bit more ﬂour-like qualities as ﬁne powder, but the diﬀerence could be hard to
examine and the grade given was the same for all formulations (Table 10). The quality of the
powder has a tendency to agglomerate over time. This can be due to incomplete encapsulation
of the monoelein but does not aﬀect re-dispersion [52]. However, this makes the powder quite
diﬃcult to work with, hence why the powder should be stored in a dry vacuum environment. An
important aspect of these results is that the grading system is subjective and the samples have
not been compared to a reference in the range of diﬀerent qualities.
Each formulation was reconstituted in MQ water in order to examine the cubosomes’ capability
to disperse as a future vaccine should be able to reconstitute fully upon addition of water with
gentle inversion of the container. The reconstitution quality changed signiﬁcantly from before and
after being dried in an oven indicating the importance of the drying process after spray drying
(Figure 13). It is known that when drying occurs, dextran forms the coating encapsulating the
particle. As the cubic gel itself contains up to 40 % water, the drying also occur at the core of the
particles and will aﬀect the powder properties [52]. These results could indicate further drying
and removal of water is giving a better reconstitution.
31
==PAGE:41==
(a)
(b)
Figure 13: Reconstitution of cubosome powder before and after being dried in an oven for 24h at 80◦C.
(a) Reconstitution before oven. (b) Reconstitution after oven.
Poor reconstitution properties can be related to the composition of the spray drying feed and
parameters. Studies have shown that one of the parameters that aﬀect the powders ability to
reconstitute is the temperature, where higher temperatures give better reconstitution. Recon-
stitution has been found the easiest with temperatures above 110◦C. This experiment was carried
out at 100◦C perhaps, being the reason for poor reconstitution before drying [95].
Adding
a stabilizer into the cubosomes like Kolliphor 407 has been suggested as it helps form more
stable cubosomes, which is important in term of creating a stable vaccine [96].
A diﬀerence
was seen in the Kolliphor 407 containing cubosomes where the reconstitution was easier than
for dimodan/dextran cubosomes. However, the drying process would still be needed in order to
obtain the best reconstitution.
The spray drying process is still promising for drying vaccines as it is easily scalable and inexpensive
[91]. Studies have also shown that the production of cubosomes is a very stable process and the
parameter settings of temperature, atomization pressure, feed rate and aspiration rate are quite
ﬂexible [95]. An often used alternative to spray drying is freeze drying [97]. This process works
by freezing the solution, then reducing the pressure and adding heat to allow the frozen water in
the material to sublimate. The powders prepared by freeze drying are drier than those prepared
by spray drying, since the ﬁnal moisture content in freeze drying is determined by a secondary
drying step, which is a vacuum drying process performed at room temperature. Freeze drying
is not always preferred as it tends to form a thick cake-like substance that needs to be broken
down through the secondary drying step thus, taking longer time [57]. The spray dried cubosome
powders produced in theses studies were evaluated based on the grading schemes and yield, and
only cubosomes containing Kolliphor 407 6 % were further studied for particle size, coating and
release studies.
32
==PAGE:42==
6.2
Characterization of particles
The cubic structure of hydrated particles dispersed in phosphate buﬀer at pH 7.4 was measured for
all formulations mentioned in Table 4. Hydrated particles that did not contain OVA and Quil-A
showed no SAXS pattern that indicated cubosomes, which could be because mostly vesicles were
present in the samples (Figure 14a). Cubosomes containing Kolliphor 407 6 % with OVA and
Quil-A showed SAXS patterns characteristics of the cubic phase Lm3m (Figure 14b). Lm3m has
a primitive surface and is part of the bicontinuous cubic mesophase together with Ia3s (gyroid
surface) and Pn3m (diamond surface) [25]. Previous studies have found the cubic structure Pn3m
upon hydration [91], [55]. The relative distance provide information about the size of the lattice
giving the cubic structure and 4 peaks should at least be visible in a spectrum in order to give
conﬁdent statements about the symmetry aspect of the mesophase, hence further investigation is
needed to determine the cubic structure [98].
The lack of cubosomes found in formulations without OVA and Quil-A could indicate a stabilizing
eﬀect of OVA in the cubosomes as found in previous studies [91], [73]. The lack of cubosome peaks
could indicate vesicles being formed instead of cubosomes, this would however not be detectable in
the SAXS measurement [60]. Studies have shown that cubosomes are in general quite stable with
a high membrane resistance and high solubility [25]. However, one study showed that cubosomes
tend to lose their cubic structure to form vesicles when reconstituted in pH 6.6 [73]. Further
investigation of the cubosome formulation could be investigated in cryo-TEM imaging giving an
indicating of the ratio between possible cubosomes and vesicles in the samples not containing
OVA and Quil-A.
33
==PAGE:43==
(a)
(b)
Figure 14:
Q values vs.
intensity pattern obtained from SAXS measurements.
(a) Example of
Dimodan/dextran cubosomes not showing any peaks of cubic structure.
(b) Cubosomes containing
Kolliphor 407 6 % with OVA and Quil-A dispersed in phosphate buﬀer pH 7.4.
6.2.1
Particle size
The particle size distribution of dimodan/dextran cubosomes and cubosomes containing Kolliphor
407 6 % with and without OVA was determined with TOF. The mean size of dry dimodan/dextran
particles was 10 ± 0.7 µm. When adding Kolliphor 407 6 %, the particle size increased to 12.6
± 0.4 µm. When further adding OVA and Quil-A, the particles size decreased to 8.1 ± 0.9 µm
(Table 11). In order to gain knowledge on the dry particle size distribution around 1000-2000
particles should be collected per sample. The amount of particles counted per sample ranged
from 500 particles to around 6000 particles which could be a risk of inaccurate results.
Table 11:
Particle size measurements of dry particles using time-of-ﬂight.
The measurements were
performed in triplicates and data are expressed as mean ± SD.
Sample
Mean mass particle size (µm)
Dimodan/dextran
10.0 ± 0.7
Kolliphor 407 6 %
12.6 ± 0.4
Kolliphor 407 6 % +
OVA + Quil-A
8.1 ± 0.9
The size distribution of hydrated particles in water were measured with DLS. The mean size
of dimodan/dextran cubosomes was 315.8 ± 13.15 µm. When adding Kolliphor 407 6 %, the
particle size increased to 416.8 ± 73.8 µm. When further adding OVA and Quil-A, the particles
size decreased to 283.3 ± 11.2 µm (Table 12). This tendency is seen with both dry and hydrated
34
==PAGE:44==
particles with the diﬀerent formulations. The addition of Quil-A has been seen to aﬀect lipid
particles as it tends to attach to the membrane creating pores that stimulate an immune response
[31]. Particles up to 500 nm have been reported to be able to diﬀuse through the mucus and
for cell uptake of APCs such as macrophages. All samples were below 500 nm showing ability
to diﬀuse through the mucus and for cell uptake of APCs [42]. Similar studies have measured
dimodan/dextran cubosomes containing OVA between 256-281 nm [58], [2].
PDI was measured on the width of the molecular weight distributions indicating the homogeneity
of the particles shapes [99]. A sample with a PDI below 0.2 is considered monodisperse. All
samples were above 0.2 indicating polydisperse homogeneity with a range of particle sizes [64].
Polydispersity can be due to aggregation or simply diﬀerent primary size. The variation was quite
high as seen in the SDs and repeating the experiment should be considered in order to gain higher
consistency maybe with a higher sample concentration.
Table 12: Size measurements of hydrated particles using dynamic light scattering. The measurements
were performed in triplicates and data are represented as mean ± SD
Sample
Z mean (nm)
PDI mean
Dimodan/dextran
315.8 ± 13.15
0.41
Kolliphor 407 6 %
416.8 ± 73.8
0.48
Kolliphor 6 % +
OVA + Quil-A
283.3 ± 11.2
0.48
6.3
Loading of SU-8 microcontainers
SU-8 microcontainers were loaded with cubosome powder using powder embossing [75].
An
optical microscope and SEM were used to visualize the loading of microcontainers.
At ﬁrst,
both a shadowmask and an aligned mask holding the microcontainer chip were used for loading,
resulting in a loading of under 1 mg per chip.
This gave high uncertainties and the loading
process often had to be redone as the amount were lower than ﬁrst measured before ﬁlling. Also,
the loss of microcontainers were high and gave further problems with the loading. Experience with
microcontainers cracking was often seen, resulting in repeating of loading, as the microcontainers
were no longer reliable in protection of the drug (Figure 15).
35
==PAGE:45==
Figure 15: Optical image of a cracked microcontainer chip after performing powder embossing [75].
The mask was changed to a shadow mask with the same dimensions as the microcontainers chip.
The chip was manually held and the small shadow mask was carefully placed and aligned with
the microcontainers. The amount of loaded cubosome powder increased to around 3 mg similar
to previous studies, and small amounts of powder were found between the arrays of the cavities
and the microcontainers seemed evenly ﬁlled (Figure 16) [73], [75].
Figure 16: SEM image of drug loaded SU-8 microcontainers. The scale bar corresponds to 1 mm.
The drug loading method used for these experiments resulted in lots of waste powder as the
excess powder not loaded into the microcontainers was compressed and needed to be discarded.
The method also requires practice in order to obtain high loading capacity and automation should
be considered for an up-scale production.
36
==PAGE:46==
The microcontainers used in these studies were microfabricated from the negative epoxy photoresist
SU-8. This method is not compatible with a large scale manufacturing generally required for
commercial vaccines, and will have to be replaced with biodegradable microcontainers in the
future such as polycaprolactone (PCL) containers. PCL is a biodegradable material providing
less toxicity.
To ensure licensing by regulatory authorities the biodegradable polymer PLGA
could also be used to make microcontainers [100].
6.4
Spray coating of AquaPolish E
In order to control the release from loaded SU-8 microcontainers in the GI-tract, a pH-sensitive
coating is spray coated onto the cavity of the loaded microcontainers. One of the aims of this study
was to evaluate the quality of the aqueous polymer AquaPolish E. A 1 % solution in MQ water
was spray coated onto clear silicon SU-8 chips. Diﬀerent heights, temperatures and pressures were
evaluated and problems with a too thin coating were seen making a puddle of coating solution
around the chip (Figure 17a). When increasing the height and temperature a thinner layer was
seen but created an uneven layer of coating (Figure 17b). The uneven layer could indicate the
pressure being too high.
Also, problems with high ventilation in the spray coater forced the
coating to be sprayed beside the chip giving the need to spray a higher area of coating, but again
creating a crooked layer.
(a)
(b)
Figure 17: Silicon SU-8 chips spray coated with 1 % AquaPolish E in water. (a) example of a 20 layer
coating in 40◦C at a height of z=50 and pressure of 0.022 kPa. (b) example of a 20 layer coating in 50◦C
at a height of z=25 with a pressure of 0.038 kPa.
By moving the chip and spray coating area far from the ventilation and increasing the loops a
visually even area was observed and further examined in the optical microscope. The AquaPolish
E solution mixed in water was a milky white color indicating it being a dispersion and not a
solution. This was veriﬁed when examining 40 layers of coating showing particles spread out on
37
==PAGE:47==
the chips (Figure 18). One study using AquaPolish E mixed in water was successful in creating
an aqueous coating for tablets showing great results when exposed to low pH acid and release in
phosphate buﬀer pH 6.8 [83]. The solution made in the study was 30% AquaPolish E in water
with another plasticizer, propylene glycol added. The solution was spray coated using a spray
gun at 40◦C. Not being able to make a solution without particles was not expected and further
optimization of the solution itself was needed.
(a)
(b)
Figure 18: Silicon SU-8 chips spray coated with 1 % AquaPolish E in water. (a) example of a 40 layer
coating in 50◦C at a height of z=25 and pressure of 0.022 kPa. (b) example of a 40 layer coating in 60◦C
at a height of z=25 with a pressure of 0.038 kPa.
6.4.1
Optimization and thickness
As one optimization, 1 % AquaPolish E was made in water with the plasticizer triethylcitrat
added. However, no signiﬁcant diﬀerence was seen in the solution. The organic solvent IPA was
added to the solution as this has previously been seen to dissolve pH depended polymer solutions
[77], [94].
The solutions were mixed in diﬀerent ratios with water and evaluated visually for
clarity. The solutions were ﬁltered in order to remove any undissolved particles. When containing
mostly water the mixture appeared completely white. As more were added, the solution became
more clear but when containing more than 50 % IPA the solution turned blurry and unclear. The
solution containing 50 % MQ water and 50 % IPA was the most clear and chosen to be further
studied.
AquaPolish E 1 % 50:50 IPA:MQ water was spray coated on clear silicon SU-8 chips and diﬀerent
parameters were evaluated in an optical microscope. The coating appeared to be much more clear
however, particles were still visible at 40 layers of coating. When coating the ﬁrst chip particles
were present but disappeared when coating the second and third chip. This could indicate that
38
==PAGE:48==
particles precipitate in the bottom of the syringe when kept still and reappearing when reﬁlling
the syringe. Also, the ﬁlter paper used for ﬁltration capture particles from 5-13 µm leaving smaller
particles in the mixture. With particles still present in the mixture, a completely dissolved solution
was not possible to obtain. However, a thick even layer seemed achievable and the solution was
chosen for further investigation of thickness.
Assessing the thickness is important when investigating the ability to create an even layer of
coating and studying how the thickness reacts when adding several layers. The thickness was
measured for 40◦C and 50◦C with high pressure at 0.038 kPa in 20 and 40 layers of coating,
to evaluate the eﬀect of changing the temperature and adding several layers to the chip. The
measured thickness for spray coating at 40◦C was 13.83± 1.02 µm for 20 layers of coating, and
29.87± 1.25 µm for 40 layers. The layers tend to follow the number of coatings exponentially
in thickness as more than a doubling from 20 to 40 layers is observed. The same tendency is
seen with spray coating at 50◦C as 20 layers of coating showed a thickness of 7.87± 0.29 µm and
19.5± 0.17 µm for 40 layers. The thickness decreased when spray coating at 50◦C indicating water
being evaporated when using higher temperatures (Figure 19).
Figure 19: Thickness measurements of diﬀerent temperature and number of layers. The measurements
were performed in triplicates and diagram presents mean ± SD.
39
==PAGE:49==
The thickness was measured three diﬀerent places at the chip to evaluate the evenness of the
coating. All coatings had little to no variation from the top to the bottom of the chip indicating
a relatively even coating. The measurement from the starting point of the coating to the end also
seemed even (Figure 20). This indicates good parameter setting for the spray coating and giving
no further concern regarding the ventilation inside the spray coating and a crooked coating.
With the method used for measuring thickness in this thesis, a direct measure of coating on
microcontainers was impossible. However, the measurements are able to give an approximation of
both thickness and evenness. A possible method for measuring on the spray coated microcontainer
is X-Ray CT, a nondestructive technique for visualizing interior features within a solid object like
a microcontainer [87].
Figure 20: Example of a measured thickness proﬁle of 40 layers of coating sprayed at 40◦C. The thickness
appeared even and around 30 µm. The measurements were performed in triplicates.
6.4.2
Spray coating of SU-8 microcontainers
Based on evaluation of thickness and visualization of the coating, further spray coating was done
at 40◦C with a pressure of 0.038 kPa. SU-8 microcontainer chips were loaded and coated with
20, 40 and 50 layers. Through SEM it was possible to gain qualitative and visual assessment
on the uniformity and morphology of the coating.
When coating with 20 layers the coating
appeared cracked and did not cover the microcontainers (Figure 21a). The reason could be that
the AquaPolish E does not contain enough plasticizer which makes the coating smooth and avoids
cracking.
When coating 40 layers the microcontainer appeared nearly closed and the coating
seemed thick. Once going up to 50 layers of coating most microcontainers were closed and a
qualitatively higher degree of uniformity was seen (Figure 21b). The coating does not need to
close the microcontainer entirely to cover and protect the cubosome powder. The small opening
were considered as suﬃciently coated as the closing depended on the amount of cubosome powder
loaded in the microcontainers.
40
==PAGE:50==
(a)
(b)
Figure 21: SEM image of AquaPolish E 1 % 50:50 isopropanol:Milli-Q water. (a) 20 layers of coating.
The scale bar corresponds to 500 µm. (b) 50 layers of coating. The scale bar corresponds to 1 mm.
6.5
Qualitative release studies
A qualitative release study of cubosomes without coating was designed and evaluated through
SEM. Loaded SU-8 microcontainer chips were tested for dispersing abilities with dimodan/dextran
cubosomes and cubosomes containing Kolliphor 407 6 %.
Also, a pH-activated release of the
AquaPolish E coating was studied to ensure that the biological variance in the GI-tract would not
cause unexpected lid disintegration in possible future in vivo studies.
The loaded SU-8 microcontainer chips were placed in scintillation vials and buﬀer pH 6.6 were
added and studied in SEM after 30, 60 and 90 min.
For dimodan/dextran cubosomes most
powder was released after 30 min. However, powder was still present in microcontainers after
90 min (Figure 22a).
For cubosomes containing Kolliphor 6 % all powder was released after
30 min (Figure 22b). This could indicate Kolliphor 407 6 % reacting in the cubosome mixture
increasing the solubilization [53]. Also, based on particle sizes cubosomes containing Kolliphor
407 6 % showed bigger particles that could be easier to release, whereas the small particles in
dimodan/dextran cubosomes could be stuck in the corners of the microcontainers.
41
==PAGE:51==
(a)
(b)
Figure 22: SEM image of qualitative release of cubosomes. The scale bar corresponds to 500 µm. (a)
Dimodan/dextran cubosomes after 90 min. (b) Cubosomes containing Kolliphor 407 6 % after 30 min.
For evaluation of the AquaPolish E coating the microcontainers were submerged in buﬀer at pH
4.7 to simulate the environment of the stomach. After 60 min the coating seemed intact (Figure
23a) and the microcontainers were moved to buﬀer pH 6.6 to simulate the environment of the
intestine. Here, the lids dissolved and the cubosome powders were released within 30 min (Figure
23b). Similar experiment and results have been seen with Eudragit EL100-55 and seem promising
in terms of AquaPolish E as a new pH-sensitive polymer for spray coating [73].
(a)
(b)
Figure 23: SEM image of qualitative release of cubosomes with 50 layers og AquaPolish E 1 % 50:50
isopropanol:Milli-Q water. (a) Example of coating after 60 min of release in buﬀer pH 4.7. The scale bar
corresponds to 1 mm. (b) Example of coating after 30 min of release in buﬀer pH 6.6. The scale bar
corresponds to 500 µm.
42
==PAGE:52==
6.6
In vitro release of cubosomes
The release time is essential to study in an oral drug delivery system.
Release of OVA from
SU-8 microcontainers were investigated with cubosomes containing Kolliphor 407 6 %, OVA and
Quil-A. The in vitro time of OVA release were measured by a µDiss proﬁler, predicting the time
expected for cubosomes to release. A 2 mM phosphate buﬀer pH 4.7 and 10 mM pH 6.6 were
used to simulate the stomach and small intestine. The release occurred under constant rotation
of the microcontainer chips to mimic the GI tract. As the loaded mass of OVA varied across the
samples, the data and results are expressed in % of the total load of OVA present in the cubosomes
over time. The uncoated microcontainer chips showed an initial rapid release where 98 % OVA
was released after 40 min (Figure 24). The rapid release was expected due to the cubosomes high
solubility and no protection at the cavity of the microcontainers.
Figure 24: Release of ovalbumin (OVA) from SU-8 microcontainers in 2 mM phosphate buﬀer pH 6.6,
expressed as percentage of the total load of OVA present in cubosomes in 60 min. The release study was
performed in triplicates and the data is presented as mean ± SD.
To study the release of OVA from coated microcontainers, the samples were reconstituted in
phosphate buﬀer pH 4.7 for 60 min. One chip was studied in SEM and the remaining chips were
reconstituted in pH 6.6 for 3 h. After 60 min in pH 4.7 the coating did not seem intact and several
microcontainers had lost the layer of coating around the cavity (Figure 25b). This was further
conﬁrmed by the data that showed release of up to 60 % OVA during 60 min in pH 4.7 (Figure
25a). The protection that coating provides is crucial in creating a controlled release and after 3 h
in pH 6.6 a total release of 75 % was seen. The fact that not all OVA was released can be due to
a rapid release from the top of the microcontainers, but leaving cubosome powder stuck deeper
into the microcontainers.
43
==PAGE:53==
(a)
(b)
Figure 25: Release of ovalbumin (OVA) from SU-8 microcontainers in 2 mM phosphate buﬀer pH 4.7 for
60 min and 10 mM phosphate buﬀer pH 6.6 for 3 h, expressed as percentage of the total load of OVA present
in cubosomes. The data is presented as mean ± SD. (a) Total release of OVA during dissolution. The
change of buﬀer from pH 4.7 to pH 6.6 is indicated with a red line. (b) Example of coated microcontainer
chip after 60 min in pH 4.7. The scale bar corresponds to 500 µm.
.
A similar release study with cubosomes containing OVA and Quil-A coated with Eudragit L100-55
has been performed showing the coated lids completely intact after 60 min in pH 4.7 and all OVA
being released after 30 min in pH 6.6 [73]. The coating soaked in pH below the dissolution point
needs to be intact in order to evaluate the performance in the stomach. AquaPolish E does not
meet the expectations in this release study.
Another release study was performed using Nile red labelled cubosomes with and without Kolliphor
407 6 % using a micro-plate reader measuring ﬂuorescence.
After 30 min in 2 mM maleic
acid buﬀer pH 4.7 the coating appeared cracked and several microcontainers were wide open
leaving no protection from release (Figure 26a). Within the ﬁrst 30 min in pH 4.7 around 10
% was released. The total amount of release was 15 % and was measured within 45 min. The
microcontainers were studied in a ﬂuorescence microscope showing no indication of any Nile red
being left in the microcontainers. The rapid release at pH 4.7 indicates, like the OVA release
study, that the AquaPolish E lid is not suﬃcient enough and that it could be aﬀected by the
circumstances of the studies maybe being the buﬀer or the movement of the microcontainer chip.
Both dimodan/dextran cubosomes and cubosomes containing Kolliphor 407 6% seemed similar in
release proﬁles however, the total release was very low (Figure 26b).
44
==PAGE:54==
Nile red is a lipid dye and the amount of Nile red labelled cubosomes in the samples were calculated
based on dimodan [101]. The low amount of total release could indicate that Nile red did not
stick to all lipid in the cubosome mixture. Another reason could be loss of ﬂuorescence during
either the spray drying process or the release study when samples were kept and covered with foil.
The release study was performed twice as the amount of ﬂuorescence ﬁrst measured was very low
and new Nile red labelled cubosomes were spray dried a day prior to the second release study to
ensure newly made cubosomes.
An earlier study was performed on release in biological environments with diﬀerent ﬂuorescently
labelled lipids (FLLs) incorporated into liposomes.
Investigating the stability was performed
by quantitatively determining the tendency of liposomes to dissociate during incubation with
size exclusion chromatography. Results indicated the FLLs being more loosely anchored to the
nanoparticles than ﬁrst assumed and simple buﬀer environments are not suitable for studying
stability and release in context of biological systems [102]. This could be another reason for the
low release seen in this study and further evaluation of the Nile red labelled cubosomes stability
could be performed to evaluate the eﬃciency of this release study.
(a)
(b)
Figure 26: Release of Nile red labelled cubosomes. (a) Example of coated microcontainer chip after 30
min in 2 mM maleic acid buﬀer pH 4.7. Scale bar corresponds to 1 mm. (b) Total release of Nile red
labelled cubosomes. The measurements were performed in triplicates and data is presented as mean ±
SD.. Buﬀer was switched to 10 mM maleic acid buﬀer pH 6.6 after 30 min. Blue: Dimodan dextran
cubosomes, green: Dimodan dextran cubosomes containing Kolliphor 407 6 %
.
45
==PAGE:55==
6.7
Concluding optimization and evaluation
After evaluation of the AquaPolish E coating from release studies, the thickness was measured
again resulting in very low consistency from chip to chip. In order to avoid particles in the bottom
of the syringe, the solution was changed for every program. Also, a cleaning step was introduced
where all tubings were cleaned with water between every program. The AquaPolish E solution
was coated with 40, 50 and 60 layers. When introducing the cleaning step the samples showed
higher consistency making the spray coating process more reliable. The results showed a thinner
coating than ﬁrst measured (Figure 27). This could be due to the cleaning step if water was still
present in the tubing system diluting the solution.
Figure 27: Thickness measurements before and after introducing a cleaning step in the spray coating
program. The measurements were performed in triplicates and diagram presents mean ± SD.
The consistency of the applied spray coating process was still not suﬃcient which could be due
to the AquaPolish E solution being unstable. When ﬁltered prior to spray coating the solution
seemed clear however, after an hour the solution became more blurry. This could be the particles
not being dissolved as seen previously during the solution optimization. After working with the
AquaPolish E powder for 4 months the powder appeared more sticky and time required for making
the coating solution went from 10 min to 24 h with stirring. This could be because the powder
was inﬂuenced by the storage humidity or that the powder was not meant to have a long shelf life.
In general, acrylic polymers are resistant to oxidation and hydrolysis. However, when exposed to
acidic or alkaline conditions, the acrylic has been shown to be hydrolyzed to poly(acrylic acid)
and alcohol [103]. This could perhaps be the reason for not creating a lid with the pH-sensitivity
promised by the product.
46
==PAGE:56==
To evaluate the cleaning step, a quantitative release of OVA was repeated. The data showed up
to 70 % release within the ﬁrst 30 min in pH 4.7 (Figure 28). The cleaning step ended up giving
a higher release than ﬁrst measured indicating that the cleaning step did not give the desired
eﬀect. This could be due to the lower thickness measured when introducing the cleaning step or
the solution itself as previously discussed.
Figure 28: Release of ovalbumin (OVA) from SU-8 microcontainers coated with AquaPolish E 1 % 50:50
isopropanol:Milli-Q water including a cleaning step. Released in 2 mM phosphate buﬀer pH 4.7 for 60 min
and 10 mM phosphate buﬀer pH 6.6 for 3 h, expressed as percentage of the total load of OVA present in
cubosomes. The data is presented as mean ± SD. The change of buﬀer from pH 4.7 to pH 6.6 is indicated
with a red line.
For further optimization the AquaPolish E solution could be added another plasticizer together
with IPA. This could help the cracking seen for spray coating 20 layers and perhaps help build a
better lid layer by layer. A sample of AquaPolish E containing more propylene glycol than already
added could also provide better protection of the microcontainers [85]. Parameters used for spray
coating could also be considered for optimization. When spray coating 60 layers of coating, high
variation is seen and introducing a coating break could be a solution. This would create a break
for the coating to dry and hence create a more buildable lid. Changing the spray coating speed
could also create the same eﬀect.
Previous studies have found the particle morphology changing when released from Eudragit L100-
55. Through SAXS measurement cubosomes have been shown to turn into hexosomes once released
from the coated microcontainers [2], [73]. Investigating the eﬀect when coated with AquaPolish
E could be interesting. Creating an eﬀective pH-sensitive lid without a relatively high release in
low pH should be obtained before that.
47
==PAGE:57==
7
|
Conclusion
The aim of this project was to evaluate the eﬀect of spray dried cubosomes with the plasticizer
Kolliphor 407. Reconstitution showed to be easier with cubosomes containing Kolliphor 407 6 %
however, drying the particles after the spray drying process was crucial in order to obtain good
reconstitution for all formulations. The particle size distribution based on both dry and hydrated
particles showed a tendency to increase when cubosomes were added only Kolliphor 407 6 % and
decrease to a point below control dimodan/dextran cubosomes when added both Kolliphor 407
6 %, OVA, and Quil-A. The tendency gave an understanding of the eﬀect of adding a surfactant
Quil-A to the cubosomes.
The aim was also to evaluate the acrylic polymer AquaPolish E as an aqueous pH sensitive
lid creating a speciﬁc drug target release from SU-8 microcontainers. Through investigation of
diﬀerent spray coating parameters, an AquaPolish E solution was not obtainable with only water,
and IPA was added in order to dilute particles in the mixture. In the optimization of the spray
coating mixture, AquaPolish E 1 % solution containing 50 % MQ water and 50 % IPA was
chosen. In vitro release studies performed in this project demonstrated that the coating was able
to withstand 2 mM maleic acid buﬀer pH 4.7 for 60 min and showed release of cubosomes within 30
min in 10 mM maleic acid buﬀer pH 6.6 when evaluated qualitatively in SEM. Qualitative release
studies showed a release of up to 60 % within 60 min in 2 mM phosphate buﬀer pH 4.7, indicating
an insuﬃcient protection of the drug when exposed to a pH that simulated the environment of
the stomach. Measuring ﬂuorescence of Nile red labelled cubosomes showed a 10 % release within
30 min in pH 4.7 out of 15 % release in total. Further optimization is needed in order to obtain
higher consistency in thickness and release. Based on the results of this study, a pH-sensitive lid
created by AquaPolish E is not obtainable for a targeted release in the small intestine at this
point.
48
==PAGE:58==
8
|
Future perspectives
The development of inexpensive and less toxic oral vaccines for worldwide distribution is of
considerable interest. In doing so, developing oral vaccine delivery systems using microcontainers
shows great potential.
In the future replacing the SU-8 microcontainer with biodegradable
microcontainers like PCL or PLGA would be necessary in order to gain licensing from regulatory
authorities. [7], [100]. The addition of Kolliphor 407 seems promising but needs further invest-
igation in order to evaluate the stabilizing eﬀect. In vitro release studies with an already studied
pH sensitive lid like Eudragit L100-55 could create a better comparison in evaluating the stabilizing
eﬀect. A diﬀerent stabilizer could be added to the cubosomes suitable for oral administration like
poloxamer 188 [94].
The possibility of a new aqueous polymer, AquaPolish E is presented in this study. The spray
coating method and parameter settings need optimization. This could be in the form of changing
the generator power, pressure, and temperature. Furthermore, the challenge regarding the high
ventilation in the spray coater, creating a crooked layer of coating, needs to be overcome. Improve-
ment of the morphology and thickness of the coating is necessary to create a suitable lid. The
optimized lid should be validated by in vitro release studies. Ultimately, in vivo animal studies
should be performed in order to asses the eﬀect of the spray coated lids in closer resemblance to
the human body.
The internal structure of cubosomes by SAXS could be further investigated in a release study. Also,
examining the stability of the structure over time could be interesting in further understanding
the cubic structure.
Cryo-TEM could be used as well to verify and investigate the particles
individually. In the vaccine model, a diﬀerent adjuvant than Quil-A should be considered. This
could be a synthetic substitute that is more consistent and easily produced, such as Monophosphoryl
Lipid A. This adjuvant is known to possess strong immunostimulatory properties and has been
evaluated for more than two decades as an adjuvant for promoting immune responses to immuno-
genic antigens [104], [105].
Considering liposomes instead of cubosomes as vaccine carrying particles could be considered.
Liposomes are well-studied and have been found to be a stable nanoparticle for carrying antigens
and adjuvants [106], [36]. Future research will hopefully lead to a better understand of oral drug
delivery and the possibility of developing oral vaccines.
49
==PAGE:59==
9
|
References
[1] Camilla Foged. Subunit vaccines of the future: The need for safe, customized and
optimized particulate delivery systems. Therapeutic Delivery, 2(8):1057–1077, 2011.
[2] Line Hagner Nielsen, Thomas Rades, Ben Boyd, and Anja Boisen. Microcontainers as an
oral delivery system for spray dried cubosomes containing ovalbumin, 2017.
[3] Andrew B. Hill, Christopher Kilgore, Margaret McGlynn, and Charles H. Jones.
Improving global vaccine accessibility. Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 42:67–73, 2016.
[4] Julia E. Vela Ramirez, Lindsey A. Sharpe, and Nicholas A. Peppas. Current state and
challenges in developing oral vaccines. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews, 114:116–131, 2017.
[5] Guy Hutton and Fabrizio Tediosi. The costs of introducing a malaria vaccine through the
expanded program on immunization in Tanzania. American Journal of Tropical Medicine
and Hygiene, 75(SUPPL. 2):119–130, 2006.
[6] Peter Michael Moyle and Istvan Toth. Modern Subunit Vaccines: Development,
Components, and Research Opportunities. ChemMedChem, 8(3):360–376, 2013.
[7] Vincent Pavot, Nicolas Rochereau, Christian Genin, Bernard Verrier, and Stéphane Paul.
New insights in mucosal vaccine development. Vaccine, 30(2):142–154, 2012.
[8] Patrik Lundquist and Per Artursson. Oral absorption of peptides and nanoparticles across
the human intestine: Opportunities, limitations and studies in human tissues. Advanced
Drug Delivery Reviews, 106:256–276, 2016.
[9] Lin Liu, Wen Dong Yao, Yue Feng Rao, Xiao Yang Lu, and Jian Qing Gao. pH-responsive
carriers for oral drug delivery: Challenges and opportunities of current platforms. Drug
Delivery, 24(1):569–581, 2017.
[10] Marie Boegh and Hanne Mørck Nielsen. Mucus as a barrier to drug delivery -
Understanding and mimicking the barrier properties. Basic and Clinical Pharmacology and
Toxicology, 116(3):179–186, 2015.
[11] Marie Boegh, Camilla Foged, Anette Müllertz, and Hanne Mørck Nielsen. Mucosal drug
delivery: Barriers, in vitro models and formulation strategies. Journal of Drug Delivery
Science and Technology, 23(4):383–391, 2013.
50
==PAGE:60==
[12] How Your Gastrointestinal Tract Works, University of Missouri
https://www.muhealth.org/conditions-treatments/surgical/bariatric-surgery/getting-
started/anatomy-and-function-of-the-gi-tract,
13-08-18.
[13] Pierre André Billat, Emilie Roger, Sébastien Faure, and Frédéric Lagarce. Models for drug
absorption from the small intestine: where are we and where are we going? Drug
Discovery Today, 22(5):761–775, 2017.
[14] David Rumsey. Small intestine. Structure and function, pages 126–133, 2005.
[15] Laura M. Ensign, Richard Cone, and Justin Hanes. Oral drug delivery with polymeric
nanoparticles: The gastrointestinal mucus barriers. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews,
64(6):557–570, 2012.
[16] Bridget R. Glaysher and Neil A. Mabbott. Role of the draining lymph node in scrapie
agent transmission from the skin. Immunology Letters, 109(1):64–71, 2007.
[17] David J. Brayden and Alan W. Baird. Apical membrane receptors on intestinal M cells:
Potential targets for vaccine delivery. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews, 56(6):721–726,
2004.
[18] Daniel A. Norris and Patrick J. Sinko. Eﬀect of size, surface charge, and hydrophobicity
on the translocation of polystyrene microspheres through gastrointestinal mucin. Journal
of Applied Polymer Science, 63(11):1481–1492, 1997.
[19] Claus-Michael Lehr, Fred G.J. Poelma, Hans E. Junginger, and Josef J. Tukker. An
estimate of turnover time of intestinal in the rat in situ loop. International Journal of
Pharmaceutics, 70:235–240, 1991.
[20] Christer Atuma, Vicki Strugala, A. Allen, and L. Holm. The adherent gastrointestinal
mucus gel layer: thickness and physical state in vivo. American Journal of
Physiology-Gastrointestinal and Liver Physiology, 280(5):G922–G929, 2001.
[21] Malin E.V. Johansson, Jenny K. Gustafsson, Karolina E. Sjöberg, Joel Petersson, Lena
Holm, Henrik Sjövall, and Gunnar C. Hansson. Bacteria penetrate the inner mucus layer
before inﬂammation in the dextran sulfate colitis model. PLoS ONE, 5(8), 2010.
[22] Ronald W. Ellis. Technologies for the design, discovery, formulation and administration of
vaccines. Vaccine, 19(17-19):2681–2687, 2001.
51
==PAGE:61==
[23] Stanley J. Cryz. Live attenuated vaccines for human use. Current Opinion in
Biotechnology, 3(3):298–302, 1992.
[24] Mike de Veer and ElS MeeuSeN. New Developments in Vaccine Research. Discovery
Medicine, 12(64):195–204, 2011.
[25] Sharan Bobbala and Sarah Hook. Is There an Optimal Formulation and Delivery Strategy
for Subunit Vaccines? Pharmaceutical Research, 33(9):2078–2097, 2016.
[26] Marianne Hansson, Per-Åke Nygren, and Stefan Ståhl. Design and production of
recombinant subunit vaccines. Biotechnology and applied biochemistry, 32:95–107, 2000.
[27] Sivagurunathan Moni Sivakumar, Mohammed M. Safhi, M. Kannadasan, and
Natarajapillai Pillai Sukumaran. Vaccine adjuvants - Current status and prospects on
controlled release adjuvancity. Saudi Pharmaceutical Journal, 19(4):197–206, 2011.
[28] Maria Dayanne de A. Dantas, Humberto de Araújo Tenório, Thiago Inácio B. Lopes, Hugo
Juarez V. Pereira, Anita J. Marsaioli, Isis M. Figueiredo, and Josué Carinhanha Caldas
Santos. Interactions of tetracyclines with ovalbumin, the main allergen protein from egg
white: Spectroscopic and electrophoretic studies. International Journal of Biological
Macromolecules, 102:505–514, 2017.
[29] Zhouyi Xiong and Meihu Ma. Enhanced ovalbumin stability at oil-water interface by
phosphorylation and identiﬁcation of phosphorylation site using MALDI-TOF mass
spectrometry. Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces, 153:253–262, 2017.
[30] Manmohan Singh and Derek T. O’Hagan. Recent advances in veterinary vaccine
adjuvants. International Journal for Parasitology, 33(5):469–478, 2003.
[31] Sarah Hook and Thomas Rades. Immune Stimulating Complexes (ISCOMs) and Quil-A
Containing Particulate Formulations as Vaccine Delivery Systems. Immunomic Discovery
of Adjuvants and Candidate Subunit Vaccines, pages 233–261, 2013.
[32] Patrick H. Demana, Christian Fehske, Karen White, Thomas Rades, and Sarah Hook.
Eﬀect of incorporation of the adjuvant Quil A on structure and immune stimulatory
capacity of liposomes. Immunology and Cell Biology, 82(5):547–554, 2004.
[33] Bengt Rönnberg, Makonnen Fekadu, and Bror Morein. Adjuvant activity of non-toxic
Quillaja saponaria Molina components for use in ISCOM matrix. Vaccine,
13(14):1375–1382, 1995.
52
==PAGE:62==
[34] Dirk C. van Setten, Gerrit van de Werken, Gijsbert Zomer, and Gideon F.A. Kersten.
Glycosyl compositions and structural characteristics of the potential immuno-adjuvant
active saponins in the Quillaja saponaria Molina extract Quil A. Rapid Communications
in Mass Spectrometry, 9(8):660–666, 1995.
[35] Marie Aleth Lacaille-Dubois and Hildebert Wagner. New perspectives for natural
triterpene glycosides as potential adjuvants. Phytomedicine, 37:49–57, 2017.
[36] Gideon Kersten and Daan Crommelin. Liposomes and ISCOMs. Vaccine, 21(9):915–920,
2003.
[37] Joseph G Altin, Christina L van Broekhoven, and Christopher R Parish. Targeting
dendritic cells with antigen-containing liposomes: antitumour immunity. Expert Opinion
on Biological Therapy, 4(11):1735–1747, 2004.
[38] Anna Taddio, Moshe Ipp, Suganthan Thivakaran, Ali Jamal, Chaitya Parikh, Sarah
Smart, Julia Sovran, Derek Stephens, and Joel Katz. Survey of the prevalence of
immunization non-compliance due to needle fears in children and adults. Vaccine,
30(32):4807–4812, 2012.
[39] Shujing Wang, Huiqin Liu, Xinyi Zhang, and Feng Qian. Intranasal and oral vaccination
with protein-based antigens: Advantages, challenges and formulation strategies. Protein
and Cell, 6(7):480–503, 2015.
[40] Camilla Foged, Birger Brodin, Sven Frokjaer, and Anne Sundblad. Particle size and
surface charge aﬀect particle uptake by human dendritic cells in an in vitro model.
International Journal of Pharmaceutics, 298(2):315–322, 2005.
[41] Béatrice Heurtault, Benoît Frisch, and Françoise Pons. Liposomes as delivery systems for
nasal vaccination: strategies and outcomes. Expert opinion on drug delivery, 7(7):829–844,
2010.
[42] Martin F. Bachmann and Gary T. Jennings. Vaccine delivery: A matter of size, geometry,
kinetics and molecular patterns. Nature Reviews Immunology, 10(11):787–796, 2010.
[43] Jamie F S Mann, Eisin Shakir, Katharine C. Carter, Alexander B. Mullen, James
Alexander, and Valerie A. Ferro. Lipid vesicle size of an oral inﬂuenza vaccine delivery
vehicle inﬂuences the Th1/Th2 bias in the immune response and protection against
infection. Vaccine, 27(27):3643–3649, 2009.
53
==PAGE:63==
[44] Samuel K Lai, Elizabeth O’Hanlon, Suzanne Harrold, Stan T Man, Ying-Ying Wang,
Richard Cone, and Justin Hanes. Rapid transport of large polymeric nanoparticles in fresh
undiluted human mucus. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
104(5):1482–1487, 2007.
[45] Marguerite Rinaudo. Chitin and chitosan: Properties and applications. Progress in
Polymer Science, 31(7):603–632, 2006.
[46] Sashadhar Mukherjee, Subhabrata Ray, and Rajesh Thakur. Solid lipid nanoparticles: A
modern formulation approach in drug delivery system. Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, 71(4):349, 2009.
[47] John S . Patton and Martin Carey. Watching Fat Digestion. American Association for the
Advancement of Science Stable, 204:145–148, 2018.
[48] Xavier Mulet, Ben J. Boyd, and Calum J. Drummond. Advances in drug delivery and
medical imaging using colloidal lyotropic liquid crystalline dispersions. Journal of Colloid
and Interface Science, 393(1):1–20, 2013.
[49] Yulin Chen, Ping Ma, and Shuangying Gui. Cubic and hexagonal liquid crystals as drug
delivery systems. BioMed Research International, 2014, 2014.
[50] Madhurilatha Thadanki, Paruchuri Srivalli Kumari, and K Suria Prabha. Overview of
Cubosomes: a Nano Particle. International journal of research in pharmacy and chemistry,
1(3):535–541, 2011.
[51] Di Bei, Jianing Meng, and Bi-Botti C Youan. Engineering nanomedicines for improved
melanoma therapy: progress and promises. Nanomedicine, 5(9):1385–1399, 2010.
[52] Patrick T. Spicer, William B. Small, Matthew L. Lynch, and Janet L. Burns. Dry powder
precursors of cubic liquid crystalline nanoparticles (cubosomes). Journal of Nanoparticle
Research, 4(4):297–311, 2002.
[53] Zahra Karami and Mehrdad Hamidi. Cubosomes: Remarkable drug delivery potential.
Drug Discovery Today, 21(5):789–801, 2016.
[54] Ling Ran Du, Xiao Jing Lu, Hai Tao Guan, Yong Jie Yang, Meng Jie Gu, Zhuo Zhao
Zheng, Tian Shi Lv, Zi Guang Yan, Li Song, Ying Hua Zou, Nai Qi Fu, Xian Rong Qi, and
Tian Yuan Fan. Development and evaluation of liquid embolic agents based on liquid
crystalline material of glyceryl monooleate. International Journal of Pharmaceutics,
471(1):285–296, 2014.
54
==PAGE:64==
[55] Patrick T. Spicer, Kristin L. Hayden, Matthew L. Lynch, Akua Ofori-Boateng, and
Janet L. Burns. Novel process for producing cubic liquid crystalline nanoparticles
(cubosomes). Langmuir, 17(19):5748–5756, 2001.
[56] Manish Diwan, Roop Krishen Khar, and Gursaran Pran Talwar. Tetanus toxoid loaded
’preformed microspheres’ of cross-linked dextran. Vaccine, 19(28):3853–3859, 2001.
[57] Mahmoud Ameri and Yuh Fun Maa. Spray drying of biopharmaceuticals: Stability and
process considerations. Drying Technology, 24(6):763–768, 2006.
[58] Christoﬀer von Halling Laier, Zarmeena Abid, Ingrid Elise Konow Weydahl, Thomas
Rades, Boisen Anja, and Line Hagner Nielsen. Spray drying of cubosomes for oral vaccine
delivery. Lyngby, Technical University of Denmark, page p. 1, 2016.
[59] Tomás Sou, Els N. Meeusen, Michael de Veer, David A V Morton, Lisa M. Kaminskas, and
Michelle P. McIntosh. New developments in dry powder pulmonary vaccine delivery.
Trends in Biotechnology, 29(4):191–198, 2011.
[60] Ben J. Boyd, Yao Da Dong, and Thomas Rades. Nonlamellar liquid crystalline
nanostructured particles: Advances in materials and structure determination. Journal of
Liposome Research, 19(1):12–28, 2009.
[61] Lukas Boge, Karin Hallstensson, Lovisa Ringstad, Jenny Johansson, Therese Andersson,
Mina Davoudi, Per Tomas Larsson, Margit Mahlapuu, Joakim Håkansson, and Martin
Andersson. Cubosomes for topical delivery of the antimicrobial peptide LL-37. European
Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics, 134(November 2018):60–67, 2019.
[62] Patrick D Kinney and David Y H Pui. Inlet Eﬃciency Study for the.
12(February):188–193, 1995.
[63] Yongcheng Chen, E. M. Barber, and Yuanhui Zhang. Sampling eﬃciency of the TSI
aerodynamic particle sizer. Instrumentation Science and Technology, 26(4):363–373, 1998.
[64] Sahir Khurshid, Emmanuel Saridakis, Lata Govada, and Naomi E. Chayen. Porous
nucleating agents for protein crystallization. Nature Protocols, 9(7):1621–1633, 2014.
[65] Jennifer M. Gamboa and Kam W. Leong. In vitro and in vivo models for the study of oral
delivery of nanoparticles. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews, 65(6):800–810, 2013.
[66] Paolo Marizza, Stephan S. Keller, Anette Müllertz, and Anja Boisen. Polymer-ﬁlled
microcontainers for oral delivery loaded using supercritical impregnation. Journal of
Controlled Release, 173(1):1–9, 2014.
55
==PAGE:65==
[67] Line Hagner Nielsen, Ana Melero, Stephan Sylvest Keller, Jette Jacobsen, Teresa
Garrigues, Thomas Rades, Anette Müllertz, and Anja Boisen. Polymeric microcontainers
improve oral bioavailability of furosemide. International Journal of Pharmaceutics,
504(1-2):98–109, 2016.
[68] Jeong Bong Lee, Kyung Hak Choi, and Koangki Yoo. Innovative SU-8 lithography
techniques and their applications. Micromachines, 6(1):1–18, 2015.
[69] Katrine Qvortrup, Kennedy M. Taveras, Ole Thastrup, and Thomas E. Nielsen. Chemical
synthesis on SU-8. Chemical Communications, 47(4):1309–1311, 2011.
[70] Krishnamurthy V. Nemani, Karen L. Moodie, Jeoﬀry B. Brennick, Alison Su, and Barjor
Gimi. In vitro and in vivo evaluation of SU-8 biocompatibility. Materials Science and
Engineering C, 33(7):4453–4459, 2013.
[71] Niranjan Sahu, B. Parija, and Sreeram Panigrahi. Fundamental understanding and
modeling of spin coating process: A review. Indian Journal of Physics, 83(4):493–502,
2009.
[72] Hariharasudhan D. Chirra, Ling Shao, Natalie Ciaccio, Cade B. Fox, Jennifer M. Wade,
Averil Ma, and Tejal A. Desai. Planar Microdevices for Enhanced In Vivo Retention and
Oral Bioavailability of Poorly Permeable Drugs. Advanced Healthcare Materials,
3(10):1648–1654, 2014.
[73] Christoﬀer von Halling Laier, Blake Gibson, Jorge Alberto Moreno, Thomas Rades, Sarah
Hook, Line Hagner Nielsen, and Anja Boisen. Microcontainers for protection of oral
vaccines, in vitro and in vivo evaluation. Journal of Controlled Release, 294:91–101, 2018.
[74] Niklas Sandler, Anni Määttänen, Petri Ihalainen, Leif Kronerg, Axel Meierjohann, Tapini
Viitala, and Jouko Peltonen. Inkjet Printing of Drug Substances and Use of Porous
Substrates-Towards Individualized Dosing. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
100(8):3386–3395, 2011.
[75] Zarmeena Abid, Carsten Gundlach, Onur Durucan, Christoﬀer von Halling Laier,
Line Hagner Nielsen, Anja Boisen, and Stephan Sylvest Keller. Powder embossing method
for selective loading of polymeric microcontainers with drug formulation. Microelectronic
Engineering, 171:20–24, 2017.
56
==PAGE:66==
[76] Sanjukta Bose, Stephan S. Keller, Tommy S. Alstrøm, Anja Boisen, and Kristoﬀer Almdal.
Process optimization of ultrasonic spray coating of polymer ﬁlms. Langmuir,
29(23):6911–6919, 2013.
[77] Line Hagner Nielsen, Johan Nagstrup, Sarah Gordon, Stephan Sylvest Keller, Jesper
Østergaard, Thomas Rades, Anette Müllertz, and Anja Boisen. pH-triggered drug release
from biodegradable microwells for oral drug delivery. Biomedical Microdevices, 17(3):1–12,
2015.
[78] Alpana Kulkarni, Shreya Rumalla, Swati Andhale, Ajit Kolatkar, and Bhanudas Kuchekar.
Taste Masking of Ayurvedic Nutraceutical Formulation by Pan Coating Process.
Pharmacognosy Journal, 7(4):215–220, 2015.
[79] Rohit Mehta, Anuj Chawla, Pooja Sharma, and Pravin Pawar. Formulation and in vitro
evaluation of Eudragit S-100 coated naproxen matrix tablets for colon-targeted drug
delivery system. Journal of Advanced Pharmaceutical Technology & Research, 4(1):31,
2013.
[80] Stephan Sylvest Keller, Filippo Giacomo Bosco, and Anja Boisen. Ferromagnetic shadow
mask for spray coating of polymer patterns. Microelectronic Engineering, 110:427–431,
2013.
[81] Koen Gilissen, Jeroen Stryckers, Pieter Verstappen, Jeroen Drijkoningen, Gaël H L
Heintges, Laurence Lutsen, Jean Manca, Wouter Maes, and Wim Deferme. Ultrasonic
spray coating as deposition technique for the light-emitting layer in polymer LEDs.
Organic Electronics: physics, materials, applications, 20:31–35, 2015.
[82] ExactaCoat. ExactaCoat Ultrasonic Spray system (Sonotek, USA),
https://www.sono-tek.com/product/exactacoat/ 26-12-18.
[83] Abdel Naser Zaid and Aiman Qaddomi. Development and stability evaluation of enteric
coated Diclofenac sodium tablets using AquaPolish E. Pak. J. Pharm. Sci, 25(1):59–64,
2012.
[84] Rabia Bushra, Muhammad Harris Shoaib, Nousheen Aslam, Zafar Alam Mehmood, and
Durriya Hashmat. Enteric coating of ibuprofen tablets (200 mg) using an aqueous
dispersion system. Brazilian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 46(1):99–107, 2010.
[85] Biogrund. AquaPolish E product information. http://biogrund.com/wp-
content/uploads/2018/07/BGRND_ProdInfo-AquaPolishE-10-2017-Screen.pdf.
57
==PAGE:67==
[86] K.E. Carr, P.G. Toner, and K.M. Saleh. Scanning Electron Microscopy. Histopathology,
6:324, 1982.
[87] Chiara Mazzoni, Fabio Tentor, Sophie Andersen Strindberg, Line Hagner Nielsen,
Stephan Sylvest Keller, Tommy Sonne Alstrøm, Carsten Gundlach, Anette Müllertz, Paolo
Marizza, and Anja Boisen. From concept to in vivo testing: Microcontainers for oral drug
delivery. Journal of Controlled Release, 268:343–351, 2017.
[88] Jennifer B Dressman, Gordon L. Amidon, Christos Reppas, and Vinod P. Shah.
Dissolution testing as a prognostic tool for oral drug absorption: immediate release dosage
forms. Pharmaceutical research, 15:11–22, 1998.
[89] Jordan L Cohen, Barbara B Hubert, Lewis J Leeson, Christopher T Rhodes, Joseph R
Robinson, Theodore J Roseman, and Eli Shefter. The Development of USP Dissolution
and Drug Release Standards. Pharm Res, 7(10):983–987, 1990.
[90] Pion. DISS Proﬁler,
https://pion-inc.com.cn/dissolution/microscale-dissolution/diss-proﬁler/ 27-12-18.
[91] Christoﬀer von Halling Laier, Blake Gibson, Marco van de Weert, Ben J. Boyd, Thomas
Rades, Anja Boisen, Sarah Hook, and Line Hagner Nielsen. Spray dried cubosomes with
ovalbumin and Quil-A as a nanoparticulate dry powder vaccine formulation. International
Journal of Pharmaceutics, 550(1-2):35–44, 2018.
[92] Irnayuli Sitepu, Laura Ignatia, Annaliese K. Franz, Diana M. Wong, Sarah Asih Faulinab,
Manki Tsuid, Atit Kantie, and Kyria Boundy-Millsa. An improved high-throughput Nile
red ﬂuorescence assay for estimating intracellular lipids in a variety of yeast species.
Microbial Methods, 91(2):321–328, 2012.
[93] Christian Neuchl and Alfons Mersmann. Fractionation of polydisperse dextran using
ethanol. Chemical Engineering Science, 50(6):951–958, 1995.
[94] Ramya Devi, P. Sandhya, and Vedha Hari. Poloxamer: A Novel Functional Molecule For
Drug Delivery And Gene Therapy. Pharmaceutical Science and Research, 5(8):159–165,
2013.
[95] Christoﬀer von Halling Laier, Tommy Sonne Alstrøm, Mia Travers Bargholz,
Pernille Bjerg Sjøltov, Thomas Rades, Anja Boisen, and Line Hagner Nielsen. Evaluation
of the eﬀects of spray drying parameters for producing cubosome powder precursors.
European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics, pages 1–15, 2018.
58
==PAGE:68==
[96] S. B. Rizwan, D. Assmus, A. Boehnke, T. Hanley, B. J. Boyd, T. Rades, and S. Hook.
Preparation of phytantriol cubosomes by solvent precursor dilution for the delivery of
protein vaccines. European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics, 79(1):15–22,
2011.
[97] Di Bei, Tao Zhang, James B. Murowchick, and Bi-Botti C. Youan. Formulation of
Dacarbazine-loaded Cubosomes. Part III. Physicochemical Characterization. AAPS
PharmSciTech, 11(3):1243–1249, 2010.
[98] Stephen T. Hyde. Identiﬁcation of lyotropic liquid crystal mesophases. John Wiley & Sons,
New York, 1th edition, 2001.
[99] Marko Rogošić, Helena Jasna Mencer, and Zoran Gomzi. Polydispersity index and
molecular weight distributions of polymers. European Polymer Journal, 32(11):1337–1344,
1996.
[100] Fabienne Danhier, Eduardo Ansorena, Joana M. Silva, Régis Coco, Aude Le Breton, and
Véronique Préat. PLGA-based nanoparticles: An overview of biomedical applications.
Journal of Controlled Release, 161:505–522, 2012.
[101] Phillip Greenspan and Stanley D Fowler. Spectroﬂuorometric studies of the lipid probe,
Nile Red. Journal of Lipid Research, 26(7):781–789, 1985.
[102] Rasmus Münter, Kasper Kristensen, Dennis Pedersbæk, Jannik Bruun Larsen, Jens B.
Simonsen, and Thomas Andresen. Dissociation of Fluorescently Labeled Lipids from
Liposomes in Biological Environments Challenges the Interpretation of Uptake Studies.
Nanoscale, 10:22720–22724, 2018.
[103] Zaki Ahmad. Coatings, acrylic polymers. Principles of Corrosion Engineering and
Corrosion Control, pages 382–437, 2006.
[104] Jean-Francois Jeannin. Lipid A in Cancer Therapy, volume 667. Springer
Science+Business Media, 7th edition, 2009.
[105] Shin Sasaki, Kenji Hamajima, Jun Fukushima, Atsushi Ihata, Norihisa Ishii, Itsou Gorai,
Fumiki Hirahara, Hiroshi Mohri, and Kenji Okuda. Comparison of intranasal and
intramuscular immunization against human immunodeﬁciency virus type 1 with a
DNA-monophosphoryl lipid A adjuvant vaccine. Infection and Immunity, 66(2):823–826,
1998.
59
==PAGE:69==
[106] Signe Tandrup Schmidt, Camilla Foged, Karen Smith Korsholm, Thomas Rades, and
Dennis Christensen. Liposome-based adjuvants for subunit vaccines: Formulation
strategies for subunit antigens and immunostimulators. Pharmaceutics, 8(1):1–22, 2016.
60
