==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering
Implementation and Evaluation of
Estimation of Distribution Algorithms
on Combinatorial Problems
Dominik Kiefer (s172184)
Supervisor: Carsten Witt, Associate Professor
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Estimation of distribution algorithms (EDAs) are population-based randomized search
heuristics used in optimization. They are a variant of evolutionary algorithms (EAs)
that iteratively evolve their population of individuals, while EDAs develop iteratively
their probabilistic model used for sampling a population of promising solutions.
Recent advances in the development of theoretical tools for the runtime analysis
on simple combinatorial problems now allow us to analyze the runtime behaviour of
EDAs in a broader context. In this thesis we present a framework that allows the
empirical runtime analysis and comparison of a variety of algorithms. We identify 14
different parameters in EDAs with dependencies, which led us to develop an algorith-
mic framework to allow sensible benchmarking. The algorithmic framework is novel
as it allows us to isolate and analyze the influence of each algorithmic component on
the empirical runtime.
The complexity of modeled dependencies in the probabilistic model presents us
with a class of univariate EDAs, where one assumes independence of problem variables,
and multivariate EDAs, where dependencies are modeled with additional problem
variables. We implement the univariate EDAs UMDA and cGA, multivariate MIMIC
and BOA, fitted in our algorithmic framework, and implement as reference algorithms
the (1+1)EA and a randomized hill climber. Implemented fitness functions are the
common fitness functions OneMax, LeadingOnes, Jump and FourPeaks, and
the boolean satisfiability problem as a fitness function with Max-HornSAT and
Max-3SAT. Our results include empirical runtime results on varying search space
dimension n, population size λ and selection size µ.
We present empirical results on the multimodal behaviour of UMDA, cGA and
MIMIC on OneMax and cGA and MIMIC on Jump. The two phase transitions
in empirical runtime have been proven and shown for UMDA on OneMax, have
been theoretically developed for cGA on OneMax and Jump and are novel empirical
results for MIMIC, although further analysis suggests a similar behaviour to UMDA
on OneMax.
On the benefit of multivariate EDAs over univariate EDAs we present a theoretical
runtime analysis with model update costs on OneMax to show that second-order
statistics applied in the probabilistic model update step can not be neglected. We
further present empirical and theoretical evidence, that MIMIC on LeadingOnes
has the same expected runtime as UMDA on LeadingOnes with similar parameters.
We conclude that selection is the deciding factor, while the choice of the probabilistic
==PAGE:4==
ii
Summary
model does not affect the empirical expected runtime.
Throughout various experiments and especially in a runtime comparison on Max-
3SAT we note that BOA as a multivariate EDA performs significantly better than
the univariate EDAs for non-optimal parameters. We suspect that this is due to a
better diversity preservation for increasing maximal in-degree k in BOA.
The analysis component of our framework includes novel visualizations: a heatmap
for frequency analysis that supports the analysis on diversity preservation and a
heatmap for fitness distance visualization that suggests the fitness function Jump as
building block for Max-3SAT instances.
We conclude with notes on future work regarding the influence of the probabilistic
model on runtime and use cases where the benefit of EDAs lies in all of its various
output.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute at the Institute for Applied Mathemat-
ics and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of
the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science degree in Computer Science and
Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, December 28, 2018
Dominik Kiefer (s172184)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Carsten Witt, Associate Professor at the Institute for Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU),
for his continuous support throughout this thesis.
He provided first the research
topic and was later open for discussions regarding the implementation, development
of hypothesis and presentation of results. He was additionally helpful with hints on
recent literature from a conference one week prior to the start of this thesis, that I
would have missed otherwise.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
5
2.1
Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Estimation of Distribution Algorithms (EDAs)
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Fitness Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Tools for Analysis and Comparison of EDAs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Framework Design and Implementation
19
3.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Framework Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Framework Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Benchmark Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5
Analysis Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Overview of Algorithmic Components
27
4.1
List of Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Parameter Dependencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Isolation of Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Parameter Reduction
31
5.1
Fixed Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Varying Search Space Dimension - A First Comparison . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Varying Population Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.4
Multimodal Behaviour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.5
Varying Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6
Benefit of Multivariate EDAs
49
6.1
Second-Order Statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2
MIMIC vs UMDA - Analysis of a Bivariate Probabilistic Model . . . .
51
6.3
A Comparison on A Non-Deceptive Fitness Function . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.4
A Comparison on Max-3SAT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7
Conclusion
65
A Framework Implementation
67
B Varying Search Space Dimension
69
C Varying Population Size
73
D Discussion of MIMIC
75
D.1 Selection and Update . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
D.2 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
D.3 Diversity Preservation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
E MAX-3SAT
81
Bibliography
85
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
There are two distinct ways of searching for an optimal solution to a problem: com-
plete search or search using heuristics. While complete search considers the whole
search space in the worst case and systematically goes through the solutions, heuris-
tics focus on finding a solution of certain quality within a reasonable amount of time.
Heuristics that find the same solution under same settings are called deterministic
strategies and can get stuck in local optima. Stochastic strategies on the other hand
use randomness to ensure that an optimal solution can eventually be found. As prob-
lems might be NP-hard or complete search simply not feasible, the field of heuristics
within optimization continues to be of great interest.
Estimation of distribution algorithms (EDAs) are stochastic population-based
heuristics. They iteratively sample individuals according to a probabilistic model,
evaluate the individuals according to a fitness function, followed by an update of the
probabilistic model according to a selection of individuals. The difference between
EDAs and evolutionary algorithms (EAs) is the general approach of reaching an in-
dividual with highest possible fitness value: while EAs develop their population by
continuous cross-over or mutation, EDAs generally discard their population every
generation and develop their probabilistic model such that sampling of an individual
with highest fitness becomes more likely.
In this thesis we present an analysis of EDAs on combinatorial problems with focus
on the influence of algorithmic components on runtime behaviour and a discussion
about the benefit of multivariate EDAs over univariate EDAs. For such analysis we
define an algorithmic framework that allows the comparison of various EDAs and
reference algorithms, design a framework for benchmarking and present the results
of experiments executed within the implemented framework.
1.1
Motivation
The motivation to study EDAs is manifold as research is linked to both theoretical
and practical advances.
The runtime behaviour of EDAs on various fitness functions is empirically known,
but comes often without theoretically proven bounds. Recent advances with the de-
velopment of analytic tools, ref. [KW19], facilitate the development. Further analysis
can lead to insights into the interaction of algorithmic components and their influence
on runtime behaviour, such as our example study regarding the influence of selection
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
over the choice of a probabilistic model in Chapter 6.2.4, or insights into the structure
of fitness functions, ref. [Wat10; PT12]. Theoretical advances in the field of EDAs,
evolutionary algorithms (EAs) or generally randomized search heuristics by noting,
for example, building blocks in fitness function structures or multimodal behaviour
in runtime analysis will facilitate research and comparison across disciplines.
On the practical side, EDAs might not only be applied as a randomized search
heuristic to sample eventually individuals with a global optimal fitness value, but
additionally to provide insight with its internally developed probabilistic model. Use
cases are various and can be found in bioinformatics [Arm+08], logistics [Gra08],
machine learning [Pro15b] or more specifically graph partitioning [SO99] and inexact
graph matching [Ben+02].
1.2
Overview
In this chapter, we introduce and motivate the research done and present the structure
of our results in the following paragraph:
In Chapter 2 we introduce the notation, algorithms and tools used throughout the
thesis. We introduce the class of evolutionary algorithms (EAs) with our reference
algorithms used in benchmarking, develop our algorithmic framework when introduc-
ing estimation of distribution algorithms (EDAs), present all relevant fitness functions
and finally describe the tools and methods used for the analysis and comparison of
runtime results.
Chapter 3 presents the design and implementation of our framework that allows
hypothesis testing and evaluation regarding the influence of algorithmic components
on and comparison of runtime results. We propose a framework that further allows
benchmarking on a variety of parameters. By referring to related work, we motivate
our choice of developing new and specifically the presented framework with the two
components for running simulations and analyzing the results. Finally we remark
on specifics for the implementation and setup of benchmarking and analysis. The
framework is set up such that it further allows large-scale simulations in clusters, and
results are stored in a way to facilitate the subsequent analysis step.
The first analysis of the algorithmic components in Chapter 4 presents us with
a list of 14 identified parameters. We further discuss parameter dependencies and
isolation of algorithmic components for sensible benchmarking and analysis of results.
In Chapter 5 we present our first comparison of empirical runtime results after
applying parameter reduction. Our reduced set of parameters for benchmarking con-
sists of the search space dimension n, population size λ and selection size µ. We first
discuss our choice of chosen parameters for benchmarking, and further present for
each experiment our hypothesis regarding expected results followed by the empirical
runtime results and a subsequent discussion thereof. In our experiments we encounter
multimodal behaviour for various EDAs on various fitness functions which we further
analyze in Chapter 5.4.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Overview
3
Following in Chapter 6, we discuss the benefit of multivariate EDAs over univariate
EDAs. We develop a cost model to show the influence of second-order statistics in
multivariate EDAs on expected runtime. We compare in detail the runtime influence
of a bivariate probabilistic model with a univariate one on fitness function OneMax,
both theoretically and empirically. We further compare a variety of algorithms on a
non-deceptive fitness function and conclude with a comparison on Max-3SAT.
In Chapter 7 we conclude our results and remark on future work.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Background
This chapter introduces notation and definitions used throughout the thesis.
In the context of population-based heuristics, a string or solution x is called an
individual. Individuals are defined as elements of a search space S, x ∈S, and are
assigned a value (e.g. natural numbers) by a fitness function f, f : S →N.
We limit our definition of an individual to a bit string of fixed length n, x ∈S = {0, 1}n,
where xi, i ∈{1, . . . , n}, denotes the bit at position i. While a fixed length restriction
is necessary for applied fitness functions, a binary alphabet is not strictly necessary,
but simplifies analysis and is typically used in the context of combinatorial problems.
The set of currently existing individuals is called a population, with a generation
being an instance of a population.
2.1
Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs)
Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) are population-based heuristics: each iteration of the
search for a global optimum creates new individuals by considering a set of previously
created individuals.
2.1.1
Algorithm
The general structure of EAs is as follows. First, the population is initialized by sam-
pling individuals uniformly at random. Second, each individual is evaluated through
a fitness function.
Third, the following steps are executed in a loop until a stop
criterion is reached: individuals are selected, that fulfill certain criteria - commonly
individuals with the best fitness. Those individuals, also called parents, make up the
basis for the creation of new individuals by recombining individuals and applying
mutation operations. As a last step in the loop, the fitness of the new individuals is
evaluated by same fitness function and a replacement strategy chooses individuals to
build up the population for next iteration.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Background
Algorithm 1 General structure of EAs, as described by [DJW02]
1: Initialize population of λ individuals uniformly at random
2: Evaluate fitness of each individual
3: while stop criterion not reached do
4:
Select individuals
5:
Create individuals by recombination and mutation
6:
Evaluate fitness of new individuals and replace some in population
7: end while
Stop Criterion
A stop criterion for the algorithm is necessary to prevent the
algorithm from possibly running indefinitely. Intuitively, a stop criterion includes
both events: satisfying a goal and reaching a resource limit. Commonly, this includes
a selection of following criteria:
1. Sampling of a global optimum, an individual with highest possible fitness
2. Number of fitness function evaluations reaching a limit
3. Number of loop-executions reaching a limit
4. Time limit reached
5. No progress, i.a.
the number of fitness function iterations reaching a limit
without having evaluated an individual with higher fitness
Our benchmarks are executed using the first two criteria, as further described in
Chapter 3.3.
The following two sections describe one evolutionary and one local search algo-
rithm with notes on their choice additionally in Chapter 3.3.2.
2.1.2
(1+1)EA
The most simple EA works on a population of two individuals x and y, where x
serves as the parent and base for mutation. In the following algorithm, f(·) denotes
the fitness function where a maximum value presents a global maximum.
Algorithm 2 (1+1)EA, as described by [DJW02]
1: Initialize individual x ∈{0, 1}n uniformly at random
2: while stop criterion not reached do
3:
y := x
4:
Flip each bit of y independently with probability
1
m
5:
Replace x by y ⇔f(y) ≥f(x)
6: end while
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Estimation of Distribution Algorithms (EDAs)
7
This algorithm is a well-known evolutionary algorithm with existing variations
in the selection procedure, e.g.
(µ, λ)-selection, where the µ best individuals are
selected from λ sampled individuals, or an elitist (µ + λ)-selection. Ref. to [BS93] for
an overview of evolutionary algorithms.
2.1.3
Randomized Local Search (RLS)
Randomized Local Search (RLS) is another algorithm with the same structure as the
(1+1)EA but a different mutation operator: flipping bit i, i ∈{1, . . . , n}.
This mutation operator restricts the algorithm to local optima with a neighbour-
hood of Hamming distance 1, which is not very useful on various tested combinatorial
problems where progress depends on larger bit flips at once. We will therefore con-
sider the RLS with a larger neighbourhood of Hamming distance 2 (especially useful
for MST-instances, as described by [NW07]).
Algorithm 3 RLS with a neighbourhood of Hamming-distance 2 [NW07]
1: Initialize individual x ∈{0, 1}n uniformly at random
2: while stop criterion not reached do
3:
y := x, b ∈{0, 1} randomly
4:
if !b then
5:
i ∈{0, 1} uniformly at random, flip ith bit of y
6:
else
7:
(i, j) ∈{(k, l) | 1 ≤k < l ≤m} randomly, flip ith and jth bit of y
8:
end if
9:
Replace x by y ⇔f(y) ≥f(x)
10: end while
2.2
Estimation of Distribution Algorithms (EDAs)
Estimation of Distribution Algorithms (EDAs) are a subclass of EAs, also called
probabilistic model-building genetic algorithms (PMBGAs). They iteratively update
a probabilistic model that is used to sample individuals while commonly discarding
the whole population after each model update, in contrast to introduced evolutionary
algorithms.
The goal of reaching a global optimum in EDAs is achieved by iterative model
updating and sampling, in comparison to applying operators like cross-over and mu-
tation on existing individuals in EAs. The general structure of EDAs is therefore
closely related to EAs, as can be seen in the following Algorithm:
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Background
Algorithm 4 General structure of EDAs
1: Initialize model uniformly at random
2: repeat
3:
Sample λ individuals with probabilistic model
4:
Evaluate fitness of each individual
5:
Select µ individuals
6:
Update probabilistic model
7: until stop criterion reached
2.2.1
Probability Distribution
Every bit can be modelled by a random variable Xi, with xi denoting bit i of x
and X denoting the vector of random variables.
EDAs can thus be classified by
the complexity of their probabilistic model, i.a. by modelling the dependencies of
the random variables. Fig. 2.1 presents a visualization of the different probabilistic
model classes used by each EDA.
2.2.2
Univariate EDAs
In the most simple case, univariate EDAs assume independence of all bits. The joint
probability distribution over the set of n events then becomes:
p(X) = p(x1) · . . . · p(xn).
(2.1)
n-Bernoulli-λ-EDA
The n-Bernoulli-λ-EDA is a framework introduced by [FKK16],
that generalizes a class of already existing univariate EDAs, including all later in-
troduced univariate EDAs. It is a specialization of Algorithm 4 that discards the
population D in the beginning of each iteration t and defines the probabilistic model
or frequencies p for next generation t + 1 through function ψ. The parameters of the
update function are the current frequencies p(t), the population and the fitness values
of each individual.
The framework, presented as Algorithm 5, will be the reference for all introduced
univariate EDAs.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Estimation of Distribution Algorithms (EDAs)
9
Figure 2.1: Examples of classes of dependency graphs: a) assumption of pairwise
independence used by UMDA, b) pairwise dependence as used by MIMIC, c) pairwise
dependence as used by BMDA, d) pairwise dependence with maximal in-degree k as
used by BOA (here k = 3).
Algorithm 5 n-Bernoulli-λ-EDA by [FKK16]
1: t ←0
2: for i ∈{1, . . . , n} do
3:
p(t)
i
←1
2
4: end for
5: repeat
6:
D ←∅
7:
for j ∈{1, . . . , λ} do
8:
x ←individual sampled with respect to p(t)
9:
D ←D ∪{x}
10:
end for
11:
p(t+1) ←ψ
(
p(t), (x, f(x))x∈D
)
12:
t ←t + 1
13: until optimum in D
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Background
UMDA
The Univariate Marginal Distribution Algorithm (UMDA) is one exam-
ple of an univariate EDA, where all bits are considered independent and pi(xi) is
estimated by the marginal frequency of event xi over a selected set of individuals.
The following algorithm, originally formulated by [MP96], is an implementation
of Algorithm 4 (and generalized by Algorithm 5) with p(t) denoting the marginal fre-
quencies at time t and x(k) denoting the kth individual ordered by decreasing fitness.
As a result, p(t+1) becomes the marginal frequency vector for µ individuals of highest
fitness.
Algorithm 6 UMDA, presentation by [KW19]
1: …
▷Initialization as in Algorithm 5
5: repeat
6:
D ←∅
7:
for j ∈{1, . . . , λ} do
8:
x ←individual sampled with respect to p(t)
9:
D ←D ∪{x}
10:
end for
11:
for i ∈{1, . . . , n} do
12:
p(t+1)
i
←1
µ
∑µ
k=1 x(k)
i
13:
end for
14:
t ←t + 1
15: until stop criterion not reached
cGA
The compact Genetic Algorithm (cGA) [HLG99] uses a different approach:
each iteration it samples two (also possible: λ) individuals, and adjusts the frequency
of each bit by
1
K in case the bits of the two best solutions x(1), x(2) differ. K can also
be referred to by population size [KW19] or learning rate.
The only difference between Algorithm 6 and cGA is line 12 in the loop that
updates the marginal probabilities:
p(t+1)
i
←max
{
0, min
{
1, p(t)
i
+ 1
K
(
x(1) −x(2))}}
(2.2)
In Section 2.4.2 we motivate the application of margins, such that probabilities
within [ 1
n, 1 −1
n] are used. The marginal probabilities with bounds then become:
p(t+1)
i
←max
{ 1
n, min
{
1 −1
n, p(t)
i
+ 1
K
(
x(1) −x(2))}}
(2.3)
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Estimation of Distribution Algorithms (EDAs)
11
2.2.3
Bivariate EDAs
Bivariate EDAs assume an acyclic pair-wise dependence of random variables in X.
The joint probability distribution over the set of n events then becomes the prod-
uct of conditionally dependent or conditionally independent probabilities. At least
one probability function pi must be conditionally independent of any other random
variable, such that no cyclic dependence occurs.
MIMIC
Mutual Information Maximization Input Clustering (MIMIC) is a bivariate
EDA, that comes with two notable ideas by [DIV97]:
1. A heuristic for choosing probability distribution and
2. A description of an alternative to Algorithm 4.
We introduce both ideas in the following paragraphs.
Minimizing Relative Entropy
MIMIC uses the following joint probability dis-
tribution, with ΠXi denoting the set of parents of random variable Xi, i ∈{1, . . . , n}.
The set of parents here consists of exactly one element and only occurs once.
p(X) = p(X1|ΠX1)p(X2|ΠX2) . . . p(Xn−1|ΠXn−1)p(Xn)
(2.4)
To compare ˆp(X) (the probability of the random variables with probability distri-
bution considering the optimal but unknown set parents ΠXi) with p(X) (using the
probability distribution considering parents Π) applies MIMIC the Kullback-Leibler
divergence [DIV97], also called relative entropy.
The Kullback-Leibler divergence for discrete probability distributions, with nota-
tion from [MM03], is:
DKL(p ∥ˆp) = −
∑
X
p log
( ˆp
p
)
(2.5)
The authors [DIV97] propose a heuristic to find a ˆp that minimizes the divergence,
as there are n! possible permutations of π = [ΠX1, . . . , ΠXn−1]. The algorithm runs in
O(n2) where entropy calculations are considered O(1). To the best of our knowledge
comes the proposed greedy heuristic without qualitative guarantees.
Ref. Chapter 4 in [DIV97] for the heuristic that determines π and how p(X) is
used for sampling.
Algorithm
The authors [DIV97] propose an algorithm to iteratively develop a
model that becomes increasingly likely to sample a global optimum x of maximal
fitness f(x) or minimal cost C(x). We believe that a sample and a point denote an
individual (it is unclear if an update ”from a sample” is meant literally and in an
unknown way or from individuals of lower cost than θi).
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Background
Algorithm 7 MIMIC as described by [DIV97]
1: t ←0
2: sample population uniformly at random
3: θt ←median fitness
4: while stop criterion not reached do
5:
update parameters of pθt(x) from a sample
6:
generate more samples from pθt(x)
7:
θt+1 ←nth percentile of data (population)
8:
keep points of lower cost than θt+1
9:
t ←t + 1
10: end while
Interpretation of MIMIC
Algorithm 7 leaves multiple parameters open for
interpretation, i.a. the words or methods update parameters, more samples and lower
cost are ambiguous, undefined or open for interpretation.
Chapter 3.3.2 elaborates on the implementation choice, such that Algorithm 4
becomes the common structure of all implemented algorithms. The general choice
of parameter reduction in Chapter 4 lists all parameters and motivates a parameter
reduction further. Therefore refer all following chapters with MIMIC to an algorithm
combining UMDA with the bivariate relative-entropy minimizing model (first idea)
used for sampling.
In Appendix D we discuss further the difficulties encountered with MIMIC as
presented in [DIV97].
BMDA
The Bivariate Marginal Distribution Algorithm (BMDA) [PGS01] is an-
other bivariate EDA that models pairwise dependencies. The constructed graph con-
sists of one or multiple trees, as shown in comparison in Fig. 2.1. The most important
dependencies are selected by using Pearson’s chi-square test (χ2). Ref. [PM99a] for
the algorithm definition and an initial comparison with EAs and UMDA.
BMDA is part of the analysis of algorithmic components in later chapters, al-
though without practical comparison, as explained in Chapter 3.3.2.
2.2.4
Multivariate EDAs
The dependency graph of random variables in multivariate EDAs is similar to the one
of bivariate EDAs with less restrictions: a random variable can be conditionally de-
pendent on multiple other random variables. The dependency graph remains acyclic.
The joint probability distribution therefore becomes:
p(X) = p(X1|ΠX1)p(X2|ΠX2) . . . p(Xn|ΠXn)
(2.6)
At least one set of parents ΠXi must be the empty set.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Estimation of Distribution Algorithms (EDAs)
13
BOA
The Bayesian Optimization Algorithm (BOA) [PGC99] defines its dependency
graph through an acyclic Bayesian network with the joint probability distribution of a
multivariate EDA. It is a multivariate EDA as the maximum number of the parental
random variables k, k :=
max
1≤i≤n |ΠXi| is variable, k ≥0, k ∈N.
Equivalently, k
denotes the maximum in-degree for each node (random variable) in the dependency
graph.
The construction of the dependency graph applies the Bayesian Dirichlet
metric.
Besides using a different model, the general structure of BOA is defined
exactly as for BMDA (ref. [PM99a]).
Unless noted otherwise, the following chapters refer with BOA to an algorithm
combining the structure of UMDA with a multivariate dependency graph used for
sampling.
The dependency graph is constructed according to a greedy algorithm
using the K2 score (BD metric simplified) as defined in the following paragraph.
Bayesian Dirichlet metric
The Bayesian Dirichlet metric (BD metric) p(D, B|ξ)
evaluates how well a given graph B fits to given data D and background information
or prior information ξ.
The graph with highest BD metric value is inherently unknown. The problem of
finding the graph with highest value, depending on chosen k, is either polynomial
(k = 1) or NP-complete (k > 1), also when applying different metrics [HGC95]. As
a result, a greedy algorithm is used: starting with an empty graph, the edge that
maximizes the BD value is added iteratively, considering allowed graph structures.
In the context of this thesis, ξ is not available and all graphs are considered
equally likely in the model update step, p(B|ξ) = 1. The BD metric without using
prior information is also called K2-score [CH92]. In case of individuals of a binary
alphabet and no prior information, the BD metric can be simplified as follows.
p(D, B|ξ) = p(B|ξ)
n
∏
i=1
∏
πi
Γ(m′(πi))
Γ(m′(πi)) + m(πi))
∏
xi
Γ(m′(xi, πi)) + m(xi, πi))
m′(xi, πi)
(2.7)
K2 =
n
∏
i=1
∏
πi
Γ(2)
Γ(2 + m(πi))
∏
xi
Γ(1 + m(xi, πi))
(2.8)
Γ denotes the gamma function, Πi the set of parents of Xi, πi an element of Πi
m(πi) the number of occurrences of πi in D and m(xi, πi) the number of occurrences
of πi while Xi = xi.
K2 Score
Besides reducing complexity, the value of the K2 score in comparison
to the general BD metric was also examined scientifically: ref. [BK01] for an empirical
evaluation that supports the K2 score usage.
Further References
The application of the BD metric assumes a Dirichlet
distribution on its parameters.
Ref.
[CH92] for detailed explanations to all four
assumptions when using this metric.
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Background
Ref. [PGS01] for a detailed explanation of the algorithm, ref. [CJ10] for efficiency
related properties of the BD score and ref. [Scu18] for an analysis of BD score varia-
tions and consequences of the Dirichlet assumption. Ref. [HGC95] for an introduction
of the BDe metric, a likelihood-equivalent specialization of the BD metric without
the Dirichlet distribution assumption.
2.3
Fitness Functions
A fitness function f associates each element in the search space (bit string) with a
value, here: f : {0, 1}n →N.
2.3.1
Common Fitness Functions
To facilitate theoretical analysis and benchmarking, a variety of fitness functions have
been established. The following functions are a selection of commonly used pseudo-
boolean functions for different classes of problem difficulty.
OneMax(x) :=
n
∑
i=1
xi
(2.9)
OneMax [Muh92] associates an individual with the number of 1-bits.
Its global
optimum is the bit string consisting of ones only.
LeadingOnes(x) :=
n
∑
i=1
i∏
j=1
xj
(2.10)
LeadingOnes [Rud97] associates a bit string with the number of leading consecutive
1-bits, starting from the left. It can therefore be used to analyze how EDAs handle
dependencies between bits. The global optimum is the same as for OneMax.
Jumpm(x) :=
{
m + OneMax(x)
(OneMax (x) ≤n −m) ∨(OneMax (x) = n)
n −OneMax(x)
otherwise
(2.11)
Jump [DJW02] is a fitness function similar to OneMax but with gap size m: between
the global optimum (all ones) and n−m ones is Jump defined such that all bit strings
in between have a decreasing fitness.
This behaviour is also called deceptive and
visualized in Fig. 2.2. A Jump-instance with bigger gap size is intuitively thought to
be harder to solve.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Fitness Functions
15
Figure 2.2: Fitness over the number of ones for the fitness function Jump with gap
size m = 5 and search space dimension n = 20. The individual with the bit string of
1s denotes the global optimum with highest fitness. Visualization similar to [Doe+17]
Fig. 1.
Trap(x) := OneMax(x) + (n + 1)
n
∏
i=1
(xi −1)
(2.12)
Trap [DJW02] is a defined as OneMax but has its global maximum at the zero bit
string. It can alternatively be defined as Jumpn−1.
FourPeaks(x) := max [tail(0, x), head(1, x)] + R(x, T)
(2.13)
tail(b, x) = number of trailing bs in x
(2.14)
head(b, x) = number of leading bs in x
(2.15)
R(x, T) =
{
n
(tail (0, x) > T ∧(head(1, x) > T)
0
otherwise
(2.16)
FourPeaks [BC95] is an example of a fitness functions with multiple peaks or global
optima. It has two global optima at T + 1 leading ones and trailing zeros with either
all zeros or all ones in between. The other two local optima exist for all ones and
all zeros where the reward R becomes zero. Parameterizable with T is the distance
between the local and global optima.
A function like FourPeaks or SixPeaks [DIV97] can be used to analyze the vari-
ance kept in a population where global optima exist with a high Hamming-distance.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Background
0-1-bias
All introduced common fitness functions can be generalized to 0-1 unbiased
global optima. OneMax, for example, can be seen as a special case of a Hamming
distance minimization problem, where the global optimum a is defined as a string of
1s. It is therefore, that all EDAs assume no bias and the runtime for OneMax or
its general version becomes the same. Ref. [KW19] for more on generalized common
fitness functions.
2.3.2
Classification
For a better understanding of different fitness functions, one can classify them accord-
ing to their difficulty of finding a global optimum. They can be classified in various
ways:
1. Modality: unimodal functions have one peak, such as OneMax and Leadin-
gOnes, and are solvable by hill climbers. Multimodal functions comprise all
other functions with two peaks, also called bimodal functions, or more. For
multimodal functions, reaching the global optimum usually requires another
approach than hill climbing, as there is the possibility to get stuck in a local
optimum.
2. Deceptiveness: a deceptive function leads a hill climber to local optima with
the risk of getting stuck without reaching a global optimum, i.a.
deceptive
functions are multimodal functions with a high Hamming distance between a
local maximum and a global maximum.
3. The number of optimal solutions: it seems intuitively easier to find a global
optimum if there are many [Wat10].
4. Fitness-distance correlation (FDC) r: the correlation between a solution fitness
and a global optimum is another classifier for problem difficulty. As a distance
measure, the Hamming-distance between two bit strings can be used, where two
opposite extremes of correlation results are OneMax and Trap [JF95].
5. Phase transition: the shift between problem difficulties with varying parameters
[HHW96]. A well-known phenomena is the phase transition found in random
3-SAT clauses where the critical value of the clause-to-variable ratio exhibits an
easy-hard-easy pattern [CKT91].
Ref. [Wat10] for an Introduction to Fitness Landscape Analysis and Cost Models
for Local Search and more on static cost models.
Ref. [JF95] for a definition of r and the FDC evaluation of various fitness functions
using the Hamming distance.
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Tools for Analysis and Comparison of EDAs
17
2.3.3
Combinatorial Problems
While the class of common fitness functions, ref. Section 2.3.1, is essential for initial
theoretical work and comparison of runtime, common real-world problems can be
found as combinatorial problems, including NP-complete problems. Deceptive and
multimodal problems, possibly with an unknown number of solutions, they offer a
variety of problem instances with practical applications.
Boolean Satisfiability Problem
Max-3SAT is a generalization of the NP-complete
Boolean satisfiability problem (SAT) [Kar72] and a variant of Max-SAT where the
problem is to determine the maximum number of satisfiable clauses. The problem
instance is given in conjunctive normal form (CNF) where n denotes the number of
variables and m the number of clauses. We restrict ourselves here to satisfiable 3SAT
problem instances, such that the maximum number of satisfiable clauses is known to
be exactly m, although the number of different solutions might be unknown.
With Max-3SAT we refer to a fitness function that returns the number of satisfied
clauses for a given satisfiable 3SAT instance.
The bit string represents the truth
assignment of the vector of n variables.
HornSAT refers to the satisfiability problem for a given set of Horn clauses in
CNF, i.a. clauses with at most one positive literal. With Max-HornSAT we refer
to a fitness function that returns the number of satisfied clauses for a given satisfiable
HornSAT instance.
While HornSAT is solvable in linear time with the help of unit propagation by
regular SAT-solvers, we consider this fitness function of potential interest as there
has not been any research of this kind on Max-3SAT, and Max-HornSAT offers
similar but easier to solve problem instances.
2.4
Tools for Analysis and Comparison of EDAs
In this section we provide the definition and tools for analyzing and comparing EDAs.
2.4.1
Runtime Analysis
With Algorithm 4 we provide a general structure of EDAs and describe later in
Chapter 3.3 how we implement all algorithms in a way that we can compare results.
This black-box approach is essential for a comparison, and the analysis is commonly
done on either runtime or convergence results [KW19].
Convergence analysis refers to the convergence of the probabilistic model in EDAs,
is historically older [KW19] and was, for example, used in [DIV97; PGC99; Loz00].
Runtime refers to the number of fitness function evaluations until a global optimum
is sampled for the first time. Ref. [KW19] for an historical analysis on this topic.
Runtime results according to this definition are not related to the physical time a
simulation requires.
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Background
2.4.2
Theoretical Tools for Analysis
With the foundation of EDAs, also the theoretical tools for their analysis developed.
By now, the theoretical foundation allows runtime and convergence proofs for EAs and
(mostly univariate) EDAs and is based on probability theory and statistics. In this
section we introduce the tools used, but refer to literature for a detailed background.
Fixed Frequencies
If frequencies, the vector of marginal distributions in the prob-
abilistic model of each EDA, are allowed to become fixed at 0 or 1, then they can
not be changed by any next update step. This behaviour can make it impossible
for certain algorithms to get out of local optima. A common guard against fixed
frequencies is the introduction of margins or bounds for the frequencies [m, 1 −m]
with m ∈(0, 1
2] and commonly m =
1
n [KW19]. UMDA requires margins even for
unimodal problems [Che+10].
Unless stated otherwise, all algorithms and simulations use frequencies [ 1
n, 1 −1
n].
Progress
The class of common fitness functions, ref. Section 2.3.1, facilitates the
analysis of the development of the probabilistic model generation-wise. In Leadin-
gOnes, for example, the number of leading consecutive ones determines the fitness.
From initially sampling uniformly at random, selecting the individuals with the most
leading ones and developing a probabilistic model on that sample, the next generation
is is expected to be sampling individuals with more leading ones. Progress can here
be seen as the expected advance in the likelihood of sampling individuals with more
leading ones than in previous generation.
Progress can be influenced by multiple factors such as the population size, learning
rate or, most notably for LeadingOnes, the selection ratio.
Example: Progress in LeadingOnes
When using margins as described above,
the probability p of sampling r leading ones is p ≤
(
1 −1
n
)r with r →n : p ≤1
e.
Progress therefore requires to set µ ≤λ
e for the selection process.
Genetic Drift
The iteration of sampling, selection and model update, leads without
a signal to frequencies converging to the borders [Sha05; FKK16]. This phenomenon
is called genetic drift and shows a requirement for EDAs: progress of any kind must be
able to overcome the occurrence of genetic drift. This can be achieved with stronger
drift due to selection or some artificial bias towards uniform distributions [KW19].
Broader Context
Above tools are introduced as of their relevance to the work in
the next chapters and should be only considered as such. Ref. [AD11] for a solid
background on randomized search heuristics.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Framework Design
and Implementation
The final framework satisfies a goal, which is referenced throughout this chapter and
best described as follows:
Goal
The practical comparison of EDAs (and reference EAs) requires first an im-
plementation or framework that produces simulation results that allow subsequent
analysis. The framework flexibly allows a comparison of EDAs on a reduced set of
parameters to give a rough estimate of or show trends. Finally, it allows hypothesis
testing regarding the influence of certain parameters and allow to draw conclusions
regarding the benefit of multivariate EDAs over univariate EDAs.
Overview
The framework design and -implementation process is described in the
following sections, starting with related and available work. Section 3.2 describes
the design choices and decisions to reach above described goal. Following are details
regarding the framework implementation with implemented algorithms and fitness
functions. Section 3.4 describes the specific benchmark setup that produces results
in later chapters, and finally we describe the environment used for analysis and com-
parison of results.
3.1
Related Work
While all chosen algorithms are known for more than 25 years, no publicly available
implementation exists, that allows simulations with above described goals.
Search with keywords Estimation of Distribution, EDAs or specific EDAs resulted
in following findings:
• Implementations exist for specialized areas such as GANs (Generative Adver-
sarial Networks, a class of algorithms used in unsupervised machine learning)
[Pro15b] or Autoencoders (a type of an artificial neural network) [Pro15a] for
EDAs. Neither their results nor their setup seems appropriately usable for this
work.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Framework Design and Implementation
• The implementation is not available or likely not usable due to its age, e.g. ref.
[Pel99].
• Implementations exist without documentation, being modular or reusable, e.g.
only used for graph generation [Lod06].
During the development of the framework, that would allow described goals, it
became also clear that:
• The parameter space requires at least partially a parameter reduction early on
to allow sensible benchmarking. More on that in Chapter 4.
• The actually framework design and development requires more time than coding
a simple UMDA.
• Research with above goal is novel. An available framework or code base can
therefore not be expected.
3.2
Framework Design
The framework can be described as the two components simulation and analysis,
as they both differ in their means and objective.
The concept of the framework
components is visualized in Fig. 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Framework with the components for simulation and analysis.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Framework Design
21
The first component is the simulation, that includes the parameters for a simula-
tion, the (distributed) execution of the simulation and storing the results. The task
of the simulation is mostly computationally demanding.
The second component is the analysis, that reads the results and allows various
interactive tasks for analysis both statistically and visually. This task requires data
processing and interactivity.
As a result to the differences, both components are developed separately and
connected through the interface of the results.
3.2.1
Framework Component: Simulation
Notation
The sub components of the simulation require some further notation:
A run denotes the execution of a simulation with a fixed set of parameters, the
unit of a simulation. The result is simulation data of one set of parameters, with
varying pseudo-random number generator seed, that can be averaged.
A batch denotes the execution with one varying parameter, e.g. n, and consists
of one or more runs. The result can be used to analyze the runtime behaviour for an
algorithm on a fitness function and one varying parameter.
An experiment denotes the process of executing all components of the simulation
once, e.g. with the goal of comparing all implemented algorithms one two fitness
functions and one varying parameter. It consists of one or more batches.
Parameter Input
The typical goal for an experiment is the runtime analysis in
comparison with one varying parameter. That parameter can be n, λ, µ, etc. but does
not allow all possible parameters (ref. Chapter 4) for practical reasons. Parameters,
that are supported to be set as input to an experiment, are:
1. Model (EDA, EA, or similar)
2. Fitness function
3. Varying parameter (one varying parameter in one batch)
4. Start value, end value and stepsize for the varying parameter
5. Maximum number of evaluations (fitness function evaluations)
6. Number of repetitions in a run
7. Flag for environment (local or DTU cluster)
8. Additional parameters for fitness function, fixed parameters or model
9. ID of run (for parallel runs)
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Framework Design and Implementation
Distributed Computation
The algorithms are partially difficult to parallelize
sensibly: the outer loop of EDAs can not be parallelized, as one iteration requires the
result of the previous iteration, and the inner components of, for example UMDA,
would require high distributional effort for sampling or sorting.
On the contrary, trends, phase transitions and multimodal behaviour can already
be observed for parameters and a runtime, that clearly requires no parallelization.
Additionally, averaged results are of interest and lead to parallelization on a higher
context level. An experiment executed on different cores (possibly different machines),
i.a. initialized with a different seed, and with same parameters, can utilize all compu-
tational power available without bottlenecks of synchronization, critical sections and
thread control.
Storing Results
Results are stored as easily write- and readable CSV-files. Results
include:
1. Filename, composed of date, model, fitness, and other run-specific data
2. Value of variable parameter
3. Runtime
4. Flag for success (every simulation has a maximum runtime count)
5. Optional data: string of solution (for 3SAT instances), fdc-matrix or frequency
vectors
3.2.2
Framework Component: Analysis
This component reads in the results and allows interactive processing of the data.
Runtime
The runtime results refer to the amount of fitness function evaluations
until an individual is evaluated with the fitness of a global optimum. Runtime re-
sults are visualized as a graph with variable axis and labeling, scales, size and error
bar. This analysis tool is usable independent of the definition of runtime, as other
definitions only affect one axis label.
Success rate
Fitness functions like Trap or Max-3SAT easily lead to an un-
bounded expected runtime for certain parameter sets, such that a runtime analysis
is not possible. The success rate is defined as the part of simulations that concluded
successfully for a given value. Results are presented similarly to the runtime.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Framework Implementation
23
Fitness Distance Correlation (FDC)
The fitness distance is usually reduced
to a value r, ref. Chapter 2.3.2. For visual purposes, the FDC related data is here
presented as a heatmap.
The components are: Hamming distance to the global
optimum with range [0, n], fitness with range [0, max fitness] and count. If a global
optimum was found in the simulation, then the count for tuple (0, max fitness) is at
least 1. A colormap defines the color for a given count range.
Frequency Development
The frequency development presents the marginal fre-
quencies of the model for one simulation for each iteration, i.a. for each model update.
Similarly to the FDC the frequencies are presented as a heatmap, as one option to
reduce 3D data to a two dimensional medium. Animation, where one dimension rep-
resents the time, was not chosen as it does not give an immediate presentation of the
data.
Both the FDC and frequencies are plotted for one run with all parameters fixed,
while runtime and success rate average over the result of a batch, i.a. at least one
varying parameter with averaged results from multiple runs.
3.3
Framework Implementation
We chose to implement the simulation component of the framework in C++. C++
is one possible language that offers type safety, inheritance, efficient computation,
established libraries for operations on graphs and availability on the DTU HPC cluster.
While other languages, e.g. Java, match same criteria, the final choice was made with
respect to implementing the framework efficiently.
The UML for the core structure of the simulation component is presented in Fig.
3.2.
Fig.
A.1 in the appendix presents the framework with example classes and
additional elements.
3.3.1
Applied Design Patterns
The structure shows twice the usage of the template pattern [Gam95; Com93] with
the template methods init, sample, select and updateModel in the abstract class
Benchmark and scoreIndividual in the abstract class Fitness.
In Benchmark, the general structure of Algorithm 4 is ensured by method run,
while all containing methods are specified according to each implementation.
In
Fitness, the usage of the template pattern allows a modular fitness implementation.
3.3.2
Implemented Algorithms
Following are details regarding the choice of implemented algorithms.
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Framework Design and Implementation
Figure 3.2: UML for simulation component. Abstract methods are written in italics.
EDAs
The implemented EDAs are UMDA, cGA, MIMIC and BOA and motivated
as follows:
• The implemented EDAs cover all defined categories: UMDA and cGA as uni-
variate, MIMIC as bivariate and BOA as multivariate EDA.
• While there are more available algorithms in respective classes - univariate
Population-Based Incremental Learning (PBIL) [Bal94], Bivariate Marginal Dis-
tribution Algorithm (BMDA) [PM99b], multivariate Linkage-Tree Genetic Algo-
rithm (LTGA) [Thi10] or extended Compact Genetic Algorithm (eCGA) [Har99]
- research regarding the impact of algorithmic components or benefit regarding
multivariate EDAs can be executed with chosen algorithms.
• The focus of research in this area lies in understanding internals of EDAs and
not implementing exhaustive options of algorithms. For example: MIMIC im-
plements model building using a relative entropy metric, while BOA implements
the K2 score, a simplified BD metric. One could easily imagine both EDAs with
switched applied model building metrics. Yet, this has neither been done yet in
research, and neither been mentioned, to the best of our knowledge.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Framework Implementation
25
Reference Algorithms
Additionally implemented are RLS, a randomized hill
climber, and (1+1)EA, one variant of the class of (µ + λ)EAs. The reasons are:
• Those algorithms are reasonably well understood in the context of (runtime)
behaviour on combinatorial problems, as the available literature shows.
• Arguments regarding the benefit of EDAs should consider the alternative ap-
proaches to finding a global optimum in their argument.
• More complex EAs exist, that are possibly similar to the structures that can be
modeled by multivariate EDAs: ref. [BS93] for an overview on EAs for param-
eter optimization, or [Zho+11] for a survey on multiobjective EAs. However,
their implementation would deviate from the objective of analyzing the influence
of algorithmic components on runtime and a comparison between univariate and
multivariate EDAs.
Further Design Decisions
The implementation of MIMIC and BOA deviate from
their original design, as mentioned in respective sections in Chapter 2.2. Their design
comes with a difference in multiple parameters, such as method of selection and
replacement. To draw conclusions from runtime differences, we decided for described
changes for the following benefit:
• Significant differences in runtime behaviour can be assigned to specific algorith-
mic components and eases assigning contribution.
• Runtime behaviour results for one varying component are the base for results
of varying multiple components.
• Parameter reduction for complex models is beneficial as results can now be
compared to the univariate models where theoretical results exist.
3.3.3
Implemented Fitness Functions
Analysis and benchmarking of EDAs on combinatorial problems suggests a variety
of fitness functions: simple ones allow further theoretical analysis, and complex ones
resemble more closely relevant practical applications.
Implemented fitness functions are: OneMax, LeadingOnes, Jump, Trap, FourPeaks,
Max-HornSAT and Max-3SAT.
The first four fitness functions are academically of interest as their simple structure
facilitates developing theoretical results on runtime behaviour for various parameters,
e.g. ref. Table 1 in [KW19]. FourPeaks is implemented as a fitness function where
one can observe the development of variance within a population. Finally, the last
two functions are representative of fitness functions in practice.
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Framework Design and Implementation
3.4
Benchmark Setup
Parameters for each batch are defined as parameter input to the benchmark frame-
work. The execution of an experiment with a different batches therefore corresponds
to executing the program a times, with different parameters respectively. In practice
that leads to a shell script with a lines of code.
Distributed Computation
If multiple cores are available for computation, they
can be utilized on the highest level of a run, as described in Chapter 3.2.1.
The available resource is the DTU HPC cluster using scheduler MOAB [Com18]
and resource manager TORQUE [Sta06]. Multiple cores are utilized by defining a jobs
with the help of a job array. The pseudo-random number generator random_device in
the C++ standard library guarantees a different seed for each job, as time can not be
used. Moreover, the start time of a job is unknown and possibly occurs simultaneous
with another job. The output files containing the results are stored following a defined
naming convention with a job-unique identifier to ensure unique names.
3.5
Analysis Setup
A well established tool for interactive computing is the Jupyter Notebook (formerly
IPython Notebook) with support of multiple languages [She14]. Well integrated in
that environment is Python with libraries like Pandas and NumPy for data analysis
[McK12] and plotting functionality [LL09].
The analysis component of the framework is therefore developed in Python within
the Jupyter Notebook environment.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Overview of
Algorithmic
Components
With four parameters I can fit an
elephant, and with five I can
make him wiggle his trunk.
John von Neumann
[MKH10]
The parameter space for EDAs is enormous and requires parameter reduction to
allow the comparison of results. In this chapter, we discuss that statement, also used
as a design decision (ref. Chapter 3.3.2).
First, we introduce all identified parameters, then describe dependencies between
those parameters and finally discuss the influence of the design decisions on the out-
come of the goal (ref. Chapter 3 for goal definition).
4.1
List of Parameters
In this paragraph, we define all identified parameters. The parameter space denotes
all following numbered parameters, while all additional non-numbered parameters are
specific for benchmarking and are not considered part of the parameter space.
General Parameters
1. Fitness function with parameter. The fitness function can be chosen with pos-
sibly an additional parameter, e.g. the gap size m in Jump.
2. n, the dimension of the search space or bit string length.
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Overview of Algorithmic Components
3. m, the frequency margin.
4. Runtime. Generally, runtime is defined as the count of fitness function evalua-
tions until a global maximum is sampled. Also possible are time or the iteration
count of the loop of Algorithm 4.
5. Stop criterion. Typically, the criterion consists of two conditions: reaching a
positive result such as sampling a global maximum, or sampling it a certain
number of times, and a resource limit.
Examples for a resource limit are a
maximum count for runtime, frequencies converging or no improvement, i.a.
sampling an individual with a better fitness within a certain period.
Selection and Replacement
6. λ, the population size. λ does not explicitly exist in RLS, ref. Chapter 2.1.3,
or cGA, ref. Chapter 2.2.2, but parameter K for cGA can be seen as a corre-
sponding parameter.
7. µ, the selection size.
8. Method of selection. BOA as defined in [PGC99] defines this method as ”select
a set of promising strings” and allows a creative interpretation. A standard
interpretation is the selection of individuals with highest fitness.
9. Method of replacement. In EDAs like UMDA, the whole population is discarded
after the model update; the new population replaces the previous one. MIMIC
as defined in [DIV97], for example, retains the individuals with fitness above a
threshold. How that threshold is updated, could be seen as another parameter.
Another example is BOA as defined in [PGC99]: the new population replaces
the worst τλ individuals, e.g. the worst half of the previous population with
τ = 0.5. However, the number of newly sampled individuals might be lower
than the population size λ.
Probabilistic Model Building
10. EDA. The main algorithm can be chosen with possibly an additional parameter,
e.g. the maximal in-degree k in BOA.
11. Probabilistic Model. The probabilistic model defines the complexity that the
probability distribution of the EDA can model. For graphs as data structure,
allowed dependencies between the nodes (random variables) in the graph cor-
respond to defined univariate or multivariate classification, visualized in Fig.
2.1.
12. Probabilistic model building metric. Depending on the probabilistic model cho-
sen, a variety of established metrics is available for defining a relation between
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Parameter Dependencies
29
the data and the probabilistic model. Examples for metrics are relative entropy
in MIMIC, K2 score in BOA (a BD metric variant, ref. last paragraph in Chap-
ter 2.2.4 for other variations) or Pearson’s chi-squared test (χ2) in BMDA, ref.
[PM99a]. This parameter is further explained in Chapter 6.1.
13. Heuristic for model building.
Depending on the probabilistic model chosen,
determining the graph that represents the data best can be a NP-complete
task, e.g. k > 1 for BOA. As this is common to various metrics, ref. [HGC95],
it becomes necessary to choose a heuristic for approximating the best solution.
MIMIC, for example, deploys a greedy heuristic that begins with an empty
graph and performs only edge insertions.
14. Model update or using prior information.
Generally possible are either dis-
carding the model of previous generation and prior information, or using prior
information.
Prior information can be the input to the probabilistic model
building metric or can be utilized to incrementally update the model.
The K2 score is an example of a metric that discards all prior information. Dur-
ing the model update, information about the model of previous generation is
not utilized. This is possibly what the authors of MIMIC [DIV97] refer to with
the first step in their algorithm: ”Update the parameters of the density estima-
tor [model] [...] from a sample”, although it is unclear how prior information
could be used in MIMIC applying relative entropy.
We define the EDA (10) and the probabilistic model (11) above as two distinct pa-
rameters. Choosing BOA as an EDA with k = 3, but a probabilistic model with
an additional maximal out-degree, for example, does not represent the invention of
a new EDA but is better captured by identifying variables. Both parameters are
linked, however, as for example a univariate EDA renders the choices regarding the
probabilistic model indifferent.
Additional Parameters
• Seed of the random number generator. A fixed seed makes the results of an ex-
periment exactly reproducible, but requires the same order of batch-executions,
as a seed is typically selected once in the beginning of the experiment.
• Number of repetitions. The number of repetitions of a run does not affect the
expected (average) outcome.
4.2
Parameter Dependencies
The list of 14 identified parameters are categorized, but come more specifically with
dependencies. For example:
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Overview of Algorithmic Components
• µ ≤λ: only λ individuals are available for selection from a population for a
model update.
• λ ≪2n: EDAs are not suited for the problem, if estimating the underlying
probability distribution for sampling a global optimum requires superpolyno-
mial sampling.
• The stop criterion should consider the choice of runtime to allow sensible bench-
marking.
• The probabilistic model building metric needs to be suited for availability of
prior information.
Above dependencies become visible during implementation of the algorithm. Re-
maining are the more complex dependencies, with unknown effect on runtime be-
haviour, such as:
• The relation of n, λ and µ. Ref. Table 1 in [KW19] for an overview over relations
with concrete numbers and asymptotic notations on three algorithms and three
fitness functions.
• The interplay of the probabilistic model with the selection and replacement
strategy. Cf. MIMIC defined in Section 2.2.3 with MIMIC as introduced in
[DIV97].
4.3
Isolation of Components
The dependencies of the whole set of 14 parameters are mostly unknown. We begin
therefore with isolating the parameters, fixing them and analyzing separately their
influence on runtime when variable. This reduces the problem of unknown dependen-
cies in the parameter space to approachable tasks and defines the structure of this
research.
Gradually, more parameters can be considered variable, using related literature
to bound parameters and allowing search in the parameter space.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5
Parameter Reduction
In this chapter, we compare the runtime of all implemented algorithms on common
fitness functions, ref. Chapter 2.3.1.
The following section describes the setup for a comparison on one varying param-
eter, while keeping all other parameters fixed. For the choice of this setup refer to
previous chapter.
Section 5.2 presents a first comparison with varying search space dimension n and
Section 5.3 a comparison with varying population size λ.
The notation and presentation of results is kept similar throughout all chapters,
with details partially referenced in the appendix. First, we state expected results and
then discuss the findings with varying empirical and theoretical support.
5.1
Fixed Parameters
Going through the list of possible parameters, defined in Section 4.1, we compare
EDAs on fitness functions with one varying parameter. We choose to initially focus on
parameters n, µ and λ, as these parameters exist in almost all implemented algorithms.
Also, theoretical results regarding runtime behaviour consider mostly these three
parameters.
In the following list, we discuss all other parameters with their fixed setting:
• The margin m is set to m := 1
n, with the frequencies defined to [m, 1 −m], as
introduced in Chapter 2.4.2 (ref. [Che+09; DL15] for more).
• The runtime remains the count of fitness function evaluations.
• The stop criterion is the first sampling of a global optimum.
All presented
(averaged) results consist of experiment data in which every run was completed
until finding a global optimum without interruption (resource limit), unless
specifically stated otherwise.
• The µ individuals with highest fitness are selected.
• The population of previous generation is discarded for all EDAs.
• For each EDA, the probabilistic model, the model building metric and their
heuristic are used as defined in respective sections in Chapter 2.2. We present
a discussion about the benefit of multivariate EDAs in Chapter 6.
==PAGE:42==
32
5 Parameter Reduction
– In experiments, we set the BOA-specific parameter of maximal in-degree
k to k = 1 and k = 3, as k = 0 is represented by UMDA, intermediary
k = 2 is not used to better show trends for large k and larger k > 3 come
with additional computational cost.
• There is no prior information applicable for any EDA in the context of this thesis,
as their use without prior information is a key component of the research.
5.2
Varying Search Space Dimension - A First
Comparison
We present a first comparison of all implemented algorithms on common fitness func-
tions with variable n. The search space dimension is as a parameter of particular
importance, as it relates to the application range of respective algorithms.
5.2.1
Expected Results
We do expect the (1+1)EA and RLS to perform well on OneMax and LeadingOnes
in comparison to the EDAs, as they require no tuning of additional parameters. The
results of EDAs should give an initial view on expected runtime behaviour, although
the experiment parameters might not be optimal for any n.
5.2.2
OneMax
Fig. 5.1 presents the results for the experiment on OneMax with varying n, λ = 50
and µ = λ
2 , averaged over 1000 runs.
Discussion of Results
The (1+1)EA and RLS perform best, as the optimum
can be easily found for this non-deceptive fitness function. All EDAs perform similarly
well in the early stages until n = 40. For n > 40 MIMIC performs significantly worse
than all other EDAs, most likely due to non-optimal parameters λ and µ. The results
for BOA (k = 1 and k = 3) and UMDA are alike, such that the computationally
expensive results for BOA were only executed until n = 80 (k = 1) and n = 40
(k = 3) with same run count.
Ref. Fig. B.1 in Appendix B for the results with error bar.
5.2.3
LeadingOnes
Fig. 5.2 presents the results for the experiment on LeadingOnes with varying n,
λ = 50 and µ = λ
2 , averaged over 1000 runs.
==PAGE:43==
5.2 Varying Search Space Dimension - A First Comparison
33
Figure 5.1: Runtime over n for various algorithms on OneMax with λ = 50 and
µ = λ
2 , averaged over 1000 runs and logarithmic view.
Discussion of Results
The (1+1)EA and RLS perform best, as the optimum
can be easily found for this non-deceptive fitness function. All EDAs perform similarly
well for n = 10. Generally similar perform UMDA and MIMIC; BOA (k = 1) and
BOA (k = 3). It is interesting to note, that BOA seems to perform well in comparison
to other EDAs for non-optimal parameter settings. The worse performance of UMDA
and MIMIC for n ≥20 is due to the parameter µ, as analyzed in Chapter 5.5.
Ref. Fig. B.2 in Appendix B for the results with error bar.
5.2.4
Jump
Fig. 5.3 presents the results for the experiment on Jump with gap size m = 3, varying
n, λ = 50 and µ = λ
2 , averaged over 1000 runs.
The gap size 3 makes it impossible for RLS with a Hamming neighbourhood of 2
to sample the global optimum if it was not sampled in the first iteration. Results for
Jump with gap size m = 3 are therefore always without RLS.
Discussion of Results
This is an example of a common fitness function, where
EDAs perform generally better than simple EAs, as the deceptive component of the
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Parameter Reduction
Figure 5.2: Runtime over n for various algorithms on LeadingOnes with λ = 50
and µ = λ
2 , averaged over 1000 runs and logarithmic view.
fitness function only renders bridging the fitness gap less likely, but not impossible.
Continuously best perform UMDA, cGA and BOA, with similar average results al-
though cGA comes with the highest variance. Ref. Fig. B.3 in Appendix B for the
results with error bar.
The results for BOA (k = 1 and k = 3) and UMDA are alike, such that the
computationally expensive results for BOA were only executed until n = 50 (k = 1)
and n = 40 (k = 3) with same run count. Interestingly the variance for results with
BOA is significantly lower than for UMDA, ref. Fig. B.3.
The design of the (1+1)EA makes a 3-bit flip from the local optimum to the global
optimum unlikely with increasing n, which explains the runtime.
5.3
Varying Population Size
EDAs develop their probability distribution based on individuals selected from a
population. Therefore we analyzed the runtime in comparison with variable λ next.
The algorithms (1+1)EA and RLS run independently of parameter λ and there-
fore come only with a single value for set parameters. Both algorithms are however
visualized for various λ values to make them visible, although running independently
==PAGE:45==
5.3 Varying Population Size
35
Figure 5.3: Runtime over n for various algorithms on Jump with gap size m = 3,
λ = 50 and µ = λ
2 , averaged over 1000 runs and logarithmic view.
of the actual λ value. cGA is executed with varying K, K = λ as explained in Chapter
2.2.2.
Algorithms (1+1)EA, RLS and cGA run independently of chosen µ value.
5.3.1
Expected Results
This experiments for varying λ will show the ideal range of λ for a given n. We
expect that the runtime results become increasingly worse for both λ close to zero
and λ ≫n. A small λ, will lead to an inefficient and possibly exponential runtime
due to genetic drift (ref. Chapter 2.4.2), while for big values, the amount of fitness
function evaluations for each iteration will outweigh the benefit of the iterative process
of sampling, selection and model update.
5.3.2
OneMax
Fig. 5.4 presents the results with error bar for the experiment on OneMax with
varying λ, n = 256 and µ = λ
4 , averaged over 500 runs.
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Parameter Reduction
Figure 5.4: Runtime with error bar over λ for various algorithms on OneMax with
n = 256 and µ = λ
4 , averaged over 500 runs and logarithmic view. The algorithms
(1+1)EA and RLS run independently of parameter λ and are visualized for multiple
λ to ease a comparison.
Discussion of Results
The best performing algorithms in this setup are UMDA,
BOA and cGA. The (1+1)EA and RLS find the global maximum fast on average, but
with a significant higher variance in runtime. MIMIC is slowest with a sign of multi-
modal behaviour that we analyze in the next chapter.
BOA is only presented with k = 1 in Fig. 5.4, as the results for BOA with k = 3
are similar to k = 1.
The trend with an exponentially decreasing cost in runtime for small λ and a
polynomial increasing cost with bigger λ is visible as expected.
Parameter µ set as µ = λ
4 results in the best runtime results for UMDA, MIMIC
and BOA. The graph shows therefore the optimal combination of n, λ and µ on
OneMax for those algorithms. More on that in Chapter 5.5.
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Varying Population Size
37
Figure 5.5: Runtime with error bar over λ for various algorithms on LeadingOnes
with n = 64 and µ = λ
4 , averaged over 500 runs and logarithmic view. The algorithms
(1+1)EA and RLS run independently of parameter λ and are visualized for multiple
λ to ease a comparison.
5.3.3
LeadingOnes
Fig. 5.5 presents the results with error bar for the experiment on LeadingOnes with
varying λ, n = 64 and µ = λ
4 , averaged over 500 runs.
Discussion of Results
The best performing algorithm in this setup is RLS,
with (1+1)EA following closely.
The runtime of UMDA, MIMIC and BOA is similar for their best result. For
larger λ the runtime behaviour differs in comparison, with BOA notably continuing
to have the best results with lowest variance. BOA with k = 3 comes with a similar
runtime to BOA with k = 1 and is therefore only presented with a few values in Fig.
5.5.
Significantly slower is cGA, requiring a much larger λ value than the other EDAs
to run in expected polynomial time.
Parameter µ set to µ = λ
4 results in the best runtime results for UMDA, MIMIC
and BOA. The graphic shows therefor the optimal combination of n, λ and µ on
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Parameter Reduction
LeadingOnes for those algorithms, similar as the result for OneMax.
5.3.4
Jump
Fig. 5.6 presents the results for the experiment on Jump with gap size m = 3 with
varying λ, n = 64 and µ = λ
4 , averaged over 500 runs.
Discussion of Results
The best performing algorithm in this setup is UMDA,
followed by BOA1 and BOA3. MIMIC and cGA perform similarly well for different
λ, (1+1)EA is not competitive in comparison and RLS can not solve this problem
unconditionally. Here, the averaged result of 500 runs for (1+1)EA for each λ includes
1-9 results that did not sample a global optimum until the stop criterion of 3 · 106
fitness function evaluations.
In contrast with results on OneMax and LeadingOnes, a lower k value for BOA
seems to be favourable for the expected runtime. Notably, UMDA and MIMIC have
the same empirical runtime for larger values of λ.
Ref. Fig. C.1 in Appendix B for the results with error bar.
5.4
Multimodal Behaviour
In Section 5.3.2 we encountered the first time a runtime result on varying λ with
two local minima, a multimodal behaviour.
MIMIC exhibits on OneMax in Fig.
5.4 two local minima, empirically located at λ = 32 and λ = 300, with exhibiting
non-competitive (partially exponential) results empirically for λ < 32.
5.4.1
Phase Transition - UMDA on OneMax
Above described behaviour is visible for various EDAs on various fitness functions
and is theoretically analyzed for UMDA on OneMax. The runtime behaviour can be
explained as three phases, where the phase transition marks a visible local minimum.
Fig. 5.7 is a reproduction of the result by [KW19], that clearly shows the two local
maxima.
Phase Transition
For UMDA on OneMax, the two phase transitions can be
explained as follows:
1. With a small λ, no sensible model update is possible and the runtime can
become exponential.
On OneMax one can define progress, as the possibly
slow but eventual convergence of frequencies to 1 −1
n, such that sampling the
global optimum is most likely. The margins, however, make sampling of 0-bits
possible, and any such event requires superpolynomial time to recover from
(further explained by [KW19]).
==PAGE:49==
5.4 Multimodal Behaviour
39
Figure 5.6: Runtime over λ for various algorithms on Jump with gap size m = 3,
n = 64 and µ = λ
4 , averaged over 500 runs and logarithmic view. The (1+1)EA runs
independently of parameter λ and is visualized for multiple λ to ease a comparison.
The transition occurs around log n, from where the runtime is proven to be in
O(λn).
2. The progress due to selection is increasingly strong with increasing λ in com-
parison to the genetic drift that partially counters progress as random noise.
The second phase transition occurs around √n log n, after which the (positive)
influence of selection on the frequencies is more likely than the genetic drift,
with a proven runtime in O(λ√n). A detailed description of state-of-the-art
theoretical runtime bounds and theoretical tools for runtime analysis is given
by [KW19].
Empirical Results
The empirical results of multimodal behaviour of UMDA
on OneMax by [KW19] and reproduced in Fig. 5.7 come with a high variance. The
multimodal behaviour becomes empirically clearer with increasing n, as the difference,
√n log n −log n, of both phase transitions increases. The limiting factor here are the
resource costs of such experiments, and therefore was the experiment, as presented
in Fig. 5.7, executed with only 875 runs (respective 2000 runs by [KW19]) and not a
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Parameter Reduction
(a) Averaged result. A reproduction of [KW19] Fig. 3 (left).
(b) Averaged result with error bar.
Figure 5.7: Runtime over λ for UMDA on OneMax with n = 2000 and µ =
λ
2 ,
averaged over 875 runs. The (averaged) result for λ = 32 represents an empirically
evaluated local minimum. With step size 8 for λ, the next smaller value of λ = 24
resulted in 10 runs that did not find a global optimium within 100.000 iterations, a
stop criterion for that experiment, and is therefor not plotted.
higher n to better visualize the trend. Additionally, this experiment was executed to
facilitate the comparison with the following results.
5.4.2
Expected Results
In the following sections, we present results for cGA on common fitness functions One-
Max, LeadingOnes and Jump with an analysis regarding multimodal behaviour.
We start in Section 5.4.3 with a reproduction of empirical runtime results by
[KW19], a visible multimodal behaviour of cGA on OneMax, but expect to gain
more insight by having results with visualized variance comparable with the results
of cGA on other common fitness functions.
For both, cGA on LeadingOnes, ref. Section 5.4.4, and cGA on Jump, ref. Sec-
tion 5.4.5, we expect to see multimodal behaviour, but with varying degree: Leadin-
gOnes requires progress in a specific way, while Jump is similar to OneMax but
with a deceptive element. Therefore, results for Jump are expected to be empirically
similar to OneMax.
==PAGE:51==
5.4 Multimodal Behaviour
41
5.4.3
cGA on OneMax
While [KW19] presented the idea, that a similar bimodal behaviour can be shown for
cGA on OneMax, with varying K instead of λ, later on [LSW18] presented their
results, solidifying the initial thought with proofs for cGA.
Independently of whether intermediary parameter choices (between the two local
optima) of K for cGA on OneMax are harmful or simply not optimal, we present
with Fig. 5.8 the experiment of cGA on OneMax with n = 2000, averaged over 500
runs.
Discussion of Results
The result is an analogous picture to Fig. 5.7 with the
results of UMDA on OneMax. The local optima for cGA and UMDA are empirically
found at different λ (respective K) values, although the theoretical bounds are defined
the same with λ ∈Θ(log n) and λ ∈Θ(√n log n. Both experiments were executed
with n = 2000, and differences in the position of the local optima can be the result of
theoretically unknown influences, differences of a constant factor in described bounds
or the influence of choice µ = λ
2 in the experiment with UMDA on OneMax.
5.4.4
cGA on LeadingOnes
Fig. 5.9 presents the results for the experiment with cGA on LeadingOnes with
n = 100 and n = 200 on varying K.
(a) Averaged result.
(b) Averaged result with error bar.
Figure 5.8: Runtime over K for cGA on OneMax with n = 2000, averaged over 500
runs.
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Parameter Reduction
(a) Averaged result.
(b) Averaged result with error bar.
Figure 5.9: Runtime over K for cGA on LeadingOnes with n = 100 and n = 200,
averaged over 2400 runs (n = 100) and 1200 runs (n = 200) and logarithmic view.
Discussion of Results
The empirical runtime behaviour does not appear to be
multimodal. For small values of K, the runtime is expected exponential, as random
noise influences the update stronger than the progress by each iteration can counter.
With larger values of K, the runtime is increasing, but with low variance. There is no
intermediary phase visible, as for cGA on OneMax, ref. Section 5.4.3. The empirical
result can not be used to allow conclusions regarding the existence of that phase in
LeadingOnes, but allows another conclusion: progress requires a specific K value
above a threshold, else the runtime is expected exponential.
The runtime minimum for cGA on LeadingOnes is empirically found at K =
96, n = 100 and K = 256, n = 200.
5.4.5
cGA on Jump
The result for the experiment with cGA on Jump with gap size m = 3, n = 500,
averaged over 2000 runs, is presented in Fig. 5.10.
Discussion of Results
The occurrence of multimodal behaviour for cGA on
fitness functions other than OneMax has not been mentioned in literature, to the
best of our knowledge. However, the similarity in the runtime behaviour to the result
in Fig. 5.8, suggests that the similarity of OneMax and Jump - the common base
function of maximizing 1-bits for an optimal result, with a partially deceptive part in
Jump - might explain the similarity of runtime behaviour:
==PAGE:53==
5.4 Multimodal Behaviour
43
(a) Averaged result.
(b) Averaged result with error bar.
Figure 5.10: Runtime over K for cGA on Jump with gap size m = 3, n = 500,
averaged over 2000 runs.
• The initial exponential runtime for small λ (respective K) is common for most
EDAs, as disturbances caused by random noise require superpolynomial time
to fix.
• A low variance for big lambda (respective K) occurs when the influence of
selection (respective update parameter) is bigger than the genetic drift.
• The second phase transition constitutes a significantly smaller local minimum
(global minimum) in runtime. This has not been shown by theoretical results,
as the amount of parameters makes it difficult to produce such a result. (For
exactly this reason, we started the experiments with a parameter reduction to
allow the comparison of results.)
• Intermediary λ (respective K) values between the phase transitions, result in
non-optimal runtime behaviour. Significantly different in our result in Fig. 5.10
in comparison to the result of cGA on OneMax is the high variance for inter-
mediary K values. This was predicted by [LSW18] for cGA on OneMax, but
empirically becomes significantly visible on Jump.
A conclusion from the last point is: the cGA requires the progress due to selection
to be significantly higher, i.a. a high K value, than the influence of genetic drift,
such that the second phase transition constitutes empirically expected better runtime
results.
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Parameter Reduction
5.5
Varying Selection
Progress requires selection.
The population size influences the spread of in-
dividuals with varying fitness, and the selection influences the rate of change for a
model update. The closer the amount of selected individuals is to the population
size, the closer are the frequencies of the updated probabilistic model of the EDA in
expectation to the frequencies of the previous model. Contrary, the fewer individuals
are selected, the easier can the frequencies change towards the model that represents
the selection best in that EDA.
Overview
We started this chapter with a runtime comparison with varying n,
ref. Section 5.2. The initial result is non-competitive runtime behaviour for various
EDAs, e.g. MIMIC on LeadingOnes in comparison to UMDA.
The runtime comparison with varying λ, ref. Section 5.3 showed, that the initial
overview was an experiment with non-optimal parameter settings. On LeadingOnes,
for example, MIMIC and UMDA showed similar empirical runtime behaviour, with
µ = λ
4 , ref. Fig. 5.5, and prior λ = 50, µ = λ
2 in Fig. 5.2.
In this section, we present our third comparison with experiments on varying µ,
the parameter for selection: µ = λ
s with s ∈{2, 3, 4, 8, 16}, s < λ. This will conclude
the experiments with focus on the reduced set of parameters n, λ and µ.
Presentation of Results
We will conduct experiments with varying λ, as in
the previous section, and compare runtimes for different µ as a another set of points
in a graph. We choose this method, as varying µ plotted on one axis is hardly possible.
We can show, for example, that LeadingOnes requires µ to be µ ≤λ
e to have an
asymptotically bounded runtime, presented in the next section. Experiments with
large µ, i.a. a large λ or large s in µ = λ
s , would require therefore an increasingly
large λ and an increasingly large n to be in the vicinity of runtime results of interest.
The computational limit for such experiments, as well as the choice of comparable
results, leads to the similar presentation.
5.5.1
Required Selection on LeadingOnes
Progress for the fitness function LeadingOnes is defined as an increasing number of
leading 1-bits in the bit string. This differs from progress in, for example, OneMax
where generally the number of 1s in the bit string must be increased. For optimal
frequencies on LeadingOnes with margins, i.a. frequencies in [ 1
n, 1 −1
n] as defined
in Chapter 2.4.2, the probability of sampling the optimum is then
(
1 −1
n
)n. The
probability of sampling a (non-optimal) bit string with at least one 0-bit becomes
1 −
(
1 −1
n
)n.
Initially, the frequencies are set to 0.5, as we assume no 0-1 bias in fitness functions
(ref.
Chapter 2.3.1) and are updated in each generation.
The probability p0 of
==PAGE:55==
5.5 Varying Selection
45
sampling an individual with at least one 0-bit and asymptotic notation is:
p0 ≥1 −
(
1 −1
n
)n
→1 −1
e(n →∞)
(5.1)
This requires selection parameter µ to be µ ≤λ
e for asymptotically expected progress.
5.5.2
Expected Results
For experiments with varying µ, we expect to find an empirically optimal value s for
each n and λ given µ = λ
s .
µ is linked to λ and the runtime behaviour for varying λ and a fixed µ is empirically
known as presented in Section 5.3. We therefore expect the runtime behaviour to
be similar for experiments with only varying µ, i.a. visually a similar result when
plotted, but transformed in comparison. We further expect to find optimal runtime
results with µ = λ
s close to s = e, but, with similar reasoning as in previous section,
additionally expect s ≥e.
To see significant differences in the results with varying µ, and with respect to
non-asymptotic benchmarking possibilities, we restrict ourselves to experiments with
s ∈{2, 3, 4, 8, 16}.
5.5.3
Varying Selection for MIMIC on Jump
Fig. 5.11 presents the results for the experiment with MIMIC on Jump with gap size
m = 3, n = 128, µ = λ
s on varying λ and s, s ∈{2, 4, 6, 8, 16}.
Discussion of Results
The empirically best results for MIMIC on Jump with
gap size m = 3 are found for s ∈{4, 6} for µ = λ
s considering the average runtime with
variance. Further experiments show similarly an optimal runtime for s ∈[3, 4, . . . , 6].
Small and large values for parameter s in µ = λ
s , i.a. s = 2 and s > 8, result in a
worse empirical runtime, suggesting that an asymptotic best values for s exists. We
continue to suspect it close to s = e with a similar argument to required selection
parameter for LeadingOnes, ref. Section 5.5.1.
Comparing the empirical runtime behaviour in Fig. 5.11b, we note the same gen-
eral pattern for any presented s: the empirical runtime is expected exponential until
a threshold value, after which the empirical runtime seems linearly increasing with
λ. The phase transition marks the global runtime minimum considering empirically
averaged runtime with variance.
5.5.4
Trend Analysis for MIMIC on Jump
Fig. 5.12 presents the results for the experiment with MIMIC on Jump with gap size
m = 3, µ = λ
4 on varying λ with different n in comparison. Fig. 5.12a presents the
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Parameter Reduction
(a) Averaged result.
(b) Averaged result with error bar.
Figure 5.11: Runtime over λ for MIMIC on Jump with gap size m = 3, n = 128, µ = λ
s
and various s, s ∈{2, 4, 6, 8, 16}, averaged over 2000 runs.
combined results, while Fig. 5.12b and Fig. 5.12c show in-depth runtime results for
n = 24 and n = 40.
Discussion of Results
The runtime result in comparison in Fig. 5.12a confirms,
that the empirical runtime behaviour is similar not only for varying s in µ = λ
s , but
also for increasing search space dimension n.
Benchmarking on small n allows us to observe multimodal runtime behaviour for
n = 24 in Fig. 5.12b. This was not possible to observe in the results of the experiment
in previous section, ref.
Section 5.5.3, as of runtime limitations for n = 128 on
expected exponential empirical runtime. Already for n = 40, ref. Fig. 5.12c, we
observe empirically exponential runtime until λ = 196 with varying 0-3 runs out of
12.000 runs that were counted with the runtime limit of 500.000 although no global
maximum was sampled until then.
Best results (best average with low variance) seem to be around λ = 200 + 2n.
5.5.5
Varying Selection for UMDA on Jump
Fig. 5.13 presents the results for the experiment with UMDA on Jump with gap size
m = 3, n = 128, µ = λ
s on varying λ and s, s ∈{2, 4, 6, 8, 16}.
Discussion of Results
Contrary to MIMIC on Jump with gap size m = 3,
UMDA exhibits empirical runtime optima for s ∈{3, 4, 6, 8} with empirically similar
==PAGE:57==
5.5 Varying Selection
47
(a) Averaged result, logarithmic view.
(b) Averaged result with error bar for n = 24.
(c) Averaged result with error bar for n = 40.
Figure 5.12: Runtime over λ for MIMIC on Jump with gap size m = 3, µ = λ
4 and
various n, n ∈{16, 24, . . . , 56}, averaged over 12.000 runs.
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Parameter Reduction
(a) Averaged result.
(b) Averaged result with error bar.
Figure 5.13: Runtime over λ for UMDA on Jump with gap size m = 3, n = 128 and
varying µ = λ
s , s ∈{2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 16} averaged over 12.000 runs.
runtime average and variance. The same trend of increasing runtime with small or
large values of s and again the repetitive pattern of two runtime phases with mini-
mal empirical runtime results in the phase transition lead also here to the conclusion
that an optimal s exists. However, the application of a different probabilistic model,
univariate in UMDA and bivariate in MIMIC, changes the runtime behaviour signifi-
cantly: the optimal parameter lead in UMDA on Jump, ref. Fig. 5.13, to an expected
runtime of 2.000 fitness evaluations, empirically evaluated, and 4.500 fitness evalua-
tions for MIMIC, ref. Fig. 5.11. We can additionally observe that the empirically
evaluated optimal parameters come with similar λ values for UMDA, ref. Fig. 5.13,
and varying significantly in MIMIC, ref. Fig. 5.11.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Benefit of Multivariate
EDAs
6.1
Second-Order Statistics
Multivariate EDAs allow modelling of dependencies between random variables in their
probabilistic model. These dependencies are modelled as graphs with nodes denot-
ing the random variable of a bit in the bit string, and edges denoting a dependency
between two random variables. All introduced multivariate EDAs use acyclic graphs
with directed edges, as one can not sample individuals with cyclic dependencies with-
out prior knowledge.
Whether a dependency exist between a pair of random variables (we do not con-
sider hyper graphs), is defined by the set of selected individuals of a population, but
must be interpreted and decided according to a metric. The metric uses second-order
statistics to guide the choice of deciding on a model (graph) that minimizes or maxi-
mizes a statistical value. Examples for such statistics are:
• Entropy. MIMIC uses the Kullback-Leibler divergence [DIV97] or relative en-
tropy to model bivariate dependencies.
• Chi-squared tests (χ2). The chi-square test, often denoting Pearson’s chi-squared
test, assumes a chi-squared distribution on its variables and can be used to vali-
date the null hypothesis that the tested model represents the underlying model
with unknown dependencies best. Pearson’s chi-squared test is used, for exam-
ple, in BMDA [PM99a].
• Bayesian-Dirichlet (BD) metric. The BD metric is used to score how closely the
tested model represents the given data, the selected individuals of a population.
It is used similarly to Pearson’s chi-squared test, but assumes an underlying
Dirichlet distribution. Ref. Chapter 2.2.4 for further information on the BD
metric and references to its various specializations.
The above list is a list of example statistics encountered in introduced EDAs. The
application of other statistics or statistical tests is possible or necessary, for example
with different assumptions on the distribution for the random variables. We list above
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Benefit of Multivariate EDAs
examples to note, that they are theoretically exchangeable and therefore identified as
a parameter in Chapter 4.1.
Computational Overhead
Computing the probabilistic model, that describes the
set of selected individuals best, can be difficult. Finding such best model in BOA
with the BD metric and the maximal in-degree parameter k set to k > 1 is a NP-
complete problem as described in Chapter 2.2.4.
Even for problems that can be
solved deterministically in polynomial time, a heuristic that approximates the best
model might be beneficial for the overall computational cost. The runtime result, as
presented in previous chapter, does not visualize the computational overhead of the
model building method by the model building heuristic.
Model Building Cost
MIMIC, the bivariate EDA with relative entropy and
greedy heuristic as described in [DIV97], requires O(n2) for each model building iter-
ation. More specifically: every λ fitness function evaluations (sampling in one genera-
tion) conclude with the model building, that requires 1 empirical entropy calculation
and n −1 relative entropy calculations.
The EDA with model building of cost ω(n) is therefore theoretically (and often
practically) not competitive on fitness functions, where the existence of a more com-
plex probabilistic model does not equal its cost, cf. the following example.
6.1.1
Theoretical Runtime Analysis with Model Update Costs on
OneMax
The expected runtime for UMDA on OneMax is bound by O(λ√n), λ > √n log n
[NW10; SW16]. The condition λ > √n log n marks a phase that that corresponds to
the third phase, starting with the second phase transition, in Chapter 5.4.1.
In the following, we approximate runtime bounds for UMDA and MIMIC on
OneMax with the goal of including the cost of a model update.
Therefore, we
consider the runtime cost at a more granular level, with a fitness evaluation of an
individual in Θ(n), as we need to look at every bit once, instead of O(1). We do not
consider the following calculations complete in the way, that we neglect terms that
are independent of the probabilistic model used, such as the cost of sorting of the
fitness values, as we concentrate on the runtime influence of the model update step.
UMDA
The runtime for UMDA on OneMax including the cost of marginal
probability calculations can be calculated as follows:
1. On expected λ√n total fitness function evaluations, the frequencies are updated
every λ fitness evaluations on µ < λ individuals of size n.
2. A fitness evaluation runs with n linear to the size of the bit string. λ√n fitness
evaluations come therefore with the cost of λn√n.
==PAGE:61==
6.2 MIMIC vs UMDA - Analysis of a Bivariate Probabilistic Model
51
3. Assuming constant costs for each bit, i.a. a cost of λn for the calculations of
the marginal probabilities for λ individuals, we have λ√n
λ
= √n model updates
of cost λn.
4. Combined we get that the runtime including fitness evaluations at a granular
level and model update costs is bound by O(λn√n), λ > √n log n for UMDA
on OneMax.
MIMIC
The runtime for MIMIC on OneMax including the cost of conditional
probability calculations can be calculated as follows:
1. Assuming no significant empirical influence on the runtime when using a differ-
ent model, we continue to expect λ√n total fitness function evaluations. The
frequencies are continued to be updated every λ fitness evaluations on µ < λ
individuals of size n.
2. A fitness evaluation runs with n linear to the size of the bit string.
3. The (relative) entropy is calculated for step i, i ∈[1, . . . , n −1] relative to n −i
random variables, resulting in n(n+1)
2
entropy calculations.
4. Each entropy calculation requires to look at least at one bit of µ individuals.
5. The combined relative entropy computation runs in Ω(µn2).
6. Combined we get Ω(λn√n + µ√nn2), λ > √n log n with the same runtime
including fitness evaluations as for UMDA (λn√n) and model update costs (√n
model updates with lower approximated cost µn2)for MIMIC on OneMax.
For benchmarking purposes, we can approximate the granular runtime for parameters
µ and λ with Θ(n), e.g. for experiments with varying λ and µ = λ
4 . The model update
cost in MIMIC then dominates the overall runtime by the additional factor n. This
shows, that the computational overhead for model building can not be neglected. In
above calculations we assume no significant empirical influence on the runtime when
using a different model, which has to be empirically or theoretically validated first.
Additionally we neglect the cost of sampling individuals in above calculations, as
sampling in the univariate case, i.a. with marginal frequencies only, can not be faster
in the multivariate case when considering conditional probabilities.
6.2
MIMIC vs UMDA - Analysis of a Bivariate
Probabilistic Model
The reference framework as described in Chapter 5, allows us to isolate the influence
of second-order statistics, applied in multivariate EDAs. In this chapter we analyze
the influence of a relative entropy minimization heuristic, implemented in MIMIC, on
a non-deceptive fitness function LeadingOnes.
==PAGE:62==
52
6 Benefit of Multivariate EDAs
6.2.1
Expected Results
OneMax
The simplicity of fitness function OneMax is of advantage for theo-
retical runtime analysis for any EDA, as there exist no dependencies between the bits.
Furthermore considering the results of previous chapters, we do not expect MIMIC
to perform significantly better on OneMax than UMDA with the same parameters.
The only difference between MIMIC, as defined in Chapter 2.2.3, and UMDA is a
more powerful probabilistic model that allows to model dependencies that are not
apparent in OneMax.
In Section 6.1.1 we discussed the computational overhead by the model update
step of MIMIC and further expect to be limited with benchmarking to parameters
suited for MIMIC, i.a. a lower limit of benchmarking values of n than possible with
UMDA.
LeadingOnes
Theoretical runtime analysis results for UMDA on LeadingOnes
show O(nλ log(n) + n2) with λ ≥b log(n) for some constant b > 0 and λ > (1 +
δ)eµ, δ > 0 [DL15]. Ref. Chapter 5.5.1 for the explanation of the relation µ < λ
e .
LeadingOnes is the fitness function, that requires progress in a specific way: the
global optimum is the bit string consisting of 1s, but in contrast to OneMax, the
count of the leading 1-bits as fitness value leads to the development of the frequencies
towards the optimum setting with respect to the position of the bit. Naturally, the
frequency of the leading bit (here: leftmost or first) is developed faster in expectation
towards the optimal probability for sampling a 1, than any other frequency.
The dependency of the bit position towards the fitness value, can be modelled
pairwise, similar to the model in Fig.
2.1 b).
The similarity in the structure of
LeadingOnes and the dependency graph that the probabilistic model in MIMIC
can develop now suggest, that MIMIC is specifically suited for solving LeadingOnes
efficiently!
6.2.2
OneMax
Fig. 6.1 presents the results for the experiment on OneMax with varying n, λ = 2n
and µ = λ
4 , averaged over 200 runs. This experiment gives an overview over the run-
time with increasing n and optimal results for the empirically evaluated parameters
of λ = 2n and µ = λ
4 for MIMIC on OneMax.
Discussion of Results
The empirically optimal parameters of λ = 2n and µ =
λ
4 for MIMIC on OneMax and varying n, show no significant difference in runtime
between UMDA and MIMIC. Our conclusion is, that the influence of the probabilistic
model that allows bivariate dependencies in MIMIC does not improve the empirical
runtime significantly to the probabilistic model based on marginal frequencies in
UMDA.
The runtime results for BOA with k = 1 are not significantly different than
the empirical results for UMDA and MIMIC. The averaged results for BOA with
==PAGE:63==
6.2 MIMIC vs UMDA - Analysis of a Bivariate Probabilistic Model
53
(a) Averaged result and logarithmic view.
(b) Averaged result with error bar and logarithmic view.
Figure 6.1: Runtime over n for UMDA, MIMIC and BOA (k = 1) on OneMax with
λ = 2n and µ = λ
4 , averaged over 200 runs.
k = 1 are empirically matching the results for UMDA. The non-significant but notable
differences in runtime for small n, n < 100, are due to the empirical simple estimate
of λ = 2n.
6.2.3
LeadingOnes
Fig. 6.2 presents the results for the experiment on LeadingOnes with varying n,
λ = n and µ =
λ
4 , averaged over 200 runs.
This experiment gives an overview
over the runtime with increasing n and optimal results for the empirically evaluated
parameters of λ = n and µ = λ
4 for MIMIC on LeadingOnes.
Discussion of Results
The empirically optimal parameters of λ = n and µ =
λ
4 for MIMIC on LeadingOnes and varying n, show no significant difference in
empirical runtime between UMDA and MIMIC. Our conclusion is, that MIMIC as
a bivariate EDA offers no advantage over univariate EDAs on LeadingOnes. This
comes unexpectedly, as the probabilistic model that allows bivariate dependencies in
MIMIC is seemingly suited to capture the underlying dependencies between the bits.
Setting the population size λ with λ = n, results in an expected runtime of
O(n2 log(n).
The predicted runtime could be validated in Fig.
6.2 a), matching
exactly n2 log10(n).
==PAGE:64==
54
6 Benefit of Multivariate EDAs
(a) Averaged result, function x2 log(x) plotted as reference.
(b) Averaged result with error bar and logarithmic view.
Figure 6.2: Runtime over n for UMDA and MIMIC on LeadingOnes with λ = n
and µ = λ
4 , averaged over 200 runs with error bar.
6.2.4
Further Analysis on LeadingOnes
Above findings result in the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1 The relative entropy minimization heuristic in MIMIC offers no im-
provement over the univariate probabilistic model in UMDA for optimal parameters
on LeadingOnes.
Proof Idea
1. Every generation, there is a position for which the bits are sampled according
to the marginal distribution of same position, p(Xπn).
2. Genetic drift (of frequencies for random variables in positions with higher index)
is started in the first round by selection.
3. The marginal probabilities are the same for both a population sampled through
marginal probabilities or conditional probabilities.
a) ”⇒”: The marginal probabilities of a population sampled with marginal
probabilities is expected unchanged.
b) ”⇐”: The marginal probabilities of a population sampled with conditional
probabilities are defined by the law of total probability for event xi:
p(xi) =
∑
xj∈{0,1}
p(xj)p(xi|xj)
(6.1)
==PAGE:65==
6.3 A Comparison on A Non-Deceptive Fitness Function
55
As we sample xi dependent on xj in MIMIC, random variable Xi being
dependent on random variable Xj, the law of total probability shows that
the resulting marginal probabilities are expected the same.
4. We define progress as a change in marginal probabilities for bits in order of index
towards 1 while marginal probabilities for bits with lower index stay stable.
5. Using (3) we get: the structure of the probability distribution in MIMIC does
not slow down progress on average and does not speed up progress on average.
Sampling with conditional probabilities has no expected influence with respect
to progress for optimal parameters.
However, we observed differences in runtime for non-optimal parameter settings,
for example in Fig.
5.5 for larger λ.
Non-optimal parameters show a significant
higher runtime variance and no improvement for MIMIC over UMDA! This difference
suggests that genetic drift is amplified due to sampling with conditional probabilities.
6.3
A Comparison on A Non-Deceptive Fitness
Function
The analysis of the benefit of multivariate EDAs over univariate EDAs includes the
comparison on deceptive and non-deceptive fitness functions. In the previous sec-
tion, we concluded, that the runtime of MIMIC does not benefit from its bivariate
probabilistic model in comparison to the runtime of UMDA on OneMax and Leadin-
gOnes.
In this section, we finish our comparison of non-deceptive fitness functions with a
last look at OneMax.
6.3.1
Expected Results
Not relying on any empirically validated optimal parameters, but running an experi-
ment with fix n and varying λ and µ, we expect to see similar results as in Chapter
5.3.2 and 6.2 on OneMax: RLS performing best, cGA worst and (1+1)EA, UMDA,
MIMIC and BOA similarly well in between. Following in Section 6.3.3 we discuss our
results of cGA considering the unused selection parameter.
6.3.2
A Final Comparison on OneMax
Fig. 6.3 presents the results with error bar for the experiment on OneMax with
varying λ, n = 256 and µ = λ
4 , averaged over 200 runs. This experiment presents
us with a general comparison of runtime between EDAs, (1+1)EA and RLS, while
the EDAs UMDA, MIMIC and BOA (k = 1) run with fixed µ = λ
4 . Best results
considering variance are empirically achieved by RLS, UMDA and BOA at λ = 176.
==PAGE:66==
56
6 Benefit of Multivariate EDAs
Following is the (1+1)EA with significantly higher averaged runtime and variance.
Last comes MIMIC empirically at λ = 440. The (1+1)EA and RLS run independently
of parameter λ and µ.
Fig.
6.4 presents the results with error bar for the experiment of UMDA on
OneMax with varying λ, n = 256 and varying µ = λ
s , s ∈{2, 4, 8, 16, 32}, averaged
over 200 runs. The averaged results for varying s show a similar empirical runtime
behaviour with one local minimum, besides for s = 32, where the runtime begins to
exhibit a multimodal behaviour. The area of local minima is presented in more detail
with error bar in Fig. 6.4b. The best runtime result for UMDA on OneMax can be
achieved for any s ∈{2, 4, 8} for different respective values of λ. A higher value of s
leads to an empirically higher runtime for all λ.
Fig.
6.5 presents the results for the experiment on OneMax with varying n,
λ = 2n and µ =
λ
4 , averaged over 200 runs.
This experiment gives an overview
over the runtime with increasing n and optimal results for the empirically evaluated
parameters of λ = 2n and µ =
λ
4 for MIMIC on OneMax with large n.
The
(1+1)EA and RLS run independently of parameter λ, and cGA, (1+1)EA and RLS
run independently of parameter µ. Fig. 6.5 extends the results of Fig. 6.1.
Discussion of Results
The best runtime result on OneMax are as expected
reached by RLS, as the bit flip operations in RLS allow a fast arrival at the global
optimum. Second come UMDA and BOA (tested also with k = 3), although BOA
comes with a practical model building overhead in computational cost that is not
(a) Averaged result.
(b) Averaged result with error bar.
Figure 6.3: Runtime over λ for various algorithms on OneMax with n = 256 and µ =
λ
4 , averaged over 200 runs. The RLS and (1+1)EA run independently of parameter
λ and µ and are visualized for varying λ for visibility.
==PAGE:67==
6.3 A Comparison on A Non-Deceptive Fitness Function
57
(a) Averaged result.
(b) Averaged result with error bar and focus on empirical minima
on smaller interval with λ ≤200.
Figure 6.4: Runtime over λ for UMDA on OneMax with n = 256 and varying µ,
µ = λ
s , s ∈{2, 4, 8, 16, 32}, averaged over 200 runs.
(a) Averaged result and logarithmic view.
(b) Averaged result with error bar and logarithmic view.
Figure 6.5: Runtime over n for various algorithms on OneMax with λ = 2n and
µ = λ
4 , averaged over 200 runs.
==PAGE:68==
58
6 Benefit of Multivariate EDAs
included in the runtime result. The (1+1)EA is comparatively similar in expected
runtime as for optimal parameters in UMDA, but comes with a higher variance, ref.
Fig. 6.3b. MIMIC is not competitive in comparison to UMDA and shows multimodal
behaviour, ref. Fig. 6.3b, similar to UMDA on OneMax for larger n, ref. Chapter
5.4.1. The second phase transition leads to empirically global runtime minima with
both expected runtime and considering variance. The intermediary phase results in
higher empirical runtime, similarly explained in Chapter 5.4.3.
UMDA comes notably with a variety of parameters specific i, s = 2i in µ = λ
s and
respective λ that results in similar empirical optimal runtime results, ref. Fig. 6.4b.
This is contrary to the observed differences for optimal runtime on for example Jump
in Chapter 5.5.5. UMDA additionally begins to show its multimodal behaviour on
OneMax for small values of µ (respective high values of s).
The parameters λ = 2n and µ = λ
4 for MIMIC on OneMax and varying n are
empirically resulting in close to optimal runtime behaviour, cf. Fig. 6.3b. However,
these parameters are not optimal for UMDA or BOA, although with notably similar
runtime as MIMIC for n > 100.
In the following section we discuss the seemingly worse runtime behaviour of cGA
on OneMax, contrary to the empirically similar runtime results presented in Chapter
5.2.2.
6.3.3
Varying Selection for cGA
In previous experiments with varying selection, i.a. different values for s for µ =
λ
s , s > 1, we noted, that cGA runs independently of parameter µ. This is due to
the actual missing variety in population size, in contrast to the existence in UMDA,
MIMIC and BOA.
Recent results on the runtime behaviour of cGA on Jump introduce the algorith-
mic component of an increased population size with subsequent selection [HS18]. The
results suggest a similar runtime improvement with variations in empirically optimal
parameter settings as we noted in previous sections for UMDA, MIMIC and BOA.
The cGA with varying population size as presented in [HS18] was not implemented
as part of this thesis, as our focus lies on the analysis of the algorithmic components
of EDAs and benefits of multivariate EDAs. As such, UMDA can be seen as another
univariate EDA but with existing variable λ and µ and satisfies the variety within
univariate EDAs for benchmarking.
6.4
A Comparison on Max-3SAT
The fitness function Max-3SAT returns the number of satisfied clauses for a given
clause instance. As a fitness function to the NP-complete problem 3SAT, Max-3SAT
is neither categorized well by being deceptive or non-deceptive, but solving its problem
instances is highly relevant for practical applications.
==PAGE:69==
6.4 A Comparison on Max-3SAT
59
6.4.1
Problem Instances
As problem instances, we choose problem instances provided by SATLIB [HS00], as
the satisfiability library offers a variety of problem instances and their instances are
commonly used for benchmarking in literature.
The available instances with smallest n, denoting the number of variables and the
search space dimension, are available as Uniform Random-3SAT instances generated
in the phase transition region, unforced with filtering. With m denoting the number
of clauses, m
n = 4.26 marks the phase transition region for Random-3-SAT instances
with large n [CKT91]. Those 3SAT instances are considered difficult to solve, while for
smaller m
n almost all instances seem to be satisfiable and for larger m
n the probability
of generating satisfiable instances declines to zero. 3SAT instances can be forced to
be satisfiable by including a solution or global optimum in the generation process.
This, however, changes the difficulty of the instance. Our choice of problem instances
are uf20-91, the 1.000 3SAT instances with n = 91, m = 91, generated uniformly at
random, unforced and filtered for satisfiability. Applied in Max-3SAT, the global
optimum is therefore known to be 91.
6.4.2
Expected Results
Having a variety of 3SAT problem instances in the phase transition region, we expect
to see varying results for different problem instances.
As our algorithms are not
particularly suited to solve those 3SAT instances, we do not have any expectations
regarding the best choices of λ and µ.
Additionally we can expect an exponential runtime, thus requiring another ap-
proach of comparing results. We will focus on comparing the success rate over run-
time as a stop criterion. The success rate over a denotes the proportion of runs that
resulted in sampling a global with up to a possible fitness function evaluations. The
parameters n = 20 and m = 91 allow us to obtain results although expecting an
exponential (worst-case) runtime.
6.4.3
Max-3SAT
The results are presented with references to the respective problem instance names
of uf20-91 in [HS00].
Number of Global Optima
One notable difference in the used instances is
the number of global optima. Fig. E.1 in Appendix E presents an analysis of the first
100 files of given 1.000 files. Our experiments were performed on files with a varying
number of global optima.
==PAGE:70==
60
6 Benefit of Multivariate EDAs
6.4.4
Results
Fig. 6.6 presents the results for the experiment of various algorithms on Max-3SAT
in a scatter matrix with varying λ, λ ∈{2, 4, 20, 100} and varying problem instances
computed from 100 runs each.
Fig. 6.7 presents the results for the experiment of UMDA and BOA with k =
1, 3 on Max-3SAT in a scatter matrix with varying λ, λ ∈{10, 20, 30} and varying
problem instances computed from 100 runs each.
The problem instances in File 3 to File 7 have the following number of global
optima: 1, 3, 2, 4, 23.
6.4.5
Discussion of Results
We performed extensive benchmarking on File 1 to File 10 with λ ∈{2, 4, . . . , 10}
and λ ∈{20, 30, . . . , 100}, µ ∈{ λ
2 , λ
4 } and present results on a selection of those
parameters, as the results come with repetitive patterns and following conclusions:
1. Population size: a large population size, i.a. λ > 20, results in empirically worse
results than a small population size, i.a. λ ∈{2, 4} for µ = λ
2 . Cf. results for
large λ in Fig. 6.6, File 3, File 4 and File 6.
2. Selection: trends found with µ = λ
2 are also present for µ = λ
4 . Results are not
present as initial testing suggests no improvement over µ = λ
2 .
3. Plateauing success rate: the experiments are conducted with a runtime limit of
2.000.000 for RLS, (1+1)EA, UMDA, cGA and MIMIC, and a limit of 200.000
for BOA (k = 1, 3) due to resource limits. The higher runtime limit is chosen
with respect to the number of fitness function evaluations exhaustive search
would require: 220 = 1.048.576. The success rate reaches comparatively fast a
plateau, partially close to 1.0, as seen in Fig. 6.6, empirically within the first
50.000 fitness function evaluations. This suggests the existence of local optima
with a high Hamming-distance to the global optimum.
4. There is no visible correlation between the number of global optima and the
success rate for a specific runtime limit. A further analysis is presented in the
following section.
5. BOA with k = 3 generally performs significantly better than BOA with k = 1
or UMDA for same but less-optimal parameters. This can be seen both in Fig.
6.6 and Fig.
6.7: with increasing λ the success rate decreases for all three
algorithms, but least for BOA with k = 3. This observation for non-optimal
parameters was also found for example in LeadingOnes, ref. Fig. 5.2, but is
especially of interest here, as the actual optimal parameters are unknown. We
refer here to less-optimal parameters for a lower success rate within the first
100.000 fitness function evaluations, without loss of generality (ref. 3. above).
==PAGE:71==
6.4 A Comparison on Max-3SAT
61
Figure 6.6: Success rate over maximal runtime for various algorithms on Max-3SAT
with varying λ and µ = λ
2 , computed each from 800 runs. The (1+1)EA and RLS
run independently of parameter λ.
6. The influence of the algorithmic components on the runtime, here: runtime
success, is difficult without an appropriate definition of a metric for comparison.
Previously used metric considering averaged runtime with error bar and looking
for minimal values is not applicable here, as we encounter a significant part of
runs ended due to runtime limitations on expected exponential runtime.
Similarity of Max-3SAT to Jump
Fig.
6.8 presents the fitness distance
versus the Hamming distance to the global optimum for two exemplary runs of UMDA
with λ = 8 and µ = λ
2 . The Max-3SAT instance is File 3, as it has exactly one global
optimum.
The global optimum is reached at 91, as our Max-3SAT instances have m = 91
clauses, and the global optimum is sampled at least once in the last generation as
defined as our stop criterion.
Fig. 6.8 is an attempt to reduce the n-dimensional space of Max-3SAT instances
to one dimension using the Hamming distance. This visualization leads us to the
conclusion, that we can use the fitness function Jump as a building block for Max-
3SAT instances: Hamming distance local neighbours in Max-3SAT instances lead
the frequency development towards local optima (as for all individuals in Jumpm,
where m denotes the gap size, and the number of 1-bits is less or equal n −m), and
==PAGE:72==
62
6 Benefit of Multivariate EDAs
Figure 6.7: Success rate over maximal runtime for UMDA and BOA with k = 1, 3 on
Max-3SAT with varying λ and µ = λ
2 , computed each from 2000 runs.
(a) Quick path to global optimum.
(b) Stable at local optimum.
Figure 6.8: Heatmap of count of individuals fitness (color) per fitness value (y-axis)
and Hamming distance to global optimum (x-axis). Both heatmaps are single exem-
plary runs for UMDA with λ = 8, µ = λ
2 on File 3 of selected Max-3SAT instances
with exactly one global optimum.
==PAGE:73==
6.4 A Comparison on Max-3SAT
63
the local optimum might be Hamming distance far (defined by the gap size in Jump).
Fig. 6.8b is an example of encountering a local optimum with high Hamming distance
to the global optimum.
The expected runtime success depends therefore on the likelihood of reaching a
local optimum with high Hamming distance to the global optimum. Ref. [HSS04] for
the related problem of the hardness of MaxSAT instances for local search algorithms.
This is partially independent of the number of existing global optima (ref. 4. in list
above), as we do not know the dependency between reaching such described local
optimum with respect to the number of global optima.
Notes on Diversity Preservation
We state above, that for less-optimal pa-
rameters than the empirically found optimal parameters with respect to a high success
rate until a runtime limit of 100.000, BOA seems to perform partially significantly
better than UMDA, ref. Fig. 6.7. This hints at a better diversity preservation for
BOA, as this trend is noticed for increasing k and the maximal in-degree parameter k
controls the complexity of the probabilistic model generated in BOA. Ref. to [WC11]
on diversity preservation versus convergence to a single optimum. Ref. to Chapter
D.3 for useful visualizations of analysis preservation.
6.4.6
Notes on Max-HornSAT
Max-HornSAT was initially thought of as a possible stepping stone for understand-
ing and analyzing results on Max-3SAT. We conducted experiments regarding this
idea, but came to the conclusion, that Jump is suited better.
For possibly future research we would like to state the complications and insights
for Max-HornSAT instance generations:
• To the best of our knowledge, there is no literature on Max-HornSAT instance
generation. Most likely due to the simplicity of the problem; its instances are
solvable in linear time by general SAT-solvers.
• Max-HornSAT instance generation comes with additional parameters, such
as number of clauses, number of variables within a clause or including forced
solutions or global optima (allowing simpler frequency analysis)
• Max-HornSAT instances with forced solutions are similar to FourPeaks or
similar fitness functions: a number of global optima exist while additional local
optima are generated that can be deceptive in the way that their Hamming
distance to the global optima is large.
==PAGE:74==
64
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
We analyzed the runtime behaviour of estimation of distribution algorithms (EDAs)
on combinatorial problems with focus on the influence of algorithmic components and
the benefit of multivariate EDAs. For this purpose, we first introduced EDAs and
their application on combinatorial problems. We introduced a variety of algorithms
for later comparison and developed an algorithmic framework that allows described
analysis and comparison of various algorithms (EDAs and simple evolutionary algo-
rithms) on various fitness functions. We then proposed a framework for the runtime
analysis, consisting of a simulation component for running the experiments and an
analysis component for analyzing the results of the experiments.
In total, we identified 14 different parameters within this framework. This amount
of different parameters required us to reduce the varying parameters in benchmarking
to a sensible set on which we could perform initial experiments. We began with ex-
periments with varying search space dimension n, followed by varying population size
λ and selection parameter µ. Our results include reproduction, practical validation
and discovery of multimodal behaviour for various EDAs on various common fitness
functions, such as for cGA on OneMax. We furthermore presented a trend analysis
for optimal parameters and reference them to theoretical results in literature where
existing.
On the benefit of multivariate EDAs such as BOA over univariate EDAs we first
described a cost model that includes the computational overhead of the probabilistic
functions used in every generation in the model update step. Further empirical and
theoretical results show that MIMIC, the EDA with a probabilistic model that can
express bivariate dependencies, has the same expected empirical runtime as UMDA,
a univariate EDA, on LeadingOnes. We discussed the influence of selection over the
choice of a probabilistic model, and noted that the accuracy of how well a probabilistic
model depicts the underlying dependencies of selected individuals within a population
might not affect the empirical runtime behaviour.
Our evaluation on Max-3SAT, i.a. 3SAT instances with hard uniformly at ran-
dom sampled clauses in the phase transition region, concluded the comparison on
BOA with different maximal in-degree k (where k = 0 resembles UMDA). We no-
ticed that an increasing value of k resulted in empirically better results when the
non-varying parameters were generally not optimal, hinting at a comparably greater
diversity preservation. We additionally identified Jump as the fitness function, that
resembles best a building block for Max-3SAT.
==PAGE:76==
66
7 Conclusion
The presentation and visualization of results regarding the marginal frequency
development and fitness distance correlations is novel in this thesis, to the best of our
knowledge.
Future Work
Our proposed algorithmic framework with 14 identified parameters
required a subsequent parameter reduction to allow sensible benchmarking. Future
work could include a focus on the probabilistic model building components, as de-
scribed in Chapter 4.1. We noted, that all encountered multivariate EDAs such as
MIMIC and BOA apply probabilistic models with model building heuristics, as the
underlying problem of finding the graph with dependencies that depicts the set of se-
lected individuals best might be NP-complete. However, there has been no research
regarding the guarantees of the developed graphs with such heuristics and various
metrics regarding the runtime bounds. Results will identify and further develop the
focus within the identified parameter space.
One motivation for the design of multivariate EDAs is the idea, that the structure
of an individual is more important than its specific values [DIV97]. However neglected
in model building are the actual fitness values of the individuals one performs an
update on, ref. element 8 in Chapter 4.1. A similar idea resulted in the significance-
based cGA (sig-cGA) [DK18], that considers additional input over time as input for
the model update.
In an ideal scenario, the chosen EDAs runs a relevant problem instance, finds a
set of global and local optima and returns its latest probabilistic model that allows
further insight into the problem instance. This is a scenario in which none of the
three elements are currently in practice:
1. Relevant problem instances, e.g. difficult 3SAT instances, are often solved effi-
ciently by specialized programs, e.g. SAT-solvers.
2. Most EDAs are not suited to find a set of global optima, unless additional di-
versity preserving components are added. This is further discussed in Appendix
D.3.
3. EDAs are commonly run to find a (preferably global) optimal individual, with-
out preserving its latest internal state of the probabilistic model for further
analysis.
The framework presented in this thesis allows all above with focus on the analysis
of the runtime behaviour regarding algorithmic components. However, use cases in
bioinformatics or logistics lead to the idea of future work regarding a framework
supporting all three steps and the focus of analyzing actual problem instances.
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX A
Framework
Implementation
==PAGE:78==
68
A Framework Implementation
Figure A.1: UML for simulation component with example implemented classes. Ad-
ditional classes like components from the boost library for graph-related functionality
are not part of this diagram, as separate documentation exists [SLL01].
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX B
Varying Search Space
Dimension
This chapter has additional graphs regarding the runtime comparison with variable
n. Fig. B.1, B.2 and B.3 are not presented in the main body, as the error bar is not
essential in a first comparison on mostly non-optimal parameters. Nevertheless, the
figures are provided here for additional information.
Note, for example, the smaller variance for BOA on Jump with gap size m = 3 in
comparison to UMDA in B.3.
==PAGE:80==
70
B Varying Search Space Dimension
Figure B.1: Runtime with error bar over n for various algorithms on OneMax with
λ = 50 and µ = λ
2 , averaged over 1000 runs and logarithmic view.
==PAGE:81==
B Varying Search Space Dimension
71
Figure B.2: Runtime with error bar over n for various algorithms on LeadingOnes
with λ = 50 and µ = λ
2 , averaged over 1000 runs and logarithmic view.
==PAGE:82==
72
B Varying Search Space Dimension
Figure B.3: Runtime with error bar over n for various algorithms on Jump with gap
size m = 3, λ = 50 and µ = λ
2 , averaged over 1000 runs and logarithmic view.
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX C
Varying Population
Size
==PAGE:84==
74
C Varying Population Size
Figure C.1: Runtime with error bar over λ for various algorithms on Jump with gap
size m = 3, n = 64 and µ = λ
4 , averaged over 500 runs and logarithmic view.
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX D
Discussion of MIMIC
While MIMIC, as presented by [DIV97], offers two interesting components worth
analyzing, further runtime analysis shows that they are worth being analyzed sep-
arately, as seen in Chapter 6.2. In the following sections, we support further our
choice on our MIMIC implementation by discussing the difficulties with the original
implementation by [DIV97].
D.1
Selection and Update
The description of the algorithm is partially vague, which makes the recreation of
results by [DIV97] or direct comparison impossible. The following lists consist of
quotes from same paper and comments regarding them:
1. establishing a new threshold, θ1 = θ0 −ϵ. This hints at a condition of θt+1 < θt,
while the amount of sampling as an intermediary step can prohibit this.
2. Update the parameters of the density estimator from a sample. Literal reading
suggests updating the estimator using one individual: which one, and how? On
the other hand, a sample could refer to a selection of individuals (population):
does an update respect the previous structure of minimized relative entropy or
is it discarded? The presented algorithm hints at the last mentioned choice.
3. Generate more samples. How many individuals should be sampled?
4. In the interest of computational efficiency, we employ a straightforward greedy
algorithm to pick a permutation. While it is clear, that a brute-force approach
of testing n! permutations is computationally infeasible, it is unclear, how well
the proposed heuristic performs.
D.2
Results
The authors of [DIV97] come to conclusions regarding the benefit of proposed algo-
rithm without analyzing which element deserves the credit:
1. The process is repeated [whole outer loop] until the values of C(x) cease to
improve. Was this actually used as a stop-criterion? This would mean, that a
==PAGE:86==
76
D Discussion of MIMIC
runtime improvement in terms of fitness function evaluations could simply be
the cause of an early stagnating progress!
2. [..] the MIMIC algorithm was able to capture the underlying structure of the
problem, and combine information from all the maxima. The first part is a
tautology: a defined structure, here: pairwise conditional probabilities, always
structures input, this is independent of its usability. The second part is possibly
wrong: only bivariate dependencies can be captured. In Section D.3 we analyze
further the statement of combining information from all the maxima [DIV97].
3. MIMIC directly communicates information about the cost function from the
early stages to the later stages of the search. This is dependent on especially
their second critical assumption. This could also be a description of the role of
θ.
D.3
Diversity Preservation
The authors of MIMIC [DIV97] state: the MIMIC algorithm was able to capture the
underlying structure of the problem, and combine information from all the maxima.
This statement comes in the context of the algorithm’s performance on SixPeaks, a
fitness function that adds two local optima to FourPeaks. Both fitness functions
have global optima, as described in Chapter 2.3.1, and local optima with a Hamming
distance of at least T to a global optimum.
Expected Results on FourPeaks
According to their statement, it should be
notable, also empirically, that information from the maxima in the population is
captured by the probabilistic model and used. On FourPeaks we therefore expect
to see individuals developing continuously towards the local optima of ones (leading
ones) and zeroes (trailing zeroes). We expect to see initially frequencies with a high
likelihood of sampling leading ones and trailing zeroes, and finally frequencies close
to 0.5 that suggest that both local optima are present.
Discussion of Results
Fig. D.1, D.2 and D.3 present the marginal frequency
development of MIMIC on FourPeaks with parameters n = 30, λ = 32, µ = λ
4 and
T = 3. Each figure presents the frequency development of one run, exemplary, but
with varying results.
Fig. D.1 presents a run where a global maximum was sampled finally. Fig. D.2
and Fig. D.3 present a run, where no global maximum was found after allowed 100.000
fitness function evaluations.
Without discussing the results in detail, we note, that the expected behaviour
of frequency development towards both optima is not present in any figure and was
not observed in any run. We can therefore argue, that the probabilistic model in
MIMIC does neither allow to capture the underlying structure of the fitness function
==PAGE:87==
D.3 Diversity Preservation
77
FourPeaks particularly well, nor combine the information from local optima in a
particularly useful way. We conclude, that statements regarding the benefit of cap-
turing certain structures are possibly outweighed by the lack of diversity preservation
methods, as already described in Chapter 6.4.
==PAGE:88==
78
D Discussion of MIMIC
Figure D.1: Marginal frequency development of MIMIC on FourPeaks with n =
30, λ = 32, µ = λ
4 , T = 3. A global optimum was found after 832 fitness evaluations
in generation 26.
==PAGE:89==
D.3 Diversity Preservation
79
Figure D.2: Marginal frequency development of MIMIC on FourPeaks with n =
30, λ = 32, µ = λ
4 , T = 3. No global optimum was found after 100.000 fitness evalua-
tions, or 3125 generations. Visualized are the marginal frequencies after the first 200
generations, as the frequencies for subsequent generations do not differ significantly.
==PAGE:90==
80
D Discussion of MIMIC
Figure D.3: Marginal frequency development of MIMIC on FourPeaks with n =
30, λ = 32, µ = λ
4 , T = 3. No global optimum was found after 100.000 fitness evalua-
tions, or 3125 generations. Visualized are the marginal frequencies after the first 200
generations, as the frequencies for subsequent generations do not differ significantly.
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX E
MAX-3SAT
==PAGE:92==
82
E MAX-3SAT
Figure E.1: Count of files over number of global optima within a file for the first 100
problem instances of uf20-91. The clauses of the 3SAT instances are sampled unforced
uniformly at random in the phase transition region, are filtered by satisfiability and
provided by SATLIB [HS00]. The lowest number of solutions is 1, found in 17 files.
The highest number of solutions is 83, found in 1 file.
==PAGE:93==
E MAX-3SAT
83
Figure E.2: xxx
Figure E.3: xxx
==PAGE:94==
84
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[AD11]
Anne Auger and Benjamin Doerr. Theory of randomized search heuristics:
Foundations and recent developments. Volume 1. World Scientific, 2011.
[Arm+08]
Rubén Armañanzas et al. “A review of estimation of distribution algo-
rithms in bioinformatics”. In: BioData mining 1.1 (2008), page 6.
[Bal94]
Shumeet Baluja. Population-based incremental learning. a method for
integrating genetic search based function optimization and competitive
learning. Technical report. Carnegie-Mellon Univ Pittsburgh Pa Dept Of
Computer Science, 1994.
[BC95]
Shumeet Baluja and Rich Caruana. “Removing the genetics from the stan-
dard genetic algorithm”. In: Machine Learning Proceedings 1995. Elsevier,
1995, pages 38–46.
[Ben+02]
Endika Bengoetxea et al. “Inexact graph matching by means of estima-
tion of distribution algorithms”. In: Pattern Recognition 35.12 (2002),
pages 2867–2880.
[BK01]
Christian Borgelt and Rudolf Kruse. “An empirical investigation of the
K2 metric”. In: European Conference on Symbolic and Quantitative Ap-
proaches to Reasoning and Uncertainty. Springer. 2001, pages 240–251.
[BS93]
Thomas Bäck and Hans-Paul Schwefel. “An overview of evolutionary al-
gorithms for parameter optimization”. In: Evolutionary computation 1.1
(1993), pages 1–23.
[CH92]
Gregory F Cooper and Edward Herskovits. “A Bayesian method for the
induction of probabilistic networks from data”. In: Machine learning 9.4
(1992), pages 309–347.
[Che+09]
Tianshi Chen et al. “Rigorous time complexity analysis of univariate
marginal distribution algorithm with margins”. In: Evolutionary Com-
putation, 2009. CEC’09. IEEE Congress on. IEEE. 2009, pages 2157–
2164.
[Che+10]
Tianshi Chen et al. “Analysis of computational time of simple estima-
tion of distribution algorithms”. In: IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
Computation 14.1 (2010), pages 1–22.
==PAGE:96==
86
Bibliography
[CJ10]
Cassio Polpo de Campos and Qiang Ji. “Properties of Bayesian Dirichlet
Scores to Learn Bayesian Network Structures.” In: AAAI. 2010, pages 431–
436.
[CKT91]
Peter C Cheeseman, Bob Kanefsky, and William M Taylor. “Where the
really hard problems are.” In: IJCAI. Volume 91. 1991, pages 331–340.
[Com18]
Adaptive Computing. “Moab Cluster Suite”. In: online http://www.adaptivecomputing.com
(2018).
[Com93]
Code Complete. “A Practical Handbook of Software Construction”. In:
Steve C. McConnell, lSBN 1.556 (1993), page 15484.
[DIV97]
Jeremy S De Bonet, Charles Lee Isbell Jr, and Paul A Viola. “MIMIC:
Finding optima by estimating probability densities”. In: Advances in neu-
ral information processing systems. 1997, pages 424–430.
[DJW02]
Stefan Droste, Thomas Jansen, and Ingo Wegener. “On the analysis of
the (1+ 1) evolutionary algorithm”. In: Theoretical Computer Science
276.1-2 (2002), pages 51–81.
[DK18]
Benjamin Doerr and Martin S Krejca. “Significance-based estimation-of-
distribution algorithms”. In: Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation Conference. ACM. 2018, pages 1483–1490.
[DL15]
Duc-Cuong Dang and Per Kristian Lehre. “Simplified runtime analysis
of estimation of distribution algorithms”. In: Proceedings of the 2015 An-
nual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation. ACM. 2015,
pages 513–518.
[Doe+17]
Benjamin Doerr et al. “Fast genetic algorithms”. In: Proceedings of the Ge-
netic and Evolutionary Computation Conference. ACM. 2017, pages 777–
784.
[FKK16]
Tobias Friedrich, Timo Kötzing, and Martin S Krejca. “EDAs cannot be
balanced and stable”. In: Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation Conference 2016. ACM. 2016, pages 1139–1146.
[Gam95]
Erich Gamma. Design patterns: elements of reusable object-oriented soft-
ware. Pearson Education India, 1995.
[Gra08]
Jörn Grahl. “Estimation of distribution algorithms in logistics: Analysis,
design, and application”. PhD thesis. Universität Mannheim, 2008.
[Har99]
Georges Harik. “Linkage learning via probabilistic modeling in the ECGA”.
In: Urbana 51.61 (1999), page 801.
[HGC95]
David Heckerman, Dan Geiger, and David M Chickering. “Learning Bayesian
networks: The combination of knowledge and statistical data”. In: Ma-
chine learning 20.3 (1995), pages 197–243.
[HHW96]
Tad Hogg, Bernardo A Huberman, and Colin Williams. “Frontiers in
problem solving: phase transitions and complexity”. In: Artif. Intell 81
(1996).
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
87
[HLG99]
Georges R Harik, Fernando G Lobo, and David E Goldberg. “The com-
pact genetic algorithm”. In: IEEE transactions on evolutionary computa-
tion 3.4 (1999), pages 287–297.
[HS00]
Holger H Hoos and Thomas Stützle. “SATLIB: An online resource for
research on SAT”. In: Sat 2000 (2000), pages 283–292.
[HS18]
Václav Hasenöhrl and Andrew M Sutton. “On the runtime dynamics
of the compact genetic algorithm on jump functions”. In: Proceedings
of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference. ACM. 2018,
pages 967–974.
[HSS04]
Holger H Hoos, Kevin Smyth, and Thomas Stützle. “Search space fea-
tures underlying the performance of stochastic local search algorithms
for MAX-SAT”. In: International Conference on Parallel Problem Solv-
ing from Nature. Springer. 2004, pages 51–60.
[JF95]
Terry Jones and Stephanie Forrest. “Fitness distance correlation as a
measure of problem didculty for genetic algorithms”. In: Proceedings of
the 6th international conference on genetic algorithms. Volume 95. 1995,
pages 184–192.
[Kar72]
Richard M Karp. “Reducibility among combinatorial problems”. In: Com-
plexity of computer computations. Springer, 1972, pages 85–103.
[KW19]
Martin S Krejca and Carsten Witt. “Theory of Estimation-of-Distribution
Algorithms”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.05392 (2019).
[LL09]
Hans Petter Langtangen and Hans Petter Langtangen. A primer on sci-
entific programming with Python. Volume 2. Springer, 2009.
[Lod06]
Clemens Lode. “Algorithms based on evolutionary algorithms”. In: github
(2006).
[Loz00]
Jose A Lozano. “Analyzing the population based incremental learning
algorithm by means of discrete dynamical systems”. In: Complex Systems
12 (2000), pages 465–479.
[LSW18]
Johannes Lengler, Dirk Sudholt, and Carsten Witt. “Medium step sizes
are harmful for the compact genetic algorithm”. In: Proceedings of the Ge-
netic and Evolutionary Computation Conference. ACM. 2018, pages 1499–
1506.
[McK12]
Wes McKinney. Python for data analysis: Data wrangling with Pandas,
NumPy, and IPython. ” O’Reilly Media, Inc.”, 2012.
[MKH10]
Jürgen Mayer, Khaled Khairy, and Jonathon Howard. “Drawing an ele-
phant with four complex parameters”. In: American Journal of Physics
78.6 (2010), pages 648–649.
[MM03]
David JC MacKay and David JC Mac Kay. Information theory, inference
and learning algorithms. Cambridge university press, 2003.
==PAGE:98==
88
Bibliography
[MP96]
Heinz Mühlenbein and Gerhard Paass. “From recombination of genes
to the estimation of distributions I. Binary parameters”. In: Interna-
tional conference on parallel problem solving from nature. Springer. 1996,
pages 178–187.
[Muh92]
Heinz Muhlenbein. “How genetic algorithms really work: mutation and
hillclimbing”. In: Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. on Parallel Problem Solving from
Nature, 1992. Elsevier. 1992.
[NW07]
Frank Neumann and Ingo Wegener. “Randomized local search, evolution-
ary algorithms, and the minimum spanning tree problem”. In: Theoretical
Computer Science 378.1 (2007), pages 32–40.
[NW10]
Frank Neumann and Carsten Witt. “Ant colony optimization and the min-
imum spanning tree problem”. In: Theoretical Computer Science 411.25
(2010), pages 2406–2413.
[Pel99]
Martin Pelikan. “A simple implementation of the Bayesian optimization
algorithm (BOA) in C++(version 1.0)”. In: Illigal Report 99011 (1999).
[PGC99]
Martin Pelikan, David E Goldberg, and Erick Cantú-Paz. “BOA: The
Bayesian optimization algorithm”. In: Proceedings of the 1st Annual Con-
ference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation-Volume 1. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc. 1999, pages 525–532.
[PGS01]
Martin Pelikan, David E Goldberg, and Kumara Sastry. “Bayesian opti-
mization algorithm, decision graphs, and Occam’s razor”. In: Proceedings
of the 3rd Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. 2001, pages 519–526.
[PM99a]
Martin Pelikan and Heinz Mühlenbein. “Marginal distributions in evolu-
tionary algorithms”. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on
Genetic Algorithms Mendel. Volume 98. Citeseer. 1999, pages 90–95.
[PM99b]
Martin Pelikan and Heinz Mühlenbein. “The bivariate marginal distribu-
tion algorithm”. In: Advances in Soft Computing. Springer, 1999, pages 521–
535.
[Pro15a]
Malte Probst. “Denoising autoencoders for fast combinatorial black box
optimization”. In: Proceedings of the Companion Publication of the 2015
Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation. ACM.
2015, pages 1459–1460.
[Pro15b]
Malte Probst. “Generative adversarial networks in estimation of distri-
bution algorithms for combinatorial optimization”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1509.09235 (2015).
[PT12]
Adam Prugel-Bennett and Mohammad-Hassan Tayarani-Najaran. “Max-
imum satisfiability: Anatomy of the fitness landscape for a hard combi-
natorial optimization problem”. In: IEEE transactions on evolutionary
computation 16.3 (2012), pages 319–338.
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
89
[Rud97]
Günter Rudolph. Convergence properties of evolutionary algorithms. Ko-
vac, 1997.
[Scu18]
Marco Scutari. “Dirichlet Bayesian network scores and the maximum
relative entropy principle”. In: Behaviormetrika (2018), pages 1–26.
[Sha05]
Jonathan L Shapiro. “Drift and scaling in estimation of distribution al-
gorithms”. In: Evolutionary computation 13.1 (2005), pages 99–123.
[She14]
Helen Shen. “Interactive notebooks: Sharing the code”. In: Nature News
515.7525 (2014), page 151.
[SLL01]
Jeremy G Siek, Lie-Quan Lee, and Andrew Lumsdaine. The Boost Graph
Library: User Guide and Reference Manual. Pearson Education, 2001.
[SO99]
Josef Schwarz and Jiřı́ Očenášek. “Experimental study: hypergraph par-
titioning based on the simple and advanced genetic algorithm BMDA
and BOA”. In: Proceedings of the Mendel. Volume 99. Citeseer. 1999,
pages 124–130.
[Sta06]
Garrick Staples. “TORQUE resource manager”. In: Proceedings of the
2006 ACM/IEEE conference on Supercomputing. ACM. 2006, page 8.
[SW16]
Dirk Sudholt and Carsten Witt. “Update strength in EDAs and ACO:
How to avoid genetic drift”. In: Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolution-
ary Computation Conference 2016. ACM. 2016, pages 61–68.
[Thi10]
Dirk Thierens. “The linkage tree genetic algorithm”. In: International
Conference on Parallel Problem Solving from Nature. Springer. 2010,
pages 264–273.
[Wat10]
Jean-Paul Watson. “An introduction to fitness landscape analysis and
cost models for local search”. In: Handbook of metaheuristics. Springer,
2010, pages 599–623.
[WC11]
Warin Wattanapornprom and Prabhas Chongstitvatana. “Solving multi-
modal combinatorial puzzles with edge-based estimation of distribution
algorithm”. In: Proceedings of the 13th annual conference companion on
Genetic and evolutionary computation. ACM. 2011, pages 67–68.
[Zho+11]
Aimin Zhou et al. “Multiobjective evolutionary algorithms: A survey of
the state of the art”. In: Swarm and Evolutionary Computation 1.1 (2011),
pages 32–49.
==PAGE:100==
