==PAGE:1==
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for
the routing of service technicians
Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering in Transport and Logistics
DTU Management Engineering
David Ramírez Martí - s171714
Supervisors:
Allan Larsen
Satya Sarvani Malladi
Technical University of Denmark
December 30, 2018
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgments
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisors Allan Larsen and Satya Sarvani Malladi.
Being part of a research project with them has been a great experience. Especially, working in
close collaboration with Satya has provided me with an opportunity to learn ﬁrst-hand how to
improve my work approach in an academic context.
I wish to acknowledge the support from the stakeholders involved in the EUFAL project
and in particular from MT Højgaard, which has provided the case study for this thesis.
Finally, I would also like to thank my parents, my friends and my work colleagues for being
there for me and making my life easier during these ﬁve months of hard work.
==PAGE:3==
Preface
The motivation of this thesis is to promote the introduction of electric commercial vehicles into the
ﬂeets of companies, either public or private, that provide logistics services in cities. Electric vehi-
cles have clear environmental advantages with respect to conventional vehicles, and the expected
implementation of electric mobility will make our cities much cleaner. In addition, the much
higher energy efﬁciency and the lower maintenance complexity of electric engines in comparison
with internal combustion engines leads us to think that there are several economic beneﬁts as well,
as many reports indicate. However, there are also drawbacks that impede the implementation of
electric cars, such as their battery range and the cost of both batteries and charging infrastructure.
I was curious to see how introducing electric mobility could affect the business performance, at
least in operational terms, of a company that operates a ﬂeet of vehicles in a city like Copenhagen.
Due to my background in operations research and management, I was interested in doing a thesis
within this topic that combined simulation and optimization. I contacted Professor Allan Larsen
because of his extensive experience in those ﬁelds, and he agreed to be my main supervisor. He
introduced me to the Electric Urban Freight and Logistics (EUFAL) research project and the two
available case studies: MT Højgaard’s routing of electricians to construction sites, and Region
Hovedstaden’s transportation of blood samples to hospitals in the Copenhagen urban area. Before
the summer vacation, I was introduced to Postdoc Satya Sarvani Malladi, who had been recently
allocated to the project, and she became my co-advisor. In our kickoff meeting, we all aligned on
the learning objectives for my thesis and decided that I would be working on MT Højgaard’s case.
We also decided that I would be writing my thesis as a research paper. My advisors suggested
this approach because using simulation as a tool to assess decisions in electric vehicle routing has
not been widely studied in the literature, and it could be helpful for the research team to use my
thesis as input for a future publication that integrates both case studies mentioned above. I agreed
on this because I think that a more compact thesis ﬁts my writing style better and also because I
saw this as a challenge, as I had to read more and compare my work to what other researchers
had done.
The project plan agreed with my advisors when I started my thesis work included several
steps, and the ﬁrst one was the literature review. During the ﬁrst two weeks, I read and summa-
rized papers related to simulation within city logistics. However, since this thesis covers some
other topics such as technician routing or electric mobility, the literature review has been an on-
going process that has been done in parallel with other tasks and has taken approximately three
months to ﬁnish.
The next step was to build a basic simulation model of a traveling salesman problem (TSP) in
AnyLogic. It used a nearest neighbor heuristic and incorporated some geographical information
features of the software. We did not have any data from the company by then, so I worked with a
benchmark instance for the ﬁrst two months of my thesis. During this process, I became familiar
with agent-based modeling in AnyLogic, as I had only had experience with discrete event simu-
lation in a previous DTU course. The following tasks corresponded to the addition of features to
the TSP model, such as the introduction of the energy consumption model.
When I extended the model to that of a capacitated vehicle routing problem with time win-
dows, I implemented the Clarke-Wright savings heuristic. By that time we already had data from
Region Hovedstaden’s blood samples case, so I could work with real data from Copenhagen, al-
though it was not the speciﬁc case study of my thesis. The following step was to integrate the
adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic into the simulation model, which was challenging
because the algorithm was coded in Python by my co-advisor Satya and neither of us had tried to
call a script in another programming language from AnyLogic, which is written in Java.
==PAGE:4==
Once this problem was solved, we contacted MT Højgaard to get the data that we needed to
adapt the model to their speciﬁc case study. While we were waiting for the data, I started writing
and structuring the paper, so that I could be as efﬁcent as possible when analyzing the data and
building the ﬁnal simulation model. The data was provided by the end of November, and by
that time the project was delayed by more than two weeks according to the plan. Finishing the
model was the most demanding part of the project, and the bigger size and complexity of the MT
Højgaard case made us realize that some of the previous work had some errors that we had to
solve before obtaining the ﬁnal results. Overall, I am satisﬁed with the output of my study and I
think that it offers relevant insights for further research in this topic.
The main ﬁndings of my thesis project can be found in the paper Assessing the sustainability
of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians, which is presented in the following. As I
mentioned at the beginning, I ﬁnd this topic very exciting and I would be glad if my small contri-
bution as part of this research project can help making our cities greener by encouraging logistics
companies to transition into electric mobility.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Problem description
3
3
Literature review
4
3.1
Technician routing and scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
Electric vehicle routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.3
Simulation in urban logistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4
Methodology
6
4.1
Mathematical formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2
Energy consumption model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.3
Adaptive large neighborhood search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.4
Agent-based simulation model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.5
Performance metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5
Case study description
13
6
Computational results
16
6.1
Economic and environmental assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
6.2
Analysis of operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6.3
Impact of temperature on EV energy consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
7
Conclusions
21
References
22
Appendix 1: Parameters of the energy consumption model
26
Appendix 2: Parameters of the ALNS
29
==PAGE:6==
List of Tables
1
Key Performance Indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
Vehicle speciﬁcations used in the simulation model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Temperature distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
KPI results. Each column heading indicates the number of EVs available in each
experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Parameters for efﬁciency by vehicle type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6
Parameters for PM in the energy consumption model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
7
Parameters for PT in the energy consumption model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
8
Parameters used in the ALNS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
List of Figures
1
Solution approach to the ﬂeet electriﬁcation problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Flow chart of the agent-based simulation model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Compatibility constraints generation approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Simulation view window in AnyLogic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Operational costs and CO2 emissions by number of available EVs . . . . . . . . . . .
18
6
Energy costs/100 km and CO2 emissions/km by number of available EVs . . . . . .
19
7
Distance covered and time per vehicle by number of available EVs
. . . . . . . . . .
20
8
Operational time breakdown per vehicle by number of available EVs . . . . . . . . .
20
9
Energy consumption in EVs by temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
List of Abbreviations
EV
Electric vehicle
BEV
Battery electric vehicle
PHEV
Plug-in hybrid electric vehicle
ICEV
Internal combustion engine vehicle
VRP
Vehicle routing problem
GVRP
Green vehicle routing problem
TRSP
Technician routing and scheduling problem
MFVRPTWCC
Mixed ﬂeet VRP with time windows and compatibility constraints
ABS
Agent-based simulation
DES
Discrete event simulation
ALNS
Adaptive large neighborhood search
KPI
Key performance indicator
GIS
Geographical information system
==PAGE:7==
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the
routing of service technicians
David Ramírez Martí
Department of Management Engineering, Technical University of Denmark
Abstract
The growing availability of electric vehicles (EVs) in the market brings a new alternative
to ﬂeet managers that need to purchase new vehicles, and there is a need for tools to assess
the decision of ﬂeet electriﬁcation. In the context of the technician routing in an urban setting,
many parameters that have an impact on the energy consumption of EVs change on a daily
basis. Because of this, we propose an agent-based simulation model to generate different sce-
narios that can provide a more realistic approach to the computation of the operational costs
of various degrees of EV implementation, as well as the environmental footprint of those ﬂeets
in terms of CO2 emissions. Our simulation model integrates an adaptive large neighborhood
search heuristic to solve the operational technician routing problem. In addition, our energy
consumption model includes an auxiliary component due to heating or air conditioning, which
had not been included in many optimization studies. Our results on a case study show that
the introduction of electro-mobility in urban logistics offers substantial economic and environ-
mental beneﬁts, although operational cost savings may not be enough when compared to the
high difference in acquisition costs.
Keywords: electric mobility, technician routing, simulation, urban logistics, electric vehicle (EV)
1
Introduction
Most transport activities for urban logistics today are widely regarded as not sustainable in the
long term because of the widespread use of conventional vehicles (also known as internal com-
bustion engine vehicles, ICEVs). These have a negative impact on the environment, since their
greenhouse gas emissions aggravate climate change, and also on society, as urban pollution has
a signiﬁcant effect on human health. The population living in urban areas is expected to increase
from the current 55% to 68% in 2050 (UN, 2018), and therefore the need for freight transport in
cities will predictably grow, especially because of the rising demand for e-commerce. Thus, the
effect of the negative impacts will increase if we there is no intervention. It is now an oppor-
tune moment for ﬁrms and public sector to seek win-win solutions that ensure sustainability. An
approach to this would be using less polluting vehicles to perform the same operations, such as
electric vehicles (EVs). Ambitious environmental regulations, together with the technological ad-
vances made by the industry in recent years, have made electro-mobility a real alternative for
those companies that are purchasing or planning to purchase new vehicles for their ﬂeet.
As of today, there are two main types of EVs: battery electric vehicles (BEVs) and plug-in
hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs). On the one hand, BEVs store all the energy they need in a battery,
which means that they do not produce greenhouse gas emissions at the tailpipe. This couples
1
==PAGE:8==
2
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
the emissions of a BEV to those of the energy supply, thus taking the emissions away from the
city and relocating them to the energy generation stage. The main concern about BEVs, both for
manufacturers and consumers, is that their range is still limited compared to their competition.
However, the great improvements in Li-ion batteries in recent years, both in performance and
production costs, have triggered many companies in the automotive sector to invest in research
and development (International Renewable Energy Agency, 2017). On the other hand, PHEVs
use a combination of both an internal combustion engine and a smaller battery to ensure a higher
range than BEVs. Although PHEVs are seen today as a reasonable alternative to ICEVs because
they produce less emissions and have a similar range, the plug-in electrical capabilities need the
same charging infrastructure as that needed for BEVs, which often represents a high investment
for customers.
Both types are performing similarly in terms of sales, and the global electric ﬂeet is now over
3 million EVs (International Energy Agency, 2018). The market share of EVs is expected to reach
50% by 2030 and eventually push conventional vehicles out of the market by 2050 (Waraich et al.,
2015). These predictions are rather optimistic and will only take place if policies encouraging the
purchase of EVs and restricting the use of ICEVs are enforced throughout the world, which seems
like a major global challenge in the context of ﬁghting climate change.
The focus of this article is set on the introduction of electro-mobility, speciﬁcally commercial
BEVs, in urban logistics. The growing popularity of EVs and its potential implementation in
cities raises many challenges for researchers in diverse areas such as battery technology or policy-
making. A complete description and state-of-the-art of the problems related to goods distribution
with EVs can be found in Pelletier et al. (2016). From an industrial point of view, as many car
manufacturers are introducing commercial EVs in the market, companies that use commercial
vehicles on a daily basis and that see EVs as a reasonable alternative, would beneﬁt from having
a decision analysis tool that informs them of the impact of ﬂeet electriﬁcation in terms of business
competitiveness. This is the case of MT Højgaard, the company that provides our case study.
For a company that operates a ﬂeet of vehicles in an urban setting, many parameters that
affect energy consumption in EVs are likely to change on a daily basis. An example of this is tem-
perature, which has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on auxiliary energy consumption through the heating
and air conditioning system. This can reduce greatly the autonomy of the vehicle under extreme
weather conditions, thus jeopardizing the feasibility of EV implementation in certain contexts.
Therefore, we propose an agent-based simulation model that allows us to generate different sce-
narios. This will provide a more realistic approach to the computation of the total operational
costs, among other relevant indicators, of a mixed ﬂeet of vehicles (both EVs and ICEVs) that
operate in an urban area for the routing of service technicians. The operational vehicle routing
problem is solved by means of an adaptive large neighborhood search (ALNS) heuristic, inspired
by the works of Røpke and Pisinger (2006b). Our simulation model integrates the routes generated
by the ALNS and provides a visualization of the results on a map.
In the assessment of the case study, we will compare a series of performance metrics for differ-
ent ﬂeet compositions in terms of the number of EVs. This will show an estimate of the impact, in
economic and environmental terms, of introducing electro-mobility in a company that deals with
the operational problem of technician routing in an urban area. Moreover, our assessment will
also analyze the differences between EVs and ICEVs of the operations assigned by the ALNS for
different ﬂeet compositions, as well as the impact of temperature on energy consumption in EVs.
Our study, however, will not focus on selecting the optimal composition of the ﬂeet in terms of
vehicle types; instead, several scenarios with different ratios of EVs with respect to the total ﬂeet
will be generated and tested. An additional issue that may be addressed when introducing EVs is
the location of charging infrastructure, but this decision is not part of the scope of this study.
==PAGE:9==
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
3
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• Analyzes ﬂeet electriﬁcation decisions based on generated scenarios within the context of
technician routing in an urban area.
• Builds an agent based simulation model for mixed ﬂeet vehicle routing problems that inte-
grates geographical information.
• Considers auxiliary components in the energy consumption model.
This article has been structured in the following way: in Section 2, we present the problem of
this study. In Section 3, there is a literature review of the topics that are relevant to the methods of
the solution approach. We present the methodology in Section 4. In Section 5, the case study of this
paper is described. In Section 6, the computational results of the simulation study are displayed,
along with a brief discussion of the obtained results. Finally, in Section 7 there are the conclusions
and our perspectives for future research in this direction.
2
Problem description
In this paper, we address the introduction and integration of EVs in a ﬂeet of commercial vehicles
operated by a ﬁrm that deploys technician services in an urban area. The so-called electriﬁcation
of commercial ﬂeets raises several uncertainties because the technology available in the market for
commercial electric vehicles is still in an early stage, and only a few companies have actually be-
gun incorporating EVs into their ﬂeets. However, the reduction in the operational costs of energy
and maintenance from switching from fossil fuels to the electric energy supply may indicate that
EVs are a good option, especially for urban logistics operations. Not surprisingly, many compa-
nies that deal with such operations are currently investigating EV integration into their ﬂeets. The
lack of known successful implementation cases is a factor that is impeding the decision to switch
to the new technology of EVs by abandoning the traditional (and proven to be reliable) technology
of conventional vehicles. This paper makes an effort to ﬁll this gap of knowledge to practitioners.
The main motivation of this study is to encourage the electriﬁcation of commercial ﬂeets that
operate in cities. As mentioned above, very few logistics companies have electric vehicles in their
ﬂeets and, because of that, other companies are missing decision tools for planning the implemen-
tation of EVs. The objective of this paper is to provide a tool that, given a certain ﬂeet composition,
can calculate the costs of the operations of that ﬂeet, as well as the environmental impact in terms
of CO2 emissions when compared to a 100% ICEV ﬂeet. In this way, companies that perform
logistics operations in urban areas will be equipped with decision analysis in terms of business
competitiveness to support the decision of electrifying their ﬂeet.
The operational problem that is studied in this paper consists in the routing of service techni-
cians, and can be formally deﬁned as a mixed ﬂeet vehicle routing problem with time windows
and compatibility constraints. We consider a heterogeneous ﬂeet of vans of different types vary-
ing in size and energy source. Each driver is assigned a speciﬁc vehicle for the entire horizon.
We model the possibility for EVs to visit a battery recharging station en-route. However, in the
simulation-based experimental study, we dismiss this possibility since the feasible driving range
of most commercial EVs available in the market is typically higher than the total distance cov-
ered by technicians in a single day within an urban area. We remark that adding recharging stops
to the routes would result in a signiﬁcant productivity loss even with the most recent charging
technology in the context of urban logistics and time constraints. Each customer is characterized
by a hard time window of service, although in reality, electrician services work with very loose
==PAGE:10==
4
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
time windows. The customer requests in this context can be very speciﬁc in terms of technical
skills, and not all technicians may be able to provide all the requested services. Therefore, in this
problem there are compatibility constraints between technicians and customer requests.
3
Literature review
This section has the goal of providing an overview of the state of the art related to the problem that
this paper addresses, and also at guiding the reader to what is the motivation behind approaching
this problem as a simulation study. First, we provide an overview of previous work within techni-
cian routing problems. Then, we present a brief review of the problems and solution approaches
to vehicle routing in electric mobility. Finally, we show papers pertaining to simulation analysis
within the scope of city logistics, along with a conclusion of why we consider simulation as a tool
to address this problem.
3.1
Technician routing and scheduling
The technician routing and scheduling problem (TRSP) analyzed in this paper is a variant of the
vehicle routing problem (VRP) as introduced by Dantzig and Ramser (1959), which was formu-
lated as a generalization of the traveling salesman problem. The general VRP has been extensively
studied in the literature, and different formulations with their corresponding applications can be
found in Toth and Vigo (2014).
The workforce planning of service technicians, due to its potential complexity, has been often
formulated as a scheduling problem without taking routing costs into consideration. Examples
of this are Tsang and Voudouris (1997), in which service times depend on the skills of the tech-
nicians; and Xu and Chiu (2001), where it is assumed that it is not possible to serve all requests,
and therefore the objective is to maximize the total requests served according to different priority
or urgency levels. A mixed integer programming formulation of this problem can be found in
Bredström and Rönnqvist (2008) and in Parragh and Doerner (2018), in which synchronization
constraints are included, meaning that more than one technician can attend a customer request if
needed.
The TRSP was ﬁrst formulated by Dutot and Laugier (2006) as a way of scheduling the growing
number of telecommunications technicians in France Telecom. Cordeau et al. (2010) proposed a
construction heuristic and an adaptive large neighborhood heuristic (ALNS) for a technician and
task scheduling problem formulation that has an objective function with weighted makespans.
Pillac et al. (2013) proposes a parallel ALNS metaheuristic for the TRSP, which is further extended
for dynamic TRSPs in Pillac et al. (2018). A learning experience-based approach to service times
is introduced in Chen et al. (2016), which also includes a complete formulation and description of
the technician routing problem. This problem has been recently extended to include a mixed ﬂeet
of electric and conventional vehicles in Villegas et al. (2018), which is the ﬁrst paper to look at the
mixed ﬂeet technician routing problem from an optimization point of view. A review of workforce
routing and scheduling problems, including some examples for service technicians, can be found
in Castillo-Salazar et al. (2016).
3.2
Electric vehicle routing
Green vehicle routing, understood as the optimization of energy consumption in operational rout-
ing problems, is a research ﬁeld that has grown in popularity since the deﬁnition of the green ve-
hicle routing problem (GVRP) by Erdo˘gan and Miller-Hooks (2012). An even earlier approach is
==PAGE:11==
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
5
the pollution-routing problem, introduced by Bekta¸s and Laporte (2011), which focused on reduc-
ing the cost associated to emissions and provided a detailed approach to energy consumption in
transportation. Extensive surveys of green vehicle routing research can be found in Demir et al.
(2014), Lin et al. (2014) and the more recent Bekta¸s et al. (2018). Reviews of the state of the art in
electric mobility with regards to goods distribution and city logistics are Pelletier et al. (2016) and
Margaritis et al. (2016).
Many articles in this topic are related to different extensions of the GVRP by Erdo˘gan and
Miller-Hooks (2012). An extension to the GVRP that introduced time windows and vehicle capac-
ity constraints was introduced by Omidvar et al. (2012) and solved by means of the metaheuristic
algorithms simulated annealing and genetic algorithm. A formulation with visits to recharging
stations along the routes was introduced by Schneider et al. (2014) and adapted by Keskin and
Çatay (2016) to allow partial recharging. In Murakami (2017), the author considers the original
network graph instead of a reduced graph, which allows to take into account events in interme-
diate vertices such as intersections. Leggieri and Haouari (2017) linearized the formulation of the
original GVRP and solved it with a commercial MIP solver in reasonable CPU times.
Goeke and Schneider (2015) introduced a mixed ﬂeet of electric and conventional vehicles.
The authors solved this formulation with a version of the adaptive large neighborhood (ALNS)
heuristic with some differences with respect to the ALNS as introduced by Røpke and Pisinger
(2006b). In this paper, the energy consumption model is also more detailed, since both types of
vehicles have to be considered.
3.3
Simulation in urban logistics
In the area of simulation within urban logistics, several techniques can be found in the literature,
namely agent-based simulation (ABS), discrete event simulation (DES), Monte Carlo, instance gen-
eration and system dynamics. However, according to the state of the art that can be seen in Jlassi
et al. (2017), ABS and DES are the most widely used simulation techniques in urban logistics,
which can be explained by the wide availability of commercial software that use ABS and/or DES.
In that paper, the authors also conclude that the problems of majority of the published papers they
analyzed fall into the category of Transportation, Network and Infrastructure, while those related
to Vehicle Routing and/or Electromobility have been less studied.
In the ﬁeld of simulation within vehicle routing, Fan et al. (2009) considers a multi-objective
VRPTW and solves it with the NSGA-II algorithm. Then, an ABS model is built in the simula-
tion software AnyLogic with the goal of generating different instances to test variations in two
key parameters of the problem. Merkuryeva and Bolshakovs (2010) discusses a vehicle schedul-
ing problem, and assesses the feasibility of the distribution planning in economic terms with an
ABS model in AnyLogic. This model includes four different parameters that are changed in the
"what-if" analysis. Cortés et al. (2011) looks at the technician dispatch problem from a simula-
tion perspective. This approach generates weekly instances for the daily dispatch of technicians
over a planning horizon of a year to assess the optimal number of technicians to hire (ﬂeet sizing
problem).
An electro-mobility problem within urban logistics that has been assessed through simulation
in the literature is the utilization of EVs for taxicab ﬂeets. Jäger et al. (2017) simulates the taxicab
ﬂeet of Munich. An EV-only scenario is evaluated and then it is compared it to an ICEV-only
scenario, with the results showing that vehicles with at least 250 km of autonomy could operate
without major inconveniences. Bischoff and Maciejewski (2014) analyzes the case of the smaller
city of Mielec, Poland, with the results showing that EVs can handle everyday operations like fuel-
powered cars, but a demand increase of more than 7% would be critical. The study also shows
==PAGE:12==
6
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
that introducing more than one charger per taxi rank does not reduce waiting times, and that
dispatching taxis by their state of charge instead of by their order of arrival does not produce a
more efﬁcient service.
Waraich et al. (2015) gathers previous works from the authors to develop an open source frame-
work which is aimed at analyzing detailed models of electricity demand and supply models. The
case study consists of a series of scenarios regarding the future introduction of EVs in Zurich. The
results illustrate that the shift from fuel to electricity will reduce energy consumption and CO2
emissions, although electricity demand peaks will require actions on the supply side.
This literature study aims to prove that, although the technician routing problem has been
widely studied from an optimization point of view, there is a gap in the literature for simulation
approaches, which have been more focused either on the traditional VRP without considering
electro-mobility or on other applications. In addition to this, variations in certain parameters that
change on a daily basis in the operational problem, such as the number of customer requests or
the weather conditions, have a signiﬁcant impact on EV energy consumption. Therefore, it makes
sense to seek a simulation study to generate different instances that can provide a more realistic
approach to the computation of the operational costs and other relevant performance metrics.
4
Methodology
The solution approach that has been selected to solve the ﬂeet electriﬁcation problem has three
different components, going from the operational to the strategic level in the planning hierarchy.
First, there is the operational technician routing problem, formally deﬁned as a Mixed Fleet Vehi-
cle Routing Problem with Time Windows and Compatibility Constraints (MFVRPTWCC), which
consists in generating feasible sequences of customer visits for the vehicles in the ﬂeet on any
given day. On top of the operational problem there is the simulation problem, whose goal is the
estimation of the economic feasibility and the sustainability of EV operations in urban logistics.
The focus of this paper is set on this problem and, in order to achieve this goal, we propose build-
ing a simulation model of the logistics system of interest and conducting a scenario analysis to
study the impact of various problem parameters. The solution method proposed in a future paper
within this research project for the operational problem is embedded in the simulation framework.
Finally, there is the strategic mixed ﬂeet composition problem, which consists of determining the
optimal mix composition of the ﬂeet given a set of vehicle types. However, this last problem will
not be part of this paper and will be approached in later stages of the project. In Figure 1, there is
a visual summary of the three components of the ﬂeet electriﬁcation problem.
Figure 1: Solution approach to the ﬂeet electriﬁcation problem
==PAGE:13==
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
7
4.1
Mathematical formulation
In this section, we provide a mixed integer programming model of the MFVRPTWCC as described
in Section 2. The notation used in this formulation is inﬂuenced by those in the models of Goeke
and Schneider (2015) and Keskin and Çatay (2016), and it can be seen in the following:
Sets:
K
Set of vehicles
W
Set of vehicle types
KE ⊆K
Set of EVs
F ′
Set of visits to recharging stations
F ′
0
Set of visits to recharging stations including depot vertex 0
N
Set of customers {1, 2, ..., n}
N0
Set of customers including depot vertex 0
N′
Set of customers and visits to recharging stations
N′
0
Set of customers and visits to recharging stations including depot vertex 0
N′
n+1
Set of customers and visits to recharging stations including depot vertex n + 1
N′
0,n+1
Set of customers and visits to recharging stations including both depot vertices
A
Set of arcs {(i, j) : i, j ∈N ∪{0, n + 1}}
Parameters:
dij
Distance between vertices i and j
tijk
Travel time between vertices i and j for vehicle k
bi
Recharging rate at recharging station i
Ek
Battery range of vehicle k
Qk
Capacity of vehicle k
aik
1 if task to be performed at vertex i is compatible with vehicle k, 0 otherwise
rijk(qjk)
Energy consumption between vertices i and j for vehicle k, function of qjk
di
Demand of customer i
[ei, li]
Time window of vertex i
si
Service time at vertex i
ck
Energy cost of vehicle k
fk
Daily maintenance and usage cost of vehicle k
pi
Penalty or taxi cost for not serving customer i
0, n + 1
Depot vertices
Decision variables:
xijk
1 if arc (i, j) is traversed by vehicle k, 0 otherwise
yik
Remaining battery capacity on arrival at vertex i on vehicle k
zk
1 if vehicle k is used, 0 otherwise
τik
Arrival time at vertex i
qik
Remaining cargo level on arrival at vertex i on vehicle k
ui
1 if customer i is not served, 0 otherwise
Yik
State of charge on departure from vertex i on vehicle k
==PAGE:14==
8
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
The mathematical formulation of the problem is as follows:
min
X
k∈K
fkzk +
X
(i,j)∈A
X
k∈K
ckrijk(qjk)xijk +
X
i∈N
piui
(1)
subject to:
X
j:(i,j)∈A
X
k∈K
xijk ≤1
∀i ∈N
(2)
X
j:(i,j)∈A
X
k∈KE
xijk ≤1
∀i ∈F ′
(3)
X
j:(i,j)∈A
xijk −
X
j:(j,i)∈A
xjik = 0
∀i ∈N ′, k ∈KE
(4)
X
j:(i,j)∈A
xijk −
X
j:(j,i)∈A
xjik = 0
∀i ∈N, k ∈K \ KE
(5)
X
j:(0,j)∈A
x0,j,k =
X
i:(i,n+1)∈A
xi,n+1,k = zk
∀k ∈K
(6)
X
j:(j,i)∈A
X
k∈K
xijk = 1 −ui
∀i ∈N
(7)
X
j:(j,i)∈A
xijk ≤aik
∀i ∈V, k ∈K
(8)
τik + (si + tijk) −ln+1(1 −xijk) ≤τjk
∀i ∈N0, j ∈N ′
n+1, k ∈K
(9)
τik + tijk + bi(Yik −yik) −ln+1(1 −xijk) ≤τjk
∀i ∈F ′, j ∈N ′
n+1, k ∈KE
(10)
ei ≤τik ≤li
∀i ∈N ′
0,n+1, k ∈K
(11)
qik −di + Qk(1 −xijk) ≥qjk
∀i ∈N ′
0, j ∈N ′
n+1, k ∈K
(12)
Qk ≥q0k
∀k ∈K
(13)
yik −rijk(qjk)xijk + Ek(1 −xijk) ≥yjk
∀i ∈N, j ∈N ′
n+1, k ∈K
(14)
Yik −rijk(qjk)xijk + Ek(1 −xijk) ≥yjk
∀i ∈F ′
0, j ∈N ′
n+1, k ∈KE
(15)
Ek ≥Yik
∀i ∈F ′
0, k ∈KE
(16)
xijk, zk, ui ∈{0, 1}
∀i, j ∈N ′
0,n+1, k ∈K
(17)
yik, τik, qik, Yik ≥0
∀i ∈N ′
0,n+1, k ∈K
(18)
The objective function (1) minimizes the total operational costs, which are composed of the
energy costs, the maintenance and usage costs, and the taxi costs or penalties for not serving cus-
tomers. Constraints (2) and (3) ensure that all vertices (customers and visits to recharging stations,
respectively) are visited at most once. Constraints (4) and (5) ensure ﬂow conservation at the non-
depot vertices. Constraints (6) account for the amount of used vehicles. Constraints (7) calculate
the number of customers that are not served. Constraints (8) are compatibility constraints, mean-
ing that they invalidate the non-compatible arcs. Constraints (9) guarantee the time feasibility of
arcs leaving the depot or any customers. Constraints (10) do the same but for recharging visits.
Constraints (11) ensure that time windows are respected for every visited customer. Moreover,
(9)-(11) are sub-tour elimination constraints. Constraints (12) guarantee that the demand of all
customers is satisﬁed. Constraints (13) make sure that the initial cargo level is not negative nor
goes over the capacity of the vehicle. Constraints (14) and (15) compute the state of charge at all
vertices and ensure that it is not negative. Constraints (16) establish the state of charge after a
recharging visit and make sure it is not greater that the range of the vehicle. Finally, constraints
(17) and (18) deﬁne the values that the decision variables can take.
==PAGE:15==
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
9
4.2
Energy consumption model
Our energy consumption model accounts for mechanical power, which is what the operations re-
search literature has focused the most on (see for instance Bekta¸s and Laporte (2011) or Demir
et al. (2011)), and also auxiliary power due to heating and air conditioning. Ambient temperature
has an important effect on the auxiliary energy consumption, and extreme temperatures can re-
duce greatly the range of electric cars. This loss of autonomy can threaten the feasibility of the
implementation of electric mobility in urban logistics operations, and therefore it is important to
model the auxiliary component in a realistic way. Our model for auxiliary power uses the heat
balance method as can be seen in Fayazbakhsh and Bahrami (2013) and Valentina et al. (2014).
Energy consumption rijk(qj) has been modeled as the following function, which returns the
value of energy in kWh:
rijk(qj) =







φdϕdPijk(qj)tijk
Pijk(qj) ≥0, k ∈KE
φrϕrPijk(qj)tijk
Pijk(qj) < 0, k ∈KE
max

kND + Pijk(qj)
η·ηtf , 0

tijk
k ̸∈KE
Pijk(qj) = PM((i, j), k) + PT ((i, j), k, To) + PO
PM((i, j), k) =

crmk(qj)g cos α + 1
2ρaAfcdv2 + mk(qj)g sin α + mk(qj)a

v
PT ((i, j), k, To) = IH
1
ηH
(PH + PCon) + IC
1
ηC
(PC + PCon + PRad + PP ),
where PM((i, j), k), PT ((i, j), k, To), and PO are mechanical, temperature control, and other addi-
tional energy consumption associated to a vehicle (such as a refrigerator connected to its battery),
respectively.
Here, IH and IC are binary variables that indicate whether heating mode or cooling mode is
being used. The components of PT are further deﬁned below. The main component is the heat
needed to warm up the air inside the car in case of heating (PH) or cool down in case of cooling
(PC). The rest of components are the following: PCon is the power loss due to conduction through
the surfaces of the vehicle, PRad represents the heat introduced in the car due to solar radiation,
and PP is the cooling load corresponding to one person inside the car.
PP =
X
i∈Persons
HPrADu
PH = ˙m CP (Td −To)
PC = ˙m CP (To −Td)
PCon =
X
i∈Surfaces
AiUi|To −Td|
PRad =
X
i∈Surfaces
AiτiIDN

cos θi + C (1 + cos Σ)
2
+ ρg cos θz
(1 −cos Σ)
2

,
where IDN = A exp(−B/ cos θz)
==PAGE:16==
10
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
All parameters that have been used in our model can be seen, along with a brief description
and their source, in tables 5, 6 and 7 in the appendix. Speciﬁcally, the efﬁciency parameters used
in the deﬁnition of rijk(qj) are deﬁned in Table 5, and the parameters used in the deﬁnitions of PM
and PT are deﬁned in Table 6 and Table 7, respectively.
4.3
Adaptive large neighborhood search
In order to solve the operational instance presented above, we present a new adaptive large neigh-
borhood search (ALNS) heuristic algorithm. Since its introduction by Røpke and Pisinger (2006b),
ALNS has been extensively used in the literature to solve vehicle routing problems, and specif-
ically the mixed ﬂeet vehicle routing problem with time windows as can be seen in Goeke and
Schneider (2015) and Keskin and Çatay (2016). In this section, we describe brieﬂy the ALNS that
has been embedded in the simulation model, and a full description will be provided in a future
paper within this project, along with performance analysis on a case study.
In order to get an initial feasible solution to start the ALNS algorithm, we have used the con-
struction heuristic of Goeke and Schneider (2015). Once the ALNS has a feasible solution, that
solution is ruined and recreated in every iteration by destroy and repair operators, respectively.
These methods are selected randomly in the ﬁrst iteration, and the probability for each one to be
selected is updated after each iteration accordingly to the performance of the method (roulette
wheel selection). The solutions obtained after each iteration have to fulﬁll a Simulated Annealing-
based criterion in order to be accepted as the current solution. The parameters used in the ALNS
are those used in Christensen (2014), and they are indicated in Table 8 in the appendix.
We have introduced ﬁve destroy and two repair methods in our ALNS. The destroy operators
are the following:
• Random removal. Randomly removes a certain number of vertices from the current solu-
tion.
• Worst removal. Introduced by Røpke and Pisinger (2006a), sorts all vertices by their contri-
bution to the cost of the current solution in descending order, and removes a certain number
of customers that are more likely to be at the bottom of the list.
• Shaw removal. Introduced by Shaw (1997), aims at removing vertices that are related to
each other according to several criteria i, which are weighed with a parameter γi. In our
case, the criteria are distance, arrival time difference, demand difference, a parameter that
indicates whether the vertices’ routes in the current solution are different or not, and earliest
time difference.
• Random route removal. Since there is a ﬁxed cost associated to the use of vehicles, it is
reasonable to think that the cost would decrease if there are fewer routes in the solution.
This operator removes random routes until a certain number of vertices have been removed.
• Adjacent string removal. Introduced by Christiaens and Vanden Berghe (2018) as part of
the slack induction by string removals heuristic. It removes strings of customers that are
geographically close to each other. The rationale behind this is that removing only customer
vertices that are adjacent may fail to introduce enough spatial slack to improve the solution.
If adjacent strings of customers are removed instead of only vertices, the method becomes
more effective.
==PAGE:17==
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
11
The repair operators used in our ALNS are as follows:
• Greedy insertion. Inserts the vertex that increases the cost function the least in every itera-
tion.
• Regret insertion. Introduced by Røpke and Pisinger (2006a), aims at anticipating a detri-
mental effect after inserting a vertex. The k-regret value is calculated as the difference be-
tween the best position and the k-th best possible position for a customer to be inserted in
any of the routes in the current solution. Then, the vertex with the highest regret value is
inserted in the best possible position, which is the one that yields a lower cost increase. We
implemented a 2-regret insertion method, meaning that the regret value was computed as
the difference between the best and second best insertion.
4.4
Agent-based simulation model
In the following, we present an agent-based simulation model that is capable of representing the
technician routing problem that is addressed in this paper. This model has been implemented in
the simulation software AnyLogic, and it integrates geographical information system (GIS) data
that is retrieved from OpenStreetMap.
There are three agent types in our model: the nodes of the network, the vehicles and a dummy
agent that is in charge of creating the routes by calling the ALNS algorithm. The network nodes,
which consist of the depot and customer nodes, can be considered as passive components, since
they are static and no actions are assigned to them. On the contrary, the route creator and vehicle
types are active, as both are described by a more complex behavior and have action charts assigned
to them.
There is interaction between agents in our model. The vehicle agents start their respective state
charts when they receive a message from the route creator agent. Speciﬁcally, the message is sent
after the routes have been retrieved from the results of the ALNS, so the vehicles start their oper-
ations as soon as it is possible to know which vehicles are needed to serve the customer requests
and which are their sequences of customer visits. Moreover, there exists interaction between ve-
hicles and network nodes. Every time a vehicle visits a customer, the customer agent stores that it
has been visited.
The different events that occur during a simulation run are described below and can be seen in
Figure 2. They can be divided into four groups, of which the ﬁrst two happen before the vehicles
start their operations:
1. First, the initialization of the simulation consists of setting the scenario parameters that are
stochastic but stay constant throughout the simulation, such as ambient temperature or ser-
vice times. In this stage, all agents are created: the network node agents (i.e.: depot and
customer agents) are created and placed on a map, vehicle agents are created and placed
where the initial depot is, and the route creator agent is also created.
2. Then, the action chart of the route creator agent starts. Its ﬁrst step is to generate an instance
that provides the ALNS with enough data to solve the MFVRPTWCC. Once the data instance
is available, the ALNS algorithm script is called by the simulation. Its output is read in the
next step, and a matrix with the routes for every vehicle as generated by the ALNS is stored.
After that, a message is sent to the vehicle agents.
Once the routes have been generated and the vehicle agents have received the message from
the route creator agent, the vehicles can start their operations. The next steps of the simulation are
described in the following:
==PAGE:18==
12
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
Figure 2: Flow chart of the agent-based simulation model
3. At ﬁrst, the vehicles start at the initial depot and move on to the ﬁrst customer of the route.
They wait until the time window of the customer opens (if needed) and then they start the
service. After the service is ﬁnished, they move on to the next customer and repeat this
sequence until there are no more customers to serve in the route. In that case, they go to the
ﬁnal depot and ﬁnish their tasks.
4. Finally, the simulation waits until all the vehicles have ended their operations, and when
this happens, the ﬁnal data that is needed for the calculation of the performance metrics is
retrieved. After this, the simulation run can be considered to be ﬁnished.
4.5
Performance metrics
One of the fundamental steps in simulation modeling is the deﬁnition of performance metrics.
In this section, a shortlist of key performance indicators (KPIs) is presented. A dashboard with
graphs that contain these KPIs has also been implemented in the simulation view window in
AnyLogic. The purpose of this is to get an overview with a reduced number of indicators that
==PAGE:19==
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
13
allows us to compare the performance of different ﬂeet compositions. However, there are some
other metrics that can provide relevant information after a simulation experiment, and they will
be discussed in Section 6.
The KPIs selected for this model are as follows:
Table 1: Key Performance Indicators
#
KPI
Units
1
Served customers
%
2
Number of used vehicles
-
2.1
Number of used EVs
-
2.2
Number of used ICEVs
-
3
Total operational costs
$
4
Total CO2 emissions
kg
5
Distance/vehicle
km
6
Total time/vehicle
h
7
Energy consumption for an EV/100 km
kWh
7.1
Mechanical component
kWh
7.2
Auxiliary component
kWh
5
Case study description
The study conducted for this paper is part of a larger research project called Electric Urban Freight
and Logistics (EUFAL), whose aim is to encourage the electriﬁcation of commercial ﬂeets in order
to reduce the carbon footprint of urban logistics operations. The case of this paper has been pro-
vided by Danish construction company MT Højgaard, which is considering buying commercial
BEVs, speciﬁcally the models Renault Kangoo Z.E. and Renault Master Z.E., if it does not have a
negative impact on their business performance. Its subsidiary Lindpro is the electric installations
company that provides electrician services to all construction sites of the MT Højgaard group, and
it has to deal mainly with two problems: (i) the tactical decision of assigning electricians to vehi-
cles over the entire horizon, and (ii) the operational decision of assigning jobs to electricians and
determining the tour for each subset of jobs for the corresponding vehicles (joint assignment and
routing).
We will focus on the technician routing problem in the urban area of Copenhagen (postal codes
1000-2999), which is currently managed at the beginning of each working day by Lindpro for its
conventional vehicle ﬂeet. However, we must deal with different vehicle types, including the
commercial EV models that the company is considering for their ﬂeet. This operational problem
has been formulated as a Mixed Fleet Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows and Com-
patibility Constraints (MFVRPTWCC), which will be solved by means of the ALNS heuristic as
presented in Section 4. Our simulation model will generate several scenarios with different work-
load and weather conditions (which may affect the results of the routing algorithm) in order to
provide a more realistic approach to the computation of the operational costs and other relevant
performance metrics.
In this section, we present the parameters that have been used as input to the model for our
simulation experiments, which have been classiﬁed into deterministic or stochastic. It is impor-
tant to note that the stochastic parameters are classiﬁed as such because they follow a statistical
==PAGE:20==
14
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
distribution when the instances are generated by the simulation model. However, that does not
mean that a stochastic VRP is solved in every simulation run, since all the parameters are already
determined when the ALNS is called.
The deterministic parameters are the following:
• Travel times. Retrieved from Open Source Routing Machine (Luxen and Vetter, 2011), a
routing server that uses GIS data from OpenStreetMap.
• Fleet size. The number of vehicles operated by Lindpro in the urban area of Copenhagen is
139 as of November 2018.
• Vehicle speciﬁcations. As of today, the vehicle ﬂeet is entirely composed of commercial
ICEVs, mainly Ford Connect (small van), Renault Traﬁc (medium-large van) and Volkswa-
gen Transporter (also medium-large). Since the Traﬁc and the Transporter have similar char-
acteristics and there are more Traﬁc in the ﬂeet, we consider two types of ICEVs: small ICEV
with the speciﬁcations of the Connect and medium-large ICEV with the speciﬁcations of the
Traﬁc. As mentioned above, the company is considering purchasing the commercial EVs Re-
nault Kangoo Z.E. (small van) and Renault Master Z.E. (medium-large van). Therefore, we
include two types of EVs: small EV with the speciﬁcations of the Kangoo Z.E. and medium-
large EV with the speciﬁcations of the Master Z.E.. We also know that the number of small
vans is approximately half the number of medium large-vans, and we preserve that ratio in
our simulation experiments.
The additional weight for tools and equipment has been estimated by the company to be
250 kg for small vans and 400 kg for medium-large vans. CO2 emissions will be calculated
for ICEVs with their speciﬁc emissions/km times the distance they cover, and for EVs with
the average emissions/kWh in the Denmark (Danish Energy Agency, 2018) times the energy
they consume. The maintenance and tyre costs (ﬁxed costs) are considered to be 2$/day for
ICEVs (Victoria Transport Policy Institute, 2017) and 65% of that cost for EVs (Lebeau et al.,
2013). A summary of the parameters used for our calculations is displayed in Table 2:
Table 2: Vehicle speciﬁcations used in the simulation model
Small EV
Renault
Kangoo Z.E.
M-L EV
Renault
Master Z.E.
Small ICEV
Ford Connect
M-L ICEV
Renault Traﬁc
Available EV range
30 kWh
30 kWh
-
-
Weight
1505 kg
2125 kg
1623 kg
1800 kg
Add. weight
250 kg
400 kg
250 kg
400 kg
CO2 emissions
364 g/kWh
364 g/kWh
124 g/km
170 g/km
Fixed costs
1.3 $/day
1.3 $/day
2 $/day
2 $/day
• Energy costs. The cost of electricity in Danish households is 0.36$/kWh as of the ﬁrst half
of 2018 (Eurostat, 2018). The cost of diesel fuel in Denmark is 1.61$/l as of December 2018
(Statista, 2018), which has been converted into 0.1787$/kWh for our calculations.
• Customer demands. As can be seen in the energy consumption model and in the notation
of the mathematical formulation, energy consumption rijk depends on qjk, which represents
the cargo level on arrival at vertex j for vehicle k. However, because of the characteristics of
the technician routing problem, the demand for all customer requests is set to 0.
==PAGE:21==
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
15
• Time windows. The company does not work with strict time windows, so the earliest time
is set to 0 for all nodes and the latest time is considered to be the end of the technicians’
working day (in Denmark, 7.4 hours).
• Depot and customer locations. Based on a list of customer locations provided by the com-
pany, we have generated a list of 988 addresses in the urban area of Copenhagen. When the
number of customer requests in a scenario has been selected, the customer locations are ran-
domly picked from the list. The ﬁrst element in the list is the depot location, and we consider
the start and end depot to be the same. This address list also contains latitude and longitude
information, which has been obtained by means of an online geocoder (LocalFocus, 2018).
Since the urban area of Copenhagen is relatively ﬂat, we assume that the slope of the road is
0 degrees.
The parameters that include stochasticity are the following:
• Number of customer requests. Based on historical data from the company, we can con-
clude that the number of customer requests typically ranges between 375 and 475 customers.
Therefore, a uniform discrete distribution has been created for this parameter with a mini-
mum of 375 and a maximum of 475.
• Service times. The service time represents the amount of time needed to serve a customer
request, which is assumed to be the same for all drivers. The data provided by the company
allows us to analyze service times. These show that around 25% of the visits are done in
less than 10 minutes, half of them in less than 30 minutes and 75% of them in less than two
hours. Since we have historical data of service times, it has been possible to create a custom
continuous distribution for service times in AnyLogic based on that data.
• Task-technician skills compatibility. Information about technician skills was considered by
the company to be conﬁdential, and the generation of compatibilities between technicians
and customer requests has been rather complicated to model in a realistic way. Our approach
to this has been to create four different driver skill sets (namely A, B, C and D), which are
randomly assigned to vehicles with a probability of 25% each. Each of these skill sets can be
compatible with tasks with a service time up to a certain amount of time. In our case, A can
do tasks up to 90 minutes, B up to 180 minutes, C up to 270 minutes and D up to 360 minutes
(see Figure 3, where the blue color indicates compatibility between driver and task).
Figure 3: Compatibility constraints generation approach
However, setting a full compatibility between those skill sets and tasks according to service
times yielded a very low number of vehicles needed to serve all requests, as well as a long
time taken by the ALNS to generate a solution. Therefore, in order to make the results of
the ALNS more realistic and computationally faster, we decided to assign Bernoulli distri-
butions with 0.05 probability (that is, a discrete distribution that returns 1 with a probability
==PAGE:22==
16
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
of 5% and 0 with a probability of 95%) if there is a match between a driver skill set and a
customer request. This means that, on average, 1 in every 20 vehicles with a suitable driver
skill set will be compatible with the task. Since there is a theoretical possibility of having
customer requests with no compatible drivers, we assign a random driver to those speciﬁc
requests.
• Temperature. Based on historical climate data for the last 5 years in the city of Copen-
hagen (Danish Meteorological Institute, 2018), four different distributions have been created
to model air temperature, one for each season. All of them are normal truncated continuous
distributions, and the probability for each one to be selected is 25%. The parameters (in oC)
of the distributions are shown in Table 3:
Table 3: Temperature distributions
Distribution
Minimum
Maximum
Mean
Std. deviation
Winter
-9.1
12.2
2.733
2.273
Spring
-9.3
29.3
8.567
4.367
Summer
5.4
33.1
17.686
4.676
Autumn
-3.7
27.5
10.733
2.985
6
Computational results
In this section, we present the results of the simulation experiments that we have performed in or-
der to assess the electriﬁcation of the company’s ﬂeet as described in Section 5. Our experiments
have been conducted on a personal computer with an 8th generation Intel Core i5 processor with
8 GB of RAM and running Windows 10. They are carried out using AnyLogic Personal Learning
Edition, with the ALNS being implemented in Python and called by AnyLogic at the beginning of
every simulation run. The ALNS has been limited to 25 iterations in order to increase computa-
tional speed. As can be seen in Figure 4, the simulation view window contains a visualization of
the routes performed by each vehicle on a map, as well as a dashboard with several graphs that
contain relevant performance metrics.
We have performed two parameter variation experiments:
• Our main experiment changes the number of available EVs for the ALNS while ﬁxing the
maximum number of vehicles to the current ﬂeet size. We have analyzed 11 different degrees
of EV implementation, namely 0, 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 30, 60, 90, 120 or 139 available EVs. We
generated more scenarios with fewer EVs because that is what the company is considering
at the moment. Every scenario was run for 50 replications. This experiment, including all
550 simulations, took approximately 33 hours to ﬁnish. The results of this experiment are
analyzed in depth in Section 6.1 and Section 6.2, and a table with the results for the KPIs
presented in Section 4 can be seen in Table 4. All results are averages across replications.
• An additional experiment was conducted to assess the effect of temperature on EV energy
consumption through its auxiliary component. We set the number of available EVs to 15
and dismissed the seasonal temperature distributions presented in Section 5. 10 different
temperature scenarios are created, from -10oC to 35oC, with a step of 5oC. Each scenario is
run with a ﬁxed seed and without replications. The experiment took around 40 minutes to
ﬁnish and its results are analyzed in Section 6.3.
==PAGE:23==
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
17
Figure 4: Simulation view window in AnyLogic
Table 4: KPI results. Each column heading indicates the number of EVs available in each experiment
#
KPI
0
3
6
9
12
15
30
60
90
120
139
1
Served customers (%)
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
99.99%
100.00%
100.00%
2
Number of used vehicles
119.40
114.82
115.14
116.00
117.78
115.56
116.06
117.34
116.88
114.54
116.08
2.1
Number of used EVs
0.00
3.00
6.00
9.00
12.00
15.00
30.00
60.00
90.00
112.86
116.08
2.2
Number of used ICEVs
119.40
111.82
109.14
107.00
105.78
100.56
86.06
57.34
26.88
1.68
0.00
3
Total operational costs ($)
801.86
761.74
771.38
757.14
761.29
750.03
714.79
645.21
571.58
508.62
517.45
4
Total CO2 emissions (kg)
908.13
858.66
876.82
850.67
850.13
843.85
790.39
694.41
611.73
552.31
563.97
5
Distance/vehicle (km)
42.20
42.21
42.84
42.41
42.36
42.94
43.01
43.83
43.75
43.04
42.61
6
Total time/vehicle (h)
5.22
5.21
5.24
5.27
5.26
5.26
5.29
5.31
5.28
5.23
5.24
7
Energy consumption for an EV/100 km (kWh)
-
21.68
22.23
21.94
22.04
22.29
22.22
21.11
20.49
20.45
20.96
7.1
Mechanical component (kWh)
-
17.95
17.93
17.95
17.87
17.95
17.63
17.04
16.58
16.33
16.20
7.2
Auxiliary component (kWh)
-
3.72
4.30
3.99
4.16
4.35
4.60
4.07
3.91
4.12
4.76
==PAGE:24==
18
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
6.1
Economic and environmental assessment
In the following, we analyze the results of our main simulation experiment in terms of the busi-
ness competitiveness and the environmental impact of different degrees of EV implementation.
It is important to remark that, with our instance generation set-up, no customer requests are left
unattended (in only one case out of 550, 3 customer were not served), and the number of needed
vehicles does not increase if we substitute ICEVs by EVs. This applies to all scenarios of EV imple-
mentation, which indicates that the lower range of EVs does not have an impact on the capacity
of the ﬂeet for attending the demand. This can be explained by the relatively low distance that
the technicians drive on a daily basis, which is around 42 km on average, i.e. far less than the
expected EV range. In Figure 5, we can see a graph with the results for operational costs and CO2
emissions. For all three lines, it is possible to see that there is practically no difference between the
scenarios with 120 and 139 available EVs. That is because the number of vehicles needed to serve
the demand is usually below 120 for all tested scenarios, and therefore the differences between
having 120 or 139 available EVs can only be seen in a small number of instances.
Figure 5: Operational costs and CO2 emissions by number of available EVs
The results for the operational costs show that there is a signiﬁcant cost reduction as we in-
crease the number of EVs. Speciﬁcally, there would be a 37% reduction of the operational costs if
all vehicles in the ﬂeet were electric. This means that, on average, an EV is 2.44$/day cheaper than
an ICEV when performing the same operations. The results of the scenarios with 15 or less EVs
illustrate that the cost savings per vehicle do not decrease faster when the number of available
EVs is lower. By contrast, we can see that cost savings are relatively linear until there are enough
EVs to cover all the demand.
The CO2 emissions results follow a very similar trend if we compare them to the operational
costs results in Figure 5, as both are linked to the energy consumption. There is a 39.2% reduction
of the total CO2 emissions if we substitute all ICEVs by EVs, meaning that an EV emits on average
3 kg/day less than an ICEV that performs the same tasks. Moreover, if we consider that the CO2
emissions corresponding to the generation of the electricity consumed by EVs are not produced
inside the urban area, we can say that each EV takes 7.5 kg of CO2 away from the city every day.
==PAGE:25==
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
19
In Figure 6, we provide more detailed ﬁgures of the different scenarios for energy costs (with-
out including maintenance and tyre costs) and CO2 emissions weighed by distance.
Figure 6: Energy costs/100 km and CO2 emissions/km by number of available EVs
These graphs show that both energy costs and CO2 emissions are 35-40% lower in EVs than in
ICEVs. Note that, in the case of CO2 emissions/km, values for ICEVs are lower in the scenarios
with more EVs. That is because in those cases, the routing algorithm selects less medium-large
vans, which are heavier and more pollutant.
The assessment of operational costs reveal that, in this case study, there is a saving of less than
40% of the daily costs when an ICEV is replaced by an EV. However, this may fall short when
compared to the difference in acquisition price between conventional and electric cars, which is
around 65% for commercial vehicles of similar characteristics (Renault Danmark, 2018). Given the
electricity cost in Denmark (the highest in the EU), EVs may not seem as attractive as in other
countries. Nevertheless, there is a remarkable cost reduction at the operational level, and the
evident environmental beneﬁts of reducing the amount of urban CO2 emissions still suggest that
ﬂeet electriﬁcation is overall a good decision.
6.2
Analysis of operations
This part focuses on examining the differences between EVs and ICEVs in terms of the distances
and times assigned to them by the ALNS routing algorithm. These variations occur because of the
lower operational cost of EVs, so the heuristic is likely to choose EVs over ICEVs and to assign
longer routes to EVs. Our purpose here is to analyze how relevant this contrast is. By looking at
the second KPI in Table 4, we can see that all available EVs are selected in every scenario except
in the last two, in which the number of needed vehicles can be less than the number of available
EVs as commented above.
In Figure 7, we present average distance and total time ﬁgures per vehicle, differentiating be-
tween EVs and ICEVs. The distance graph shows how routes longer than average are consistently
assigned to EVs in comparison to ICEVs when there are fewer EVs available. Accordingly, routes
shorter than average are assigned to ICEVs when there are more EVs in the ﬂeet. On average, the
distance covered by EVs is 21.4% longer than that covered by ICEVs.
The time graph shows that the average shift length for technicians is around 5.2 hours for
all scenarios. This gives an average ﬂeet utilization of 60.6% if we take into account that not all
vehicles are used by the ALNS. In reality, this number may be higher due to the existence of
customer requests placed outside the urban area that are served by technicians based in the city.
However, these were dismissed in our study for simpliﬁcation purposes.
==PAGE:26==
20
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
Figure 7: Distance covered and time per vehicle by number of available EVs
The difference between EVs and ICEVs in terms of route length can be also seen in the time
graph, as technicians that drive EVs are assigned longer shifts than those that drive ICEVs. In
order to assure that this difference is proportional to that seen in the distance graph, we need to
look into how the time is being used, since there could be also a signiﬁcant variation in the time
spent serving customer requests. A breakdown of the operational time can be seen in Figure 8:
Figure 8: Operational time breakdown per vehicle by number of available EVs
These graphs show that driving times for EVs are, as expected, greater than those assigned
to ICEVs. However, there is an additional, smaller difference in serving times. This may happen
because (i) having a longer route often means visiting a greater number of customers, or (ii) the
construction heuristic tends to assign more customers to the ﬁrst vehicles in the set, which in our
case are EVs. Since we are using a low number of iterations, the construction heuristic has a great
impact on the ﬁnal solution for each simulation run.
6.3
Impact of temperature on EV energy consumption
As mentioned in the beginning of this section, an additional experiment was performed in order
to verify our auxiliary energy consumption model and, as a consequence, assess the effect of tem-
perature on energy consumption in EVs. The output variable that has been selected to analyze
this is the energy consumption per 100 km, and it can be seen in Figure 9. Moreover, it is split into
its mechanical and auxiliary components, showing the percentage of the latter with respect to the
total energy consumption on the graph.
==PAGE:27==
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
21
Figure 9: Energy consumption in EVs by temperature
It is worth noticing that under adverse weather conditions, especially in the winter, the energy
consumption can increase by more than 50% in EVs. Speciﬁcally, in the case of -10oC as can be seen
in Figure 9, it increases by 65%, with the auxiliary component accounting for 39.4% of the total
energy consumption. In the case of intense heat during the summer, with a temperature of 35oC,
auxiliary energy represents 31.2% of the total energy consumption. These ﬁgures are consistent
with those offered by Renault for the range of the Kangoo Z.E. (Renault Danmark, 2018).
The impact of ambient temperature is particularly relevant in urban areas, as cars move at a
slower speed than on intercity roads. Therefore, vehicles need more time to cover 100 km and,
since the energy consumption is proportional to the driving time, they need to consume more
energy in the heating or air conditioning system when driving through the city.
7
Conclusions
This paper aims at analyzing the sustainability of introducing electric mobility in a ﬂeet of vehi-
cles operated by service technicians in an urban area. We have reviewed previous work in the
literature, and we have noticed a gap for simulation studies within technician routing that in-
clude electro-mobility. Since many parameters that affect energy consumption in EVs change on a
daily basis in the context of urban logistics, we propose simulation as a tool to generate scenarios
that can provide a more realistic approach to the computation of the operational costs and CO2
emissions, among other relevant performance metrics.
We have deﬁned the operational problem as a mixed ﬂeet vehicle routing problem with time
windows and compatibility constraints (MFVRPTWCC), and we have provided a mathematical
formulation that can be seen as an extension of the models presented by Goeke and Schneider
(2015) and Keskin and Çatay (2016). Our energy consumption model accounts for auxiliary power
due to heating or air conditioning, which had not been considered in many optimization studies
and represents an important part of the total energy consumption, especially in EVs. We have
proposed an agent-based simulation model to generate different instances of the MFVRPTWCC.
==PAGE:28==
22
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
These instances are solved by means of an adaptive large neighborhood search (ALNS) algorithm,
and the results for each instance are read and carried out by our simulation model. This model
has been implemented in the simulation software AnyLogic and it includes GIS data from Open-
StreetMap. The output of the routing algorithm is visualized on a map, along with a dashboard
that includes the KPIs selected for our analysis.
The case study for this paper was provided by MT Højgaard, and we focused on the routing
of electricians to construction sites in the urban area of Copenhagen. The main challenge that was
raised when setting the input to our model was how to approach compatibility constraints, as we
did not have access to such conﬁdential information. With our case study set-up, the results show
some interesting ﬁndings. First, EV range restrictions do not affect the number of cars needed to
serve all the demand: this means that technician routing in cities is a favourable scenario for EV
implementation, even if heavy electric vans have a very limited range. Moreover, overall CO2
emissions are reduced by 3 kg/day when substituting an EV by an ICEV. In terms of costs, the
results show that there is a 37% reduction per vehicle on average at the operational level when
switching from conventional to electric. The analysis of the routing operations assigned by the
ALNS reveal that EVs cover longer routes than ICEVs, which is consistent with the deﬁnition of
the operational costs in the objective function. An additional experiment was conducted in order
to assess the impact of temperature on energy consumption in EVs, and it illustrated that adverse
weather conditions can reduce the range of EVs by up to 40%.
All in all, the cost analysis demonstrates that ﬂeet electriﬁcation offers a considerable cost re-
duction at the operational level, and taking into account its environmental beneﬁts, it seems like a
reasonable decision. However, operational cost savings may fall short when compared to the high
cost of purchasing an EV when compared to an ICEV, as well as the cost of the charging infras-
tructure needed for this change. We suggest a thorough assessment of the total cost of ownership
based on our results as a line of further research. In the same way, we propose doing an analysis of
how electricity costs in different countries impact EV implementation feasibility, since Denmark
is a country with very high electricity costs and our results show that it is not the most suitable
setting for EV implementation.
References
Bekta¸s, T., Fabian Ehmke, J., Psaraftis, H. N., and Puchinger, J. (2018). The role of operational
research in green freight transportation. European Journal of Operational Research, 16(28):1–
17.
Bekta¸s, T. and Laporte, G. (2011). The pollution-routing problem. Transportation Research Part B,
45:1232–1250.
Bischoff, J. and Maciejewski, M. (2014).
Agent-based simulation of electric taxicab ﬂeets.
In
Transportation Research Procedia, volume 4, pages 191–198. Elsevier B.V.
Bredström, D. and Rönnqvist, M. (2008). Combined vehicle routing and scheduling with tempo-
ral precedence and synchronization constraints. European Journal of Operational Research,
191(1):19–31.
Castillo-Salazar, J. A., Landa-Silva, D., and Qu, R. (2016). Workforce scheduling and routing prob-
lems: literature survey and computational study. Annals of Operations Research, 239:39–67.
==PAGE:29==
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
23
Chen, X., Thomas, B. W., and Hewitt, M. (2016). The technician routing problem with experience-
based service times. Omega (United Kingdom), 61:49–61.
Christensen, J. M. (2014). Adaptive large neighbourhood search with exact methods for VRPTW.
Christiaens, J. and Vanden Berghe, G. (2018). Slack induction by string removals for vehicle rout-
ing problems. Technical report.
Cordeau, J.-F., Laporte, G., Pasin, F., and Røpke, S. (2010). Scheduling technicians and tasks in a
telecommunications company. Journal of Scheduling, 13:393–409.
Cortés, C. E., Gendreau, M., Leng, D., and Weintraub, A. (2011). A simulation-based approach
for ﬂeet design in a technician dispatch problem with stochastic demand.
Journal of the
Operational Research Society, 62(8):1510–1523.
Danish Energy Agency (2018). Key ﬁgures | Energistyrelsen.
Danish Meteorological Institute (2018). Måned/sæson/år: DMI.
Dantzig, G. B. and Ramser, J. H. (1959). The truck dispatching problem. Management Science,
6(1):80–91.
Demir, E., Bektas, T., and Laporte, G. (2011). A comparative analysis of several vehicle emission
models for road freight transportation. Transportation Research Part D, 16:347–357.
Demir, E., Bektas, T., and Laporte, G. (2014). A review of recent research on green road freight
transportation. European Journal of Operational Research, 237:775–793.
Dutot, P.-F. and Laugier, A. (2006). Technicians and interventions scheduling for telecommunica-
tions. Technical report.
Erdo˘gan, S. and Miller-Hooks, E. (2012).
A green vehicle routing problem.
Transportation
Research Part E, 48:100–114.
EUNADICS-AV (2018). Solar zenith angle (SZA).
Eurostat (2018). Electricity price statistics - Statistics explained.
Fan, W., Xu, H., and Xu, X. (2009). Simulation on vehicle routing problems in logistics distribu-
tion. COMPEL - The International Journal for Computation and Mathematics in Electrical
and Electronic Engineering, 28(6):1516–1531.
Fayazbakhsh, M. A. and Bahrami, M. (2013). Comprehensive modeling of vehicle air conditioning
loads using heat balance method. SAE International.
Goeke, D. and Schneider, M. (2015). Routing a mixed ﬂeet of electric and conventional vehicles.
European Journal of Operational Research, 245:81–99.
International Energy Agency (2018). Global EV outlook 2018. Technical report.
International Renewable Energy Agency (2017). Electric vehicles: Technology brief. Technical
report.
Jäger, B., Wittmann, M., and Lienkamp, M. (2017). Agent-based modeling and simulation of taxi
ﬂeets. In Conference on Future Automotive Technology, pages 1–22.
==PAGE:30==
24
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
Jlassi, S., Tamayo, S., and Gaudron, A. (2017). Simulation applied to urban logistics: a state of the
art. In Proceedings of 10th International Conference on City Logistics.
Keskin, M. and Çatay, B. (2016). Partial recharge strategies for the electric vehicle routing problem
with time windows. Transportation Research Part C, 65:111–127.
Kühlwein, J. (2016). Driving resistances of light-duty vehicles in Europe: present situation, trends,
and scenarios for 2025. Technical report.
Lebeau, K., Lebeau, P., Macharis, C., and Van Mierlo, J. (2013). How expensive are electric vehicles?
A total cost of ownership analysis. World Electric Vehicle Journal, 6(4):996–1007.
Leggieri, V. and Haouari, M. (2017). A practical solution approach for the green vehicle routing
problem. Transportation Research Part E, 104:97–112.
Lin, C., Choy, K. L., Ho, G. T. S., Chung, S. H., and Lam, H. Y. (2014). Survey of green vehicle
routing problem: past and future trends. Expert Systems With Applications, 41:1118–1138.
Liu, K., Wang, J., Yamamoto, T., and Morikawa, T. (2018). Exploring the interactive effects of ambi-
ent temperature and vehicle auxiliary loads on electric vehicle energy consumption. Applied
Energy, 227(January):324–331.
LocalFocus (2018). Batch geocoder for journalists.
Luxen, D. and Vetter, C. (2011). Real-time routing with OpenStreetMap data. In Proceedings of the
19th ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information
Systems, GIS ’11, pages 513–516, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
Margaritis, D., Anagnostopoulou, A., Tromaras, A., and Boile, M. (2016). Electric commercial
vehicles: practical perspectives and future research directions. Research in Transportation
Business & Management, 18:4–10.
Merkuryeva, G. and Bolshakovs, V. (2010).
Vehicle schedule simulation with AnyLogic.
In
UKSim2010 - UKSim 12th International Conference on Computer Modelling and Simulation,
pages 169–174.
Murakami, K. (2017). A new model and approach to electric and diesel-powered vehicle routing.
Transportation Research Part E, 107:23–37.
Omidvar, A., Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, R., Omidvar, A., and Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, R. (2012). Sus-
tainable vehicle routing: strategies for congestion management and refueling scheduling.
Parragh, S. N. and Doerner, K. F. (2018). Solving routing problems with pairwise synchronization
constraints. Central European Journal of Operations Research, 26:443–464.
Pelletier, S., Jabali, O., and Laporte, G. (2016). 50th anniversary invited article - Goods distribution
with electric vehicles: review and research perspectives. Transportation Science, 50(1):3–22.
Pillac, V., Gu, C., and Medaglia, A. L. (2018). A fast reoptimization approach for the dynamic
technician routing and scheduling problem. In Recent Developments in Metaheuristics, vol-
ume 62, pages 347–367. Springer.
Pillac, V., Guéret, C., and Medaglia, A. L. (2013). A parallel matheuristic for the technician routing
and scheduling problem. Optimization Letters, 7(7):1525–1535.
==PAGE:31==
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
25
Ramsey, J. and Kuehn, T. (2018). Solar radiation. pages 1–14.
Renault Danmark (2018). Ny Kangoo Z.E. | Elbiler | Renault Danmark.
Røpke, S. and Pisinger, D. (2006a). A uniﬁed heuristic for a large class of vehicle routing problems
with backhauls. European Journal of Operational Research, 171:750–775.
Røpke, S. and Pisinger, D. (2006b). An adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic for the pickup
and delivery problem with time windows. Transportation Science.
Schneider, M., Stenger, A., and Goeke, D. (2014). The electric vehicle-routing problem with time
windows and recharging stations. Transportation Science, 48(4):500–520.
Shaw, P. (1997). A new local search algorithm providing high quality solutions to vehicle routing
problems. Technical report.
Song, B., Kwon, J., and Kim, Y. (2015). Air conditioning system sizing for pure electric vehicle.
World Electric Vehicle Journal, 7:407–413.
Statista (2018). Diesel prices in Denmark 2000-2018 | Statistic.
Toth, P. and Vigo, D. (2014). Vehicle routing: Problems, methods, and applications.
Tsang, E. and Voudouris, C. (1997). Fast local search and guided local search and their application
to British Telecom’s workforce scheduling problem. Operations Research Letters, 20:119–127.
UN (2018). 68% of the world population projected to live in urban areas by 2050, says UN | UN
DESA | United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs.
Valentina, R., Viehl, A., Bringmann, O., and Rosenstiel, W. (2014). HVAC system modeling for
range prediction of electric vehicles.
IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, Proceedings,
(Iv):1145–1150.
Victoria Transport Policy Institute (2017). Transportation cost and beneﬁt analysis II - Vehicle costs.
Technical report.
Villegas, J., Guéret, C., Mendoza, J. E., Montoya, A., and Villegas, J. G. (2018). The technician
routing and scheduling problem with conventional and electric vehicle. Technical report.
Waraich, R. A., Georges, G., Galus, M. D., and Axhausen, K. W. (2015). Adding electric vehicle
modeling capability to an agent-based transport simulation. In Transportation Systems and
Engineering: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications, pages 282–318.
Xu, J. and Chiu, S. Y. (2001). Effective heuristic procedures for a ﬁeld technician scheduling prob-
lem. Technical report.
==PAGE:32==
26
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
Appendix 1: Parameters of the energy consumption model
Table 5: Parameters for efﬁciency by vehicle type
EVs
Notation
Description
Value
Source
φd, φr
electric
engine
efﬁ-
ciency
during
dis-
charge and recupera-
tion
1.184692,
0.846055
Goeke and Schneider (2015)
ϕd, ϕr
coefﬁcient to account
for external factors and
state of charge for dis-
charge and recupera-
tion
1.112434,
0.928465
Goeke and Schneider (2015)
ICEVs
Notation
Description
Value
Source
k
engine friction factor
0.2 kJ / rev / l
Demir et al. (2011)
N
engine speed
33 rev/s
Demir et al. (2011)
D
engine displacement
1.6 liters
Renault Danmark (2018)
η
efﬁciency
parameter
for diesel engines
0.9
Demir et al. (2011)
ηtf
drive train efﬁciency
0.4
Demir et al. (2011)
==PAGE:33==
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
27
Table 6: Parameters for PM in the energy consumption model
PM
Notation
Description
Value
Source
cr
coefﬁcient
of
rolling
friction
0.01
Demir et al. (2011)
α
gradient of the road
0◦
See Section 5
ρa
density of air
1.2041 kg/m3
Demir et al. (2011)
Af
frontal surface area of
the vehicle
4.06 m2
Kühlwein (2016)
cd
drag coefﬁcient
0.34
Kühlwein (2016)
mk(qj)
total mass due to vehi-
cle in kg k with mass qj
reaching node j
-
See Section 5
g
gravity acceleration
9.81 m/s2
Demir et al. (2011)
vk
average speed of vehi-
cle k in m/s
15 m/s
-
ak
acceleration of vehicle
k in m/s2
0
Demir et al. (2011)
==PAGE:34==
28
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
Table 7: Parameters for PT in the energy consumption model
PT
Notation
Description
Value
Source
A, B, C
constant coefﬁcients from
ASHRAE Clear Day Solar
Flux Model
1.088, 0.205, 0.134
Ramsey and Kuehn (2018)
θz
zenith angle (the angle of
solar light with respect to
the vertical)
35o
EUNADICS-AV (2018)
θi
angle of incidence (with
respect to the normal to
surface i)
55o
EUNADICS-AV (2018)
ρg
reﬂectivity of ground
0.2
Fayazbakhsh and Bahrami (2013)
Ai
area of surface i
Awindshield = 1 m2,
Awindow = 0.6 m2,
Arear
=
0.8 m2,
Aroof
=
1
m2,
P
i Ai = 4 m2
Fayazbakhsh and Bahrami (2013)
τi
emissivity of surface i
0.8
Fayazbakhsh and Bahrami (2013)
Ui
heat transfer coefﬁcient of
air with respect to surface
i
0.003 kW/m2·K
Fayazbakhsh and Bahrami (2013)
CP
speciﬁc heat of air at con-
stant pressure
1.005 kJ/kg·K
Fayazbakhsh and Bahrami (2013)
ηH/C
thermal
efﬁciency
of
heaters or coolers
2.5 for both
Liu et al. (2018)
˙m
mass of air ﬂow rate from
the heater/cooler
0.3185 kg/s
Song et al. (2015)
HP
human heat production
rate
58.2 W/m2
Fayazbakhsh and Bahrami (2013)
np
number of passengers
1
-
ADu
DuBois area (the surface
area of skin of an adult)
1.8 m2
Fayazbakhsh and Bahrami (2013)
Td
desired temperature
20◦C
-
To
outside temperature
-
See Section 5
==PAGE:35==
Assessing the sustainability of electro-mobility for the routing of service technicians
29
Appendix 2: Parameters of the ALNS
Table 8: Parameters used in the ALNS
ALNS
Notation
Description
Value
ζ
cooling factor
0.9999
ω
start temperature parameter
0.015
π
maximum removal percentage
35%
η
segment size
125
γ
resetting parameter
5000
φ
noise parameter
0%
r
reaction factor
0.1
σ1
new global best reward
33
σ2
better current solution reward
9
σ3
new solution reward
13
