==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Machine Learning Methods
for Power System Applications
José María Hidalgo Arteaga
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3800
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
www.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Security assessment is among the most fundamental functions of power system opera-
tor. The sheer complexity of power systems exceeding a few buses, however, makes it
an extremely computationally demanding task. The emergence of deep learning meth-
ods that are able to handle immense amounts of data, and infer valuable information
appears as a promising alternative. This thesis has three main contributions. First,
inspired by the remarkable performance of convolutional neural networks for image
processing, it is represented for the first time power system snapshots as 2-dimensional
images, thus taking advantage of the wide range of deep learning methods available
for image processing. Second, deep neural networks are trained on a large database
for the NESTA 162-bus system to assess both N-1 security and small-signal stability.
It is found that the deep learning approach is over 255 times faster than a standard
small-signal stability assessment, and it can correctly determine unsafe points with
over 99% accuracy. The deep learning algorithm is successfully tested in the IEEE
14-bus system, where it is found capable of determining the security of an operat-
ing point with an almost 100% accuracy. The deep learning approach outperforms
simpler neural networks for power system security assessment. Third, the deep neu-
ral network is integrated to a security-constrained optimal power flow through an
iterative algorithm. This algorithm finds a feasible operating point that is classified
as secure by the deep neural network but is not capable yet to obtain the optimal
solution.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was prepared at the Department of Electrical Engineering (DTU
Elektro) at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements for
acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Electrical Engineering.
It has been carried out under the supervision of Prof. Spyros Chatzivasileiadis
from DTU Elektro. A scientific paper based on the work in this thesis and named
”Deep Learning for Power System Security Assessment” has been submitted to the
conference IEEE Powertech 2019.
Kongens Lyngby, December 28, 2018
José María Hidalgo Arteaga
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Professor Spyros Chatzivasileiadis for giving me
the opportunity of working in such a relevant emerging topic. He has been a great
supervisor, finding always time for meetings and giving me the necessary feedback
and guidance to succeed with this work. I also want to thank Spyros for encouraging
me to aim high during this Master’s thesis, resulting in the submission of my first
scientific paper.
I also want to thank Fiodar Hancharou for his help and creativity during his
two months as a visiting student at DTU. He participated in the generation of the
first images representing a power system state as well as in developing deep learning
algorithms.
An acknowledgement goes also to Florian Thams, PhD student at DTU. He in-
troduced me the computer cluster at DTU and provided me with databases that I
used to train machine learning algorithms. He also provided me with small-signal
stability analysis calculations when I needed it.
Lejla Halilbasic, PhD student at
DTU, deserves also a thanks for her help with formulating optimal power flows in a
Python environment.
The last but not the least, I would like to thank my parents for their support
during my Master’s studies.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
2.1
Structure of a multi-layer perceptron . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Single artificial neuron . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Error curves in the training and validation sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Structure of an autoencoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Structure of a CNN with 3-dimensional input arrays . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Structure of a recurrent neural network. Source: [16] . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.7
Gross electricity generation from renewable sources in Germany. Source:
https://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/EN/Infografiken/development-of-electricity-
generation-from-renewables-in-germany.html . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1
Channel P . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Channel Q
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Channel V
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Example of image representing a snapshot of NESTA 162-bus power system 19
3.5
Structure of a typical CNN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.6
Convolution between two nodes in a CNN. Source: https://towardsdatascience.
com/applied-deep-learning-part-4-convolutional-neural-networks-
584bc134c1e2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.7
Max-pooling between two nodes in a CNN. Source: https://www.quora.
com/What-is-max-pooling-in-convolutional-neural-networks
. . .
23
3.8
Image representing the weights in Conv1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.9
Radar chart of the scores in the different cases. Table 3.3 describes the
used parameters for each case. Note that each axis has a slightly different
range in order to enhance the readability of the figure. The numerical
values of the scores can be seen in Table A.1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.10 Radar chart of the scores with a basic MLP vs ConvNet. Note that the
axes in Specificity and MCC have been scaled differently than the rest of
scores. The numerical values of the scores can be seen in Table A.2 . . . .
30
3.11 Example of image representing a snapshot of IEEE 14-bus power system .
32
3.12 Image representing the weights in Conv1 for the IEEE 14-bus case . . . .
33
3.13 Radar chart of the scores with a basic MLP vs ConvNet in generated
database. The numerical values of the scores can be seen in Table A.3 . .
35
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
List of Tables
3.1
Representation of the CNN architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Confusion Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
Cases depending on Φ and α. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Time tests: Small-signal stability analysis vs. ConvNet model . . . . . . .
31
3.5
Representation of the CNN architecture for the IEEE 14-bus power system 33
3.6
Scores obtained from a basic MLP vs ConvNet for the IEEE 14-bus system 34
4.1
Operational costs for the different AC-OPF cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
A.1 Model’s scores
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
A.2 Scores obtained from a basic MLP vs ConvNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
A.3 Scores obtained from a basic MLP vs ConvNet for the generated database
45
B.1
Bus data from the IEEE 14-bus case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
B.2
Generator data from the IEEE 14-bus case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
B.3
Branch data from the IEEE 14-bus case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
C.1 Bus data from the NESTA 162-bus case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
C.2 Generator data from the NESTA 162-bus case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
C.3 Branch data from the NESTA 162-bus case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
List of Figures
vii
List of Tables
ix
Contents
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Machine Learning in Power Systems
5
2.1
Artificial Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Deep Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Applications of Machine Learning in Power Systems
. . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Deep Learning for Power System Security Assessment
17
3.1
Training and Testing Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Image Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Structure of the Deep Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
Proposed Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.6
Algorithm Extension to Other Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Extensions for AC-OPF
37
4.1
CNN-constrained AC-OPF
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
CNN-guided AC-OPF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Conclusion
41
==PAGE:14==
xii
Contents
5.1
Achievements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
A Scores in Radar Charts
45
B IEEE 14-bus Case System
47
C NESTA 162-bus Case System
49
Bibliography
57
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The first chapter of this Master’s thesis report aims to introduce the work performed
during the thesis.
At first, Section 1.1 explains the context in which this thesis
has been done and the main motivations. Section 1.2 briefly shows the methodology
followed to achieve the goals set in the Master’s thesis. Finally, Section 1.3 introduces
the structure of this document.
1.1
Context and Motivation
The exponential increase of Big Data collection nowadays, as well as the constantly
developing Big Data analysis techniques, has enabled engineers and data scientists
to continually find new applications of machine learning in several fields.
One of
these benefited fields is power system operation, which has evolved recently thanks
to the increasing deployment of smart meters and sensors in the power grid. The
need of processing the collected data from the just mentioned devices and extracting
meaningful information out of it, has turned machine learning into an essential set of
tools to perform these tasks.
This thesis finds its motivation in the improvement of the efficiency in performing
power system security assessment. The goal is to build a machine learning algorithm
that aims to classify an operating point from a power system as secure or unsecure.
This classification should be way faster than performing small-signal stability analysis
[17] for all possible N-1 contingencies in a power system. The data collected from
sampling the operation of a power system can be used to train these machine learning
algorithms.
The use of deep learning algorithms for power system security assessment is a topic
that is still in its early development phase, being [23] the only publication made so far
about it. The possibility of developing one of the first applications of deep learning
in power system security assessment as well as writing and submitting one of the first
scientific papers treating this promising topic is certainly the biggest motivation of
this Master’s thesis.
This thesis has three main contributions.
First, taking advantage of the wide
range of deep learning methods for image processing, it is introduced for the first time
appropriate 2-D representations of power system snapshots as images. Second, using
a large database of operating points for the NESTA 162-bus system [6], different deep
neural networks for N-1 security and small-signal stability assessment are trained, and
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
their performance is investigated. Finally, it is also briefly discussed ways to integrate
such deep neural networks in a security-constrained optimal power flow framework.
1.2
Methodology
The methodology applied to implement the main contributions of this thesis, pre-
sented in last section, is explained in the following paragraphs.
The very first step is to obtain the database of a power system, in this case the
NESTA 162-bus system. The set of data must contain multiple snapshots representing
operating points in the power system. A database accurately representing the security
boundary in the NESTA 162-bus case is obtained from [25].
The concept of image of the state of a power system is then designed and the
database is turned into a set of images, one per snapshot. The images contain power
and voltage data from all buses and lines in the NESTA 162-bus system. The images
are labelled as secure or unsecure. This images are used to train convolutional neural
networks, a type of deep learning algorithm that has been proven successful in im-
age recognition and classification. The deep neural network must be able to perform
the power system security assessment accurately and faster than by using traditional
methods, such as computing small-signal stability analysis for all possible N-1 contin-
gencies or computing load flows. In other terms, the success of this algorithm depends
on increasing the computational speed by using deep neural networks.
In order to prove the deep learning algorithm’s success, this same method is
applied with a different database from the NESTA 162-bus case and with a database
from other power system, the IEEE 14-bus case [4]. The deep neural network is also
compared to basic neural networks with the purpose of showing how a deep learning
algorithm outperforms basic machine learning algorithms in power system security
assessment.
The trained deep neural network is then integrated in a security-constrained opti-
mal power flow. Due to the complexity of the deep learning algorithm, its integration
in an optimal power flow is made as an iterative process where the line flows limits
are variables guided by the deep neural network.
The databases used for training the neural networks are generated in the HPC
DTU cluster computer using Matpower 6.0, a MATLAB-based optimal power flow
library. The deep neural networks are implemented using TensorFlow, an open-source
Python-based machine learning library. The images are created also in a Python
environment.
The convolutional neural networks are trained in the GPU cluster
owned by DTU.
The optimal power flows and its variations are implemented using Pypower, the
open-source Python-based version of the Matpower 6.0 library.
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Structure
3
1.3
Structure
This Master’s thesis is structured in different chapters. Chapter 2 explains the basics
of machine learning needed to understand the content of the following chapters. It is
focused on neural networks and deep learning algorithms in general and ends showing
machine learning applications in power systems.
Chapter 3 is the most relevant
chapter of the whole thesis. It explains how the images from power systems snapshots
are created as well as how the deep neural networks are structured and trained. In
this chapter, the performance on different evaluation metrics of the deep learning
algorithm is analysed. Deep convolutional neural networks are also tested on other
power systems.
In Chapter 4, the different approaches to integrate deep neural networks in a
security-constrained optimal power flow are explained. This thesis concludes in Chap-
ter 5 with a recap of the achievements made in this thesis and suggestions on the paths
to follow in future work.
==PAGE:18==
4
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Machine Learning in
Power Systems
Machine learning can be defined as a category of algorithm that aims to increase
software applications’ accuracy in prediction of outcomes that have not been explicitly
programmed. It is a current application of artificial intelligence which also provides
computer systems the ability to learn and improve automatically from experience.
This set of algorithms begin the learning process with an input dataset of observa-
tions or samples from the behaviour of a system. Using statistical analysis, machine
learning algorithms look for patterns and build mathematical models in order to take
decisions or make predictions. The main goal of machine learning is to allow comput-
ers learn without any human intervention during the learning process. These methods
are completely data-driven and rely on different sets of data that are used to train the
mathematical model (training set), validate the model while training and improve its
performance (validation set) and finally test it on unseen data (test set).
Machine learning algorithms can be classified depending on the problem they
intend to solve and the type of data available.
These different machine learning
methods are listed below.
• Supervised learning: This subcategory of machine learning uses for training
a set of data consisting on a pair of input (typically a set of different variables)
and output (also named supervisory signal) observations from a system. The
algorithm then builds a mathematical model capable of inferring the possible
outcomes from unseen input observations.
Depending on the type of output data, these algorithms can be identified as
regression algorithms, if the output data can have any numerical value within a
range, or classification algorithms, if the output is restricted to a set of labels or
classes. These mathematical models are trained by the iterative optimization
of an objective function that aims to minimise the prediction errors.
Supervised learning has applications in multiple fields like power systems, image
recognition, financial markets analysis, business intelligence, human resources,
computer vision, etc.
==PAGE:20==
6
2 Machine Learning in Power Systems
• Unsupervised learning: This machine learning subset of algorithms learns
from unlabelled, uncategorised or unclassified training data. In other terms,
the training data does not have any output observations, only a set of input
variables. Unsupervised learning can identify commonalities in the data and
react depending on the presence of such commonalities in unseen data. These
algorithms are capable of learning the relationship between elements in a set of
data that has not been previously labelled. This allows unsupervised learning
algorithms to draw inferences and to uncover hidden structures in the data that
are not evident.
The most commonly used methods in unsupervised learning are clustering algo-
rithms or cluster analysis. These algorithms group the data in different clusters
in a way that samples belonging to one cluster have more commonalities with
other observations from the same cluster than with elements belonging to other
clusters.
Unsupervised learning is widely used in fields such as medicine, bioinformatics,
pattern recognition, image analysis, etc.
• Reinforcement learning: The last subcategory of machine learning methods
interacts directly with its environment by producing actions and discovering
errors that result in a reward.
The most important characteristics of these
methods are trial and error search and delayed reward. Reinforcement learning
allows software agents and machines to determine automatically the optimal
behaviour in order to maximise its performance in a specific context. A rein-
forcement signal in form of a reward feedback is required for the agent to learn
which is the best action.
Reinforcement learning has a wide range of applications in control systems,
industrial automation and robotics. In [22], DeepMind presents AlphaGo, a
reinforcement learning algorithm capable of beating five times in a row the
European champion of the game Go and later beating four times against one
the World champion of the game Go. This paper is a benchmark in machine
learning and artificial intelligence applications.
All these machine learning methods use mathematical optimization with the pur-
pose of minimising prediction errors or wrong decisions and ensure that the learning
process is taking place.
The most powerful tool within machine learning are artificial neural networks
which are presented in section 2.1. The large amounts of data available nowadays
plus the advance in neural network algorithms result in the famous subcategory of
machine learning called deep learning which is explained in section 2.2.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Artificial Neural Networks
7
2.1
Artificial Neural Networks
Artificial neural networks (ANN) are a set of machine learning algorithms that have
been inspired by the biological neural networks that constitute the human brain.
Artificial neural networks are a machine learning algorithm framework that work
with complex models and processes complex data inputs. The applications of ANNs
are spread over numerous fields and all subcategories of machine learning algorithms.
In the same way as in biological neural networks, ANNs are based on a collection of
connected artificial neurons, also called nodes or perceptrons. Imitating the synapses
between biological neural networks, these artificial neurons receive signals from their
connections to other nodes and process those signals before transmitting them to
additional connected nodes.
The signal connecting two artificial neurons is a real number and the output of
each node is computed by a non-linear activation function of the sum of its weighted
inputs. The connections between nodes have weights associated that are adjusted
while the learning process takes place. These weights can increase or decrease the
strength of the connection between two artificial neurons. The signals are sent through
the connections depending on biases, parameters associated to each neuron that are
adjusted while learning, and non-linear activation functions. Artificial neurons are
typically aggregated into layers. Each layer may process its inputs in a different way
than the other ones depending on its shape and the place they have in the ANN.
Signals are processed from the first layer, also named input layer, to the last layer,
also called output layer, passing through multiple hidden layers.
Figure 2.1: Structure of a multi-layer perceptron.
==PAGE:22==
8
2 Machine Learning in Power Systems
The first and simplest type of ANN is the so called feed-forward neural network.
In this type of neural network, the information only moves forward from the input
layer, through the hidden layers (if any) to the output layer. If there is hidden layers,
this kind of neural network can be called multi-layer perceptron (MLP). The structure
of a typical multi-layer perceptron is shown in Figure 2.1. In this image it can be
seen an ANN with two hidden layers, an input layer with 10 features or variables and
an output layer with two labels, classes or variables.
Equation 3.1 shows how the input from other artificial neurons is processed in a
perceptron to build its output.
Xj = g(
n
∑
i=1
(WijXi + bj))
(2.1)
In the just mentioned equation, Xj is the output from the neuron j, Xi is the output
from the perceptron i from the previous layer, Wij is the weight in the connection
between neurons i and j, bj is the bias associated to neuron j and g is the activation
function of the neuron j. This is easily seen in Figure 2.2 where the weights multi-
plying the previous perceptron signals are summed to the bias and introduced to an
activation function that will determine the output signal of the artificial neuron.
Activation
function
P
w2
x2
...
...
wn
xn
w1
x1
b0
1
inputs weights
Figure 2.2: Single artificial neuron.
The learning process in ANNs is made by adjusting a set of trainable parame-
ters: weights and biases. This trainable parameters are randomly initialised, usu-
ally in a normal distribution.
The most popular learning technique for MLPs is
back-propagation. In back-propagation, the output values of the neural network are
compared to the actual values and the error is calculated by a predefined cost or
loss function. This error is fed backwards through the neural network adjusting the
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Artificial Neural Networks
9
weights in each connection and the biases in each neuron with the goal of minimis-
ing the value of the cost function. The weights and biases are adjusted properly via
gradient descent, a non-linear optimization method that calculates the derivative of
the error function with respect to the trainable parameters and changes weights and
biases in a way that the value of the loss function decreases.
This process is repeated the times needed to converge to a state of the weights and
biases where the value of the loss function is small. Once this happens, the neural
network has learned to some extent from the input data. While training the ANN,
the input data is typically fed via small batches of data. The gradients of the loss
function are calculated and the weights and biases are updated after every time a
batch of data is fed to the network. Every time the whole input dataset (all the small
batches) is fed into the network for training, an epoch can be counted.
Figure 2.3: Error curves in the training and validation sets.
After every epoch, the error is calculated in the validation set to see if it is decreas-
ing as desired. The number of epochs needed to train the ANN comes determined
by the error curves shown in Figure 2.3. The more epochs the ANN is trained, the
lower will be the error in the training set but this is not the same in the validation
set. If the training error is remarkably small while the validation error is big, the
neural network is over-fitted, meaning that it has learned the training data extremely
well and is incapable of generalising to other datasets. If the error in both training
and validation sets is high, the neural network is under-fitted and it requires more
training. The optimal number of epochs is reached when the validation error reaches
its minimum value. Over-fitting and under-fitting must be avoided.
==PAGE:24==
10
2 Machine Learning in Power Systems
2.2
Deep Learning
Deep learning, also known as deep neural networks, is a subset of machine learning
that uses large amounts of data, known simply as Big Data, to train a wide variety of
complex neural networks. Deep learning algorithms have applications in supervised,
unsupervised and reinforcement learning.
The evolution of deep learning has come hand to hand with the evolution of the
digital era, which has brought an enormous amount of raw data in all possible forms
and from every scientific field. This Big Data comes usually unstructured with high
levels of abstraction. The fact that the amount of data is so vast that could take
decades for humans to extract information out of it, makes deep learning acquire
a huge potential in processing this data and extracting this relevant information.
Deep learning algorithms become the perfect match to develop artificial intelligence
systems.
The exponential evolution of processors and specially the use of GPUs
(Graphics Processing Unit) for training deep learning algorithms has made possible
the breakthrough of deep learning amongst the most successful methods to handle
Big Data and create AI applications.
Deep neural networks can have multiple architectures depending on the problem
they intend to solve and the type of data available for it. The three major deep neural
network architecture types are briefly explained below.
• Unsupervised Pre-trained Networks (UPNs): This type of deep learn-
ing algorithms can be classified as unsupervised learning. They use previously
trained weights as starting point instead of initialise them randomly. The most
common architectures within this category are autoencoders, whose structure
can be observed in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Structure of an autoencoder.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Deep Learning
11
Autoencoders are neural networks used to learn highly efficient encodings (rep-
resentation of the dataset) in an unsupervised way. The goal of autoencoders
is to learn this encodings for dimensionality reduction. After the dimensional-
ity reduction side, the auto encoder generates a representation of the original
input (decoding). They basically compress the data from the input layer into
a reduced code that is then uncompressed that aims to represent the initial
input. Its architecture is usually a feed-forward neural network, specifically a
MLP with an input and output layers of the same size and with several smaller
hidden layers in between. They are widely used in feature extraction.
• Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs):
Convolutional nets are pre-
sented in [16] as neural networks designed to process data that comes in forms
of multiple arrays. These arrays are typically two-dimensional, when represent-
ing for example images, or three-dimensional, if the arrays represent volumes.
Convolutional neural networks are feed-forward multilayer neural networks as
well.
A CNN’s goal is to learn features in the training data via convolution. They
suit perfectly for image and object recognition. Their efficacy in image and
video recognition shows the power of deep learning algorithms.
They have
been successfully applied in detection and recognition of regions and objects in
images. Benchmark companies like Google or Apple use deep convolutional nets
for language processing, face recognition, computer vision and multiple artificial
intelligence applications.
Figure 2.5: Structure of a CNN with 3-dimensional input arrays.
The structure of this type of neural networks comes with a first set of layers
(convolutional and pooling layers) where the patterns of the input arrays are
found and processed. The last set of layers are fully-connected layers, in the
same way as a MLP. This structure is represented in Figure 2.5 in a simple way.
Deep convolutional nets are used later in this report for power system security
==PAGE:26==
12
2 Machine Learning in Power Systems
assessment and therefore the structure of a convolutional neural network is
explained in more detail in Chapter 3.
• Recurrent Neural Networks: Recurrent neural networks make use of se-
quential information. They have the name recurrent because they perform the
same task for all different elements belonging to a sequence, being the output
dependant on previous computations. This class of ANN has the connections
between nodes activated depending on the variable time. Recurrent neural net-
works behave dynamically in time sequences. They can use their internal state
as a memory and process different sequences of inputs.
A basic recurrent neural network is formed of nodes grouped in layers and
connected to every single node of the next successive layer.
Unlike in feed-
forward neural networks, each node is activated depending on a real numerical
value that varies in time domain.
Input vectors filled with real numerical values arrive at the input layer, one at
a time. The recurrent neural network calculates the activations of every node
as in Equation 3.1. Each layer of the recurrent neural network processes one
element of the sequence. The typical structure of a recurrent neural network is
shown in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Structure of a recurrent neural network. Source: [16].
Recurrent neural networks are very powerful dynamic systems that find appli-
cations in handwriting or speech recognition.
Recursive Neural Networks are a type of recurrent neural networks that are or-
ganised hierarchically in form of tree structures with a fixed number of branches
instead of the parallel structure shown in Figure 2.6. Recursive nets express bet-
ter the relationships between long distance elements in a sequence.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Applications of Machine Learning in Power Systems
13
2.3
Applications of Machine Learning in Power
Systems
The increasing quantity of sensors and data collectors deployed in modern power
systems has led to enormous amounts of data collected about power system operation,
energy consumption and electric power generation. This Big Data from power systems
can help to model, predict and understand physical behaviours of power systems.
Data mining and machine learning experts have found an escalating amount of
opportunities in applications of Big Data analysis techniques to power systems and
the energy business. Since energy-related data is typically available to the public
and easily accessible, data scientists and engineers find the opportunity to make
data-driven predictions in fields such as renewable energy, energy markets or power
system security. Machine learning has also been proven a really useful tool in energy-
based applications like efficiently monitoring and regulation of energy consumption
in households.
The constant increase in the share of renewable energy production makes notably
important to adapt the power system operation to new technologies. Figure 2.7 shows
the increase of renewable energy production in Germany during the first fifteen years
of this century. The accelerated rise in renewable energy integration in modern power
systems has been supported by numerous machine learning applications in the power
generation industry, specially in solar and wind energy. The correct prediction of
the power output in solar and wind power plants is crucial for bidding in electricity
markets. Energy traders take use of machine learning algorithms on a daily basis to
forecast power generation and then offer it in their corresponding electricity markets
with the goal of minimising operational costs.
In wind energy production, a wind farm’s performance relies on the total power
generated by the wind turbines. The estimation of the power generation as well as
the power curve (i.e. the power output as a function of the wind speed) is a hard
task due to non-linearities and depends on multiple factors like the location of the
wind farm, the weather forecast and seasonalities. In Ref. [18], an equivalent model
of a wind farm is built under normal operating conditions based on a data-driven
approach, specifically artificial neural networks. The just mentioned model is used
for monitoring the power generation process and for power production forecasting.
In Ref. [5], the wind power output from a wind turbine is predicted by training a
regression tree. A deep learning approach, based in convolutional neural networks,
for probabilistic wind power forecasting is presented in [28].
In solar energy, machine learning methods have also been used recently to increase
the accuracy of the solar power forecasts with the purpose of optimising the solar en-
ergy production in solar power plants.
In Ref.
[2], an extreme learning machine
(basically a feed-forward neural network algorithm performing a classification) tech-
nique is utilised for photovoltaic power forecasting. In [9], deep learning algorithms,
in particular autoencoders, are applied to solar energy power forecasting, showing
a superior performance compared to basic neural networks and physical forecasting
==PAGE:28==
14
2 Machine Learning in Power Systems
models.
Figure 2.7: Gross electricity generation from renewable sources in Germany. Source:
https://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/EN/Infografiken/development-
of-electricity-generation-from-renewables-in-germany.html.
Concerning power system operation, the most relevant topic in which machine
learning has found applications is in power system security. Power system security
assessment belongs to the most fundamental functions of every system operator. Its
aim is to screen a wide range of possible operating points in order to identify a safe
operating region and eliminate the possibility of a blackout. Power system operators
run different types of security assessment at regular time intervals, ranging from intra-
day to every year, checking each operating point against a defined set of instability
types, including steady-state stability (e.g. N-1 security criterion), transient stability,
small-signal stability, and voltage stability [20].
Assessing power system security for every possible operating point is an extremely
computationally demanding task. For systems exceeding the size of a few buses, the
problem becomes intractable due to the millions of possible operating points. Several
approaches have been proposed in the literature, and some of them have also been
applied in real power systems, to address this challenge, either through the definition
of stability indices that are fast to calculate, through analytical reformulations and
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Applications of Machine Learning in Power Systems
15
approximations (e.g. Lyapunov function [27]) or different computationally efficient
methods [19, 26].
Machine learning for transient stability assessment has been applied for the first
time in Ref. [29], in the form of decision trees. Since then, different approaches have
been proposed for different problems, e.g. security assessment [12], controlled island-
ing [14], and others. With the recent very successful application of deep convolutional
neural networks for image and speech recognition, and extremely difficult combina-
torial problems (e.g. Go game), deep learning methods appear to offer a promising
toolbox with significant potential for power system applications.
Assessing power
system security by deep learning, however, remains highly unexplored. Ref. [7] uses
machine learning to assess power system security and devise remedial actions. Ref.
[23] uses deep learning for extracting valuable features in order to build security rules
that can distinguish between safe and unsafe points.
In Chapter 3, deep learning algorithms will be used to perform power system se-
curity assessment demonstrating how powerful is a deep learning approach compared
to other techniques.
==PAGE:30==
16
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Deep Learning for
Power System Security
Assessment
The deep learning algorithm introduced is based on convolutional neural networks
(CNN), which have been successful for applications in image recognition. Inspired by
that, in this thesis it is developed a representation of power system snapshots by im-
ages, which can then be fed directly to the convolutional neural network. Considering
the rapid development of powerful deep learning algorithms for image processing, an
appropriate representation of power system snapshots as images can take advantage
of all the state-of-the-art methods developed in the artificial intelligence community.
In the first sections, the input data used for the training and testing of the neural
network is presented. Then, the following sections continue with the methodology to
create the appropriate images, and the structure of the CNN. The results and the
application of the deep learning algorithm in other systems is shown at the end of
this chapter.
3.1
Training and Testing Database
The input data is generated for the NESTA 162-bus system [6]. In previous work
by the Center of Electric Power and Energy at Technical University of Denmark, an
efficient database generation method has been introduced, which manages to generate
hundreds of thousands of operating points, for a specific load profile, around the
security boundary of the system about 10-20 times faster than other state-of-the-art
methods [25]. Using this algorithm, it is possible to assess the N-1 security and small-
signal stability of a large dataset of operating points (about 1,000,000) for the NESTA
162-bus test system [6].
Each operating point in the database is represented by bus voltages, angles, net
active and reactive power demand and active and reactive power in each line. The
security assessment is based on small-signal stability analysis for a subset of the
possible N-1 contingencies C = [C1, C2, ..., Cn] in the NESTA 162-bus system. An
==PAGE:32==
18
3 Deep Learning for Power System Security Assessment
operating point is considered safe if the damping ratio ζ for all contingencies C is
higher than 3%, i.e. if min(ζ( ¯C)) ≥0.03. The variable safety becomes 1 when an
operating point is considered safe and 0 when unsafe.
3.2
Image Generation
The images that we create aim to represent the state of a power system, based on
the location of the different variables extracted from power flows in arrays. In image
recognition algorithms, the images are turned into 2D arrays filled with numerical
values that the convolutional neural network can understand.
Each colour image
is usually converted to three arrays or channels, typically RGB, that represent the
intensity of red, green and blue colour in each pixel.
Following this method, the
images created from power system data are also divided in three channels PQV that
represent the active power, reactive power, and voltage in each snapshot of the power
system.
The 2D arrays associated with channels P and Q will be N × N matrices, where
N is the number of buses in the 162-bus case. The diagonal of each matrix has the
net active Pi and reactive Qi power demands at each bus i respectively. If bus i and
bus j are connected by a line, the active Pij and reactive Qij power flows are placed
in the position (i, j) of the matrix while Pji and Qji are placed in (j, i). Since power
losses in the lines are also taken into account, these matrices are not symmetrical.
The data from each channel is previously normalised separately by calculating the
absolute value of each element and then dividing by the maximum value of P or Q
in the whole database. All normalised values are between 0 and 1. Figures 3.1 and
3.2 show images in a greyscale from channels P and Q.
Figure 3.1: Channel P.
Figure 3.2: Channel Q.
Figure 3.3: Channel V.
The 2D arrays associated with channel V also have size N × N, and its diagonal
is filled with the voltages Vi in each bus.
The off-diagonal elements, i ̸= j, are
filled with the absolute values of the voltage drops Vij along each line. Unlike the
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Image Generation
19
rest of the channels, the matrices in channel V are symmetrical. The data in this
channel (bus voltage and line voltage drop) are again normalised similar to the other
channels. Figure 3.3 shows an image representing channel V in a greyscale. In the
three channels PQV, the matrices are sparse because the power system has only 284
lines for the 162 buses.
Figure 3.4: Example of image representing a snapshot of NESTA 162-bus power
system.
An example of an image can be seen on Figure 3.4, where the three channels
PQV are superimposed and plotted as if they were RGB, creating a coloured picture.
The coloured pixels are always placed in the same spots but with different intensities.
==PAGE:34==
20
3 Deep Learning for Power System Security Assessment
Even though all snapshots are different, two different snapshots are usually visually
similar with a naked eye – but not for a computer. In his Nobel lecture in 2011 [21],
Saul Perlmutter explained that an early way of searching supernovae was to take
images from distant galaxies periodically and subtract the negative from an older
image to the latest image. Both images would look the same but when there is a
supernova, the subtraction leaves a single white point over a dark background. If
this same procedure is followed with the images created from snapshots of a power
system, it will be possible to spot the differences in all snapshots.
An image Xs ∈RN,N,c created from a snapshot s of the power system is a 3D
tensor1 with size [N, N, c], and c being the number of channels. The total input data
set X ∈RS,N,N,c with all the snapshots turned into images becomes a 4D tensor with
[S, N, N, c] size, where S is the number of snapshots that the database contains. Due
to the large size that X has (104.8 GB), only small batches of it, Xb ∈Rb,N,N,c where
b is the batch-size and b << S, are generated when needed in the training process.
The output data, a vector containing zeros and ones depending on the security
state of each snapshot, is turned into labels by one-hot encoding having as a result an
output data set y ∈RS,Nc where Nc is the number of labels: in our case two (safe/un-
safe). In [3], one-hot encoding is explained as an encoding method for categorical
variables having n categories that can be encoded as n-dimensional feature vectors.
For each category, one of the positions of the vector is filled by a one and the rest by
zeros, resulting in a vector space where each category is orthogonal and equidistant
to the rest. Unsafe snapshots are now represented as [1, 0] while safe snapshots as [0,
1].
Once the input X and output y sets are constructed, all the data is split into
training (Xtrain and ytrain), validation (Xval and yval) and test sets (Xtest and ytest).
The training set contains a 70% of the total set while the validation and test sets
contain the remaining 10 % and 20% of the data respectively. Initially, the data set
is shuffled to assure that all subsets have the same share of safe cases (about 14.5%).
Due to the fact that X does not fit in the memory of the computers used to train
the CNN, it is impossible to create the full size tensor X before training. Instead, we
split the number of snapshots S in training, validation and testing sets and generate
smaller batches Xb that we use as input to the CNN.
3.3
Structure of the Deep Neural Network
Convolutional neural networks have been designed for processing data in form of
multiple arrays. As explained before, our model has to process three 2D arrays that
represent P, Q and V in the studied power system. The structure of a convolutional
net has several stages. The initial stages, which focus on the image processing, are
1The term “tensor” refers to multidimensional arrays or vectors, used in TensorFlow (https:
//www.tensorflow.org/), the machine learning library we use. We will use the terms “tensor” and
“array” interchangeably.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Structure of the Deep Neural Network
21
composed by series of convolutional and pooling layers. The output of this initial
stages is reshaped in a flattening layer and then fed into fully-connected layers, the
last stages of the CNN. The typical structure of a CNN is shown in Figure 3.5 2.
Figure 3.5: Structure of a typical CNN .
The whole convolutional net works with the same principle as a multi-layer per-
ceptron (MLP). Equation (3.1), where g is the activation function and Wij and bj
are the weights and biases from node i to node j respectively, shows how the output
of each node is calculated.
Xj = g(
F
∑
i=1
(WijXi + bj))
(3.1)
The different layers that form the CNN, as well as its training process, are explained
in the following paragraphs.
3.3.1
Convolutional Layer
Convolutional layers take as input 2D arrays and train a series of 2D kernels or filters
that aim to recognise patterns in the input arrays giving the local weighted sum as
an output. The terms ”filter” and ”kernel” are used interchangeably referring to the
weights in convolutional layers in form of 2D arrays. Figure 3.6 shows a convolution
between two nodes in convolutional layers. The filters are multiplied to a moving
window that outputs the weighted sum in every possible position.
2This figure is generated by adapting the code from https://github.com/gwding/draw_convnet
==PAGE:36==
22
3 Deep Learning for Power System Security Assessment
Figure 3.6: Convolution
between
two
nodes
in
a
CNN.
Source:
https:
//towardsdatascience.com/applied-deep-learning-part-4-
convolutional-neural-networks-584bc134c1e2.
The input to any convolutional layer is a 4D batch Xb with [b, H, W, Fi−1] size
that is turned into a [b, H, W, Fi] tensor where H and W are the height and width
of the 2D arrays respectively and Fi and Fi−1 are the number of filters or nodes in
layer i and in the previous one respectively.
The weights in a convolutional layer are a 4D tensor with a [K, K, Fi−1, Fi] size,
being K the kernel size, while the biases are a 1D tensor of Fi size. The kernel size
and the number of filters are tuning parameters chosen by the user.
The most commonly used activation function in convolutional layers is the Rec-
tified Linear Unit (ReLU) [1], whose function is f(x) = max(0, x) [15]. The just
mentioned function activates a node only when activation function’s input is greater
than 0.
3.3.2
Max-Pooling Layer
The pooling layers do not have weights and biases associated and their aim is to
reduce the spatial size of the convolutional layers’ output. Max-pooling is the most
commonly used type of pooling, and also the one used in our algorithm. Max-pooling
layers apply a moving window, in our case of size 2 × 2, over a 2D input and give the
maximum value from every sub-region covered by the window. Figure 3.7 graphically
explains how the max-pooling layer works.
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Structure of the Deep Neural Network
23
Figure 3.7: Max-pooling
between
two
nodes
in
a
CNN.
Source:
https:
//www.quora.com/What-is-max-pooling-in-convolutional-
neural-networks.
This type of layer is applied after each convolutional layer, giving as an output
a [b, H
2 , W
2 , Fi] size tensor. The activation function is applied after the max-pooling
layer, instead of right after the convolutional layer, because it is less costly due to its
smaller sized input.
3.3.3
Flattening Layer
Flattening layers connect convolutional or pooling layers to fully-connected layers.
This type of layer reshapes the output of the last max-pooling layer into a 1D array
per snapshot in order to be able to feed the first fully-connected layer. The size of
the output of this layer [b, H ·W ·Fi] is the result of compacting the three dimensions
from the previous layer [b, H, W, Fi].
3.3.4
Fully-connected Layer
In fully-connected layers, each node is connected to all the nodes from the previous
layer.
The output of each layer is a Fi-size vector per snapshot.
The first fully-
connected layer is fed by the flattening layer. The weights in these layers are a 2D
tensor with a [Fi−1, Fi] size while the biases are a Fi-size vector. In all fully-connected
layers except the last one, a 20% (dropout rate) of the nodes are disconnected while
training in order to avoid over-fitting.
All fully-connected layers except the output layer are activated by a ReLU function.
The output layer, which is the one that finally performs the classification, is activated
by a Softmax function or normalised exponential function [8]. Softmax equations are
shown in (3.2) and (3.3), where σ represents the output, Nc is the number of classes
==PAGE:38==
24
3 Deep Learning for Power System Security Assessment
and Xi is the input vector. The Softmax function turns a Nc-dimensional vector
of real values into a vector of the same size with values between 0 and 1 where
all elements sum 1. This function is used in the output layer in order to get the
probability distribution over the different classes, in our case safe and unsafe. The
CNN chooses the class with the highest probability to occur as the predicted security
state.
σ : RNc →{σ ∈RNc | σi > 0,
Nc
∑
i=1
σi = 1}
(3.2)
σ(X)i =
eXi
∑Nc
i=1 eXi
for
i = 1, ..., Nc
(3.3)
3.3.5
Training the Neural Net
Once the CNN architecture has been explained, a loss function has to defined. The
loss function is based on the cross entropy between the estimated and real output
probability distributions.
Cross entropy equation across m snapshots is shown in
(3.4) as the first term, where yi and ˆyi are the real and predicted probabilities of class
i respectively. The first term of the cross entropy, which corresponds to the positive
class predictions, is multiplied by a class coefficient Φ in order to penalise more wrong
positive predictions (Φ > 1) or wrong negative predictions (Φ < 1). The coefficient
Φ is useful when the labels of the data are unbalanced. Based on the loss function
presented in [23], the estimated recall
ˆ
Rec, specificity
ˆ
Spe, precision
ˆ
Pre and F1-score
ˆ
F1, whose definitions are explained later, are added multiplied by the negative costs
αr, αs, αp and αf respectively. These costs are negative because we aim to maximise
the algorithm’s performance on those metrics. The total loss function includes also L2
regularisation at the end in order to avoid over-fitting and also penalise large values
of weights.
(3.4)
Loss = −1
m
m
∑
i=1
[Φyilog(ˆyi) + (1 −yi)log(1 −ˆyi)]
−αr ˆ
Rec −αs ˆ
Spe −αp ˆ
Pre −αf ˆ
F1 + λ
2
NL
∑
j=1
W 2
j
Adam optimiser [13], which is an algorithm based on stochastic gradient descent, is
used to minimise the loss function while tuning the trainable parameters of the neural
network: weights and biases.
The optimiser is initialised with an initial learning
rate chosen by the user. The CNN is trained applying mini-batch gradient descent
method, meaning that the parameters are updated every time a batch, smaller than
the training set, goes through the optimiser.
This small batches are created and
overwritten every time in order to be able to fit this learning process in the available
memory space. The whole training set, and therefore all the batches, go through the
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Proposed Model
25
optimiser in every epoch. After every epoch, the model is validated in the validation
set. The final model will be the one with the highest validation accuracy in all the
epochs. Before training, a large number of epochs is chosen but in order to avoid over-
fitting, early stopping is applied with a patience parameter chosen by the user. This
means that if the validation loss does not decrease in all those epochs, the training
stops and the saved weights and biases are the ones corresponding to the epoch with
the highest validation accuracy.
3.4
Proposed Model
The proposed CNN architecture initially has three consecutive series of convolutional
and max-pooling layers. The kernel size of the layers is 9 × 9, 7 × 7 and 5 × 5 for
the first, second and third convolutional layers while the number of filters is 20, 40
and 80 respectively. The kernel size decreases from the first layer because the input
to the convolutional layers gets smaller. This allows to increase the number of filters
in the next layers.
Figure 3.8: Image representing the weights in Conv1.
==PAGE:40==
26
3 Deep Learning for Power System Security Assessment
Figure 3.8 shows the weights corresponding to the first convolutional layer. This
image has been created by normalising the weights and superimposing the three input
channels PQV into one as if they represented RGB channels. There is twenty 9 × 9
images due to the number of filters and their size in the first convolutional layer. Red,
green and blue colours represent large weights in channels P, Q and V respectively
and small in the rest. Black colour represents small weights in the three channels
while white colour shows large weights in all of them. This colourful image can only
be obtained from the first layer since in the following ones, the inputs are more than
the initial three.
The flattening layer is applied after the last max-pooling layer. Then, the first
fully-connected layer, with 250 nodes is fed. This layer feeds directly to the output
layer which has 2 nodes, one per label. Table 3.1 shows the shapes of each layer as
well as the shapes of the weights and biases. The number of learnable parameters to
train in each layer is also represented. It can be observed that most of the learnable
parameters are concentrated in FC1. The number and size of the filters as well as
the number of nodes have been chosen heuristically.
The optimiser is fed with a batch-size of 128 snapshots and a maximum of 200
epochs, with a patience of 30 epochs. The initial learning rate is set to 0.001.
The model has been implemented using the Python open source machine learning
library TensorFlow for GPU and trained in a Tesla V100 GPU node from DTU HPC
cluster during 23 hours.
Table 3.1: Representation of the CNN architecture.
Layer
Shape
Weights size
Bias size
# param
Input
[b,162,162,3]
Conv1
[b,162,162,20]
[9,9,3,20]
[20]
4.880
Max-pool1
[b,81,81,20]
Conv2
[b,81,81,40]
[7,7,20,40]
[40]
39.240
Max-pool2
[b,40,40,40]
Conv3
[b,40,40,80]
[5,5,40,80]
[80]
80.080
Max-pool3
[b,20,20,80]
Flatten
[b,32000]
FC1
[b,250]
[32000,250]
[250]
8.000.250
FC2 (output)
[b,2]
[250,2]
[2]
502
Total
8.124.952
3.5
Results
In this section, the results obtained by the presented model are shown.
At first,
the evaluation metrics used to measure how good is our model are explained. After
that, the scores obtained by testing the model are presented. Then, a comparison
==PAGE:41==
3.5 Results
27
between the deep learning approach and a basic neural network is made. The time
improvement using the presented model over traditional methods is shown at the end.
3.5.1
Evaluation Criterion and Model Performance
The evaluation criterion used is based on the confusion matrix, shown in Table 3.2.
The confusion matrix is filled with the True Positives (TP), referring to the number
of snapshots predicted as unsafe that are actually unsafe, True Negatives (TN), the
number of snapshots predicted as safe that are actually safe, and False Positives (FP)
and False Negatives (FN) as the snapshots that have been predicted as the opposite
class that they actually are.
Table 3.2: Confusion Matrix.
Predicted Unsafe
Predicted Safe
Actual Unsafe
TP
FN
Actual Safe
FP
TN
The following rates are extracted from the different elements in the confusion
matrix.
• Recall: Also named as Sensitivity or True Positive Rate (TPR), is the propor-
tion of correct positive predictions in all the positive cases. Calculated as:
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(3.5)
• Specificity: Also called True Negative Rate (TNR), is the proportion of correct
negative predictions in all the negative cases. Calculated as:
Specificity =
TN
TN + FP
(3.6)
• Precision: Also known as Positive Predictive Value (PPV), is the proportion
of correct positive predictions in all positive predictions. Calculated as:
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(3.7)
• F1-Score: The harmonic mean of Precision and Recall. Calculated as:
F1 = 2 Prec · Rec
Prec + Rec
(3.8)
• Accuracy: The proportion of correct predictions in all data set. Calculated
as:
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + FP + TN + FN
(3.9)
==PAGE:42==
28
3 Deep Learning for Power System Security Assessment
• Matthews correlation coefficient: A measure of correlation between pre-
dicted and actual values in a binary classification. It yields a coefficient between
-1 and 1, being 1 when the prediction is perfect, 0 when the prediction is no
better than random and -1 when all predicted values are mistaken. Calculated
as:
MCC =
(TP · TN) −(FP · FN)
√
(TP + FP)(TP + FN)(TN + FP)(TN + FN)
(3.10)
The measure of accuracy should be enough to measure the quality of the classification
for a database with the same number of safe and unsafe operating points. Since this
is not the case, only 14.56% of the cases are safe, other rates become also meaningful
when evaluating the classification. It needs to be mentioned also that it is substan-
tially more important to predict correctly unsafe cases than safe cases. In our case a
FN implies a higher cost than a FP. For that reason, it is more important to have a
high Recall than a high Specificity.
As it has just been mentioned, the data base labels are unbalanced in favour of
the unsafe cases. If we were looking for balancing the cross entropy loss, the balanced
class coefficient Φb would be Φb =
Ssafe
Sunsafe = 0.17 where Ssafe and Sunsafe are the
number of safe and unsafe snapshots respectively.
Since we aim to minimise the
FNs because predicting unsafe correctly is more important, the class coefficient has
to be Φ > Φb, in our studied cases Φ ≥1. The metric costs vector is defined as
α = [αr, αs, αp, αf]. The metrics directly related to predicting unsafe cases correctly
and therefore decreasing FNs are Recall, Precision and F1-Score while Specificity is
related to the safe cases predictions.
Table 3.3: Cases depending on Φ and α..
Cases
Φ
α = [αr, αs, αp, αf]
1
1
[0, 0, 0, 0]
2
2
[0, 0, 0, 0]
3
5
[0, 0, 0, 0]
4
1
[0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 0.5]
5
1
[0.5, 0, 0.5, 0.5]
6
2
[0.5, 0, 0.5, 0.5]
7
3
[0.5, 0, 0.5, 0.5]
8
2
[0, 0, 0.5, 0.5]
Table 3.3 shows the different studied cases, with different values of Φ and α, and
Figure 3.9 shows the best scores of our model in the test set in each case. The radar
chart aims to demonstrate how the variation of Φ and α can influence the training
outcome. Note that the scale of each axis in this diagram is specified under each
label.
==PAGE:43==
3.5 Results
29
Cases 1-3 show the variation of Φ while α is filled with zeros. It can be observed
that a value close to the optimal Φ could be around 2 since increasing it more is
counterproductive. In case 4, all the values from α are increased while Φ stays 1 and
the results are improved in comparison with case 1. The addition of evaluation metrics
in the loss function results in an improvement of performance. Increasing Φ and α too
much can result in worse scores due to the trade-off between the importance of the
different terms in the loss function. Since having a high Specificity is less important
than the rest, cases 5-7 have αs as zero while the rest of elements in α stay 0.5. It
can be observed again that when Φ equals 2, in case 6, there is a peak of performance.
In case 6 we obtain the highest score in Recall with a 99.14% meaning that from all
the combinations tried, the one that predicts the best the unsafe states is case 6. On
the other hand, in case 8 where both αr and αs are zero, the model scores the best in
F1-Score, MCC and accuracy with a 99.14%, 0.942 and 98.54% respectively. In this
case the overall classification performs better than in the rest of cases but the correct
classification of unsafe classes decreases in exchange of a rise in MCC and accuracy.
Figure 3.9: Radar chart of the scores in the different cases.
Table 3.3 describes
the used parameters for each case. Note that each axis has a slightly
different range in order to enhance the readability of the figure. The
numerical values of the scores can be seen in Table A.1.
==PAGE:44==
30
3 Deep Learning for Power System Security Assessment
3.5.2
Improvement with respect to a basic neural network
With the purpose of demonstrating that a deep learning approach, in this case a
CNN, outperforms more basic machine learning algorithms in power system security
assessment, a basic neural network has been trained in order to compare its scores
with the convolutional net.
The input to this neural network is a vector with 324 elements. This input vector
is filled with two variables per bus. Depending on the type of bus and the presence of
net power demand in each bus, two different variables per bus are chosen between bus
voltage Vbus, bus angle θbus, net active power demand Pbus and net reactive power
demand Qbus. Buses with no net power demand contribute with Vbus and θbus since
the remaining variables stay zero in all snapshots. The variables chosen in buses with
demand depend on the bus type. Load buses PQ contribute with Vbus and Pbus while
generator buses PV contribute with θbus and Qbus since these are the only variables
that change in all snapshots.
The swing bus Vθ contributes with Pbus and Qbus
because Vbus and θbus in this bus are fixed to 1 p.u. and 0 radians respectively.
The structure of the neural network is a basic MLP with one hidden layer. The
input layer consists on 324 perceptrons, one per variable, while the hidden layer has
500 nodes. The output layer has two neurons, one per label (safe and unsafe). The
number of nodes in the hidden layer has been chosen heuristically.
Figure 3.10: Radar chart of the scores with a basic MLP vs ConvNet. Note that
the axes in Specificity and MCC have been scaled differently than the
rest of scores. The numerical values of the scores can be seen in Table
A.2.
==PAGE:45==
3.6 Algorithm Extension to Other Cases
31
Figure 3.10 shows the scores of the CNN trained in case 8 in blue and the scores of
the basic MLP in red. It can be observed how the deep learning algorithm outperforms
the basic neural network in all scores. The convolutional net learns remarkably better
the safe cases than the basic neural net. This affects especially the accuracy and MCC,
which are way higher in the convolutional net than in the basic MLP.
It can be assured that the deep learning algorithm presented improves the learning
process with respect to a basic neural network and performs notably better in the
different evaluation scores explained before.
3.5.3
Time testing
The main goal of building this model is to have an algorithm that gives a result
faster than by computing small-signal stability analysis for all possible contingencies.
For that reason, the presented model is also tested in the time needed to perform a
security assessment and compared to the time spent in computing all necessary small-
signal stability analyses. In order to have a fair comparison, both methods are tested
in the same machine. The DTU HPC cluster is used for the just mentioned task and
both models are tested in a single core from an Intel Xeon Processor E5-2650 v4. For
both methods, the security assessment is performed on a single snapshot 1000 times.
Table 3.4 shows the average time per test over these 1000 tests.
Table 3.4: Time tests: Small-signal stability analysis vs. ConvNet model.
Small-signal stability analysis
ConvNet model
Average Time
21’950 ms
86 ms
As it can be observed in Table 3.4, the time spent to perform a security assessment
for the studied power system is reduced about 255 times, making the presented model
way more efficient for security assessment than traditional methods.
3.6
Algorithm Extension to Other Cases
This section aims to prove that the deep learning algorithm presented can be success-
fully used in other cases such as other power systems or other databases from the
same power system. For that reason, the deep learning algorithm is first adjusted to
perform power system security assessment in the IEEE 14-bus system [4], and then
to perform the same task but trained from a different database from the NESTA
162-bus system.
3.6.1
IEEE 14-bus system
The database used to train the CNN is obtained from [25]. This database contains
the whole operating space, sampled with a step size of 1 MW, for a specific load
==PAGE:46==
32
3 Deep Learning for Power System Security Assessment
profile in the IEEE 14-bus system. The total set of data contains 2.515.396 snapshots
with a share of 0.12% of secure operating points. Safe snapshots are N-1 secure and
small-signal stable.
Following the same procedure explained before, an image of the IEEE 14-bus
power system is generated and shown in Figure 3.11.
Figure 3.11: Example of image representing a snapshot of IEEE 14-bus power sys-
tem.
The architecture of the convolutional net is slightly changed with respect to the
one used for the NESTA 162-bus system. Since the images in this case have a size
of 14 × 14, the filter sizes need to be reduced. The structure of the CNN used for
the IEEE 14-bus case is shown in Table 3.5. The first layers consist of two pairs of
convolutional and max-pooling layers. The filter sizes are 5 × 5 and 3 × 3 for the first
and second convolutional layers respectively. The number of filters are 20 for the first,
and 40 for the second convolutional layer. The fully-connected layers have the same
number of nodes as in the convolutional net for the NESTA 162-bus case. It can be
observed again that most of the trainable parameters lay on the first fully-connected
layer.
==PAGE:47==
3.6 Algorithm Extension to Other Cases
33
Table 3.5: Representation of the CNN architecture for the IEEE 14-bus power sys-
tem.
Layer
Shape
Weights size
Bias size
# param
Input
[b,14,14,3]
Conv1
[b,14,14,20]
[5,5,3,20]
[20]
1.520
Max-pool1
[b,7,7,20]
Conv2
[b,7,7,40]
[3,3,20,40]
[40]
7.240
Max-pool2
[b,4,4,40]
Flatten
[b,640]
FC1
[b,250]
[640,250]
[250]
160.250
FC2 (output)
[b,2]
[250,2]
[2]
502
Total
169.512
The weights belonging to the first convolutional layer for the IEEE 14-bus case
are shown in Figure 3.12. This weights have been plot in the same way as in the
previous case.
Figure 3.12: Image representing the weights in Conv1 for the IEEE 14-bus case.
==PAGE:48==
34
3 Deep Learning for Power System Security Assessment
The data set is split in training, validation and test sets in the same way as in the
previous case. The convolutional net is trained with the same values of Φ and α as
in case 8. In order to compare it again to a basic neural network, an MLP with the
same architecture as the one presented in subsection 3.5.2 and the input adapted to
the IEEE 14-bus case system is trained. Table 3.6 compares the scores of the deep
learning algorithm against the basic MLP.
Table 3.6: Scores obtained from a basic MLP vs ConvNet for the IEEE 14-bus
system.
Recall (%)
Specificity (%)
Precision (%)
F1-Score (%)
MCC
Accuracy (%)
Basic MLP
100
0
99.88
99.94
0
99.88
ConvNet
99.999
98.126
99.998
99.999
0.987
99.997
The labels in this data set are extremely unbalanced (99.88% of unsafe snapshots
vs 0.12% of safe snapshots). This makes way too difficult for the basic neural network
to differentiate between both classes. For that reason, the basic MLP scores a 100%
in Recall and therefore notably good as well in precision, F1-Score and accuracy. On
the other hand the Specificity goes directly to 0%. This means that the basic neural
network is incapable of distinguishing between the two classes and predicts all cases
as unsecure. The zero score in MCC means that the prediction made is no better
than a random prediction.
The scores of the convolutional net in this case demonstrate again how powerful is
this deep learning algorithm. The CNN is perfectly capable of distinguishing between
secure and unsecure with a 99.999% in Recall and a 98.126% in Specificity. Both
precision and F1-Score are improved with respect to the basic MLP. In this case, the
MCC reaches a 0.987 and the accuracy of the prediction is a 99.997%. This is a
prove of how good the presented deep learning algorithm works for power security
assessment, not only in the NESTA 162-bus case, but in other power systems like the
IEEE 14-bus case.
3.6.2
A different data set from the NESTA 162-bus system
A new database is generated from the NESTA 162-bus case. This set of data samples
over the net power demands in all buses with power demand. At first, using the
Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS), the whole space between 0.25 and 1.5 times the
net power demands is sampled. Using the LHS a uniform distribution of samples can
be achieved across the whole space. A sample is secure in the base case if none of the
bus voltages and line flow limits are violated. A sample is N-1 secure if none of the
mentioned limits are violated in all possible contingencies.
After using LHS, all N-1 secure points are saved and then those same points are
sampled again using LHS with the purpose of increasing the N-1 secure share of
samples. At the end, the final database has 336.306 points and a 29.425% of N-1
secure points. This database has been generated using the open-source MATLAB
==PAGE:49==
3.6 Algorithm Extension to Other Cases
35
language based library Matpower 6.0. The main differences between this database
and the one initially used are that in this one the operating space covers different
load profiles and it does not represent the security boundary but a larger space. This
has the disadvantage that makes the step size between samples way larger than in
the initial database since the number of samples is similar and the space covered is
bigger. Note also that in this set of data the security is assessed only by voltage and
line flow limits and small-signal stability is not included.
A convolutional net with the same architecture as the one shown in Table 3.1 is
trained and compared to the performance of a basic neural network with the same
architecture as the one described in subsection 3.5.2. Figure 3.13 shows the scores of
these two models compared in a radar chart.
Figure 3.13: Radar chart of the scores with a basic MLP vs ConvNet in generated
database. The numerical values of the scores can be seen in Table A.3.
It is again demonstrated that a deep convolutional neural network learns and
predicts better than a basic MLP. It can be observed that for this case the CNN
outperforms the basic neural network in all scores again. In any case, it has to be
noted that a CNN trained with this database works way worse than with the one
obtained from [25]. This shows how important is to have a good set of data to train
machine learning algorithms.
==PAGE:50==
36
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4
Extensions for AC-OPF
An AC Optimal Power Flow (AC-OPF) is defined as an optimization algorithm that
aims to minimise the cost of the operation of a power system taking into account the
power flow equations and the line flow limits. This optimization algorithm considers
the full AC power flow equations. The basic formulation of an AC-OPF is shown in
Equation 4.1.
min
PGi
cT PG
s.t.
SG −SL = diag(V )Y
∗
busV
∗
|Vi · Y
∗
linei→j,row−iV
∗|≤Si→j,max
|Vj · Y
∗
linej→i,row−jV
∗|≤Sj→i,max
0 ≤PG ≤PG,max
QG,min ≤QG ≤QG,max
Vmin ≤V ≤Vmax
δmin ≤δ ≤δmax
(4.1)
The objective function cT PG represents the total cost of the operation of a power
system, being c a vector with the costs per MW of the active power injections made by
all generators PG. The equality constraint ensures that the AC power flow equations
are fulfilled. The apparent power generated SG and demanded SL per bus are complex
vectors calculated as SG = PG + jQG and SL = PL + jQL respectively, where QG
and QL the reactive power generation and load. The apparent power in all buses is
calculated as S = diag(V )Y
∗
busV
∗, where V is the complex vector of the bus voltages
and Ybus is the bus admittance matrix. The operator (·)∗denotes the conjugate of a
complex vector or matrix.
Inequality constraints ensure that the apparent power line flows do not violate
limits in both flow directions. Smax represents the apparent power line flow limits
while Yline is the line admittance matrix. The lower and upper bounds in PG, QG, V
and the bus angles δ are represented at the end.
In Chapter 3, a deep learning algorithm capable of assessing the security state of
a power system in terms of small-signal stability for all possible N-1 cases has been
presented. The fact that the mentioned algorithm performs this security assessment
255 times faster than traditional methods, makes the inclusion of small-signal stability
==PAGE:52==
38
4 Extensions for AC-OPF
analysis from all N-1 contingencies in an AC-OPF formulation more suitable than ever
before.
Inspired by previous work by the Center of Electric Power and Energy at DTU,
where Decision Trees have been reformulated for stability assessment to a Mixed Inte-
ger Linear Program [24] or Mixed Integer Second Order Cone Program [10] in order to
fully consider N-1 security and small-signal stability in Optimal Power Flow, possible
extensions of the deep learning algorithm to AC-OPF formulations are discussed in
this chapter.
4.1
CNN-constrained AC-OPF
The first approach to include N-1 security and small-signal stability is by reformu-
lating the AC-OPF as a Non Linear Program (NLP) including directly the deep
convolutional net model. This new formulation of the AC-OPF is shown in Equation
4.2.
min
PGi
cT PG
s.t.
SG −SL = diag(V )Y
∗
busV
∗
f(PG, QG, V ) ≥0.5
0 ≤PG ≤PG,max
QG,min ≤QG ≤QG,max
Vmin ≤V ≤Vmax
δmin ≤δ ≤δmax
(4.2)
The inequality constraints in this new formulation of the AC-OPF have been
substituted by the equation f(PG, QG, V ) ≥0.5, where f(PG, QG, V ) outputs the
probability of being N-1 secure and small-signal stable calculated by the CNN model.
The convolutional net is a non-linear model due to the non-linearities in the activation
functions in all layers. The AC-OPF is implemented using the open-source Python
language based library Pypower.
One of the biggest challenges of including a convolutional net as a constraint is
the calculation of its gradient, defined in Equation 4.3.
∇f =
[ ∂f
∂x1
, ∂f
∂x2
, ..., ∂f
∂xn
]
(4.3)
Due to the complexity of the convolutional net, the gradients are calculated by the
definition of derivative, shown in Equation 4.4, where xi is any of the input variables
to the CNN and h is a small numerical value that is chosen to be 1e-6.
∂f
∂xi
= f(xi + h) −f(xi −h)
2h
(4.4)
==PAGE:53==
4.2 CNN-guided AC-OPF
39
This CNN-constrained AC-OPF is implemented for the NESTA 162-bus case and
the IEEE 14-bus case. Due to the complexity of the deep convolutional net and the
high computational charge of its gradient calculation, the CNN-constrained AC-OPF
does not converge in either of the cases.
4.2
CNN-guided AC-OPF
A possible way to integrate the neural network in an optimal power flow framework is
through an iterative process, which will be named CNN-guided AC-OPF and whose
algorithm is shown as a pseudo-code in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 CNN-guided AC-OPF
1: Given: Original line flow limits Slimits, probability of secure p.
2: Initialize Sline,max = [∞, ∞, ..., ∞], secure = 0.
3: Compute AC-OPF.
4: Compute security prob. p = f(PG, QG, V ).
5: if p>0.5 then
6:
secure = 1
7: end if
8: Calculate line flows S.
9: Sline,max = max(S, Slimits).
10: ϵ = 0.01Sline,max.
11: while secure = 0 do
12:
Compute AC-OPF.
13:
Compute security prob. p = f(PG, QG, V ).
14:
if p>0.5 then
15:
secure = 1
16:
end if
17:
Calculate line flows S.
18:
if Si = Sline,max,i then
19:
Sline,max,i = Sline,max,i −ϵi
20:
else
21:
Sline,max = Sline,max −ϵ
22:
end if
23:
if AC-OPF not converged then
24:
secure = −1
25:
end if
26: end while
27: return AC-OPF, p,secure
This algorithm begins by computing the AC-OPF with no line flow limits. New
line flow limits are then included in the following iterations in a way that in every
==PAGE:54==
40
4 Extensions for AC-OPF
iteration they become more restrictive. In each iteration, the AC-OPF is computed
and the optimal operating point is passed through the CNN in order to assess if it is
secure or not. This process ends when an N-1 secure and small-signal stable point is
found.
This algorithm is implemented for the NESTA 162-bus case. Although it cannot
be assured that the obtained result is the optimal solution, the algorithm can find an
AC-OPF feasible point that is also N-1 secure and small-signal stable. The average
time to obtain this operating point in the NESTA 162-bus system, after carrying out
50 tests in an Intel Core i7-8550-U CPU is 19.99s. The average time to compute an
AC-OPF without any security constraints is 1.40s.
Table 4.1 shows a comparison between the optimal operational costs obtained
from computing the AC-OPF as in Equation 4.1, the same AC-OPF without line
flow limits, and finally the CNN-guided AC-OPF. Note that in the last case, the
result obtained is not an optimal solution.
Table 4.1: Operational costs for the different AC-OPF cases.
AC-OPF
AC-OPF (w/o line flow limits)
CNN-guided AC-OPF
Operational Cost ($/h)
4230.22
3774.33
3805.88
The obtained operating point’s security is tested by small-signal stability analysis.
This test results in an unsecure state.
Due to issues with the security boundary
database used to train the CNN model, the operating points that it contains do not
cover some regions that are feasible in the AC-OPF. The authors of [25] are currently
working on improving the mentioned database.
For that reason, it is important
to state how crucial is to have a proper database in order to train deep learning
algorithms.
The CNN-guided AC-OPF algorithm has not been implemented in the IEEE 14-
bus case because this power system does not have predefined line flow limits.
Future work should focus on the efficient integration of the deep neural network
in an optimal power flow, guaranteeing convergence and potentially optimality.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
This chapter concludes the M.Sc. thesis by first doing a recap of the achievements
obtained in this work in Section 5.1. Then possible future work paths to follow from
this thesis are proposed in Section 5.2.
5.1
Achievements
This thesis has presented a method based on convolutional neural networks and deep
learning for power system security assessment. There are three main contributions.
First, it has been represented for the first time power system snapshots as images
that can be easily processed by convolutional neural networks. Acknowledging the
fact that safe or unsafe operating points exhibit similar patterns, power flows between
buses are represented as 2-dimensional images. Taking advantage of the wide range of
deep learning methods available for image processing, it can be achieved a remarkable
performance of deep neural networks for power system security assessment.
Second, it has been developed and extensively tested different deep neural net-
works to assess N-1 security and small-signal stability on the NESTA 162-bus system.
The presented approach is over 255 times faster than a standard small-signal stability
assessment for a single operating point, while it achieves an accuracy of over 98% and
a Recall of over 99.14% (i.e. classifying unsafe states as unsafe). The same deep neu-
ral networks to assess N-1 security and small-signal stability have been successfully
tested on the IEEE 14-bus system with an almost 100% of accuracy and Recall and
with a Specificity (i.e. classifying safe states as safe) over 98%.
Finally, an algorithm has been developed in order to include N-1 security and
small-signal stability in an AC-OPF formulation through an iterative process. The
so called CNN-guided AC-OPF is capable of finding a N-1 secure and small-signal
stable operating point that belongs to the feasible set of the AC-OPF.
5.2
Future Work
In this section, several suggestions are made concerning the possibilities of improve-
ment of this thesis as well as where could further work be focused on.
The very first suggestion concerns the way that the images from power system
snapshots are created. The arrays that represent the power system images are sparse
==PAGE:56==
42
5 Conclusion
and, in power systems with a large number of buses, its size way too big. The power
system images use a huge memory space that is incremented quadratically with the
number of buses. Equation 5.1, where N is the number of buses, shows this proportion.
Also, the fact that the images take a lot of memory space slows the training process
since there is no other way, with the computers and GPUs we have nowadays, than
creating the images only when needed while training instead of creating them all at
the beginning.
size ∝N 2
(5.1)
Since arrays representing images have a large size and most of its elements are zero, a
new way to create images less sparse and less sized would mean a great improvement.
Also, the way the information from buses and power lines is placed in an image does
not represent the real closeness between buses. It would make more sense that in the
case that bus i and bus j are interconnected, the image would show the variables from
both buses close to each other since they are more correlated than the variables from
two non-interconnected buses. In the NESTA 162-bus case, if bus 1 is interconnected
with bus 162, both buses would be in the opposite corners of the image but due to
their interconnection, their variables would be more correlated than with other buses.
The convolutional net processes the images locally. Convolutional layers apply fil-
ters to the images locally while max-pooling layers reduce the images size by choosing
the element with the maximum value within a region. If the elements filling the ar-
rays were locally placed depending on their connections, the convolutional net would
process better the images extracting better information out of it.
The variables from the buses could be placed based on proximity to other buses
instead of placed and ordered as the diagonal of the arrays. This would reduce the
size of the images. A distribution of the variables along the image depending on the
topology of the power system would decrease the size and sparsity of the arrays and
therefore make the training process faster.
About the databases used to train the deep neural networks, the perfect database
would be the one that represents the best the whole security boundary. The creators
of the database from [25], used to train the deep neural network for the NESTA 162-
bus system, have discovered that it does not cover the security boundary in some
regions belonging to the feasible set of the AC-OPF. It is extremely important to
have an adequate database to train a neural network. A new database with this new
region from the security boundary included would work better for security assessment
and would turn into successful the implementation of the CNN-guided AC-OPF.
The database used for training the IEEE 14-bus case deep neural network samples
the whole space of operating points, so this one works well. The problem of sampling
the whole space comes when the power system is larger. Creating a database con-
taining the whole space sampled with a step size of 1 MW for a system with more
buses increases exponentially the number of snapshots. For that reason it is better
to find and sample the security boundary and assure that this database represents all
regions belonging to the boundary.
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Future Work
43
Further work should also focus on verification techniques. When testing a machine
learning algorithm, the model is evaluated in several conditions and its behaviour is
observed. When verifying a machine learning algorithm, it can be assured that the
system will not misbehave under a wide range of events. In [11], safety verification
techniques for deep learning algorithms are presented. Based on the just cited paper,
the deep convolutional net presented in this thesis could be verified.
As discussed in the previous chapter, future work must also focus on the integra-
tion of deep learning for power system security assessment to an AC optimal power
flow framework. A possible path to move on this would be to reformulate the AC-
OPF as a Mixed Integer Non-Linear Program (MINLP), where the deep learning
algorithm is integrated as a function that outputs 1 if secure and 0 otherwise.
==PAGE:58==
44
==PAGE:59==
APPENDIX A
Scores in Radar Charts
This Appendix shows the numerical values of the scores that are represented as a radar
chart during this thesis. Table A.1 corresponds to Figure 3.9, Table A.2 corresponds
to Figure 3.10 and Table A.3 corresponds to Figure 3.13.
Table A.1: Model’s scores.
Case
Recall(%)
Specificit(%)
Precision(%)
F1(%)
MCC
Accuracy(%)
1
98.96
91.92
98.63
98.79
0.916
97.94
2
99.07
94.42
99.05
99.06
0.935
98.39
3
97.92
98.87
99.80
98.86
0.927
98.06
4
98.74
95.76
99.27
99.01
0.933
98.31
5
99.01
94.63
99.09
99.05
0.935
98.37
6
99.14
94.52
99.07
99.10
0.938
98.46
7
98.34
97.68
99.60
98.96
0.932
98.24
8
98.84
96.74
99.44
99.14
0.942
98.54
Table A.2: Scores obtained from a basic MLP vs ConvNet.
Recall (%)
Specificity (%)
Precision (%)
F1-Score (%)
MCC
Accuracy (%)
Basic MLP
96.772
70.723
95.089
95.923
0.707
92.974
ConvNet
98.84
96.74
99.44
99.14
0.942
98.54
Table A.3: Scores obtained from a basic MLP vs ConvNet for the generated
database.
Recall (%)
Specificity (%)
Precision (%)
F1-Score (%)
MCC
Accuracy (%)
Basic MLP
90.621
80.329
91.785
91.199
0.703
87.616
ConvNet
91.324
85.679
93.927
92.607
0.76
89.676
==PAGE:60==
46
==PAGE:61==
APPENDIX B
IEEE 14-bus Case
System
The data corresponding to the IEEE 14-bus case system is shown in this Appendix.
Table B.1 shows the data from each bus, Table B.2 shows the generator data and
Table B.3 shows the data corresponding to each line.
Table B.1: Bus data from the IEEE 14-bus case.
Bus
Type
Pd
Qd
Gs
Bs
area
Vm
Va
baseKV
zone
Vmax
Vmin
1
3
0
0
0
0
1
1.06
0
0
1
1.06
0.94
2
2
21.7
12.7
0
0
1
1.045
-4.98
0
1
1.06
0.94
3
2
94.2
19
0
0
1
1.01
-12.72
0
1
1.06
0.94
4
1
47.8
-3.9
0
0
1
1.019
-10.33
0
1
1.06
0.94
5
1
7.6
1.6
0
0
1
1.02
-8.78
0
1
1.06
0.94
6
2
11.2
7.5
0
0
1
1.07
-14.22
0
1
1.06
0.94
7
1
0
0
0
0
1
1.062
-13.37
0
1
1.06
0.94
8
2
0
0
0
0
1
1.09
-13.36
0
1
1.06
0.94
9
1
29.5
16.6
0
19
1
1.056
-14.94
0
1
1.06
0.94
10
1
9
5.8
0
0
1
1.051
-15.1
0
1
1.06
0.94
11
1
3.5
1.8
0
0
1
1.057
-14.79
0
1
1.06
0.94
12
1
6.1
1.6
0
0
1
1.055
-15.07
0
1
1.06
0.94
13
1
13.5
5.8
0
0
1
1.05
-15.16
0
1
1.06
0.94
14
1
14.9
5
0
0
1
1.036
-16.04
0
1
1.06
0.94
Table B.2: Generator data from the IEEE 14-bus case.
Bus
Pg
Qg
Qmax
Qmin
Vg
mBase
status
Pmax
Pmin
1
232.4
-16.9
10
0
1.06
100
1
332.4
0
2
40
42.4
50
-40
1.045
100
1
140
0
3
0
23.4
40
0
1.01
100
1
100
0
6
0
12.2
24
-6
1.07
100
1
100
0
8
0
17.4
24
-6
1.09
100
1
100
0
==PAGE:62==
48
B IEEE 14-bus Case System
Table B.3: Branch data from the IEEE 14-bus case.
From
To
r
x
b
rateA
rateB
rateC
ratio
angle
status
angmin
angmax
1
2
0.01938
0.05917
0.0528
0
0
0
0
0
1
-360
360
1
5
0.05403
0.22304
0.0492
0
0
0
0
0
1
-360
360
2
3
0.04699
0.19797
0.0438
0
0
0
0
0
1
-360
360
2
4
0.05811
0.17632
0.034
0
0
0
0
0
1
-360
360
2
5
0.05695
0.17388
0.0346
0
0
0
0
0
1
-360
360
3
4
0.06701
0.17103
0.0128
0
0
0
0
0
1
-360
360
4
5
0.01335
0.04211
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
-360
360
4
7
0
0.20912
0
0
0
0
0.978
0
1
-360
360
4
9
0
0.55618
0
0
0
0
0.969
0
1
-360
360
5
6
0
0.25202
0
0
0
0
0.932
0
1
-360
360
6
11
0.09498
0.1989
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
-360
360
6
12
0.12291
0.25581
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
-360
360
6
13
0.06615
0.13027
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
-360
360
7
8
0
0.17615
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
-360
360
7
9
0
0.11001
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
-360
360
9
10
0.03181
0.0845
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
-360
360
9
14
0.12711
0.27038
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
-360
360
10
11
0.08205
0.19207
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
-360
360
12
13
0.22092
0.19988
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
-360
360
13
14
0.17093
0.34802
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
-360
360
==PAGE:63==
APPENDIX C
NESTA 162-bus Case
System
The data corresponding to the NESTA 162-bus case system is shown in this Appendix.
Table C.1 shows the data from each bus, Table C.2 shows the generator data and Table
C.3 shows the data corresponding to each line.
Table C.1: Bus data from the NESTA 162-bus case.
Bus
Type
Pd
Qd
Gs
Bs
area
Vm
Va
baseKV
zone
Vmax
Vmin
1
1
0
0
0
-100
1
1.03841
2.00301
345
9
1.06
0.94
2
1
0
0
0
0
1
1.03378
-3.04416
345
9
1.06
0.94
3
1
370
96.9
0
0
1
0.99919
-5.84738
161
12
1.06
0.94
4
1
0
0
0
0
1
1.01636
-7.23222
345
3
1.06
0.94
5
1
0
0
0
-50
1
1.05565
2.66535
345
8
1.06
0.94
6
2
0
0
0
0
1
0.99069
9.00459
22
9
1.06
0.94
7
1
0
0
0
0
1
1.0303
-3.38787
345
9
1.06
0.94
8
1
398
0
0
0
1
1.04986
-6.79833
115
12
1.06
0.94
9
1
0
0
0
0
1
1.03496
-0.68791
345
8
1.06
0.94
10
1
226
0
0
0
1
0.98425
-11.51262
230
12
1.06
0.94
11
1
0
0
0
0
1
0.99306
-7.9075
230
10
1.06
0.94
12
1
193
0
0
0
1
1.05081
-6.63908
115
12
1.06
0.94
13
1
204
0
0
0
1
1.0316
-4.40087
345
12
1.06
0.94
14
1
381
0
0
0
1
1.05121
-3.78636
161
12
1.06
0.94
15
1
-80
0
0
0
1
1.01582
0.1824
230
12
1.06
0.94
16
1
-54.2
0
0
0
1
1.05379
-4.87705
161
12
1.06
0.94
17
1
-116.5
0
0
0
1
1.05776
-4.24833
161
12
1.06
0.94
18
1
34.4
11.67
0
0
1
1.06
-8.61557
161
6
1.06
0.94
19
1
64.4
0
0
0
1
1.00211
-12.5954
161
12
1.06
0.94
20
1
37.9
12.5
0
0
1
0.96468
-9.76822
69
10
1.06
0.94
21
1
-69.8
0
0
0
1
1.04663
-5.51941
161
12
1.06
0.94
22
1
17.39
5.27
0
0
1
1.029
-12.00735
161
6
1.06
0.94
23
1
63.5
0
0
0
1
0.99529
-10.18928
161
12
1.06
0.94
24
1
0
0
0
0
1
1.00467
-8.42203
161
6
1.06
0.94
25
1
0
0
0
-50
1
0.99105
-4.33107
345
6
1.06
0.94
26
1
0
0
0
-50
1
1.00175
4.12158
345
1
1.06
0.94
27
1
324
57.9
0
0
1
0.99653
-5.40466
345
12
1.06
0.94
28
1
38.47
13.17
0
0
1
0.98679
-11.18566
161
6
1.06
0.94
29
1
28.31
9.03
0
0
1
0.99025
-12.88138
161
6
1.06
0.94
30
1
101.2
32.52
0
15
1
1.01124
-14.56723
161
6
1.06
0.94
31
1
72.5
0
0
0
1
0.98946
-12.02843
161
12
1.06
0.94
32
1
52.7
15.06
0
20
1
1.01356
-15.77456
161
6
1.06
0.94
33
1
45.17
15.06
0
20
1
0.99874
-17.67449
161
6
1.06
0.94
34
1
14.18
5.25
0
3.2
1
0.99095
-17.56616
161
1
1.06
0.94
35
1
54.48
14.63
0
5
1
0.98545
-19.00878
161
1
1.06
0.94
36
1
31.96
8.68
0
3
1
0.99269
-17.91972
161
2
1.06
0.94
37
1
0
0
0
0
1
0.99861
-5.39165
345
11
1.06
0.94
38
1
14.76
4.08
0
1.5
1
1.01274
-12.54024
161
2
1.06
0.94
39
1
0
0
0
0
1
0.9792
-7.50903
345
6
1.06
0.94
40
1
52.88
17.6
0
0
1
0.99078
-16.47291
161
1
1.06
0.94
==PAGE:64==
50
C NESTA 162-bus Case System
41
1
39.2
12.8
0
0
1
0.99247
-14.45661
161
1
1.06
0.94
42
1
0
0
0
0
1
0.98405
-7.03126
345
2
1.06
0.94
43
1
41.5
0
0
0
1
0.98744
-10.08503
161
12
1.06
0.94
44
1
16.32
3.71
0
0
1
0.98209
-10.55835
161
2
1.06
0.94
45
1
20.02
5.41
0
1.9
1
0.98357
-11.54564
161
2
1.06
0.94
46
1
65.31
22.3
0
26.2
1
0.98418
-14.5394
161
10
1.06
0.94
47
1
4.82
1.56
0
0
1
0.96768
-16.56057
161
2
1.06
0.94
48
1
33.76
22.86
0
0
1
0.97005
-14.45376
161
10
1.06
0.94
49
1
6.82
1.78
0
0
1
0.96562
-16.92507
161
2
1.06
0.94
50
1
99.7
0
0
0
1
0.97098
-13.06146
161
12
1.06
0.94
51
1
0
0
0
0
1
0.97527
-11.58712
161
3
1.06
0.94
52
1
218.2
42.8
0
0
1
1.00857
-13.34563
161
3
1.06
0.94
53
1
0
0
0
0
1
0.98237
-7.41884
161
10
1.06
0.94
54
1
70.34
29.57
0
0
1
0.9712
-13.40445
161
10
1.06
0.94
55
1
0
0
0
0
1
0.98193
-7.21325
161
1
1.06
0.94
56
1
25.29
7.26
0
3.2
1
0.97809
-15.73791
161
7
1.06
0.94
57
1
48.48
15.61
0
0
1
0.97151
-13.10925
161
1
1.06
0.94
58
1
0
0
0
0
1
1.00672
-4.29637
230
10
1.06
0.94
59
1
84.43
27.05
0
0
1
0.98223
-8.91224
230
10
1.06
0.94
60
1
244
0
0
0
1
1.00349
-9.52202
115
12
1.06
0.94
61
1
0
0
0
0
1
0.98819
-7.01415
230
10
1.06
0.94
62
1
-865.6
0
0
0
1
1.02115
6.38245
230
12
1.06
0.94
63
1
59.1
0
0
0
1
0.99077
-5.25782
230
12
1.06
0.94
64
1
0
0
0
0
1
1.02579
-4.62424
345
10
1.06
0.94
65
1
-26.3
0
0
0
1
1.02705
-0.82502
345
12
1.06
0.94
66
1
0
0
0
-50
1
0.99779
-7.08482
345
10
1.06
0.94
67
1
22.54
7.03
0
6
1
0.99032
-16.64837
161
7
1.06
0.94
68
1
40.42
12.68
0
12
1
1.00126
-14.89422
161
7
1.06
0.94
69
1
0
0
0
0
1
1.00739
-13.47291
161
1
1.06
0.94
70
1
0
0
0
0
1
0.99862
-1.75835
161
1
1.06
0.94
71
1
29.87
11.93
0
12
1
0.96918
-9.19042
161
1
1.06
0.94
72
1
427
0
0
0
1
1.03888
-3.64671
161
12
1.06
0.94
73
2
0
0
0
0
1
0.96775
-1.75835
20
1
1.06
0.94
74
1
0
0
0
0
1
0.99758
-7.80156
345
5
1.06
0.94
75
1
0
0
0
-50
1
1.03612
1.71615
345
8
1.06
0.94
76
2
0
0
0
0
1
0.95868
10.46393
24
1
1.06
0.94
77
1
26.41
8.78
0
4.7
1
0.99986
-15.05788
161
1
1.06
0.94
78
1
79.12
0
0
0
1
1.00843
-12.81007
161
5
1.06
0.94
79
1
0
0
0
0
1
1.01792
-10.56934
161
5
1.06
0.94
80
1
15.76
5.25
0
2.8
1
0.98982
-13.41414
161
1
1.06
0.94
81
1
50.88
16.8
0
22.1
1
0.98787
-20.88962
69
1
1.06
0.94
82
1
62.28
20.26
0
10.4
1
0.98812
-16.40971
161
1
1.06
0.94
83
1
0
0
0
0
1
0.99036
-15.4461
161
1
1.06
0.94
84
1
37.9
9.49
0
2.6
1
0.98275
-11.75494
161
2
1.06
0.94
85
1
40.52
11.26
0
12
1
0.9498
-17.47858
161
1
1.06
0.94
86
1
50.73
13.35
0
12
1
0.94821
-20.57928
161
2
1.06
0.94
87
1
16.91
4.23
0
0
1
0.95729
-18.7354
115
2
1.06
0.94
88
1
60.6
4.44
0
0
1
0.96959
-19.37665
69
4
1.06
0.94
89
1
0
0
0
0
1
0.96874
-21.67672
115
2
1.06
0.94
90
1
50.21
16.76
0
10
1
0.94
-23.96323
115
2
1.06
0.94
91
1
51.24
12.83
0
0
1
0.98464
-10.50216
161
2
1.06
0.94
92
1
36.12
9.05
0
0
1
0.97563
-11.71503
161
2
1.06
0.94
93
1
103.8
34.56
0
0
1
0.98672
-5.99591
161
2
1.06
0.94
94
1
164
6.49
0
0
1
1.00477
-11.29923
161
5
1.06
0.94
95
1
117.2
39.01
0
0
1
1.00693
-10.37608
115
2
1.06
0.94
96
1
119.2
0
0
0
1
0.98822
-19.48988
115
2
1.06
0.94
97
1
22.84
5.71
0
0
1
1.00052
-11.51347
115
2
1.06
0.94
98
1
151.1
50.35
0
0
1
1.00417
-8.88521
115
2
1.06
0.94
99
2
0
0
0
0
1
1.01047
-4.82034
18
2
1.06
0.94
100
1
23.21
6.9
0
3
1
0.97632
-20.354
115
2
1.06
0.94
101
2
0
0
0
0
1
0.99547
-14.04737
14
2
1.06
0.94
102
1
16.54
4.08
0
0
1
0.97743
-11.34282
161
2
1.06
0.94
103
1
322
0
0
0
1
0.99036
-9.15198
161
12
1.06
0.94
104
1
31.52
10.46
0
5.6
1
0.98416
-19.21613
115
2
1.06
0.94
105
1
24.84
6.23
0
1.7
1
1.01742
-13.01005
115
2
1.06
0.94
106
1
0
0
0
0
1
0.97483
-17.40352
161
4
1.06
0.94
107
1
35.41
5.41
0
0
1
0.96026
-18.38815
161
4
1.06
0.94
108
3
0
0
0
0
1
0.94
0
22
2
1.06
0.94
109
1
0
0
0
0
1
0.99767
-7.34244
345
5
1.06
0.94
==PAGE:65==
C NESTA 162-bus Case System
51
110
1
0
0
0
0
1
1.04147
-2.24956
161
3
1.06
0.94
111
1
65.41
16.72
0
0
1
1.01396
-6.86474
161
3
1.06
0.94
112
1
0
0
0
-50
1
1.04451
0.26355
345
3
1.06
0.94
113
1
32.7
0
0
0
1
1.03903
-3.68854
161
12
1.06
0.94
114
2
0
0
0
0
1
1.02037
4.06326
14
3
1.06
0.94
115
1
17.32
3.34
0
0
1
1.01389
-9.64944
161
3
1.06
0.94
116
1
56.08
11.2
0
0
1
1.01768
-11.10399
161
3
1.06
0.94
117
1
101.9
20.06
0
0
1
1.00905
-11.70262
161
3
1.06
0.94
118
2
0
0
0
0
1
1.01167
-7.97823
14
3
1.06
0.94
119
1
0
0
0
0
1
1.00293
-9.04543
345
3
1.06
0.94
120
1
0
0
0
0
1
1.0417
-0.15105
345
8
1.06
0.94
121
2
0
0
0
0
1
1.02461
7.65514
24
3
1.06
0.94
122
1
47.28
9.36
0
0
1
0.94513
-20.54195
161
3
1.06
0.94
123
1
165
0
0
0
1
0.94
-21.02418
161
12
1.06
0.94
124
1
-571
90.9
0
0
1
0.9896
-5.353
345
12
1.06
0.94
125
2
2000
0
0
0
1
1.02519
-4.94102
345
12
1.06
0.94
126
1
-467
0
0
0
1
1.01012
-1.57319
345
12
1.06
0.94
127
1
-52.6
0
0
0
1
1.02141
-4.61652
345
12
1.06
0.94
128
1
0
0
0
0
1
1.03875
-0.09955
345
8
1.06
0.94
129
1
0
0
0
0
1
1.0434
-0.28444
345
8
1.06
0.94
130
2
0
0
0
0
1
1.03531
9.16491
22
8
1.06
0.94
131
2
0
0
0
0
1
1.06
6.53385
18
8
1.06
0.94
132
1
159
0
0
0
1
1.04332
-3.16201
161
12
1.06
0.94
133
1
30.1
6.02
0
0
1
1.04921
-4.88748
69
3
1.06
0.94
134
1
17.46
3.34
0
0
1
1.03698
-3.58738
161
3
1.06
0.94
135
1
20.06
4.01
0
0
1
1.046
-4.931
69
3
1.06
0.94
136
1
20.06
4.01
0
0
1
1.03931
-5.19161
69
3
1.06
0.94
137
1
20.06
4.01
0
0
1
1.043
-5.15319
69
3
1.06
0.94
138
1
0
0
0
0
1
1.04504
-3.99854
69
3
1.06
0.94
139
1
10.1
2.01
0
0
1
1.04026
-4.75386
69
3
1.06
0.94
140
1
13.58
2.68
0
0
1
1.04247
-5.0798
69
3
1.06
0.94
141
1
0
0
0
0
1
1.00394
-6.81384
161
3
1.06
0.94
142
1
27.09
5.35
0
0
1
1.01574
-13.80444
69
3
1.06
0.94
143
1
21.07
4.01
0
0
1
1.00131
-12.43908
69
3
1.06
0.94
144
1
12.37
2.01
0
0
1
1.02242
-9.08363
69
3
1.06
0.94
145
1
10.83
2.21
0
0
1
1.02568
-7.20405
69
3
1.06
0.94
146
1
21.33
4.01
0
0
1
1.00513
-12.94527
69
3
1.06
0.94
147
1
216.4
42.8
0
0
1
1.00467
-12.76656
161
3
1.06
0.94
148
1
120
24
0
0
1
1.00673
-13.8565
69
3
1.06
0.94
149
1
0
0
0
0
1
0.99853
-1.71655
161
1
1.06
0.94
150
1
4.8
1.6
0
0
1
0.99638
-2.32723
161
1
1.06
0.94
151
1
24
8
0
0
1
0.98777
-4.26609
161
1
1.06
0.94
152
1
6
0
0
0
1
1.0153
-2.75639
161
12
1.06
0.94
153
1
4
1.6
0
0
1
0.99127
-3.8473
69
1
1.06
0.94
154
1
28
9.6
0
6
1
0.95381
-9.73237
69
1
1.06
0.94
155
1
12
4
0
0
1
0.963
-8.0248
69
1
1.06
0.94
156
1
8
2.4
0
0
1
0.95789
-9.37022
69
1
1.06
0.94
157
1
32
10.4
0
0
1
0.96461
-9.69012
69
1
1.06
0.94
158
1
16
5.6
0
3
1
0.94983
-10.88283
69
1
1.06
0.94
159
1
8
2.4
0
0
1
0.94882
-10.80795
69
1
1.06
0.94
160
1
14.4
4.8
0
3
1
0.95057
-10.35266
69
1
1.06
0.94
161
1
32
10.4
0
0
1
0.98423
-5.44125
161
1
1.06
0.94
162
1
20
6.4
0
0
1
0.98262
-6.13974
161
1
1.06
0.94
==PAGE:66==
52
C NESTA 162-bus Case System
Table C.2: Generator data from the NESTA 162-bus case.
Bus
Pg
Qg
Qmax
Qmin
Vg
Base
Status
Pmax
Pmin
6
896.341
81.074
400
-200
0.99069
100
1
1217
0
73
0
36.12
267
-72
0.96775
100
1
566
0
76
1244.016
15.937
605
-170
0.95868
100
1
1282
0
99
139.67
54.702
75.6
-60.6
1.01047
100
1
186
0
101
87.898
38.6
38.6
-24.4
0.99547
100
1
180
0
108
598.998
34.661
576
-576
0.94
100
1
1151
0
114
146.325
33
33
-25
1.02037
100
1
148
0
118
175.997
95
95
-44
1.01167
100
1
189
0
121
690.204
204.985
250
-120
1.02461
100
1
1005
0
125
2279.694
89.995
1295
-1099
1.02519
100
1
2590
0
130
562.859
131.428
288
-144
1.03531
100
1
591
0
131
580
269.995
290
-265
1.06
100
1
580
0
Table C.3: Branch data from the NESTA 162-bus case.
From
To
r
x
b
rateA
rateB
rateC
ratio
status
angmin
angmax
1
2
0.0035
0.0321
0.5438
613
613
613
0
1
-30
30
1
3
0.0034
0.0326
0.7224
895
895
895
0
1
-30
30
1
4
0.0064
0.0621
0.987
470
470
470
0
1
-30
30
1
5
0.0011
0.0119
0.2012
663
663
663
0
1
-30
30
1
6
0
0.0133
0
900
2206
2206
1.0519
1
-30
30
2
7
0.0014
0.0125
0.2122
605
605
605
0
1
-30
30
2
13
0.0046
0.0417
0.7058
610
610
610
0
1
-30
30
3
14
0.2361
1.0122
0
29
29
29
0
1
-30
30
3
50
0.0389
0.1699
0
169
169
169
0
1
-30
30
3
103
0.1074
1.8023
0
17
17
17
0
1
-30
30
3
123
0.2883
1.6719
0
18
18
18
0
1
-30
30
3
124
0.014
0.6483
0
46
46
46
0
1
-30
30
3
125
0.0084
0.1139
0
257
257
257
0
1
-30
30
4
112
0.0059
0.0568
0.925
514
514
514
0
1
-30
30
4
115
0
0.0185
0
500
1586
1586
1
1
-30
30
4
119
0.0014
0.0119
0.205
591
591
591
0
1
-30
30
5
120
0.0022
0.0224
0.3792
644
644
644
0
1
-30
30
5
129
0.0022
0.0268
0.4612
702
702
702
0
1
-30
30
5
131
0
0.0127
0
710
2310
2310
1.0249
1
-30
30
7
8
0.0004
0.0189
0
672
1552
1552
0.9751
1
-30
30
7
9
0.0017
0.0169
0.2872
637
637
637
0
1
-30
30
8
10
0.4591
1.0703
0
26
26
26
0
1
-30
30
8
12
0.0106
0.0574
0
159
159
159
0
1
-30
30
8
13
0.1274
0.4784
0
60
60
60
0
1
-30
30
8
14
0.0473
0.3956
0
74
74
74
0
1
-30
30
8
15
0.5035
1.7433
0
17
17
17
0
1
-30
30
8
132
0.0252
0.288
0
102
102
102
0
1
-30
30
9
75
0.0013
0.015
0.2682
684
684
684
0
1
-30
30
10
11
0.0051
0.037
0.0716
366
366
366
0
1
-30
30
10
13
0.1299
0.622
0
47
47
47
0
1
-30
30
10
15
0.1275
0.7033
0
42
42
42
0
1
-30
30
10
60
0.2525
1.2242
0
24
24
24
0
1
-30
30
11
15
0.0285
0.1793
0.3484
162
162
162
0
1
-30
30
11
46
0.0142
0.1225
0.1876
238
238
238
0
1
-30
30
11
58
0.017
0.107
0.2074
271
271
271
0
1
-30
30
11
59
0.0071
0.0471
0.0852
350
350
350
0
1
-30
30
12
2
0.0008
0.0377
0
336
778
778
1.0252
1
-30
30
12
13
0.1038
0.3137
0
89
89
89
0
1
-30
30
12
14
0.1598
0.6415
0
45
45
45
0
1
-30
30
12
132
0.4486
1.5773
0
18
18
18
0
1
-30
30
13
15
0.044
0.3227
0
91
91
91
0
1
-30
30
==PAGE:67==
C NESTA 162-bus Case System
53
13
62
0.0098
0.1221
0
240
240
240
0
1
-30
30
14
72
0.0107
0.0828
0
264
264
264
0
1
-30
30
14
113
0.0063
0.0382
0
235
235
235
0
1
-30
30
14
132
0.0057
0.0374
0
244
244
244
0
1
-30
30
15
58
0.0115
0.0732
0.142
344
344
344
0
1
-30
30
15
60
0.3907
1.6753
0
18
18
18
0
1
-30
30
15
62
0.0084
0.0588
0
359
359
359
0
1
-30
30
15
63
0.1704
1.4555
0
21
21
21
0
1
-30
30
16
17
0.6017
1.4373
0
19
19
19
0
1
-30
30
16
18
0.0297
0.107
0.0546
184
184
184
0
1
-30
30
16
27
0.1574
0.8871
0
33
33
33
0
1
-30
30
16
126
0.1053
0.5132
0
56
56
56
0
1
-30
30
16
127
0.0958
0.5276
0
55
55
55
0
1
-30
30
17
18
0.0213
0.1013
0.0642
209
209
209
0
1
-30
30
17
19
0.2314
0.7678
0
37
37
37
0
1
-30
30
17
21
0.0471
0.2665
0
109
109
109
0
1
-30
30
17
127
0.0287
0.2637
0
111
111
111
0
1
-30
30
18
30
0.0207
0.1088
0.052
220
220
220
0
1
-30
30
18
32
0.0234
0.122
0.0582
219
219
219
0
1
-30
30
18
37
0
0.0456
0
225
644
644
1.1193
1
-30
30
19
21
0.3867
1.9005
0
16
16
16
0
1
-30
30
19
38
0.0239
0.125
0.0596
219
219
219
0
1
-30
30
19
43
0.0603
0.2572
0
112
112
112
0
1
-30
30
19
127
0.1074
0.6809
0
43
43
43
0
1
-30
30
20
53
0
0.114
0
75
258
258
1
1
-30
30
20
157
0.0113
0.0279
0.0004
44
66
66
0
1
-30
30
21
22
0.0312
0.1629
0.0778
177
177
177
0
1
-30
30
21
127
0.0105
0.6414
0
46
46
46
0
1
-30
30
22
38
0.014
0.054
0.025
190
190
190
0
1
-30
30
22
39
0
0.0493
0
225
595
595
1.1081
1
-30
30
22
40
0.0188
0.0717
0.0328
189
189
189
0
1
-30
30
22
41
0.0172
0.085
0.0404
213
213
213
0
1
-30
30
23
24
0.0174
0.0511
0.023
167
167
167
0
1
-30
30
23
60
0.066
0.3093
0
93
93
93
0
1
-30
30
24
25
0
0.034
0
225
863
863
1.0217
1
-30
30
24
28
0.0249
0.0725
0.0202
166
166
166
0
1
-30
30
24
45
0.0137
0.0725
0.034
220
220
220
0
1
-30
30
25
26
0.0059
0.0583
0.9302
501
501
501
0
1
-30
30
25
27
0.0044
0.041
0.8384
618
618
618
0
1
-30
30
26
74
0.0063
0.0607
0.93
481
481
481
0
1
-30
30
26
75
0.003
0.0322
0.5038
661
661
661
0
1
-30
30
26
76
0
0.0082
0
1250
3578
3578
1.04
1
-30
30
27
31
0.0101
0.1273
0
230
230
230
0
1
-30
30
27
62
0.0173
0.581
0
51
51
51
0
1
-30
30
27
65
0.0105
0.2764
0
107
107
107
0
1
-30
30
27
125
0.035
1.6845
0
18
18
18
0
1
-30
30
27
126
0.0022
0.0225
0
646
646
646
0
1
-30
30
27
127
0.1506
1.4355
0
21
21
21
0
1
-30
30
28
29
0.024
0.0965
0.0444
193
193
193
0
1
-30
30
29
30
0.038
0.15
0.0696
177
190
190
0
1
-30
30
29
31
0.0206
0.0833
0.0384
194
194
194
0
1
-30
30
30
32
0.0249
0.1005
0.0458
194
194
194
0
1
-30
30
32
33
0.0114
0.0448
0.0208
191
191
191
0
1
-30
30
33
34
0.028
0.114
0.052
180
195
195
0
1
-30
30
33
35
0.0216
0.107
0.051
214
214
214
0
1
-30
30
33
36
0.0102
0.0536
0.0254
220
220
220
0
1
-30
30
34
40
0.0397
0.1517
0.069
188
188
188
0
1
-30
30
34
77
0.0235
0.0896
0.0408
189
189
189
0
1
-30
30
35
40
0.0271
0.1341
0.0638
179
213
213
0
1
-30
30
36
67
0.0176
0.0924
0.044
220
220
220
0
1
-30
30
37
39
0.0039
0.0379
0.67
630
630
630
0
1
-30
30
37
126
0.004
0.0381
0.67
624
624
624
0
1
-30
30
37
127
0.004
0.0403
0.6832
641
641
641
0
1
-30
30
39
42
0.002
0.0186
0.32
617
617
617
0
1
-30
30
40
81
0.03
0.345
0.0038
81
85
85
0
1
-30
30
40
82
0.004
0.019
0.0108
209
209
209
0
1
-30
30
41
81
0.037
0.372
0.0058
79
79
79
0
1
-30
30
41
83
0.0052
0.0256
0.0124
213
213
213
0
1
-30
30
41
84
0.0057
0.058
0.0292
301
301
301
0
1
-30
30
==PAGE:68==
54
C NESTA 162-bus Case System
42
109
0.0019
0.0196
0.333
648
648
648
0
1
-30
30
43
44
0.0188
0.0751
0.0348
193
193
193
0
1
-30
30
43
103
0.0324
0.1702
0
170
170
170
0
1
-30
30
43
124
0.0293
0.1766
0
164
164
164
0
1
-30
30
43
125
0.1449
0.6509
0
44
44
44
0
1
-30
30
44
102
0.013
0.05
0.0236
180
189
189
0
1
-30
30
44
103
0.0127
0.051
0.0244
180
193
193
0
1
-30
30
45
54
0.0108
0.057
0.0272
220
220
220
0
1
-30
30
46
47
0.031
0.1378
0.0622
177
203
203
0
1
-30
30
47
48
0.0251
0.1114
0.0502
177
203
203
0
1
-30
30
47
49
0.003
0.012
0.0054
193
193
193
0
1
-30
30
48
50
0.0336
0.166
0.078
174
174
174
0
1
-30
30
48
51
0.042
0.13
0.057
171
171
171
0
1
-30
30
48
52
0.054
0.168
0.074
167
167
167
0
1
-30
30
49
87
0.014
0.068
0.0266
423
423
423
0
1
-30
30
50
51
0.03
0.09
0.041
168
168
168
0
1
-30
30
50
123
0.4071
1.8543
0
16
16
16
0
1
-30
30
50
125
0.1337
0.6031
0
48
48
48
0
1
-30
30
51
141
0.0323
0.1
0.0442
171
171
171
0
1
-30
30
52
79
0.0623
0.2126
0.094
133
133
133
0
1
-30
30
52
106
0.0231
0.0717
0.0314
171
171
171
0
1
-30
30
52
116
0.006
0.0487
0.0256
270
270
270
0
1
-30
30
52
117
0.0117
0.0493
0.023
198
198
198
0
1
-30
30
52
118
0
0.052
0
200
565
565
1.0429
1
-30
30
53
11
0.0005
0.02
0
375
1467
1467
1
1
-30
30
53
54
0.0275
0.1961
0.0956
149
149
149
0
1
-30
30
53
55
0.0005
0.0026
0.0022
219
219
219
0
1
-30
30
54
56
0.0174
0.091
0.043
219
219
219
0
1
-30
30
54
57
0.025
0.1237
0.0588
213
213
213
0
1
-30
30
55
57
0.0462
0.1763
0.0802
161
161
161
0
1
-30
30
55
149
0.0153
0.0671
0.0312
202
202
202
0
1
-30
30
55
162
0.004
0.0189
0.0098
209
209
209
0
1
-30
30
56
67
0.017
0.0894
0.0424
220
220
220
0
1
-30
30
57
80
0.0272
0.1037
0.0472
180
189
189
0
1
-30
30
58
61
0.0133
0.1018
0.1842
276
286
286
0
1
-30
30
59
61
0.0106
0.0706
0.121
351
351
351
0
1
-30
30
60
61
0.0027
0.0653
-0.0022
100
449
449
1.0252
1
-30
30
60
61
0.002
0.0393
0
200
746
746
1.0252
1
-30
30
60
62
0.3674
0.964
0
29
29
29
0
1
-30
30
60
65
0.1041
0.4144
0
69
69
69
0
1
-30
30
60
126
0.5367
1.8295
0
16
16
16
0
1
-30
30
61
62
0.0296
0.2275
0.3996
128
128
128
0
1
-30
30
61
63
0.0043
0.0422
0.0764
345
422
422
0
1
-30
30
62
63
0.0158
0.1702
0
172
172
172
0
1
-30
30
62
65
0.004
0.074
0
396
396
396
0
1
-30
30
62
126
0.0044
0.2969
0
99
99
99
0
1
-30
30
63
65
0.2409
1.96
0
15
15
15
0
1
-30
30
64
65
0.005
0.0571
0.9098
512
512
512
0
1
-30
30
64
66
0.0033
0.0381
0.6066
684
684
684
0
1
-30
30
65
126
0.0031
0.1536
0
191
191
191
0
1
-30
30
66
11
0
0.0118
0
500
2486
2486
1
1
-30
30
67
68
0.0193
0.1013
0.0482
220
220
220
0
1
-30
30
68
69
0.0068
0.0353
0.0168
218
218
218
0
1
-30
30
69
77
0.0098
0.0374
0.017
189
189
189
0
1
-30
30
69
78
0.0114
0.0434
0.0196
180
188
188
0
1
-30
30
69
79
0.0052
0.0433
0.022
273
273
273
0
1
-30
30
70
73
0
0.0197
0
495
1489
1489
1.0398
1
-30
30
70
149
0.0002
0.0018
0.001
284
284
284
0
1
-30
30
70
149
0.0002
0.0018
0.001
284
284
284
0
1
-30
30
71
85
0.0304
0.1506
0.0716
191
191
191
0
1
-30
30
71
150
0.0196
0.097
0.0462
213
213
213
0
1
-30
30
72
113
0.0022
0.013
0
232
232
232
0
1
-30
30
72
132
0.0028
0.0168
0
234
234
234
0
1
-30
30
72
152
0.0385
0.18
0
160
160
160
0
1
-30
30
74
119
0.0031
0.031
0.4822
639
639
639
0
1
-30
30
75
128
0.0008
0.0087
0.166
665
665
665
0
1
-30
30
75
130
0.0004
0.0242
0
578
1212
1212
1.0249
1
-30
30
78
79
0.0051
0.0336
0.0182
245
245
245
0
1
-30
30
78
80
0.0244
0.093
0.0422
180
189
189
0
1
-30
30
==PAGE:69==
C NESTA 162-bus Case System
55
79
74
0
0.018
0
500
1630
1630
1.0248
1
-30
30
82
83
0.0053
0.0249
0.013
208
208
208
0
1
-30
30
84
93
0.0125
0.0826
0.0414
245
245
245
0
1
-30
30
85
86
0.0211
0.1046
0.0498
214
214
214
0
1
-30
30
86
87
0.028
0.112
0.0538
255
255
255
0
1
-30
30
86
88
0.044
0.228
0.109
127
127
127
0
1
-30
30
88
96
0.074
0.25
0.0142
48
113
113
0
1
-30
30
88
106
0.0079
0.0468
0.0232
173
619
619
0
1
-30
30
89
86
0
0.057
0
90
515
515
1.0252
1
-30
30
89
90
0.069
0.134
0.014
69
98
98
0
1
-30
30
90
96
0.1837
0.359
0.037
73
73
73
0
1
-30
30
91
92
0.0156
0.0819
0.0376
220
220
220
0
1
-30
30
91
93
0.0143
0.0895
0.045
239
239
239
0
1
-30
30
91
94
0.0145
0.0957
0.048
245
245
245
0
1
-30
30
92
102
0.015
0.061
0.0292
194
194
194
0
1
-30
30
93
42
0
0.026
0
400
1129
1129
1.0248
1
-30
30
93
108
0
0.0154
0
600
1905
1905
1.0503
1
-30
30
94
103
0.0227
0.1333
0.066
217
217
217
0
1
-30
30
94
107
0.0613
0.1891
0.0836
148
148
148
0
1
-30
30
94
109
0
0.035
0
300
839
839
1.0248
1
-30
30
95
91
0.0054
0.0458
-0.0036
250
637
637
1.02
1
-30
30
95
96
0.087
0.212
0.086
109
109
109
0
1
-30
30
95
97
0.1289
0.2809
0.0334
58
95
95
0
1
-30
30
95
98
0.0071
0.043
0.0224
168
168
168
0
1
-30
30
95
99
0
0.0685
0
150
429
429
1.0296
1
-30
30
96
100
0.069
0.161
0.0186
69
107
107
0
1
-30
30
96
101
0
0.1031
0
96
285
285
1.0296
1
-30
30
97
44
0.0051
0.1007
-0.0025
84
291
291
1.0252
1
-30
30
98
93
0.0006
0.0214
-0.0341
504
1371
1371
1.0252
1
-30
30
98
105
0.1485
0.293
0.031
69
90
90
0
1
-30
30
100
104
0.062
0.145
0.0166
69
107
107
0
1
-30
30
103
123
0.182
0.751
0
38
38
38
0
1
-30
30
103
124
0.0002
0.0167
0
1757
1757
1757
0
1
-30
30
103
125
0.0279
0.1972
0
148
148
148
0
1
-30
30
104
34
0.008
0.0637
-0.0033
106
457
457
1
1
-30
30
105
38
0
0.116
0
45
253
253
1.0252
1
-30
30
106
107
0.0196
0.0611
0.0268
171
171
171
0
1
-30
30
107
122
0.013
0.0621
0.0296
210
210
210
0
1
-30
30
109
119
0.006
0.0577
0.929
506
506
506
0
1
-30
30
109
124
0.002
0.0222
0.3782
671
671
671
0
1
-30
30
109
125
0.007
0.062
1
471
471
471
0
1
-30
30
110
111
0.023
0.099
0.046
180
200
200
0
1
-30
30
110
112
0
0.0185
0
500
1586
1586
1
1
-30
30
110
114
0
0.0768
0
150
382
382
1.0398
1
-30
30
110
134
0.0032
0.0256
0.0134
268
268
268
0
1
-30
30
110
141
0.021
0.0649
0.0288
171
171
171
0
1
-30
30
111
115
0.0527
0.2215
0.103
129
129
129
0
1
-30
30
112
120
0.0005
0.0044
0.072
601
601
601
0
1
-30
30
112
121
0
0.019
0
720
1544
1544
1.0499
1
-30
30
113
132
0.0459
0.2911
0
100
100
100
0
1
-30
30
113
134
0.0008
0.0072
0.0038
284
284
284
0
1
-30
30
115
117
0.0019
0.0154
0.033
270
270
270
0
1
-30
30
116
117
0.0048
0.0391
0.0214
271
271
271
0
1
-30
30
116
119
0
0.009
0
1000
3260
3260
1.0248
1
-30
30
116
147
0.0035
0.0286
0.0156
271
271
271
0
1
-30
30
117
147
0.0022
0.0175
0.01
268
268
268
0
1
-30
30
120
14
0.0003
0.0188
0
500
1561
1561
0.9751
1
-30
30
120
128
0.0004
0.0051
0.1
717
717
717
0
1
-30
30
120
129
0.0003
0.0038
0.0652
715
715
715
0
1
-30
30
122
123
0.0175
0.0835
0.0398
210
210
210
0
1
-30
30
123
125
0.0423
0.2441
0
119
119
119
0
1
-30
30
124
125
0.0113
0.1585
0
185
185
185
0
1
-30
30
124
126
0.0577
0.8256
0
36
36
36
0
1
-30
30
125
126
0.0201
0.5915
0
50
50
50
0
1
-30
30
126
127
0.0877
0.7049
0
42
42
42
0
1
-30
30
128
72
0.0004
0.018
0
500
1630
1630
1
1
-30
30
129
132
0.0004
0.0198
0
500
1482
1482
1
1
-30
30
133
134
0
0.041
0
160
716
716
1.0249
1
-30
30
133
135
0.0109
0.0259
0.0004
44
65
65
0
1
-30
30
==PAGE:70==
56
C NESTA 162-bus Case System
133
136
0.039
0.099
0.0016
39
67
67
0
1
-30
30
133
137
0.0134
0.0504
0.001
60
81
81
0
1
-30
30
135
138
0.0466
0.1182
0.002
39
67
67
0
1
-30
30
136
139
0.026
0.065
0.001
39
66
66
0
1
-30
30
137
140
0.0041
0.0156
0.0004
60
81
81
0
1
-30
30
138
110
0
0.041
0
160
716
716
1
1
-30
30
138
139
0.026
0.065
0.001
39
66
66
0
1
-30
30
138
140
0.0251
0.0941
0.0018
60
80
80
0
1
-30
30
138
145
0.0923
0.2338
0.0038
39
67
67
0
1
-30
30
142
51
0
0.1728
0
83
170
170
1.07
1
-30
30
142
143
0.1582
0.3919
0.0068
44
66
66
0
1
-30
30
142
146
0.1618
0.3861
0.007
44
65
65
0
1
-30
30
143
144
0.0927
0.2322
0.002
44
66
66
0
1
-30
30
144
141
0
0.082
0
80
358
358
1.0249
1
-30
30
144
145
0.089
0.221
0.0032
39
66
66
0
1
-30
30
144
146
0.068
0.2906
0.0058
60
86
86
0
1
-30
30
148
116
0
0.041
0
160
716
716
1
1
-30
30
149
26
0
0.0386
0
300
760
760
1
1
-30
30
149
26
0
0.0386
0
300
760
760
1
1
-30
30
149
150
0.001
0.0085
0.002
276
276
276
0
1
-30
30
149
151
0.0039
0.0262
0.0138
247
247
247
0
1
-30
30
149
152
0.0253
0.1168
0.0544
207
207
207
0
1
-30
30
151
161
0.0021
0.0138
0.0074
244
244
244
0
1
-30
30
153
70
0
0.0916
0
93
321
321
1
1
-30
30
153
70
0
0.0916
0
93
321
321
1
1
-30
30
153
154
0.071
0.2841
0.0054
50
83
83
0
1
-30
30
153
155
0.043
0.1856
0.0038
66
86
86
0
1
-30
30
154
156
0.0155
0.0379
0.0008
50
66
66
0
1
-30
30
154
160
0.0102
0.0429
0.001
50
85
85
0
1
-30
30
155
156
0.0176
0.0822
0.0014
66
89
89
0
1
-30
30
156
157
0.053
0.1273
0.0022
33
65
65
0
1
-30
30
157
55
0
0.0827
0
150
355
355
1
1
-30
30
157
158
0.0489
0.1404
0.0028
50
71
71
0
1
-30
30
158
159
0.0339
0.0664
0.0012
50
59
59
0
1
-30
30
159
160
0.019
0.0811
0.012
50
86
86
0
1
-30
30
161
162
0.0022
0.0103
0.0054
208
208
208
0
1
-30
30
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1]
Abien Fred Agarap. Deep Learning using Rectified Linear Units (ReLU). online:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.08375. March 2018.
[2]
Manoja Kumar Behera, Irani Majumder, and Niranjan Nayak. “Solar photo-
voltaic power forecasting using optimized modified extreme learning machine
technique”. In: Engineering Science and Technology, an International Journal
21.3 (2018), pages 428–438. issn: 2215-0986. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jestch.2018.04.013. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2215098617316063.
[3]
Patricio Cerda, Gaël Varoquaux, and Balázs Kégl. “Similarity encoding for
learning with dirty categorical variables”. In: Machine Learning 107.8 (Septem-
ber 2018), pages 1477–1494. issn: 1573-0565. doi: 10.1007/s10994-018-5724-
2. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10994-018-5724-2.
[4]
Rich Christie. “Power Systems Test Case Archive”. August 1993. url: http:
//www.ee.washington.edu/research/pstca/pf14/pg_tca14bus.htm.
[5]
A Clifton et al. “Using machine learning to predict wind turbine power output”.
In: Environmental Research Letters 8.2 (2013), page 024009. url: http://
stacks.iop.org/1748-9326/8/i=2/a=024009.
[6]
Carleton Coffrin, Dan Gordon, and Paul Scott. “NESTA, The NICTA Energy
System Test Case Archive”. 2014. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1411.0359.
[7]
B. Donnot et al. “Introducing machine learning for power system operation sup-
port”. In: 2017 iREP Symposium - Bulk Power System Dynamics and Control
- X (iREP), Porto, Portugal. August 2017, pages 1–10.
[8]
Bolin Gao and Lacra Pavel. On the Properties of the Softmax Function with
Application in Game Theory and Reinforcement Learning. online: https://
arxiv.org/pdf/1704.00805.pdf. 2017.
[9]
A. Gensler et al. “Deep Learning for solar power forecasting — An approach
using AutoEncoder and LSTM Neural Networks”. In: 2016 IEEE International
Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC). October 2016, pages 002858–
002865. doi: 10.1109/SMC.2016.7844673.
[10]
Lejla Halilbasic et al. “Data-driven Security-Constrained AC-OPF for Opera-
tions and Markets”. In: 20th Power Systems Computation Conference (PSCC).
June 2018.
==PAGE:72==
58
Bibliography
[11]
Xiaowei Huang et al. “Safety Verification of Deep Neural Networks”. English.
In: Computer Aided Verification (CAV). Edited by Rupak Majumdar and Vik-
tor Kunčak. Lecture Notes in Computer Science Part 1. Springer, July 2017,
pages 3–29. isbn: 9783319633862. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-63387-9_1.
[12]
C. A. Jensen, M. A. El-Sharkawi, and R. J. Marks. “Power system security
assessment using neural networks: feature selection using Fisher discrimination”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 16.4 (November 2001), pages 757–763.
issn: 0885-8950. doi: 10.1109/59.962423.
[13]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Op-
timization”. In: CoRR abs/1412.6980 (2014). arXiv: 1412.6980. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
[14]
S. Koch et al. “Mitigation of cascading failures by real-time controlled islanding
and graceful load shedding”. In: 2010 iREP Symposium - Bulk Power System
Dynamics and Control - VIII (iREP), Buzios, Brazil. August 2010. doi: 10.
1109/IREP.2010.5563284.
[15]
Y. Lecun et al. “Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE 86.11 (November 1998), pages 2278–2324. issn: 0018-
9219. doi: 10.1109/5.726791.
[16]
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. “Deep learning”. In: Nature
521 (2015), pages 436–444.
[17]
Y. V. Makarov, Zhao Yang Dong, and D. J. Hill. “A general method for small
signal stability analysis”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 13.3 (August
1998), pages 979–985. issn: 0885-8950. doi: 10.1109/59.709086.
[18]
Antonino Marvuglia and Antonio Messineo. “Monitoring of wind farms’ power
curves using machine learning techniques”. In: Applied Energy 98.C (2012),
pages 574–583. doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2012.0. url: https://ideas.
repec.org/a/eee/appene/v98y2012icp574-583.html.
[19]
K. Morison, Lei Wang, and P. Kundur. “Power system security assessment”. In:
IEEE Power and Energy Magazine 2.5 (2004), pages 30–39. issn: 1540-7977.
doi: 10.1109/MPAE.2004.1338120.
[20]
P. Kundur et al. “Definition and classification of power system stability IEEE/-
CIGRE joint task force on stability terms and definitions”. In: IEEE Trans.
on Power Systems 19.3 (August 2004), pages 1387–1401. issn: 0885-8950. doi:
10.1109/TPWRS.2004.825981.
[21]
Saul Perlmutter. “Nobel Lecture: Measuring the acceleration of the cosmic ex-
pansion using supernovae”. In: Rev. Mod. Phys. 84 (1127 August 2012).
[22]
David Silver et al. “Mastering the Game of Go with Deep Neural Networks
and Tree Search”. In: Nature 529.7587 (January 2016), pages 484–489. doi:
10.1038/nature16961.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
59
[23]
M. Sun, I. Konstantelos, and G. Strbac. “A Deep Learning-Based Feature Ex-
traction Framework for System Security Assessment”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Smart Grid (2018), pages 1–1. issn: 1949-3053. doi: 10.1109/TSG.2018.
2873001.
[24]
F. Thams et al. “Data-Driven Security Constrained OPF”. In: 2017 iREP Sym-
posium - Bulk Power System Dynamics and Control - X (iREP), Porto, Portugal.
August 2017, pages 1–10.
[25]
F. Thams et al. “Efficient Database Generation for Data-Driven Security As-
sessment of Power Systems”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems (2018).
Online avaiable: https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.01074.
[26]
Thierry Van Cutsem and Costas Vournas. Voltage stability analysis of electric
power systems. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1998.
[27]
T. L. Vu et al. “Structural Emergency Control Paradigm”. In: IEEE Journal on
Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems 7.3 (September 2017),
pages 371–382. issn: 2156-3357. doi: 10.1109/JETCAS.2017.2696358.
[28]
Huai-Zhi Wang et al. “Deep learning based ensemble approach for probabilistic
wind power forecasting”. In: Applied Energy 188 (February 2017), pages 56–70.
doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.11.111.
[29]
Louis A. Wehenkel. Automatic Learning Techniques in Power Systems. Boston/Lon-
don/Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1998.
==PAGE:74==
