==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Virtual reality technologies in the AEC
industry
A study on use cases and best practices
Author:
Gabriele Brambini (s162264)
Supervisors:
Ergo Pikas, Postdoc at DTU Management Engineering
Josef Oehmen, Associate Professor at DTU Management
Engineering
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management Engineering
Department of Management Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet
Building 426
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 4800
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The Architecture, Engineering and Construction (AEC) industry is known as one of
the most inefficient industries in the world. Change of project delivery methods and
implementation of new technologies have been studied and tested for improving the
situation. In this context, the recent wave of the VR technology has sparked interest
in multiple AEC companies. Being a recent development, the potentials of VR in this
industry are still unclear.
The scope of this research is to understand the status of
the technology and the most beneficial use cases. Due to a lack of availability of data
sources, in order to get most insights around the technology, eleven interviews have been
conducted. From this research, it became clear that virtual reality is a visualization
tool that can facilitate communication if used correctly. Generally, the technology is
considered to be mature enough to be used for professional operations, but the users
and the industry are still not ready for its implementation. According to academia, the
use cases for VR can be relatively broad. In practice, it was found that VR is mostly
used for visualization of the model during design review, approval and promotion. For
best use in these situations, virtual reality requires appropriate 3D models that are
often unavailable. A way to overcome the situation is to implement Building Information
Modeling (BIM) in an integrated project delivery system, where client and organizations
facilitate good practices.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Management Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark and in collaboration with a consulting company in
Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Civil Engi-
neering.
Kongens Lyngby, January 9, 2019
 
Gabriele Brambini (s162264)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, professor Josef Oehmen, for giving me the opportu-
nity of working on this thesis with his team at DTU Management Engineering. I would
like to thank post-doc Ergo Pikas, my co-supervisor, for his close supervision, support
and assistance throughout the whole thesis. Moreover, I would like to thank the em-
ployees from the company in collaboration for the support, information, and insight that
they gave me. Also, big thanks to all the people who agreed to contribute to my research
and let me interview them. Finally, I must express my profound gratitude to my fam-
ily and friends for providing me with unfailing support and continuous encouragement
throughout my years of study and through the process of researching and writing this
thesis. This accomplishment would not have been possible without them. Thank you.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Motivation and Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Research Aim and Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Research Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Research Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Literature Review
7
2.1
Project Delivery Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Integrated Project Delivery
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
Collaboration in Construction Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.3
Section Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
Technologies in the AEC Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.1
Building Information Modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.2
IT Adoption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.3
Section Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3
Virtual Reality Technologies in the AEC Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3.1
Definition of Virtual Reality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3.2
Applications of VR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3.2.1
Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
2.3.2.2
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3.2.3
Collaboration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.3.3
Section Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.4
Chapter Summary and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3
Methodology
39
3.1
Qualitative Research Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.2
Data Collection and Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.3
Chapter Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4
VR and AR in Practice
45
4.1
Participants’ backgrounds
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.2
Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2.1
Hardware and Software Used
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2.2
Benefits and Challenges of VR and AR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.2.3
Use cases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.3
Chapter Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5
Discussion
59
5.1
Limitations and Further Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6
Conclusion
63
A Codebook For Analysis
65
Bibliography
75
==PAGE:11==
List of Abbreviations
AEC
Architecture, Engineering, and Construction
AIA
American Institute of Architecture
AR
Augmented Reality
AV
Augmented Virtuality
BIModel Building Information Model
BIM
Building Information Modeling
CAVE
Cave Automatic Virtual Environment
DBB
Design-Bid-Build
DB
Design-Build
DRA
Design Risk Assessment
HMD
Head-Mounted Device
IT
Information Technology
RFI
Request for Information
VR
Virtual Reality
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In this chapter an introduction of the new trends of practice in the architecture, engi-
neering, and construction (AEC) industry of the last few decades will be given. Also,
the problem which has been tackled with this master project, its boundaries, and the
related aim and questions will be described. The research approach and structure will
also be outlined.
1.1
Research Motivation and Problem
Statement
The Danish construction industry has been facing a large number of challenges in the
past few decades. As a result, its productivity decreased by 0.5-1% per year in the
period from 1995 to 2011,[50] see Figure 1.1.
The low productivity of construction industry, however, is also a global challenge,
which has led several analysts to conclude that the construction industry is now ripe
Figure 1.1: Productivity Growth in Denmark 1995-2011 [50].
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
for disruption.[59, 5] Root causes include complex regulations, little cross-functional
collaboration, lack of innovation, large dependency of public-sector demand, and a mis-
match between risk and reward in contractual structures.[59, 5] This results in the AEC
industry being often associated with waste, delays, cost-overrun and low safety.
Many authors have been considering ways to tackle these issues since early in the
20th century. Reports about the issue include: ‘Reaching for the Skies’ in 1934, the
Simon Report in 1944, the Banwell report in 1967, Koskela’s report ’Application of the
New Production Philosophy to Construction’ in 1992, the Latham Report ’Constructing
the Team’ in 1994, and the Egan Report ”Rethinking Construction” in 1998.
The authors called for a change in the industry in order to improve quality, efficiency
and productivity. This has led to the spread of the lean construction (LC) process and
the integrated project delivery (IPD) method since the 90’s, which were believed to
revolutionize the AEC industry.
Recently, a common approach to address the many challenges that the construction
industry has been facing is the adoption of technologies that are increasingly entering
the market. The global investments in construction technology has, in fact, increased by
183% from 2014 to 2016.[34] Researchers and practitioners are studying and testing the
new possibilities with the new tools throughout the whole life-cycle of projects. One of
the technologies that has mostly attracted the attention in recent years is virtual reality
(VR). According to an interviewed sales manager of the VR, there have been four hypes
for this technology in the past few decades, but only now, with the recent improvements
to the technology, it seems to actually be making its way in the industry.
VR is envisaged to improve the communication, especially between the different
stakeholders to improve the development of shared understanding. Sacks et al.[57] have,
for example, brought together designers and construction workers in a virtual environ-
ment to discuss safety-related issues of the design solutions, which are proven to be
made much clearer thanks to VR. Similarly, Liu et al.[36] promoted the use of an im-
mersive virtual reality environment during designers meetings, designers-client meetings
and designers-contractors meetings of an energy retrofit project. It was observed that the
meetings were efficient as all stakeholders had a clear understanding of what was viewed
collectively in the model. This is important, indeed, because one of the main root causes
for numerous problems in the AEC industry is often related to the poor communication,
misunderstanding between the different stakeholders and/or poor quality of information
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Research Scope
3
being exchanged.[53] Together with the IPD method and BIM technologies, which give
importance to collaborative practices among others things, there is hope for improve-
ments in the construction industry. As long as there is concern and understanding of the
three aspects of collaboration described by Liu et al.[35] (the tools and framework used,
the way information is transmitted and the relationship between the parties involved),
effective collaboration may be achieved.
As of now, after initial exploratory interviews in the collaborating consulting com-
pany, a low level of adoption of VR was observed. Furthermore, internet search also
provided little evidence of successful implementation of VR in practice. But why is it
so? If researchers have proven that using virtual reality helps improving communica-
tion and shared understanding, what is preventing people from adopting it? A general
lack of understanding of the use cases, benefits and challenges of the technology is still
preventing companies from making the investment and leveraging their employees to
implement these new tools.
1.2
Research Scope
In this research, the scope is limited to studying the implementation of VR in the AEC
industry context. Specifically, related to the planning, design, construction and opera-
tion/maintenance of facilities. The use cases will be analyzed and compared between
academia and practice.
The use of the term ”VR” is frequently used in association with a variety of environ-
ments that fall somewhere along a spectrum from reality to virtual reality, which include
augmented reality (AR) and augmented virtuality (to be explained later). Augmented
virtuality (AV) is though at its very early stages of development and there are no use
cases to be found. It is, therefore, not included in this research. It must be noted that
virtual reality has already been in the development for around two/three decades and,
along with it, different means of creating the virtual environment can be found. At the
beginning, virtual reality was simply related to the visualization on a computer screen,
then it became a visualization through the CAVE (Cave automatic virtual environment),
which required to set up a three-to-six-face cubic room with projected images (see Sec-
tion 2.3.2.2). Only recently it became the virtual reality environment provided by the
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
head-mounted devices (HMD).
Due to the fact that the HMDs are so recent, most of the studies about VR found
in the literature are conducted either with the desktop-based visualization or the cave
automatic virtual environment (CAVE). The conclusions around their applications are
therefore being critically reviewed because the virtual environment solution which is
used today is based on the HMD.
1.3
Research Aim and Questions
As virtual reality slowly increased popularity over the past few years, the interest of the
collaborating company for implementing it in day-to-day tasks also increased. Before
making the investment, it is of importance for the company to get a deeper insight in
the tool. The aim for this research is, therefore, to understand how virtual reality can
be implemented by studying the use cases of virtual reality, the benefits and challenges
that have arisen so far in the industry. To meet the overall research aim, the following
general questions have been proposed to operationalize this research:
1. What is the state-of-the-art of virtual reality in the construction industry, including
academia and practice?
2. What are the main use cases, related benefits and challenges of implementing the
VR technology in the AEC domain?
1.4
Research Approach
In order to accomplish the aim of this research, a qualitative research applying inductive
reasoning principles was conducted. This “involves the search for pattern from observa-
tion and the development of explanations – theories – for those patterns through series
of hypotheses”.[7] The research methods include a literature review for understanding
construction processes and technology, and a set of interviews for exploring the current
situation of virtual reality in the AEC industry. The general process of the research is
depicted by the flow chart shown in Figure 1.2.Patterns, resemblances and regularities
in the collected data are observed in order to reach conclusions.
==PAGE:17==
1.5 Research Structure
5
Figure 1.2: Research process.
1.5
Research Structure
The organization of this thesis is as follows: Chapter 2 reviews the literature on design
processes, collaboration in AEC industry, implementation of IT, and use cases of VR in
the industry. Chapter 3 elaborates the methodology carried out for the research. Chapter
4 outlines the findings. Chapter 5 discussed the findings combined with the literature,
and outlines the limitations of the research. Finally, chapter 6 gives a conclusion to the
work done.
==PAGE:18==
6
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
The literature review is broken down into three areas that cover the project delivery
process, technology implementation, and the virtual reality.
In Section 2.1, it will be explored how the construction industry is being influenced
by the lean construction and integrated project delivery methodology. Aspects such as
collaboration and its characteristics will be discussed more in particular. In Section 2.2,
it will be discussed how technologies have been implemented in the industry until now
and which technologies are making it possible to adopt virtual reality technologies. In
Section 2.3, the use cases with virtual reality technologies that have been subject of
studies of researchers will be outlined.
2.1
Project Delivery Process
With this section the objective is to give a structural framework for implementation of
virtual reality technologies. The lean construction principles and ways these principles
can be achieved with an integrated project delivery process will be studied. Collaboration
is one of the main aspects at the base of the integrated process and it will be discussed in
particular. Concepts such as communication and shared understanding will be covered
to create a framework for why virtual reality can be beneficial towards these aspects.
2.1.1
Integrated Project Delivery
Owners are increasingly demanding more value from their projects. But what is value?
Often the owner associates the value(s) of a project with cost and time, being two
parameters that can easily be tracked and measured.[17] With the computing power
we have today, value can also be associated to other aspects like energy consumption,
carbon footprint, natural light, etc.[18] By clearly defining, emphasizing, and tracking
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Literature Review
the project values, each member of the project team is able to make decisions ”for the
good of the project” because they understand what that means in the context of that
specific project.[17] However, the traditional delivery process of Design-Bid-Build (DBB)
completely separates stakeholders from one another, who, in turn, tend to only focus
on the interests of their own business. Conflicting interests are a result of this and,
together with incompatible cultures among team members and limited access to timely
information, they lead the industry to suffer from difficulties and dysfunctionalities.[45]
At the light of these problems, many owners have shown frustration associated to the
traditional delivery processes and have demanded change.
Lean construction (LC) comes in as an alternative solution introducing lean manu-
facturing principles and practices to the construction industry where optimizing the flow
of the process is key. The focus of LC is minimizing ”waste of materials, time, and effort
in order to generate the maximum possible amount of value” [31]. Some owners have
started to apply these principles through different approaches that change the way they
are contracting their project teams. Based on principles of trust and mutual respect, mu-
tual benefit and reward, collaborative decision-making, early involvement of key project
stakeholders, early goal definition and intensified planning, and open communications,
Integrated Project Delivery (IPD) is emerging as an effective project delivery choice for
the industry.[45] Building Information Modeling (BIM) is a relatively new technology
that has also been envisioned to revolutionize the construction industry by improv-
ing collaboration and understanding among the stakeholders, due to the translation of
tacit interface knowledge into explicit CAD information [19], and increase efficiency.[6]
Rischmoller et al.[54] also highlighted improvements in value generation thanks to the
capacity to detect clashes between disciplines early in the process, automatically retrieve
quantities from the models, and better visualize models during meetings. As a result,
IPD and BIM go often hand-in-hand in construction projects.
In 2007, Eckblad et al.[15] from the American Institute of Architecture (AIA) intro-
duced new terminology for the IPD to distinguish it from the conventional terminology
that would otherwise recall a process that does not include collaborative practices. The
two processes are compared in Figure 2.1.
As it is shown, the early stages in IPD generally last longer than the traditional
process. This is due to the increased team involvement and level of completion of the
design before the documentation phase. This prolonged initial effort, though, saves time
in the documentation phase and the agency review and buyout phases. The combined
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Project Delivery Process
9
Figure 2.1: Traditional and IPD processes compared [15].
effect of these phases results in a higher level of definition and coordination of the project
that will enable a more efficient construction and therefore a shorter construction period,
characterized by a possibly better predictability.
The stages are described by Eckblad et al.[15] as follows:
1. Conceptualization: key stakeholders are involved already in the conceptualization
stage. The goal at this time is to obtain as much input as possible, capture key
parameters for technologies (like BIM) that are to be adopted, develop performance
goals and metrics for measurements, and develop a preliminary schedule linked to
developing the model.
2. Criteria design: different options are evaluated and tested on a ”best for project”
basis. BIM models can be used to test ”what if” scenarios and determine what the
team will accomplish. By the end of the stage, the scope and price is fixed and the
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Literature Review
owner signs off on what will be built, allowing the team to evolve and optimize the
design. Collaboration of stakeholders is key to early recognize inadequate building
performance and reach agreements between trades to enable prefabrication.
3. Detailed design: all the key design decisions, building systems, and building ele-
ments are finalized. Subcontractors and vendor are involved for coordination and
conflict resolution. If BIM is used, the model is object of constant checks for in-
consistencies, the prime design professional develops protocols and coordinates all
aspects of the BIM model until it is time for the contractors to take control and
finalize all the systems in detail in the 3D model. Cost estimate is done by ex-
tracting accurate information of the model. Specifications for the building become
prescriptive since the objects in the model are representations of the real objects.
4. Implementation documents: the subcontractors document how systems and struc-
tures will be created.
Furthermore, documents are generated for third parties
to use for permitting, financing and regulatory purposes. When BIM is used, this
phase is significantly shortened, if not eliminated. Subcontractors augment the 3D
model with information necessary for fabrication and installation purposes. Re-
hearsal of construction is enabled by the BIM’s 4D scheduling and cost is finalized
through 5D. The final documents include information for: procurement, assembly,
layout, detailed schedule, procedural information, legal requirements.
5. Buyout: the buyout of all the subcontractors is finalized.
6. Agency: Thanks to the use of BIM, agency review can happen concurrently with
the project. The analysis feature of BIM can also provide a report of performance
and criteria analysis that validate the design.
The checking of the design for
building code and regulatory criteria with the final model is, therefore, shortened
as well.
7. Construction: the benefits of the process start to realize.
These include: less
construction administration effort because conflicts have been resolved virtually;
fewer Request for Information (RFI) because the stakeholders have been involved
in the development of the design intent; better understanding of the design intent
because consistent information and documentation is available to all participants;
less waste; less injuries.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Project Delivery Process
11
8. Closeout: the closeout of an integrated project will greatly depend upon the busi-
ness terms agreed by the parties. A more complete BIM will be provided to the
owner for maintenance and operation purposes.
One example for successful implementation of IPD process is the Caltrans District 7
Headquarters,[70]. Being completed in 2004, it is one of the first projects to have im-
plemented the integrated project delivery methodology. It is of interest to note that
the building information modeling (BIM) platform was also at its preliminary stages,
refer to Section 2.2.1. Monthly, weekly and daily meetings between the various parties
took place since the beginning of the project. Together with recommendations from
individuals with expertise in certain areas, it allowed for up front problem solving which
limited costly changes down the line. An example for this is the selection of the cement
board facade system. The original designs called for a particular size of cement board
panel that would have resulted in lost product off-cut waste. By bringing in the manu-
facturer in the preliminary stages, the size of the cement panels were redesigned to suit
the manufacturer’s stock size, with no detriment to the aesthetic intent of the design.
The budget for the project was fixed and whatever money was saved during the process
was reintroduced in the funds to either cover the cost of parts that went over budget
or improve areas of the project. The project was successful under all aspects: it was
delivered on time, on budget and of a quality material palette.
In a study carried out by Kent and Becerik-Gerber [28], 15 professionals with differ-
ent backgrounds were given a survey regarding the adoption of the integrated project
delivery (IPD) methods in their companies. Respondents suggest trust, respect, and
good working relationships are the key to successful IPD projects. Many believe IPD
cannot work without these relational factors and indicate monetary incentives are not
the most effective at fostering collaboration. Respondents also feel good leadership is
required to encourage a collaborative team environment. On the other hand, the survey
reflects a high degree of uncertainty from the respondents about the possibility of cre-
ating this type of environment. Contracts specifically developed for IPD are not widely
used by the industry (in the USA), and there are concerns around risk and reward
sharing, liability insurance, and open-book accounting. Although several believe that
there are benefits, the majority is still looking for more evidence to fully adopt IPD as
a project delivery method.
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Literature Review
2.1.2
Collaboration in Construction Industry
For decades the design process has been seen as an ordered and predictable phenomenon,
which could be divided into contracts, phases, activities, assignments, etc. that were
executable more or less independently in a linear process.[8] However, the complexity
we find in construction projects makes it anything but predictable and it can be char-
acterized by structural, social and time aspects. A complexity due to the number of
nodes and relationships needed to achieve one of the multiple possible solutions to a
problem, a complexity due to the social aspects of the stakeholders who have different
backgrounds, culture, targets and objectives, a complexity due to time-related-issues, as
things change unpredictably over time.
Each group of people involved in a project, which belongs to a specific design disci-
pline or business function, has its own perspective on the process. None of them is more
important than the other as product development requires all of these people. A refor-
mation of design methodology should incorporate all of these different perspectives and
provide a consistent framework to the people involved in product development, thus sup-
porting the development of a shared understanding of the whole process.[21] In 1994, sir
Michael Latham published the report ’Constructing the Team’ [32] where he described
the construction industry as ‘ineffective’, ‘adversarial’, ‘fragmented’ and ‘incapable of
delivering for its customers’. He then proposed that the industry should move away from
its adversarial structure, adopting a more integrated approach with greater partnering
and teamwork.
The integrated approach implies that multiple stakeholders work together, collabo-
rate. Collaboration is, though, a delicate topic and it is important to take into account
all the different aspects of a project’s complexity to make the collaboration efficient. It
is not by simply putting people together in a room that best decisions will be made,
and often even collocation can be troublesome. The challenge for a design team is to
synchronize their activities to achieve a better design [67] and, therefore, satisfy the
client’s needs. The key for an effective collaboration is in creating shared understanding
about the problem, and shared commitment to the possible solutions.[58] Shared under-
standing is referred to as a mutual view among the team members on relevant design
topics and design activities, and it is not always easy to achieve as communication often
fails to deliver what one thinks. In these situations of design conversations, it is very
important to keep the client’s needs and concerns in the foreground.[41]
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Project Delivery Process
13
Valkenburg [67], from Delft University of Technology, videotaped and analyzed three
professional designers collaborating for two hours to define a conceptual design of a prod-
uct, given instructions on the problem. The amount of incomprehension about the design
content in the team was shockingly high and resulted in frustrations and slow design
progress. The incomprehension, and therefore not reaching a shared understanding, was
often due to:
• lack of attention;
• generating too many solution alternatives without clearly evaluating them;
• avoiding conflict and moving on to different topic.
However, through thorough discussions about conceptual topics and visualization of
ideas on paper the team was able to create a shared understanding on most matters.
This study reflects what happens in real design teams and, according to Valkenburg, the
way they construct shared understandings needs to be improved.
Another case, which is worth mentioning, is the collaboration between designer (in
this case an architect) and client, which is the key activity to form the root require-
ments for the design. Shen [61] and Yu et. al [73] proposed the following reasons for
communication difficulties between the designers and their clients:
• the client’s viewpoint is not fully considered;
• there is not enough communication between stakeholders;
• design requirements are not sufficiently managed;
• the needs expressed by the clients often change;
• there is a lack of feedback from the client.
Shen[61] then proposed four ways to improve the communication and shared understand-
ing:
1) permit the client to feel as their contributions are valued;
2) involve stakeholders from an early stage;
3) effectively manage client’s requirements changes;
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Literature Review
4) employ appropriate and easy to understand visualization techniques.
While the first two require socially oriented solutions that include collaboration and
human behaviour aspects, the latter two require technological improvements that do
not see social barriers.
According to Norouzi et al.[46], the combination of technology and human manage-
ment approaches is key to improve communication and collaboration performance in
architectural design practices. The new approach should consider and be aware of three
factors: tools characteristics, information characteristics and relationship characteristics.
(1) The tools refer to the information technology used for the project, including com-
puter software and hardware and the communications media infrastructure that will be
used as a framework for project-related communications. Examples for this framework
can be email systems, a project specific intranet system and the processes for holding
meetings.[35]
(2) The information transmitted in building projects can be distinguished into three
categories: technical information, commercial information, and management and control
information [10]. The first includes designs and technical evaluations (e.g. drawings,
specifications, etc.), the second includes contract details (e.g. delivery schedules, costs,
payments schedule, etc.), and the latter groups the documentation provided by the
project managers to control the project (e.g. meeting minutes, submittals and shop
drawings, requests for information, safety information, daily logs and project schedules,
etc.).
(3) The relationship refers to the one between the sender and receiver of a message. It
should be based on trust and mutual understanding of background, knowledge, abili-
ties, and experiences. The relationship, though, is often influenced by various interests,
attitudes, and expectations between sender and receiver. [35]
These three elements have also been identified as key elements for effective collabo-
ration in a previous study performed by Shelbourn et al.[60]. In this study these three
categories were named technology, business processes, and people. The authors carried
out a survey to define the importance of each element for effective collaboration based
on the respondents’ perceptions. It was found that the people category was attributed
the most importance with 40%, followed by business processes (34%) and technology
(26%).
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Technologies in the AEC Industry
15
2.1.3
Section Summary
The traditional way of doing things in the construction industry has far been fought
by researchers and clients. The integrated project delivery system has come in help to
revolutionize the industry. Achieving a successful IPD requires though a complete change
in mindset, moving on from the traditional system that, for decades, has characterized
the way people do their job in the industry. As discussed in Eckblad’s IPD process [15],
BIM can facilitate many aspects of it from the criteria design to the closeout, but people
and business practices also need to adapt to the new platform. The adaption and change
of mindset are processes that do take time, but it is important to start implementing
them to be on top of the trend and understand the potentials. Furthermore, a key point
in the IPD system is the need for collaboration and involvement of many stakeholders
from early stages. These processes are very complicated as they are based on human
interaction. Psychological and social problems often arise in these situations and the
dynamics should be understood in order to overcome them.
The ”Collaboration in
Construction Industry” section is an attempt to give light to some of these problems.
The topic has probably no absolute solution, but what can be done is to try to find ways
to best facilitate the collaboration and involvement processes.
2.2
Technologies in the AEC Industry
The new methods proposed with the integrated project delivery have proven to be ben-
eficial in many aspects of the project and allow for increasing the value delivered. In
the scope of improving the construction processes and deliver the maximum value, tech-
nologies have also taken their part. The construction industry constitutes of physical
processes supported by information flows. New technologies like BIM and VR try to
facilitate these flows to make them more accessible and understandable. However, their
implementation in the industry still has to overcome some obstacles. At the base of
BIM stands Information Technology (IT). Its implementation in the construction indus-
try has been object of studies in the early years of the 21st century and many aspects
discussed in the literature are found to be relevant for the adoption of BIM technology.
In this section it will be over-viewed what BIM has brought to the industry and what
researchers have discovered to be the issues in adopting this innovative system, IT.
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Literature Review
2.2.1
Building Information Modeling
The concept of Building Information Modeling has existed since the 1970s, when major
aerospace companies first used computer-aided 3D modeling, changing the way air-crafts
were designed and built.[1] Only after 2002, though, when Autodesk® published a white
paper titled ”Building Information Modeling”, the term ”BIM” started spreading in the
industry to refer to the digital representation of the building process. According to US
National Building Information Model Standard Project Committee, Building Informa-
tion Modeling (BIM) is defined as ”a digital representation of physical and functional
characteristics of a facility. A BIM is a shared knowledge resource for information about
a facility forming a reliable basis for decisions during its life-cycle; defined as existing
from earliest conception to demolition”. It continues ”A basic premise of BIM is collabo-
ration by different stakeholders at different phases of the life cycle of a facility to insert,
extract, update or modify information in the BIM to support and reflect the roles of
that stakeholder”.[20]
From a 3D visualization tool that includes information about geometry, specifications,
aesthetics, thermal and acoustic properties, etc., BIM has become 5 dimensional allowing
owners and contractors to identify, analyze and record the impact of changes on project
schedule and costs.[1] 4D CAD system is a function tool of BIM that shows the 3D objects
appearing in time according to a defined schedule. Contractors are then able to identify
risks earlier and, thus, make better decisions. According to Kim et al.[29], as construction
projects are growing both in scale and in complexity, the amount of data that is being
generated is greater and project schedules are more complex. Tools like BIM and VR
give the opportunity to project managers to manage this data, visualize these complex
schedules and, once again, allow them to make better decisions. Furthermore, in order
to fully benefit from their use, it is important that project owners and contractors use
it from the very early stages of the project and that all stakeholders adopt standardized
design and data-reporting formats that are compatible with the BIM platform.[1]
The benefits of BIM have been widely accepted, so that some governments, e.g.
British, Finnish and Singaporean, even mandated the use of BIM for public infrastruc-
ture projects.[1]
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Technologies in the AEC Industry
17
2.2.2
IT Adoption
Information Technology is a broad term that refers to the entire information domain,
which includes the hardware, software, peripherals, and networking. An item falls under
the IT umbrella when it is used for the purposes of storing, protecting, retrieving, and
processing data electronically. Ever since the Information technology (IT) revolution in
the late eighties and early nineties, IT has been seen as the prime driver in the improve-
ment of business activities. In this view, IT projects in construction have often aimed to
support the information flows hoping that the whole process would improve. However,
the construction process is so chaotic that this has often resulted in not reaching the
desired goals.[30] A company’s vision and policy have a direct influence on strategic IT
adoption and implementation within a construction organization. The company’s vision
functions as a long-term strategic objective of IT adoption while the company’s policy
enhances IT implementation by determining the framework for employee behaviour. Top
management support has a key role in the IT adoption decision because this support
is also essential for development of infrastructure and people for IT adoption within
the organization.[11] Said that, Peansupap et al.[48] identified three levels on which IT
implementation sees resistance: organizational, personal, and group levels.
Before IT can be implemented, the organization needs to make a decision on doing
the necessary investment. Lack of technology awareness, financial constraints, technol-
ogy immaturity, and unsuited benefits for organizational needs are all initial constraints.
During adoption, the lack of experience of the senior manager, who introduces the tech-
nology, may trigger a user resistance. Uncertainty and complexity associated with the
IT technology can cause lack of confidence in the users’ perception of the value or ef-
fectiveness of an IT application which also triggers a user resistance. Furthermore, for
an organization it is important to see expected outcomes and benefits after investing in
something new, but these are often not met. The expected outcomes are, indeed, often
ideal benefits of the technology that are not based on organizational understandings.[23]
This lack of outcomes lead to an organization resistance to the technology implementa-
tion. However, this is part of the nature of implementation: trial of IT pilot projects
and organizational learning will provide opportunities to minimize unrealistic IT benefit
estimates. Understanding a pilot project’s characteristics, both negative and positive,
will better help IT managers plan IT investments.[48]
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Literature Review
On a personal level, the constraints are covered by internal and external aspects.
Internally, users may simply lack IT skills that would limit the use of it. Furthermore,
although the users may be willing to learn, they often do not have time to learn and
resolve problems with the IT. Externally, training sessions often focus on technical func-
tions, omitting how the users can actually apply the tool to their work processes. This
may result in a negative experience or poor perception of the potential derived benefits.
The senior manager’s lack of confidence in real benefits being realizable, and lack of
promotion also act as constraints for user’s adoption of the tool.
Working in group is often beneficial in the implementation of a new tool such as IT.
Colleagues can show one another how to do things when one has difficulties. However,
physical distance and lack of time are main constraints to the group-learning process.
Based on these constraints, Peansupap et al.[48] suggest that organizations should
closely manage their IT initiative decision making and implementation using pilot stud-
ies and a reflective learning approach to maximize advantages from lessons learned. IT
application deployment is primarily about people related issues of effective change man-
agement, knowledge transfer and leadership by a champion and adoption team to sell
benefits and support users.
While the study carried out by Peansupap et al. focused on the practical issues and
constraints that raised in the case studies with the implementation of IT, Koskela and
Dave [30] tried to identify and propose a new approach to IT adoption based on the
understanding of the processes that lay behind. The traditional process of Design-Bid-
Design is fragmented by ”independent” sub-processes that are assumed to create a whole
production process in an additive manner. By improving each and every sub-process,
the whole process is assumed to improve. Despite Koskela and Dave did realize improve-
ments to single activities, like estimating, planning, QA, etc. with the adoption of IT
solutions, the dispersion of information from different parties often causes duplication,
information and value loss, and subsequent problems at a project, or company level.
The principles, which the traditional process is based on, are not ideally suited for a
technology revolution.[68] Re-engineering of the business process was envisioned as a
solution to, at least, some of the problems related to the use of information technology.
Instead of seeing IT as a direct link to benefits, benefits are a result of IT and infor-
mation processes. What was recommended as a solution were process design principles
similar to the lean construction concept, augmented with IT capabilities.[30] In this
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Technologies in the AEC Industry
19
case, there are two important issues which accentuate. First, precisely identifying the
processes that, by using IT, will result in a reduction of waste, being the main goal of
lean principles. Second, IT may induce waste. It is therefore important to emphasize
potential challenges like disruption, reliability of new system and utilization.
Another way to re-engineer construction was associated to Design-Build (DB) mode
to deliver a construction project. The concept of a DB project is that the client gives,
in a single contract, the execution of both design and construction to one company
(usually contractor) that has the freedom to integrate design and construction in a
suitable way. The performance of the design-build delivery system in comparison to
other major delivery systems has been studied in two recent studies in the U.S. and UK
(Konchar & Sanvido, 1998; Bennett, Pothecary & Robinson, 1996). The results indicate
that statistically, the DB process outperforms the traditional Design-Bid-Build process
in several respects. The U.S. study finds DB to be 6% less costly than DBB, whereas
the UK study estimates that DB is 13-32% less costly than DBB (however, these figures
have been calculated in incompatible ways and it is difficult to draw general conclusions
from them). It can be noted, though, that such an impact of an organizational solution
outweighs the impacts of the use of information technology, discussed above. Koskela
and Dave then proposed to focus on creating a framework for better process where IT is
viewed as ”a means towards designing, controlling, and improving processes”, and not
viewing IT as a prime driver to improvement.
2.2.3
Section Summary
BIM is a platform that allows to collect all the data and information of a project in one
place, making it easy to manage and control the interaction between multiple stakehold-
ers. However, its implementation has reached only few construction industries in the
world although its benefits have been widely understood. To understand the possible
reasons why BIM has hardly been adopted in general, the case of IT implementation
in the construction industry was reviewed. In fact, the arguments and discussions that
are brought up by the authors are highly relatable to the use of BIM in most recent
years. As one of the key problems of adopting IT is associated to the process itself in
which IT is implemented, BIM also requires a dedicated process which will exploit all
its potentials.
==PAGE:32==
20
2 Literature Review
2.3
Virtual Reality Technologies in the AEC
Industry
As seen in Section 2.2, there are many technologies that are being used to try changing
and improving the AEC industry. In this section the focus will be set on the work that
has been done by researchers around the virtual reality (VR) technologies in the AEC
industry.
2.3.1
Definition of Virtual Reality
Virtual reality is often associated to a variety of virtual environments that fall somewhere
along a virtuality continuum, see Figure 2.2.[44]
Figure 2.2: Presentation of virtuality continuum [revisited, 33].
This continuum sees real environments on one end and virtual environments on the other.
In between there’s a full spectrum of mixed reality (MR), an environment where real
and virtual objects coexist. Augmented reality (AR) is an environment where the reality
is augmented by means of computer-generated information. This means, for example,
that virtual objects overlay the real objects. Augmented virtuality (AV) is, on the other
hand, an environment where real objects enter the virtual world.
Figure 2.3: The CAVE.
Furthermore, it must be noted that what is referred
to as ”virtual reality” in research papers has changed
over the years. Initially, virtual reality was based on the
visualization of virtual objects on a computer screen,
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Virtual Reality Technologies in the AEC Industry
21
then the virtual environment was developed to be im-
mersive through the CAVE, a room-sized cube with
three to six walls on which virtual images are projected. The user(s) are then centered
in this ”room” and are in some level immersed in the VE, see Figure 2.3. Nowadays,
virtual reality is generally associated with a virtual environment in which the user is
fully immersed thanks to a head-mounted device (HMD). Google Cardboard® is one
solution for the HMD and it allows for an easy, immersive way to visualize a virtual
environment with one’s own mobile device.
Other solutions include the HTC Vive®
and Oculus Rift®, which, in addition to Google Cardboard®’s feature, allow the user to
interact with virtual objects in a seemingly real manner.
Virtual reality has been fascinating the industry for quite some years, and thanks
to these affordable and easy-to-access solutions it has the possibility to be implemented
for daily tasks in the AEC industry. It offers a natural medium for the users providing
a 3D view that can be manipulated in real-time and used collaboratively to explore
and analyze design options and simulations of the construction process.[9] Users can
navigate freely in real time and interact with virtual objects in the virtual environment
(VE). Navigation includes the ability to move around and explore features in the VE,
while interaction implies the ability to control the VE, such as manipulating virtual
objects.[63]
In this section, VR technologies refer to all tools that are being used for the whole
spectrum of mixed reality and virtual reality. However, AV is not very popular either in
research or in practice, and is therefore left behind.
2.3.2
Applications of VR
The use of VR in design applications require that the 3D CAD models from the different
disciplines can be imported by the VR system in order to create the VE to be explored.
The VR systems are often based on technology from the computer-game industry and
work accordingly, with similar types of navigation modes and representations of the
environment. Therefore, the VE are often easy to explore and allow non-CAD users to
access and interact with 3D models.[72]
Mahboob et al.[43] state that it is important to consider later life phases of the
product and its interaction with neighbouring systems (e.g. actor(s) and environment),
because it will lead to a solution that meets the relevant needs of all the stakeholders.
==PAGE:34==
22
2 Literature Review
Virtual reality technology can be of great use at this point as it can directly show a
product in its later life phases along with its context. Product’s later life situations
and product’s interaction with actor(s) and environment can be evaluated inside VR by
means of product use-case scenarios.[43] However, the application of VR is often limited
in the industry, Mahbook et al.[42] identifies the following three reasons for this:
• the time and the effort needed for the preparation of virtual models is very high;
• these models are also limited in terms of their reuse and/or reuse of parts of them
and
• once constructed, very few modifications are possible, therefore a new situation
can force a complete new preparation.
2.3.2.1
Education
Virtual reality technologies are making their way into education in architecture, engi-
neering and construction disciplines. The obvious lack of experience makes it often hard
for students to visualize and understand principals found in theory, and complex spatial
and temporal relationships involved in the designing of structures.
Kamath et al.[27] experimented the use of interactive VR models by architectural
students.
The students were able to explore and interact with the virtual building,
make simulations from CAD data and modify different architectural elements. They
found that students were understanding architectural concepts and basic ideas more
easily. The 3D explorations were the starting point for discussions and decision making
process for design solutions, with students showing their real understanding of the design
spaces.
Another field where these technologies have taken their part in facilitating the teach-
ing is structural engineering. Quinn et al.[51] in Berlin created a prototype with AR,
StructAR, to allow the users to interact with physical educational structural systems,
for example a portal frame, and visualize simultaneously the system’s structural perfor-
mance under load, see Figure 2.4.
Very often structural engineering principals are hard for students to understand. This
tool allows for an intuitive and engaging educational experience and is being utilized in
the architecture departments of the Berlin University of Arts as well as the University
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Virtual Reality Technologies in the AEC Industry
23
Figure 2.4: Projected axial forces on a portal frame forcibly displaced by the user[51].
of Bath. The authors are currently working also on a VR solution, called StructVR
(Figure 2.5). The advantages are numerous: virtual systems, versatile scale, high fidelity,
engaging visuals, greater potential for directed user experiences and freedom of three
dimensions. A disadvantage over StructAR, though, is the limited ability to provide
the user with force feedback. Both solutions are still limited to the pre-defined systems,
which do not allow for arbitrary, but have great use for educational purposes.
Figure 2.5: A mock-up image for StructVR [51].
Ong and Huang [47] in Singapore made a similar AR prototype but with the focus on
integrating AR and finite element analysis (FEA). FEA has widely been applied to daily
practice in structural engineering assessment, maintenance and repair to identify critical
components, evaluate structural reliability, investigate causes of failure and determine
==PAGE:36==
24
2 Literature Review
repair strategies. However, the traditional FEA tools do not facilitate model evaluation
and result interpretation due to a complex and non-intuitive user interface. Ong and
Huang’s solution involves visualization of the FEA results on the physical object in an
AR environment. The analyses are carried out almost simultaneously The user defines
the mesh model and the parameters (e.g. loads, constraints and material properties)
and runs the analysis (for further details on how the whole process works, the reader
it redirected to the research paper ”Structure design and analysis with integrated AR-
FEA” [47]). The results are augmented onto the physical object, see Figure 2.6(a). One
of the best uses of the tool, though, is the ability of changing the design with virtual
objects to explore various solutions and performance of a structure, see Figure 2.6(b).
(a) Augmented results on physical struc-
ture[47]
(b) Updated model and results[47]
Figure 2.6: Example of using AR and FEM on physical objects.
This feature has great potentials, among others: educating inexperienced students
and exploring possible solutions to repair and transform existing structures on site. This
last potential requires detailed modeling of the existing building, which may even be
impossible for old buildings, of which drawings are often missing. But with the broad
use of BIM tools for newer buildings, the application of this technology is not far from
being reachable.
These tools are not enclosed only to the AEC industry but have applications in
other fields, for example mechanical or aviation engineering. The possibilities are far
reaching but the technology is still developing. One of the ultimate goals is to be able
to interact with arbitrary structural systems and visualize the structural performance
simultaneously in an immersive virtual environment, namely utilizing VR.[51] In fact,
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Virtual Reality Technologies in the AEC Industry
25
using AR as the two examples above is limited in such a way that it needs physical
objects to be of use.
Physical objects and mock ups are cumbersome and not very
practical.
2.3.2.2
Training
The construction site is known to be a dangerous working environment. As mentioned
earlier in Section 2.1.1, accidents can both happen from design-related issues and human
actions on site. In the literature it is argued that the latter issue could be positively
impacted by effective training programs. The training programs cover areas of health
and safety, equipment and operational tasks.
Traditionally, training is provided in a classroom setting with slide presentations or
videos. The safety information provided often do not represent real construction site
conditions and the training sessions fail to effectively engage the trainees.[69] In 1969,
Edgar [71] presented a hierarchy of the teaching style and its effectiveness on trainees’
learning, see Figure 2.7. As we can see, already back then it was clear that a classroom
setting was not ideal for the trainees, whereas engaging them in a life-like situation
would result in the best learning.
Figure 2.7: Pyramid of learning effectiveness, modified from Edgar[74].
==PAGE:38==
26
2 Literature Review
In recent years, VR and related technologies, such as BIM, game technologies, and
AR, have therefore been developed to improve the current construction safe training
practices.
In 2008, Lucas and Tabet [38] and Lucas et al.[39] utilized both a desktop-based VR
and a CAVE as immersive environments to train young miners in day to day operations
around the conveyor belt, being this one of the biggest source of injuries and fatalities
in the mining industry.
The VR experience is based on a gaming engine and gives
the trainee a life-like experience where they are able to think through actions needed
to complete tasks, act them out, and experience direct consequences to their actions
while receiving immediate feedback. Theoretically, the knowledge acquired from these
actions and reactions is stored in the long-term memory of the user and easily retrieved
and applied within real-life context.[12] The authors did not argue that VR is the most
beneficial and effective method of learning material, however, through surveys and qual-
itative analysis of the responses, they concluded it is an effective and feasible alternative
with its set of limitations. For start, training with a personal laptop or computer does
not allow the user to interact with a training professional who can answer questions.
Furthermore, the usability for this method could also be an issue for older miners who
are not used to computer gaming engine. As for the CAVE, although it allows for a
life-size environment allowing for better perception and further engaging the user, its
size and precision set up required rises issues with accessibility to such training appli-
cations. Usability is also a major issue in this case, as the users may get frustrated
or distracted from the main purpose of the training if unable to easily navigate in the
CAVE to retrieve the necessary information.
In 2012, Sacks et al.[56] tested the efficiency of utilizing the CAVE as a mean to train
construction workers compared to traditional methods. Thirty-three subjects received
traditional classroom training and other thirty-three received training using the CAVE.
Before the training, the subjects answered a safety knowledge test to set the baseline for
measurement. After the training, they answered another safety knowledge test and an
experience questionnaire. Approximately a month after the training, they answered a
third safety knowledge test. The content for the training was selected according to the
frequency of accident types reported in Perlman et al.[49]. The topics were organized by:
general site safety, safety in cast-in-situ concrete, and safety during stone cladding work.
For the purpose of this review, the latter two categories are referred to together as specific
==PAGE:39==
2.3 Virtual Reality Technologies in the AEC Industry
27
tasks. Sacks et al.[56] found that training in a VR environment was more beneficial for
specific tasks, whereas in terms of general site safety the advantages were insignificant.
In the VR training, the trainees showed a higher level of alertness for the entire period.
By contrast, during the traditional training, trainees failed to keep focused beyond the
first hour. Proving that training in VR is more engaging. Furthermore, training with
VR was found to be slightly more effective over time than with traditional training.
The authors discuss that the level of sophistication and reality of the VR solution was,
however, quite limited. With improvements to this technology, namely the HMDs we
have in the market today, the likelihood of identifying significant differences between
the two approaches would highly increase.
In 2015, Zhao and Lucas [74] proposed a prototype of a training program based
on immersive VR simulation for electricity-related matters with HMDs. The prototype
provides the users with a scenario of construction in which they can freely move. Firstly,
they walk around and are notified when they are in the vicinity of hazards, which are
explained thoroughly based on regulations and construction electrocution investigation
reports. Then the user is sent to complete a task without clues or reminders of hazards,
and the user must identify and control the electrical hazards. Whenever the user fails to
identify a hazard, the avatar reacts accordingly and loses health points (HP). Since not
every employee needs to be familiar with all hazards and environments, the prototype
allows for filtering and selecting scenarios, tasks and hazards based on the users’ needs.
The goal of the VR-based safety training program was to offer a safe working environment
where employees could effectively rehearse tasks with electrical hazards and ultimately
promote their abilities for electrical hazard cognition and intervention. In fact, methods
like ’on-the-job training’, where the training is brought out within the workplace using
existing tools, machines and equipment, and ’full-scale training mock-ups’ can hardly
allow trainees to fully rehearse electricity-related tasks, access all electrical hazards, and
experience possible consequences in real life. Whereas, VR is not constrained by these
limits and can provide with a full participatory experience without the safety risk from
electricity. Another benefit that the authors believe can be achieved is the long-term
commitment to safety. By experiencing the consequences of one’s actions in a life-like
situation, workers would indeed realize that all activities are to be safe, and not only
the tasks object of the training.
==PAGE:40==
28
2 Literature Review
2.3.2.3
Collaboration
Collaboration is a very important aspect of nowadays projects. Without collaboration
it would almost be impossible to deliver a product, since this requires the involvement
of numerous parties in one single project. However, it needs improvements and VR
has proved to be a good tool to facilitate it. How it is facilitating better collaboration,
will be described in the following sections where collaboration is tackling two aspects of
design: design alternatives and safety.
Collaboration for Design Alternatives
Visualization, in environments such as VR, is often associated with aesthetics, and there-
fore architecture. Lo Tian Tian [64] experimented bringing together end-users and archi-
tects to jointly define a mass housing design solution. The collaboration was facilitated
by computational support system involving:
• ModRule [37], a system based on gaming logic that allows the architects to prepare
a framework for collaborative design. It has an easy interface with step-by-step
work flow, which allows the participants to be actively involved and to be able to
contribute to the design in an informed matter;
• Fuzor [26], a virtual environment BIM software that allows users to simulate, eval-
uate and collaborate design.
It incorporates and links data from software like
Revit® [4].
One at a time, the users had control over the design.
The aim was to allow every
participant to actively work on the design and discuss with the neighbors for possible
solutions, often by means of communication and compromise. The results achieved by
the author were not available in the paper, however, an interview has been carried out
and will be discussed later in the chapter.
Multiple authors have studied the use of virtual reality in design meetings and they
all agree on the improvement in understanding and communication that VR can provide
to the subjects involved. The authors experimented different scenarios outlined below.
First of all, Dayan and Sacks [14] recorded the understanding achieved by customers
who experience customization of an apartment in a virtual reality environment using
head-mounted devices and the ones who experience the same space through traditional
==PAGE:41==
2.3 Virtual Reality Technologies in the AEC Industry
29
drawings. This study does not involve collaboration but only analyzes the improved
understanding of the single user.
Through analyzing the questionnaires the partici-
pants filled after their session, the authors proved significant cognition enhancement
attributed to the use of virtual reality for the perception of the apartment, its function
and its proportions compared to the use of traditional drawings and CAD. This study
involved participants of initial low cognitive learning state (the apartments were first
presented to them during the experiment), actual apartment customers would address
the customization process from a more advanced cognitive learning state.
Al Khatib et al.[2] carried out experiments with six different student design projects,
each group was made of seven students. Each group met four times in total divided
in two phases: conceptual design phase and detailed design phase. For each phase the
students carried out two meetings once using a virtual reality environment, the CAVE,
and once using AutoCAD [3] drawings on a screen. Through surveys and analysis of the
recorded meetings the authors derived their conclusions. VR improved the motivation
and engagement of the students, it facilitated proposing new solutions and advancing of
the project thanks to a better understanding of each others ideas. However, the results
did not show significant impact of effective participation, effectiveness of the meetings
and improved consensus in VR compared to using AutoCAD.
Liu et al.[36], contrarily, do identify design meetings being more productive and
the reviews more effective through the use of VR tools and immersive display system,
provided, though, that the VR models have an appropriate level of detail and func-
tionalities. The focus of their study was a case study of an advanced energy retrofit
project, whose design process integrated all stakeholders. The meetings were carried out
in an immersive construction lab, which contained a CAVE, and had various purposes:
integrated design and design review meetings; presenting the design ideas to decision
makers; demonstrating the technical and design features to the future user group; and
reviewing the design for facility maintenance purposes.
The authors used interviews and surveys to collect data on the experiences of the
users. They noticed meetings and discussions being more efficient thanks to the fact
that the participants were more engaged and kept a consistent understanding while col-
lectively viewing the model in an immersive manner. During design review meetings
it was observed that the immersive display sparked deep questions and led to the dis-
covery of unexpected issues. Generally, the participants showed more confidence in the
==PAGE:42==
30
2 Literature Review
understanding of the model. In order to get an effective collaboration, the authors sug-
gest that the model should contain an appropriate level of detail that does not lead
the participants to discover too many trivial issues that can derail the original purpose
of the meetings. Furthermore, the project manager should focus on showing only the
relevant information for the meeting goals. The participants showed a lack of general
understanding of the technology and admitted they would not have used the tools if
it weren’t for research purposes. The necessity of meeting all in one place would also
prevent them from using the tool. However, this is already solved by the immersive VR
technologies with head mounted devices that are available nowadays and that allow for
remote meetings.
What can be concluded from these experiments is that the use of virtual reality in
collaborative meetings does improve understanding of each others ideas and therefore
makes it easier to make decisions. However, the experiments found in the literature do
not use the tools that are available nowadays, namely the head mounted devices, which
create a fully immersive environment and may have better benefits than what the CAVE
can achieve.
Collaboration for Safety
As previously mentioned, construction safety should be considered in the early phases
of design to best impact the project, as the ability to influence the construction site
safety progressively decreases with the process. Zhou, Whyte and Sacks [75] discuss
that designers need to talk with the contractors in order to understand how work will
be constructed, find out the size of components for safe installation and coordinate at
best the program for safe sequencing of work. Furthermore, the contractor also needs
to get a clear understanding of the design rationale.
In 2015, Sacks et al.[57] experimented the collaboration between construction workers
and designers with the use of the CAVE to facilitate the process at a later stage of the
design. Their aim was to discover the designers attitude towards the collaboration and
to explore the efficacy of design reviews for construction safety. Earlier studies than
Sacks’s, conducted by Gherardi and Nicolini [22], Rooke and Clark [55] and Styhre [62],
have concluded that collaboration between designers and construction professionals had
often failed due to the different approach the designers and construction professionals
have for learning: from written documents the first, and from trial and error the latter.
==PAGE:43==
2.3 Virtual Reality Technologies in the AEC Industry
31
The use of VR technology to facilitate a dialogue on safety issues between the design
teams and the construction teams is an attempt to overcome the issue of the different
approaches in learning.
In the experiment, many issues in the design were brought up and the designers
generally accepted to make changes to the design in order to improve safety. However,
they would not be willing to make changes when the issues involved aesthetic elements.
What was found is that 8 out of 10 subjects would accept changes, see Table 2.1. An
interesting thing is that the largest group (50%) is made of designers who lack skills
in identifying hazards, but their openness to change lets us assume that collaboration
between designers and builders is indeed necessary to make the designers aware of the
consequences of their design and, therefore, make better and safer decisions.
Approach attitude
Do not identify hazards
Identify hazards
Do not accept change
10%
10%
Accept change
50%
30%
Table 2.1: Types of designer [57] .
In terms of efficacy of design reviews in VR, Sacks discusses that thanks to VR and
dialogues the designers were able to understand the consequences in safety of the design
solutions. One evidence is given in a situation where in response to a question by the
construction professional about whether the designer has influence, the designer states:
‘Now that you’ve shown me. I think I do’.
2.3.3
Section Summary
In this section multiple papers tackling actual and possible virtual reality technology
practices were reviewed. The practices were quite different from one another and were
categorized according to the purpose for using the tool: education, training, and collab-
oration (both in terms of design and in terms of design review for safety).
Generally, the VR technologies have proven to be beneficial for better space, size,
and concept understanding and for engaging the users. However, the users seem to have
difficulties in adjusting to these new tools, limiting therefore their usability. The CAVE,
which is covered in the majority of the papers, is criticized for its lack of portability due
to the fixed set-up. As mentioned by Liu et al.[36], it would not be used in real situations
==PAGE:44==
32
2 Literature Review
unless for research purposes, where researchers would deal with the technology set-up
and facilitation of its use.
2.4
Chapter Summary and Discussion
In this chapter numerous papers were reviewed to understand three main aspects: project
processes in the construction industry, technologies’ potentials and their implementation
in the construction industry, and applications of virtual reality in the construction in-
dustry. In the first part, it was outlined how integrated processes can help revolutionize
the construction industry and the issues that may arise with them. In the second sec-
tion, past IT adoption in the industry has been reviewed because of the high level of
relation that the topic has to the recent problems that the industry is facing with the
implementation of BIM technologies, which are the base for a proper use of the VR tools.
Lastly, recent studies on VR applications in the construction industry were reviewed to
give a sense of what some of the potentials are for using VR in practice.
To summarize: the construction industry is ripe for disruption and needs a complete
change of the traditional processes. The way the industry is envisioned to revolution-
ize is to adopt an integrated approach to all the processes in a project delivery. This
approach is especially facilitated by recent powerful technologies, namely BIM. Both
integrated processes and BIM have their issues though. For the former, on one hand,
collaboration is key, but human interaction is often troublesome as conversations are
often characterized by misunderstandings which lead to inefficiency and unwanted re-
sults. On the other hand, integration of multiple stakeholders with different interests
and responsibilities often encounters contractual obstacles. For the latter, like IT, the
implementation of technologies often encounter many obstacles, including personal, so-
cial, and organizational barriers. In this picture, virtual reality comes in as a facilitator
of integrated processes by improving communication and people’s understandings of a
project in its multiple aspects. However, with its powerful visualization capacity, the
applications in the construction industry are much wider than just facilitating collab-
oration. Altogether the different applications work in synergy to both deliver higher
value to all stakeholders and reduce risks and waste. However, it is important to under-
stand that the implementation of a single tool, VR, may only have a little impact on
the whole process of a project. To accomplish the envisaged results, the whole system
==PAGE:45==
2.4 Chapter Summary and Discussion
33
surrounding VR, including project delivery processes, organizational processes, etc. is to
be improved. The literature here provided demonstrates, indeed, that the human factor
and the processes around a tool must be taken into account to achieve greater value.
Discussion
The IPD process proposed by Eckblad [15] is considered to be a good starting point
for new projects, but a slight change to it is introduced. In fact, Fischer [17] discusses
that an integrated design process can not exist with well-defined phases - phases should,
instead, overlap:
1. The conceptualization and criteria design should overlap because users will not be
able to articulate what they want and what’s valuable for them unless they see
possible designs and their cost and value.
2. As the design gets detailed it must be validated against all user values iteratively
and the value or the design adjusted when they get out of sync. The scope de-
fined in the criteria design is, therefore, an integrated part of the detailed design,
something that is checked and rechecked throughout the process.
This is visualized by fading out the borders, see Figure 2.8. Furthermore, during the
integrated design process, it is very important to include the construction and opera-
tional perspectives. For the first, construction insights will make the design buildable
already from the early stages and the documentation time will be significantly reduced;
for the second, operational input will create a building which can be operated more
smoothly.[17]
Figure 2.8: Revisited IPD work flow.
In this framework virtual reality should be seen as a tool, a means to better commu-
nicate, by having a better perception and understanding of 3D models, and to effectively
collaborate, by having a better shared understanding. At the basis for implementation
==PAGE:46==
34
2 Literature Review
of the tool, the problem is not only adopting VR itself. The problem is especially con-
nected to the lack of a stable supporting system, namely IPD and BIM, that should be
promoted by the government in global terms, and the client in local terms. IPD allows
for different disciplines to collaborate for the good of the project, whereas the platform,
provided by BIM tools, facilitates the collaboration and learning of the participants.
Without a 3D model the VR would have no use.
Given the few cases that have been documented of projects that benefited from using
these new processes and tools, it is understandable that there is a general hesitation to
invest money and effort in them. Woksepp [72] developed a survey for practitioners who
implemented building information models (BIModels) for the design and planning of a
large pelletizing plant, with the goal of revealing the attitude of the average user towards
their application. Despite the BIModels (named VR models in the survey) were broadly
accepted and very useful in the process, the users showed skepticism over the adoption
of it in future works, see questions 5b and 5c in Figure 2.9. In fact, the majority of the
workers expressed a necessity of seeing successful pilot projects and economic analysis
in order for them to be convinced in using the tools. The same logic would then go for
the client.
Figure 2.9: Summary of the participants’ attitudes toward the use of the VR model
at work [72].
The researches discussed in the latter section provide examples of uses of virtual
reality for specific aspects of the construction industry, but some do not define a clear
framework for their application. Based on the understanding of the content and the
project delivery process, the use cases, the process stages, the users, and the platforms
==PAGE:47==
2.4 Chapter Summary and Discussion
35
were summarized in Figure 2.10. In the same order as they appear in the literature
review, each paper will be here discussed to clarify their framework.
Kamath et al.[27] and Quinn et al.[51] focus on improving the teaching of structural
concepts to students by utilizing either AR or VR, or both. Kamath et al. used VR
so that students would understand better the concepts by visualizing them in a 1:1
virtual environment. The concept is fairly applicable in the industry when the engineers
need to explain why some solutions are better than others to the architects during the
design process. Quinn et al.’s prototypes (StructAR, and especially Struct VR) have
other potentials too. Easy and interactive visualization of structural performance can
be beneficial in all the stages of the design process. Structural engineers can dissuade the
architect and client from structurally-unfeasible ideas. With the IPD process proposed,
the engineers may already be part of the project from the conceptualization and would
be able to prevent those ideas from developing further.
The prototype proposed by Ong and Huang [47] has great potentials during the operation
of a structure for maintenance and renovation purposes. Through the use of AR tools,
the engineer can inspect the element of interest on site and directly try different solutions
in a virtual environment.
Lucas and Tabet [38], Lucas et al.[39], Sacks et al.[56], and Zhao and Lucas [74] all
focus on training of the subcontractors who are to do the work on site during construc-
tion. However, the training can also be performed in case of complicated/dangerous
maintenance activities.
The stage for this use case is not directly dependent of the
project delivery process, however, based on Sacks et al.’s study it is suggested that the
training happens not too distant from the actual operation. In fact, the effect on long
term efficiency of a VR training is proven to be only slightly better than the traditional
training.
Tian Tian [64] utilized VR HMD and desktop-based solution to introduce end-users in
a design of a mass-housing project together with the architect. This case is applicable
particularly during the conceptualization phase because the input of the end-users is
fundamental to create the base for a project. What is found from their input will, in
fact, contribute to the client’s needs. In a discussion with the author through Skype
meeting, it was expressed the need for a better platform, where multiple users could
interact with the model at the same time. Furthermore, it was also noted that the
end-users should have a controlled level of freedom for the design. In this sense, the
architect should have a clear idea of the main infrastructures of the building (general
==PAGE:48==
36
2 Literature Review
form, structure, and utilities) before allowing end-users to give their input, otherwise
the result would be too broad and unusable.
The experiment on better space cognition with VR HMD carried out by Dayan and
Sacks [14] opens the doors for marketing purposes. The spaces in the model need to
be final, so that the end-user and/or client can start thinking about customizing their
future spaces. It is an application that real estate companies can use for better selling
their properties as well. The results of the study is though very important in general for
any application as it provides with a further proof that VR HMD provides better space
and size understanding.
Al Khatib et al.’s experiment [2] is directly related to the job of designers, when they
meet during the whole design process to advance with the design and to review design
solutions. It proves better engagement of the team members and better understanding of
one another’s ideas when utilizing an immersive solution rather than the computer-based
CAD solution.
Liu et al.[36] reviewed a project where the CAVE solution was utilized during the design
process, from criteria design to the delivery of the final design. All the parties had been
involved in different situations, including integrated design and design review meetings;
presenting the design ideas to decision-makers; demonstrating the technical and design
features to the future user group; and reviewing the design for facility maintenance
purposes. Despite the broad acceptance of the solution for the better understandings
and meetings’ efficiency, the complexity of the tools forming the CAVE platform limited
the regular application to other projects.
Finally, Sacks et al.[57] involved architect and construction experts to review the design
and optimize the solutions in terms of safety, but can be relevant also for gaining input
on constructability of the structure. This use case is important for the early stages of the
design process but can be carried out at any time in the design process. However, the
earlier this collaboration is done, the fewer the surprises down the line. Also, the model
used in the experiment was almost completed and the architects showed low flexibility
in changing aesthetics aspects of the design. If the issues are brought up earlier in the
process when the ideas are still premature, there is probably higher chances of convincing
the architect to change the design.
As a conclusion to the adoption of virtual reality solutions in the construction in-
dustry based on these cases, it can be said that VR proves to improve communication,
==PAGE:49==
2.4 Chapter Summary and Discussion
37
space and size cognition, therefore, the applications are numerous in all the parts of the
project delivery process. A general lack of knowledge of the technology and the com-
plexity of the CAVE solution are, though, reasons for the low level of implementation.
The HMDs can be part of the solution to the challenges encountered with the CAVE,
however, the lack of research papers covering the use of HMD does not allow for an
appropriate comparison of the two platforms.
(a) Use Cases
(b) Stages
==PAGE:50==
38
2 Literature Review
(c) Users
(d) Platforms
Figure 2.10: Summarizing tables of VR practices according to the literature review.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
Due to the nature of the research questions tackled in the research, a qualitative approach
with inductive reasoning has been envisioned as the most appropriate method to achieve
the research objectives. In this chapter the research approach will be discussed more
in detail. We will see what defines a qualitative methodology based on the book by
Patton ”Qualitative research and evaluation methods”[52] and how it was applied for
this research.
3.1
Qualitative Research Methodology
According to Patton [52], a qualitative method strategy is made up of three parts: qual-
itative data, a design strategy, and content analysis.
Qualitative Data
The qualitative data can be collected from open-ended interviews, observations and
documents. The interviews provide information about personal experiences, opinions,
feelings and knowledge; the observations are fieldwork descriptions of activities, be-
haviours, conversations, processes, etc.; finally, documents are written materials from
organizational or programs records, official publications and reports. A qualitative re-
search can include data either from one of the three types or from a combination of them.
In case the data comes from only one set, it is important to be aware of the limitations
that come with it: for example, interviews can be characterized by bias or untrue state-
ments, organizational pressures, and misunderstandings and, therefore, may need to be
validated against other sources of information. Responses to open-ended questions are
often long, broad and variable in content making it difficult to analyze. Yet, they allow
for a deeper understanding of the interviewee’s point of view. It is also to note that
==PAGE:52==
40
3 Methodology
often after interview sessions the perfect question(s) that should have been asked to tie
the whole thing together may become clear. This may be seen as a lost opportunity for
making sense of the information collected. However, Patton brings light to this stating
that ”analysis will make clear what would have been most important to study, and the
evaluation report will finally make clear to decision makers what they had really wanted
to know, but could not articulate at the time.”
Design Strategy
The design strategy can be of three kinds as well: naturalistic inquiry, emergent
design flexibility, and purposeful sampling. The naturalistic inquiry is an approach to
understand the social world as it unfolds naturally. In this view the researcher does
not try to manipulate the observed phenomena. With an emergent design flexibility
the researcher adapts his/her inquiry as understanding deepens and situations change.
The latter, purposeful sampling, is an approach where the case studies (that can be
people, communities, cultures, etc.) are selected because they are believed to be rich in
information for the topic of interest.
Content Analysis
Content analysis, generally, refers to any qualitative data reduction and sense-making
effort that attempts to identify core consistencies and meanings.Patton [52] suggests the
following strategies for content analysis:
(1) Unique case orientation - Assumes each case is special and unique; the first level of
analysis is being true to, respecting, and capturing the details of the individual cases
being studied; cross-case analysis follows from and depends on the quality of individual
case studies.
(2) Inductive analysis and creative synthesis - Immersion in the details and specifics
of the data to discover important patterns, themes, and interrelationships; begins by
exploring, then confirming; guided by analytical principles rather than rules; ends with
a creative synthesis.
(3) Holistic perspective - The whole phenomenon under study is understood as a com-
plex system that is more than the sum of its parts; focus on complex interdependencies
and system dynamics that cannot meaningfully be reduced to a few discrete variables
and linear, cause effect relationships.
==PAGE:53==
3.2 Data Collection and Analysis
41
(4) Context sensitivity - Places findings in a social, historical, and temporal context;
careful about the possibility or meaningfulness of generalizations across time and space;
emphasizes instead careful comparative case analyses and extrapolating patterns for pos-
sible transferability and adaptation in new settings.
The qualitative analysis is generally not an easy task.[52] The main challenge is to
make sense of all the raw data collected. It involves reducing the volume of raw informa-
tion, sifting trivia from significance, identifying significant patterns, and constructing a
framework for communicating the essence of what the data reveals. There are no formu-
las for determining significance. No ways exist of perfectly replicating the researcher’s
analytical thought processes. No straightforward tests can be applied for reliability and
validity. In short, there is no absolute rule but the researcher is expected to do their
very best with full intellect to fairly represent the data and communicate what the data
reveals given the purpose of the study.
3.2
Data Collection and Analysis
In the current section, the methods that were embarked for data collection and analysis
will be reviewed. In short, these include interviews, purposeful sampling and inductive
analysis.
Interviews and Purposeful Sampling
Due to the low level of adoption of VR in the collaborating company, it was not
possible to find real-life VR sessions that could be observed. Furthermore, publications
have been used for the literature review. Open-ended interviews revealed to be the most
appropriate data collection method. It allowed for reaching more people (despite the
physical distances) and collect multiple point of views (both in role and organizational
terms) on the topic.
The open-ended interviews aimed to understand experiences and potentials in the
eyes of the practitioners, benefits and challenges they perceive, and the framework within
they work. The open-ended interviews were standardized so that the interviews would
be highly focused and the interviewee’s time used efficiently. The analysis is facilitated
by making responses easy to find and compare. In order to capture the framework in
==PAGE:54==
42
3 Methodology
which the interviewee works and implements virtual reality, the first questions asked
during the interviews concerned background, role and motivations to use VR. The rest
of the questions tackled more in specific the use cases and the characteristics around
them, e.g. benefits, challenges, roles involved, stages, feedback, and so on.
The interviews were conducted with eleven AEC industry professionals who were
purposefully selected because they were believed to have experienced VR and related
technologies in their work processes. The first interviewees were selected through net-
work and intranet of the collaborating company, however, due to the few number of
people found, it was necessary to do an internet search. In the internet search keywords
like virtual reality, construction industry, practice, and collaboration were used and only
articles written by practitioners were selected. The authors were then contacted through
email and asked if they wanted to contribute to the research. Some interviewed people
referred to other professionals that also had experience on the topic and who, in turn,
were also contacted. The majority of the interviews were conducted through internet
voice meetings, and only four sessions were conducted face-to-face. It was declared that
the data would be treated as confidential and no names, both of companies and intervie-
wee, would be disclosed. With the permission of the interviewees, the conversations were
recorded and then transcribed for analysis purposes. The process of developing and con-
ducting the interviews took around ten weeks between June 18 and August 28. A follow
up interview session with some of the interviewees would have been useful for a better
understanding of company settings and contract related measures for implementation of
BIM and VR.
Content Analysis - Inductive Analysis
The content analysis was carried out with the help of the software Atlas.ti 8 for Mac.
A license was provided by DTU Management Engineering department to work on the
research. The starting point for the analysis was to transcribe the collected data, e.g.
the interview recordings, followed by a coding process to organize the data.
General ideas for the headings to organize the data were based on the literature
review and general understanding of the topic; they also reflected the questions asked
in the interviews. These include type of use cases, users, platforms, process stages, and
interviewee’s role. The heading ideas did not define the direction for the analysis, rather
gave it an initial conceptual framework for data organization and structure. With that
==PAGE:55==
3.3 Chapter Summary
43
in mind, it was then possible to start coding the transcriptions.
The codes represent categories which are the results of an interpretive process in
which the data is respected and the category labels are as close as possible to the
language used by the interviewees; for example, in order not to lose the meaning of one’s
words labels like ”benefit: does not require technical skills” or ”challenge: people wander
around”. In other cases, categories were generated also based on previous understandings
on the industry processes and technology that seem to cover the message transferred by
the interviewee.
This process was done in an iterative manner. In fact, the initial label for a category
may come from a first understanding of the context; however, through reading of other
cases, similar meanings may be categorized under different headings that lead to a need
of reorganization of labels. For example, initial labels for the position in the company
of the interviewees were given based on what was stated in the interview: international
BIM integration lead, digital design leader, technical director, technology manager, etc..
However the similarities in the ways they perceive VR made it so that, for the purpose
of this research, they were all categorized as one into ”technology expert”. Furthermore,
some categories that initially were believed to bring value, like the type of projects for
which VR was used (e.g. bridges, building, etc.), after the coding process of all the
transcriptions revealed to be superfluous for the research and were therefore omitted.
The code list used for the research can be found in Appendix A.
In order to reveal patterns, multiple codes were assigned to the single quotations.
The codes would describe, for example, the use case, the benefit or challenge expressed,
the platform, the users involved, and the relevant stages. Often all this information was
not expressed explicitly by the interviewee, instead, it was often rising from the context
or made clear in later times of the interviews.
3.3
Chapter Summary
The nature of this research is to understand from people’s experiences and literature
what the best practices of virtual reality and augmented reality are in the construction
industry.
The adoption of these technologies encounters many obstacles that relate
not only to technical issues but also to human aspects. In this view, the qualitative
research methodology was envisioned as the best way to achieve the goals of the research.
==PAGE:56==
44
3 Methodology
Collection of data through interviews, purposeful selection of participants and inductive
analysis form the framework in which the study is conducted.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4
VR and AR in Practice
In this chapter a background of the participants is given and the findings from the
interviews are outlined and discussed.
The findings section is structured as follows:
platforms used for VR and AR, the perceived benefits and challenges of the tools, and
use cases.
At the end of the chapter the conclusions will be drawn from both the
literature review and the findings, giving answers to the questions of the thesis.
4.1
Participants’ backgrounds
The interviewees are all practitioners who were believed to provide valuable information
about the application of virtual and augmented realities in the construction industry.
An overview of the role in the company, location, and the type of industry of each
interviewee is seen in Table 4.1. The aim was to gain input from as many people with
different roles as possible. However, most of the participants who were reached have
similar roles and are in charge of facilitating the use of VR and AR along with other
BIM tools in their companies. These practitioners were easily reachable as they would
be the ones publishing articles about VR, whereas managers, designers and other users
would be more in the dark. Thanks to referrals, though, it was also possible to contact
a couple of technology vendors, engineers, an architect and a client. The technology
vendors provide the research with a point of view which is external to the construction
industry. Their input may be then less characterized by bias statements.
The respondents are ordered by their role. R1 through R5 have similar roles and are
grouped as technology experts; R6 and R7 are technology vendors/managers in software
companies; R8 and R9 are consultant and contractor engineers respectively; R10 is an
architect specialized in digital solutions; finally, R11 is a client at a public institution
with architectural backgrounds who is currently working on one of the first large projects
to use 3D Models as the main documentation for the construction.
R9 is also part
==PAGE:58==
46
4 VR and AR in Practice
Table 4.1: Interviewed people.
of this project, a laboratory building, and has been part of it during construction as
BIM coordinator. All of the respondents have either used in first person VR with a
head mounted device or seen it being used in practice by colleagues. AR, instead, has
only been experienced by three out of the eleven respondents (R7, R9, and R11) in
very limited conditions. R4 is currently experimenting the use of the software Fuzor
(described below) in his company in order to define whether it brings value or not.
4.2
Findings
This section is divided into three subsections that touch different aspects of the informa-
tion collected from the interviewees. First, the hardware and software utilized to make
the VR and AR experiences possible are outlined. Thereafter, the way the respondents
perceive these technologies, including benefits and challenges, is described. Finally, the
use cases are illustrated.
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Findings
47
4.2.1
Hardware and Software Used
The virtual reality head mounted devices that are being used in the industry by the
participants are either HTC Vive or Oculus Rift, two virtual reality solutions that require
a station set up.
Setting them up often requires IT skills [R2] and it is, therefore,
practical to have a designated semi-permanent space and location for them.[R9] A more
recent wireless solution mentioned by R2 is the Oculus Go. Thanks to being wireless,
it is a portable solution that consists of a headset and a controller. The video quality
is lower and it relies on the cloud technology. Models are uploaded to the cloud and
are shareable among different parties. After the interview with R2, it was possible to
experience it in first person. The VR session was streamed on a screen through access to
the cloud, but, in that occasion, it did not sync correctly resulting in sketchy and freezing
streaming, despite the smooth experience in the VR. What seemed to be the problem
was a bad internet connection, which sparked immediate concern on the reliability and
applicability of the tool in regular practices.
In order to transfer 3D models into a virtual environment, there are different software
in the market that can be used. The most common software among the respondents are:
Enscape[16], LumenRT[40], Unity[65], Unreal Engine[66], IrisVR[25], InsiteVR[24] and
Fuzor[26]. Enscape and LumenRT generate quick high-quality renders (R8 specifies that
it generally takes him 30 minutes to go from CAD to VR) whose use differs from the
user’s perspective. In fact, R8, the engineering consultant, expressed LumenRT to be
the perfect software to easily create a VR model for the client which is easy to use
and runs smoothly, despite the CAD models being very detailed and large in size. On
the other hand, from a architectural point of view [R10], Enscape is not enough for
presenting the product to the client, because in that case ”you may want to have an
interactive experience” and Enscape does not allow it. On the other hand he praises the
software for being ”fantastic because it’s affordable, does really, really, well, it’s quick,
and it renders really well” but specifies ”for someone who wants to fire something up
really fast and is just looking at something for their own purposes”. Unity and Unreal
Engine are two gaming software that allow the user to ”do what they want”[R10] for
the rendered and interactive VR experiences. However, it may take days to create a
VR experience and it is not practical in a context of dynamic work where things change
continuously. Furthermore, they are complicated software and, since there is not a job
==PAGE:60==
48
4 VR and AR in Practice
position for it, it is usually only people who have interest and know how to work with
the software that actually do the job.[R10] The last three software that are being used
by the respondents (IrisVR, InsiteVR, and Fuzor) can be considered as a blending of
the two type of software just mentioned. They are visualization software that allow to
create interactive VR models in an easy and intuitive way. IrisVR and InsiteVR focus
on design review aspects allowing for annotation, remote collaboration (both in VR and
not), layer selection, shadow simulations, etc. Whereas Fuzor provides other features
(including 4D scheduling, phase filtering support, clash management, and many more)
that can be used both on a computer and in an immersive environment. These features
make it more relevant for contractors and consultants.[R10]
Augmented reality is generally supported by the Microsoft HoloLens and mobile
devices. Microsoft HoloLens is a headset that works as a stand-alone hardware with
software and downloadable content. It is currently limited to support small size files
(lower than 400MB)[R4] and requires, therefore, effort for optimization of the models.
It is a pricey solution and there are very few use cases in the industry where it is actually
implemented. Most of the technology experts are currently experimenting and getting
to know the technology. Many of the respondents have expressed their excitement for
the numerous potentials it has in the industry. R7 warns that many of the promotional
videos, found in the market and showing use cases of AR, may not represent actual
implementation of the technology in practice. For mobile devices, Dalux[13] is a software
that is currently being used in the industry for augmented reality experiences during
construction. It mainly allows for construction progress tracking, task assignment, and
issue and safety reporting. An interesting downside of the tool mentioned by R11 is
that by using mobile devices for AR, the mobility of the user is limited to only one
hand. This is a big limitation for construction purposes, it is therefore utilized only for
management purposes.[R9, R11]
4.2.2
Benefits and Challenges of VR and AR
Most of the interviewees have expressed explicitly how the immersive environment pro-
vided by VR headsets gives a better space and size understanding to the users, allowing
for better decisions that will result in optimized solutions and better communication.
The client is able to make quicker decisions that are clear to the design team, so that
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Findings
49
they are able to deliver what is wanted with less surprises down the line.[R10] According
to R1, R2, R3 and R6, VR has also potential during the tendering, pre-construction,
and construction phases to communicate to the builders what has to be done, reducing
misunderstandings and errors. Furthermore, thanks to the real-life sensation it provides,
VR can be used for understanding how easy it is to navigate through a building of large
dimensions, for example a hospital or an airport, and improve the design accordingly.[R5]
R6 and R9 emphasized how intuitive the VR tool is as well. R9 continues by saying
that, since the client and end-users often do not possess the technical skills for visualizing
correctly the 2D drawings and 3D models on a computer screen, but they ought to give
valuable feedback on the project, VR comes in as an intuitive tool that allows them to
easily ”point out what is not working”. This is also supported by R5 who expresses the
importance of being able to engage the client in the project, which is usually harder
with only 2D drawings and computer screens. R2, R3, R4, R5, and R8 even expressed
how fast and easy it is nowadays to obtain a VR experience from the 3D model. It
is not to forget though, that high hardware specifications may be needed to achieve
such aforementioned benefits. [R4, R6, R9, R10] In fact, R5 thinks that if the frames
displayed are sketchy and do not provide a real-life sensation to the user it may make
them feel nauseous. R3 states, though, that the upgrades and general improvement
of the technologies usually improve the experiences, and has not come across the issue
for the past year and a half. R10 says that ”it is not uncommon to see clients feeling
disoriented after being in the VR”, however, positive experiences occur more often then
the bad ones.
According to R5, in a context of promotion and marketing, VR headsets are consid-
ered to be expensive tools. The interviewee compares them to the Google Cardboard, a
portable VR platform for use with a smartphone, which only requires a person to have a
smartphone with them. Using Google Cardboard has relatively no cost and can reach out
to a greater audience, despite the lower video quality. On the other hand, in a context
where the architect promotes their products, VR headsets are not that expensive. In
fact, ”buying three rendered shots from a proper external company would already cover
the cost of the hardware and software needed to make VR experiences”[R10]. Also R2
stated that what it cost them to create the VR experience, as a way to impress the client
and win the bid of the project, was very low compared to the value they get back from
winning the project.
==PAGE:62==
50
4 VR and AR in Practice
AR is not a tool which people have experienced enough yet, however, thanks to its
portability and features, many respondents see great potentials with it in the future.
In fact, the AR headsets, that are available in the market today, still come with few
limitations that prevent them from being adopted. Limitations include the size of the
model that, at the moment, can not exceed 400MB [R4]; the high cost [R1], and the
impracticality of bringing the tool on site, where the risk for damage is quite high (and
the cost is too high to cover for the damages). And just like for the implementation of
VR, it will take time to change the traditional way of working.
Overall, VR is considered mature enough for its applications in the construction
industry,[R3, R10] whereas ”AR has still some way to go before in can be adopted
regularly in practice”[R10]. According to R3, though, in order to implement VR in day
to day operations, there is a need of a push from the clients: ”I think one of the reasons
why we haven’t seen it as something in the normal, is that (...) we haven’t seen VR as
a requirement from clients in their projects.” and continues ”if it was actually a skill, a
service the client required, you would get some long term benefits”.
4.2.3
Use cases
The possibilities of utilizing virtual reality are many. Based on the interviews, virtual
reality in practice is being used for:
• marketing and promotion;
• design approval;
• design review, tendering and design
risk assessment;
• involvement of end-users;
• simulation.
AR, on the other hand, has been used for marketing and for quality control and assurance,
but in very few cases.
Marketing, Promotion, and Design Approval
One of the most natural and straightforward use cases for VR is promotion and mar-
keting. Simply showing a product, in an immersive environment, will generate a ”wow”
factor that makes the experience more memorable and the product more vendible than
by looking at a 3D model through a computer screen or 2D drawings.[R5] In fact ”with
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Findings
51
VR you can get a very intense and real idea of the structure, [...] you can feel how it
will be to stay in the construction once it’s done” [R7]. The downside is that generally
”it will cost money and work effort to do something good for sales (purposes)”[R2]. In
that regard, R1 and R5 state that at times, even utilizing a lower video quality tool like
Google Cardboard, which is much more portable and cheaper, is enough to generate the
same marketing value, as the clients are often impressed by the experience.
Another way to promote a construction to the client is to take them on site and with
the HoloLens show them the future construction in place.[R7] For most people ”being
able to see a substantial 3D model in front of you that stays fixed to the ground as you
walk around is revelation”. It generates excitement and interest. And the more the tool
is used, the more ”it generate ideas of how to take it further, in what other ways it can
be used”.[R7]
In similar ways described above, due to the characteristics of the VR, better space
and size understanding, better visualization, and providing a real feel of the structure,
the design team is able to receive a quicker approval from the client, and move on with
the design faster.[R1, R6, R7, R9]
Design Review, Tendering and Risk Assessment
Thanks to the capacity of visualizing a model in a scale 1:1 provided by VR, designers
have taken advantage of the tool to better understand and evaluate the spaces they de-
sign.[R10] In case of designing a children department of a hospital, R3 had the designers
experience the space in VR at the height of a child. The designers were enlightened by
this experience: from an adult perspective, the model seemed beautiful and practical;
however, as they entered the model from a child’s perspective, they realized that it
was not possible to see outside the windows and they felt like they were walking in a
closed box. This led to improvements to the design. VR is also being used to collab-
orate and coordinate the different disciplines (architecture, mechanical and structural
engineering, etc.) during design. However, this is not used regularly because ”it it not
easy enough”[R10]. In case of doubts on a particular aspect of the project, it is more
valuable and quicker to make a call (with any meeting call application), open the model
and share the screen rather than going through the whole process of entering a virtual
environment, which is usually available only in permanent spaces in the company.[R10]
R1 suggests though that the designers should use the VR headsets at times, because
==PAGE:64==
52
4 VR and AR in Practice
he often experienced that architects do not realize how their design would actually look
in real life, and the VR experience led them to make changes and improvements to the
design. R8 also agrees: ”When you work with a 3D model daily, then you just stare
blind of some details. Sometimes to get a fresh input I think it is good to use VR. It
should be something you do every month or when you make big changes”.
With regards to the collaboration with different disciplines, the technology manager
R4, instead, has had good experiences. After running a clash detection of the models, the
involved parties are called in for a remote collaboration utilizing Fuzor. The participants
either join with their own VR headset or follow the sessions from the computer screen.
According to R4, it ”works perfectly” as there have not been any compatibility problems
or people being unable to join the meeting. It is to be noted that all parties had access to
BIM-advanced computers/laptops. Also R5 experienced remote collaboration sessions,
but expressed difficulties in maintaining the focus on the purpose of the meeting as
people have the tendency to wander around a model when they enter it in VR. In this
case, ”drive mode” comes of use. It is a visualization mode where one person makes the
other participants see what he/she wants to show.[R4]
In other cases, VR is used to show the subcontractors what needs to be done in
construction.[R1, R2, R3, R6] The respondents all agree that VR gives a clear idea of
what and how to build the structure and also it allows to catch errors before starting
the work on site. This brings much value to the construction, ”reducing the amount
of misunderstanding and then, of course, errors”[R2]. Furthermore, this can be done
remotely, for example, R1 promotes multi-user collaboration sessions between the project
team and the trades on site as a better way to communicate and work together at long
distances.
Another use case for VR is related to design risk assessment (DRA). In a wind farm
project, R8 created VR models using LumenRT after the DRA sessions as hazard doc-
umentation for the client. Walkthroughs in the model were prepared by the consultant
for facilitating the navigation through design aspects discussed during the DRA sessions.
The idea is that the client can then access the models in a VR environment and get a
better perspective on issues found by the consultants.
Involvement of End-Users
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Findings
53
The involvement of end-users during the conceptualization stage or design process is not
a wide-spread practice in the construction industry. However, with the IPD ideology,
their input is more and more gaining respect from the practitioners.
Hospitals and
laboratories are two types of projects that have been discussed of benefiting from it.
With healthcare projects, it is necessary to ”receive an approval from a large number
of people, and quite often people have a tough time visualizing or understanding plans,
or even renderings”.[R1] VR is considered to be ideal for making the people understand
”the space, and the concept of the space” (that can include operation theater, patient
care suite, or administration space) and, therefore, they are able to easily and quickly
approve the design proposed.
With the laboratory project discussed by R9 and R11, the end-users were a ”very
important part that brought enormous value”[R11]. Hundreds of people were involved in
the early stages before the design development, and they provided ”like 1000 comments
on the project” by visualizing it in an immersive virtual environment.
The people
involved were key persons of user groups who were called in to experience their facilities
in VR. Among other things, they were able to check whether or not the equipment
needed for their work would be able to come in the laboratory, or if the installations
were placed correctly to best use them.[R9] The client [R11] expressed how important
it is to have these sessions after a program (conceptualization) is made and as early as
possible in the design process because their feedback often requires change to the project.
In fact, ”it’s easy to change when you have few documents, but when you do it in design
development then you have thousands of documents that are related to the change and
that need to be changed. Then you make mistakes and it always gives feedback later
on.”
Simulation
Light simulation (or shadow simulation) and 4D scheduling are other use cases for VR.
R1 utilized the light simulation tool of IrisVR in one project case where the client was
very interested in the efficiency of the building and day lighting. Otherwise he thinks
that often clients are not ”sophisticated enough” in such terms to fully utilize the feature.
In case of the laboratory discussed by R9 and R11, the contractors were involved from an
early stage and were able to use the Fuzor shadow simulation feature to discuss lighting
with the client in an easy way. This brought value to the construction company, as it is
==PAGE:66==
54
4 VR and AR in Practice
usually an analysis brought out by the architects, as it allows to do extra job in an easy
way.
In order to optimize the construction flow, 4D scheduling has become increasingly
popular in the industry. When it comes to buildings, this is particularly facilitated by
BIM technologies.
Fuzor, for example, allows to create a quick animation linking a
3D model to a Microsoft project schedule.[R4] In association with VR, the contractors
are able to optimize the schedule and make better decisions.[R3] Furthermore, it gives
support to their decisions when they show the schedule to the client and subcontractors.
[R3] R11 recognizes limitations of creating 4D schedules in case of distinct project, as
the schedule development requires a larger database than what is available nowadays.
R8 also used the 4D scheduling for offshore structures, however, does not identify VR
as a necessary tool. The gaming engine is the important part of the visualization. In
fact, if all the detailed CAD models of the stakeholders were to be assembled, the whole
thing would crash. Thanks to the gaming engine, the models are easily brought together
and animated in a smooth experience. VR is used sometimes during the meetings for
visualizing the schedule but is not bringing value, as ten to twenty people are usually
present at the meetings but only one person can utilize VR.
Construction Quality Control and Assurance
In the laboratory project, AR on mobile devices is used to run quality control of the
construction.[R9, R11] Construction managers are able to compare easily, through a
mobile device, what is done and what was planned to be done. Also, they make sure
that the installations are placed correctly as planned. It is a trial period for the company
and the software is still upgrading. Some limitations include overlapping precision of
the model with the actual structure, and getting accustomed to the new system by the
construction team.
4.3
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, the data collected from the interviews has been reviewed and combined
into three aspects: platforms used, benefits and challenges of VR and AR, and use cases.
In the Figures 4.1 a,b,c,d, for each use case experienced by a respondent, the platform,
the users involved, and the stages are highlighted. It is possible to note that the most
==PAGE:67==
4.3 Chapter Summary
55
common use cases identified by the participants are related to the design process and to
the marketing/promotion of the product.
(a) R1 through R3
==PAGE:68==
56
4 VR and AR in Practice
(b) R4 through R6
==PAGE:69==
4.3 Chapter Summary
57
(c) R7 through R9
==PAGE:70==
58
4 VR and AR in Practice
(d) R10 and R11
Figure 4.1: Summarizing tables of VR practices according to the interviewees.
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
In the literature review, the potentials to improve the construction industry have been
discussed. The integrated project delivery process, together with BIM technologies, were
found to be valuable candidates for the task. From the interviews carried out with R1
and R11, it became clear that the client is in charge of implementing IPD contracts and
pushing good practice amongst the stakeholders.
R11 revealed that this was not an easy task as it required a complete change of how
people were working on a project, and there are missing general rules or policies on how
to tackle the process - especially around the use of BIM: ”(the consultants, architects
and contractors) are not used to do it and it is difficult to have an online model with 50
people working on it. There’s a need of procedures on how to do it, when to upload, etc.”
The data is considered to support the argument discussed in the literature review, that
for implementing IT (in this case BIM) into regular practice there is a need of standards
and policies promoted by the government and the clients.
However, by setting the
requirement of a fully detailed 3D model in the contract, in the laboratory project, the
workers had no choice but to provide it to the client in one way or another (details
were not provided). R9, who is also working on the project of R11, recognized an overall
acceptance by the project team. Through early collaboration of the contractors with the
project team, it was possible to coordinate ”what the contractors considered as enough
detail for building the structure and what the consultants wanted to put in”[R9]. This
is very important because too much detail in a model, as discussed by Liu et al.[36],
may cause distractions to the users navigating the model in VR. It is then important
that, during VR sessions, the appropriate level of detail is visualized in the models. The
possibility to create layers in the model that can be turned off and on with a click in
the visualization session may facilitate this process. For best results these layers should
be standardized on a higher level and managed by a project manager on a lower level.
The value of digitizing all the information is still to be understood in the laboratory
project, as the construction is in progress. However, R9 and R11 expressed satisfaction
==PAGE:72==
60
5 Discussion
with the way the project is being delivered. In the interview with R7, concerns were
expressed regarding the digitalization of the construction industry. In fact, the intervie-
wee experienced that, in order to receive approval from public institutions, it is often
requested to deliver paperwork. This paperwork is said to be counterproductive because
”if you are able to digitize everything into 3D models, but still need to do paperwork to
get approval”[R7], this is considered as extra work.
In the context were IPD and BIM create a baseline for improving the efficiency of the
construction industry, VR was discussed, in the literature review, to be a tool, a means
for better communication that can lead to optimized solutions. Similarly, interviewee
R10 pointed out that it is important to understand that ”VR is a new medium for better
communication. Not all projects need to use it, but if it’s going to help communicate the
design intent to the client and actually help them making decisions, then it’s definitely
a useful tool”. The view of the interviewee was limited to architecture, however, the
message may be valuable for other perspectives where VR can facilitate the sharing
of information in a way that is easy to understand. Most of the interviewees, in fact,
recognize that VR provides greater space and size understanding, and in turn result
in optimized and improved solutions to the design. These characteristics make it easy
for the users to see value in utilizing the tool particularly during the design process,
for design review and approval, and during promotion of the design. In the case study
followed by Liu et al.[36], the use cases for the immersive virtual environment mostly
reflect what was found from the multiple interviews: design review, promoting design
ideas to decision makers, demonstrating the technical and design features to the future
user groups (that can be subcontractors or end-users) and reviewing the design for
facility maintenance purposes. The latter case was quickly mentioned by R3, but due
to a lack of further information was not included in the findings.
In the literature, much attention was also found on safety and training aspects. The
authors revealed much potential with VR for improving safety conditions on site. The
topic was not addressed by any interviewees. However, R11 suggested and agreed on that
the IPD lookalike process has resulted in a safer construction site. Assuming that the
time for project delivery is fixed, in a traditional project, the design phase would often
go over time, resulting in squeezed schedules for construction. In case of the project
of R11, through collaboration and coordination of the main stakeholders the project
was more under control and decisions were made better from an early stage. It was
noted that for large and distinct projects, like this one, the collaboration of the main
==PAGE:73==
5.1 Limitations and Further Research
61
stakeholders was very valuable. In case of smaller projects, the collaboration is believed
to be unnecessary.
Despite the difficulties in implementing VR in the project delivery processes, the
technology (hardware and software) available in the market are well received by the
users: quick VR model generation, good visualization, fair cost, etc. Given the different
opinions in certain use cases, it is not possible to validate the best use cases for the
tool. However, it is clear that design review, design approval and marketing/promotion
are the ones benefiting the most. The visualization capabilities of VR make it easy for
people to recognize its value for these cases.
5.1
Limitations and Further Research
The present research is subjected to a number of limitations both in practical and theo-
retical terms. The lack of adoption of VR and AR in the collaborating company did not
provide the occasion to make observation of VR sessions in real situations. Furthermore,
no business cases or user cases with VR or AR appeared to exist. The only practical
source of data that was available was then interviews. This is a limiting factor because
no real observation could be made on the use cases, but the observation only relied
on interview data from eleven sources. The practical data situation did not provide
the possibility of data triangulation with other data sources as only interview data is
existent. Triangulation is important to strengthen a study as it allows to validate the
results. Moreover, despite the effort to find and contact various practitioners around the
globe, by the time the analysis was completed, it was revealed that the people sampled
for the research were not sufficient to provide enough insight in the different use cases.
Multiple practitioners with the same background should also be sampled to provide a
base of relevant comparison.
Regarding the data collected, it was also quite limiting. Often the information was
provided in single statements without proper elaboration of the facts. This resulted in
quite narrow information that was unusable for the research. In other cases the data
was just misleading from the main focus, VR. For example, during the interview with
R11, VR and BIM were often mixed up. Despite the attempts of bringing focus onto
VR, the answers often diverged onto BIM. Similarly, R8 often ended up discussing the
VR as VR models, referring to the models created with LumenRT or Unity, but did not
==PAGE:74==
62
5 Discussion
actually utilize the VR headsets.
Furthermore, some information acquired through the interviews drew attention to
very particular cases, without a clear framework, and it did not allow for a generalization
of patterns. Some people also have had contrasting experiences with the technology:
remote design review meetings worked perfectly for R4, but were problematic for R10;
R3 finds 4D schedule simulations in VR beneficial for the contractors, however, the client
R11 recognizes a lack of database to develop a significant 4D schedule.
In theoretical terms, the methodology utilized revealed a lack of appropriate structure.
Due to the different perspectives of the participants, the interview structure should
have been differentiated accordingly. In that way, it may have been easier to capture
the relevant information that the interviewees could provide. An analysis of potential
outcomes, based on the different perspectives, should have then been developed.
Due to restricted time, it was not feasible to carry out a second session of interviews
with more specific questions. Based on the framework outlined in this paper, future
research can focus on specific use cases and do experiments to prove the actual benefits
of using virtual reality technologies compared to traditional methods of visualization and
collaboration. The experiment could be carried out either in a research or commercial
framework but the outcomes would probably differ. For the first case, the benefits would
be proven only theoretically, but often theory and practice do not go along. In the latter
case, results would be more relevant for practitioners.
In the near future, different
business cases will probably be available for study. Including Fuzor implementation in
R4’s company and the laboratory project, which is soon to be completed.
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
The nature of this research was to explore virtual reality within an AEC domain. From
exploratory discussions with practitioners and initial readings regarding the topic, it was
discovered that there is a lack of business cases and of general knowledge of the potentials
around VR. This study was then provided to bring light onto use cases of virtual reality
and to give an understanding of best practices in the industry. The evidence in the paper
shows that virtual reality, per se, is a mature technology that is ready for implementation.
It allows for better space visualization of the design that leads to better communication
and optimized solutions. However, to bring best value to the industry, VR should not
be implemented as a standalone tool. The implementation should come along with a
change of the organizational structure, where BIM technologies and IPD models work
in synergy.
==PAGE:76==
64
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX A
Codebook For Analysis
==PAGE:78==
ATLAS.ti Report 
Interviews - review 
Codes 
● BENEFIT 
● Benefit: better communication 
● Benefit: better decisions 
● Benefit: better visual experience 
● Benefit: compatibility VR-Desktop 
● Benefit: cost 
● Benefit: does not require technical skills 
● Benefit: drive mode 
● Benefit: flexibility 
● Benefit: getting other people's perspective 
● Benefit: Google Cardboard vs HMD 
● Benefit: intuitive 
● Benefit: less errors 
● Benefit: less misunderstandings 
● Benefit: less surprises down the stream 
● Benefit: mature technology 
● Benefit: optimized solutions 
● Benefit: portability 
● Benefit: quick approval 
● Benefit: quick VR model from CAD model 
==PAGE:79==
● Benefit: quickly notice issues 
● Benefit: remote working 
● Benefit: sharability 
● Benefit: simplified and easier to understand clash detection report 
● Benefit: size understanding 
● Benefit: space understanding 
● Benefit: value back 
● Benefit: VR model runs more smoothly than CAD 
● Benefit: VR vs Desktop-based 
● CHALLENGE 
● Challenge: 100% working model 
● Challenge: continuous updates 
● Challenge: cost 
● Challenge: difficult implementation 
● Challenge: lack in specs 
● Challenge: lack in technology 
● Challenge: lack of education 
● Challenge: lack of knowledge 
● Challenge: level of detail 
● Challenge: long time to create VR models 
● Challenge: low video quality 
● Challenge: model size 
● Challenge: people wander around 
● Challenge: portability 
==PAGE:80==
● Challenge: premature 
● Challenge: required adv. model not subject to change 
● Challenge: required good specs 
● Challenge: requires a new position 
● Challenge: sickness 
● Challenge: standardization of technology 
● Challenge: technology itself can't keep up with each other 
● Challenge: the use is not mature 
● Challenge: too long of a process to put on 
● Challenge: understand right value 
● COMPANY 
● Company: Architecture 
● Company: Consulting 
● Company: Contractor 
● Company: Software development 
● FAKE 
● FEEDBACK 
● Feedback: design was not as expected 
● Feedback: enlightened 
● Feedback: happy 
● Feedback: Impressed 
● Feedback: long time for something unnecessary 
● Feedback: uncomfortable experience 
○ Interviewee: R1 
==PAGE:81==
○ Interviewee: R2 
○ Interviewee: R3 
○ Interviewee: R4 
○ Interviewee: R5 
○ Interviewee: R6 
○ Interviewee: R7 
○ Interviewee: R8 
○ Interviewee: R9 
○ Interviewee: R10 
○ Interviewee: R11 
○ IPD 
● PLATFORM 
● Platform: AR 
● Platform: AR - DAQRI 
● Platform: AR - Hololens 
● Platform: Dalux 
● Platform: Desktop-based VR 
● Platform: Enscape 
● Platform: Fuzor 
● Platform: HTC Vive 
● Platform: InsiteVR 
● Platform: IrisVR 
● Platform: LumenRT (VR) 
● Platform: Oculus Go 
==PAGE:82==
● Platform: Oculus Rift 
● Platform: PC 
● Platform: Unity 
● Platform: VR - Google Cardboard 
● Platform: VR - HMD 
● Platform: VR - Oculus Go 
● POTENTIAL AR 
● Potential AR: collaboration 
● Potential AR: Construction 
● Potential AR: day to day operation 
● Potential AR: design 
● Potential AR: Digitalization 
● Potential AR: Interior design of the built 
● Potential AR: Maintanence 
● Potential AR: visualization on site 
● POTENTIAL VR 
● Potential VR: 4D scheduling 
● Potential VR: collaboration 
● Potential VR: design 
● Potential VR: maintenance 
● Potential VR: management 
● Potential VR: safety analysis 
● Potential VR: storytelling 
● Potential VR: training 
==PAGE:83==
● PROJECT TYPE 
● Project type: building 
● Project type: energy 
● Project type: healthcare 
● Project type: infrastructure 
● Project type: landscape 
● Project type: large construction 
● ROLE 
● Role: Architect 
● Role: BIM Coordinator 
● Role: Client 
● Role: Engineering Consultant 
● Role: Researcher 
● Role: Sales Manager 
● Role: Technology Expert 
● STAGE 
● Stage: conceptual 
● Stage: construction 
● Stage: design process 
● Stage: detailed design 
● Stage: operation 
● Stage: pre-construction 
● SUGGESTION 
● USE CASE 
==PAGE:84==
● Use Case: 4D scheduling 
● Use Case: collaboration 
● Use Case: construction 
● Use Case: design Approval 
● Use Case: design review 
● Use Case: design risk assessment 
● Use Case: early involvement 
● Use Case: light Simulation 
● Use Case: maintenance 
● Use Case: promotion 
● Use Case: quality assurance 
● Use Case: quality control 
● Use Case: renovation 
● Use Case: simulating 
● Use Case: tender 
● USER 
● User: architect 
● User: client 
● User: construction managers 
● User: consultant 
● User: contractor 
● User: designer 
● User: end-user 
● User: engineer 
==PAGE:85==
● User: project manager 
● User: structural engineer 
● User: subcontractor 
● VALUE 
● Value: competition 
● Value: extra results to the client 
● Value: marketing 
==PAGE:86==
74
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[1]
Rajat Agarwal, Shankar Chandrasekaran, and Mukund Sridhar.
Imagining construction’s digital future. McKinsey&Company. 2016.
[2]
Ahmad Al Khatib et al. ““The Impact of Immersive Virtual Reality on
Collaboration in Design Meetings: A Comparative Study””.
In: CIE45 Proceedings (2015).
[3]
Autodesk, Inc. AutoCAD.
url: https://www.autodesk.eu/products/autocad/overview.
[4]
Autodesk, Inc. Revit.
url: https://www.autodesk.eu/products/revit/overview.
[5]
Filipe Barbosa et al. Reinventing Construction: A Route To Higher Productivity.
McKinsey&Company. 2017.
[6]
J Bedrick and T Rinella. “A report on integrated project delivery”.
In: American Institute of Architects, Washington, DC (2006).
[7]
H Russell Bernard.
Research methods in anthropology: Qualitative and quantitative approaches.
Rowman & Littlefield, 2017.
[8]
Sven Bertelsen. “Construction management in a complexity perspective”.
In: 1st International SCRI Symposium, Salford, UK. 2004.
[9]
D Bouchlaghem et al.
“Visualisation in architecture, engineering and construction (AEC)”.
In: Automation in Construction 14.3 (2005), pp. 287–295.
issn: 18727891, 09265805. doi: 10.1016/j.autcon.2004.08.012.
[10]
Great Britain. Construct IT: Bridging the Gap: an Information Technology
Strategy for the United Kingdom Construction Industry.
HM Stationery Office, 1995.
==PAGE:88==
76
Bibliography
[11]
Dale Christenson and Derek HT Walker.
“Understanding the role of “vision” in project success”.
In: Project Management Journal 35.3 (2004), pp. 39–52.
[12]
Ruth C Clark and Richard E Mayer. E-learning and the science of instruction:
Proven guidelines for consumers and designers of multimedia learning.
John Wiley & Sons, 2016.
[13]
Dalux. url: https://www.dalux.com/.
[14]
Amit Dayan and Rafael Sacks.
““Cognition Enhancement using Virtual Reality in Apartment Customization”.
In: Proceedings of the Joint Conference on Computing in Construction (JC3) 1
(2017), pp. 571–578.
[15]
Stuart Eckblad et al. “Integrated project delivery-a working definition”.
In: AIA California Council, Sacramento, CA 25 (2007).
[16]
Enscape™. url: https://enscape3d.com/.
[17]
Martin Fischer et al. “A simple framework for integrated project delivery”. eng.
In: 22nd Annual Conference of the International Group for Lean Construction:
Understanding and Improving Project Based Production, Iglc 2014 (2014),
pp. 1319–1330.
[18]
F. Flager et al. “Multi-objective building envelope optimization for life-cycle cost
and global warming potential”. eng. In: Ework and Ebusiness in Architecture,
Engineering and Construction - Proceedings of the European Conference on
Product and Process Modelling 2012, Ecppm 2012 (2012), pp. 193–200.
[19]
James E Folkestad.
“Concurrent design for production (CDP): Materialising interface knowledge on a
US residential construction project using computer aided design objects”.
In: Proceedings IGLC-14, July (2006).
[20]
Frequently Asked Questions. Accessed: 2018-06-26.
National BIM Standard - United States.
[21]
K. Gericke and L. Blessing.
“An analysis of design process models across disciplines”. In: Proceedings of
International Design Conference, Design DS 70 (2012), pp. 171–180.
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
77
[22]
Silvia Gherardi and Davide Nicolini.
“To transfer is to transform: The circulation of safety knowledge”.
In: Organization 7.2 (2000), pp. 329–348.
[23]
Terri L Griffith, Raymond F Zammuto, and Lynda Aiman-Smith.
“Why new technologies fail: Overcoming the invisibility of implementation”.
In: Industrial management 41.3 (1999), pp. 29–34.
[24]
InsiteVR. url: https://insitevr.com/.
[25]
IrisVR. url: https://irisvr.com/.
[26]
Kalloc Studios, Inc. Fuzor. url: https://www.kalloctech.com.
[27]
Rajanish S Kamath, Tukaram D Dongale, and Rajanish K Kamat.
“Development of Virtual Reality Tool for Creative Learning in Architectural
Education”. In: International Journal of Quality Assurance in Engineering and
Technology Education (IJQAETE) 2.4 (2012), pp. 16–24.
[28]
David C Kent and Burcin Becerik-Gerber. “Understanding construction industry
experience and attitudes toward integrated project delivery”. In: Journal of
construction engineering and management 136.8 (2010), pp. 815–825.
[29]
Hyeon Seung Kim et al. “Application of information technology for visualizing
and optimizing construction project schedule”.
In: Iceis 2013 - Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Enterprise
Information Systems 2 (2013), pp. 329–332.
[30]
Lauri Koskela and Bhargav Dave. “Process and IT”.
In: Construction Innovation 8.4 (2008), pp. 244–249.
[31]
Lauri Koskela et al. “The foundations of lean construction”.
In: Design and construction: Building in value (2002), pp. 211–226.
[32]
M. Latham, Joint Review of Procurement, and
Contractual Arrangements in the United Kingdom Construction Industry.
Constructing the Team: Joint Review of Procurement and Contractual
Arrangements in the United Kingdom Construction Industry : Final Report.
H.M. Stationery Office, 1994. isbn: 9780117529946.
url: https://books.google.dk/books?id=aVRyQgAACAAJ.
==PAGE:90==
78
Bibliography
[33]
LEGO and the Augmented Reality Toy Market. 2017.
url: https://invisible.toys/lego-augmented-reality-toy-market/.
[34]
Tracxn Technologies Private Limited. Construction Tech Startup Landspace.
2017. url: https://www.slideshare.net/Tracxn/tracxn-research-
construction-tech-landscape-february-2017.
[35]
Yan Liu. “Critical factors for managing project communication among
participants at the construction stage”.
PhD thesis. The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 2009.
[36]
Yifan Liu, Jennifer Lather, and John Messner. “Virtual Reality to Support the
Integrated Design Process: A Retrofit Case Study”.
In: Computing in Civil and Building Engineering (2014). 2014, pp. 801–808.
[37]
Tian Tian Lo et al. ModRule.
url: http://anzasca.net/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/15_58_197.pdf.
[38]
Jason Lucas and Walid Thabet. “Implementation and evaluation of a VR
task-based training tool for conveyor belt safety training”. In: Journal of
Information Technology in Construction (ITcon) 13.40 (2008), pp. 637–659.
[39]
Jason Lucas et al. “Improving health and safety through conveyor system
training in a virtual environment”.
In: Abstract accepted for, International Future Mining Conference. 2008.
[40]
LumenRT. url: https://www.bentley.com/en/products/brands/lumenrt.
[41]
Hal Macomber, Gregory Howell, and John Barberio. “Target-value design: Nine
foundational practices for delivering surprising client value”.
In: AIA Practice Management Digest (2007).
[42]
Atif Mahboob et al. “A method for efficient and task oriented configuration of
Virtual Reality (VR) models for the analysis of technical systems”.
In: Engineering for a Changing World: Proceedings; 59th IWK, Ilmenau
Scientific Colloquium, Technische Universität Ilmenau, September 11-15, 2017
59, 2017.WS.2.02 (Nov. 2017).
url: http://uri.gbv.de/document/gvk:ppn:1000299597.
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
79
[43]
Atif Mahboob et al. “SYSML Behaviour Models For Description Of Virtual
Reality Environments For Early Evaluation Of A Product”.
In: DS92: Proceedings of the DESIGN 2018 15th International Design Conference.
2018, pp. 2903–2912.
[44]
Paul Milgram and Fumio Kishino. “A taxonomy of mixed reality visual displays”.
In: IEICE Transactions on Information and Systems 77.12 (1994), pp. 1321–1329.
[45]
XOAA NASFA, AHEFO APPA, and AIA AGC.
“Integrated project delivery for public and private owners”.
In: Retrieved December 12 (2010), p. 2012.
[46]
Nima Norouzi et al. “The architect, the client and effective communication in
architectural design practice”.
In: Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences 172 (2015), pp. 635–642.
[47]
SK Ong and JM Huang.
“Structure design and analysis with integrated AR-FEA”.
In: CIRP Annals 66.1 (2017), pp. 149–152.
[48]
Vachara Peansupap and Derek HT Walker.
“Information communication technology (ICT) implementation constraints: A
construction industry perspective”. In: Engineering, construction and
architectural management 13.4 (2006), pp. 364–379.
[49]
Amotz Perlman, Rafael Sacks, and Ronen Barak.
“Hazard recognition and risk perception in construction”.
In: Safety science 64 (2012), pp. 22–31.
[50]
Produktivitetsforskelle på tværs af brancher. DI’s produktivitetspanel. 2013.
url: https://di.dk/SiteCollectionDocuments/Opinion/Konjunktur/
Produktivitetsforskelle%20p%C3%A5%20tv%C3%A6rs%20af%20brancher.pdf.
[51]
Gregory Quinn, Adrian Galeazzi, and Christoph Gengnagel.
“Augmented and Virtual Reality Structures”.
In: Proceedings of the IASS Annual Symposium 2017 (Sept. 2017).
[52]
Patton Michael Quinn. “Qualitative research and evaluation methods”.
In: California EU: Sage Publications Inc (2002).
[53]
RIBA. “Taking Action”. In: (2007).
==PAGE:92==
80
Bibliography
[54]
Leonardo Rischmoller, Luis F Alarcón, and Lauri Koskela. “Improving value
generation in the design process of industrial projects using CAVT”.
In: Journal of management in engineering 22.2 (2006), pp. 52–60.
[55]
John Rooke and Leslie Clark.
“Learning, knowledge and authority on site: a case study of safety practice”.
In: Building Research & Information 33.6 (2005), pp. 561–570.
[56]
Rafael Sacks, Amotz Perlman, and Ronen Barak.
“Construction safety training using immersive virtual reality”.
In: Construction Management and Economics 31.9 (2013), pp. 1005–1017.
[57]
Rafael Sacks et al.
“Safety by design: dialogues between designers and builders using virtual reality”.
In: Construction Management and Economics 33.1 (2015), pp. 55–72.
[58]
Patricia B. Seybold. “How to Address ’Wicked Problems’: Use Dialogue Mapping
to Build a Shared Understanding and Evolve a Group’s Thinking”.
In: Book Reviews (2013).
[59]
Shaping the Future of Construction: A Breakthrough in Mindset and Technology.
World Economic Forum and The Boston Consulting Group. 2016.
url: https://www.bcgperspectives.com/Images/Shaping_the_Future_of_
Construction_may_2016.pdf.
[60]
Mark Shelbourn et al.
“Planning and implementation of effective collaboration in construction projects”.
In: Construction Innovation 7.4 (2007), pp. 357–377.
[61]
Weilin Shen. “A BIM-based Pre-occupancy Evaluation Platform (PEP) for
facilitating designer-client communication in the early design stage”.
PhD thesis. The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 2011.
[62]
Alexander Styhre. Managing knowledge in the construction industry.
Routledge, 2009.
[63]
W Thabet, MF Shiratuddin, and D Bowman.
“Virtual reality in construction: A review”.
In: Engineering Computational Technology (2002), pp. 25–52.
[64]
Lo Tian Tian and Marc Aurel Schnabel. “Multi User Online Design Environment
for Mass Housing-A collaborative decision-support tool”. In: (2016).
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
81
[65]
Unity. url: https://unity3d.com/.
[66]
Unreal Engine.
url: https://www.unrealengine.com/en-US/what-is-unreal-engine-4.
[67]
Rianne C Valkenburg. “Shared understanding as a condition for team design”.
In: Automation in construction 7.2-3 (1998), pp. 111–121.
[68]
N Venkatraman. “IT-induced business reconfiguration”.
In: The Corporation of the 1990’s. Information Technology and Organizational
Transformation, M. Scott Morton, ed (1991), pp. 122–158.
[69]
Peng Wang et al. “A Critical Review of the Use of Virtual Reality in
Construction Engineering Education and Training”. In: International journal of
environmental research and public health 15.6 (2018), p. 1204.
[70]
Tim Winstanley. Integrated Project Delivery Methodology. 2011. url: https:
//www.archdaily.com/153953/integrated-project-delivery-methodology.
[71]
Paul WF Witt. “Audio-visual methods in teaching”.
In: Audiovisual communication review 2.4 (1954), pp. 291–298.
[72]
Stefan Woksepp and Thomas Olofsson.
“Credibility and applicability of virtual reality models in design and construction”.
In: Advanced Engineering Informatics 22.4 (2008), pp. 520–528.
issn: 18735320, 14740346. doi: 10.1016/j.aei.2008.06.007.
[73]
Ann TW Yu, Qiping Shen, and Edwin HW Chan. “An analytical review of the
briefing practice in Hong Kong’s construction industry”.
In: International Journal of Construction Management 5.1 (2005), pp. 77–89.
[74]
Dong Zhao and Jason Lucas.
“Virtual reality simulation for construction safety promotion”. In: International
journal of injury control and safety promotion 22.1 (2015), pp. 57–67.
[75]
Wei Zhou, Jennifer Whyte, and Rafael Sacks.
“Construction safety and digital design: A review”.
In: Automation in Construction 22 (2012), pp. 102–111.
==PAGE:94==
