==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
M.Sc. Thesis
Investigating The Use Of DCR Monocle 
For Creating Process Models 
Using Eye Tracking
January 2019 
Author: 
Jon Buch-Lorentsen 
Supervisors: 
Barbara Weber 
Per Bækgaard 
Andrea Burattin 
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science Richard Petersens Plads, 
building 324, 
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 
Phone +45 4525 3031 
compute@compute.dtu.dk 
www.compute.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
Abstract 
Monocle is a novel tool developed to facilitate translation between natural language and 
declarative process modelling. The tool aims to help users create and maintain process 
models in the DCR environment. This thesis investigates Monocle by examining how users 
engage with the tool to create models. This has been done through an exploratory study 
consisting of two experiments with a total of 17 participants. To understand how users 
engage with the tool eye tracking has been used to gain insight to users viewing patterns 
when creating process models with the tool. The eye tracking data has been analysed using 
process mining to discover process maps showing how the participants gaze transition 
between the areas of interest in the interface. Verbal data has been recorded to complement 
the eye tracking data. This was done through semi-structured interviews that were analysed 
with qualitative coding.  
The results show that the tool is useful for certain aspects of model creation but also have 
weaknesses. The tool shows great potential for creating activities and being used for getting 
started. However the results indicate that the tool is too cumbersome for adding constraints 
and relations and that the beneﬁts of using it are not noticeable. It is however also found 
that this might be inﬂuenced by the experience of the user and the complexity of the 
process. Furthermore it is found that users might be adding undeﬁned constraints to the 
model when using the modeller. 
==PAGE:4==
Preface 
This thesis was carried out in the period August 1, 2018 to January 1, 2019 at the 
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at The Technical University 
of Denmark. The thesis was supervised by Professor Barbara Weber, Associate Professor Per 
Bækgaard and Assistant Professor Andrea Burattin. Additionally PhD student Amine 
Abbad Andaloussi assisted in the supervision. The thesis is part of the authors M.Sc. in 
Digital Media Engineering. This report serves as documentation of the work which has 
been done. 
==PAGE:5==
Content 
1 Introduction 
1 
1.1 Research Questions 
2 
1.1.1 Research question 1 
2 
1.1.2 Research question 2 
2 
1.2 Structure of Report 
2 
2 Background 
3 
2.1 Business Process Modelling 
3 
2.1.1 Declarative and Imperative Models 
4 
2.1.2 Hybrid Model Representations 
5 
2.2 DCR graphs 
5 
2.2.1 Monocle 
7 
2.2.2 The Simulator 
9 
2.3 Eye tracking 
10 
2.3.1 Measurements 
11 
2.3.2 Areas of Interest 
12 
2.4 Process Mining 
12 
2.4.1 Disco 
13 
2.5 Qualitative Research 
15 
2.5.1 Verbal Data 
15 
2.5.2 Qualitative Coding 
16 
3 Research Method 
18 
3.1 Exploratory Research 
18 
3.2 Task Design 
18 
3.3 Data Collection Methods and Design 
20 
3.3.1 Models 
20 
3.3.2 Eye tracking 
20 
3.3.3 Interviews 
20 
3.3.4 Questionnaire 
22 
3.3.5 Galvanic Skin Response 
22 
4 Experiment One 
23 
4.1 Participants 
23 
==PAGE:6==
4.2 Task Description 
23 
4.3 Procedure  
24 
4.4 Instruments 
26 
5 Experiment Two 
27 
5.1 Participants 
27 
5.2 Task Description 
27 
5.3 Procedure 
27 
5.4 Instruments 
28 
6 Data Analysis Procedure 
29 
6.1 Data Preparation 
29 
6.1.1 Eye Tracking to Process maps 
29 
6.1.2 Transcribing Interviews 
30 
6.2 Analysis Procedure 
31 
6.2.1 Models 
31 
6.2.2 Process Maps 
31 
6.2.3 Interviews 
32 
7 Results 
33 
7.1 RQ1 
33 
7.1.1 Models 
33 
7.1.2 Process Maps 
34 
7.2 RQ2 
39 
7.3 Summary 
43 
8 Discussion 
45 
8.1 Results and Methods 
45 
8.2 Future Work 
46 
9 Conclusion 
47 
10 Bibliography 
48 
11 Appendix 
51 
11.1 Process Description for Test 
51 
11.2 Danish Translation of Process Description for Test 
52 
11.3 Familiarisation Process description 
53 
11.4 Online Appendix 
54
==PAGE:7==
1 Introduction 
A critical aspect of any software is to design for the end user. It is therefore advantageous for 
developers to understand how users engage with their program. This knowledge can help them 
gain insight to improve the software and give inspiration for future implementations. Designing 
software tools, such as advanced case management systems,  is a non-trivial task. To design well 
the developers must understand how their program is being used. A well made software tool can 
ease the workload of the user an enhance the quality of what they are creating with the 
application. Complex software therefore requires a deep investigation to get a clear grasp of how 
users are operating. In such softwares it is not just about designing a slick interface but about 
understanding which features can empower the users. 
This thesis has been an investigation into a novel tool made for building process model. This tool 
is called Monocle and was made for the software DCR graphs. DCR graphs is an Industrial case 
management tool made for case workers without a background in process modelling[1]. DCR 
graphs is based on a ﬂexible but complex modelling language, and for this reason it is at the core 
of DCR graphs to develop an intuitive and understandable tool[2]. DCR are aiming to bring a 
powerful modelling tool to domain experts, to do so they must implement the right features for 
making it comprehensible to the users. A recent tool added to DCR is aimed at addressing this. 
This tool is called Monocle. The tool gives the ability to create bi-directional linkage between 
textual process descriptions and the process models. This adds traceability and a more 
pronounced connection between the description and the model[3]. However this feature also 
requires the modeller to take effort and create these connections. Monocle creates a new way of 
modelling that is an addition to DCRs already established method of modelling.  This creates 
some potential new dynamics of how users chooses to model. 
In this thesis the Monocle tool is being investigated to understand how users engage with 
Monocle and how the interplay in the software is inﬂuenced by this new feature. It also 
investigates why users engage with Monocle in the discovered manner and what the beneﬁts and 
challenges of Monocle are. To investigate these questions an exploratory study is conducted to 
examine how users create models. Eye tracking is used alongside interviews to collect data about 
their usage and experience. A novel method is then applied where process mining is used to 
analyse the eye tracking data to gain insight to users viewing patterns 
!1
==PAGE:8==
1.1 Research Questions 
The aim of this study is to investigate how Monocle is being used and why it is being used in the 
apparent manner. To drive the investigation two research questions has been established. 
1.1.1 Research question 1 
The main question to investigate is how Monocle tool is being used and how it is being used in 
relation to the remaining interface. This is done to understand which functionalities of Monocle is 
used and which functionalities of the remaining interface is used during modelling. 
RQ1: How does users engage with a modelling task using Monocle tool? 
1.1.2 Research question 2 
Secondly it is interesting to understand why Monocle and the modeller are being used in the 
apparent manner. To examine this the beneﬁts and challenges of using Monocle can be used to 
understand why users engage the way they do.
RQ2: What are the beneﬁts and challenges of using Monocle? 
For the remainder of this report the two research questions will be refer to as RQ1 and RQ2
1.2 Structure of Report 
Chapter 2 will provide background knowledge and theory for the project. It will present relevant 
theory for the methods used and present the software under examination. Chapter 3 will go over 
the approach taken for designing an experiment. Chapter 4 and 5 will go over each of the 
conducted experiment in detail. Chapter 6 explains how the raw data was prepared and how it 
was analysed. Chapter 7 presents the results from the analysis. Chapter 8 will discuss the results 
and the methods used and suggest future work for the project. Chapter 9 will conclude and 
summarise the project. 
!2
==PAGE:9==
2 Background 
To delve further into the project it is necessary to investigate the underlying theory. This will be 
presented in this chapter to create a foundation for the project. The background presented is ﬁrst 
business process modelling as it is a fundamental aspects of this project. Secondly the software 
DCR graphs will be examined to get an understanding of the software in focus. Finally the 
methods and tools for gathering and analysing data will be examined. These methods are eye 
tracking, process mining and qualitative research. Each topics will be presented in light of their 
relevance to this project. 
2.1 Business Process Modelling 
Business process modelling (or short process modelling) plays a central role for this project as the 
software to be investigated is a process modelling tool but also because process mining, used to 
evaluate the software, is related to process modelling.. The basics of process modelling are 
therefore relevant for understanding and diving deeper in both areas. 
A process model is a formalised model representation of a business process[4]. The model is 
represented with a collection of process activities which are connected to achieve a common 
goal[4]. An example of a process model can be seen in ﬁgure 2.1. Come up with an idea, write project 
proposal and reﬁne idea are examples of activities and the arrows are relations between them. 
Figure 2.1: A process model created in the DCR environment. 
!3
==PAGE:10==
The type of process modelled can be anything but as the name indicate the tool is often used for 
business processes or for software processes. Process models can be created by experts who 
investigates the business aspect to be mapped and then develops a model from this knowledge[5]. 
Process models can also be created in other ways such as automatic discovery which will be 
discussed in section 2.4. Process models can help people understand the process of businesses and 
be used to improve performance. It can also be used to simulating alternatives to the current 
process[4]. A process model must often capture several ways in which sequences of activities can 
be executed. It is therefore necessary to have a process modelling language which can deﬁne 
relationships between activities. A sequence of activity executions is known as a trace[5]. There 
exists many different process modelling language. Each language follow unique notations and 
rules. Depending on the language used models may look and behave differently and is therefore 
non-trivial to select a language[5]. Popular languages include BPMN and EPC[6]. 
2.1.1 Declarative and Imperative Models 
In process modelling there is distinction between imperative- and declarative modelling 
languages. DCR graphs is based on a declarative modelling language which is an important 
characteristics of the software (See section 2.3). The differentiation has roots in programming 
where imperative focuses on how a program operates and declarative focuses on what the 
program should achieve, without being concerned with how it is achieved[7]. In process 
modelling imperative is characterised by an ‘inside-to-outside’ approach[7]. This means that all 
alternatives to how the model should be executed needs to be explicitly deﬁned. Declarative 
modelling is characterised by an ‘outside-to-inside’ approach[7]. In such models it is not speciﬁed 
exactly how the model should work but only the most essential characteristics are explained. By 
default such models can be executed in any way and restrictions and constraints are added to the 
model to deﬁne its boundaries[7]. Historically imperative languages have been most widely used 
and the major languages can all be deﬁned as imperative[6]. However the value of using 
declarative languages is emerging within the research area of process modelling[7]. Declarative 
languages are more ﬂexible than imperative and can therefore capture more possible traces with a 
simpler model. The disadvantage of declarative languages is a general poorer understandability, 
this means that reading and understanding a declarative model is often more difﬁcult than an 
imperative model[8].
It has also been shown that the information in the process to be modelled can potentially 
inﬂuence which type of language is best suited[8]. A distinction can be made between sequential- 
and circumstantial information[8]. Sequential information is information about how one 
particular action leads to a particular outcome[8]. A sequential statement could be “Activity X 
must be executed before activity Y can be executed”. Circumstantial information is information 
about the overall conditions and circumstances which produces an  certain outcome[8]. It is 
therefore often about whether conditions have or have not occurred. An example of 
!4
==PAGE:11==
circumstantial information could be: “Whenever activity X has been executed the process can be 
terminated by executing activity Y”. 
2.1.2 Hybrid Model Representations 
As mentioned the issue of declarative modelling languages is that they are generally more difﬁcult 
to read and understand than imperative languages. To alleviate this issue hybrid representations 
can be useful. A hybrid representation can be a combination of different modelling languages or 
it can be the combination of modelling notation with textual annotation[9]. DCR can be deﬁned 
as a having a hybrid model representation as there are several notation methods to assist the user. 
One of these notation features is Monocle which will be explained in details in section 2.2.1. 
2.2 DCR graphs 
DCR Graphs (stands for Dynamic Condition Response graphs) is a software developed by the 
Process and System Models research group lead by Thomas Hildebrandt at the IT University of 
Denmark and Exformatics A/S[10]. The tool is created for knowledge workers to help digitise 
business processes and model workﬂows[11]. Speciﬁcally it is being developed as part of the 
EcoKnow project which is focusing on digitising case management processes in local 
governments[12].  By using the tool users are able to create process models through an interactive 
editor tool. The basic view of the DCR interface (called DCR Designer) can be seen in ﬁgure 2.2. 
The main window in ﬁgure 2.2 will be referred to as the modeller throughout this report. From 
the modeller a model can be created adding activities from the left column. The activities can 
then be name in the right side menu. Relations between the activities can be created by selecting 
an activity and then right clicking on another activity to create a relation to it. The modeller also 
supports other features, such as the ability to nest activities within other activities, however these 
will be disregarded as it has not been investigated in this project. Besides the modeller the software 
also features hybrid representation with the simulator for testing the model and Monocle for 
textual highlights. DCR is based on a declarative process modelling language. This is a central 
aspect of the tool since it is the belief of the developers that the ﬂexibility can beneﬁt case workers 
as it allows for more workﬂow executions in a model[2]. Processes often needs to be updated or 
changed throughout the lifetime of the process. Imperative languages such as BPMN are very 
rigid and require more process updates due to the nature of the language[13]. The ﬂexibility of 
declarative notation can therefore limit the workload needed from the case workers. A high 
priority for DCR is therefore to compensate for the complexity associated with a declarative 
languages[2]. One way this is addressed is the hybrid representations; Monocle and The 
Simulator. 
!5
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.2: The basic interface view of  DCR Designer. 
The DCR language's core notation is based on activities, activity stats, roles and relations[14]. 
Activities are the nodes which resembles actions performed in the model. An activity can either be 
in the state of included or excluded. While an activity is excluded it cannot be executed. Roles are 
the actors who perform the activities. A role can be attributed to each activity. Relations are the 
edges between activities that deﬁne the constraints and relationships between the activities. In 
ﬁgure 2.2 we can see each of the elements e.g. Receive invoice is an activity performed by the role 
Company this has two relations to the Register invoice activity. In DCR there are 5 main relations: 
condition, response, include, exclude and milestone. A relation must originate in one activity and 
point towards another activity. To deﬁne the relations this will be referred to as the ﬁrst- and 
second activity 
Condition is a commonly used relation which restricts the second activity from being executed 
unless the ﬁrst activity is executed. The second activity can also become available if the ﬁrst 
activity becomes excluded. The response relation makes the second activity pending after the ﬁrst 
activity has been executed. When pending an exclamation marks appears on the activity which 
means the activity awaits execution. The include relation includes the second activity to the model 
when the ﬁrst activity is executed. The exclude excludes the second activity from the model when 
the ﬁrst is executed.  The milestone relations restricts the second activity if the ﬁrst activity is 
pending. The restriction can also be surpassed by excluding the pending activity. By default all 
!6
==PAGE:13==
activities can be executed and all traces are possible but by adding relations the process becomes 
restricted. In ﬁgure 2.3 each of the relation can be seen together with their description.
Figure 2.3: The 5 different relations together with their deﬁnitions taken from the DCR wikipedia . 
1
2.2.1 Monocle 
Monocle (formerly known as Highlighter Tool) is a new feature introduced into the DCR graphs 
environment in the summer 2018. In an article concerning tool the developers state the following 
about the tool: “The purpose of the tool is to allow domain experts with some familiarity with the 
modelling notation, to easily construct and maintain declarative models”[3]. Monocle is a feature 
that can be opened in a window next to the modeller. Monocle can hold the textual process 
description and be used to build the model. By highlighting parts of the text activities, roles and 
relations can be directly generated into the model. This creates a permanent highlight of the text 
piece selected. Model parts created this way becomes bi-directionally linked to the highlight, this 
means that when selecting either the part in the model or the highlight in the text, the 
corresponding element also becomes selected. It is therefore a method to directly extract the 
process model and reduce the gap from the textual description to the model[3]. A view of the 
interface when having the tool opened can be seen in ﬁgure 2.4. With the tool it is also possible to 
link parts of the model that has already been created by assigning elements to text highlights. 
Deﬁning the text to highlight is the job of user and can vary depending on their preferences. 
They can chose to highlight one word or a whole sentence for relation. Sometimes it can also be 
necessary to highlight text parts such as a comma when a constraint is only implicitly mentioned 
in the textual process. 
 https://wiki.dcrgraphs.net/wiki/70/graph
1
!7
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.4: The interface with Monocle app opened. The highlighted words indicate the parts of  the text that has 
been directly linked to the model. 
When highlighting a text piece a pop-up menu appears where the user can select to either add it 
as an activity, role or relation. Creating activities in this manner makes the activity appear in the 
modeller. Roles become available in the menu to the right of the modeller. When adding relations 
there is an intermediate step where a new menu appears in place of the text. Here the user needs 
to select the relation she wants to add and the activities which the relation is coming from and 
going to. The screen view of this can be seen in ﬁgure 2.5. On the left in Monocle is the ﬁlter. 
This displays all the activities, roles and relations in the model. Using Monocle, the user is able to 
perform the same actions as with the modeller. Monocle therefore adds a choice to the user where 
she is able to deﬁne her own modelling strategy. 
As mentioned Monocle is a tool developed to both help during model creation and model 
maintenance. A user may not create models in a sequential manner. Instead she might take an 
opportunistic approach which requires re-inspection and re-comprehension of his work[7]. It is 
imagined that Monocle is beneﬁcial in such cases and potentially many others. However Monocle 
is a novel alignment for declarative modelling[3]. There is therefore little research directly related 
to be found about the impact of such a tool.
!8
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.5: The view of  the Monocle relation adder. 
2.2.2 The Simulator 
The Simulator is a feature which allows the user to test their model. When running the simulator 
unrestricted activities of the model can be executed and the ﬂow of the model can be tested. The 
simulator shows a log of activities by default however it is also possible to render the graph while 
simulating. The interface when running the simulator can be seen in ﬁgure 2.6.  
!9
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.6: The view of  the simulator without render turned on. 
2.3 Eye tracking 
Eye tracking is the process of measuring a persons eye movements. It has been showed that the 
innate characteristics of the eyes can reveal information about a persons physical and mental 
processes[15]. The method has been widely used in the ﬁeld of human-computer interaction and 
for studying usability of websites and interfaces[15]. The most dominant method of eye tracking 
is done through pupil and corneal reﬂection tracking. This method is known as PCCR; pupil 
center corneal reﬂection[16]. Eye tracking commonly uses infrared- camera and light source since 
it is necessary to measure the pupil and corneal reﬂection with very high precision[16]. Using a 
regular light provides less contrast for identifying the pupil and corneal reﬂection. Additionally 
other light sources can interfere and cause issues for eye tracking if not based on infrared light. 
Eye tracking can be deﬁned as a non-intrusive modality as neither the light or camera causes 
nuisance to the user. 
In this project eye tracking will be used to evaluate and understand the viewing patterns and 
visual attention of the users. Eye tracking will be used to understand which parts of the interface 
the participants have been looking at and how they have been moving their gaze between 
different parts of the interface. To understand this Areas of Interests(AOIs) will be used. The 
following sections will focus on explaining AOIs and the relevant measurements related to AOIs. 
!10
==PAGE:17==
2.3.1 Measurements 
The book Eye Tracking: A Comprehensive Guide to Methods and Measures presents  over 100 measures 
which can be used from eye tracking data[16]. The relevant measures to investigate will  for any 
given study depend on the research question. This study will be focusing on extracting AOIs for 
creating process maps, this section will therefore only be focussing on the measures relevant to 
AOIs. 
Figure 2.7: In the image we see both ﬁxations and saccades with the circles being ﬁxations and lines being 
saccades. A map like this is known as a scan path and the numbers indicate the order of  ﬁxations. 
2.3.1.1 Fixations 
It is called a ﬁxation when we focus our eyes on a narrow point in space. The focus area of our 
eye spans less than 2 degrees of our total visual ﬁeld of over 200 degrees[16]. A ﬁxation can last 
from between 100 ms to several seconds. It is generally considered that the attention of the person 
is put to the same object as the person is ﬁxating on[17]. This is known as the eye-mind 
hypothesis. However this can only hold true as long as the information the person is looking at is 
relevant for the task at hand[17]. The length of ﬁxations can be due to various internal reasons. 
In ﬁgure 2.7 we can see a set of ﬁxations in a scene where each circle represents a ﬁxation and the 
size represents the length of the ﬁxation.
!11
==PAGE:18==
2.3.1.2 Saccades 
Saccades are quick movements of the eye from one ﬁxation to a new. This is the fastest movement 
the body can produce and usually takes between 30-80 ms depending on the length of the 
saccade[16]. It is generally considered that the eye is blind during a saccade and unable to take in 
new information. It has been shown that saccades rarely take the shortest path between two 
points and that the path often have a curvature. Furthermore a saccade rarely hits right on the 
intended target and therefore a saccade is often followed by a smaller correcting movement called 
a glissade[16]. In ﬁgure 2.7 we can see the saccades between ﬁxations represented by the lines. 
2.3.2 Areas of Interest 
AOIs are segregations in the stimulus deﬁned by the researchers. AOIs are a commonly used since 
it is a useful tool which can improve the analysis of the eye tracking data[18]. The areas are 
deﬁned by what is being investigated and by the user interface. Deﬁning the AOIs is not 
elementary and how they are divided will have an inﬂuence on the analysis. It is therefore 
important to consider a meaningful division. AOIs should always be deﬁned before the analysis as 
post-hoc analysis is subject to data dredging[16]. AOIs can either be assigned statically or 
dynamically depending on the interface and whether it is static or dynamic. A static interface will 
often be preferable as dynamic AOIs requires manual encoding. Implementing AOIs in your eye 
tracking study opens up to new ways of analysing the data. You can compare metrics between 
AOIs, such as the number of ﬁxations or the average length of ﬁxations in different AOIs. 
Central measures which will be used for creating process maps are dwells and transitions. The 
dwell is deﬁned as the time from the users eye enter an AOI and until leaving it again. This means 
any number of ﬁxations and saccades can occur within a dwell as long as the saccades land within 
the AOI. When a saccade lands outside the AOI the dwell ends. Note that a dwell is also referred 
to as a AOI hit. A transitions is the passing from one AOI to another. Again several ﬁxations and 
saccades can occur before the users gaze enters an AOI. This means that if signiﬁcant parts of an 
interface has not been assigned to AOIs some behaviours will be left unexplained in the analysis. 
2.4 Process Mining 
Process mining combines element from process modelling with elements from data science. 
Process mining allows for the automatic generation and identiﬁcation of process models. It is 
called discovery (or Automated Business Process Discovery) when a new process model is 
generated by an algorithm from a dataset[5]. In order to discover a process model an event log is 
needed. An event log is a type of dataset extracted from a recorded process. An event log carries 
information about the executed activities and for each activity a timestamp for when it was 
!12
==PAGE:19==
executed. It also contains a case ID. The case ID relates to the instance of the process. These 3 
attributes are considered as the basics of an event log to create a process model[5]. An example 
of an event log can be seen in ﬁgure 2.8. This event log is a simpliﬁed version of an AOI event 
log. In the log the AOIs are activities and the participant is the case ID. A 1 indicate which AOI is 
being looked at. In process mining this transfers to the activity being executed. 0 indicate AOIs 
not looked at and -1 indicate inactive AOIs. By discovering a process model from an AOI event 
log we can see the pattern of how the participant have been viewing the AOIs. 
Figure 2.8: An example of  AOI event log. 
An event log can contain various other attributes depending on what is being investigated from 
the process. Further attributes can be useful when analysing the model as it enables to ﬁlter the 
model based on these attributes. There exists various algorithms for discovering process models 
which also discovers in different process languages. The algorithm used is referred to as the miner. 
Currently there exists several tools made for discovering process models and analysing them. In 
this project the tool Disco will be used for discovering and analysing process models from the AOI 
event log.
2.4.1 Disco 
Disco is a process mining toolkit which has been designed to easily import data. Disco allows for 
discovering models without expert knowledge of process mining and the underlying 
algorithms[19]. Disco creates graphical representations from the provided event log to models 
called process maps. The miner algorithm used in Disco to create models is based in the Fuzzy 
miner[20]. The Fuzzy miner is a mining algorithm that introduced the map metaphor and called 
!13
==PAGE:20==
its model maps[20]. The language used for process maps is rather simple. By default Disco 
displays the absolute frequencies of the activities and transitions. The transitions are indicated 
with weighted arrows. A higher weight indicates more transitions which is shown by a thicker 
arrow. An Example of a process map can be seen in ﬁgure 2.9.  
Figure 2.9: Example of  a process map discovered in Disco. 
Besides the graphical map representation Disco has several other features for analysing the data. 
The data can be ﬁltered based on the different attributes such as case ID, activities, timeframes or 
any other attribute which has been deﬁned in the event log. This enables for comparisons between 
various groups in the event log. Disco also includes statistics about the data. Here various 
information can be inferred about the different cases and activities to compare them to one 
another. The view of the statistics in Disco can be seen in ﬁgure 2.10. This is useful in an 
exploratory study as the data can be investigated from different angles. 
!14
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.10: The statistics view of  Disco. 
2.5 Qualitative Research 
Qualitative research is a naturalistic type of scientiﬁc research that focusses on subjective data 
rather than numerical data[21]. It often takes an exploratory approach to understanding why a 
phenomenon occurs[21]. In this project it will be used to gain deeper insight to understanding 
why users engage with the interface the way they do. To do so verbal data will be collected and 
analysed. 
2.5.1 Verbal Data 
Complementing eye tracking data with verbal data is widely used for usability studies[16]. Having 
subjective data adds validity as it enables triangulation between data to ensure what is observed in 
the eye tracking data is also conﬁrmed in the verbal data[16]. Two frequently used methods of 
collecting verbal data within human-computer interaction and usability studies are think-aloud 
and interviews.
Think-aloud is a method in which the users are asked to explain their thoughts as they are 
performing a given task. The participants are asked to remove their ﬁlter from though to speech 
and just articulate whatever pops into their mind[22]. This method captures the immediate 
response and reaction from the participants. However this method is very intrusive and will highly 
inﬂuence the test as the participants attention will be divided between the task and explaining 
their thoughts. It also requires certain effort from the participant as it might not come natural to 
!15
==PAGE:22==
speak your every thought. Furthermore in relation to eye tracking it has been suspected that the 
act of speaking can alter eye movement and also make recordings less accurate[16]. Because of 
these issues a retrospective think-aloud is often proposed for eye tracking. In this method the eye 
tracking recording is played back to the user after the test. While watching the participant is asked 
to recall their thought during the moments in the videos and explain them. It is considered that 
the participants memory of the moments will be enhanced by having the video as a reminder. It 
should be noted that this method will greatly increase the length of the test [16]. Another 
common method used in evaluation studies are interviews. Interviews can range from structured 
to unstructured. In a structured interview the interviewer only asks a list of predeﬁned questions 
whereas in an unstructured interview there are no pre-made questions and the interviewer guides 
the interview as it progresses. In between is the semi-structured interview which is based on a set 
of predeﬁned questions but as the conversation evolves the interviewer can chose to ask questions 
to probe on arising subjects [23]. Interviews with less structure often have greater depth and 
breadth as they can explore unforeseen topics and are very useful when exploring an unfamiliar 
problem domain[23]. However less structure also requires more skill from the interviewer who 
must be able to ask the right questions. A common drawback of the interview and retrospective 
think aloud is the problem of recall. Only what the participants remember from the test will be 
reported [23].
2.5.2 Qualitative Coding 
Qualitative coding (coding in short) is a method which can be used to analyse qualitative data. It 
can be used to understand the data and can potentially be used to construct a theory about the 
data which is know as grounded theory[24]. The method has a very open framework which 
means that the method provides a set of tools which the researcher can use as they want[25]. 
Coding can therefore be done in different ways as the process is highly inﬂuenced by factors such 
as the data and the research question[25]. It is a tool to help researchers reach their goal rather 
than it is an strictly predeﬁned path that she must follow. Coding is an inductive method where a 
bottom-up approach is usually taken for developing an understanding of the data. It can therefore 
also be seen as an exploratory method which let ﬁndings arise from the data The data used for 
coding can come in numerous forms and examples are: text transcribed from an interview, video, 
photos, websites, e-mail correspondence, journals, documents, ﬁeld notes[26]. Coding is done 
though a number of steps. And can generally be divided into four steps; coding, sorting, theme-
ing, theorising[25]. 
In the ﬁrst step pieces of data are assigned codes which can be words or sentences that captures 
the essence of the given data. This step is known as the ﬁrst coding cycle[26]. Throughout a 
dataset the same code will often be applied many times to different data. This is one of the goals 
of coding as it condenses the data and reveals the frequency of different topics[25]. Coding is 
therefore the process of linking the data and getting to the underlying concepts. There are many 
!16
==PAGE:23==
methods of coding and Saldana presents 29 methods in the book The Coding Manual for Qualitative 
Researchers for ﬁrst cycle coding[26]. It should be noted that you are not limited to choosing one 
coding method and that you can encode your data in several different ways to view your data 
through different lenses. A commonly used method for ﬁrst coding cycle is initial coding. This 
method looks at the data openly and breaks it down into discrete parts. The goal is to remain 
open to all possible directions which the data could lead to[26]. After the ﬁrst coding cycle comes 
sorting. In this step you group codes together and see how all the codes you have generated relate 
to each other. The third step is the second coding cycle. Similar to the ﬁrst cycle, there also exists 
different methods for coding the second cycle. Saldana presents 6 methods [26]. The methods are 
however similar since they aim to develop a sense of categorical, thematic and conceptual 
understanding from the ﬁrst cycle codes[26]. Axial coding is a commonly implemented which 
divides the codes into categories by the codes properties and dimensions[26]. In the ﬁnal step a 
theory of the data can be developed. This step is what deﬁnes grounded theory.
!17
==PAGE:24==
3 Research Method 
In this section the approach taken for conducting experiment will be explained. It will start with 
discussing the overall method of an exploratory study. Then the more concrete aspects of the 
study will be explained. The task for the participants will be presented along with the decisions 
made for the design Then the methods for collecting data from the experiment will be presented 
along with the approaches. 
3.1 Exploratory Research 
To investigate Monocle an exploratory approach was chosen. In an exploratory study a subject is 
examined to hopefully gain new insights. This means there are no pre made hypotheses which are 
to be conﬁrmed or rejected. Instead a broad research question is deﬁned which allows interesting 
aspects or issue to arise from the data. This indicate a bottom-up approach where the research 
should try to avoid having pre conceived ideas of what to look for and instead be open minded. 
Findings from an exploratory study are often not ﬁnal answers but rather indications of 
interesting aspects in the data and about the subject. If the study ﬁnds interesting aspects then 
these ﬁndings can be taken further in following studies to make more evidential studies. The goal 
of exploratory research is therefore to ﬁnd hypotheses rather than testing them[27]. This study 
will therefore not be searching for statistical signiﬁcances in the data. Instead it will try and look at 
the data from many different angles to see if there is anything interesting arising. These ﬁndings 
will then be reported and discussed. It is then the possibility that future research might ﬁnd ideas 
or inspiration from this work to use for new studies on the subject. Unlike a descriptive study 
where precision in the research- design and questions is important to eliminate biases and noise 
an exploratory study should be more open and ﬂexible to be able to consider many different 
aspects of the phenomenon[27]. 
3.2 Task Design
In order to learn about Monocle it was necessary to design a task in which the participants would 
be using Monocle. Since Monocle is made to help both for model creation and model 
maintenance it was also necessary to ﬁgure out what should be the focus, as this would highly 
inﬂuence the design of the task. This led to a discussion with the developers of Monocle about 
what would be most valuable to investigate. It was decided to keep model creation as the focus 
since it is the most important aspect of the tool and what the tool is originally intended for. 
For creating a model it was necessary to have a textual description which the participant could 
model and highlight from. Since DCR graphs is designed for declarative model creation it was 
!18
==PAGE:25==
decided to design a circumstantial description for the task. In previous work regarding declarative 
process modelling a circumstantial model, based on constraints, had been proposed[28]. This 
process model description was used and adapted to ﬁt in the context of DCR Graphs. The 
process description deﬁned how to submit a project proposal. In order to have a suitable text, it 
was necessary to change the formulation of a few sentences in the description. This ensured that 
activities and relations were explicitly mentioned and could be directly linked to words in the text. 
Additionally one activity were changed from language check to check for plagiarism. This was done to 
make a model that could support all the 5 different types of relations, in order to have a 
comprehensive evaluation of all the DCR constraints. Furthermore it was decided to add 
invariants which the participant would have to check off after building the model. The invariants 
were additional constraints which could be in the model but had not been explicitly mentioned in 
the textual description. These were added to include constraints which should not be added with 
Monocle. They could also be used to see whether the participants would add invariant from their 
own knowledge of the process domain. 
Table 3.1: The textual process description created for the experiments. 
Table 3.1 shows the textual description and the 5 invariants which the participants had to 
implement during the test. It was also decided that the test would let the participant freely chose 
how to use the modeller rather than oblige the participants to use it. The drawback of this was 
!19
The process of writing a project proposal starts when the author comes up with an initial idea. 
Afterwards, it is possible to write a project proposal and to reﬁne the idea at any time. After having 
written the project proposal it becomes possible to check for plagiarism. Every time a new proposal is 
written, the author has the chance of checking for plagiarism once. It is possible to cancel the 
proposal if it turns out that the idea is infeasible. Otherwise, as soon as the project proposal is 
described suﬃciently well, it is possible for the author to submit the proposal. Note that a proposal 
can be submitted only once.                         
Invariants: 
1.
Ensure that it only becomes possible to cancel the proposal after the author has come up with an 
initial idea 
2.
Ensure that the proposal cannot be cancelled after submitting and that it cannot be submitted 
after cancelling 
3.
Ensure that checking for plagiarism can be done once and only once every time the proposal is 
written 
4.
Ensure that the proposal always needs to be updated when the idea has been reﬁned 
5.
Ensure that if the idea has been reﬁned, then the proposal cannot be submitted before it has 
been updated 
==PAGE:26==
that participants might choose to ignore Monocle completely. However in light of RQ1 the 
investigation wanted to explore how they engage with Monocle and if the approach would be 
forced upon them the question could not really explore how the participants would naturally 
engage with Monocle. 
3.3 Data Collection Methods and Design 
The overall methodology for capturing and analysing data was deﬁned at the beginning of the 
project. However it was still need to deﬁne how speciﬁcally these methods would be used and 
implemented and if there were any additional data which could be gathered to assist the analysis. 
This section will go over each of the methods chosen to investigate the research questions. It also 
explains how it was implemented to the experiment.
3.3.1 Models
Reviewing a process model in DCR graphs can reveal information about the model builders 
approach to creating it. It can be seen how they created the model; which activities, relations and 
roles did they create. It can also be seen which parts were connected to Monocle and which parts 
were created directly in the modeller. Since RQ1 is about investigating how they engaged with 
Monocle, this information can complement the eye tracking data for investigating this question. 
The models can also potentially be used to extract other information how they made the model 
and how consistent it is with the textual description.For each participant the model will be saved 
with their participant number so it can be used to examine their model during the data analysis. 
3.3.2 Eye tracking 
As mentioned process maps based on eye tracking AOIs will be used to capture the viewing 
patterns of the participants. The interface will be divided into AOIs and the data will be used to 
identify AOI- dwells and transitions. This information will then be used to discover process maps 
using Disco. These maps will then serve as the main driving force force for investigating RQ1. 
3.3.3 Interviews 
For gathering verbal data and investigating RQ2 interviews were chosen over retrospective think 
aloud as it was expected that the test would take a considerable amount of time (more than 20 
minutes) and that doubling this time would be infeasible. To keep some reference for the 
participants the model and highlights they had created would be present during the interview. 
Following the exploratory nature of the experiment it was also chosen to perform semi-structured 
interviews which allowed for unforeseen topics to emerge.
!20
==PAGE:27==
6 overall questions were created for the interview These questions served as the main structure for 
the interview and would be asked to all participants. Each question then had a list of subquestions 
which would serve to either probe in on a given answer or to encourage the participant to 
continue talking. The 6 questions and subquestions can be seen in table 3.2. 
Table 3.2: The interview questions used for gathering verbal data. 
!21
1. Did you use Monocle to drive the modelling? 
•
Was it the main tool used for creating the model? 
2. Could you create all activities and relations using Monocle or did you have to use the 
modeller for certain aspects? 
•
If no; 
•
why was using Monocle not enough? Brieﬂy go over your approach and explain what happened and what 
you did 
•
If yes; 
•
So you felt you were able to create an adequate model with only Monocle? 
•
How many of you did and felt the same? (For case workers) 
•
Follow up for both 
•
Were there any DCR relations you could not easily identify from the text? 
•
Were you in a situation where you had to extend the model with activities or relations that were not 
explicitly mentioned in the text? 
•
For what purpose have you used the modeller? 
•
Have you used and for what purpose have you used the simulator? 
•
In what order have you used the tools? 
3. How did Monocle help you in the modelling task? 
•
Can you mention the features that were useful in monocle 
•
How does the Monocle help you to identify important information from the text. 
4. What challenges did you face using Monocle? 
•
Were there anything you were not able to do, using the tool? 
•
Could you think of features that could be improved? 
5. Was there anything you especially liked or disliked about using the Monocle tool? 
•
Something that worked well or not so well 
6. Any Further comments? 
•
Any points you wanted to make but did not feel you could express from my other questions?
==PAGE:28==
In the ﬁrst question the participants were asked if Monocle was the main driving force for 
building the model. This was asked to get their initial view on what they used to create the model. 
In the second question they would be asked about how they created relations and activities and 
whether they used Monocle or the modeller. This ﬁrst part of the question was mostly related to 
RQ1 but was necessary to answer in order to understand the individual participant to better 
understand their coming answers and to ask the right follow up questions. By explaining how they 
modelled it would also lead up to naturally explaining why they did so (the second part of the 
question). This would force the participants to reﬂect on their reasoning behind their modelling 
strategy. Having the participants explain their approach also gave some data which could be 
triangulated with the observations from the eye tracking data. Question 3, 4 and 5 would directly 
ask about the the positive and negative aspects about using Monocle. In between each question 
the sub questions that suited their answers would be asked and also new questions would be asked 
if the participants would mention something interesting that had not been expected.
3.3.4 Questionnaire 
When performing an eye tracking experiment it is necessary to know whether the participant has 
any eye conditions as these might cause issues which can contaminate the data collected[16]. For 
this reason a questionnaire was added to the experiment. The questionnaire would both serve to 
expound any eye related conditions but also to gather basic demographic information about the 
participants. Thirdly a set of questions were added about the participants experience with DCR 
graphs. These additional information also had potential to be used in the analysis as it could 
potentially distinguish participants into different groups of behaviour or experience. The full 
questionnaire can be found in Appendix 11.4.
3.3.5 Galvanic Skin Response
Galvanic Skin Response (GSR) is the measurement of the electrical conductance of skin using 
electrodes. The electrodes are usually put on two ﬁngers. Variation caused by sweat glands are 
then measured. These variations have a correlation with the arousal of the person being 
measured[16]. It was decided to measure GSR of the participant since supplementing this with 
eye tracking can give insight to the cognitive load and emotional response of the users[16]. This 
was therefore tracked as an extra data source that could be investigated in future work. However it 
was not used for the analysis of this work and to keep conciseness it has not been mentioned in 
the background chapter.  
!22
==PAGE:29==
4 Experiment One 
Experiment one can be considered the main experiment. The experiment was conducted 
individually in a controlled environment where the users would ﬁrst be introduced to DCR, then 
created a model and ﬁnally participate in an interview. This chapter will go over the details of the 
experiment. 
4.1 Participants
The participants which participated in the experiment were recruited through convenience 
sampling. As the test would require the participants to create a process model the recruitment was 
focussed on obtaining participants who had some previous exposure to process modelling or at 
least some experience with programming. A total of 10 participants were recruited for the 
experiment with the majority being computer science students from DTU.
4.2 Task Description 
The description of the main task can be seen in table 3.1 in research method. However as the 
participants had only slight- or no previous experience with using DCR graphs, it was necessary 
to familiarise them with the tool before throwing them into the main task. To do so a 
familiarisation session, in which the participants would learn the program, was designed. The 
familiarisation started with a slideshow in which the basics of DCR was presented. Afterwards the 
5 relations were explained to the participant using the modeller. This was done by creating the 
relation, then explaining it and ﬁnally simulating it to show its behaviour. After this the 
participants were taken through the ﬁnal part of the familiarisation in which they would build a 
model. This task was designed to resemble the actual task and contained a process description text 
which the participants would model. The process was based on children’s show called Postman 
Pat  in which a mailman delivers letters (See appendix 11.3 for the process). This was chosen as 
2
the process as it would be easy to comprehend the process. Thereby the participants could focus 
their attention on learning to build the model rather than understanding the process and its 
semantics. The task was divided into two parts where each part contained a short process 
description and one invariant. In the ﬁrst part the facilitator would take the lead and create the 
ﬁrst two roles, activities and relations while discussing it with the participant. After this the 
facilitator would hand the mouse to the participant and let them continue while still assisting and 
discussing the task. After completing the ﬁrst part the facilitator would ask the participant to 
continue on to the second part. Throughout this part the facilitator would act more passive and 
only intervene if the participants asked for help or were struggling. The second part was 
 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Postman_Pat
2
!23
==PAGE:30==
deliberately designed to be similar to the ﬁrst part. Throughout the session participants were 
taught and encouraged to model with Monocle and shown to add invariants using the modeller. 
During the main task the participant were given a help window which would display the relations 
and a description of them. This was to help them in case they forgot how a relation behaved. The 
placement of the help window along with the rest of the interface setup can be seen in ﬁgure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Interface setup for participants. 
4.3 Procedure 
The experiment took place in a designated eye tracking lab at The Technical University of 
Denmark between October 29 and November 6, 2018. The experiment had three steps: 
Familiarisation session, the test and an interview session. In the ﬁrst step the participants would be 
introduced to DCR graphs as explained above. Afterwards the participant would be asked to read 
and sign a consent form allowing for usage of the data collected during the experiment. The 
consent form can be found in appendix 11.4. Then the participants had to ﬁll out a questionnaire.  
!24
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.2: Setup during the ﬁrst step. F indicate position of  the facilitator and P indicate the position of  the 
participant. The familiarisation process model was created on PC 1 while the slideshow which contained info about 
the 5 relations were on PC 2. 
After ﬁnishing the questionnaire the participant were asked to move over to the eye tracking 
computer for the second step. Here they were ﬁrst equipped with the GSR tracker and then the 
eye tracker was calibrated. After calibrating the eye tracker the test would start. Once the 
participants felt they had ﬁnished building the model they would notify the facilitator who would 
then provide the participant with the invariants. When the participants felt they had checked of 
all invariants they would again notify the facilitator. The facilitator would then turn of the eye 
tracker and GSR device.  
Figure 4.3: Setup during the second step. F indicate position of  the facilitator and P indicate the position of  the 
participant. The facilitator placed himself  out of  sight of  the participant but where he was able to overview the 
participant and PC 3 in case of  any issues. 
!25
==PAGE:32==
In the third step the facilitator would sit next to the participant while still having their model 
visible on PC 3 and conduct the interview. The interview was recorded on PC 1 After the 
interview the experiment would be over. 
Figure 4.4: Setup during the third step. F indicate position of  the facilitator and P indicate the position of  the 
participant. The facilitator sat next to the participant to ask questions while using PC 1 to audio record. The model 
was still visible on PC 3 for the participant or facilitator to comment on. 
4.4 Instruments 
For tracking the participants gaze the Tobii Pro x3-120 eye tracker[29] was used. The eye tracker 
uses PCCR with an infrared camera and illumination to capture the eye. The eye tracker comes 
with an external processing unit in which the eye tracking processing of the raw data can be 
calculated. 
The eye tracker was used in combination with Tobii Studio (now named Tobii Pro Studio). This 
software allows for setting up and managing experiments. It also allows for various analysis of the 
data such as creating and analysing AOIs, segmenting the video, attention maps and other various 
statistics[30]. 
To ensure that the interface had same dimensions for all participants the program Sizer  was used 
3
to adjust the size of the Modeller, Monocle and the help window.
Galvanic skin response was tracked using the Shimmer3 GSR+ Unit using their Consensys 
software[31].
 http://www.brianapps.net/sizer4/
3
!26
==PAGE:33==
5 Experiment Two 
A second experiment was conducted in connection with a workshop concerning Monocle tool. 
The workshop was an introduction to Monocle for caseworkers who had previous experience with 
DCR graphs. 7 caseworkers participated in the experiment. The experiment was designed to be 
similar to experiment one, but some changes were necessary due to the setting and timeframe of 
the workshop. Since all participants modelled at the same time eye tracking was not possible and 
instead screen recordings were captured.
5.1 Participants
The participants of experiment two consisted of 7 caseworkers working at Syddjurs municipality. 
The caseworkers had previous experience with DCR graphs as they had attended previous DCR 
workshops. The majority of the case works were still novice users however their level varied.
5.2 Task Description
The same textual process description was used for experiment two as had been used for 
experiment one however as the workshop was in danish the text had been translated (the danish 
description can be seen in appendix 11.2). Furthermore the number of invariants were reduced to 
two as it was not assumed that they could ﬁnish all ﬁve in the given timeframe. The invariants 
kept were invariant 1 and 4. 
5.3 Procedure 
The experiment took place October 30, 2018 at a conference room in Syddjurs Municipality 
buildings. The experiment consisted of the process building exercise followed by an interview. 
The participants were given 25 minutes to model the process. The participants were asked to 
download, install and run a screen capturing software before the exercise. After the exercise the 
videos were collected with an external hard-drive. Additionally the participants were given a pre-
made DCR account which ensured that the models could be analysed. After the model building 
exercise a semi-structured group interview took place. The interview was based on the same 
questions which had been used for the experiment one. Few changes were made to ﬁt a group e.g. 
in the ﬁrst question the participants were asked to raise their hand if they agreed to have used 
Monocle to drive the modelling.
!27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5.1: Photo taken during the group interview at Syddjurs. 
5.4 Instruments 
The participants had all brought their work computers which they used for the modelling task.To 
record the participants screen and interactions the program Open Broadcaster Software  was 
4
used. To record the interview a omnidirectional conference microphone was used to ensure 
capturing all the participant. 
 https://obsproject.com/
4
!28
==PAGE:35==
6 Data Analysis Procedure 
This chapter will explain how the data collected from experiment one and two was analysed. 
Firstly the preparation of the raw data will be presented. Then the methods used for analysing 
will be mentioned and the analysis procedure will be explained. This will be done for each of the 
3 main data sources used for investigating the research questions; Models, Eye tracking and 
interviews. When differentiating between participants from experiment one and two the 
participants will be referred to as student participants and caseworker participants. It should be 
noted that the eye tracking analysis only contains the student participants whereas the models and 
interviews contains both groups of participants.
6.1 Data Preparation 
After realising the experiments the raw data had to be prepared and cleaned for further analysis. 
The models did not require any work before analysing and will therefore not be mentioned. The 
eye tracking data and interviews required substantial work for being prepared. This section will 
present what had to be done to each data source. 
6.1.1 Eye Tracking to Process maps 
The ﬁrst step for preparing the eye tracking videos was to segment them into parts. In order to 
compare the modelling task and the invariant task the videos had to be segmented into two parts. 
A segmentation feature is implemented in Tobii Studio and could be done with little effort.
During the experiments there had been some issues regarding the simulator. It became apparent 
that the render function of the simulator was not fully compatible with Monocle. The render 
therefore only worked sometimes . This resulted in uncontrolled behaviour during simulation as 
5
some people would use render, some would not use it because of the issue and some would retry 
until it worked. Since this added inconsistency and would have been extremely cumbersome to 
map with AOIs it was chosen to segment out the parts where the participants used the simulator. 
It should also be noted that the simulator AOI therefore only covers the button that would start 
the simulation tool. By looking through the eye tracking videos it was conﬁrmed that most often 
they would only look at the button when also running the simulator. For this reason the simulator 
button AOI will be taken as an indication of their simulator usage in the analysis.
Next the eye tracking data needed to be divide into AOIs. Since the interface was dynamic it was 
also necessary to make the AOIs dynamic. In total 6 AOIs were added. Initially more overlapping 
 Video of simulator issue: https://youtu.be/ZZaSpMmdGrU
5
!29
==PAGE:36==
AOIs were added to have a more detailed division, however the overlap proved to be an obstacle 
for using it in Disco. The 6 AOIs created were; The text named All text, the simulator called 
Simulator, the Model called Model, the menu to the right of the model called Side menu, the image 
explaining the 5 relations called Relation help and ﬁnally the screen that would appear when adding 
a relation from Monocle called Relations adder. As mentioned in section 2.2.1 the text would 
disappear when the relation adder appears. This means that transitions between these two AOIs 
are not possible (except for second when the relation adder appears or disappears), this should be 
noted when analysing the process models. 
Figure 6.1: AOI divisions of  the interface. 
Once all the AOIs had been mapped the data could be exported to an AOI event log as an .tsv 
ﬁle. This ﬁle was then cleaned and formatted to .xes using a previously made script created for 
same cause . This made it compatible to load into Disco. 
6
6.1.2 Transcribing Interviews
A total of 1 hour and 12 minutes of interview had been recorded from experiment one and 
experiment two. Since the interviews were audio ﬁles it was decided to transcribe them to make it 
easier to analyse. This was done manually by replaying the recordings and writing down while 
listening. The full transcriptions of all interviews can be found in appendix 11.4. 
 https://github.com/DTU-SPE/tsv2xes
6
!30
==PAGE:37==
6.2 Analysis Procedure 
This section explains the procedure of how each of the 3 data sources were analysed. 
6.2.1 Models
To identify what the participants had used Monocle for the models were opened and Monocle 
was investigated to check for highlights. After checking all models the participants were divided 
into three groups:
•
Participants using Monocle only for activities and roles 
•
Participants using Monocle for activities, roles and some relations 
•
Participants using Monocle for activities, roles and all relations 
After creating the three groups, the videos of them were review to ensure that they had in fact 
used Monocle to directly create the markup or whether they had created it from the modeller and 
then afterwards connected it to Monocle. It was observed that non of the participant had used 
Monocle to retrospectively add markup but that it had only been used actively. 
6.2.2 Process Maps 
It is crucial to understand what the model represents in order to analyse the discovered process 
maps. First thing to understand is how the eye tracking measurements translates over to the 
elements of the process map. Each participant represents a case. The activities in the maps are 
representing the different AOIs. Each activity has a frequency, this number is representing the 
total number of dwells in the given AOI. The edges between the activities represent transition 
between AOIs and the frequency of the edges is the total number of transitions between the two 
given AOIs.
After the process models has been discovered the different attribute ﬁlters could be used to explore 
the data from different angles. First the full map of all participants was examined. This was done 
by simply comparing the frequency of different AOIs and observing the transitions between the 
AOIs to see the importance and centrality of the different AOIs. After this different attributes 
were ﬁltered in order to compare different maps. The ﬁrst comparison was how the modelling 
task and the invariant task compared to see if there were in difference in their approach to the 
two tasks. From looking at the models it had been observed that the participants could be divided 
depending on their usage of Monocle. To see if there was a difference whether using Monocle or 
modeller for relations two groups were compared. The ﬁrst group contained the participants only 
using the modeller for relations and the other group contained the participants using only 
Monocle for relations.
!31
==PAGE:38==
The next aspect which was decided to look into was the conﬁdence of the participants. This was 
to see if participants who were more secure in what they were doing had a different approach 
than participants who were less secure. To deﬁne conﬁdence their usage of assistance from the 
simulator and the relation help was used. Each participant were reviewed in the Disco statistics for 
their usage of either the simulator or relation help. They were then divided between  participant 
spending more or less than 10% gazing towards the relation help or the simulator.
6.2.3 Interviews
To analyse the data initial coding was used for the ﬁrst coding cycle. For the second coding cycle 
axial coding was used. A bottom-up approach was taken for the coding. Therefore no 
preconceived codes or groups were deﬁned for the data. Instead the code was read through and 
codes deﬁned directly from the data. To really understand the data the ﬁrst cycle was done 
through 2 iterations. In the ﬁrst iteration very detailed codes were added to all interesting parts of 
the interviews. In the second cycle the interviews were reviewed again but this time it was done 
while having the list of codes from the ﬁrst iteration at hand. The codes were hereby reviewed 
and codes containing same connotation were merged. It should be noted that the count of the 
codes was the number of participants who mentioned it one or more times rather than counting 
each time it was mentioned. This was chosen to be more representative as some participants 
would mention the same code several times while probed in the interview. This could have created 
a skew about the relevance of a code. After the coding a total of 51 codes had been created. Next 
step was to identify how they could be sorted. This was also done over several iterations where 
different combinations were attempted. The sorting ended up having seven themes:
1.
Usage of the tools 
2.
Strong in Monocle 
3.
Strong in modeller 
4.
Tool issues 
5.
Usage of the simulator 
6.
Implementing invariants 
7.
Suggestions for improvements 
After having the 7 themes each group were carefully reviewed again to see what picture the 
combination of the codes gave.
!32
==PAGE:39==
7 Results 
This chapter will present the results extracted from the data together with reﬂections on what the 
results are showing and what might be the reasons for the observed behaviours. 
7.1 RQ1 
To investigate RQ1 both the models and the process maps were used. Therefore this section is 
divided between the two, showing the results of each data source.  
7.1.1 Models
All the participants both students and case workers had used Monocle to create the activities and 
the role. For relations 5 of the 10 student participant did not create any relations using Monocle, 3 
student participants created a couple of the relations with Monocle but then moved to the 
modeller and 2 student participants used Monocle extensively for nearly all relations.  
Figure 7.1: The highlights in Monocle created by two participants. The participant on the left only marked roles 
and activities while the participant on the right also highlighted relations. 
Of the case worker participants 4 did not use Monocle for relations. 2 case workers used it to add 
3 relations and 1 case worker used it for adding 9 of a 13 total of relations. The results indicate 
!33
==PAGE:40==
that the initial attractiveness of using Monocle is rather low. It also shows that of the 8 
participants who started using Monocle 5 switched to the modeller. This could be because they 
did not like using Monocle and that the beneﬁts of it was not apparent to them. It could also be 
because they could not identify words to highlight. Since this process description has been 
designed to have the constraints explicitly mentioned other processes might be even harder for 
users to model with Monocle. 
 
7.1.2 Process Maps 
Figure 7.2: Process map depicting the full task and all participants .
7
Figure 7.2 shows the model with all participants for both tasks. The model shows that the model 
was looked to the most with a frequency of 1633 whereas the text in Monocle had a frequency of 
934. It can be seen that these two AOIs also were the parts of the interface which the participants 
transitioned the most between with approximately 830 transitions each way. The map also 
indicates that almost every time the text was looked at, the previous AOI looked at was the model. 
This is also conﬁrmed by looking at the other edges going to the text which all have fairly low 
frequencies with the highest one being 44 from the side menu. When looking at the Model it can 
be seen that it is the central activity with the most weight on its outgoing and incoming edges. 
This indicates that the model was the base of their attention an the place participants would 
return to after looking elsewhere. We can see that the side menu was looked at quite a signiﬁcant 
amount of times (399) and thereby the third most looked at AOI. This is not expected as the side 
 High resolution images of all process maps can be found in appendix 11.4
7
!34
==PAGE:41==
menu had very low relevance for the modelling task. There is a likelihood that a part of these 
cases are due to the model being next to the side menu and transitions to the side menu can be 
due to imprecise saccades aimed at the model (or eye tracking inaccuracies). However it seems 
unlikely that this explains all the dwells. Inspecting the statistics in Disco it can be seen that the 
median duration of looking at the side menu was 0.325 seconds. It can therefore indicate that the 
side menu is a distraction drawing unnecessary attention from the users.
Figure 7.3: Process map depicting modelling task. 
Figure 7.4: Process map depicting invariant task. 
!35
==PAGE:42==
From ﬁgure 7.3 and 7.4 we compare the viewing patterns of the participants in the modelling task 
and the invariant task. In ﬁgure 7.3 we see the map from the modelling task and in ﬁgure 7.4 the 
invariant task. Overall the two models show quite the same tendencies. There is slightly more 
equal weight between model and text in the invariant task but nothing substantially. It can be seen 
that the simulator was used relatively more in the invariant task . This could indicate that the 
participants  found this task more challenging. The relation helper was used more in the 
modelling task which indicate they used it in the beginning to better understand the relations.  
Figure 7.5: Process map depicting modelling relations with modeller. 
Figure 7.6: Process map depicting modelling relations with Monocle. 
!36
==PAGE:43==
In ﬁgure 7.5 and 7.6 the participants who use the modeller for adding relations (ﬁgure 7.5) are 
compared with the participants who used Monocle (ﬁgure 7.6). Starting by comparing their use of 
text and model we see that it is quite the same between the two groups. It could have been 
expected that the participants using Monocle for relations would have looked more times in the 
text, but that is not the case. It can be seen that the participants who added relations using 
Monocle looked fewer times to both the help and the simulator. The participants who used 
Monocle were therefore more certain in their modelling which might have been the reason they 
used Monocle which could again indicate that inexperience might have inﬂuenced why the 
majority did not use Monocle for relations. 
Figure 7.7: Process map depicting participants with low conﬁdence. 
!37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 7.8: Process map depicting participants with high conﬁdence. 
Figure 7.7 shows the model of participants with low modelling conﬁdence and ﬁgure 7.8 shows 
participants with high modelling conﬁdence. It is quite clear that there is a difference between the 
two groups in the distribution between the model and the text. By inspecting statistics in Disco it 
can be seen that the relative frequency for looking at the model for both groups is 45% however 
for looking at the text the participants with high conﬁdence had a relative frequency of 31% 
where the low conﬁdence group spent 23%. It therefore seems that participants with lower 
conﬁdence are less focussed on the text. 
Inspecting further in disco we can see the median dwell duration in these AOIs between our two 
groups. The median time of looking at the text were approximately the same about 1.4 seconds 
however the median duration of looking at the model was 1.37 for participants with low 
conﬁdence and 0.816 for participants with high conﬁdence. This means that in terms of duration 
high conﬁdence spend less time looking at model. Another thing that can be seen is a higher 
amount of transitions between the relations adder and the model for participants with higher 
conﬁdence. This again indicate that the participants who were more secure modelling were more 
likely to use Monocle for relations.
!38
==PAGE:45==
7.2 RQ2 
During the analysis and coding 7 categories of the codes emerged. In this part each of the 
categories will be presented along with what can be derived from the content. For each category a 
table will be presented containing the codes and number of participants who attested the code. 
Table 7.1: The table show the codes belonging to the category ‘Usage of  the tools’.  
In table 7.1 we see the Usage of the tool codes. The codes show a rather similar picture of how 
the participants created the model. In several it is indicated that activities were created ﬁrst using 
Monocle and that the relations were then created afterwards with the modeller. A few participants 
also comment on their logic behind: First you arrange the activities in the modeller and then it is 
intuitive to continue modelling there. There are also a few which explains how Monocle was used, 
but even here 1 of the 2 explains how he would have preferred to use the modeller. 
Usage of the tools
Code
No. Of Participants
I identiﬁed relations in the text and added them directly in the modeller
4
After the initial steps of making activities I mainly went between modeller and 
simulator
3
I start with Monocle for activities and roles, but then I quickly jump to the 
modeller to model
2
After making activities, I set it up visually in modeller - Then it is intuitive to 
keep working in the modeller with relations
2
Used Monocle for relations but would prefer the modeller
1
After creating the activities I set them up visually in the modeller
1
I made relations from modeller but planned to assign it to text afterwards -But 
mainly because of this exercise
1
I was able to ﬁnd all relations with Monocle except a few I added with the 
modeller
1
!39
==PAGE:46==
Table 7.2: The table show the codes belonging to the category ‘Strong in Monocle’. 
Table 7.2 show what the participants saw as positive with using Monocle. The two main aspects 
mentioned was to use Monocle for activities and roles and for getting a clear overview. Only 3 
participants mentioned traceability as a beneﬁt they saw from the tool. 
Table 7.3: The table show the codes belonging to the category ‘Strong in modeller’. 
In table 7.3 we see the positive aspects about the modeller which were mentioned. The 
participants indicated that it was faster and more intuitive to add relations with the modeller.  
Strong in Monocle
Code
No. Of Participants
Helps to easily and intuitively ﬁnd roles and activities 
6
Monocle is good for overview and structure
5
Moncole add traceability for seeing what has been covered
3
Monocle is a great help for getting startet and makes the task less confusing
2
Monocle can quickly make activities
1
Strong in modeller
Code
No. Of Participants
It is easier and faster to use modeller for relations
3
Intuitive to directly connect them in model
2
Modeller is more interactive
1
Modeller gives a better visualisation of what you are doing
1
!40
==PAGE:47==
Table 7.4: The table show the codes belonging to the category ‘Tool issues’. 
Table 7.4 shows the issues that were mentioned and associated with the tool. We see that the 
majority of issues mentioned lies with using Monocle for relations. The issues faced by most 
participants was to ﬁnd the right text to highlight for the relations which was mentioned by 6 
participants. This was said even though the text had been designed to have all relations explicitly 
mentioned in the text. It indicates that to most users it is not a simple task to identify the words to 
highlight when highlighting relations. Besides this the participants mentioned that Monocle was 
too slow. Two participants also stated that traceability was not useful since the text was not so 
long. 
Tool issues
Code
No. Of Participants
Not easy to assign a relation to a single piece of text directly
6
It is difﬁcult to change a highlighting
2
Time-consuming to use Monocle for relations
2
Highlighting the same twice is counter-intuitive
2
Traceability might be useful for longer texts, but not for short texts
2
The modelling becomes too complex for using Monocle
1
Several relations to same text makes traceability not so good
1
I forgot about the highlighting. The ability to add relations from Monocle should 
be more visible
1
Further exposure might make me more comfortable with using Monocle
1
The side menu is annoying on a small screen
1
Too many highlights create confusion
1
!41
==PAGE:48==
Table 7.5: The table show the codes belonging to the category ‘Usage of  the simulator’. 
Table 7.5 show the comments they had about the simulator. The simulator was mainly used to 
verify the model. It also seemed that some participant used the simulator to learn how to model. 
Table 7.6: The table show the codes belonging to the category ‘Implementing invariants’. 
Table 7.6 show comments about adding invariants to the model. It can be seen that the majority 
of the participants had added invariants by themselves with only one indicating that they did not 
add any by themselves. This could be explained by either (a) participants add the relations from 
the text and consciously decide to also include the invariants, (b) when the participants are 
mentally translating the textual description to model they are unconsciously adding additional 
relations. With the data collected this cannot be further investigated however it potential that 
using the modeller for modelling can make users unconsciously add additional invariants not 
speciﬁcally mentioned. 
Usage of the simulator
Code
No. Of Participants
I used simulator to verify what I had built really worked
8
I used the simulator when having modelled most, to see if everything was 
working as intended
2
I used simulator to ﬁnd out how some relations worked
1
I went back and forth between building and the simulator
1
It gives a nice testing ﬂow
1
I used the simulator everytime I created a new relation
1
Implementing invariants
Code
No. Of Participants
I had created some of the invariants before I saw them
6
I created my own invariants that were not mentioned
2
I only created the relations I were speciﬁcally told to add
1
I added some relations that were not clear from the text
1
!42
==PAGE:49==
Table 7.7: The table show the codes belonging to the category ‘Suggestions for improvements’. 
During the interviews the participant came with a number of suggestions that they thought could 
improve DCR graphs. These suggestions have been collected in table 7.7 under the category 
‘Suggestions for improvements’. There were no suggestions that were mentioned more than once 
and the complexity of the suggestions ranged from changing the colour scheme to automatic verb 
identiﬁcation. 
7.3 Summary 
This section will sum up the main ﬁndings which were identiﬁed in the results of the data 
analysis. The section only includes aspects that were indicated or observed in a substantial 
number of participants.  
❖
The participants used Monocle for adding activities and many found it to be easy and 
intuitive. They also found it to be helpful for getting an overview of the task when getting 
started. 
❖
8 of the 17 participants used Monocle for relation however 5 only added a few relations 
and instead moved over to using the modeller. 
❖
The participants found it easier to create relations using the modeller. Many participant 
had troubles ﬁnding the right words to highlight which added extra work and time 
needed. 
❖
Low experience might inﬂuence users to opt out from using Monocle as it initially 
requires higher workload. 
❖
The side menu might be a distraction to users 
Suggestions for improvements
Code
No. Of Participants
Ability to exclude activities from Monocle
1
Add all instances of a word as role automatically
1
Auto suggest of verbs as relations
1
Guides for common ways of setting the arrows
1
Ability to format text in Monocle
1
Clearer colors in Monocle
1
!43
==PAGE:50==
❖
The model is the most central AOI in the interface which most participants have their 
gaze based on. This is the case for both participants modelling relations with Monocle 
and with the modeller. However, participants with a higher conﬁdence in their modelling 
spend relatively less time looking at the model and relatively more time looking in the 
text. 
❖
Many participants added invariants before they were asked to. This could indicate an 
unconscious process taking place when translating from natural language to the model 
that changes the nature of the process. Using Monocle might prevent users from doing 
this. 
!44
==PAGE:51==
8 Discussion 
This project set out to investigate and explore Monocle tool using eye tracking, process mining 
and qualitative research. This section will discuss the results and the methods used for obtaining 
them. It will highlight the positive and negative outcomes and discuss what could have been done 
differently. The chapter will end with a future works section which will discuss the steps that could 
be done for taking the project further. 
8.1 Results and Methods 
The Monocle tool has been created to help users create and maintain models. This project has 
especially investigated the tool for it’s model creation capabilities. The results indicates that it is 
not attractive to model relations using Monocle. Of the 17 participants 9 did not add a single 
relation using it and only 3 participants chose to continue using Monocle for adding relations. 
This shows us that the initial attractiveness of Monocle is rather low. Users disregards it as it 
requires more work and is less intuitive. However some of the beneﬁts of Monocle might not be 
apparent from the ﬁrst impression of using it. The traceability beneﬁt was identiﬁed by 3 
participants however this beneﬁt might be more apparent for modelling longer processes or for 
maintaining models. This aspect is still interesting and has only been touched upon lightly. Even if 
Monocle is cumbersome in the early stages it might lower the cognitive load when creating more 
complex models. As mentioned users might take an opportunistic approach for longer processes 
which require re-comprehension of their own work. Monocle can therefore give a clearer view of 
what has been modelled and what has not. For better testing the aspect of traceability the 
experiment could have been designed differently. Adding a longer textual description would not 
have been an option for this experiment as the timeframe of the experiment was already in the 
high end of what you can expect from volunteer participants. Instead an approach that could 
have been taken would have been to create a test that mixed model creation with model 
comprehension. Such a test could contain a longer text with an unﬁnished model which the 
participants would have to complete or update. Such a test could perhaps better demonstrate the 
traceability aspect of Monocle since the participants would need to understand the model in 
order to ﬁnish building it. It could then be investigated if the negative aspects of the tool, such as 
the issue of identifying text, becomes outweighed by the positive aspect of traceability. 
For experiment one it was not possible to recruit participants with experience using DCR. Instead 
most of the participants had never used DCR graphs before. This aspect has most likely 
inﬂuenced the results. The results can be deﬁned as applicable to new users but it is not certain 
the same holds true for more experienced users. It could therefore have been interesting to also 
have tested on more experienced users to see if their approach is different. Users with more 
experience might also have been more inclined to using Monocle. The reason so few participants 
!45
==PAGE:52==
chose to use Monocle for relations might be related to the fact that they had to learn so much new 
for the test and choosing the modeller for relations was one way to immediately reduce the effort 
needed. More experienced users might therefore also have provided more direct insight into the 
usage of Monocle as many of the participants only tried adding relations from Monocle in the 
familiarisation session. 
8.2 Future Work 
For future work there are several aspects which could be focussed on. Since the GSR data has not 
been analysed this could be a starting point for moving further with the project. As indicated 
Monocle might have an inﬂuence on the cognitive workload of the user. The GSR data might 
therefore be able to shed more light onto this aspect. This aspect can also be investigated with the 
eye tracking data as pupil dilation is inﬂuenced by cognitive workload. 
Another thing that could be done is investigating the models the users created further. It could be 
analysed with test-cases how accurate the models they had created were. This could again help 
understand which users were better at modelling to see how this inﬂuenced how they modelled. 
The data could also be explored further by cross checking between the different datasources. An 
example of what could be explored is whether the participants who abandon Monocle are the 
same participants who state that it is difﬁcult to identify relations in the text. 
Finally the results from this work could be used to dig deeper into interesting aspects. For once it 
could be interesting to understand if Monocle is more useful for adding relations in longer or 
more complex processes or if the issue of identifying the right words is still too big an issue. It 
could also be interesting to dig deeper into why users add invariants, which are not mentioned, to 
the model and if it has something to do with the modeller and whether Monocle can prevent this. 
!46
==PAGE:53==
9 Conclusion 
Throughout this project the Monocle tool of DCR has been investigated. Two research questions 
were conceived to drive the investigation of the tool. To gather data about the usage two 
experiments have been carried out in which participants have been creating process models using 
the tool. Their usage and view of the the tool has been collected with eye tracking, interviews and 
the models they have created. This data has then been used to investigate the research questions. 
Using the eye tracking data the interface was divided into AOIs. This was exported as an event 
log which was used to discover process maps using the tool Disco. The interviews were 
transcribed and qualitative coding was applied. The data was then analysed taking an exploratory 
approach. 
Monocle was created to facilitate model creation and maintenance. This project investigated how 
users engage with the tool for creating models. The results show that users ﬁnd the tool helpful for 
getting an initial overview and for adding activities and roles. However for adding relations most 
users prefer the modeller. It is indicated that Monocle requires more initial work for creating 
relations and that the traceability aspect is not outweighing this issue. It is however indicated that 
experience might inﬂuence this perception. The results also showed that users might be 
unconsciously adding invariants to the model and that using the modeller might be implicated in 
this. 
!47
==PAGE:54==
10 Bibliography 
1.
Mukkamala RR, Hildebrandt T, Slaats T. Towards Trustworthy Adaptive Case Management 
with Dynamic Condition Response Graphs. In: 2013 17th IEEE International Enterprise 
Distributed Object Computing Conference. IEEE; 2013:127-136. doi:10.1109/EDOC.
2013.22. 
2.
Debois S, Hildebrandt T, Marquard M, Slaats T. The DCR Graphs Process Portal. http://
www.itu.dk http//www.exformatics.com http://www.diku.dk/. Accessed December 30, 2018. 
3.
López HA, Debois S, Hildebrandt TT, Marquard M. The Process Highlighter: From Texts to 
Declarative Processes and Back. https://bpmai.org/foswiki/pub/BPMAcademicInitiative/. 
Accessed December 29, 2018. 
4.
Vaisman A. An Introduction to Business Process Modeling. In: Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg; 
2013:29-61. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-36318-4_2. 
5.
van der Aalst W. Process Mining. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2016. doi:
10.1007/978-3-662-49851-4. 
6.
Haisjackl C, Zugal S, Soffer P, et al. Making Sense of Declarative Process Models: Common 
Strategies and Typical Pitfalls. In: Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg; 2013:2-17. doi:
10.1007/978-3-642-38484-4_2. 
7.
Pichler P, Weber B, Zugal S, Pinggera J, Mendling J, Reijers HA. Imperative versus 
Declarative Process Modeling Languages: An Empirical Investigation. In: Springer, Berlin, 
Heidelberg; 2012:383-394. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-28108-2_37. 
8.
Fahland D, Lübke D, Mendling J, et al. Declarative versus Imperative Process Modeling 
Languages: The Issue of Understandability. In: Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg; 2009:353-366. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-01862-6_29. 
9.
Andaloussi A, Slaats A;, Burattin T;, Hildebrandt A;, Weber TT. Understandability of 
Hybrid Process Models Using DCR Graphs. APA; 2018. https://ecoknow.org. Accessed 
December 30, 2018. 
10. DCR. https://wiki.dcrgraphs.net/wiki/68/dcr. Accessed December 30, 2018. 
11. Dynamic Condition Response (DCR) - Welcome to DCR Solutions. https://
dcrsolutions.net/. Accessed December 30, 2018. 
12. About – Effective co-created & compliant adaptive case management for Knowledge workers. 
https://ecoknow.org/about/. Accessed December 30, 2018. 
13. Debois S, Hildebrandt T, Slaats T, Marquard M. A Case for Declarative Process Modelling: 
Agile Development of a Grant Application System. In: 2014 IEEE 18th International 
!48
==PAGE:55==
Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference Workshops and Demonstrations. 
IEEE; 2014:126-133. doi:10.1109/EDOCW.2014.27. 
14. Debois S, Hildebrandt TT, Laursen PH, Ulrik KR. Declarative process mining for DCR 
graphs. In: Proceedings of the Symposium on Applied Computing  - SAC ’17. New York, 
New York, USA: ACM Press; 2017:759-764. doi:10.1145/3019612.3019622. 
15. Jacob RJK, Karn KS. Eye Tracking in Human-Computer Interaction and Usability 
Research: Ready to Deliver the Promises. Mind’s Eye. January 2003:573-605. doi:10.1016/
B978-044451020-4/50031-1. 
16. Holmqvist K, Nyström M, Andersson R, Dewhurst R, Halszka J, Weijer J van de. Eye 
Tracking : A Comprehensive Guide to Methods and Measures. Oxford University Press; 
2011. http://portal.research.lu.se/portal/en/publications/eye-tracking--a-comprehensive-
guide-to-methods-and-measures(03ff6e58-7456-448f-9f45-1c3660bc05f4).html. Accessed 
December 30, 2018. 
17. Hyönä J. The use of eye movements in the study of multimedia learning. Learn Instr. 
2010;20(2):172-176. doi:10.1016/J.LEARNINSTRUC.2009.02.013. 
18. 7 Most Used Eye Tracking Metrics and Terms - iMotions. https://imotions.com/blog/7-
terms-metrics-eye-tracking/. Accessed December 30, 2018. 
19. Günther CW, Rozinat A. Disco: Discover Your Processes. https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/
56b5/96c0762224d612a2cbf9b873423a12ff5b6b.pdf. Accessed December 29, 2018. 
20. Günther CW, Van Der Aalst WMP. Fuzzy Mining-Adaptive Process Simpliﬁcation Based on 
Multi-Perspective Metrics. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?
doi=10.1.1.81.1207&rep=rep1&type=pdf. Accessed December 29, 2018. 
21. Lewis S. Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design: Choosing Among Five Approaches. 
Health Promot Pract. 2015;16(4):473-475. doi:10.1177/1524839915580941. 
22. Jaspers MWM, Steen T, Bos C van den, Geenen M. The think aloud method: a guide to user 
interface design. Int J Med Inform. 2004;73(11-12):781-795. doi:10.1016/J.IJMEDINF.
2004.08.003. 
23. Lazar J, Feng JH, Hochheiser H. Research Methods in Human-Computer Interaction. Wiley; 
2010. https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/6206730-research-methods-in-human-
computer-interaction. Accessed December 30, 2018. 
24. Charmaz K, Belgrave LL. Grounded Theory. In: The Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology. 
Oxford, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd; 2015. doi:10.1002/9781405165518.wbeosg070.pub2. 
25. Bryman A. Social Research Methods. Oxford University Press; 2004. 
26. Saldaña J. The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers. Sage; 2009. 
!49
==PAGE:56==
27. Kothari CR. Research Methodology : Methods and Techniques. New Age International; 
2004. 
28. Reichert M, Weber B. Enabling Flexibility in Process-Aware Information Systems : 
Challenges, Methods, Technologies. Springer; 2012. 
29. Tobii Pro X3-120 Eye Tracker User Manual User Manual Tobii Pro X3-120 Eye Tracker.; 
2017. www.tobiipro.com. Accessed December 30, 2018. 
30. Tobii Studio User’s Manual User’s Manual Tobii Studio. www.tobiipro.com. Accessed 
December 30, 2018. 
31. Wearable GSR Sensor | Shimmer Galvanic Skin Response Sensor | EDA sensor. http://
www.shimmersensing.com/products/shimmer3-wireless-gsr-sensor. Accessed December 30, 
2018. 
!50
==PAGE:57==
11 Appendix 
11.1 Process Description for Test 
The process of writing a project proposal starts when the author comes up with an initial idea. 
Afterwards, it is possible to write a project proposal and to reﬁne the idea at any time. After 
having written the project proposal it becomes possible to check for plagiarism. Every time a new 
proposal is written, the author has the chance of checking for plagiarism once. It is possible to 
cancel the proposal if it turns out that the idea is infeasible. Otherwise, as soon as the project 
proposal is described sufﬁciently well, it is possible for the author to submit the proposal. Note 
that a proposal can be submitted only once.                         
Invariants: 
1.
Ensure that it only becomes possible to cancel the proposal after the author has come up with 
an initial idea 
2.
Ensure that the proposal cannot be cancelled after submitting and that it cannot be submitted 
after cancelling 
3.
Ensure that checking for plagiarism can be done once and only once every time the proposal 
is written 
4.
Ensure that the proposal always needs to be updated when the idea has been reﬁned 
5.
Ensure that if the idea has been reﬁned, then the proposal cannot be submitted before it has 
been updated 
The process can be viewed on DCR graphs with the following link: 
https://www.dcrgraphs.net/Tool?id=8844# 
!51
==PAGE:58==
11.2 Danish Translation of Process Description for Test 
Lav en process model over følgende tekst: 
Processen for at skrive et projektforslag starter med at forfatteren ﬁnder på en idé. Bagefter er det 
muligt at skrive projektforslaget og rafﬁnere ideen på hvilket som helst tidspunkt. Efter at have 
skrevet projektforslaget er det muligt at tjekke for plagiat. Hver gang projektforslaget er blevet 
genskrevet er det muligt at tjekke for plagiat én gang. Det er muligt at annullere projektforslaget 
hvis det viser sig at være en uholdbar idé. Ellers er det muligt at indsende projektforslaget når det 
er færdigskrevet. Noter at et projektforslag kun kan blive indsendt én gang. 
Efter at have lavet modellen, garanter da at følgende udsagn bliver opfyldt af modellen: 
1. Projektforslag kan ikke blive annulleret efter det er blevet indsendt, og ligeledes kan det ikke 
indsendes hvis det er blevet annulleret. 
2. Projektforslaget skal blive opdateret efter ideen er blevet rafﬁneret. 
The process can be viewed on DCR graphs with the following link: 
https://www.dcrgraphs.net/Tool?id=8392 
!52
==PAGE:59==
11.3 Familiarisation Process description 
Part 1
A day for Sonja and Mailman Per: 
In the mail ofﬁce Sonja is responsible for the mail. At any time Sonja can receive a letter. When 
receiving mail it is necessary that Sonja sorts new letters with the rest of the mail. Once a day 
Sonja’s husband Mailman Per delivers the letters. Mailman Per only delivers if atleast one new 
letter has been received and if all received letters have been sorted. 
 
Invariant:
Ensure that Sonja can only sort once after receiving new letters
Part 2
However problems can occur! If his cat Emil runs away then Mailman Per must ﬁnd Emil before 
he can deliver the letters. Emil can sometimes run away several times.
Invariant: 
Ensure that Mailman Per is only able to ﬁnd Emil once after he runs away. 
The process can be viewed on DCR graphs with the following link: 
https://www.dcrgraphs.net/Tool?id=8367 
!53
==PAGE:60==
11.4 Online Appendix 
https://drive.google.com/open?id=1vBx2s9PrVAAF8Etq2I4OYOZyPbmwLXL3 
The above link contains the online appendix of the thesis. The online appendix includes: 
•
Images of the process maps used for the data analysis 
•
The questionnaire and participants answers 
•
The AOI event log 
•
Transcription ﬁle for the interviews 
•
Consent form 
•
Slideshow for familiarisation session 
To see the raw data or have any other inquiries please contact the author: jonbuchl@gmail.com 
!54
