==PAGE:1==
Web service choreography using a
Domain Speciﬁc Language
Jeppe Mads Dickow
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis aims at designing and developing a new language for service chore-
ography. The language should be applicable to existing software solutions, and
targeted at developers as a tool for applying choreography to service- and inter-
process communication. The proposed solution relies on a centralized checker,
checking the observed interactions between choreography participants.
Instrumentation is used to intercept method calls/invocations and store the
observed traces. This approach is implemented on the Java virtual machine
(JVM) and gathers the necessary information for performing the choreography
checking.
Correlation sets are implemented on top of these traces, and to provide the data
for correlation, the data stored in the traces can be queried via a path based
query language. In general the information that is available in a trace depends on
the speciﬁc implementation of the trace gathering. In the future the solution can
be extended to support other languages, as it uses a platform agnostic message
exchange format between the trace gatherer and the choreography checker.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with designing and implementing a new language for service
choreography. In addition to the language, a solution for gathering traces for
choreography checking is implemented. The trace gathering solution relies on
the source code being available, such that it can be enriched with instrumen-
tation features. The target audience for this choreography language is not so
much the business, but much more the software developers.
The thesis consists of an introduction to the problem domain and existing work
in web-service choreography and orchestration.
The related work presented
is not an exhaustive study of existing literature, but introduces the solutions
inspiring the implementation in this thesis.
Following the introduction to the domain, the proposed language, along with the
correlation set solution will be introduced. The trace concept used to observe
behavior will also be explained in this section, in particular what it captures
and what its data structure looks like.
After introducing the language and data structures, the implementation will be
introduced.
The implementation section will start by introducing an implementation for
gathering traces on the JVM platform. Then the message format used to ex-
change these traces with the checker will be described.
Finally this section
concludes with a description of the language implementation as a domain spe-
ciﬁc language (DSL), along with the solution to the checker, which is used for
==PAGE:6==
iv
checking conformance against the choreography descriptions.
Once the solution have been introduced, a short toy-example will be used to
show how to apply the implemented solution to a real application.
Finally the report concludes with a section on technologies used to realize the
implementation, as well as a conclusion followed by a short section on future
work.
Source code
: All source code used to produce the code snippets seen in this
thesis is available online. The urls for both the language implementation, and
the example project developed to showcase the implementation can be accessed
at.
• https://github.com/Dickow/chortlin
• https://github.com/Dickow/dtu-pay-example
Lyngby, 15-January-2019
Jeppe Mads Dickow
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Hubert Baumeister, for the amazing help
he has provided throughout the entire thesis period.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Jolie & Chor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
WS-BPEL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.3
WS-CDL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.4
BPMN 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Solution
11
2.1
Choreography language
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.1
Uniqueness constraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Traces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.1
Trace satisfaction relationship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Argument data structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Value retrieval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
Correlation sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6
Correlation set extension functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.7
Sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.8
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.9
Trace gathering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.9.1
Intercepting method calls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.9.2
Instrumentation & conﬁguration . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.9.3
Sending traces
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
2.10 Shared data types
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.11 Choreography checker
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.11.1 AST & Choreography DSL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.11.2 Traces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
2.11.3 Correlation DSL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
2.11.4 AST & choreography validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
2.11.5 Online checker
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
2.11.6 Trace satisfaction relationship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3
DTU pay example
47
3.1
Fictive description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.3
Applying the language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.4
Applying the implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4
Technologies
55
4.1
Byte Buddy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.2
Spring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.3
Google protobuf
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5
Conclusion & Future work
61
5.1
Parallel types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.2
Recursive types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.3
Timed interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Bibliography
65
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Distributed applications are commonly encountered today, frequently these ap-
plications are built with scaleability and availability in mind.
These traits
spawned the idea of microservices [DGL+17].
Microservices are the idea of
designing applications as we design objects. It is the idea of encapsulating a
domain within a single service, to ensure that the development cost and speed
does not decrease as we add more functionality to the system as a whole.
As microservices has gained more and more traction in recent years, research
have gone into how to formalize and verify communication between distributed
services. In traditional monolithic applications it is much easier to reason about
communication, as the concept is often a ﬁrst-class citizen of the language that
is used.
When reasoning about the communication between services, where
each service might be implemented in a separate language or even a separate
programming paradigm, this becomes much harder.
Diﬀerent approaches have been taken to tackle this problem, some involve for-
malizing services, others try to enforce a structure on the communication be-
tween the services, followed by a validation of the observed communication. The
latter approach is what is of interest to this thesis.
Enforcing structure on communication can be done either via orchestration or
by using choreography. Orchestration involves a central entity controlling the
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
ﬂow of execution, also known as an orchestrator.
Choreography on the other hand relies on a global description of message ﬂows
and participants, and instead of enforcing that they proceed as described, the
conformance to the choreography description is checked and validated.
Both paradigms must solve many of the same problems, such as routing of mes-
sages to their respective sessions, and modeling of all possible message ﬂows
such as sequential, parallel, branching or recursive executions. The main diﬀer-
ence between the two paradigms is therefore whether or not there is a central
controlling entity present.
Before introducing the approach taken in this thesis, we shall ﬁrst cover some of
the existing solutions for both choreography and orchestration. These solutions
are used as inspiration for the solution presented in this thesis.
1.1
Related work
1.1.1
Jolie & Chor
Jolie [MGLZ07] is a programming language for developing distributed services,
commonly referred to as micro services. While Jolie is not in its design intended
to solve the web service choreography problem, it has been used in conjunction
with another language, to solve the choreography problem. This language is
known as Chor [CMCM13] and is developed by the same people as Jolie. Both
languages are based on a formal deﬁnition and have strict typing rules associated
with them, making them very desirable when reasoning about properties, that
a given service expresses or should express.
Chor relies on an abstract session concept to diﬀerentiate between running in-
stances of their choreographies. This session concept is implemented in Jolie
and uses a formal deﬁnition for how each client correctly handles the correlation
sets [MC11]. In short Jolie treat data structures as trees and correlation sets
are then deﬁned by paths on these trees. These paths are then used to traverse
the trees and ﬁnd a matching key present in the established correlation sets.
The way Chor checks whether participants conform to the choreography re-
quirements, are via endpoint projection (EPP). EPP is a concept of projecting
a deﬁnition onto an endpoint, either to validate that the endpoint satisﬁes the
deﬁnition, or in other cases to generate the endpoint based on the deﬁnition.
The strength of EPP is that either of the cases can be applied, which means
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Related work
3
that for internally owned services, one could generate correct endpoints and for
external endpoints, their correction could be checked to ensure that endpoints
satisfy the requirements of a deﬁnition.
The main weakness of Chor is that it currently1 only supports generating Jolie
services.
1.1.2
WS-BPEL
WS-BPEL [OAS] BPEL for short, is not intended to solve the web service chore-
ography problem, instead it focuses on the web service orchestration problem.
While this is not a solution to the choreography problem, BPEL still has ele-
ments that are relevant to this project, in particular message correlation tech-
niques. In BPEL the correlation sets in BPEL are deﬁned by the exchanged
messages.
For a simple example consider the buyer and a seller interaction used by the
authors of BPEL to illustrate how BPEL works. The buyer issues a request to
the seller for a speciﬁc product, this product might have a product ID associated
with it. For that initial interaction this ID can be used to correlate messages,
however once the purchase goes through, the invoice ID will be added to the
correlation set and used to correlate message going forward.
The scenario describes two fundamental correlation mechanisms in BPEL, that
of initiating a new correlation set, extending and modifying the set and match-
ing against an already created correlation set. These mechanisms have greatly
inspired the solution to correlation sets described in this thesis.
1.1.3
WS-CDL
WS-CDL is the proposed solution for describing web-service choreographies.
This proposal is made by the same group who proposed BPEL.
WS-CDL describes choreographies in terms of role-types, relationship-types and
participant-types. Role-types describe the abstract representation of a role, roles
can participate in relationships with each other. I.e. a buyer role and seller
role might work in relationship with each other to form a "buying and selling
relationship".
1date retrieved 04-01-2019
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
Participants on the other hand concretize the abstract role-types. I.e. a partic-
ipant can assume many roles and therefore one participant might participate in
many relationships via its roles.
In order for participants to communicate with each other, WS-CDL deﬁnes a
channel-type, these channels represent shared knowledge between participants
in terms of how they can communicate with each other.
Channel-types are
bound to role-types and contain references as to which participant implements
the channel. Apart from containing information as to how the communication
can occur, these channels specify how information about a channel may be
communicated between participants and what communication paradigm is used
on the channel, for example request, request/response, and just response.
Correlation of messages sent via channels is also deﬁned in the channel-type, as
the channel deﬁnes an identity of messages in terms of an XPath query [XPa], the
result of this query should return an identiﬁer that can be used for correlating
messages sent across the channel. E.g. an orderId property might be present on
all messages sent via the "seller-buyer" channel. Alternative identiﬁers can also
be deﬁned, in case the primary identiﬁer is not available one of the alternative
identiﬁers will be used instead.
Progression of a choreography in WS-CDL is deﬁned in terms of work units,
these work units represent the progress of the choreography as a whole. Each
work unit have a guard associated with it, and a ﬂag indicating whether or
not it is blocking. Blocking work units require that the choreography cannot
continue until their guard is satisﬁed, whereas non-blocking guards simply skip
their work unit if the guard was not satisﬁed.
Work units contain a number of activities that are performed as part of a work
unit. Activities which represent interactions between participants are not re-
stricted in terms of how they occur after each other. Instead a choreography
contains a success criteria that all participants agree on. Once this criteria is
satisﬁed the choreography is said to be completed. Likewise a choreography
can contain deﬁnitions of exceptional occurrences.
In case of exceptions, an
exception handler can be deﬁned, this handler is an agreement between the par-
ticipants of what should occur in the event of an exception. Exceptions can
occur during a choreography for various reasons, these include malformed mes-
sages, timeouts, application errors, and many others. Timeout errors are errors
that must be speciﬁed for interactions, in order for participants to check whether
a timeout has occurred. Timeouts come in two variants, one timeout involves
exchanges that take too long, such as cases where the receiver is overloaded and
therefore unable to respond. The other form of timeout involves a hard dead-
line for when an interaction is expected to occur within a choreography, this
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Related work
5
deadline is speciﬁed in terms of a DateTime object2. Like all the other possible
exceptions, when a timeout occurs a choreography must exit abnormally and
not successfully.
WS-CDL also contains support for structuring activities, these structuring mech-
anisms include sequential, parallel and choice structures. Sequential structures
are straight forward, each activity must complete before the next can occur,
likewise for the parallel structure, all activities declared parallel may occur
concurrently.
The choice structure however represent a choice between mul-
tiple activities, once any activity has been activated then the other activities
are no longer valid and are disabled. For a full description of the WS-CDL
see [KBR+04]
1.1.4
BPMN 2
BPMN is an initiative by some of the leading software companies, to create a
new industry standard for managing business processes3. The BPMN 2 standard
includes a deﬁnition of choreographies, in particular how to model them. The
standard puts great emphasis on the fact, that a choreography is distributed
amongst all participants, therefore all required information must be available
in the exchanged messages. Making it possible for the participants to reach a
decision regarding the choreography, based on the exchanged messages. This
is a hard requirement as otherwise it is impossible to determine the state of
the choreography in terms of validity of the message exchanges. In the BPMN
2 choreography deﬁnition a choreography involves a series of activities. These
activities represent either a simple choreography between two or more partic-
ipants, or it can be the collapsed version of a larger existing choreography.
Participants in the choreography are represented by the pools in BPMN 2 col-
laboration diagrams, these pools are also referred to as partner entities in BPMN
2 terminology.
Communication between two partner entities in BPMN 2 choreography dia-
grams are depicted using the choreography activity. One such activity can be
seen in ﬁgure 1.1, here two participants are performing a participating in a re-
quest/respond scenario. The initiating participant is the participant where the
bar is not colored, whereas the colored bar represents the receiving participant.
The presence of a message from each participant indicates that both a request
and a response is expected, whereas had there only been a message from the
initiator it would have been a request only scenario.
2https://www.w3schools.com/xml/schema_dtypes_date.asp
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_process
==PAGE:16==
6
Introduction
Figure 1.1: Depiction from the OMG BPMN2 standard deﬁnition document,
it shows a choreography activity between two participants in a
request/respond scenario.
BPMN 2 supports various ﬂow constructs, these are loops, multi-instance in
parallel, and multi-instance in sequence. Loops are standard loops as known
from most programming languages such as Java and C#. The presence of a
loop declares that an activity can happen multiple times, however not for how
many times the loop may occur. Multi-instance parallel indicates that messages
can be processed in any order in which they arrive. Compared to the looping
construct, multiple messages may arrive at the same time, whereas in the loop
the activity must be ﬁnished before it can occur again. The sequential version
of the multi-instance requires that the messages that arrive are processed in
sequential order, whereas in the parallel case the order of the processing is not
mandated.
BPMN 2 also speciﬁes a call construct, this call construct can call globally de-
ﬁned existing choreographies. This allows designers to compose choreographies.
To create multiple message ﬂows, the BPMN 2 standard uses the same gateway
constructs that is used in the rest of the BPMN 2 standard. The supported gate-
ways for choreographies include the exclusive gateway, the event based gateway,
the inclusive gateway, the parallel gateway, and ﬁnally the complex gateway.
The exclusive gateway is very similar to the choice construct of the WS-CDL
standard, as it describes a choice where only a single path may be taken, based
on what conditions holds true ﬁrst. In order to determine the exclusive gate-
way, the initiator of the activities following an exclusive gateway, must be a
receiver/sender of the activity just before the exclusive gateway.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Motivation
7
Event based gateways include a few of the events deﬁned in the BPMN 2 stan-
dard.
The message based gateway, the timer based gateway, and the signal
intermediate gateway versions can be used. The message based gateway may
only be used if either the senders or the receivers of the subsequent messages are
the same. Otherwise it cannot be determined whether the choreography is be-
ing executed correctly. Using timers for gateways impose even more restrictions,
namely that the participants following a timer gateway, must be involved in the
activity that precedes the timer gateway, otherwise it cannot be determined
which ﬂow in the choreography should be taken.
Signals can also be used in the event gateway, however the signal that is raised
must be visible to all participants of the activity following the gateway.
BPMN 2 also support branching, this is done using the inclusive gateway. This
gateway allows the designer to model that the process splits into multiple pro-
cesses. Later the processes can be joined again. To formally support this, a
number of restrictions is put on this, in particular it is not possible to split the
process unless the sender of the message is the receiver of the previous message
preceding the gateway. Neither is it possible to join the processes again, unless
the sender of the activity following a merge gateway is also the receiver of all
message in the preceding activities.
Parallel choreographies can also be modeled in BPMN 2, this is done with the
parallel gateway. There are no conditions that must hold for a parallel gateway
to have eﬀect, however in order to verify that the choreography is conformed to,
the sender of all the activities following the gateway, must be a participant of
the preceding activities.
Finally the complex gateway works very much like the inclusive merge gateway,
however it is slightly diﬀerent in that it can merge based on a diﬀerent criteria.
For example it might merge after only 2
3 of the possible message have arrived,
this is diﬀerent from a traditional merge where all messages must arrive before
the merge is successful. For a full reference of the documentation please see
[OMG11]
1.2
Motivation
From the above sections a few common and key features for any solution in this
problem domain can be inferred.
For any solution to be considered complete, it must support sequential communi-
cation, parallel communication and loops. The communication can be modeled
==PAGE:18==
8
Introduction
as requests as it is in BPEL and WS-CDL, or it can be modeled as interactions
between two services such as in Jolie and Chor.
The way correlation is performed is similar for all solutions.
Correlation is
performed on the messages exchanged between services, while languages such
as WS-CDL and BPEL rely more heavily on XML as the language for struc-
turing messages, Jolie relies on a more abstract message format based on trees.
Common for the solutions is that they rely on query based techniques for retriev-
ing values from messages regardless of their individual message formats. The
retrieved values are used to correlate incoming messages to correct instances,
making multiple concurrent sessions possible.
The representation of the language can be either graphical or text based. BPEL,
WS-CDL and BPMN 2 are all built as descriptive languages on top of XML.
The description is then translated into a graphical representation or vice versa,
making models presentable to non-technical staﬀ. This is a great feature when
services are regarded as critical to the business. On the other hand, the devel-
opers implementing the underlying services require detailed speciﬁcations, and
information should not be hidden behind graphical speciﬁcations. Some formats
such as BPMN 2 does not require a detailed graphical description, instead the
necessary information for implementing the solution can be ﬁlled in at a later
stage, such as when developing the solution.
Arguably the approach taken by Jolie and Chor is much better suited for solving
the choreography and orchestration problem than BPEL, WS-CDL and BPMN
2. This is based on the fact that a Jolie or Chor program is always complete,
i.e. there can be no missing information in the speciﬁcation. This is similar
to traditional programming languages, where one cannot write a program that
does not compile4.
What motivated this thesis is a key feature that all of the above solutions fall
short of, namely the ability to easily integrate with existing software applica-
tions. All existing languages require that software applications tailor themselves
to match the needs of the chosen language. For many of these languages, this
involves describing services in WSDL, for others it requires the use of graphical
modeling tools and then mapping that to source code. In Jolie and Chor one
would have to write Jolie and Chor programs in order to gain the beneﬁts that
the languages provide. This might be a great ﬁt for developing new applica-
tions, but another solution applicable to existing applications would ease the
adoptability of applying choreography to existing services.
In this thesis I propose a solution based on a concise language inspired by the
4Unless the language is interpreted, then an error may be raised at runtime instead.
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Motivation
9
multi-party asynchronous session types [HYC16] on which Jolie is based. Along
with a correlation set implementation based on queries performed over tree
structures. The language is implemented as a DSL, built on top of the JVM
and made available as a software library.
Along with the language, a checker is described and implemented, such that
conformance to speciﬁcations can be evaluated during execution. The behavior
of services is observed using a trace model, based on the assumption that it is
possible to observe the invocation and return of a method. Since the solution
does not rely on messages sent between services, it will instead rely on observ-
ability of method arguments and return values. These arguments and return
values will be structured in a rooted tree, and can be queried using a query
language described in the solution.
==PAGE:20==
10
Introduction
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Solution
This chapter contains all information regarding the proposed language and data
structures used. Following the deﬁnition of the language, the implementation
will be introduced.
2.1
Choreography language
The deﬁnition of choreographies is based on the notation in [HYC16].
The
purpose of G is to deﬁne the choreography that participating services should
conform to, such as one service calling another via the HTTP protocol.
G ::=
p →p′ : m′ : (ℓ).G′
(Invocation of receiver observed)
|
return p : m : (ℓ).G′
(Return from invoked receiver)
|
{gj : Gj}j∈J
(Choice)
|
end
(end / no operation)
==PAGE:22==
12
Solution
p ::= type
|
”external”
m ::= method
ℓ::= string
p →p′ : m′ : (ℓ).G′
denotes the invocation of participant p′ on method m′
where the sender is assumed to be p.
The language does not assume that knowledge regarding the sender p exists, as
it is unknown as to how p sends to p′. In some cases p might also be an external
entity, therefore no knowledge of p can be expected to be available.
return p : m : (ℓ).G′
describes the scenario where an observable was previ-
ously invoked and is now expected to return from its invocation. The require-
ment of the return type is that an invocation exists prior to the return, i.e. an
invocation of the same observable (p : m) as in the return type.
{gj : Gj}j∈J
allows for branching in choreographies.
The type states that
a branch (gj | j ∈J) must be taken, where J contains all possible branches
declared.
end
is the ﬁnal type of any choreography. I.e. there can be no branches that
do not end with an end type. Unless a choice is speciﬁed, which is also valid as
a ﬁnal type.
The type system uses supporting types, such as p and m to make the language
more concise. When dealing with these types one should keep in mind that type
refers to a participant which is expected to be observable. One instance of such a
participant could be a JVM class1. The type m refers to an invocable endpoint,
on the JVM this would be a method, and for this thesis m will be regarded as
a method. The special keyword ”external” is reserved for situations where one
wants to emphasize that the participant is external to the system. The external
keyword is used to model situations where a known receiver receives a message
from an external source.
Combining a typed participant p and an endpoint m, produces what is referred
to as an observable. This term will be used throughout the remainder of the
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_class_file
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Traces
13
thesis, it is important to know that the participant on its own is not considered
observable.
Only the combination of p : m is considered observable in the
language.
The language also supports variable assignments i.e. assignment of the type p
beforehand. This assignment is especially useful, when long internal identiﬁer
names start to clutter the choreography deﬁnitions. The syntax for deﬁning
variables is simple, as only types of p is assignable and the syntax is: identifier :
type | ”external”. The identiﬁer can be any string that uniquely identiﬁes the
participant, and unless the keyword external is used, the participant is assumed
to be observable when paired with an endpoint m. An example of its usage could
be:
client : external
server : EndpointController
client →server : serveClient : (Serve the client request).
return server : serveClient : (Return from server).
end
Here the language is used to describe a trivial example where a client contacts a
server, and the server replies with an answer. The language states that for the
participants to conform to the description, an invocation of server at method
serveClient must be observed, followed by a return from that same method.
2.1.1
Uniqueness constraint
The language requires that for all deﬁned choreographies G1, .., Gn no observable
(p : m) participates in more than one choreography. This is to simplify the
correlation set solution deﬁned later.
2.2
Traces
The execution of a choreography is done by the participants of the choreogra-
phy, however these participants might not respect the global description of the
choreography. One can check whether participants conform to the choreography,
by tracing the local execution in the participating services.
==PAGE:24==
14
Solution
This section describes the deﬁnition of a trace, and its relationship with chore-
ographies.
A trace t is a sequence of events e1, .., en where an event ei can be either
invocation(p, m(d1, .., dn)) or return(p, m(d1, .., dn), r). di denotes an argument
passed as input to the observed method call, and r denotes the return value pro-
duced by calling the method.
2.2.1
Trace satisfaction relationship
The satisfaction relationship between a trace t and a choreography G is given
in 2.1. Here e :: t denotes the current event e, followed by the remaining trace
t.
An invocation denotes the invocation of method m for participant p and
return denotes the return from method m for participant p.
invocation(p′, m′(d1, .., dn)) :: t |= p →p′ : m′ : (ℓ).G′
if t |= G′
return(p, m(d1, .., dn), r) :: t |= return p : m : (ℓ).G′
if t |= G′
t |= {gj : Gj}j∈J
if (∃j | t |= gj)
t |= end
if t = ∅
(2.1)
2.3
Argument data structure
Before introducing how correlation and extension functions are deﬁned and what
their syntax looks like, the data structure on which they operate must be intro-
duced. All arguments observed as part of an event will be stored as a rooted
tree with labelled edges.
V alue ::= string
| boolean
| number
| null
| List(V alue1, .., V aluen)
| Object((string × V alue)1, .., (string × V alue)n)
(2.2)
Deﬁnition 2.2 deﬁnes the possible argument types. The types string, boolean,
number, null, and tuples are assumed to be well known types. The (string
× Value) tuple indicates that an Object consists of key-value pairs, where each
Value is identiﬁed by a key of type string.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Argument data structure
15
As previously stated, the tree structure used to hold this data is a rooted tree
where all edges are labelled. It contains a single root and each node may or may
not contain any child nodes. The number of children that a node can have is
not bounded by a predeﬁned number, it depends on the input arguments and
their structure.
There may be paths that leads from a child to a parent, however we shall assume
that instead of establishing a path to an ancestor, the tree is unfolded so as to
maintain the tree topology. Such paths can occur when an argument containing
cyclic references is encoded using the value types deﬁned in 2.2.
Construction of the argument tree is performed as a function T(V alue) = τ,
where τ denotes the constructed argument tree.
All values apart from the
Object type is considered simple values, i.e. they are represented as a single
node with no children. The Object value on the other hand is a node where
all contained tuples, are stored as children of the node. Hence for an arbitrary
Object value with the tuples (k1,′ A′), (k2, true), (k3, List(′B′, 10,′ C′)). The
tree would be constructed as in ﬁgure 2.1. If any of the simple values are used
as the root node, i.e. any value not of type Object, then the tree is just a single
node containing that value. This is the case even when dealing with the List
value, as the entire list is considered a single value.
Figure 2.1: General structure of an Object value when constructed as an ar-
gument tree.
Combining this with the observed events an argument tree is constructed over
either the input data or the return data. The argument tree functions ArgTree
and RetTree deﬁned in 2.3 and 2.4 are used to construct argument trees from
events.
The ArgTree function is deﬁned for any event e while the RetTree function is
deﬁned only for return events.
The deﬁnitions assume that di is a formal parameter, containing both a Value
and an identiﬁer stored as a tuple. While r is the return value observed with
==PAGE:26==
16
Solution
the event, stored as a Value type.
τ = ArgTree(e) =
(
T(Object(d1, .., dn))
if e = return(p, m(d1, .., dn), r)
T(Object(d1, .., dn))
otherwise
(2.3)
τ = RetTree(return(p, m(d1, ..dn), r)) = T(r)
(2.4)
As an example of how this can be applied to a method in Java, consider the
following Java code snippet.
1
boolean
transferMoney(String
merchant , String
customer , int amount)
{}
An invocation of the method transferMoney with the arguments given as ’DTU
book store’, ’s911112’ and 500, encoded using the above Value types would
result in the following encoding.
Object((′merchant′, ’DTU book store’),
(′customer′, ’s911112’),
(′amount′, 500))
The same structure can be encoded in argument tree representation, this repre-
sentation is shown in ﬁgure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Rooted tree representation of the arguments with labelled edges.
2.4
Value retrieval
The tree representation of the arguments, allow for retrieval by deﬁning paths
that can be applied to the trees in order to retrieve a speciﬁc value. A path P
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Correlation sets
17
is deﬁned as a sequence of edges ε1, .., εn. P can be applied to a given argument
tree τ, yielding one of two possible results. Either the path P leads to a valid
traversal of the tree τ, in this case the result is the node that was reached by
following the path P. Otherwise the path was not applicable to τ, then the path
failed to produce a value, this is denoted as ϵ.
The presence of ϵ can be used to raise an error, because the function was not
applicable to the supplied argument tree. It is important not to confuse the
null value with ϵ as these represent diﬀerent things. This is due to the fact
that many languages allow for passing null values for references in arguments.
One such language is Java, where variables of non-primitive types2 are allowed
to be null.
Paths can be speciﬁed to retrieve the entire tree τ as the value, this is done
using the special path P = root.
An example of constructing and applying a path P can be shown for the example
tree in ﬁgure 2.2. Say we are interested in retrieving the customer value of the
argument. The path would be deﬁned as P = customer, applying this path to
the tree τ would yield P(τ) = ’s911112’.
2.5
Correlation sets
A trait shared by all solutions to the choreography problem, is the support
for correlation sets.
This is necessary to support the inherently concurrent
environment, for which choreography solutions are applied. Correlation sets are
used to associate messages to sessions, where a session represents an isolated
instance of a choreography.
In many cases this is done by establishing a set of named key value pairs for each
receiving or sending interaction. Such an approach is similar to the one applied
in this solution. Correlation values are stored as key-value pairs (tuples) and
are considered equal if they are equal w.r.t. the equality deﬁnition of tuples.
Retrieving keys and values from events in a running system, requires that the
designer of the choreography speciﬁes a set of correlation functions, equivalent
to the number of observables in the choreography.
This is required, as it is
otherwise impossible to distinguish between two traces belonging to separate
sessions, unless a correlation deﬁnition exists, which given the observed argu-
ments of each event, can unambiguously assign each event to diﬀerent sessions.
2https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/nutsandbolts/datatypes.html
==PAGE:28==
18
Solution
This is required, as it is otherwise impossible to diﬀerentiate between two traces
belonging to separate sessions, unless there exists a correlation deﬁnition, which
given the observed arguments of each event, can correctly assign each event to
diﬀerent sessions.
The deﬁnition of a proper correlation set is given as a tuple, containing a set of
all correlation keys, along with a set of correlation functions.
({x1, .., xn}, {fxi(p, m) | xi ∈{x1, .., xn} ∧(p, m) ∈G})
(2.5)
A function fxi(p, m) can be applied to an event e yielding either a value (xi, vi)
or the empty value ϵ. The value v ∈{V : Value} denotes the retrieved value by
applying a path P to the argument tree ArgTree(e).
An instance of a correlation set is deﬁned as a set of tuples containing the key x
and the value v. The structural deﬁnition of the correlation set is given in 2.6
{(x1, v1), .., (xn, vn)}
(2.6)
2.6
Correlation set extension functions
Assigning values to the keys in a correlation set is done using extension functions.
Basically functions are deﬁned for observables in a choreography G, and can be
applied to retrieve values similarly to the correlation functions used to correlate
events to active sessions. The deﬁnition of extension functions is given as.
X = ({(fxi(p, m))1, .., (fxi(p, m))n | xi ∈{x1, .., xn} ∧(p, m) ∈G},
{(rxi(p, m))1, .., (rxi(p, m))n | xi ∈{x1, .., xn} ∧(p, m) ∈G})
Similarly the extension functions can be applied to an event e yielding either a
value (xi, vi) or the empty value ϵ. In addition it is possible to specify functions
rxi which are applied to the return value of an event. This is applicable in case
the observed event is a return event.
Given an event e(p, m) the function fX(p, m)(e) produces the set of all (xi, vi)
correlation values for which there exists an extension function fxi(p, m).
Additionally if the event e is a return event all rxi(p, m) functions are used to
extend the correlation set as well. These functions are applied to the RetTree(e)
instead of the ArgTree(e).
==PAGE:29==
2.7 Sessions
19
2.7
Sessions
With traces, events, and correlation sets deﬁned, we can provide a solution to
the correlation problem.
Given a new event e, how can we determine whether it belongs
to an active instance of a choreography, or if a new instance of
a choreography should be created.
First we establish the notion of a session, a session S = (t, G, {(x1, v1), .., (xn, vn)})
is a triple containing a trace t belonging to a choreography G, and an instance
of a correlation set {(x1, v1), .., (xn, vn)}.
Assuming then that a set of sessions {S1, .., Sn} exists when a new event e
arrives. Solving the correlation problem is then a matter of applying the function
fxi(p, m)(e), and check whether the following holds for any session.
(∃j | (xi, fxi(p, m)(e)) ∈{(x1, v1), .., (xn, vn)}j)
If this is the case we add the new event e to the trace of Sj. The extension
functions deﬁned for the observable (p, m) observed in e will also be invoked
to further populate the correlation set of Sj.
Sj is then updated as follows
Sj = (t :: e(p, m), G, {(x1, v1), .., (xn, vn)} ∪fX(p, m)(e)).
When no session was found, a new session Snew will instead be created such
that Snew = (e(p, m), G, fX(p, m)(e)).
G is the choreography for which the
observable p : m belongs.
2.8
Implementation
Developing a system that satisﬁes the requirements of the choreography checker
and trace gatherer is a twofold process. Most importantly the solution needs an
implementation that can construct and represent the data structures described
in the choreography language. Furthermore the implementation must implement
the checking algorithm, this should be done independently of how the traces are
gathered.
==PAGE:30==
20
Solution
Secondly the solution must provide a solution for gathering the traces that
is used to check choreography conformance. This should preferably be done
independently of how the checker is applied, as it will provide a great deal of
ﬂexibility to the implementation. A simpliﬁed overview of the system can be
seen in ﬁgure 2.3. Here the three main software components are shown, along
with their necessary dependencies.
Figure 2.3: Simple system overview of the independent components making
up the complete solution to the choreography problem.
The ﬂexibility provided by separating the trace gathering and the choreography
checking, allows the checker to apply choreography checking independently of
how traces are provided. The only requirement of the choreography checker
is that traces are provided in a speciﬁc representation. This representation is
deﬁned using Googles protobuf language, the Google protobuf language will be
covered later in section 4.3 as well as the protobuf message format used for
exchanging messages in this solution.
For the choreography checker to check conformance of a service, traces must be
supplied by means of a separate implementation for observing method interac-
tions. The traces must be constructed according to the google protobuf schema
and sent to the checker solution.
This solution provides an implementation
==PAGE:31==
2.9 Trace gathering
21
of trace gathering for applications running on the JVM. All the code related
to intercepting and preparing traces are packaged within the trace gathering
solution.
In general a system that utilizes the choreography checking solution can be il-
lustrated as in ﬁgure 2.4. The nodes S1 to S4 may represent classes, processes,
modules, or whole applications. The dashed arrows can be any messaging mech-
anism, such as messages over a network or interprocess communication. Inde-
pendently of these details, the choreography checker must only consider observed
traces and check whether they conform to the described choreographies. The in-
terception of the message however is technology speciﬁc, so for each application,
a solution to intercepting the desired methods must be supplied.
Figure 2.4: Distributed service setup, commonly seen in microservice-inspired
web applications. S1 to S4 represent abstract services, while C
represents the choreography checker service.
In the following sections the solution for gathering traces and checking the gath-
ered traces will be described. A description of the exchanged traces will also
be introduced. Finally the section concludes with an example of an application,
where the solution can be applied.
2.9
Trace gathering
During execution of a distributed system, each participant in a choreography is
expected to perform a number of operations to follow the choreography. Con-
formance to the choreography can be checked by applying the satisfaction rela-
tionship to the observed traces for a given choreography.
==PAGE:32==
22
Solution
The solution used for observing traces in the system is based on byte code instru-
mentation. Annotations are used to enrich the methods which must be observed.
Byte code instrumentation allows for intercepting invocations and returns of the
participants and their methods. The paper [Aar05] gives a short introduction
on bytecode instrumentation on the JVM. The idea of using instrumentation is
to avoid modifying existing software as much as possible, instead each partici-
pant is instrumented with a small piece of code that stores an event whenever
it is invoked. While most of the work is done automatically, the users must
still apply the annotations to the relevant methods themselves, alternatively
one could intercept all method calls and ﬁlter out those that were uninteresting.
Doing this would require unnecessary overhead, so for this solution the more
conservative annotation-based instrumentation approach has been taken.
2.9.1
Intercepting method calls
The general ﬂow for intercepting and gathering traces can be seen in ﬁgure 2.5
and 2.6. The main diﬀerence between the cases, is whether the interception must
deal with the potential return value of the intercepted method. The stage of
the invocation also diﬀers for each case. For example when a method is invoked
the interception happens before the real method, however when intercepting a
return, the interception logic is called after the real method returns.
Figure 2.5: Interception ﬂow for the invocation of a participant.
==PAGE:33==
2.9 Trace gathering
23
Figure 2.6: Interception ﬂow for the return from a participant.
2.9.1.1
Observable behavior
Using the instrumentation approach enables observation of invocations of in-
strumented methods, as well as their returns. The parameters that a method is
called with can also be retrieved.
The parameter values from events are needed for event correlation when distin-
guishing between multiple concurrent sessions.
With the available information it is possible to determine whether one invoca-
tion occurs before another, so long as the interception mechanism stores the
observations in FIFO order for causally related observations. For this solution
the interception mechanism is done for the JVM, here programs execute sequen-
tially and it is therefore easy to guarantee that traces are stored in FIFO order
as the interception code will run before the program is allowed to continue.
As an example of what traces are generated when a method is called on the
JVM, consider ﬁgure 2.7. All invocations and returns can be observed by the
instrumentation solution. For the instrumented class in ﬁgure 2.7, both anno-
tations have been applied, therefore two traces are generated and sent to the
checker.
==PAGE:34==
24
Solution
Figure 2.7: Generated traces for a class with both @TraceInvocation and
@TraceReturn annotations.
Multiple calls to the same method even if it is invoked by the class itself can
also be observed. For an example consider ﬁgure 2.8. Here the instrumented
class calls itself, this can still be observed by the implemented instrumentation
solution.
Figure 2.8: Diﬀerent observable scenarios.
2.9.1.2
Unobservable behavior
While the invocation and return of methods are easily observable, it is not
possible for the solution to observe anything related to the sending of messages.
==PAGE:35==
2.9 Trace gathering
25
This includes who the sender is, while it is somewhat possible to determine
this in method calls on the same JVM, no information is available when these
messages travel across the network.
Since the solution does not distinguish
between the chosen transportation used, it is not possible in general to determine
anything regarding the sender. Nor is it possible to use any information which
might be available in the protocol being used.
This restriction is especially
problematic if users expect to use something like a session cookie. While it is
possible to circumvent this issue by exposing protocol and network information
as part of the method parameters, it requires that users modify their program
to make this information available. The deﬁned language however, does not
require that senders are observable, so for this solution the available information
is suﬃcient to provide a satisfactory implementation.
The greatest weakness of the solution compared to existing choreography so-
lutions is the lack of information on the senders.
In all other choreography
solutions the sender is also modeled and part of validation, this is however not
possible in this solution.
Should it be a requirement that the sender of a message is checked as well, then
this solution would not be applicable, as this is simply not observable using the
instrumentation approach this solution relies on.
2.9.2
Instrumentation & conﬁguration
Conﬁguration of the solution resides in the conﬁguration sub-package.
This
package provides convenience methods for easily setting up the solution, this is
done via factories and statically available objects.
The Instrumentation package contains the static method implementations that
are applied in the instrumentation step. The code that is applied to the in-
vocation of methods can be seen in listing 2.1. Apart from the Kotlin speciﬁc
language constructs the important aspect of this listing is that it is statically
available. This is a requirement of the library which is used to perform the
instrumentation. Eﬀectively the declared piece of code will be called just before
the actual invocation of the instrumented method.
1
object
BeforeAdvisor {
2
@JvmStatic
3
@Advice. OnMethodEnter
4
fun
beforeMethod(
5
@Advice.AllArguments
allArguments: Array <Any?>,
6
@Advice.Origin
method: Method)
7
{
==PAGE:36==
26
Solution
8
InterceptionStrategy .strategy.intercept(Invocation(
Observation(method.declaringClass , method), allArguments
))
9
}
10
}
Listing 2.1: Instrumentation advisor class for invocation of methods.
Custom annotations are used in order to ﬁnd the methods where instrumen-
tation should be applied. One annotation for the invocation and another for
the return of a method. The way it works is by using a Java agent, then once
a class is being loaded where any of its methods contain any of the declared
annotations. The static code from listing 2.1 is applied to the method.
From the listing it should also be apparent that a static object is used to in-
tercept the methods. This interception strategy is conﬁgured at runtime via
the provided static conﬁguration methods. A simple example of applying the
instrumentation to a method can be seen below in listing 2.2. Here the method
authenticate for class Login is intercepted, both when it is invoked and when
it returns. The instrumentation is conﬁgured via the subsequent Interception-
Conﬁguration.setupForHttpInterception method call. The HTTP conﬁguration
requires that the user tells it where it must send the traces. I.e. at what URL
is the choreography checker accepting HTTP POST requests. Methods that are
intercepted by this implementation, will provide the participant as the canonical
name of the class the method belongs to.
1
class
Login{
2
@TraceInvocation
3
@TraceReturn
4
public
UserSession
authenticate(
5
String
username , String
password)
6
{
7
...
8
}
9
}
10
11
class
UserSession{
12
public
String
userId;
13
}
14
15
16
var
configuration = new
HttpConfiguration ("checker/invocation",
17
"checker/return");
18
InterceptionConfiguration . setupForHttpInterception ( configuration );
==PAGE:37==
2.9 Trace gathering
27
Listing 2.2: Small
example
showing
the
usage
of
the
instrumentation
annotations and conﬁguration object.
2.9.3
Sending traces
The provided implementation for sending events to the checker in the intercep-
tion solution sends the observed traces over HTTP. This allows the checker to
run in a separate application and receive observed traces via HTTP. In section
2.10 the data that is exchanged will be explained, but in order for Java objects
to be sent in the shared format, a mapping from Java types and classes must
exist. This mapping is also provided as part of this solution, in listing 2.3 the
code performing the mapping is shown.
In general many concepts can be mapped one to one, however for objects the
main idea is to map them much like one would map them to JSON objects.
Meaning that all declared ﬁelds for an object is iterated over and mapped. The
mapped ﬁelds are then gathered in a dictionary and put into the Struct value
type.
1
private fun
buildProtobufValue (argument: Any?): Value.Builder {
2
return
when(argument){
3
null -> newValue ().setNullValue (NullValue.NULL_VALUE)
4
is Number
-> newValue (). setNumberValue (argument.toDouble ())
5
is String
-> newValue (). setStringValue (argument)
6
is Collection <*> -> newValue ().setListValue( buildListValue (
argument))
7
is Array <*> -> newValue ().setListValue( buildListValue (
argument))
8
is Boolean
-> newValue ().setBoolValue(argument)
9
is Enum <*> -> newValue (). setStringValue (argument.name)
10
else -> newValue (). setStructValue ( buildStructValue (argument
)) // Construct
struct
from
declared
fields of class
11
}
12
}
Listing 2.3: Mapping implementation from Java types to protobuf types.
The mapped data can be sent over HTTP. This is facilitated by the default
HTTP client implementation introduced in Java113. The implementation uti-
lizes that protobuf objects can be serialized to a binary format and can therefore
be sent as bytes over HTTP. For the receiving application to know how to read
3https://openjdk.java.net/groups/net/httpclient/intro.html
==PAGE:38==
28
Solution
the message, the content type is set to ’application/x-protobuf’.
While this content type is not standardized by any oﬃcial means, it seems to be
among a selection of options commonly used when sending protobuf payloads
over HTTP. The actual implementation of the HTTP sender can be seen in
listing 2.4. The implementation is a realization of the TraceSender interface,
in the future it might be worthwhile to provide alternative ways of sending the
traces, for example using message queues.
1
class
HttpSender(private
val
configuration : HttpConfiguration ) :
TraceSender {
2
private val
contentType = "application/x-protobuf"
3
private val
httpClient = HttpClient. newHttpClient ()
4
5
override
fun send(invocationDTO: DtoDefinitions . InvocationDTO )
{
6
val
request = HttpRequest.newBuilder(URI( configuration .
invocationTraceEndpoint ))
7
.POST(HttpRequest. BodyPublishers .ofByteArray(
invocationDTO.toByteArray ()))
8
.header("content -type", contentType)
9
.build ()
10
val
response = httpClient.send(request , HttpResponse .
BodyHandlers.ofString ())
11
if (response.statusCode ()
>= 300 || response.statusCode ()
<= 199) {
12
throw
error ()
13
}
14
}
15
16
override
fun send(returnDTO: DtoDefinitions .ReturnDTO) {
17
val
request = HttpRequest.newBuilder(URI( configuration .
returnTraceEndpoint ))
18
.POST(HttpRequest. BodyPublishers .ofByteArray(
returnDTO.toByteArray ()))
19
.header("content -type", contentType)
20
.build ()
21
val
response = httpClient.send(request , HttpResponse .
BodyHandlers.ofString ())
22
if (response.statusCode ()
>= 300 || response.statusCode ()
<= 199) {
23
throw
error ()
24
}
25
}
26
}
Listing 2.4: Kotlin implementation of the HTTP TraceSender interface.
==PAGE:39==
2.10 Shared data types
29
2.10
Shared data types
The observed traces are exchanged by means of Google protobuf messages. The
schema for these messages is provided in listing 2.5.
1 syntax = "proto3";
2 import "google/protobuf/struct.proto";
3
4 option
java_package = "com.dickow.chortlin.shared.trace.protobuf";
5
6 message
ArgumentDTO {
7
string
identifier = 1;
8
google.protobuf.Value
value = 2;
9 }
10
11 message
ObservedDTO {
12
string
participant = 1;
13
string
method = 2;
14 }
15
16 message
InvocationDTO {
17
ObservedDTO
observed = 1;
18
repeated
ArgumentDTO
arguments = 2;
19 }
20
21 message
ReturnDTO {
22
ObservedDTO
observed = 1;
23
repeated
ArgumentDTO
arguments = 2;
24
google.protobuf.Value
returnValue = 3;
25 }
Listing 2.5: Google protobuf schema deﬁnition of events exchanged as
messages.
These messages are compiled to Java .class ﬁles by using the protobuf compiler.
However any programming language environment can provide an implemen-
tation of the protobuf schema deﬁnition. By using this schema it is possible
to exchange events from various environments, without requiring users to lock
themselves into a speciﬁc technology stack.
Currently most popular programming languages are supported by the protobuf
compiler and the guarantee is that, given the .proto ﬁle containing the schema,
any language that the protobuf compiler supports can use the schema right
away. It should be noted that the schema makes use of the dynamic Value type
provided by the protobuf well-known types [Goo]. The strength of the Value
type is that it can encode any type of argument, and when it must be mapped
to the internal Value type, the mapping can be performed based on the type of
the encoded value. This is a great feature as the type of the arguments cannot
be pre-determined.
==PAGE:40==
30
Solution
The choreography checker provides an implementation for translating from the
protobuf Value type, to the Value type used for correlation, the internal Value
type was introduced in section 2.3. The types supported by the protobuf Value
type is quite similar to the types supported by this solution. The mapping from
the protobuf values is given in listing 2.6. The function is a recursive function,
calling itself when encountering nested structures, such as Struct and List
types.
1
private fun toValue(value: protobuf.Value): Value {
2
return
when(value.kindCase){
3
protobuf.NULL_VALUE
-> NullValue ()
4
protobuf.NUMBER_VALUE
-> NumberValue(value.numberValue)
5
protobuf.STRING_VALUE
-> StringValue(value.stringValue)
6
protobuf.BOOL_VALUE
-> BooleanValue(value.boolValue)
7
protobuf.STRUCT_VALUE
->
8
ObjectValue(value.structValue.fieldsMap.mapValues {
9
entry
-> toValue(entry.value)
10
})
11
protobuf.LIST_VALUE
->
12
ListValue(value.listValue.valuesList.map{toValue(it)})
13
protobuf.KIND_NOT_SET
-> NullValue ()
14
else -> error ()
15
}
16
}
Listing 2.6: Mapping function from protobuf Value types to the Value types
used in this solution.
2.11
Choreography checker
Similarly to the trace gathering module, the choreography checker is split into
multiple sub packages. Each of these packages implement a speciﬁc part of the
overall choreography checker solution. In ﬁgure 2.9 the general package struc-
ture of the choreography checker is shown. The abstract syntax tree (AST)
and choreography sub-packages provide the implementation for describing and
representing choreographies in the solution.
The AST package also contains
a validation implementation, this is used to check whether the rules and con-
straints described in the language section is respected.
Describing and applying correlations to choreographies are implemented in the
correlation package. The checker has its own representation of traces and events,
as this is a core concept to the choreography checker. In section 2.10 the map-
ping from the events sent over the wire to the internal Value type was shown.
==PAGE:41==
2.11 Choreography checker
31
The implementation of this mapping resides in the trace package, as well as spe-
ciﬁc class deﬁnitions for traces when working with them in the checker. Lastly
the checking module provide the implementations for checking observed traces.
In short this module provides the implementation for the online checker and
includes the implementation of sessions.
Figure 2.9: Package overview for the choreography checker module.
2.11.1
AST & Choreography DSL
The abstract syntax tree that is constructed over the choreography language,
is modeled by means of a class hierarchy resembling the types provided by the
language. The class diagram for the AST can be seen in ﬁgure 2.10, at the center
is the abstract concept of an ASTNode. All nodes must implement traversal of
the tree, this functionality can conveniently be handled by the abstract class.
==PAGE:42==
32
Solution
Figure 2.10: Class diagram over the AST classes, each representing a speciﬁc
type of the choreography language.
Building the representation of the AST is done by interacting with a builder
pattern implementation. The builder pattern used in this solution is sometimes
referred to as a ﬂuent API 4. All methods that the builder exposes, can be
directly traced to the underlying choreography language. The classes that realize
the DSL implementation is shown in ﬁgure 2.11. The consequence of this design
is that the AST nodes themselves know how to add children to the resulting
AST. All the logic regarding building the AST however, is implemented in the
abstract class ASTNode.
To begin constructing the AST, a special TypeFactory is exposed, this factory
has two static methods, which allows for building the initial node of a chore-
ography. Once the initial node has been constructed, most of the remaining
choreography is built by interacting with the builder instead.
There is one exception and that is for the Choice type, here the type accepts
branches of choreographies. These branches are built using the TypeFactory to
deﬁne new choreographies.
4https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fluent_interface
==PAGE:43==
2.11 Choreography checker
33
Figure 2.11: Class diagram over the AST builder classes.
Participants in the language are represented either as external participants or in-
ternal participants. This is reﬂected in the implementation via the Participant
interface realizations, the participants can be either internal or external. When
a participant is declared as external, nothing can be observed for it, however for
internal participants the invocation of their methods can be described and ob-
served. Lastly the receiver for the Interaction type and the observable of the
ReturnFrom type accept an ObservableParticipant. This is the combination
of a participant and a method.
Usage of the implemented DSL should resemble the choreography language as
much as possible. As explained in this section, this is achieved via the use of a
ﬂuent API design. Furthermore to avoid some of the verbosity that a language
such as Java might impose, a number of static factory methods with convenient
naming is used. This should improve the readability of the DSL.
Continuing with the example of the simple login method in listing 2.2, the login
scenario can be described using the DSL.
Say that we are interested in observing the invocation and then the return of the
authenticate method for the class Login. This we would describe as in listing 2.7.
In contrast to this, when using the choreography language the scenario would
be described as in example 2.7. Apart from a few typing disciplines required
in the DSL version, the two languages should not feel that diﬀerent from each
==PAGE:44==
34
Solution
other.
client : external
login : Login
client →login : authenticate : (Authenticate client).
return login : authenticate : (Tell client if it was authenticated).
end
(2.7)
1
var client = external("client");
2
var login = participant(Login :: class);
3
4
interaction(client , login.onMethod("authenticate "),
5
"Authenticate
client")
6
.returnFrom(login.onMethod("authenticate"),
7
"Tell
client if it was
authenticated ")
8
.end();
Listing 2.7: Describing the login scenario from listing 2.2 using the DSL.
2.11.2
Traces
Traces are modeled internally in the choreography checker, this has to do with
the attempt at making the checker agnostic towards the origin of the traces.
Therefore, all traces are mapped from the received wire format deﬁned in pro-
tobuf data types to the internal representation. The mapping was shown in
section 2.10 on shared data types.
The class diagram showing the internal
Value type is shown in ﬁgure 2.12. All the classes are direct implementations
of the speciﬁed value types deﬁned in 2.2.
==PAGE:45==
2.11 Choreography checker
35
Figure 2.12: Class diagram over the value types deﬁned in 2.2.
These values are used in the classes modeling traces for the solution. The class
diagram showing the internal representation of a trace can be seen in 2.13. Most
of these classes correlates directly to the description given of traces in section
2.2. The main diﬀerence is that the concept of an indexed event is introduced.
The indexed version of an event is to keep track of the order in which events
were observed. This helps maintaining knowledge on which events have been
matched and where in the list the event resided.
The Trace class has been given additional functionality, and exposes methods
for manipulating the underlying events and keeping track of which events have
already been matched.
Figure 2.13: Class diagram over the internal choreography checker class rep-
resentation of traces.
==PAGE:46==
36
Solution
2.11.3
Correlation DSL
Describing how to correlate messages with active sessions is also a part of the
solution. It is integral to the solution to support correlation of traces to active
sessions, otherwise only a single instance of a choreography can exist at any time.
In section 2.5 the argument tree structure of values, as well as the language for
specifying paths were introduced. These speciﬁcations have been implemented
in the choreography checker solution as well.
Similarly to the choreography
DSL, the correlation language is also implemented using a builder pattern. The
implementation allows for method chaining such that a path can be built starting
from an arbitrary node or by using the special path "root". In ﬁgure 2.14 the
implementation of the builder is shown using a class diagram.
Figure 2.14: Classes for constructing a path and the resulting Path classes.
Building the correlation involves more than just deﬁning paths, the solution
must also support building an entire correlation for all observables. This corre-
lation set must in turn be associated with a choreography, allowing the validation
step to check that all observables are deﬁned in the correlation set. Figure 2.15
and 2.16 shows all relevant classes for deﬁning correlations and building the
functions.
The design is divided into two parts, ﬁrst of all it should be possible to create the
objects representing the correlation and extension functions. Instead of doing
this by using the construct for each correlation object, factories and builders
are introduced. These classes are intended to increase the readability of the
resulting code, and to encapsulate any implementation details of the underlying
objects.
==PAGE:47==
2.11 Choreography checker
37
Figure 2.15: Factories and builder classes used when constructing correlation
deﬁnitions and functions.
Figure 2.16: Correlation and correlation functions, showing the supported op-
erations and their return values.
To understand how the classes work together as a coherent API. The usage of
the various classes will be illustrated by the use of the login example from listing
2.2. The correlation will use the username of the user until a session has been
established. The session identiﬁer is part of the return value of the method,
therefore the correlation needs to add a key from the input of the method, as
well as the return value of the method. This can be described using the cor-
==PAGE:48==
38
Solution
relation API as seen in listing 2.8. Each statement in the listing describes a
diﬀerent part of the correlation requirement. First of all the deﬁneCorrelation
call creates a builder instance used to deﬁne the top level of the correlation. In
short the result of building the correlation is a map from observable participants
to correlation functions, these mappings are gathered when the call to ﬁnish()
is issued. As correlations are deﬁned for a participant and a method, an added
correlation speciﬁes for which observable the correlation is deﬁned. In this exam-
ple a correlation for the participant Login is added for its method authenticate.
The path used to retrieve the correlation value is deﬁned by username and the
correlation value is identiﬁed by "userName". The argument tree provided as
input for the correlation function and input extension is shown in ﬁgure 2.17a,
while the return value is shown in ﬁgure 2.17b.
(a) Argument tree over the input values of
the authenticate method.
(b) Argument tree over the
return value of the au-
thenticate method.
Figure 2.17
1
login = participant(Login :: class);
2
3
defineCorrelation ()
4
.add(
5
correlation(login.onMethod("authenticate"), "userName",
6
node("username").build ()
7
. extendFromInput ("userName", node("username").build ()
8
. extendFromReturn ("userId", node("userId").build ()
9
.done ())
10
.finish ()
Listing 2.8: Using the correlation API to describe how to apply correlation to
the login example.
==PAGE:49==
2.11 Choreography checker
39
2.11.4
AST & choreography validation
Validating the constructed AST is done by using the VISITOR pattern 5. Not
many rules are deﬁned for the language, but a few are and must be checked.
• All paths must have end with an end node or with a choice node.
• All return nodes must have a matching invocation node
• An end node may not have a subsequent node
These rules can be checked by traversing the constructed AST and whenever a
return node is encountered, the previously visited interactions are checked for
a matching invocation. The checking of the end node is even simpler, when
visiting an end node, if the there is a subsequent node the AST is violating a
rule. Lastly when visiting any node, with no subsequent node, if the node is not
an end or a choice node the AST is also not valid.
The other validation that is performed is regarding deﬁned correlations. It is
required that each observable have a correlation deﬁned, as well as the initial
node having an extension function. This can also be checked by traversing the
AST and checking all observables whether they exist in the supplied correlation
set. If any of these rules are violated, an error can be raised indicating the
choreography is invalid.
These validations are run whenever the online checker is created, this is done to
make sure that invalid checkers won’t be generated.
2.11.5
Online checker
In section 2.2.1 we deﬁned how to check whether a trace respects a given chore-
ography. This is suﬃcient for doing oﬄine checking of gathered traces, however
online checking is much more interesting, but doing this requires another compo-
nent, namely being able to keep track of traces and maintain a state of ongoing
choreographies.
Informally an online checker function can be described as a
function that takes a set of choreographies, a set of active sessions, and a single
trace. The function then returns whether that trace was expected in any of
the active sessions. Furthermore the checker must maintain a state of active
sessions and their observed traces. The uniqueness constraint described earlier
5https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visitor_pattern
==PAGE:50==
40
Solution
now becomes useful, as it is easy to determine which choreography a trace be-
longs to. The choreography that a participant belongs to, can be decided by a
single lookup in a dictionary over participants and the choreography that they
belong to.
Checking newly arrived traces against the active sessions might result in three
possible states. Either the trace correlates to an active session and it will be
checked in the context of that session. Such a case can have three results, the
trace might not conform to the choreography and the choreography is violated,
it might be expected but the entire choreography has not yet been observed, or
lastly it might be the ﬁnal trace expected and the choreography was successfully
observed. In case the trace violated the choreography, the session must be ended
as it is in a state of violation. If the trace was expected but the choreography
is still in progress, the correlation set must be extended with any extension
functions associated with that observable.
Lastly if the trace resulted in a
completed choreography, the session must also be ended but without raising an
error.
If the trace does not belong to any active session, a new session for that trace
is constructed and checked. Following the creation of a new session, the above
states for checking a trace then apply once more.
The online checker has been implemented using the Kotlin language and the
implementation of the checker is shown in listing 2.9.
The sessionManager
which is used by the online checker will be described after the listing.
1
fun check(trace: TraceElement): ChoreographyStatus {
2
val
session = sessionManager.getSession(trace)
3
return
when (session) {
4
null -> {
5
val
newSession =
6
sessionManager .beginSession(trace)
7
checkTraceAgainstSession (newSession , trace)
8
}
9
else -> checkTraceAgainstSession (session , trace)
10
}
11
}
12
13
fun
checkTraceAgainstSession (session: Session , trace: TraceElement)
: ChoreographyStatus {
14
val result = check(session , trace)
15
return
when (result) {
16
CheckResult.None -> {
17
sessionManager .endSession(session)
18
throw
error ()
19
}
==PAGE:51==
2.11 Choreography checker
41
20
CheckResult.Full -> {
21
sessionManager .endSession(session)
22
ChoreographyStatus .FINISHED
23
}
24
CheckResult.Partial
-> {
25
session.extendKeys(trace)
26
ChoreographyStatus .IN_PROGRESS
27
}
28
}
29
}
30
31
fun check(session: Session , trace: TraceElement): CheckResult {
32
session.store(trace)
33
return
session.choreography.start.satisfy(session.
observedTraces ())
34
}
Listing 2.9: Kotlin code for the online checker
In section 2.7 it was described that sessions are created and destroyed as the
system is running. The session manager is introduced to manage this. In short it
provides three methods, beginSession, getSession, and endSession. The session
manager requires knowledge of all possible choreographies, for which it must
manage sessions. This is necessary to determine for which choreography a session
should be started. In listing 2.10 the implementation of the session manager is
given.
For this version of the solution, only an in-memory version is given,
however it would be possible to provide one where the sessions are persisted in
a persistent data store. This in turn would allow the system to shut down and
continue at a later stage.
1
class
InMemorySessionManager (private
val
choreographies : List <
Choreography >) : SessionManager
2
{
3
private val
activeSessions = Hashtable <UUID , Session >()
4
5
override
fun
endSession(session: Session) {
6
activeSessions .remove(session.sessionId)
7
}
8
9
override
fun
beginSession(trace: TraceElement ): Session {
10
val
choreography = choreographies .firstOrNull {
11
c -> c.contains(trace.getObservation ())
12
}
13
if ( choreography != null) {
14
val
sessionId = UUID.randomUUID ()
15
val
session = Session(sessionId , choreography , trace)
16
activeSessions [sessionId] = session
==PAGE:52==
42
Solution
17
return
session
18
} else {
19
throw
error ()
20
}
21
}
22
23
override
fun
getSession(trace: TraceElement ): Session? {
24
return
activeSessions.values.find { session
->
25
session.correlatesTo(trace) &&
26
session. containsObservable (trace. getObservation ())
27
}
28
}
29
}
Listing 2.10: Kotlin class for the in-memory session manager.
When ending a session, the session is removed from the active session data
store, for this implementation this is a simple dictionary, where a unique key
is used to identify the session. Beginning a session involves the usage of the
uniqueness constraint, the manager tries to ﬁnd a choreography which contains
the observable from the trace, if a choreography exists for the observable a new
session is created and stored. Otherwise an error is raised, as the trace was not
expected in any of the supplied choreographies.
The last function which supports retrieving a session from a trace, goes through
all active sessions and tries to ﬁnd one where the trace correlates and where
the underlying choreography contains the observable. If a session is found it is
returned, otherwise it returns nothing represented by the null value.
2.11.6
Trace satisfaction relationship
Deciding whether a trace satisﬁes a given choreography is implemented using
the satisfaction relationship described in section 2.2.1. Each extension of the
ASTNode abstract class must implement a single method, the interface that
deﬁnes this method is shown in ﬁgure 2.18.
==PAGE:53==
2.11 Choreography checker
43
Figure 2.18: Interface for the satisfaction relationship deﬁned in sections 2.2.1.
Both the Interaction and ReturnFrom types implement this relationship, they
are however very similarly so for brevity only one of them is shown. The im-
plementation of the satisfaction relationship for interactions is shown in listing
13.
1
override
fun
satisfy(trace: Trace): CheckResult {
2
val
matchResult = matcher. matchInvocation (trace. getNotConsumed
(), receiver)
3
return
when (matchResult) {
4
is SuccessfulMatch
-> {
5
trace.consume(matchResult.matchedEvent)
6
next !!. satisfy(trace)
7
}
8
is InvalidTraceMatch
-> CheckResult.None
9
is NoMoreTraceMatch
-> CheckResult.Partial
10
else -> CheckResult.None
11
}
12
}
Listing 2.11: Satisfaction relationship implementation for the Interaction
type.
And the matcher that tests the trace is shown in listing 2.12. It utilizes the
sequential relationship between traces and choreographies as it is deﬁned in
section 2.2.1.
1
fun
matchInvocation (
2
traces: MutableList <TraceEventIndexed >, expected: Observable):
MatchResult
3
{
4
return
when (traces.isNotEmpty ()) {
5
true -> {
6
val
element = traces.first ()
==PAGE:54==
44
Solution
7
if (element.traceEvent is Invocation && element.
traceEvent.getObservation () == expected)
8
{
9
SuccessfulMatch (element)
10
} else {
11
InvalidTraceMatch ()
12
}
13
}
14
false
-> NoMoreTraceMatch ()
15
}
16
}
Listing 2.12: Matcher implementation for checking a list of events against an
invocation.
Two types remain for the satisfaction relationship, these are the Choice and End
types. The satisfaction relationship for the End type is shown in listing 2.13 and
the relationship for Choice is shown in listing 2.14. The satisfaction relationship
for the Choice type checks all possible paths, and if any path has a partial or
full match then that result is used, otherwise the trace that is checked must be
invalid for that choreography so a no match result is returned. There is also
another special case for choices, if there are no more traces remaining it is not
yet possible to determine whether the trace properly satisﬁes the choreography,
so therefore a partial match is returned until further events are observed.
1
override
fun
satisfy(trace: Trace): CheckResult {
2
val
satisfied = trace. getNotConsumed ().isEmpty ()
3
return if (satisfied) CheckResult.Full else
CheckResult.None
4
}
Listing 2.13: Satisfaction relationship implementation for the End type
1
override
fun
satisfy(trace: Trace): CheckResult {
2
if (trace. getNotConsumed ().isEmpty ()) {
3
return
CheckResult.Partial
4
}
5
6
val
pathResults = possiblePaths.map {
7
path -> path.satisfy(trace.copy ())
8
}
9
return
when {
10
pathResults.contains(CheckResult.Full) -> CheckResult.Full
11
pathResults.contains(CheckResult.Partial) -> CheckResult.
Partial
12
else -> CheckResult.None
13
}
14
}
==PAGE:55==
2.11 Choreography checker
45
Listing 2.14: Satisfaction relationship implementation for the Choice type
==PAGE:56==
46
Solution
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 3
DTU pay example
To show that the developed solution can be applied in practice, a simple example
have been developed. The developed example is greatly inspired by the web
service courses from DTU.
3.1
Fictive description
Lately many new payment methods have surfaced and a few students at DTU
have invented a new payment method. This method involves the usage of small
tags, these tags are issued to each user of the payment method.
Each tag uniquely identiﬁes the user who owns the tag and whenever the user
wishes to purchase something from a store, he/she shows the tag and the mer-
chant scans the tag.
The system installed at the merchant then contacts the DTU pay backend ser-
vices. The DTU pay service then identiﬁes who the merchant is and who the
customer is, then it issues a transaction request to the bank with which it has
agreements.
The developers of DTU pay are interested in knowing whether the services are
correctly communicating with each other. For this reason it has been decided
==PAGE:58==
48
DTU pay example
to try out the solution developed in this thesis. In the following section the
appliance of the solution to this example will be described.
3.2
Implementation
Considering the DTU pay example. One could make the scenario more concrete
by mapping the abstract modules i.e. Merchant, DTUPay and Bank into their
probable respective Java classes. The communication between them might look
like the following sequence diagram.
Figure 3.1: Sequence diagram for the DTU pay example.
The underlying simpliﬁed source code for these classes might be implemented
as in listings 3.1, 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4.
The example code is implemented using
the Spring framework [Spr18b]. Spring is a heavy user of annotations, there-
fore all involved classes and methods have been annotated with a multitude of
annotations.
1
@RestController
2
@RequestMapping (value = "merchant")
3
public
class
Merchant {
4
5
@PostMapping(value = "{merchant }/pay")
6
public
ResponseEntity
pay(@PathVariable
String
merchant ,
7
@RequestBody
PaymentDTO
payment)
8
{
9
try {
10
... // Send
request to DTU pay
==PAGE:59==
3.2 Implementation
49
11
}
12
catch(Exception e){
13
return new
ResponseEntity (HttpStatus.BAD_REQUEST);
14
}
15
16
return new
ResponseEntity(HttpStatus.OK);
17
}
18
}
Listing 3.1: Merchant class
1
@RestController
2
@RequestMapping ("dtu/pay")
3
public
class
DTUPayController {
4
private
final
DTUBankIntegration
bankIntegration ;
5
6
@Autowired
7
public
DTUPayController ( DTUBankIntegration
bankIntegration ) {
8
this. bankIntegration = bankIntegration ;
9
}
10
11
@PostMapping("{merchant }/{ token}")
12
public
ResponseEntity <Boolean > pay(
13
@PathVariable
String
merchant ,
14
@RequestBody
Integer
amount ,
15
@PathVariable
String
token)
16
{
17
var result = bankIntegration . transferMoney (merchant , token ,
amount);
18
return
ResponseEntity.ok(result);
19
}
20
}
Listing 3.2: DTU Pay controller class
1
public
class
DTUBankIntegration {
2
3
public
boolean
transferMoney(String
merchant , String
customer ,
Integer
amount)
4
{
5
try{
6
... // Send
transaction to the bank
7
}
8
catch(Exception e){
9
return
false;
10
}
11
12
return
true;
==PAGE:60==
50
DTU pay example
13
}
14
}
Listing 3.3: DTU Bank integration class, this class is responsible for issuing
requests to the bank controller.
1
@RestController
2
@RequestMapping ("bank")
3
public
class
BankController {
4
5
@PostMapping("transactions")
6
public
ResponseEntity <Boolean > transfer( @RequestBody
TransactionDTO
transaction){
7
... // Effectuate
transaction
8
return new
ResponseEntity <>( HttpStatus.OK);
9
}
10
}
Listing 3.4: Bank controller class, this class is responsible for receiving
requests on the bank interface.
3.3
Applying the language
Applying the choreography language to the example, it is possible to capture
the same scenario, as described in the sequence diagram in ﬁgure 3.1. We start
out by deﬁning the choreography, then we deﬁne the correlation to be used for
the choreography. The choreography can be seen in 3.1.
client : external
merchant : Merchant
dtuPay : DTUPayController
dtuBank : DTUBankIntegration
bank : BankController
==PAGE:61==
3.3 Applying the language
51
1.client →merchant : pay : (initiate payment).
2.merchant →dtuPay : pay : (pay).
3.dtuPay →dtuBank : transferMoney : (integrate with bank).
4.dtuBank →bank : transfer : (perform transfer at bank).
5. return bank : transfer : (return once transferred).
6. return dtuBank : transferMoney : (return from the DTU bank integration).
7. return dtuPay : pay : (return from dtu pay).
8. return merchant : pay : (ﬁnished payment).
9. end
(3.1)
Now the correlation for each observable of the choreography must be deﬁned as
well.
We must deﬁne a correlation for each observable which means that we must
deﬁne a correlation for each of the following observable participants.
merchant : pay
dtuPay : pay
dtuBank : transferMoney
bank : transfer
correlation set = ({merchantId, userId},
{fmerchantId(merchant : pay) →merchant,
fmerchantId(dtuPay : pay) →merchant,
fuserId(dtuBank : transferMoney) →customer,
fuserId(bank : transfer) →transaction.customer})
X = ({fmerchantId(merchant : pay) →merchant,
fuserId(dtuPay : pay) →customer},
∅)
==PAGE:62==
52
DTU pay example
3.4
Applying the implementation
In the previous section the choreography and correlation was deﬁned using the
choreography language and the correlation sets. The solution uses the builder
implementation to provide the DSL as a ﬂuent API. In this section the usage of
the implementation will be shown and compared to the deﬁnition in the above
section.
First of all the shorthand version of the participants will be introduced.
Recall that the instrumentation solution provided class identiﬁers via their
canonical names, hence the long qualiﬁed class name.
1
var client = external("Client");
2
var
merchant = participant("com.dickow.dtu.pay.example.merchant.
Merchant");
3
var dtuPay = participant("com.dickow.dtu.pay.example.dtu.
DTUPayController ");
4
var
dtuBank = participant("com.dickow.dtu.pay.example.dtu.
DTUBankIntegration ");
5
var bank = participant("com.dickow.dtu.pay.example.bank.controllers
.BankController");
Then we deﬁne the correlation and lastly we create the choreography and asso-
ciate the deﬁned correlation to the choreography.
1
var cdef = defineCorrelation ()
2
.add(correlation(merchant.onMethod("pay"),
3
"merchantId", node("merchant").build ())
4
. extendFromInput ("merchantId", node("merchant").build ()
)
5
.done ())
6
.add(correlation(dtuPay.onMethod("pay"),
7
"merchantId", node("merchant").build ())
8
. extendFromInput ("userId", node("token").build ())
9
.done ())
10
.add(correlation(dtuBank.onMethod(" transferMoney "),
11
"userId", node("customer").build ())
12
.noExtensions ())
13
.add(correlation(bank.onMethod("transfer"),
14
"userId", node("transaction").node("customer").build ())
15
.noExtensions ())
16
.finish ();
1
var
choreography =
2
interaction(client , merchant.onMethod("pay"),
==PAGE:63==
3.4 Applying the implementation
53
3
"initiate
payment")
4
.interaction(merchant , dtuPay.onMethod("pay"), "pay")
5
.interaction(dtuPay , dtuBank.onMethod(" transferMoney "),
6
"integrate
with bank")
7
.interaction(dtuBank , bank.onMethod("transfer"),
8
"perform
transfer at bank")
9
.returnFrom(bank.onMethod("transfer"),
10
"return
once
transferred")
11
.returnFrom(dtuBank.onMethod("transferMoney "),
12
"return
from the DTU bank
integration")
13
.returnFrom(dtuPay.onMethod("pay"), "return
from dtu pay")
14
.returnFrom(merchant.onMethod("pay"), "finished
payment")
15
.end()
16
. setCorrelation(cdef);
Now that the choreography have been deﬁned and the correlation set up. The
last remaining step is to apply the trace gathering to the participating services.
In this case the trace gathering solution for the JVM suﬃces and it can be
applied to each individual service.
To apply the tracing, the two supported
annotations @TraceInvocation and @TraceReturn must be applied where nec-
essary.
For this example, both annotations must be applied to all methods, then to ef-
fectuate the annotations the interception must be conﬁgured with a strategy for
sending the traces. The chosen exchange method is HTTP traﬃc. As the solu-
tion supports sending traces over HTTP the URL for the choreography checker
must be supplied before the annotations have any eﬀect. This is done with a
single call to setup the sender as seen below.
1
InterceptionConfiguration . setupForHttpInterception (Constants.
configuration);
Where constants is an abstract class providing static ﬁnal variables. In this
case an instance of an HttpConﬁguration, which contain the endpoint for both
invocation and return traces.
The choreography checker does not impose any speciﬁc technology other than it
must run in the JVM. But for this example the checker is exposed over HTTP
by implementing another Spring Boot REST web service. Two endpoints are
provided, one for invocations and one for returns.
These endpoints are the
endpoints conﬁgured in the HttpConﬁguration.
After performing these steps the applications should now be setup for sending
observed events to the checker, who in turn check these events one by one and
makes sure they conform to the described choreography, or throws an error.
==PAGE:64==
54
DTU pay example
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 4
Technologies
4.1
Byte Buddy
Before describing what it is that Byte Buddy accomplishes in this solution, The
Java class loader must ﬁrst be introduced as well as what byte code instrumen-
tation is and how it applies to methods on the JVM.
The class loader is responsible for resolving classes that are used throughout
the Java program, i.e. whenever there is a reference to a type, the class loader
is responsible for loading this type [LB98]. There is however not only a single
class loader, instead there can be many in an application. Each class loader
is ultimately a child of the system class loader which is a special class loader
embedded in the JVM implementation. Whenever a type is encountered, the
class loader furthest down the inheritance chain will attempt to resolve the type,
by ﬁrst calling its parent and if that fails it will try to resolve it by itself. This
ensures that system types are always resolved by the primordial class loader and
system class loader, before custom class loaders can modify the existing types.
Byte code instrumentation puts itself in between the class loading that the class
loader performs. Since Java 1.51 there has been oﬃcial support for instrumen-
1https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/lang/instrument/
Instrumentation.html
==PAGE:66==
56
Technologies
tation via the instrumentation API, this means that whenever a class loader
loads a class, one can register an agent that intercepts the class loading and
gets a chance to modify the byte code before the class is loaded. This allows for
various features, one prominent example is proﬁling of methods, since it is easy
to add proﬁling for all method calls using this instrumentation approach.
For this project, Byte Buddy have been used because it allows for this instru-
mentation of methods in a simple manner. Using the Byte Buddy api greatly
simpliﬁes developing and performing the byte code instrumentation, as every-
thing is wrapped inside a convenient api.
Byte Buddy does the instrumentation by means of its Advice api, this api allows
developers to deﬁne a set of static methods, pair them with an agent and a
matching strategy. Whenever a class is loaded, the agent then checks whether
the loaded class has any methods that match one of the matching strategies,
if this is the case it instruments the method with the static methods.
The
instrumentation is done by inlining the static methods2, something that the
JIT compiler does frequently during JIT compilation as well.
One of the strengths of using the Byte Buddy approach is the fact that ev-
erything can be conﬁgured via the Advice API at runtime.
While this is a
potential strength, it does also incur an additional startup cost, albeit only per-
formed whenever the conﬁguration is run, which is probably only once during
application startup. A simple explanation of byte code instrumentation and its
usages can be found in [Aar05].
4.2
Spring
Examples in this project have been developed using the Spring framework
[Spr18b]. The framework has many capabilities, however for this report only
the REST support is interesting. The development model for creating a new
service in Spring is straightforward, but for reference purposes I shall give a
short introduction to what is going on in the DTU pay example.
Since the
application relies on Spring Boot [Spr18a] the application is built as a self con-
tained JAR, and a web-server is embedded with the application. This enables
simple execution, as the application can simply be run by using the java -jar
program. Spring Boot imposes the opinions and views of the Spring Framework
on the application, this also eases the conﬁguration eﬀort, as the framework
attempts to auto detect the features that the application requires, in this case
REST services.
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inline_expansion
==PAGE:67==
4.3 Google protobuf
57
1
public
static
void main(String [] args) {
2
SpringApplication .run( ApplicationStart .class , args);
3
}
Listing 4.1: The main method of Spring boot application.
Endpoints in Spring are written similarly to many other frameworks and should
not be surprising to someone who has used any frameworks that supports REST
before. The simple merchant endpoint in the DTU pay scenario is deﬁned as
the following:
1
@RestController
2
@RequestMapping (value = "merchant")
3
public
class
Merchant {
4
5
@PostMapping(value = "{merchant }/pay")
6
public
ResponseEntity
pay(
7
@PathVariable
String
merchant ,
8
@RequestBody
PaymentDTO
payment)
9
{
10
}
11
}
Listing 4.2: Example of Spring REST controller from the DTU pay example.
label
From the example it should be apparent that the framework relies heavily on
annotations to conﬁgure the service. We shall leave the inner workings of the
framework for another day, we just need to know that when these annotations
are applied, Spring either uses the values of the annotations to build a map
of possible URLs that the application may handle, or it uses the concept of
dynamic proxying to provide some additional features to the application. It is
also possible to do dynamic bindings to values speciﬁed in the request URL, this
can be seen in listing ??. Here the {merchant} part of the value declares that
the method accepts some parameter, with the name merchant.
4.3
Google protobuf
The data exchange format used for the solution relies on the protocol buﬀer
(proto) language [Pro] developed at Google3.
The language itself allows for
3https://www.google.com/about/
==PAGE:68==
58
Technologies
deﬁning message types, describing how to both serialize and parse binary data.
It is important to note that the message exchanged in this format are not self
describing, therefore in order to correctly parse a message, the deﬁnition of the
message must be available to the parser.
For this purpose a number of programming languages are supported by Google,
what this means is that along with the proto language, a compiler is distributed.
The compiler can generate source code for multiple popular general purpose
programming languages.
The generated source code is direct representation
of the message deﬁnition written in the proto language. Along with the mes-
sage classes, classes to help build the messages are also generated, for the Java
programming languages these are implementations of the builder pattern.
Writing the generated message classes to a stream depends on which language
is used. For the Java language it could be done by simply calling the method
writeTo(OutputStream stream), this method must be implemented by all Mes-
sage classes.
Each message deﬁned in the proto language, will for the Java
implementation result in a Message class. All these classes then support being
written to a standard Java OutputStream.
Similarly an InputStream may be read to construct a Message class from a
stream. It is up to the developer to make sure the correct message type is used
to read from a particular stream. This is due to the fact, that the binary output
does not per default, contain information describing the type of the exchanged
message.
Along with these standard mechanisms for constructing, parsing, and writing
the messages across the wire. The implementation provides a number of well-
known types. One of these types are the Value type. As described in section
2.10 this type is used to represent the dynamic structure of the exchanged data.
It is not known at compile time which types a user of the library might use,
therefore a general type which is capable of representing all4 types. Simply put
the Value type can be any of the types in ﬁgure 4.1.
4I claim this, however there might be cases where this is not true.
==PAGE:69==
4.3 Google protobuf
59
Figure 4.1: Supported value types of the well-known Value type, from the
Google protobuf language reference.
To deal with these types, the solution in this thesis provide a mapping from
the protobuf types, to the types used in representing arguments internally. The
mapping is given in listing 2.6.
==PAGE:70==
60
Technologies
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 5
Conclusion & Future work
This thesis provides a concise language for describing choreographies in a textual
format, as well as correlation sets to support concurrent sessions. The choreog-
raphy checker and correlation set implementations are not bound to any speciﬁc
technology, but provides an abstraction built on top of the protobuf message
format, allowing extensions to other languages in the future.
The language however does not provide any mechanisms for observing the actual
messages being sent, as it is not known what transportation mechanisms are
used. While this in some cases will make the language inapplicable, it does
provide some ﬂexibility, because it can be applied more broadly, even for inter-
process communication.
The main contribution of this thesis is a new choreography language.
This
language is simple and textual which is inspired by the language approach taken
in Jolie and Chor.
Along with the language, an implementation is provided to easily apply the
language in practice. This includes an implementation of gathering traces for
JVM applications.
The solution presented in this thesis shows that it is possible to make a solution,
that is easy to apply to pre-existing software, without having to rewrite any of
the source code.
==PAGE:72==
62
Conclusion & Future work
A downside of using this language in its current state, is that it does not yet
support parallel and recursive choreography deﬁnitions.
These types are all
present in existing solutions and should be part of this language for it to have
the same capabilities as existing solutions.
The lacking functionality is discussed in the following sections, and provides a
brief explanation of the work required for the language to be extended with
these features.
5.1
Parallel types
Modeling parallelism in choreographies require that the language supports par-
allel types. The main challenge with this is that traces may be interleaved, this
means that it is not possible to assume that traces arrive in sequential order.
The result is that it is not possible to impose a total ordering on the observed
traces, instead one can establish a partial ordering, such that related events are
ordered correctly.
Consider an example with two participants of a choreography. These partici-
pants are denoted by p1 and p2. Assuming the language supports parallel types,
then we might write that the invocation and return of p1 and p2 happen con-
currently. In our example the | symbol is used to indicate that the expression
on the left hand side, may occur concurrently to the right hand side.
external →p1 : m1 : (invoke p1).
return p1 : m1 : (return again).
end
|
external →p2 : m2 : (invoke p2).
return p2 : m2 : (return again).
end
With this example we cannot say anything about the expected occurrence of
traces between the two parallel interactions. However for each participant there
exists an ordering for which trace can happen ﬁrst. The invocation must happen
before the return for p1 : m1 and likewise for p2 : m2. This leads us to the idea
of partial ordering of traces. We then impose a total ordering on traces which
are related on either side of a parallel operator and allow other traces unrelated
to this, to occur so long as they satisfy the ordering on another parallel path.
==PAGE:73==
5.2 Recursive types
63
5.2
Recursive types
The recursive type allows for deﬁning choreography where a number of steps
may occur multiple times. The easiest way to think of a recursive type is to
compare it to a procedure. One can declare a point in the choreography as
callable, then another type can be used to call that same callable.
Supporting this recursive type would allow users to deﬁne choreographies where
loops of actions may occur. Using the recursive type on its own however would
result in inﬁnite recursion as it is impossible to step over the call step. Instead
the recursive type can be paired with the choice type to allow for conditional
calls.
One case where this would be useful would in paged operations. Here paged
refers to some operation where the total payload is too large to be processed at
once, instead it is broken down into smaller pages and each page is processed
separately. Here one could declare that they expect to see the invocation of
the participant handling the page, or they would expect the choreography to
advance along another branch of the choice type. Requiring the usage of both
the recursive/callable type and the choice type.
5.3
Timed interactions
Certain scenarios require that interactions are observed within a certain time-
frame, an example of this could be a transaction. Say that DTU pay from the
example invokes the transfer method of the bank. Certainly in the context of
the global choreography description, an invocation of the bank is expected to be
seen within a reasonable time frame. If such a trace is not observed, then with
the current implementation, that session would live forever allowing the trace
to be observed at any point in time.
Instead a notion of timed interactions could be introduced.
Stating that if
a previous trace have been observed, but the subsequent trace have not been
observed within some timeframe, the session is invalidated and the choreography
is violated. This would ensure that crashing participants would not leave active
sessions, but instead these sessions would be destroyed after a certain amount
of time.
==PAGE:74==
64
Conclusion & Future work
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[Aar05]
Jari Aarniala. Instrumenting Java bytecode. Science, 42:5971–5990,
2005.
[CMCM13] Marco Carbone, Fabrizio Montesi, Marco Carbone, and Fabrizio
Montesi. Deadlock-freedom-by-design. In Proceedings of the 40th
annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT symposium on Principles of pro-
gramming languages - POPL ’13, volume 48, page 263, 2013.
[DGL+17]
Nicola Dragoni,
Saverio Giallorenzo,
Alberto Lluch Lafuente,
Manuel Mazzara, Fabrizio Montesi, Ruslan Mustaﬁn, and Larisa
Saﬁna. Microservices: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow. 2017.
[Goo]
Google.
Protocol Buﬀers
|
Well-known types.
https://
developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/reference/
google.protobuf.
[HYC16]
Kohei Honda, Nobuko Yoshida, and Marco Carbone. Multiparty
Asynchronous Session Types.
Journal of the ACM, 63(1):1–67,
2016.
[KBR+04]
Nickolas Kavantzas, David Burdett, Gregory Ritzinger, Tony
Fletcher, and Yves Lafon. Web Services Choreography Description
Language Version 1.0, 2004.
[LB98]
Sheng Liang and Gilad Bracha. Dynamic class loading in the Java
virtual machine. ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 33(10):36–44, 1998.
[MC11]
Fabrizio Montesi and Marco Carbone. Programming services with
correlation sets. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including
==PAGE:76==
66
BIBLIOGRAPHY
subseries Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes
in Bioinformatics), volume 7084 LNCS, pages 125–141, 2011.
[MGLZ07]
Fabrizio Montesi, Claudio Guidi, Roberto Lucchi, and Gianluigi
Zavattaro. JOLIE: a Java Orchestration Language Interpreter En-
gine. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, 181(1):19–
33, 2007.
[OAS]
Web Services Business Process Execution Language. http://docs.
oasis-open.org/wsbpel/2.0/OS/wsbpel-v2.0-OS.html.
[OMG11]
OMG.
THE BUSINESS PROCESS MODEL AND NOTATION
SPECIFICATION VERSION 2.0.
https://www.omg.org/spec/
BPMN/2.0/, 2011.
[Pro]
API
Reference
|
Protocol
Buﬀers
|
Google
Develop-
ers. https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/
reference/overview.
[Spr18a]
Spring.
Spring
Boot.
https://spring.io/projects/
spring-boot, 2018.
[Spr18b]
Spring.
Spring Framework.
https://spring.io/projects/
spring-framework, 2018.
[XPa]
XML Path Language (XPath) 3.1.
https://www.w3.org/TR/
xpath-31/.
