==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Sailing through the Northwest Passage
Marie Mørk (s112770)
Supervisor:
Anders Stockmarr
Co-supervisors:
Bugge T. Jensen
Jimmie Stig Beckerlee
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
With the decline of the Arctic ice sheet, routes passing through the Arctic Ocean have
become navigable. For voyages between Northern Europe and Asia, these routes are
significantly shorter than conventional routes passing through the Suez (SCR) or
Panama Canal (PCR). Thus they propose a possible economical advantage, as the
travelling time and fuel expenses might be reducible. In this study, the feasibility of
operating the Arctic routes, i.e. the North West Passage (NSR) and Northern Sea
Route (NSR) is studied by comparing with the costs of SCR.
To reach the goal of the analysis, an economic model for the total cost of operating
the routes is set up. The model includes variables for the daily costs due to invest-
ment, insurance, wages, fuel consumption and additional fees. The fuel consumption
is made to be dependent on weather conditions, as it is assumed that they will affect
the feasibility of operating the Arctic routes. Using simulation data from FORCE
Technology’s ship simulation tool, the impact of the weather on the movements of a
model ship is studied. This study concludes that the best candidate for an output
variable capable of describing these movements is the ship’s speed over ground (SOG),
which can be easily related to fuel consumption. In modelling SOG, five input vari-
ables are considered: handle setting, ocean depth, ocean current, wind, and waves.
The effect of each of these variables is studied independently. For handle setting, the
dependency is modelled using RPM (Rotations Per Minute) which is derived from
handle setting and is ship specific. Similarly, the dependency on the ocean depth is
modelled by TOH (drafT Over Height), which is a measure of the ocean depth rela-
tive to the ship draft. Contributions from wind and waves are studied by applying
a multidimensional time series model (MISO) to the data. Using this method, this
study has succeeded in obtaining a reasonable model for the wind dependency using
lags of the wind about half a minute in the past. However, it was not possible to
obtain a reasonable model for the dependency on waves. A model using a number of
wave data lags equal to the maximum wave period is thus forced upon the data. The
models for the dependency on each of the input variables individually are summed to
form a candidate for a model capable of handling all input variables.
The candidate model is optimized using data from multiple simulation scenarios
by applying the maximum likelihood (ML) method.
Due to the candidate model
having a vast number of parameters, it was not possible to optimize the full model
==PAGE:4==
ii
Summary
directly. As a result of limited time, the model was thus reduced until convergence
was reached. The coefficients from this optimization resulted in a non-stationary time
series process. The time restrictions on the project did not leave time for exploring
the possibility of applying a transformation that would render the time series process
stationary, thus allowing simulation of the model. Instead, a rough estimate of the
mean SOG is modelled from the input variables.
The model is applied to real meteorological data obtained through the Copernicus
Marine Environment Monitoring Service (CMEMS). Fuel consumption and travel
time for each of the routes are estimated from the mean value of SOG and the
additional costs from the economical model are added. The study shows that the
effect of including the environmental disturbances in the estimate for SOG is negligible.
However, adding the additional operation costs identified in the economic model, there
is a significant reduction in the daily costs of operating the Arctic routes compared to
SCR. The difference in costs is thus not caused by the specific weather conditions in
the data sets considered, but rather the other costs identified in the economic model.
The study concludes that there is an economic feasibility of operating the Arctic
routes in the future assuming ice conditions navigable without ice breaker assistance.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Masters’ thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring a Masters’ degree in Mathematical Modelling and Computation.
Kongens Lyngby, January 16, 2019
Marie Mørk (s112770)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would first like to thank my principal supervisor, Anders Stockmarr, for our weekly
meetings and his guidance and support throughout the project period. I also wish to
thank my co-supervisors, Bugge Jensen and Jimmie Beckerlee for sitting in on a num-
ber of meetings and giving their insights on the simulation tool. A special thanks to
Jens Bay and Bugge Jensen at FORCE Technology for always welcoming me, taking
the time to answer any questions I might have and help me out with the simulations.
I would also like to thank Dario Pacino, Niels Kjølstad Poulsen, and Roberto
Galeazzi at DTU for taking the time to meet with me and discuss the project. At the
Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI) I would like to thank Till Soya Rasmussen,
Matilde Brandt Kreiner and Vibeke Huess for their assistance in obtaining meteoro-
logical data.
And last, but certainly not least, a great big thank you to my friends and family
for checking in on me, making me eat and proofreading all of this.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Ship simulator
5
2.1
The model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Input and output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Ship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Data Acquisition
11
3.1
Routes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Weather and ocean depth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Matching weather and routes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Theory
19
4.1
MISO model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Pre-whitening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Model acceptance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Maximum Likelihood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Data Modelling
23
5.1
Initial analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Choice of output variable
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3
Fuel Consumption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.4
Handle setting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.5
Ocean depth
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.6
Current
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.7
Wind . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.8
Waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.9
Multiple input variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
Economic model
55
6.1
Daily fixed costs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
Daily variable costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.3
Additional costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.4
Total costs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7
Results
61
7.1
Weather effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.2
Total daily expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
8
Discussion
65
8.1
FORCE simulation tool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
8.2
Modelling approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
8.3
Simulation designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
8.4
Application to other ships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
9
Conclusion
69
A Routes
71
B Environmental data
75
C Modelling
79
C.1 Initial analysis of simulation data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
C.2 Handle dependency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
C.3 Wind dependency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
C.4 Wave dependency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
C.5 Multiple inputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
D Linearization of ARMA model
99
Bibliography
103
List of Tables
105
List of Figures
108
Glossary
111
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In 2009, the 15th Conference of the Parties (COP15) took place in Copenhagen at
which the former Danish Foreign Minister, Villy Søvndal, gave a speech stating: ”The
ice is melting at the poles” [SH12]. While this fact has severe implications for the
global environment and the future of planet Earth, it has enabled new opportunities
for the maritime industry. Due to changing conditions in the Arctic Ocean the North
West Passage (NWP) and Northern Sea Route (NSR) have become navigable. These
routes are of significant interest when travelling between Northern Europe and Asia,
since they are significantly shorter than the conventional Suez Canal Route (SCR)
and Panama Canal Route (PCR).
A study conducted by the Maritime department at the Copenhagen Business
School (CBS) in 2016 [Han+16] concluded that if the ice sheet continues to decline,
there are major opportunities for the maritime industry in operating the NSR as
opposed to SCR. In the models applied in the report, the ships were travelling at
a constant speed, which was reduced for the parts of the voyage through the Arctic
Ocean. The models applied in the study are based on different scenarios of fuel prices
and rates of the future Arctic sea ice decline. The study gives a strong indication that
routes crossing the Arctic Ocean can be economically feasible around 2040. However,
it is crucial to study the impact of changing weather conditions along the routes as
these can heavily affect the expected economic advantage. If it is confirmed that trav-
elling through the Arctic Ocean will indeed result in a reduction of the time spent
and/or the amount of fuel consumed, it could have profound consequences for the
future of the shipping industry.
In this master’s thesis, possible shipping routes through the Arctic Ocean are
studied along with a reference route using the SCR. The overall aim of the thesis is
to examine how an economical model for the total cost of operating these routes, can
be constructed when environmental conditions are taken into account. The environ-
mental parameters, which are expected to influence the viability of the new routes,
include the depth of the ocean, the amount of wind and waves, the currents along
the route, and finally the ice conditions. The analysis conducted in this thesis will
be based on simulated data obtained from FORCE Technology’s ship simulation tool
which is able to conduct simulations of ship movements under a variety of different
weather scenarios. In order to obtain a model which includes the weather distur-
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
bances’ influence on fuel consumption, the ship movements will be modelled using
time series analysis with the weather parameters as exogenous variables. The aim of
this part of the project is to find a single time series model capable of describing the
ship movements given a set of weather conditions. Using this model, the ship’s voyage
along each of the routes can be simulated using real data on the conditions along the
routes, which in turn enables an estimate of the fuel consumption. In addition to
the fuel consumption related to the movement of the ship, the fuel consumption from
electrical appliances and heating systems is taken into account in the model. Finally,
the economic model needs includes expenses to crew wages, insurances, investments,
and route specific costs.
The thesis is organized as follows. The FORCE ship simulation tool is examined
in Chapter 2. Outputs from the ship simulator provides the basis for the analysis of
ship movements, and thus motivates an understanding of the model the simulations
are based upon as well as its implementation. Chapter 3 focuses on the specifics of the
routes studied and the data relevant to describe the weather conditions along routes.
In Chapter 4, the theoretical concepts used in the thesis are presented focusing on
the time series model used for describing the ship movements. Chapter 5 is devoted
to the modelling of simulation data obtained from FORCE Technology’s ship simu-
lator. In this chapter, the optimal choice of output variable used to describe the fuel
consumption of the ship influenced by weather disturbances is discussed and settled
upon. Thereafter, the influences of a range of input variables from the FORCE ship
simulator are studied individually to form a basis for a complete time series model for
ship movements. Finally, this model is tested and its coefficients estimated using data
from simulations where all input variables are included. In Chapter 6, the variables
of the economic model are introduced and the model is formulated. This chapter thus
gives an overview of the components needed to calculate the price of operating the
routes. The results of the analysis given different scenarios are stated in Chapter 7.
In Chapter 8 the findings of the study are discussed. This includes a discussion of
the FORCE ship simulator, the simulation designs, the modelling approach, and the
applicability of the model to other ships and scenarios.
Notes on the data modelling chapter
The applied theory behind time series modelling is presented in this chapter and the
effect of all the input variables, given by the possible weather parameters, is studied
for the specific choice of output parameter. When the effect of the weather parameters
has been studied, all the individual contributions are added to form the basis of the
model. Simulations of the ship voyage can then be made based on this model. Having
performed a coefficient optimization and model reduction technique, the residuals of
the applied model are investigated in order to check its validity. Finally, when the
performance of the model has been investigated and validated, a time series model
==PAGE:13==
1 Introduction
3
of the wind and waves’ effect on the ship can be formulated. This is the time series
model of the weather conditions which is used as an input to the final model of ship
movements along the route. The additional inputs used in the final model of the ship
movements are waypoints along the chosen routes and data of the weather conditions.
Given a successful model of ship movements, the output variable of the model is used
to determine the fuel consumption by applying a transfer function. The estimated
fuel consumption for the ship along the studied routes is the corner stone of the
analysis. When this quantity is determined, an estimate of the total cost of operation
of each of the routes considered can be computed.
The advantage of having a time series model of how the environmental conditions
affect the ship as opposed to the force model used at FORCE technology, is that it is
very fast to simulate. Ideally the model can be used to estimate the cost of a voyage
given based on weather forecasts and thereby compare the the costs of navigating
different routes.
Furthermore, due to the dependency on both the environmental
conditions and the weather, it can be used to optimize a voyage, such that the cargo
is delivered on time with the minimum amount of fuel consumption. However, this
application is considered outside the scope of the project.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Ship simulator
Simulations of the ship movements are made using the FORCE ship simulator de-
veloped by FORCE Technology [17]. These simulations serve as the basis for the
analysis conducted in this thesis. In this chapter, the key components of the FORCE
ship simulator are introduced. The ship used for the simulations is presented as well,
as the choice of ship affects the outcome.
2.1
The model
The FORCE ship simulator is based on a force model which means that the ship
movements are determined using a calculation of the net force along each axis in a
3-dimensional coordinate system. Two different coordinate systems are used in the
implementation of the tool: one based on the ship placement on Earth, referred to
as the Earth coordinate system, and the other one defined using the axes of the ship
which is called the general body axis (GBA) coordinate system. In the Earth coordi-
nate system, the x axis is defined along the longitudes, the y axis along the latitude,
and finally the z axis is defined as the distance from the center of the Earth. The
GBA coordinate system is defined with the x axis as the imaginary axis going from
the aft to the bow of the ship called the longitudinal axis, the y axis is defined as
the axis transverse to the longitudinal axis, and the z axis as the vertical line going
through the center of the ship. Rotations around each of the axes are allowed which
gives a total of six degrees of freedom. The Earth coordinate system is used to map
the ship location whereas the GBA coordinate system is used when adding the force
contributions and calculating the ship movements.
The ship movements are governed by a track controller which attempts to steer
the ship along a given track. Deviations from the track due to environmental forces
are counter acted by the rudder angle. The implemented controller is a so-called
Proportional Derivative (PD) fuzzy controller [Wika]. A PD controller is a control
loop feedback mechanism in which the error on the ship position relative to the cho-
sen track is evaluated and corrected. It is called a PD controller as it consists of
a proportional and a derivative term. The proportional term corrects the position
based on the error on the current placement of the ship. A correctional response will
only be generated when there is an error between the desired value and the process
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Ship simulator
value. The derivative term corrects based on the displacement trend. If there is a
fast change of error, the derivative term has a damping effect on the correction term.
The term ”fuzzy” comes from the fact that the coefficients of the correctional terms
depend on the magnitude of the error on the ship placement. It should be noted that
a PD controller is not able to correct for a constant disturbance e.g wind or current.
For instance, if the ship is disturbed by a strong wind from the left, it will follow a
parallel track to the right of the desired course. This can be corrected by implement-
ing an integral term in the controller for which the correction term is dependent on
the integral of past errors. At FORCE Technology the integral term has been omitted
from the model, as it is not important that the controller stays exactly on course for
the purposes of the simulation tool.
In the implementation of the model, the curvature of the Earth is ignored which
is referred to as a Flat Earth approximation[Kne13].
The approximation has no
effect on the latitude, which has a constant conversion to nautical miles (nm) all
over the Globe. Expressing the coordinates as degrees, which are subdivided in 60
minutes, one latitude minute corresponds to 1 nm. For the longitudinal coordinate,
the distance between two minutes changes with the location on Earth. At the Equator,
one longitude minute equals 1 nm, but for all other positions it is corrected by the
latitude such that one minute longitude corresponds to cos(lat) nm.
2.2
Input and output
The FORCE ship simulator enables multiple input options. The variables of interest
to this project are handle setting, ocean depth, current, wind, and waves. Handle
setting determines the level at which the motor is operating and is chosen as opposed
to a constant speed, as a speed pilot is not fully implemented in the simulator. Ocean
depth is of interest as the ship speed is limited in shallow waters due to the so-called
squat effect, which is an additional force dragging the ship down and hence increasing
its draft [12]. For all the weather variables, the input is defined by a strength and
direction. The speed of the current is defined in knots which is generally constant
in time but can be varied by introducing a current map. The speed of the wind is
defined in meters per second. An option for gusty wind conditions is implemented,
which allows for a standard deviation on the speed and variation of the wind direc-
tion. The wave input is defined using the significant wave height, its period and the
direction. Significant wave height is defined from crest to trough as 4√σSE, with
σSE being the standard deviation of the surface elevations. The wave profile is thus
stochastic by nature, while its direction is constant. Note that for waves and wind
it is convention to define their directions as ”coming from”. However, in this report
they are defined as ”going towards” which is standard in mathematical vector anal-
ysis. This is chosen in order to ensure that all directions are defined using the same
convention and thus making it straightforward to compare them. All directions are
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Ship
7
defined in degrees with respect to north.
The four output variables which are of importance to the analysis conducted in
this thesis are: speed, course, heading and rudder angle. The four variables are briefly
presented below.
Coordinates: Coordinates in the simulation tool are given as the longitude and
latitude of the ship’s position.
Speed: The speed of the ship can be defined as either the speed over bottom or
the speed through water. In this thesis, the speed is defined as the speed over
ground (SOG) which is the relevant measure when considering the time it takes
to travel a given distance. The speed over ground is measured in knots.
Bearing: The is defined as the direction from a ship to a given point. Note that
because Earth is elliptical, the course bearing will change as the ship moves.
Bearing is measured in degrees relative to north.
Heading: The heading is the direction in which the ships’ nose is pointed, measured
in degrees relative to north.
The heading is not identical to the bearing in
situations where the vessel is affected by forces acting from the sides of the
ship.
Rudder angle: The rudder angle is the angle of the rudder as compared to the
longitudinal axis of the ship i.e. the imaginary axis defined along the length of
the ship.
2.3
Ship
In September 2018, Venta Maersk completed its maiden voyage through the North
Eastern passage [Mae18].
The voyage began on the 22nd of August 2018 in the
port of Vladivostok, Russia, and was completed on the 28th of September 2018 in
Bremerhaven, Germany, giving a total travel time of 37 days. Before entering the
Bering strait, stops were made in Vostochny Stevedoring Company and Busan from
where 660 reefer containers were transported to Bremerhaven. The voyage travelled
by Venta Maersk is very similar to the routes considered in this analysis through the
Arctic Ocean. Thus, the vessel type used in this analysis is chosen similar to Venta
Maersk. The best match defined in the FORCE Technology’s database is called AT-
LAS, which is a container ship modeled in loaded condition. The mathematical model
of this ship is derived using a scaling of a model for a similar ship. This means that
the ship itself was not tested in the turbines and towing tank at FORCE [Ter11]. In
Table 2.1 the main dimensions of the two ships are given for comparison.
ATLAS is a regular container ship without an ice classification, which means that
it is not build to travel ice filled waters. Ice classes are defined from the Baltic rule
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Ship simulator
systems in which ships are assigned with an ice class based on its ability to travel in ice
conditions [Hou+10]. The smallest ice classes are assigned to vessels able to navigate
light ice conditions (Ice class III and II), whereas the largest (Ice Class IA Super) is
assigned to vessels capable of navigating in difficult ice conditions without ice breaker
assistance. The main difference between an ice reinforced vessel and a regular one, is
that more steel is used in the production of an ice reinforced vessel. Venta Maersk
is a Maersk V class container ship, assigned to ice class 1A, which are ships capable
of navigating difficult Baltic ice conditions, with the occasional use of ice breaker
assistance [Hou+10, p. 112]. The total weight accounted for by steel in a Maersk V
class container feeder is about 10.000 ton, of which only 250 ton are due to the ice
class1. The relatively small weight difference shows that it is a reasonable assumption
that the weight difference between ships with and without ice classification can be
neglected. This means that the ship can travel with the same amount of cargo when
operating routes in the Arctic as it does when operating the conventional routes.
Venta Maersk
ATLAS
Length
200 m
215.6 m
Width
35.2 m
32.2 m
Draft
11 m
11 m
Service speed
22 knots
20.5 knots
Capacity
3596 TEU
2680 TEU
Table 2.1: Main dimensions of Venta Maersk and ATLAS [Ter11] [Mik18].
1These are approximations given by Jens Bay at Force Technology
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Ship
9
Figure 2.1: Venta Maersk, picture from [Pos].
==PAGE:20==
10
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Data Acquisition
When studying the possible advantages of using shipping routes through the Arctic
Ocean, it is necessary to base the analysis upon concrete routes which are comparable
and navigable for the ship of interest. In this chapter, the shipping routes which the
analysis of this project is based upon are presented. Furthermore, it is described how
the data describing the environmental conditions along these routes is obtained.
3.1
Routes
When travelling between Northern Europa and Asia, routes crossing the Arctic Ocean
are significantly shorter than the corresponding travel distances for the conventional
routes. In this analysis, routes between Amsterdam in the Netherlands and Shanghai
in China are considered since these are cities with large international ports. Three
routes connecting the two cities are considered: the conventional route going through
the Suez Canal (SCR), a route through the Northwest Passage (NWP), and a route
following the Northern coastline of Russia known as the Northern Sea Route (NSR).
The route going through the Panama Canal has been omitted as it is longer than
SCR and thus regarded as being a less competitive choice.
Routes are defined using so-called waypoints which are the latitude and longitude
coordinates that the ship sails between. The distance between two waypoints is re-
ferred to as a leg. When planning the routes, they were drawn into Google Earth
Pro [Goo] using the ”path” tool. In Figure 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 the routes are visualized
using Google Earth. The latitudes and longitudes of the routes were exported to an
Excel sheet in which the waypoints corresponding to Amsterdam and Shanghai have
been matched, such that the routes have the same starting and ending point. In order
to ensure that meaningful values for the environmental conditions, such as the ocean
depth and the weather conditions, used in the simulations, the start and end coordi-
nates are chosen just outside the harbours. Finally, for the two routes crossing the
Arctic Ocean, the waypoints between the Bering Strait and Shanghai were matched
such that these parts of the voyages are identical.
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Data Acquisition
Figure 3.1: Northern Sea Route from Amsterdam to Shanghai. The route is drawn
in and extracted from Google Earth Pro [Goo].
Figure 3.2: North West Passage from Amsterdam to Shanghai. The route is drawn
in and extracted from Google Earth Pro [Goo].
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Routes
13
Figure 3.3: Suez Canal Route from Amsterdam to Shanghai. The route is drawn
in and extracted from Google Earth Pro [Goo].
The two Arctic routes, NWP and NSR, are defined relatively close to the coastline
where the risk of ice coverage is small. This choice of route is viable since the ATLAS
ship has a relatively small draft of 11 meters which enables it to navigate the shallow
waters close to the coast with draft limitations of 13 meters [Han+16, p. 33]. Due
to the smaller risk of ice, the navigable season is longer for these routes compared to
more northern versions of the routes. Furthermore, there is a smaller risk of needing
ice breaker assistance, which leads to reduced expenses. However, when the routes
are chosen close to the coastline their lengths are increased as compared to the more
direct northern routes. This causes additional expenses as a larger amount of fuel is
consumed and the voyage takes longer to complete. These disadvantages are expected
to be less significant than the advantages achieved by choosing routes closer to the
coastline.
The initial bearing of each route is calculated using the function bearing from R
package geosphere [Hij17]. In this function, the initial bearing between two points
is calculated by following the shortest path on an ellipsoid.
The leg distance is
calculated using the function distGeo from the same package, which calculates the
shortest distance between two points on an ellipsoid. Tables showing the waypoints,
each leg distance, and the initial bearing of each route are included in Appendix A. An
overview of the number of waypoints and the total length of each route is provided in
Table 3.1. When comparing the total length of the two northern routes to the SCR,
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Data Acquisition
there is a reduction in travel distance of about 25% for the NSR and 21% for the
NWP.
Route
Number of waypoints
Length
NSR
28
7,873.19 nm
NWP
34
8,352.31 nm
SCR
36
10,564.63 nm
Table 3.1: The total number of waypoints and length of each of the routes studied.
3.2
Weather and ocean depth
The environmental conditions along each of the studied routes are modeled using data
primarily obtained through the European Earth Observation Programme Copernicus.
The programme provides meteorological data through the Copernicus Marine Envi-
ronment Monitoring Service (CMEMS). All data sets are obtained as netcdf files in
which the position for each measurement is provided using the latitudinal and longi-
tudinal coordinates. In order to determine the local conditions at the waypoints of
each of the studied routes, the latitudes and longitudes of each waypoint is matched
to the closest lying grid point in each data set. The data considered for this project
is from September 2017. September is chosen, as it is in the middle of the navigation
season of the Arctic routes, thus having the minimum risk of ice.
Ocean depth
The ocean depth along each route is examined using a netcdf file of the RTopo-2
bedrock topography dataset which is provided by Till Soya Rasmussen at the Danish
Meteorological Institute (DMI). In this data set, the ocean depth measurements have
a horizontal grid spacing of 30 arcsec [Sch+16]. Using this dataset, the ocean depth
at each waypoint is determined by matching the closest grid points. Some of the
determined ocean depth values for waypoints inside the Suez Canal show that the
waters are too shallow for the ship to navigate. However, given the relatively small
size of ATLAS, it is known that it is possible to navigate the canal. The inaccuracy of
the determined ocean depths can be a consequence of the Suez Canal being relatively
narrow for which the technique used to match the grid points is inadequate. The
values of the ocean depth along the troublesome leg of the route between Port Said
and Suez are thus manually updated to match the depth of the Suez Canal of 24
meters [Wikb].
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Weather and ocean depth
15
Ice
Data describing the possible ice sheet along the routes is used to assess whether
icebreaker assistance is necessary in order to navigate the Arctic routes. This data
is not used as an input parameter in the fuel consumption model. The level of ice
coverage is measured using two variables: the ice thickness measured in meters, and
the ice concentration, which is given as a fraction. Data covering both variables is
obtained from the monthly fields of the Copernicus product GLOBAL-ANALYSIS-
FORECAST-PHY-001-024 [Lel+16], which is based on a model of the oceans.
Waves
The influence of waves along each route is modelled using three parameters: the
significant wave height, the wave period and the direction of the waves. This data
is obtained from the Copernicus product GLOBAL-ANALYSIS-FORECAST-WAV-
001-027 which is model based and provides instantaneous observations for every three
hours [Aou18]. For each of the waypoints along the routes, all data from September
2017 is extracted. From this data, the mean values of the wave height, wave period
and direction is computed. The mean direction is calculated by applying
θµ = tan−1
( 1
n
∑n
i sin(θi)
1
n
∑n
i cos(θi)
)
,
(3.1)
where θi is the direction of observation i. If the term 1
n
∑n
i cos(θi) is negative, 180◦is
added to the result due to the definition of tan. Although not stated specifically in the
documentation, it is assumed that the wave direction is defined in the conventional
way as ”coming from”. Consequently, an angle of 180◦are added to the directions
obtained.
Wind
Data describing the wind conditions is obtained from the Copernicus product WIND-
GLO-WIND-L4-NRT-OBSERVATIONS-012-004 which provides both the eastward
and northward wind speed. The applied grid size is 25 km × 25 km and the wind
speed is measured every six hours [Ben18]. All observations from September 2017
are extracted from which the wind direction and speed are determined using sim-
ple trigonometry. Defining northward wind as x and eastward wind as y, the wind
direction is calculated as
θ = tan−1
(x
y
)
.
(3.2)
Here, the direction is computed relative to north due to the definitions of x and y.
The speed is found by applying Pythagoras’ theorem:
v =
√
x2 + y2.
(3.3)
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Data Acquisition
Having the wind directions and speeds, the mean and standard deviation is computed
for each waypoint of the routes. The mean direction is calculated as shown by applying
(3.1).
Ocean Current
Data on ocean currents is obtained from the hourly mean fields of the Copernicus
product GLOBAL-ANALYSIS-FORECAST-PHY-001-024, which has a grid spacing
of 0.083◦× 0.083◦[Lel+16]. The current is defined as the east- and northward sea
water velocity in meters per second, and it can thus be processed in the same way
as the wind data using (3.2) and (3.3). The data obtained is recalculated into knots,
which is the input variable for currents in the simulation tool.
Notes on the data obtained
In Appendix B tables of the environmental conditions along the routes in September
2017, obtained by applying the techniques introduced in this chapter, are listed. For
SCR and NWP there are missing data in the data sheets. For the NWP, there are
some missing values for waves on leg 10-14. On the same WPs, there non-zero values
for ice. Generally, the ice conditions are not very rough, and the ship operating NSR
has an ice classification. Thus, it is deemed reasonable that the ship is able to operate
this leg of the voyage, and that there are no waves because of the ice. Inside the Suez
there are missing weather variables for the part of the voyage in the Suez Canal. It
seems reasonable that the waves and current has no large effect when sailing inside a
canal, why these values are set to zero. For the missing wind on two of the waypoints,
it is set to a mean value of the surrounding values with a Gaussian noise added.
3.3
Matching weather and routes
The environmental conditions at WPi needs to be related to a part of the voyage,
for which they are applied. This can not be obtained directly using the conventional
definition of the legs, as a route has one less leg than WP. Instead, an alternative
version of the legs centralized around the waypoints, Lcen is introduced. The length
of Lcen,i centralized around WPi is defined as
Lcen,i = 1
2(Li,i−1 + Li,i+1)
(3.4)
where Li,j is the length of the leg from WPi to WPj. Using the centralized version of
the legs, the conditions at waypoint i are applied to a travel distance equal to Lcen,i
of the total route length. The approach is visualized in Figure 3.4.
The direction in which the ship sails along Lcen,i is set to be constant and equal
to the bearing of WPi. As bearings are also defined in-between waypoints, it is not
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Matching weather and routes
17
Figure 3.4: Visualization of the definition of Lcen.
possible to calculate a bearing for the last WP. In this analysis, the bearing at the
final waypoint, WPN, is estimated to be the same as for WPN−1. In Table 3.2, the
manipulation of leg distances and bearings are exemplified by the first and last way-
points of NSR. It should be noted that the routes made out for this project consists of
relatively few waypoints. This results in a large error on the observed environmental
conditions and the approximation of the sailing direction being constant can be chal-
lenged as valid. A more precise measure of the sailing direction and environmental
conditions, can be obtained by adding more waypoints to the routes.
Data
Simulation
WP
Bearing
Leg [nm]
Bearing
Legcen [nm]
1
1.10
-
1.10
118.44
2
-2.88
236.89
-2.88
265.05
3
21.91
293.21
21.91
368.22
26
-136.48
394.17
-136.48
317.66
27
-116.73
241.15
-116.73
250.44
28
-
259.74
-116.73
129.87
Table 3.2: Bearing and leg distances as computed for NSR going from Amsterdam
to Shanghai and how they are manipulated to match the waypoints.
==PAGE:28==
18
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4
Theory
In this section, the theory behind the Multiple-Input Single-Output time series model
is first presented. Using this model, it is possible to model observations dependent on
multiple input variables. The dependency on the input variables can be estimated by
applying a pre-whitening procedure. This method is explained in the second section of
the chapter. Finally, the applied measure of model performance is presented, and the
maximum likelihood method for determining model coefficients is briefly introduced.
4.1
Multiple-Input, Single-Output (MISO) model
The output from the ship simulator is modelled using time series analysis. Because
the output is dependent on the input variables chosen for the simulation, the system
is described as a time series with input. A system with single-input single-output
including observation noise is described as [Mad08, p 220]
Yt =
∞
∑
i=−∞
hiXt−i + Nt
(4.1)
where Nt is the observation noise and hi the transfer function from the input vari-
able, Xt−i, to the output variable, Yt. It is assumed that Nt can be described by an
ARMA model and that Nt and Xt are mutually uncorrelated stationary stochastic
processes. For this study, the output variable are dependent on multiple environmen-
tal conditions. Thus, the model is expanded to the more general case with multiple
input variables. This model is referred to as a Multiple-Input Single-Output (MISO)
model. A MISO model is defined as [Mad08, p. 226]
Yt =
∞
∑
i=−∞
h1,iX1,t−i + · · · +
∞
∑
i=−∞
hm,iXm,t−i + Nt
(4.2)
where the Xm,t denotes the mth exogenous input variable independent of Yt at time
t. The main difficulty of modelling MISO models is to find the significant lags of
the input variables. This is equivalent to finding the transfer function from Xt to
Yt. A technique for estimating the transfer function is the pre-whitening procedure,
described in the next section.
==PAGE:30==
20
4 Theory
4.2
Pre-whitening
The transfer function for each of the exogenous input variables, h, is estimated by
applying a pre-whitening procedure to the corresponding input variable. The purpose
of applying pre-whitening is to get a representation of the series, where Xt is white
noise. If this condition is met, the relationship between the cross-covariance γXY and
the transfer function, can be written as [Mad08, p 217]
γXY (k) = hkσ2
X,
(4.3)
where σ2
X is the variance of X. Hence, the transfer function can be estimated from
the cross-covariance of the white noise process Xt and the output Yt.
The procedure for pre-whitening is [Mad08, p 224] to firstly fit the input series with
a suitable ARMA series
ϕ(B)Xt = θ(B)αt
(4.4)
where B is the backshift operator and αt is white noise. The input series is then
pre-whitened
αt = θ(B)−1ϕ(B)Xt
(4.5)
Hereafter, the output series, Yt is filtered with the same model;
βt = θ(B)−1ϕ(B)Yt
(4.6)
and an an estimate of the impulse response function is found as
ˆhk = Cαβ(k)
Cαα(0) = Cαβ(k)
S2α
.
(4.7)
Here, Cαβ(k) denotes the estimated cross-covariance between α and β at lag k, and
S2
α is the empirical variance of the residuals of the ARMA model fitted to the input
series. The cross covariance can be estimated from data as [Mad08, p 150]
CXY (k) = 1
N
N−k
∑
t=1
(Xt −¯X)(Yt+k −¯Y )
(4.8)
CXY (−k) = 1
N
N−k
∑
t=1
(Xt+k −¯X)(Yt −¯Y ).
(4.9)
The significance level of the estimated transfer function is estimated from the signif-
icance level of the cross-covariance and scaled. The significance level of the cross-
covariance is
2SαSβ
√
N
(4.10)
==PAGE:31==
4.3 Model acceptance
21
Scaling this by the denominator of (4.7), the significance level of the estimated transfer
function is estimated to be
2Sβ
√
NSα
(4.11)
Once the impulse response function is estimated, it is used to determine the sig-
nificant lags of the exogenous variables affecting the output variable.
An ARMA
model of the output variable itself can be determined and the significant exogenous
lags added.
When the full model is found and fitted, model reduction should be
performed to ensure that the model is not over-fitted, as some of the terms might
cancel out. In the case at hand, the input variables are chosen independently of each
other as inputs to a simulation tool, and there is therefore no correlation between
the variables. This is one of the conditions for the pre-whitening procedure to be
applicable. The other condition is that the input variables ca be described relatively
well by an ARMA model. This is not a given for the generated wind and wave series,
why this condition might be problematic to the analysis. It is possible to model any
series using a large enough ARMA model. However it is normal practice to limit the
AR and MA terms to a maximum of three to ensure that the model describes the
stochastic nature of the process and not the specific series analyzed. Throughout the
project, the number of AR and MA terms will be limited in this way.
4.3
Model acceptance
When additional terms are introduced in a model or model reduction is applied, a
likelihood-ratio test can be used to determine whether the new model should be
accepted. The ratio is given as [MT11, p. 25-26]
λ = L0
L1
where L0 is the likelihood of the smaller model and L1 the larger. The χ2 is used to
evaluate whether the new model should be accepted. Let k denote the difference in
number of parameters between the two models. χ2 is then calculated as
χ2 = −2 · log(λ)
(4.12)
and compared to a preset quantile of the χ2 distribution with k degrees of freedom.
The larger model is accepted if the computed χ2 is larger than a pre-set quantile.
Throughout the analysis, the quantile is set at 95%. Most often, only one term will
be added or removed at a time, giving one degree of freedom and hence a critical χ2
quantile of 3.84.
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Theory
4.4
Maximum Likelihood
The maximum likelihood (ML) method is used to optimize the final time series model
in the analysis.
This is necessary since the development of the ARMA model is
performed using the build-in build-in ARIMA functions in R studio, which is not capable
of modelling multiple time series at once.
For a time series model
Yt + ϕ1Yt−1 + · · · + ϕpYt−p = ϵt + θ1ϵt−1 + · · · + θqϵt−q
(4.13)
it is assumed that ϵt is a normally distributed white noise process with variance σ2
ϵ .
The likelihood function is the joint probability distribution function for all observa-
tions given θ and the variance of the white noise process σ2
ϵ . It is written as [Mad08,
p 166]
L(YN; θ, σ2
ϵ ) = f(YN|θ, σ2
ϵ )
=
(
N
∏
t=p+1
f(Yt|Yt−1, θ, σ2
ϵ )
)
f(Yp|θ, σ2
ϵ ),
(4.14)
where θ and Yt are vectors defined as
θT = (ϕ1, ..., ϕp, θ1, ..., θq)
(4.15)
YT
t = (Yt, Yt−1, ..., Y1).
(4.16)
Assuming infinitely many past observations of Y , the estimate ˆYt|t−1 is
ˆYt|t−1(θ) = −
p
∑
i=1
ϕiYt−i +
q
∑
i=1
θiϵt−i(θ),
(4.17)
from which we get the prediction error
ϵt(θ) = Yt −ˆYt|t−1(θ).
(4.18)
In [Mad08, p167] it is shown that the ML estimate for θ is found by minimizing the
prediction error, i.e. by minimizing
S(θ) =
N
∑
t=p+1
ϵ2
t(θ).
(4.19)
After using the ML method to optimize the parameters of the model, the modelling
of the ship movements as a function of the chosen weather parameters is final and
can be used to determine fuel costs of operating the routes considered.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 5
Data Modelling
In preparation for the project, the MISO model was practised by completing an as-
signment from the Time Series course at DTU. The aim of the assignment was to
predict heat consumption by modelling heat production data from the Danish VEKS
district heating system. Exogenous variables available were air temperature, solar
radiation and wind speed. The analysis showed that the MISO model was better
suited for predicting the heat consumption than a regular ARIMA model.
5.1
Initial analysis
A series of initial simulations were performed to check how the simulations are carried
out in the FORCE ship simulator. The analysis showed that the simulator has a seed
implemented, making the input spectre of wind and waves deterministic. This results
in simulations that are based on the same wind and wave spectrum scaled by the mean
value and standard deviation selected, which implies that the analysis becomes biased.
The problem was partly solved by performing simulations with changing weather con-
ditions in one run and afterwards cutting it into individual series. By doing so, the
wind and wave spectre of two consecutive simulations are different. When cutting the
data series into sub series, an interval between the two series is left out to ensure that
they are not correlated and to allow for burn-in such that the variations in the ships
movements has reached an equilibrium. However, it was not possible to conduct all
experiments needed in one single run due to a limitation on the maximum run time
and organizational issues. Therefore, the analysis is sometimes based on biased data.
The initial analysis included an examination of the minimum simulation time
needed in order for the variations in the input variables to be well described. This
was done by comparing the mean, standard deviation, maximum and minimum of
15, 30, 45 and 60 minutes simulations. The analysis showed that simulating the ship
movements for 15 minutes is sufficient for capturing the distributions in wind and
waves, although the full spectrum is not simulated within this time frame.
Inspecting the distribution of the simulated wind spectrum, the standard devia-
tion was found to be about half of the value chosen for the simulation. This should
==PAGE:34==
24
5 Data Modelling
not be of importance for the modelling, as the analysis is not based on the input
variables but the spectrum simulated. Nonetheless, when simulating series for the
analysis, the wind is in general simulated with a relatively high input standard de-
viation to accommodate this issue. Apart from the discrepancy between the chosen
and simulated standard deviation in the wind speed, the alterations in the wind direc-
tions cannot be directly translated from one of the inputs. Rather, the wind direction
seems to alter from the chosen direction with a few degrees to each side no matter
the chosen standard deviation.
It should also be noted that the outputs are subject to some simulation noise.
For simulations not affected by the stochastic variables wind and waves, it would be
expected that the vessels movements are constant after burn-in. However, plots of
vessel position, speed and rudder angle from such simulations are subject to small
periodical variations. An example of the variations can be seen in Figure C.1 in Ap-
pendix C.1 for a handle setting of 75%, depth of 500 m, and a current with a speed
of 2 knots in direction 280◦.
5.2
Choice of output variable
Over the duration of the project, multiple output variables from the FORCE ship
simulator were investigated as candidates for describing the variations in fuel con-
sumption. The initial approach was to model the ship’s dislocation perpendicular to
the course, under the assumption that a dislocation would result in increased fuel
consumption when the ship was steered back on course. However, analysis showed
that there were multiple complications in the approach. First off, as the integral part
of the PID regulator is not integrated in the FORCE ship simulator, the ship never
returned to its’ original course after being steered off as a result of weather pertur-
bations. Instead a new equilibrium position is found in a distance from the original
course dependent on the strength of the weather inputs. The problem was solved by
mean correcting the series, which made it possible to model the series, but implies
that it is not be possible to model sudden changes in the weather and fuel needed
to steer back. Rather, the ship finds a new equilibrium position with a mean dis-
tance to the original course dependent on the strength of the perturbation. Because
of this, by modelling the dislocation, it would not be possible to get a measure of
the extra power (and thereby fuel) used for the ship to return to it’s original course.
Furthermore, due to the sample interval of one second, the ship’s position changed
very little at each time step. This resulted in an estimated auto regressive function
(ACF) which had a very slow decrease towards zero, which is needed to successfully
model the data using time series analysis. It was tried to differentiate the dislocation
series, but the first and second derivative were still moving too slowly towards zero.
As a consequence, it was investigated whether downsampling the data would provide
better results. For simulations with only the wind present, a fast Fourier transform
==PAGE:35==
5.3 Fuel Consumption
25
(FFT) analysis showed that the series could be downsampled by a factor between 60
and 100, while the factor was only about 5 for simulations in which waves had been
included.
As the rudder angle is more sensitive to sudden changes in the environment than
the ship’s position, and is not affected by the lack of the integral part of the regula-
tor, it was chosen as a better candidate for a suitable output variable. However, it
was soon realized that the rudder angle is strongly dependent on the ships’ heading,
which then needed to be calculated or modelled to find a reliable model for the rudder
angle. Another difficulty with this variable is that the uncertainties on the angle are
not Gaussian, as there is a natural limit to the maximum angle. Furthermore, sin and
cos are not linear functions, making it unlikely that one coefficient for the exogenous
variables in each direction should be adequate for describing changes in the rudder an-
gle. Lastly, the rudder angle is not sufficient to describe the ships’ movements, as it is
not sensitive to perturbations in the exogenous variables along the x axis. The rudder
angle alone does not tell how far the ship has travelled, why additional variables such
as the ships’ location along the x axis or its’ speed would be needed for the modelling.
The analysis of the rudder angle and the revelation that the ship’s location or
speed needed to be modelled as well to calculate the distance travelled, served as
inspiration for the final approach in which the ship’s speed is modelled directly. As
the simulations are performed with a constant notch setting, the fuel consumption
is constant in time. Therefore, a model for the ship speed can be used to find the
time used to travel a certain distance, from which the total fuel consumption can be
calculated. In this chapter, the analysis conducted with the ship speed as the output
variable is presented. First the dependency on single input variables is modelled and
the results are added together in a complete model, which is then tested and reduced.
5.3
Fuel Consumption
The best candidate for an output variable describing the ship’s movements is found to
be SOG. This value needs to be related to the fuel consumed from the ship movements.
For a ship travelling with a constant handle setting, the fuel consumed is constant in
time. Consequently, the SOG is related to the time spent on completing the voyage.
This is formulated as
t =
d
SOG
(5.1)
with d being the distance travelled and t the time.
The engine power is dependent on the Rotations Per Minute (RPM) in the engine,
from which the power consumption can be determined. Using the R function lm(),
the relationship is determined as a 3rd degree polynomial with the intercept omitted;
P = 15 · RPM −0.22 · RPM2 + 0.02 · RPM3 + ϵ
(5.2)
==PAGE:36==
26
5 Data Modelling
The fit is visualized in Figure 5.1 and the statistics of the model fit listed in Table 5.1.
ˆβ
σ ˆβ
RPM
15.219
0.998
RPM2
-0.218
0.030
RPM3
0.0188
0.0002
ϵ
-
13.65
Table 5.1: Power dependency on RPM model summary.
ˆβ denotes the estimated
coefficients and σ ˆβ the standard error.
Having determined the power and time spend, the fuel consumption is determined
from (6.6), which describes fuel consumption as a function of power, time and specific
fuel consumption.
5.4
Handle setting
The handle setting determines the power consumption of the ship’s main engine and
consequently the fuel consumption. An increase in the handle setting results in a
larger fuel consumption, but a reduced travel time. As noted in the former section, the
handle setting determines RPM from which the ship speed can be determined if there
are no environmental disturbances. Having a set of handle settings and corresponding
RPM for a specific ship, it is standard practice at FORCE to use linear interpolation
between the points to determine the functional relationship. This method is used, as
Figure 5.1: Relationship between RPM and power. The points corresponds to data
on the power produced in the main engine of ATLAS, while the red line
is the modelled relationship.
==PAGE:37==
5.4 Handle setting
27
the manufacturer optimizes the engine for specific handle settings, see Table 5.2. The
linear interpolation is performed using the R function approxfun() and is visualized
in Figure C.2 in Appendix C.2.
Handle
RPM
SOG [knots]
Stop
0 %
0
0
Dead slow
12.5 %
27
5
Slow
25 %
38
8
Half
50 %
54
11.6
Full manoeuvre
80 %
70
15
Full sea speed
100 %
102
20.5
Table 5.2: Handle setting and RPM for Atlas at the optimization points. SOG is
obtained from simulations.
The relationship between SOG and RPM has been found by performing simula-
tions with the handle settings of Table 5.2. The handle settings are transformed into
RPM using the linear interpolation scheme, and the relationship between speed and
RPM is determined using the R function lm(). By applying the likelihood ratio test,
the optimal model is found to be linear with the intercept omitted;
SOG = 0.206 · RPM + ϵ.
(5.3)
The statistics of the model are provided in Table 5.3, and a plot of the fit is shown
in Figure 5.2. The standard residual error of the fit is relatively large, making the
model a rough approximation.
ˆβ
σ ˆβ
RPM
0.206
0.003
ϵ
-
0.48
Table 5.3: Handle dependency model summary. ˆβ denotes the estimated coefficients
and σ ˆβ the standard error.
==PAGE:38==
28
5 Data Modelling
Figure 5.2: Linear relationship between RPM and SOG. The points corresponds to
simulation data, while the red line is the modelled relationship.
5.5
Ocean depth
The dependency of SOG on ocean depth is based on simulations with a handle setting
of 75% and depths equal to 500, 100, 35, 30, 25, and 20 meters. Ocean depth is
redefined with respect to the draft of the ship as TOH (drafT Over Height);
TOH =
Draft
Ocean depth.
(5.4)
Generally, a ship is not allowed to navigate waters with a depth less than the draft
of the ship plus two meters. This threshold is set to avoid grounding. Furthermore,
the ocean depth only reduces the ship speed significantly when it is less than three
times the draft of the ship. Based on this, a critical region is defined as
TOHmin =
Draft
3 · Draft
= 1
3
(5.5)
TOHmax =
Draft
Draft + 2
= 11
13
The dependency of SOG on the ocean depth is only investigated inside the critical
region. In Figure 5.3, the SOG from the simulations is plotted against TOH. The
critical region is indicated with a vertical dotted line at TOHmin, where the ship starts
to experience the influence of the ocean depth, and a gray shaded area for TOH larger
than TOHmax, where the ship is not allowed to navigate. In order to only model the
TOH dependency inside the critical region, TOH values outside the critical region
are forced to zero. Values inside the critical region are shifted by TOHmin to ensure
==PAGE:39==
5.5 Ocean depth
29
Figure 5.3: Modelled relationship between TOH and ship speed in the critical region.
The points correspond to simulation data, while the red line is the
estimated model for the dependency .
that the intercept of the functional relationship matches the speed when the ship is
not influenced by ocean depth. The data is fitted with a linear function using the R
function lm() with the linear dependency on RPM included, giving the model
SOG = 0.215 · RPM −4.5 · TOHs + ϵ.
(5.6)
The subscript s on TOH indicates that it has been shifted by TOHmin. A summary
of the statistics can be seen in Table 5.4. Note that the coefficient obtained for the
dependency on RPM is very similar to the one obtained when modelling the depen-
dency on the handle setting alone.
ˆβ
σ ˆβ
RPM
0.215
0.002
TOHs
-4.5
0.07
ϵ
-
0.2
Table 5.4: TOHs dependency model summary. ˆβ denotes the estimated coefficients
and σ ˆβ the standard error.
It should be noted that SOG obtained for an ocean depth of 30 meters (TOH =
0.37) is larger than the values obtained in deep waters outside the critical region. As
the theory states that the effect of shallow waters only becomes significant when the
depth is less than three times the ships’ draft, there is a possible error in the model
for this specific ship in the simulator.
==PAGE:40==
30
5 Data Modelling
5.6
Current
For the current analysis, four different simulations have been performed, see Table 5.5.
Each run has been performed with the current in five directions; 180◦, 225◦, 270◦,
315◦, and 360◦relative to north. The initial analysis of test runs from the simulator
Current speed
Handle
Depth
Run 1
2 knots
75 %
500 m
Run 2
2 knots
75 %
20 m
Run 3
2 knots
85 %
500 m
Run 4
1 knot
75 %
500 m
Table 5.5: Input settings of the simulations on which the SOGs dependency on
current is based upon. All runs are performed for current directions 180,
225, 270, 315, and 360 degrees relative to the sailing direction of the ship.
showed that the vessel speed is subject to simulation noise, although very low. Con-
sequently, when modelling the dependency of SOG on currents, the mean SOG will
be considered.
For the direction dependent input variables, the vectors are projected onto the
x and y axis, the x axis being along the course and y the displacement from the
course. The component along the x axis will be divided into forces acting on the
front and aft of the ship, as it is likely that these will not affect the ship in the same
way. This, together with the assumption that a force acting on the left side of the
ship affects the ship speed in the same way as a force acting from the right, results
in three components of each variable, X; side (Xs), front (Xf), and aft (Xa), where
at least one of Xf and Xa is zero at any point in time. Applying this to the current,
the components Cs, Ca, and Cf as obtained.
A linear dependency on TOH and
handle setting will be added to the model as found appropriate in the former sections.
Performing likelihood ratio tests, the results showed that all variables are significant,
and the best model is
SOG =1.3 + 0.194 · RPM −6.0 · TOHs
−0.96 · Cf −0.09 · Cs + 0.99 · Ca + ϵ.
(5.7)
A summary of the model statistics is given in Table 5.6. Ideally, there should not
be an intercept in the model, as SOG should be uniquely determined by the input
variables. However, its’ significance can be explained from the former models of the
dependence on TOH and RPM, which had relatively large standard errors on the
residuals. Modelling the current, a possible bias in those models is accounted for by
introducing the intercept. Note that the RPM coefficient matches the one obtained
in the former sections, while the TOHs coefficient is larger than the one obtained in
the section on depth dependency. In Figure 5.4, the fit is visualized with the speed
plotted against Cx, which is a combination of Cf and Ca.
Positive values of Cx
==PAGE:41==
5.7 Wind
31
ˆβ
σ ˆβ
I
1.3
0.01
RPM
0.194
0.02
TOHs
-6.0
0.1
Cf
-0.96
0.02
Cs
-0.09
0.02
Ca
0.99
0.02
ϵ
-
0.04
Table 5.6: Current dependency model summary.
ˆβ denotes the estimated coeffi-
cients and σ ˆβ the standard error.
corresponds to a current coming from the back, while negative values denote currents
coming from the front.
Figure 5.4: Vessel speed as a function of Cx, which is the current along the x axis
i.e. a combination of Cb (positive) and Cf (negative).
5.7
Wind
In this section, it is examined how the ship’s SOG depends on the wind speed. The
relationship is studied using four simulations in which the values for the wind speed,
handle and depth have been systematically varied. The input parameters of these
simulations are listed in Table 5.7. For each run, the scenario has been simulated
for wind directions 180◦, 250◦, 270◦, 315◦, and 360◦relatively to the course of the
==PAGE:42==
32
5 Data Modelling
Wind speed
Handle
Depth
Run 1
20 ± 10 m/s
75 %
500 m
Run 2
20 ± 10 m/s
75 %
20 m
Run 3
20 ± 10 m/s
85 %
500 m
Run 4
10 ± 5 m/s
75 %
500 m
Table 5.7: Overview of the input setting for the simulations used to determine the
impact of the wind speed on the ship’s SOG. All runs are performed for
wind directions 180◦, 250◦, 270◦, 315◦, and 360◦relative to the ships
sailing direction.
ship. The wind directions given by 180◦, 270◦, and 360◦corresponds to the wind
coming from the front, side, and aft of the ship respectively. When determining the
relationship between the ship’s SOG and the wind speed, the main part of the mod-
elling is performed on the simulations in run 1 with these wind directions. When
a suitable model is determined for these scenarios, the model be tested on the data
from the other runs. This is done in order to assure that the model is able to handle
the variations made in each scenario.
As described in Section 5.6, the wind is split in components corresponding to wind
coming from the front, (Wif), the side (Wis), and aft (Wia) of the ship. Note that
the simulations are performed with a gusty wind speed, such that the wind direction
fluctuates with a few degrees. The wind reaching the ship from other directions than
the chosen main direction is considered negligible and will be ignored initially. The
wind component considered is thus Wif for wind direction 180◦, Wis for wind direc-
tion 270◦Wis, and Wia for wind direction 360◦.
In order to avoid a possible bias related to the seed implemented in the applied
simulation tool, each wind scenario is simulated using only one simulation where the
wind direction is changed on an hourly basis. The data series is subsequently divided
into intervals corresponding to the different wind directions. After a change of wind
direction, a number of observations are removed entirely from the data set to ensure
that the SOG has reached an equilibrium. After cleaning the data, 2100 data points
remain for each direction of each wind scenario. Figure 5.5 shows a plot of the time
series of the wind speed and the ship’s SOG obtained in run 1 with wind direction
180◦. The SOG series shows a periodical tendency with a period of about 900 seconds,
for which a comparable pattern can be seen in the wind speed time series. From this
it is hypothesized that there is a periodical pattern in the wind series with a period
of about a quarter of an hour. Inspecting the series further, it is found that there is
a difference in the simulated series, possibly generated by adding a random variable
to the same pattern.
In Figure 5.6, the estimated cross-correlations between wind speed and SOG are
==PAGE:43==
5.7 Wind
33
Figure 5.5: Time series of SOG and wind speed obtained for wind direction 180◦
relative to the course of the ship in run 1.
plotted.
The cross correlations are calculated using the R function ccf using the
main component of the wind speed for all directions considered. Only the negative
lags of the cross-correlations are taken into account in the model since the positive
lags of the wind speed can not affect the ship’s SOG as they correspond to future
realizations of the wind profile. For negative lags, the estimated cross-correlations
shows a negative correlation between SOG and wind coming from the front and side
of the ship and a positive correlation with wind coming from the aft. It is reasonable
that a wind coming from the front causes a decrease in SOG while a wind from the
aft causes an increase. The side wind affects the ship perpendicular to its sailing
direction, thus pushing the ship off its track. The negative correlation between side
wind and SOG is explained by the fact that the controller compensates for side wind
by having a non-zero rudder angle to stay on course. This causes the resistance on
the ship through the water to increase, resulting in the ship is slowed down.
The starting point of the time series analysis is to find an ARIMA model describ-
ing SOG without exogenous variables. This will serve as a basis for the MISO model.
In Figure 5.7 the auto correlation function (ACF) and partial auto correlation func-
tion (PACF) of the normal and differentiated SOG series is shown for 180◦. The
corresponding plots for 270◦and 360◦are included in Figure C.3 in Appendix C.3.
For the normal series, the ACF does not decline fast enough towards zero, why the
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Data Modelling
Figure 5.6: Cross-correlations between the wind speed and SOG given for wind
directions of 180◦, 270◦and 360◦relative to the course of the ship. The
correlations are determined for the simulations of run 1.
differentiated series are used to find a suitable model.
It is found that the best model to describe the variations in the data is an
ARIMA(2,1,2).
Plots of the ACF and PACF of the residuals can be seen in Fig-
ure C.4 in Appendix C.3. The model fits the data relatively well, although there
are too many significant lags in the PACF. For 270◦there are no significant lags in
the residuals, which shows that the data is fully described by the ARIMA model.
Nonetheless, because the cross-correlation plots showed a correlation between SOG
and side wind, exogenous variables will be added for side wind. In Table C.1 in Ap-
pendix C.3 the coefficients of the fitted models are listed. Even though the series are
fitted independently of each other, there is some agreement between the coefficients
obtained. This is positive, as the the aim of the analysis is to find a set of coefficients
able to describe all wind scenarios.
When determining the significant lags of the wind speed, the pre-whitening pro-
cedure described in Section 4.2 is applied. First, the wind series are fitted with an
appropriate ARMA model. The ACF and PACF of the wind speed series is shown in
Figure 5.8. Based on these plots, it is decided not to differentiate the series. Using
the log likelihood ratio test, the optimal model is found to be an ARMA(2,1). The
ACF and PACF of the residuals can be seen in Figure 5.9. For both ACF and PACF
there are too many significant lags to consider the residuals of the fitted series as
white noise. Consequently, there is reason to doubt the results of applying the pre-
whitening procedure, as equation 4.3 does not hold.
Applying the pre-whitening procedure, lag 1 to 300 of the wind series will be con-
sidered. This is equal to looking at the wind speed 5 minutes in the past. Lag 0 is
excluded, as it corresponds to the wind at the time SOG is observed, and thereby
cannot have influenced the value of SOG yet. These choices leads to the significant
lags listen in Table 5.8. Plots of the estimated transfer function and the significance
==PAGE:45==
5.7 Wind
35
Figure 5.7: The ACF and PACF of the time series for SOG in run 1, with a wind
direction of 180◦. The top and bottom plots show the ACF and PACF
for the normal and differentiated time series respectively. .
level are shown in Figure C.5 in Appendix C.3.
Significant lags
180◦
19 83 88 101 110 170 181 182 193 217 224 225 228 277 285
270◦
19 88 101 110 170 181 182 193 224 225 228 262
360◦
19 62 67 88 101 110 170 181 182 193 217 224 225 228 262
Table 5.8: Significant lags of the wind speed series found from pre-whitening. Num-
bers in bold are the lags that are significant for all wind directions.
The significant lags are added to the ARIMA(2,1,2) model, which was found to
be the best candidate for describing SOG when the exogenous lags are not included.
Model reduction is applied by fitting a model with all variables included as well as
models where one of the variables are removed at a time. The log likelihood ratios
between the complete and reduced models are computed, and in each iteration the
variable corresponding to the lowest χ2 value is removed from the complete model.
The procedure is repeated until all computed χ2 values are above the significance
level. The ARMA parameters are included in the reduction process and it is checked
whether additional ARMA terms should be included as well.
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Data Modelling
Figure 5.8: ACF and PACF of wind speed series from run 1.
Figure 5.9: ACF and PACF of the residuals of the wind series from run 1 fitted
with an ARMA(2,1).
For 270◦and 360◦the optimal model is found to be an ARIMA(2,1,2) with lags
19, 110, and 170 in side and aft wind respectively. For 180◦the optimal model is
ARIMA(2,1,2) with lag 19 and 110 of front wind. The ACF and PACF of the resid-
uals of the model can be seen in Figure 5.10. The model is not suited for 180◦and
360◦, where there are still too many significant lags. For 270◦the data is are well
described, but this was already the case for a simple ARIMA(2,1,2) without exoge-
nous lags. The fitted coefficients of the three simulations can be seen in Table C.2 in
Appendix C.3. Note that the significant lags are front wind for 180◦, side wind for
270◦and aft wind for 360◦. The ARMA coefficients of the model are a bit closer to
each other than for the models without exogenous variables. As the exogenous lags
corresponds to wind from different directions, the coefficients does not need to match.
For 180◦and 270◦the coefficients of the exogenous lags are all negative, while they
==PAGE:47==
5.7 Wind
37
Figure 5.10: ACF and PACF of the residuals of the fits based on the findings from
the pre-whitening procedure.
are positive for 360◦. This aligns with the expectations from the cross-correlation
plots.
The standard deviations on the coefficients are larger than the coefficients
themselves, making the models unstable.
The model based on the results of pre-whitening the wind series is not qualified
for describing the SOG series.
As the FORCE ship simulator is build on a force
model, it is investigated if the data is better described by using the most recent lags
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Data Modelling
of the exogenous variables. This is done by creating a model with exogenous lags
in the vicinity of the significant lags from pre-whitening. For all models lag 1 to 30
and 100 to 120 are added, and for 270◦and 360◦lag 160 to 180 are added as well.
Performing model reduction ARIMA(2,1,3) was found to be better suited as the ba-
sis of the MISO model. In Figure C.6 in Appendix C.3, a plot of the computed χ2
as a function of the exogenous lag removed is shown. The plot shows that the fist
lags are far more significant than those close to 110 or 170. The red horizontal line
corresponds to the significance level for the log likelihood ratio test with 1 degree of
freedom. Based on the plot, a model candidate is formulated with the first 25 lags of
the wind components.
After performing model reductions, the best fit for 180◦is an ARIMA(2,1,3) with
23 significant lags. For 270◦it is an ARIMA(2,1,3) with 24 significant lags and for
360◦ARIMA(2,1,1) with 23 significant lags.
The residuals of the applied models
are shown in Figure 5.11. The models provide a satisfactory fit for all directions,
with only a few lags above the significance level for 180◦and 360◦. In Figure C.7
in Appendix C.3, the coefficients of the exogenous variables of the optimal models
are plotted. For 180◦and 270◦the coefficients are all negative and increases towards
zero for larger lags. For 360◦the coefficients are all positive and decreasing towards
zero. It should be noted that the standard deviation on the coefficients of the the
largest lags considered are still larger than the coefficients themselves, making the
model unstable.
180◦
270◦
360◦
AR(1)
1.91 ± 0.03
1.963 ± 0.007
1.31 ± 0.05
AR(2)
−0.92 ± 0.03
−0.996 ± 0.007
−0.33 ± 0.05
MA(1)
−1.38 ± 0.04
−1.42 ± 0.03
−0.72 ± 0.04
MA(2)
0.24 ± 0.04
0.36 ± 0.04
-
MA(3)
0.19 ± 0.03
0.14 ± 0.01
-
Table 5.9: Coefficients of the models of the SOG dependency on wind based based
on the most recent 25 lags..
It is hypothesized that applying a kernel to the wind speed series will help stabi-
lize the model and reduce the number of significant lags of the wind speed. The first
approach was to smooth the wind speed series using exponential smoothing. Optimiz-
ing the forgetting factor, the optimal value was found to be 0, such that the series is
not smoothed at all. As a consequence, forgetting factors equal to 0.9 and 0.95 were
forced on the series as it was deemed that the weights obtained for lag 1 to 25 were
suitable. The attempted modelling of SOG with the smoothed series as exogenous
variable did not result in a model adequate for describing the variations in the data.
Based on the tendency of linearly declining coefficients in Figure C.7, a triangular
kernel with a width of 25 lags and the highest weight on the most recent lag was
==PAGE:49==
5.7 Wind
39
Figure 5.11: ACF and PACF of the residuals of the optimal model for the SOG
dependency on wind fitted with a maximum of 25 lags before reduction.
After reduction, the number of significant lags is 23 for front and aft
wind and 24 for side wind.
applied. This approach did not result in a suitable model either. As neither of the
applied kernels resulted in a more stable model for SOG the hypothesis of stabilizing
the models by adding a kernel was rejected.
Smoothing the wind speed series did not prove successful, why the model based on
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Data Modelling
the most recent 25 lags of the wind speed is found to be the best candidate for a model
describing the SOG dependency on wind speed. That is, an ARIMA(2,1,3) model
with 23 lags of front and aft wind along with 24 lags of side wind. In Figure C.8, C.9,
C.10, and C.11 in Appendix C.3 the residuals are shown for all runs and directions
listed in Table 5.7. Note that the residuals are much smaller for run 4 than for run 1.
This can be explained by the fact that the mean wind speed is smaller, thus affecting
the ship movements less. This indicates that it is possible to reduce the number of
significant lags for smaller wind speeds. If that is the case it might also very well
be the model should be expanded for wind speeds larger than 20 m/s. However, as
none of the wind speeds found in Section 3.2 for any of the routes succeeds 20 m/s
the model is not expanded. Thus, the best model candidate for describing SOG with
wind disturbances is
(1 + ϕ1B + ϕ2B2)∇1SOGt = (1 + θ1B + θ2B2 + θ3B3)ϵt
+
23
∑
i=1
η1,iWif,t−i +
24
∑
i=1
η2,iWis,t−i +
23
∑
i=1
η3,iWia,t−i.
(5.8)
5.8
Waves
The starting point of the analysis of the waves’ effect on SOG is the same as for the
wind analysis. Four different simulations has been carried out with altering wave
directions. An overview of the simulations can be found in Table 5.10. As for the
analysis of the winds’ effect, the main modelling will be performed on the simulations
from run 1 with wave directions 180◦, 270◦, and 360◦. The wave direction is constant
in time, such that there is only one wave component for each of these simulations. For
180◦the wind is coming from the front and the wave component is denoted Waf. For
270◦the wind comes from the side and is denoted Was, while the waves are coming
from the aft for 360◦with the component Waa.
Wave height
Wave period
Handle
Depth
Run 1
4 m
10 s
75 %
500 m
Run 2
4 m
10 s
75 %
20 m
Run 3
4 m
10 s
85 %
500 m
Run 4
3 m
8 s
75 %
500 m
Table 5.10: Overview of the input settings of the simulations which the speeds de-
pendency on waves is based upon.
All runs are performed for wave
directions 180◦, 225◦, 270◦, 315◦, and 360◦relative to north.
In Figure 5.12 and Figure 5.13 the time series of SOG and wave height obtained
in run 1 are plotted for 180◦and 360◦respectively. The series are plotted for the
same time interval. Note that the wave period is much shorter in Figure 5.12 than
==PAGE:51==
5.8 Waves
41
Figure 5.12: Time series of SOG with wave disturbances and wave heights obtained
for wave direction 180◦in run 1.
in Figure 5.13, although both simulations are performed with the same wave period.
This is due to the Doppler effect which is taken into account when the waves are sim-
ulated in FORCE Technology’s ship simulator. As the time series in Figure 5.12 are
from a scenario with the waves hitting the ship from the front, the period observed
relative to the ship is relatively shorter than when the waves are hitting the ship from
the aft as in Figure 5.13. From the plotted time series, it seems that for waves coming
from the aft, a negative wave height results in an increase in SOG while positive wave
heights causes the ship to slow down. It is the other way around for waves coming
from the front. This is counter intuitive, as the ship needs to push through a positive
wave height causing an increase in the resistance on the ship through the water. The
disconnection between the expected and actual response might be caused by a delay
in the response of SOG to the wave heights.
Estimated cross-correlations between wave height and SOG are shown in Fig-
ure 5.14. For all wave directions, the cross-correlation varies between positive and
negative values. For 180◦, the cross-correlation for lags close to 0 are positive, while it
is negative for the other directions. An interpretation of this is that side waves affects
SOG in a way similar to waves from the aft. Intuitively, it is expected the effect of
side waves is similar to that of front waves, as it causes the ship to have a non-zero
rudder angle. From the values of the estimated cross correlations, it looks like there
is a slightly larger dependency on front and aft waves, than for waves coming from
the side. The cross-correlations have a periodic behavior with a period similar to the
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Data Modelling
Figure 5.13: Time series of SOG with wave disturbances and wave heights obtained
for wave direction 360◦in run 1.
ones observed for the time series in Figure 5.12 and Figure 5.13. The cross correla-
tion with the absolute value of the wave heights has been computed to see if it results
in a constant sign of the correlation, see Figure C.13 in Appendix C.4. The plots
shows that the estimated cross-correlations between the variables are insignificant for
almost all lags for 180◦and 270◦while all cross correlations are below the significance
level for 360◦. Furthermore, for 270◦, significant cross correlations are only obtained
for positive lags, corresponding to future realizations of the waves. As there is clear
visual correlation between SOG and wave height in the time series plots, the approach
of modelling with the absolute value of the wave heights is rejected.
As with wind, the starting point will be to find the best candidate for a time series
model describing SOG of the ship disturbed by waves without exogenous variables.
In Figure 5.15, the ACF and PACF for SOG with wave direction 180◦is shown. The
corresponding plots for 270◦and 360◦can be seen in Figure C.12 in Appendix C.4.
Based on these plots, there is no evidence that the series should be differentiated to
find a suitable time series model. However, as it was found in the former section
on wind dependency that SOG needs to be differentiated to find a model for the
wind disturbances, and the aim of the project is to find a model able to describe all
disturbances, the SOG series with wave disturbances are differentiated as well.
The SOG time series are fitted individually for each wave direction, as the time
series observed have very different behaviour. Even though there is a clear periodical
tendency in the SOG series, it is fitted without seasonal components, as the period-
==PAGE:53==
5.8 Waves
43
Figure 5.14: Cross correlation between wave height and SOG for relative wave di-
rections 180◦, 270◦, and 360◦.
ical behaviour is hypothesized to be due to the wave series. This is hypothesized as
the periodical behavior was not present in the data from the simulations with wind
disturbances. For 180◦, the optimal model is found to be ARIMA(2,1,3), while for
270◦and 360◦it is ARIMA(3,1,3). The ACF and PACF of the residuals of the fitted
series are shown in Figure 5.16, while the fitted parameters are listed in Table C.3 in
Appendix C.4. Based on the ACF and PACF plots, none of the models are adequate
for describing the data.
When performing pre-whitening, the initial step of finding a suitable ARMA mod-
els for the wave height series needs to be done individually, as the wave height series
are dependent on SOG and thus have individual seasonality. Completely different
models are found for the three scenarios. For 180◦, the optimal model is found to be
ARIMA(3, 0, 3) × (3, 0, 0)9, for 270◦it is ARIMA(3, 1, 3) × (3, 0, 0)12 while for 360◦
it is ARIMA(3, 1, 1). Even though there is clearly a seasonal tendency for 360◦as
seen in Figure 5.13, it was not possible to find a suitable seasonal ARMA model.
This might be explained by the periods’ dependency on the ship speed. If the wave
period varies too much as a result from variations in ship speed, the seasonality is
not constant and thus it cannot be fitted. The ACF and PACF of the residuals of the
fitted series is shown in Figure C.14 in Appendix C.4. None of the fitted models are
adequate for describing the data, why the resulting estimate of the transfer function
is not completely reliable.
The transfer functions are computed with a maximum of 300 lags, equal to look-
ing at realized wave heights 5 minutes in the past. Plots of the estimated transfer
functions are shown in Figure C.15 in Appendix C.4, with the significant lags listed
in Table 5.11. There is no clear tendency in the significant lags found, however a
periodic tendency can be seen in the estimated transfer functions. The number of
significant lags for side waves is much less than for front and aft waves. Furthermore,
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Data Modelling
Figure 5.15: ACF and PACF of the wave series obtained for wave direction 180◦in
run 1.
Significant lags
180◦
1:3, 5:17, 20:24, 29:31, 108, 117:118, 121:123, 206:208, 213:214,
229:230, 235, 242:244, 247:249, 253:254 282
270◦
8:10, 15
360◦
1:8, 11:12, 16, 19:23, 26:31, 35:39, 48:51, 55:58, 63:65,
78:80, 83:87, 91:92, 113:115, 141:142, 276, 281:283, 296
Table 5.11: Significant lags of the wave heights found by applying the pre-whitening
procedure.
the value of the transfer function is a order of magnitude less for 270◦compared to
180◦and 360◦for the first lags. From this, it seems that the ship is less dependent on
waves hitting from the side. The SOG series will be fitted using the ARIMA models
found for the SOG series as the basis with the significant lags of the wave series added.
Because the absolute value of the transfer function wears off after about 30 lags, only
the significant lags less than 30 are considered in the modelling. The models are
reduced in the same way as it was done in the section on the wind dependency. That
is, model candidates are formulated with one of the parameters removed and their log
==PAGE:55==
5.8 Waves
45
Figure 5.16: ACF and PACF of the residuals of the ARIMA model fitted to the
SOG series with wave disturbances.
likelihood computed. In each iteration, the candidate model with the smallest value
for χ2 computed in reference to the complete model, will be removed. The process is
repeated until the smallest value of χ is above the significance level set in the theory
chapter. The best model candidates after reduction are listed in Table 5.12. The
ACF and PACF of the residuals of these models are shown in Figure 5.17. As there
is still an abundance of significant lags for both ACF and PACF, the model is not
adequate for describing the variances in the data set and other candidate models are
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Data Modelling
explored.
.
ARIMA
X lags
180◦
(3,1,2)
1:3, 5:12, 14:16, 20:21,23:24, 29:30
270◦
(3,1,3)
8:10
360◦
(3,1,3)
1:8, 11:12, 16, 19:23, 27,29:30
Table 5.12: Reduced SOG models with wave disturbances, based on the significant
lags found from the pre-whitening procedure.
An explanation for the difficulties finding an optimal model for the waves might be
that the force on the ship is not linearly dependent on the wave height. Based on con-
versations with my co-supervisor at FORCE Technology, the speed is hypothesized
to be dependent on the square of the wave height. Consequently, it has been tried to
transform the wave series to get a better model. The transformation applied is a log
transform with an offset as the wave series has negative values, e.i. log(x + α), with
α chosen such that the argument is positive for all values of x. The transformed wave
series are refitted and the pre-whitening procedure repeated. However, the resulting
models did not prove more success full in describing the variations in the data, why
the approach has been abandoned.
Instead, inspired by the best candidate model for the wind dependency, the data
is modelled using the most recent lags of the wave series. For each of the series, the
maximum number of lags is set to be two times the estimated period of the realized
series. For 180◦the period is found from the fit of´the wave series to be 9, for 270◦
it was found to be 12. For 360 it was not possible to find the wave period from
the data.
It is estimated to be 17 based on log likelihood ratio tests of the best
candidate for a seasonal component. The models are based on the ARIMA models
found best for describing the SOG series when no exogenous lags are added. The
resulting ACF and PACFs are shown in Figure 5.18. The pattern of the significant
lags is seen to be very similar to the one obtained when modelling the data with
the pre-whitening procedure. However, the model using the most recent lags has an
advantage compared to the transfer function based model, as it is applicable to the
other runs in Table 5.10, for which the pre-whitening procedure resulted in other
estimates of the significant lags. The coefficients of the model are investigated to
see if there is a tendency, which can inspire other model formulations. The plots
can be seen in Figure C.16 in Appendix C.4. There seems to be a periodic tendency
of the coefficients with two periods represented in for this choice of significant lags.
Consequently it is tried to model the data using a number of significant lags equal to
one wave period. Additionally, a model is formulated with the wave crest and troughs
split in two separate variables. However, none of these approaches resulted in models
suitable for describing the simulated data.
==PAGE:57==
5.8 Waves
47
Figure 5.17: ACF and PACF of the SOG with wave input, based on results from
pre-whitening.
None of the models considered are able to describe the data. Apart from the
models described so far, it has been tried to model various combinations of the log
transform and the model using the most recent lags. None of these attempts were
success full. However, a candidate model is needed in order to proceed in the data
modelling. In the end, four candidates are considered; These are the model based
on the estimated transfer function (Transfer), the model with two wave periods of
lags considered (2 Periods) a long with the model were one period is considered (1
Period) and the approach where one wave period of lags are considered, and the
wave crests and troughs are split in two variables (1 Period CT). In Table 5.13 the
Akaike information criterion (AIC) of the best candidate models are shown. As the
transfer function is found to be specific to the data set modelled and the chosen
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Data Modelling
Figure 5.18: ACF and PACF of the SOG with wave input, with the wave lags set
to 2 times the wave period.
parameters cannot be explained physically, it is abandoned. The remaining three
models are equally bad for describing.
Given the need to have a model for the
wave dependency, the model with the smallest number of parameters (1 Period) is
chosen.
The model should be able to describe all scenarios, independent on the
input variables, which means that the period should be chosen such that it covers
all scenarios. Investigating the data, 360◦has the largest wave period in all of the
simulations in Table 5.10, estimated at 17 seconds. Consulting the data obtained
in the Section 3.2, the maximum wave period observation is 13 seconds. To leave a
room for improvements and possible model reductions, the best candidate for a wave
model is decided to be an ARIMA(3,1,3) with 20 lags in each direction. The chosen
model is applied to the rest of the simulations listed in Table 5.10 for directions 180◦,
==PAGE:59==
5.9 Multiple input variables
49
Transfer
2 Periods
1 Period
1 Period CT
180◦
-18347.2
-19993.85
-19988.83
-19562.54
270◦
-19904.39
-20277.34
-20247.23
-19330.27
360◦
-24857.83
-23976.87
-24634.11
-24061.05
Table 5.13: Comparison of AIC of the SOG model with wave input investigated .
270◦, and 360◦. As the wave direction is constant, the system is singular for the other
directions, why the model cannot be applied directly. The resulting ACF and PACFs
are shown in Figure C.17 - Figure C.20 in Appendix C.4. The ACF and PACF have
similar behaviour across the simulated data. None of the fits are adequate, however,
it has not been possible to find a more suitable model.
(1 + ϕ1B + ϕ2B2 + ϕ3B3)∇1SOGt = (1 + θ1B + θ2B2 + θ3B3)ϵt
+
20
∑
i=1
δ1,iWaf,t−i +
20
∑
i=1
δ2,iWas,t−i
+
20
∑
i=1
δ3,iWaa,t−i
(5.9)
5.9
Multiple input variables
The estimation of the complete model including all input variables is done on the
basis of six simulations, for which the input variables are listed in Table 5.14. The
directions of the weather is visualized in Figure C.21 in Appendix C.5 for easier
comparison.
run 1
run 2
run 3
run 4
run 5
run 6
Wiv [m/s]
10 ± 8
5 ± 2
15 ± 10
12 ± 6
18 ± 6
10 ± 5
Wid
220◦
195◦
20◦
140◦
40◦
310◦
Wah [m]
3
4
2
1
3
4
Wap [s]
6
8
5
4
6
8
Wad
240◦
290◦
50◦
230◦
260◦
340◦
Cv [knots]
2
0.5
1
1
0.2
2.5
Cd
210◦
40◦
320◦
280◦
125◦
10◦
Depth [m]
100
25
30
50
200
30
Handle [%]
75
85
65
80
70
80
Table 5.14: Overview of the input variables for the simulations which the time series
model with all input variables is estimated from.
Wi denotes wind
variables, Wa wave variables, and C is for current. The subscript v
denotes speed, d direction, h height, and p period.
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Data Modelling
Adding up all the contributions from the analysis of single input variables, the
candidate for the final model becomes
(1 + ϕ1B + ϕ2B2 + ϕ3B3)∇1SOGt = (1 + θ1B + θ2B2 + θ3B3)ϵt
+ RPM + TOHs + Cf + Cs + Ca
+
23
∑
i=1
η1,iWif,t−i +
24
∑
i=1
η2,iWis,t−i
+
23
∑
i=1
η3,iWia,t−i
+
20
∑
i=1
δ1,iWaf,t−i +
20
∑
i=1
δ2,iWas,t−i
+
20
∑
i=1
δ3,iWaa,t−i
(5.10)
As it is not possible to fit multiple time series at once using the build-in functions
in R, the ML method described in the theory is used. In this section it was showed
that the log likelihood optimization is done by minimizing
S(θ) =
N
∑
t=p+1
ϵ2
t(θ)
(5.11)
= Yt −ˆYt|t−1(θ),
(5.12)
where Yt is the output variable, in this case SOG. However, this cannot be done
directly, as ˆYt|t−1(θ) is dependent on past values of ϵt(θ), which are unknown. Thus,
in order to apply the method, the MA terms are rewritten in terms of the output
variable. It is not possible to linearize the difference term in this way. Consequently,
the model rewritten is an ARMA(3,3) and it applied to the differentiated series of Y .
By doing so, only the differentiated series can be simulated using the model. However,
as Yt can be written in terms of the differentiated series ∆Yt as
Yt = Y0 +
t
∑
i=1
∆Yt−i,
(5.13)
this can be accounted for by adding a reasonable value for Y0 and taking the cumu-
lative sum of the series. The dependency on Y0 is negligible in finite time. This can
==PAGE:61==
5.9 Multiple input variables
51
be shown by investigating a simple time series model:
Yt = ϕ1 + ϵt
= ϕ1(ϕ1Yt−2 + ϵt−1) + ϵt
=
t−1
∑
i=0
ϕi
1ϵt−i.
This shows that the dependency on ϵ1, the estimation error at time t, is ϕt−1
1
. For
stationary time series, ϕ1 < 1, why this number becomes very small.
Having motivated the method, the linearization of ARMA(3,3), is calculated. In
Appendix D, the first 5 expansions calculated are presented. After 5 expansions, it
is deemed that the dependency on the lags of ϵt are negligible, as the values of θi are
generally less than one for a stationary series. The final expansion is shown in (D.1).
Yt ≈ϵt + (θ1 −ϕ1)Yt−1 + (θ1ϕ1 −ϕ2 + (θ2 −θ2
1))Yt−2
+ (θ1ϕ2 −ϕ3 + (θ2 −θ2
1)ϕ1 + (θ3 −2θ1θ2 + θ13))Yt−3
+ (θ1ϕ3 + (θ2 −θ2
1)ϕ2 + (θ3 −2θ1θ2 + θ13)ϕ1 + (3θ2
1θ2 −2θ1θ3 −θ2
2 −θ4
1))Yt−4
+ ((θ2 −θ2
1)ϕ3 + (θ3 −2θ1θ2 + θ13)ϕ2 + (3θ2
1θ2 −2θ1θ3 −θ2
2 −θ4
1)ϕ1
+ (θ2(3θ1θ2 −4θ3
1 −1 −θ3) + θ2
1(3θ3 + θ3
1)))Yt−5
+ ((θ3 −2θ1θ2 + θ13)ϕ3 + (3θ2
1θ2 −2θ1θ3 −θ2
2 −θ4
1)ϕ2
+ (θ2(3θ1θ2 −4θ3
1 −1 −θ3) + θ2
1(3θ3 + θ3
1))ϕ1)Yt−6
+ ((3θ2
1θ2 −2θ1θ3 −θ2
2 −θ4
1)ϕ3
+ (θ2(3θ1θ2 −4θ3
1 −1 −θ3) + θ2
1(3θ3 + θ3
1))ϕ2)Yt−7
+ (θ2(3θ1θ2 −4θ3
1 −1 −θ3) + θ2
1(3θ3 + θ3
1)ϕ3)Yt−8
(5.14)
5.9.1
Log likelihood optimization
Using the linearized form of SOGt, the model is optimized using the R optimization
algorithm optim(). The dependency on the constant terms TOHs, RPM, Cf, Cs, and
Cf vanishes when the series are differentiated. Thus the optimization is performed
without these variables. Reasonable starting values for the algorithm are found by
fitting the time series model to the data from each of the simulations performed with
all input variables, listed in Table 5.14. When applying the optimization algorithm to
the full model, convergence is not reached. This is a result from the vast number of
coefficients (136) in the model. Due to time limitations, it was not possible to apply
another method for optimizing the coefficients. Instead, the number of parameters in
the model are reduced. The first parameters to be excluded are the lags of wind and
waves hitting the ship from the side. This is chosen, as the analysis of the simulations
containing only wind or waves showed that the dependency on these parameters is
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Data Modelling
less than for front and aft. By doing so, the number of parameters is reduced to
92. Still, the optimization does not reach convergence. Consequently the largest lags
of the other wind and wave variables are removed until convergence can be reached.
This was accomplished for 15 lags of front and aft wind along with 10 lags of front
and aft waves. It has been chosen to have more significant lags of the wind, as the
wind model is more dependable than the one for waves, for which it was not possible
to find a reasonable ARMA model.
The fitted coefficients resulted in a non-stationary ARMA process. These can
not be simulated directly without transformation. Furthermore, it is highly unlikely
that a non-stationary ARMA model is a reasonable fit for the differentiated SOG
series.
Non-stationarity in a time series model indicates that there is a trend in
the data. For the case at hand that would mean that the ship accelerates, which
cannot be explained, as the simulations are done with a constant handle setting and
with weather variables that are more or less constant. Thus, there is nothing in the
system that could explain an acceleration. Due to time restrictions on the project,
the approach is thus abandoned. Instead, the mean SOG is estimated from a linear fit
of the environmental conditions along with RPM and handle setting. This is done to
reach a model that in some sense is able to predict the SOG based on environmental
conditions.
5.9.2
Determining SOGµ
It is not possible to fit the model on the six simulations with all weather variables
included alone, as there are more variables in the model than data points. Therefore,
the single input simulations for wind, waves and current are included in the estima-
tion. This makes the model biased, as these simulations are performed with very
little variation in ocean depth, handle setting and strengths of the weather variables.
However, due to limited time, the results will be used as a rough estimate for SOG.
As the model is not simulated the environmental variables are; wind speed and di-
rection, current speed and direction, wave height (H0), period (Tp), and direction.
The model is fitted using the R function glm, as opposed to lm, for which there are
problems predicting from data frames containing zeros. Model reduction showed that
the wave period and waves coming from the sides are not significant, resulting in the
final model
SOGµ =1.3 + 0.2 · RPM −5.8 · TOHs
−0.06 · µW if −0.004 · µW is + 0.03 · µW ia
−0.94 · Cf −0.05 · Cs + 1.04 · Ca
−0.06 · H0f + 0.05 · H0a + ϵ.
(5.15)
The statistics of the fitted model are shown in Table 5.15.
The coefficients of RPM, TOHs and the current components are similar to the
one obtained in the analysis of the single input simulations. For wind, the component
==PAGE:63==
5.9 Multiple input variables
53
ˆβ
σ ˆβ
I
1.3
0.02
RPM
0.194
0.003
TOHs
-5.8
0.2
µW if
- 0.057
0.003
µW is
-0.004
0.002
µW ia
0.028
0.003
Cf
- 0.94
0.03
Cs
-0.05
0.03
Ca
1.04
0.02
HOf
-0.06
0.01
HOa
0.05
0.01
ϵ
-
0.11
Table 5.15: SOG0 model summary. ˆβ denotes the estimated coefficients and σ ˆβ the
standard error.
coming in from the front of the ship has a larger effect than the one from the back.
For current and wave it is the other way around.
In Figure 5.19, the fitted mean speed is shown as a red line upon the distribution
of the vessels’ speed for the final six simulations. In most cases, the fit is okay, giving
a value for SOG0 which is an appropriate candidate for the time series simulations.
However, for run 4, SOG0 is slightly underestimated.
==PAGE:64==
54
5 Data Modelling
Figure 5.19: Fitted values for SOG for the six simulations performed with all envi-
ronmental coditions.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 6
Economic model
In this chapter, all the components contributing to the final economical model of
operating the shipping routes are presented. The expenses can be divided into three
main types: daily fixed costs, daily variable costs, and additional costs, where the
additional costs are the route specific expenses. The estimated values and models
presented in this chapter are provided by Jens Bay at FORCE Technology. These
are, naturally, very rough estimates with large uncertainties attached.
6.1
Daily fixed costs
The daily fixed costs consists of the investments in the ship, the crew costs, including
both wages and living costs, the insurances of ship, crew and cargo, and finally the
ship maintenance. Each of these variables are studied below.
Ship investments
The financing is assumed to be covered by three types of financing with interest rates
payable per annum (PA). The distribution of the loan is given as:
• 70% from a 20-year loan from the Danish “Skibskreditfond” at 2% PA
• 20% from a 10-year bank loan (the ship owners prime finance source) at 4% PA
• 10% from investment of the ship owners own capital at 10% PA with a depre-
ciation of 10 years
Furthermore, it is assumed that the ship owner will sell the ship after 20 years at
an estimated price of 25% of the original investment, and that the used ship price is
used for the self financing for a new ship. The ship is assumed to have 357 operating
days (51 weeks), which is reduced to 350 (50 weeks) after five years as the ship then
needs to be docked for a 5-year inspection, repairs, bottom cleaning and painting. For
a ship the size of ATLAS, the estimated price is USD 33 million. If the ship needs
to have ice classification 1A, it is estimated to be 5% more expensive, resulting in a
total cost of USD 35 million. From the distribution of the loans, the daily expense in
==PAGE:66==
56
6 Economic model
year i is calculated as the total payment due divided by the operation days;
InvtS,i = PDS,i + PB,i + PSF,i
NOP,i
(6.1)
where PDS is the payment due to Danish “Skibskreditfond”, PB the payments to the
bank, PSF the self-financed payment, and NOP,i the number of operating days in year
i. For the estimated ship price, the daily expenses due to investments are calculated
and listed in Table 6.1.
Skibskreditfond
Bank
Self-investment
Regular ship
year 1-5
USD 3,968
USD 2,285
USD 1,450
year 5-10
USD 4,048
USD 2,331
USD 1,479
year 10-20
USD 4,048
-
-
Ice reinforced ship
year 1-5
USD 4,197
USD 2,418
USD 1,596
year 5-10
USD 4,281
USD 2,466
USD 1,627
year 10-20
USD 4,281
-
-
Table 6.1: Daily expenses due to the investment for a container ship of ATLAS’ size
with and without ice class 1A.
Crew cost
When determining the costs of the ship crew, it is assumed that all crew members
are hired under the Danish International Ship register. This means that the crew
members do not pay taxes in Denmark or anywhere else. The tax freedom is given to
the ship owner meaning that he only pays the crew net wage (after taxes) which in
practice is taken as 60% of the normal wage. It is assumed that the time the on/off
ratio is 3 to 1. The total cost of crew wages, WC, is thus determined as the total cost
of the crew necessary on the ship, W, plus the expenses of the crew off duty:
WC = (1 + 1/3) · W.
(6.2)
According to the Danish Maritime Authority (DMA), the safe manning of the example
ship is 13 persons. However, in practice these ships need more crew to operate so it is
assumed that 23 persons will be needed. The crew consists of navigators, engineers,
deck crew, and additional crew such as electricians and stewards.
This gives an
estimated cost of 2,706 USD for the crew present on the ship and thus a total cost of
WC = USD 3,608.
==PAGE:67==
6.2 Daily variable costs
57
Insurance of ship, crew, and cargo
The total cost related to the insurance of the ship and crew members is assumed to
be 2% of the ship value. The cargo is also insured and is assumed to be 2% of the
cargo value. Thus, the daily cost of insurances depends on the ship price, the value of
the cargo and the year, as the number of operating days. The total cost is expressed
as:
InsS,C,i = 0.02 · V AS + 0.02 · V AC
NOP,i
,
(6.3)
where V AS and V AC represent the value of the ship and cargo respectively and NOP,i
is the number of operating days in year i. Usually, the value of the cargo is more than
that of the ship. In this project, it is estimated at USD 40 million.
Ship maintenance
The ship maintenance cost covers daily maintenance as well as docking costs. It is
estimated as a average cost per year of 2.5% of the ship price. Thus, the contribution
from ship maintenance is found from
MS,i = 0.025 · V AS
NOP,i
.
(6.4)
6.2
Daily variable costs
The variable daily costs considered are the fuel cost for main and auxiliary engines,
as well as lubrication and hydraulic oil.
6.2.1
Fuel costs
The fuel consumption is divided in two contributions; fuel consumption related to the
ship movements, and electrical consumption. The main part of this project is dedi-
cated to formulate a model for the fuel consumption related to the ship movements
when the environmental conditions along the routes are taken into consideration. The
power consumption is dependent on the handle setting and the time spend on com-
pleting the voyage. The time spend on completing the voyage will be estimated from
SOG, while the power consumption can be estimated using (5.2). The daily power
consumption related to the movement of the ship is denoted Pv
Apart from the power consumption due to ship movements, there is a daily ad-
ditional consumption from the generation of electrical power. In this project, the
electric power consumed per day for the electrical appliances on board are assumed
to be constant at 28.000 kWh. It is denoted Pelec. To this amount an extra con-
sumption is added from the electrical power spend on cooling containers, Pcont. This
==PAGE:68==
58
6 Economic model
power consumption is dependent on the number of cooled containers and the ambient
temperature. The daily power consumption due to cooling of containers is estimated
as
Pcont = Ncont(45 + 4 · Tamb)
(6.5)
where Ncont is the number of containers needing cooling, Tamb is the ambient tem-
perature and 45 kWh the base load. For the purposes of this project, the ambient
temperature is set as a mean for all routes. For the Arctic routes it is estimated at
10◦and for SCR 25◦.
Summing up all contributions, the total daily power consumption is given by
F = (Pelec + Pcont + Pv) · SFC
(6.6)
Here, SFC is the specific fuel consumption, which is defined as the fuel consumption
per unit time divided by the power. The fuel cost per day is given as
CF = F · PF
(6.7)
where PF denotes the price of fuel in tonnes, and t is the time spend on completing
the voyage. In this study, the fuel price is estimated at 600 USD per ton. To get from
the total fuel price to the daily cost, the fuel consumed on one voyage is divided by
the time taken to complete the voyage.
Lubrication and hydraulic oil cost
The expenses to lubrication and hydraulic oil is a percentage of the total fuel con-
sumption. Thus it is calculated as
CO = F · p · PO
(6.8)
with p being the percentage of the total fuel consumption and PO the price of lubrica-
tion and hydraulic oil in USD per tonne. For this study, it is assumed that p = 0.015
and PO = USD 800.
6.3
Additional costs
The additional costs are route specific and will be denoted as AR. In the following,
the extra costs of operating each of the routes considered, are summarized.
Suez Canal fee
The Suez Canal fee is calculated using Leth Agencies online Suez toll calculator [Age],
and is found to be USD 229.087 one way. The daily expenses are given as the Suez
Canal fee divided by the time it takes to complete the voyage.
==PAGE:69==
6.4 Total costs
59
NSR
In the North east passage, the icebreaker assistance is divided into 5 areas at a cost
of about USD 100.000 each. It is up to the ship master to decide how many areas
with ice breaker assistance is needed. In addition to this, it is a demand to bring two
Russian ice pilots on the journey. The cost of this is estimated at USD 150.000.
NWP
At the present time, there are no additional costs of operating the NWP[Ege10]. How-
ever, the infrastructure of the route is less developed than the other routes, why it is
riskier to navigate. Furthermore, it is not known what the bill for a rescue operation
will amount to. Consequently, there is an economic advantage navigating this route,
but with a greater risk of a dangerous situation, which will result in an extra expense
along with a delay in the delivering time, which often results in a shipping delay
charge.
6.4
Total costs
Summing all the contributions, the daily cost of a voyage is written as
C = InvtS,i + WC + InsS,i + MS,i + CF + CO + AR/t.
(6.9)
Here, InvtS,i is the investment cost, dependent on the ship, S and year, i. WC is
the daily crew wages and InsS,i is the insurance, dependent on the ship and year.
The variable MS,i is the maintenance costs, while CF and CO correspond to the fost
related to fuel and oil, respectively. The additional costs are denoted by AR/t and
are dependent on the route R, and the time spent on completing the voyage, t.
==PAGE:70==
60
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 7
Results
In this chapter, the results obtained are presented. The chapter will be split in two
parts. In the first part the effect of environmental disturbances on the fuel consump-
tion is investigated. The second section shows the effect on the daily operation cost
of adding all the expenses from the economic model (6.9).
7.1
Weather effects
To have a reference for the effect of weather disturbances, the time spent completing
a voyage and the related fuel costs are determined for the case where all weather
variables are equal to zero. The results can be seen in Table 7.1 for handle settings
65%, 75% and 85%. The standard deviations are calculated using propagation of un-
certainty on the estimated SOG. Thus, the standard errors only reflect the statistical
uncertainty. In reality, the numbers are subject to large uncertainties as the data is
simulated and the data sets that the model is based upon are biased, as discussed on
Section 5.9.2.
For a constant handle setting, the daily fuel cost are unchanged, as the main
engine operates at a constant power. Thus, the differences in time spent and fuel
consumption cancel each other out in the daily price. The results show that the time
taken to complete a round-trip between Amsterdam and Shanghai is significantly
reduced when operating the Arctic routes.
Although the expenses saved are not
visible when inspecting the daily costs, the Arctic routes still have an advantage
to the SCR, as more voyages can be completed in a year, thus generating a larger
revenue.
In Table 7.2, the time spent, fuel consumed, total fuel cost and daily fuel cost is
given for the scenario including weather disturbances. Comparing with the results in
Table 7.1, the effects of including weather in the calculations are barely noticeable.
Returning to the linear model for SOG in (5.15), the coefficients of the wind distur-
bances are very small. So even for rough winds, the mean speed over ground stays
almost the same. The same is the case for the dependency on the wave height. The
largest contribution to SOG comes from the the current and ocean depth. Investi-
gating the environmental data collected along the routes, the ocean current speeds
obtained are very small. This is a disadvantage of using the monthly means of the
==PAGE:72==
62
7 Results
Time
Fuel cons.
Total fuel cost
Daily fuel cost
[days]
[ton]
[USD]
[USD]
Handle = 65%
NSR
49.3 ± 0.1
1,219.5 ± 0.4
731,700 ± 200
14,840 ± 70
NWP
52.30 ± 0.07
1,293.7 ± 0.4
776,200 ± 200
14,840± 70
SCR
66.2 ± 0.2
1,636.3 ± 0.5
981,800 ± 300
14,800 ± 100
Handle = 75%
NSR
45.75 ± 0.06
1,425.0 ±0.4
855,000 ± 200
18,700 ± 100
NWP
48.54 ± 0.07
1,511.8 ± 0.4
907,100 ± 200
18,700 ± 100
0 SCR
61.4 ± 0.2
1,912.2 ± 0.6
1,147,300 ± 300
18,700 ± 100
Handle = 85%
NSR
39.99 ± 0.06
1,894.0 ± 0.4
1,136,400 ± 200
28,400 ± 200
NWP
42.42 ± 0.07
2,009.2 ± 0.4
1,205,500 ± 200
28,400 ± 200
SCR
53.7 ± 0.2
2,541.4 ± 0.6
1,524,900 ± 400
28,400 ± 200
Table 7.1: Time spent, fuel consumed, total fuel price and daily fuel cost for each
route calculated for the scenario where there is no weather disturbances.
variables. However, the CMEMS data set was inspected, and generally the speed of
the currents observed are mush smaller than 1 knot. Furthermore, it is only very few
of the waypoints where the ocean depth is within the critical region, where it has
significant effect on SOG. As all weather inputs are based on monthly averages, the
effects of extreme weather scenarios are averaged out. Basing the weather variables
on monthly means was done under the assumption that the environmental conditions
along the routes would be very different. However, this assumption is not supported
by the data. To analyze the effect of weather fully, the difference between travelling
from Amsterdam to Shanghai and Shanghai to Amsterdam is investigated, as one of
the ways might be more favorable than the other.
In Table 7.3 the fuel costs of and time consumed are listed for when the ship is
travelling from Amsterdam to Shanghai. In Table 7.4, the corresponding numbers for
travelling from Shanghai to Amsterdam are listed. The difference in travelling from
Europe to Asia or the other way around are exemplified for a handle setting of 75%.
The results shows that there is no significant change in the travel time between the
two voyages.
7.2
Total daily expenses
Apart from the expenses due to fuel costs, the additional costs identified in Chapter 6
are calculated and added to the daily price of operating the three routes. For this part
of the calculation, the results in Table 7.2 are used for the fuel consumption related
to the ship movements and the total travel time. For the Arctic routes, the expenses
==PAGE:73==
7.2 Total daily expenses
63
Time
Fuel cons.
Total fuel cost
Daily fuel cost
[days]
[ton]
[USD]
[USD]
Notch = 65%
NSR
50.1 ± 0.3
1,239.7 ± 0.5
743,800 ± 200
14,800 ± 200
NWP
52.7 ± 0.3
1,303.3 ± 0.3
782,000 ± 200
14,800 ± 200
SCR
67.5 ± 0.3
1,668.8 ± 0.6
1,001,300 ± 300
14,800 ± 100
Notch = 75%
NSR
46.5 ± 0.2
1,446.8 ± 0.5
868,000 ± 200
18,700 ± 200
NWP
48.9 ± 0.2
1,522.1 ± 0.5
913,300 ± 200
18,700 ± 200
SCR
62.5 ± 0.3
1,947.3 ± 0.6
1,168,400 ± 300
18,700 ± 200
Notch = 85%
NSR
40.5 ± 0.3
1,919.0 ± 0.6
1,151,400 ± 200
28,400 ± 400
NWP
42.7 ± 0.3
2,021.1 ± 0.7
1,212,700 ± 300
28,400 ± 400
SCR
54.5 ± 0.4
2,581.8 ± 0.9
1,549,000 ± 400
28,400 ± 300
Table 7.2: Time spent, fuel consumed, total fuel price, and daily fuel cost for each
route calculated with weather disturbances.
Time
Fuel cons.
Fuel cost
[days]
[ton]
[USD]
NSR
23.2 ± 0.1
722.4 ± 0.3
433,500 ± 200
NWP
24.3 ± 0.2
758.0 ± 0.3
454,800 ± 200
SCR
31.3 ± 0.2
974.0 ± 0.5
584,400 ± 300
Table 7.3: Fuel costs of travelling from from Amsterdam to Shanghai with a handle
setting of 75% including weather disturbances.
Time
Fuel cons.
Fuel cost
[days]
[ton]
[USD]
NSR
23.2 ± 0.1
724.4 ± 0.3
434,600 ± 200
NWP
24.5 ± 0.2
764.1 ± 0.3
458,500 ± 200
SCR
31.2 ± 0.2
973.2 ± 0.5
584,000 ± 300
Table 7.4: Fuel costs of travelling from from Shanghai to Amsterdam with a handle
setting of 75% including weather disturbances.
related to an ice reinforced ship are used, while the SCR is operated by a regular
container ship without ice reinforcement. The additional fees from ice pilots along
NSR and Suez canal fees are added to the respective routes. Icebreaker assistance
is not included, as this extra expense is only relevant to the NSR, for which the ice
coverage found in the CMEMS data should be manageable without assistance. The
calculations are performed for the scenario where 400 containers are cooled.
==PAGE:74==
64
7 Results
Year 1-5
Year 6-10
Year 11-20
NSR
45,371
45,744
41,846
NWP
42,142
42,515
38,617
SCR
52,015
52,375
48,760
Table 7.5: Total daily cost of operating the three routes in USD given for the years
1-5, 6- 10 and 11-20. For these calculations, the number of cooled con-
tainers is set to 400, and the handle setting is at 75% .
The reason for the price increase in year 6-10 is that the number of operation days
are reduced, due to docking of the ship for repairs, as discussed in Section 6.1. This
affects the investment and insurance cost per operating day. In year 11-20, the cost
is reduced again, as two of the loans (self-investment and bank) are payed off, see
Table 6.1. As stated in Chapter 6, it is assumed that the ship is sold after year 20
and that the income is used to invest in a new ship. If the ship is kept after year
20, the daily costs are further reduced, as all bank loans are payed off, resulting in a
decrease of USD 4,281 for the ice reinforced ship and 4,048 for the regular ship (see
Table 6.1). The route with the cheapest daily operational cost is NSR. This is due
to the fact that there are no additional fees of operating this route. If ice breaker
assistance is needed on the NSR, the daily cost will go up by USD 2,220 - 10,800,
dependent on the number of areas in which the assistance is needed. Thus, the daily
cost of operating the NSR will exceed that of SCR if icebreaker assistance is needed
in all areas. This result shows that it is only feasible to operate the Arctic routes at
times where the ice coverage is small enough that the ship can navigate without or
with very little ice breaker assistance. Although there is not a specified cost for ice
breaker assistance along the NWP, it is not recommendable to use the route in rough
ice conditions, due to the lack of infrastructure and risk that the ship will get stuck.
In the economic model, the difference in daily costs of operating the Arctic routes
compared to SCR comes down to the ship price, the travel time, the route specific
additional expenses and the electrical power consumed on container cooling which is
dependent on the ambient temperature. The daily costs reflected in Table 7.5 are
computed for 400 cooled containers. For the Arctic routes, the ambient temperature
is fixed at 10◦while it is 25◦for SCR. In the example above, the daily expenses
due to container cooling is thus 4,590 for the Arctic routes and 7,830 for SCR. For
the number of containers considered, this means a daily reduction in expenses to
container cooling of 36% for for the Arctic routes compared to SCR.
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion
In this chapter, the various components of the analysis conducted are discussed. This
includes a section on the analysis of FORCE Technology’s ship simulation tool and
a discussion of the design of the simulations performed using the ship simulator.
Furthermore, based on the analysis of the simulated data, the modelling method is
discussed. Finally, the models applicability to other ships and scenarios is summa-
rized.
8.1
FORCE simulation tool
In the initial analysis of the data simulated from the FORCE ship simulation tool, it
was found that the standard deviation on the simulated wind speed is less than the
actual input value. This rises questions as to how the wind spectrum is simulated
in the implementation and whether the values of the simulated time series indeed
resembles real wind spectra. Furthermore, it is not clear how the wind direction is
defined for gusty wind. It has not been possible to find a correspondence between
the input variable for the standard deviation and the variations in directions in the
simulated series. The fluctuations appear to be constant no matter the input variable.
Initially, the approach to the project was to model the ships displacement from
the chosen track. However, due to the lack of an integral part in the track controller
in the regulator, this was not possible in practise as the ship is not steered back on
the chosen track if affected by a constant force. Additionally, because the minimum
sampling frequency in the simulator is 1 second, the changes in the logged ship posi-
tions were too small to be modelled using time series analysis, as the dependency on
past positions was too large, such that the ACF did not decrease fast enough towards
zero. Instead it was tried to model the rudder angle, which has a faster reaction to
the changing conditions, as this is the tool controlling the position of the ship. In
the end, this approach was abandoned as well because the angle of the rudder is not
linearly dependent on the changing conditions, and because it was realized that hav-
ing modelled the rudder angle, it would be necessary to convert it into a ship speed,
which was already an output variable and thus modelled directly instead.
In this part of the process there was the additional realization that a working
speed pilot is not implemented in the simulation tool. Consequently, it is not possi-
==PAGE:76==
66
8 Discussion
ble to generate trustworthy data with varying fuel consumption. Instead, a constant
handle setting is chosen for the simulation, and the speed of the ship varies as a result
from the environmental conditions. The consequence of these findings is that it was
not possible to approach the problem in the way originally intended. A more simple
approach modelling the SOG was thus chosen. Doing so, the part of the project on
determining a transfer function from the modelled output variable to the fuel con-
sumption became redundant, as the fuel consumption is constant in time.
The SOG is measured along the longitudinal axis of the ship. This was not real-
ized until fairly late in the process, why it has not been altered to the speed along
the sailing direction. To get the actual speed along the sailing direction, the SOG
measured along the longitudinal axis needs to be scaled by sin(heading) and a con-
tribution added from transverse wind equal to cos(heading + 90◦). However, even
for the most extreme weather conditions in the simulations performed, the maximum
heading is about 10 degrees, giving a scaling error of about 2 pct.
As a last pointer, the wind and waves are not considered as correlated input
variables in the simulation tool. Waves are generated by wind, and thus this is a
disadvantage, as it does not reflect actual conditions. The tool is developed for other
purposes than the data analysis conducted in this project, why some of the choices
in the implementation are not optimal for this purpose.
8.2
Modelling approach
Due to time constraints, it was not possible to arrive at a MISO model for the ship
movements. The main problem in modelling the data was the waves, for which it was
not possible to formulate a time series model. Waves does not affect the ship in the
same way as the other weather variables, as it causes rotations along the axes of the
ship. These rotations might be the cause of the difficulty in modelling the simulated
SOG series with wave input.
Modelling the data, wind acting on the ship from left is assumed to affect the ship
in the same way as wind coming from right. This results in the coefficients along the y
axis to be the same. However, as the FORCE ship simulator is based on a force model,
it should be possible for two forces, acting on opposite sides of the ship, to cancel
each other out. In the approach used for the data modelling, the dependency on the
weather components are completely split. It is very unlikely that this is a reasonable
model, as the cross correlation between the coefficients should be taken into account.
For instance, for shallow waters, the ship is pulled down thus increasing its’ draft
and thereby the resistance on the ship through the water. In this scenario, the wind
will have a reduced effect on the ship movements. Ideally, all coefficients should be
intertwined in a multidimensional time series model. With that being said, it is not
a given that such a model would work out. In this study, it was not possible to find
==PAGE:77==
8.3 Simulation designs
67
a model describing the wave disturbances alone. This problem will not be solved by
a multidimensional time series model. If more information was available on how the
wave forces are calculated in the simulation tool, it might be possible to formulate
a better model. For instance, there might be a delay between the generated wave
series and their impact on the ship. Knowledge on this might help in the modelling.
For instance, the wind model was only found by considering that the simulations are
based on a force model, why it was hypothesized that the most recent lags of the
wind should have the largest effect.
8.3
Simulation designs
The simulations are performed for rough weather conditions, compared to the data
obtained through CMEMS. This choice is made, to make sure that any simulation
noise in the ship simulator is drowned out. Simulations with more moderate input
variables have been carried out, but in most cases it was found that the dependence
on the weather inputs was not visible in the data series. Because the models are
developed for relatively rough weather conditions, the results might not be applicable
to the data obtained through CMEMS.
Modelling the mean value of SOG, it was not possible to estimate the dependency
based on the simulations with all input variables alone, as there are more parameters
in the model than simulations. Consequently, data from the single input simulations
for current, wind and waves was included in the model estimation. This makes the
model biased, as these simulations were performed with very little variation in ocean
depth, handle setting, and settings for the weather conditions.
Given more time,
more experiments with all environmental variables should be carried out, and the
coefficients of the model for the mean SOG re-estimated using this data.
8.4
Application to other ships
The coefficients of the mean value of SOG can be re-estimated for other ships using
simulation data. But based on the difficulties discussed in this chapter, it is not ad-
visable to use this as a reliable measure of the mean speed. In the case that a MISO
model had been obtained for the ship at hand, it would not be directly applicable to
other ships. First of all, all coefficients of the model would need to be re-estimated
using simulation data from the new ship. Apart from that it is not given that a
MISO model for another ship would have the same ARIMA dependency on past ob-
servations or that the number of lags included for the exogenous variables would be
adequate.
If a time series model is to be formulated, I would recommend that the findings
from this study are used to describe a multi-variate time series model. Such a model
==PAGE:78==
68
8 Discussion
should be described in a way that the coefficients of the weather variables are depen-
dent on each other. Furthermore, the side components of the forces should be split
in left and right, such that they are able to cancel out each other.
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
Investigating each of the input variables individually, adequate models were obtained
describing the dependency on handle setting, ocean depth, ocean current, and wind
disturbances alone. For simulations with waves as the only input variable, it was
not possible to find a suitable model with the methods applied. The best model for
wave dependency was thus chosen to be one reducing the number of parameters. The
models for the dependency on each of the input variables were summed to form a
candidate for a model able to predict SOG based on all input variables. The model
was linearized to enable simultaneous estimates of coefficients for multiple simulated
data sets, using ML estimation. Using an optimization algorithm, the coefficients
of this model were estimated. However, due to a vast number of coefficients in the
candidate model, it was not possible to reach convergence using this approach. The
project being time limited, the parameters of the candidate model were reduced until
convergence could be reached. Unfortunately, the coefficients returned were those of a
non-stationary time series model. Such a model cannot be simulated directly without
applying transformations, which is identified as a future task. In the end, the mean
SOG was estimated as the mean value from a linear fit of the input variables based on
simulation data with single input variables as well as data sets with all inputs enabled.
A cost model containing input from ship investments, insurance, wages, and fuel
costs, along with route specific expenses was formulated. The model is able to de-
scribe the change in costs due to ice reinforcement of a ship. Furthermore, the model
allows for specific adjustments to the price from the value of the cargo and the number
of containers needing cooling aboard. Combining the mean SOG with the cost model,
estimates for the time needed to travel each of the three routes were computed. This
was done using real meteorological data from September 2017. The results showed
that the effect of the weather was negligible for the data considered. Furthermore,
it was shown that the daily cost of a voyage is reduced for the Arctic routes, under
the assumption that ice breaker assistance is not needed. If ice breaker assistance
is needed to operate NSR, the expenses are vastly increased. Hence, if ice breaker
assistance is needed along all of the Russian coast, the daily expense of operating
NSR exceeds that of SCR. Expenses to container cooling are included in the eco-
nomic model. The power needed to cool a container is dependent on the ambient
temperature, thus giving an advantage to the Arctic routes.
==PAGE:80==
70
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX A
Routes
WP
Landmark
Latitude
Longitude
Bearing
Leg [nm]
1
Amsterdam
52.72
4.48
1.10
-
2
56.66
4.62
-2.88
236.89
3
61.53
4.11
21.91
293.21
4
68.20
11.49
48.64
443.24
5
71.55
25.42
84.72
351.06
6
69.75
56.86
40.80
629.82
7
72.48
65.21
51.70
231.24
8
74.60
76.79
49.78
234.96
9
77.92
103.33
84.13
424.20
10
77.17
130.09
97.26
347.80
11
76.56
141.71
110.95
163.03
12
73.39
162.04
111.86
368.14
13
68.44
-174.82
133.30
539.73
14
Bering Strait
66.13
-169.06
-143.03
192.77
15
63.86
-172.85
-113.68
167.16
16
62.40
-179.31
-116.46
196.64
17
60.24
172.88
-115.40
260.36
18
58.17
165.47
-162.37
260.31
19
55.08
163.77
-140.23
194.09
20
51.83
159.51
-126.24
247.71
21
49.82
155.42
-108.06
197.01
22
48.55
150.14
-117.84
221.25
23
45.89
143.46
-96.50
316.18
24
45.66
140.94
-136.85
106.90
25
41.22
135.59
-140.70
354.44
26
36.01
130.46
-136.48
394.17
27
33.05
127.17
-116.73
241.15
28
Shanghai
31.01
122.67
-
259.74
Total distance
7873.19height
Table A.1: Coordinates of the planned route along NSR including computed values
for initial bearing and leg distance.
==PAGE:82==
72
A Routes
WP
Landmark
Latitude
Longitude
Bearing
Leg [nm]
1
Amsterdam
52.72
4.48
-35.27
0.00
2
55.74
0.63
-21.07
226.20
3
59.46
-2.21
-69.00
241.54
4
60.85
-11.26
-81.94
283.95
5
61.05
-25.95
-91.85
429.01
6
59.17
-45.98
-41.99
609.68
7
61.52
-50.56
-20.60
196.53
8
66.10
-54.85
-26.80
298.02
9
71.52
-63.83
-53.28
379.92
10
74.19
-80.10
-81.58
329.40
11
74.36
-90.50
-86.08
170.09
12
74.28
-101.88
-95.97
185.14
13
73.52
-114.59
-125.25
217.12
14
72.58
-118.82
-163.98
93.27
15
71.14
-120.09
-101.59
90.23
16
70.69
-125.49
-86.13
109.64
17
70.54
-138.03
-67.17
250.63
18
72.04
-156.58
-127.55
368.41
19
68.61
-167.58
-166.35
303.58
20
Bering Strait
66.13
-169.06
-143.03
152.85
21
63.86
-172.85
-113.68
167.16
22
62.40
-179.31
-116.46
196.64
23
60.24
172.88
-115.40
260.36
24
58.17
165.47
-162.37
260.31
25
55.08
163.77
-140.23
194.09
26
51.83
159.51
-126.24
247.71
27
49.82
155.42
-108.06
197.01
28
48.55
150.14
-117.84
221.25
29
45.89
143.46
-96.50
316.18
30
45.66
140.94
-136.85
106.90
31
41.22
135.59
-140.70
354.44
32
36.01
130.46
-136.48
394.17
33
33.05
127.17
-116.73
241.15
34
Shanghai
31.01
122.67
0.00
259.74
Total distance
8352.31height
Table A.2: Coordinates of the planned route along NWP including computed values
for initial bearing and leg distance.
==PAGE:83==
A Routes
73
WP
Landmark
Latitude
Longitude
Bearing
Leg [nm]
1
Amsterdam
52.72
4.48
-132.05
-
2
50.95
1.44
-112.85
155.40
3
49.88
-2.26
-123.37
155.70
4
48.58
-5.17
-151.80
138.77
5
45.97
-7.16
-148.83
176.42
6
43.09
-9.52
-179.29
199.93
7
37.11
-9.61
109.23
358.94
8
35.93
-5.70
89.92
201.83
9
35.91
-3.48
76.97
107.98
10
37.67
10.44
104.97
678.51
11
34.90
20.88
106.81
532.33
12
Port Said
31.41
32.28
176.15
610.94
13
30.73
32.34
172.07
41.02
14
30.33
32.40
132.76
24.19
15
30.19
32.57
-177.47
11.67
16
Suez
29.91
32.55
163.45
16.90
17
28.74
32.95
136.92
72.98
18
27.45
34.29
149.15
104.94
19
20.55
38.62
149.23
476.69
20
12.50
43.45
91.61
555.60
21
12.16
51.34
98.63
464.08
22
10.76
59.87
99.82
509.08
23
8.32
72.61
106.31
769.49
24
7.11
76.66
108.39
251.74
25
5.77
80.65
90.54
251.34
26
5.58
90.92
86.84
614.34
27
5.87
96.62
121.48
341.48
28
3.87
99.85
128.40
226.93
29
1.25
103.13
117.93
251.88
30
0.46
104.60
41.42
99.97
31
4.20
107.88
30.03
297.52
32
10.21
111.40
30.24
415.85
33
18.34
116.37
30.80
565.30
34
26.66
121.93
13.85
585.30
35
31.08
123.19
-97.96
272.50
36
Shanghai
31.01
122.67
-
27.10
Total distance
10564.63height
Table A.3: Coordinates of the planned route along SCR including computed values
for initial bearing and leg distance.
==PAGE:84==
74
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX B
Environmental data
==PAGE:86==
76
B Environmental data
WP
Depth
Ice
Wave
Wind
Current
THK
F
H0 [m]
Tp [s]
θ
v [m/s]
θ
v [knots]
θ
1
-17.5
1.0
5.7
139.5
5.8
38.3
0.2
79.0
2
-60.0
1.4
6.6
166.9
7.2
282.2
0.1
131.3
3
-339.2
1.7
9.4
240.1
6.9
312.1
0.3
293.4
4
-157.2
1.7
9.5
123.7
5.6
310.9
0.1
53.5
5
-290.3
1.8
9.7
354.7
6.7
311.0
0.2
3.5
6
-40.6
1.2
6.2
164.2
7.7
263.3
0.1
115.2
7
-85.7
1.3
6.1
183.4
7.0
258.1
0.1
348.3
8
-32.1
1.3
5.8
274.6
7.9
237.8
0.1
302.5
9
-166.8
0.1
0.0
0.9
5.2
144.4
6.6
94.8
0.1
268.8
10
-68.7
0.0
0.0
1.0
5.7
57.5
6.5
135.0
0.1
32.1
11
-18.4
1.1
5.6
276.3
7.1
123.4
0.2
139.1
12
-28.2
1.3
6.2
24.5
6.6
118.6
0.1
126.9
13
-50.0
1.2
6.9
22.8
5.8
142.1
0.1
276.8
14
-49.4
1.3
6.9
190.5
6.8
101.4
0.3
87.0
15
-51.3
1.2
8.5
95.3
5.8
255.6
0.3
8.9
16
-132.5
1.2
8.3
180.4
5.9
121.4
0.1
331.9
17
-1576.5
1.5
8.8
264.2
6.2
173.1
0.1
55.1
18
-3580.2
1.6
9.1
211.3
6.2
61.2
0.1
189.2
19
-5941.2
2.0
9.1
266.0
7.7
57.9
0.1
281.2
20
-3351.2
2.0
9.9
134.8
6.6
84.0
0.1
14.5
21
-178.0
2.0
9.8
82.0
6.5
37.2
0.2
195.5
22
-1882.0
1.8
8.3
223.5
6.2
87.6
0.2
148.3
23
-107.8
1.1
7.8
66.1
5.4
74.8
0.1
268.8
24
-288.8
1.3
6.3
220.6
6.8
32.6
0.1
29.6
25
-3578.0
1.0
6.0
297.8
5.2
145.5
0.1
167.2
26
-1539.5
1.1
6.2
129.1
5.8
226.3
0.2
261.1
27
-110.8
1.4
7.1
334.4
7.3
233.4
0.1
64.1
28
-19.0
1.1
6.2
249.0
7.0
216.3
0.2
93.1
Table B.1: Environmental conditions along NSR, September 2017. THK denotes
the ice thickness, and F the fraction. H0 is used for the significant wave
height with Tp being the period. θ is the direction relative to north and
v the speed.
==PAGE:87==
B Environmental data
77
WP
Depth
Ice
Wave
Wind
Current
THK
F
H0 [m]
Tp [s]
θ
v [m/s]
θ
v [knots]
θ
1
-17.5
1.0
5.7
139.5
5.8
38.3
0.2
79.0
2
-74.0
1.4
6.4
111.4
7.7
48.5
0.1
138.3
3
-78.0
1.9
8.2
236.7
8.3
289.7
0.1
118.8
4
-652.0
3.0
9.6
142.1
9.0
276.7
0.1
286.2
5
-1554.5
2.7
9.4
348.2
8.3
7.9
0.1
232.2
6
-2331.5
2.4
9.1
326.9
8.2
149.1
0.1
351.7
7
-897.5
2.0
8.5
346.6
7.3
125.5
0.2
328.7
8
-119.6
1.9
7.7
26.6
8.2
98.5
0.1
318.2
9
-2239.8
1.7
7.4
258.2
7.2
139.3
0.1
221.2
10
-786.8
0.1
0.0
6.3
145.2
0.1
291.9
11
-244.1
0.4
0.1
7.3
130.7
0.1
158.1
12
-207.5
2.3
0.5
6.0
135.3
0.2
165.9
13
-173.6
2.1
0.6
4.8
347.1
0.1
39.9
14
-106.7
0.4
0.1
5.0
358.0
0.1
216.2
15
-140.5
0.9
4.5
86.6
6.9
340.1
0.1
308.8
16
-291.3
1.1
5.5
266.4
6.8
347.1
0.1
357.6
17
-995.6
1.2
6.1
3.6
6.6
211.5
0.2
357.6
18
-123.3
1.5
6.8
187.2
6.8
191.9
0.1
329.2
19
-47.9
1.4
6.4
30.6
7.8
242.6
0.1
286.2
20
-49.4
1.3
6.9
190.5
6.8
101.4
0.3
87.0
21
-51.3
1.2
8.5
95.3
5.8
255.6
0.3
8.9
22
-132.5
1.2
8.3
180.4
5.9
121.4
0.1
331.9
23
-1576.5
1.5
8.8
264.2
6.2
173.1
0.1
55.1
24
-3580.2
1.6
9.1
211.3
6.2
61.2
0.1
189.2
25
-5941.2
2.0
9.1
266.0
7.7
57.9
0.1
281.2
26
-3351.2
2.0
9.9
134.8
6.6
84.0
0.1
14.5
27
-178.0
2.0
9.8
82.0
6.5
37.2
0.2
195.5
28
-1882.0
1.8
8.3
223.5
6.2
87.6
0.2
148.3
29
-107.8
1.1
7.8
66.1
5.4
74.8
0.1
268.8
30
-288.8
1.3
6.3
220.6
6.8
32.6
0.1
29.6
31
-3578.0
1.0
6.0
297.8
5.2
145.5
0.1
167.2
32
-1539.5
1.1
6.2
129.1
5.8
226.3
0.2
261.1
33
-110.8
1.4
7.1
334.4
7.3
233.4
0.1
64.1
34
-19.0
1.1
6.2
249.0
7.0
216.3
0.2
93.1
Table B.2: Environmental conditions along NWP, September 2017. THK denotes
the ice thickness, and F the fraction. H0 is used for the significant wave
height with Tp being the period. θ is the direction relative to north and
v the speed.
==PAGE:88==
78
B Environmental data
WP
Depth
Ice
Wave
Wind
Current
THK
F
H0 [m]
Tp [s]
θ
v [m/s]
θ
v [knots]
θ
1
-17.5
1.0
5.7
139.5
5.8
38.3
0.2
79.0
2
-49.0
0.9
6.2
232.4
6.4
26.4
0.3
47.7
3
-142.8
1.5
9.4
174.7
7.7
13.9
0.1
167.9
4
-112.0
2.4
10.4
245.5
7.1
5.4
0.1
264.9
5
-4812.5
2.4
10.8
222.9
7.0
172.3
0.1
99.2
6
-189.5
2.1
11.0
110.5
5.2
122.4
0.2
237.5
7
-1925.8
2.0
10.0
230.5
7.6
97.3
0.1
261.3
8
-501.8
0.9
8.2
209.3
6.6
358.4
0.5
170.9
9
-1506.8
0.9
5.7
341.8
5.3
244.2
0.4
113.4
10
-206.5
1.0
5.3
268.3
5.8
152.0
0.2
173.3
11
-2734.0
0.8
5.4
61.1
5.7
127.4
0.3
158.3
12
-24.0
0.6
5.5
352.2
4.4
124.3
0.1
139.3
13
-24.0
3.7
113.6
14
-24.0
15
-24.0
16
-24.0
4.3
98.3
0.1
114.0
17
-64.8
0.9
4.2
81.3
6.0
267.0
0.1
90.4
18
-1164.0
1.1
4.9
129.7
6.4
128.4
0.3
239.2
19
-836.8
1.0
6.2
133.4
5.0
114.4
0.2
135.9
20
-183.2
0.4
4.2
227.5
4.5
350.8
0.4
2.4
21
-406.8
1.8
8.5
352.3
5.8
284.6
0.5
78.0
22
-4453.2
1.9
9.0
321.6
7.0
28.9
0.3
245.9
23
-2135.8
1.8
10.9
21.8
6.5
165.4
0.2
127.8
24
-1899.8
1.9
11.1
94.6
7.0
3.5
0.2
158.7
25
-1997.0
2.1
12.2
134.2
7.6
14.5
0.6
177.3
26
-3884.2
2.2
13.1
207.5
6.3
32.4
0.3
237.0
27
-1324.0
0.7
7.4
82.4
3.6
166.5
0.3
227.9
28
-62.5
0.5
6.1
349.1
3.0
287.6
0.2
333.8
29
-17.0
0.1
3.0
167.9
3.8
295.8
0.4
327.7
30
-20.8
0.3
4.3
333.9
4.5
292.2
0.1
283.6
31
-29.2
0.3
4.4
354.0
3.7
44.0
0.1
39.2
32
-3646.2
0.9
6.7
71.4
5.0
40.8
0.4
205.4
33
-3797.8
1.2
8.0
3.2
4.7
344.5
0.4
286.1
34
-58.0
1.7
7.7
101.5
6.6
220.2
0.2
26.3
35
-56.5
1.5
7.1
96.7
7.1
219.6
0.2
298.1
36
-19.0
1.1
6.2
249.0
7.0
216.3
0.2
93.1
Table B.3: Environmental conditions along SCR, September 2017. THK denotes
the ice thickness, and F the fraction. H0 is used for the significant wave
height with Tp being the period. θ is the direction relative to north and
v the speed.
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX C
Modelling
C.1
Initial analysis of simulation data
Figure C.1: Speed variation for a simulation with a constant current input with a
speed of 2 knots and direction 270◦relative to the sailing direction of
the ship.
C.2
Handle dependency
Figure C.2: Linear interpolation between handle setting and RPM.
==PAGE:90==
80
C Modelling
C.3
Wind dependency
Figure C.3: ACF and PACF of the differentiated SOG simulated with wind distur-
bances in run 1, shown for all directions considered in the analysis.
==PAGE:91==
C.3 Wind dependency
81
AR(1)
AR(2)
MA(1)
MA(2)
180◦
1.60 ± 0.06
−0.62 ± 0.06
−0.70 ± 0.06
−0.18 ± 0.03
270◦
1.20 ± 0.09
−0.22 ± 0.09
−0.34 ± 0.09
−0.17 ± 0.03
360◦
1.24 ± 0.14
−0.32 ± 0.11
−0.37 ± 0.14
−0.18 ± 0.03
Table C.1: Coefficients of ARIMA(2,1,2) fitted to the SOG from the simulations
containing wind disturbances.
Figure C.4: ACF and PACF of the residuals of SOG fitted with an ARIMA(2,1,2).
==PAGE:92==
82
C Modelling
Figure C.5: Transfer function of the wind effect on SOG.
==PAGE:93==
C.3 Wind dependency
83
180◦
270◦
360◦
AR(1)
1.59 ± 0.08
1.24± NaN
1.33 ± 0.19
AR(2)
−0.60 ± 0.07
−0.26± NaN
−0.40 ± 0.16
MA(1)
−0.69 ± 0.08
−0.37± NaN
−0.44 ± 0.19
MA(2)
−0.18 ± 0.03
−0.17± NaN
−0.19 ± 0.03
Xt−19
(−1.5 ± 2.5) · 10−5
−2.54 · 10−6± NaN
(0.45 ± 2.55) · 10−5
Xt−110
(−1.1 ± 2.2) · 10−5
(−0.22 ± 2.4) · 10−5
(0.59 ± 2.42) · 10−5
Xt−170
-
−2.62 · 10−6± NaN
(0.47 ± 2.34) · 10−5
Table C.2: Coefficients the ARIMA(2,1,2) model fitted to SOG disturbed by wind,
with significant lags found from pre-whitening.
Figure C.6: Computed χ2 for each of the parameters in the model for SOG with
wind input.
==PAGE:94==
84
C Modelling
Figure C.7: Plot of the coefficients the wind lags for the optimal model for SOG
including wind. The number of significant lags is 23 for front and aft
wind and 24 for side wind.
==PAGE:95==
C.3 Wind dependency
85
Figure C.8: ACF and PACF of the residuals of the final model for SOG including
wind disturbances applied to all directions in run 1.
==PAGE:96==
86
C Modelling
Figure C.9: ACF and PACF of the residuals of the final model for SOG including
wind disturbances applied to all directions in run 2.
==PAGE:97==
C.3 Wind dependency
87
Figure C.10: ACF and PACF of the residuals of the final model for SOG including
wind disturbances applied to all directions in run 3.
==PAGE:98==
88
C Modelling
Figure C.11: ACF and PACF of the residuals of the final model for SOG including
wind disturbances applied to all directions in run 4.
==PAGE:99==
C.4 Wave dependency
89
C.4
Wave dependency
Figure C.12: ACF and PACF of SOG for wave directions 270◦and 360◦relative to
the sailing direction.
==PAGE:100==
90
C Modelling
Figure C.13: Cross correlation between the absolute value of wave height and SOG.
180◦
270◦
360◦
AR(1)
1.555 ± 0.008
2.236 ± 0.017
2.618 ± 0.015
AR(2)
−0.939 ± 0.008
−1.998 ± 0.03
−2.43 ± 0.027
AR(3)
-
0.650 ± 0.017
0.781 ± 0.015
MA(1)
2.858± NaN
2.498 ± 0.0096
0.983 ± 0.025
MA(2)
2.85± NaN
2.396 ± 0.015
0.941 ± 0.016
MA(3)
0.992± NaN
0.872 ± 0.008
0.559 ± 0.0196
Table C.3: Coefficients of ARIMA models fitted to the SOG series when the simu-
lations are done with a wave input.
==PAGE:101==
C.4 Wave dependency
91
Figure C.14: ACF and PACF of the residuals of optimal ARMA models fitted to
the wave series.
==PAGE:102==
92
C Modelling
Figure C.15: Estimated transfer function from waves to SOG.
==PAGE:103==
C.4 Wave dependency
93
Figure C.16: Coefficients of the wind lags for the SOG model with wave input
modelled with exogenous lags equal to two times the estimated wave
period.
==PAGE:104==
94
C Modelling
Figure C.17: ACF and PACF of the residuals of the final model for SOG including
waves applied to all directions in run 1.
==PAGE:105==
C.4 Wave dependency
95
Figure C.18: ACF and PACF of the residuals of the final model for SOG including
waves applied to all directions in run 2.
==PAGE:106==
96
C Modelling
Figure C.19: ACF and PACF of the residuals of the final model for SOG including
waves applied to all directions in run 3.
==PAGE:107==
C.4 Wave dependency
97
Figure C.20: ACF and PACF of the residuals of the final model for SOG including
waves applied to all directions in run 4.
==PAGE:108==
98
C Modelling
C.5
Multiple inputs
(a) Run 1
(b) Run 2
(c) Run 3
(d) Run 4
(e) Run 5
(f) Run 6
Figure C.21: Visualization of the direction of the weather disturbances relative to
the ship of the six runs containing all input variables.
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX D
Linearization of ARMA
model
The final model includes an ARIMA(3,1,3) of the ship speeds’ dependency on past
values. In order to optimize the model with the ML method, the ARIMA model
needs to be linearized. As the difference term cannot be linearized directly, it will be
ignored, such that the model describes the differentiated series. An ARMA model is
defined as
Yt + ϕ1Yt−1 + ϕ2Yt−2 + ϕ3Yt−3 = ϵt + θ1ϵt−1 + θ2ϵt−2 + θ3ϵt−3
This can be rewritten as
Yt = ϵt −ϕ1Yt−1 −ϕ2Yt−2 −ϕ3Yt−3 + θ1ϵt−1 + θ2ϵt−2 + θ3ϵt−3
(D.1)
The difficulty is that the errors, ϵ are unknown. Thus, these terms are rewritten in
terms of Yt.
ϵt = Yt + ϕ1Yt−1 + ϕ2Yt−2 + ϕ3Yt−3 −θ1ϵt−1 −θ2ϵt−2 −θ3ϵt−3
This can be used to find an expression for ϵt−1:
ϵt−1 = Yt−1 + ϕ1Yt−2 + ϕ2Yt−3 + ϕ3Yt−4 −θ1ϵt−2 −θ2ϵt−3 −θ3ϵt−4
(D.2)
Inserting (D.2) into (D.1) yields
Yt =ϵt + (θ1 −ϕ1)Yt−1 + (θ1ϕ1 −ϕ2)Yt−2 + (θ1ϕ2 −ϕ3)Yt−3 + (θ1ϕ3)Yt−4
+ (θ2 −θ2
1)ϵt−2 + (θ3 −θ1θ2)ϵt−3 −θ1θ3ϵt−4.
For this expansion, the approximation for Yt is thus
Yt ≈ϵt + (θ1 −ϕ1)Yt−1 + (θ1ϕ1 −ϕ2)Yt−2 + (θ1ϕ2 −ϕ3)Yt−3 + (θ1ϕ3)Yt−4
(D.3)
Repeating the procedure described above, the expansions listed below are obtained
==PAGE:110==
100
D Linearization of ARMA model
Yt =ϵt + (θ1 −ϕ1)Yt−1 + (θ1ϕ1 −ϕ2 + (θ2 −θ2
1))Yt−2
+ (θ1ϕ2 −ϕ3 + (θ2 −θ2
1)ϕ1)Yt−3 + (θ1ϕ3 + (θ2 −θ2
1)ϕ2)Yt−4
+ ((θ2 −θ2
1)ϕ3)Yt−5
+ (θ3 −θ1θ2 −(θ2 −θ2
1)θ1)ϵt−3
+ (−θ1θ3 −(θ2 −θ2
1)θ2)ϵt−4
+ (−(θ2 −θ2
1)θ3)ϵt−5
(D.4)
Yt =ϵt + (θ1 −ϕ1)Yt−1 + (θ1ϕ1 −ϕ2 + (θ2 −θ2
1))Yt−2
+ (θ1ϕ2 −ϕ3 + (θ2 −θ2
1)ϕ1 + (θ3 −2θ1θ2 + θ13))Yt−3
+ (θ1ϕ3 + (θ2 −θ2
1)ϕ2 + (θ3 −2θ1θ2 + θ13)ϕ1)Yt−4
+ ((θ2 −θ2
1)ϕ3 + (θ3 −2θ1θ2 + θ13)ϕ2)Yt−5
+ ((θ3 −2θ1θ2 + θ13)ϕ3)Yt−6
−(θ1θ3 + (θ2 −θ2
1)θ2 + (θ3 −2θ1θ2 + θ3
1)θ1)ϵt−4
−((θ2 −θ2
1)θ3 + (θ3 −2θ1θ2 + θ3
1)θ2)ϵt−5
−((θ3 −2θ1θ2 + θ3
1)θ3)ϵt−6
(D.5)
Yt =ϵt + (θ1 −ϕ1)Yt−1 + (θ1ϕ1 −ϕ2 + (θ2 −θ2
1))Yt−2
+ (θ1ϕ2 −ϕ3 + (θ2 −θ2
1)ϕ1 + (θ3 −2θ1θ2 + θ13))Yt−3
+ (θ1ϕ3 + (θ2 −θ2
1)ϕ2 + (θ3 −2θ1θ2 + θ13)ϕ1 + (3θ2
1θ2 −2θ1θ3 −θ2
2 −θ4
1))Yt−4
+ ((θ2 −θ2
1)ϕ3 + (θ3 −2θ1θ2 + θ13)ϕ2 + (3θ2
1θ2 −2θ1θ3 −θ2
2 −θ4
1)ϕ1)Yt−5
+ ((θ3 −2θ1θ2 + θ13)ϕ3 + (3θ2
1θ2 −2θ1θ3 −θ2
2 −θ4
1)ϕ2)Yt−6
+ ((3θ2
1θ2 −2θ1θ3 −θ2
2 −θ4
1)ϕ3)Yt−7
−((θ2 −θ2
1)θ3 + (θ3 −2θ1θ2 + θ3
1)θ2
+ (3θ2
1θ2 −2θ1θ3 −θ2
2 −θ4
1)θ1)ϵt−5
−((θ3 −2θ1θ2 + θ3
1)θ3 + (3θ2
1θ2 −2θ1θ3 −θ2
2 −θ4
1)θ2)ϵt−6
−((3θ2
1θ2 −2θ1θ3 −θ2
2 −θ4
1)θ3)ϵt−7
(D.6)
==PAGE:111==
D Linearization of ARMA model
101
Yt =ϵt + (θ1 −ϕ1)Yt−1 + (θ1ϕ1 −ϕ2 + (θ2 −θ2
1))Yt−2
+ (θ1ϕ2 −ϕ3 + (θ2 −θ2
1)ϕ1 + (θ3 −2θ1θ2 + θ13))Yt−3
+ (θ1ϕ3 + (θ2 −θ2
1)ϕ2 + (θ3 −2θ1θ2 + θ13)ϕ1 + (3θ2
1θ2 −2θ1θ3 −θ2
2 −θ4
1))Yt−4
+ ((θ2 −θ2
1)ϕ3 + (θ3 −2θ1θ2 + θ13)ϕ2 + (3θ2
1θ2 −2θ1θ3 −θ2
2 −θ4
1)ϕ1
+ (θ2(3θ1θ2 −4θ3
1 −1 −θ3) + θ2
1(3θ3 + θ3
1)))Yt−5
+ ((θ3 −2θ1θ2 + θ13)ϕ3 + (3θ2
1θ2 −2θ1θ3 −θ2
2 −θ4
1)ϕ2
+ (θ2(3θ1θ2 −4θ3
1 −1 −θ3) + θ2
1(3θ3 + θ3
1))ϕ1)Yt−6
+ ((3θ2
1θ2 −2θ1θ3 −θ2
2 −θ4
1)ϕ3
+ (θ2(3θ1θ2 −4θ3
1 −1 −θ3) + θ2
1(3θ3 + θ3
1))ϕ2)Yt−7
+ (θ2(3θ1θ2 −4θ3
1 −1 −θ3) + θ2
1(3θ3 + θ3
1)ϕ3)Yt−8
−((θ3 −2θ1θ2 + θ3
1)θ3 + (3θ2
1θ2 −2θ1θ3 −θ2
2 −θ4
1)θ2
+ (3θ1θ2
2 −4θ3
1θ2 + 3θ2
1θ3 −θ2 −θ2θ3 + θ5
1)θ1)ϵt−6
−((3θ2
1θ2 −2θ1θ3 −θ2
2 −θ4
1)θ3
+ (3θ1θ2
2 −4θ3
1θ2 + 3θ2
1θ3 −θ2 −θ2θ3 + θ5
1)θ2)ϵt−7
−((3θ1θ2
2 −4θ3
1θ2 + 3θ2
1θ3 −θ2 −θ2θ3 + θ5
1)θ3)ϵt−8
(D.7)
==PAGE:112==
102
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
[12]
Ship Manoeuvre Theory. FORCE Technology. 2012.
[17]
Action and action effects. Force Technology. 2017.
[Age]
Leth Agencies. Online Suez toll cancluator https://lethagencies.com/
egypt/calculator-suez.
[Aou18]
Lotfi Aouf. Quality information document for global ocean waves analy-
sis forecasting product GLOBAL-ANALYSIS-FORECAST-WAV-001-027.
Downloaded from http://marine.copernicus.eu/services-portfolio/
access-to-products/?option=com_csw&view=details&product_id=
GLOBAL_ANALYSIS_FORECAST_WAV_001_027. Copernicus Marine Environ-
ment Monitoring Service. January 2018.
[Ben18]
Abderrahim Bentamy. Quality information document for the global wind
products WIND-GLO-WIND-L4-NRT-OBSERVATIONS-012-004. Down-
loaded from http://marine.copernicus.eu/services- portfolio/
access-to-products/?option=com_csw&view=details&product_id=
WIND_GLO_WIND_L4_NRT_OBSERVATIONS_012_004. Copernicus Marine
Environment Monitoring Service. January 2018.
[Ege10]
Karl Magnus Eger. Costs and Fees on the Northwest Passage. Arctics
Knowledge Hub. http://www.arctis-search.com/Costs+and+Fees+
on+the+Northwest+Passage. 2010.
[Goo]
Google. Google Earth Pro. Desktop version of Google Earth, downloaded
from https://www.google.com/intl/da/earth/desktop/.
[Han+16]
Ørts Hansen et al. Arctic shipping - Commercial opportunities and chal-
lenges. Technical report. CBS Maritime, January 2016.
[Hij17]
Robert J. Hijmans. Package ‘geosphere’. Accessed 29-11-2018. https://
cran.r-project.org/web/packages/geosphere/geosphere.pdf, 2017.
[Hou+10]
House et al. The Ice Navigation Manual. Witherby Publishing Group,
2010.
[Kne13]
John Kneen. Flat Earth Approximation. Technical report. Retrieved from
https : / / sites . google . com / site / johnkneenmicrocontrollers /
performance/flatearth on 29-12-2018. RMIT University, 2013.
==PAGE:114==
104
Bibliography
[Lel+16]
J-M. Lellouche et al. Quality Information Document for Global Sea Physi-
cal Analysis and Forecasting Product GLOBAL-ANALYSIS-FORECAST-
PHY-001-024. Downloaded from http://marine.copernicus.eu/services-
portfolio/access-to-products/?option=com_csw&view=details&
product_id=GLOBAL_ANALYSIS_FORECAST_PHY_001_024. Copernicus
Marine Environment Monitoring Service. October 2016.
[Mad08]
Henrik Madsen. Time Series Analysis. Chapman Hall/CRC, 2008.
[Mae18]
Maersk. “Maersk concludes trial passage of Northern Sea Route”. In:
Mearsk press relase (September 2018). https://www.maersk.com/en/
news/2018/09/28/maersk-concludes-trial-passage-of-northern-
sea-route.
[Mik18]
Bent Mikkelsen. “Første Baltic Feeder til Maersk Line”. In: Maritime Dan-
mark Aps (April 2018), pages 4–6.
[MT11]
Henrik Madsen and Poul Thyregod. Introduction to General and Gener-
alized Linear Models. Chapman Hall/CRC, 2011.
[Pos]
National Post. Picture of Venta Maersk from https://nationalpost.
com/news/worlds-biggest-shipping-firm-tests-russian-arctic-
route.
[Sch+16]
Janin Schaffer et al. “A global, high-resolution data set of ice sheet topog-
raphy, cavity geometry and ocean bathymetry”. In: Earth System Data
Science (2016).
[SH12]
Paul Sauer and Nynne Himmelstrup. “Her er Søvndals mest berømte ci-
tater”. In: Jyllands-Posten (September 2012). List of famous quotes by
the former foreign minister.
[Ter11]
Ole Tersløv. Ship description: Ship 3601, Container Vessel, Loaded Con-
dition, Atlas. FORCE Technology. 2011.
[Wika]
Wikipedia. PID controller. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PID_
controller. Accessed 29-12-2018.
[Wikb]
Wikipedia. Suez Canal. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Suez_Canal.
Accessed 29-11-2018.
==PAGE:115==
List of Tables
2.1
Main dimensions of Venta Maersk and ATLAS [Ter11] [Mik18]
. . . . . .
8
3.1
The total number of waypoints and length of each of the routes studied
.
14
3.2
Bearing and leg distances as computed for NSR going from Amsterdam
to Shanghai and how they are manipulated to match the waypoints
. . .
17
5.1
Power dependency on RPM model summary.
ˆβ denotes the estimated
coefficients and σ ˆβ the standard error
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Handle setting and RPM for Atlas at the optimization points. SOG is
obtained from simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3
Handle dependency model summary. ˆβ denotes the estimated coefficients
and σ ˆβ the standard error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.4
TOHs dependency model summary. ˆβ denotes the estimated coefficients
and σ ˆβ the standard error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.5
Input settings of the simulations on which the SOGs dependency on cur-
rent is based upon. All runs are performed for current directions 180, 225,
270, 315, and 360 degrees relative to the sailing direction of the ship . . .
30
5.6
Current dependency model summary. ˆβ denotes the estimated coefficients
and σ ˆβ the standard error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.7
Overview of the input setting for the simulations used to determine the
impact of the wind speed on the ship’s SOG. All runs are performed for
wind directions 180◦, 250◦, 270◦, 315◦, and 360◦relative to the ships
sailing direction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.8
Significant lags of the wind speed series found from pre-whitening. Num-
bers in bold are the lags that are significant for all wind directions . . . .
35
5.9
Coefficients of the models of the SOG dependency on wind based based
on the most recent 25 lags.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.10 Overview of the input settings of the simulations which the speeds depen-
dency on waves is based upon. All runs are performed for wave directions
180◦, 225◦, 270◦, 315◦, and 360◦relative to north . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.11 Significant lags of the wave heights found by applying the pre-whitening
procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.12 Reduced SOG models with wave disturbances, based on the significant
lags found from the pre-whitening procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
==PAGE:116==
106
List of Tables
5.13 Comparison of AIC of the SOG model with wave input investigated
. . .
49
5.14 Overview of the input variables for the simulations which the time series
model with all input variables is estimated from. Wi denotes wind vari-
ables, Wa wave variables, and C is for current. The subscript v denotes
speed, d direction, h height, and p period
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.15 SOG0 model summary. ˆβ denotes the estimated coefficients and σ ˆβ the
standard error
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.1
Daily expenses due to the investment for a container ship of ATLAS’ size
with and without ice class 1A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7.1
Time spent, fuel consumed, total fuel price and daily fuel cost for each
route calculated for the scenario where there is no weather disturbances .
62
7.2
Time spent, fuel consumed, total fuel price, and daily fuel cost for each
route calculated with weather disturbances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.3
Fuel costs of travelling from from Amsterdam to Shanghai with a handle
setting of 75% including weather disturbances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.4
Fuel costs of travelling from from Shanghai to Amsterdam with a handle
setting of 75% including weather disturbances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.5
Total daily cost of operating the three routes in USD given for the years 1-
5, 6- 10 and 11-20. For these calculations, the number of cooled containers
is set to 400, and the handle setting is at 75%
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.1 Coordinates of the planned route along NSR including computed values
for initial bearing and leg distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.2 Coordinates of the planned route along NWP including computed values
for initial bearing and leg distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.3 Coordinates of the planned route along SCR including computed values
for initial bearing and leg distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
B.1
Environmental conditions along NSR, September 2017. THK denotes the
ice thickness, and F the fraction. H0 is used for the significant wave height
with Tp being the period. θ is the direction relative to north and v the
speed
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
B.2
Environmental conditions along NWP, September 2017. THK denotes the
ice thickness, and F the fraction. H0 is used for the significant wave height
with Tp being the period. θ is the direction relative to north and v the
speed
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
B.3
Environmental conditions along SCR, September 2017. THK denotes the
ice thickness, and F the fraction. H0 is used for the significant wave height
with Tp being the period. θ is the direction relative to north and v the
speed
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
==PAGE:117==
List of Tables
107
C.1 Coefficients of ARIMA(2,1,2) fitted to the SOG from the simulations con-
taining wind disturbances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
C.2 Coefficients the ARIMA(2,1,2) model fitted to SOG disturbed by wind,
with significant lags found from pre-whitening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
C.3 Coefficients of ARIMA models fitted to the SOG series when the simula-
tions are done with a wave input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
==PAGE:118==
List of Figures
2.1
Venta Maersk, picture from [Pos] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1
Northern Sea Route from Amsterdam to Shanghai. The route is drawn in
and extracted from Google Earth Pro [Goo] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
North West Passage from Amsterdam to Shanghai. The route is drawn in
and extracted from Google Earth Pro [Goo] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Suez Canal Route from Amsterdam to Shanghai. The route is drawn in
and extracted from Google Earth Pro [Goo] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Visualization of the definition of Lcen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.1
Relationship between RPM and power. The points corresponds to data
on the power produced in the main engine of ATLAS, while the red line
is the modelled relationship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Linear relationship between RPM and SOG. The points corresponds to
simulation data, while the red line is the modelled relationship
. . . . . .
28
5.3
Modelled relationship between TOH and ship speed in the critical region.
The points correspond to simulation data, while the red line is the esti-
mated model for the dependency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4
Vessel speed as a function of Cx, which is the current along the x axis i.e.
a combination of Cb (positive) and Cf (negative) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.5
Time series of SOG and wind speed obtained for wind direction 180◦
relative to the course of the ship in run 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.6
Cross-correlations between the wind speed and SOG given for wind di-
rections of 180◦, 270◦and 360◦relative to the course of the ship. The
correlations are determined for the simulations of run 1
. . . . . . . . . .
34
5.7
The ACF and PACF of the time series for SOG in run 1, with a wind
direction of 180◦. The top and bottom plots show the ACF and PACF for
the normal and differentiated time series respectively.
. . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.8
ACF and PACF of wind speed series from run 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.9
ACF and PACF of the residuals of the wind series from run 1 fitted with
an ARMA(2,1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.10 ACF and PACF of the residuals of the fits based on the findings from the
pre-whitening procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
==PAGE:119==
List of Figures
109
5.11 ACF and PACF of the residuals of the optimal model for the SOG depen-
dency on wind fitted with a maximum of 25 lags before reduction. After
reduction, the number of significant lags is 23 for front and aft wind and
24 for side wind . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.12 Time series of SOG with wave disturbances and wave heights obtained for
wave direction 180◦in run 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.13 Time series of SOG with wave disturbances and wave heights obtained for
wave direction 360◦in run 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.14 Cross correlation between wave height and SOG for relative wave direc-
tions 180◦, 270◦, and 360◦. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.15 ACF and PACF of the wave series obtained for wave direction 180◦in run 1 44
5.16 ACF and PACF of the residuals of the ARIMA model fitted to the SOG
series with wave disturbances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.17 ACF and PACF of the SOG with wave input, based on results from pre-
whitening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.18 ACF and PACF of the SOG with wave input, with the wave lags set to 2
times the wave period . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.19 Fitted values for SOG for the six simulations performed with all environ-
mental coditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
C.1 Speed variation for a simulation with a constant current input with a speed
of 2 knots and direction 270◦relative to the sailing direction of the ship .
79
C.2 Linear interpolation between handle setting and RPM . . . . . . . . . . .
79
C.3 ACF and PACF of the differentiated SOG simulated with wind distur-
bances in run 1, shown for all directions considered in the analysis . . . .
80
C.4 ACF and PACF of the residuals of SOG fitted with an ARIMA(2,1,2) . .
81
C.5 Transfer function of the wind effect on SOG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
C.6 Computed χ2 for each of the parameters in the model for SOG with wind
input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
C.7 Plot of the coefficients the wind lags for the optimal model for SOG in-
cluding wind. The number of significant lags is 23 for front and aft wind
and 24 for side wind . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
C.8 ACF and PACF of the residuals of the final model for SOG including wind
disturbances applied to all directions in run 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
C.9 ACF and PACF of the residuals of the final model for SOG including wind
disturbances applied to all directions in run 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
C.10 ACF and PACF of the residuals of the final model for SOG including wind
disturbances applied to all directions in run 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
C.11 ACF and PACF of the residuals of the final model for SOG including wind
disturbances applied to all directions in run 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
C.12 ACF and PACF of SOG for wave directions 270◦and 360◦relative to the
sailing direction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
C.13 Cross correlation between the absolute value of wave height and SOG
. .
90
==PAGE:120==
110
List of Figures
C.14 ACF and PACF of the residuals of optimal ARMA models fitted to the
wave series
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
C.15 Estimated transfer function from waves to SOG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
C.16 Coefficients of the wind lags for the SOG model with wave input modelled
with exogenous lags equal to two times the estimated wave period
. . . .
93
C.17 ACF and PACF of the residuals of the final model for SOG including
waves applied to all directions in run 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
C.18 ACF and PACF of the residuals of the final model for SOG including
waves applied to all directions in run 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
C.19 ACF and PACF of the residuals of the final model for SOG including
waves applied to all directions in run 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
C.20 ACF and PACF of the residuals of the final model for SOG including
waves applied to all directions in run 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
C.21 Visualization of the direction of the weather disturbances relative to the
ship of the six runs containing all input variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
==PAGE:121==
Glossary
Aft: the back of the ship
Bearing: initial direction from the ship to a specific point
Bow: the nose of the ship
Course: the planned route
Draft: vertical distance between waterline and the bottom of the hull of the ship
Handle setting: the percentage the main engine is working on
Heading: orientation of the bow of the ship in degrees relative to north
Longitudinal axis of the ship: the imaginary axis defined along the length of the
ship
Rudder angle: the angle of the rudder as compared to the longitudinal axis of the
ship
Significant wave height: defined as four times the standard deviation of the sea
surface elevation
==PAGE:122==
112
Glossary
Abbreviations
ACF
Auto Correlation Function
AIC
Akaike information criterion
ARMA
Auto Regressive Moving Average
CMEMS
Copernicus Marine Environment Monitoring Service
GBA
General Body Axis
CBS
Copenhagen Business School
MISO
Multiple-Input, Single-Output
ML
Maximum Likelihood
NM
Nautical Miles
NSR
Northern Sea Route
NWP
North West Passage
PACF
Partial Auto Correlation Function
PCR0
Panama Canal Route
PD
Proportional Derivative
RPM
Rotations Per Minute
SCR
Suez Canal Route
SFC
Specific Fuel Consumption
SOG
Speed Over Ground
TOH
drafT Over Height
WP
Waypoint
==PAGE:123==
==PAGE:124==
