==PAGE:1==
Mapping and scheduling of
real-time tasks on multi-core
autonomous driving platforms
Shane Daniel McLean
s091405
Kongens Lyngby
M.Sc. January, 2019
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Matematiktorvet, building 303B,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3351
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
M.Sc.-2019
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Modern vehicles combine an increasing number of functions of diﬀerent criti-
cality, from driver assistance, autonomous driving, to infotainment and cabin
comfort, into the same hardware platform.
These integrated platforms and
functions, commonly known as Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS),
feature real-time components, such as safety-critical multi-core processors and
Real-Time Operating Systems (RTOS), on top of which critical and non-critical
software functions with complex timing requirements and inter-dependencies are
executed. In this thesis we consider real-time safety-critical automotive applica-
tions modeled as a set of communicating software tasks, each characterized by
a period, a worst-case execution time and hard deadlines. In addition, chains of
tasks (e.g., performing sensing, processing and actuation) have to satisfy worst-
case end-to-end constraints required by ADAS functions. We are interested in
determining a mapping of tasks to the cores of the platform and in computing a
static schedule of the assigned tasks on each core, such that the task deadlines
and their jitter, as well as end-to-end constraints on task chains are satisﬁed.
We propose a novel Simulated Annealing (SA)-based metaheuristic which allows
task preemption by simulating an Earliest Deadline First (EDF) scheduling pol-
icy parameterized by task oﬀsets and local deadlines decided by SA. Compared
to previous methods, our approach allows task preemption within the static
schedule, which improves the schedulability of applications, and can handle
very large and realistic test cases. The developed algorithms have been evalu-
ated using several real-world and synthetic test cases that have been generated
from realistic inputs.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁllment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a Master of Science degree in Computer Science and
Engineering.
The work has been supervised by Professor Paul Pop.
Kongens Lyngby, January 6, 2019
S McLean 
Shane Daniel McLean
s091405
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to the people supporting me throughout
this project, with no relevance given to the order.
My wife and family. Your endless support throughout my study (and especially
my thesis) is the very reason, I have gotten to where I am. You have been
the pillars, I have rested on, which without I would have plummeted from the
greatest of heights to the deepest of depths.
Professor Paul Pop. I walked into your oﬃce six months ago without realizing
the journey, I would embark on. This project has truly been a remarkable and
educational experience, where you as my supervisor have played a vital role.
Your guidance and feedback has been a tremendous help, only surpassed by
your limitless patience for all my crazy ideas. Thank you.
Silviu S. Craciunas from TTTech Computertechnik AG. Your assistance in both
the theoretical and practical aspects of this project were crucial to its success.
I am grateful for all the insightful discussions we have had. Working with you
have been an inspiration, allowing me to envision my future goals. Thank you.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Thesis Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Platform and Application Models
7
2.1
Platform Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Application Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Timing Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Problem formulation
13
3.1
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Mapping and Scheduling Strategy
15
4.1
Greedy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Simulated Annealing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3
Recursive Simulated Annealing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.4
Design Transformations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.5
Cost Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.6
EDF Simulation for Schedule Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.6.1
Runtime analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Generating synthetic data
29
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3.1
Taskset Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3.2
Taskset generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3.3
Task chain generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.4
Brief summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
6
Parameter Tuning
41
6.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7
Experimental Evaluation
47
7.1
Benchmarking using realistic tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.2
Benchmarking using synthetic tasks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.2.1
Comparison with realistic tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.2.2
Very large task sets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8
Conclusion and Future work
57
8.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A Deliverables
59
A.1 Source code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.2 Data ﬁles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
B Static schedules
63
C Runtime Analysis
65
D Additional Plots
67
E Task chain analysis
75
==PAGE:11==
Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Description
ADAS
Advanced Driver Assistance Systems
AUTOSAR
Automotive Open System Architecture
ECU
Electronic Control Unit
EDF
Earliest Deadline First
GA
Genetic Algorithm
ILP
Integer Linear Programming
LCM
Least Common Multiple
LIDAR
Light Detection and Ranging
MLE
Maximum Likelihood Estimation
OS
Operating System
PCIe
Peripheral Component Interconnect Express
PMO
Parameter Meta-Optimization
RA
Recursive Simulated Annealing
RTOS
Real Time Operating System
SA
Simulated Annealing
SIL
Safety Integrity Level
SoC
System on a Chip
TSN
Time Sensitive Networking
WCET
Worst-Case Execution Time
==PAGE:12==
x
Abbreviations
==PAGE:13==
Notations
Notation
Description
A
An ADAS platform, given by A(V, E).
ai,k
Arrival of the k’th instance of the i’th task, given by
φi + (k −1) · Ti + ri
C
The set of all core values oﬀered by the architecture.
Ci
The worst-case-execution-time (WCET) of a task.
σi
The core assignment of a task.
Di
The relative deadline of a task.
di
The absolute deadline of a task instance, given by di =
ai,k + Di −ri.
E
The communication links between the processors.
li
The maximal measured end-to-end latency of a task
chain.
Li
The maximum allowed end-to-end latency for a given
task chain instance.
fi
The maximal relative ﬁnishing time of a task τi; that is,
the highest (relative) ﬁnishing time of all τi’s instances.
FD
Frequency distribution of the deadline ratios of a set of
tasks.
FJ
Frequency distribution of the jitter ratios of a set of
tasks.
Fr
Frequency distribution of the earliest release ratios of a
set of tasks.
FT
Frequency distribution of the periods of a set of tasks.
Γ
The set of n periodic tasks, deﬁned by {τi | 1 ≤i ≤n}.
==PAGE:14==
xii
Notations
Notation
Description
Ji
The maximum jitter a task is allowed to exhibit. This
constraint is enforced on both the start and end of exe-
cution of two consecutive task instances.
ji
The maximum observed jitter of a task; that is, the
maximum deviation of both the start and ﬁnishing times
between any two consecutive instances.
Lℵ
The set of task chains.
M
Core mapping function deﬁned by M : Γ →Ci
N
Processor mapping function deﬁned by N : Γ →V
ℵi
A task chain given by the tuple ({τ1 ≺... ≺τk}, Li, pi)
φi
The initial oﬀset/displacement of task arrival times.
ρD
The weighted penalty of exceeding the deadline con-
straints.
ρℵ
The weighted penalty of exceeding the end-to-end la-
tency constraints.
ρJ
The weighted penalty of exceeding the jitter constraints.
pi
The priority for a given task chain, bounded by [0, 1]
Ti
Length of the period of a task.
R
Token labelling function deﬁned by N : V →R
ri
The earliest possible release/oﬀset of a task instance
within its period.
R
Set of tokens representing the responsibility of the pro-
cessors.
S
A static schedule table.
s
Solution given by the tuple (M, S, D).
τi
A task deﬁned by the tuple (σi, ri, φi, Ci, Ti, Di)
V
The set of processors given by the architecture, with
each processor deﬁned by vi ∈V.
X
Probabilistic transition matrix representing bigram fre-
quencies.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Modern vehicles increasingly include a growing number of complex functions,
commonly known as Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS), aimed at
providing driver assistance, e.g. automated parking, adaptive cruise control,
lane changing/keeping assistant, emergency brake assistance and even fully au-
tonomous driving. Most of these functions are already available but are imple-
mented via independent electronic control units (ECUs) tailored for the speciﬁc
task [1]. This design approach has several downsides, among them being cost,
wiring and complex integration concerns. Hence, there is a growing trend to
migrate more and more of these functions from hardware to software, allowing
modularization and isolation within an integrated hardware platform, which can
then be cooperatively used and centrally managed [1]. The integrated platform
is running Automotive Open System Architecture (AUTOSAR) [2] or similar
real-time operating systems and usually has a middleware layer, which abstracts
away the speciﬁcs of the hardware, and thus facilitate software/hardware inde-
pendence.
The fusion of multiple software functions into the same hardware platform
present multiple advantages, but also several challenges, especially in the real-
time, testing and safety domains [3]. The advantage apart from the cost factor,
include the use of generic platforms, that promote reuse and portability for
diﬀerent car manufacturers as well as ﬂexibility for adding new functions of dif-
ferent criticality levels, implemented by diﬀerent OEMs in a composable manner
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
with guaranteed temporal and spatial isolation. In this way diﬀerent applica-
tion domains with diﬀerent criticality levels can coexist on the same platform
without sacriﬁcing real-time capabilities.
However, this mixed-criticality paradigm applied to the automotive domain,
requires new concepts in terms of safety-critical temporal and spatial isolation,
new scheduling results and conﬁgurations tools, as well as analysis of the real-
time behavior, that can support veriﬁcation and validation for SIL certiﬁcation
(c.f. [1,4]).
Generally, ADAS platforms are composed of heterogeneous multi-core CPUs
and SoCs of diﬀerent performance and safety levels, that are interconnected by
a (real-time) communication backbone [5–7]. For example, AthosMotion and
RazorMotion [8] feature a highly scalable architecture based on two Renesas
R-Car-H3 SoCs and the Renesas RH850P/1H-C MCU and are able to run in
parallel with diﬀerent operating systems (AUTOSAR, VxWorks, Linux, etc.).
These platforms are usually used in conjunction with a Middleware layer, e.g.
the MotionWise framework [8], which abstracts away communication, mem-
ory, hardware and OSs providing interference-free composability for software
functions.
In such integrated platforms, the ADAS functions have not only
Figure 1.1:
Example of ADAS vision system [9].
complex timing requirements but also feature a complex interdependence be-
tween sensors, control software and actuators. For example, one function for
driver assistance collects sensor data from both cameras and distance sensors
(ultrasonic, LIDAR) into a sensor fusion layer which then transmits its data to
navigation and control algorithms, that generate the appropriate signals e.g. for
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Related Work
3
the emergency brake system (see ﬁgure 1.1 and 1.2). This succession of function
execution creates a temporal dependency chain, which has to comply to a set of
timing requirements. I.e., there is a maximum allowed latency for the in-order
execution of the aforementioned functions. In order to guarantee both the in-
terdependence and real-time timing behavior, the ADAS functions have to be
scheduled in an appropriate manner. Moreover, other less critical systems, like
infotainment, comfort and utility are also integrated into the same platform,
and must not interfere with the real-time behavior of critical functions.
Figure 1.2:
Abstract view of a High-End ADAS system [1].
In this thesis we present a novel heuristic-based scheduling algorithm for ADAS
platforms, that takes into account the diﬀerent dimensions of timing and depen-
dency requirements and is designed with scalability in mind. The optimization
algorithm is based on simulated annealing but extends the well-known method
with a recursive layer, that takes into account not only the timing constraints
but also design goals, such as function allocation on computing units.
1.1
Related Work
The scheduling of task sets with dependencies has been a well-studied topic
within the real-time community.
Task schedules with inter-task dependencies are computed in [10] by modifying
the oﬀsets and deadlines of the individual tasks and then using EDF to sched-
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
ule the new task set [11, p. 59], which is similar to our approach. In [12] the
notion of absolute and relative timing constraints (i.e. events are temporarily
dependent on each other) for source and sink task requirements are introduced.
Furthermore, the authors present a scheduling approach for uniprocessor sys-
tems with complex timing constraints such as jitter requirements. In [13], an
optimal task schedule for communicating tasks is generated using a branch-
and-bound approach. In [14] a similar approach to ours is presented, which
uses EDF simulation to create static schedules for tasks with communication
and precedence dependencies, but in contrast to our work the results only apply
for dependencies between tasks with equal periods. The temporal dependencies
between tasks presented in the prior work described above are not as complex as
the ones arising from the ADAS task chains, where task periods can be diﬀerent.
In the context of ADAS, the complex task chain requirements has been addressed
in terms of computing the worst-case end-to-end latency of a chain based on a
given schedule (c.f. [15, 16]). In such approaches, the schedule is ﬁxed by the
scheduling policy (e.g. ﬁxed priority) and the analysis focuses on determining
the worst-case latency, when there is variance in the execution of said tasks.
Our approach is diﬀerent in that it generates schedules, that already adhere to
the task chain requirements, which does not necessitate a further analysis, since
the real-time requirements are guaranteed by the schedule construction. In [17],
the authors present a model-checking based method to compute worst-case re-
sponse times and end-to-end latencies of tasks, that have chain dependency and
communication constraints. In the work presented in [18], the authors intro-
duce a task chain latency analysis, that does not require information about the
concrete scheduling algorithm.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work to propose a heuristic-based
solution to the combined task-to-core assignment and scheduling problem in
ADAS platforms that generates schedules, which respect both task and complex
task chain timing constraints.
1.2
Thesis Overview
The thesis is structured by the following eight chapters:
Chapter 2 presents the abstraction models for the architecture and applica-
tion, including the timing constraints.
Chapter 3 gives a formal deﬁnition of the scheduling problem.
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Thesis Overview
5
Chapter 4 introduces a metaheuristic optimization for ﬁnding feasible sched-
ules.
Chapter 5 describes the process of generating synthetic data, such that an
experimental evaluation is possible.
Chapter 6 describes the process of automatically tuning the parameters of the
algorithms. This is done to both increase the performance of the heuristic
search, as well as minimize the risk of introducing bias.
Chapter 7 experimentally evaluates and compares the implementation on both
realistic and synthetic test cases.
Chapter 8 concludes the thesis and describes ideas for future work.
==PAGE:20==
6
Introduction
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Platform and Application
Models
This chapter presents the system model used throughout this thesis.
More
speciﬁcally, it describes the platform and application models.
2.1
Platform Model
The ADAS hardware platform is a multi-core multi-SoC embedded ECU fea-
turing a variety of CPUs and GPUs running at diﬀerent speeds, which are
interconnected through either a deterministic Ethernet backbone (TSN [19],
TTEthernet [20]) or through PCIe. The diﬀerent processors are necessary to be
able to process the information arriving from a variety of sensors (radar, ultra-
sonic sensors, cameras, LIDAR, etc.) but also to run control loops and other
utility functions (lane keeping/changing assistant, emergency braking, logging,
etc.). RazorMotion [8], for example, features a Renesas RH850P/1H-C ASIL D
MCU with lockstep cores running at 240 MHz and two Renesas R-Car H3 ASIL
B SoCs with four Cortex A57, four Cortex A53, one Cortex R7, one IMP-X5,
and one IMG PowerVR GX6650 GPU.
Figure 2.1 presents a high-level view of the ADAS platform. Each host can run
==PAGE:22==
8
Platform and Application Models
Figure 2.1:
High-level platform model.
a diﬀerent operating system depending on the safety and performance require-
ments. Each such OS can have a diﬀerent scheduling policy, ranging from ﬁxed-
priority (AUTOSAR) to table-driven or dynamic priority scheduling (Safety-
RTOS). However, there is a growing tendency to use a table-driven static sched-
ule execution due to the compositionality and isolation properties [21–24]. I.e.
tasks, that are already scheduled, are not inﬂuenced by new tasks being added
to the system. Hence, in this thesis we focus on creating static schedules for
the table-driven dispatching mechanism of the Safety-RTOSs. We expect that
in the future, there will also be virtualization layers, where each host can run a
multitude of OSs and therefore will feature some form of hierarchical scheduling
paradigm (c.f. [21, 25]). In order to provide a common execution environment
and hardware abstraction, a middleware layer, e.g. the MotionWise [8] layer,
is running on top of each operating system, where all signals are mapped to
Ethernet/PCIe communication. The middleware layer also ensures portability
of software functions to be located according to their execution and safety re-
quirements and to optimize utilization and power/memory consumption at the
host level [1]. Moreover, the middleware layer provides the capability to exe-
cute tasks according to a table-driven pre-computed schedule (i.e. according
to the time-triggered paradigm) thus enabling predictable timing behavior of
functions and isolation from other tasks [23]. Finally, the deterministic commu-
nication backbone extends the real-time capabilities of the RTOS layer to the
communication layer between hosts (c.f. [26]).
We model an ADAS platform as a graph A(V, E), where each vertex vi ∈V
is a processor (e.g., a multi-core SoC or a GPU), and the edges E capture the
communication links between the processors. Each processor vi ∈V has a list
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Application Model
9
of cores Ci.
2.2
Application Model
On top of this platform a large number of diﬀerent software functions, imple-
mented by diﬀerent vendors, must be integrated and deployed. It is imperative
in this context that software functions, which are tested independently can be
integrated with other software functions compositionally without violating their
real-time requirements.
The system is composed of applications (called tasks or runnables), that are
either pre-assigned to cores or must be assigned by the scheduling algorithm.
Tasks have real-time requirements, both in terms of execution (oﬀset, deadline,
jitter) as well as temporal dependencies arising from either task chains (deﬁned
below) or communication between tasks.
In terms of the task model, we model the applications as a set of n periodic
tasks, Γ = {τi | 1 ≤i ≤n}, similar to the model in [27]. A task τi is deﬁned
by the tuple (σi, ri, φi, Ci, Ti, Di) with σi representing the core, Ci denoting
the computation time, Ti the period, ri the earliest release time, φi the initial
oﬀset/displacement of task arrival times and Di the relative deadline of the
task under the assumption that Di ≤Ti.
Each real-time task τi yields an
inﬁnite set of instances (jobs) τi,k, k = 1, 2, . . . Each instance τi,k is deﬁned by
an arrival time ai,k = φi + (k −1) · Ti + ri and an absolute deadline di,k =
ai,k + Di −ri [11, p. 80]. Tasks can be preempted at any time instant on a
timeline with macrotick granularity given by the underlying OS capabilities and
speciﬁed by the architecture model.
A subset of the tasks are not assigned to a speciﬁc core of their given parent
processor (CPU or GPU). If a task τi is pre-assigned, then its core σi will be
given. Otherwise, we decide their assignment to a speciﬁc core, in that the σi of
a task τi can take any value from a ﬁnite set of core values Ci. The assignment
of tasks to cores is captured by the mapping function M : Γ →Ci; thus, once
the assignment is decided, M(τi) gives the core σi.
Currently, tasks cannot migrate at run time, after they have been assigned to
a core, but in the future we envision that task migration, when done properly
with respect to the deterministic timing behavior, will allow even better resource
utilization. As mentioned above, we assume that the underlying RTOS on each
core features a table-driven dispatching for which appropriate scheduling tables
need to be generated. The scheduling allows preemption, i.e., a table can be
==PAGE:24==
10
Platform and Application Models
constructed such that a task is interrupted by another task, and then resumes
its execution.
These preemptions are decided when the schedule tables are
constructed.
For a given mapping M, we denote the schedule table with S. In this table,
each task τi has a list of oﬀsets Φi on its core σi. The ﬁrst oﬀset in Φi, denoted
with φi, captures the initial oﬀset of τi’s arrival time within the schedule, and
the rest of the oﬀsets in Φi are the times when task τi resumes its execution, if
preempted. Figures 2.2 and 4.3 show examples of such schedule tables, depicted
as a Gantt chart.
2.3
Timing Constraints
Each task may have implicit timing constraints arising out of the task deﬁnition
and explicit constraints in terms of arrival oﬀsets and/or deadline requirements.
Hence, a task must execute periodically with the given period Ti, and in each
period it must ﬁnish its worst-case execution Ci within the deﬁned deadline Di,
starting after the earliest release time ri. In addition, tasks may also have jitter
requirements, i.e. constraints on the variance of execution of consecutive period
instances [11, p. 81-82]. We denote the jitter requirements of a task τi with Ji
and the observed jitter ji. Meaning, that for any two consecutive task instances,
the maximal deviation of both starting and ﬁnishing times are bounded by Ji.
Other timing requirements are related to message passing between tasks, where
the communication latency have to be considered. The most complex set of
timing requirements come from the so-called task (or event) chains (c.f. [18]).
A task chain speciﬁes, that at least one instance of every task in the given task
chain list has to be executed in the speciﬁed order within a given maximum
end-to-end task chain latency. These task chains also feature a priority ﬁeld,
pi, which can be used for optimization of the end-to-end latency of individual
chains based on their priority. Hence, each task chain represents a sequence of
events, that needs to be executed in order to complete a complex task (most
of the time the complex task is related to sensor fusion). Since the tasks in
the chain can be on diﬀerent hosts/cores, the communication latencies must be
also taken into account, where the communication always is performed over the
middleware layer. What makes matters more complicated is, that tasks in the
chains may have diﬀerent activation patterns and periodicity.
To exemplify this, we give a simple example of a task chain in Figure 2.2. Here
the chain is composed of 4 tasks, a source (τ1), two processing tasks (τ2, τ3) and
a sink (τ4) with periods of 20 ms, 5 ms, 10 ms and 20 ms, respectively. From
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Timing Constraints
11
Figure 2.2:
Task chain example.
each instance of the source there needs to be a succession of instances of the
other tasks, such that the order is maintained, and the latency does not exceed
the maximum allowed. It is allowed, that an instance of the processing or sink
tasks will merge the signal sent from the source, if the latency is not exceeded.
In the example, the sink merges the signal from two execution instances of the
processing task τ3.
Let Lℵdenote the set of task chains, where a task chain is given by the tuple
ℵi = ({τ1 ≺... ≺τk}, Li, pi) with Li being the maximum allowed end-to-end
latency and pi being the priority bounded by [0, 1].
For a chain ℵi = ({τ1 ≺... ≺τk}, Li, pi) ∈Lℵ, we formalize the correctness con-
dition for the in-order execution and end-to-end latency requirement as follows:
∀τ1,x, x ∈
n
0, . . . , hpi
T1
o
:
∃{y2, . . . , yk} such that

start(τ2,y2) ≥end(τ1,x)

∨

∀j ∈{2, k −1} : start(τj+1,yj+1) ≥end(τj,yj)

∨

end(τk,yk) −start(τ1,x) ≤Li

,
(2.1)
where hpi is the hyperperiod of the chain ℵi calculated as the least common
multiple of all task periods in the respective chain and start(τi,j) and end(τi,j)
denote the start and end of the execution of the job τi,j, respectively.
==PAGE:26==
12
Platform and Application Models
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Problem formulation
This chapter decomposes the problem being addressed by this thesis.
3.1
Outline
The objective of this thesis is to design and develop a meta-heuristic optimiza-
tion, that needs to ﬁnd an assignment of unassigned tasks to cores, such that
the tasks are schedulable on each assigned core with respect to their timing
constraints (oﬀsets, deadlines and jitter), as well as with respect to the task
chain requirements. Moreover, since communication is either between individ-
ual tasks or between tasks in a task chain, the scheduling algorithm also needs
to ﬁnd a schedule for the deterministic communication backbone, that respects
the required maximum latencies. We concentrate on the scheduling problem
on the task level and only consider the communication cost as a constant de-
lay for a PCIe communication backbone, part of a task’s WCET. Extending
the scheduling strategy for the communication layer for TTEthernet and TSN
backbones is subject for future work. The thesis will investigate, if a Simulated
Annealing (SA) metaheuristic can handle large problem sizes, and will explore
other alternative implementations as well.
As an input to our problem, we have the ADAS platform A and the applications,
==PAGE:28==
14
Problem formulation
denoted by the set of tasks Γ, including the task chains Lℵand all the mapping
and timing constraints, and we want to determine:
• a mapping M of tasks to the cores of the platform A.
• a static schedule S of tasks on each core σi ∈C.
Such that:
O.1 All tasks are mapped to both an ECU and one of its cores. E.g. all tasks
have a designated ECU on which they must run, however the core assign-
ment is not necessarily deﬁned. Thus tasks are not allowed to migrate
from ECU’s or cores once assigned.
O.2 The end-to-end constraints on the task chains are satisﬁed, and they are
minimized.
O.3 All the tasks are schedulable and comply with their individual constraints.
E.g.
tasks are not allowed to exceed their deadlines or speciﬁed jitter
constraints.
Furthermore, we assume that the ECU’s and cores are running at the same
speed for the sake of simplicity. However, we would be able to accommodate a
heterogeneous architecture by normalizing the execution time Ci by the relative
speed factor of the individual core.
Finally, evaluating the eﬃciency of the
solution is expected to be performed experimentally. To this end we have been
provided with three (sanitized) realistic data sets. While these realistic data sets
does provide us with the opportunity to test the solution, it does not constitute
a wide enough selection to determine the eﬃciency by itself. As such, this thesis
also seeks to model high quality synthetic data sets, such that the solution can
be evaluated more thoroughly.
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4
Mapping and Scheduling
Strategy
As explained in section 2 and 3, the scheduling problem resulting out of the
platform and task models is very complex and necessitates new scheduling ap-
proaches. While other approaches use optimal algorithms (e.g. based on Satisﬁ-
ability Modulo Theories or ILP [26]), the size and growing complexity of ADAS
platforms make such approaches infeasible in practice. It is expected that ADAS
platforms, which already have the complexity of an entire in-vehicle electronics
system [8], will grow to a scale of thousands of functions with hundreds of com-
plex event chain requirements. We therefore aim to ﬁnd a heuristic algorithm,
that can scale with the growing ADAS trend, and can solve complex scheduling
problems in a realistic time frame.
We propose a novel Simulated Annealing (SA)-based metaheuristic approach
(described in Section 4.3) for the task mapping to core’s problem, which uses
a scheduling heuristic to solve the task scheduling problem.
The scheduling
heuristic allows task preemption by simulating an Earliest Deadline First (EDF)
scheduling policy parameterized by task oﬀsets and local deadlines decided by
SA, see Section 4.6. For a mapping of task to cores we assign, according to our
SA strategy, an oﬀset and a deadline to each task and simulate EDF to obtain
the static schedule, if one can be found. We then check if the schedule adheres
to the timing requirements imposed by the jitter and task chain constraints.
==PAGE:30==
16
Mapping and Scheduling Strategy
The algorithm, explained in detail in Section 4.3, tries to modify the mapping
of tasks M, the task oﬀsets (φi ≥0) and deadlines D, in order to ﬁnd an optimal
feasible solution with respect to the end-to-end latency of chains. The novelty
in our approach is that our proposed Simulated Annealing-based method makes
use of the diﬀerent dimensions, that inﬂuence task execution, i.e., task mapping,
task oﬀsets and task deadlines in a recursive way in order to converge to a near-
optimal solution faster than traditional approaches.
4.1
Greedy
Greedy is a greedy algorithm, that executes as follows: It decides the mapping
such that the processor utilization is balanced. It schedules the tasks considering
that preemption is allowed, all oﬀsets are zero, and that all deadlines (if not
otherwise speciﬁed) are equal to the periods.
4.2
Simulated Annealing
Simulated Annealing (SA) is an optimization heuristic, that tries to ﬁnd the
global optimum by randomly selecting a new solution from the neighbors of the
current solution [28]. However, SA being a metaheuristic, is not guaranteed to
ﬁnd the optimal solution. The SA algorithm is a variant of the neighborhood
search technique, where the local search space is explored by moving from the
current solution to a neighbor solution. In general, the new solution is accepted,
given it is an improvement. However, in the case of SA, a worse solution can
also be accepted with a certain probability, that depends on the deterioration of
the cost function Cost and on a cooling scheme captured by a control parameter
called initial temperature, ts, which is analog to the temperature concept of the
physical annealing process and a cooling rate cr, which is the rate at which the
temperature drops with time. An essential component of the algorithm is the
generation of a new solution s′ starting from the current one s. The generation
of the neighbor solution s′ depends on the details of the optimization problem
and the internal representation of a solution.
The neighbor solutions s′ are
generated through performing design transformations (also called moves) on s.
==PAGE:31==
4.3 Recursive Simulated Annealing
17
4.3
Recursive Simulated Annealing
To tackle the large problem size, we present a novel approach called Recursive
Simulated Annealing (RA), see Alg 1. In short, RA is an extension of SA using
recursion, and a diverse cooling scheme allowing the acceptance probability to
run at diﬀerent decay rates within the recursion levels. We denote a solution
by the tuple s = (M, S, D), where M is the mapping, S is the schedule that
contains all the tasks oﬀsets and D which are deadlines used to control the
schedule synthesis (see Section 4.6).
While the classic Simulated Annealing is able to restore a state of a previous
candidate, given that the newest generated failed to accept (see Fig. 4.1a), RA
expands on this (see Fig. 4.1b). It does so by allowing it to backtrack on multiple
decisions deﬁned by the recursion depth. As each level is focusing on one type
of design transformation, it seeks to ﬁnd the best solution in terms of the Cost
function within the allotted energy.
(a) Classic SA
(b) Recursive Annealing
Figure 4.1: SA (a) vs. RA (b) depicted as a state machine.
Once the annealing process within a given recursion level has been terminated,
the candidate is propagated back and asserted. If it is rejected, it tries again
keeping the previous moves leading up to this point. Ideally, this improves the
overall ability of ﬁnding a global optimum, as it can evaluate a candidate by
the respective move within its recursion level, or by the accumulated result of
several moves of all levels. Conversely, SA can only remember one good move
at a time. One of the prominent features of SA (and by extension also RA) is,
that we also accept worse solutions with a certain probability. This rests on the
assumption that an immediate neighboring state, although worse, might lead to
an improvement later on (see line 11 in Alg.1). Furthermore, by extending the
annealing process of RA with multiple cooling schemes, it allows one to adjust
the probability of accepting a poorer solution (thereby how much exploration is
done) with respect to each individual move. This, combined with the recursive
backtracking capability further enhances its ability to perform hill climbing as
demonstrated in Chapter 7.
If we review the pseudo code listed for RA in Alg 1, we see that it takes the
==PAGE:32==
18
Mapping and Scheduling Strategy
Algorithm 1 RecursiveAnnealing(A, Γ, s0, ts, tf, cr, i)
1: t ←ts
2: s ←ScheduleSynthesis(A, Γ, s0)
3: s∗←s
4: while t > tf do
5:
s′ ←GenerateNeighbor(A, Γ, s, t, i)
6:
if Cost(s′) < Cost(s) then
7:
s ←s′
8:
if Cost(s′) < Cost(s∗) then
9:
s∗←s′
10:
end if
11:
else if exp( Cost(s)−Cost(s′)
t
) > random[0, 1] then
12:
s ←s′
13:
end if
14:
t ←t · (1 −cr)
15: end while
16: return s∗
following input: The platform model A, the applications Γ, the initial solution
s0 for the recursion level (s0 is a candidate generated from a greedy algorithm
at recursion level 1), the initial temperature ts for the current recursion level,
the ﬁnal temperature tf (which serves as the termination criteria), the cooling
rate cr for the recursion level and the current recursion level i. As mentioned,
RA uses multiple cooling schedules compared to classic SA, one for each deﬁned
recursion depth. An illustration of the cooling schemes for SA and RA can be
observed in Fig. 4.2. Here the traditional exponentially decaying cooling scheme
for SA is shown (purple curve). In contrast to SA, the cooling scheme for RA
depicts a jagged like curve decreasing over time at diﬀerent rates (light green
curve). The orange points indicate the temperature and relative cooling rate
at the upper most recursion level, the black points for the second level and the
black line for the ﬁnal recursion level. Additionally, lower temperature limit, tf,
can also be observed as the minimal data points in the graph (indicated by a
red point), which allows the annealing process for the given recursion depth to
terminate early if needed. We denote with s′ the neighboring candidate solution
generated from the currently accepted solution s (see line 5). Similar to SA,
s′ is accepted if it improves on s (see line 7). The cost function Cost is used
to evaluate a solution and is detailed in Section 4.5. We record the best so
far solution s∗seen at line 9. RA returns s∗, when it terminates. The actual
recursion is performed by calling the GenerateNeighbor procedure at line 5, and
the procedure itself is shown in Alg. 2.
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Recursive Simulated Annealing
19
GenerateNeighbor functions as a simple state machine, starting on line 4, with
the transition function based on the recursion level. We use three moves, de-
scribed in detail in Section 4.4, SwapTask, AdjustOﬀset and AdjustDeadline.
RA
SA
Iterations
Temperature
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
Figure 4.2:
Illustrative plot of cooling schemes for RA and SA respectively.
All permutations of these moves were tried and based on observations from
performed experiments, the state machine is conﬁgured such that the moves
are performed in the following order, as we go deeper into the recursion levels:
AdjustDeadline, SwapTasks, AdjustOﬀset.
Algorithm 2 GenerateNeighbor(A, Γ, s, t, i)
1: ts ←t · tscale
2: tf ←max(1, ts · thresholdi+1)
3: cr ←coolingRatei
4: switch i
5:
case 1
6:
s′ ←AdjustDeadline(s)
7:
return RA(A, Γ, s′, ts, tf, cr, i + 1)
8:
case 2
9:
s′ ←SwapTasks(s)
10:
return RA(A, Γ, s′, ts, tf, cr, i + 1)
11:
case 3
12:
s′ ←AdjustOﬀset(s)
13:
return ScheduleSynthesis(s′)
In Alg. 2 each recursion level is represented by i and has a speciﬁc cooling rate
==PAGE:34==
20
Mapping and Scheduling Strategy
cr. Descending through the recursion levels will scale the temperature relative
to the current value, as illustrated by the light blue point in Fig. 4.2, where the
temperature decreases from its value (given by the orange point at depth 1). To
elaborate, given a temperature scale of 0.9 and a start temperature ts,1 = 1, 000
at level 1, the start temperature ts,2 = 900 at level 2 and ts,3 = 810 at level
3.
Conversely, the temperature can also increase by using tscale > 1.0.
As
mentioned, each recursion level has a termination temperature tf. For level 1
this limit is static at 1.0, but any level beyond the ﬁrst is a fraction of the scaled
temperature.
4.4
Design Transformations
AdjustDeadline adjusts the deadline of a single randomly selected task. Only
tasks that failed at complying to the jitter constraints, are potential candidates
for this move. Note that the deadlines in D are used to control the resulted
EDF schedule. We do not change the relative deadline Di of the task, which
is one of its timing constraints. For a task τi, AdjustDeadline will modify the
deadline used by EDF to schedule τi, such that it is lower or equal to Di. We
check for each resulted schedule that all timing constraints, e.g.
jitter, task
chain latencies including the speciﬁed task deadlines Di, are satisﬁed.
SwapTasks swaps the core mapping of two randomly selected tasks, considering
the imposed mapping constraints.
For example, if the task has a processor
aﬃnity, the swapping is done within the cores of the particular processor. Only
tasks that are allowed to swap, are considered, meaning only tasks without a
predeﬁned core assignment. Oﬀset and Deadline adjustments are reset to zero
for both tasks when performing this action. Finally, the utilization/core load is
not considered, and as such this action might overload one of the cores.
AdjustOﬀset changes the oﬀset of a randomly selected task. This action has
two modes. (1) It will select tasks from a speciﬁc processor, if deadline/jitter
constraints are violated. The target is determined by the processor with the
highest number of accumulated violations. Initially, the speciﬁc core were also
included as part of the selected, however it decreased the performance. (2) If
no deadline/jitter violations occur, then the task is chosen randomly from the
complete task set.
We have also considered two additional design transformations, MoveTask and
ReduceCoreLoad. Both were removed as experiments demonstrated, that the
performance decreased when utilized. MoveTask, similar to its sibling Swap-
Tasks, moves a randomly selected task from one core to another. Similar to
==PAGE:35==
4.5 Cost Function
21
AdjustOﬀset, it could target a processor where its underlying tasks violated
deadline/jitter constraints.
ReduceCoreLoad is a move similar to MoveTask
with the primary diﬀerence in that it targets a speciﬁc CPU and core, which is
experiencing jitter violations.
4.5
Cost Function
The cost function (Cost), deﬁned in Eq. 4.1, captures both a minimization
objective with respect to the end-to-end latency of task chains and penalties
representing constraint violations given by the application. The function itself
has two cases, (1) a value if the solution conﬁguration meets all the timing
constraints and (2) a combination of static and dynamic penalties, if one or
more timing constraints are violated, i.e.,
Cost(s) =



P
ℵi∈Lℵ
li
Li ·pi
|Lℵ|
· w1
if χ(s) = true
w1 + ρℵ+ ρD + ρJ
if χ(s) = false
(4.1)
where χ(s) is a test deﬁned by χ(s) = ρℵ+ ρD + ρJ ̸> 0.
The minimization objective is the average weighted distance of the measured
end-to-end latency li over the imposed constraint Li, of all task chains. The
static penalty w1 in Eq. 4.1 for χ(s) = false ensures, that any invalid solution
will be rated worse relative to that of any valid solution. That is, it adjusts the
score such that the minimal penalty value is higher than that of any feasible
solution, thereby preventing the annealing process from accepting any invalid
candidate over a valid one, as the currently best.
Furthermore, the penalty
function incurs an increased cost, if any end-to-end, deadline or jitter constraints
are violated, as also evident from Eq. 4.1. Here ρℵ, listed in Eq. 4.2, measures
the weighted average of end-to-end violation. The violation of a chain ℵi is
deﬁned as the diﬀerence between its highest observed chain latency li and its
end-to-end constraint Li.
ρℵ=
P
ℵi∈Lℵ
min(Li,max(0,li−Li)
Li
|Lℵ|
· w2
(4.2)
Also, from Eq. 4.2 we see that the observable violation range is clamped in
the interval [0, Li], whereas the penalty itself is bounded by [0, w2] and grows
proportionally with the number of violations.
Likewise, the additional deadline and jitter costs (ρD and ρJ) is listed by Eq. 4.3
and Eq. 4.4, respectively. Here ρD measures the weighted average of deadline
==PAGE:36==
22
Mapping and Scheduling Strategy
violations with a violation range clamped in the interval [0, Di]. The deadline
violation of a task τi is denoted as the diﬀerence between the maximal relative
ﬁnishing time of all τi’s instances fi and the relative deadline Di.
ρD =
P
τi∈Γ
min(Di,max(0,fi−Di)
Di
|Γ|
· w3.
(4.3)
Finally, ρJ measures the weighted average of jitter violations.
Likewise, we
deﬁne the jitter violation of a task τi as the diﬀerence between the maximal
observed jitter ji and the threshold Ji. The violation range is then clamped in
the interval [0, Ji].
ρJ =
P
τi∈Γ
min(Ji,max(0,ji−Ji)
Ji
|Γ|
· w4,
(4.4)
In Eq.4.1-Eq.4.4, we list w1, w2, w3 and w4 as static weights designed to capture
the importance of the respective violation with the following constraints: w2 ≥
w1, w3 ≥w1, w4 ≥w1.
The constants were determined based on manual
experimentation and observations, with w1 through w4 set to 10,000, 40,000,
10,000 and 60,000, respectively. Please note that there are no optimal values for
the weights, since they have to be adapted to the application domain, criticality
deﬁnitions and design goals of the respective use-case.
The penalty function has been devised such that small improvements, with
respect to violations, will reduce the weighted penalties. Ideally, this guides the
annealing process, such that it comparatively can assert gradual improvements.
Conversely, using a coarse grained penalty function would lead an increased
number of ties between candidate solutions when evaluating their ﬁtness. Using
this ﬁne grained approach, the penalty is thus a tighter approximation of the
true distance from achieving a valid solution.
4.6
EDF Simulation for Schedule Synthesis
Scheduling of tasks to processors is a well researched topic [29]. In our case, it
is intractable to generate optimal schedules, hence we use a heuristic algorithm.
Researchers have proposed heuristic algorithms such as List Scheduling [29], but
these cannot handle the preemption allowed in our schedule tables. Therefore,
given a mapping of tasks, we propose a schedule synthesis heuristic (Alg. 3)
based on simulating Earliest Deadline First (EDF) scheduling (Alg. 4).
==PAGE:37==
4.6 EDF Simulation for Schedule Synthesis
23
EDF is a well-known scheduling algorithm [11], that decides at runtime which of
the ready tasks gets to run on the processor. EDF uses dynamic task priorities
based on their deadlines: The task with the earliest deadline, considering the
current time moment, is given the highest priority and may interrupt lower
priority tasks.
Considering that: each task runs for its WCET, we have a
mapping and a set of oﬀsets and deadlines, we then simulate how EDF would
perform the scheduling. We consider the outcome of this EDF simulation to
be our schedule table S. For a given mapping, oﬀsets and deadlines, EDF will
always produce the same schedule. We vary the output schedule produced by the
EDF simulation by allowing the Recursive Simulated Annealing to change the
mapping M, oﬀsets φi of each task τi and deadlines D via the moves presented
in Section 4.4.
Algorithm 3 ScheduleSynthesis(A, Γ, s)
1: Initialize(s)
2: l ←2 · hyperperiod + MaxOﬀset
3: for each vi ∈V ∈A do
4:
for each σk ∈Ci ∈vi do
5:
Enqueue(Qσ, σk)
6:
end for
7: end for
8: while Empty(Qσ) is false do
9:
σ ←Dequeue(Qσ)
10:
cycle ←NextCycle(σ)
11:
if cycle < l then
12:
next ←EDFSimulation(σ, cycle)
13:
SetNext(σ, next)
14:
Enqueue(Qσ, σ)
15:
end if
16: end while
17: return s
ScheduleSynthesis receives as input the architecture A, applications Γ and the
the solution s to be simulated by EDF (containing the mapping M, oﬀsets φ and
deadlines D). Due to the nature of task chains and their temporal dependen-
cies, the simulation of each core cannot be executed separately. That is, each
schedule produced by the individual EDF simulations must take every other
task execution into account.
We start by assigning all tasks to their respective cores (line 1 in Alg.3). All
tasks without a task mapping will be mapped according to a best-ﬁt strategy
with respect to utilization, i.e., balancing the processor and core utilization. We
run the simulation for a length l (set in line 2), after which the schedule will
==PAGE:38==
24
Mapping and Scheduling Strategy
repeat itself. l is deﬁned by 2 · hyperperiod + MaxOﬀset, where hyperperiod is
determined as the Least Common Multiple of all tasks in Γ and the MaxOﬀset
is the maximum over all oﬀsets φi [30].
The iteration over the simulation length l is done in the while-loop in Sched-
uleSynthesis (lines 8–16). The current time is captured by cycle, and we advance
the time to the next event, that needs to be simulated.
The EDF simulation is performed per core σ (line 12) and we use a queue Qσ,
containing all cores from all processors, ordered by the earliest event that needs
to be simulated. To start the simulation, lines 3–7 add cores to the queue Qσ,
by visiting all the cores in the architecture A.
The next event to be simulated is determined by taking the head of the queue
Qσ (Dequeue) and calling NextCycle. We add cores to be simulated in Qσ only
if we are still within the simulation length l. The while loop stops, when there
are no cores to be simulated (Qσ is empty). The EDF simulation logic is taking
place in the EDFSimulation (Alg. 4), called at line 12, which simulates up to
the next event, which is returned. The product of ScheduleSythesis is then a
recording of all occurred events, from which we can derive the schedule table S
of the current solution s.
Let us now explain how the EDFSimulation in Alg.4 works. EDFSimulation
takes as input the core to be simulated σ and the current cycle. It then simulates
up to the next event, which is returned.
We keep track of the tasks to be
simulated in two queues: Qw is the waiting queue containing tasks waiting to
be released for core σ, ordered by release times. Qr is the ready queue containing
tasks waiting to be executed on σ.
Our EDFSimulation implementation is able to skip unnecessary cycles. It does
so by progressing towards the nearest event deﬁned by either releasing a tasks
from the waiting queue, choosing the task with the earliest deadline ﬁrst from the
ready queue, completing a task or allowing preemption to occur on certain break
point deﬁned by a parameter called macrotick for each core. The macrotick
deﬁnes the preemption granularity. The macrotick is set such that it allows
preemption, under the constraint that the overhead due to context switches, on
each processor, should be low, see [14,31,32] for a discussion.
If there is a task already running on σ during cycle (line 4), then this task
τcurrent is simulated either until the next event, which could be either the task
completion (line 7), or until the task is interrupted by a higher priority task.
The ready Qr and waiting Qw queues are updated and the next event is created.
The ready queue is also updated, if there is no task already running (line 16).
The Release function releases all the waiting tasks from Qw to Qr.
==PAGE:39==
4.6 EDF Simulation for Schedule Synthesis
25
Algorithm 4 EDFSimulation(σ, cycle)
1: Qw ←WaitingQueue(σ)
2: Qr ←ReadyQueue(σ)
3: next ←∞
4: if HaveTask(σ) is true then
5:
τcurrent ←Current(σ)
6:
TriggerTaskEvent(τcurrent, cycle)
7:
if Completed(τcurrent) then
8:
Enqueue(Qw, τcurrent)
9:
end if
10:
Qr ←Release(Qr, Qw, cycle)
11:
τcurrent ←GetTask(Qr)
12:
if HaveTask(σ) is true then
13:
next ←Next(τcurrent)
14:
end if
15: else
16:
Qr ←Release(Qr, Qw, cycle)
17: end if
18: if Empty(Qr) is false then
19:
τnext ←Peek(Qr)
20:
nextp ←Next(τnext)
21:
if nextp < next then
22:
next ←nextp
23:
τcurrent ←GetTask(Qr)
24:
end if
25: else if HaveTask(σ) is false and Empty(Qw) is false then
26:
τnext ←Peek(Qw)
27:
next ←Next(τnext)
28: end if
29: return next
The next event may be (i) the current task completion (line 13), (ii) the pre-
emption of the current task by a higher priority task (line 22) or (iii) the next
task to be handled (line 27). We use the functions Peek and Next to determine
the next event; Peek(Q) returns the top most element in the queue, without re-
moving it, and Next(τ) returns the next event cycle for τ. We know, if we have
a preemption, as the next event nextp comes before the event that completes
the current task, see line 21.
The actual task execution takes place in the function TriggerTaskEvent, which
progresses the task. This function also checks the timing constraints. As the
EDF simulation is producing events iteratively, validation of the constraints
==PAGE:40==
26
Mapping and Scheduling Strategy
is likewise performed on a event-by-event basis. At line 6 in Alg. 4, Trigger-
TaskEvent is invoked using the currently reached cycle. This function advances
the task state such that its remaining execution time is reduced by the number
of cycles skipped. However, if the event being triggered is the initial or the
completion event of a task, with respect to its current period, a notiﬁcation will
be raised in such a way, that all related constraints are checked.
Let us use the examples from Figure 4.3 to illustrate this.
We consider an
architecture with a single processor consisting of two cores, σ1 and σ2, both of
which having a macro tick of 1 ms. The depicted application is modelled by
the task set Γ = {τ1, τ2, τ3}, which is constrained by zero jitter for all tasks.
The tasks are deﬁned as τ1 = (σ0, 0, φ1, 4, 10), τ2 = (σ0, 0, φ2, 1, 4) and τ3 =
(σ1, 0, φ3, 4, 20). Furthermore, the set of task chains is deﬁned by Lℵ= {ℵ1},
with ℵ1 = ({τ1 ≺τ2 ≺τ3}, 20, 1.0). Please note, that given Eq. 2.1, only two
chain instances are necessary to validate as the hyperperiod of ℵ1 is 20 ms, and
the period of τ1 is 10 ms.
10
20
30
0
τ1
τ2
τ3
Latency L1
Latency L2
(a) End-to-end task chain latencies not satisﬁed
10
20
30
0
τ1
τ2
τ3
Latency L1
Latency L2
φ1
φ3
(b) End-to-end task chains latencies satisﬁed
Figure 4.3: Unoptimized (a) vs. optimized (b) schedules.
Figure 4.3a depicts a solution, where the jitter and the task chain end-to-end
constraints are violated, whereas Figure 4.3b shows a valid solution. The cor-
responding static schedules are given by Figure B.1 and Figure B.2 in the ap-
pendix. As seen from Figure 4.3a, τ1 violates its jitter constraints, as the start
(and end) of execution within its periods varies. This is detected, when Trig-
gerTaskEvent raises the events for the respective tasks instances. For example,
the event triggering the start of execution with respect to τ1,1 and τ1,2 diﬀers by
1 ms. While the initial oﬀset φi for all tasks is 0, resulting in τ2,1 and τ3,1 start-
==PAGE:41==
4.6 EDF Simulation for Schedule Synthesis
27
ing their execution ﬁrst, neither are source tasks with respect to ℵ1. Moving
forward, τ1,1 is started at cycle 1, causing the event to trigger the registration of
a task chain instance ℵ1,1. At cycle 4, τ1,1 is preempted by τ2,2 while τ3,1 com-
pletes is execution. Although τ3,1 is a sink task, and a chain instance has been
registered, the instance has yet to receive the completion of τ1,1 and τ2,k before
it is accepted. That is, the presence of an event from τ2,k that happens after
τ1,1 must be registered. Subsequently, τ1,1 completes at cycle 5, allowing the
ℵ1,1 to advance its state, waiting for τ2,3. Lastly, τ3,2 ﬁnalizes its execution at
cycle 23, thus completing ℵ1,1 with a resulting latency of 23, which incidentally
violates the given constraints. The chain instance ℵ1,2 is registered at cycle 10,
and also ﬁnalizes at cycle 23, yielding a latency of 14. Given that both latency
and jitter constraints have been violated, the product of the ScheduleSynthesis
is not feasible.
However, in an optimized solution, solving the associated violations can be
achieved by manipulating the initial oﬀsets φi for the tasks, as depicted in
Figure 4.3b. Here, the schedule have been altered such that all executions of τ1
and τ3 have been deferred by φ1 and φ3. For τ1, the displacement φ1 solves the
jitters, because all jobs τ1,i now start (and end) at the same cycle relative to its
period. Finally, τ3 has been displaced by 9 cycles, such that its initial execution
allows τ3,1 to catch the events from τ2,3 (and by extension τ1,1), thus reducing
the latency of ℵ1,1. Likewise, by introducing φ1 for τ1 the latency of ℵ1,1 was
reduced even further. The combined eﬀect of φ1 and φ3 is full compliance of all
constraints with the resulting latency’s of 10 ms and 20 ms for ℵ1,1 and ℵ1,2,
respectively.
4.6.1
Runtime analysis
Expressing the run time complexity of the schedule synthesis is problematic, in
that the execution depends on multiple parameters beyond the size of the input.
E.g. the architecture supports multiple processors, each with possibly diﬀerent
macroticks, that would cause the granuality of preemption to change dramat-
ically. Consequently, the number of events generated during the simulations
would then increase or decrease substantially depending on the conﬁguration.
To alleviate these problems, certain assumptions have been made, that allow us
to ascertain the complexity of the schedule synthesis more easily:
A.1 For all processors vi ∈V we assume that macrotick(vi) = 1.
A.2 For the task set Γ, we assume that all tasks τi are distributed evenly over
all cores σk ∈Ci ∈vi.
==PAGE:42==
28
Mapping and Scheduling Strategy
A.3 For all tasks in Γ, considering their mapping to cores, we assume that the
task periods Ti are harmonic.
With respect to A.1, the assumption ensures that we have the highest possible
granularity of preemption to properly reﬂect the worst case running time. For
A.2, we know that the EDF schedule is simulated for each individual core.
Assuming an uniform distribution of tasks will simplify the process of deriving
the running time. For A.3, we know that the ScheduleSynthesis will run for
the simulation length l which largely depends on the hyperperiod of the task
sets. Conversely, disharmonic task sets would cause a signiﬁcant increase of the
simulation length not reﬂecting the expected behavior.
We thus consider the set of all possible cores values C, the simulation length
l, the set of tasks Γ and the set of task chains Lℵas the variable input for
the ScheduleSynthesis algorithm. We start by determining the complexity of
the inner most function calls, namely the EDFSimulation algorithm. The worst
case running time of the EDFSimulation algorithm occurs, when the Trigger-
TaskEvent function is executed, seen at line 4 in Alg. 4. The TriggerTaskEvent
has a upper bound worst case of O(|Lℵ|). Subsequently, EDFSimulation might
enqueue a completed task to the waiting queue (line 8), release tasks from the
waiting queue (line 10), or assign a new executing task (line 11). Considering
that each core σi only contain a subset of tasks (cf. A.2), such operation would
incur a log( |Γ|
|C|) cost. The remainder of the execution is negligible. Thus the
worst case upper bound for EDFSimulation is O(|Lℵ| + log( |Γ|
|C|)).
Lastly, the running time of the ScheduleSynthesis algorithm is determined. Lines
3 to 7 in Alg. 3, iterate over all possible core values |C|. Each core is inserted
into a queue, with each insertion taking log(|C|), for a total of |C| · log(|C|).
Comparatively, this is a lower order term and is omitted. For lines 8 to 16, the
number of iterations is restricted by the events occurring within the simulation
length l. Considering that each core will produce l events, when the utilization
is 1.0, we get in worst case l · |C| iterations. Depicted by line 9 and line 14,
the cores are continuously removed and inserted, with an associated log(|C|)
cost. Furthermore, each successful iteration calls the EDFSimulation function
(line 12). Taking the previous runtime estimates into consideration, we get a
worst case upper bound of O(l · |C| · (log(|C|) + |Lℵ| + log( |Γ|
|C|))) for the Sched-
uleSynthesis algorithm. An experimental evaluation is decpited in Fig. C.1 in
the appendix showing the growth of the running time, when scaling the number
of tasks and/or task chains.
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 5
Generating synthetic data
5.1
Introduction
Determining the eﬃciency of the proposed implementation is a rigorous process
of experimentally evaluating its performance against multiple test scenarios. For
this purpose, the sponsors of this project have provided three anonymized task
sets. While the provided task sets exempliﬁes the State-Of-The-Art with respect
to automotive applications, we cannot base our evaluation exclusively on these
realistic samples, as the sample size is too small. Consequently, we are in need of
a tool, which can produce artiﬁcial automotive application models representing
State-Of-The-Art. Ideally, such a tool would also allow a generation of task
sets, that are larger than currently required by the automotive industry, as to
evaluate the proposed meta heuristic’s scalability.
Multiple approaches exists, which address this problem to some degree. How-
ever, not all are applicable within the needed time frame. A classical approach
to this problem is generation of synthetic tasks which mimics some of the in-
trinsic properties exhibited by the expected application domain. The product
of such a technique would then be synthetic task sets, which are suﬃciently
diﬀerent from one to another as to provide a diﬀerent challenge, while retaining
the overall structure, such that the challenge remain within its class.
Cur-
rent literature suggests the use of several algorithms [33, 34], each derive their
==PAGE:44==
30
Generating synthetic data
purpose from diﬀerent aspects of synthetic task set generation, with the em-
phasis predominantly relying on the eﬃciency with respect to running time or
bias. While several methods for task synthesis have been suggested, we have
not found any literature addressing the issue of replicating the inherent intent
or purpose that each tasks represent. More speciﬁcally, for a multi processor
platform, the purpose of tasks allocated to each processor might be distinctly
diﬀerent. Furthermore, the provided realistic task sets have been sanitized, and
the underlying process of creation have been omitted, which complicates the
the process of generating synthetic task sets even further. Also, as mentioned
in Chapters
2 and
3, the application model is subject to timing constraints
given by task chains. Any process of creating synthetic task sets would then
have to entail generation of synthetic task chains. To the best of our knowledge,
this issue has not been addressed by the community yet. The approach pre-
sented here, is a combination of existing methods for task synthesis selected by
the ease-of-use, rather than its eﬃciency in terms of typical metrics as well as
the application of simple machine learning techniques to achieve a high quality
synthetic task sets.
5.2
Analysis
The primary goal of the task set generator is, as described in section 5.1, to facil-
itate the experimental evaluation using multiple test cases thereby establish the
proposed implementation’s eﬃciency in solving problems within the same class
and of varying size. Although a task synthesis can mimic the properties of cur-
rent automotive applications to some degree, extending the scope to encompass
future applications is problematic. First and foremost, it is unknown how the
systems will scale in terms of both hardware and software. Thus synthesizing
tasks with the notion of representing future application models, in the absolute
sense, is beyond the scope of this project. However, in order to demonstrate the
capabilities of the meta-heuristic with respect to future performance require-
ments, we propose that a naive increase of both the workload and architecture
is employed. While this is far from accurate, certain assumptions can reduce
the uncertainty or increase the similarity of the generic tasks with respect to its
domain. The following considerations related to task set synthesis have been
made:
1) Relying purely on random decision making to generate the underlying
properties leads to a task set decoherent from its domain.
2) The platform supports multiple ECUs dedicated to diﬀerent purposes.
The characteristics of tasks diﬀer widely depending on the hosting ECU.
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Analysis
31
3) The introduction of the task chains, described in section 2.3, compounds
the need to respect the role of the ECUs and by extension the role of the
tasks as well.
Reﬂecting upon these considerations, we can say that for 1), it is relatively easy
to decide on the individual properties of a task, but ignoring the relationship
between them could introduce behavioral anomalies, which is normally not as-
sociated with ADAS applications.
The basis for this statement is grounded
in the assumption, that task periods tend to be determined by user decisions,
where as the execution time have greater variations due to architectural mech-
anisms [33].
Consequently, treating periods rather than execution times, as
random variables, might result in the loss of harmonic relationships between
tasks. With 2) it is evident from reviewing the realistic task sets as well as
reviewing existing architectures, that the ECUs serve diﬀerent purposes. For
the architecture model presented in this thesis and explained in Chapter 2, we
have identiﬁed four processors each representing a distinct responsibility (see
Table 5.1). Ignoring the roles of the processors, and by extension the roles of
Table 5.1: Table depicting vi ∈V and their associated responsibility
Processor
Responsibility
Abbreviation
v0
Decision Making
DM
v1
Sensor Fusion
SF
v2
Front Camera
FC
v3
Surround Camera
SC
the tasks they execute, could lead to the same problem of not reﬂecting the
characteristics of real applications within the domain. For 3) we can say, that
as task chains are a constraint over a set of tasks hosted by diﬀerent ECUs, the
adverse eﬀect would most likely cause additional deviation from the realistic
characteristics if not taken into account.
Given this, we suggest that the characteristics are determined by examining
the distributions of selected properties (inherent in the realistic data), and a
probabilistic model is constructed from the these. This model is then used as
a basis for generating the task sets. The following key attributes have been
asserted:
(a) utilization factor of all the ECUs and their cores.
(b) proportion of tasks with and without core assignment relative to its parent
ECUs.
(c) frequency distribution of periods FT .
==PAGE:46==
32
Generating synthetic data
(d) frequency distribution of the deadline ratios FD .
(e) frequency distribution of the jitter ratios FJ.
(f) frequency distribution of the earliest activation ratios Fr.
(g) composition of the task chains with respect to the ECUs.
The frequency distribution F is deﬁned as a (reversible) function yielding the
number of instances, in which a variable takes each of its possible values. With
respect to items (c) through (f), the frequency distributions will be generated
for each individual ECUs as to increase the similarity to the application domain.
5.3
Implementation
The process of task set generation is achieved through multiple stages. First, the
tool receives as input a realistic task set, the number of tasks and task chains,
as well as the desired architectural scale. Then, the architecture and application
models are analyzed at run time, and a probabilistic model is constructed. Using
this model, a synthetic application model is generated by ﬁrst creating a set of
tasks and afterwards a set of task chains. Finally, a new architecture model is
created by scaling the provided architecture proportionally.
5.3.1
Taskset Analysis
For the sake of brevity, the implementation of the automated task set analysis
will not be elaborated in a detailed manner. Rather a brief overview of the
underlying process will be described. The realistic task set is given as input
for the analysis procedure. The tasks are then partitioned by the ownership
of the ECUs, and each subset then undergo a statistical analysis resulting in
multiple frequency distributions.
More speciﬁcally, the frequency of periods
(FT ), deadlines ratios (FD), jitter ratios (FJ) and earliest activation ratios
(Fr) with respect to each processor are produced. The deadline ratio is deﬁned
as the relation between the deadline of a task and its period ( Di
Ti ). Thus the
frequency distribution for deadline ratios, FD, is a function which captures the
occurrences of the observed deadline ratios. In a similar fashion, the jitter ratio
is deﬁned as the relation between the jitter constraint Ji of a task τi and its
laxity, (
Ji
Di−Ci ) . Finally, the earliest activation ratio is given by the relation
between the earliest activation ri of a task and its laxity, (
ri
Di−Ci ).
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Implementation
33
5.3.2
Taskset generation
Creating a set of tasks is done using the TaskSynthesis algorithm (Alg. 5). It
takes as input the expected number of tasks to generate, n, as well as the utiliza-
tion factor Uf. As the expected platform is utilizing both multiple processors
and cores, we run the task synthesis algorithm for each processor independently
with Uf being the accumulated utilization factor of all its constituent cores.
Also, the probability frequency distributions (for the respective ECU) are pro-
vided, allowing it to randomly decide the tasks properties on a statistical basis.
Subsequently, a set of utilization values are created using the UUnifast-Discard
algorithm (line 2 in Alg.5). This algorithm was ﬁrst suggested by Bini and But-
tazzo in [33], as a means of creating unbiased utilization values for uni processor
systems. This was then further extended by Davis et. al. in [34], to accom-
modate the increasing demand for task synthesis for multi processor systems.
The n tasks are then created, one by one, using the set of utilizations U in
conjunction with the provided frequency tables (line 4 to 8). That is, a period
is randomly decided using the Pick function with the frequency table FT as its
parameter (line 4). Then, given that we know that ui = Ci/Ti, the execution
time is decided by multiplying the utilization value ui with the selected period
Ti (line 5). Finally, the deadline, jitter and earliest activation are determined
using the function Pick with their respective frequency tables as a parameter.
E.g. for deadlines, a random deadline ratio is picked using the frequency table
FD, and multiplied by the tasks period (line 6).
Algorithm 5 TasksetSynthesis(n, Uf, FT , FD, FJ, Fr)
1: Γ ←∅
2: U ←UUnifastDiscard(n, Uf)
3: for each ui ∈U do
4:
Ti ←Pick(FT )
5:
Ci ←max(1, Ti · ui)
6:
Di ←max(Ci, Pick(FD) ·Ti)
7:
Ji ←Pick(FJ) ·(Di −Ci)
8:
ri ←Pick(Fr) ·(Di −Ci)
9:
τi ←(ri, Ci, Ti, Di)
10:
Γ ←Γ ∪τi
11: end for
12: return Γ
The deadline Di is lower bound by Ci, such that it always remain above the
execution time. Once all descriptive properties have been computed, the task is
then ﬁnalized and added to the set Γ (line 9 and 10). The generation of tasks
continues until all n tasks are created, at which point the task set Γ is returned
(line 12). This process is repeated for all processors listed by the platform model.
==PAGE:48==
34
Generating synthetic data
Please note that the core assignment is not decided during task creation, but
rather afterwards using a best-ﬁt algorithm with respect to the core’s utilization;
Furthermore, core assignment of tasks is only done for a subset proportional to
the ratio determined by the analysis.
5.3.3
Task chain generation
Generation of synthetic task chains has to our knowledge not been described by
modern literature. Furthermore, the decisions behind the task chain properties,
such as the priority pi, end-to-end latency Li, or which tasks to group under
timing constraints, was not disclosed by our sponsor TTTech. In fact, the only
information available throughout this project were three anonymized task sets.
In this thesis we present a method for synthesizing task chains, in which existing
task sets are mapped using N-gram statistics in place of deep knowledge of the
application domain. The synthesis occurs in three stages: i) The input task
chains are processed and token streams are extracted. ii) The streams are then
mapped to a transition matrix, a bigram statistical representation of adjacent
token pairs. iii) New chains are synthesized using the transition matrix as a
probabilistic ﬁnite state machine.
5.3.3.1
Feature extraction
The initial stage receives as input the set of task chains Lℵ. In Table 5.2 a
subset of task chains from ADAS1 is listed (the full listing is seen in Table E.1
in the appendix). Task chains, described in detail in Chapter 2, is represented
Table 5.2: Table depicting 5 task chains (realistic task set ADAS1)
Chain
Precedence
pi
Li
ℵ1
τ128 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ2 ≺τ12 ≺τ9 ≺τ137
0.85
40000
ℵ4
τ125 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ2 ≺τ7
0.65
50000
ℵ5
τ129 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ2 ≺τ5 ≺τ81 ≺τ82
0.45
60000
ℵ6
τ144 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ6 ≺τ3 ≺τ12 ≺τ9 ≺τ133
0.75
60000
ℵ31
τ7 ≺τ5 ≺τ81 ≺τ83 ≺τ81 ≺τ5 ≺τ4 ≺τ9 ≺τ127
0.4
135000
by the tuple: ℵi = ({τ1 ≺... ≺τk}, Li, pi) ∈Lℵ, constituting a set of tasks Γℵi,
a priority pi and Li as the maximum allowed end-to-end latency. In order to
generate synthetic task chains, we need to build a probabilistic model reﬂecting
the existing set of task chains. For that to happen, we need to translate the
existing task chains from its actual form to an abstract representation called
==PAGE:49==
5.3 Implementation
35
features.
Features are a term commonly used within machine learning and
pattern recognition meant to describe non-redundant values, that facilitate the
training process. Feature extraction is thus the process of reducing the data from
a high dimensionality to a more manageable size. In this case, the extraction is
achieved through the following steps: i) translating the set of tasks Γℵi of each
chain ℵi into a sequence of communication links, and ii) translate the sequence
of communication links into a series of token streams (representing a chain of
responsibilities). We refer to Chapter 2, where the ADAS platform is presented
Table 5.3: Mapping tasks to communication links
Chain
Communication links Eℵi
ℵ1
{v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3}
ℵ4
{v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0}
ℵ5
{v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1}
ℵ6
{v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3}
ℵ31
{v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3}
as the graph A(V, E). The assignment of tasks to processors is thus captured by
the mapping function N : Γ →V, such that N(τi) gives the hosting processor
vi. Applying the mapping function N on all elements in Γℵi of chain ℵi then
gives the sequential order of communication between processors. E.g. for ℵ4
we have the set of tasks Γℵ4 = {τ125 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ2 ≺τ7}, resulting in the
communication links: Eℵ4 = {v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0}. In Table 5.3 we can
observe the translation of multiple task chains, listed by Table 5.2, into their
respective communication links.
Once the communication links have been extracted, we transform the sequence
into a token stream. For that purpose, we have the labelling function R : V →R,
with R = {DM, SF, FC, SC}, such that R(v0) gives the token DM . See Ta-
ble 5.1 for a complete mapping between each processor and their responsibili-
ties. Using R over the communication links listed in Table 5.3, we get the token
streams presented in Table 5.4.
Table 5.4: Mapping of communication links to features
Chain
Feature stream
ℵ1
{SC, DM, DM, DM, DM, DM, SC}
ℵ4
{SC, DM, DM, DM, DM}
ℵ5
{SC, DM, DM, DM, DM, SF, SF}
ℵ6
{SC, DM, DM, DM, DM, DM, DM, SC}
ℵ31
{DM, DM, SF, SF, SF, DM, DM, DM, SF}
==PAGE:50==
36
Generating synthetic data
5.3.3.2
Bigram statistical representation
The second stage constructs a probabilistic transition system from the token
streams using bigram statistics. Bigrams are a special case of N-grams, used
for statistical analysis in multiple domains, including cryptography, linguistics
and bioinformatics, where identiﬁcation or classiﬁcation of sequence patterns
are computationally hard. N-grams functions over a continuous sequence of n
items from a given sample of words or tokens. More formally, we use bigrams
to predict the conditional probability of the next token based on the currently
inspected token. This property of predicting the next token can similarly be used
for generation of a continuous sequences rather than determining the similarity
of a sequence with its training data [35–37].
Estimating the conditional probabilities is done by computing the maximum
likelyhood estimation (MLE) of the tokens pairs in the input sequence [37].
Meaning, we do not take unobserved phenomena into account, but only assign
probabilities to observed bigram events. To compute the bigram probability
of a token x given a previous token y, we compute the occurrences of C(yx),
and normalize by counting all bigrams sharing the same ﬁrst word y. Below
in Fig. 5.1 we see the transition matrix representing the bigram probabilities
obtained using the token streams depicted by Table 5.4 as input. Here each row
represents the current token, and their respective value for each column repre-
sents the conditional probability with its predicted token. Also, from Fig. 5.1
we see that two additional tokens, Start and End are present. These exemplify
the latent start and end of any token sequence. As an example, the conditional
Figure 5.1: Bigram statistics of token streams listed in Table.5.4
X =








Start
DM
SF
FC
SC
End
Start
0.0
.2
.0
.0
.8
.0
DM
.0
.75
.12
.0
.08
.04
SF
.0
.16
.50
.0
.0
.33
FC
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
SC
.0
.66
.0
.0
.0
.33
End
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
0.0








probabilities for SF are estimated by reviewing the sequences depicted in Ta-
ble 5.4. First, all SF bigrams are counted: C(SFDM) = 1, C(SFSC) = 0,
C(SFFC) = 0, C(SFSF) = 3, C(SFEnd) = 2. Then all occurrences of SF
bigrams are counted: C(SF?) = 6. The resulting normalization to probabilities
can be observed from the respective row in Fig. 5.1.
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Implementation
37
5.3.3.3
Chain synthesis
The ﬁnal step in creating task chains uses the TaskChainSynthesis algorithm
(Alg. 6).
It takes as input the expected number of chains to create n, the
expected mean length of task chains x, the standard deviation of the mean s, a
set of synthetic tasks Γ and a transition matrix X. The algorithm runs until n
task chains have been created (line 3), with i being the iterator keeping track
of the count created (line 2).
Algorithm 6 TaskChainSynthesis(n, x, s, Γ, X)
1: Lℵ←∅
2: i ←0
3: while i < n do
4:
Γi ←∅
5:
P ←PatternSynthesis(X, x, s)
6:
for each Ti ∈P do
7:
τi ←TaskByType(Γ, Ti)
8:
Γi ←Γi ∪{τi}
9:
end for
10:
Li ←Latency(Γi)
11:
ℵ←(Γi, Li, 1.0)
12:
Lℵ←Lℵ∪{ℵ}
13:
i ←i + 1
14: end while
15: return Lℵ
At every iteration a new sequence pattern is generated by calling the Pattern-
Synthesis algorithm (see Alg. 7) at line 5. Each pattern P consists of a sequence
of tokens Ti ∈R with each token representing a responsibility mapped to a pro-
cessor vi ∈V (see Table 5.1). From this, a subset of tasks Γi are randomly
selected from Γ with a processor matching the responsibility Ti, using the func-
tion TaskByType (lines 6 to 9). The resulting set Γi is the chain of tasks, which
are subject to the latency requirements. Next, the end-to-end constraint is es-
timated using the function Latency with Γi as input (line 10). It estimates the
latency requirement using a linear approximation obtained through regression
over the realistic task chains. Lastly, the chain is ﬁnalized (line 11) and added
to the set of task chains Lℵ(line 12). Once all chains have been created, the
process terminates by returning the generated task chains (line 15).
Generation of patterns used for chain synthesis is seen in Alg. 7. It requires a
transition matrix X as input (explained in section 5.3.3.2) containing the con-
==PAGE:52==
38
Generating synthetic data
ditional probability estimates. Also, the expected mean and standard deviation
length of chains, x and s, are provided which is a particular important aspect of
this algorithm. Considering that the transition system functions over probabil-
ity estimates, termination only occurs when transitioning to a ﬁnal state; This
is independent of the length of the pattern generated. To correct for this, we
utilize a similar approach to that of Simulated Annealing using an acceptance
function, that determines whether the length of the generated pattern is within
the expected norm. The process of pattern generation starts by transitioning
from the initial token Start, using the function NextToken (line 3). The pat-
tern incrementally appends new tokens until the terminal state End is reached
(lines 4 to 7).
Algorithm 7 PatternSynthesis(X, x, s)
1: repeat
2:
P ←∅
3:
T ←NextToken(Start, X)
4:
while T ̸= End do
5:
P ←P ∪{T }
6:
T ←NextToken(T )
7:
end while
8: until random[0,1] < Accept(|P|, x, s)
9: return P
Once the candidate pattern is complete, it will either be accepted and returned
(line 8 and
9) or rejected and thereby restarting the process anew (line 1).
The function Accept takes the length of the candidate pattern |P|, and the
expected mean and standard deviation length of chains x and s respectively.
Based on the probability density function of a normal distribution, it returns the
probability of the candidate having the length |P|, were it randomly drawn from
the distribution. Similar to Simulated Annealing, deciding whether to accept
a candidate is achieved by comparison of a random value between 0.0 and 1.0.
A reduced representation of the synthetic task chains is listed as Table E.3 and
Table E.4 in Appendix E.
5.4
Brief summary
The synthetic task sets are synthesized using a custom generator created as part
of this thesis. It derives the desired task properties from realistic task sets given
by TTTech. That is, the generator receives as input a model of an architecture
==PAGE:53==
5.4 Brief summary
39
and a realistic task set, which subsequently undergoes a statistical analysis.
From this, it is able to synthesize new task sets, that mimic the processor
utilization in terms of both periods and execution times. Furthermore, it ensures
that the hyperperiod of the application stays within the expected norm, as well
as placing jitter constraints for a representative share of the tasks. Also, as
mapping tasks to cores represent one of the primary goals, the generator will
ensure, that a subset of the tasks will be without a predeﬁned core designation.
Finally, it generates a set of task chains with lengths adhering to that of its
realistic parent; drawing tasks from the respective processors and cores such that
the chain mimics the behavior of having both source, processing and sink tasks.
As part of the thesis deliverables, multiple samples of synthetically generated
task sets of increasing scale have been included as a separate compressed ﬁle.
==PAGE:54==
40
Generating synthetic data
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 6
Parameter Tuning
6.1
Introduction
To run the SA and RA algorithms we need a cooling scheme.
Such cooling
schemes are often set manually based on experience. While it is possible to
obtain good quality solutions from the annealing process based on manually
derived cooling schedules, the process of manually tweaking the parameters is
cumbersome. Furthermore, described in chapter 4, the cooling schedule con-
trols the probability of accepting an intermediate solution even though its ﬁt-
ness score indicates it is further from the goal. As such, the cooling schedule
itself has considerable impact on the performance of the annealing process, thus
utilizing a poor cooling schedule could cause the experimental evaluation to be
skewered. Consequently, we decided to use an automated approach called pa-
rameter meta optimization (PMO) to determine the cooling schedules for this
project [38,39]. PMO is a technique which employs an optimization algorithm
(meta-level) to optimize the parameters of an underlying algorithm (base-level).
More speciﬁcally, we have used a Genetic Algorithm (GA) [28] on the meta-level,
in conjunction with a statistical racing algorithm, to cultivate a small selection
of candidate parameters for the underlying SA and RA (at the base-level). That
is, a GA was used as an overlaying optimizer, on top of the implemented RA and
SA algorithms representing the ﬁtness function of the individuals. We denote
these GASA and GARA.
==PAGE:56==
42
Parameter Tuning
As the algorithms used at the base-level, are stochastic by nature, one cannot
purely rely on evaluating the parameters once. Rather, each parametrization
has to be evaluated multiple times to establish its relative eﬃcacy. As the base-
level algorithms by themselves are computationally expensive, the requirement
of evaluating each conﬁguration of parameters multiple times further exagger-
ates the computational requirements. One approach to alleviate this, is by using
a technique called racing, which ensures that multiple evaluations are conducted
on a candidate, and only separate the ones, that are clearly better or not sig-
niﬁcantly worse [39].
6.2
Method
GA is a metaheuristic optimization approach, which belongs to the class of
Evolutionary Algorithms, and is inspired from the process of natural evolution
(see Alg. 8). The set of candidate solutions is called a population, and each
solution is encoded using a vector called a chromosome.
The population is
initialized to n candidate solutions, where n is the population size (line 1 in
Alg.8).
The population is then evolved by selecting a set of candidates and performing
recombination and mutation to generate oﬀsprings (line 4-5). We use elitism to
allow the best candidates to survive and tournament selection to select parents
for performing recombination and mutation.
In a tournament, a number of
chromosomes are chosen at random, and the ﬁttest one wins.
Algorithm 8 GeneticAlgorithm(p0, n)
1: p ←p0
2: while n > 0 do
3:
Evaluate(p)
4:
p′ ←Select(p)
5:
Mutate(p′)
6:
Aggregate(p, p′, ledger)
7:
p = p′
8:
n = n −1
9: end while
As each individual represents an execution of RA or SA, thus being a stochastic
process, one cannot rely on a speciﬁc ﬁtness value. That is, the ﬁtness value
obtained from an annealing process will vary from execution to execution, when
subject to time constraints that prohibits it from converging towards a global
minima. Furthermore, the ﬁtness values would also vary depending on the input
==PAGE:57==
6.3 Results
43
problem. Considering that, we expect to ﬁnd a cooling schedule suitable for
multiple input problems, and that we cannot allow the underlying candidates to
run indeﬁnitely, we let the candidate record all ﬁtness values during its lifetime,
with the true ﬁtness score being the adjusted mean thereof.
Additionally, using the Aggregate procedure, any eliminated candidate would
share the knowledge it had gained with one surviving sibling (line 6); More
speciﬁcally, a candidate might be eliminated due to poor performance in its
infancy.
As such, a living sibling (with identical genes) would consume the
recorded performance, and the adjusted mean would be recomputed anew. This
serves to adjust for inadvertent bias, where individuals with poor performance
early on could be eliminated prematurely (as well as the reverse). Finally, the
parent population is replaced by the oﬀspring population (line 7). These steps
are repeated until the termination condition is reached, in this case a speciﬁc
number of generations has been cultivated (line 2).
Finally, throughout the
execution of the algorithm, all eliminated individuals were stored in memory
along with their recorded ﬁtness scores. The ﬁnal result was then a complete
ledger of all known individuals including their scores.
For the individuals representing the SA, the chromosomes were deﬁned by the
vector CSA = [cr60s, n] with cr60s being the cooling rate given a 60 second time
constraint, and n being the number of iterations with a static temperature.
Similarly, the chromosome for individuals representing RA was deﬁned by the
vector CRA = [threshold3, threshold2, cr3, cr2, cr1,60s, tscale]. It is important to
note, that the cooling schedules found using this approach are calibrated towards
ﬁnding solutions within a 60 second window, and are thus not directly applicable
beyond this duration without re-calibration.
6.3
Results
The GAs were conﬁgured with a population size of 150, mutation rate of 5%,
uniform crossover rate of 50%, tournament size of 3. Additionally, elitism (se-
lecting individuals with a good ﬁtness for survival in the next round) was enabled
with a 15% selection of the statistically best individuals of the entire popula-
tion and 15% of the best oﬀsprings of every generation. Given that the CSA
chromosome contains fewer genes compared to its counterpart CRA, the GASA
would converge faster towards a global optimum. Consequently, the GASA was
allowed to run for 125 generations whereas the GARA was cultivated over 250
generations. Both GASA and GARA utilized the same training set, consisting of
36 synthetically generated task sets, each consisting of 151 tasks, 31 task chains
and an architectural scale of 1.0. Finally, individuals of both GASA and GARA
==PAGE:58==
44
Parameter Tuning
were constrained by a 60 second window, meaning that the base-level algorithm,
representing each individual, would terminate after 60 seconds. As the GA pro-
duces a complete ledger of all individuals and their performance level, selecting
the best performing was then done by ﬁltering candidates having the highest
statistical signiﬁcance combined with the lowest ﬁtness score. Seen in Table 6.1
and 6.2, the top 5 individuals have been selected and ordered by their ﬁtness
represented by each row.
# Fitness Age
P
cr60s
n
1
8595
5900 0.34 0.043 84
2
8632
1814 0.35 0.043 99
3
8689
1846 0.33 0.043 82
4
8734
335
0.36 0.032 73
5
8780
438
0.33 0.043 91
Table 6.1: Top 5 of individuals extracted from the GASA ledger.
As we can see from Table 6.1, GASA produced several individuals with a high
number of trials (see the Age column), compared to its counterpart GARA in
Table 6.2. This is in part due to the fact that the cooling schedule for SA rely
on fewer parameters, thus converging faster towards a optimum. As a result,
good candidates are found faster (with respect to the number of generations),
thereby increasing the number of trials for good candidates. This is observed
in the columns cr60s and n representing the chromosome, where the values are
relatively close together.
# Fitness Age
P
threshold3 threshold2
cr3
cr2
cr1,60s
tscale
1
6935
142
0.66
0.241
0.620
0.019 0.093
0.049
0.027
2
6996
109
0.64
0.060
0.040
0.019 0.093
0.049
0.027
3
7012
123
0.65
0.029
0.620
0.019 0.093
0.049
0.027
4
7089
133
0.62
0.029
0.494
0.019 0.093
0.049
0.027
5
7173
156
0.61
0.029
0.110
0.019 0.093
0.049
0.027
Table 6.2: Top 5 of individuals extracted from the GARA ledger.
Conversely, GARA did not obtain the same degree of signiﬁcance in its results, as
is evident from the number of trials (see the Age column). However, inspecting
the chromosomes in Table 6.2, we can see that the diﬀerence between them
occur in the genes representing the thermal thresholds (see the threshold3 and
threshold2 columns). This combined with the low number of trials indicates,
that the tuning process terminated before it could fully converge towards a
reliable cooling schedule. Finally, the column P indicates the likelihood, that a
feasible solution will be found using the cooling scheme speciﬁed by the given
==PAGE:59==
6.3 Results
45
row, within the 60 second window. While the method of obtaining the cooling
schedules was not intended to be used as a performance indicator, it is temping
to note that RA has a seemingly higher probability of ﬁnding feasible solution
within the same time frame.
While the results are inconclusive in that we cannot claim to have found optimal
cooling schemes, they do oﬀer the advantage of eliminating bias, which would
have been otherwise introduced using a manual approach. Considering how the
cooling schemes govern the acceptance probability of worse solutions, it seems
reasonable to assume, that multiple equally suﬃcient parameters might exist for
each algorithm, which very well could be the case here. Further investigation
of higher quality parameters have been put on hold due to the time constraints
surrounding this project, and consequently the results gathered here will be used
as part of the experimental evaluation for both algorithms.
The selected cooling schedules used to further benchmark RA and SA are the
top candidate listed in Table 6.1 and 6.2. Here we see CSA = [0.043, 84] and
CRA = [0.241, 0.617, 0.019, 0.093, 0.049, 0.027] and further visually illustrated in
Fig. 6.1.
RA
SA
Iterations
Temperature
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
Figure 6.1:
Plot of the derived cooling schemes for RA and SA respectively.
Here it is noteworthy to mention, that for RA (green curve), the conﬁguration
seems to have a very low initial temperature for the recursion depths beyond the
initial. One explanation is, that it is advantageous to have a high acceptance
probability for the upper recursion level, allowing a wider exploration of the
search space, and then substantially constrain the exploration in the deeper
==PAGE:60==
46
Parameter Tuning
levels. Please notice that for SA in Fig. 6.1, the curve takes a jagged shape. This
is due to the actual implementation of SA allowing it to freeze the temperature
for several iterations, (in this case 84) before it decreases.
As both the realistic and synthetic test cases were expected to run for more
than 60 seconds in order to produce valid schedules, it was necessary to re-
calibrate the cooling scheme, such that the thermal termination criteria matches
the expected running time. Thus, ﬁnalizing the actual cooling scheme with re-
spect to a speciﬁc time constraint was achieved by scaling the estimated cool-
ing rate proportionally to its calibration window. More speciﬁcally, adjusting
the SA cooling scheme for usage beyond a 60 second window was achieved by
crtime = cr60 s ·
60
time, where time is the expected time limit. Similarly, adjust-
ing the cooling scheme for RA is done by scaling the initial recursion level using
cr1,time = cr1,60 s ·
60
time , with all other values unmodiﬁed.
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 7
Experimental Evaluation
We were interested to evaluate our proposed Recursive Simulated Annealing in
terms of its ability to ﬁnd feasible solutions, which meet all the timing con-
straints. Determining the eﬃcacy of RA was achieved through a combination of
synthetic and realistic test scenarios, benchmarked against its sibling Simulated
Annealing, as well as a Greedy task mapping. The synthetic task sets were cre-
ated using the tool explained in Chapter 5. We remind the reader that SA does
not use recursion. The parameters for SA and RA, i.e. the cooling schedule,
have been determined as presented in Chapter 6. All experimental results were
collected using an Intel Core i7-5820K, 3.3 GHz, 64 GB RAM running Windows
10.
==PAGE:62==
48
Experimental Evaluation
7.1
Benchmarking using realistic tasks
For the following scenario we have used three test cases, ADAS1 to ADAS3,
which are variants of an anonymized realistic task set, currently in use in a series-
production vehicle. All test cases have 151 tasks and 31 task chains, but with
varying jitter, earliest activation and macrotick constraints. The experiment
was setup such that 200 trials were conducted by RA and SA for each test case;
The Greedy algorithm is not stochastic and always outputs the same result. The
results are depicted in Table 7.1, with each row ADAS1–ADAS3 representing
the results of a task set. As the experiment progresses through each case, the
algorithms were given additional time due to an inherent increased complexity
(see the Time column). For each algorithm (Greedy, SA and RA), we show
in the table, under the Sched.
columns, the percentage of cases (out of the
200 trials) for which the algorithms determine schedulable solutions (all timing
constraints are satisﬁed; 1 means 100%). The columns labelled Chains have the
percentage of chains out of the total chains, for which the respective algorithm
was able to satisfy the end-to-end constraints.
Table 7.1: Evaluation results on realistic test cases
Test case Time
Greedy
SA
RA
Chains Jitter Sched.
Chains
Jitter
Sched.
Chains
Jitter
Sched.
Min Avg Max Min Avg Max
Min Avg Max Min Avg Max
ADAS1
200s
0.90
0.42
0.00
0.84 0.97 1.00 0.79 0.97 1.00
0.51
0.87 1.00 1.00 0.84 0.99 1.00
0.83
ADAS2
400s
0.55
0.26
0.00
0.84 0.93 1.00 0.53 0.64 0.84
0.00
0.87 0.99 1.00 0.74 0.97 1.00
0.77
ADAS3
800s
0.74
0.26
0.00
0.71 0.96 1.00 0.47 0.62 0.79
0.00
0.87 0.98 1.00 0.63 0.94 1.00
0.61
Similarly, Jitter denotes the percentage of jitter constraints satisﬁed. These val-
ues are presented for in terms of minimum, average and maximum considering
the 200 runs. As we can see from Table 7.1, RA can ﬁnd feasible solutions for
all test cases. As the test cases get progressively more diﬃcult from ADAS1
to ADAS3, in terms of timing constraints that need to be satisﬁed, RA retains
its ability of ﬁnding solutions within the allotted time; SA, however, does not.
Although SA can ﬁnd solutions where a large percentage of timing constraints
are satisﬁed, it only discovers feasible solutions for ADAS1. Both SA and RA
improve considerably compared to the Greedy approach, which satisﬁes a de-
creasingly small fraction of constraints as we progress from ADAS1 to ADAS3.
This is also illustrated by the graphs depicted by Fig. 7.1 (High resolution
versions are listed in Appendix D). In these ﬁgures, we depict the mean cost
function value (from Eq 4.1) on the y-axis as a function of time given by the
metaheuristics (x-axis). I.e. We calculate the mean cost function value over the
200 trials at evenly divided intervals of 5%.
==PAGE:63==
7.1 Benchmarking using realistic tasks
49
The horizontal red line indicates the threshold, when a solution is feasible (the
cost function value indicates, that all the timing constraints are satisﬁed). The
blue line indicates a threshold, for which below a feasible solution does not exist,
and primarily serves as a sanity check thereof. However, given that we do not
know the optimal solutions (and their associated cost function values), it also
indicates a pessimistic lower bound for any optimal solution.
(a) ADAS1
(b) ADAS2
(c) ADAS3
Figure 7.1: Mean ﬁtness values with standard deviation, min and max com-
paring SA and RA (obtained over 200 trials against each of task
sets).
From the ﬁgure, we can see that RA shows a trend of converging faster towards
valid schedules, when compared to SA. This aligns with the observations made
from our previous experiments, and further validates the advantage RA has
over the traditional simulated annealing. However, looking at Fig. 7.1a it seems
that SA could be better at minimizing the end-to-end constraints. I.e. once SA
has found a valid schedule, the rate at which it minimizes the communication
latency appears higher compared to RA.
==PAGE:64==
50
Experimental Evaluation
7.2
Benchmarking using synthetic tasks
The experiments using synthetic task sets were split into two phases: (1) Adopt
the problem size and time constraint as listed in the realistic test scenario.
This seeks to address two concerns: (i) Assert the relative eﬃciency of the
algorithms on a broader variety of task sets reﬂecting current level of resources
and constraints. (ii) If possible, determine if the task generator is producing task
sets not representative of the domain. We do not expect this to be established in
the absolute sense, but it rather serves as a sanity check. Meaning, we replicate
the test cases depicted in Section 7.1 using synthetically generated task sets
(based on all three task sets: ADAS1-ADAS3). If the results severely deviate
from expectations or the results given in Section 7.1, then the validity of the
synthetic tasks would be questionable. Subsequently, the results in Section 7.2.2
would be subject to the same level of uncertainty. We acknowledge that this
does not prove, that the synthetic tasks sets are representative of the domain.
(2) Increase both the problem size (architecture scale, number of tasks and
task chains) and the time constraints given to each trial. This seeks to address
whether the strategy of using meta-heuristics combined with EDF-simulation is
a viable long term strategy or not.
7.2.1
Comparison with realistic tasks
Similar to the realistic test scenario, we have three test cases: ADAS1 to ADAS3.
Each consists of 32 synthetic tasks sets based on its realistic counter part. All
contain 151 tasks and 31 task chains. Also, each task set was subject to 32 trials
of both RA and SA, while the Greedy algorithm only required one trial; Thus
a total of 1024 trials (per algorithm) were conducted per test case.
The results are depicted in Table 7.2, where each row ADAS1–ADAS3 has the
results for each case.
To replicate the setup given in Section 7.1, the algo-
rithms were limited to the same time duration (see the Time column). Thus
the columns represents the same metrics as in Table 7.1, with the only diﬀer-
ence being aggregated over multiple diﬀerent task sets. A direct comparison
Table 7.2: Evaluation results on synthetic test cases
Test case Time
Greedy
SA
RA
Chains
Jitter
Sched.
Chains
Jitter
Sched.
Chains
Jitter
Sched.
Min Avg Max Min Avg Max
Min Avg Max Min Avg Max
Min Avg Max Min Avg Max
ADAS1
200s 0.23 0.52 0.68 0.15 0.40 0.57
0.00
0.74 0.98 1.00 0.80 1.00 1.00
0.69
0.74 0.99 1.00 0.80 1.00 1.00
0.74
ADAS2
400s 0.39 0.54 0.71 0.09 0.29 0.47
0.00
0.71 0.94 1.00 0.59 0.95 1.00
0.39
0.77 0.98 1.00 0.68 0.98 1.00
0.72
ADAS3
800s 0.36 0.52 0.81 0.06 0.27 0.56
0.00
0.52 0.87 1.00 0.50 0.86 1.00
0.10
0.52 0.93 1.00 0.56 0.93 1.00
0.31
between Table 7.2 and Table 7.1 reveals, that SA is capable of ﬁnding feasible
==PAGE:65==
7.2 Benchmarking using synthetic tasks
51
solutions for all test cases (and at a higher rate), when evaluated on synthetic
task sets (see column Sched.) opposed to the realistic task sets. Similarly to the
realistic test scenario, Greedy is still not fully able to comply with the timing
constraints leading it to fail at ﬁnding feasible schedules. Furthermore, compar-
ing the performance of RA, we see that while it retain its lead over SA, it does
so with a slight reduction in its ability to ﬁnd feasible solutions. We believe
that the stochastic process of generating synthetic task sets, cause the task sets
to have a varying degree of diﬃculty. We use the term diﬃculty loosely, as
we have no method to which, we can objectively assert this. Assuming this to
be correct, it would be reasonable to expect, that an increased number feasible
solutions would be found by SA - which could explain the general diﬀerence in
performance when comparing with the results listed in Table 7.1. Given that
ADAS1
100% 100% 100% 97%
94%
94%
94%
94%
91%
88%
88%
84%
84%
78%
75%
75%
75%
69%
69%
69%
66%
63%
63%
59%
56%
56%
53%
53%
50%
50%
41%
38%
ADAS2
91%
91%
91%
88%
84%
78%
78%
78%
78%
75%
75%
75%
75%
72%
72%
72%
69%
69%
69%
69%
69%
69%
69%
66%
66%
66%
66%
63%
56%
56%
50%
50%
ADAS3
63%
53%
53%
53%
50%
47%
41%
38%
38%
38%
38%
38%
34%
34%
34%
31%
31%
31%
31%
31%
31%
28%
28%
22%
19%
16%
13%
13%
9%
9%
6%
0%
(a) RA
ADAS1
100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 97%
97%
94%
94%
94%
94%
94%
94%
91%
91%
91%
88%
84%
84%
81%
81%
59%
34%
28%
19%
13%
13%
3%
3%
0%
0%
ADAS2
97%
97%
97%
97%
94%
94%
94%
88%
72%
63%
59%
56%
53%
38%
31%
22%
22%
19%
13%
13%
9%
9%
6%
6%
3%
3%
3%
3%
3%
0%
0%
0%
ADAS3
78%
63%
53%
50%
28%
25%
9%
9%
9%
3%
3%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
(b) SA
Figure 7.2: Mean scheduability values obtained over 1024 trials against 32
synthetic ADAS1, ADAS2 and ADAS3 task sets respectively.
the results in Table 7.2 represent the mean values over multiple task sets, it
reﬂects the central tendency of the measurements, but does not illustrate the
underlying performance variance between the task sets. In Fig. 7.2, the percent-
age of valid solutions (scheduability) have been grouped by their associated task
sets. Here each row represents the test case (ADAS1 to ADAS3), each colored
cell represents one unique task set (out of the 32) and the value corresponds to
the percentage of valid schedules found (out of 32 trials). From the ﬁgure we
see that RA ﬁnds valid schedules for all task sets except one, whereas SA have
multiple task sets not being solved. Also, from Fig. 7.2 we can see, that the
overall rate of ﬁnding feasible schedules decrease, as we progress from ADAS1 to
ADAS3, which coincides with the observations made in Section 7.1. In addition
to this, by inspecting Fig. 7.2, it seems that RA have a more evenly distributed
rate of ﬁnding valid schedules, whereas SA tends to solve fewer problems at
a higher rate. To better illustrate this, we refer to Fig. 7.3 which depict the
probability density on the y-axis, as a function of scheduability (percentage of
valid solutions) by the x-axis seen over multiple task sets. From the ﬁgures we
can see, that the probability density of RA trends to cluster, whereas SA has a
larger spread. One interpretation is that RA trends to ﬁnd feasible schedules at
==PAGE:66==
52
Experimental Evaluation
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
SA
RA
Scheduability
Density
(a) ADAS1
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
SA
RA
Scheduability
Density
(b) ADAS2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
SA
RA
Scheduability
Density
(c) ADAS3
Figure 7.3: Density plots of scheduability of 32 synthetic ADAS1, ADAS2 and
ADAS3 task sets.
a more reliable rate compared to SA, when presented with diﬀerent task sets.
Also, as the majority of density is located more to the right, RA also tends to
have an overall higher rate of ﬁnding valid schedules, as also depicted by Ta-
ble 7.2. Conversely, if we look at SA, we see that for ADAS1 and ADAS2 they
appear slightly U-shaped, and for ADAS3 it appears to be skewered to the left,
which supports the observation, that SA solves fewer problems but at a higher
rate. However, it also indicate, that SA might be comparatively less robust,
as the density displace faster to the left, when the test cases get progressively
harder (ADAS1 through ADAS2) due to increasing timing constraints. Finally,
one important observation (or lack thereof) relates to the general distributions
for both RA and SA depicted by the three graphs.
We do not observe any
anomalous trends. That is, the density is not systematically skewered across
==PAGE:67==
7.2 Benchmarking using synthetic tasks
53
all graphs. This observation is important, because we know, that the synthetic
task sets were modelled from its realistic counter parts, and each trial were
given the same amount of time. Had the task generator been faulty, such that
it produced task sets of an extremely low diﬃculty, the density would have been
located predominantly to the right for both RA and SA on all three graphs.
Conversely, had the diﬃculty of the task sets been extremely high, the majority
of the density would have been to the left. Clearly, this is not the case. Al-
though not conclusive, we have no indications of the synthetic task sets being
disproportionately diﬀerent from their realistic counter part in terms of diﬃ-
culty. Subsequently, we have no reason to discard any results obtained from
experiments using synthetic tasks. For a complete listing of cost function values
obtained during this experiment, we refer to Figures D.7, D.8 and D.9 listed in
Appendix D, as they further illustrate these observations.
(a) ADAS1
(b) ADAS2
(c) ADAS3
Figure 7.4: Mean ﬁtness values with standard deviation, min and max com-
paring SA and RA (each obtained over 1024 trials against 32 syn-
thetic ADAS1, ADAS2 and ADAS3 task sets respectively).
Finally, a comparison of the convergence rate between RA and SA is presented
in Fig. 7.4. The graphs were produced from a separate experiment: 32 new
==PAGE:68==
54
Experimental Evaluation
task sets were created each containing 151 tasks and 31 task chains, and each
sampled over 32 trials for a total of 1024 trials. Again, the horizontal red line
represents the threshold for feasible solutions relative to the cost function value.
The blue line is no longer represented, because the graphs depicts mean perfor-
mance over multiple task sets, thus multiple lower thresholds would have to be
depicted making it illegible. From Fig. 7.4 we see that, RA tends to converge
faster (on average) towards a valid schedule compared to SA, which supports
the observations made in Section 7.1. Also, we see that SA appear to be better
at minimizing the end-to-end constraints as the cost function values decreases at
a higher rate, once a valid solution has been found. This property was also ob-
served in the convergence graphs using realistic task sets. However, two notable
diﬀerences between the graphs depicted in Fig. 7.4 and Fig. 7.1: 1) the spread
of the cost function value shown for SA in Fig. 7.4 appear higher. Meaning
the maximum value (indicated by the purple area) and standard deviation (SD,
indicated by the vertical bars) are much higher than its realistic counter part.
2) SA is ﬁnding solutions for ADAS2 and ADAS3, which was not the case for
its realistic counterpart. Both are best interpreted as the variance of diﬃculty,
illustrated by Table.7.2 and Fig. 7.3, when using multiple task sets, leading to
a comparatively increased number of feasible solutions.
7.2.2
Very large task sets
For the ﬁnal test scenario, we want to ascertain if using meta heuristics com-
bined with EDF-simulations are a viable long term solution for ﬁnding feasible
schedules, when confronted with very large task sets. In doing so, we have relied
on the task generator explained in Chapter 5, which also allows us to scale up
the number of tasks, chains and processors in increments of 100% relative to its
input. The following scenario consists of four test cases, ranging from 100% to
500% in scale. I.e. for ADAS1x100% the application contains 151 tasks and 31
chains using a model of the architecture discussed in Chapter 2, whereas with
ADAS1x200% the architecture would double the number of processors, tasks
and task chains. It is important to note, that increasing both the number of
tasks and task chains results in a problem, which scales in two dimensions. As
such it is expected, that the required time to ﬁnd a feasible solution increases
substantially. Furthermore, the time allotted for each test case have been de-
termined manually.
The results are presented in Table 7.3. Here each row represent the actual test
case, however for *ADAS1x100% the results are reused from Table 7.2 listed in
Section 7.2.1. Any other test case listed in Table 7.3 would undergo 32 trials
for every algorithm, with an increasing time duration. We acknowledge that
the sample size for this test scenario is very small. However, due to the re-
==PAGE:69==
7.2 Benchmarking using synthetic tasks
55
quired increase in time per trial, it would be unfeasible to attempt a larger
sample size within the time frame needed to complete the experiment. Please
note, that although the time is not scaled proportionally with the increase in
number of tasks, chains and architecture, the overall rate of solving the chain
latency and jitter constraints (by extension also ﬁnding schedulable solutions)
is erratic. This is due to the exponential increase in the search space, which
makes it increasingly diﬃcult to ﬁnd feasible solutions, combined with the vari-
ance of diﬃculty. As we can see from Table 7.3, the Greedy has comparatively
Table 7.3: Evaluation results on synthetic test cases of increasing size
Test case
Time
Greedy
SA
RA
Chains Jitter Sched.
Chains
Jitter
Sched.
Chains
Jitter
Sched.
Min Avg Max Min Avg Max
Min Avg Max Min Avg Max
*ADAS1x100%
200s
0.52
0.40
0.00
0.74 0.98 1.00 0.80 1.00 1.00
0.69
0.74 0.99 1.00 0.80 1.00 1.00
0.74
ADAS1x200%
3000s
0.61
0.46
0.00
0.66 0.75 0.81 0.61 0.68 0.81
0.00
0.98 1.00 1.00 0.95 1.00 1.00
0.97
ADAS1x300%
6000s
0.67
0.49
0.00
0.71 0.75 0.84 0.73 0.77 0.83
0.00
0.89 0.98 1.00 0.90 0.99 1.00
0.63
ADAS1x400% 10000s
0.59
0.39
0.00
0.67 0.71 0.77 0.61 0.68 0.78
0.00
0.85 0.95 1.00 0.82 0.95 1.00
0.19
ADAS1x500% 30000s
0.61
0.42
0.00
0.69 0.73 0.79 0.66 0.71 0.77
0.00
0.90 0.97 1.00 0.86 0.96 1.00
0.44
the worst performance. Also, we see that RA outperforms SA (and Greedy) in
all metrics for all test cases; RA being the only algorithm able to ﬁnd schedu-
lable solutions within the allotted time, once the problem size increases (seen
in the column Sched.). Lastly, we see that RA has a relative drop in ﬁnding
feasible schedules (19% in column Sched.) for ADAS1x400%, and has a relative
increase for ADAS1x200%. We oﬀer two possible, but not mutually exclusive,
explanations: (1) Given that the task sets are produced with varying diﬃculty,
the test case for ADAS1x400% might be an example of a more diﬃcult task
set, and conversely for ADAS1x200% a relatively easier task set. (2) The time
allotted has not been balanced properly, e.g. the test case for ADAS1x400% was
not given enough time to fully converge towards feasible solutions. Conversely,
ADAS1x200% might have been given more time than necessary to reach a high
percentage of valid solutions. Reﬂecting on the results gained by the experiment,
we expect that both RA and SA would be able to ﬁnd an increased percentage
of feasible solutions given more time. However, RA clearly appears superior to
SA, when presented with very large task sets.
==PAGE:70==
56
Experimental Evaluation
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 8
Conclusion and Future work
8.1
Conclusion
In this thesis we have considered safety-critical ADAS applications mapped on
modern multi-processor platforms. The applications are modeled as a set of
communicating software tasks with complex timing requirements, e.g. jitter,
deadlines and end-to-end latency bounds on task chains. We have proposed an
optimization strategy that, given the application and platform models, deter-
mines a mapping of tasks to the cores of the platform and a static schedule of
tasks on each core, such that the timing constraints are satisﬁed. Our opti-
mization strategy (called RA, from Recursive Simulated Annealing) extends a
Simulated Annealing (SA)-based metaheuristic to use recursion in order to ex-
plore the solution space faster. RA uses inside a scheduling heuristic based on
an EDF simulation to solve the preemptive task scheduling problem. The exper-
imental evaluation on several realistic and synthetic test cases has demonstrated
that our proposed RA strategy is able to ﬁnd solutions, that meet the timing
constraints faster than traditional approaches and scales with the growing trend
of ADAS platforms.
==PAGE:72==
58
Conclusion and Future work
8.2
Future work
As future work we want to extend our Recursive Simulated Annealing approach
to include the scheduling on the communication as well as potential virtual-
ization layers, i.e., create schedules that also deﬁne the message (in case of a
TTEthernet or TSN communication backbone) and hypervisor/guest-OS sched-
ule tables. Additionally, we envision adding other optimization objectives like
reducing the number of task preemptions (in order to reduce context switch
overhead) as part of the scheduling problem.
==PAGE:73==
Appendix A
Deliverables
This section describe the thesis deliverables and their usage.
A.1
Source code
1. Concurrency is an assembly library created to facilitate concurrent pro-
cessing.
2. Convergence is an executable, that benchmarks the implemented algo-
rithms and extracts raw data used for plotting convergence graphs de-
picted in chapter 7.
3. Plots is an executable, that benchmarks the implemented algorithms and
extracts the raw data used for plotting cooling schemes and other various
graphs.
This was used early in the development, but have since been
deprecated. Plots depicting cooling schemes in chapter 4 and 6 have been
produced using this tool.
4. RuntimeAnalysis is an executable, that benchmarks the ScheduleSyn-
thesis algorithm, thus producing data for the run time analysis plots.
==PAGE:74==
60
Deliverables
5. zFASScaling is an executable, that benchmarks the implemented algo-
rithms, and extracts the performance data depicted by Table 7.1, 7.2, 7.3
in chapter 7.
6. Custom is an executable made for manual testing of hand written task
sets.
7. Generated is an executable made for manual testing of synthetic task
sets.
8. Test is an executable made for manual testing of various ideas.
9. TTech is an executable made for manual testing of realistic task sets.
10. FindSolution is an executable, that allows the user to search for feasible
schedules given a speciﬁc input. The user can specify the chosen algorithm,
time duration and input ﬁle(s). The program gives as output: the static
schedule S, the ﬁnal solution s, and optionally a graphical representation
of the static schedule (SVG).
11. Generate is an executable, that allows the user to generate synthetic task
sets. The user can specify the input task set, number of tasks, number of
chains, architectural scale and number of task sets to generate.
12. ParameterTuning is an executable, that automatically ﬁnds near-optimal
parameters for the deﬁned algorithms (RA and SA) using a genetic algo-
rithm. This process was described in chapter 6.
13. Planner is the main assembly library, that contains all the logic for sched-
ule synthesis as well as the implemented meta-heuristics. It also includes
a prototype of a genetic algorithm for ﬁnding feasible schedules.
14. PlanningTests is the library containing 95 larger test scenarios for vali-
dating the integrity of the solution. This was widely used throughout the
project as a baseline for testing the validity of new ideas.
15. TasksetGenerator is the assembly library containing all the logic for
generating synthetic task sets.
The primary diﬀerence between Convergence and zFASScaling is that the
Convergence project stores all ﬁtness values obtained during all trials. As such,
the amount of information stored in memory inﬂuences the performance. That
said, Convergence produces a graph, which is more robust in terms of interpre-
tation. Conversely, the zFASScaling project only stores the ﬁnal ﬁtness values
obtained from the individual trials. Thus the information obtained using zFASS-
caling is considered closer to the actual performance.
==PAGE:75==
A.2 Data ﬁles
61
A.2
Data ﬁles
The following list describe the sub-folders of the data.zip ﬁle:
1. Testplan depicts the estimated time to manufacture the experimental
data and plots used in chapter 7.
2. Synthetic tasksets contains 15 synthetically generated task sets, rang-
ing from 100% to 500% in scale, using the realistic ADAS1 as input for
the Generate executable. These task sets were not used as part of the
experiments listed in Chapter 6 and 7, but rather serves to demonstrate
the implementation itself. That said, the samples where created using the
same library as all other synthetic task sets used througout this thesis.
3. Realistic tasksets contains 3 realistic task sets provided by TTTech. All
task sets have been sanitized.
4. Static schedules contains a feasible static schedule for each of the re-
alistic ADAS1, ADAS2 and ADAS3 task sets, obtained using the Find-
Solution executable. Additionally, it contains the application and archi-
tecture models (including the found mappings, oﬀsets, etc.) allowing one
to re-validate the results, using the FindSolution executable. Finally,
it includes the descriptive results of the static schedules (ﬁtness values,
violation counts etc.).
5. Benchmarks contains the raw data ﬁles used for evaluating the perfor-
mance in chapter 7. These were obtained using the zFASScaling exe-
cutable.
6. Plots contains the raw data ﬁles used for evaluating the convergence of
the algorithms in chapter 7. These were obtained using the Convergence
executable.
7. Parameter estimation contains the raw data used for selecting the unbi-
ased (and good) parameters, described in chapter 6. These were obtained
using the ParameterTuning executable.
8. Runtime experiment contains the raw data collected for examining the
run time of the ScheduleSynthesis algorithm, explained in chapter 4. These
were obtained using the RuntimeAnalysis executable.
9. E2E calculation contains the raw data as well as the regression analy-
sis for determining the function for estimating the end-to-end latency of
synthetic task chains. This was brieﬂy mentioned in chapter 5.
==PAGE:76==
62
Deliverables
==PAGE:77==
Appendix B
Static schedules
The following section lists two static schedules produced for the example illus-
trated by ﬁgure 4.3.
==PAGE:78==
64
Static schedules
Figure B.1: Static schedule for example given by Fig. 4.3a
************************* Static Schedule ************************* 
 
******** Result for CPU: 0 ******** 
 
**** Schedule for CORE: 0 **** 
TASK[NAME=T1, WCET=4, PERIOD=10, DEADLINE=10] : [^1,3][5,5.][^10,11][13,14.][^21,23][25,25.][^30,31][33,34.] 
TASK[NAME=T2, WCET=1, PERIOD=4, DEADLINE=4] : [^0,0.][^4,4.][^8,8.][^12,12.][^16,16.][^20,20.][^24,24.][^28,28.][^32,32.][^36,36.]
 
**** Schedule for CORE: 1 **** 
TASK[NAME=T3, WCET=4, PERIOD=20, DEADLINE=20] : [^0,3.][^20,23.] 
Figure B.2: Static schedule for example given by Fig. 4.3b
************************* Static Schedule ************************* 
 
******** Result for CPU: 0 ******** 
 
**** Schedule for CORE: 0 **** 
TASK[NAME=T1, WCET=4, PERIOD=10, DEADLINE=10] : [^3,3][5,7.][^13,15][17,17.][^23,23][25,27.][^33,35][37,37.] 
TASK[NAME=T2, WCET=1, PERIOD=4, DEADLINE=4] : [^0,0.][^4,4.][^8,8.][^12,12.][^16,16.][^20,20.][^24,24.][^28,28.][^32,32.][^36,36.]
 
**** Schedule for CORE: 1 **** 
TASK[NAME=T3, WCET=4, PERIOD=20, DEADLINE=20] : [^9,12.][^29,32.] 
==PAGE:79==
Appendix C
Runtime Analysis
Seen in ﬁgure C.1, the running time measured in milliseconds is depicted as the
function value on the y-axis with respect to the number of tasks and task chains
(x-axis). The graphs have been sampled over 32 diﬀerent synthetic ADAS1 task
sets, each undergoing 128 trials for each increment in scale. The graphs thus
depict the mean of the measured run times. The red graph depict an incremental
growth of 200% in terms of both tasks and chains, while the blue graph only
increases the number of tasks with no task chains. The green graph depict the
diﬀerence between the red and blue graphs, and as such illustrate the growth
in terms of increasing the number of chains. Also, the number of cores increase
proportionally with the scale for all graphs. At a scale of 100%, the task set
contains 151 tasks, and 31 task chains. Consequently, the task set contains 451
tasks and 93 chains, when incrementing the scale to 300% etc. The gray lines
serves to emphasize the convex nature of the graphs.
==PAGE:80==
66
Runtime Analysis
Figure C.1: Experimental run time measurements of ScheduleSynthesis when
given problems of increasing sizes.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Tasks
Tasks+Chains
Chains
Scale (%)
Time (ms)
100
500
900
1300
1700
2100
2500
2900
3300
3700
4100
4500
4900
5300
5700
==PAGE:81==
Appendix D
Additional Plots
The convergence ﬁgures, presented in chapter 7, have been rendered in a higher
resolution for eligibility as D.1, D.2, D.3, D.4, D.5 and D.6. As in chapter 7,
the ﬁgures depict the performance evaluation of both SA and RA with respect
to diﬀerent task sets of both realistic and synthetic origin.
Also, shown in ﬁgure D.7, ﬁgure D.8 and ﬁgure D.9, we see the distribution
of ﬁtness values obtained through benchmarking RA and SA on synthetic test
cases. The ﬁtness values have been colored, to increase the readability, using a
gradient from green to red. Green indicates a valid solution have been found,
whereas red indicate that the produced static schedule was in violation of the
constraints.
Reading the cells depicted horizontally, indicates the individual
trials for the respective task set. The cells have been sorted vertically according
to the scheduability column and horizontally according to the ﬁtness values.
Interestingly, we can see that SA has a horizontal cut between feasible and
unfeasible solutions, indicated by the transition of green cells to red. Conversely,
RA has a relatively vertical cut in comparison. This supports the argument, that
RA tends to have a higher rate of solving a larger variety of task sets, opposed
to SA.
==PAGE:82==
68
Additional Plots
Figure D.1:
Mean ﬁtness values with standard deviation, min and max com-
paring SA and RA (obtained over 200 trials against the realistic
ADAS1 task set).
Figure D.2:
Mean ﬁtness values with standard deviation, min and max com-
paring SA and RA (obtained over 200 trials against the realistic
ADAS2 task set).
==PAGE:83==
69
Figure D.3:
Mean ﬁtness values with standard deviation, min and max com-
paring SA and RA (obtained over 200 trials against the realistic
ADAS3 task set).
Figure D.4:
Mean ﬁtness values with standard deviation, min and max com-
paring SA and RA (obtained over 1024 trials against 32 synthetic
ADAS1 task sets).
==PAGE:84==
70
Additional Plots
Figure D.5:
Mean ﬁtness values with standard deviation, min and max com-
paring SA and RA (obtained over 1024 trials against 32 synthetic
ADAS2 task sets).
Figure D.6:
Mean ﬁtness values with standard deviation, min and max com-
paring SA and RA (obtained over 1024 trials against 32 synthetic
ADAS3 task sets).
==PAGE:85==
71
#1
#2
#3
#4
#5
#6
#7
#8
#9
#10
#11
#12
#13
#14
#15
#16
#17
#18
#19
#20
#21
#22
#23
#24
#25
#26
#27
#28
#29
#30
#31
#32
Sched. Avg
Dataset 23
4673
4762
4846
4847
4907
4919
4946
4962
4962
4979
4988
4990
4998
5013
5023
5033
5123
5130
5171
5172
5195
5216
5243
5257
5306
5323
5388
5519
5602
5669
5731
5792
100% 5146
Dataset 21
4659
4847
4850
4873
4896
4903
4917
4928
4934
4949
4961
5059
5064
5068
5108
5108
5128
5137
5151
5207
5217
5224
5241
5259
5295
5529
5552
5562
5601
5648
5670
5674
100% 5163
Dataset 22
4733
4774
4803
4807
4813
4842
4858
4988
5001
5017
5056
5064
5068
5096
5115
5129
5132
5215
5233
5255
5312
5321
5398
5444
5451
5474
5480
5518
5609
5619
5647
5831
100% 5191
Dataset 19
4876
4889
4968
4993
4994
4995
5006
5087
5129
5129
5150
5184
5209
5228
5229
5279
5309
5328
5357
5382
5387
5418
5453
5462
5499
5589
5728
5894
6031
6314
6516 10022
97%
5501
Dataset 24
4766
4789
4831
4846
4872
4916
4945
4966
4998
5012
5056
5060
5068
5068
5074
5075
5076
5140
5174
5207
5264
5299
5390
5399
5411
5426
5453
5496
5509
5516 10002 10066
94%
5443
Dataset 17
4819
4935
4966
5072
5081
5082
5105
5130
5167
5174
5203
5203
5227
5232
5308
5311
5371
5433
5519
5536
5617
5652
6094
6131
6214
6225
6307
6394
6661
7696 10001 10002
94%
5840
Dataset 18
4796
4803
4821
5001
5003
5102
5116
5144
5152
5185
5201
5302
5380
5399
5447
5535
5558
5582
5789
5902
5942
6000
6053
6133
6250
6302
6376
6386
6708
6941 10002 10049
94%
5886
Dataset 16
4531
4596
4746
4836
4907
4968
5023
5099
5167
5193
5252
5282
5299
5315
5394
5474
5476
5488
5581
5581
6341
6438
6440
6517
6520
6557
6586
6815
6825
6920 10001 10002
94%
5912
Dataset 13
4664
4749
4760
4813
4826
4902
4939
4965
4974
5012
5028
5090
5107
5176
5207
5262
5265
5292
5329
5441
5531
5552
5652
6163
6538
6641
6716
6742
6767 10001 10034 10251
91%
5856
Dataset 30
4441
4541
4615
4643
4645
4678
4685
4757
4991
5052
5063
5068
5086
5187
5301
5398
5446
5629
5674
5678
5778
5813
5853
5912
5993
6020
6098
7777 10002 10006 10227 10295
88%
5948
Dataset 15
4543
4620
4742
4865
4923
4924
4996
5239
5290
5362
5423
5461
5494
5504
5550
5741
5953
6076
6359
6415
6452
6567
6570
6576
6660
6708
6775
6869 10002 10003 10004 10140
88%
6275
Dataset 20
4838
4841
4866
4984
4985
4997
5010
5010
5105
5114
5209
5222
5227
5281
5423
5449
5544
5753
5773
5972
6079
6081
6082
6185
6208
6294
6514 10001 10002 10008 10017 10040
84%
6191
Dataset 14
4724
4850
4948
4977
5053
5080
5093
5102
5115
5137
5196
5204
5230
5294
5323
5362
5405
5449
5600
5846
5968
6405
6443
6628
6707
6900
6955 10001 10003 10008 10022 10032
84%
6252
Dataset 1
5563
5623
5763
5797
5843
5873
5920
5933
5936
5970
5973
5982
5983
5983
5989
6001
6011
6020
6166
6190
6196
6244
6292
6841
6855 10004 10022 10039 10042 10044 10056 10140
78%
6915
Dataset 27
4540
4581
4596
4622
4625
4669
4682
4745
4808
4827
4834
4849
4913
4942
4998
5007
5009
5009
5034
5047
5124
5210
6603
7554 10026 10034 10064 10065 10099 10114 10114 10145
75%
6296
Dataset 7
5055
5207
5230
5292
5348
5377
5388
5425
5500
5518
5532
5537
5550
5572
5576
5585
5602
5653
5656
5680
5889
6373
6440
6714 10006 10006 10015 10047 10050 10054 10081 10085
75%
6720
Dataset 11
4906
4951
4963
5045
5102
5241
5605
5611
5643
5655
5786
5796
5850
5891
5929
6286
6316
6369
6382
6489
6537
6571
6579
7078 10002 10024 10073 10074 10075 10077 10110 10125
75%
6911
Dataset 8
5167
5252
5281
5325
5411
5496
5512
5535
5555
5588
5654
5685
5699
5704
5732
5788
5863
6033
6275
6361
6362
6727 10000 10002 10023 10032 10050 10091 10132 10151 10157 10205
69%
7089
Dataset 10
4844
5035
5066
5137
5299
5496
5600
5741
5791
5801
5854
5881
5913
5964
5986
6086
6478
6598
6650
6824
6878
7034 10036 10038 10071 10073 10076 10079 10083 10090 10133 10138
69%
7212
Dataset 4
5651
5670
5688
5702
5794
5829
5829
5856
5897
5898
5899
5946
5976
6022
6034
6082
6131
6135
6171
6258
6263
6309 10023 10024 10029 10049 10053 10076 10081 10149 10195 10444
69%
7255
Dataset 6
5120
5206
5212
5282
5313
5396
5414
5415
5451
5477
5479
5492
5574
5591
5912
6252
6290
6339
6528
7011
7352 10002 10007 10009 10018 10019 10039 10053 10057 10135 10192 10281
66%
7248
Dataset 29
4574
4734
4744
4774
4779
4816
4921
5264
5411
5490
5496
5683
5723
5736
5848
6076
6112
6134
6135
6400 10001 10002 10129 10136 10143 10196 10206 10211 10222 10266 10291 10413
63%
7221
Dataset 9
4756
4972
5733
5744
5785
5879
6207
6307
6317
6336
6365
6368
6459
6485
6514
6525
6530
6608
6642
6730 10000 10001 10031 10070 10074 10075 10076 10077 10079 10080 10083 10249
63%
7630
Dataset 31
4477
4667
4677
4681
4848
4984
5598
5619
5619
5700
5718
5780
5857
6002
6076
6124
6199
6266
6762 10001 10002 10023 10130 10136 10171 10179 10204 10225 10228 10240 10311 10315
59%
7432
Dataset 5
5039
5149
5227
5261
5269
5321
5324
5404
5419
5454
5455
5509
5546
5795
5797
6107
6205
6630 10003 10015 10037 10041 10041 10047 10075 10094 10115 10122 10123 10150 10151 10224
56%
7536
Dataset 3
5497
5611
5699
5771
5798
5819
5875
5933
5993
6056
6068
6080
6098
6155
6197
6324
6462
6519 10012 10014 10016 10028 10029 10030 10036 10041 10049 10058 10082 10088 10094 10095
56%
7770
Dataset 26
4479
4598
4631
4645
4660
4692
4721
4789
4814
4876
4958
5025
5025
5047
5070
5119
5345 10002 10007 10013 10050 10054 10058 10078 10102 10111 10143 10150 10167 10188 10227 10232
53%
7315
Dataset 12
4722
4727
4955
4957
4983
5074
5089
5183
5524
5842
5908
5913
6031
6235
6321
6367
6808 10006 10024 10057 10073 10076 10078 10078 10079 10089 10108 10126 10147 10148 10218 10375
53%
7698
Dataset 32
4833
4900
5213
5304
5464
5483
5502
5563
5643
5714
5858
5990
6033
6147
6230
6232 10001 10009 10051 10059 10061 10109 10149 10159 10221 10222 10309 10319 10329 10403 10465 10518
50%
7922
Dataset 2
5352
5528
5618
5634
5712
5739
5760
5821
5843
5887
5999
6064
6077
6155
6192
6228 10009 10014 10017 10020 10031 10032 10036 10046 10046 10049 10051 10056 10070 10108 10186 10240
50%
7957
Dataset 28
4652
4769
4808
4817
4955
4964
4972
5033
5062
5110
5347
6841
7645 10006 10013 10013 10048 10058 10064 10069 10089 10090 10100 10106 10109 10113 10134 10141 10283 10465 10491 10845
41%
8194
Dataset 25
4455
4563
4667
4689
4793
4864
4877
4887
4953
4956
4989
5230 10030 10060 10064 10067 10070 10074 10074 10076 10081 10091 10110 10117 10135 10136 10137 10158 10174 10174 10287 10629
38%
8146
(a) Fitness values using RA
#1
#2
#3
#4
#5
#6
#7
#8
#9
#10
#11
#12
#13
#14
#15
#16
#17
#18
#19
#20
#21
#22
#23
#24
#25
#26
#27
#28
#29
#30
#31
#32
Sched. Avg
Dataset 14
4579
4585
4644
4645
4651
4657
4662
4668
4677
4683
4687
4701
4709
4738
4740
4746
4767
4783
4790
4800
4801
4849
4857
4857
4896
4925
4971
4974
5023
5047
5380
6477
100% 4843
Dataset 23
4513
4699
4740
4754
4795
4799
4803
4806
4829
4848
4895
4915
4916
4927
4928
4936
4941
4941
4956
4962
4962
4984
4985
5005
5007
5010
5088
5096
5162
5183
5270
5466
100% 4941
Dataset 24
4887
4909
4920
4969
4970
4979
4991
5028
5031
5032
5055
5055
5065
5066
5079
5086
5089
5090
5109
5111
5117
5128
5132
5194
5204
5223
5227
5256
5257
5344
5347
5798
100% 5117
Dataset 22
4804
4879
4935
4939
4953
4956
4965
4965
5002
5008
5064
5105
5126
5162
5171
5172
5176
5179
5181
5192
5201
5204
5206
5256
5302
5313
5321
5404
5412
5442
5580
5771
100% 5167
Dataset 20
4948
4971
5038
5098
5135
5153
5158
5164
5218
5240
5253
5262
5276
5279
5306
5348
5350
5369
5396
5403
5414
5428
5437
5472
5508
5520
5532
5578
5598
5599
5610
5774
100% 5339
Dataset 21
5034
5263
5267
5275
5300
5331
5337
5355
5369
5389
5420
5427
5430
5437
5453
5492
5525
5535
5553
5566
5571
5588
5632
5657
5661
5711
5714
5723
5742
5775
5826
5952
100% 5510
Dataset 16
4697
4708
4761
4792
4819
4835
4835
4848
4856
4898
4912
4935
4942
4961
4969
4988
4988
5036
5048
5065
5096
5097
5117
5133
5155
5208
5216
5236
5256
5256
5273 10004
97%
5154
Dataset 3
5590
5613
5633
5651
5697
5733
5746
5793
5795
5857
5881
5892
5900
5919
5922
5924
5947
5975
5997
6015
6017
6031
6038
6039
6073
6101
6176
6192
6236
6316
6878 10021
97%
6081
Dataset 30
4472
4504
4520
4527
4603
4609
4666
4678
4702
4702
4710
4718
4728
4732
4742
4752
4773
4785
4791
4794
4796
4809
4820
4821
4846
4910
5039
5082
5139
5515 10009 10456
94%
5117
Dataset 25
4702
4702
4801
4832
4849
4879
4890
4934
4936
4956
4967
4978
5005
5014
5019
5083
5094
5115
5125
5128
5132
5133
5145
5149
5181
5236
5250
5263
5379
5581 10100 10209
94%
5368
Dataset 17
4798
4846
4861
4876
4878
4927
4946
4951
4977
4981
4987
5004
5015
5059
5065
5072
5082
5097
5118
5118
5193
5200
5250
5256
5259
5269
5375
5411
5447
6366 10025 10460
94%
5443
Dataset 15
4905
4987
5020
5036
5047
5116
5151
5155
5163
5202
5203
5219
5226
5252
5254
5284
5285
5287
5326
5332
5364
5375
5413
5418
5455
5460
5505
5511
5520
5705 10000 10018
94%
5569
Dataset 6
5056
5215
5220
5323
5349
5359
5363
5368
5386
5404
5406
5436
5441
5444
5477
5486
5519
5531
5551
5576
5593
5610
5626
5670
5713
5754
5764
5860
6438
6835 10131 10353
94%
5852
Dataset 13
4750
6477
6477
6493
6523
6535
6584
6586
6622
6627
6631
6700
6719
6746
6824
6826
6837
6842
6889
6897
6905
6922
6951
6973
7004
7034
7085
7144
7315
7421 10208 10227
94%
6962
Dataset 31
4946
5117
5184
5252
5316
5394
5398
5425
5435
5455
5473
5474
5525
5543
5558
5591
5599
5618
5623
5626
5650
5686
5730
5790
5798
6007
6133
6171
6670 10058 10323 10325
91%
6028
Dataset 5
5271
5428
5461
5478
5491
5509
5514
5534
5538
5559
5568
5571
5580
5584
5614
5619
5636
5650
5662
5710
5720
5723
5755
5782
5788
5864
5910
6266
7224 10006 10130 10130
91%
6102
Dataset 10
5891
5992
6163
6338
6437
6462
6479
6529
6550
6567
6627
6635
6642
6672
6718
6732
6756
6759
6776
6844
6889
6908
6960
6974
7055
7121
7240
7252
7383 10006 10091 10099
91%
7017
Dataset 27
4143
4166
4416
4441
4447
4472
4495
4522
4534
4554
4555
4574
4605
4623
4628
4637
4638
4690
4701
4718
4733
4735
4753
4767
4773
4897
4967
5186 10121 10160 10181 10295
88%
5316
Dataset 18
4765
4811
4893
4916
4917
4932
5027
5036
5061
5082
5096
5097
5102
5109
5119
5145
5211
5215
5222
5224
5259
5276
5329
5449
5492
6392
6857 10001 10001 10001 10026 10041
84%
5972
Dataset 9
5503
5561
5595
5625
5691
5698
5711
5785
5813
5815
5832
5856
5871
5882
5926
5952
5961
6040
6165
6241
6336
6379
6572
6658
6672
6880
7059 10001 10006 10022 10032 10046
84%
6662
Dataset 32
5415
5795
5856
5874
5982
6120
6218
6278
6285
6311
6374
6376
6442
6455
6477
6503
6518
6533
6635
6671
6675
6697
6702
7462
7547
8184 10005 10031 10032 10033 10254 10271
81%
7157
Dataset 19
4801
5146
6005
6100
6104
6129
6173
6200
6261
6320
6354
6438
6521
6673
6683
6702
6723
6748
6768
6811
6945
7048
7132
7147
7715
7815 10010 10014 10023 10025 10043 10101
81%
7177
Dataset 1
5618
5639
5648
5669
5674
5780
5957
5960
5987
5993
6050
6104
6209
6218
6224
6351
6522
6527
6706 10001 10004 10023 10070 10121 10145 10146 10151 10153 10154 10158 10161 10181
59%
7697
Dataset 4
5995
6223
6226
6331
6433
6553
6581
6762
6771
6857
7300 10000 10000 10009 10016 10021 10024 10024 10025 10050 10108 10135 10136 10180 10192 10232 10337 10349 10360 10432 10449 10450
34%
8924
Dataset 7
5496
5939
6338
6419
6493
6600
6706
6758
7182 10008 10011 10021 10024 10031 10043 10049 10051 10088 10089 10089 10109 10122 10140 10151 10168 10183 10187 10194 10221 10472 10486 10853
28%
9116
Dataset 26
4505
4698
4755
4906
5110
6926 10021 10041 10065 10074 10079 10082 10094 10098 10116 10121 10124 10128 10142 10144 10151 10163 10183 10186 10188 10214 10230 10279 10289 10456 10494 10762
19%
9245
Dataset 2
5573
5741
5806
6178 10008 10014 10015 10018 10018 10019 10019 10020 10020 10020 10022 10022 10023 10023 10024 10026 10031 10032 10037 10041 10043 10045 10046 10059 10063 10067 10070 10110
13%
9508
Dataset 12
5263
5478
5573
7136 10000 10007 10008 10015 10030 10036 10040 10048 10055 10063 10074 10083 10085 10086 10087 10095 10102 10115 10120 10148 10230 10242 10309 10368 10375 10378 10380 10390
13%
9607
Dataset 11
6915 10070 10072 10073 10075 10077 10077 10077 10078 10079 10080 10084 10085 10086 10088 10089 10090 10093 10097 10100 10101 10101 10103 10105 10106 10108 10121 10123 10123 10135 10152 10248
3%
10000
Dataset 29
4608 10125 10158 10170 10179 10196 10203 10210 10212 10217 10237 10275 10281 10292 10304 10315 10329 10329 10359 10372 10384 10392 10413 10448 10474 10526 10535 10543 10543 10605 10822 11250
3%
10197
Dataset 28 10040 10048 10048 10051 10057 10060 10062 10067 10070 10073 10074 10076 10082 10086 10087 10087 10096 10097 10097 10097 10097 10099 10099 10102 10102 10112 10114 10122 10132 10138 10166 10362
0%
10097
Dataset 8
10119 10152 10160 10164 10192 10199 10201 10224 10229 10229 10236 10237 10241 10270 10289 10309 10319 10351 10397 10435 10500 10638 10670 10841 10843 10868 10998 10999 11188 11217 11265 11383
0%
10511
(b) Fitness values using SA
Figure D.7: Fitness values obtained over 1024 trials against 32 synthetic
ADAS1 task sets.
==PAGE:86==
72
Additional Plots
#1
#2
#3
#4
#5
#6
#7
#8
#9
#10
#11
#12
#13
#14
#15
#16
#17
#18
#19
#20
#21
#22
#23
#24
#25
#26
#27
#28
#29
#30
#31
#32
Sched. Avg
Dataset 8
5032
5090
5101
5130
5197
5270
5270
5274
5319
5325
5417
5430
5621
5644
5653
5773
5850
5877
5947
5993
6010
6014
6019
6141
6190
6205
6287
6545
6780 10062 10457 10739
91%
6146
Dataset 6
5032
5074
5184
5273
5281
5291
5310
5405
5410
5439
5721
5859
5872
5886
5931
5946
6108
6132
6156
6165
6231
6240
6268
6295
6359
6396
6556
6688
7411 10067 10551 10631
91%
6318
Dataset 23 5557
5636
5644
5645
5691
5731
5736
5781
5789
5826
5833
5843
5874
5913
5934
5944
5977
5988
5994
6036
6048
6061
6061
6088
6098
6110
6141
6193
6208 10456 10575 10907
91%
6354
Dataset 5
5195
5208
5213
5233
5240
5253
5271
5271
5285
5292
5436
5457
5542
5570
5819
5830
5841
5952
6040
6092
6128
6226
6330
6374
6398
6398
6559
6614 10000 10032 10722 11357
88%
6349
Dataset 22 5559
5681
5742
5803
5816
5826
5861
5893
5908
5914
5941
5947
5958
5965
5978
5984
5995
6064
6065
6109
6110
6126
6140
6194
6195
6236
6257 10300 10548 10582 10619 11458
84%
6712
Dataset 10 4647
4778
4914
4971
5006
5053
5176
5185
5255
5432
5540
5657
5721
5739
5953
6097
6241
6323
6356
6540
6563
6576
6656
6854
7118 10001 10001 10002 10002 10003 10005 10006
78%
6699
Dataset 7
5072
5155
5176
5179
5225
5247
5354
5374
5398
5476
5507
5516
5858
5861
5991
6012
6029
6066
6180
6189
6375
6425
6441
6784
7688 10014 10026 10062 10305 10362 10889 11289
78%
6829
Dataset 25 5390
5488
5568
5583
5596
5672
5738
5744
5798
5851
5881
5908
5963
6053
6114
6149
6200
6244
6255
6354
6371
6417
6428
6496
6507 10000 10003 10013 10014 10026 10035 10083
78%
6873
Dataset 13 5438
5452
5478
5582
5611
5617
5628
5646
5747
5783
5860
5860
5935
6030
6030
6126
6130
6163
6226
6282
6331
6408
6532
6611
6932 10015 10179 10182 10182 10198 10411 10411
78%
6907
Dataset 3
4659
4784
4825
4861
4926
4951
5020
5042
5125
5216
5423
5426
5429
5431
5491
5526
5824
5966
6086
6124
6261
6303
6431
6506 10030 10154 10200 10210 10267 10475 10490 10494
75%
6686
Dataset 4
4673
4695
4877
4911
4923
4937
5133
5321
5414
5439
5447
5458
5479
5538
5806
6057
6082
6108
6149
6303
6444
6466
6551
6797 10032 10057 10259 10302 10378 10475 10516 10548
75%
6799
Dataset 15 5153
5277
5325
5365
5374
5401
5415
5436
5510
5570
5587
5610
5682
5760
5907
5938
5962
5971
5979
6171
6183
6258
6272
6922 10093 10114 10125 10167 10181 10182 10322 10345
75%
6861
Dataset 9
4880
4910
4925
4934
5078
5083
5108
5199
5328
5449
5535
5648
5748
5756
5917
5929
6381
6469
6490
6556
6763
6947
6995
7199 10000 10001 10001 10002 10036 10061 10100 10204
75%
6864
Dataset 16 5300
5461
5466
5497
5544
5587
5588
5603
5633
5639
5663
5666
5725
5765
5888
5926
5931
5949
5998
6070
6129
6367
6483 10001 10104 10109 10181 10191 10191 10259 10316 10445
72%
7021
Dataset 27 5589
5622
5645
5671
5672
5727
5781
5823
5824
5934
5987
6080
6100
6112
6166
6183
6253
6294
6304
6305
6315
6427
7213 10001 10001 10002 10002 10009 10015 10023 10031 10078
72%
7162
Dataset 24 5600
5638
5645
5646
5686
5738
5740
5821
5832
5860
5867
5917
5947
5956
5976
5979
6008
6011
6085
6099
6158
6221
6226 10014 10364 10387 10491 10524 10624 10637 10670 10935
72%
7197
Dataset 2
4643
4678
4765
4922
4942
4951
5166
5183
5245
5347
5358
5416
5432
5470
5501
5714
5954
6118
6165
6218
6399
6417 10013 10200 10205 10212 10216 10238 10246 10279 10435 10475
69%
6954
Dataset 1
4790
4892
4933
4952
4968
4984
5007
5037
5074
5300
5344
5413
5449
5611
5640
5737
6077
6125
6134
6156
6409
6580 10216 10220 10258 10258 10332 10411 10479 10487 10599 10605
69%
7015
Dataset 18 4842
4956
4975
5032
5151
5152
5372
5412
5469
5515
5525
5545
5656
5659
5783
5934
6018
6268
6462
6469
6965
7145 10000 10000 10002 10038 10149 10165 10240 10369 10371 10953
69%
7112
Dataset 17 4729
4836
5037
5084
5154
5298
5311
5364
5379
5498
5632
5759
5802
5884
6224
6324
6426
6512
6802
6823
6858
6960 10000 10002 10003 10004 10071 10071 10095 10097 10222 10578
69%
7151
Dataset 30 5428
5633
5719
5722
5742
5780
5836
5915
5960
5965
5977
6031
6054
6085
6113
6183
6207
6312
6347
6376
6416
8032 10001 10010 10036 10050 10055 10117 10119 10131 10132 10236
69%
7335
Dataset 29 5555
5750
5758
5806
5868
5871
5876
5929
6106
6208
6223
6226
6270
6338
6339
6349
6367
6414
6415
6463
6464
6587 10000 10008 10008 10014 10039 10050 10077 10117 10128 10180
69%
7369
Dataset 14 5318
5501
5518
5589
5600
5629
5704
5983
6079
6130
6141
6207
6219
6221
6332
6334
6336
6379
6409
6557
6693
6703 10138 10154 10177 10183 10192 10193 10203 10269 10315 10430
69%
7370
Dataset 11 4791
4928
5065
5079
5116
5201
5238
5278
5394
5436
5458
5532
5534
5664
5720
5802
6211
6222
6329
6411
6800 10000 10001 10004 10005 10011 10030 10032 10065 10178 10210 10217
66%
7124
Dataset 12 4738
4765
4855
4877
5174
5219
5253
5388
5414
5613
5636
5658
5671
5824
6141
6174
6566
6701
6746
6802
8123 10001 10021 10060 10076 10098 10113 10203 10204 10217 10274 10299
66%
7278
Dataset 28 5474
5485
5540
5563
5571
5726
5780
5804
5898
5971
6031
6043
6046
6100
6139
6188
6303
6317
6526
6701
6846 10001 10003 10003 10004 10005 10006 10009 10026 10082 10084 10540
66%
7400
Dataset 32 5508
5610
5716
5747
5825
5856
5858
5899
5939
5964
6020
6031
6131
6158
6183
6236
6251
6331
6557
6582
7033 10000 10001 10053 10076 10087 10107 10109 10133 10196 10260 10377
66%
7464
Dataset 31 5644
5818
5857
5912
5924
5929
5936
5940
5952
6219
6236
6263
6288
6290
6369
6431
6470
6800
6817
6939 10001 10004 10010 10013 10050 10051 10058 10062 10089 10109 10118 10209
63%
7650
Dataset 19 4664
4911
4917
4924
4930
4938
4940
4994
5049
5287
5319
5595
5672
5760
5784
5917
6502
6813 10000 10001 10001 10002 10002 10003 10005 10025 10037 10047 10074 10211 10229 10716
56%
7446
Dataset 26 5558
5616
5670
5726
5728
5832
5864
5937
5947
5971
5989
6055
6083
6137
6168
6192
6406
6594 10000 10001 10001 10001 10004 10005 10014 10017 10017 10020 10053 10060 10091 10101
56%
7746
Dataset 20 4799
4860
4883
4886
4939
4943
4944
4955
4998
5040
5171
5230
5305
5493
5612
6896 10000 10001 10001 10018 10018 10036 10048 10055 10099 10101 10116 10117 10131 10177 10850 10948
50%
7677
Dataset 21 5558
5594
5628
5697
5716
5803
5806
5859
5874
5948
5991
6058
6149
6209
6285
6414 10360 10393 10415 10444 10465 10484 10495 10509 10540 10543 10563 10564 10642 10698 10724 11903
50%
8260
(a) Fitness values using RA
#1
#2
#3
#4
#5
#6
#7
#8
#9
#10
#11
#12
#13
#14
#15
#16
#17
#18
#19
#20
#21
#22
#23
#24
#25
#26
#27
#28
#29
#30
#31
#32
Sched. Avg
Dataset 2
4819
4825
4909
4913
4916
4930
4943
4950
4956
4971
5001
5008
5010
5033
5056
5076
5085
5086
5097
5220
5260
5276
5314
5444
5658
5711
5775
5907
5937
5974
6670 10540
97%
5415
Dataset 3
4850
5058
5269
5298
5374
5428
5438
5448
5476
5490
5541
5605
5648
5661
5684
5739
5768
5789
5793
5795
5800
5831
5833
5843
5848
5856
5889
5936
5941
6100
6143 10387
97%
5799
Dataset 22 5580
5677
5779
5868
5895
5964
6073
6098
6116
6136
6138
6160
6164
6169
6202
6202
6231
6240
6242
6277
6282
6292
6304
6362
6376
6391
6419
6439
6594
6614
7717 10035
97%
6345
Dataset 21 5770
5889
5939
5945
5992
6009
6060
6076
6105
6116
6129
6151
6158
6237
6294
6296
6309
6316
6328
6344
6420
6427
6453
6462
6479
6481
6610
6667
6943
7259
7289 10000
97%
6436
Dataset 17 5098
5117
5191
5292
5298
5307
5326
5327
5335
5341
5349
5372
5376
5390
5391
5402
5448
5451
5475
5524
5535
5559
5580
5585
5602
5666
5792
5835
5957
7024 10002 10396
94%
5792
Dataset 24 5775
5840
5840
5854
5859
5899
5917
5973
5981
5988
5992
6000
6005
6071
6076
6087
6092
6101
6155
6211
6216
6217
6220
6231
6233
6235
6302
6425
6464
7390 11495 12055
94%
6475
Dataset 27 5861
5891
5921
5989
6003
6009
6034
6043
6073
6107
6132
6159
6204
6212
6242
6268
6283
6335
6378
6390
6401
6448
6458
6471
6479
6504
6573
6581
6952
7179 10036 10061
94%
6521
Dataset 8
5365
5387
5405
5450
5503
5516
5562
5599
5638
5660
5663
5677
5761
5768
5779
5816
5827
5841
5871
5894
5895
5906
5945
6069
6078
6247
6367
7175 10000 10001 10013 10056
88%
6335
Dataset 12 4996
5032
5078
5099
5167
5206
5228
5261
5315
5384
5546
5599
5656
5678
5702
5703
5745
5806
5839
6088
6116
6143
6283 10002 10024 10055 10059 10154 10298 10335 10466 10584
72%
6864
Dataset 16 5659
6029
6248
6298
6329
6383
6410
6478
6481
6499
6510
6539
6590
6644
6696
6716
6760
7067
7171
7320 10000 10005 10005 10007 10009 10014 10017 10019 10027 10033 10069 10176
63%
7850
Dataset 13 6106
6134
6137
6290
6337
6447
6501
6510
6562
6582
6659
6679
6739
6963
6995
7047
7234
7276
7350 10000 10000 10003 10022 10022 10041 10050 10064 10065 10081 10105 10119 10125
59%
8039
Dataset 29 5578
5578
5668
5804
5831
5856
5905
5912
5946
5988
5995
6100
6163
6215
6224
6310
6544
6580 10000 10017 10030 10067 10115 10118 10120 10131 10143 10198 10198 10199 10206 10216
56%
7811
Dataset 30 5500
5644
5646
5694
5788
5896
6091
6095
6164
6205
6330
6344
6445
6642
7461
7523
7832 10001 10002 10003 10004 10006 10010 10021 10022 10028 10060 10075 10110 10112 10121 10159
53%
8064
Dataset 14 6287
6321
6650
6655
6711
6914
6973
6990
7050
7318
7563
8064 10000 10000 10000 10000 10000 10000 10000 10000 10000 10000 10000 10001 10002 10002 10009 10014 10023 10046 10059 10094
38%
8867
Dataset 32 6157
6245
6352
6353
6361
6490
6664
6669
6719
7792 10000 10001 10006 10007 10015 10050 10050 10050 10050 10050 10051 10052 10052 10052 10052 10055 10063 10070 10107 10193 10415 10481
31%
8991
Dataset 28 5742
6237
6433
6951
7245
7441
7916 10000 10001 10001 10003 10007 10019 10023 10024 10024 10032 10034 10034 10037 10038 10038 10042 10068 10069 10118 10151 10152 10160 10164 10183 10187
22%
9362
Dataset 6
6460
6738
6847
7101
7238
7244
7702 10000 10001 10006 10016 10025 10040 10061 10076 10077 10077 10077 10077 10077 10077 10077 10077 10077 10077 10078 10078 10079 10081 10084 10132 10320
22%
9412
Dataset 5
5809
5934
6024
6155
6209
6529 10015 10029 10049 10055 10056 10085 10092 10100 10116 10171 10185 10196 10318 10334 10335 10361 10404 10598 10731 10803 10831 10937 10997 11086 11151 11411
19%
9628
Dataset 18 5313
5508
5550
7325 10000 10000 10000 10000 10001 10001 10001 10002 10006 10007 10016 10020 10021 10029 10098 10108 10120 10162 10230 10261 10286 10301 10309 10326 10329 10340 10344 10542
13%
9611
Dataset 31 5374
6369
6652
7686 10003 10006 10006 10023 10028 10037 10051 10053 10054 10058 10061 10068 10075 10103 10103 10106 10113 10117 10126 10130 10152 10164 10165 10166 10167 10202 10318 10332
13%
9658
Dataset 25 6171
6639
7141 10000 10001 10003 10003 10006 10011 10015 10019 10021 10024 10035 10036 10042 10044 10048 10049 10052 10082 10082 10083 10086 10089 10108 10108 10119 10139 10176 10218 10635
9%
9759
Dataset 10 5999
6252
6396 10003 10004 10023 10024 10038 10062 10075 10076 10079 10094 10098 10102 10104 10105 10108 10109 10113 10118 10120 10128 10139 10167 10200 10200 10200 10200 10202 10419 10554
9%
9766
Dataset 20 5897
6082 10000 10000 10003 10003 10004 10004 10008 10008 10008 10009 10009 10011 10014 10015 10015 10016 10016 10017 10018 10023 10023 10024 10026 10029 10032 10032 10036 10036 10095 11156
6%
9802
Dataset 23 6011
6121 10765 10776 10785 10831 10974 11105 11125 11180 11187 11258 11278 11289 11438 11480 11490 11516 11558 11658 11722 11749 11816 11825 11833 11840 11852 11862 11872 11933 11958 12144
6%
11132
Dataset 11 7307 10000 10000 10000 10002 10002 10005 10006 10010 10011 10015 10017 10017 10018 10023 10057 10102 10148 10150 10151 10153 10154 10159 10167 10168 10184 10215 10228 10323 10365 10401 10434
3%
10031
Dataset 7
5403 10000 10005 10007 10036 10038 10039 10043 10043 10046 10050 10054 10059 10063 10068 10070 10129 10133 10143 10170 10208 10209 10209 10214 10214 10304 10344 10437 10485 10519 10876 11196
3%
10057
Dataset 4
5478 10021 10026 10041 10042 10076 10145 10152 10161 10165 10180 10185 10194 10197 10229 10230 10235 10235 10243 10247 10251 10261 10272 10284 10316 10358 10363 10383 10463 10575 10593 10615
3%
10101
Dataset 1
5234 10087 10130 10135 10151 10152 10162 10174 10189 10195 10207 10209 10214 10215 10227 10229 10230 10236 10263 10330 10398 10410 10410 10437 10439 10442 10475 10476 10477 10482 10516 10562
3%
10140
Dataset 26 6302 10036 10080 10081 10085 10102 10106 10127 10138 10148 10158 10207 10232 10233 10257 10259 10273 10273 10274 10284 10292 10293 10298 10317 10317 10318 10351 10359 10511 10535 10579 11143
3%
10155
Dataset 15 10001 10128 10144 10144 10147 10149 10158 10160 10175 10176 10176 10176 10177 10177 10179 10181 10186 10187 10191 10192 10200 10201 10201 10204 10205 10211 10231 10249 10307 10307 10315 10430
0%
10196
Dataset 9
10010 10017 10058 10062 10072 10090 10090 10113 10134 10140 10148 10161 10164 10200 10214 10227 10289 10305 10322 10325 10355 10362 10386 10400 10409 10452 10637 10695 10701 10730 10749 11168
0%
10318
Dataset 19 10014 10027 10062 10081 10094 10100 10112 10123 10152 10198 10198 10232 10281 10336 10351 10355 10360 10396 10512 10512 10525 10587 10607 10699 10766 10792 10818 10936 10966 10977 10992 11271
0%
10451
(b) Fitness values using SA
Figure D.8: Fitness values obtained over 1024 trials against 32 synthetic
ADAS2 task sets.
==PAGE:87==
73
#1
#2
#3
#4
#5
#6
#7
#8
#9
#10
#11
#12
#13
#14
#15
#16
#17
#18
#19
#20
#21
#22
#23
#24
#25
#26
#27
#28
#29
#30
#31
#32
Sched. Avg
Dataset 21 5073
5256
5259
5281
5287
5345
5353
5391
5402
5417
5494
5495
5505
5516
5565
5582
5606
5627
6459
6651 10002 10011 10061 10108 10155 10162 10310 10313 10532 10541 10642 10759
63%
7317
Dataset 31 5496
5499
5501
5545
5547
5618
5719
5725
5753
5773
5826
5860
5906
5917
5972
6041
6162 10000 10001 10081 10122 10123 10124 10143 10143 10144 10240 10242 10287 10310 10360 10713
53%
7840
Dataset 24 5303
5313
5376
5402
5411
5455
5511
5540
5543
5618
5675
5813
5852
5872
6091
6339
6451 10000 10049 10131 10139 10161 10168 10211 10398 10467 10653 10710 10735 10856 10877 10878
53%
7906
Dataset 14 5201
5253
5255
5329
5349
5374
5379
5390
5392
5405
5409
5463
5814
5848
5915
6094
7471 10001 10001 10006 10410 10425 10573 10589 10628 10681 10693 10720 10726 11423 11425 11475
53%
7972
Dataset 23 5201
5283
5381
5412
5428
5470
5518
5592
5657
5685
5728
5736
5848
5983
6141
6250 10001 10042 10103 10141 10163 10170 10193 10312 10338 10362 10374 10477 10566 10729 10854 10901
50%
8001
Dataset 11 4849
4862
5134
5152
5231
5240
5242
5305
5330
5333
5574
5639
6282
6575
6641 10019 10022 10080 10259 10260 10261 10263 10265 10373 10400 10423 10472 10507 10578 11495 11523 11604
47%
8162
Dataset 29 5420
5505
5587
5656
5706
5730
5738
5820
5937
6110
6439
6844
7550 10001 10002 10005 10027 10093 10100 10106 10130 10142 10162 10164 10213 10215 10217 10222 10239 10327 10328 10331
41%
8471
Dataset 30 5078
5366
5524
5595
5732
5753
5815
5937
5978
6026
6139
6498 10000 10001 10003 10027 10079 10121 10123 10134 10153 10194 10194 10211 10259 10288 10329 10329 10330 10334 10845 10857
38%
8570
Dataset 15 5089
5211
5301
5324
5350
5361
5375
5543
5594
5624
5812
7343 10009 10010 10010 10013 10025 10098 10126 10316 10319 10414 10480 10502 10514 10544 10761 11059 11064 11129 11318 12191
38%
8682
Dataset 25 6146
6211
6234
6262
6530
6686
6693
6762
6788
6811
6838
7134 10001 10003 10004 10019 10024 10048 10049 10057 10071 10077 10078 10084 10109 10145 10171 10175 10188 10189 10317 10337
38%
8789
Dataset 10 4868
4990
5041
5203
5301
5451
5567
5932
6215
6281
6502
6966 10017 10019 10044 10048 10054 10065 10081 10260 10261 10263 10270 10416 10423 11505 11509 11511 11548 11610 11615 11636
38%
8796
Dataset 20 5830
5912
5941
6026
6057
6070
6124
6158
6279
6375
6711
6942 10000 10001 10003 10005 10011 10011 10012 10014 10023 10040 10049 10053 10157 10186 10276 10323 10444 11342 11430 13229
38%
8814
Dataset 32 5336
5372
5375
5508
5660
5710
5713
5760
5950
6126
6170 10000 10056 10059 10086 10089 10111 10113 10115 10129 10146 10146 10151 10231 10271 10280 10333 10344 10356 10378 10515 10786
34%
8668
Dataset 26 6029
6142
6309
6415
6596
6644
6747
6885
6913
7244
7494 10000 10001 10001 10002 10003 10003 10006 10013 10014 10026 10027 10034 10041 10089 10097 10106 10134 10164 10182 10316 10344
34%
8907
Dataset 28 6315
6347
6380
6506
6686
6702
6918
6924
6977
7187
7311 10001 10003 10015 10028 10029 10030 10030 10059 10131 10132 10164 10165 10184 10190 10202 10214 10231 10242 10415 10433 10456
34%
8988
Dataset 22 5246
5343
5380
5440
5495
5638
5670
5697
5788
6320 10001 10006 10045 10056 10104 10135 10148 10164 10258 10267 10274 10285 10317 10361 10383 10396 10414 10452 10518 10540 10794 10815
31%
8836
Dataset 13 5174
5323
5351
5412
5462
5477
5549
5620
5825
6901 10000 10000 10003 10007 10007 10012 10122 10306 10306 10557 10573 10629 10681 10865 10865 10872 10948 10948 11010 11157 11471 11473
31%
9028
Dataset 27 6257
6275
6356
6417
6517
6666
6682
6867
6980
7533 10001 10002 10002 10002 10004 10004 10028 10110 10132 10147 10164 10169 10181 10199 10235 10251 10323 10329 10332 10345 10370 10452
31%
9073
Dataset 12 5170
5217
5493
5826
6170
6195
6226
6388
6594
6709 10008 10030 10054 10059 10154 10261 10264 10266 10269 10276 10317 10361 10390 10433 10605 10659 10712 11500 11500 11501 11521 11641
31%
9149
Dataset 9
4963
6021
6066
6249
6250
6361
6501
6530
6622
7370 10002 10002 10002 10003 10003 10034 10034 10054 10097 10264 10290 10330 10407 10419 10433 10447 10472 11440 11454 11496 11496 11562
31%
9177
Dataset 16 4858
5180
5418
5479
5551
5603
5667
5700
5848
5864 10011 10023 10033 10148 10302 10519 10788 10803 10969 11014 11038 11060 11076 11137 11173 11301 11473 11482 11483 11520 11535 12064
31%
9254
Dataset 19 5710
5763
5795
5945
5990
6118
6201
6275
6295 10001 10002 10003 10004 10018 10020 10023 10053 10110 10185 10196 10222 10230 10233 10234 10258 10310 10310 10311 10312 11308 11439 12217
28%
9128
Dataset 1
5653
5989
5995
6085
6137
6183
6240
6263
6615 10013 10045 10058 10062 10073 10083 10085 10130 10160 10168 10190 10246 10381 10634 10729 11067 11385 11460 11744 11834 11994 12588 13585
28%
9496
Dataset 18 5855
5998
6049
6086
6106
6163
6361 10001 10002 10003 10038 10043 10052 10080 10111 10125 10181 10192 10196 10200 10230 10232 10232 10235 10244 10280 10309 10310 11178 11507 11949 13518
22%
9502
Dataset 17 5806
5932
6105
6189
6573
7036 10003 10008 10070 10078 10079 10136 10180 10230 10231 10232 10257 10257 10273 10293 10549 10556 10710 11010 11064 11094 11174 11290 11451 12309 12572 12586
19%
9885
Dataset 2
5636
5869
5887
6054
6319 10018 10043 10043 10045 10053 10061 10072 10075 10084 10116 10133 10141 10154 10162 10177 10208 10278 10399 10559 10649 10832 11380 11687 11981 12317 12338 12978
16%
9898
Dataset 7
6183
6508
6554
6640 10001 10002 10003 10054 10079 10087 10088 10109 10118 10144 10192 10294 10444 10445 10447 10451 10468 10487 10524 10537 10636 10951 10989 11055 11227 11309 11348 11367
13%
9992
Dataset 3
6166
6264
6517
6716 10013 10013 10027 10053 10056 10058 10059 10064 10071 10104 10114 10129 10130 10178 10182 10194 10234 10440 10450 10513 10538 10757 11118 11414 11452 11959 12016 12673
13% 10021
Dataset 5
6347
6599
6754 10001 10001 10003 10007 10086 10089 10089 10118 10214 10244 10373 10422 10444 10454 10464 10465 10475 10483 10561 10704 11029 11072 11294 11295 11303 11304 11305 11369 11378
9%
10211
Dataset 4
5971
6371
7043 10000 10001 10042 10048 10055 10058 10061 10064 10066 10068 10071 10074 10225 10411 10633 10635 10724 11273 11415 11483 11527 11628 11895 11926 11993 12296 12316 12621 12750
9%
10492
Dataset 6
5956
6248 10002 10003 10005 10033 10038 10055 10095 10120 10144 10177 10444 10446 10448 10448 10450 10451 10461 10462 10467 10537 10577 10666 10977 11048 11199 11290 11301 11305 11378 11421
6%
10270
Dataset 8
10000 10000 10001 10002 10033 10035 10087 10091 10125 10261 10301 10318 10444 10454 10455 10460 10468 10492 10603 10824 10862 10918 10989 11054 11237 11296 11299 11299 11317 11340 11377 11423
0%
10621
(a) Fitness values using RA
#1
#2
#3
#4
#5
#6
#7
#8
#9
#10
#11
#12
#13
#14
#15
#16
#17
#18
#19
#20
#21
#22
#23
#24
#25
#26
#27
#28
#29
#30
#31
#32
Sched. Avg
Dataset 16 5194
5250
5512
5551
5585
5598
5626
5676
5705
5707
5711
5731
5731
5741
5774
5798
5840
6004
6067
6100
6220
6242
6256
6342
7650 10000 10000 10000 10003 10099 10392 11497
78%
6831
Dataset 23 5461
5465
5569
5600
5674
5676
5713
5914
5977
6004
6010
6011
6078
6217
6235
6246
6544
6687
6811
7154 10019 10057 10065 10083 10090 10094 10200 10466 10471 10488 10490 10497
63%
7627
Dataset 29 5692
5721
5776
5864
5924
6077
6110
6161
6165
6206
6284
6299
6316
6381
6742
6824
7254 10000 10000 10000 10000 10000 10000 10001 10002 10002 10002 10004 10004 10005 10517 10856
53%
8037
Dataset 14 5164
5189
5320
5390
5430
5466
5497
5679
5728
5751
5807
5822
5825
5918
5960
6372 10000 10001 10002 10003 10003 10004 10005 10005 10005 10006 10008 10010 11247 11269 11517 11556
50%
7999
Dataset 12 5088
5400
5528
6257
6360
6396
6971
7325
7375 10001 10003 10007 10008 10013 10086 10184 10184 10185 10186 10186 10258 10258 10258 10259 10262 10269 10271 10277 10351 10629 10659 11677
28%
9162
Dataset 21 5749
5820
5841
5962
6014
6030
6068
6909 10000 10000 10000 10000 10000 10001 10001 10001 10001 10001 10002 10002 10003 10003 10003 10003 10004 10005 10006 10009 10206 10232 10584 10782
25%
9070
Dataset 1
6091
6364
6416 10000 10004 10004 10011 10014 10023 10030 10056 10057 10098 10108 10155 10156 10199 10244 10250 10347 10404 10491 10494 10628 10633 10690 10711 10774 10861 11127 12455 13082
9%
10093
Dataset 22 5409
5644
6009 10004 10010 10435 10462 10463 10474 10476 10479 10494 10494 10501 10501 10506 10714 10767 10791 10869 10909 10914 10935 10936 10949 10960 10960 10974 11002 11067 11121 11126
9%
10230
Dataset 15 5341
5562
5626 10967 11221 11467 11475 11480 11490 11490 11492 11493 11503 11503 11511 11512 11513 11513 11520 11544 11555 11556 11558 11560 11567 11569 11573 11578 11645 11707 11796 11892
9%
10962
Dataset 30 5832 10000 10000 10000 10000 10000 10000 10000 10000 10001 10007 10041 10215 10215 10215 10215 10218 10218 10219 10220 10220 10224 10272 10424 10449 10478 10502 10502 10505 10574 10861 10871
3%
10109
Dataset 18 7465 10001 10025 10039 10049 10060 10230 10232 10234 10235 10235 10235 10237 10238 10238 10241 10242 10243 10244 10257 10265 10309 10309 10310 10310 10366 10473 12074 12440 12474 12531 13352
3%
10506
Dataset 26 10002 10003 10005 10005 10011 10013 10018 10018 10019 10023 10026 10027 10037 10040 10050 10081 10131 10145 10153 10157 10169 10177 10192 10193 10232 10268 10284 10300 10336 10375 10382 10531
0%
10138
Dataset 20 10053 10063 10069 10074 10078 10082 10093 10099 10103 10103 10107 10126 10136 10139 10142 10143 10150 10150 10150 10152 10157 10165 10175 10186 10198 10236 10250 10287 10298 10307 10470 10503
0%
10170
Dataset 4
10058 10059 10066 10071 10075 10080 10082 10089 10090 10091 10102 10102 10106 10109 10109 10112 10114 10121 10122 10128 10129 10132 10143 10144 10157 10164 10177 10193 10211 10581 10820 12002
0%
10211
Dataset 24 10013 10041 10070 10071 10078 10081 10082 10084 10101 10127 10135 10141 10155 10160 10177 10186 10210 10224 10243 10248 10249 10264 10278 10280 10284 10319 10330 10388 10548 10549 10595 10600
0%
10228
Dataset 9
10060 10080 10094 10096 10096 10099 10099 10112 10120 10128 10137 10152 10152 10155 10172 10183 10191 10211 10231 10234 10281 10281 10319 10343 10349 10355 10408 10418 10447 10506 10569 10755
0%
10245
Dataset 5
10012 10095 10106 10115 10120 10141 10152 10165 10170 10189 10201 10217 10235 10235 10254 10268 10279 10300 10303 10306 10313 10329 10330 10340 10349 10355 10382 10392 10472 10498 10539 10713
0%
10277
Dataset 25 10028 10128 10131 10136 10145 10180 10201 10219 10232 10233 10237 10259 10276 10281 10285 10294 10299 10300 10306 10314 10317 10325 10328 10336 10338 10351 10358 10372 10401 10412 10417 10512
0%
10280
Dataset 19 10021 10064 10079 10110 10153 10160 10160 10163 10168 10168 10200 10247 10257 10259 10287 10293 10305 10314 10320 10334 10340 10344 10353 10364 10374 10408 10440 10467 10503 10510 10588 10700
0%
10295
Dataset 28 10330 10341 10343 10343 10345 10346 10351 10353 10354 10355 10355 10357 10360 10365 10368 10369 10374 10379 10386 10388 10389 10389 10413 10425 10434 10464 10479 10499 10531 10561 10568 10622
0%
10404
Dataset 31 10206 10212 10232 10247 10249 10258 10307 10322 10327 10335 10360 10378 10410 10427 10434 10444 10450 10460 10461 10482 10488 10490 10498 10508 10508 10509 10534 10537 10574 10653 10864 11336
0%
10453
Dataset 10 10246 10270 10276 10277 10285 10291 10294 10297 10306 10307 10311 10313 10314 10343 10355 10372 10411 10415 10440 10474 10512 10518 10522 10550 10584 10647 10689 10706 10712 10739 10784 11635
0%
10475
Dataset 6
10453 10464 10472 10473 10475 10476 10478 10478 10484 10485 10485 10486 10486 10488 10489 10489 10493 10494 10495 10495 10495 10496 10500 10513 10538 10543 10553 10604 10605 10623 11409 11455
0%
10562
Dataset 32 10092 10159 10232 10234 10252 10280 10284 10306 10364 10368 10383 10425 10447 10478 10681 10821 10898 10909 10928 10937 11056 11089 11177 11283 11295 11308 11313 11316 11503 11604 11724 11753
0%
10809
Dataset 27 10183 10205 10417 10437 10544 10633 10633 10640 10684 10689 10869 10884 10901 10945 10946 10987 10987 11004 11018 11019 11087 11095 11111 11137 11146 11152 11163 11170 11194 11245 11379 11413
0%
10904
Dataset 3
10081 10099 10385 10413 10413 10644 10648 10660 10665 10681 10687 10728 10730 10752 10771 10795 10797 10813 10817 10824 10876 10925 10946 10967 10976 11081 11095 11461 12193 12458 12636 12803
0%
10963
Dataset 8
10955 11028 11031 11059 11060 11064 11073 11073 11082 11089 11092 11092 11095 11096 11099 11103 11103 11104 11105 11106 11107 11108 11108 11108 11108 11111 11117 11118 11118 11124 11144 11335
0%
11097
Dataset 13 10002 10004 10497 10643 10791 10813 10918 10947 10947 10987 11037 11138 11161 11191 11292 11302 11325 11331 11442 11459 11483 11504 11504 11627 11638 11744 11882 11917 11941 11987 12064 12520
0%
11282
Dataset 7
10484 10487 11111 11331 11343 11344 11351 11352 11358 11361 11378 11381 11383 11389 11397 11415 11417 11422 11435 11435 11438 11441 11450 11453 11453 11468 11471 11473 11478 11482 11483 11494
0%
11349
Dataset 11 10015 10293 11498 11506 11522 11527 11537 11538 11547 11554 11556 11558 11560 11560 11560 11562 11564 11565 11582 11600 11604 11604 11617 11617 11620 11637 11672 11673 11676 11681 11681 11691
0%
11499
Dataset 17 10243 10243 10246 10250 10321 10637 11005 11084 11559 11658 11699 11713 11774 11865 11910 11933 12098 12166 12169 12250 12362 12630 12632 12731 12770 12771 12788 12878 12952 13050 13058 13275
0%
11897
Dataset 2
10155 10197 10262 10447 10540 10643 11679 11687 11741 11829 11858 11962 12176 12340 12471 12558 12569 12583 12587 12622 12658 12678 12730 12730 12737 12789 12818 12919 12998 13242 13272 13371
0%
12120
(b) Fitness values using SA
Figure D.9: Fitness values obtained over 1024 trials against 32 synthetic
ADAS3 task sets.
==PAGE:88==
74
Additional Plots
==PAGE:89==
Appendix E
Task chain analysis
The following ﬁgures depict the task dependencies and the communication links
between processors of the realistic task set ADAS1, as well as a single synthetic
task set.
Please note, that these ﬁgures only depict the emerging sequence
pattern of task chains, and not the speciﬁc attributes associated by said task
chains.
==PAGE:90==
76
Task chain analysis
Table E.1: Table depicting task precedence of task chains (realistic task set
ADAS1)
Chain Precedence
pi
Li
ℵ1
τ128 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ2 ≺τ12 ≺τ9 ≺τ137
0.85 40000
ℵ2
τ146 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ5 ≺τ81 ≺τ80 ≺τ79 ≺τ81 ≺τ5 ≺τ13 ≺τ9 ≺τ141
0.9 110000
ℵ3
τ129 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ2 ≺τ13 ≺τ9 ≺τ130
0.6 100000
ℵ4
τ125 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ2 ≺τ7
0.65 50000
ℵ5
τ129 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ2 ≺τ5 ≺τ81 ≺τ82
0.45 60000
ℵ6
τ144 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ6 ≺τ3 ≺τ12 ≺τ9 ≺τ133
0.75 60000
ℵ7
τ82 ≺τ82 ≺τ82 ≺τ82 ≺τ82 ≺τ82 ≺τ82 ≺τ79 ≺τ79 ≺τ81 ≺τ5 ≺τ6 ≺τ3 ≺τ12 ≺τ9 ≺τ134 0.5 450000
ℵ8
τ6 ≺τ3
0.75 10000
ℵ9
τ143 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ5 ≺τ81 ≺τ80 ≺τ79 ≺τ13 ≺τ81 ≺τ5 ≺τ12 ≺τ9 ≺τ142
0.95 120000
ℵ10
τ147 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ5 ≺τ81 ≺τ80 ≺τ79 ≺τ13 ≺τ81 ≺τ5 ≺τ12 ≺τ9 ≺τ142
0.95 120000
ℵ11
τ2 ≺τ2 ≺τ5 ≺τ81 ≺τ13 ≺τ81 ≺τ5 ≺τ12 ≺τ9 ≺τ142
0.55 120000
ℵ12
τ8 ≺τ12 ≺τ9 ≺τ140
1
40000
ℵ13
τ148 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ5 ≺τ81 ≺τ80 ≺τ79 ≺τ79 ≺τ78 ≺τ81 ≺τ5 ≺τ0 ≺τ1 ≺τ11 ≺τ9 ≺τ135
1
140000
ℵ14
τ149 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ0 ≺τ5 ≺τ81 ≺τ78 ≺τ81 ≺τ5 ≺τ1 ≺τ11 ≺τ9 ≺τ138
1
100000
ℵ15
τ150 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ0 ≺τ5 ≺τ81 ≺τ78 ≺τ81 ≺τ5 ≺τ1 ≺τ11 ≺τ9 ≺τ138
1
100000
ℵ16
τ145 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ5 ≺τ81 ≺τ80 ≺τ79 ≺τ79 ≺τ78 ≺τ81 ≺τ5 ≺τ0 ≺τ1 ≺τ11 ≺τ9 ≺τ135
1
140000
ℵ17
τ8 ≺τ5 ≺τ81 ≺τ79 ≺τ79 ≺τ78 ≺τ81 ≺τ5 ≺τ0 ≺τ1 ≺τ11 ≺τ9 ≺τ135
1
140000
ℵ18
τ149 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ0 ≺τ11 ≺τ9 ≺τ139
1
60000
ℵ19
τ150 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ0 ≺τ11 ≺τ9 ≺τ139
1
60000
ℵ20
τ136 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ1 ≺τ11 ≺τ9 ≺τ135
0.7 60000
ℵ21
τ126 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ0 ≺τ1 ≺τ11 ≺τ9 ≺τ138
0.8 100000
ℵ22
τ126 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ0 ≺τ1 ≺τ11 ≺τ9 ≺τ135
0.8 100000
ℵ23
τ132 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ0 ≺τ1 ≺τ11 ≺τ9 ≺τ135
0.8 100000
ℵ24
τ149 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ0 ≺τ5 ≺τ81 ≺τ78 ≺τ81 ≺τ5 ≺τ0 ≺τ11 ≺τ9 ≺τ131
1
120000
ℵ25
τ150 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ0 ≺τ5 ≺τ81 ≺τ78 ≺τ81 ≺τ5 ≺τ0 ≺τ11 ≺τ9 ≺τ131
1
120000
ℵ26
τ148 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ5 ≺τ81 ≺τ80 ≺τ79 ≺τ79 ≺τ78 ≺τ81 ≺τ5 ≺τ1 ≺τ11 ≺τ9 ≺τ138
1
140000
ℵ27
τ145 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ5 ≺τ81 ≺τ80 ≺τ79 ≺τ79 ≺τ78 ≺τ81 ≺τ5 ≺τ1 ≺τ11 ≺τ9 ≺τ138
1
140000
ℵ28
τ8 ≺τ5 ≺τ81 ≺τ79 ≺τ79 ≺τ78 ≺τ81 ≺τ5 ≺τ1 ≺τ11 ≺τ9 ≺τ138
1
140000
ℵ29
τ148 ≺τ9 ≺τ10 ≺τ5 ≺τ81 ≺τ80 ≺τ79 ≺τ79 ≺τ78 ≺τ81 ≺τ5 ≺τ0 ≺τ11 ≺τ9 ≺τ131
1
130000
ℵ30
τ8 ≺τ5 ≺τ81 ≺τ79 ≺τ79 ≺τ78 ≺τ81 ≺τ5 ≺τ0 ≺τ11 ≺τ9 ≺τ131
1
120000
ℵ31
τ7 ≺τ5 ≺τ81 ≺τ83 ≺τ81 ≺τ5 ≺τ4 ≺τ9 ≺τ127
0.4 135000
==PAGE:91==
77
Table E.2: Table depicting task chain communication links (realistic task set
ADAS1)
Chain Communication links Eℵi
ℵ1
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ2
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ3
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ4
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0
ℵ5
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1
ℵ6
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ7
v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ8
v0 ; v0
ℵ9
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ10
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ11
v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v0 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ12
v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ13
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ14
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ15
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ16
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ17
v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ18
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ19
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ20
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ21
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ22
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ23
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ24
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ25
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ26
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ27
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ28
v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ29
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ30
v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ31
v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
==PAGE:92==
78
Task chain analysis
Table E.3: Table depicting task precedence of task chains (synthetic task set
based on ADAS1)
Chain Precedence
pi
Li
ℵ1
τ42 ≺τ71 ≺τ20
1 40000
ℵ2
τ1 ≺τ46 ≺τ124 ≺τ106 ≺τ125 ≺τ123 ≺τ112 ≺τ87 ≺τ102 ≺τ79 ≺τ42 ≺τ19
1 120000
ℵ3
τ13 ≺τ91 ≺τ104 ≺τ77 ≺τ75 ≺τ95 ≺τ39 ≺τ23
1 80000
ℵ4
τ6 ≺τ79 ≺τ38 ≺τ88 ≺τ29 ≺τ125 ≺τ113 ≺τ117 ≺τ120 ≺τ105 ≺τ120 ≺τ95 ≺τ26
1 130000
ℵ5
τ2 ≺τ78 ≺τ30 ≺τ38 ≺τ49 ≺τ30 ≺τ66 ≺τ48 ≺τ102 ≺τ49 ≺τ38 ≺τ85 ≺τ25
1 130000
ℵ6
τ8 ≺τ30 ≺τ63 ≺τ123 ≺τ117 ≺τ125 ≺τ106 ≺τ105 ≺τ34 ≺τ91 ≺τ95 ≺τ62 ≺τ72 ≺τ70 ≺τ69 ≺τ24 1 150000
ℵ7
τ118 ≺τ111 ≺τ122 ≺τ122 ≺τ69 ≺τ69 ≺τ21
1 80000
ℵ8
τ12 ≺τ39 ≺τ78 ≺τ101 ≺τ52 ≺τ102 ≺τ103 ≺τ73 ≺τ108 ≺τ66 ≺τ22
1 110000
ℵ9
τ8 ≺τ99 ≺τ125 ≺τ112 ≺τ108 ≺τ118 ≺τ125 ≺τ124 ≺τ125 ≺τ124 ≺τ75 ≺τ56 ≺τ23
1 130000
ℵ10
τ88 ≺τ93 ≺τ93 ≺τ114 ≺τ66 ≺τ69 ≺τ66 ≺τ62 ≺τ85 ≺τ21
1 100000
ℵ11
τ9 ≺τ85 ≺τ91 ≺τ118 ≺τ114 ≺τ106 ≺τ117 ≺τ61 ≺τ81 ≺τ16
1 100000
ℵ12
τ7 ≺τ91 ≺τ78 ≺τ101 ≺τ34 ≺τ25
1 70000
ℵ13
τ3 ≺τ32 ≺τ100 ≺τ105 ≺τ123 ≺τ122 ≺τ106 ≺τ112 ≺τ118 ≺τ66 ≺τ108 ≺τ110 ≺τ81 ≺τ48 ≺τ20
1 140000
ℵ14
τ14 ≺τ104 ≺τ74 ≺τ93 ≺τ15
1 60000
ℵ15
τ37 ≺τ44 ≺τ124 ≺τ105 ≺τ56 ≺τ101 ≺τ23
1 80000
ℵ16
τ10 ≺τ101 ≺τ81 ≺τ15
1 50000
ℵ17
τ11 ≺τ73 ≺τ56 ≺τ18
1 50000
ℵ18
τ38 ≺τ73 ≺τ72 ≺τ37 ≺τ120 ≺τ91 ≺τ42 ≺τ56 ≺τ21
1 90000
ℵ19
τ5 ≺τ94 ≺τ44 ≺τ74 ≺τ93 ≺τ61 ≺τ44 ≺τ62 ≺τ104 ≺τ66 ≺τ101 ≺τ19
1 120000
ℵ20
τ104 ≺τ102 ≺τ34 ≺τ66 ≺τ77 ≺τ110 ≺τ105 ≺τ123 ≺τ105 ≺τ38 ≺τ78 ≺τ37 ≺τ30 ≺τ17
1 140000
ℵ21
τ8 ≺τ101 ≺τ29 ≺τ56 ≺τ114 ≺τ123 ≺τ73 ≺τ69 ≺τ16
1 90000
ℵ22
τ11 ≺τ46 ≺τ122 ≺τ127 ≺τ117 ≺τ104 ≺τ71 ≺τ26
1 80000
ℵ23
τ14 ≺τ93 ≺τ96 ≺τ77 ≺τ73 ≺τ29 ≺τ70
1 80000
ℵ24
τ9 ≺τ98 ≺τ93 ≺τ98 ≺τ62 ≺τ61 ≺τ34 ≺τ38 ≺τ44 ≺τ30 ≺τ98 ≺τ92 ≺τ26
1 130000
ℵ25
τ9 ≺τ46 ≺τ72 ≺τ69 ≺τ85 ≺τ91 ≺τ103 ≺τ94 ≺τ92 ≺τ25
1 100000
ℵ26
τ6 ≺τ91 ≺τ123 ≺τ120 ≺τ63 ≺τ56 ≺τ62 ≺τ96 ≺τ88 ≺τ85
1 100000
ℵ27
τ8 ≺τ77 ≺τ127 ≺τ113 ≺τ112 ≺τ126 ≺τ128 ≺τ120 ≺τ112 ≺τ38 ≺τ32 ≺τ73 ≺τ85 ≺τ17
1 140000
ℵ28
τ13 ≺τ56 ≺τ38 ≺τ65 ≺τ91 ≺τ32 ≺τ17
1 80000
ℵ29
τ13 ≺τ74 ≺τ81 ≺τ70 ≺τ32 ≺τ69 ≺τ96 ≺τ61 ≺τ78 ≺τ98 ≺τ93 ≺τ77 ≺τ18
1 130000
ℵ30
τ40 ≺τ72 ≺τ91 ≺τ97 ≺τ92 ≺τ72 ≺τ88 ≺τ40 ≺τ17
1 90000
ℵ31
τ4 ≺τ102 ≺τ63 ≺τ123 ≺τ100 ≺τ30 ≺τ56 ≺τ81 ≺τ16
1 90000
==PAGE:93==
79
Table E.4: Table depicting task chain communication links (synthetic task set
based on ADAS1)
Chain Communication links Eℵi
ℵ1
v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ2
v3 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ3
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ4
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ5
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ6
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ7
v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ8
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ9
v3 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ10
v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ11
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ12
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ13
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ14
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ15
v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ16
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ17
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ18
v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ19
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ20
v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ21
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ22
v3 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ23
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0
ℵ24
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ25
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ26
v3 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0
ℵ27
v3 ; v0 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ28
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ29
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ30
v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
ℵ31
v3 ; v0 ; v0 ; v1 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v0 ; v3
==PAGE:94==
80
Task chain analysis
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[1] G. Niedrist, “Deterministic architecture and middleware for domain control
units and simpliﬁed integration process applied to ADAS,” https://www.
tttech.com/technologies/adas/, 2016.
[2] S.
Bunzel,
“AUTOSAR
–
the
standardized
software
architecture,”
Informatik-Spektrum, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 79–83, Feb 2011. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00287-010-0506-7
[3] O. Gietelink, J. Ploeg, B. D. Schutter, and M. Verhaegen, “Development
of advanced driver assistance systems with vehicle hardware-in-the-loop
simulations,” Vehicle System Dynamics, vol. 44, no. 7, pp. 569–590, 2006.
[4] M. Hammond, G. Qu, and O. A. Rawashdeh, “Deploying and scheduling
vision based advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS) on heterogeneous
multicore embedded platform,” in Proceedings International Conference on
Frontier of Computer Science and Technology (FCST), 2015.
[5] S. Sommer, A. Camek, K. Becker, C. Buckl, A. Zirkler, L. Fiege, M. Arm-
bruster, G. Spiegelberg, and A. Knoll, “Race: A centralized platform com-
puter based architecture for automotive applications,” in Proceedings IEEE
International Electric Vehicle Conference (IEVC), 2013.
[6] M. Becker, D. Dasari, B. Nicolic, B. Akesson, V. Nelis, and T. Nolte,
“Contention-free execution of automotive applications on a clustered many-
core platform,” in Proceedings Euromicro Conference on Real-Time Systems
(ECRTS), 2016.
==PAGE:96==
82
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[7] M. Becker, D. Dasari, V. Nelis, M. Behnam, L. M. Pinho, and T. Nolte,
“Investigation on AUTOSAR-compliant solutions for many-core architec-
tures,” in Proc. Euromicro DSD, 2015.
[8] TTTech Computertechnik AG, “Automated Driving Oﬀering,” https://
www.tttech-auto.com/products/automated-driving/, 2018, retrieved oct-
2018.
[9] “TI Vision SDK, Optimized Vision Libraries for ADAS Systems,” 2014.
[10] H. Chetto, M. Silly, and T. Bouchentouf, “Dynamic scheduling of real-time
tasks under precedence constraints,” Real-Time Syst., vol. 2, no. 3, 1990.
[11] G. C. Buttazzo, Hard Real-time Computing Systems: Predictable Schedul-
ing Algorithms And Applications (Real-Time Systems Series).
Springer-
Verlag, 2011.
[12] S. Choi and A. K. Agrawala, “Scheduling of real-time tasks with com-
plex constraints,” in Performance Evaluation:
Origins and Directions.
Springer-Verlag, 2000.
[13] T. F. Abdelzaher and K. G. Shin, “Combined task and message schedul-
ing in distributed real-time systems,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst.,
vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 1179–1191, 1999.
[14] S. S. Craciunas, R. Serna Oliver, and V. Ecker, “Optimal static schedul-
ing of real-time tasks on distributed time-triggered networked systems,” in
Proceedings IEEE Emerging Technology and Factory Automation (ETFA).
IEEE Computer Society, 2014.
[15] M. Becker, D. Dasari, S. Mubeen, M. Behnam, and T. Nolte, “End-to-end
timing analysis of cause-eﬀect chains in automotive embedded systems,”
J. Syst. Archit., vol. 80, no. C, pp. 104–113, Oct. 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sysarc.2017.09.004
[16] J. Schlatow and R. Ernst, “Response-time analysis for task chains in com-
municating threads,” in Proceedings IEEE Real-Time and Embedded Tech-
nology and Applications Symposium (RTAS), 2016.
[17] A. C. Rajeev, S. Mohalik, M. G. Dixit, D. B. Chokshi, and S. Ramesh,
“Schedulability and end-to-end latency in distributed ecu networks: For-
mal modeling and precise estimation,” in Proceedings ACM International
Conference on Embedded Software (EMSOFT).
ACM, 2010.
[18] M. Becker, D. Dasari, S. Mubeen, M. Behnam, and T. Nolte, “Synthesiz-
ing job-level dependencies for automotive multi-rate eﬀect chains,” in Pro-
ceedings International Conference on Embedded and Real-Time Computing
Systems and Applications (RTCSA), 2016.
==PAGE:97==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
83
[19] Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc, “Time-Sensitive Net-
working Task Group,” http://www.ieee802.org/1/pages/tsn.html, 2016.
[20] W. Steiner, G. Bauer, B. Hall, and M. Paulitsch, “TTEthernet: Time-
Triggered Ethernet,” in Time-Triggered Communication, R. Obermaisser,
Ed.
CRC Press, Aug 2011.
[21] F. Sagstetter, S. Andalam, P. Waszecki, M. Lukasiewycz, H. Stähle,
S. Chakraborty, and A. Knoll, “Schedule integration framework for time-
triggered automotive architectures,” in Proceedings ACM/EDAC/IEEE
Design Automation Conference (DAC).
ACM, 2014.
[22] M. Lukasiewycz, R. Schneider, D. Goswami, and S. Chakraborty, “Modu-
lar scheduling of distributed heterogeneous time-triggered automotive sys-
tems,” in Proceedings Asia and South Paciﬁc Design Automation Confer-
ence (ASPDAC), 2012.
[23] A. Mehmed, W. Steiner, and M. Rosenblattl, “A time-triggered middleware
for safety-critical automotive applications,” in The 22nd International Con-
ference on Reliable Software Technologies–Ada-Europe 2017, 2017.
[24] R. Ernst, S. Kuntz, S. Quinton, and M. Simons, “The Logical Execution
Time Paradigm:
New Perspectives for Multicore Systems (Dagstuhl
Seminar 18092),” Dagstuhl Reports, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 122–149, 2018.
[Online]. Available: http://drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2018/9293
[25] R. Serna Oliver and S. S. Craciunas, “Hierarchical scheduling over Oﬀ- and
On-chip deterministic networks,” SIGBED Review, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 8–14,
2016.
[26] S. S. Craciunas and R. Serna Oliver, “Combined task- and network-level
scheduling for distributed time-triggered systems,” Real-Time Systems,
vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 161–200, 2016.
[27] C. L. Liu and J. W. Layland, “Scheduling algorithms for multiprogramming
in a hard-real-time environment,” Journal of the ACM, vol. 20, pp. 46–61,
1973.
[28] E. K. Burke, G. Kendall et al., Search methodologies.
Springer, 2005.
[29] O. Sinnen, Task scheduling for parallel systems.
John Wiley & Sons, 2007,
vol. 60.
[30] J. Y.-T. Leung and M. Merrill, “A note on preemptive scheduling of pe-
riodic, real-time tasks,” Information processing letters, vol. 11, no. 3, pp.
115–118, 1980.
==PAGE:98==
84
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[31] A. Zuepke, M. Bommert, and D. Lohmann, “AUTOBEST: a united
AUTOSAR-OS and ARINC 653 kernel,” in Proceedings IEEE Real-Time
and Embedded Technology and Applications Symposium (RTAS), 2015.
[32] M. Aichouch, J. Prévotet, and F. Nouvel, “Evaluation of the overheads and
latencies of a virtualized rtos,” in Proceedings IEEE International Sympo-
sium on Industrial Embedded Systems (SIES), 2013.
[33] B. E. and B. G., “Measuring the performance of schedulability tests,” 2005.
[34] D. R. I. and B. A., “Priority assignment for global ﬁxed priority pre-emptive
scheduling in multiprocessor real-time systems.”
IEEE Real-Time Systems
Symposium, 2009.
[35] L. I. and K. K., “The practical value of N-grams in generation,” 1998.
[36] ——, “Generation that exploits corpus-based statistical knowledge,” 1998.
[37] J. D. and M. J. H., “Speech and Language Processing,” 2014.
[38] K. G. Neumüller C., Wagner S. and A. M., “Parameter Meta-optimization
of Metaheuristic Optimization Algorithms,” 2011.
[39] S. S.K. and E. A.E., “Comparing Parameter Runing Methods for Evolu-
tionary Algorithms,” 2009.
