==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
MASTER’S THESIS 
 
 
Accessibility in rural areas
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mathias Schmidt  
S123242 
 
 
January 2019 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
==PAGE:3==
i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Front page picture: Erhverv og Kultur (2018) 
Project type: Master’s Thesis 
English title: Accessibility in rural areas 
Danish title: Tilgængelighed i landdistrikter 
Submission date: January 1st 2019 
Author: Mathias Schmidt, S123242 
Supervisor: Associate Professor Michael Bruhn Barfod, DTU Management Engineering 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
ii 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
iii 
 
Preface 
This report is my master’s thesis, which concludes my study at the MSc of engineering 
programme entitled Transport and logistics at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).  
The project has been conducted in corporation with the administration for technology and 
environment at Guldborgsund Municipality. 
The planners at Guldborgsund Municipality have been extremely helpful, provided local 
knowledge and helped out in any way they could throughout the project, which have been 
immensely beneficial to the project. All the help, ideas and local knowledge provided by the 
municipality have been highly appreciated, and I sincerely hope the results and 
recommendations presented in this project, will be to some benefit for the municipality. 
The project have been supervised by Michael Bruhn Barfod, Associate Professor at DTU, for 
which I thank him greatly. He has provided me with motivation, thoughtful feedback and great 
ideas, which have helped develop and advance this project.  
Additionally, I would like to thank Thomas Ross Pedersen, Senior Analyst Officer at DTU, for 
his support and patience in the process of calculating cost matrices.  
Finally, for much appreciated and useful feedback, as well as motivational support in the entire 
project period, I thank my friends Kim Andersen and Anders Lank Bislev. 
 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mathias Schmidt 
Copenhagen 
January 2019 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
iv 
 
  
 
==PAGE:7==
v 
 
Abstract 
The main objective of this thesis is to develop a preliminary framework, which can be used by 
planners to measure and assess accessibility in rural areas. The goal of the framework is to be 
used as a tool to support a sustainable development of transport in rural areas, by enabling 
planners to assess and analyse transport and land-use changes’ impact on accessibility.  
A literature study is conducted to better understand relevant aspects of accessibility and 
accessibility planning in general. In the study the focus is on different perspectives of how to 
measure accessibility, which relevant component to include in a measure and different criteria 
to review and chose a relevant measure. 
Based on the literature study, a location-based gravity measure is chosen as the preferred 
method to measure accessibility in rural areas. This is primarily done, based on the measures 
ability, to measure the transport and land-use components of accessibility. The gravity measure 
is then used, to further develop an accessibility index, which is presented in a framework. The 
measure can be used to measure accessibility to a spatial zone. 
The main theory behind the gravity measure is that the measure is inversely proportional to the 
distance to the given attraction. The gravity measure have been used in accessibility assessments 
in previous research. However, in this project, the gravity measure is adapted to take different 
activity categories into account. This is done be setting up specific cost sensitivity parameters 
for defined activity categories. 
The usability and understandability of the framework are tested in a case study in Guldborgsund 
Municipality in Denmark. The case study focuses on assessing accessibility for the target group 
of youths between 15 and 25 years old living in the municipality. The case study focuses on 
accessibility by public transport, but a comparison to private transport (car) is made as well.  
Based on a general analysis the travel behaviour and possibilities of youths in rural areas in 
Eastern Denmark, definitions of specific activity categories are made. These eight defined 
activity categories are target group specific. The analysis also form a foundation for the design 
of an online survey focused on the target group. The main goal of the survey is to set up activity 
category specific weights, which is used to estimate a cost sensitivity parameter for each activity 
category. The activity category specific weights, represent the importance for the target group, 
of having access to the activities in the specific category.  
Furthermore, questions regarding e.g. the respondents travel behaviour and background are 
also asked in conducted survey. 
The eight defined target group specific activity categories consists of a number of different 
activities. For every category explicit land-used based activities is defined based on various data 
sources. Thereby a number of spatial locations are found for each activity category.  
==PAGE:8==
vi 
 
In the case study Guldborgsund Municipality is divided into close to 4.000 zones, which all are 
quadrants of 500 x 500 m. The spatial location of each activity is used to define the number of 
activities in each activity category for every zone.  
The final input in the measure is a cost for travel between all zones. In the case study a measure 
of time (minutes) is used as a cost. Based on a private and a public transport network, cost 
matrices for the shortest travel time between all zone pairs are estimated. 
The cost sensitivity parameters, locations of activities and cost matrices are then used to 
estimate accessibility index scores for all defined zones in Guldborgsund Municipality for both 
private and public transport. Furthermore, the framework is used to present and assess 
accessibility for specific activity categories such as Education or Shopping. 
The results show that the accessibility for youths for public transport is significantly lower than 
for private transport in all areas in the municipality. The accessibility for youths is highest in the 
main town of Nykøbing F., and is generally lowest in the outskirts of the municipality.  
Based on the literature study and the estimates of accessibility for youths in Guldborgsund 
Municipality, recommendations for ways to improve accessibility are proposed. Here a scenario 
for a new bus line between Nørre Alslev and Øster Kippinge is assessed, and it is found, to 
significantly improve the accessibility by public transport in a relatively large area of the 
municipality. 
It is found in the project that both the usability and understandability of the developed 
preliminary framework are good. The framework can be used for analysing and assessing 
accessibility in rural areas, and to find areas for which accessibility can be improved. 
Furthermore, possible transport or land-use changes in a study area can be assessed, to see the 
impact on accessibility of these changes for a specific target group. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
vii 
 
Sammenfatning 
Hovedformålet med dette speciale er at udvikle et foreløbigt rammesystem, som kan bruges af 
planlæggere til at analysere og vurdere tilgængelighed i landdistrikter. Formålet med 
rammesystemet er, at kunne bruge det som et værktøj til, at understøtte en bæredygtig udvikling 
på transportområdet. Dette skal muliggøres ved, at rammesystemet skal kunne bruges til at 
analysere 
og 
vurdere 
de 
tilgængelighedsmæssige 
konsekvenser 
af 
transport- 
og 
arealanvendelsesmæssige ændringer i et område. 
For bedre at forstå relevante aspekter af tilgængelighed og tilgængelighedsplanlægning udføres 
der et litteraturstudie. I studiet er fokus på forskellige perspektiver for, hvordan tilgængelighed 
kan måles, samt hvilke relevante komponenter, der kan inkluderes i et mål for tilgængelighed. 
Derudover er fokus også på kriterier for, hvordan et mål for tilgængelighed og dets 
anvendelighed kan vurderes og udvælges. 
Baseret på litteraturstudiet er den lokationsbaserede gravity målemetode for tilgængelighed 
udvalgt som den foretrukne metode til at måle tilgængelighed i landdistrikter. Dette er valgt 
baseret på målemetodens evne til at måle og inkludere transport og arealanvendelsesmæssige 
aspekter af tilgængelighed. Gravity målemetoden er derefter anvendt som grundlag for en 
videreudvikling af målemetoden, der indgår i rammesystemet. Gravity målemetoden kan 
bruges til at måle tilgængelighed til arealafgrænsede zoner. 
Hovedteorien bag gravity målemetoden er, at den er omvendt proportionel med distancen til 
en given attraktion. Målemetoden er før blevet anvendt i forskning til vurdering af 
tilgængelighed, men i dette projekt, er gravity målemetoden blevet tilpasset, så også forskellige 
aktivitetskategorier tages i betragtning. Dette gøres ved, at for hver prædefineret 
aktivitetskategori at definere specifikke omkostningssensitivitets parametre. 
Rammesystemets anvendelighed og forståelighed testes i et casestudie for Guldborgsund 
Kommune. Casestudiets målgruppe er unge mellem 15 og 25 år, der bor i kommunen. 
Casestudiet fokuserer på tilgængelighed med kollektiv transport, hvilket sammenlignes med 
tilgængeligheden med bil.  
Baseret på en generel analyse af unge i landdistrikters transportmuligheder og rejsevaner i 
Østdanmark, defineres otte specifikke aktivitetskategorier til brug i den videre analyse. Disse 
otte definerede aktivitetskategorier er dermed specifikke for målgruppen. Analysen former også 
et grundlag for udarbejdelsen af en online spørgeskemaundersøgelse målrettet målgruppen. Det 
primære formål med spørgeskemaundersøgelsen er, at finde specifikke vægte for 
aktivitetskategorierne. Dette danner grundlag for estimeringen af omkostningssensitivitets 
parametrene. De specifikke vægte for aktivitetskategorierne, repræsenterer, hvor vigtigt det er 
for målgruppen at have adgang til aktiviteterne i den specifikke kategori. 
Derudover spørges der i den udførte spørgeskemaundersøgelse ind til respondenternes 
transportvaner og baggrund. 
==PAGE:10==
viii 
 
De otte definerede målgruppespecifikke aktivitetskategorier består hver af et antal forskellige 
aktiviteter. For hver kategori er specifikke arealanvendelsesmæssige aktiviteter defineret, 
baseret på forskellige datakilder.  
I casestudiet er Guldborgsund Kommune delt i knap 4.000 zoner, der alle består af kvadrater på 
500 x 500 m. Lokationen for hver aktivitet benyttes til at estimere antallet af aktiviteter for hver 
kategori i alle zoner.  
Det sidste input i målemetoden er de omkostninger, der er forbundet med at rejse mellem zoner. 
Disse omkostninger angives i cost matricer. I casestudiet er tid (minutter) benyttet som 
omkostning. Til at estimere disse cost matricer benyttes et netværk for henholdsvis kollektiv 
transport og vejtrafik og ud fra dette estimeres den korteste rejsetid mellem hver zone. 
Omkostningssensitivitets parametrene, aktivitetslokationerne samt cost matricerne benyttes 
herefter til at estimere tilgængeligheds indeks scorer for alle zoner i Guldborgsund Kommune. 
Dette gøres for både bil- og kollektiv transport. Derudover benyttes rammesystemet og 
målemetoden til at vise og vurdere tilgængelighed for specifikke aktivitetskategorier som fx 
Uddannelse eller Shopping. 
Resultaterne viser, at tilgængeligheden for unge for kollektiv transport er signifikant lavere for 
kollektiv transport end for bil transport i alle områder i kommunen. Tilgængeligheden for unge 
er højest i og omkring Nykøbing F., og er generelt lavere nu længere en zone befinder sig fra 
Nykøbing F. 
Baseret på litteraturstudiet og estimaterne for tilgængelighed for unge i Guldborgsund 
Kommune fremsættes anbefalinger til måder, hvorpå tilgængeligheden kan forbedres. Her 
vurderes et scenarie, hvor der indføres en ny buslinje mellem Nørre Alslev og Øster Kippinge, 
og det vurderes, at denne buslinje vil forbedre tilgængeligheden signifikant i et relativt stort 
område af kommunen.  
Det vurderes i projektet, at det udviklede rammesystem både er anvendeligt og har en god 
forståelsesgrad. Rammesystemet kan bruges til at analysere og vurdere tilgængelighed i 
landdistrikter. Derudover kan det bruges til at lokalisere områder, hvor tilgængeligheden kan 
forbedres.  
Rammesystemet kan desuden bruges til at analysere, hvordan mulige transport og 
arealanvendelsesmæssige ændringer i et analyseområde medfører ændringer i tilgængelighed 
for en specifik målgruppe. 
 
==PAGE:11==
1 
 
Table of contents 
1. Introduction .................................................................................................... 3 
1.1 Sustainable development goals ............................................................................................. 3 
1.2 Project scope ......................................................................................................................... 4 
1.3 Report structure ................................................................................................................... 5 
2. Background .................................................................................................... 7 
2.1 Accessibility planning ........................................................................................................... 7 
2.2 Accessibility measure tools ................................................................................................ 15 
2.3 Review of accessibility measures ....................................................................................... 21 
2.4 Best practice in accessibility planning ............................................................................... 22 
3. Development of framework ........................................................................... 25 
3.1 Target groups ...................................................................................................................... 25 
3.2 Activities ............................................................................................................................. 26 
3.3 Accessibility index .............................................................................................................. 27 
3.4 Research tools .................................................................................................................... 34 
3.5 Framework ......................................................................................................................... 35 
4. Case study - Guldborgsund Municipality........................................................ 37 
4.1 Study area ........................................................................................................................... 38 
4.2 Definition of activity categories for the target group ........................................................ 48 
4.3 Survey ................................................................................................................................. 49 
4.4 Data analysis ...................................................................................................................... 55 
4.5 Results of the case study .................................................................................................... 66 
4.6 Sensitivity of the analysis ................................................................................................... 73 
4.7 Recommendations for Guldborgsund Municipality ..........................................................80 
5. Discussion .................................................................................................... 85 
5.1 Limitations and development of the index ........................................................................ 85 
5.2 Review of the index ............................................................................................................ 86 
5.3 Case study ........................................................................................................................... 88 
6. Conclusion and perspectives ......................................................................... 93 
6.1 Future work and development ........................................................................................... 94 
 
==PAGE:12==
2 
 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
3 
 
1. Introduction 
In recent years, there has been an increased focus among planners and policy makers on 
sustainable transport solutions in cities. The focus has mainly been towards reducing car 
dependency and thereby reducing negative environmental effects and emissions.  
Bicycle campaigns, expansions of public transport networks and car sharing schemes are just 
some initiatives that have been in focus in cities, with the overall goal of reducing car dependency 
on an individual level and thereby ensure a more sustainable development guided by transport 
planning. 
Outside major cities – in suburbs and in rural areas – car dependency is high and alternative 
transport solutions are often limited. This is often due to a lower population density and greater 
distances between activities. Since a significant share of trips being made as well as the transport 
effort1 take place in suburbs and rural areas, it is important to support a sustainable transport 
development in these areas as well.  
1.1 Sustainable development goals 
Sustainable development in terms of transport is consistently in focus across different levels of 
government. Local-, regional- and national authorities have in recent years started to implement 
the UN Sustainable Development Goals (United Nations, 2016) in planning and solutions where 
possible. These 17 overall goals focus on many different aspects of development, and many of 
them require development in the transport sector as well. The impact of sustainable transport 
on the Sustainable Development Goals is shown in Figure 1. It is clear that transport has an 
impact on many different aspects of sustainable development.  
One of the UN goals is to “make cities inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable”.  The targets for 
this goal are among other to reduce environmental impacts and ensure access for all to basic 
services. Furthermore, one clear target is to: 
”… provide access to safe, affordable, accessible and sustainable transport systems for 
all, improving road safety, notably by expanding public transport… ” (United Nations, 
2016) 
Even though this goal is oriented towards development in cities, it can be seen as similarly 
important to provide access to a good transport system in rural areas as well. Additionally a 
sustainable development in the entire society will be difficult to reach without also focusing on 
sustainable transport systems in rural areas.  
One thing is to make a transport system accessible and another thing is to make a transport 
system, which increases accessibility by providing better access to activities and basic services, 
while still ensuring that the system is sustainable. The latter is a focus point for this project, 
                                                     
1 Transport effort (In Danish: Transportarbejde) is a measure describing the passenger- or freight transport 
in an area or a country by different transport modes, and can be measured in passenger-kilometres or freight-
kilometres (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE), 2009). 
 
==PAGE:14==
4 
 
where developing a preliminary tool to analyse and find sustainable accessibility solutions in 
rural areas is the main goal.  
 
FIGURE 1 – SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT IMPACTS ON ACHIEVING THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS 
(SDG’S) (UNITED NATIONS, 2016). 
1.2 Project scope 
All people have a need to reach basic services and other activities. Therefore having access to 
basic services is essential to a person’s everyday life. Furthermore, being able to reach e.g. leisure 
activities or job opportunities within a reasonable time can be an important factor for people’s 
overall life quality (Lucas, 2012). However, especially in rural areas it can be a challenge for 
people to get to basic services and activities – and even more if they want to use more sustainable 
transport modes than the car, such as cycling, walking or public transport.  
In rural areas the distances are longer, the buses less frequent and the car dependency higher 
than in urban areas. Therefore it can be an even bigger challenge to support a sustainable 
development when it comes to transport mode choice. Nevertheless, it is essential to provide 
alternative modes to the car, both to support a sustainable development, but also to provide 
transport opportunities for those groups of individuals with limited options. These groups can 
be e.g. people without a driver’s license, elderly, people with low income or youths. Groups, 
which due to a limited mode choice, have additional challenges when it comes to having access 
to activities – especially in rural areas. 
==PAGE:15==
5 
 
Accessibility planning as a concept focuses on enabling groups of individuals to reach activities 
or destinations by planning land-use and transport. Planning for better accessibility in rural 
areas can therefore help increase the life quality of groups of individuals.  
This is also the purpose of this project, where a preliminary framework is developed for planners 
to use when assessing accessibility in rural areas. The goal is that the framework can help in 
assessing accessibility, which can lead to more sustainable transport and a better inclusions for 
especially groups of individuals with limited opportunities in terms of activities and limited 
access to these activities. 
By improving the accessibility for public transport, bicycles or other alternative transport modes, 
it is expected that car dependency in the area decreases. Therefore it is a goal to improve the 
accessibility for alternative transport modes, since it will lead to a more sustainable development 
in the area of transport.  
The developed preliminary framework can be used by planners to better understand where, how 
much and for which groups of individuals accessibility improvements take place, if an 
infrastructure or land-use initiative is implemented. 
To test the usability and understandability of the framework, a simplified case study is set up. 
This is done for the rural municipality of Guldborgsund in Denmark. 
1.3 Report structure 
The present thesis is structured as follows. 
In Chapter 2 the background and theoretical foundation of the thesis are presented. Based upon 
a literature study of accessibility, different relevant measures and components of accessibility 
are presented together with criteria for reviewing them. 
In Chapter 3 a preliminary framework for how accessibility can be assessed and measured in 
rural areas is developed. This framework is based upon the best practice in accessibility planning 
found in the background study.   
To test the usability and understandability of the developed framework a case study is carried 
out in Chapter 4. Here possible applications of the results are assessed and specific 
recommendations and suggestions for ways to improve the accessibility in the study area are 
presented. 
Chapter 5 presents a discussion of the thesis, with a specific focus on the applicability of the 
framework and the process of the case study.  
Finally, Chapter 6 contains the main conclusions as well as suggestions for future work and 
further development for the preliminary framework and the thesis in general are presented. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:16==
6 
 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
7 
 
2. Background 
When people commute, travel or transport themselves from one place to another the goal is to 
engage in activities of some kind. These activities that people engage in provide added life 
quality. No matter if the activity is a school, a theatre or a hospital, having access to the activity 
create value in people’s life economically, culturally, socially, in terms of health, etc. Therefore 
it is essential for planners to ensure and optimise the access to activities for people - preferably 
in a smart and sustainable way. 
In this chapter the background of accessibility planning in rural areas is examined based upon 
relevant literature. This is done by first establishing definitions of both accessibility and mobility 
and then further examining the possibilities and limitations of different transport modes and 
new technologies in rural areas in terms of improving accessibility. Secondly the best practice of 
accessibility planning is examined in a rural context with a focus on how to choose and review 
relevant measures when assessing accessibility. 
2.1 Accessibility planning 
Accessibility planning seeks to enable people to reach their desired opportunities. Since people 
wish to engage in different activities, they will need to move. In this way both transport- and 
land-use planning, as well as the interaction of these two, play an important role in enabling 
people to reach their desired opportunities. 
2.1.1 Defining accessibility and mobility 
When assessing the functionality of a transport system two key terms are often used, namely 
accessibility and mobility.  
Mobility as a concept refers to one’s ability to move and is used in a wide range of different ways 
and definitions in both transport-, geography-, sociology- and health studies among others. In 
transport the concept is often used as an expression of the ability or the possibility to move. 
Kristensen (2014) 2  defines mobility as an expression of how fast a person can move 
geographically, safely and affordably by using the transport system. This means that when 
measuring mobility it is necessary to consider four aspects: time, cost, safety and comfort. All 
together these four aspects are the most important barriers for people’s ability to move and 
therefore also their mobility (Kristensen, 2014).  
Possibly the first time accessibility was used as a concept in relation to transport planning and 
land-use was in 1959 by W. T. Hansen in the article “How accessibility shapes land-use”. Here 
Hansen defines accessibility as the potential of opportunities for interactions. Hansen argues 
that an accessibility measure is proportional to the size of the attraction, so a larger attraction 
will attract more than a small attraction. Similarly, Hansen states that an accessibility measure 
is inversely proportional to the distance to the given attraction. Therefore the closer an attraction 
                                                     
2 Original definition of mobility in Danish: “Mobilitet er et udtryk for hvor hurtigt, man ved brug af 
transportsystemet kan flytte sig geografisk, sikkert, komfortabelt og overkommeligt.” (Kristensen, 2014) 
==PAGE:18==
8 
 
is the more it will attract (Hansen, 1959). This work has later led to the development of the 
gravity model, which is described later. 
Nevertheless, there is a need for a more clear and precise definition of the accessibility concept 
to make the importance of focusing on both the transport- and the land-use system clear when 
planning for accessibility. Geurs and van Wee (2004) define accessibility as: 
 “The extent to which land-use and transport systems enable (groups of) individuals to 
reach activities or destinations by means of a (combination of) transport mode(s)”  
In this definition it is clear that accessibility depends on both land-use and transport systems 
and not least the interaction of the two. Where transport is the aspect that enables people to 
reach an activity or destination, land-use planning can be an important tool in specifying 
locations of both people and activities and hereby improving the accessibility. In this project 
accessibility is defined as by Geurs and van Wee (2004).  
2.1.2 Accessibility or mobility 
Accessibility is an important concept when it comes to measuring and analysing transport 
systems performance. The concept is often used in scientific research, especially in the fields of 
geography, transport- and urban planning. The terms mobility and accessibility are often 
misunderstood as being the same or very similar at least, which is not the case. Mobility evaluate 
person and freight movement and can be defined as being the ability or effectiveness of 
movement and can be measured in person kilometres, travel time from door-to-door or ton km 
for freight (Litman, 2003). An improved mobility will therefore lead to areas further away being 
reachable within a maintained travel time. This can be achieved by e.g. limiting congestion, 
building new infrastructure or in other ways improving travel time.  
Accessibility evaluate the ability to reach desired activities by people and businesses. Therefore 
accessibility both depends on transport planning as well as land-use planning. An improved 
transport system in terms of e.g. a higher frequency for a bus line or even mobility improvements 
will therefore lead to people having an improved ability to reach activities and therefore 
improved accessibility. In a similar way land-use planning can also improve accessibility by e.g. 
establishing new activities or relocating housing, job opportunities or activities (Litman, 2003).  
An increased mobility will lead to more people traveling longer distances, which is not a goal in 
itself. Rather a more sustainable approach is to plan for individuals ability to reach desired 
activities by planning land-use and transport to provide better accessibility. This will not 
necessarily increase the distance travelled, but will provide people with more opportunities, 
which will create value in people’s lives.  
As the transport system in rural areas often has high mobility by car, it can be difficult to find 
ways to improve the mobility significantly without building costly infrastructure. Furthermore 
mobility planning assumes that better mobility will lead to people reaching the services they 
need, without considering the location of these services and the whole land use aspect of 
planning. Since transport and land use planning are so intertwined, the focus in this project is 
to improve accessibility in rural areas.  
==PAGE:19==
9 
 
2.1.3 Rural areas 
In recent years there has been an increasing focus for cities on limiting congestion and thereby 
increasing mobility as well as improving accessibility for different groups of individuals. 
Therefore the majority of all studies related to accessibility have also focused on - and been 
applied on - specific cases in urban environments (see e.g. cases from Perth, Australia (Curtis 
and Scheurer, 2010), Auckland, New Zealand (Mavoa et al., 2012), Rome, Italy (Coppola and 
Papa, 2013) or Copenhagen, Denmark (Pons Rotger and Nielsen, 2015).  
In recent years an increase in the spatial concentration of basic services in rural areas has also 
been observed (Neumeier, 2016). This is mainly due to changes in demographics (e.g. fewer 
people living in rural areas) and an increased pressure on the basic service providers for 
minimizing costs. These basic services can be everything from primary schools and post offices 
to doctor surgeries (Higgs and White, 1997). An increased spatial concentration will be expected 
to have a negative influence on accessibility. Accessibility from any place to an activity (in this 
case basic services) is expected to decrease, if the number of opportunities to do that certain 
activity decreases (Geurs and van Wee, 2004). However, by optimising e.g. the transport 
solutions available and making it easier to reach those remaining activities this negative effect 
on accessibility can be expected to be counteracted.  
Goals of equal access in rural areas 
Apart from the before mentioned sustainability goals by the UN (See section 1.1), other levels of 
government also have clear sustainability and accessibility goals. It is a stated goal by the 
European Commission to ensure territorial cohesion. A main objective of territorial cohesion is 
to ensure that no citizens have disadvantages in terms of access to public services, housing or 
employment opportunities due to where they live (European Commission, 2017). Similarly it is 
also a goal on both a national level in Denmark (Det Økonomiske Råd, 2015) and on a municipal 
level for Guldborgsund Municipality (Guldborgsund Kommune, 2016) to ensure equal access to 
public provided welfare services – also and especially in rural areas. However, as the spatial 
concentration of basic services in rural areas is increasing, it is ever more important to ensure 
good access to these services and thereby also ensuring territorial cohesion. The transport 
system is an important tool in ensuring access to services. To keep the same access to services 
as the spatial concentration of services increases, accessibility to these services should be 
ensured to help achieve the goals for territorial cohesion. 
2.1.4 Potential transport modes in rural areas 
Private cars are the most dominant form of transport both in cities and in rural areas around the 
world, even for shorter trips where the car could be replaced by a more sustainable transport 
mode such as the bicycle or public transport (Halldórsdóttir, Nielsen and Prato, 2015). While 
the car is used for 58 % of all trips in Denmark,  approximately 75 % of all the distance travelled 
is done by car (Center for Transport Analytics, 2014b).  
Cars do cause emissions, which influences the local air quality, especially in cities, but also 
affects the climate due to CO2 emissions. There are consequently significant health and 
economic benefits of alternative modes of transport replacing car trips (Grabow et al., 2012). So 
==PAGE:20==
10 
 
there is both a need and a great potential for more sustainable transport modes both in cities 
and in rural areas. 
Due to this, a central element in accessibility planning is to promote alternative transport modes, 
both to bolster the use of more sustainable transport modes, but also to improve accessibility for 
people who, for various reasons, do not have access to the car as a mode. 
Car ownership and thereby access to a car in a household has a significant influence on which 
mode an individual chooses for a trip (Commins and Nolan, 2010). There is a clear tendency in 
travel surveys that if an individual has access to a car, then this individual is also more likely to 
choose it as a mode. Furthermore, more cars in a household also means more trips with car as 
the preferred mode (Kitamura, 1989). As car ownership in Denmark is generally higher in rural 
areas compared to urban areas3, it can be a challenge to promote more sustainable transport 
modes such as public transport, cycling or walking, simply because cars are accessible in most 
households and public transport on top of that often is scarce in rural areas.  
However, if the goal is to improve accessibility in a sustainable way, this also means that the 
alternative modes to the car must be accessible and also attractive to use. In rural areas 
alternative modes to the car are, depending on the trip distance, most often buses in various 
forms and sizes, cycling or sometimes walking. In the following the various potential alternative 
transport modes in rural areas, including both advantages and challenges, will be examined. 
Public transport 
Buses in rural areas are often less frequent and with fewer passengers than in cities. 
Nevertheless, they can be essential for many groups of people, when it comes to providing 
accessibility. Similarly local trains and regional trains are infrequent and train stations can be 
rare in rural areas. 
Generally public transport is the chosen transport mode in 6 % of all trips in Denmark of which 
buses are used for approximately half of those trips (Center for Transport Analytics, 2015a). 
People in rural areas (towns with less than 1.000 inhabitants) generally travel less by public 
transport than people in cities. People in rural areas travel on average 2,5 km per day by public 
transport whereas people in Metropolitan Copenhagen travel 5,2 km per day (Center for 
Transport Analytics, 2015a). This can be seen a consequence of a less frequent and widespread 
public transport system in rural areas compared to cities. These factors together with a higher 
car ownership leads to people using the public transport system less in rural areas. 
Demand Responsive Transport 
In a number of municipalities in Denmark many bus lines in rural areas have been replaced or 
supplemented by Demand Responsive Transport (DRT), where the benefits of both bus-based 
and taxi-based services are combined. The main advantage for policy makers and planners of 
DRT is that the costs are relatively low compared to running e.g. a bus service with few or even 
                                                     
3 On average households in rural areas own 1,28 cars, whereas households in urban areas (towns with more 
than 1.000 inhabitants) own 0,98 cars (The Danish National Transport Survey, 2018). 
==PAGE:21==
11 
 
no passengers at all, while still ensuring accessibility to activities and services for people (Wang 
et al., 2015). 
There are however several barriers that limit the effectiveness of DRT services. These barriers 
can be both institutional, cultural, technological, social, economic, practical or political (Enoch 
et al., 2004). One barrier that often is met is a lack of knowledge for likely niche market, meaning 
potential target groups for DRT services have little or no knowledge about the service and also 
planners do not know who would be likely to use a DRT service if it is provided (Davison et al., 
2012). Another barrier is that the public knowledge about the DRT services available is limited 
(Enoch et al., 2004). If an individual does not know about the option to use a DRT service as a 
mode, it cannot be expected that the individual will use the service.  
In Denmark DRT schemes are mainly organised through FlexDanmark, where different services 
are offered (FlexDanmark, 2018)4:  
• 
Flextrip 
o DRT from an address to an address directly. Here the trips are combined so that 
different people are picked up or dropped off along an optimised route. The travel 
time can therefore be longer compared to a regular taxi, however the cost for the 
user is lower as well.  
• 
Teletaxi 
o In many ways similar to a trip with a taxi, but mostly used when there are very few 
passengers in an area. The passenger order a pickup, and the service often 
replaces a bus trip or is used as a service for the passenger(s) to access the public 
transport system. 
• 
Paratransit 
o For people with disabilities. This service is made to ensure that people with 
disabilities have the same opportunities as others to e.g. visit their family or 
participate in activities, even though they are not able to use regular buses or 
trains.  
• 
Patient transport 
o For people going to and from doctor surgeries, hospitals, etc. who can for various 
reasons not use public transport.  
Flextrip (in the following Flextur) and Teletaxi can be seen as alternatives to public transport, 
whereas services such as paratransit and patient transport offer core services, which public 
transport is incapable of. Therefore the latter two services are not further discussed in this 
project. Thus DRT schemes in this project will be referred to as services equal or similar to 
Flextur and Teletaxi.   
DRT schemes do have many advantages such as providing an often essential alternative to both 
public transport and the car for those in need of this. People who cannot use public transport, 
due to either the start or end location being too far away from public transport options or either 
                                                     
4 The four DRT schemes are in Danish called respectively ”Flextur”, ”Teletaxa” ”Handicap kørsel” and 
”Kommunale kørselsordninger og patientbefordring”.  
==PAGE:22==
12 
 
not having access to a car or not being able to drive one, will be able to get from A to B using 
DRT. 
New technologies 
New technology and intelligent transport systems (ITS) open up for new possibilities for buses 
and public transport in urban as well as in rural areas. One example of this is self-driving buses. 
These buses operate without a driver and can therefore help save costs in the future. Bos (2017) 
looked into the possibilities of using self-driving buses as the first and last mile solution in rural 
areas in The Netherlands. The study mainly focused on bringing people to and from more direct 
bus lines i.e. from towns to villages as shown graphically in Figure 2.  
 
FIGURE 2 – THE CONCEPT OF THE STUDY OF SELF-DRIVING BUSES ADAPTED FROM (BOS, 2017). 
Bos (2017) showed that there is indeed a potential for using self-driving buses as a first and last 
mile solution. The buses proposed drive 20-40 km/h and require separate lanes. In the study it 
was showed that there is a future demand for a solution like this in the Netherlands, but that the 
possible user groups have different preferences when it comes to what they value most of travel 
time, frequency, cost, comfort, etc. Therefore it is also important to look at the specific target 
group(s) when implementing a self-driving bus.  
One could argue that self-driving buses can win a market segment in rural areas as they become 
first movers for self-driving vehicles and offer a service with low operating cost. However, as 
self-driving cars and taxis become more popular, this effect could be expected to be equalized.  
Another aspect where new technologies are being used to provide better mobility is in the 
development of Mobility-as-a-Service (MaaS) platforms. These online platforms can help the 
user to quickly gain an overview of different transport alternatives for a journey. In Denmark a 
MaaS platform called MinRejseplan has been tested in some parts of the country, and it provides 
the user with an overview on both public and private transport alternatives for a specific journey 
(Nordjyllands Trafikselskab, 2018). 
More advanced MaaS platforms, where payment is integrated into the platform, have also been 
tested outside Denmark. One example of this is the Whim platform in Finland (Whimapp, 2018). 
The goal of this platform is to provide the user with one service that covers all of their needs, no 
matter if the need is public transport, a shared vehicle (car, bicycle, etc.) or a taxi.  
==PAGE:23==
13 
 
MaaS platforms can furthermore limit and eliminate some of the barriers related to Demand 
Responsive Transport (DRT). If DRT services are incorporated into a MaaS platform more 
people would be inclined to use the services, as it would be easier to access and order.  
Cycling 
Cycling is an active mode of transport that produce health and environmental benefits 
(Piatkowski, Krizek and Handy, 2015). Cycling can also be an alternative to the car, especially 
for shorter trips. In Denmark one could argue that there is a special cycling culture, which for 
many reasons can help make the bicycle an alternative to the car. Whether or not the bicycle is 
chosen as the mode for a trip depends on many different factors such as distance, purpose, time 
of day, weather, etc. Furthermore the individual age, income, education level, etc. also have an 
influence on how likely it is that an individual chooses the bicycle for a trip (Center for Transport 
Analytics, 2018).  
As shown in Figure 3 most bicycle trips are shorter than 5 km, where approximately half of the 
trips are shorter than 2 km. This shows that the bicycle is most often used for activities that are 
at a short distance, e.g. to and from a station, for grocery shopping or even for commuting short 
distances.  
  
 
FIGURE 3 – BICYCLE MODE SHARE FOR BOTH THE NUMBER OF TRIPS AND FOR THE BICYCLE TRANSPORT 
EFFORT IN DENMARK FOR DIFFERENT TRIP LENGTHS (CENTER FOR TRANSPORT ANALYTICS, 2018). 
There are challenges when it comes to making mode shifts from cars to bicycles. Rural areas 
have more often challenges with trips in general being longer when compared to cities, due to 
the fact that activities are further apart. Furthermore, rural areas often have challenges in terms 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
0-2
2-5
5-10
10-15
15-20
>20
Share of total number of bicycle trips
Trip length [km]
Trips
Transport effort
==PAGE:24==
14 
 
of safety and comfort due to lack of good and safe infrastructure in terms of e.g. bicycle lanes or 
street lights. In addition to this, weather and season can also significantly influence cycling, as 
bad weather such as wind, rain or snow will have a negative impact on cycling as the choice of 
transport mode (Flynn et al., 2012; Center for Transport Analytics, 2018).  
Electrically assisted bicycles (E-bikes) can be an alternative for those who make longer trips, 
since the users tend to be willing to make longer trips due to a better comfort (Engelmoer, 2012). 
Nevertheless, even though the market share of E-bikes is increasing, still less than 4 % of all 
bicycle trips in Denmark are made by E-bike (Center for Transport Analytics, 2018). If the E-
bike was more common it could in itself increase accessibility for non-car users. Additionally, it 
could potentially lead to more people choosing to use an E-bike instead of a car, if they had the 
option to do so. The use of both bicycles and E-bikes instead of cars reduce emissions, however 
the reduction for E-bikes is less than for a conventional bicycle (Pierce, Nash and Clouter, 2013).  
E-bikes are most often used by commuters and people over the age of 65 (Roetynck, 2010). 
However the average age of people using E-bikes has started to fall as people in general are 
becoming more aware of the benefits of E-bikes (Engelmoer, 2012). In rural areas compared to 
cities conventional bicycles have certain challenges, as described above. However, Hiselius and 
Svensson (2017) found that E-bikes have a similar potential to replace car trips in rural areas as 
in cities.  
Walking 
Walking as a transport mode is generally used for or as a leisure activity. In Denmark 77 % of all 
walking km have leisure or errand as a purpose. Of this share almost half is with the sole purpose 
of making a trip (walking in nature, going for a run, etc.) (Center for Transport Analytics, 2014a).  
People in rural areas walk significantly less than people in cities. In Denmark people in rural 
areas (towns with less than 1.000 inhabitants) walk 0,48 km per day, whereas people in the 
Copenhagen metropolitan area walk 0,98 km per day. The reason for this can both be found in 
walking being used as a mean for access and egress trips when traveling with public transport. 
Furthermore activities are more often within reach in larger cities compared to rural areas 
(Center for Transport Analytics, 2014a). This has also been found to be the case in the United 
States, where Stewart et al. (2016) showed that people in big cities walk more for utilitarian 
purposes, whereas people in rural areas walk more for recreational purposes.  
Ridesharing  
Driving together has in recent years become increasingly more popular in Denmark, where 
ridesharing platforms such as GoMore have had an impact on the barriers of ridesharing 
(Nielsen et al., 2015). However with 1,31 people per car in Denmark and only 1,05 when the 
purpose of the trip is commuting, there is still available space for more people in the cars (Center 
for Transport Analytics, 2015b). 
Two different views on ridesharing among potential users seem to exist. One group of people 
have a positive perception towards ridesharing in general, which is mainly due to cost savings, 
greater flexibility of travel times and social interactions with vehicle occupants. On the other 
hand the other group of people has a more negative perception and points out a lack of 
==PAGE:25==
15 
 
availability, to feel unsafe and expectations of social awkwardness among other reasons for not 
using ridesharing services at all or more often (Nielsen et al., 2015). 
Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) can be used to facilitate ridesharing by creating applications 
and platforms for people to search for or offer rides. Such an application has been tested in two 
rural areas in Denmark by Agerholm and Møller (2015). Here it was found that people in rural 
areas generally are interested in ridesharing, but often with the proviso that they have some 
knowledge of whom they are going to drive with, preferably some established relation already, 
i.e. friends, family, colleague, etc. Furthermore it was found that people prefer to have the 
ridesharing or carpool arranged 2-24 hours in advance, which makes it difficult to use these 
services for more spontaneous trips.  
Yet a spontaneous ridesharing scheme has been tested in the rural Odsherred Municipality in 
Denmark, where Drive-together-stops have been set up. The idea here is to set up specific spots 
in all communities to encourage people to drive together. The scheme is yet to be evaluated 
(Odsherred Municipality, 2017).  
Nevertheless, as approximately 1 in 4 of all the kilometres driven by cars in Denmark are to or 
from work (Center for Transport Analytics, 2014b), there is a large potential for ridesharing and 
carpooling. People have vastly different preferences in terms of comfort with driving with others, 
planning of the ride, etc., and therefore it can also be difficult to make one application that suits 
all needs. In this case many different solutions meet the same goal of getting people to drive 
together for the benefit of accessibility and sustainability.  
2.2 Accessibility measure tools 
Accessibility measures have been developed for a variety of different accessibility studies 
depending on the goal and purpose of the assessment. Geurs and van Wee (2004) argues that 
accessibility measures, which are easy to interpret for researchers and policy makers, are most 
often the ones being used in evaluation of infrastructure policy plans instead of perhaps more 
complex and detailed measures. This can be due to the fact that these measures are often more 
easy to calculate as more complex measures requires more detailed data and calculations. 
Nevertheless there is not one accessibility measure tool that fits all purposes, or as Curtis and 
Scheurer (2010) explains:  
“There is considerable diversity of approach to measuring accessibility with no 
single perfect accessibility measure tool development capable of providing a multi-
focus perspective...” 
When measuring accessibility planners often focus on a certain perspective, e.g. a specific target 
group or a specific activity5. This is due to the fact that no single perfect accessibility measure 
tool exists. Therefore the goal of this project is not to provide a tool that can meet every single 
perspective of accessibility planning, but instead provide a tool that can - in the best possible 
way - measure accessibility in rural areas. In the following, accessibility components and 
                                                     
5 Examples: Petrol service provision in Germany (Neumeier, 2016), job accessibility in Copenhagen (Pons 
Rotger and Nielsen, 2015), accessibility for elderly people in Aabenraa Municipality (Skygebjerg, 2017). 
==PAGE:26==
16 
 
measures will be examined based on Geurs and van Wee (2004)6 among others, with the 
purpose of providing an understanding of best practice and what to consider when developing 
an accessibility tool. 
2.2.1 Individual action spaces 
An important aspect of assessing individuals’ accessibility is to understand how space and time 
affects their opportunities for reaching and taking part in activities.  
Hägerstrand (1970) argues that space and time affects peoples’ opportunities and quality of life. 
People have different individual action spaces or freedom of travel depending on their choice of 
transport mode and other constraints. This is what Hägerstrand (1970) calls as a general term 
for space-time geography and he argues that there are three types of constraints that affects 
individuals’ opportunities:  
• 
Capacity constraints 
o Monetary budget, time budget, availability of transport modes, the ability to use 
different transport modes, etc.  
• 
Coupling constraints 
o Limitations on coupling of activities due to time schedules and locations of 
facilities and other individuals. 
• 
Institutional constraints 
o Opening hours, access restrictions, entrance fees rules, laws, etc. 
There are therefore certain constraints, limitations and restrictions, which affect whether or not 
it is possible for an individual to reach an opportunity or activity. These constraints are 
individual and therefore require data on an individual level to be considered in an assessment. 
Nevertheless, the individual actions spaces and their constraints can be seen as a reason why 
there is a focus in travel surveys on the background information of the individual. This 
information can be used to better understand why individuals make certain decisions regarding 
mode choice, trip destination or departure time, since the theory here states that there is a direct 
link between these choices and the constraints that affect individuals’ opportunities. 
2.2.2 Components of accessibility 
The components, which Geurs and van Wee (2004) argue can be seen as components of 
accessibility, are in many ways based upon the constraints set up by Hägerstrand (1970). 
Hägerstrand focuses on three different types of constraints (capacity-, coupling- and 
institutional constraints). These types of constraints explains, what sets the limitations of 
accessibility at an individual level in terms of e.g. monetary budget, availability of transport 
modes, opening hours or other restrictions. However, Geurs and van Wee (2004) argues that 
accessibility consists of four components, namely the land-use, transport-, temporal and 
individual component. They are presented in the following, and should be seen as describtions 
of what is theoretical important to consider when measuring accessbility. 
                                                     
6 The review by Geurs and van Wee (2004) is based on an extensive literature study by Geurs and Ritsema van 
Eck (2001). 
==PAGE:27==
17 
 
Land-use component 
This component both reflects the amount, quality and spatial distribution of opportunities at 
different locations, but also the demand for these opportunities. This means that a location is 
not just a location, but should be weighted or categorised to some extent, i.e. to distinguish 
between locations with a potentially high demand and locations with a potentially low demand. 
A location with a lot of different opportunities, which is relevant for people, such as a shopping 
mall will have a higher demand, than e.g. a single niche store. Furthermore one should also 
consider the possibility that activities may have restricted capacities. This could be the case for 
e.g. workplaces, schools or hospitals. 
Even though an individual theoretically can have access to an almost unlimited number of 
activities, there seems to be a limit on how many activities (locations) an individual visits in a 
given time period. This limit seems to be approximately 25 activities across all types of activities 
at a given time (Alessandretti et al., 2018).  
Transport component 
Instead of minimising travel time or travel costs, which still often is the objective of most route 
choice models, individuals seek to maximise utility in terms of activities or opportunities within 
their time or cost budgets, when they make mobility decisions (Zahavi, 1974). 
Similar to maximising utility, disutility can also be minimised. Therefore Geurs and van Wee 
(2004) also argue that every time an individual uses the transport system, a disutility can be 
considered. This is due to the fact that people spend time and effort when using the transport 
system, and a cost for the usage must also often be paid either directly or indirectly.  
The cost, time and effort an individual uses to get from A to B results from a confrontation 
between supply of infrastructure and demand for travel. The supply is limited to e.g. a certain 
number of lanes on a road, a maximum travel speed or a time table. This leads to a cost (direct 
or indirect), time (traveling or waiting) or effort (level of comfort, accident risks, reliability, etc.) 
spend in the system by individuals. Individuals will therefore seek to minimise this disutility in 
terms of cost, time and effort in order to reach more activities or opportunities within their 
budgets. 
Temporal component 
The temporal component (Geurs and van Wee, 2004) considers the fact that opportunities can 
have certain operating hours and individuals may only have a certain time window to participate 
in an activity. This can lead to certain activities not being possible to reach for individuals, if e.g. 
the operating hours of a business fully overlap with the working hours of an individual.  
Individual component 
The final component is the individual component (Geurs and van Wee, 2004), which takes in 
socio-economic and demographic factors and reflects individual’s needs, abilities and 
opportunities. These three elements all have an influence on individuals access to transport 
modes or activities, and thereby their accessibility. Individuals have:  
==PAGE:28==
18 
 
• 
Different needs depending on e.g. their age, income, educational level or household 
situation. 
• 
Different abilities depending on e.g. availability of different transport modes or physical 
condition. 
• 
Different opportunities depending on e.g. income, travel budget, educational level or 
household situation. 
Interactions of components of accessibility 
All the components of accessibility interact with each other in some way or another. A detailed 
overview of the direct and indirect relationships between these components as well as their 
influence on accessibility are shown in Figure 4. 
 
FIGURE 4 – RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN COMPONENTS OF ACCESSIBILITY (GEURS AND VAN WEE, 2004). 
Here it can be seen that accessibility as described above depends on all four components. An 
example of how accessibility is influenced by a component could be the needs, abilities and 
opportunities which describe how the individual component contribute to accessibility.  
==PAGE:29==
19 
 
An individual’s income, gender, vehicle ownership, etc. will directly influence accessibility to this 
individual’s opportunities, as described previously. Furthermore the individual component will 
also indirectly have an influence on all other components. For example vehicle ownership will 
indirectly influence the transport component as the availability of different transport modes will 
have an influence on e.g. travel time to an opportunity and thereby also accessibility. Similarly 
the transport component will also indirectly have an influence on the individual component to 
some extent. An example of this could be a lack of bicycle infrastructure, which will make it less 
likely for an individual to own a bicycle and use it as a vehicle.  
The relation between the components of accessibility is further described by Geurs and van Wee 
(2004). 
2.2.3 Measuring accessibility 
When measuring accessibility all of the four components (land-use, transport, temporal and 
individual) are worth considering. The four components clearly show how complex accessibility 
measures can get if all factors are considered in one single measure. Therefore it is important to 
prioritise level of detail vs. resources available (e.g. time, data or budget), or as Litman (2003) 
puts it:  
“There is no single way to measure transportation performance that is both convenient 
and comprehensive.” 
However, as processing power is getting more advanced and software is continuously being 
developed, one could argue that what was once a comprehensive measure could very well be 
convenient and more easy calculated today than before. Nevertheless, it is still important to 
ensure the right balance between theory and practice. 
Geurs and van Wee (2004) argue that there are four different perspectives on measuring 
accessibility, and which measures to choose in an assessment depend on the purpose of that 
assessment. The four perspectives are infrastructure-, location-, person- and utility-based 
measures (Geurs and van Wee, 2004), which are described further in the following.  
Infrastructure-based measures 
Infrastructure-based measures are widely used in transport planning and transport policies. 
These measures analyse the observed or simulated performance of the transport infrastructure, 
and could for example be measures such as congestion level, average travel speed or travel time. 
Location-based measures  
Location-based measures are typically used in urban planning or geographical studies, and 
describe the accessibility level for spatially distributed activities. Geurs and van Wee (2004) 
describe five different location-based measures, which are to some extent adaptations of each 
other and differ greatly in complexity.  
Distance measures (connectivity measures) are a simple way of measuring accessibility between 
two points. Here the distance or travel time between two points is measured, e.g. from a 
household to a supermarket, which then indicates the travel impedance. 
==PAGE:30==
20 
 
Contour measures are used when considering the distance or travel time to several locations, 
which e.g. could be the number of supermarkets within a specific travel time from a location (e.g. 
30 minutes). In other words, all activities within a certain contour are considered. All activities 
outside this contour have no influence on the measured accessibility.  
Gravity measures (Potential measures) are often used when measuring accessibility and are a 
zone-based approach. In this approach accessibility is measured from one zone to all other zones 
depending on both the size or potential of each activity as well as the distance to the specific 
activity. Activities with less potential and/or more distant will have less influence on the 
accessibility of the zone for which it is measured.  
Competition effects are not considered in the gravity measure (potential measure), but the 
measure can be adapted to also consider these effects. This has been done in different ways, 
where one method is to use balancing factors. In short, balancing factors incorporate supply and 
demand of opportunities in an iterative process.  
Person-based measures 
Person-based measures describe e.g. which activities an individual can participate in. It is in 
other words measures of accessibility at an individual level, and are therefore also related to the 
space-time geography by Hägerstrand (1970), and his formulation of capacity-, coupling and 
individual constraints, which limits the action space and freedom of action for an individual. 
Utility-based 
Utility-based measures of accessibility are used to analyse the benefits or disadvantages 
individual obtain by gaining access to activities and are typically calculated as monetary values. 
Different types of measures are used in the literature, but common for all of them are that they 
are based on utility-theory, where one choice of a set of potential choices is picked. This can be 
used to both model travel behaviour as well as the benefits for individual users of the transport 
systems.  
2.2.4 Perspectives on accessibility measures and components 
The four perspectives of accessibility measures relate to the accessibility components in different 
ways. In Table 1 the perspectives on accessibility measures and components are shown. This 
table provides an overview of which components to consider for the different perspectives of 
accessibility measures. For each perspective different measures are shown, when a single focus 
on one component is kept, thus ignoring other components.  
Infrastructure-based measures do not include land-use components, and for this reason the 
perspective is not sensitive to change in the land-use. 
Different measures typically focus primarily on certain components. An example of this is the 
person-based measure, which focuses on the individual and temporal component, and similarly 
only include simple measures for the transport and land-use components (Geurs and van Wee, 
2004). 
==PAGE:31==
21 
 
Similarly, the location-based measures focus mostly on the transport and land-use components, 
whereas the individual and temporal components can be included in the perspective by relatively 
more generalised measures. 
TABLE 1 – PERSPECTIVES ON ACCESSIBILITY MEASURES AND COMPONENTS (GEURS AND VAN WEE, 2004). 
Measure
Component   
Transport 
component
Land-use 
component
Temporal  
component
Individual 
component
Infrastructure-
based 
Travelling speed,
Hours in 
congestion 
Peak-hour period
24 hour period 
Trip-based 
stratification,  
e.g. home-to-work, 
business, etc.
Location-based 
Travel time
Travel cost 
Amount and spatial 
distribution of the 
demand for and/or 
supply of 
opportunities
Travel time and cost 
depending on time 
period 
Stratification of the 
population  
(e.g. by income, 
educational level) 
Person-based  
Travel time 
Amount and spatial 
distribution of 
supplied 
opportunities
Temporal constraints 
for activities and 
time available for 
activities
Accessibility is 
analysed at an 
individual level 
Utility-based 
Travel cost 
Amount and spatial 
distribution of 
supplied 
opportunities
Travel time and cost 
depending on time 
period 
Utility is derived at 
the individual or 
homogeneous level 
 
2.3 Review of accessibility measures 
When selecting which accessibility measures to use in a study, it is useful to set up criteria, which 
can help determine the usability for planning practice of the specific measure. Geurs and van 
Wee (2004) have set up such criteria, which an accessibility measure should strive to meet. The 
four criteria are theoretical basis, operationalisation, accessibility as a social indicator and 
interpretability and communicability.  
The goal here is to ensure the right balance for the criteria definition between being based on 
relevant studies and theories while also being applicable in practice due to limitations in e.g. 
data, methods or models. Furthermore, the result should be fairly easy to communicate and 
interpret for different stakeholders.  
The balance between the criteria will most often be a compromise of all the criteria and it will 
therefore not always be strait forward to find an optimal measure. The different criteria are 
described in short below. 
2.3.1 Theoretical basis 
An accessibility measure should consider all components of accessibility and should therefore 
be sensible to changes in both the transport system and land-use, as well as being sensible to 
temporal constraints and individual needs, abilities and opportunities.  
The accessibility measure should also behave logically when it comes to changes in e.g. service 
level or number of opportunities. For example, if the service level of a transport mode increases, 
==PAGE:32==
22 
 
accessibility from any point in that area should increase as well, as long as all conditions are kept 
constant. 
2.3.2 Operationalisation 
Secondly, it is important to make sure that data, models and techniques as well as time and 
budget are available to use the specific measure in practice. There will often be a conflict between 
theory and practice setting up accessibility measures. Therefore, it is important to find the right 
balance between theory and practice, both to ensure the theoretical basis but also 
operationalisation.  
2.3.3 Interpretability and communicability 
Thirdly, an important aspect is to make researchers, planners as well as policy makers able to 
interpret and understand a measure. Otherwise, the result of the measure is unlikely to have an 
influence on the planning and policy making process, and will therefore not leading to 
improvement of the accessibility for the target group. Therefore, it is important to ensure the 
interpretability and communicability of the specific measure. 
When assessing accessibility graphics, figures, illustrations and maps can help support and 
insure interpretability and communicability. Data can be complex and difficult to comprehend, 
wherefore it can be helpful to use aids such as graphics and maps to analyse accessibility and 
better visualise solutions. Geographic Information Systems (GIS) is a helpful way to illustrate 
data in a way that is easy to understand, since the visualisation of data makes it easier to 
understand and communicate the result of the assessment.  
2.3.4 Accessibility as a social indicator 
Lastly Geurs and van Wee (2004) mention the importance of measuring accessibility as a social 
indicator, where the purpose is to show whatever difference in social impact for different groups 
of individuals that a land-use or transport change will lead to. An example of this could be if a 
new school opens. This will increase the accessibility in general since the number of schools 
increases, but the increase will be very different for different social groups. It can be expected 
that the accessibility will increase more for youths than for e.g. the elderly due to the fact that 
the elderly normally do not use the school as an activity.  
As having access to activities and basic services generally can be an important factor for people’s 
overall life quality, and a lack of this can lead to social exclusion (Lucas, 2012), it is essential to 
also include accessibility as a social indicator in a measure to some extent.  
2.4 Best practice in accessibility planning 
When planning for accessibility, focus should first of all be on measuring accessibility as the 
extent of how land-use and transport enable groups of individuals to reach activities. In this 
chapter, four different perspectives on how accessibility can be measured has been presented. 
The four perspectives are infrastructure-, location-, person- and utility-based measures. 
For each perspective, different components can be included depending on the chosen 
measure(s). These components are transport, land-use, temporal and individual, and the 
choice of measure type or perspective will lead to a focus on one or more specific components of 
==PAGE:33==
23 
 
accessibility. Therefore, it is essential in accessibility planning to consider the purpose of 
assessment, as different measures will meet different goals.  
One way to review the chosen accessibility measure is to consider the four criteria, which can 
help determine the usability for planning practice of a specific measure. These criteria are 
theoretical basis, operationalisation, interpretability and communicability and finally 
accessibility as a social indicator. Ideally the chosen measure should be based upon a purpose 
of the accessibility assessment (area of interest, target group, etc.) and should strive to meet all 
of these four criteria. 
All the accessibility components can be seen as important for people living in rural areas. 
However, the goal of this project is to develop a framework for ensuring better access to land-
use based activities by providing more sustainable transport options for groups of individuals 
in rural areas. Therefore, these two components of land-use and transport are also in focus in 
the further development of a framework in this project. As it can be argued that location-based 
measures are the perspective, which focuses the most on these two components, this 
perspective is also the base of the framework. 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
24 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
25 
 
3. Development of framework 
To better understand transport behaviour and land-use in rural areas, a framework for assessing 
accessibility in rural areas is set up based upon relevant literature and the background study. 
The framework is to be used as inspiration and a guideline for planners when assessing 
accessibility in rural areas. 
To assess accessibility in rural areas different potential target groups are firstly discussed. 
Subsequently first relevant generic land-use based categories of activities are proposed and 
hereafter a GIS-based index is proposed and set-up to be used when assessing a target groups 
accessibility in a rural area. 
Finally, a summary of the framework is presented as a step-wise approach including main points 
to consider when assessing accessibility in rural areas. 
The applicability and usability of the framework will later be tested on a specific case in 
Guldborgsund Municipality (see ch. 4).  
3.1 Target groups 
When assessing such a complex and multi-sided aspect as accessibility, it is important to focus 
the assessment to specific target groups for which it is easier to find precise solutions to their 
accessibility needs.  
In rural areas, target groups will have different preferences when it comes to having access to 
different types of activities. Some groups may have a need for good accessibility to e.g. education, 
whereas other groups may require good access to jobs or leisure activities. All individuals will 
have different preferences, but by looking at a smaller selection of individuals in a target group, 
it will be easier to provide solutions that meet their needs. As target groups are more 
homogeneous, it is easier to focus actions towards better accessibility that meet the needs for 
individuals in a target group than for the entire population.  
3.1.1 Examples of target groups 
In the following, a few examples of relevant target groups for accessibility assessment in rural 
areas are mentioned. These examples should be seen as inspiration for which target groups that 
could be considered. For each group, a short description of the target group is given to explain 
why ensuring accessibility for that particular group can be a challenge and therefore a focus 
point for planners and policy makers.  
To choose which target group or groups to focus on in an accessibility assessment, demographic 
data as well as knowledge of the rural area in focus can be used.  
Elderly 
Elderly people or senior residents can in terms of mobility be divided into two sub-groups: Those 
with special mobility needs (due to e.g. functional impairment) and those without.  
==PAGE:36==
26 
 
Paratransit or patient transport will in many cases be able to take care of the accessibility needs 
to health facilities for those with special needs. For those without special mobility needs 
accessibility to health facilities is not valued high. As Skygebjerg (2017) has showed, having 
access to health facilities is not what elderly people value the most. Instead having good 
accessibility to shopping (e.g. supermarket or convenience stores) and cultural activities are 
valued higher.  
Certain barriers, such as not having a driver’s license (Haustein and Siren, 2014), limit seniors’ 
possibilities to participate in activities. Therefore, the accessibility needs of the elderly could be 
a focus in accessibility assessments. 
People with low income 
Low income groups generally own fewer cars, which influences their mobility and mode choice. 
This is one reason people with low income have specific challenges in terms of accessibility (Hu, 
2017). As mobility in rural areas most often is car dependent, it can be an extra challenge for this 
group with a low income to get to and from activities.  
Similarly, other more specific low income groups such as people receiving transfer payments, 
students or single parents could also be a focus in an accessibility assessment. 
Youths 
As it is the case for low income groups, youths generally own fewer cars and more importantly 
have less access to cars than other age groups (Center for Transport Analytics, 2015c). 
Furthermore, depending on the specific definition of youths, all or many will also not have a 
driver’s license. Therefore, to have access to activities it is essential for many young people to be 
able to use other modes of transport than the car.  
Similarly, more specific groups such as children or teenagers could also be considered in an 
accessibility assessment. 
3.2 Activities 
Depending on the target group chosen in an accessibility assessment some activities may be of 
more importance than others for that group. Therefore, weights are used to indicate the 
preference and importance of the activities compared to each other. 
In Table 2, a preliminary list consisting of eight examples of land-use based activity categories 
is listed, each with a few examples of activities that could be considered in the category. Other 
activity categories could very well be considered depending on the specific target group. An 
example of this could be, if it is to be expected that e.g. accessibility to allotment gardens is 
important for the target group, then this should be specified as a category as well. However, in 
this list allotment gardens could be considered and included as a leisure activity.  
The advantage of customizing the activity categories in an assessment is to better understand 
what is weighed high for the specific target group. The disadvantage is that the results from one 
accessibility assessment are not easily comparable with another assessment. 
 
==PAGE:37==
27 
 
TABLE 2 – PREMILITARY  LIST OF LAND-USE BASED ACTIVITY CATEGORIES. 
Culture  
• 
Theatres  
• 
Museums  
• 
Concert halls 
Jobs 
• 
Private companies 
• 
Public companies 
• 
Shared offices 
Education 
• 
Primary schools 
• 
High schools and technical schools 
• 
Higher education 
Leisure 
• 
Sport clubs 
• 
Swimming halls 
• 
Hobbies 
Health and service facilities
• 
Doctor surgeries  
• 
Hospitals 
• 
Bank and post offices 
Nature and green areas
• 
Parks 
• 
Beaches 
• 
Nature areas 
Friends and family 
• 
Population 
• 
Friends and family 
Shopping 
• 
Supermarkets  
• 
Convenience stores 
• 
Niche stores  
 
It can seem unclear what e.g. leisure activities are, unless it is further specified. For instance 
Nature and green areas could have overlaps with e.g. leisure activities. Therefore, it is essential 
to specify and define, what is included in each activity category. As long as the definition of each 
category is clear, it is easier to prioritise and assign weights to more general categories such as 
Leisure, Culture or Shopping. 
A weight should be assigned to each category based on the preferences of the target group. How 
to assign and calibrate these weights will be described further in the following subchapters. 
3.3 Accessibility index 
A GIS-based accessibility index is set up to be used in the assessment of accessibility in rural 
areas. The purpose of the index is to be able to assess accessibility for a specific target group in 
a rural area, and based on the index, find sustainable ways to improve the target group’s 
accessibility. GIS-tools can help present data and are relatively easy to understand and are in an 
assessable format. The goal for setting up a GIS-based accessibility index is therefore to better 
meet the criteria of interpretability and communicability by making the index easier to 
understand and assess. 
There are a number of different ways to measure accessibility as described in Section 2.2.3. There 
are advantages and disadvantages of every measure, but in this project the accessibility index is 
based on the gravity measure, which is also called potential measure by Geurs and van Wee 
(2004), and is used as the basis for setting up the index.  
3.3.1 The gravity measure 
The main reasons why the gravity measure is chosen as a preferred way to model accessibility in 
rural areas are that it provides a combined measure of both the land-use and transport 
components of accessibility, while still ensuring a decent interpretability. Furthermore, the 
==PAGE:38==
28 
 
measure considers and value all activities based on their travel time or cost. Where contour-
measures only consider the activities within a contour around a node, the gravity measure uses 
a continuous scale and thereby gives a more accurate representation of travel impediment for 
each activity.  
The gravity measure disregards to some extent individual preferences for desirability of 
activities. This is done by treating all transport users equally. Therefore, individual preference 
for desirability of activities is not taken into account for each individual, but is rather considered 
as parameters of the model. This can be a problem if the target group is very heterogeneous and 
does not have one clear preference for desirability of activities. 
Arguably the gravity model simplifies things - as any model must do – but by estimating the 
parameters based upon empirical data of preferences of travel for the individuals within the 
target groups, the aspect of individual preference for desirability of activities is still taken into 
account.  
Geurs and van Wee (2004) discusses the use of potential accessibility measures, which are 
related to the gravity model. According to Geurs and van Wee (2004) the potential or gravity 
accessibility measure can be adapted to also consider competition effects. These practices, which 
incorporate competition effects, can be seen as more demanding in terms of available data and 
are mostly useful when assessing accessibility to activities where competition effects occur (e.g. 
jobs). The interpretability and communicability are both less clear as the competition effects 
require an iterative procedure7 to be incorporated (Geurs and van Wee, 2004). Therefore, these 
practices are not considered in this project.  
A gravity measure or potential accessibility measure will be described as follows, where a 
distance decay function represent the disutility of the travel cost (Handy and Niemeier, 1997; 
Geurs and van Wee, 2004):  
 
 =   ∙(
)


 
(1) 
 
Where  is a measure of accessibility in zone i to all activities D in zone j. Accessibility should 
always be equal to or more than 0, which is also why the cost sensitivity function is similarly 
defined as (
) ≥0. 
For the cost sensitivity function ((
)) different types of impedance functions can be used, 
namely power, Gaussian, logistic or exponential functions. The latter is most often used, and will 
also be used in this project, since it is closely tied to travel behaviour theory (Handy and 
Niemeier, 1997). An impedance function is used to indicate the fact that the closer an activity is, 
the more it will contribute to accessibility. A negative exponential function is used for the cost 
sensitivity function: 
                                                     
7 The iterative procedure is used in a double constrained spatial interaction model (Wilson, 1971; Geurs and 
van Wee, 2004). 
==PAGE:39==
29 
 
 
 =   ∙∙


 
(2) 
 
Where  is a cost sensitivity parameter that is to be estimated based on empirical data of 
preferences of travel for the individuals in the specific target group. This parameter estimates 
the disutility for the cost related to getting from zone i to zone j. The cost sensitivity parameter 
is here defined as being greater or equal to 0 and smaller or equal to 1. If β=1, then just a small 
cost will result in the accessibility index being close to 0. If β=0 the impedance function or 
distance decay function will be equal to 1, meaning that there will be no disutility for activities 
in a faraway location.  
Therefore, a greater β-value will result in lower accessibility index scores and vice versa.  
3.3.2 Accessibility index for rural areas 
To estimate accessibility in rural areas for different target groups, an accessibility index is set 
up. This index can be used for different target groups in rural areas, and will depend on the target 
group’s preferences for accessibility to different activities.  
The gravity measure is adapted to take different activity categories’ weights into account. This is 
primarily done to include the fact that different activities have different. Furthermore, the 
activity categories will have different weights, which is due to the fact that individuals have 
different cost sensitivities depending on which type of activities category that are considered.  
In practice the aspect of weights can be included by letting the cost sensitivity parameter (β) 
depend on the categorical weights. Thereby a cost sensitivity parameter can be defined for each 
activity category (k). 
 
 =    ∙∙




 
(3) 
 
Equation (3) is an adaption of Equation (2), where different cost sensitivity parameters are 
considered for each activity category (k). To estimate the combined accessibility from one zone 
(i) for all activity categories, the sum over all activity categories (m) is taken.  
It is also worth noticing that the number of activities (D) in each zone (j) also is made dependent 
on the activity categories (k). Thereby the number of activities for each category in each zone 
needs to be defined as well.  
As the activity categories (k) will not necessarily have the same number of activities, the number 
of activities D is adjusted by a category specific weight, so each activity category has the same 
sum of weighted activities. This means that if there are e.g. few educational institutions and 
many leisure activities, each educational institution will be weighted higher than the leisure 
activities. This is done to make the accessibility index for each activity category comparable to 
each other. 
==PAGE:40==
30 
 
First, the number of activities in each zone for each activity category () is multiplied by a 
weight (), which is specific for each activity category. This leads to a weighted number of 
activities in each zone for each activity category, which will be called . 
 
 =  ∙ 
(4) 
 
Where  can be determined as follows, with 100 being a chosen number for the adjusted 
number of activities for each category: 
 
 =
100
∑



 
(5) 
 
Equation (3) is adapted to also consider the adjusted number of activities: 
 
 =    ∙∙




 
(6) 
 
The equation can further be adapted as (7), if there is a need to assess accessibility to a specific 
activity category (k). This could for instance be used to assess accessibility only to a category 
such as Education or Leisure if these activity categories are especially important for a target 
group, which can help planners in land use planning.  
 
 =   ∙∙


 
(7) 
 
Estimating the cost sensitivity parameters 
The estimation of the cost sensitivity parameters () should be based on the weights, and 
converted to a decimal number using a conversion factor.  
This is a simple conversion, which main purpose serves to make it easier to overview and 
estimate the weights, by keeping them in a comprehendible format. The cost sensitivity 
parameters will be in a decimal format and the weights are simply converted by a conversion 
factor: 
 
 = 
 !"# %
&! ∙1
'
 
(8) 
 
 
 
The conversion factor will be estimated in the case study (See ch. 4). 
 
 
==PAGE:41==
31 
 
Estimating the weights 
The weights, which are assigned to each activity category are to be estimated as part of the 
accessibility assessment.  
Components of the accessibility index 
In the gravity measure all except one of the components (land-use, transport, temporal and 
individual) of accessibility are to some extent considered. The measure focuses on the 
interaction of land-use and transport, where accessibility to land-use based activity categories 
is evaluated with the use of a transport based cost.  
The individual aspect is to some extent indirectly considered as the preferences of individuals in 
a target group are used to estimate the cost sensitivity parameter. As the individuals only state 
their preferences for accessibility to different activity categories, the needs of the individual are 
taken into account, but the abilities (e.g. availability of different transport modes) and 
opportunities (limitations due to travel budget, educational level, etc.) of the individual are not 
considered in the measure itself. However, the survey can be used to provide a better 
understanding of the abilities and opportunities of the target group. 
The temporal component of accessibility is not considered in this gravity measure, which thereby 
disregards a significant aspect of the four accessibility components. Taking this component into 
account in the measure would require additional data and thereby decrease the 
operationalisation of the measure. However, as temporal effects likely will have an influence on 
accessibility in rural areas, as shops, offices and other activities have certain operating hours, 
the result of the measure will likely be influenced by not taking the temporal component into 
account.  
Nevertheless, setting up an accessibility measure will always be a trade-off between keeping the 
theoretical 
basis 
and 
ensuring 
interpretability 
and 
communicability 
as 
well 
as 
operationalisation, and therefore the gravity measure is kept more simple and the temporal 
component is not considered.  
Review of the gravity measure as an accessibility index 
When setting up an accessibility measure, four important criteria should be considered. These 
four criteria are theoretical basis, operationalisation, interpretability and communicability as 
well as accessibility as a social indicator (See Section 2.3). The gravity measure meets all of 
these criteria, but to various extent.  
First of all the theoretical basis of the measure is well described in the literature as the measure 
has been used in many and various research projects. Secondly, the operationalisation of the 
measure can be expected to be good, as the data requirements are somewhat limited. The 
operationalisation is further improved by not considering the temporal component in the 
measure.  
The gravity measure can relatively easy be communicated and interpreted with the help of e.g. 
Geographic Information Systems (GIS). By using GIS as a tool to visualise the results of the 
accessibility index, it can be made clear geographically for planners, policy makers and others, 
where there is a need to take action in improving accessibility and where the accessibility is 
==PAGE:42==
32 
 
already good. On the other hand, it may be difficult for non-planners to assess what a map with 
a zone based accessibility index actually can be used for. Therefore, it is important to also provide 
a clear and understandable explanation of what the shown index indicates, and what a difference 
in accessibility actually means for the individuals living in the area of interest.  
Furthermore, as the gravity measure can be focused on specific target groups, it will also be able 
to show differences in social impact for different groups of individuals that a land-use or 
transport change leads to. Thereby, the measure will meet the criteria of accessibility as a social 
indicator.  
3.3.3 Calculation example 
To explain the basics of the accessibility index for rural areas a small example is set up. In this 
example all numbers are made up, but it will still provide an understanding of the procedure 
needed to measure accessibility using this method. In the example three zones A, B and C are 
set up, and are shown in Figure 5. Here the travel times (min) between the zones are showed as 
well. 
 
FIGURE 5 – LOCATION OF ACTIVITIES AND TRAVEL TIME BETWEEN THE THREE ZONES A, B AND C IN THE 
STUDY AREA IN THIS EXAMPLE.  
In Figure 5 locations of two different activity categories are shown, namely Education and 
Leisure. Based on the information given in Figure 5 both a cost matrix (
) (See Table 3) and a 
table with the number of activities in each zone (See Table 4) can be set up. Mode choice is not 
considered in this example, and the travel time can therefore be seen as a general average.   
==PAGE:43==
33 
 
TABLE 3 – COST MATRIX IN MINUTES BETWEEN THE THREE ZONES FOR THE CALCULATION EXAMPLE. 
Cij [min] 
Zone A 
Zone B 
Zone C 
Zone A 
0
25
10
Zone B 
25
0
5
Zone C 
10
5
0
 
TABLE 4 – EXAMPLE OF THE NUMBER OF ACTIVITIES IN EACH ZONE FOR BOTH ACTIVITY CATEGORIES (()*) 
AND THE WEIGHTED NUMBER OF ACTIVITIES IN EACH ZONE (+)*). 
Djk 
Education 
Leisure 
Zjk 
Education 
Leisure 
Zone A 
0
1
Zone A 
0
25
Zone B  
1
0
Zone B  
100
0
Zone C 
0
3
Zone C 
0
75
 
In Table 4 the weighted number of activities in each zone () are shown as well. These values 
have been calculated based on the number of activities () using Equation (5) to calculate the 
weights () and Equation (4) to calculate . 
Finally, the cost sensitivity parameters () are needed to estimate the accessibility index scores 
for each zone. In this example they are set as follows, and indicate that Education is weighted 
higher than Leisure: 
,-./01 = 0,01 
345.64 = 0,04 
Thereby all the information needed to estimate the accessibility index scores is available. 
First the accessibility index scores for each activity category are estimated. This is done as in the 
following example of the accessibility index score for Education in Zone A. 
8,,-./01 =   ∙9,9∙
:

= 8 ∙9,9∙;; + = ∙9,9∙;> + ? ∙9,9∙;@
= 0 ∙9,9∙9 + 100 ∙9,9∙AB + 0 ∙9,9∙9 = 78 
Thereby the accessibility index score is 78 for the activity category Education in Zone A. 
Similarly, the accessibility index scores are estimated for the other zones as well as the category 
Leisure.  
The total accessibility index scores for each zone is equal to the sum of the accessibility index 
scores for all activity categories. The results for this calculation example are shown in Table 5. 
==PAGE:44==
34 
 
TABLE 5 – ACCESSIBILITY INDEX SCORES FOR EACH ZONE IN THE CALCULATION EXAMPLE FOR BOTH ACTIVITY 
CATEGORIES AND IN TOTAL. 
Accessibility 
Education 
Leisure 
Total 
Zone A 
78 
86 
164 
Zone B 
100 
83 
183 
Zone C 
95 
95 
191 
 
The results in Table 5 show that the accessibility is highest in Zone C, and lowest in Zone A. 
Generally the accessibility can be seen as good overall, as it for both activity categories in all 
zones are relatively high and close to the maximum of 100. The accessibility index score is 100 
for Zone B to Education, which is due to the fact that the only educational institution is located 
in this zone. Zone A have a accessibility index score of 78 to Education, which is mainly to the 
relatively long travel time of 25 minutes from Zone A to Zone B, where the only educational 
institution is located.  
In the case study (ch. 4) the process of obtaining data, the estimation of accessibility index scores 
and the interpretation of the results are described further.  
3.4 Research tools 
When planning for accessibility it is essential to gain knowledge of the study area itself. This 
knowledge can be used to define for which target group(s) challenges in terms of accessibility 
occur. Furthermore, specific knowledge of the travel behaviour and transport needs of the target 
group(s) can be obtained, which can form the basis for a definition of activity categories. 
This background study of the study area and relevant target groups can be made based on 
general statistics, travel surveys and the planner’s knowledge of the area.  
To better understand the travel behaviour and transport needs of the target group(s), it is 
essential to conduct additional research. This research can be in various forms, but both surveys 
and interviews or a combination of the two, can be useful research methods and at least one of 
the two are valuable for estimating the cost sensitivity parameters. The cost sensitivity 
parameters are target group specific and represent a group of individuals’ sensitivity towards 
the cost related to gaining access to a specific type of activity. 
One method of making the index more detailed is to use surveys. In statistics surveys are 
conducted to analyse individuals of a population, and through this analysis, the aim is to draw 
conclusions about the whole population. In accessibility assessments surveys can be used to 
analyse e.g. how individuals weight different activity categories, and thereby the survey can be 
used to estimate, how the individuals of the target group weight the activity categories compared 
to each other (Jones, Baxter and Khanduja, 2013).  
Another method is to make focus interviews with individuals or in plenary, which can be used to 
better understand the preferences of the target group. Interviews can as surveys be used to 
assign weights, but can be biased and time consuming compared to the amount of actual data 
obtained. A main advantage of interviews is that the interviewer will have the opportunity to ask 
==PAGE:45==
35 
 
follow-up questions. Thereby a higher quality of data can be ensured (Dicicco-Bloom and 
Crabtree, 2006).  
Where surveys can be sent out to many people without a high cost online, interviews are 
generally more time consuming for both the respondent and the interviewer. However, where a 
survey can obtain a greater quantity of responses, an interview will generally obtain responses 
of greater quality. This is due to the fact that in an interview  follow-up questions may be asked 
and responses outside pre-defined boxed can be obtained, depending on the type of interview 
(Jones, Baxter and Khanduja, 2013).  
A combination of both a survey and interviews can be seen as leading to a higher level of detail. 
A pre-interview before a survey can be used to make sure that the right questions are asked in 
the survey, and that the terms in the survey are understood across the target group. Similarly, a 
post-interview after a survey can be used to ask follow-up questions based on the responses in 
the survey. 
Indifferent of the chosen research method(s) the main goal is to estimate the target groups cost 
sensitivity, and obtain a better understanding of the target groups travel behaviour. Therefore 
possible bias, such as over- or underrepresentation in the sample, should be taken into account 
for all research methods.  
3.5 Framework 
I this chapter a preliminary framework of how to assess accessibility in rural areas has been 
developed. To sum up the framework, a stepwise approach is presented in the following. The 
stepwise approach provides an overview, which can be used when assessing accessibility in rural 
areas and is shown graphically in Figure 6.  
First definitions of the target group are made, and the preferences of this group can be used to 
define activity categories. Following this a survey (or interview) is to be conducted, where focus 
should be on asking questions regarding the target groups prioritisation of the activity 
categories. Furthermore, the questions should be focused on gaining knowledge about the travel 
needs and behaviour of the target group. The prioritisation of the activity categories from the 
survey is then used to calculate a weight for each activity category, which is then converted into 
a cost sensitivity parameter. 
There is also a need for location data for all activities for each of the defined activity categories. 
When this data is acquired, each location point is assigned to a zone and weighted.  
The zones can be defined as quadrants, and the smaller the zones, the greater level of detail can 
be observed in the results. However, smaller zones also mean more zones, wherefore more data 
processing is required when calculating the cost matrices. These cost matrices can be made for 
e.g. private and public transport and consist simply of a cost or disutility between two zones. To 
calculate these costs a digitalisation of a network is required. Both the network and the zones 
are based on basic parameter definitions, which indicate e.g. the size of the zones or the travel 
speed on a connector, with the connector being a connection from each zone to the network.  
 
==PAGE:46==
36 
 
 
FIGURE 6 – REQUIRED STEPS OF DEFINITION, DATA COLLECTION AND CALCULATION TO ESTIMATE THE 
ACCESSIBILITY INDEX SCORES IN THE DEVELOPED FRAMEWORK. 
The final step is to calculate the accessibility index scores for each zone. To do this, the cost 
matrices, activity categories by zone and the cost sensitivity parameters are used. The results of 
the index should then be used to assess accessibility in rural areas. 
In the following case study, the methods used in each step is described in greater detail.  
 
 
==PAGE:47==
37 
 
4. Case study - Guldborgsund 
Municipality 
To test the developed framework and its usability and understandability, the accessibility for 
youths in Guldborgsund Municipality is assessed. Guldborgsund Municipality is a rural 
municipality, which faces many challenges similar to those of other rural municipalities in 
Denmark, such as ensuring good mobility, accessibility and sustainable transport services.  
In this project, meetings have been held with planners from Guldborgsund Municipality, where 
they have provided local knowledge and know-how applicable to the topic and the case. Here it 
has been made clear that the municipality has long had a focus on youths and how to ensure 
accessibility for them. Youths in Guldborgsund Municipality often move away to the larger cities 
(Danmarks Statistik, 2015), which in theory could partly be due to a lack of good accessibility 
and mobility. To help keep more youths, and in particular students, the municipality has among 
other things created a student focused demand responsive transport scheme. 
For this reason, youths have been selected as the target group in this project. In particular youths 
between the ages of 15 and 25 years old, as these youths are often the ones that move away from 
the municipality. Furthermore, this group is expected to have a relatively lower income and more 
limited transport options, which can lead to opportunity constraints. 
In the following, relevant transport and land-use characteristics of Guldborgsund Municipality 
are first presented. Thereafter, a more general analysis of the target group is carried out to better 
understand the transport needs, transport options and the travel behaviour of youths in rural 
areas.  
Following this, a survey targeted the youths living in the municipality is conducted, which form 
the basis for both the estimation of weights for activity categories as well as an understanding of 
the travel behaviour of the target group.  
This leads to a data analysis, where activities for each activity category are found and both cost 
matrices and cost sensitivity parameters are estimated.  
Finally, all of this is brought together in an assessment of accessibility for youths in 
Guldborgsund Municipality, where the influences of different parameters in the analysis are 
tested. Based on this assessment and the literature study, recommendations for the municipality 
for possible initiatives to improve the accessibility for youths are presented. 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
38 
 
4.1 Study area 
Guldborgsund Municipality is located in Region Zealand in the south-eastern part of Denmark. 
The area of the municipality consists of the island of Falster as well as part of the island of 
Lolland separated by the strait Guldborgsund, after which it is named. Being the 10th largest 
municipally in Denmark by area and with just over 60.000 inhabitants (Danmarks Statistik, 
2018), the municipality is due to the relative low population density categorised as a rural 
municipality8. 
The majority of activities are to be found in the town of Nykøbing Falster (Nykøbing), which is 
also the location of the administrative centre as well as of the main institutions. A total of 10 
towns in the municipality has more than 1000 people (Danmarks Statistik, 2018). 
 
FIGURE 7 – GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY, THE CASE STUDY AREA. 
The share of families in Guldborgsund Municipality who own a car was 67 % in 2018. This share 
has increased from 64 % in 2008, and is higher than the country’s average of 61 % (59 % in 
                                                     
8 Of the four classes for municipalities in Denmark in terms of urbanisation level, Guldborgsund Municipality 
is categorised as a rural municipality (landkommune). The other classes are:  
City- (by-), intermedite (mellem-) and peripheral municipalities (yderkommuner) (Sørensen, 2014). 
 
==PAGE:49==
39 
 
2008) (Danmarks Statistik, 2018). This relatively high share of cars expectedly influence the 
travel behaviour and transport mode choice in the municipality. 
4.1.1 Regional and local transport 
In terms of transport the municipality is well connected to the surrounding areas. The 
municipality borders Lolland Municipality to the west, and bridges connects the municipality 
via. road and rail to the island of Zealand to the north. 
Transport corridors 
Guldborgsund Municipality is located in a transport corridor between the two metropolitan 
areas of Copenhagen and Hamburg (Germany), where both a motorway and a railway line 
connects the two cities. The corridor has generally a high priority politically as traffic is expected 
to increase in the future with the coming establishment of the Fehmarn Belt Fixed Link between 
Rødby and Puttgarden. Therefore, the railway is currently being upgraded with the construction 
of double-track, electrification and instalment of a new signalling system. These new 
infrastructure investments will lead to significant shorter travel time between Nykøbing F. and 
Copenhagen in the future9, as well as to Germany (Ministry of Transport and Building, 2016).  
Furthermore, the route E55 also connects the town of Nykøbing F. to the city of Rostock in 
Germany via road and ferry, which therefore makes this route an important link for the entire 
region. 
Local public transport 
Apart from the railway link that connects Copenhagen and Zealand with Lolland and Hamburg, 
local public transport is primarily focused on a number of bus lines as well as regional and local 
train lines. The buses drive primarily along the main roads between the larger towns and 
villages, but also connect to the three regional railway stations within the municipality 
(Nykøbing F., Nørre Alslev and Eskildstrup) as well as the three local railway stations 
(Sakskøbing, Ø. Toreby and Grænge). Furthermore, there are a few local buses in the city of 
Nykøbing F. as well. The entire public transport network is shown in Figure 8.  
Most towns and villages do have access to the public transport network through either a train 
station or a bus stop. However, as it is often the case in rural areas, the frequencies of the buses 
are limited. Some bus lines will just have a few departures each day (e.g. bus lines 703, 731 and 
750). These buses serve special purposes such as servicing a specific educational institution. The 
most frequent bus lines are 701, 702 and 740, which primarily serve the main town of Nykøbing 
F. 
Most bus lines outside Nykøbing F. depart every 1 to 2 hours during the day, which is 
considerable less compared to many public transport services in urban areas. At night and 
during the weekends the options are more limited in the municipality, where almost all the bus 
lines are less frequent or not in service at all. 
                                                     
9 According to the Ministry of Transport and Building (2016) the travel time from Nykøbing Falster to 
Copenhagen will decrease from 1 hour and 34 min today to 57 minutes once all decided infrastructure 
investments have been implemented. 
==PAGE:50==
40 
 
The local train line (towards Nakskov) departs from Nykøbing F. station twice an hour. The 
regional train towards Næstved and Copenhagen also departs twice an hour during the day, but 
serves Eskilstrup St. and Nørre Alslev St. once every hour (Din Offentlige Transport, 2018). 
 
FIGURE 8 – BUS- AND TRAIN LINES IN GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY (MOVIA, 2018B). 
 
==PAGE:51==
41 
 
Demand responsive transport 
The Demand Responsive Transport (DRT) service Flextur is available to all people in 
Guldborgsund Municipality. The prices are lower for trips starting outside the main town of 
Nykøbing F. to encourage people in smaller towns and villages to use the local buses. With this 
service, the user is picked up and brought from one specific address to another. Furthermore it 
is possible to travel with Flextur to other municipalities. 
Guldborgsund Municipality has developed a special DRT-service focused on youths. This service 
is called StudieFlex, and is targeted students in rural areas between the ages of 15 and 25. With 
this service, free transport between a student’s home address and educational institution can be 
provided for those who sign up. The only requirements are that the student lives at least 5 km 
from the educational institution and more than 1,5 kilometres from a bus stop (Guldborgsund 
Municipality, 2018).  
Both Flextur and StudieFlex are yet to be integrated into a Mobility-as-a-Service (MaaS) 
platform, which could increase the usability of and information about the services.  
Cycling and walking 
The distances between the major towns in Guldborgsund Municipality are relatively long. This 
in itself is expected to limit the mode share for modes such as cycling and walking, which is 
generally modes, which are used for shorter trips.  
Nevertheless, a number of cycle routes have been defined in the municipality and the 
surrounding area, as shown in Figure 9. Cycle routes are defined between most of the towns, but 
there are also many areas without a cycle route in close proximity. The cycle routes shown are 
not necessarily cycle paths, but rather recommended routes for cyclists.  
==PAGE:52==
42 
 
 
FIGURE 9 – CYCLE ROUTES IN GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY AND THE SURROUNDING AREA (OPEN STREET 
MAP). 
4.1.2 The target groups current travel behaviour 
To better understand the transport needs, transport options and the travel behaviour of the 
target group, this is examined for the target group of youths in rural areas compared to youths 
in urban areas as well as to all living in rural areas. To do this, data from The Danish National 
Travel Survey (Transportvaneundersøgelsen, TU) is used. TU is an interview survey, which in 
its current form has been continuously running since 2006. It consists of thousands of records 
of interview questions regarding e.g. characteristics of individuals, how they transport 
themselves and what purpose they had to make a trip (Christiansen and Skougaard, 2015).  
==PAGE:53==
43 
 
To publish detailed data for a specific municipality, the municipality must first be a partner in 
the survey, which Guldborgsund Municipality is not currently. Therefore the background study 
of the target group in this project is based upon data from residents in rural areas (towns with 
less than 1.000 inhabitants) in Region Zealand and The Capital Region of Denmark (Bornholm 
excluded), which also includes Guldborgsund Municipality. As rural areas within these regions 
can be assumed to being fairly homogeneous, it can also be assumed that this background study 
is similar to what could be found in a study based on only rural areas within Guldborgsund 
Municipality. 
Key figures are estimated in this project for three specific groups of individuals, and are shown 
in the following. These three specific groups of individuals are defined as follows: 
• 
Youths (rural): Individuals between 15 and 25 years old living in rural areas (towns with 
less than 1.000 people). 
• 
Youths (urban): Individuals between 15 and 25 years old living in urban areas (towns 
with more than 1.000 people). 
• 
All (rural): All individuals living in rural areas (towns with less than 1.000 people). 
Trip purpose 
The share of different trip purposes both made by youths as well as the total trips are shown in 
Figure 10. Here it can be seen that youths, who can be expected to work less often and more 
often study, have a lower share of trips to a workplace and a higher share of trips to a educational 
institutions.  
 
FIGURE 10 - SHARE OF TRIP PURPOSES FOR YOUTHS IN BOTH RURAL AND URBAN AREAS COMPARED TO ALL 
TRIPS IN RURAL AREAS (THE DANISH NATIONAL TRAVEL SURVEY, 2018). 
Time of day 
There are also small but noteworthy differences between when people in the three groups 
commence a trip. This trend is shown in Figure 11, where the two peaks in respectively the 
morning and in the afternoon are more distinct for youths in rural areas than for the two other 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
Workplace
Education
Errand
Leisure
Business
Youths (rural)
Youths (urban)
All (rural)
==PAGE:54==
44 
 
groups. This can be due to the fact that youths more often attend an education, where the 
meeting times often are less flexible.  
 
FIGURE 11 – DEPARTURE TIME FOR YOUTHS IN RURAL AND URBAN AREAS COMPARED TO ALL PEOPLE IN 
RURAL AREAS (THE DANISH NATIONAL TRANSPORT SURVEY, 2018).  
It is also worth noticing that the time which youths in urban areas commence trips is generally 
more spread-out throughout the day compared to youths in rural areas. This can be due to the 
fact that there are differences between the trip purposes for the two groups. Another aspect that 
can result in this trend, is the frequency of public transport. If e.g. a bus line in a rural area only 
departs every hour, the departure time from home is more strict for the user compared to a bus 
that departs e.g. every 10 minutes. Another aspect can be that people in urban areas may more 
often work in jobs or attend educational institutions with more flexible work or meeting hours. 
Trip length 
Departure times can be dependent on the transport mode as indicated above, but the choice of 
transport mode also depends on the length of the desired trip. This is shown in Figure 12, where 
the average trip length in kilometre is shown for different primary transport modes. Here it is 
clear that motorised transport modes are used for on average longer trips than non-motorised 
modes of transport such as walking or cycling.  
In general, youths living in urban areas make shorter trips (on average 10,8 km) compared to 
both youths in rural areas (on average 15,9 km) or all people in rural areas (on average 17,3 km). 
This also leads to shorter trips being made for youths for almost all transport modes. When living 
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
Share of trips
Youths (rural)
Youths (urban)
All (rural)
==PAGE:55==
45 
 
in a city or town, activities are generally closer to home, which means that the need for long trips 
is less.  
 
FIGURE 12 – AVERAGE LENGTH OF TRIPS MADE WITH DIFFERENT PRIMARY TRANSPORT MODES (THE DANISH 
NATIONAL TRANSPORT SURVEY, 2018). 
An interesting aspect of assessing accessibility is the goal of promoting more sustainable 
transport modes. The trip length for car as a mode is 17,4 km for people living in the two selected 
regions (Region Zealand and The Capital Region of Denmark (Bornholm excluded)). This length 
various somewhat for the three groups as shown in Figure 12. However, car trips generally differ 
greatly in length, as a noteworthy share of the trips are shorter than e.g. 10 km, as shown in 
Figure 13. 44 % of the car trips made by youths in rural areas are shorter than 10 km, and 62 % 
of the trips are shorter than 15 km. Especially these shorter trips have a potential to be made by 
non-motorised transport modes (walking and cycling) instead of the car. For longer trips made 
by car the alternatives are Demand Responsive Transport (DRT) or public transport in general. 
1,3
2,6
7,0
19,0
15,9
36,8
20,1
1,2
3,0
6,3
17,8
11,2
30,1
18,4
1,3
4,3
13,0
20,5
14,1
44,3
11,8
00
05
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Avg. trip length (km)
Youths (rural)
Youths (urban)
All (rural)
==PAGE:56==
46 
 
 
FIGURE 13 – SHARE OF CAR TRIPS FOR DIFFERENT LENGTHS OF TRIPS IN KM (THE DANISH NATIONAL 
TRANSPORT SURVEY, 2018). 
Transport mode 
The share of trips made with different transport modes are somewhat different for youths in 
rural areas compared to the total trips in rural areas. This can be seen in Figure 14, where youths 
in rural areas generally have a higher share of car trips and a lower share of public transport 
trips compared with both youths in urban areas and all people in rural areas.  
 
FIGURE 14 - MODE CHOICE FOR YOUTHS COMPARED TO ALL PEOPLE IN RURAL AREAS. THE MODE CAR ALSO 
INCLUDES VAN AND LORRY TRIPS AND DRT IS SHORT FOR DEMAND RESPONSIVE TRANSPORT (THE DANISH 
NATIONAL TRANSPORT SURVEY, 2018). 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
0-5
5-10
10-15
15-20
20-25
25-30
30-35
35-40
40-45
45-50
>50
Share of trips
km
Youths (rural)
Youths (urban)
All (rural)
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
Youths (rural)
Youths (urban)
All (rural)
==PAGE:57==
47 
 
One reason for this could simply be better service of public transport in terms of frequency, 
coverage and comfort in the urban environment compared to rural areas. Furthermore, more 
non-motorised trips are made for youths in urban areas, which again can be due to the length of 
the trips being shorter.  
Car ownership and driver license status 
Two final important aspects to consider when assessing the transport needs, the transport 
options and the travel behaviour of youths are driver’s license and car ownership shares. The 
shares for the three groups are shown in Table 6 and Table 7 respectively.  
Due to the fact that it has in recent years become legal in Denmark to get a driver’s license at the 
age of 17, only people at the age of 17 and above are considered in the share of people with or 
without a driver’s license.  
For the share of people with access to one or more cars in their household, is significantly lower 
for youths in urban areas (62 %) than in rural areas (92 %). Similarly, the share of youths with a 
driver’s license is also higher in rural areas compared to urban areas. This can further explain 
why a lower share of trips for youths in urban areas are made by car (See Figure 14), as less of 
the youths simply have the option to choose this transport mode. 
Furthermore, it is interesting to see that the share for households with two or more cars are 
higher for youths in rural areas compared to all people in rural areas. This can be due to 
differences in household structures for the two groups, as youths are more often expected to live 
in a larger household, where car ownership would be expected to be higher. For example, a 
teenager, living at home with his/her parents, will be more likely have access to both the parents 
cars (if they have two cars), whereas an older person alone would not have a need for more than 
one car.  
TABLE 6 – SHARE OF PEOPLE (AGE 17 AND ABOVE) WITH OR WITHOUT A DRIVER’S LICENSE FOR THE THREE 
GROUPS (THE DANISH NATIONAL TRANSPORT SURVEY, 2018). 
Yes 
No 
Youths (rural) 
80 %
20 %
Youths (urban) 
72 %
28 %
All (rural) 
94 %
6 %
TABLE 7 – SHARE OF PEOPLE WITH ACCESS TO ONE OR MORE CARS IN THEIR HOUSEHOLD (THE DANISH 
NATIONAL TRANSPORT SURVEY, 2018). 
No cars 
One car 
Two or more cars 
Youths (rural) 
8 %
38 %
54%
Youths (urban) 
38 %
41 %
21%
All (rural) 
8 %
55 %
37%
 
 
 
==PAGE:58==
48 
 
4.2 Definition of activity categories for the target group 
Based on the target groups current travel behaviour, general knowledge about the study area 
and best practice from the literature review, land-use based activity categories are specifically 
defined for youths. In general the same eight main categories that were suggested in the 
Development of framework (ch. 0) are kept. However, some of the categories are adapted to have 
a clearer focus on the activities, which youths are expected to use in their everyday life. These 
main activity categories, as well as which types of activities in each category are based on, are 
shown in Table 8.  
TABLE 8 – ACTIVITY CATEGORIES ADAPTED FOR YOUTHS. 
Culture 
• 
Museums  
• 
Libraries 
• 
Theatres, concert halls and cinemas 
Jobs 
• 
Private companies 
• 
Public companies 
 
Education  
• 
High schools 
• 
Production and technical schools 
• 
Higher education institutions 
Leisure 
• 
Sport clubs 
• 
Swimming halls 
• 
Fitness centres 
Health and service facilities 
• 
Doctor surgeries  
• 
Hospitals 
 
Nature and green areas 
• 
Parks 
• 
Beaches 
• 
Nature areas 
Friends and family 
• 
Population 
 
Shopping 
• 
Supermarkets  
• 
Convenience stores 
• 
Restaurants, cafes and bars. 
 
Here it is shown that the activity types of museums, libraries, theatres, concert halls and cinemas 
together form the activity category Culture. It is assessed that these activity types form the main 
opportunities for Culture for youths in rural areas. 
Several of the other activity categories have been adapted to some degree. For Education, 
primary schools are not taken into account, as it is to be expected that youths (15-25 years old) 
have finished primary school. For Shopping, popular activities among youths such as 
restaurants, cafes and bars are included, and similarly fitness centres are taken into account in 
the activity category Leisure. Hobbies are not considered for Leisure as reliable data has not 
been available for these types of activities.  
When analysing the data in section 4.4 the specific activities that are taken into account for each 
category are further described and defined.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
49 
 
4.3 Survey 
To better understand the transport behaviour and needs of youths, as well as their prioritisation 
of the different land-use based activity categories, an online survey has been carried out. The 
questionnaire consists of a total of 13 questions, where the respondents were asked to first 
prioritise different activity categories in term of importance to them and secondly questions 
regarding their transport needs and availability were asked. Furthermore, questions regarding 
basic information in terms of e.g. gender, age and place of residence were also asked. The full 
questionnaire is shown in Appendix B as well as the overall results. 
4.3.1 Bias and limitations 
A total of 68 respondents answered the questionnaire. Of these responses stated 59 that they 
were indeed between 15 and 25 years old. The responses where the stated age was below 15 or 
above 25 have not been taking into account in the analysis. Furthermore, responses stating that 
the respondent does not live in Guldborgsund Municipality are also not taken into account. 
Therefore, a total of 55 responses are used in the analysis.  
The target group for the survey was youths between the age 15 and 25 in Guldborgsund 
Municipality. To reach this target group the survey was sent out to six education institutions 
within the municipality. Therefore, one can also expect an overrepresentation of students in the 
survey, as no people with work as their primary occupation would be expected to be reached 
through these channels.  
Furthermore, no answers for the ages 15 or 16 was received. This consequently makes the survey 
not representative of the target group – as not all groups of individuals in the population are 
represented.  
Lastly, the survey does not clearly focus on people actually living in rural areas, which is defined 
in this project as towns with less than 1.000 inhabitants. The majority of respondents state to be 
living in a town with more than 1.000 people. 
Taking these possible biases into account, the survey is not representative of the population. It 
is however worth noticing that all the considered respondents are living in the study area of 
Guldborgsund Municipality, which is categorised as a rural municipality. Therefore, the 
respondents of this survey can be expected to have comparable transport behaviour and needs 
to youths in rural areas as defined in this project.  
Similarly, the respondents of this survey will be expected to have significantly different transport 
behaviour and needs than youths in a larger city. For this reason the survey can be seen, as still 
providing useful knowledge of youths’ travel behaviour, as well as their prioritisation of activity 
categories. Therefore, the survey is also used to estimate the weights for each activity category 
in this case study.  
4.3.2 Results of the survey 
In the survey the respondents were asked to answer a total of 13 questions, which mainly focused 
on the respondents background, the availability of transport modes and their prioritisation of 
the activity categories. Furthermore, questions regarding the respondents’ knowledge and usage 
==PAGE:60==
50 
 
of Demand Responsive Transport (DRT) services as well as their opinion on how to improve the 
public transport in general were asked. Taking the possible biases and limitations of the survey 
into account, the results of the survey are presented in the following. 
Background of the respondents 
As previously discussed, the survey is biased, which is among other things due to the stated 
background of the respondents. This will often be the case when the sample is relatively small 
as in this case and not targeted to all within the population.  
The majority of the respondents are female with 73 % stating female and 23 % male as their 
gender.  
The results from the survey show that the professions of the respondents are solely students. All 
answers in the category other indicated that the respondents are studying at a production school. 
Furthermore, the average age of the respondents is 20,7 years, with the majority being either 20 
or 21 years old. No respondents were either 15 or 16 years old.  
Finally, the survey is also not on target when it comes to the stated living areas of the 
respondents. Here the respondents were asked to select from a list where they live. This list 
consists of the 10 towns in Guldborgsund Municipality with more than 1.000 inhabitants along 
with a category of “In a smaller town or in the countryside” as well as an “Other” category. 52 or 
95 % stated that they are living in one of the towns with more than 1.000 inhabitants, which is 
an urban area per definition in this project. Three respondents stated to be living in a rural area.  
When analysing the background of the respondents it is clear that the target group is not well 
represented in the survey. With the majority of respondents living in urban areas and none 
neither working, unemployed or being 15 or 16 years old, it is clear that the survey is biased and 
therefore has limitations. However, the results are nevertheless used to demonstrate how 
weights can be estimated as well as to give knowledge about the travel needs of youths in 
Guldborgsund Municipality. 
Transport modes and availability 
The respondents were asked to answer questions regarding their primary transport mode as well 
as the availability of different transport modes and whether or not they do have a driver’s license 
to different vehicle types.  
The results show that 3 in 4 uses other transport modes than the car, as shown in Figure 15. 
Almost half (45 %) uses public transport, whereas 18 % uses the bicycle. Of the 6 answers in the 
category Other, 5 answered that they primarily walk and one stated to be driving with a family 
member.  
One reason why few state that their primary transport mode as the car, could be that a car is 
not available to them, or that they do not have a driver’s license. There could be a tendency to 
car availability limiting the transport mode choice, as only 18 (32 % of the respondents) stated 
that they have a car available to them in their everyday lives. This is low compared to the data 
from the Danish Travel Survey, where 92 % of youths in rural areas have access to a car in their 
household (as shown in Table 7 in section 4.1.2). 
==PAGE:61==
51 
 
 
FIGURE 15 – QUESTION 3. PRIMARY TRANSPORT MODE. 
Furthermore 25 (45 % of the respondents) stated that they have access to a bicycle, and 2 
respondents stated to have access to a moped. None had access to a motorcycle. The limited 
access to different vehicle types can help explain why a majority either use walking or public 
transport as their primary transport mode, as 15 (27 % of the respondents) did not state to 
have access to any private vehicle types. 
Driver’s licenses are also not that common for the respondents. 45 % of the respondents state 
to have a driver’s license. This is significantly lower than the expected share of 80 % of youths 
in rural areas or 72 % in urban areas (as shown in Table 6 in section 4.1.2). This can be due to 
bias in the survey, as the expected share of 80 % is also expected to be close to the share for the 
population of youths in Guldborgsund Municipality.  
Estimation of weights 
The weights estimated based on the survey are used to later estimate the cost sensitivity 
parameters (). This is done in section 4.4.3. 
To estimate the weights and help understand the land-use activity and travel needs of youths, 
two key questions were asked, with the first one being:  
“To which extent do you agree with the following statement:  
In my everyday life it is important for me to have good access to:” 
Using a likert scale the respondents then indicated the importance of each of the eight activity 
categories. The results are shown in Figure 16.  
The figure shows that Family and friends, Education, Health and services and Jobs are 
generally of high importance, where the majority agree with the statement. For all the categories 
a majority of the respondents either strongly agrees or agrees that it is important for them to 
have access to the activity. However, for the three activity categories Culture, Leisure and Nature 
25%
18%
45%
11%
Car
Bicycle
Bus or train
Other…
==PAGE:62==
52 
 
and green areas fewer respondents compared to the other activity categories strongly agrees 
with the statement. 
 
FIGURE 16 – QUESTION 1. TO WHICH DEGREE DO YOU AGREE WITH THE FOLLOWING STATEMENT: IN MY DAY 
TO DAY LIFE IT IS IMPORTANT FOR ME TO HAVE ACCESS TO (ACTIVITY CATEGORY). 
The responses from Question 1 can be compared to the results for Question 2, where the land-
use activity and travel needs of youths again are addressed. Question 2 is formulated as: 
 “Which activities are for you most important to have good access to? Please range the 
following categories in order of priority.” 
Here each respondent can choose an integer number on an importance scale from 1 to 8 for each 
of the 8 activity categories. Each number can only be assigned to one activity category and the 
number 8 is to be assigned to the activity category with the highest importance and 1 similarly 
to the lowest.  
Based on number of responses for each of the assigned numbers of the importance scale, 
Importance scores (E)  are calculated as the sum of the multiplication of the number of 
responses times the importance scale value.  
The weights for each activity category (') are found by a normalisation of the importance 
scores, which is done using the following formula. In this case a scale from 1 to 10 is chosen for 
the weights. The reason for choosing a scale with a lowest value of 1 and not 0, is that this scale 
value is assigned to the lowest weighted activity category. If a scale of e.g. 0-10 was chosen, it 
would indicate that the lowest weighted activity category had no value at all for the target group, 
which cannot be expected to be the case. 
 
' = 1 + (E −E) ∙(10 −1)
E/G −E
 
(9) 
 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90% 100%
Shopping
Nature and green areas
Leisure
Jobs
Family and friends
Health and services
Education
Culture
Strongly agree
Agree
Neither agree or disagree
Disagree
Strongly disagree
==PAGE:63==
53 
 
Where E/G and E are respectively the maximum and minimum importance score. It is worth 
noticing, that a low importance score will result in a low weight and vice versa. 
The number of responses for each activity category distributed on the importance scale is shown 
in Table 9. Here the calculated importance scores and weights are also shown. 
TABLE 9 – QUESTION 2. DISTRIBUTION OF RESPONSES FOR EACH ACTIVITY CATEGORY AS WELL AS THE 
CALCULATED IMPORTANCE SCORES AND WEIGHTS.  
  
Most important
Least important   
  
Importance scale 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
Importance score (Sk) Weight (Wk)
Culture 
4 
0 
1 
7 
3 
9 
3 
28
146 
1,0 
Education 
20 
16
7 
8 
0 
1 
3 
0 
363 
10,0 
Health and services 
7 
12 12 12
1 
7 
1 
3 
302 
7,5 
Family and friends 
15 
8 
9 
6 
8 
3 
4 
2 
311 
7,8 
Jobs 
4 
11 13
6 11
2 
6 
2 
281 
6,6 
Leisure 
1 
2 
3 
4 10 12
15
8 
174 
2,2 
Nature and green areas 
1 
2 
2 
3 
8 
15
16
8 
166 
1,8 
Shopping 
3 
4 
8 
9 14
6 
7 
4 
237 
4,8 
 
The tendency shown in the responses for Question 1, where the activity categories Education, 
Family and friends and Health and services are stated to be most important, is again the case 
in Question 2. Here these three activity categories are assigned the highest weights. Education 
have the highest importance score, which leads to the maximum weight of 10.  
The fact that the activity category Education is assigned the highest weight is not surprising, as 
all the respondents in the survey are currently students. The Family and friends (population) 
category is also weighed high, which is to be expected due to the fact that this is an important 
social aspect of young people’s lives.  
It is however to some extent surprising that Health and services is weighed as high as it is  the 
case. Youths can be expected to be relatively healthy and used to use online services such as 
internet banking, instant messaging, etc., and therefore one would expect a low need for access 
to these activities. One reason for this could be that Health and services is considered something 
essential, which without proper access can greatly lower the life quality of the individual – even 
though it is infrequently used. 
Jobs is assigned a weight of 6,6. It is worth noticing that even though the stated main occupation 
of the respondents is student; they can still have a spare-time job, and for this, access can be 
weighted high. An indicator of this could also be the fact that Jobs have been chosen as having 
the second or third highest importance respectively 11 and 13 times in Question 2. 
Shopping, which consists of activity types such as shops, restaurants and cafes, a lower weight 
of 4,8 is assigned. One reason that shopping is weighted at this level can be that youths (and 
students in this case) do not have a lot of money to spend in shops. Furthermore, some of the 
youths may have other people in their household who take care of the everyday essentials such 
==PAGE:64==
54 
 
as shopping for groceries. Another aspect to consider when assigning a weight to Shopping is 
online shopping. If online shopping is used a lot for shopping for clothes, gadgets, etc., which in 
many cases make the need for access to a physical store redundant, it could furthermore add to 
the explanation of the relatively high weight of Health and services, since the youths would have 
a need to go to a post office to collect a parcel from time to time. 
The lowest weights are assigned to the categories Culture (1,0), Nature and green areas (1,8) 
and Leisure (2,2). These three categories can all be seen as categories which add to a person’s 
life quality, but to some extent are not essential in a day-to-day life. This can be one reason why 
these three activity categories have been assigned to the lowest weights. Another aspect can be 
if the youths do not actually use either culture or leisure activities or nature and green areas in 
their everyday life. If that is the case for most youths, the activity categories will likely not have 
a high priority or importance compared to other activities.  
Other results from the survey 
The respondents of the survey were also asked to state their knowledge of the demand responsive 
transport (DRT) service called Flextur (Question 7) as well as if they had ever used Flextur and 
the student specific StudieFlex (Question 8). The results show that more than half have never 
heard of Flextur and only 18 % have actually used the DRT services.  
DRT services can be a good way to ensure access in rural areas and increase the accessibility, but 
if a majority of the respondent have never heard of the service, it does not add value for them. It 
is important to notice that almost all of the respondents (95 %) are living in urban areas, which 
can be one reason why so few have heard of or used the service. It can be expected that a higher 
share of youths living in rural areas compared to the respondents have heard of the service and 
used it, as it often can be the only feasible alternative to private transport in rural areas. 
However, increasing the awareness of Flextur’s and StudieFlex’s would be expected to increase 
the services currently relatively low market share.  
Furthermore, the respondents were asked to comment on what could make public transport 
more attractive for them (Question 9). It is clear that the cost of transport is a major concern for 
many of the respondents, who states lower prices as a thing that would make public transport 
more attractive. Furthermore, higher frequency, better correspondences or less waiting time of 
the public transport services is a stated preference. One person writes:  
“Improved departure times, so it fits better with school/work/shifts. Now I spend up to 
50 min extra on transport, because it does not fit with the time I must be at school...”10 
Here it is clear that the respondent in his/her opinion spend unnecessary time in waiting for the 
bus. This can be due to the relatively low frequency of most bus lines, which will often lead to 
longer waiting times. However, the respondent also points out, that there can be a hidden 
waiting time due to the fact that the bus schedule does not correspond with the meeting times 
at the school. For this reason, it can be necessary for students to take an earlier bus in the 
morning to not be late, even though this bus in this case is 50 min early. With a higher frequency 
                                                     
10 In Danish: ”Bedre afgangstider, så det bedre kan passe med skole/arbejde/skift. Nu bruger jeg ofte op til 
50 minutter ekstra på min transport, fordi det ikke passer med tidspunktet jeg skal møde på…” 
==PAGE:65==
55 
 
of this bus line or a time schedule which better suits the meeting times at the school this hidden 
waiting time will be reduced.  
4.4 Data analysis 
In the following, activities for each activity category is found and cost matrices and cost 
sensitivity parameters are estimated.  
The location for different activities in each activity category is found using different types of open 
source data. In this project addresses from the Danish VAT-register (CVR-register) (VIRK, 
2018) have been geocoded to find the location of different activities. Furthermore, all residential 
access addresses in Guldborgsund Municipality have been used in the analysis and were found 
in the central register DAWA (The Danish Agency for Data Supply and Efficiency, 2018).  
The open source Geographic Information Systems software QGIS (version 3.2.3) is used for the 
most part for the analysis and for the representation of the results. To estimate the cost matrices 
the extension Network Analyst in the application ArcMap (version 10.4.1.) is used.  
It is worth noticing that only activities within Guldborgsund Municipality are considered in the 
assessment. When people participate in activities they rarely consider or have limitations to 
which town or municipality the activity is located. However, the case study area has been limited 
to Guldborgsund Municipality, which means that activities in nearby towns such as Vordingborg 
or Maribo are not considered. Areas of Guldborgsund Municipality that are bordering Lolland 
or Vordingborg Municipality will therefore to some degree have a lower accessibility than if 
additional areas were considered in the assessment. Nevertheless, the assessment area has to 
have a limit and as youths in Guldborgsund Municipality is the chosen case in this project, this 
also makes an obvious choice of limitation of the study area.  
For the analysis, the study area has been divided into zones. These zones are 500 ∙ 500 I, and 
cover all land in Guldborgsund Municipality. The relatively small size of the zones of 0,25 KIA 
have been chosen to provide a greater level of detail to the results of the analysis. The total 
number of zones is 3949. 
4.4.1 Activities categories in zones 
To find the spatial location of activities, a few different methods have been used depending on 
the data available, which will be described in the following.  
For the five activity categories Education, Shopping, Culture, Leisure and Health and services ,  
addresses from the VAT-register have been geocoded, which means that each activity have been 
assigned a spatial location in the form of coordinates based on the addresses.   
All addresses in the VAT-register are divided into different business types, which in this project 
has been used to select which addresses to choose for each activity category. Which business 
types that are included in each activity are shown in Appendix C. Apart from this, the addresses 
have also been sorted, as some VAT-registered companies cannot actually be considered as an 
activity. This is for instance the case with holding companies.   
==PAGE:66==
56 
 
For the Job activity category, the VAT-register data has been used as well to estimate a number 
of workplaces for each zone. Under the assumption that different workplaces will provide 
different opportunities for jobs for youths, only specific types of workplaces have been included 
in the analysis. Each included workplace in a zone thereby adds one activity. Similarly to the 
previous mentioned activity categories, only some relevant business types have been selected to 
represent job opportunities or activities for youths. The selected business types for Jobs are also 
shown in Appendix C. Furthermore, the number of jobs in each zone is shown in Appendix D. 
A more precise and accurate representation of the job category would require data of the number 
of jobs for each workplace. This additional data has not been accessible and this representation 
is therefore not considered.  
The activity category Friends and family has been based upon an estimation of the population 
in each zone.  Under the assumption that the better accessibility an individual living in a zone i 
has to other people, the better accessibility this individual has to his/her friends and family.  
As data for all residential access addresses in Guldborgsund Municipality is available, but not 
the exact number of people living at each address, the assumption that the total residential 
population of Guldborgsund is equally spread across all residential access addresses is made. 
Thereby the sum of the people living in each zone is estimated, and put into different categories 
as shown in Figure 17. These categories for each zone (0, 1, 2, 3 or 4) are used to define the 
number of “activities” in the specific zone for the activity category Family and friends.   
For the final activity category Nature and green areas it can be difficult to determine which 
locations that are indeed considered a nature or green areas. It depends a lot on perception and 
local knowledge. Is a cemetery used for recreational purposes, or is it the nearby park, which is 
most often used to walk the dog?  
To better understand which nature and green areas that are of recreational value to especially 
youths, locations for the activity category Nature and green areas have been selected based on 
online research and feedback from the local collaboration partners in Guldborgsund 
Municipality. 13 locations have been selected as part of Nature or green areas and a figure with 
the specific locations within this category can be found in Appendix D. 
 
==PAGE:67==
57 
 
 
FIGURE 17 – CATEGORISATION OF THE ACTIVITY CATEGORY FAMILY AND FRIENDS BASED ON AN ESTIMATE OF 
THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE (POPULATION) LIVING IN EACH ZONE ((),LML). 
For all activity categories, except for Friends and family (population) and Jobs, the spatial 
location of the activities included in the analysis are shown in Figure 18.  
 
==PAGE:68==
58 
 
 
FIGURE 18 – SPATIAL LOCATION FOR ACTIVITIES IN THE CATEGORIES EDUCATION, HEALTH AND SERVICES, 
LEISURE, CULTURE, SHOPPING AND NATURE AND GREEN AREAS.  
Here it is clear, that most activities are located in Nykøbing F. and in the smaller towns of e.g. 
Sakskøbing, Nørre Alslev and Stubbekøbing. Also it is worth noticing that all activities in the 
category Education are located in Nykøbing F. For other activity categories the number of 
activities are higher and the activities are more spread-out. This is for example the case with the 
activity category Shopping or Leisure, which both have locations in both urban and rural areas 
of the municipality.  
==PAGE:69==
59 
 
Normalising the number of activities 
The total number of activities for each category varies between 9 activities for Education and 
2120 for Jobs.  
To be able to estimate the weighted number of activities () for each zone, a weight () is 
calculated for each activity category. These weights are shown in Table 10, and are simply 
calculated as 100 divided by the number of activities. Consequently, activity categories 
containing more than 100 activities will have a weight of less than 1 and vice versa. As Education 
only has a few activities (9) each of these activities are weighted 11,11, whereas for the activity 
category Jobs the number of activities are 2120, and therefore each activity is weighted with the 
low weight of 0,05.  
TABLE 10 – THE NUMBER OF ACTIVITIES AND THE CALCULATED WEIGHTS (N*) FOR EACH ACTIVITY 
CATEGORY. 
Category
(k) 
Number of activities
(∑()*
)
) 
Weights
(vk) 
Culture
22
4,55
Education
9
11,11
Health and services
60
1,67
Family and friends
806
0,12
Jobs
2120
0,05
Leisure
40
2,50
Nature and green areas
13
7,69
Shopping
145
0,69
 
4.4.2 Estimation of cost matrices 
Cost matrices for both private and public transport are estimated to be used when assessing the 
accessibility in rural areas. Two networks for respectively private and public transport are set up 
consisting of centroids (the origin- and destination point in each zone) and connectors from the 
centroids to a road or public network. Both networks are shown in Appendix E.  
To set up the two networks and estimating the cost matrices, the Network Analysis extension 
for ArcMap is used. For each zone a centroid or centre point is found, which form both the origin- 
and destination point for the zone. To connect this point to the rest of the network, a connector 
is made in each zone for respectively private and public transport. This connector connects to 
either the nearest road section or the nearest bus stop.  
For all links and connectors, a travel time is estimated. This travel time represent the cost for 
each link, and therefore the cost matrices represent a minimum value of the shortest path. The 
shortest path is then the sum of the travel time on both connectors and links between two zones.  
The calculation of the cost matrices is based on a simple calculation of distance and speed 
between zones, which gives an average travel time. By estimating the cost matrices based on an 
iterative process in a transport model, a more precise result could be achieved where e.g. 
congestion on roads or frequency for public transport could be considered.  
==PAGE:70==
60 
 
As in many aspects of this project, there is a conflict between theory and practice. On one hand 
a more precise result could be achieved, but on the other hand, it would require additional and 
more advanced transport models, which would not necessarily lead to a much more precise 
result. Therefore, as a way of ensuring a better operationalisation in this project, it is chosen to 
use this simple time-distance method. 
Private transport network 
The road network, which is used to estimate the cost matrix for private transport (cars), is a 
simple road network of all roads within Guldborgsund Municipality. This network has been 
provided by the municipal administration.  
For the private transport network the free flow speed is used, which means that no congestion 
is taken into account. Therefore, all travel times are based on the free flow speed for different 
road classes, which in this project leads to three different speeds on links/roads: 110 km/h for 
motorways, 80 for main roads and 50 for secondary roads. As it can be assumed that the 
connectors most often consists of secondary roads, the speed for the connectors is also set to 50 
km/h. 
Public transport network 
The public network is based on free accessible data from Movia for the location of all the bus 
stops and bus lines in the municipality (Movia, 2018a). In this project the public network has 
been remade and simplified to connect each bus stop to a bus line. In this process, only one stop 
has been considered in all the places, where there is a bus stop on either side of the road.  
Train lines are not a part of the network, but this leads to the network not being fully connected. 
Therefore a replacement bus line for the local train line between Sakskøbing and Nykøbing F. 
has been created with the same characteristics as the other bus lines. 
For the public transport network, an average speed for the entire network has been estimated 
based on observations in Google Maps of time schedules and travel times between several 
smaller towns. For the direct bus lines the average speeds in rural areas are approximately 40 
km/h. This does, however, not take shifts into account. Due to a relatively low frequency for 
most bus lines in rural areas compared to urban areas, a shift often leads to relative long waiting 
times, which greatly influences the average travel time. To take this disutility into account the 
average speed for the public transport links is set to 30 km/h throughout the network.  
The connectors for public transport represent the access and egress to and from the bus stops. 
Due to the fact that access and egress can be a challenge and is often done by either walking or 
cycling, the connector speed is set to 10 km/h.  
Travel time 
The average travel time from one zone to all other zones is shown for both networks in Figure 19 
and Figure 20.  
==PAGE:71==
61 
 
 
FIGURE 19 – AVERAGE TRAVEL TIME FROM EVERY ZONE TO ALL OTHER ZONES IN THE ROAD NETWORK. ONLY 
MAIN ROADS ARE SHOWED IN THIS FIGURE. 
For the private transport network, the average travel time is lowest in Nykøbing F. and in close 
proximity to the main roads connecting the town to the rest of the municipality. There is a clear 
tendency that the further away that a zone is located from Nykøbing F. the higher the average 
travel time is. This can to some extent be explained by the fact that a zone in the outskirts of the 
municipality will on average have a higher average travel distance than a centrally located zone.  
==PAGE:72==
62 
 
 
FIGURE 20 - AVERAGE TRAVEL TIME FROM EVERY ZONE TO ALL OTHER ZONES IN THE PUBLIC TRANSPORT 
NETWORK. 
For public transport (Figure 20) the average travel time is higher for all zones compared to the 
private transport network. This is due to the fact that the travel speed on both connectors and 
links (bus lines) is significantly lower in the public transport network. Additionally, the 
connectors, which have a low travel speed of 10 km/h, are also generally longer in the public 
transport network, as the bus lines are not as widely spread out as the road network. 
==PAGE:73==
63 
 
Similarly to the private transport network, the average travel time is generally shorter in 
Nykøbing F. and the centrally located zones of the municipality. Furthermore, the travel time is 
less in zones in a close proximity to a bus stop.  
4.4.3 Estimation of cost sensitivity parameters 
To estimate the cost sensitivity parameters () the weights from the survey (see 4.3.2, Table 9) 
are used. As previously explained the weights are converted to cost sensitivity parameters by 
multiplying with a simple conversion factor.  
The cost sensitivity parameters will indicate the gravitational effect of the cost (
) in the 
distance decay function, as shown in the before described gravity measure for the accessibility 
index (Equation 6 in 3.3.1).  
Estimation of the conversion factor 
A calculation example is set up to analyse the effect of different conversion factors on the cost 
sensitivity parameters () and the distance decay function in general. Here the survey weights 
(') are kept constant, but the conversion factor is changed.  
 
FIGURE 21 - DISTANCE (COST) DECAY FUNCTIONS FOR THE DIFFERENT ACTIVITY CATEGORIES WITH A 
CONVERSION FACTOR OF 0,1. 
Figure 21, Figure 22 and Figure 23 show distance decay functions for all activity categories with 
a conversion factor of 0,1 and 0,01 and 0,2 respectively. Here it is clear that a smaller conversion 
factor leads to less influence of the distance decay function.  
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
0,9
1
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
125
130
135
140
145
150
155
160
165
170
175
180
185
190
195
200
205
210
215
220
225
230
235
240
exp(-βk * cij)
Cost (min)
Culture
Education
Health and services
Family and friends
Jobs
Leisure
Nature and green areas
Shopping
==PAGE:74==
64 
 
 
FIGURE 22 – DISTANCE (COST) DECAY FUNCTIONS FOR THE DIFFERENT ACTIVITY CATEGORIES WITH A 
CONVERSION FACTOR OF 0,01. 
After having tested and seen how a number of different conversion factors impact the distance 
decay function, a conversion factor of 0,1 is chosen as a qualified estimate in the analysis. This 
conversion factor is chosen because it can be seen as given suitable distance decay functions for 
all activity categories. It is assessed that this conversion factor lead to distance decay functions, 
which are good qualified estimates of youths willingness to spend time traveling to activities. As 
the cost (minutes) increases the distance decay function approaches zero at a high rate for the 
activity categories with the lowest weights (Nature and green areas, Leisure and Culture). This 
can help show that these categories are indeed not weighted high and therefore the willingness 
to spend time traveling to these activity categories are not high.  
Similarly the activity category, which were assigned the highest weights (Education, Family and 
friends and Health and services) still decreases at the cost increases, but with a lower rate. 
When comparing a conversion factor of 0,1 (See Figure 21) to a lower conversion factor of e.g. 
0,01 (See Figure 22) the rates of which the distance decay functions are decreasing, are 
significantly less. With a conversion factor of 0,01 the distance decay functions cannot be 
expected to represent youths’ willingness to participate in the different activity categories, as 
there is a relatively small difference between the travel time to an activity being e.g. 60 min or 
240 min. It can be expected that activities located e.g. 4 hours away have a very low or close to 
0 value for an individual. For a higher conversion factor less value is assigned to activities further 
away, which is one reason why a conversion of 0,1 is chosen initially. 
Similarly, when comparing a conversion factor of 0,1 (See Figure 21) to a higher conversion 
factor of 0,2 (See Figure 23) the rates of which the distance decay functions are decreasing, are 
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
0,9
1
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
125
130
135
140
145
150
155
160
165
170
175
180
185
190
195
200
205
210
215
220
225
230
235
240
exp(-βk * cij)
Cost (min)
Culture
Education
Health and services
Family and friends
Jobs
Leisure
Nature and green areas
Shopping
==PAGE:75==
65 
 
significantly higher. A conversion factor of 0,2 lead to lower willingness to spend time traveling 
to activities.  
 
FIGURE 23 - DISTANCE (COST) DECAY FUNCTIONS FOR THE DIFFERENT ACTIVITY CATEGORIES WITH A 
CONVERSION FACTOR OF 0,2. 
As stated above a conversion factor of 0,1 is chosen as a qualified estimate in the analysis. In 
Table 11 the estimated cost sensitivity parameters for all activity categories based on this 
conversion factor are shown. 
TABLE 11 – WEIGHTS (O*) ESTIMATED BASED ON THE SURVEY AND COST SENSITIVITY PARAMETERS (P*) 
BASED ON A CONVERSION FACTOR OF 0,1. 
Activity category 
O*
P*
Culture 
1.0 
0.100 
Education 
10.0 
0.010 
Health and services 
7.5 
0.013 
Family and friends 
7.8 
0.013 
Jobs 
6.6 
0.015 
Leisure 
2.2 
0.046 
Nature and green areas 
1.8 
0.055 
Shopping 
4.8 
0.021 
 
 
 
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
0,9
1
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
125
130
135
140
145
150
155
160
165
170
175
180
185
190
195
200
205
210
215
220
225
230
235
240
exp(-βk * cij)
Cost (min)
Culture
Education
Health and services
Family and friends
Jobs
Leisure
Nature and green areas
Shopping
==PAGE:76==
66 
 
4.5 Results of the case study 
The accessibility index is used to estimate accessibility for each zone in Guldborgsund 
Municipality for both private and public transport. This is done based on the data analysis and 
the estimation of both cost matrices and cost sensitivity parameters as well the spatial location 
of all activities. First, the accessibility by private transport (car) is analysed, after which the same 
is done for public transport. 
When comparing accessibility for public and private transport respectively, significant 
differences can be observed. As shown in Table 12 the average total accessibility for private 
transport is more than double the average total of public transport. This tendency of the average 
accessibility being higher is also present for all activity categories. For Culture, the average 
accessibility for private transport is more than 10 times higher than for public transport.  
As the other inputs are kept constant, this tendency is merely due to the different cost matrices, 
which lead to general longer travel times for public than private transport.  
TABLE 12 - AVERAGE ACCESSIBILITY FOR ALL ZONES BY ACTIVITY CATEGORY FOR RESPECTIVELY PUBLIC AND 
PRIVATE TRANSPORT. SURVEY WEIGHTS AND A CONVERSION FACTOR OF 0,1. 
Avg. Accessibility 
Public
Private
Culture 
2,5
26,8
Education 
56,4
86,9
Health and services 
458
82,5
Population 
40,9
80,8
Jobs 
39,1
79,4
Leisure 
8,7
49,5
Nature and green areas 
5,4
38,2
Shopping 
18,5
42,1
  
  
  
Average total 
217,3
486,1
4.5.1 Overall accessibility by private transport 
In the following the accessibility by private transport (car) is assessed. This is done based on the 
cost matrix for private transport. 
The accessibility from each zone by private transport is shown in Figure 24. Here, a clear 
tendency of the accessibility being highest in and around Nykøbing F. can be observed. This is 
due to the fact that there is a high concentration of activities in the towns, but also that the travel 
time from this area is generally lower than in other areas (as shown in Figure 19). 
In the smaller towns of e.g. Stubbekøbing, Nørre Alslev and Nysted it could be expected that the 
accessibility would be higher, as more activities are located there compared to more rural 
locations. Nevertheless, there are no significant differences between these towns and the 
surrounding rural areas of each town. This can be due to two factors. Firstly, the travel time to 
the main town of Nykøbing F. being very similar in the respective towns and in the surrounding 
rural areas of the towns. Secondly, with travel times generally being relatively short by car, most 
==PAGE:77==
67 
 
activities will to some extent have some value in the distance decay function in the accessibility 
index, as discussed in section 4.4.3. Shorter travel times mean that the activities are closer in 
time, which gives them more value in the accessibility index. 
 
FIGURE 24 - ACCESSIBILITY INDEX SCORES (QR) FOR PRIVATE TRANSPORT IN GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY 
WITH SURVEY WEIGHTS OF YOUTHS AND A CONVERSION FACTOR OF 0,1. 
 
 
==PAGE:78==
68 
 
4.5.2 Overall accessibility by public transport 
For public transport, accessibility is estimated based on the developed framework, the weights 
from the survey, and the cost matrix for the public transport network. 
The results are shown in Figure 25. The lowest accessibility by public transport can be observed 
in the outer rims of the municipality, especially in areas not in close proximity to a bus line.  
 
FIGURE 25 – ACCESSIBILITY INDEX SCORES (QR) FOR PUBLIC TRANSPORT IN GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY 
WITH SURVEY WEIGHTS OF YOUTHS AND A CONVERSION FACTOR OF 0,1.  
==PAGE:79==
69 
 
In the northern part of the island Falster, west of Nørre Alslev, the lowest accessibility index 
scores can be observed. This is due to a combination of different things. First of all, there is just 
one single bus line, which connects this area to Sakskøbing, and from there another bus line 
connects to the main town of Nykøbing F. This means that most activities are placed relatively 
far away by public transport from this area, as the majority of all activities are places in 
Nykøbing F. and many are placed elsewhere in Falster. 
When comparing the accessibility scores of public transport to private transport there are 
significant differences. Firstly, the accessibility for private transport is significantly better for 
each area or specific zone. This is due to the fact that the travel speed and thereby travel time 
in the private transport network are significantly shorter. Consequently, all who uses a car as a 
transport mode will have fairly easy access to all activities in Nykøbing F. and other towns.  
Secondly, the accessibility for public transport is better along the public transport lines and in 
areas in close proximity to bus stops. This is different from the accessibility for private 
transport, where even though the accessibility is highest in Nykøbing F., there is a clear 
tendency that it decreases the further away a zone is located from Nykøbing F.  
It is worth noticing that as the regional train line between Nørre Alslev and Nykøbing F. (with 
stop in Eskilstrup) is not included in the public transport network, the estimated accessibility 
in this area could be improved to some degree by including this train line in the assessment.  
4.5.3 Accessibility for specific activity categories 
The developed framework facilitates accessibility assessment for specific activity categories, 
which is done in the following.  
When comparing the specific accessibility for each activity category, it is clear that the assigned 
weight for the activity category greatly influences the accessibility. The accessibility for each 
specific activity category, other than the ones shown in this section, is shown in Appendix F and 
Appendix G for respectively private and public transport. 
An example of this can be seen when comparing Figure 26 and Figure 27, which show 
accessibility to respectively the activity category Education and Shopping for public transport. 
As the cost matrix (
) is kept constant, the only input differences are the different number of 
activities () and the different cost sensitivity parameters ().  
The number of activities for each category have been weighted to be able to compare the 
accessibility of the different activity categories. This weighted number of activities is called . 
The sum of the weighted number of activities for each activity category is the same (100) for all 
categories. This means that the impact on the results of having a different number of activities 
for each category therefore will be limited.  
In this case, the number of activities is 9 for Education and 145 for Shopping. The effect of the 
number of activities depends theoretically mainly on the location of the activities and how 
spread-out they are in the assessment area. For the activities in the Education category they are 
all located in or within a close proximity to Nykøbing F., which lead to a general high accessibility 
for the activity category with the lowest scores being in the outskirts of the municipality.  
==PAGE:80==
70 
 
The activities in the Shopping category are more spread-out compared to Education, however 
still with a majority in the town of Nykøbing F. Nevertheless, for a person living in e.g. Nysted 
or Sakskøbing there will be shopping opportunities nearby, which will have some effect on the 
accessibility for Shopping in particular. An example of this effect of the spread of activities can 
be seen when the cost sensitivity parameter is kept constant. By setting the cost sensitivity 
parameter of Shopping equal to the cost sensitivity parameter of Education (,-./01 = 0,01), 
the only difference between the two will be the (weighted) number of activities.  
 
FIGURE 26 - ESTIMATED ACCESSIBILITY BY PUBLIC TRANSPORT TO EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS FOR YOUTHS 
IN GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY. 
==PAGE:81==
71 
 
 
FIGURE 27 – ESTIMATED ACCESSIBILITY BY PUBLIC TRANSPORT TO SHOPPING FOR YOUTHS IN 
GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY. 
The accessibility of Shopping, where ST1UUV,4W  ,-./01  0,01 is shown in Figure 28. In 
this figure it is clear that the accessibility increases with a reduced cost sensitivity, as ST1UUV 
was 0,021 before. It can also be observed that the average accessibility for Shopping increases 
to 32,1 with a cost sensitivity parameter equal to the parameter for Education. This value was 
18,5 for the average accessibility for Shopping with the original cost sensitivity parameter. 
==PAGE:82==
72 
 
The average accessibility for Education is 56,4. The effect of the spread of activities is in this case 
thereby equal to the difference between the average accessibility for Education and the average 
accessibility for Shopping with equal cost sensitivity parameters. In this case the difference is 
equal to 24,3. The remaining difference between average accessibility for respectively Education 
and Shopping is due to the different cost sensitivity parameters. This difference is 13,6.  
Therefore, theoretically the average accessibility of Shopping would be 32,1 (an increase of 13,6) 
if Shopping was weighted equally to Education.  
 
FIGURE 28 - ESTIMATED ACCESSIBILITY BY PUBLIC TRANSPORT TO SHOPPING FOR YOUTHS IN 
GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY WITH A COST SENSITIVITY PARAMETER OF PXYZ  [, [\. 
==PAGE:83==
73 
 
The developed index and framework can be used to assess accessibility in all areas for all pre-
defined activity categories. In this case study it provides a good understanding of, which areas 
that have a good overall accessibility and for which areas accessibility is less good. It can 
therefore be used to identify these areas, but also identity specific areas for specific activity 
categories, for which the measured accessibility is good or less good. In the following the 
sensitivity of specific parameters on the results is tested.  
4.6 Sensitivity of the analysis 
The cost sensitivity parameters () have a significant influence on how sensitive the results of 
the accessibility index are towards disutility, which in this case is in the form of travel time 
between zones.  
To test how different cost sensitivity parameters influence the results of the accessibility index, 
first, the conversion factor is changed, and then secondly, a new estimate for weights are tested.  
4.6.1 Changing the conversion factor 
As shown in section 4.4.3, the conversion factor, which is used to estimate the cost sensitivity 
parameters based upon the weights from the survey, has a significant impact on the cost 
sensitivity parameters and thereby the results. To test the sensitivity of the conversion factor it 
is therefore doubled to 0,2 and the accessibility index scores for public transport are 
recalculated. All other input and parameters are not changed. The accessibility index scores for 
all zones using a conversion factor of 0,2 are shown in Figure 29. 
In Table 13 the average accessibility index scores are shown for all activity categories for a 
conversion factor of respectively 0,1 and 0,2. Here it is clear - as it could be expected - that the 
accessibility is lower for all categories with a higher conversion factor of 0,2.  
TABLE 13 – COMPARISON OF AVERAGE ACCESSIBILITY INDEX SCORES OF 0,1 AND 0,2 AND THE DIFFERENCE 
BETWEEN THEM. 
Avg. Accessibility 
Conversion 
factor = 0,1 
Conversion 
factor = 0,2 
Relative 
difference 
Absolute 
difference
Culture 
2,5
0.5
-79 %
-2,0
Education 
56,4
34.3
-39 %
-22,1
Health and services 
45,8
23.9
-48 %
-21,9
Population 
40,9
19.6
-52 %
-21,3
Jobs 
39,1
18.4
-53 %
-20,7
Leisure 
8,7
2.2
-74 %
-6,4
Nature and green areas 
5,4
1.2
-77 %
-4,2
Shopping 
18,5
7.9
-57 %
-10,6
  
  
  
  
  
Total 
217,3
108.1
-50 %
-109,2
 
The relative difference is largest for the low weighted activity categories. This is due to the fact 
that a higher conversion factor leads to a lower willingness to pay, especially for these categories. 
==PAGE:84==
74 
 
Overall a doubling of the conversion factor will lead to approximately half the average total 
accessibility index score.  
 
FIGURE 29 - ACCESSIBILITY INDEX SCORES (QR) FOR PUBLIC TRANSPORT IN GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY 
WITH SURVEY WEIGHTS OF YOUTHS AND A CONVERSION FACTOR OF 0,2. 
To compare Figure 29 and Figure 25, which show the overall accessibility index scores for a 
conversion factor of respectively 0,2 and 0,1, the absolute difference between the two is shown 
in Figure 30. Here it is clear that the largest changes can be observed in areas in close proximity 
==PAGE:85==
75 
 
to Nykøbing F. The reason for this is that the willingness to travel from these areas to the 
activities in Nykøbing F. decreases.   
 
FIGURE 30 - ABSOLUTE DIFFERENCE IN ACCESSIBILITY INDEX SCORES FOR A CONVERSION FACTOR OF 0,2 
COMPARED TO A CONVERSION FACTOR OF 0,1. 
4.6.2 Implementing a new set of estimated weights 
The estimated weights for each activity category will have an influence on the overall 
accessibility index scores, as well as on the accessibility for the specific categories. To test the 
influence of the weights a new set of weights is set up based on a qualified estimate. This set of 
==PAGE:86==
76 
 
weights is called estimated weights (]) and will be compared to the weights based on the survey 
called survey weights ('). 
Estimating weights 
A new set of weights is set up based on a qualified estimate. This set of weights is presented in 
Table 14 and shown graphically in Figure 31, where it is compared to the survey weights. The 
weights are used to estimate cost sensitivity parameter using a conversion factor of 0,1. 
TABLE 14 –COMPARISON OF THE SURVEY WEIGHTS (O*) AND ESTIMATED WEIGHTS (Z*). 
Category
(k) 
Survey weights
(wk) 
Estimated weights
(uk) 
Culture
1,0
1,0
Education
10,0
10,0
Health and services
7,5
2,3
Family and friends
7,8
7,4
Jobs
6,6
8,7
Leisure
2,2
3,6
Nature and green areas
1,8
4,9
Shopping
4,8
6,1
 
 
FIGURE 31 – GRAPHICAL COMPARISON OF THE SURVEY WEIGHTS (O*) AND ESTIMATED WEIGHTS (Z*). 
In the estimated set of weights the highest weight is assigned to the activity category Education, 
and the lowest to the activity category Culture. The weights for these two activity categories are 
therefore the same for both set of weights.  
The main differences between the two set of weights are that Health and services is weighted 
significantly lower in the estimated weights than in the survey weights. This has been chosen 
due to the fact that it was assessed in the survey analysis (See section 4.3.2) that this activity 
category was unexpectedly weighted high. In the estimated low weight for Health and services 
it is therefore assumed that youths rarely need access to Health and service activities and more 
often use alternatives such as internet banking and other online services.  
0,0
1,0
2,0
3,0
4,0
5,0
6,0
7,0
8,0
9,0
10,0
Shopping
Nature and green areas
Leisure
Jobs
Family and friends
Health and services
Education
Culture
Weigths
Survey weights, w(k)
Estimated weigths, u(k)
==PAGE:87==
77 
 
On the other hand the activity categories Leisure and Nature and green areas are weighed 
higher, as it is assessed that this category can have social and recreational value for youths. In 
the survey weights, it can be expected that the activity categories Jobs and Shopping are 
weighted lower, as all respondents were students. Therefore are these two categories assigned a 
higher weight in the estimated weights.  
Results of a new set of estimated weights 
Based on the estimated set of weights the overall accessibility is estimated. These results are 
shown in Figure 32. The results show similar tendencies as for the results of the survey weights.  
FIGURE 32 - ACCESSIBILITY INDEX (QR) FOR PUBLIC TRANSPORT IN GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY WITH 
ESTIMATED WEIGHTS OF YOUTHS AND A CONVERSION FACTOR OF 0,1.  
==PAGE:88==
78 
 
When comparing the overall results to the results for the survey weights some differences can 
be observed. The differences for the accessibility index scores between the estimated weights 
and the survey weights are shown in Figure 33, where a negative value means a lower 
accessibility index score for the estimated weights compared to the survey weights.  
 
FIGURE 33 – DIFFERENCE IN ACCESSIBILITY INDEX SCORES BETWEEN THE USE OF ESTIMATED AND SURVEY 
WEIGHTS (CONVERSION FACTOR OF 0,1) 
==PAGE:89==
79 
 
The differences between the two set of weights are primarily in the north-western parts of the 
study area. Here the accessibility index scores are up to 5 % lower for the estimated weights than 
for the survey weights.  
The spatial locations the activities in each activity category lead to these differences. A number 
of activities in the category Health and services are located in the north-western parts of the 
study area. The lower weight for this activity category in the estimated weights will therefore 
have a negative impact on the overall accessibility index score for the estimated weights 
compared to the survey weights. Similar tendencies for other activity categories will also lead to 
differences in accessibility index scores for specific activity categories and therefore also the 
overall results. 
 
 
==PAGE:90==
80 
 
4.7 Recommendations for Guldborgsund Municipality 
In the following recommendations and ideas for further research are presented for Guldborg-
sund Municipality. The recommendations and ideas are based on the data analysis, the 
accessibility assessment and the literature study. Additionally, a new bus line is proposed and 
the accessibility impact is tested using the developed framework.  
4.7.1 Improvements in public transport to increase accessibility 
Accessibility for youths within Guldborgsund Municipality is lowest in the north-western part 
of the municipality, which is mainly due to a long route for public transport from this area to the 
main town of Nykøbing F. By improving transport solutions to and from this area, the 
accessibility will be improved. The accessibility could also be improved by creating new land-use 
based activities. 
There are different ways to improve the transport solutions in a rural area like this. One way is 
to create a new bus line, which create a direct link between this area and another area with 
activities. The possible impacts of such a new bus line is analysed and assessed in the following. 
It is worth noticing that the town of Vordingborg (north of the municipality) is outside the 
municipality, and is therefore not considered in the analysis. If Vordingborg was included in the 
assessment, accessibility would be expected increase in this specific area and the areas closest 
to the town. 
Introducing a new bus line 
In the assessment of accessibility of youths in Guldborgsund Municipality, it has been shown, 
that the north-western part of the municipality has relatively low accessibility compared to the 
rest of the study area. One way accessibility can be improved, is by introducing a new bus line or 
lengthening an existing line to and from the area. Such a new link between this area and the 
town of Nørre Alslev will create a better connection to the rest of the island of Falster (See Figure 
34). The new bus line is proposed between the town of Nørre Alslev and the village of Øster 
Kippinge. 
To estimate the accessibility index scores in this scenario, where a new bus line in introduced, a 
new link of 6,3 km is set up in the public transport network, and the cost matrix for public 
transport is recalculated. Thereby this new cost matrix is used as an input in the estimation of 
accessibility index scores. All other inputs and parameters remain the same. 
In Table 15 the average accessibility is shown for each activity category for both the current 
situation and a scenario with a new bus line. The new bus line will lead to different grades of 
improvement for the different activity categories. The reason for this is the difference in spatial 
locations of the activity categories. Some activity categories are e.g. located in or around Nørre 
Alslev, which the area west of the new bus line thereby will have an easier access to.  
 
==PAGE:91==
81 
 
TABLE 15 - AVERAGE ACCESSIBILITY BY PUBLIC TRANSPORT FOR THE CURRENT SITUATION AND A SCENARIO 
WITH A NEW BUS LINE. SURVEY WEIGHTS AND A CONVERSION FACTOR OF 0,1. 
Avg. Accessibility PT 
Public 
current situation 
Scenario 
with new bus line 
Relative 
difference
Absolute 
difference 
Culture 
2,5
2,5
1%
0,0
Education 
56,4
56,4
0%
0,0
Health and services 
45,8
46,8
2%
1,0
Population 
40,9
42,3
3%
1,3
Jobs 
39,1
40,2
3%
1,1
Leisure 
8,7
9,1
5%
0,5
Nature and green areas 
5,4
5,5
2%
0,1
Shopping 
18,5
18,9
2%
0,4
  
  
  
  
  
Total 
217,3
221,7
2%
4,4
 
In Figure 34 the relative difference in accessibility index scores is shown for each zone. Here it 
is clear that the new bus line will lead to improvements in accessibility in certain areas. The 
measured accessibility index scores will improve by up to 17 % in the area surrounding Øster 
Kippinge. For Nørre Alslev and the surrounding area a relative improvement of accessibility of 
5-10 % is measured. The entire northern part of the municipality will experience improvements 
in accessibility, where improvements of 1-5 % in the towns of Sakskøbing and Stubbekøbing are 
measured as well. The overall accessibility index scores for this scenario are shown in Appendix 
H. 
The train line from Nørre Alslev to Nykøbing F. is not considered in this project. However, 
gaining an easier access to this train line would be of benefit to both the village of Øster Kippinge 
and the surrounding area. 
The suggested new bus line will connect areas that are not well connected today and improve 
accessibility significantly in a large area. It is therefore recommended to further analysis the 
possibilities and costs for either lengthening an existing bus line or establishing a new bus line.  
It should also be considered to establish bus stops in the two villages Riserup and Egelev, which 
both are located along the proposed route. 
4.7.2 Feedback from the survey 
The survey conducted in this project (See Appendix B) includes 55 responses of an online 
questionnaire. The answers can among other things be used as inspiration for further 
assessments and as inspiration for ways to improve both mobility and accessibility for youths in 
Guldborgsund Municipality.  
 
==PAGE:92==
82 
 
 
FIGURE 34 – DIFFERENCE IN ACCESSIBILITY INDEX SCORES (QR) FOR PUBLIC TRANSPORT IN GULDBORGSUND 
MUNICIPALITY WHEN INTRODUCING A NEW BUS LINE. SURVEY WEIGHTS AND A CONVERSION FACTOR OF 0,1. 
In the survey the respondents were asked to state, what can make public transport more 
attractive to them. Here a general tendency among the responses was that the price is a concern 
for them and that a cheaper public transport system would make it more attractive to them as 
users.  
One way Guldborgsund Municipality have already made it cheaper for youths in rural areas to 
travel to and from educational institutions is with the Demand Responsive Transport (DRT) 
==PAGE:93==
83 
 
service StudieFlex. This service enables students to get free transport to an educational 
institution, depending on their access to the public transport network. It is clear that this service 
improves accessibility for the students. Accessibility could be further improved by expanding 
this service, either by easing the distance constraints for the users or by enhancing the 
knowledge of the service existence.  
In the survey it is showed that a majority of all the respondent have not heard of either the DRT 
service Flextur or StudieFlex. This lack of information for the possible users limits their 
accessibility. For this reason it would be beneficial from a accessibility point-of-view to use 
campaigns to increase the knowledge of the two DRT services existence. This would possibly 
lead to economies of scale for the cost of operation, as more users can lead to a lower cost per 
user. 
In the survey, a number of respondents also states optimised frequencies and public transport 
schedules as ways of making the public transport system in Guldborgsund Municipality more 
attractive. Here some students state to have a long (hidden) wait time for a bus to arrive or a 
class to begin, as the bus schedules does not correspond with their schedule at the school.  
Increasing the frequency of certain bus lines will inevitably lead to an increased cost of the 
system, but can also lead to a more attractive public transport system and an increased 
accessibility. With the current number of bus lines and frequencies, the public transport system 
can still be optimised by better servicing the educational institutions at specific times. The 
schedules for the buses servicing the educational institutions should be optimised regularly to 
best service these institutions at times where students generally meet or leave. 
4.7.3 General recommendations and future work 
General points to improve accessibility in rural areas, which have not directly been included in 
the analysis, includes Mobility-as-a-Service (MaaS) and alternative transport solutions.  
In this project the focus is on public transport in the form of buses. But as previously presented, 
other alternatives such as self-driving buses, bicycles, E-bikes, ridesharing and DRT can be more 
or less essential for the accessibility of individuals in rural areas.  
It is therefore recommended to further analyse potential niche markets for these alternative 
transport solutions. E-bikes have been found to have a similar potential to replace car trips in 
rural areas as in cities (Hiselius and Svensson, 2017), and with improvements in bicycle 
infrastructure and possible campaigns it can expected that the transport mode share for 
especially E-bikes can be increased. 
A further development of a Mobility-as-a-Service (MaaS) platform, would be beneficial for rural 
areas in general and also for Guldborgsund Municipality. A MaaS platform, which integrates all 
transport modes and alternatives, would potentially lead to a higher market share for alternative 
modes to the car. A challenge for increasing the market shares for public transport, DRT services 
and shared car and bicycle schemes is a lack of information. This was shown for DRT in the 
presented survey. A MaaS platform increases information of alternative modes, and thereby also 
increases accessibility by more sustainable transport modes than the car.  
==PAGE:94==
84 
 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
85 
 
5. Discussion 
In this chapter the applicability and theoretical basis of the developed framework is discussed.  
5.1 Limitations and development of the index 
A main assumption behind the gravity measure and the accessibility index is that all activities 
have value to an individual, but that this value decreases the further away the activity is.  
The main issue with this assumption is that in practice, an individual will only have a limited 
need for activities. For example if a student attends an educational institution, having access to 
this particular institution is important to the student, whereas all other educational institutions 
are most likely not important to the student. Similarly, an individual will normally only require 
access to very few job opportunities or shopping activities. 
At a given time, individuals only visit a limited number of activities. This limit seems to be 
approximately 25 activities (locations) across all types of activities at a given time (Alessandretti 
et al., 2018). With this in mind, a value for accessibility is calculated to all activities in all 
categories for the developed accessibility index in this project. Even though the distance decay 
function will lead to very small accessibility index scores approaching zero for activities far away, 
these activities will nevertheless be seen as having some (however small) value for the individual. 
If there are e.g. four supermarkets in a close proximity to an individual, a supermarket far away 
will have no practical value to this individual in his/her everyday life, nevertheless in this 
framework, every supermarket will theoretically have a value for the individual.  
As it is not known and not practically feasible to know exactly what activities all individuals in 
the target group participate in. The assumption that all activities have value to all individuals, 
but depends on both a cost and a cost sensitivity to the specific activity, therefore seems 
reasonable.  
This assumption of all activities having value to an individual is a main assumption of the 
location-based accessibility measure. In the gravity measure, all activities are seen as having a 
value for all individuals, and every individual within the target group is seen as having the exact 
same preferences when it comes to the weight of activity categories and thereby also the 
accessibility to these activities. Other measures, such as person-based accessibility measure, will 
focus more on preferences of individuals and more specifically on the constraint and limitations 
of individuals to participate in an activity. 
These constraints and limitations as well as individual needs are all part of the individual 
component of accessibility, which arguably  only to a certain degree has been taken into account 
in the accessibility index. By estimating the cost sensitivity parameters, which are based on 
weights found through a survey targeted the target group, the preferences of the individuals of 
the target group have been set equal to each other. Nevertheless, the target group is not 
homogeneous and therefore does not have homogeneous preferences. If there is a need for a 
more clear focus on individual preferences of the target group, an individual-based measure 
should be chosen instead of the location-based measure for accessibility. 
==PAGE:96==
86 
 
For the location-based measure, the focus is more on the land-use and transport components 
of accessibility. The land-use component is taken into account, as the measure is location-based 
meaning that the location of all activities adds to the measure. Furthermore, the transport 
component is considered as the distance (e.g. time) between zones is estimated in a cost matrix 
for different transport modes.  
The temporal component has not been directly considered in the measure. To include this 
measure, it would require a further development of the index and additional data in terms of e.g. 
opening hours for shops or time schedules for public transport services. The temporal 
component could to some extent be included as an estimate in the location-based measure as 
additional costs added to the cost matrices of shifts, waiting time, etc. Including the temporal 
component in the measure would lead to a to some extent more exact result. The reason for this 
is made clear in the results of the survey, where e.g. meeting times and frequency of public 
transport is stated as a challenge for youths, when it comes to choosing a public transport option. 
Nevertheless, the reason for not including the temporal component in the index is simply that it 
would require substantial additional data and data processing. By not including the temporal 
component in the index, a better operationalisation of the index is achieved. It can be argued 
that by setting the speed for all bus lines to 30 km/h, a hidden cost of e.g. shifts and waiting 
times are included to some extent – however in a very simplified way.  
5.2 Review of the index 
In this project the gravity measure is chosen as the measure in the accessibility index for several 
reasons, with the first being the ability to combine the land-use and transport components of 
accessibility. Furthermore, the measure gives a more precise measurement of accessibility than 
e.g. the simpler contour measures. 
In addition, the gravity measure was first chosen due to a well-founded theoretical basis, a good 
operationalisation and both a decent interpretability and communicability.  These criteria are, 
together with accessibility as a social indicator, relevant criteria to choose an accessibility 
measure upon.  
In terms of theoretical basis the measure is well founded in the literature and has been used in 
a number of different accessibility studies. It therefore seems clear that the measure has a solid 
theoretical basis, however with a few lacks as e.g. not all components of accessibility are directly 
included in the measure.  
Also the criteria accessibility as a social indicator is met, as the index can be focused on different 
target groups and potentially show whatever difference in social impact a land-use or transport 
change will lead to for different groups of individuals.  
When it comes to operationalisation, which is a criteria describing finding the right balance 
between a more precise measure and the availability of data, models, techniques, time and 
budget, it can be argued that it can be difficult to find this balance. Finding the right balance and 
level of operationalisation depends on the planner and goals of the assessment, since every 
assessment will not have the same prerequisites. 
==PAGE:97==
87 
 
The developed accessibility index requires data in the form of e.g. activity locations, cost 
matrices for private and public transport and survey weights or other weights to estimate cost 
sensitivity parameters. Different methods can be used to gather the data. In the case study in 
this project, open source data is used in the assessment - however with some required data 
processing. Furthermore, a survey is used to estimate the weights. 
It is assessed that it would be currently possible to measure accessibility by the developed 
method with only the use of open source data and software, except for the estimation of the 
(survey) weights. This is definitely a benefit of the developed framework as it makes it more 
available to planners, which arguably leads to a better operationalisation.  
The main challenge for meeting the criteria of operationalisation is in the data processing steps. 
The open source data available is not necessarily gathered with the goal to be used to measure 
accessibility, and therefore some data processing and assumptions are required. These data 
processing steps require a number of different tools, which, among other things, enables the 
planner to e.g. geolocate addresses, edit networks or calculate costs in networks. All of these 
tools require some data processing, which require knowledge and know-how for a planner.  
Operationalisation will to some extent also have an influence on both the interpretability and 
communicability of the measure. As a measure becomes more complex, it will arguably also be 
more difficult to interpret and communicate the results. For the developed framework, this can 
also be identified as the case. When analysing the results of the accessibility index, a simple 
explanation of why the accessibility index scores turn out as they are, cannot always be found. 
This is due to the fact that the accessibility index is put together from a series of different data 
sources and assumptions, and due to the fact that expressing all this information in one formula 
is complicated.  
The fact that the accessibility index is GIS-based, and therefore can be displayed graphically on 
a map, increases both the interpretability and communicability of the index. This graphical 
representation makes it easy to understand which areas require accessibility improvements, 
which leads to a better understanding for the planner to find specific solutions for specific areas.  
The developed accessibility index also meets the last of the four criteria for reviewing the 
accessibility measure, namely the criteria accessibility as a social indicator. As the accessibility 
index intends to focus on specific target groups, the impact that a land-use or transport change 
will lead to for the specific target group, will also be clear in the assessment. However, two 
separate assessments are required to be able to compare the impact that a change will have on 
two different groups of individuals. Nevertheless, as e.g. cost matrices can be kept for both 
assessments, only new definitions of activity categories and weights of the self-same are 
required.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:98==
88 
 
5.3 Case study 
In the case study it is shown that the accessibility measure can lead to results, which can be 
interpreted and communicated graphically in a format that is easy to understand. The developed 
framework has thereby accomplished to make the results generally usable and understandable. 
It is however worth noticing that the results from the index itself does not give a clear 
understanding of which parameters that influence the index, which is due to the fact that there 
are several underlying assumptions, parameters and calculations, which lead to the result.   
5.3.1 Data 
The accessibility assessment for youths in rural areas in Guldborgsund Municipality is primarily 
based on dependable data from official registers. As it is often the case when using a dataset 
gathered for other purposes to assess a non-related measure, it is required to process the data 
based on assumptions.  
The primary source of data for the locations of activity is the Danish VAT-register. Here a main 
issue is that the data is sometimes lacking a correct physical address, as some local company 
owners will register their private address or another address. Furthermore, a number of the 
registered companies cannot in fact be seen as an activity for an individual, as in several cases 
companies are in fact e.g. holding companies.  
For this reason, the VAT-register data must first be sorted by relevant main business codes/types 
for each activity category, and later every entry should be reviewed manually to sort out 
irrelevant companies, which cannot be seen as an activity. In this process of selecting certain 
business types and reviewing all entries, relevant activities may be screened out. The whole 
process also puts a limit to e.g. the maximum assessment area, as some manual reviewing is 
required. 
For every activity category assumptions have been made. For the six categories Culture, 
Education, Health and service, Jobs,  Leisure and Shopping, which are based on VAT-register 
data, the main business codes/types have been used to define each category. The selection of 
which business types to include in each activity category is based on a qualified estimate of, what 
is relevant for the target group in each category. An additional survey or focus interview with 
individuals of the target group could help to get a better understanding of which business types 
to include in each activity category.  
Having the selection of which business types to include in each activity category, based upon a 
qualified estimate of the planner, can lead to a gap between the apprehension of the planner and 
the target group. The planner may have a different understanding than the general 
understanding of the target group of, what a specific activity is, and what is contained in the 
activity category. 
5.3.2 Activity category definitions 
Another related aspect for the definition of activity categories is which activities to include in 
each category. Some people may perceive libraries as a part of the category Culture, whereas 
other may perceive it as part of the category Education. For this reason it is important to make 
==PAGE:99==
89 
 
sure that it is understood by the respondent of the survey or interview what is included in each 
category, before actually asking the respondent to prioritise (assign weights) to each category.  
In the survey conducted in this project, only a few examples of activities in each activity category 
were provided to the respondent. Therefore, it cannot be expected that all respondents have had 
the same understanding of what was included in each activity category when assigning weights.  
For the activity categories Family and friends the assumption that if an individual has good 
access to other people (population), this individual will also have good accessibility to his or her 
friends and family. It is clear that just because an individual lives in close proximity to many 
people, then it does not necessarily mean that these people are friends or family of the individual. 
Yet, as it has been shown that accessibility to friends and family is important for youths, it can 
seem important to include this activity category in the assessment. Therefore, this assumption 
is necessary, as no data for locations of family and friends can be found, except for an estimate 
of the general population data.  
To find the population categories for each zone in the study area, data for every residential access 
addresses is used. Here it is assumed that the same number of individuals live at each address. 
This assumption is necessary based on the data available, however not every access address will 
have the same number of people. There can be differences between e.g. urban and rural areas, 
which then are not taken into account in the estimation of population categories. If this is the 
case, it could lead to an underrepresentation of the population in e.g. urban areas, which 
consequently would lead to an overrepresentation of the accessibility in rural areas. It is assessed 
that this will have an insignificant or small influence on the overall accessibility, but might have 
an influence on the specific activity category Friends and family. 
For the activity category Jobs workplaces are used to represent the category, but the size of the 
workplace is not taken into account due to limited accessible data. Therefore a small workplace 
with only a few employees has the same weight as a big workplace. Ideally, the activities in this 
category would be weighted based on the number of workplaces, to better represent the size and 
thereby attraction of workplace. 
Lastly, for the activity category Nature and green areas the activities are found based on online 
research and feedback from the local collaboration partners in Guldborgsund Municipality. 
Ideally, these activity locations should be found by the target group and not the planners. By not 
involving the target group, relevant activities in this category might be left out of the assessment, 
or non-relevant activities might be included. This has a small influence in this study, as Nature 
and green areas are weighted low for youths.  
5.3.3 Data processing 
As previously discussed the criteria operationalisation is generally met in the case study, but is 
challenged by the gathering and processing of data as well as the methods available to do so. It 
is worth mentioning that the zone-size in the case study is set to 500 ∙ 500 meters, which due to 
the relatively large size of Guldborgsund Municipality leads to a total of 3949 zones. The 
relatively high amount of zones has had an negative influence on the data processing time. The 
amount of zones has led to data processing issues, more specifically when estimating the cost 
==PAGE:100==
90 
 
matrices, where the travel time between all zones is calculated. This means that there is a need 
for 3949A = 15,6 million calculations. After these calculations accessibility for each of the eight 
activity categories has been calculated between each zone pair (8 activity categories ∙ 15,6 million 
zone pairs = 124,8 million) – which requires a good amount of processing time for a standard 
office computer. 
This shows that the selection of the size and thereby the number of zones is also important to 
the operationalisation of the accessibility measure in practice. With more zones, more 
calculations are needed. If a zone size of e.g. 1000 ∙ 1000 meter had been chosen instead, 
approximately 1000 zones would have been required to cover the study area. For comparison, 
there would then be a need for approximately 1 million calculations of the travel time between 
zone pairs – or approximately 16 times fewer calculations. This would lead to a decreased 
processing time and an improved operationalisation.  
The advantage of more zones is that the accessibility assessment is more precise in terms of area. 
It is more clear where the low accessibility exactly occurs and where solutions are needed. 
Nevertheless, for this case study it is assessed that larger zones of 1000 ∙ 1000 I would have 
met the purpose of the case study.  
The two networks for private and public transport are both relative simple in this project. For 
the public transport network, only buses are considered in the network. By not including 
alternative public transport modes such as trains, only a part of the whole network is included 
in the analysis. This has had and influence on the cost matrix for public transport and thereby 
also the accessibility assessment. Especially in areas such as Nørre Alslev or Eskildstrup, where 
there is a direct regional train line to Nykøbing F., the accessibility index scores would be 
expected to be improved in the analysis if train lines were also included in the network.  
A simplification is also made by setting a fixed speed for all bus lines (30 km/h) and on all 
connectors (10 km/h) in the public transport network. This is a simplification based on an 
estimation of the average travel time for buses in rural areas in Guldborgsund Municipality of 
40 km/h. By setting the travel speed to 30 km/h a cost for shifts and low frequency is indirectly 
included as costs. Ideally, a more realistic result can be achieved, if reliable data is available, by 
estimating the travel time between bus stop based upon time schedules. 
Shifts between lines and frequency are, as stated above, only indirectly included in the analysis. 
Especially in rural areas, waiting times can be long when traveling by public transport, as the 
public transport is often less frequent than in urban areas. It would be possible to include 
estimates for these temporal components as an indirect cost in the cost matrices. 
5.3.4 Survey 
In this project a survey is conducted with the primary purpose of eventually estimating the cost 
sensitivity parameters. Furthermore, the purpose is also to better understand the transport 
behaviour and needs of youths. 
The majority of the respondents of the survey are not part of the target group (youths in rural 
areas), as most lived in urban areas per definition in this project. In addition, the survey is biased 
==PAGE:101==
91 
 
in terms of not being representative of all age groups. Nevertheless, the results from the survey 
are used in the case study to test and examine the method. In assessing accessibility, using the 
developed framework a main focus should be on gathering reliable weights of the target group, 
as this is a cornerstone in the framework. This has not been feasible in this project due to limited 
time and resources as well as a focus on framework development. Nevertheless, the results of 
the survey give some understanding of the transport needs of youths in Guldborgsund 
Municipality. 
It can be argued that even though the respondents are not living in rural areas per definition in 
this project, they are still youths living in Guldborgsund Municipality, which is considered a 
rural area. Therefore, the transport behaviour and needs of the respondents are also valuable 
knowledge for planners in the municipality when assessing accessibility or mobility issues.  
The chosen method for the survey is an online survey, which can be argued to be part of the 
reason for the biased survey. Ideally a survey should be available to all within the target group, 
and possibly be assigned weights if one group of individuals is underrepresented among the 
respondents.  
Another way to improve the survey could be to conduct additional or supplementary research 
such as interview sessions or focus group interviews. An advantage of this approach could be to 
get an improved and more clear definition of the activity categories through feedback from the 
respondents, with the possibility to ask follow-up questions. In this project, it can be possible 
that the respondent have e.g. perceived the activity category Health and service as something 
else than e.g. doctor surgeries and hospitals, since it is weighted unexpectedly high. By 
conducting an interview session or focus group interview a clearer understanding of the 
perception of this category could have been achieved. 
5.3.5 Scaling, weights and conversion factors 
In this project a set of weights (') is used to normalise the importance scores achieved based 
upon the conducted survey. A conversion factor is then used to estimate the cost sensitivity 
parameters based upon the weights. 
The whole process, from asking a question in a survey to estimating the cost sensitivity 
parameters, is based upon a qualified estimate of what scale and conversion factor to use. 
Whereas the scale for the weights primarily is used to change the format of the importance scores 
to more easy-to-understand weights, the conversion factor does indeed have a significant impact 
on the overall result. This estimate for the conversion could be optimised if based on further 
research.  
5.3.6 Sensitivity of the index 
The influence and sensitivity of different inputs and parameters in the index have been tested. 
Here it is clear that the cost sensitivity parameters have a significant influence on the 
accessibility index scores – both for specifibussec activity categories, but also for the overall 
results.  
==PAGE:102==
92 
 
As the cost sensitivity parameters are estimated based on weights and a conversion factor, the 
method for estimating the weights and the estimate of a conversion factor have a significant 
impact on the overall results.  
Therefore it is essential to focus on conducting target group based research for the estimation of 
weights. By asking more in a survey, limiting bias and conducting interview, the output in the 
form of weights will become more precise and reliable. As a consequence the measure 
accessibility will therefore also become more reliable and better represent the actual accessibility 
of the target group. 
 
 
==PAGE:103==
93 
 
6. Conclusion and perspectives 
In this project, a preliminary framework for analysing accessibility for groups of individuals in 
rural areas has been developed, with the purpose of promoting sustainable transport solutions 
in rural areas. The framework has been shown to be applicable for planners and policy makers 
when assessing accessibility, as it has shown usable and understandable results in a case study. 
The framework can be used to assess impacts on accessibility of specific transport or land-use 
initiatives, both on an overall level and for specific activity categories such as Education or 
Shopping. If a new bus line is planned to open the measure can be used to assess to which degree 
this new bus line will improve accessibility for specific group(s) of individuals. Similarly, the 
impacts on accessibility can be assessed if an land-use based activity is to be opened, closed or 
relocated.  
The developed framework has been applied to a case study of youths in Guldborgsund 
Municipality. The GIS-based accessibility index has been used to assess areas with lower 
accessibility, and recommendations for possible initiatives to improve accessibility have been 
presented.  
A main recommendation in this project is a new bus line between Nørre Alslev and Øster 
Kippinge, which will connect areas, which are not directly connected with public transport today. 
Here the framework have been applied to assess for which areas accessibility improvements will 
occur for youths. Similarly the framework could be used to assess to which degree accessibility 
will decrease if e.g. a bus line or an educational institution were to close.  
Based on a literature review, a preliminary framework has been developed, which consists of a 
location-based accessibility measure. Both the land-use and transport components of 
accessibility have been found important components of accessibility measures for rural areas. 
With a focus on primarily these two components, the gravity measure has therefore been chosen 
to best assess the components of accessibility for assessments in rural areas.  
A special measure for assessing accessibility has been developed based on a literature review. 
Here different activity categories are taken into account by adapting the measure to also consider 
the different weights that these categories represent for a group of individuals. This has been 
done by both dividing activities into activity categories and estimating specific cost sensitivity 
parameters for these categories.  
The usability and understandability of the developed measure and framework have been tested 
on a case study in Guldborgsund Municipality, where youths in rural areas has been selected as 
the target group. The case study has showed that the developed framework is applicable to a case 
of youths and can be used to measure accessibility for a specific target group.  
The framework has been applied and has led to useful results for both the assessment of 
accessibility by private and public transport. This makes it possible to support a more 
sustainable development by better understanding the accessibility challenges for public 
transport in rural areas compared to private transport. 
==PAGE:104==
94 
 
The results of the case study show that the accessibility is better for all areas for private transport 
modes compared to public transport. Additionally, the accessibility is for all assessed transport 
modes lower in the outskirts of the municipality and higher in the main town of Nykøbing F. 
In addition to this, the assessment of accessibility in Guldborgsund Municipality has showed 
significant differences for accessibility to the different specific activity categories. Here it has 
been made clear that the cost sensitivity parameters for the accessibility to an activity category, 
have significant influences on the accessibility, where a high cost sensitivity leads to a generally 
low accessibility and vice versa.  
6.1 Future work and development 
As the developed framework is only preliminary, there are different ways to further develop and 
optimise the framework. The project can be seen as a platform for further development in two 
main ways: Theoretical development of the framework as well as optimised ways to collect and 
process data.  
These two ways to further develop the framework also to a certain degree represents the 
challenge of meeting the criteria of operationalisation when assessing accessibility. A 
framework with a measure, which include a more precise representation of the theoretical basis, 
also requires more data. But if better tools and optimised ways to collect and process data are 
developed as well, it may not all together lead to a higher cost of the assessment in terms of time 
or resources, but rather a more precise assessment with more components included.  
The theoretical basis could be further developed by to a higher degree or in other ways including 
the accessibility components in the framework. Examples of this could be to include other costs 
than travel time in the cost matrices such as waiting time or different costs based on 
access/egress mode to the public transport system.  
In addition to this, the individual component of accessibility is to a limited degree taken into 
account in the developed gravity measure, but could be optimised or developed further. In this 
project, surveys and interviews are suggested as the main ways to gather information for 
estimation of the weights and cost sensitivity parameters for each activity category. Explicit 
methods to conduct these surveys and interviews could be developed, with the goal to make a 
tool for planners to use when estimating weights for activity categories.  
When the weights have been estimated, a conversion factor is used to convert them to cost 
sensitivity parameters. In this project, the conversion factor has been found using a qualified 
estimate. The conversion factor has in this process been showed to have a significant impact on 
the distance decay functions and therefore also the overall results. Ideally, it would be possible 
to find a conversion factor based on several relevant cases to be used in future assessments. 
Another way to further develop the framework is to optimise the process of collecting and 
processing data. One goal could be to develop specific GIS-based tools, which use open source 
data from e.g. Open Street Map or other sources to automatically locate relevant activities based 
on predefined activity categories. Another goal could be to develop tools to calculate accessibility 
based on specific inputs of data.  
 
==PAGE:105==
95 
 
References 
Agerholm, N. and Møller, J. (2015) ‘Intelligent Carpooling in rural areas – opportunities 
and barriers’, 22nd ITS World Congress, Bordeaux, France 5–9 October 2015, pp. 1–11. 
Alessandretti, L. et al. (2018) ‘Evidence for a conserved quantity in human mobility’, 
Nature Human Behaviour, 2(7), pp. 485–491. doi: 10.1038/s41562-018-0364-x. 
Bos, P. (2017) Self-driving bus to improve accessibility of rural areas in the Netherlands. 
Radboud University Nijmegen. 
Center for Transport Analytics (2014a) ‘Transportvaneundersøgelsen - Faktaark om 
transport til fods i Danmark’, pp. 1–2. Available at: 
http://www.cta.man.dtu.dk/english/tvu. 
Center for Transport Analytics (2014b) ‘Transportvaneundersøgelsen Biltrafik i Danmark’, 
pp. 1–2. 
Center for Transport Analytics (2015a) ‘Transportvaneundersøgelsen - Faktaark om 
kollektiv transport i Danmark’, pp. 1–2. Available at: 
http://www.cta.man.dtu.dk/transportvaneundersoegelsen/tu-udgivelser/faktaark-om-
kollektiv-transport-i-danmark-2014. 
Center for Transport Analytics (2015b) Transportvaneundersøgelsen Faktaark om antal 
personer per køretøj. Available at: http://www.cta.man.dtu.dk/english/tvu. 
Center for Transport Analytics (2015c) ‘Transportvaneundersøgelsen Faktaark om 
Transport i forhold til alder’, pp. 1–2. 
Center for Transport Analytics (2018) Transportvaneundersøgelsen Faktaark om 
cykeltrafik i Danmark. Available at: http://www.cta.man.dtu.dk/english/tvu. 
Christiansen, H. and Skougaard, B. Z. (2015) Documentation of the Danish National 
Travel Survey. Kgs. Lyngby. 
Commins, N. and Nolan, A. (2010) ‘Car ownership and mode of transport to work in 
Ireland’, Economic and Social Review, 41(1), pp. 43–75. 
Coppola, P. and Papa, E. (2013) ‘Accessibility Planning Tools for Sustainable and 
Integrated Land Use/Transport (LUT) Development: An Application to Rome’, Procedia - 
Social and Behavioral Sciences. Elsevier B.V., 87, pp. 133–146. doi: 
10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.10.599. 
Curtis, C. and Scheurer, J. (2010) ‘Planning for sustainable accessibility: Developing tools 
to aid discussion and decision-making’, Progress in Planning, 74(2), pp. 53–106. doi: 
10.1016/j.progress.2010.05.001. 
Danmarks Statistik (2015) ‘Ingen store kønsforskelle på flytning fra byer’, Nyt fra 
Danmarks Statistik, 340. Available at: www.dst.dk/nyt/19519. 
 
==PAGE:106==
96 
 
Danmarks Statistik (2018) Statistikbanken. Available at: 
http://www.statistikbanken.dk/statbank5a/default.asp?w=1600 (Accessed: 6 November 
2018). 
Davison, L. et al. (2012) ‘Identifying potential market niches for Demand Responsive 
Transport’, Research in Transportation Business and Management. Elsevier Ltd, 3, pp. 
50–61. doi: 10.1016/j.rtbm.2012.04.007. 
Det Økonomiske Råd (2015) Danmark i Balance. 
Dicicco-Bloom, B. and Crabtree, B. F. (2006) ‘The qualitative research interview’, Medical 
Education, (40), pp. 314–321. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2929.2006.02418.x. 
Din Offentlige Transport (2018) ‘Public transport schedules of 11/12 2018’. Available at: 
www.dinoffentligetransport.dk. 
Engelmoer, W. (2012) The E-bike : opportunities for Commuter Traffic. University of 
Groningen. 
Enoch, M. et al. (2004) ‘INTERMODE: innovations in Demand Responsive Transport’, 
Report for: Department for Transport and Greater Manchester Passenger Transport 
Executive. Available at: http://www.dft.gov.uk. 
Erhverv og Kultur (2018) Ta’ bussen til de gode oplevelser. Available at: 
https://erhvervogkultur.net/artikel/ta-bussen-til-de-gode-oplevelser/ (Accessed: 29 
December 2018). 
European Commission (2017) Seventh Report on Economic, Social and Territorial 
Cohesion. 7th edn. Edited by L. Dijkstra. European Union. doi: 10. 2776/176864. 
FlexDanmark (2018) Kørselsordninger. Available at: 
https://www.flexdanmark.dk/web/flextrafik/korselsordninger (Accessed: 28 September 
2018). 
Flynn, B. S. et al. (2012) ‘Weather factor impacts on commuting to work by bicycle’, 
Preventive Medicine. Elsevier Inc., 54(2), pp. 122–124. doi: 10.1016/j.ypmed.2011.11.002. 
Geurs, K. T. and Ritsema van Eck, J. (2001) ‘Accessibility measures: review and 
applications. Evaluation of accessibility impacts of land-use transportation scenarios, and 
related social and economic impact’, RIVM Report, 787, pp. 1–265. doi: Cited By (since 
1996) 37\rExport Date 21 September 2011. 
Geurs, K. T. and van Wee, B. (2004) ‘Accessibility evaluation of land-use and transport 
strategies: Review and research directions’, Journal of Transport Geography, 12(2), pp. 
127–140. doi: 10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2003.10.005. 
Grabow, M. L. et al. (2012) ‘Air Quality and Health Benefits from Reduced Car Travel in 
the Midwestern United States’, Environmental Health Perspectives, 68(1). doi: 
10.1289/ehp.1103440. 
Guldborgsund Kommune (2016) Vores fælles guldborgsund - Kommuneplanstrategi 
2015-2027. 
==PAGE:107==
97 
 
Guldborgsund Municipality (2018) StudieFlex. Available at: 
https://www.guldborgsund.dk/studieflex (Accessed: 11 December 2018). 
Hägerstrand, T. (1970) ‘What About People in Regional Science.Pdf’, People of the 
Regional Science Association, 24(1), pp. 6–21. doi: 10.1007/BF01936872. 
Halldórsdóttir, K., Nielsen, O. A. and Prato, C. G. (2015) Behavioural models for cycling - 
Case studies of the Copenhagen Region. Available at: 
http://orbit.dtu.dk/ws/files/122774772/Katrin_Phd_FINAL.pdf. 
Handy, S. L. and Niemeier, D. A. (1997) ‘Measuring accessibility: An exploration of issues 
and alternatives’, Environment and Planning A, 29(7), pp. 1175–1194. doi: 
10.1068/a291175. 
Hansen, C. T., Rasmussen, B. and Hinz, H. N. (2010) Learning Objectives for Master ’ s 
theses at DTU Management Engineering. 
Hansen, W. T. (1959) ‘How accessibility shapes land-use’, Journal of the American 
Institute of Planners, 25(2), pp. 73–76. doi: 10.1080/01944365908978307. 
Haustein, S. and Siren, A. (2014) ‘Seniors’ unmet mobility needs - how important is a 
driving licence?’, Journal of Transport Geography. Elsevier Ltd, 41, pp. 45–52. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2014.08.001. 
Higgs, G. and White, S. D. (1997) ‘Changes in service provision in rural areas. Part 1: The 
use of GIS in analysing accessibility to services in rural deprivation research’, Journal of 
Rural Studies, 13(4), pp. 441–450. doi: 10.1016/S0743-0167(97)00030-2. 
Hiselius, L. W. and Svensson, Å. (2017) ‘E-bike use in Sweden – CO2 effects due to modal 
change and municipal promotion strategies’, Journal of Cleaner Production. Elsevier Ltd, 
141, pp. 818–824. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.09.141. 
Hu, L. (2017) ‘Job accessibility and employment outcomes: which income groups benefit 
the most?’, Transportation. Springer US, 44(6), pp. 1421–1443. doi: 10.1007/s11116-016-
9708-4. 
Jones, T. L., Baxter, M. A. J. and Khanduja, V. (2013) ‘A quick guide to survey research’, 
Annals of The Royal College of Surgeons of England, 95(1), pp. 5–7. doi: 
10.1308/003588413X13511609956372. 
Kitamura, R. (1989) ‘A causal analysis of car ownership and transit use’, Transportation, 
16(2), pp. 155–173. doi: 10.1007/BF00163113. 
Kristensen, N. B. (2014) ‘Mobilitet, tilgængelighed og fremkommelighed - Indikatorer for 
transportsystemets kvalitet’. DTU Transport, pp. 1–28. 
Litman, T. (2003) ‘Measuring Transportation : Traffic , Mobility and Accessibility’, ITE 
Journal (Institute of Transportation Engineers), 73(10), pp. 28–32. 
Lucas, K. (2012) ‘Transport and social exclusion: Where are we now?’, Transport Policy. 
Elsevier, 20, pp. 105–113. doi: 10.1016/j.tranpol.2012.01.013. 
 
==PAGE:108==
98 
 
Mavoa, S. et al. (2012) ‘GIS based destination accessibility via public transit and walking in 
Auckland, New Zealand’, Journal of Transport Geography. Elsevier Ltd, 20(1), pp. 15–22. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2011.10.001. 
Ministry of Transport and Building (2016) Rejsetidsforbedringer for togpassagerer. 
Available at: www.trm.dk. 
Movia (2018a) Kommune/BusInfo (MapServer). Available at: 
http://geoservices.moviatrafik.dk/arcgis/rest/services/Kommune/BusInfo/MapServer 
(Accessed: 20 November 2018). 
Movia (2018b) Kommunetrafikkort Movia - Kommunetrafikkort. Available at: 
https://www.moviatrafik.dk/kommuneregion/trafikbestilling/kommunetrafikkort. 
Neumeier, S. (2016) ‘Accessibility to Services in Rural Areas’, disP - The Planning Review, 
52(3), pp. 32–49. doi: 10.1080/02513625.2016.1235877. 
Nielsen, J. R. et al. (2015) ‘Of “white crows” and “cash savers:” A qualitative study of travel 
behavior and perceptions of ridesharing in Denmark’, Transportation Research Part A: 
Policy and Practice, 78, pp. 113–123. doi: 10.1016/j.tra.2015.04.033. 
Nordjyllands Trafikselskab (2018) MinRejseplan. Available at: 
https://www.nordjyllandstrafikselskab.dk/Billetter---priser/MinRejseplan (Accessed: 5 
October 2018). 
Odsherred Municipality (2017) Kør sammen i Odsherred. Available at: 
http://www.odsherred.dk/borger/kultur-og-fritid/folkemoedet-i-odsherred/koer-
sammen-i-odsherred (Accessed: 18 September 2018). 
Piatkowski, D. P., Krizek, K. J. and Handy, S. L. (2015) ‘Accounting for the short term 
substitution effects of walking and cycling in sustainable transportation’, Travel Behaviour 
and Society. Hong Kong Society for Transportation Studies, 2(1), pp. 32–41. doi: 
10.1016/j.tbs.2014.07.004. 
Pierce, J. M. T., Nash, A. B. and Clouter, C. A. (2013) ‘The in-use annual energy and carbon 
saving by switching from a car to an electric bicycle in an urban UK general medical 
practice : the implication for NHS commuters’, Environ Dev Sustain, (15), pp. 1645–1651. 
doi: 10.1007/s10668-013-9454-0. 
Pons Rotger, G. A. and Nielsen, T. S. (2015) ‘Effects of job accessibility improved by public 
transport system: Natural experimental evidence from the copenhagen metro’, European 
Journal of Transport and Infrastructure Research, 15(4), pp. 419–441. 
Roetynck, A. (2010) PRESTO Cycling Policy Guide - Electric Bicycles. Available at: 
www.presto-cycling.eu. 
Skygebjerg, S. (2017) Accessibility Index for Aabenraa Municipality. Technical University 
of Denmark. 
Sørensen, J. F. L. (2014) ‘Landdistrikternes befolknings- og beskæftigelsesudvikling’, 
Center for Landdistriktsforskning, Syddansk Universitet, (April), pp. 1–23. 
==PAGE:109==
99 
 
Stewart, O. T. et al. (2016) ‘Comparing Associations Between the Built Environment and 
Walking in Rural Small Towns and a Large Metropolitan Area’, Environment and 
Behavior, 48(1), pp. 13–36. doi: 10.1177/0013916515612253. 
The Danish Agency for Data Supply and Efficiency (2018) Danmarks Adressers Web API 
(DAWA). Available at: https://dawa.aws.dk/ (Accessed: 14 November 2018). 
The Danish National Transport Survey (2018) ‘.’ Center for Transport Analytic, Transport 
DTU. Available at: http://www.cta.man.dtu.dk/english/tvu. 
United Nations (2016) Mobilizing Sustainable Transport for Development. Available at: 
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/2375Mobilizing Sustainable 
Transport.pdf. 
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) (2009) Glossary for 
Transport Statistics. 4th editio. International Transport Forum. 
VIRK (2018) VAT-register. Available at: https://datacvr.virk.dk/data/ (Accessed: 20 
October 2018). 
Wang, C. et al. (2015) ‘Case Studies on Transport Policy Exploring the propensity to travel 
by demand responsive transport in the rural area of Lincolnshire in England’, Case Studies 
on Transport Policy. Elsevier Ltd, 3(2), pp. 129–136. doi: 10.1016/j.cstp.2014.12.006. 
Whimapp (2018) Whim and the Mobility as a Service concept. Available at: 
www.whimapp.com (Accessed: 5 October 2018). 
Wilson, A. . (1971) ‘A family of spatial interaction models, and associated developments’, 
Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space, 3(1), pp. 1–32. doi: 10.1068/a030001. 
Zahavi, Y. (1974) Travel time budgets and mobility in urban areas, U.S Department of 
Transportation. Report FHW PL-8183. Available at: 
http://www.surveyarchive.org/Zahavi/TravelTime_Budgets.pdf. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:110==
100 
 
 
 
==PAGE:111==
101 
 
Appendix 
 
• 
Appendix A - Learning objectives 
• 
Appendix B - Survey 
• 
Appendix C - Definition of activity categories 
• 
Appendix D - Activities in the categories Jobs and Nature and green areas 
• 
Appendix E - Networks 
• 
Appendix F - Accessibility by private transport for specific activity categories 
• 
Appendix G - Accessibility by public transport for specific activity categories 
• 
Appendix H – Overall accessibility by public transport with a new bus line 
 
 
==PAGE:112==
102 
 
Appendix A 
Learning objectives 
TABLE 16 - THE PROJECT SPECIFIC LEARNING OBJECTIVES (RIGHT) WITH THE CLASSIFICATION IN BLOOM’S 
TAXONOMY11 (LEFT). 
Knowledge  
and comprehension 
• Examine and define accessibility and different ways to index it through a 
literature study.
Application 
• Illustrate the designed framework in a clear and easy-to-understand 
format. 
Analysis 
• Apply the framework to a case-study in Guldborgsund Municipality.
Synthesis 
• Design a preliminary framework for analysing accessibility for target 
groups in rural areas with a focus on usability and understandability 
based on the literature study. 
Evaluation 
• Appraise the applicability of the designed framework critically. 
• Recommend specific measures to improve the accessibility for the case 
in the Guldborgsund Municipality.
 
 
 
 
                                                     
11  Bloom’s Taxonomy is among other things used to hierarchically order learning objectives (Hansen, 
Rasmussen and Hinz, 2010) 
==PAGE:113==
103 
 
Appendix B 
Survey 
In November 2018 an online survey was conducted. The survey was sent out using Google 
Analytics and  was targeted youths living in Guldborgsund Municipality. In the following all 13 
questions are presented in the original form in Danish as well as a English translation. 
Furthermore the results for each question are presented. 
A total of 55 of the responses are considered in the results. 13 responses are due to age and place 
of residence not considered in the results. 
Question 1 
“Hvor enig er du i følgende udsagn:  I min hverdag er det vigtigt for mig, at have god adgang 
til:” 
“To which extent do you agree with the following statement: In my everyday life it is important 
for me to have good access to:” 
Strongly 
agree 
Agree
 
Neither agree 
or disagree 
Disagree
 
Strongly 
disagree 
Culture 
8
22
19
3
3
Education 
40
14
0
1
0
Health and services 
35
18
2
0
0
Family and friends 
42
8
5
0
0
Jobs 
37
15
3
0
0
Leisure 
16
22
14
2
1
Nature and green areas 
17
28
8
0
2
Shopping 
31
22
1
1
0
Question 2 
“Hvilke aktiviteter er vigtigst for dig at have god adgang til? Ranger venligst følgende 
kategorier i prioriteret rækkefølge.” 
“Which activities are for you most important to have good access to? Please range the following 
categories in order of priority.” 
  
Most important 
Least important
  
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Culture 
4
0
1
7
3
9
3
28
Education 
20
16
7
8
0
1
3
0
Health and services 
7
12
12
12
1
7
1
3
Family and friends 
15
8
9
6
8
3
4
2
Jobs 
4
11
13
6
11
2
6
2
Leisure 
1
2
3
4
10
12
15
8
Nature and green areas 
1
2
2
3
8
15
16
8
Shopping 
3
4
8
9
14
6
7
4
==PAGE:114==
104 
 
 
Question 3 
“Hvilket transportmiddel bruger du oftest i din hverdag?” 
“Which transport mode do you most often use in your everyday life?” 
Answers 
Share 
Car 
14
25%
Bicycle 
10
18%
Bus or train 
25
45%
Moped or motorcycle 
0
0%
Other… 
6
11%
Total 
55
 100%
Answers from the category other: 
Danish: “Min far køre mig”, “går”, “går”, “går”, “gå ben”, “jeg går”. 
(English: “Driving with my father”, “walking”, “walking” , “walking” , “walking” , “walking”.) 
Question 4 
“Hvilke køretøjer har du kørekort til?” 
“Which vehicles do you have a driver’s licence for?” 
In this question more than one answer was permitted. 9 respondents indicated having both a 
licence of moped and car.  1 indicated to both have a licence for a moped and not having a licence. 
Answers 
Moped 
11
Motorcycle 
0
Car 
24
I do not have an license 
28
Other… 
2
Total 
65
 
Answers from the category other: 
Danish: “Lastbil”, “Ved ikke”. 
English: “Truck”, “Don’t know”. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:115==
105 
 
 
Question 5 
“Hvilke af følgende transportmidler har du adgang til i din hverdag?” 
“Which of the following vehicle types do you have access to in your everyday life?” 
Answers
Moped 
2
Motorcycle 
0
Car 
18
Bicycle 
25
I do not have access to 
any of the vehicle types above 
18
Other… 
0
Total 
63
 
In this question more than one answer was permitted. 7 of the respondents indicated to both 
have access to a car and a bicycle. 3 indicated to not have access to a vehicle while also indicating 
having access to either a bicycle (2) or a moped (1). 
Question 6 
“I hvor høj grad mener du, at dine transportmuligheder begrænser dig i din hverdag?” 
“To which extent do you believe that your transport options are limiting you in your everyday 
life?” 
1 (greatly) 
2 
3 
4 
5 (no limitations) 
Total 
8
10
15
9
13
55
15%
18%
27%
16%
24%
100%
 
Question 7 
“Kender du til det offentlige tilbud om dør-til-dør transport kaldet Flextur?” 
“Do you know of the public service of door-to-door transport called Flextur?” 
Answers 
Share 
Yes 
16
29%
No 
32
58%
Do not know 
7
13%
Total 
55
100%
 
Question 8 
“Har du nogensinde benyttet dig af enten Flextur eller Studieflex?” 
==PAGE:116==
106 
 
“Have you ever used Flextur or Studieflex?” 
Answers 
Share 
Yes 
9
16%
No 
42
76%
Do not know 
4
7%
Total 
55
100%
Question 9 
“Hvad kan gøre kollektiv transport mere attraktivt for dig?” 
“What can make public transport more attractive for you?” 
In this question the respondent could provide an non-mandatory open text answer. All answers 
that were given by the 55 respondents are presented in original form below. 
At man kan komme frem og tilbage til sit studie med et ungdomskort uden at man kun kan komme til 
Glumsø
At det er billigere.
Ved ikke
At det er nemt og billigt, samt at tog/bus kører ofte
Bedre afgangs tider så det bedre kan passe med skole/arbejde/skift. Nu bruger jeg ofte op til 50 minutter 
ekstra på min transport fordi det ikke passer med tidspunktet jeg skal møde på eller før mit næste 
transport middel kommer.
Flere busruter til “landet” (udenfor byzonerne) - sekundært billigere transport priser
Billigere
At det er billigere end at køre i egen bil
Vis det blev gjort billiger og det kørte bedre og mere
det ved jeg godt nok ikke.
Har intet imod kollektiv transport, men sædevarme kunne da være skønt.
Ikke sikker på hvad det er
At der er billigere
Ved det ikke
Lad være med at være så f****** dyr
Ved ikke
Det ved jeg ikke
Mindre ventetid
Ved ikke
At det bliver billigere
Billigere billetter
Billigere
Billiger
Ingen anelse
Da jeg ikke har nogen kendskab til det, mangler jeg en masse oplysninger for at kunne udtale mig.
Flere afgange
Ikke rigtig noget, jeg bor ret centralt når det gælder at komme rundt til diverse destinationer som er 
relevant for mig.
==PAGE:117==
107 
 
Question 10 
“Hvad er dit køn?” 
“What is your gender?” 
Answers 
Share 
Male 
15
27%
Female 
40
73%
Total 
55
100%
Question 11 
“Hvad er din alder?” 
“How old are you?” 
 
FIGURE 35 – QUESTION 11 - DISTRIBUTION OF ANSWERS IN TERMS OF AGE.  
 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
Answers
Age
==PAGE:118==
108 
 
Question 12 
“Hvad laver du til dagligt?” 
“What do you do on a daily basis?” 
Answers
Share
Upper secondary education (Gymnasium) 
11
20%
Vocational education (Erhversuddannelse)
11
20%
Higher education 
23
42%
Full-time work 
0
0%
Part-time work 
0
0%
Unemployed 
0
0%
Do not wish to disclose 
4
7%
Other… 
6
11%
Total 
55
100%
 
Answers from the category other: 
Danish: “Multicenter syd”, “KUU – kombineret ungdomsuddannelse”, “Multicendersyd”, 
“Kuu”, “Produktionsskole”, “Produktionsskoleelev”. 
All of these answers in the category Other refer to a production school or the specific production 
school Multicenter Syd. 
Question 13 
“Hvilket område i Guldborgsund Kommune bor du i?” 
“Which areas of Guldborgsund Municipality do you live in?” 
Answers 
Share 
In a smaller town or in the countryside 
2
4%
Nykøbing Falster 
26
47%
Sakskøbing 
7
13%
Sundby 
1
2%
Nørre Alslev 
7
13%
Stubbekøbing 
4
7%
Nordbyen 
1
2%
Væggerløse 
2
4%
Nysted 
3
5%
Idestrup 
1
2%
Eskildstrup 
0
0%
Other… 
1
2%
Total 
55
100%
Answer from the category other: “Toreby”, which is a rural area per definition in this project. 
==PAGE:119==
109 
 
Appendix C 
Definition of activity categories 
Structured Query Language (SQL) definitions used to sort and define activity categories in 
Microsoft Access that are based on data from the CVR-register (the Danish VAT-register).   
The data for each category have been defined based on specific main business codes 
(hovedbranchekoder). Certain specific businesses have been screened out based on assessment 
of whether or not the business is actually providing an opportunity/activity for the target group. 
Types of business that has been screened out are e.g. holding companies, funds or businesses 
where the spatial location does not have any applicability to the user.   
Culture  
UPDATE CVR SET CVR.Act_category = "Culture" 
WHERE ((("Where [CVR]![navn_tekst] Not") In 
("Magasin","IDEKLUBBEN","Skovbrugsmagasinet på Corselitze fond")) AND 
((CVR.hovedbranche_kode)=591400)) OR (((CVR.hovedbranche_kode)=900400)) OR 
(((CVR.hovedbranche_kode)=910110)) OR (((CVR.hovedbranche_kode)=910200)); 
 
(22 entries) 
 
Education  
UPDATE CVR SET CVR.Act_category = "Education" 
WHERE ((("Where [CVR]![navn_tekst] Not") In ("Tegnstøttet kommunikation","F.A.A.S.T 
ApS","Erhvervsakademi Sjælland, Nykøbing F.","Irene Christensen Instituttet","VUC 
Storstrøm","VUC Storstrøm - kursussted","VUC Storstrøm Afd. Nykøbing F")) AND 
((CVR.hovedbranche_kode)=853120)) OR (((CVR.hovedbranche_kode)=853200)) OR 
(((CVR.hovedbranche_kode)=854100)) OR (((CVR.hovedbranche_kode)=856000)); 
 
(9 entries) 
 
Health and service  
UPDATE CVR SET CVR.Act_category = "Health and services" 
WHERE (((CVR.hovedbranche_kode)=861000 Or (CVR.hovedbranche_kode)=862100 Or 
(CVR.hovedbranche_kode)=862200)); 
 
(60 entries) 
 
Leisure  
UPDATE CVR SET CVR.Act_category = "Leisure" 
WHERE ((("Where [CVR]![navn_tekst] Not") In ("STALD GLARMESTER GUSTAV 
SØRENSEN& SØN IVS","MK Edutainment","Aj-Racing","Stephan Hansen","Mikkel Mac 
Racing ApS","Simon Larsen Rally Sport","Mark O. Madsen v/Mark Overgaard 
Madsen","Gotvedgruppen","ØSTDANMARKS BORD-TENNIS UNION POSTBOKS 
207","Cykelevent - Danmark","Susan Olsson","Selskabet af 2003","Sakskøbing Tambourkorps 
& Brass")) AND ((CVR.hovedbranche_kode)=931200)) OR 
(((CVR.hovedbranche_kode)=931900)) OR (((CVR.hovedbranche_kode)=931100)); 
 
(40 entries) 
 
==PAGE:120==
110 
 
 
 
Shopping 
UPDATE CVR SET CVR.Act_category = "Shopping" 
WHERE ((("Where [CVR]![navn_tekst] Not") In ("Storstrømsfængsel butik")) AND 
((CVR.hovedbranche_kode)=471110)) OR (((CVR.hovedbranche_kode)=471120)) OR 
(((CVR.hovedbranche_kode)=471130)) OR (((CVR.hovedbranche_kode)=471900)); 
 
(39 entries) 
 
Restaurants and cafes (considered part of the activity category “Shopping”) 
UPDATE CVR SET CVR.Act_category = "Restaurants and cafes" 
WHERE (((CVR.hovedbranche_kode)=561010) AND (("Where [CVR]![Id] Not") In 
("2668","3032”;”3085”;”3035”;”3271”;”3278”;”3272”;”3058”;”3070”;”3071”;”3066”;”3300”;”3
301”;”3041”;”3299”;”3052”;”3090”;”3097”;”3077”;”3078”;”3079”;”3122”;”3133”;”3131”;”3108”
;”3110”;”3105”;”3116”;”3152”;”3165”;”3141”;”3185”;”3199”;”3195”;”3173”;”3182”;”3183”;”3260”
;”3281”;”3282”;”3283”;”3292”;”3036”;”3037”;”3291”;”3174”;”3193”;”3286”;”3129”;”3184"))) 
OR (((CVR.hovedbranche_kode)=561020)) OR (((CVR.hovedbranche_kode)=563000)); 
 
(106 entries) 
 
 
Jobs 
UPDATE CVR SET CVR.Act_category = "Jobs" 
WHERE CVR.hovedbranche_kode IN 
(107110”;”107120”;”432200”;”432900”;”433200”;”433300”;”433410”;”433420”;”433900”;”43
9100”;”439910”;”452010”;”452020”;”452030”;”452040”;”471110”;”471120”;”471130”;”471900
”;”472100”;”472200”;”472300”;”472400”;”472500”;”472900”;”473000”;”474100”;”474200”;”
474300”;”475100”;”475210”;”475220”;”475300”;”475400”;”475910”;”475920”;”475930”;”475
990”;”476100”;”476200”;”476410”;”476420”;”476430”;”476500”;”477110”;”477120”;”477210”
;”477400”;”477500”;”477610”;”477620”;”477630”;”477700”;”477820”;”477830”;”477840”;”47
7890”;”477900”;”478100”;”478200”;”478900”;”479111”;”479112”;”479113”;”479115”;”479116”;
”479117”;”479119”;”479120”;”479900”;”494200”;”521000”;”551010”;”551020”;”552000”;”553
000”;”559000”;”561010”;”561020”;”562100”;”562900”;”563000”;”591400”;”620200”;”7820
00”;”791100”;”812100”;”812210”;”812290”;”812900”;”813000”;”821900”;”822000”;”829200
”;”871010”;”872010”;”872020”;”873010”;”873020”;”879010”;”881010”;”881020”;”881030”;”
889130”;”889140”;”889150”;”889160”;”889910”;”900110”;”900200”;”910110”;”910200”;”931
100”;”931200”;”931300”;”932100”;”960210”;”960220”) 
(2120 entries) 
 
 
==PAGE:121==
111 
 
Appendix D 
Activities in the categories Jobs and Nature and green areas 
Nature and green areas 
 
FIGURE 36 – LOCATIONS OF THE DEFINED ACTIVITIES IN THE CATEGORY NATURE AND GREEN AREAS. 
 
 
==PAGE:122==
112 
 
Jobs 
 
FIGURE 37 – NUMBER OF ACTIVITIES PER ZONE FOR THE CATEGORY JOBS IN GULDBORGSUND 
MUNICIPALITY. 
 
 
==PAGE:123==
113 
 
Appendix E 
Networks 
Private transport network 
 
FIGURE 38 – PRIVATE TRANSPORT NETWORK USED TO ESTIMATE A COST MATRIX BETWEEN ALL ZONES. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:124==
114 
 
Public transport network 
 
FIGURE 39 – PUBLIC TRANSPORT NETWORK USED TO ESTIMATE A COST MATRIX BETWEEN ALL ZONES. 
 
 
==PAGE:125==
115 
 
Appendix F 
Accessibility by private transport for specific activity categories 
The accessibility by public transport for all activity categories are showed in the following. The 
estimations of accessibility in these categories are based upon the survey weights and a 
conversion factor of 0,1 (to estimate the cost sensitivity parameters).  
Culture 
 
FIGURE 40 - ESTIMATED ACCESSIBILITY BY PRIVATE TRANSPORT TO THE ACTIVITY CATEGORY CULTURE FOR 
YOUTHS IN GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY. 
==PAGE:126==
116 
 
Education 
 
FIGURE 41 - ESTIMATED ACCESSIBILITY BY PRIVATE TRANSPORT TO THE ACTIVITY CATEGORY EDUCATION 
FOR YOUTHS IN GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:127==
117 
 
Health and services 
 
FIGURE 42 - ESTIMATED ACCESSIBILITY BY PRIVATE TRANSPORT TO THE ACTIVITY CATEGORY HEALTH AND 
SERVICES FOR YOUTHS IN GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:128==
118 
 
Friends and family (population) 
 
FIGURE 43 - ESTIMATED ACCESSIBILITY BY PRIVATE TRANSPORT TO THE ACTIVITY CATEGORY FRIENDS AND 
FAMILY (POPULATION) FOR YOUTHS IN GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY. 
 
 
==PAGE:129==
119 
 
Jobs 
 
FIGURE 44 - ESTIMATED ACCESSIBILITY BY PRIVATE TRANSPORT TO THE ACTIVITY CATEGORY JOBS FOR 
YOUTHS IN GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY. 
 
 
==PAGE:130==
120 
 
Leisure 
 
FIGURE 45 - ESTIMATED ACCESSIBILITY BY PRIVATE TRANSPORT TO THE ACTIVITY CATEGORY LEISURE FOR 
YOUTHS IN GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY. 
 
 
==PAGE:131==
121 
 
Nature and green areas 
 
FIGURE 46 - ESTIMATED ACCESSIBILITY BY PRIVATE TRANSPORT TO THE ACTIVITY CATEGORY NATURE AND 
GREEN AREAS FOR YOUTHS IN GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY. 
 
 
==PAGE:132==
122 
 
Shopping 
 
FIGURE 47 - ESTIMATED ACCESSIBILITY BY PRIVATE TRANSPORT TO THE ACTIVITY CATEGORY SHOPPING FOR 
YOUTHS IN GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY. 
  
 
 
==PAGE:133==
123 
 
Appendix G 
Accessibility by public transport for specific activity categories 
The accessibility by public transport for the activity categories Culture, Health and services, 
Family and friends (population), Jobs, Leisure and Nature and green areas are showed in the 
following. The estimations of accessibility in these categories are based upon the survey weights 
and a conversion factor of 0,1 (to estimate the cost sensitivity parameters).  
Culture 
 
FIGURE 48 – ESTIMATED ACCESSIBILITY BY PUBLIC TRANSPORT TO THE ACTIVITY CATEGORY CULTURE FOR 
YOUTHS IN GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY. 
==PAGE:134==
124 
 
Health and services 
 
FIGURE 49 - ESTIMATED ACCESSIBILITY BY PUBLIC TRANSPORT TO THE ACTIVITY CATEGORY HEALTH AND 
SERVICES FOR YOUTHS IN GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:135==
125 
 
Friends and family (Population) 
 
FIGURE 50 - ESTIMATED ACCESSIBILITY BY PUBLIC TRANSPORT TO THE ACTIVITY CATEGORY FRIENDS AND 
FAMILY (POPULATION) FOR YOUTHS IN GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY. 
 
 
==PAGE:136==
126 
 
Jobs 
 
FIGURE 51 - ESTIMATED ACCESSIBILITY BY PUBLIC TRANSPORT TO THE ACTIVITY CATEGORY JOBS FOR 
YOUTHS IN GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:137==
127 
 
Leisure 
 
FIGURE 52 - ESTIMATED ACCESSIBILITY BY PUBLIC TRANSPORT TO THE ACTIVITY CATEGORY LEISURE FOR 
YOUTHS IN GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:138==
128 
 
Nature and green areas 
 
FIGURE 53 - ESTIMATED ACCESSIBILITY BY PUBLIC TRANSPORT TO THE ACTIVITY CATEGORY NATURE AND 
GREEN AREAS FOR YOUTHS IN GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:139==
129 
 
Appendix H 
Overall accessibility by public transport with a new bus line 
 
FIGURE 54 - ACCESSIBILITY INDEX SCORES (QR) FOR PUBLIC TRANSPORT IN GULDBORGSUND MUNICIPALITY 
WITH THE INTRODUCTION OF A NEW BUS LINE BETWEEN ØSTER KIPPINGE AND NØRRE ALSLEV.  
SURVEY WEIGHTS AND A CONVERSION FACTOR OF 0,1.  
  
 
