==PAGE:1==
A Discontinuous Spectral
Galerkin Scheme for Uncertainty
Quantiﬁcation and State
Estimation of Chromatographic
Processes
Alexander Hørsholt
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
This thesis investigates a dynamical model describing a chromatographic sepa-
ration process based on an ideal equilibrium relation, and proposes numerical
models for accurate and eﬃcient simulation of this process. Algorithms for state
estimation of the chromatographic process are developed, and these algorithms
are based on the proposed numerical models of the underlying process. The
content of this thesis naturally divides into separate parts.
The ﬁrst part introduces and develops two numerical models for simulation
of chromatographic processes: 1) a high-order, discontinuous-Galerkin ﬁnite-
element (DG-FE) model and 2) a standard low-order, ﬁnite-volume (FV) model.
The FV method is developed to serve in comparison with the proposed DG-
FE method. The results from this comparison illustrate the capability of the
high-order method to produce accurate solutions at low computational eﬀort.
Compared to the FV method, the DF-GE method is able to generate solutions
at much higher accuracy, while using an order of magnitude fewer states. This
makes the DG-FE method an ideal simulator.
The second part investigates algorithms for state estimation of linear chromato-
graphic processes. A disturbance model is proposed for simultaneous estimation
of the uncertain states and inlet concentration of the chromatographic pro-
cess, using the Kalman ﬁlter as an optimal linear estimator. Parallel to the
results from the ﬁrst part, the DG-FE method is able to produce state esti-
mates with higher accuracy and lower computational eﬀort than the the FV
method. These improvements are again by an order of magnitude, and makes
the DG-FE method ideally suited for state estimation.
==PAGE:4==
ii
The third, and ﬁnal part, investigates four algorithms for state estimation of non-
linear chromatographic processes. The four ﬁlters are the: 1) Extended Kalman
Filter (EKF), 2) Ensemble Kalman Filter (EnKF), 3) Unscented Kalman Filter
(UKF) and 4) Particle Kalman Filter (PF). A comparison of the four nonlinear
ﬁlters reveals, that the EKF is the most computationally feasible, while being
capable of producing reasonably accurate state estimates. A deterministic and
probabilistic approach towards nonlinear input estimation is given by a com-
parison between the EKF and EnKF, and both ﬁlters are capable of estimating
the uncertain inlet concentrations using an augmented model formulation of the
nonlinear model.
The work during this project gave rise to the writing and submission of three
conference papers. These papers are listed in the following:
1. A Discontinuous-Galerkin Finite-Element Method for Simulation of Packed
Bed Chromatographic Processes (submitted and accepted).
2. Spatial Discretization and Kalman Filtering for Ideal Packed Bed Chro-
matography (submitted).
3. State and Input Estimation of Nonlinear Chromatographic Processes (sub-
mitted).
Each paper has been enclosed in the thesis in Appendix C - E.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis is submitted in fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc.
in Mathematical Modeling and Computation granted by the Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark (DTU). The project has been carried out during the pe-
riod from 27th of August 2018 to 27th of January 2019 at the Department
of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science (DTU Compute), under the
academic supervision of John Bagterp Jørgensen (jbjo@dtu.dk), Lasse Hjuler
Christiansen (lhch@dtu.dk), Kristian Meyer (krismey@kt.dtu.dk) and Jakob
Huusom (jkh@kt.dtu.dk). The workload corresponds to 30 ECTS.
I would like to thank all my advisors for the time and eﬀort they have devoted to
this project, as well as their many ideas, discussions and helpful advice during
the last 5 months. Thank you Tobias for sharing your insight of nonlinear ﬁlters,
and thank you Mark, Mathias and Rasmus for reading my thesis and providing
valuable feedback.
Lyngby, 27-January-2019
Alexander Hørsholt
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Preface
iii
List of Abbreviations
ix
Nomenclature
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Chromatographic Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Motivation and Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3.1
Fast Simulation of Chromatographic Processes
. . . . . .
5
1.3.2
State Estimation of Chromatographic Processes . . . . . .
7
1.4
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.5
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
The Chromatographic Model
11
2.1
The Diﬀerent Models of Chromatography
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
The Equilibrium Dispersive Model of Chromatography . . . . . .
16
2.3
Derivation of the EDM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Equilibrium Isotherms for the EDM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.5
The Linear EDM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.5.1
Solution to the Linear EDM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Discretization by the Discontinuous-Galerkin and Finite-Volume
Method
27
3.1
The Galerkin Approximation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
The Normed Approximation Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
3.3
The Choice of Orthogonal Basis Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3.1
The Polynomial Basis Functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3.2
The Legendre Polynomials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.3
The Truncated Polynomial Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3.4
The Gauss Quadratures and Discrete Orthogonality
. . .
34
3.3.5
The Orthogonal Polynomial Interpolation . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3.6
The Modal and Nodal Approximations . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.7
The Discrete Galerkin Operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.4
The Discontinuous-Galerkin Finite-Element Method
. . . . . . .
41
3.4.1
Construction of the Orthonormal Basis Functions . . . . .
44
3.4.2
The Numerical Flux Functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.4.3
Imposing the Boundary Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.5
Global Assembly of the DG-FE and FV Method
. . . . . . . . .
47
3.5.1
The Global DG-FE Operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.5.2
The Global FV Operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.6
Solving the Linear EDM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
3.7
Solving the Nonlinear EDM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
3.8
Temporal Discretization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
3.8.1
Numerical Temporal Discretization . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
3.8.2
Exact Temporal Discretization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
3.9
MATLAB Implementation I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
3.10 Numerical Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
3.10.1 Numerical Case I: Convergence of the DG-FE and FV
Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
3.10.2 Numerical Case II: Performance Comparison of the DG-
FE and FV Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
3.10.3 Numerical Case III: DG-FE Method for
Multi-Component Nonlinear Modeling . . . . . . . . . . .
65
4
State Estimation of Chromatographic Processes
67
4.1
Linear State Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.1.1
Stochastic Linear State-Space Model . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
4.1.2
Dynamic Kalman Filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
4.1.3
Stationary Kalman Filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
4.1.4
Linear Disturbance Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
4.2
MATLAB Implementation II
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
4.3
Nonlinear State Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
4.3.1
The Extended Kalman Filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
4.3.2
The Ensemble Kalman Filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
4.3.3
The Particle Kalman Filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
4.3.4
The Unscented Kalman Filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
4.3.5
Nonlinear Disturbance Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
4.3.6
Discussion of the Nonlinear State Estimation Algorithms
88
4.4
MATLAB Implementation III . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
vii
4.5
Numerical Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
4.5.1
Numerical Case I: Comparison of the DG-FE and FV
Method for Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
4.5.2
Numerical Case II: Linear Model Input Estimation . . . .
93
4.5.3
Numerical Case III: Comparison of the Nonlinear Filters .
95
4.5.4
Numerical Case IV: Nonlinear Model Input Estimation . .
98
4.5.5
Numerical Case V: Nonlinear Estimation of a Binary Mix-
ture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
5
Outlook
103
5.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
5.2
Recommendations for Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
A MATLAB Code Guide
107
B Project Plan and Evaluation
111
C Paper I
117
D Paper II
125
E Paper III
133
Bibliography
141
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:11==
List of Abbreviations
The abbreviations considered in this work are:
CADET
. . . . . . . . . Chromatographic Analysis and Design Toolkit
DARE
. . . . . . . . . Discrete-Algebraic-Ricatti-Equation
DG-FE
. . . . . . . . . Discontinuous-Galerkin Finite-Element
DOF
. . . . . . . . . Degrees-Of-Freedom
EKF
. . . . . . . . . Extended Kalman Filter
EnKF
. . . . . . . . . Ensemble Kalman Filter
FV
. . . . . . . . . Finite-Volume
GQ
. . . . . . . . . Gauss Quadrature
HPLC
. . . . . . . . . High-Performance Liquid Chromatography
IVP
. . . . . . . . . Initial Value Problem
LGL
. . . . . . . . . Legendre-Gauss-Lobatto
LSERK
. . . . . . . . . Low-Storage Explicit Runge Kutta Method
NMPC
. . . . . . . . . Nonlinear Model Predictive Control
ODE
. . . . . . . . . Ordinary Diﬀerential Equation
PF
. . . . . . . . . Particle Filter
PDE
. . . . . . . . . Partial Diﬀerential Equation
RMSD
. . . . . . . . . Root-Mean-Square-Deviation
UKF
. . . . . . . . . Unscented Kalman Filter
ZOH
. . . . . . . . . Zero-Order-Hold
==PAGE:12==
x
List of Abbreviations
==PAGE:13==
Nomenclature
Parameters
The chromatographic column and simulation parameters are denoted alphabet-
ically as:
L
Column length
cm
Di
Axial dispersion coeﬃcient
cm2/min
cf,i
Feed concentration
g/L
tinj
Injection time
min
v
Interstitial velocity
cm/min
ai
Isotherm parameter
−
bi
Isotherm parameter
−
Pe
Peclet number
−
F
Phase ratio
−
ϵ
Porosity
−
tf
Simulation ﬁnal time
min
Nt
Theoretical plate number
−
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
C h a p t e r 1
Introduction
Chromatography was ﬁrst developed in Russia by the Italian born Mikhail
Tswett, as a preparative technique for separating plant pigments such as chloro-
phyll, carotenes, and xanthophylls, at the turn of the last century [GFSK06].
The word chromatography originally derives from Greek chroma, which means
to color and graphein, which means to write. Since these plant pigments have
diﬀerent colors, the technique was given its name. The discovery made in the
ﬁrst decade of the 20th century brought with it a growing interest in chromatog-
raphy. An interest which has seen active and steady increase, to a point where
chromatography is now acknowledged as a ubiquitous industrial unit operation,
for the extraction and puriﬁcation of ﬁne chemicals, many which are used in the
pharmaceutical and biotechnology industry [GB11].
1.1
The Chromatographic Process
The chromatographic separation process may be performed in both small and
large scale. Small scale production is commonly referred to as analytical chro-
matography, while large scale production is commonly known as preparative
chromatography. As an analytical technique, chromatography is used to identify,
analyze and quantify diﬀerent compounds of a given mixture. The analytical
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
technique may be used to evaluate parameters of the diﬀerent components, or
used as a preliminary stage to preparative chromatography [HM16]. In produc-
tion and industrial scale however, column liquid chromatography is widely used
as an important unit operation for downstream processing of biopharmaceutical
products. Preparative chromatography is used in chemical and pharmaceutical
production in order to isolate and purify compounds of interest [GB11].
Component A
Component B
time [s]
concentration [g/L]
tinj
time [s]
concentration [g/L]
A
B
B
A
Convection
Diﬀusion
Polar silica beads (Stationary phase)
High Polarity        Low Polarity
Chromatographic Column
Mobile phase
Figure 1.1: Conceptual representation of the molecular separation that occurs
in a packed bed chromatographic column.
Figure 1.1 shows a conceptual representation of the molecular separation, which
occurs inside the column of a packed-bed chromatograph. The column is packed
with a ﬁne grained porous material, where a continuous ﬂow of liquid containing
a mixture of many diﬀerent components is injected through a nozzle at the inlet
into the column.
This continuous ﬂow forms what is known as the mobile
phase in the column. As illustrated by concept in Figure 1.1, this procedure
creates a ﬂow, which carries molecules of each component in the mobile phase
through the column from left to the right using either gravity or pressure. The
physical and chemical properties of each component and the porous medium
lead to diﬀerent aﬃnities towards each other, and molecules transition from
the mobile to stationary phase by adsorption onto the porous medium. The
speed of this transition is dependent on these aﬃnities. This interaction between
components inside the column, is used as a way to separate the molecules, where
they move along the column at diﬀerent speeds, forming diﬀerent concentration
bands that may be extracted at the outlet. Typically, a known solute with a
==PAGE:17==
1.1 The Chromatographic Process
3
strong aﬃnity to the stationary phase is injected to manipulate pH, polarity or
another property that may inﬂuence the separation of the molecules of interest.
The inﬂuence of this solute may be used to control the chromatographic process,
and steer the process towards a desired state. Eﬃcient control may in turn lead
to an increase in yield of the desired components, and reduce the costs of the
chromatographic process.
Figure 1.2 shows a High-Performance Liquid Chromatograph (HPLC) stationed
in building 227 at the Technical University of Denmark. Figure 1.3 shows an
actual chromatographic column, which Figure 1.1 is a conceptual representation
of.
The column has a length of 15 cm, and is a small scale column, which
may be operated by the chromatograph. Columns such as this one has many
applications. It can be used to analyze samples from fermentations, determine
the secondary metabolite concentrations in given medium and to determine
speciﬁc yields of fermentations.
Figure 1.2: A High-Performance Liquid Chromatography unit stationed in
building 227 at the Technical University of Denmark.
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
Figure 1.3: A chromatographic column around 15 cm is shown, which may be
used in conjunction with the chromatographic separation unit.
1.2
Literature Overview
While chromatography is extensively used as a separation technique in down-
stream biopharmaceutical manufacturing, practical application of chromatogra-
phy remains a costly process [HSJ+18]. In 2015 the global biopharmaceutical
market was predicted to reach 167 billion US Dollars [GB11]. As a consequence
the potential mathematical modeling, parameter estimation, control and opti-
mization may have on chromatographic processes is therefore becoming increas-
ingly signiﬁcant.
Accurate modeling and simulation of chromatographic processes described by
models with increasing complexity [ABFN18, HLv18, vA10, KDE00, BWA+13],
is an active and extensively studied ﬁeld of interest. Open modeling frameworks
such as the Chromatography Analysis and Design Toolkit (CADET) [Lv18]
provide freely distributed software under the GPL license capable of executing
the most common scientiﬁc workﬂows such as model calibration, process design,
experimental design as well as many other designs of chromatographic processes.
Parameter estimation [KE06, KDS+09a, LNE14, KDS+09b], optimization [PSNv13,
HM16, Sel18] and control [Sel18] try to bridge the gap between minimizing the
high cost associated with the chromatographic process, while maintaining an
eﬃcient separation with a high production yield.
1.3
Motivation and Challenges
The success of the chromatographic separation process is tied to the fulﬁllment
of two objectives: 1) to extract as much as possible of each component from
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Motivation and Challenges
5
a given mixture, 2) with each component separated as much as possible and
in the least amount of time. To optimize the separation process, it therefore
becomes natural to consider appropriate control strategies such as Nonlinear
Model Predictive Control (NMPC).
The fulﬁllment of these two objectives inherently pose a number of diﬀerent
challenges, among these challenges it is notable that: 1) the dynamics of the
chromatographic processes are inherently described by complex models, and
these complex models often require independent determination of many un-
certain model parameters.
These parameters may be be costly and diﬃcult
to derive by experiments [GFSK06, CSBS14, KE06, KDS+09a]. In addition,
these models are described by nonlinear, convection-dominated partial diﬀeren-
tial equations (PDEs), that require specialized numerical methods in order to
be solved accurately and eﬃciently. 2) Measurements of the inlet concentrations
of each component are typically not possible to obtain for industrial feed stocks,
and information about the process is therefore tied entirely to the uncertain mea-
surements taken at the outlet [BWA+13]. The measurements available at the
outlet are typically not of the concentration, but have to be computed indirectly
through available data obtained by the speciﬁc process used for separation.
However as a fundamental prerequisite, NMPC and other control techniques
rely crucially on proper state estimation of the underlying process. A conceptual
illustration of the NMPC principle is shown in Figure 1.4. This ﬁgure depicts
the exchange of information between each part of an NMPC loop.
During
discrete times, tk, the chromatographic process provides the estimator with
measurements, y, which are obtained using sensors. The estimator computes
the ﬁltered states, ˆx, and the regulator is used to dynamically optimize the
process with a speciﬁed control u.
To meet the above challenges and provide the ﬁrst steps towards NMPC of
chromatographic processes, this project seeks to develop fast and accurate nu-
merical methods, that upon discretization of the coupled nonlinear PDEs lead
to numerical schemes, that ensure high-order accuracy using few degrees-of-
freedom (DOFs). Furthermore, this project seeks to develop reliable state es-
timation techniques of the underlying chromatographic processes. To this end,
this project falls into two main parts.
1.3.1
Fast Simulation of Chromatographic Processes
The simulation of multi-component chromatographic processes under nonlinear
conditions and equilibrium based kinetics require fast and accurate numerical
methods [JSAW11, HLv18, MHA18b]. These processes are described by non-
==PAGE:20==
6
Introduction
Estimator
Regulator
Process/Model
y
x
u
v
Figure 1.4: Conceptual representation of the interaction between state esti-
mator, regulator (dynamic optimizer) and the process/model in
NMPC. This project seeks to develop an accurate numerical model
of the chromatographic process and eﬃcient state estimation al-
gorithms. These components constitute the monitoring and pre-
diction part of the NMPC loop.
linear, convection-dominated coupled PDEs [JSAW11]. The underlying physics
of these PDEs are convection-dominated, and discontinuities in the inlet con-
centrations may over time give rise to steep concentration proﬁles and shock
formations on either side of the elution bands [MG92]. These shocks challenge
and cause diﬃculties for many numerical methods based on ﬁnite-diﬀerence or
ﬁnite-volume discretizations, and to mitigate this, eﬃcient high-order accurate
schemes are necessary to produce reliable simulations of the underlying physical
models [MHA18b].
The ﬁrst part of this thesis seeks to mitigate the numerical diﬃculties posed to-
wards conventional numerical schemes, by using a high-order, nodal discontinuous-
Galerkin ﬁnite-element (DG-FE) scheme, as an accurate and performance eﬃ-
cient simulator [MHA18b]. This numerical scheme oﬀers h-p adaptivity, which is
attractive since high-order accuracy may be achieved by increasing the number
of elements for a ﬁxed polynomial order or by increasing the polynomial or-
der for a ﬁxed number of elements [HW08]. The Equilibrium Dispersive Model
(EDM) is proposed as nonlinear model to describe the dynamics of the under-
==PAGE:21==
1.4 Contributions
7
lying chromatographic process.
1.3.2
State Estimation of Chromatographic Processes
The inlet concentrations of the chromatographic column often consist of a mix-
ture of many diﬀerent and complex molecules. These inlet concentrations typi-
cally result from a fermentation in the downstream biopharmaceutical manufac-
turing process. Most often it is not possible to obtain measurements of the inlet
concentrations of each component, that enters the chromatographic column.
Therefore information of the process is tied entirely to the measurements taken
at the outlet, which only begin to appear after the chromatographic process is
undertaken. As a consequence, information of the concentration at the outlet
of the chromatographic column need to be computed indirectly from available
measurements, and this data is typically corrupted by measurement noise.
This second part of this thesis seeks to investigate the simulation of linear
and nonlinear chromatographic processes under uncertainty.
The discretiza-
tion of the EDM leads to a stochastic, continuous-discrete model. This project
will develop state estimation techniques for simultaneous estimation of the sys-
tem states and unknown inlet concentrations of linear and nonlinear chromato-
graphic processes. The Kalman ﬁlter is used as an optimal estimator for the
linear chromatographic process, while the following four diﬀerent ﬁlters are used
as estimators for the nonlinear process. The ﬁlters considered are the: 1) Ex-
tended Kalman Filter (EKF), 2) Unscented Kalman Filter (UKF), 3) Particle
Filter (PF) and 4) the Ensemble Kalman Filter (EnKF).
1.4
Contributions
The work during this project gave rise to three conference papers. The project
was carried out in the period from August 25th 2018 to January 25th 2019, and
the papers were written and submitted, while simultaneously working on the
project. In the following, the three papers are listed in publication order as:
1. A Discontinuous-Galerkin Finite-Element Method for Simulation of Packed
Bed Chromatographic Processes, which has been submitted to the 12th
IFAC Symposium on Dynamics and Control of Process Systems (DY-
COPS), and has currently been accepted.
==PAGE:22==
8
Introduction
2. Spatial Discretization and Kalman Filtering for Ideal Packed-Bed Chro-
matography, which has been submitted to the European Control Confer-
ence 2019 (ECC).
3. State and Input Estimation of Nonlinear Chromatographic Processes, which
has been submitted to the IEEE Conference on Control Technology and
Application (CCTA).
1.5
Thesis Outline
The thesis consists of the following chapters:
• The Chromatographic Model: This chapter introduces the EDM used
for modeling the chromatographic process. The model is derived using
an equilibrium mass balance consideration.
The choice of equilibrium
relations describing the transition from mobile to stationary phase, which
couples the dynamics between the components occupying the process, are
outlined in this chapter as well.
• The Discontinuous Galerkin Method: The mathematical prelimi-
naries for understanding the DG-FE method are presented.
Based on
this understanding, this chapter derives a spatial discretization using a
method-of-lines approach, which considers the spatial and temporal dis-
cretization of the EDM separately. The high-order, DG-FE method is used
to discretize the spatial derivatives of the model. In addition, a ﬁrst-order,
FV method is derived to be used in comparison with the DG-FE method.
Three propositions on how to obtain solutions to the nonlinear model are
presented, and an eﬃcient time-step procedure based on a Low-Storage
Explicit Runge-Kutta (LSERK) method is proposed to advance solutions
to the nonlinear EDM in time. An exact time-integration is derived for the
linear EDM. Finally, an array of diﬀerent case studies are investigated in
order to demonstrate the capabilities of the DG-FE method, as an ideally
suited simulator.
The main work of this chapter gave rise to the ﬁrst conference paper
paper: A Discontinuous-Galerkin Finite-Element Method for Simulation
of Packed Bed Chromatographic Processes.
• State Estimation of Nonlinear Chromatography: This chapter be-
gins by developing a stochastic, state-space model, that results from the
discretization of the linear EDM using the DG-FE and FV method. This
model assumes, that the noise present in the process is kept constant over
==PAGE:23==
1.5 Thesis Outline
9
each discrete time interval. The dynamic and stationary Kalman ﬁlters
are presented and described as estimators of the stochastic state-space
model. Furthermore, a stochastic, continuous-discrete model, is proposed
to model the nonlinear chromatographic process under uncertainty. The
EKF, UKF, PF and EnKF are described for the numerical model that re-
sults from the discretization of the nonlinear EDM. A disturbance model
is proposed to model the unknown inlet concentrations of the chromato-
graphic column. The Kalman ﬁlters are applied in the linear and nonlinear
cases as estimators, and are used to estimate the uncertain inlet and outlet
states simultaneously. The capabilities of the DG-FE method for ﬁltering
is demonstrated using both the linear and nonlinear model.
The main work of this chapter gave rise to the two remaining conference
papers: 1) Spatial Discretization and Kalman Filtering for Ideal Packed-
Bed Chromatography and 2) State and Input Estimation of Nonlinear
Chromatographic Processes.
• Outlook: Conclusions are made in this chapter, and recommendations
for future work are given.
==PAGE:24==
10
Introduction
==PAGE:25==
C h a p t e r 2
The Chromatographic
Model
The following chapter presents the theoretical foundation for understanding the
mathematical model of chromatography used in this thesis.
The content of
this chapter is divided into separate parts. The ﬁrst part introduces three fun-
damental models of chromatography.
These models are the: 1) Equilibrium
Dispersive Model (EDM), 2) Lumped Kinetic Model (LKM) and 3) General
Rate Model (GRM). The second part consists of an assessment and discussion
of the complexity of each mathematical model, and based on these consider-
ations the EDM is chosen as an adequate model. The third part provides a
derivation of the EDM based on a mass balance equilibrium. Finally, an analyt-
ical solution is presented to the EDM based on a linear equilibrium relation of
the concentrations. The analytical solution will prove useful later in the thesis,
as it provides a way of comparing the accuracy of numerical schemes used to
approximate solutions of the model. It also ensures that these numerical models
are implemented correctly.
==PAGE:26==
12
The Chromatographic Model
2.1
The Diﬀerent Models of Chromatography
The literature contains a variety of models, that describe the behavior of packed-
bed chromatographic processes inside a separation column. Well known models
[GFSK06] include the:
1) Equilibrium Dispersive Model.
2) Lumped Kinetic Model.
3) General Rate Model.
Other models such as the ideal and lumped pore model exist, but this section is
dedicated to describing the three most common models: 1) through 3). These
models are nonlinear, convection-dominated PDEs describing the interaction
between chromatographic components inside a separation column. The models
1) through 3) are derived from mass balances, each under varying assumptions.
The EDM is considered to be the simplest of the three models, and is based on
six fundamental assumptions [GFSK06]. These assumptions are: 1) the chro-
matographic process is isothermal, and the transition from mobile to stationary
phase is modeled by an equilibrium isotherm with instantaneous reaction ki-
netics. 2) The mobile phase is incompressible. 3) There is axial dispersion in
the column, which causes band broadening of the concentration proﬁles.
4)
The stationary phase is packed with a porous material of equidistant spherical
particles, and the solvent is not adsorbed in the stationary phase. 5) The col-
umn is radially homogeneous and 6) the mobile and stationary phase of each
component do not interact.
The Equilibrium Dispersive Model: Under the following assumptions 1)
through 6) the EDM is governed by the dynamics of the nonlinear, convection-
dominated PDE on the form:
∂ci
∂t + v ∂ci
∂z = Di
∂2ci
∂z2 −F ∂cs,i
∂t ,
(2.1a)
cs,i = fi(c1, c2, . . . , cNc).
(2.1b)
The ith concentration of the mobile phase and stationary phases are denoted
respectively as ci and cs,i. The parameters of the EDM (2.1) are listed as:
1. v the interstitial velocity of the ﬂuid.
2. Di the ith axial diﬀusion coeﬃcient.
==PAGE:27==
2.1 The Diﬀerent Models of Chromatography
13
3. F the dimensionless phase ratio.
4. ϵ the dimensionless total porosity of the packing bed material inside the
column.
The EDM typically appears on the form (2.1), however this is an inconvenient
representation of the model, for reasons that will become apparent later in the
thesis. A more convenient representation is introduced, which eases the physical
understanding and implementation of the conservation based numerical schemes.
The equilibrium relation describing the transition from mobile to stationary
phase is governed by the term (2.1b). This relation implies that the reaction
kinetics are instantaneous, and that equilibrium of the mobile and stationary
phase is achieved immediately. This is a reasonable assumption in most cases,
since component concentrations in nonlinear chromatographic processes remain
relatively low, with concentrations rarely exceeding 10% (w/w). A variety of
models exist for describing the relation in (2.1b), such as the linear and Langmuir
isotherm models. An extensive list of these models are given in [GFSK06].
The EDM is correct if the mass transfer in the chromatographic separation col-
umn is governed solely by molecular diﬀusion across the mobile phase ﬂowing
around the packing material, and if the exchange of feed components between
the stationary and mobile phases is very fast. Otherwise, the model is an ap-
proximation. However, because most modern chromatographic columns achieve
high eﬃciency using ﬁne-particle packing materials, the model is often a realistic
approximation of the true dynamics inside the column [GFSK06].
The Lumped Kinetic Model: The dynamics of the LKM are governed by
the same PDE (2.1), as in the EDM. However, the mass balance equation in
(2.1) is combined with a kinetic equilibrium relation, which relates the rate of
variation of the concentration of the ith component in the stationary phase, to
its concentrations in each mobile phase and to the equilibrium concentration in
the stationary phases. This gives a model on the form:
∂ci
∂t + v ∂ci
∂z = Di
∂2ci
∂z2 −F ∂cs,i
∂t ,
(2.2a)
∂cs,i
∂t
= gi(c1, c2, . . . , cNc, cs,1, cs,2, . . . , cs,Nc; k),
(2.2b)
cs,i = fi(c1, c2, . . . cNc).
(2.2c)
In other words, the equilibrium is no longer achieved instantaneously as in the
EDM, but rather the equilibrium is attained after some period of time has
passed during the chromatographic process.
The speed of the transition to
equilibrium between each concentration phase is governed by the kinetic mass
transfer coeﬃcient k.
==PAGE:28==
14
The Chromatographic Model
Diﬀerent kinetic models exist to model the dynamical equation in (2.2b), such
as the linear kinetic and Langmuir kinetic model. These models are listed ex-
tensively in [GFSK06]. In principle, the kinetic models are more exact than the
equilibrium based ones, such as the EDM. However, the diﬀerence between the
band proﬁles produced from the EDM and the LKM are negligible when the col-
umn eﬃciency is high and exceeds a few hundred theoretical plates [GFSK06].
The dynamics of the LKM is therefore captured by the simpliﬁed EDM for high
eﬃcient chromatographic columns.
The General Rate Model: The GRM is the most comprehensive and real-
istic of the three models, since it takes into account all of the phenomena that
inﬂuence the formation of the band proﬁles inside the chromatographic column.
The GRM considers separately two fractions of the mobile phase: 1) the fraction
that percolates through the column bed, which carries the components along the
column denoted denoted ci, and 2) the stagnant fraction contained in the porous
particles denoted cp,i. A mass balance equation is written for each of the two
phases for each of the i components. The dynamics of the GRM are described
by a model on the form:
ϵc
∂ci
∂t + v ∂ci
∂z = ϵcDL,i
∂2ci
∂z2 −(1 −ϵc)kf,iap(ci −cp,i|r=rp)),
(2.3a)
∂cp,i
∂t
+ 1 −ϵp
ϵp
∂cs,i
∂t
= 1
r2
∂
∂r

r2

Dp,i
∂cp,i
∂r
+ 1 −ϵp
ϵp
Ds,i
∂qi
∂r

,
(2.3b)
∂cs,i
∂t
= gi(c1, c2, . . . , cNc, cs,1, cs,2, . . . , cs,Nc),
(2.3c)
cs,i = fi(c1, c2, . . . cNc).
(2.3d)
The concentration qi denotes the stationary phase concentration at equilibrium.
For the EDM the stationary concentration, cs,i, equals the stationary concen-
tration at equilibrium, qi, since the mass transfer kinetics occur instantaneously.
The GRM contains a large collection of parameters. However, for completeness
these parameters are listed below as:
1) ap is the external surface area of the packing material.
2) ci and cp,i are the bulk and stagnant ith mobile phase concentration.
3) cs,i is the ith stationary phase concentration.
4) qi is the ith stationary phase concentration at equilibrium.
5) Di is the axial dispersion coeﬃcient of the ith component.
6) Dp,i is the pore diﬀusion coeﬃcient of the ith component.
7) Ds,i is the surface diﬀusion coeﬃcient of the ith component.
==PAGE:29==
2.1 The Diﬀerent Models of Chromatography
15
8) ϵc is the external porosity of the column bed.
9) ϵp is the internal porosity of the packing material.
10) kext,i is the ﬂuid particle mass transfer coeﬃcient.
11) r and rp are the radial position and radius of the spherical particles.
12) v is the interstitial velocity of the ith component.
The GRM is a radially heterogeneous model, since there is friction between
the occupying components and the wall surrounding the column. Therefore the
packing density, phase ratio, permeability, external porosity, interstitial velocity
etc. are diﬀerent depending on the radial and spatial coordinates (z, r). The
GRM considers surface diﬀusion, Ds,i, pore diﬀusion, Dp,i, which introduces the
radial dimension and axial diﬀusion, Di, which causes band broadening to the
particles in the column. This is contrary to the EDM, which does not assume an
inﬁnitely eﬃcient column, and instead lumps all the dispersive eﬀects into one
dispersion coeﬃcient Di. Finally, the GRM models the eﬀective rate constant
kext,i by a ﬁlm transfer coeﬃcient.
While the GRM is the most comprehensive and realistic model of chromatogra-
phy, since it takes into account many of the phenomena that have inﬂuence on
the formation of band proﬁles, it is however also the most complex model. The
GRM requires determination of many of the aforementioned parameters, which
may not be readily available. Typically, these parameters have to be determined
by parameter identiﬁcation through a series of experiments. While this may be
acceptable in practical cases, it is often not easy, since this requires the acqui-
sition of accurate band proﬁle data in a wide range of experimental conditions.
This is both expensive and time consuming, and explains why the GRM is not
as popular as its more simple counterparts the EDM or LKM [GFSK06]. Use of
the GRM should therefore be limited to cases, where the mass transfer kinetics
of the components are slow.
In speciﬁc cases [QAJ+13, GFSK06, van81] when either of the the physical mod-
els (EDM, LKM and GRM) simplify to a linear model by choice of equilibrium
and kinetic relation, it has been shown that closed form solutions to these mod-
els exist. These closed form solutions are not useful for simulation of the real
chromatographic processes, as the conditions and assumptions on which they are
derived typically reﬂect unrealistic simulation scenarios. In order to accurately
model the dynamics of the EDM, LKM and GRM, eﬃcient numerical schemes
that guarantee solutions, even when the models are complex and nonlinear, need
to be considered. Based on the latter discussion, the model of scope in this the-
sis is chosen as the EDM. This is a relatively simple model, which accurately
predicts the formation of band proﬁles, and for high eﬃciency chromatography
==PAGE:30==
16
The Chromatographic Model
the EDM is a good approximation of the behavior inside the chromatographic
column. However, in order to model the chromatographic process appropriate
boundary conditions, and information about the equilibrium isotherm relation,
needs to be speciﬁed. These considerations are made in the subsequent section.
2.2
The Equilibrium Dispersive Model of Chro-
matography
The EDM is a nonlinear, convection-dominated PDE of the form (2.4a) and
involves the concentrations of Nc components in the mobile, ci, and stationary
phase at equilibrium, qi.
In the literature, a variety of boundary conditions exist to model almost any
conﬁguration of the column [GFSK06]. A Danckwerts boundary condition is
used to model the inlet concentration proﬁle, and a zero Neumann condition
is given at the outlet [Dan53]. For high-performance chromatographic systems
with many theoretical plates, the diﬀusion at the inlet is almost zero and a
Dirichlet condition is typically used to model the inlet concentration. Given
proper initial conditions, the multi-component ﬂow inside the column is gov-
erned by the nonlinear, convection-dominated PDE on the form:
∂¯ci
∂t (t, z) = −∂¯Ni
∂z (t, z),
in Ω× (0, T),
(2.4a)
Ni(t, z) = vcin,i,
on {0} × (0, T),
(2.4b)
∂ci
∂z (t, z) = 0,
on L × (0, T),
(2.4c)
ci = c0,i,
on Ω× {0},
(2.4d)
for all i = 1, . . . , Nc, with total number of components Nc for a column Ω=
(0, L) of length L > 0.
The total concentration in (2.4) of the ith component is denoted ¯ci, and is the
sum of the mobile and stationary phases in the porous medium:
¯ci(t, z) = ϵci(t, z) + (1 −ϵ)qi(t, z).
(2.5)
The porosity of the packing material is denoted ϵ. The ﬂow through the porous
medium is:
¯
Ni(t, z) = ϵNi(t, z).
(2.6)
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Derivation of the EDM
17
The ﬂow in the column is assumed to be a combination of a convective ﬂow,
vci, and dispersive ﬂow, Ji, given as:
Ni(t, z) = vci(t, z) −Ji(t, z),
(2.7)
where v is the interstitial velocity of the ﬂuid. The dispersive ﬂow is governed
by Fick’s law:
Ji(t, z) = −Di
∂c
∂z ,
(2.8)
where Di is the ith dispersion coeﬃcient. The dispersion coeﬃcient is related
to the number of theoretical plates, Nt, inside the column by [GFSK06] as
D =
Lv
2Nt . The ith component is injected into the column with a rectangular
pulse from time t1 to t2 of width tinj given as:
ci,in(t) =
(
ci,f,
t1 ≤tinj ≤t2,
0,
tinj < t2,
(2.9)
with a feed concentration for the ith component denoted ci,f. The inlet concen-
tration is modeled by a Danckwert’s boundary condition, and a zero Neumann
condition is given at the outlet as:
Ni(t, 0) = vcin,i(t),
(2.10)
Ni(t, L) = vci(t, L).
(2.11)
2.3
Derivation of the EDM
The following derives the governing equations (2.4) of the EDM. Under the
assumptions 1) through 6), the governing mass balance equations for the chro-
matographic process may be derived. Consider a cylinder Ω= (0, L) of length
L > 0. Denote ci the ith mobile concentration and qi the ith stationary phase
concentration, which under these assumptions only depend on the displacement
in the cylinder z and time t. Consider the control volume V , that appears when
taking a slice of length ∆z of the column Ω. This concept is illustrated in Figure
2.1.
All column and component properties are assumed constant inside the control
volume V . The equations of mass balance state, that the amount of accumulated
mass of component i, inside such a cross section V , is equal to the diﬀerence in
amount that enters, and amount that exits the slice:
cacc = cinj −cout.
(2.12)
==PAGE:32==
18
The Chromatographic Model
Z
Z+Δz
Δz
Ni, Z
Ni, Z+Δz
z
Ci
S
V
Figure 2.1: Control volume V of the theoretical chromatographic column Ω.
The amount of mass of component i which enters the slice, is given as the ﬂux
at position Z:
Ni,Z = ϵS

vci −Di
∂ci
∂z

Z,t
.
(2.13)
The parameters are the total porosity of the column packing, ϵ, the cross-
sectional area of the column, S, the local average velocity of the mobile phase,
v, and the axial dispersion coeﬃcient, Di, of the ith component. The ﬁrst term
inside the parenthesis in (2.13) accounts for the convective inﬂux and the second
term accounts for the axial dispersion, which occurs due to the molecular dif-
fusion and non-homogeneity of the inﬂow. The dispersion is modeled by Fick’s
law. The same reasoning allows for the deﬁnition of the ﬂux of solute, that exits
the slice at position Z + ∆z:
Ni,Z+∆z = ϵS

vci −Di
∂ci
∂z

Z+∆z,t
.
(2.14)
The rate of accumulation of the mobile and stationary phase inside the slice of
volume S∆z is ﬁnally given as:
Ni, ¯
Z = S∆z

ϵ∂ci
∂t + (1 −ϵ)∂qi
∂t
 ¯
Z,t
.
(2.15)
Here ¯Z is the average value of z through the slice from left to right. Substituting
equations (2.13) through (2.15) into the mass balance law in (2.12), provides an
expression for the mass balance diﬀerence equation of the ith component in the
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Derivation of the EDM
19
mobile phase as:
S∆z

ϵ∂ci
∂t + (1 −ϵ)∂qi
∂t
 ¯
Z,t
= ϵS

vci −Di
∂ci
∂z

Z,t
−ϵS

vci −Di
∂ci
∂z

Z+∆z,t
.
(2.16)
Rearranging terms in (2.16) allows the mass balance diﬀerence to be rewritten
as:
ϵ ∂ci
∂t
 ¯
Z,t
+ (1 −ϵ) ∂qi
∂t
 ¯
Z,t
= −ϵ
  vci −Di ∂ci
∂z

Z+∆z,t −
 vci −Di ∂ci
∂z

Z,t
∆z
!
.
(2.17)
Recall, that the interstitial velocity v and the axial dispersion coeﬃcient Di are
constant along the column. Then by letting ∆z →0, the governing nonlinear
PDE (2.4a) appears in the limit as:
∂¯ci
∂t (t, z) = −∂¯Ni
∂z (t, z).
(2.18)
Equation (2.18) is then written in terms of the convective and diﬀusive ﬂux by
deﬁning Ni = vci −Ji, where Fick’s law is Ji = −D ∂c
∂z. The total amount of
each component in mobile and stationary phase inhabiting the porous material
is equivalent to ¯ci = ϵci + (1 −ϵ)qi. One equation must therefore be written for
each of the i components in the chromatographic process leading to a system of
Nc diﬀerent PDEs.
Remark 1. The model (2.18) typically appears on the form:
∂ci
∂t + v ∂ci
∂z = Di
∂2ci
∂z2 −F ∂qi
∂t ,
(2.19)
see [QAJ+13, GFSK06, JSAW11, MHA18b].
Here F =
Vs
Vm =
1−ϵ
ϵ
is sim-
ply the phase ratio, where Vs and Vm correspond to the volumes occupied by
the stationary and mobile phase. The ﬁrst and third terms are accumulation
terms of the mobile and stationary phase. The third term is a convective term
and the fourth term on the right hand side of the equation is a diﬀusion term.
The equation in (2.19) is given explicitly in terms of the concentration ci and
would typically be discretized and solved by a ﬁnite-diﬀerence scheme [LeV07].
Therefore one would typically identify the equation in (2.19) as a second or-
der, nonlinear convection-dominated PDE. However, the formulation in (2.18)
is more intuitive, since it incorporates the physical behavior of the system and
provides an easy implementation of conservation based numerical schemes, such
as the DG-FE and FV method, which will become clear later.
==PAGE:34==
20
The Chromatographic Model
In order to successfully model these equations, appropriate boundary conditions
are necessary. In the literature a variety of boundary [GFSK06] conditions exist,
which are able to model any possible conﬁguration of the chromatographic col-
umn. A boundary condition on the left and right side is necessary to model the
equation (2.18). The inﬂux of mass is typically modeled by a Robin boundary
condition, which in chromatographic literature is known commonly as Danckw-
erts boundary condition. This condition appears at the inlet of the column at
z = 0 and is given by:
Ni|z=0 =

vici −D∂ci
∂z

z=0
= vcin,i(t).
(2.20)
The Danckwerts boundary condition states, that the mass ﬂux at the inlet is
equal to the mass ﬂux of a pipe, which has the same diameter as the chromato-
graphic column. Assuming D = 0 the boundary condition becomes a Dirichlet
condition, while for D > 0 the boundary condition accounts for dispersive ef-
fects at the inlet, which in theory states that particles of each component may
disperse back into the pipe inlet.
In actual columns [GFSK06] Di is ﬁnite, and Di ∂c
∂z

z=0 is nonzero. The Danck-
werts boundary condition should therefore be used on systems with low column
eﬃciency, since the dispersive term more accurately describes the inﬂow at the
pipe inlet. In columns with many theoretical plates the dispersion is very low,
and one could use a Dirichlet condition instead. The dispersion coeﬃcient D is
related to the number of theoretical plates by:
D = Lv
2Nt
,
(2.21)
where Nt is the number of theoretical plates.
At the outlet of the column, z = L, a homogeneous Neumann outﬂow boundary
is implemented. This condition assures a continuous ﬂow of the concentration
proﬁle at the outlet, which connects the tube receiving the component after
leaving the column. The component exits the column only by convection at the
outlet. This condition is given as:
Ni|z=L = vci(t, L),
(2.22)
which is the equivalent of stating:
Di
∂ci
∂z

z=L
= 0.
(2.23)
The amount of injected concentration of a component is given as a rectangular
pulse:
cin,i(t) =
(
cf,i,
t1 ≤t ≤t2,
0,
t2 < t.
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Equilibrium Isotherms for the EDM
21
The width of the pulse is tinj = t2 −t1.
The PDE in (2.18) governs the dynamics of the multi-component ﬂow and ac-
companied with boundary conditions at the inlet and outlet the EDM is now
suitable for modeling purposes.
2.4
Equilibrium Isotherms for the EDM
The equilibrium isotherm is an equilibrium relation between the components oc-
cupying the chromatographic column, which describes the willingness of a com-
ponent to transition from mobile to stationary phase and stick to the porous
medium. The EDM is derived based on the assumption, that the concentra-
tions of the ith component in its mobile and stationary phase are assumed to
be equilibrium at all times. In other words, the reaction kinetics of the chro-
matographic process are assumed to be instantaneous. The equilibrium relation
typically relates all the components occupying the chromatographic column, and
this relation in general implies that qi is a function qi = fi(c1, c2, . . . , ci, . . . , cNc),
which depends on all the components in the chromatographic column. There-
fore f is typically a nonlinear function, that couples the equations in (2.4), and
this transition may therefore be described by a variety of equilibrium isotherms,
which models qi.
The chromatographic literature oﬀers a variety of diﬀerent equilibrium isotherms
for both single- and multi-component systems [GFSK06]. In general, the amount
of any given component adsorbed at the equilibrium state within a mixture al-
most always decreases with the increase of the amount of another component. A
collection of diﬀerent components in the mobile phase which are occupying the
chromatographic column, will therefore always experience an inherent competi-
tion to occupy the space in the stationary phase. This behavior is not captured
by one single expression for the equilibrium isotherm, but rather a variety of
diﬀerent isotherms exist. These relations are each based on diﬀerent assump-
tions, and are useful for modeling diﬀerent phenomena. One such equilibrium
model is the multi-component Langmuir isotherm.
The Multi-Component Langmuir Isotherm
The following section derives the multi-component Langmuir isotherm. Consider
two components A and B of a binary mixture at equilibrium. Depending on
their aﬃnity towards each other and the porous material they occupy, either of
==PAGE:36==
22
The Chromatographic Model
the components in the mixture may stick to a particle of the porous medium, and
occupy a fraction of the surface. One part, S0, of the surface is free, implying
it is only covered by the solvent, one part, SA, is covered by the molecules of
component A and the remaining part, SB by the molecules of component B.
Thus the total surface covered is:
S0 + SA + SB = 1,
(2.24)
where S0, SA and SB is the surface area covered by the solvent and components
A and B.
At equilibrium the rate of adsorption equals the rate of desorp-
tion. The rate of desorption is proportional to the surface area occupied by
the molecules of the speciﬁc component [GFSK06].
During equilibrium this
proportionality is given as:
kd,i = ka,iS0Ci,
= ka,iCi(1 −SA −SB).
(2.25)
The subscript i denotes, which of the components are considered. The coeﬃ-
cients kd,i and ka,i are the desorption and adsorption rates for the speciﬁc com-
ponent. Equation (2.25) gives two equations with two unknowns for i ∈{A, B}.
Solving these simultaneously gives:
Si =
ka,i
kd,i Ci
1 + ka,A
kd,A CA + ka,B
kd,B CB
.
(2.26)
The amount of the ith component that is adsorbed, i.e in stationary phase qi,
is proportional to the surface area covered by the molecule. This derivation
was given for a binary mixture, but for systems with Nc > 2 components the
expression generalizes. Instead, one may deﬁne what is known as the competitive
Langmuir isotherm for a mixture of Nc components, by considering a sum of
areas S0 + PNc
j
Sj = 1. The competitive Langmuir isotherm is then given as:
qi =
aici
1 + PNc
s=1 bscs
.
(2.27)
The equilibrium coeﬃcients in (2.27) are simply the fractions of the adsorption
and desorption coeﬃcients in equation (2.26).
The Linear Isotherm
In dilute systems where concentrations are very low, the competition between
components become negligible, and the equilibrium relation described by the
Langmuir isotherm (2.27) simpliﬁes to a linear isotherm:
qi = aici.
(2.28)
==PAGE:37==
2.4 Equilibrium Isotherms for the EDM
23
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Mobile Concentration c [g/L]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Stationary Concentration q [g/L]
Linear Isotherm
a=0.1
a=0.3
a=0.5
a=1.00
(a) Linear isotherm.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Mobile Concentration c [g/L]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Stationary Concentration q [g/L]
Langmuir Isotherm
a=b=0.25
a=b=0.5
a=b=0.75
a=b=1.00
(b) Langmuir isotherm.
Figure 2.2: Realization of the linear and Langmuir isotherm for varying values
of the equilibrium constant ai and bi.
As a consequence the diﬀerent components do not compete with each other for
position in the stationary phase, and using the linear isotherm (2.28) decouples
the PDEs in the EDM (2.4).
Figure 2.2 illustrates the the behavior of the
two diﬀerent isotherms: linear and Langmuir for varying concentrations and
isotherm parameters a, b ∈[0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.00].
==PAGE:38==
24
The Chromatographic Model
2.5
The Linear EDM
The following introduces the linear EDM, and the closed form solution to the
governing PDE of this model is presented. Given a linear equilibrium relation
(2.28) the EDM (2.4) reduces to a linear PDE given as:

1 + 1 −ε
ε
ai
 ∂ci(t, z)
∂t
= −∂Ni(t, z)
∂z
,
(2.29)
under the same boundary (2.20) + (2.22) and initial conditions.
2.5.1
Solution to the Linear EDM
The choice of equilibrium isotherm determines, how the dynamics of the diﬀerent
components described by the EDM will behave. The Langmuir isotherm couples
the EDM such that it for Nc > 1 becomes a system of multiple PDEs. In most
cases of multi-component chromatography, it is not possible to give any general
statements of the dynamics described by the coupled equations of said process
[GFSK06]. In almost every case one has to rely on numerical simulations to
give a description of the dynamics of the chromatographic process. In speciﬁc
simulation scenarios and under simplifying assumptions, it has been shown that
closed form solutions to the EDM (2.4) do exist.
However, for systems described by the linear isotherm, the PDE of the EDM
decouples, such that the dynamics for each component are independent. Given
a single component system with an equilibrium relation described by the linear
isotherm it is possible to obtain a closed form solution to the EDM using a
Danckwerts and Neumann boundary at the in- and outlet. The exact solution
is derived in the Laplace domain, and back transformation to physical time is
possible, providing an expression for the solution. The solution is derived in
[van81, QAJ+13] and is on the form:
c(t, z) =
(
cin + (cinj −c0)H(t, z),
0 < t ≤tinj,
cin + (cinj −c0)H(t, z) −cinjH(t −tinj, z),
t > tinj,
(2.30)
==PAGE:39==
2.5 The Linear EDM
25
where:
H(t, z) = 1
2erfc
αz −tPea
2
√
αt

+
tPe2
a
πα
 1
2
+ exp

−(αz −tPea)2
4αt

−1
2

1 + zPea + tPe2
a
α

exp (xPea) erfc
αz + tPea
2
√
αt

+
4tPe2
a
φα
 1
2 
1 + Pea
4

2 −z + tPea
α

× exp
"
Pea −α
4t

2 −z −+ttPea
α
2#
−Pea
"
2 −z + 3tPea
2α

+ Pea
4

2 −z + tPea
α
2#
× exp(Pea)erfc
α(2 −z) + tPea
2
√
αt

.
(2.31)
The parameter Pea is the Peclet number, and is given as Pea = Lv
D and α =
(1 + Fa) P eaL
v
. The complementary error function is given as:
erfc(z) = 1 −erf(z) =
2
√π
Z ∞
z
exp(−t2) dt.
(2.32)
Closed form solutions such as (2.30) are interesting for a variety of reasons, and
may be used to study isolated eﬀects of the chromatographic system. However,
in the context of this work the solution will be used later to prove the convergence
rates of the DG-FE and FV schemes, since it can be used to provide accurate
estimates of the numerical approximation error.
While closed form solutions exist for the linear EDM, no such forms exist for
the nonlinear EDM. The lack of such solutions, emphasizes the need for numer-
ical schemes, that accurately and in an eﬃcient way, are able to compute the
dynamics of the coupled equations governing the nonlinear model. Therefore,
the purpose of the following chapter is to derive an accurate and eﬃcient nu-
merical scheme, which is based on the DG-FE method to solve the EDM when
equilibrium relations in the process are nonlinear.
==PAGE:40==
26
The Chromatographic Model
==PAGE:41==
C h a p t e r 3
Discretization by the
Discontinuous-Galerkin and
Finite-Volume Method
The following chapter covers the theoretical background, implementation and
results of the discontinuous-Galerkin ﬁnite-element (DG-FE) and ﬁnite-volume
(FV) method. The ﬁrst part begins by providing an understanding of the pre-
liminaries of each method. The actual discretization of the EDM by both nu-
merical methods are described in detail afterwards. Finally, the implementation
of the numerical methods, and results of this implementation, are covered in the
remaining sections.
The model equations in (2.4) are discretized using a method-of-lines approach.
This procedure allows for a separate discretization of the spatial and temporal
derivatives. The spatial derivatives are discretized using the DG-FE and FV
method [MHA18b], and this results in a continuous-time discrete-space model.
The DG-FE method is chosen, since it oﬀers high-order accuracy and h-p adap-
tivity i.e. reﬁnement of the approximation can be done by either increasing the
number of elements for a ﬁxed polynomial order (h-adaptivity) or by ﬁxing the
number of elements and increasing the polynomial order (p-adaptivity). The FV
method is chosen as a simple model to benchmark against the DG-FE method.
Given a linear equilibrium relation a state-space model is obtained from the
==PAGE:42==
28 Discretization by the Discontinuous-Galerkin and Finite-Volume Method
continuous-time discrete-space model by an exact time integration. However,
for the nonlinear equilibrium relation an explicit Runge-Kutta method is chosen
as a time-step procedure, and Newton’s method is used to solve the governing
nonlinear equation (2.5) during each time-step.
3.1
The Galerkin Approximation
Galerkin (Spectral) methods and ﬁnite-element methods are closely related.
Both methods originate as series solutions to PDEs. Spectral methods approxi-
mate solutions to PDEs by ﬁnite series of orthogonal basis functions. Common
choices for such basis functions are for example the complex exponential func-
tions, Chebyshev or Legendre polynomials. However, Hermite, Laguerre and
other orthogonal polynomial series may also be considered as expansion func-
tions.
Finite-element methods approximate solutions to PDEs by piecewise
linear functions.
The main diﬀerence between each method is that spectral
methods use globally deﬁned basis functions, while ﬁnite element methods use
locally deﬁned basis functions. By combining the concepts of both methods, one
may arrive at a broader class of methods known as the spectral ﬁnite-element
methods. The DG-FE method is an example of a method, which combines these
two approaches. To develop a spectral ﬁnite-element method, there are three
fundamental choices that need to be considered. These choices are:
1) How to determine what local orthonormal basis functions should be used
on each element.
2) How to compute nodes on each element.
3) How to determine the solutions unknowns of the method.
The remaining part of this chapter will be spent on developing the DG-FE
method for solving the EDM, using the principles described in 1) through
3). The mathematics presented in the following sections are based on [Kop09,
HGG07, Lea15].
3.2
The Normed Approximation Space
The following introduces the appropriate normed approximation space, which
contains the relevant basis functions used to construct the DG-FE method.
==PAGE:43==
3.3 The Choice of Orthogonal Basis Functions
29
The approximation space is equipped with its inner product and norm, and is
the weighted Hilbert space L2
w(a, b). The weighted Hilbert space L2
w(a, b) has
support on [a, b] where a, b ∈R, and is deﬁned as:
L2
w(a, b) =
(
f :]a, b[→R,
Z b
a
|f(x)|2w(x) dx < ∞
)
.
(3.1)
The inner product associated with this space is:
(f, g)L2w(a,b) =
Z b
a
f(x)g(x)w(x) dx,
(3.2)
for ∀f, g ∈L2
w(a, b). Since L2
w(a, b) is a Hilbert space, the norm is associated
with the inner product, and is deﬁned as:
||f||L2w(a,b)=
q
(f, f)L2w(a,b).
(3.3)
The following sections mainly considers a subsection of this space L2
w(−1, 1).
3.3
The Choice of Orthogonal Basis Functions
A deﬁning character of any spectral method is the choice of orthogonal basis
functions used to approximate the solution with. For periodic domains a natural
choice is to approximate the solutions with a Fourier basis, which considers the
complex exponentials [Kop09] in a series expansion:
FN(x) =
N
2
X
k=−N
2
ˆfkeikx,
(3.4)
for some order N. This approximation is a modal expansion with expansion
coeﬃcients ˆfk. A modal expansion is an expansion in terms of a set of basis
functions and corresponding expansion coeﬃcients as in (3.4).
The periodic
nature of this representation is not well suited for problems of non-periodic
nature, such as the PDEs described by the EDM (2.4). The periodic nature of
the Fourier basis functions, does therefore not ﬁt well with the framework of
the DG-FE method, and based on this consideration a more appropriate basis
is chosen later.
When the solutions are non-periodic alternative basis functions should be con-
sidered, such as the orthogonal polynomial basis functions mentioned previously.
A nodal approximation is a representation of orthogonal polynomials as an in-
terpolant through a set of node values. Both a nodal and modal approximation
may be used to construct the DG-FE method. However, in this context, a nodal
DG-FE method is used.
==PAGE:44==
30 Discretization by the Discontinuous-Galerkin and Finite-Volume Method
3.3.1
The Polynomial Basis Functions
Spectral methods are typically represented in terms of polynomial series, and
an eﬃcient way of generating orthogonal polynomial basis functions is therefore
necessary. One way to generate these polynomial bases is by use of the Strum-
Liouville Theorem [Kop09]. The main result of the theorem states that under
certain assumptions, the solutions or eigenfunctions of the corresponding Strum-
Liouville Problem form a basis for the weighted space L2
w(a, b) introduced in
Section 3.2 . These eigenfunctions are therefore useful, to represent solutions
that are square integrable.
On the interval (−1, 1) only a distinct class of polynomials satisfy these as-
sumptions. They are known as the Jacobi polynomials, and are represented by
P α,β
k
(x). The order of the polynomial is k and α, β > −1. These polynomials
are orthogonal with respect to the weighted inner product of L2
w(−1, 1) that is:
Z 1
−1
P (α,β)
l
(x)P (α,β)
k
(x)w(x) dx = γ(α,β)
k
δlk.
(3.5)
These polynomials form a basis in L2
w(−1, 1). Furthermore, these polynomials
are eﬃcient for approximating smooth problems, as they will converge at a
rate depending on the smoothness of the functions being expanded, without
the need for any special conditions such as periodicity. The ﬂexibility of these
polynomials make them ideal for constructing spectral ﬁnite-element methods
to approximate solutions on non-periodic domains.
The Jacobi polynomials are easy to evaluate, diﬀerentiate and integrate, and
in general they oﬀer attractive properties, that make them ideal for eﬃcient
numerical implementation: 1) The Jacobi polynomials may be computed by a
three term recurrence, which makes them computationally eﬃcient to imple-
ment, and ideal for the development of the spectral methods. 2) For k ≥1, the
polynomials P (α,β)
k
have k distinct real roots in the interval (−1, 1). This feature
is useful when evaluating discrete inner products using Gauss quadratures. 3)
Finally, the derivatives of the polynomials also satisfy a three term recurrence
relation.
Two series of polynomials exist, which are of particular usefulness to spectral
methods. These polynomials are the Legendre polynomials:
Lk(x) = P (0,0)
k
(x),
(3.6)
and the Chebyshev polynomials:
Tk(x) = P
(−1
2 ,−1
2 )
k
(x).
(3.7)
==PAGE:45==
3.3 The Choice of Orthogonal Basis Functions
31
Both polynomials have attractive features, that may tailor the numerical method
in a speciﬁc way. The Legendre polynomials have weight functions w(x) = 1,
and the corresponding inner products are easily evaluated.
The Chebyshev
polynomials have attractive approximation properties as they may be evaluated
fast using the Fast Fourier Transform [Kop09]. A more rigorous discussion of
these choices is presented in [Kop09].
3.3.2
The Legendre Polynomials
The Legendre polynomials are a particular class of Jacobi polynomials. These
polynomials will be extensively used in this thesis, and as such they are presented
more thoroughly in the following. They are obtained as eigenfunctions to the
Strum-Liouville problem when α = β = 0, are polynomials in L2(−1, 1) since
w(x) = 1 and satisfy the three term recurrence:
Lk+1(x) = 2k + 1
k + 1 xLk(x) −
k
k + 1Lk−1(x),
(3.8)
with L0(x) = 1 and L1(x) = x. The derivatives of the polynomials are easily
evaluated, as they satisfy the relation:
(2k + 1)Lk(x) = L′
k+1(x) −L′
k−1(x).
(3.9)
The polynomials are orthogonal on the interval x ∈(−1, 1) with weight function
w(x) = 1, and their inner products are computed as:
γk = (Lk, Lk)L2(−1,1),
(3.10)
= ||Lk||2
L2(−1,1),
(3.11)
=
2
2k + 1.
(3.12)
The Legendre polynomials constitute the set of basis functions, which will be
used for constructing the DG-FE method. They form a class of orthonormal
polynomials, by the normalizing the classical Legendre polynomials with the
constant γk. This choice covers the requirement in the ﬁrst paragraph of Section
3.1.
Figure 3.1 shows a plot of the orthonormal Legendre polynomials, which have
been normalized by the constant γk. The following will cover how these polyno-
mials may be used in ﬁnite series to approximate functions, and later derivatives,
in the DG-FE method.
==PAGE:46==
32 Discretization by the Discontinuous-Galerkin and Finite-Volume Method
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
x
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
N(x)
Orthonormal Legendre Polynomials
L0
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
Figure 3.1: The normalized Legendre polynomials on the interval (−1, 1).
3.3.3
The Truncated Polynomial Series
The Jacobi polynomials form a basis for L2
w(−1, 1), and by the Strum-Liouville
theorem, they can be used to represent any square integrable function f as an
inﬁnite polynomials series:
f(x) =
∞
X
k=0
ˆfkP (α,β)
k
(x).
(3.13)
The expansion coeﬃcients, { ˆfk}N
k=0, are given as:
ˆfk = (f, P (α,β)
k
)L2w(−1,1)
||P (α,β)
k
||2
L2w(−1,1)
,
(3.14)
=
1
γ(α,β)
k
Z 1
−1
f(x)P (α,β)
k
(x)w(x) dx,
(3.15)
for 0 ≤k ≤N, due to the orthogonality of the basis functions [Kop09].
In order to use these polynomials for practical and computational application,
the solution should be approximated by a ﬁnite series instead of an inﬁnite series
(3.13). The inﬁnite series (3.13) is therefore truncated at some integer N ≥0:
PNf(x) =
N
X
k=0
ˆfkφk(x),
(3.16)
==PAGE:47==
3.3 The Choice of Orthogonal Basis Functions
33
where PN is the orthogonal projection operator representing a Nth degree poly-
nomial. Now introduce the truncation approximation error, τ, which is given
as:
τ =
∞
X
k=N+1
ˆfkφk(x).
(3.17)
Then the function f in (3.13) is expressed as:
f(x) =
N
X
k=0
ˆfkφk(x) +
∞
X
k=N+1
ˆfkφk(x),
(3.18)
= PNf(x) + τ.
(3.19)
The error of this approximation is therefore dependent on how fast the expansion
coeﬃcients, { ˆfk}N
k=0, decay towards 0 for k →∞.
It holds that for suﬃciently smooth functions f ∈L2
w(−1, 1) the limit:
lim
N→∞||f −PNf||L2w(a,b)= ||τ||L2w(−1,1)= 0,
(3.20)
exists, and is known as the spectral accuracy of the series approximation [Kop09].
The the norm of the truncation error τ is:
||τ||L2w(−1,1)=
∞
X
k=N+1
| ˆfk|2||φk||L2w(−1,1).
(3.21)
The convergence of this approximation is clearly dependent on the decay rate of
the expansion coeﬃcients { ˆfk}N
k=0. In fact the convergence rate may accurately
predicted for any function f ∈Hp
w(−1, 1), where Hp
w(−1, 1) is the space of
continuous derivatives from p = 0, 1, . . . , k−1, and integrable derivatives f (k)(x).
This convergence rate is established in [HGG07] as:
||f −PNf||L2w(−1,1)≤CN −p||f||Hp
w(−1,1),
(3.22)
for any real valued constant C.
If the function is not smooth, that is p = 1, then the approximation converges
slowly at a ﬁrst-order rate. However, if the function is inﬁnitely smooth, that is
p = ∞, the approximation converges rapidly towards the exact solution. This
property is known as spectral accuracy, and it highlights a strong feature of
the spectral methods. Since for arbitrarily smooth functions f, that is p = ∞,
the polynomial series converge at an exponential rate towards the true solution.
The spectral convergence property provides a fast and accurate approximation,
using only a few degrees of freedom (DOFs) compared to other approximation
methods, but also requires suﬃcient smoothness of the solution.
==PAGE:48==
34 Discretization by the Discontinuous-Galerkin and Finite-Volume Method
3.3.4
The Gauss Quadratures and Discrete Orthogonality
In cases where no closed form of (3.15) exist the integral has to be approximated
in order to determine the expansion coeﬃcients { ˆfk}N
k=0. The true expansion co-
eﬃcients are approximated by a set of discrete coeﬃcients { ˜fk}N
k=0 for functions
f, which do not have closed form solutions to (3.15). One way to approximate
these discrete coeﬃcients, is by using a quadrature rule on a discrete set of nodes
{xj} ∈(a, b). A quadrature rule is an approximation of the deﬁnite integral of
a function. An example of such a quadrature rule is given as:
Z b
a
f(x)P (α,β)
k
(x)w(x) dx ≃
N
X
j=0
f(xj)P (α,β)
k
(xj)wj,
(3.23)
where wj = w(xj) are the quadrature weights. For approximations with orthog-
onal polynomials, the quadrature rules should satisfy:
N
X
j=0
φk(xj)φl(xj)wj =
Z b
a
φk(x)φl(x)w(x) dx,
(3.24)
over the widest possible range of indicies k and l. The quadrature rule with
maximal precision, i.e, that are exact for the largest order polynomials are
known as the Gauss quadrature (GQ) rules [Kop09].
The GQ rule is given
as:
Z b
a
f(x)w(x) dx ≃
N
X
j=0
f(xj)wj.
(3.25)
The function f is given as f(x) = φk(x)φl(x), which corresponds to (3.24). Since
Jacobi polynomials are used as approximations, they may naturally be used for
the quadrature rule as well. By interpolating f using Lagrange polynomials:
f(x) ≃
N
X
i=0
f(xi)ℓi(x),
(3.26)
and:
ℓi(x) =
N
Y
j=0,j̸=i
x −xj
xi −xj
,
(3.27)
==PAGE:49==
3.3 The Choice of Orthogonal Basis Functions
35
where ℓi is the ith Lagrange polynomial, and is deﬁned on the N zeros of P (α,β)
N
,
that is the nodes {xj}N
j=0 ∈(−1, 1), the GQ rule is given as:
Z 1
−1
f(x)w(x) dx ≃
Z 1
−1
N
X
i=0
f(xi)ℓi(x)w(x) dx,
(3.28a)
=
N
X
i=0
f(xi)
Z 1
−1
ℓi(x)w(x) dx,
(3.28b)
=
N
X
i=0
f(xi)wi.
(3.28c)
Note that now a = −1 and b = 1.
The GQ (3.28) is exact for all functions, f, that are polynomials of degree 2N +1
or less. The Legendre-Gauss quadrature rule is:
xj = zeroes of LN+1(x),
(3.29a)
wj =
2
(1 −x2
j)(L′N+1(xj))2 .
(3.29b)
However, these points do not include the endpoints x = ±1, as would typically
be necessary, when approximating the integrals. For problems with Legendre
weighted integrals, the Legendre-Gauss-Lobatto (LGL) quadrature rule is:
xj = zeroes of LN+1(x), +1, −1,
(3.30a)
wj =
2
N(N + 1)
1
[LN(xj)]2 ,
(3.30b)
for j = 0, 1, . . . , N, as they contain the two endpoints ±1. Since the two ab-
scissas have been determined, the LGL rule is exact for polynomials of degree
2N −1 or less [Kop09]. The set of quadrature points I = {xj}N
j=0 will in the
following be referred to as the reference interval I.
With the quadrature rule properly deﬁned, the discrete inner product for or-
thogonal polynomial approximations may now be deﬁned as:
(u, v)N =
N
X
j=0
u(xj)v(xj)wj,
(3.31)
where xj and wj are LGL abscissas and weights for j = 0, 1, . . . , N. By replacing
u and v with the basis functions φl and φk then:
(φl, φk)N =
Z 1
−1
φl(x)φk(x) dx = ||φk||2
Nδlk.
(3.32)
==PAGE:50==
36 Discretization by the Discontinuous-Galerkin and Finite-Volume Method
The term in (3.32) is an approximation of (3.5), and the quadrature is exact
for k < N and is the LGL rule ||φk||2
N=
2
2k+1 = γk, where γk is the Legendre
weight described in Section 3.3.2.
This section has provided a way to compute nodes, which is required by the
second paragraph in Section 3.1.
Inner products may now be computed as
discrete approximations on a reference element described by an LGL grid.
3.3.5
The Orthogonal Polynomial Interpolation
The latter has provided a way to evaluate the inner products discretely. The
polynomial interpolant for the nodal approximation is now derived as:
INf(x) =
N
X
k=0
˜fkφk(x).
(3.33)
The interpolant IN satisﬁes the interpolation property INf(xj) = f(xj) for
j = 0, 1, . . . , N. Here the discrete coeﬃcients are written as ˜fk to distinguish
them from the aforementioned continuous coeﬃcients ˆfk of the truncation ap-
proximations in (3.17).
Finding the interpolant is equivalent to ﬁnding the discrete coeﬃcients ˜fk. The
discrete coeﬀecients are given by evaluating the orthogonal polynomial expan-
sion as the discrete inner product (3.31).
The coeﬃcients of the orthogonal
polynomial expansion may then be computed approximately as:
˜fk = 1
˜γk
(INf, φk)N,
(3.34a)
= 1
˜γk
(f, φk)N,
(3.34b)
= 1
˜γk
N
X
j=0
f(xj)φk(xj)wj,
(3.34c)
=
1
||φk||2
N
N
X
j=0
f(xj)φk(xj)wj
(3.34d)
with discrete, orthogonal normalization:
˜γk = ||φk||2
N=
N
X
j=0
φk(xj)2wj.
(3.35)
==PAGE:51==
3.3 The Choice of Orthogonal Basis Functions
37
The function f may be approximated using the discrete coeﬃcients as:
f(x) ≃IN(x) =
N
X
k=0
˜fkφk(x).
(3.36)
Inserting (3.34) into (3.36) and changing the order of summations obtains the
nodal interpolation representation. This polynomial representation will be use-
ful, when later deriving the nodal DG-FE formulation:
f(x) ≃
N
X
k=0

1
˜γk
N
X
j=0
f(xj)φkwj

φk(x),
(3.37a)
=
N
X
j=0
f(xj)
 N
X
k=0
1
˜γk
φk(xj)φk(x)wj
!
,
(3.37b)
=
N
X
j=0
f(xj)ℓj(x).
(3.37c)
The Lagrange polynomial may then be computed as:
ℓj(x) =
N
X
k=0
1
˜γk
φk(xj)φk(x)wj,
(3.38)
for the given abscissas.
Since orthogonal basis functions remain orthogonal under discrete inner prod-
ucts created from GQs, the discrete coeﬃcients { ˜fk}N
k=0 of (3.15) can be ob-
tained from (3.34) by quadratures as:
˜fk = 1
ˆγk
N
X
j=0
f(xj)φk(xj)wj,
(3.39)
where ˜γk is computed by (3.35).
3.3.6
The Modal and Nodal Approximations
Based on the former discussion, the function, f, may be approximated by either
a modal or nodal form:
f(xj) =
N
X
n=0
ˆfnφn(xj) =
N
X
n=0
fnℓn(xj), j = 0, 1, . . . , N,
(3.40)
==PAGE:52==
38 Discretization by the Discontinuous-Galerkin and Finite-Volume Method
where xj are the nodal interpolation points, which are the LGL quadrature
abscissas. The generalized Vandermonde matrix, V, is deﬁned element-wise as
Vij = φj(xi). The generalized Vandermonde matrix is therefore given as:
V =


φ1(x0)
φ2(x0)
. . .
φN(x0)
φ1(x1)
φ2(x1)
. . .
φN(x1)
...
...
...
...
φ1(xN)
φ2(xN)
. . .
φN(xN)

.
(3.41)
Writing out the deﬁnition in (3.40):
f = V ˆf,
(3.42)
allows for a useful relationship between the coeﬃcients of the modal:
ˆf = ( ˆf1, ˆf2, . . . , ˆfN)T ,
(3.43)
and nodal:
f = (f1, f2, . . . , fN)T ,
(3.44)
expansions. Note that (·)T is the transpose of a vector or matrix. The modal
and nodal representations are related by (3.40) as:
f T ℓ(x) = ˆf T φ(x),
(V ˆf)T ℓ(x) = ˆf T φ(x),
ˆf T Vℓ(x) = ˆf T φ(x),
VT ℓ(x) = φ(x).
This evaluation has produced the useful, compact relationship:
VT ℓ(x) = φ(x).
(3.45)
The ith Lagrange polynomial can then be expressed as:
ℓi(x) =
Np
X
n=1
 VT −1
in φn(x),
(3.46)
which will become useful for determining the element matrices of the DG-FE
method. Note that the relation in (3.38) and (3.46) are identical. The indi-
cies have been shifted however and now n = 1, 2, . . . Np, where Np = N + 1.
This indexing will be used extensively in the following to keep with notation of
[HW08].
==PAGE:53==
3.3 The Choice of Orthogonal Basis Functions
39
3.3.7
The Discrete Galerkin Operators
In order to evaluate the inner products, the associated basis needs to be clearly
speciﬁed. In the context of this work the Legendre polynomials are used, as
they represent an orthogonal basis on L2(−1, 1).
To avoid a scaling of the
inner products an orthonormal basis is chosen. The orthonormal (also known
as normalized) Legendre polynomials are a natural choice for such a basis. The
orthonormal Legendre polynomials are given as:
ϕn(r) = ˜Pn−1(r) = Pn−1(r)
√γn−1
,
(3.47)
on the reference interval r = {xj}Np
j=1 ∈I. The polynomials in (3.47) are in
fact the normalized Legendre polynomials shown previously in Figure 3.1. The
points r ∈I are now points on the LGL grid. The polynomials Pn−1(r) are the
classical Legendre polynomials of order n, and the coeﬃcients are computed as:
γn−1 =
2
2n + 1,
(3.48)
is the scaling (3.12).
The Legendre polynomials are scaled with the factor
√γn−1
−1, such that the inner products evaluate as:
(φn, φm)I =

˜Pn−1, ˜Pm−1

I = δmn,
(3.49)
and the polynomials are orthonormal. Note that δmn is the Dirac delta function.
With the relationship in (3.45) established, a clear formulation of the matrix-
based method, for evaluating the discrete inner products for the spectral meth-
ods, can be provided. The element-wise values of the mass matrix M are given
by the integral:
Mij =
Z 1
−1
ℓi(r)ℓj(r) dr,
(3.50a)
=
Z 1
−1


Np
X
n=1
 VT −1
in φn(r)




Np
X
m=1
 VT −1
jm φn(r)

dr,
(3.50b)
=
Np
X
n=1
Np
X
j=1
 VT −1
in
 VT −1
jm (φn, φm)I,
(3.50c)
=
Np
X
n=1
 VT −1
in
 VT −1
jn ,
(3.50d)
==PAGE:54==
40 Discretization by the Discontinuous-Galerkin and Finite-Volume Method
using (3.46) and the orthonormal property, that is the inner product on I is
(φn, φm)I =
R 1
−1 φn(r)φm(r) = δnm and Np = N +1, where N is the polynomial
order of the orthonormal Legendre polynomials. Hence, the mass matrix, M, is
given as the product:
M =
 VVT −1 .
(3.51)
The element-wise values of the mass matrix S are then computed as:
Sij =
Z 1
−1
ℓi(r) d
drℓj(r) dr,
(3.52a)
=
Z 1
−1
ℓi(r)
Np
X
n=1
d
drℓj(r) |rn ℓn(r) dr,
(3.52b)
=
Np
X
n=1
Z 1
−1
ℓi(r)ℓn(r) d
drℓj(r) |rn dr,
(3.52c)
=
Np
X
n=1
MinDr,(nj),
(3.52d)
= (MDr)ij ,
(3.52e)
where the diﬀerentiation matrix is given as Dr,(ij) = d
drℓj(r) |ri . The stiﬀness
matrix S is then computed by the product:
S = MDr.
(3.53)
The entries of the diﬀerentiation matrix, Dr, can be found directly by the rela-
tion:
VT ℓ(r) = ˜P(r)
(3.54)
VT d
drℓ(r) = d
dr
˜P(r),
(3.55)
from (3.45), where the basis functions are now orthonormal Legendre polyno-
mials. Evaluating this leads to:
VT DT
r = (Vr)T ,
(3.56)
where Vr is the gradient of the Vandermonde matrix:
d ˜Pn
dr =
p
n(n + 1) ˜Pn−1(r),
(3.57)
where ˜Pn−1 are the orthonormal Legendre polynomials.
The relationship in
(3.57) is established in [HW08]. The entries of Dr are computed by the product:
Dr = VrV−1.
(3.58)
==PAGE:55==
3.4 The Discontinuous-Galerkin Finite-Element Method
41
Consequently, inner products on L2(−1, 1) for functions f, g ∈C∞(−1, 1) may
now be evaluated eﬃciently using (3.45) as:
(f, g)L2(−1,1) ≃
Z 1
−1
 f T ℓ(r)
  gT ℓ(r)

dr,
(3.59)
= f T
Z 1
−1
 VT −1 ϕ(r)ϕ(r)T (V)−1 dr

g,
(3.60)
= f T  VVT −1 ,
(3.61)
= f T Mg,
(3.62)
by the mass matrix M. Here f and g are the nodal coeﬃcients f = (f1, f2, . . . , fNp)T
and g = (g1, g2, . . . , gNp)T . The vector ℓ(r) = (ℓ1(r), ℓ2(r), . . . , ℓNp(r))T are the
stacked Lagrange polynomials.
The matrices M and Dr constitute the fundamental building blocks of the
DG-FE method. These matrices may in principle be computed directly from
any chosen basis. However, in this particular case an orthonormal Legendre
basis is chosen. These building blocks allow for the discretization of the EDM
by the DG-FE method, and they provide a way for computing the solution
unknowns in the DG-FE method. This completes the requirement in the third
paragraph in Section 3.1. Based on these considerations the details of the DG-
FE discretization of the EDM are covered in the following section.
3.4
The Discontinuous-Galerkin Finite-Element
Method
The previous sections have provided the mathematical foundation for under-
standing and constructing the building blocks of the DG-FE method.
The
following presents the discretization of the EDM (2.4) by the DG-FE method,
based on these considerations. The result of this discretization is a high-ﬁdelity
simulator, that can be used for simulation of the chromatographic model in
(2.4).
The indices i are suppressed in the following derivation for convenience of no-
tation. Begin by considering the governing equation of the EDM (2.4a), and
==PAGE:56==
42 Discretization by the Discontinuous-Galerkin and Finite-Volume Method
deﬁne the terms:
f = vc −
√
Dg,
(3.63a)
g =
√
D ∂c
∂z ,
(3.63b)
w = ¯c
ϵ.
(3.63c)
Using the deﬁnitions in (3.63), the governing equation of the EDM (2.4a) may
be recast as:
∂w
∂t = −∂
∂z f,
(3.64a)
g =
√
D ∂c
∂z .
(3.64b)
Note that (3.63c) simply corresponds to a scaling of the total concentration
given in (2.5).
Consider the spatial domain Ω= (0, L) representing the chromatographic col-
umn of length L > 0, and partition it into Ne non-overlapping elements z ∈
(zk
l , zk
r ) = Ωk, where zk
l and zk
r refer to the left and right boundaries on Ωk.
The local solution is approximated on each element, Ωk, by a polynomial of
order N = Np −1:
wk
h(z, t)
gk
h(z, t)

=
Np
X
n=1
 ˆwk
n(t)
ˆgk
n(t)

ϕn(z) =
Np
X
j=1
wk
h(zk
j , t)
gk
h(zk
j , t)

ℓk
j (z).
(3.65)
Equation (3.65) states, that the local solution on each k elements (wk
h, gk
h) may
be represented by either a modal, {ϕn}Np
n=1, or nodal, {ℓk
j }Np
j=1, basis. To this
end, recall that the Lagrange polynomials, {ℓk
j }Np
i=1, satisfy the interpolation
property, ℓk
j (zj) = δij (the Kronecker delta function).
Ω1 Ω2 Ω3
ΩNe-1ΩNe
a=xl
1
xr
Ne-1=xl
Ne
  xl
Ne-1
  xr
3
xr
2=xl
3
xr
1=xl
2
xr
Ne=b
Figure 3.2: Partitioning of the domain Ω= (0, L) by the DG-FE method,
where a = 0 and b = L.
==PAGE:57==
3.4 The Discontinuous-Galerkin Finite-Element Method
43
Given the local solution (3.65) on each of the Ne elements, the DG-FE method
approximates the global solution, (w, g), by the Nth order piecewise polynomi-
als:
w(z, t)
g(z, t)

≃
wh(z, t)
gh(z, t)

=
Ne
M
k=1
wk
h(z, t)
gk
h(z, t)

.
(3.66)
To determine the approximate solution, (wh, gh), the DG-FE method uses a
Galerkin approach. To this end, consider the local residuals on each element
given as:
Rk
w = ∂wk
h
∂t + ∂f k
h
∂z ,
(3.67a)
Rk
g = gk
h −
√
D∂ck
h
∂z ,
(3.67b)
for z ∈Ωk, and deﬁne the approximation space of piecewise smooth polynomials
of order N = Np −1:
VN
k := {v : vk ∈PN(Ωk), ∀Ωk ∈Ω},
(3.68)
where PN are polynomials of degree at most N. The local, discrete Galerkin
approximation to (3.64) is then recovered by multiplying each residual equation
in (3.67a) with a test function {ℓk
j }Np
n=1 in VN
k and integrating:
Z
Ωk
Rk
wℓk
j dz = 0,
(3.69a)
Z
Ωk
Rk
gℓk
j dz = 0.
(3.69b)
The strong form of (3.64) is recovered by applying Gauss’ Theorem twice to each
residual in (3.69). Since each element Ωk is disconnected from its neighboring
elements, due to the local statement on each residual, the solution (wk
h, gk
h) is
discontinuous, and is not unique at the interfaces between elements. This is mit-
igated by replacing the intermediate values of ck
h and f k
h of the ﬁrst integration
by numerical ﬂuxes c∗(c−, c+) and f ∗(c−, c+, g−, g+). The notation (-) and (+)
refer to interior and exterior interface states of an element Ωk. A conceptual
illustration of this notation is shown in Figure 3.3. By performing the second
integration, the system (3.69) is recast on the strong form [MHA18b]:
Z
Ωk
∂wk
h
∂t ℓk
j dz +
Z
Ωk
∂f k
h
∂z ℓk
j dz =
I
∂Ωk ˆn · (f k
h −f ∗)ℓk
j dz,
(3.70a)
Z
Ωk gk
hℓk
j dz +
√
D
I
∂Ωk ˆn · (ck
h −c∗)ℓk
j dz =
√
D
Z
Ωk
∂ck
h
∂z ℓk
j dz.
(3.70b)
The boundaries (also known as edges) of the kth elements are denoted by ∂Ωk,
and ˆn = (−1, 1)T is the outward pointing unit normal.
==PAGE:58==
44 Discretization by the Discontinuous-Galerkin and Finite-Volume Method
Ωk-1
Ωk+1
Ωk
ul
k (-)
ur
k (-)
ur
k-1 (+)
ul
k+1 (+)
Figure 3.3: The lack of solution uniqueness at the interfaces is addressed by
expressing the numerical ﬂux in terms of the interior (-) and ex-
terior (+) interface states u = (c, f). The superscripts refer to
the given element, while the subscripts refer to the placement at
either the left l or right r side of the element.
3.4.1
Construction of the Orthonormal Basis Functions
The fundamental building blocks of the DG-FE method derived in the previous
sections now become necessary, in order to evaluate the inner products in the
strong form (3.70) on each element Ωk. The matrix-based methods for evaluat-
ing the discrete inner products in Section 3.3.7 are extended from the reference
grid I to the whole spatial domain Ω. To this end, consider the aﬃne mapping
z : [−1, 1] →Ωk given by:
z(r) = zk
l + 1 + r
2
∆z,
(3.71)
where ∆z = ∆zk = zk
r −zk
l is the equidistant length of each element Ωk.
Recall that the orthonormal basis functions, ϕn, are chosen as the orthonormal
Legendre polynomials:
ϕn(r) = ˜Pn−1(r) =
1
q
2
2n+1
Pn−1(r),
(3.72)
where Pn−1 are the usual Legendre polynomials. By the map (3.72), the lo-
cal approximate solution is now represented by the basis functions deﬁned on
the reference element I. This implies that the the local, element-wise Galerkin
operators may be computed directly from the fundamental matrices derived in
==PAGE:59==
3.4 The Discontinuous-Galerkin Finite-Element Method
45
Section 3.3.7 by a change of coordinates as:
Mk =
Z
Ωk
ℓk
i (z)ℓk
j (z) dz =
Z zk
r
zk
l
ℓk
i (z)ℓk
j (z) dz,
(3.73a)
= ∆zk
2
Z 1
−1
ℓi(r)ℓj(r) dr,
(3.73b)
= ∆zk
2 M,
(3.73c)
and:
Sk =
Z
Ωk
ℓk
i (z)dlk
j
dz (z) dz =
Z zk
r
zk
l
ℓk
i (z)dℓk
j
dz (z) dz,
(3.74a)
=
Z 1
−1
ℓi(r)dℓj
dr (r) dr = MDr,
(3.74b)
= S.
(3.74c)
The change of coordinates is computed using the derivative of the aﬃne trans-
formation dz = 1
2dr∆z and the deﬁnitions of the mass matrix M and stiﬀness
S deﬁned in (3.50) and (3.52).
Note that the aﬃne mapping allows for exact evaluation of the integrals (3.73)
without the use of quadrature rules [HW08]. By substitution of the nodal ex-
pansion (3.65) and the operators (3.73) into (3.70), the semi-discrete form is
recovered as:
Mk ∂wk
h
∂t + Skf k
h = E

ˆn · (f k
h −f ∗)
zk
r
zk
l ,
(3.75a)
Mkgk
h =
√
DSkck
h −
√
DE

ˆn · (ck
h −c∗)
zk
r
zk
l .
(3.75b)
Here the local operator E = (e1, eNp) evaluates the surface term, where ei is a Np
size vector with value 1 at position i. The ﬁnal semi-discrete form is recovered
from (3.75):
∂wk
h
∂t
= −2
∆z Drf k
h + 2
∆z L

ˆn · (f k
h −f ∗)
zk
r
zk
l ,
(3.76a)
gk
h = 2
√
D
∆z Drck
h −2
√
D
∆z L

ˆn · (ck
h −c∗)
zk
r
zk
l ,
(3.76b)
where (wk
h, gk
h, f k
h) ∈RNp are the nodal coeﬃcients on each element, Ωk, and
L =
 Mk−1 E is the lifting matrix.
==PAGE:60==
46 Discretization by the Discontinuous-Galerkin and Finite-Volume Method
3.4.2
The Numerical Flux Functions
To capture the physical phenomena of the model (2.4), the following speciﬁes
appropriate numerical ﬂuxes (c∗, g∗, f ∗). The ﬂuxes may be approximated by a
variety of options [JSAW11]. The following choices are based on considerations
presented in [MHA18b]. Given the diﬀusive nature of band broadening, the ﬂux
c∗is approximated on all element boundaries by a central ﬂux:
c∗= c−+ c+
2
.
(3.77)
The ﬁeld diﬀerences on each element interface are then:
ˆn · (ck
h −c∗) = ˆn · (c−−c+).
(3.78)
Note, that an interface in this context refers to the discontinuous connection be-
tween elements. Given the deﬁnition of f in (3.63a), it is reasonable to consider
f ∗as the sum of a convective and diﬀusive ﬂux:
f ∗= f ∗
conv(c−, c+) + f ∗
diﬀ(g−, g+).
(3.79)
The convective term is approximated by an upwind ﬂux, and the diﬀusive term
by a central ﬂux on all interfaces except at the left boundary:
f ∗= v
2
 c−+ c+ + ˆn ·
 c−+ c+
+
√
D
2
 g−+ g+
.
(3.80)
The ﬁeld diﬀerences on each element interface, excluding the left boundary, is
given by:
ˆn · (f k
h −f ∗) = ˆn ·
 
v(c−−c+) −
√
D(g−−g+)
2
!
−v
2(c−−c+).
(3.81)
On the remaining left most interface, the ﬂux is speciﬁed as a central ﬂux to
ease the numerical implementation of the Robin boundary condition, thereby
giving rise to the ﬁeld diﬀerence:
ˆn · (f k
h −f ∗) = ˆn · (f −−f +).
(3.82)
3.4.3
Imposing the Boundary Conditions
The DG-FE method allows for a practical implementation of the boundary
conditions, which is done weakly by deﬁning the exterior ghost states (c+, g+) at
==PAGE:61==
3.5 Global Assembly of the DG-FE and FV Method
47
the left and right most boundary of Ω. These terms are introduced as part of the
numerical ﬂux, but are not well-deﬁned on the boundary of the domain. They
are naturally deﬁned as part of the implementation of the boundary conditions.
Begin by considering Danckwerts condition in (2.4b) given as:
p = vc −D ∂c
∂z = vcin.
(3.83)
The numerical ﬂux on the boundary for f is equal to the inﬂow at the boundary:
f(c−) + f(c+)
2
= vcin.
(3.84)
Rearranging terms gives:
f(c+) = −f(c−) + 2vcin,
(3.85)
= −f(c−) + 2vc+,
(3.86)
where cin = c+. Equivalently, the numerical ﬂux on the left boundary requires
that inlet concentration is deﬁned as the exterior concentration c. Doing so
requires:
c−+ c+
2
= cin,
(3.87a)
c−+ c+ = 2c+,
(3.87b)
c−= c+.
(3.87c)
The homogeneous Neumann condition in (2.4c):
∂c
∂z = 0,
(3.88)
is implemented in a similar manner, and gives rise to the following conditions
on the right boundary as:
c−= c+,
(3.89)
g+ = −g−.
(3.90)
3.5
Global Assembly of the DG-FE and FV Method
The following section covers the global assembly of the high-order DG-FE and
ﬁrst-order FV method. Typically, a local assembly of the numerical methods
as in [MHA18b, HCM+19] would be preferred, since it allows for a fast and
==PAGE:62==
48 Discretization by the Discontinuous-Galerkin and Finite-Volume Method
eﬃcient implementation of the DG-FE method using the the local DG-FE op-
erators derived in the previous section. However, in order to easily identify the
model structure of the discretization, which will become necessary later when
implementing the linear and nonlinear Kalman ﬁlters, a global assembly based
on a set of global operators is proposed to discretize the EDM (2.4). The global
formulation is a convenient way of using the local operators to fully discretize
the nonlinear EDM on the form:
d
dtw(c(t)) = f(c(t), u(t)) = Acc(t) + Bcu(t),
(3.91a)
w(c(t)) = c(t) + Fq(c(t)),
(3.91b)
where the matrices Ac and Bc are the global discretization matrices. The vector
c(t) now contains the stacked values of the concentration for each element in each
discrete point, such that c(t) = (c1,1, c2,1, . . . cNp,1, c1,2, c2,2 . . . , cNp,Np×Ne)T and
u(t) = cin(t).
A shortcoming of the global formulation is, that due to the nature of the DG-FE
discretization, an extra state variable is needed to determine the ﬂuxes accu-
rately between each interface of the elements. This implies that cNp,i = c1,i+1
for i = 1, . . . , Np −1 when reﬁning the discretization. In principle, this leads
to redundancy in the global operators, which may be avoided by an implemen-
tation using only the local operators derived in Section 3.3.7.
However, the
accuracy of the DG-FE method ensures that relatively few states are necessary
to obtain an accurate numerical solution to (3.91). As such the trade-oﬀdoes
not represent an actual computational burden later during the implementation.
3.5.1
The Global DG-FE Operators
The global operators may be deﬁned in terms of discrete, fundamental ﬂux
operators E, F, G and H. These operators allow the surface integrals in (3.76)
to be given in terms of matrix based products of E, F, G and H. The action of
applying these operators, correspond to evaluating the Lagrange polynomials at
the end of each abscissas. These operators are given as:
Eij = ℓi(−1)ℓj(−1),
Fij = ℓi(−1)ℓj(1),
(3.92)
Gij = ℓi(1)ℓj(−1),
Hij = ℓi(1)ℓj(1).
(3.93)
The interpolating properties of the Lagrange polynomials ℓi(xj) = δij reduce
the discrete ﬂux operators to sparse matrices with ones in the separate corners.
==PAGE:63==
3.5 Global Assembly of the DG-FE and FV Method
49
They are the given in the following as:
E :=
1

,
F :=

1
,
(3.94)
G :=

1

,
H :=

1

∈RNp×Np.
(3.95)
These ﬂux operators are used in the following, to discretize the surface term in
(3.75b) as matrix based products.
Discretization by the fundamental ﬂux operators:
Consider the ﬁrst
term (3.75b) of the semi-discrete form. The term (3.75b) may be rewritten using
the discrete ﬂux elemental operators. Begin by assuming, that the numerical
ﬂux, c∗, is approximated by a central ﬂux. The surface term E

ˆn · (ck
h −c∗)
zk
r
zk
l
may then be expressed in terms of E, F, G and H as:
E

ˆn · (ck
h −c∗)
zk
r
zk
l = [ℓk(ck
h −c∗)]zk
r
zk
l ,
(3.96a)
= ck
h(zk
r ) −c−(zk
r ) + c+(zk
r )
2
−

ck
h(zk
l ) −c−(zk
l ) + c+(zk
l )
2

,
(3.96b)
= ck
r −1
2
 ck
r + ck+1
l

−

ck
l −1
2
 ck
l + ck−1
r

,
(3.96c)
= 1
2
 ck
r −ck+1
l

−1
2
 ck
l −ck−1
r

,
(3.96d)
= 1
2Hck −1
2Gck+1 −
1
2Eck −1
2Fck−1

,
(3.96e)
= 1
2Hck −1
2Gck+1 −1
2Eck + 1
2Fck−1.
(3.96f)
Figure 3.3 provides a conceptual understanding on the indexing across the local
elements used in (3.96).
For interior elements in the domain Ω, the result in (3.96) allows the term in
(3.75b) to be recast as:
Mkgk
h =
√
DSkck
h −
√
D
1
2Hck −1
2Gck+1 −1
2Eck + 1
2Fck−1

,
(3.97)
=
√
DSkck
h +
√
D

−1
2Hck + 1
2Gck+1 + 1
2Eck −1
2Fck−1

.
(3.98)
The boundary conditions (3.83) and (3.88) require that ck
l = ck−1
r
(at the left
boundary) and ck
r = ck+1
l
(at the right boundary) respectively.
This gives
==PAGE:64==
50 Discretization by the Discontinuous-Galerkin and Finite-Volume Method
separate expressions for the matrix structure at the end-points.
The global
formulation of (3.75b) is then:
MGg =
√
DSGc +
√
DGG
nonec.
(3.99)
The global average operator, GG
none, that omits imposing Dirichlet or Neumann
boundary conditions, appears when setting the ghost states equal to the interior
states (c+
h = c−
h ), and may then be computed as:
GG
none =


−1
2H
1
2G
−1
2F
1
2(E −H)
1
2G
...
...
...
−1
2F
1
2(E −H)
1
2G
−1
2F
1
2E


.
(3.100)
The global mass matrix, MG, and global stiﬀness matrix, SG, are given as
Kronecker products with the local DG-FE matrices. These matrices may be
computed as:
MG = I ⊗Mk,
(3.101)
=


M1
...
MNe

,
(3.102)
SG = I ⊗S,
(3.103)
=


S
...
S

,
(3.104)
where ⊗is the Kronecker product and I ∈RNp×Np is the identity matrix.
Similarly, the second term in the semi discrete form (3.75a) may be discretized
using the global operators. Given the expressions for the global mass and stiﬀ-
ness matrix and using the expression for f = vc −
√
Dg, the term (3.75a) is
discretized in the following as:
MG ∂w
∂t + SGf =

ℓ(f k
h −f ∗)
zk
r
zk
l ,
(3.105)
MG ∂w
∂t + SG(vc −
√
Dg) =

ℓ(vck
h −f ∗
conv)
zk
r
zk
l +
h
ℓ(−
√
Dgk
h −f ∗
diﬀ)
izk
r
zk
l
,
(3.106)
∂w
∂t = v
 MG−1 
GG
left,hom (c + cine1) −

GG
left,hom + 1
2FG
left,hom

c

+
 MG−1 
GG
hom
√
D

g −
 MG−1 SG(vc −
√
Dg).
(3.107)
==PAGE:65==
3.5 Global Assembly of the DG-FE and FV Method
51
Using the relation g =
√
D
 MG−1  SG + GG
none

c from (3.99), the right hand
side is discretized as:
dw
dt (c(t)) = Acc(t) + Bcu(t),
(3.108)
where the globally deﬁned Ac and Bc matrices are given as:
Ac = −v
 MG−1 
SG + 1
2FG
left,hom + SGD
 MG−1  SG + GG
none

+
 MG−1 
GG
homD
 MG−1  SG + GG
none

,
(3.109)
Bc = v
 MG−1 GG
left,home1.
(3.110)
Now the inlet concentration is u(t) = cin(t), and e1 ∈RNpNe×1 is a vector
containing all zeros, but the ﬁrst entry which contains a 1.
The global average operators FG
left,hom and GG
left,hom left homogeneous boundary
conditions are computed as:
FG
left,hom =


H + 2E
−G
−F
H + E
−G
...
...
...
−F
E

,
(3.111)
and:
GG
left,hom =


E −1
2H
1
2G
−1
2F
1
2(E −H)
1
2G
...
...
...
−1
2F
1
2(E −H)
1
2G
−1
2F
1
2E


.
(3.112)
The global average operator with homogeneous boundary conditions is:
GG
hom =


E −1
2H
1
2G
−1
2F
1
2(E −H)
1
2G
...
...
...
−1
2F
1
2(E −H)
1
2G
−1
2F
1
2E −H


.
(3.113)
3.5.2
The Global FV Operators
The following derives a ﬁrst-order, FV scheme, which is a standard solver used
for solving convection-diﬀusion equations. This method is derived to serve as a
benchmark in a comparative performance study with the DG-FE method.
==PAGE:66==
52 Discretization by the Discontinuous-Galerkin and Finite-Volume Method
The FV method partitions the domain Ωinto a set of Nz ﬁnite control volumes
Vj =
h
zj−1
2 , zj+ 1
2
i
with center j. A conceptual representation of this parti-
tioning is shown in Figure 3.4. The faces of the ﬁnite volumes are located at
zj+ 1
2 = (j + 1
2 −1
2)∆z = j∆z and uniform width ∆z = zj+ 1
2 −zj−1
2 with length
L = Nz∆z.
Consider the governing equation of the EDM given in (2.4). The ith ﬂux-term
of (2.4a) is approximated by a volume average over each cell index as:
d
dtw1 = −N3/2 −N1/2
∆z
,
j = 1,
d
dtwj = −Nj+1/2 −Nj−1/2
∆z
,
j ∈[2, Nz−1] ,
d
dtwNz = −NNz+1/2 −NNz−1/2
∆z
,
j = Nz.
Recall that w is deﬁned as (3.63c), and is the total concentration of the ith
component divided by the porosity ϵ. The ﬂux at each control volume is then:
N1/2 = vcin(t),
j = 0,
(3.114a)
Nj+1/2 = vcj + Jj+1/2,
j ∈[1, Nz−1] ,
(3.114b)
NNz+1/2 = vcNz,
j = Nz,
(3.114c)
where the derivative is approximated by a ﬁrst order, forward diﬀerence stencil.
Figure 3.4: Conceptual illustration of the partitioning of the domain Ω=
(0, L) into Nz ﬁnite control volumes Vk by the FV method.
==PAGE:67==
3.6 Solving the Linear EDM
53
This discretization leads to a system of equations on the form:
d
dtw1 =
 v
∆z

cin −
v + Di/∆z
∆z

c1 +
Di/∆z
∆z

c2,
(3.115a)
d
dtwj =
v + Di/∆z
∆z

cj−1 −
v + 2Di/∆z
∆z

cj +
Di/∆z
∆z

cj+1, (3.115b)
d
dtwNz =
v + Di/∆z
∆z

cNz−1 −
v + Di/∆z
∆z

cNz.
(3.115c)
The system of equations may then be expressed in compact state-space form for
each i components as:
d
dtw(c(t)) = Acc(t) + Bcu(t).
(3.116)
The structure of (3.115) may be used to compute the matrices Ac and Bc as:
Ac =


−βi
γi
βi
−αi
γi
βi
−αi
γi
βi
−αi
γi
βi
−βi


,
Bc =


µi
0
0
0
0


.
(3.117)
The elements of Ac and Bc are computed as:
αi = βi + γi,
βi =
v+Di/∆z
∆z
κi
,
γi =
Di/∆z
∆z
κi
,
κi = 1 + 1 −ϵ
ϵ
ai,
µi =
v
∆z
κi
.
Figure 3.6 illustrates the sparsity patterns of Ac for the DG-FE and FV method.
The DG-FE method displays the anticipated block structure, while the FV
method has a tridiagonal pattern, which corresponds to the structure of (3.117).
3.6
Solving the Linear EDM
Given the linear isotherm (2.28), the discretized DG-FE and FV model in (3.108)
and (3.117) reduces to the continuous-time discrete-space model on the form:
d
dtc(t) = ˜Acc(t) + ˜Bcu(t),
(3.118)
where the matrices are scaled such that:
˜Ac = (1 + Fa)−1 Ac
(3.119)
==PAGE:68==
54 Discretization by the Discontinuous-Galerkin and Finite-Volume Method
0
50
100
150
200
nz = 6160
0
50
100
150
200
DG-FE Method
0
50
100
150
200
nz = 598
0
50
100
150
200
FV Method
Figure 3.5: Sparsity patterns for the DG-FE and FV method. The DG-FE
method uses a polynomial N = 9 and Ne = 20 elements. The FV
method uses Nz = 200 cells.
and:
˜Bc = (1 + Fa)−1 Bc.
(3.120)
When the equilibrium isotherm is nonlinear the continuous-time discrete-space
model is not given explicitly in terms of the concentration c. However, there are
several approaches one may consider to address this problem, and the following
section is dedicated to describing these approaches.
3.7
Solving the Nonlinear EDM
By spatial discretization of either the DG-FE or FV method the resulting system
admits the following form:
d
dtw(c(t)) = Acc(t) + Bcu(t),
(3.121a)
w(c(t)) = c(t) + Fq(c(t)).
(3.121b)
The discretized equations (3.121) may then be solved by a variety of approaches.
Speciﬁcally, three diﬀerent approaches are considered, and they are stated in the
following propositions:
==PAGE:69==
3.8 Temporal Discretization
55
Proposition 1. The chain rule is used to form a system of ODEs explicitly in
terms of the concentration c. The corresponding system given as:
d
dtc(t) = (I + FJ )−1 (Acc(t) + Bcu(t)) ,
(3.122)
is then solved by an adequate numerical time-step procedure to advance the solu-
tion in time, where I is the identity and J = ∂q
∂c is the Jacobian of the isotherm
relation q. The trade-oﬀof using the chain rule and forming the Jacobian, is
that the numerical scheme is non-conservative, which may lead to unphysical
solutions, where mass is lost. The proposition is still stated for completeness
however.
Proposition 2. The system (3.121) is solved by an adequate numerical time-
step procedure to advance the solution in time. This obtains the k + 1 solution
wk+1 = w(c(tk+1)). Since an explicit relationship for the function c(w) does
not exist for the nonlinear isotherm, the concentration ck+1 = c(tk+1) is instead
obtained by solving the equation:
w(c(tk+1)) = c(tk+1) + Fq(c(tk+1)),
(3.123)
Solutions to (3.123) may be computed by solving the residual equation R(c(tk+1)) =
w(c(tk+1)) −c(tk+1) −Fq(c(tk+1)) = 0 using Newton’s method.
Proposition 3. Begin by obtaining the solution w by solving (3.121).
The
concentration c is obtained by instead using the following implicit function for
c(w), which ensures a conservative formulation [DGM18]. The function is:
ci(w) =
wi
1 + Faiρ0(w),
(3.124)
where ρ0(w) is the only positive root of the following rational function:
Rw(y) = 1 −y +
Nc
X
i=1
y
y + Fai
biwi,
(3.125)
and 1 ≤ρ0(w) ≤1 + P
j bjwj, where the index refers to the individual com-
ponent of the multicomponent mixture.
The only positive root of (3.125) is
approximated using a nonlinear solver based on Kelley’s nsold algorithm, which
is Newton’s method using Newton-Armijo iterations, adaptive Jacobian updates
and parabolic line search via 3-point interpolation [Kel03]. The algorithm uses
a third party Matlab code nsold.m provided by [Kel03].
3.8
Temporal Discretization
The following section considers two approaches for propagating solutions to the
linear (3.118) and nonlinear (3.121) equations in time. A variety of methods
==PAGE:70==
56 Discretization by the Discontinuous-Galerkin and Finite-Volume Method
exist for advancing the solution in time, and whether the problem is linear
or nonlinear is signiﬁcant in determining a computationally attractive method.
The linear EDM leads to a discretized state-space model, which may integrated
exactly in time and solved by a series of matrix multiplications. The nonlinear
EDM requires more specialized iterative methods to propagate the solutions, and
to this end a low-storage, ﬁve-stage fourth-order explicit, Runge-Kutta method
(LSERK) is proposed as a computationally accurate time-stepper.
3.8.1
Numerical Temporal Discretization
In order to discretize the general, semi-discrete problem in time:
d
dtw(c) = L(c, t),
(3.126)
where L is some right-hand-side function, that appears from the spatial dis-
cretization, one can use the classical fourth-order, four-stage explicit Runge-
Kutta method (ERK). The method advances the solution in time by the time
step ∆t from cn to cn+1. The method is given by the following procedure:
k(1) = L(cn, tn),
(3.127a)
k(2) = L

cn + 1
2∆tk(1), tn + 1
2∆t

,
(3.127b)
k(3) = L

cn + 1
2∆tk(2), tn + 1
2∆t

,
(3.127c)
k(4) = L(cn + ∆tk(3), tn + ∆t),
(3.127d)
w(cn+1) = cn + 1
6

k(1) + 2k(2) + 2k(3) + k(4)
.
(3.127e)
The method in (3.127) is a widely adopted method, but it has the downside
of being memory expensive, since it requires four extra storage arrays, k(i),
i = 1, . . . , 4. An attractive alternative to this method is the low-storage version
(LSERK) [KC94, HW08] of the form:
p(0) = c(tn)
(3.128a)
i ∈[1, . . . , 5] :
(
k(i) = aik(i−1) + ∆tf(p(i−1), tn + ci∆t),
p(i) = p(i−1) + bik(i),
(3.128b)
w(cn+1) = p(5).
(3.128c)
The coeﬃcients for the LSERK method are given in Table 3.1. The LSERK
diﬀers from ERK method, since it uses an additional storage level. However,
==PAGE:71==
3.8 Temporal Discretization
57
Table 3.1: Coeﬃcients for the low-storage, ﬁve-stage, fourth-order, explicit,
Runge-Kutta method (abbreviated LSERK) are listed for conve-
nience.
i
ai
bi
ci
1
0
143299717447
9575080441755
0
2
−567301805773
1357537059087
5161836677717
13612068292357
1432997174477
9575080441755
3
−2404267990393
2016746695238
1720146321549
2090206949498
2526269341429
6820363962896
4
−3550918686646
2091501179385
3134564353537
4481467310338
2006345519317
3224310063776
5
−1275806237668
842570457699
2277821191437
14882151754819
2802321613138
2924317926251
this is compromised by the price of an additional function evaluation, since the
low-storage method has ﬁve instead of four stages. This additional function
evaluation might make the LSERK method less appealing, but it is oﬀset by
an increased stability region, which makes it possible to advance the solution
at greater time-steps ∆t. The trade-oﬀbetween the two methods is discussed
extensively in [KC94, HW08].
To ensure numerical stability of the solutions to the nonlinear EDM the Courant-
Friedrichs-Lewy (CFL) condition is used to calculate the step size ∆t [BMRS18].
For numerically stable solutions the step size ∆t should be chosen such that it
is:
∆t =
C
v + 2D
∆z
∆z,
(3.129)
where ∆z is the spatial step-size.
3.8.2
Exact Temporal Discretization
Let Ts be the sampling time and tk = t0 + kTs for k ≥0. Then ck = c(tk) =
c(t0 + kTs). The input, u(t), is parameterized as a zero-order-hold (ZOH):
u(t) = uk,
tk ≤t ≤tk+1,
k = 0, 1, . . . , NT −1,
(3.130)
over a discrete set of times tk. The continuous-time representation in (3.118)
given as:
d
dtc(t) = ˜Acc(t) + ˜Bcu(t),
(3.131)
==PAGE:72==
58 Discretization by the Discontinuous-Galerkin and Finite-Volume Method
is then converted to a discrete-time representation:
ck+1 = Ack + Buk.
(3.132)
The matrices A and B may be computed oﬄine, using the matrix exponential
function exp(·) for the expression:
A
B
0
I

= exp
 ˜Ac
˜Bc
0
0

Ts

.
(3.133)
==PAGE:73==
3.9 MATLAB Implementation I
59
3.9
MATLAB Implementation I
In the following, brief comments are given on the MATLAB implementation
regarding the nonlinear multi-component simulator. Figure 3.6 illustrates the
workﬂow in the practical MATLAB implementation of the nonlinear solver.
The example given in Figure 3.6 assumes, that a nonlinear system with two
components is solved. The MATLAB code may use either Proposition 2 or
Proposition 3 put forward in Section 3.7. The operations performed in the
dark grey colored box are oﬄine, and the solution is computed online in the
light grey box.
Linear_Matrices_DGFE.m
   -  Defines the discretized global flux 
operators Ac and Bc. 
Run_Two_Comp_Nonlin.m
   -  Loads DGFE module, defines 
simulation scenario, grid properties 
and loads global variables.
   - Calls the LSERK method for 
numerical simulation.
System_Parameters.m
  -  User defined system parameters 
and simulation scenario.
RK4_Two_Comp.m
   -  Runs the LSERK algorithm for time
T = 0 .. tf. Computes stepsize dt. Sets 
nsold.m optimization parameters.
   -  Calls nsold.m or RK4.m in each of 
the 1 through 5 stages.
nsold.m (or RK4.m)
   -  Upon convergence finds 
positive first positive root and 
computes c1 and c2.
Rfun_Two_Comp.m 
(or rhsfun.m)
   -  Computes Jacobian and RHS of 
the rational function.
Output
   
-  Returns output c1 and c2.
For i=1:5
Ac, Bc
θ
c , c 
f, J
c0
1       2
Figure 3.6: Practical illustration of the workﬂow setup in MATLAB for solving
the nonlinear EDM.
==PAGE:74==
60 Discretization by the Discontinuous-Galerkin and Finite-Volume Method
Table 3.2: Simulation and column parameters for linear case study.
Parameters
Symbol
Value
Metric
Column length
L
1
cm
Porosity
ϵ
0.4
-
Interstitial velocity
v
1
cm/min
Theoretical plates
Nt
250
-
Henry’s constant
a
1
-
Initial concentration
c0
0
g/L
Feed concentration
cf
4
g/L
3.10
Numerical Study
This section investigates three numerical case studies of the DG-FE and FV
method: 1) the ﬁrst case study veriﬁes the h-p adaptivity of the DG-FE method
and ﬁrst order convergence of the FV method. 2) The second study investigates
a performance comparison between the two solvers, in order to verify the su-
perior performance of the high-order method. 3) The third case study demon-
strates the capabilities of the high-order method for solving coupled, nonlinear
problems. To this end, a well established nonlinear scenario describing a binary
mixture is investigated [MG92, MHA18b].
3.10.1
Numerical Case I: Convergence of the DG-FE and
FV Method
The ﬁrst case study investigates simulation of a chromatographic process with
one component and a linear equilibrium isotherm described by the linear EDM
(2.29). The column parameters used in the linear case study are listed in Table
3.2, and resemble a realistic case study by [QAJ+13]. The feed concentration
cf is injected over a time total period of tinj = 2 min. The total simulation time
spans a period of tf = 5 min, and the sampling time is set to Ts = 0.01 min.
The linear EDM is solved by discretizing the spatial ﬂux according to (3.131)
by using the global DG-FE operators ˜Ac and ˜Bc. The temporal variable is dis-
cretized using an exact discretization, resulting in a system on the form (3.132).
The solution was found by propagating (3.132) using a polynomial order N = 20
and Ne = 30 elements.
Figure 3.7 shows a collection of snapshots of the solution to the linear EDM
(2.29) for increasing time steps using the aforementioned column parameters
and simulation scenario. The concentration band propagates left through right
in the chromatographic column. During this propagation band broadening of
==PAGE:75==
3.10 Numerical Study
61
0
0.25
0.5 0.75
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
t =0.5 [min]
0
0.25
0.5 0.75
1
0
1
2
3
4
5 t =1.001 [min]
0
0.25
0.5 0.75
1
0
1
2
3
4
5 t =1.502 [min]
0
0.25
0.5 0.75
1
0
1
2
3
4
5 t =2.003 [min]
0
0.25
0.5 0.75
1
0
1
2
3
4
5 t =2.504 [min]
0
0.25
0.5 0.75
1
0
1
2
3
4
5 t =3.005 [min]
0
0.25
0.5 0.75
1
0
1
2
3
4
5 t =3.506 [min]
0
0.25
0.5 0.75
1
0
1
2
3
4
5 t =4.007 [min]
0
0.25
0.5 0.75
1
0
1
2
3
4
5 t =4.508 [min]
Concentration [g/L]
Displacement [cm]
Figure 3.7: Snapshots of the DG-FE solution for diﬀerent time-steps.
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
Column Outlet
Component 1
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
Column Inlet
Component 1
Concentration [g/L]
Time [min]
Figure 3.8: The inlet and outlet concentration of the chromatographic column.
the concentration proﬁle occurs, which is one of the characterizing assumptions,
the model is based on. This is observed more clearly in Figure 3.8, which shows
the inlet and outlet concentration of the chromatographic column.
As previously described in Section 2.5.1, the analytical solution is known for
the linear EDM [van81, QAJ+13]. The availability of this solution allows for an
evaluation of the error using the exact ℓ2(Ω) norm in the spatial domain, and
as a way to address the adaptivity of the DG-FE and FV method. The discrete
==PAGE:76==
62 Discretization by the Discontinuous-Galerkin and Finite-Volume Method
ℓ2(Ω)-norm over the domain Ω= (0, L) is:
||ea||ℓ2(Ω) = ||c −ca||ℓ2(Ω),
(3.134a)
=
 Nz
X
i=1
(c −ca)2
! 1
2
.
(3.134b)
The DOFs, Nz, of each method is either the number quadrature points times
number of elements Nz = Np × Ne for the DG-FE method or the total number
of cells for the FV method. The error, ea, is measured as the diﬀerence:
ea = c −ca,
(3.135)
between the approximate DG-FE or FV solution (denoted c) and the known
analytical solution (denoted ca) given in (2.30).
In the following consider again the column parameters listed in Table 3.2. The
feed concentration cf is injected over a time total period of tinj = 2 min, and
consider a ﬁnal simulation time of tf = 2 min.
The solution to the linear
EDM is simulated using both the DG-FE and FV method for increasing DOFs.
After each successful simulation the error between the analytical solution and
approximate solution is computed in the right most grid point, using the discrete
ℓ2-norm (3.134b).
Figure 3.9a demonstrates the h-p adaptivity of the DG-FE method. The h-
reﬁnement is demonstrated for N ∈{1, 2, 3, 4, 5} for increasing number of el-
ements, and the p- reﬁnement by ﬁxing the number of elements Ne = 10 and
increasing the polynomial order N.
This is due to the spectral convergence
property, which is tied to the smoothness of the solution explained previously
[HW08]. A tolerance of ϵ = 10−10 is achieved after only 300 DOFs using p-
reﬁnement of the DG-FE method.
Figure 3.9b demonstrates the ﬁrst-order convergence of the FV method when
increasing the number of ﬁnite-volume cells Nz ∈{200, 400, . . . , 2000}.
The
error of the FV method decays at rate O(∆z) when increasing the reﬁnement
∆z, since the method is ﬁrst-order accurate. As a result the FV method requires
many more DOFs than the DG-FE method to reach a desirable accuracy. In
terms of accuracy, the DG-FE method is able to compute reliable solutions,
by an order of magnitude faster than the FV method, and therefore represents
a competitive alternative to conventional high-performance methods for fast
chromatographic simulations.
==PAGE:77==
3.10 Numerical Study
63
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.9: (a) Shows a demonstration of the h-p adaptivity of the local, DG-
FE scheme for varying number of polynomial order N and elements
K. (b) Shows a demonstration of the ﬁrst-order convergence of the
FV scheme.
==PAGE:78==
64 Discretization by the Discontinuous-Galerkin and Finite-Volume Method
3.10.2
Numerical Case II: Performance Comparison of the
DG-FE and FV Method
The second case study compares the computational performance of the DG-
FE and FV methods ability to reach a desired tolerance, ϵ, by increasing the
precision of both numerical schemes by increasing the DOFs.
Figure 3.10 shows such a comparison between the DG-FE and FV method.
Each dot in the Figure represents a single simulation, and is characterized by
the accuracy and DOFs of each particular simulation. The parameters used for
simulating are similar to the previously used ones, and they are listed in Table
3.2.
The ﬁgure also compares the required CPU-time necessary to compute
the solution by (3.132) for each method. Increasing the DOFs requires more
computational time for both the DG-FE and FV method. However, due to the
h-p adaptivity, the DG-FE method is able to mitigate this performance burden,
since the method requires far less states to reach a desirable accuracy. As a
consequence, the DG-FE method stands out as a much faster alternative to the
FV method, and is in the following solely considered from now on, as the desired
numerical simulator.
10 -12
10 -10
10 -8
10 -6
10 -4
10 -2
10 0
-Error Tolerance
4.00
4.85
6.18
7.19
9.31
29.0
91.0
309.0
849.0
1381.0
CPU-Time [s] (
 10 -4)
1-D CPU-times of Simulation Performance
30
60
180
300
420
600
1000
2000
3000
4000
Degrees of Freedom
DG-FE Method
FV Method
Figure 3.10: Comparison of the desired tolerance, ϵ, achievable by the DG-FE
and FV method for varying CPU time and DOFs when simulating
the state-space model for k = 20 iterations.
==PAGE:79==
3.10 Numerical Study
65
Remark 2. Note, that for increasing number of DOFs, the matrix exponential
in (3.133) becomes increasingly time burdening to compute. The FV method
requires many states to reach high accuracy, and therefore the additional cost
of computing the matrix exponential becomes quite signiﬁcant. However, this is
not included in the timing, since the matrix exponential is considered an oﬄine
computation.
3.10.3
Numerical Case III: DG-FE Method for
Multi-Component Nonlinear Modeling
The third case study considers simulation of a binary mixture chromatographic
process, with a nonlinear equilibrium relation modeled by the competitive Lang-
muir isotherm (2.27). Since the model is nonlinear and has two components, the
dynamics are described by a system of two coupled PDEs in (2.4). The column
parameters for the two-component system is given in Table 3.3. The column
parameters represent a realistic benchmark study by [MG92, JQA+13, SSH08].
The problem is simulated under liquid chromatography conditions with Nt =
500 theoretical plates and under HPLC conditions with Nt = 5000 theoretical
plates. The feed concentration cf,1 and cf,2 of both components are injected
over a time total period of tinj = 12 min. The ﬁnal simulation time is set to
tf = 40 min. The CFL condition is set to C = 0.3 for numerically stable solu-
tion. The solution is simulated under liquid chromatography conditions using
a polynomial order N = 5 and Ne = 100 elements, using the technique de-
scribed in Proposition 3. In general, the technique described in Proposition
3 proved to be almost twice as fast as Proposition 2.
To demonstrate the capabilities of the DG-FE method the dynamics are also
simulated under HPLC conditions. The system is simulated using N = 5 order
polynomials and Ne = 1000 elements. For columns with higher eﬃciencies, that
is larger number of theoretical plates, the DOFs necessary for computing stable
solutions increase as well, due to the nature of the CFL condition in (3.129).
Figure 3.11 shows the concentrations of each component at the inlet and outlet
of the chromatographic column under liquid chromatographic conditions and
under HPLC conditions. The dynamics illustrated in the left window of Figure
3.11, show the formation of a shock layer proﬁle. The simulation demonstrates,
that strong nonlinearities produce overshoots in the concentration proﬁle, which
is caused by the choice of nonlinear isotherm. This is a well-known phenomena
in chromatography [MHA18b]. Furthermore, for ﬁnite dispersion coeﬃcients,
the shock layer at the band front has a thickness greater than zero [MG92].
Therefore, the shock layer proﬁle does not represent a true discontinuity, which
==PAGE:80==
66 Discretization by the Discontinuous-Galerkin and Finite-Volume Method
Table 3.3: Simulation parameters for linear case study.
Parameters
Symbol
Value
Metric
Column length
L
1
cm
Porosity
ϵ
0.4
-
Interstitial velocity
v
0.1
cm/min
Theoretical plates
Nt
500, 5000
-
Henry’s constant
a1, a2
0.5, 1
-
Isotherm parameters
b1, b2
0.05, 0.1
-
Initial concentration
c0
0
g/L
Feed concentration
cf,1, cf,2
10
g/L
Figure 3.11: The inlet and outlet concentrations for the ﬁrst and second com-
ponent. The inlet concentrations for the ﬁrst and second compo-
nent are injected simultaneously and in equal amount.
allows for the use of high-order basis functions in simulation.
The right window in Figure 3.11 shows the concentration of each component
under HPLC conditions. The simulation shows that the concentrations band al-
most fully convection-dominated and give rise to steep shocks. These shocks are
nearly vertical as a result of the high eﬃciency of the column. Even though the
problem is highly convection-dominated, the use of high-order basis functions
still allow for an accurate approximation of the shock proﬁles of the solution.
==PAGE:81==
C h a p t e r 4
State Estimation of
Chromatographic Processes
State estimation is a technique, which is used to reconstruct a state variable of
a given process. The reconstruction is based on: 1) noisy measurements and
2) a dynamical model of the process. The estimator therefore acts as a medi-
ator, and provides a most likely estimate of the state given the physical model
and measurement information. Figure 1.4 in Chapter 1 provides a conceptual
illustration of this principle.
The following chapter considers state estimation of chromatographic processes.
These processes are modeled by stochastic, continuous-discrete 1 systems, which
are on the form:
dg(x(t)) =
Deterministic
z
}|
{
f(t, x(t), u(t))dt +
Stochastic
z
}|
{
σ(t)dω(t),
(4.1a)
g(x(t)) = x(t) + Fq(x(t)),
(4.1b)
y(tk) = h(tk, x(tk)) + vk.
(4.1c)
The compact model in (4.1) represents a semi-discrete system, which consists
of a deterministic and stochastic term. The deterministic term appears when
1The continuous-discrete formulation implies that the modeled dynamics are continuous
and the measurements are discrete.
==PAGE:82==
68
State Estimation of Chromatographic Processes
the spatial derivatives of the EDM are discretized using the DG-FE method. In
addition the model is augmented with a stochastic Brownian motion σ(t)dω(t),
which models the uncertainty of the process. Details of this model are provided
in the subsequent sections.
The following provides descriptions of diﬀerent state estimation techniques for
the system of equations in (4.1) when the dynamics of the EDM (2.4) are lin-
ear and nonlinear. These models require diﬀerent state estimation techniques,
therefore this chapter naturally divides into two separate parts: 1) the ﬁrst part
considers a stochastic state-space model, which is derived when the model in
(4.1) is linear, that is when the equilibrium relation is linear q(x(t)) = ax(t).
The Kalman ﬁlter is used as an optimal linear estimator for this problem. 2)
The second part consider the nonlinear stochastic, continuous-discrete model
in (4.1), that is when the equilibrium relation is nonlinear q(x(t)) = f(x(t)).
To this end four ﬁlters: the EKF, UKF, PF and the EnKF are developed for
state estimation, when the dynamics of the EDM are described by the Langmuir
isotherm (2.27).
The state estimation techniques considered in this thesis all consist of two parts.
Whether the model is linear or nonlinear, these parts are: 1) a measurement-
update and 2) a time-update to estimate the uncertain states. In the measurement-
update the information from the discrete measurement is used to estimate the
current state.
This estimate uses information from the physical model (4.1)
and the measurement device (sensor). In the time-update the dynamics of the
EDM is used to advance the state estimate in time between each discrete mea-
surement. Figure 4.1 provides a conceptual illustration of this principle. The
time-update is typically the computational bottleneck of the nonlinear ﬁlters
[Jør07, RJ18, Sim06], as it requires solution of many nonlinear ODEs, in order
to advance the state and covariance estimates. The linear Kalman ﬁlter is not
as computationally demanding, as the update is computed by simply advancing
the state-space model, which is less computationally demanding, using either
an oﬄine (stationary ﬁlter) or online (dynamic ﬁlter) approach.
Measurement-Update
Time-Update
Measurement-Update
Time-Update
Continuous Chromatographic Process
Measurement
Measurement
Figure 4.1: Conceptual illustration of the measurement- and time-update in
the Kalman ﬁlters.
To keep with the notation of relevant literature [Jør07, JTMK07, RJ18], note
that x(t) is now the state vector of concentrations, u(t) is the inlet concentration
==PAGE:83==
4.1 Linear State Estimation
69
cin,i(t) in (2.9), f is the right hand side resulting from the spatial discretization
and the relations (2.5) and (4.1b) are equivalent by a scaling with the porosity
ϵ.
In presence of an unmeasured disturbance, a disturbance model is necessary
to guarantee oﬀset-free control of the ﬁltered state. The inlet concentration of
the chromatographic column is typically not known for industrial feed stocks,
and may be modeled as an unknown disturbance. The unknown disturbance,
xd(t), is assumed to evolve as stochastic Brownian motion dxd(t) = σddωd(t),
and is augmented as an extra state in the model (4.1). The augmented model
may then be used to estimate the states and unknown input simultaneously.
A measurement equation for each augmented disturbance state is necessary to
guarantee a valid disturbance model [PR03].
Finally, the main purpose of this chapter is to provide a systematic description
of each state estimation technique used in this thesis. However, the purpose
is not to provide derivations of each ﬁlter, but rather to provide an algorith-
mic understanding of each ﬁlter. The following sections consider and provide
equations for 1) the Kalman ﬁlter and 2) the nonlinear ﬁlters.
4.1
Linear State Estimation
The following section introduces the stochastic state-space model.
Consider
the model in (4.1).
Given a linear isotherm, the deterministic part may be
discretized according to the procedure in Section 3.8.2 using a ZOH parame-
terization of the time and input. This model assumes that the noise is kept
constant over each discrete time interval tk. As a consequence the process noise
is modeled as a piecewise stochastic noise term wk.
The dynamic and stationary Kalman ﬁlters are presented for state estimation
of the state-space model. Given such a model, the Kalman ﬁlter is the best
linear estimator. Given the stationary Kalman ﬁlter, several of the matrices are
considered static and may be precomputed [Sim06].
==PAGE:84==
70
State Estimation of Chromatographic Processes
4.1.1
Stochastic Linear State-Space Model
The stochastic state-space model is a realization of the discretized EDM, and
consists of a deterministic and stochastic part. This model is on the form:
xk+1 = Axk + Buk + Gwk,
(4.2a)
zk = Cxk,
(4.2b)
yk = zk + vk,
(4.2c)
and is a simpliﬁed representation of the model in (4.1) based on the previous
assumptions. This corresponds to conversion from a continuous-time represen-
tation to an equivalent discrete-time representation. The initial state x0, process
noise wk and measurement noise vk are identically ideally distributed as:
x0 ∼N(¯x0, P0),
(4.3a)
wk ∼Niid(0, Q),
(4.3b)
vk ∼Niid(0, R).
(4.3c)
Note that N(µ, Σ) is a normal distribution with mean µ and covariance Σ.
4.1.2
Dynamic Kalman Filter
Assume that the mean and covariance of the initial state (4.3a) are known. The
dynamic Kalman ﬁlter equations may then be stated as follows. The one-step
ahead prediction of the state, ˆxk|k−1, and its covariance, Pk|k−1, are computed
as:
ˆxk|k−1 = Aˆxk−1|k−1 + Buk−1,
(4.4a)
Pk|k−1 = APk−1|k−1AT + GQGT .
(4.4b)
Using the measurement equation in (4.2), the one-step ahead prediction of the
measurement, ˆyk|k−1, may be computed as:
ˆyk|k−1 = Cˆxk|k−1,
(4.5)
The error between the measurement and physical model, which is known as the
innovation ek, is obtained by:
ek = yk −ˆyk|k−1,
(4.6a)
Re,k = CPk|k−1CT + R,
(4.6b)
==PAGE:85==
4.1 Linear State Estimation
71
and the Kalman ﬁlter gain matrix, Kfx,k, is computed by the expression:
Kfx,k = Pk|k−1CT R−1
e,k.
(4.7)
Finally, the ﬁltered state, ˆxk|k, and its covariance, Pk|k, at the current time are
computed as:
ˆxk|k = ˆxk|k−1 + Kfx,kek
(4.8a)
Pk|k = Pk|k−1 −Kfx,kRe,kKT
fx,k.
(4.8b)
To ensure that the covariance Pk|k is positive semideﬁnite, the term in (4.8b) is
rewritten as:
Pk|k = (I −Kfx,kC)Pk|k−1(I −Kfx,kC)T
+ Kfx,kRKT
fx,k.
(4.9)
The term in (4.9) is positive semideﬁnite, since Pk|k−1 and R are positive
semideﬁnite.
The Kalman ﬁlter is summarized in the following algorithm.
Given xk|k−1,
Pk|k−1, the past measurements (y1, . . . , yn) and the input (u1, . . . , un), Algo-
rithm 1 condenses the aforementioned equations, and describes each step of the
dynamic Kalman ﬁlter for monitoring and prediction. The algorithm describes
the computational workﬂow during each iteration k = 0, 1, . . . , NT .
4.1.3
Stationary Kalman Filter
The stationary Kalman ﬁlter is a computationally more attractive alternative
to the dynamic ﬁlter, since the matrices may be precomputed oﬄine.
The
stationary Kalman ﬁlter equations may be stated as follows. The equations for
computing the ﬁltered state are equivalent to the ones presented for the dynamic
Kalman ﬁlter. However, the covariance is no longer time-dependent and may
be precomputed as P.
The covariance, P, is obtained by solving the Discrete-Algebraic-Ricatti-Equation
(DARE):
P = APAT + GQGT −(APCT )(CPCT + R)−1(APCT )T ,
(4.10)
which is used to compute the stationary state and the ﬁlter gains:
Re = CPCT + R,
(4.11a)
Kfx = PCT R−1
e .
(4.11b)
==PAGE:86==
72
State Estimation of Chromatographic Processes
Algorithm 1 Dynamic Kalman ﬁlter for estimation of a stochastic discrete
linear system.
1: Input: ˆxk|k−1, yk, uk, Pk|k−1.
2: Compute innovation:
3:
ˆyk|k−1 = Cˆxk|k−1.
4:
ek = yk −ˆyk|k−1.
5:
Re,k = CPk|k−1CT + R
6: Compute ﬁltered state and ﬁltered process noise:
7:
Kfx,k = Pk|k−1CT R−1
e,k.
8:
Kfw,k = SR−1
e,k.
9:
ˆxk|k = ˆxk|k−1 + Kfx,kek.
10:
ˆwk|k = Kfwek.
11:
Pk|k = Pk|k−1 −Kfx,kRe,kKT
fx,k.
12:
Qk|k = Qk −Kfw,kRe,kKT
fw,k.
13: Compute one-step predictions:
14:
ˆxk+1|k = Aˆxk|k + Buk + Edk.
15:
Pk+1|k = APk|kAT + GQk|kGT −AKfx,kST GT −GSKT
fx,kAT .
16: Compute predictions:
17:
ˆxk+1+j|k = Aˆxk+j|k + Buk + Edk, j = 1, 2, . . . , NT −1.
18: Compute output predictions:
19:
ˆzk+j|k = Cˆxk+j|k, j = 0, 1, . . . , NT .
20:
ˆyk+j|k = Cˆxk+j|k, j = 0, 1, . . . , NT .
21: Return: {ˆxk+j|k}NT
j=0, {ˆyk+j|k}NT
j=0, {ˆzk+j|k}NT
j=0.
Parallel to the equations in the dynamic Kalman ﬁlter, the one-step ahead
prediction of the state and measurement are computed as:
ˆxk|k−1 = Aˆxk−1|k−1 + Buk−1,
(4.12a)
ˆyk|k−1 = Cˆxk|k−1,
(4.12b)
The innovation, ek, ﬁltered state, ˆxk|k, are also equivalently computed as:
ek = yk −ˆyk|k−1,
(4.13a)
ˆxk|k = ˆxk|k−1 + Kfxek.
(4.13b)
Finally, the covariance, Pk|k, is computed as by the stationary matrix P as:
Pk|k = (I −KfxC)P(I −KfxC)T + KfxRKT
fx.
(4.14)
The time-dependent matrices are now replaced by the stationary matrix P, and
as a consequence the stationary Kalman ﬁlter arises as a simpliﬁcation of the
dynamic Kalman ﬁlter.
==PAGE:87==
4.1 Linear State Estimation
73
Algorithm 2 Stationary Kalman ﬁlter for estimation of a stochastic discrete
linear system.
1: Input: ˆxk|k−1, yk, Kfx, Kfw.
2: Compute innovation step:
3:
ˆyk|k−1 = Cˆxk|k−1.
4:
ek = yk −ˆyk|k−1.
5: Reconstruct states and process noise:
6:
ˆxk|k = ˆxk|k−1 + Kfxek.
7:
ˆwk|k = Kfwek.
8: Compute one-step predictions:
9:
ˆxk+1|k = Aˆxk|k + Buk + Edk.
10: Compute predictions:
11:
ˆxk+1+j|k = Aˆxk+j|k + Buk + Edk, j = 1, 2, . . . , NT −1.
12: Compute output predictions:
13:
ˆzk+j|k = Cˆxk+j|k, j = 0, 1, . . . , NT .
14:
ˆyk+j|k = Cˆxk+j|k, j = 0, 1, . . . , NT .
15: Return: {ˆxk+j|k}NT
j=0, {ˆyk+j|k}NT
j=0, {ˆzk+j|k}NT
j=0.
In the linear time invariant case the states are predicted, by both the dynamic
and stationary Kalman ﬁlter as:
ˆxk+1+j|k = Aˆxk+j|k + Bˆuk+j|k,
j > 0,
(4.15a)
Pk+1+j|k = APk+j|kAT + GQGT .
(4.15b)
The output prediction is:
ˆzk+j|k = Cˆxk+j|k,
j > 0,
(4.16a)
Rz,k+j|k = CPk+j|kCT .
(4.16b)
Algorithm 2 describes each step of the stationary Kalman ﬁlter for monitoring
and prediction. Given xk|k−1, the Kalman gains Kfx, Kfw computed from P,
the past measurements (y1, . . . , yn) and the input (u1, . . . , un), the algorithm
illustrates the computational workﬂow during each iteration k = 0, 1, . . . , NT .
The stationary Kalman ﬁlter therefore oﬀers a simpliﬁed set of computations
compared to the dynamic Kalman ﬁlter.
4.1.4
Linear Disturbance Modeling
In order to estimate the unknown inlet concentrations of the chromatographic
column, the model in (4.2) requires a modiﬁcation. A disturbance model may be
used to estimate the ﬁltered states and uncertain concentrations simultaneously.
==PAGE:88==
74
State Estimation of Chromatographic Processes
This topic discussed is discussed extensively in literature [Jør07, MB02, PR03,
HPJJ11]. Given a state-space model on the form:
xk+1 = Axk + Buk + Bddk + Gwk,
(4.17a)
yk = Cxk + Cddk + vk.
(4.17b)
The disturbance is assumed to evolve as an integrator state, that is the distur-
bance, dk, evolves as dk+1 = dk + ξk, where ξk ∼Niid(0, Qξ). The augmented
system is then:
xk+1
dk+1

=
A
Bd
0
I
 xk
dk

+
B
0

uk +
G
0
0
I
 wk
ξk

,
(4.18a)
yk = [C
Cd]
xk
dk

+ vk.
(4.18b)
The inlet concentration of the chromatographic cylinder is typically not known
for industrial feed stocks, and may be modeled as an unknown disturbance.
Measurements are taken at the outlet of the cylinder. The disturbance model
(4.18) then takes the form:
xk+1
dk+1

=
A
B
0
I
 xk
dk

+
B
0
0
I
 wk
ξk

,
(4.19a)
yk = [C
Cd]
xk
dk

+ vk,
(4.19b)
where C = [0, 0, . . . , 1] corresponds to measuring the concentration at the
outlet, since the last element of the state vector is the concentration of the
outlet. The matrix C is augmented with Cd = 0 and dk is the unknown input.
The augmented model (4.19) may then be used to estimate the states and input
simultaneously. This is done by applying the previously described ﬁlters to the
model in (4.19), since it is now on the same form as (4.2).
==PAGE:89==
4.2 MATLAB Implementation II
75
4.2
MATLAB Implementation II
In the following, brief comments on the MATLAB implementation of the Kalman
ﬁlter for the linear EDM are given. Figure 3.6 illustrates the workﬂow in the
practical MATLAB implementation of the nonlinear solver. The example given
in Figure 4.2 assumes a linear system with one component, and estimates the
uncertain states and inlet concentration simultaneously. The MATLAB code
uses the dynamic Kalman ﬁlter equations in Section 4.1.2, and is implemented
based on Algorithm 1. The MATLAB code also features an implementation of
the stationary ﬁlter, using the static equations described in Section 4.1.3. The
operations performed in the dark grey colored box are oﬄine, and the estimation
performed in the light grey box are online.
Linear_Matrices_DGFE.m
   -  Defines the discretized global flux 
operators Ac and Bc. 
System_Parameters.m
  -  User defined system parameters 
and simulation scenario.
Ac, Bc
θ       
Kalman_DGFE.m
   -  Main script which calls the 
dynamical Kalman filter.
   1) Simulates system with process 
noise wk and computes NT 
measurements yk with measurement 
noise vk.
   2) Computes filtered states {xk|k} 
and covariance {Pk|k} from the 
dynamical Kalman filter.
C2D_ZOH.m
   -  Performs ZOH discretization and 
computes A and B.
A, B
Dynamic_Kalman.m
   - Updates the states x based 
on discrete measurements y.
For i=1:NT
Stochastic_Linear_Discrete_
System.m
   -  Simulates state space-model and 
generates states {xk}.
A, B
{xk|k}, {Pk|k}
Covariances: 
Q, R, Qξ, P0   
Output
States and 
Covariance:
Figure 4.2: Practical illustration of the workﬂow setup in MATLAB for state
estimation by Kalman ﬁltering of the linear EDM.
==PAGE:90==
76
State Estimation of Chromatographic Processes
4.3
Nonlinear State Estimation
The following section introduces state estimation for the nonlinear EDM. Con-
sider the following stochastic, continuous-discrete nonlinear system, i.e. the sys-
tem with continuous dynamics and discrete measurements formulated in (4.1).
For completeness the model is again stated as the following:
dg(x(t)) = f(t, x(t), u(t))dt + σ(t)dω(t),
(4.20a)
g(x(t)) = x(t) + Fq(x(t)),
(4.20b)
y(tk) = h(tk, x(tk)) + vk,
(4.20c)
where {ω(t), t ≥0} is a standard Weiner process, i.e. a Wiener process with
incremental covariance Idt, and the measurement noise is normally distributed
vk = v(tk) ∼Nidd(0, Rk).
The dynamics of (4.20) are continuous and the
measurements y(tk) are obtained at discrete times tk. Assume knowledge of the
initial concentration (state) in the chromatographic column x(t0) ∼N(x0, P0).
This initial estimate has a degree of uncertainty, which is modeled by the initial
covariance P0. The structure in (3.108) identiﬁes the right hand side f of the
continuous-discrete dynamics as f = Acx(t) + Bcu(t). This corresponds to a
system on the form:
dg(x(t)) = (Acx(t) + Bcu(t))dt + σ(t)dω(t),
(4.21a)
g(x(t)) = x(t) + Fq(x(t)),
(4.21b)
y(tk) = Cx(tk) + vk.
(4.21c)
Note that parallel to the stochastic state-space model in (4.17), the measure-
ments are still taken at the outlet, so the matrix C in the measurement equation
(4.21c) remains linear as C = [0, 0, . . . , 1].
In the following, consider four diﬀerent algorithms for state estimation of the
continuous-discrete equations describing the nonlinear chromatographic process
in (4.21c). The ﬁlters considered are the:
1) Extended Kalman Filter (EKF).
2) Ensemble Kalman Filter (EnKF).
3) Particle Filter (PKF).
4) Unscented Kalman Filter (UKF).
The following sections introduces the governing equations describing each ﬁlter,
and provides measurement and time-updates for the continuous-discrete model.
==PAGE:91==
4.3 Nonlinear State Estimation
77
4.3.1
The Extended Kalman Filter
This section describes the EKF for the continuous-discrete model (4.21). The
EKF applies the original Kalman ﬁlter equations in Section 4.1.2 to a lineariza-
tion of the nonlinear model equations in (4.21) [Jør07, JTMK07, Sim06, RJ18].
Assume that the EKF is initialized with mean-covariance pair of the initial
states given as:
ˆx0|−1 = x0,
(4.22)
P0|−1 = P0.
(4.23)
The continuous-discrete EKF for ﬁltering and prediction then consists of a mea-
surement and time-update. These updates are stated as follows.
Measurement-update
The one-step ahead prediction of the measurement, ˆyk|k−1 = yk−1(tk), and its
approximate covariance, Rk|k−1, are computed as:
ˆyk|k−1 = h(tk, ˆxk|k−1),
(4.24)
Rk|k−1 = CkPk|k−1CT
k + Rk.
(4.25)
and:
Ck = ∂h
∂x(tk, ˆxk|k−1) = C,
(4.26)
using that h is linear. The innovation, ek, is computed as:
ek = yk −ˆyk|k−1.
(4.27)
The Kalman ﬁlter gain matrix, Kfx,k, is computed as:
Kfx,k = Pk|k−1CT
k R−1
k|k−1.
(4.28)
The ﬁltered state, ˆxk|k−1, and its approximate covariance, Pk|k, are computed
as:
ˆxk|k = ˆxk|k−1 + Kfx,kek,
(4.29)
Pk|k = Pk|k−1 −Kfx,kRk|k−1KT
fx,k.
(4.30)
Note, that the aforementioned equations are equivalent to those presented in
Section 4.1.2, since the EKF applies the original Kalman ﬁlter equations in the
measurement update.
==PAGE:92==
78
State Estimation of Chromatographic Processes
Figure 4.3 shows a illustration of the concept behind the EKF. The distribution
of the ﬁltered state is captured by the mean and covariance of the linearized
system2.
Figure 4.3: A conceptual illustration of how the EKF estimates the ﬁltered
state.
Time-update
The above formulas are for the measurement-update, and they are equivalent to
the discrete time case. The diﬀerence between the discrete-time and continuous-
time extended Kalman Filter arises in the one-step ahead propagation of the
state estimate and its covariance.
The major computational operation in the continuous-discrete extended Kalman
ﬁlter is the integration of the mean-covariance pair ˆxk+1|k = ˆxk(tk+1) and
Pk+1|k = Pk(tk+1), which advances the states and covariance from the present
time-step to the next. The one-step ahead propagation of the mean-covariance
pair is computed as the solution to the system of nonlinear ODEs:
d
dtg(ˆxk(t)) = f(t, ˆxk(t)),
ˆxk(tk) = ˆxk|k,
(4.31a)
d
dtP g
k (t) = A(t)Pk(t) + Pk(t)A(t)T + σ(t)σ(t)T ,
Pk = Pk|k,
(4.31b)
with initial conditions as the ﬁltered state and covariance ˆxk|k and Pk|k in the
time period t ∈]tk; tk+1]. The process noise is assumed to only aﬀect the inlet
concentration u(t). This choice leads to deﬁning the diﬀusion term σ(t) in (4.21)
as σ(t) = Bc.
The matrix A(t) is the Jacobian of the right hand side function, f, and is
computed as:
A(t) = ∂f
∂x(t, ˆxk(t)) = ∂
∂x (Acx(t) + Bcu(t)) = Ac,
(4.32)
2Figure 4.3 - 4.5 are used by the courtesy of Tobias K.S. Ritschel
==PAGE:93==
4.3 Nonlinear State Estimation
79
since f is linear. Since the continuous-discrete dynamics in (4.21) are not given
explicitly in terms of the state, x(t), the covariance update in (4.31b) requires
an additional computation in order to recover the true covariance, Pk+1, of the
states. To this end, consider the following two propositions.
Proposition 4. The EKF estimates the one-step ahead propagation of state
and covariance ˆxk+1|k and Pk+1|k by integrating the mean-covariance pair given
as:
d
dtg(ˆxk(t)) = f(t, ˆxk(t)),
(4.33a)
d
dtP g
k (t) = A(t)Pk(t) + Pk(t)A(t)T + σ(t)σ(t)T ,
(4.33b)
where the covariance, P g
k (t), is given as:
P g
k (t) =
 d
dxg(ˆxk(t))

Pk(t)
 d
dxg(ˆxk(t))
T
.
(4.34)
Recall that the stationary phase, q, is modeled by a nonlinear Langmuir isotherm
(2.27).
The function g is then bijective.
Hence the existence of the matrix
inverse
∂g
∂x(x(t)) = I + F ∂g
∂x(x(t)) is guaranteed.
Therefore it is possible to
recover the covariance, Pk(t), by the transformation:
Pk(t) =
 d
dxg(ˆxk(t))
−1
P g
k (t)
  d
dxg(ˆxk(t))
T !−1
,
(4.35)
accordingly. The one-step ahead propagation of the state is therefore equivalent
to:
Pk+1 = Pk(tk+1) =
 d
dxg(ˆxk(tk+1))
−1
P g
k (tk+1)
  d
dxg(ˆxk(tk+1))
T !−1
.
(4.36)
Proposition 5. The EKF estimates the one-step ahead propagation of state
and covariance ˆxk+1|k and Pk+1|k by integrating:
d
dtg(ˆxk(t)) = f(t, ˆxk(t)),
(4.37a)
d
dt (Φ(t, s)) = A(t)Φ(t, s), Φ(s, s) = I,
(4.37b)
where Φ(t, s) is the fundamental matrix. Following the approach in [JTMK07],
the solution to (4.37b) is computed by the matrix exponential:
Φ(t, s) = exp(Ac(t −s)) = exp(Ac∆t) = Φ(∆t),
(4.38)
==PAGE:94==
80
State Estimation of Chromatographic Processes
since Ac is a time-invariant matrix. Note, that exp(·) is still the matrix expo-
nential. The one-step ahead propagation of the covariance, P g
k+1, is then given
as:
P g
k+1 = P g
k (tk+1) = Φ(∆t)Pk(tk)Φ(∆t)T +
Z ∆t
0
Φ(τ)σσT Φ(τ)T dτ
(4.39)
where the integral is estimated using a quadrature rule. The covariance, Pk+1,
is then recovered accordingly by the relation established in (4.36).
4.3.2
The Ensemble Kalman Filter
This section describes the EnKF for the continuous-discrete model (4.21). The
EnKF is a particular type of particle ﬁlter, which uses the Kalman ﬁlter equa-
tions and a recursive least-squares update based on an ensemble to capture the
probability distribution of the uncertain states [GBMC+09, Sim06, RJ18]. The
ensemble size is a tuning parameter of the EnKF. Assume that the EnKF is
initialized with mean-covariance pair of the initial states given as:
ˆx0|−1 = x0,
(4.40)
P0|−1 = P0.
(4.41)
The continuous-discrete EnKF for ﬁltering and prediction then consists of a
measurement and time-update. These updates are stated as follows.
Following the approach of [Sim06, RJ18], the initial estimate of the states and
the covariance matrix are given by the mean and covariance of the initial states
as:
ˆx0|−1 = x0,
(4.42)
P0|−1 = P0.
(4.43)
Sample q particles, x(i)
0|−1, from N(x0, P0).
Measurement-update
The output of each particle is computed as:
ˆz(i)
k|k−1 = h(tk, ˆx(i)
k|k−1),
(4.44)
==PAGE:95==
4.3 Nonlinear State Estimation
81
The state and output means, the covariance and cross-covariance are computed
by the following:
ˆxk|k−1 = Wm
q
X
i=1
ˆx(i)
k|k−1,
(4.45a)
ˆzk|k−1 = Wm
q
X
i=1
ˆz(i)
k|k−1,
(4.45b)
Rk|k−1 = Wc
q
X
i=1

ˆz(i)
k|k−1 −ˆzk|k−1
 
ˆz(i)
k|k−1 −ˆzk|k−1
T
+ Rk,
(4.45c)
Sk|k−1 = Wc
q
X
i=1

ˆx(i)
k|k−1 −ˆxk|k−1
 
ˆz(i)
k|k−1 −ˆzk|k−1
T
.
(4.45d)
Compute the normalization weights Wm and Wc as Wm = 1
q and Wc =
1
q−1.
The measurements are sampled for each particle as:
ˆy(i)
k|k−1 = ˆz(i)
k|k−1 + v(i)
k .
(4.46)
The measurement noise samples, v(i)
k , are sampled from the distribution N(0, Rk).
The innovation for the i’th particle is computed as:
e(i)
k
= yk −ˆy(i)
k|k−1,
(4.47)
and the Kalman gain matrix is:
Kfx,k = Sk|k−1R−1
k|k−1.
(4.48)
For each particle, the states are updated as:
ˆx(i)
k|k = ˆx(i)
k|k−1 + Kfx,ke(i)
k .
(4.49)
Finally, the ﬁltered state estimate and covariance matrix are computed as:
ˆxk|k = Wm
Np
X
i=1
ˆx(i)
k|k,
(4.50)
Pk|k = Wc
Np
X
i=1

ˆx(i)
k|k −ˆxk|k)(ˆx(i)
k|k −ˆxk|k
T
.
(4.51)
Figure 4.4 shows how the PF/EnKF captures the distribution of the ﬁltered
states by a set of samples. These samples, for better or for worse, approximate
the true distribution of the state, as seen in the ﬁgure.
==PAGE:96==
82
State Estimation of Chromatographic Processes
Figure 4.4: Shows a conceptual illustration of how the PF/EnKF estimates
the ﬁltered state.
Time-update
The one-step ahead propagation of the ensemble states, ˆx(i)
k+1|k = ˆx(i)
k|k(tk+1),
are given as solutions to the continuous nonlinear system:
dg(ˆx(i)
k (t)) = f(ˆx(i)
k (t), u(t))dt + σ(t)dω(t),
(4.52a)
g(ˆx(i)
k (t)) = ˆx(i)
k (t) + Fq(ˆx(i)
k (t)),
(4.52b)
for each ensemble i = 1, . . . , q with initial condition ˆx(i)
k (t) = ˆx(i)
k|k in the time-
period t ∈]tk; tk+1].
4.3.3
The Particle Kalman Filter
This section describes the PF for the continuous-discrete model (4.21). The
PF is a particle ﬁlter, which uses a recursive likelihood update, based on a set
of particles to capture the probability distribution of the uncertain states. The
particle size of the PF is, like the ensemble size of the EnKF, a tuning parameter
of the ﬁlter. In other words, the PF and EnKF are almost identical, and only
the measurement-update between of each ﬁlter is diﬀerent.
In general, the EnKF and PF belong to a broader class of methods known as
Monte-Carlo methods. In principle, these methods may be used to solve any
given problem, which has a probabilistic interpretation. Since, by the law of
large numbers, expected values of random variables can be approximated by
computing the mean over some set of independent samples of that variable.
This is also the fundamental idea behind the PF and EnKF.
Following the approach of [Sim06, RJ18], assume that the PF is initialized with
==PAGE:97==
4.3 Nonlinear State Estimation
83
mean-covariance pair of the initial states given as:
ˆx0|−1 = x0,
(4.53)
P0|−1 = P0.
(4.54)
Sample q particles, x(i)
0|−1, from N(x0, P0). The continuous-discrete PF for ﬁl-
tering and prediction then consists of a measurement and time-update. These
updates are stated as follows.
Measurement-update
For each particle, compute the output as:
ˆz(i)
k|k−1 = h(tk, x(i)
k|k−1),
(4.55)
and the ith innovation, e(i)
k , as the diﬀerence between the output and measure-
ment:
e(i)
k
= yk −ˆz(i)
k|k−1.
(4.56)
The relative likelihood that the measurement, yk, is observed if the particle
output, ˆz(i)
k|k−1, is true, is computed by:
˜q(i) =
1
p
(2π)nm |Rk|
exp

−1
2

e(i)
k
T
R−1
k e(i)
k

,
(4.57)
where nm is the dimension of the output, and |Rk| is the determinant of Rk. In
this case Rk ∈R so |Rk|= Rk, since the value is strictly positive. The probability
density used in (4.57) is the normal distribution, since the measurement noise
is normally distributed.
The relative likelihood for each particle is normalized by:
˜q(i)
n =
˜q(i)
Pq
j=1 ˜q(j) ,
i = 1, . . . , q.
(4.58)
Following the approach of [RJ18, TGK16, HAH+16, HSH+17], a systematic
resampling technique is used to compute:
p(i) = (i −1) + ˜p
q
,
i = 1, . . . , q.
(4.59)
Each ˜p is a uniformly distributed scalar, i.e. ˜p ∼U(]0, 1]).
==PAGE:98==
84
State Estimation of Chromatographic Processes
Furthermore compute n(i), which is the number of indicies, l, for which p(l)
given in (4.59) is contained in the interval ]s(i−1), s(i)]. Each s(i) is computed
by the sum of normalized relative likelihoods s(i) = Pi
j=1 ˜q(j)
n
in (4.58). The
resampled particles, {ˆx(i)
k|k}q
i=1, now contain n(i) copies of each sampled state
ˆx(i)
k|k−1. The details of the resampling are provided in depth in [TGK16]. Fi-
nally the ﬁltered state, ˆxk|k, and covariance, Pk|k, may be computed from the
collection of resampled particles as:
ˆxk|k = Wm
q
X
i=1
ˆx(i)
k|k,
(4.60)
Pk|k = Wc
q
X
i=1

ˆx(i)
k|k −ˆxk|k
 
ˆx(i)
k|k −ˆxk|k
T
.
(4.61)
The weights are again computed as Wm = 1
q and Wc =
1
q−1. Figure 4.4 provides
a conceptual illustration of the estimation using the sampling principle of the
PF.
Time-update
The time-update in the PF is identical to the EnKF. The one-step ahead prop-
agation of the particle states, ˆx(i)
k+1|k = ˆx(i)
k|k(tk+1), are given as solutions to the
continuous nonlinear system:
dg(ˆx(i)
k (t)) = f(ˆx(i)
k (t), u(t))dt + σ(t)dω(t),
(4.62a)
g(ˆx(i)
k (t)) = ˆx(i)
k (t) + Fq(ˆx(i)
k (t)),
(4.62b)
for each particle i = 1, . . . , q with initial condition ˆx(i)
k (t) = ˆx(i)
k|k in the time-
period t ∈]tk; tk+1].
4.3.4
The Unscented Kalman Filter
This section describes the UKF for the continuous-discrete model (4.21). The
UKF uses a deterministic sample of 2nx + 1 number of σ-points to estimate the
distribution of the uncertain states. The particle size is a ﬁxed number, and is
not usable for tuning the ﬁlter, as the PF or EnKF. Following the approach of
[VDMAWIJ09, Sim06, RJ18], assume that the UKF is initialized with mean-
==PAGE:99==
4.3 Nonlinear State Estimation
85
covariance pair of the initial states given as:
ˆx0|−1 = x0,
(4.63)
P0|−1 = P0.
(4.64)
The continuous-discrete UKF for ﬁltering and prediction then consists of a mea-
surement and time-update. These updates are stated as follows.
Measurement-Update
Begin by computing 2nx + 1 samples of the states by the following:
ˆx(0)
k|k−1 = ˆxk|k−1,
(4.65a)
ˆx(i)
k|k−1 = ˆxk|k−1 + √c
q
Pk|k−1

i ,
(4.65b)
ˆx(i+nx)
k|k−1 = ˆxk|k−1 −√c
q
Pk|k−1

i ,
(4.65c)
(4.65d)
for i = 1, . . . , nx.
The dimension of the states is now denoted nx. The parameter c is computed
by c = α2(nx + κ), where α ∈]0, 1] and κ is set to zero. The matrix
 pPk|k−1

is computed by a Cholesky factorization, since Pk|k−1 is positive deﬁnite and
 pPk|k−1

i refers to the ith column of the matrix
 pPk|k−1

. The parameter
α determines the spread of points around ˆxk|k−1, is typically set to α = 10−3
and β is used to incorporate prior knowledge of the distribution. The value is
set to β = 2 for Gaussian distributions [VDMAWIJ09].
Now the diﬀerent normalizing weights are computed as:
W (0)
m =
λ
nx + λ,
(4.66a)
W (0)
c
=
λ
nx + λ, +(1 −α2 + β),
(4.66b)
W (i)
m =
1
2(nx + λ),
(4.66c)
W (i)
c
=
1
2(nx + λ),
(4.66d)
for i = 1, . . . , 2nx, where λ = α2(nx + κ) −nx.
==PAGE:100==
86
State Estimation of Chromatographic Processes
The output of each sample is computed by:
ˆz(i)
k|k−1 = h

tk, ˆx(i)
k|k−1

.
(4.67)
The mean, covariance and cross-covariance are each computed by:
ˆzk|k−1 =
2nx
X
i=0
W (i)
m ˆz(i)
k|k−1,
(4.68a)
Rk|k−1 =
2nx
X
i=0
W (i)
c

ˆz(i)
k|k−1 −ˆzk|k−1
 
ˆz(i)
k|k−1 −ˆzk|k−1
T
+ Rk,
(4.68b)
Sk|k−1 =
2nx
X
i=0
W (i)
c

ˆx(i)
k|k−1 −ˆxk|k−1
 
ˆz(i)
k|k−1 −ˆzk|k−1
T
.
(4.68c)
As described for the previous ﬁlters, the innovation, ek, is computed by:
ek = yk −ˆzk|k−1.
(4.69)
The Kalman gain matrix is given as:
Kfx,k = Sk|k−1R−1
k|k−1.
(4.70)
Finally, the ﬁltered state, ˆxk|k, and covariance, Pk|k, are computed by:
ˆxk|k = ˆxk|k−1 + Kfx,kRk|k−1KT
fx,k,
(4.71a)
Pk|k = Pk|k−1 −Kfx,kRk|k−1KT
fx,k.
(4.71b)
Figure 4.5 shows how the UKF captures the distribution of the ﬁltered states
by a set of deterministic samples. These points (σ-points) are sampled with
an increasing number standard deviations from the mean, and are not chosen
randomly as in the EnKF and PF.
Figure 4.5: Shows a conceptual illustration of how the UKF estimates the
ﬁltered state by a set of standard deviations away from the mean.
==PAGE:101==
4.3 Nonlinear State Estimation
87
Time-update
The time-update for the UKF is covered in the following. Begin by deﬁning the
number of states and process noise variables as the number ˜n = nx + nω, where
nω is the number of process noise variables. Also deﬁne the sets N0 = {0},
Nx = {1, . . . , 2nx} and Nω = {2nx + 1, . . . , 2nx + 2nω}.
Compute 2˜n + 1 samples of the states by the following:
ˆx(i) = ˆxk|k,
i ∈N0 ∪Nω,
(4.72a)
ˆx(i) = ˆxk|k +
√
˜c
q
Pk|k

i ,
i = 1, . . . , nx,
(4.72b)
ˆx(i+nx) = ˆxk|k −
√
˜c
q
Pk|k

i ,
i = 1, . . . , nx,
(4.72c)
for ˜c = α2(˜n + κ). Now compute the weights by:
˜W (0)
m =
˜λ
˜n + ˜λ
,
(4.73a)
˜W (0)
c
=
˜λ
˜n + ˜λ
+ (1 −α2 + β),
(4.73b)
˜W (i)
m =
1
2(˜n + ˜λ)
,
(4.73c)
˜W (i)
c
=
1
2(˜n + ˜λ)
,
(4.73d)
for i = 1, . . . , 2˜n, with the constant ˜λ = α2(˜n + κ) −˜n.
The one-step ahead propagation of the samples, for i ∈N0 ∪Nx and time
t ∈]tk; tk+1], are determined by 1) solving the continuous dynamical equations:
ˆx(i)
k (tk) = ˆx(i)
k|k
(4.74a)
g(ˆx(i)
k (t)) = ˆx(i)
k (t) + Fq(ˆx(i)
k (t)),
(4.74b)
dg(ˆx(i)
k (t)) = f(ˆx(i)
k (t), u(t))dt.
(4.74c)
The one-step ahead propagation of the samples, for i ∈Nω and time t ∈]tk; tk+1],
are then determined by 2) solving the stochastic continuous dynamical equa-
tions:
ˆx(i)
k (tk) = ˆx(i)
k|k
(4.75a)
g(ˆx(i)
k (t)) = ˆx(i)
k (t) + Fq(ˆx(i)
k (t)),
(4.75b)
dg(ˆx(i)
k (t)) = f(ˆx(i)
k (t), u(t))dt + σ(t)dω(i)(t),
(4.75c)
==PAGE:102==
88
State Estimation of Chromatographic Processes
where the increments are sampled as:
dω(i+2nx)(t) =
√
˜cdt

,
(4.76a)
dω(i+2nx+nω)(t) = −
√
˜cdt

,
(4.76b)
for all i = 1, . . . , nω. Finally, the one-step ahead state, ˆxk+1|k, and covariance,
Pk+1|k, estimate are computed recursively as:
ˆxk+1|k =
2˜n
X
i=0
˜W (i)
m ˆx(i)
k+1|k,
(4.76ca)
Pk+1|k =
2˜n
X
i=0
˜W (i)
c

ˆx(i)
k+1|k −ˆxk+1|k
 
ˆx(i)
k+1|k −ˆxk+1|k
T
,
(4.76cb)
where ˆx(i)
k+1|k = ˆx(i)
k (tk+1) are the one-step ahead states of the i samples com-
puted in step 1) - 2).
4.3.5
Nonlinear Disturbance Modeling
In order to estimate the unknown inlet concentration, the continuous-discrete
model (4.20) is augmented with a disturbance variable:
dxd(t) = σddωd(t).
(4.4)
This nonlinear disturbance model is parallel to the linear disturbance model
described in Section 4.1.4, and by augmenting with the disturbance state (4.4),
the augmented model takes the form:
d
g(x(t))
xd(t)

=
f(x(t), xd(t))
0

dt +
σ(t)
0
0
σd

d
 ω(t)
ωd(t)

.
(4.5)
The initial disturbance, ˆxd,0|−1, follows a normal distribution, ˆxd,0|−1 ∼N(xd,0, P d
0 ).
The parameters σd and P d
0 may be used to tune the ﬁlter. Note that (4.5) is in
the form (4.20), so the nonlinear ﬁlters may be used to estimate the states and
unknown input of the augmented model (4.5) simultaneously. Similar to (4.19),
the sensor, h, is still h = [C, Cd] for the nonlinear disturbance model.
4.3.6
Discussion of the Nonlinear State Estimation Algo-
rithms
The following covers a brief discussion of the four diﬀerent ﬁlters: EKF, UKF,
PF and EnKF.
==PAGE:103==
4.3 Nonlinear State Estimation
89
The EKF is probably among the most widely adopted nonlinear state estimation
technologies for nonlinear systems [Jør07]. The EKF linearizes the nonlinear
model and applies the original Kalman ﬁlter equations, as previously described.
This is a ﬁrst-order approximation, and may lead the EKF to be imprecise for
highly nonlinear system. Furthermore, continuous-time discrete-measurement
systems such as (4.20) require integration of the mean-covariance pair. This
integration may for large-scale systems become intractable, since it requires
the solution to n2
x (where nx is the number of states) nonlinear ODEs at each
iteration, and an increase in the number of states, results in an increase in the
number of nonlinear ODEs, which needs to be solved during each time-update.
Finally, the EKF requires the evaluation of the Jacobian. For some systems the
Jacobian may be diﬃcult to evaluate, but this is not much of a bottleneck, since
most algorithms require the Jacobian to run eﬃciently anyway.
The UKF uses a deterministic set of samples to improve the accuracy of the
states estimates and generally produces more accurate estimates than the EKF
[VDMAWIJ09, RJ18, Sim06]. This improved accuracy comes at a price, and
requires 2˜n + 1 simulations where ˜n = nx + nω and two Cholesky factorizations
of the covariance matrix at each iteration. For large-scale systems with many
states, the number of simulations and factorizations may become computation-
ally demanding as well.
The PF and EnKF are particle based (Monte-Carlo) approaches that use a set
of random samples to recover the distribution of the states either by likelihood
estimation (PF) or a recursive least squares update (EnKF). There is no exact
number of particles/ensembles that guarantee an accurate state estimate, and
this question remains an open research topic [GBMC+09]. This is opposed to
the UKF, which uses a deterministic set of samples. However, this is both a
strength and weakness of the particle ﬁlters, as a fewer set of ensembles (and
computational workload) may be needed to accurately capture the distribution
of state estimates compared to the EKF and UKF. However, the ability to cap-
ture the distribution of the ﬁltered states, similarly seems to be highly problem
and parameter dependent. As an example [GBMC+09] suggests in between 50-
100 ensembles, while the amount of particles needed may be in the number of
10000s as reported by [TGK16]. However, the PF/EnKF would be expected to
require less computational time for large-scale systems, as no factorization or
covariance integration is required in the PF and EnKF, which becomes a serious
bottleneck for the EKF and UKF for large enough systems.
However, many of the computations during each update of the sample based
methods: UKF, PF and EnKF are computed independent of each other and
introduce the possibility of being computed in parallel. To this end, the time
spent during integration of the mean (and integration of the covariance matrix
in the EKF) in the time-updates may be heavily brought down. Perhaps this
==PAGE:104==
90
State Estimation of Chromatographic Processes
makes the probabilistic approaches more computationally feasible compared to
the EKF.
4.4
MATLAB Implementation III
In the following, brief comments on the MATLAB implementation regarding
the four nonlinear ﬁlters are given. Figure 4.6 illustrates the workﬂow in the
practical MATLAB implementation of the four nonlinear ﬁlters. The workﬂow
illustrated in Figure 4.6 assumes a system with one component is modeled by the
nonlinear EDM (2.4), and estimates the uncertain states and inlet concentration
simultaneously. The MATLAB code uses each of the four nonlinear ﬁlters. The
operations performed in the dark grey colored box are considered oﬄine, while
the estimation in the light grey box is considered online. The scripts have been
setup to run on the DTU HPC cluster 3. This was done in order to compute
the PF and EnKF for varying sample sizes and save time.
3Link to DTUs high-performance computing website: https://www.hpc.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:105==
4.5 Numerical Study
91
Linear_Matrices_DGFE.m
   -  Defines the discretized global flux 
operators Ac and Bc. 
System_Parameters.m
  -  User defined system parameters 
and simulation scenario.
Ac, Bc
θ       
Run_Filters_Output/Input.m
   -  Main script which calls either the 
EKF, UKF, EnKF or PF.
   1) Simulates system with process 
noise  σ dω(t) and computes NT 
discrete measurements yk with 
measurement noise vk.
   2) Computes filtered states {xk|k}, 
CPU time and RMSD and for either of 
the filters.
For i=1:q 
Run_Filter.m
   -  Runs either the EKF, UKF, EnKF 
or PF either for input or output 
estimation and generates states 
{xk}.
Q , R, Pd , P0  and σd 
Output
RMSD, CPU time tCPU 
and states {xk|k}
RK4.m
   - Time update of the states 
performed by the LSERK method.
ssh user@transfer.gbar.dtu.dk
Figure 4.6: Practical illustration of the workﬂow setup in MATLAB for state
estimation by Kalman ﬁltering of the nonlinear EDM using the
four diﬀerent ﬁlters. The scripts have been setup to run on the
DTU HPC cluster.
4.5
Numerical Study
This section investigates ﬁve numerical case studies of the linear and nonlinear
state estimation problem: 1) the ﬁrst case study investigates state estimation of
the linear EDM (2.29) using the Kalman ﬁlter. To demonstrate the capability
of using high-order methods, the ﬁrst study compares the performance of the
DG-FE and FV method for computing the ﬁltered states in terms of accuracy,
DOFs and simulation time. 2) The second study demonstrates the use of the
augmented state-space model in (4.19) to estimate the unknown inlet concentra-
tion under varying inﬂuence of the disturbance tuning. 3) The third case study
investigates state estimation of the nonlinear EDM (2.4) using the four nonlin-
ear ﬁlters: EKF, UKF, PF and EnKF. A comparison between each algorithm is
==PAGE:106==
92
State Estimation of Chromatographic Processes
Table 4.1: Simulation and column parameters for linear case study.
Parameters
Symbol
Value
Metric
Column length
L
1
cm
Porosity
ϵ
0.4
-
Interstitial velocity
v
1
cm/min
Theoretical plates
Nt
250
-
Henry’s constant
a
1
-
Initial concentration
c0
2
g/L
Feed concentration
cf
4
g/L
done in terms of each ﬁlters capability for computing the ﬁltered states using the
nonlinear model. 4) The nonlinear model is augmented with a disturbance state
in (4.5), and used to estimate the unknown inlet concentration under varying
inﬂuence of the disturbance tuning. 5) The ﬁnal case study demonstrates the
EKF as an estimator, for the outlet concentration of a chromatographic system,
which features a binary mixture.
4.5.1
Numerical Case I: Comparison of the DG-FE and
FV Method for Filtering
The column parameters are identical to the linear case study in Section 3.10.2,
and for completeness they are listed again in Table 4.1. Note that the initial
concentration, c0, has been modiﬁed and is now c0 = 2. This choice is made to
avoid unphysical, negative concentrations in the estimation. The feed concen-
tration cf is injected over a time period of tinj = 2 min. The ﬁnal simulation
time is tf = 2 min. The sampling time is Ts = 0.1 min. The measurements
arrive at intervals of 6 seconds. The noise covariances used in the simulation are
Q = R = 0.12, and the disturbance model uses a tuning parameter Qξ = 0.0012.
The initial covariance is the unity P0 = I. The DG-FE simulation uses Ne = 30
elements and polynomials of order N ∈{2, 3, . . . , 14}, and the FV method
uses Nz ∈{800, 1000, 1200, . . . , 4000} DOFs (ﬁnite-volume cells). The dynamic
Kalman ﬁlter described in Section 4.1.2 is used as the optimal estimator.
Figure 4.7 compares the performance of the DG-FE and FV method, when es-
timating the inlet concentration using the disturbance model in (4.19). The
ﬁgure compares each methods capability for estimating the uncertain states in
the disturbance model in terms of the required CPU-time and DOFs. The toler-
ance, ϵ, corresponds to the accuracy of the numerical method used to compute
the ﬁltered states.
The results are parallel to the comparison and conclusion made in Figure 3.10,
and as expected the DG-FE method is signiﬁcantly faster by an order of magni-
==PAGE:107==
4.5 Numerical Study
93
10 -9
10 -8
10 -7
10 -6
10 -5
10 -4
10 -3
10 -2
10 -1
10 0
-Error Tolerance
0.0057
0.0103
0.0142
0.0262
0.0393
0.1060
0.7141
3.2771
21.16
66.39
275.7255
CPU-Time [s]
1-D CPU Times of Filter Performance
60
120
150
210
270
420
800
1000
2000
3000
4000
Degrees of Freedom
DG-FE Method
FV Method
Figure 4.7: Comparison of the desired tolerance achievable by the DG-FE and
FV method for varying CPU-time and DOFs when estimating the
ﬁltered states using the dynamic Kalman ﬁlter for k = 20 itera-
tions. The tolerance, ϵ, corresponds to the accuracy of the numer-
ical scheme used to compute the ﬁltered states.
tude, when compared to the FV method at computing the ﬁltered states. The
DG-FE method is now solely considered in the remaining part of this chapter
as the desired numerical method.
4.5.2
Numerical Case II: Linear Model Input Estimation
Figure 4.8 compares three diﬀerent realizations of the estimated inlet concen-
tration for varying disturbance tuning Qξ. The simulation ﬁnal time is now
tf = 16 min, and the feed concentration is injected after tinj = 3 min. The
injected feed stream remains active, during the remainder of the simulation.
The column parameters are again identical to the listed values in Table 4.1,
and the sampling time is Ts = 0.1 min resulting in k = 160 time steps. The
measurements again arrive at intervals of 6 seconds. The DG-FE simulation in
Figure 4.8 uses Ne = 30 elements and polynomial order N = 10. The dynamic
Kalman ﬁlter is used with an initial covariance matrix P0 = I. The process and
measurement noise covariances are Q = 0.12 and R = 0.22. Figure 4.8 considers
a scenario with disturbing tuning parameters Qξ ∈{0.052, 0.012, 0.0052}.
Figure 4.8 demonstrates the capability of the DG-FE method for estimating
==PAGE:108==
94
State Estimation of Chromatographic Processes
Figure 4.8: Three diﬀerent realizations of the estimated input are displayed for
various tuning of the disturbance parameter Qξ. The disturbance
is estimated more aggressively for increasing tuning Qξ.
the ﬁltered inlet concentration for varying disturbance tuning parameter Qξ.
The input is estimated after a natural time delay of approximately 3 minutes,
since the measurements only begin to appear at the outlet of the column after
the process has undergone a certain amount of time.
For low values of the
tuning parameter, the inlet concentration is estimated as a smooth transition.
Increasing the value of the tuning parameter allows the estimate to capture more
of the sharp proﬁle of the inlet concentration. However, this is compromised by
a more aggressive estimate, as seen in Figure 4.8, and naturally a trade-oﬀin
this transition occurs.
The placement of the sensor at the column outlet represents a worst-case sce-
nario, where measurements only become available at the outlet. However, if the
sensor is placed farther towards the inlet of the chromatographic column, the
time delay in the estimation would naturally be mitigated. Figure 4.9 shows
three diﬀerent realizations of the estimated inputs for diﬀerent placements of
the sensor at the inlet, middle and outlet of the column. As anticipated the
inlet concentration is estimated with a decreasing time delay, when moving the
sensor towards the inlet. The placement of the sensor at the outlet represents
the most realistic scenario, as measurements of industrial feed stocks typically
only appear at the outlet. In order to mitigate the delay in the estimated inlet
concentration, a possible solution could be to incorporate a time delay into the
numerical model, by knowledge of how fast the band proﬁle propagates towards
==PAGE:109==
4.5 Numerical Study
95
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
2
3
4
5
6
Column Inlet
Input
Estimate (inlet)
Estimate (middle)
Estimate (outlet)
0
5
10
16
2
3
4
5
Inlet
Measurements
Process Output
0
5
10
16
2
3
4
5
Middle
Measurements
Process Output
0
5
10
16
2
3
4
5
Outlet
Measurements
Process Output
Concentration [g/L]
Time [min]
Figure 4.9: Three diﬀerent realizations of the estimated input are displayed
for placements of the sensor at the inlet, middle and outlet of the
chromatographic column.
the column outlet.
4.5.3
Numerical Case III: Comparison of the Nonlinear
Filters
The following numerical study compares the EKF, UKF, PF and EnKF for dif-
ferent sample sizes. In order to quantify the accuracy of the diﬀerent algorithms,
the comparison is made between the root-mean-square-deviation (RMSD) of the
state variable and the total CPU-time for computing the ﬁltered states. The
RMSD is computed as:
RMSD =
 
1
NT + 1
NT
X
k=0
 ˆxk|k −xk
2
! 1
2
,
(4.6)
where ˆxk|k and xk corresponds to the ﬁltered state and process solution. This
comparison considers a scenario with simulation ﬁnal time tf = 12 min. The
feed concentration is injected immediately with an injection time of tinj = 6
min. The column parameters for the nonlinear model are listed in Table 4.2.
The concentrations are again set to avoid unphysical negative concentrations.
The polynomial order and elements are chosen such that N = 5 and Ne = 11.
==PAGE:110==
96
State Estimation of Chromatographic Processes
Table 4.2: Simulation parameters for nonlinear case study.
Parameters
Symbol
Value
Unit
Column length
L
1
cm
Porosity
ϵ
0.4
-
Interstitial velocity
v
1
cm/min
Theoretical plates
Nt
250
-
Isotherm parameters
a1, b1
1, 0.05
-
Initial concentration
c0
2
g/L
Feed concentration
cf
4
g/L
The CFL condition (3.129) is set of C = 2. This choice leads to a step size
∆t = 0.0145 min.
The measurements are set to arrive as frequently as the
process output, so they arrive with intervals ∆t, which is approximately every
second. The process and measurements covariances are set at Q = ∆t = 0.0145
and R = 0.12. The initial covariance matrices for the state and disturbance is
set to P0 = 0.052 and P d
0 = 0.052. The initial state, ˆx0|−1, follows a normal
distribution ˆx0|−1 ∼N(c0, P0).
Figure 4.10, Table 4.3 and Table 4.4 compare a set of simulations of the EKF,
UKF, PF and EnKF for varying particle and ensemble sizes. Each dot in Figure
4.10 represents a simulation by either of the four ﬁlters. The PF and EnKF are
tuned by the number of particles/ensembles, which produces a trade-oﬀbetween
the RMSD and required CPU-time.
Figure 4.10 compares the RMSD with the total CPU-time for one measurement
and time-update. Table 4.3 and Table 4.4 shows, the individual time-cost for
one measurement- and one time-update for each of the four ﬁlters. The variable
CPU1 corresponds to the average CPU-time spent during one measurements
update in milliseconds (ms). The variable CPU2 corresponds to the average
CPU-time spent during one time-update in milliseconds (ms). The RMSD is
calculated between the process simulation, xk, and the estimated states, ˆxk|k,
at the outlet of the column at z = 1 cm.
Figure 4.10 shows that the EKF updates the estimated states signiﬁcantly faster
than both the UKF, PF and EnKF, and that the EKF is able to produce rea-
sonably accurate state estimates, which in terms of the RMSD lie close to the
process solution. For the same accuracy, the UKF performs signiﬁcantly worse
as the average CPU-time is much higher in comparison to the EKF. The PF re-
quires many particles and signiﬁcant amounts of CPU-time to produce accurate
state estimates compared to the other ﬁlters. For low computational cost how-
ever, the EnKF is able to produce reasonably accurate state estimates as well,
but consequently also requires signiﬁcantly more computational time compared
to the EKF.
==PAGE:111==
4.5 Numerical Study
97
0.016
0.018
0.02
0.022
0.024
0.026
0.028
0.03
0.032
0.034
RMSD
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
CPU-Time [s]
Performance Comparison EKF, UKF, PF and EnKF
EKF
UKF
PF
EnKF
Figure 4.10: Comparison of the average CPU-time (seconds) for one mea-
surement + time-update of the EKF, UKF, PF and EnKF
for diﬀerent ensemble sizes.
The PF considers particle sizes
q ∈{10, 30, 80, 160, 180, 200} and the EnKF considers ensemble
sizes q ∈{2, 6, 10, 30, 80, 160, 180, 200} .
As anticipated from the results in Table 4.3 and 4.4 the main computational
bottleneck of each ﬁlter is the propagation of the mean state and covariance in
the time-update. The EKF propagates the mean-covariance pair, by solving n2
x
sensitivity ODEs and nx mean state ODEs. The UKF requires solution of nx
mean state ODEs for each of the 2nx + 1 samples. The number of states for the
discretization used in each simulation is nx = Np × Ne = 66.
Recall, that during each time-update the mean state is propagated by solving
nx ODEs, and during each iteration of the LSERK method, a Newton approx-
imation is performed to recover the concentration c.
Since the UKF uses a
deterministic set of samples, this creates a much larger computational burden
for the ﬁlter, since the discretization of the PDE naturally lead to a larger num-
ber of states, and in turn more Newton approximations need to be computed.
The PF and EnKF require the solution of nx mean state ODEs for each parti-
cle/ensemble during the time-update. However, the sample size is tunable and
is not ﬁxed as the UKF, so the computational burden is not as large for the
lower sample sizes.
The results of this study highlight two points: 1) the EKF is signiﬁcantly faster
than the other ﬁlters and able to produce reasonably accurate state estimates.
==PAGE:112==
98
State Estimation of Chromatographic Processes
Table 4.3: Performance comparison of the EKF and EnKF for varying ensem-
ble sizes q.
EKF
q = 2
q = 6
q = 10
q = 30
q = 80
q = 160
q = 180
q = 200
RMSD
0.0224
0.0310
0.0224
0.0174
0.0162
0.0165
0.0165
0.0166
0.0164
CPU1 (ms)
0.04
0.60
0.76
0.79
2.16
3.31
9.10
10.22
11.18
CPU2 (ms)
60.40
96.65
282.16
423.64
1444
3670.8
7244.2
8103.9
8949.8
Table 4.4: Performance comparison of the UKF and PF for varying number
of particle sizes q.
UKF
q = 10
q = 30
q = 80
q = 160
q = 180
q = 200
RMSD
0.0219
0.0089
0.0078
0.0056
0.0052
0.0049
0.0046
CPU1 (ms)
1.05
0.42
0.98
1.54
2.28
2.67
2.82
CPU2 (ms)
5435.7
423.21
1377.9
2758.4
6216
7120.6
7768.4
2) The PF and EnKF produced the lowest average RMSD values when com-
paring the process output and state estimates, but also required the largest
computational eﬀort to produce these estimates.
Two additional conclusions may be drawn from this case study: 1) the computa-
tional burden of each algorithm may be brought down signiﬁcantly as the prop-
agation of the mean state and covariance matrix in each ﬁlter are independent,
and may easily be parallelized, which would lower the computational cost signif-
icantly without compromising accuracy. 2) The conclusions made in this study
does not necessarily reﬂect the overall performance of the ﬁlters as their perfor-
mance is highly problem and parameter dependent [RJ18, GBMC+09, TGK16].
Figure 4.11 compares the estimated output states for each nonlinear ﬁlter. The
estimated output of the PF and EnKF is taken from the simulation with lowest
RMSD, for the PF that is q = 200 particles and for the EnKF that is q = 30
ensembles.
4.5.4
Numerical Case IV: Nonlinear Model Input Estima-
tion
The following numerical study demonstrates the capability of the EKF and
EnKF for input estimation using the augmented model in (4.5), The input
estimation has been implemented for these two ﬁlters, as they tend to produce
the most accurate state estimates.
Consider again the column parameters in Table 4.2. This comparison considers
==PAGE:113==
4.5 Numerical Study
99
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Process Output
EKF
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Process Output
UKF
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Process Output
PF
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Process Output
EnKF
Concentration [g/L]
Time [min]
State Estimates of EKF, UKF, PF and EnKF
Figure 4.11: Four diﬀerent output estimates are displayed for the EKF, UKF,
PF and EnKF. The PF uses 200 particles and the EnKF uses 30
ensembles.
a scenario with simulation ﬁnal time tf = 8 min. The feed concentration cf is
injected after 30 seconds, and the feed stream remains active for the remaining
part of the simulation. The polynomial order and elements are chosen such that
N = 5 and Ne = 11. The CFL condition is set to C = 2. This choice leads to a
step size ∆t = 0.0055 min. The process and measurements covariances are set
at Q = ∆t = 0.0055 and R = 0.12. The initial covariance matrix is set such that
P0 = 0.001 and P d
0 = 0.001. The initial state, ˆx0|−1, and initial disturbance
state, ˆxd,0|−1 both follow a normal distribution ˆx0|−1 ∼N(c0, P0) and ˆxd,0|−1 ∼
N(c0, P d
0 ). The ensemble size of the EnKF is set to q = 30 ensembles. The EKF
and EnKF require diﬀerent tuning parameters, these parameters are chosen such
that σEKF
d
= 1 and σEKF
d
= 0.05.
Figure 4.12 and 4.13 show two realizations of the estimated input using the
EKF and EnKF. The estimated inputs in these ﬁgures are similar to the results
shown in Section 4.5.2. However, the main diﬀerence is now that the EDM is a
nonlinear model. In Figure 4.12 measurements appear every 5 seconds, and both
ﬁlters are able to estimate the inlet concentration after a delay of approximately
3 min. In Figure 4.13 the measurements appear every 9 seconds instead. The ﬁl-
ters remain capable of estimating the uncertain inlet concentration, even though
fewer measurements are provided to the EKF and EnKF. However, the sparsity
of the data provides state estimates, which are wrought with a higher degree
of uncertainty, and the estimates ﬂuctuate around the true inlet concentration
==PAGE:114==
100
State Estimation of Chromatographic Processes
with greater variation.
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
Column Outlet
Process Output
Measured Output
0
2
4
6
8
10
Time [min]
0
2
4
6
Column Inlet
True Input
Estimated Input EKF
Estimated Input EnKF
Concentration [g/L]
Figure 4.12: Two diﬀerent input estimates are displayed for the EKF and
EnKF. The EnKF uses 30 ensembles. Measurements arrive every
5 seconds.
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
Column Outlet
Process Output
Measured Output
0
2
4
6
8
10
Time [min]
0
2
4
6
Column Inlet
True Input
Estimated Input EKF
Estimated Input EnKF
Concentration [g/L]
Figure 4.13: Two diﬀerent input estimates are displayed for the EKF and
EnKF. The EnKF uses 30 ensembles. Measurements arrive every
9 seconds.
==PAGE:115==
4.5 Numerical Study
101
4.5.5
Numerical Case V: Nonlinear Estimation of a Binary
Mixture
The ﬁnal case study considers considers state estimation of the outlet concen-
tration of a binary mixture. The parameters are identical to the nonlinear case
study in Section 3.10.3 and are listed in Table 4.5. The problem is simulated
under liquid chromatography conditions with Nt = 250 theoretical plates. Dis-
persion in the outlet proﬁles is therefore more apparent in this example. The
feed concentration cf,1 and cf,2 of both components are injected over a time to-
tal period of tinj = 12 min. The ﬁnal simulation time is set to tf = 40 min. The
CFL condition is set to C = 0.3 for numerically stable solution. The solution
under liquid chromatography conditions is simulated using a polynomial order
N = 5 and Ne = 12 elements. Measurements of both components arrive every
4 seconds. The noise covariances are Q = ∆t = 0.069 and R = 0.82. The initial
state of both components follow a normal distribution ˆx0|−1 ∼N(c0, P0), where
P0 = 0.1 is the initial covariance of both components.
0
10
20
30
40
0
5
10
15
20
Column Outlet (Component 1)
Process Output
Filtered State
0
10
20
30
40
0
5
10
15
20
Column Outlet (Component 2)
Process Output
Filtered State
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0
5
10
Column Inlet
Component 1
Component 2
Concentration [g/L]
Time [min]
Figure 4.14: Realization of the estimated output of a process with two com-
ponents occupying the chromatographic column.
The column
parameters are listed in Table 4.5. The inlet concentrations for
the ﬁrst and second component are again injected simultaneously
and in equal amount. The average RMSD of each component is
0.065. The average CPU-time of the measurement and time up-
date were 4.6 ms and 101.9 ms.
Figure 4.14 shows the estimated states of two components at the outlet column.
The states are estimated using the EKF. The equations in Section 4.3.1 gen-
==PAGE:116==
102
State Estimation of Chromatographic Processes
Table 4.5: Simulation parameters for linear case study.
Parameters
Symbol
Value
Metric
Column length
L
1
cm
Porosity
ϵ
0.4
-
Interstitial velocity
v
.1
cm/min
Theoretical plates
Nt
250
-
Henry’s constant
a1, a2
0.5, 1
-
Isotherm parameters
b1, b2
0.05, 0.1
-
Initial concentration
c0
2
g/L
Feed concentration
cf,1, cf,2
10
g/L
eralize for Nc > 1 components and may be used for estimating systems with
multiple components.
The ﬁgure demonstrates the capability for estimating
states in mixtures of multiple components.
A natural extension to these results would be to consider input estimation of the
uncertain inlet concentrations in Figure 4.14. In order to consider this exten-
sion, one would have to write a complete, augmented model on the form (4.5)
consisting of a model for each component, and apply the EKF to this model.
The implementation of this model was not completed due to time constraints on
ﬁnalizing the report. However, this extension is a natural suggestion for future
work on this project. There are many other suggestions for future work, and
these suggestions are outlined in the ﬁnal chapter along with conclusions of the
work presented in this thesis.
==PAGE:117==
C h a p t e r 5
Outlook
5.1
Conclusion
The primary goals of this thesis were tied to the development and implemen-
tation of: 1) a high-order numerical method to accurately model the governing
linear and nonlinear, coupled convection-dominated PDEs, that constitutes the
equilibrium dispersive model of chromatography. 2) Linear and nonlinear state
estimation algorithms for state estimation of chromatographic processes.
Based on the work in this thesis, the following overall conclusions can be made:
• Compared to a conventional FV method, the DG-FE method was able to
produce highly accurate solutions to the EDM. These solutions used signif-
icantly fewer DOFs, and were computed faster by an order of magnitude.
As a consequence, the DG-FE method was able to produce solutions to
the EDM much faster than the FV method. The DG-FE method was able
to simulate single and multi-component ﬂows inside the chromatographic
column.
Speciﬁcally, the method was capable of accurately simulating
well-established nonlinear cases and capturing nearly vertical shock pro-
ﬁles, that forms when simulating the model under HPLC conditions.
==PAGE:118==
104
Outlook
• The state-space model developed for the linear EDM was used in con-
junction with the dynamic Kalman to estimate the uncertain inlet con-
centration of the process, by using an augmented model formulation. The
DG-FE method proved to be advantageous to the FV method in terms of
accuracy and eﬃciency, when using the Kalman ﬁlter as state estimator.
Speciﬁcally, the DG-FE method was able to produce state estimates much
faster, using signiﬁcantly less states and with much higher model accuracy
when compared to the FV method.
• Algorithms for the EKF, UKF, PF and EnKF were developed and imple-
mented, for estimation and comparison of the uncertain outlet concentra-
tions, of the chromatographic process described by the nonlinear EDM.
The EKF proved to be the most computationally feasible among these
four nonlinear ﬁlters, and was able to produce reasonably accurate state
estimates. A deterministic and probabilistic approach towards nonlinear
input estimation was given by a comparison between the EKF and EnKF.
Both ﬁlters were capable of estimating the uncertain inlet concentrations
using an augmented model formulation of the nonlinear model. Finally,
the EKF was capable of estimating the outlet concentrations of a chro-
matographic process featuring a binary mixture.
In conclusion, the goals put forward have been matched with expectation and
promising results. The DG-FE method shows great potential as a high-ﬁdelity
solver for chromatographic processes.
The capability of the DG-FE method
for simulating these processes using few states is crucial.
This capability is
necessary for the nonlinear state estimation algorithms as well. Since the number
of states ultimately depends on the reﬁnement of the discretization, and the state
estimation algorithms need to produce reliable estimates in the shortest amount
of time, if they are to be used in online estimation in NMPC.
5.2
Recommendations for Future Work
This section presents suggestions for future work prospects, that build and ex-
tend upon the work in this project. To this end, the following recommendations
are given:
• The work in this thesis considers the EDM, which is the least complex
of the three models described in Section 2.1, where the mass transfer
kinetics are assumed to be inﬁnitely fast. To support, validate and asses
the results within a broader class of more complex scenarios, the proposed
==PAGE:119==
5.2 Recommendations for Future Work
105
state estimation techniques should be applied to the more complex models,
such as the LKM or GRM with ﬁnite mass transfer kinetics. The work
put forward in this thesis could naturally serve as a ﬁrst step towards
these models. A natural discretization choice of the GRM would be the
DG-FE method. However, specialized open-source software as CADET
[Lv18], high-ﬁdelity ﬁnite-element based simulators such as FEniCS1 or
the Spectral/hp Element Framework NEKTAR++2 could be investigated
as potential accurate and eﬃcient simulators for the nonlinear, convection-
dominated models.
• With promising results this thesis has applied state estimation of the
uncertain inlet concentrations to the EDM. However, as suggested in
[LNE14, KE06, KDS+09a, AC03] the parameters of the EDM are inher-
ently uncertain and require estimation for each chromatographic process.
Future work should therefore seek to investigate diﬀerent parameter es-
timation methods for the linear and nonlinear EDM potentially using
Kalman ﬁlter technology.
Parameter estimation methods could for ex-
ample be the nonlinear ﬁlters: EKF, UKF, EnKF and PF. Experimental
data could be investigated to estimate the key parameters in the EDM,
and apply the ﬁlters on actual data instead of the synthetic data, which
is constructed from a model with known parameters.
• The work in this thesis considers a simple LSERK method for time inte-
gration. Explicit Runge-Kutta methods such as the LSERK are popular
for integrating semi-discrete systems [HW08] resulting from DG-FE dis-
cretizations. However, these methods suﬀer from stability based time step
restrictions for stiﬀproblems with convection-dominated fronts. Implicit-
explicit integration schemes for the EDM exist [MHA18a, DGM18, BMRS18],
and these methods are able to capture shocks, which are given rise to by
sharp moving transitions between concentrations. These methods do not
compromise the accuracy of the solution, and they allow the solution to
be propagated at larger time-steps than conventional methods. This has
potential to reduce simulation time of the models. Future work should
therefore seek to investigate the beneﬁts of using such methods.
• The work in this thesis does not consider control of the chromatographic
process. Based on this work however, a natural extension would be to
consider MPC of packed bed chromatographic process. A counter-current
continuous process has been studied in [DAPC15], which controls the pro-
cess by a periodical switching of the inlet and outlet ports in the direction
of the ﬂuid ﬂow.
However, literature does not currently suggest study
of NMPC for conventional batch chromatography, and there are diﬀerent
perspectives on how the control process could be modeled. Possibilities
1Website: https://fenicsproject.org/
2Website: https://www.nektar.info/features/
==PAGE:120==
106
Outlook
include: 1) manipulating the concentrations by injection of an extra com-
ponent (such as solutes of salt) to manipulate the aﬃnities of the other
components. 2) Indirectly modeling the change in component aﬃnities
through the equilibrium parameters in the isotherms, by assuming that
ai = ai(t) and bi = bi(t) in the Langmuir isotherm (2.27) vary over time.
• The DG-FE method and nonlinear ﬁlters developed in this thesis have been
implemented for models of the form (2.4). The U-Loop reactor [OJVJ10]
is an example of a process, that may be described by a model that is
equivalent, and shares similar structure with (2.4). It would therefore be
of interest to extend the methodologies developed in this work to other
models, such as the U-Loop reactor, which shares similar structure, and
likewise to other chemical processes, which may be modeled as convection-
diﬀusion processes.
==PAGE:121==
A p p e n d i x A
MATLAB Code Guide
The following appendix is a short guide to the MATLAB code implemented
throughout the project.
The code has been enclosed in a USB-drive, which
contains all the relevant MATLAB scripts written throughout the project. The
purpose of this guide is to make the procedures used in this thesis more trans-
parent for the reader and user.
The drive contains the main folder ”Chromatography_Code_s134600”.
The
main folder itself contains four subfolders. These subfolders are:
1) Linear Chromatography.
2) Linear State Estimation.
3) Nonlinear Chromatography.
4) Nonlinear State Estimation.
==PAGE:122==
108
MATLAB Code Guide
The following is a list of each main script and functions for each subfolder. The
idea is to provide a sort of catalog for the reader and user. The subfolder 1)
Linear Chromatography contains:
• Conv_1D_DGFE.m: Computes convergence of DG-FE method.
• Conv_1D_FVM.m: Computes convergence of FV method.
• Compare_DGFE_FVM_Global.m: Compares the DG-FE and FV method.
• Run_One_Comp_Lin.m: Simulates system for one component using either
the DG-FE or FV method.
The subfolder 2) Nonlinear Chromatography contains:
• Run_One_Comp_Nonlin.m: Runs nonlinear simulation for one component.
• Run_Two_Comp_Nonlin.m: Runs nonlinear simulation for two components.
• Run_Three_Comp_Nonlin.m: Runs nonlinear simulation for three compo-
nents.
The subfolder 3) Linear State Estimation contains:
• Kalman_DGFE_Offset.m: Estimates the inlet concentration using the DG-
FE method for diﬀerent tuning parameters.
• Comparison_Dynamic_Kalman.m: Compares the dynamic Kalman ﬁlter
for the DG-FE and FV method.
• Kalman_DGFE_Offset_Varying_C.m: Computes estimates and compares
the placement of the sensor for varying positions.
• Stationary_Matrices.m: Computes stationary matrices for the static
Kalman ﬁlter.
The subfolder 4) Nonlinear State Estimation contains:
• Test_Filters_Input.m: Runs nonlinear ﬁlters for inlet concentration es-
timation.
• Test_Filters_Output.m: Runs nonlinear ﬁlters for outlet concentration
estimation.
==PAGE:123==
109
• Test_Filters_Output_Two.m: Runs nonlinear ﬁlters for outlet concen-
tration estimation of a binary mixture.
• Run_Two_Comp_Nonlin.m: Runs nonlinear EKF for estimation outlet con-
centration estimation with two components.
• Run_EKF.m: Runs EKF ﬁlter.
• Run_UKF.m: Runs UKF ﬁlter.
• Run_PF.m: Runs PF ﬁlter.
• Run_EnKF.m: Runs EnKF ﬁlter.
• Run_EKF_Input.m: Runs EnKF ﬁlter for input estimation.
• Run_EnKF_Input.m: Runs EnKF ﬁlter for input estimation.
• Run_EKF_Two.m: Runs EKF for two components.
• rhsCov.m: Computes right hand side in the covariance equation for the
EKF.
• resampling.m: Computes resampling for the PF.
• Test_RMSD.m: Compares results in terms of CPU time and RMSD.
Auxiliary scripts are:
• Load_DGFEM.m: Loads DGFEM package.
• System_Parameters.m: Deﬁnes global column parameters.
• Cinlet.m: Computes inlet concentration.
• Global_DG_Operators.m: Deﬁnes global DG-FE operators.
• Linear_Matrices_DGFEM.m: Computes global linear DG-FE operators.
• Linear_Matrices_FVM.m: Computes global linear FV operators.
• C2D_ZOH.m: Computes ZOH discretization of DG-FE and FV operators.
• Stochastic_Discrete_Linear_System.m: Realizes the simulation of stochas-
tic state-space model.
• nsold.m: Nonlinear Newton algorithm.
• rhsfun.m: Computes right hand side of the DG-FE or FV discretization.
==PAGE:124==
110
MATLAB Code Guide
• Rfun_One_Comp.m: Computes residual function (Proposition 3) for one
component.
• Rfun_Two_Comp.m: Computes residual function (Proposition 3) for two
components.
• Rfun_Three_Comp.m: Computes residual function (Proposition 3) for
three components.
• GenerateMeasurements.m: Generates measurements for a given sampling
time.
• RK4_One_Comp_Offset.m: Runge-Kutta integration function for one com-
ponent using the augmented model.
• RK4_One_Comp.m: Runge-Kutta integration function for one component.
Scripts from the MATLAB package nodal-dg-master are used for the grid
setup. The scripts are freely available at the website 1. The scripts are part of
the publication [HW08].
1https://github.com/tcew/nodal-dg
==PAGE:125==
A p p e n d i x B
Project Plan and Evaluation
This appendix contains the original project plan for the thesis, which we devel-
oped in the onset of the project, and is presented in the following. Furthermore
the project plan has been extended with an evaluation of the workload during
the project.
Project background: Chromatography is a widely used chemical technique
to separate mixtures or components in chemical plants. It is used for separating
mixtures into components in order to analyze, identify, purify, quantify, and
optimize. Chromatographic separation processes are based on the diﬀerential
adsorption of the components of a mixture. In conventional liquid chromatog-
raphy, the separation is achieved by injecting a pulse of the solute mixture into
the chromatographic column. The components move with diﬀerent velocities in
the column due to their diﬀerent aﬃnity with the solid phase. Thus, the low
retained component exits the column earlier than the more retained one and,
hence, the separation is achieved.
Motivation and challenges: The success of the separation process is primar-
ily tied to the fulﬁllment of two objectives: 1) to extract as much as possible of a
given component in 2) the least amount of time. As a challenge, these objectives
are in mutual conﬂict. To optimize the separation process, it becomes natural to
consider appropriate control strategies such a Nonlinear Model Predictive Con-
trol (NMPC). However, as a fundamental prerequisite, NMPC and other control
==PAGE:126==
112
Project Plan and Evaluation
techniques rely crucially on proper state estimation. For chromatographic pro-
cesses, there are a number of challenges. Firstly, the process is described by
coupled nonlinear partial diﬀerential equations (PDEs) that upon discretiza-
tion leads to a large number of states.
In contrast, there are typically only
a few measurements available to base the estimation on. Secondly, the initial
concentrations are often highly uncertain to the point where any optimization
procedure becomes corrupted.
Project goals and description: To meet the above challenges, this project
seeks to develop fast and reliable state estimation routines for the chromato-
graphic process. To this end, the project falls into two main parts:
(i) Fast simulation of chromatographic processes: The simulation of mul-
ticomponent chromatographic processes under nonlinear conditions and reaction
kinetics require fast and accurate numerical methods. A fundamental feature
of the ﬁrst order nonlinear partial diﬀerential equations is that discontinuities
in the solutions can develop shocks that cause major diﬃculties for the numer-
ical schemes. To this end, projects aims to develop fast, iterative discontinuous
Galerkin solvers tailored for simulation of multicomponent chromatographic pro-
cesses in 1D and 2D. DG-FE methods allow for discontinuous approximations
and produce block-diagonal mass matrices that can be used to construct eﬃ-
cient algorithms of low computational cost. These methods incorporate the idea
of numerical ﬂuxes and slope limiters in a very natural way to avoid spurious
oscillations, which usually occur due the sharp changes in the solution. The de-
veloped solvers are intended to serve as a ﬁrst step towards a realistic, parallel
3D solver, capable of handling complex geometries. Furthermore, the solvers
serve as a prerequisite for the second part of the project that concerns state
estimation.
==PAGE:127==
113
(ii) State estimation: The second part of the project seeks to develop proce-
dures for eﬃcient state estimation. Based on real-life measurements, the project
serves to investigate and adapt current state-of-the-art methodologies to ﬁt the
framework of the chromatographic process.
The goal is to asses the poten-
tial of each ﬁlter in terms of eﬀectiveness and computational eﬃciency. The
project will focus on the following ﬁltering techniques for nonlinear processes:
1) Extended Kalman Filter (EKF), 2) the Unscented Kalman Filter (UKF) 3)
Particle Filters (PF), and 4) Ensemble Kalman Filter (EnKF). To ensure fast
estimation, the project seeks to implement the ﬁlters in parallel using the DTU
HPC Cluster.
In summation, the project will follow the four steps set out:
1. Gain an in-depth understanding of the chromatographic process and the
underlying partial diﬀerential equations describing the model.
2. Develop iterative DG-FE solvers in 1D and 2D for fast and accurate sim-
ulations of the physical model.
3. Investigate state estimation algorithms and apply to the nonlinear simu-
lator alongside real data.
4. Document the investigation and results in a comprehensive thesis.
Outline: As a way of estimating the amount of work required to progress
through each step of the project, we have have outlined a plan for the proposed
workload during the semester. The project begins at the 27th of August and the
thesis is scheduled for hand-in by the 27th of January. The following outlines
a tentative plan for the workload set through the coming semester. This plan
is not compulsory, and is open to restructuring, but is key for giving an idea of
how well the project progresses.
August: The last week of August and ﬁrst week of September, will be spent on
doing a literature search of relevant research articles and books, which should
help with providing a solid background for understanding the basics of the non-
linear equilibrium dispersive model of chromatography and nodal discontinuous-
Galerkin ﬁnite-element methods (DG-FE). This background should then help
towards a theoretical understanding of the PDE model and result in a practical
implementation of a DG-FE to solve the conservation problem.
September: The ﬁrst three weeks of September will be spent on gaining an
understanding of how to derive and implement basic DG-FE schemes from rele-
vant literature. The idea is to split the nonlinear equilibrium dispersive model of
==PAGE:128==
114
Project Plan and Evaluation
chromatography into its respective convective, dispersive and nonlinear terms,
and gain an understanding of the methods by solving each term separately in a
progressive manner. We would begin by solving the linear convection equation
and continue by adding dispersive, nonlinear and coupling terms, instead of at-
tempting to solve the original problem headﬁrst. This should give a thorough
understanding that will be useful in implementing the actual DG-FE solver.
October: The four weeks of October (and part of November) will be spent on
implementing a fast, iterative DG-FE simulator of chromatographic processes
eﬃciently in 1D (possibly 2D). The goal is to have a solver capable of doing
fast simulations of chromatographic processes for multiple components ready
by then.
November: Part of October and in the beginning weeks of November will
be spent on researching and gaining an understanding of the four nonlinear
state estimation algorithms that is of interest in this project. The last part of
November will be to apply each ﬁlter algorithms on a synthetic test case of the
nonlinear chromatographic solver with added noise.
December: The last part of the project begins in the remaining weeks of
December will be to investigate real life data obtained from actual experiments
and apply the ﬁlter algorithms in combination with the nonlinear solver to
perform a state estimation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation of the problem.
January: The last part of January will be devoted to making sure that the
relevant data has been acquired and that the simulations and tests have been
performed to a satisfactory extent. Also the remaining time will be spent on
ﬁnalizing the report.
During each month the plan is to document as much as possible in the thesis,
such that the remaining report writing in January will not become as stressful
as possibly anticipated. Finally, as a way to structure the workload through
each month Figure B.1 shows a Gantt-chart of the distribution of work through
each week during the autumn semester.
Auto-Evaluation: To a large extent the proposed project outline in Figure
B.1 has been followed. Motivated by early positive results, the idea of extending
the DG-FE simulator to 2D was abandoned in favor of working on the paper:
Discontinuous-Galerkin Finite-Element Method for Simulation of Packed Bed
Chromatographic Processes. Two weeks of October were used to complete the
paper. The paper was submitted and later accepted. November month was
spent on developing the Kalman ﬁlter for the linear EDM using the FV and
DG-FE method.
Positive results based on this work led to the paper: Spa-
tial Discretization and Kalman Filtering for Ideal Packed-Bed Chromatography.
==PAGE:129==
115
Part
Task
Week 1–2 
Week 3–5  
Week 6–7 
Week 8–10 
Week 11–13 
Week 15–16 
Week 17–19 
Week 20–22 
1
Understand chrom process
and underlying model.
2
Understand principles of
DGFEM solvers.
Implement 1D DGFEM 
solver to chrom model.
3
Understand state estimation
algorithms.
Implement state estimation
algorithms for 1D test case.
Implement state estimation
algorithms for 1D DGFEM.
4
Report writing and fixing
issues.
Figure B.1: Timetable and deadlines according to dates.
This paper was submitted, and is still awaiting review. Contrary to the pro-
jectplan, December month was not spent on investigating real life data, instead
it was spent on investigating the four nonlinear Kalman ﬁlters. Positive results
based on this work yet again led to the submission of the third and last paper:
State and Input Estimation of Nonlinear Chromatographic Processes. Likewise
this paper was submitted and is still awaiting review.
==PAGE:130==
116
Project Plan and Evaluation
==PAGE:131==
A p p e n d i x C
Paper I
A Discontinuous-Galerkin Finite-Element Method for Sim-
ulation of Packed Bed Chromatographic Processes
Authors: Alexander Hørsholt, Lasse Hjuler Christiansen, Kristian Meyer, Jakob
Kjøbstad Huusom, John Bagterp Jørgensen.
Submitted to: The 12th IFAC Symposium on Dynamics and Control of Pro-
cess Systems, including Biosystems (DYCOPS 2019).
==PAGE:132==
A Discontinuous-Galerkin
Finite-Element Method for Simulation of
Packed Bed Chromatographic Processes
A. Hørsholt ∗, L.H. Christiansen ∗, K. Meyer ∗∗,
J.K. Huusom ∗∗, J.B. Jørgensen ∗
∗Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
& Center for Energy Resources Engineering (CERE),
Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
(e-mails: {aho, lhch, jbo}@dtu.dk)
∗∗Process and Systems Engineering Centre (PROSYS),
Department of Chemical Engineering,
Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
(e-mails: {krismey, jkh}@kt.dtu.dk)
Abstract: Packed bed chromatography is an important unit operation for puriﬁcation of
product molecules in biopharmaceutical processes. Packed bed chromatographic processes
are modeled as advection-diﬀusion-reaction partial diﬀerential equations. The advection term
strongly dominates the diﬀusion term. Therefore, specialized numerical methods must be used
for eﬃcient simulation of packed bed chromatographic processes. In this paper, we use a
discontinuous-Galerkin method on ﬁnite-elements for spatial discretization and low storage
explicit Runge-Kutta (LSERK) methods for numerical solution of the resulting system of
diﬀerential equations. We study the numerical solution of deterministic and stochastic models of
packed bed chromatographic processes. The stochastic model and its corresponding numerical
solution constitute the ﬁrst step toward systematic monitoring, fault detection, and optimal
predictive control of chromatographic processes. It is also an essential ingredient in uncertainty
quantiﬁcation for eﬃcient and robust design and operation of chromatographic processes.
Keywords: Chromatography, Mathematical Modeling, Numerical Simulation, Biotechnology.
1. INTRODUCTION
Even though chromatography is a costly separation pro-
cess, it is extensively used in downstream biopharmaceu-
tical manufacturing (Hong et al., 2018). Consequently,
mathematical models for simulation, parameter estima-
tion, design, control, and optimization of chromatographic
processes are important. The modeling (Arkell et al.,
2018), simulation (Klatt et al., 2000; von Lieres and An-
dersson, 2010; He et al., 2018; Leweke and von Lieres,
2018; Borg et al., 2013), control (Klatt et al., 2002), and
optimization (P¨uttmann et al., 2013; Holmqvist and Mag-
nusson, 2016; Sellberg, 2018) of chromatographic processes
have been extensively studied. Observers for chromato-
graphic procseses have also been studied (Alamir and
Corriou, 2003; Corriou and Alamir, 2006; K¨upper and En-
gell, 2006; K¨upper et al., 2009; Lemoine-Nava and Engell,
2014). Also many processes such as adsorption possess
structural similarities to chromatography, such that the
numerical techniques for observers in such processes can
be transfered to chromatographic processes (Won and Lee,
2012). In this paper, we use high-order methods for eﬃ-
cient numerical simulation of the advection-diﬀusion par-
⋆This work is part of ”Model based energy eﬃcient control for the
process industries” that is funded by EUDP in the project 64017-
05136.
tial diﬀerential equation that models chromatographic pro-
cesses (Hesthaven and Warburton, 2008; Lord et al., 2014).
We apply this method to handle stochastic inlet boundary
conditions as a ﬁrst step toward extended and unscented
Kalman ﬁlters for chromatographic processes. Systematic
use of such ﬁlters allows for monitoring, prediciton and
fault detection of chromatographic processes. The special-
ized methods, that we use for simulation in this paper, are
also needed in the extended and unscented Kalman ﬁlters
for continuous-discrete systems.
1.1 Chromatographic Processes
Chromatography is widely used for separation of pep-
tides and proteins in biopharmaceutical processes (Gui-
chon et al., 2006). Analytically, chromatography is used
for separating mixtures into components in order to an-
alyze, identify, purify, quantify, and optimize proceses
(Holmqvist and Magnusson, 2016). In production scale, it
is used to isolate and purify the compound of interest. Fig.
1 illustrates a chromatographic column. In liquid column
chromatography a cylindrical column is packed with a
stationary porous material. A continuous ﬂow of liquid
with more components are sent to the inlet of the column
in a so-called mobile phase. As illustrated in Fig. 1, this
creates a ﬂow that moves through the column from the
left to the right. The injected liquid contains the mixture
==PAGE:133==
Component A
Component B
time [s]
concentration [g/L]
tinj
time [s]
concentration [g/L]
A
B
B
A
Convection
Diﬀusion
Polar silica beads (Stationary phase)
High Polarity        Low Polarity
Chromatographic Column
Mobile phase
Fig. 1. Conceptual diagram of packed bed chromato-
graphic separation column and the separation prin-
ciple.
of components. The physical and chemical properties of
each component lead to diﬀerent aﬃnities of the molecules
to the mobile and the stationary phase. This diﬀerence
is used to separate the molecules by having them move
along the column at diﬀerent speeds. Typically, a known
solute with a strong aﬃnity to the stationary phase is
injected to manipulate pH, polarity or another property
that inﬂuences the separation of the molecules of interest.
1.2 Motivation
The simulation of multicomponent chromatographic pro-
cesses under non-linear conditions and reaction kinetics
require fast and accurate numerical methods (Javeed et al.,
2011; He et al., 2018; Meyer et al., 2018). These pro-
cesses are typically described by parabolic, non-linear,
convection-dominated, coupled partial diﬀerential equa-
tions (Javeed et al., 2011). Due to the underlying physics,
these partial diﬀerential equations are advection domi-
nated such that discontinuities in the inputs produces
shocks on either side of the elution bands (Ma and Guio-
chon, 1992). These shocks challenge and cause diﬃculties
for many numerical methods based on ﬁnite-diﬀerence
or ﬁnite volume discretization. To mitigate this, we use
a high-order nodal discontinuous-Galerkin ﬁnite-element
(DG-FE) scheme as an accurate and cost eﬃcient simula-
tor (Meyer et al., 2018). We show the h- and p-adaptivity
of the scheme by increasing the number of elements for a
ﬁxed polynomial order or by increasing the polynomial
order for a ﬁxed number of elements (Hesthaven and
Warburton, 2008). This validates that the method has the
expected high order of accuracy.
Typically, the inlet consist of many complex molecules
that are produced by a fermentation in the upstream
biopharmaceutical manufacturing process. Often the inlet
concentration of these molelcules are not measured, and
the concentrations themselves may vary signiﬁcantly. This
signiﬁcant uncertainty in the inlet concentrations makes it
hard to predict the states of a chromatographic process.
Eﬃcient state estimators may mitigate this uncertainty
by using the available measurements at the outlet. Such
estimators require a stochastic model. In this paper, we
develop a deterministic model and use it with piecewise
constant stochastic inputs. This combination produces a
stochastic model that addresses the impact that highly
uncertain inlet concentrations have on the outlet concen-
trations. In a numerical case study, we simulate the deter-
ministic model using the DG-FE simulator with the inlet
concentrations being normally distributed and piecewise
constant. The results demonstrate the eﬀect that uncertain
inlet concentrations have on the simulated states at the
outlet and emphasize the need to mitigate this eﬀect by
eﬃcient state estimation. This case study also represents
a ﬁrst-step towards observers based on extended and un-
scented Kalman ﬁlter technology.
1.3 Paper Organization
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the
equilibrium dispersive model for chromatography that we
study in this paper. Section 3 describes the numerical
discretization of the model by the DG-FE method. Section
4 presents the numerical results and conclusions are made
in Section 5.
2. THE CHROMATOGRAPHIC MODEL
The literature contains a variety of models that describes
the behaviour of liquid chromatographic processes inside
a separation column. Well known models include the
equilibrium dispersive model, the lumped kinetic model,
and the general rate model (Guichon et al., 2006). These
models are non-linear, convection dominated partial diﬀer-
ential equations describing the interaction between chro-
matographic components inside a separation column, each
under varying assumptions. In this work, we consider
the equilibrium dispersive model (ED). The ED model is
derived on six fundamental assumptions (Qamar et al.,
2013): 1) The chromatographic process occurring in the
separation column is isothermal. 2) The column is radially
homogeneous. 3) The stationary phase of the column is
packed with a porous material of equally sized spherical
particles. 4) The mobile phase is incompressible. 5) The
mobile and stationary phase of each component do not
interact with each other. 6) There is axial dispersion in
the process, which causes band broadening of the concen-
tration proﬁles.
2.1 The Equilibrium Dispersive Model of Chromatography
The ED model is a partial diﬀerential equation of the form
(1a) and involves the concentrations of Nc components in
the mobile, ci, and stationary phase, qi. The transition
from mobile to stationary phase is modelled by an equi-
librium adsorption isotherm. In the literature, diﬀerent
boundary conditions exist to model almost any conﬁgu-
ration of the column (Guichon et al., 2006). A Danckwerts
boundary condition is used to model the inlet concentra-
tion proﬁle and a zero Neumann condition is given at the
outlet (Danckwerts, 1953). Given proper initial conditions,
the multi-component ED model is given as
∂ci
∂t + F ∂qi
∂t = Di
∂2ci
∂z2 −v ∂ci
∂z ,
in Ω× (0, T),
(1a)
vci −Di
∂ci
∂z = vci,in,
on {0} × (0, T),
(1b)
∂ci
∂z = 0,
on L × (0, T),
(1c)
ci = ci,0,
on Ω× {0},
(1d)
==PAGE:134==
for all i = 1, . . . , Nc, with total number of components Nc,
for a column Ω= (0, L).
The parameters of (1) is the phase ratio F = 1−ϵc
ϵc , total
porosity of the packing material ϵc, interstitial velocity
v of the ﬂuid and the ith dispersion coeﬃcient Di. The
dispersion coeﬃcient is related to the number of theoretical
plates Nt in the cylinder by Guichon et al. (2006) as
D =
Lv
2Nt .
The ith component is injected into the column with a
rectangular pulse of injection time tinj given as
ci,in =
ci,f,
0 ≤tinj ≤t,
0,
tinj < t,
(2)
with a feed concentration for the ith component ci,f.
2.2 The Equilibrium Isotherm
The equilibrium isotherm describes the distribution of a
component between the mobile and the stationary phase
in the porous media. This implies that in general qi is a
function qi = f(c1, c2, . . . , ci, . . . , cNc) depending on all the
components in the chromatographic column. Therefore f is
typically a non-linear function that couples the equations
in (1).
The competitive Langmuir adsorption isotherm describes
a non-linear interaction between components as (Guichon
et al., 2006)
qi =
aici
1 + PNc
s=1 bscs
.
(3)
The linear adsorption isotherm is given as
qi = aici.
(4)
For low concentrations the competition between compo-
nents become almost negligible and (3) typically simpliﬁes
to the linear isotherm (4).
2.3 First-Order Equations
To apply the discretization techniques of the DG-FE
method, equation (1a) is rewritten as two ﬁrst order
equations (Bassi and Rebay, 1997). Omitting the index
i and deﬁning the functions
f(c, g(c)) := vc −
√
Dg,
(5)
w(c) := c + Fq(c),
(6)
equation (1a) takes the form
∂w
∂t (c, q(c)) = −∂
∂z (f(c, g(c)),
(7a)
g(c) =
√
D ∂c
∂z .
(7b)
Solving the equations in (7) is then equivalent to solving
(1a).
3. DISCRETIZATION
The model equations (7) are solved using a method-
of-lines approach. This procedure allows for a separate
discretization of the spatial and temporal variables. The
spatial discretization uses a DG-FEM method (Meyer
et al., 2018). This discretization recovers a continuous-
time-discrete-space system. This semi-discrete system (27)
is discretized in time using a low storage, ﬁve stage, fourth
order explicit Runge-Kutta (LSERK) method (Hesthaven
and Warburton, 2008).
3.1 Spatial Discretization
Consider the spatial domain Ωand partition it into Ne
non-overlapping elements z ∈[zk
l , zk
r ] = Ωk, where zk
l
and zk
r refer to the left and right boundaries on Ωk. The
local solution is approximated on each element, Ωk, by a
polynomial of order N = Np −1 :

wk
h(z, t)
gk
h(z, t)

=
Np
X
n=1

ˆwk
n(t)
ˆgk
n(t)

ϕn(z) =
Np
X
i=1

wk
h(zk
i , t)
gk
h(zk
i , t)

lk
i (z).
(8)
Here the local solution (wk
h, gk
h) may be represented in a
modal, {ϕn}Np
n=1, or nodal, {lk
i }Np
i=1, basis. In this regard,
recall that the Lagrange polynomials, {lk
i }Np
i=1, satisfy the
interpolation property, lk
i (zj) = δij (The Kronecker delta
function). Given (8) on each of the Ne elements, the DG-
FEM method approximates the global solution, (w, g), by
the Nth order piecewise polynomials

w(z, t)
g(z, t)

≃

wh(z, t)
gh(z, t)

=
Ne
M
k=1

wk
h(z, t)
gk
h(z, t)

.
(9)
To determine the approximate solution, (wh, gh), the DG-
FEM method uses a Galerkin approach. To this end,
consider the element-wise, local residuals
z ∈Ωk : R(w),k = ∂wk
h
∂t + ∂f k
h
∂z ,
(10a)
R(g),k = gk
h −
√
D∂ck
h
∂z ,
(10b)
and deﬁne the approximation space of piecewise smooth
polynomials of order N = Np −1
VN
k := {v : vk ∈PN(Ωk), ∀Ωk ∈Ω},
(11)
The local, discrete Galerkin approximation to (7) then
becomes
Z
Ωk
R(w),k
h
ϕn(z) dz = 0,
(12a)
Z
Ωk
R(g),k
h
ϕn(z) dz = 0,
(12b)
where {ϕn}Np−1
n=1
is an appropriate basis for VN
k . To recover
a DG-FEM formulation, the system (12a) is recast to the
form (Meyer et al., 2018):
Z
Ωk
∂wk
h
∂t lk
j dz +
Z
Ωk
∂f k
h
∂z lk
j dz =
I
∂Ωk ˆn · (f k
h −f ∗)lk
j dz,
(13a)
1
√
D
Z
Ωk gk
hlk
j dz +
I
∂Ωk ˆn · (ck
h −c∗)lk
j dz =
Z
Ωk
∂ck
h
∂z lk
j dz.
(13b)
Here c∗(c−, c+) and f ∗(c−, c+, g−, g+) denote appropriate
numerical ﬂuxes, where (-) and (+) refer to interior and
exterior interface states of each element, Ωk. Further, ∂Ωk
denotes the edges of the kth element and ˆn = (−1, 1)T is
the outward pointing unit normal.
==PAGE:135==
3.2 Construction of orthonormal basis functions - {ϕn}Np−1
n=1
Consider the aﬃne mapping z : [−1, 1] →Ωk given by
z(ξ) = zk
l + 1 + ξ
2
∆z,
(14)
where ∆z = ∆zk = zk
r −zk
l is the equidistant length of
the elements, Ωk. The orthonormal basis functions, ϕn, are
then chosen as the normalized Legendre polynomials
ϕn(ξ) = ˜Pn−1(ξ) =
1
q
2
2n+1
Pn−1(ξ),
(15)
where Pn−1 are the usual Legendre polynomials. By the
map (15), the local, approximate solution is now repre-
sented by basis functions deﬁned on the reference ele-
ment, I. Further, by using the Legendre-Gauss-Lobatto
quadrature points on I, the Legendre Vandermonde ma-
trix, V ∈RNp×Np, is well conditioned (Hesthaven and
Warburton, 2008). This implies that the the local, element-
wise Galerkin operators are given by
Mk = ∆zk
2
Z 1
−1
lk
i (ξ)lk
j (ξ) dξ = ∆zk
2 M,
(16a)
Sk =
Z 1
−1
lk
i (ξ)dlk
j
dξ (ξ) dξ = MDξ,
(16b)
where M = (VVT )−1. The diﬀerentiation matrix is com-
puted by Dξ = VξV−1, where Vξ,(i,j) =
d ˜
Pj
dξ

ξi is the
gradient of the Vandermonde matrix. Note that the aﬃne
mapping allows for exact evaluation of the integrals (16)
without the use of quadrature rules (Hesthaven and War-
burton, 2008). Now, by substitution of the nodal expansion
(8) and the operators (16) into (13), the semi-discrete form
becomes
Mk ∂wk
h
∂t + Skf k
h = E

ˆn · (f k
h −f ∗)
zk
r
zk
l ,
(17a)
Mkgk
h =
√
DSkck
h −
√
DE

ˆn · (ck
h −c∗)
zk
r
zk
l .
(17b)
Here the local operator E extracts the surface term and
E = (e1, eNp), where ei is a Np size vector with value 1 at
position i. The ﬁnal semi-discrete form is recovered from
(17)
∂wk
h
∂t
= −2
∆z Dξhk
h + 2
∆z L

ˆn · (f k
h −f ∗)
zk
r
zk
l ,
(18a)
gk
h = 2
√
D
∆z Dξck
h −2
√
D
∆z L

ˆn · (ck
h −c∗)
zk
r
zk
l ,
(18b)
where (wk
h, gk
h, f k
h) ∈RNp is the nodal coeﬃcients on each
element, Ωk, and L := Mk−1E is the lifting matrix.
3.3 Numerical Flux Functions
To capture the physical phenomena of the model (1), the
following speciﬁes appropriate numerical ﬂuxes, (c∗, g∗, f ∗).
The ﬂuxes may be approximated by a variety of options
(Javeed et al., 2011). The following choices are based on
considerations presented in Meyer et al. (2018). Given the
diﬀusive nature of band broadening, c∗is approximated
on all element boundaries by a central ﬂux
c∗= c−+ c+
2
.
(19)
The ﬁeld diﬀerences on each element interface are then
ˆn · (ck
h −c∗) = ˆn · (c−−c+).
(20)
Given the deﬁnition of f in (5), it is reasonable to consider
f ∗as the sum of a convective and diﬀusive term
f ∗= f ∗
conv(c−, c+) + f ∗
diﬀ(g−, g+).
(21)
The convective term is approximated by an upwind ﬂux
and the diﬀusive term by a central ﬂux on all interfaces,
except at the left boundary
f ∗= v
2(c−+ c+ + ˆn · (c−+ c+)) +
√
Dg−+ g+
2
.
(22)
The ﬁeld diﬀerences on each element interface, excluding
the left boundary, is given by
ˆn · (f k
h −f ∗) = ˆn ·

v(c−−c+) −
√
D(g−−g+)

2
−v(c−−c+)
2
.
(23)
On the remaining left most interface, the ﬂux is speciﬁed
as a central ﬂux to ease the implementation of the Robin
boundary condition, thereby giving rise to the ﬁeld diﬀer-
ence
ˆn · (f k
h −f ∗) = ˆn · (f −−f +).
(24)
3.4 Imposing the Boundary Conditions
The DG-FEM method allows for a practical implementa-
tion of the boundary conditions, which is done weakly by
deﬁning the exterior ghost states (c+, g+) at the left and
right most boundary of Ω. The Robin boundary condition
(1b) at the inlet is implemented by requiring that
c+
h = c−
h ,
f +
h = −f −
h + 2vci,in.
(25)
Similarly, the Neumann condition (1c) at the outlet is
enforced by the requirement that
c+
h = c−
h ,
g+
h = −g−
h .
(26)
3.5 Forward Time Integration
To advance the semi-discrete form (18) in time, the DG-
FEM approach uses the chain-rule on ∂qi
∂t in (1a) to obtain
∂ck
∂t =

I + F ∂qk
∂ck
−1 ∂wk
∂t .
(27)
Now, ck and wk correspond to row vectors in RNpNc that
contain the stacked nodal values (ck
h, wk
h) for each compo-
nent i on each element. ∂qk
∂ck is the Jacobian in RNpNc×NpNc
of the associated equilibrium isotherm evaluated in the
corresponding nodal values of ck as diagonals in the Ja-
cobian. I is the identity matrix. The right hand side is
evaluated at every element Ωk for every component i to
produce a set of ODEs that are solved using an LSERK
method.
4. NUMERICAL CASE STUDY
To demonstrate the capabilities of the DG-FE method,
the following considers two case studies. To verify the DG-
FEM scheme, the ﬁrst study performs a convergence test
for the linear isotherm (4) that compares the error between
the known solution given by van Genuchten (1981) and the
==PAGE:136==
Table 1. Simulation parameters for linear case
study.
Parameters
Symbol
Value
Metric
Column Length
L
1
[cm]
Porosity
ϵ
0.5
-
Interstitial velocity
v
1
[cm/min]
Theoretical plates
Nt
300
-
Henry’s constant
a
1
-
Initial concentration
c0
0
g/L
Feed concentration
cf
1
g/L
102
Degrees of Freedom (Np × Ne)
10-15
10-10
10-5
||u-utrue||2
h-p Convergence test
h-refinement P = 1
h-refinement P = 2
h-refinement P = 3
h-refinement P = 4
h-refinement P = 5
p-refinement Ne = 10
Fig. 2. h- and p- adaptivity of the one component, linear
isotherm problem.
computed DG-FEM solution. To represent the inherent
uncertainty of the chromatographic process, the second
study performs a stochastic simulation of the non-linear
Langmuir isotherm with a piecewise normally distributed
inlet concentration noise and a noisy initial concentration.
4.1 Case I: One component, linear isotherm
This case study demonstrates numerical convergence of
the DG-FEM scheme by verifying the h\p-adaptivity of
the error, which is deﬁned by the diﬀerence between
the numerical and analytical solution, i.e., ea = c −ca.
Table 1 lists the simulation parameters. The injection is
a rectangular pulse of cf = 1 of time tinj = 1. The ﬁnal
simulation time is tf = 4.
The error is measured in the L2(Ω) norm as
||ea||Ω,h =
Ne
X
k=1
||ea||Ωk =
Ne
X
k=1
r
(eka)T ∆zk
2 Meka,
(28)
which is similar to the standard 2-norm. Figure 2 com-
pares the results of h- and p- adaptivity. These are two
complementary reﬁnement techniques. In h-adaptivity, the
polynomial order, N, is constant and the mesh is adjusted.
In p-adaptivity, Ne is kept constant while the polynomial
order is increased on each element. In particular, p- adap-
tivity proves superior to h- adaptivity in terms of DOFs
and accuracy.
4.2 Case II: Two components, stochastic, non-linear isotherm
This case study investigates the eﬀect of introducing
process noise on the inlet concentration of the column.
The inlet concentration ci,f is perturbed
c∆w
i,in =
ci,f + ∆w,
0 ≤tinj ≤t,
∆wc,
tinj < t,
(29)
Table 2. Simulation parameters for the non-
linear, stochastic case study. The uncertain
initial states in the column are sampled as
∆v ∼N(0, 1) for positively constrained noises
∆vc
1 and ∆vc
2 .
Parameters
Symbol
Value
Metric
Column Length
L
1
cm
Porosity
ϵ
0.4
-
Interstitial velocity
v
0.1
cm/min
Theoretical plates
Nt
3000
-
Henry’s constant
a1, a2
0.05, 10
-
Constants
b1, b2
0.005, 1
L/mol
Initial concentration
c∆v
1,0, c∆v
2,0
∆vc
1, ∆vc
2
g/L
Feed concentration
c1,f, c2,f
10, 10
g/L
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
5
10
15
20
Inlet CA
CA,in
CA,in
∆w
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
5
10
15
20
Outlet CA
CA,out
CA,out
∆w
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
5
10
15
20
Inlet CB
CB,in
CB,in
∆w
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
5
10
15
20
Outlet CB
t21
t23
CB,out
CB,out
∆w
Concentration [g/L]
Time [s]
Fig. 3. Comparison of inlet and outlet concentrations
(c1, c2) for the deterministic and stochastic model.
Table 3. The RMSE calculated between deter-
ministic and stochastic band proﬁle at diﬀerent
times tj.
RMSE
t1
t5
t7
t12
t15
t20
t23
c1
14.32
10.38
7.94
1.34
2.36
8.83
13.65
c2
12.45
17.09
20.41
27.47
32.70
41.27
10.18
and the piecewise noise is sampled from ∆w ∼N(0, 1),
where ∆wc = ∆w > 0. Table 2 lists the simulation
parameters. The injection proﬁles are noisy, rectangular
pulses of time tinj = 12 with ﬁnal simulation time tf =
50. Figure 3 compares the noisy, inlet concentrations
of component 1 and 2 with the respective, predicted
states at the outlet. Compared to the deterministic case,
the stochastic model results show a signiﬁcant variation
in the predicted states at the column outlet. Table 3
displays the RMSE values that are calculated based on the
deterministic and stochastic band proﬁles for times tj. As
Table 3 shows, the stochastic band proﬁle for c1 indicates
a varying deviation. The stochastic band proﬁle for c2
shows large variations until t = 23, before it collapses and
dissipates complementary to the deterministic prediction.
In particular, a large gap between both simulations for c2
occurs at t21 to t23. As a result, the area A∆w
c2,out and Ac2,out
is 7.75 × 104 and 3.73 × 104 deviates signiﬁcantly.
==PAGE:137==
5. CONCLUSION
This paper presents a high-order DG-FE method for ef-
ﬁcient and accurate simulation of chromatographic pro-
cesses that can be described by the ED model. This is mo-
tivated by the observation that high-order methods should
be considered when simulating convection-dominated non-
linear partial diﬀerential equations such as (1). As the
main contribution, this paper considers the eﬀects of un-
certainties in the inlet concentrations. The stochastic simu-
lation demonstrates signiﬁcant deviations between the de-
terministic and stochastic states and outlet concentrations.
The stochastic chromatographic simulation model is a ﬁrst
step towards observers based on extended and unscented
Kalman ﬁlter technology.
REFERENCES
Alamir, M. and Corriou, J.P. (2003). Nonlinear receding-
horizon
state
estimation
for
dispersive
adsorption
columns with nonlinear isotherm.
Journal of Process
Control, 13, 517–523.
Arkell, K., Breil, M.P., Frederiksen, S.S., and Nilsson, B.
(2018).
Mechanistic modeling of reversed-phase chro-
matography of insulins within the temperature range
10-40◦C. ACS Omega, 3, 1946–1954.
Bassi, F. and Rebay, S. (1997). A high-order accurate dis-
continuous ﬁnite element method for numerical solution
of the compressible navier-stokes equations. Journal of
Computational Physics, 131(2).
Borg, N., Westerberg, K., Andersson, N., von Lieres, E.,
and Nilsson, B. (2013). Eﬀects of uncertainties in experi-
mental conditions on the estimation of adsorption model
parameters in preparative chromatography. Computers
& Chemical Engineering, 55, 148–157.
Corriou, J.P. and Alamir, M. (2006). A hybrid nonlinear
state observer for concentration proﬁles reconstruction
in nonlinear simulated moving bed. Journal of Process
Control, 16, 345–353.
Danckwerts, P. (1953). Continuous ﬂow systems. distribu-
tion of residence times. Chemical Engineering Science,
2, 1–13.
Guichon, G., Felinger, A., Shirazi, D., and Katti, A.
(2006).
Fundamentals of Preparative and Nonlinear
Chromatography. Elsevier, 2nd ed edition.
He, Q.L., Leweke, S., and von Lieres, E. (2018).
Ef-
ﬁcient numerical simulation of simulated moving bed
chromatography with a single-column solver. Computers
& Chemical Engineering, 111, 183–198.
Hesthaven, J. and Warburton, T. (2008). Discontinuous
nodal Galerkin methods algorithms analysis and appli-
cations. Springer.
Holmqvist, A. and Magnusson, F. (2016).
Open-loop
optimal control of batch chromatographic separation
processes using direct collocation.
Journal of Process
Control, 46, 55–74.
Hong, M.S., Severson, K.A., Jiang, M., Lu, A.E., Love,
J.C., and Braatz, R.D. (2018).
Challenges and op-
portunities in biopharmaceutical manufacturing control.
Computers & Chemical Engineering, 110, 106–114.
Javeed, S., Shamsul, Q., Andreas, S., and Warnecke, G.
(2011).
A discontinuous Galerkin method to solve
chromatographic models.
Journal of Chromatography
A, 1218(40), 7137 – 7146.
Klatt, K.U., D¨unnebier, G., and Engell, S. (2000). Mod-
eling and computational eﬃcient simulation of chro-
matographic separation processes.
Mathematics and
Computers in Simulation, 53, 449–455.
Klatt, K.U., Hanish, F., and D¨unnebier, G. (2002). Model-
based control of a simulated moving bed chromato-
graphic process for the separation of fructose and glu-
cose. Journal of Process Control, 12, 203–219.
K¨upper, A., Diehl, M., Schl¨oder, J.P., Bock, H.G., and
Engell, S. (2009).
Eﬃcient moving horizon state and
parameter estimation for SMB processes.
Journal of
Process Control, 19, 785–802.
K¨upper, A. and Engell, S. (2006). Parameter and state
estimation in chromatographic SMB processes with in-
dividual columns and nonlinear adsorption isotherms.
In International Symposium on Advanced Control of
Chemical Processes (ADCHEM), 611–616. Gramado,
Brazil.
Lemoine-Nava, R. and Engell, S. (2014). Individual col-
umn state and parameter estimation in the simulated
moving bed process: an optimization-based method. In
Proceedings of the 19th IFAC World Congress, 9376–
9381. Cape Town, South Africa.
Leweke, S. and von Lieres, E. (2018). Chromatography
Analysis and Design Toolkit (CADET). Computers &
Chemical Engineering, 113, 274–294.
Lord, G.J., Powell, C.E., and Shardlow, T. (2014).
An
Introduction to Computational Stochastic PDEs. Cam-
bridge University Press, New York, NY, USA.
Ma, Z. and Guiochon, G. (1992). Shock layer thickness in
the case of wide bands of single components and binary
mixtures in non-linear liquid chromatography. Journal
of Chromatography A, 609(1), 19 – 33.
Meyer, K., Huusom, J.K., and Abildskov, J. (2018). High-
order approximation of chromatographic models using
a nodal discontinuous Galerkin approach. Computers &
Chemical Engineering, 109, 68 – 76.
P¨uttmann, A., Schnittert, S., Naumann, U., and von
Lieres, E. (2013).
Fast and accurate parameter sen-
sitivities for the general rate model of column liquid
chromatography. Computers & Chemical Engineering,
56, 46–57.
Qamar, S., Abbasi, J.N., Javeed, S., Shah, M., Khan, F.U.,
and Seidel-Morgenstern, A. (2013). Analytical solutions
and moment analysis of chromatographic models for
rectangular pulse injections. Journal of Chromatography
A, 1315, 92 – 106.
Sellberg, A. (2018). Open-Loop Optimal Control of Chro-
matographic Separation Processes. Ph.D. thesis, Depart-
ment of Chemical Engineering, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden.
van Genuchten, M.T. (1981).
Analytical solutions for
chemical transport with simultaneous adsorption, zero-
order production and ﬁrst-order decay.
Journal of
Hydrology, 49(3), 213 – 233.
von Lieres, E. and Andersson, J. (2010). A fast and accu-
rate solver for the gerenal rate model of column liquid
chromatography. Computers & Chemical Engineering,
34, 1180–1191.
Won, W. and Lee, K.S. (2012). Nonlinear observer with
adaptive grid allocation for a ﬁxed-bed adsorption pro-
cess. Computers & Chemical Engineering, 46, 69–77.
==PAGE:138==
124
Paper I
==PAGE:139==
A p p e n d i x D
Paper II
Spatial Discretization and Kalman Filtering for Ideal Packed-
Bed Chromatography
Authors: Alexander Hørsholt, Lasse Hjuler Christiansen, Kristian Meyer, Jakob
Kjøbstad Huusom, John Bagterp Jørgensen.
Submitted to: The 17th European Control Conference (ECC19).
==PAGE:140==
Spatial Discretization and Kalman Filtering
for Ideal Packed-Bed Chromatography
Alexander Hørsholt, Lasse Hjuler Christiansen, Kristian Meyer, Jakob Kjøbsted Huusom, John Bagterp Jørgensen
Abstract— Packed-bed
chromatography
is
ubiquitous
in
pharmaceutical and biotechnological manufacturing for sep-
aration of peptides, proteins, and antibiotic molecules. We
investigate a mathematical model for ideal chromatography in
a packed bed. The partial differential equation system that
constitutes the model is linear. We discretized the mathematical
model spatially using a ﬁrst-order, ﬁnite-volume (FV) method
as well as a high-order, discontinuous-Galerkin ﬁnite-element
(DG-FE) method. We use an exact temporal discretization of
the resulting system of linear equations. For the same accuracy,
the DG-FE method requires far less states than the FV method.
We use the resulting discrete-time, state-space model for state
estimation of the packed-bed chromatographic model using a
Kalman ﬁlter. By simulation, we illustrate the applications of
the resulting state estimator in a monitoring and prediction
system for packed-bed chromatography.
I. INTRODUCTION
Column liquid chromatography is an important and widely
used unit operation for downstream processing in the bio-
pharmaceutical industry [1]. With a global biopharmaceutical
market predicted to be 167 billion US Dollars by 2015
[2], the potential mathematical modeling, parameter estima-
tion, control and optimization can have on chromatographic
processes is therefore becoming increasingly signiﬁcant.
Deterministic modeling [3], parameter estimation [4], [5],
optimization and control [6] of chromatographic processes
have been extensively studied. However, for chromatographic
processes there are a number of challenges. Experimental
applications typically contain uncertain inlet concentrations
or parameters [7]. Measurements of the inlet concentrations
are seldomly possible. Information of the process is therefore
limited to the measurements taken at the outlet, which only
begin to become available after the process has begun and
are typically corrupted by measurement noise [8]. A high
workload is often associated with an experimental setup of a
chromatographic process [9] and while modeling provides
a technique for reducing experimental effort, it becomes
necessary to address the inherent uncertainties in the process.
The purpose of state estimation is to reconstruct the state
of a system from process measurements given a model de-
scription. State estimation is ubiquitous in non-linear model
predictive control and as an estimator in monitoring and
*A. Hørsholt, Lasse Hjuler Christiansen and J. B. Jørgensen are with the
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark. K. Meyer and J.K.
Huusom are with Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering,
Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby. Corresponding
author: J. B. Jørgensen (E-mail: jbjo@dtu.dk)
prediction of chemical processes [10]. Given a physical
model describing the chromatographic process, state estima-
tion provides a way to mitigate the inherent uncertainties.
In this paper, we develop a linear-time, state-space model
based on a ﬁrst-order, ﬁnite-volume (FV) and a high-order,
discontinuous-Galerkin ﬁnite-element (DG-FE) method [11],
[12] for computationally efﬁcient numerical simulation of the
advection-diffusion partial differential equation that models
the chromatographic process [13]. We present a stochas-
tic, linear-time, state-space model with piecewise noise to
model a stochastic inlet boundary condition. We develop a
disturbance model to model the unknown input concentra-
tion and present a Kalman ﬁlter to estimate the unknown
inlet concentration and states simultaneously based on noisy
concentration measurements at the outlet.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II presents
the Equilibrium Dispersive (ED) model of chromatography,
we study in this paper. Section III describes the numerical
discretization of the model by the FV and DG-FE method.
Section IV presents the stochastic, time-linear state-space
model and describes the Kalman ﬁlter. Section V presents
the numerical results and conclusions are made in Section
VI.
II. MATHEMATICAL MODEL FOR CHROMATOGRAPHY
Fig. 1 illustrates the principles of molecular separation
using chromatography. In this section, we present a math-
ematical model for a packed-bed chromatographic column.
The key assumption in this model is that the stationary and
mobile phase of the column is in equilibrium and that this
equilibrium is ideal.
A. The Equilibrium Dispersive Model
The Equilibrium Dispersive (ED) Model is a convection-
dominated, non-linear partial differential equation of the
form (1) and governs the ﬂow of Nc components in the
mobile, ci, and stationary, qi, phases. The ED model is based
on six fundamental assumptions: 1) The chromatographic
process is isothermal and the transition from mobile to
stationary phase is modeled by an equilibrium isotherm
with instantaneous reaction kinetics. 2) The mobile phase is
incompressible. 3) There is axial dispersion in the column,
which causes band broadening. 4) The stationary phase
is packed with a porous material of equidistant spherical
particles. 5) The column is radially homogeneous. 6) The
mobile and stationary phase of each component do not
==PAGE:141==
Component A
Component B
time [s]
concentration [g/L]
tinj
time [s]
concentration [g/L]
A
B
B
A
Convection
Diﬀusion
Polar silica beads (Stationary phase)
High Polarity        Low Polarity
Chromatographic Column
Mobile phase
Fig. 1: Diagram of a column for packed-bed chromatography
and the mechanism used for separation of molecular compo-
nents.
interact. The ED model is derived in [14].
Under these six assumptions the multi-component ﬂow
inside the column Ω= (0, L) of length L > 0 is governed
by the convection-dominated, non-linear partial differential
equation
∂¯ci(t, z)
∂t
= −∂¯Ni(t, z)
∂z
,
(1)
where ¯ci is the total concentration inhabiting the porous
media
¯ci(t, z) = εci(t, z) + (1 −ε)qi(t, z).
(2)
The porosity of the packing material is denoted ε. The ﬂow
through the porous media is
¯Ni(t, z) = εNi(t, z).
(3)
The ﬂow in the column is assumed to be a combination of
a convective ﬂow, vci, and dispersive ﬂow (diffusion), Ji:
Ni(t, z) = vci(t, z) + Ji(t, z),
(4)
where v is the interstitial velocity of the ﬂuid. The dispersive
ﬂow is governed by Fick’s law
Ji(t, z) = −Di
∂ci(t, z)
∂z
,
(5)
where Di is the ith dispersion coefﬁcient. The dispersion
coefﬁcient is related to the number of theoretical plates, Nt,
in the column as Di =
Lv
2Nt [14]. The ith component is
injected into the column as a rectangular pulse
cin,i(t) =





0,
t < t1,
cf,i,
t1 ≤t ≤t2,
0,
t2 < t,
(6)
with feed concentration cf,i and injection time tinj = t2 −t1.
The inlet concentration is modeled by Danckwert’s boundary
condition and a zero Neumann condition at the outlet [15]
Ni(t, 0) = vcin,i(t),
(7a)
Ni(t, L) = vci(t, L).
(7b)
The initial condition of ith component is the initial concen-
tration
ci(0, z) = c0,i(z).
(8)
In dilute concentrations the competition between components
become negligible and the equilibrium relation may be
described by a linear adsorption isotherm
Ki = qi
ci
.
(9)
B. Linear Equillibrium Dispersive Model
The ED model (1) reduces to a linear partial differential
equation for the linear equilibrium isotherm (9) as

1 + 1 −ε
ε
Ki
 ∂ci(t, z)
∂t
= −∂Ni(t, z)
∂z
,
(10)
under the same boundary (7) and initial (8) conditions.
Remark 1: The linear model (10) often appears in the
form [16]
∂tci(t, z) = ai∂zci(t, z) + bi∂2
zzci(t, z),
(11)
explicitly in terms of the concentration ci and would typically
be discretized and solved by a ﬁnite-difference scheme [17].
However, the formulation in (1) is more intuitive, since it
incorporates the physical behavior of the system and provides
an easy implementation of conservation based numerical
schemes, such as the FV and DG-FE method.
III. NUMERICAL METHODS
The model equations are discretized using two approaches:
1) A ﬁrst-order accurate, ﬁnite-volume (FV) discretization
and 2) a high-order accurate, nodal discontinuous-Galerkin
ﬁnite-element (DG-FE) method [11], [12]. This discretization
leads to a linear, continuous-time, discrete-state formulation,
which may solved by an exact temporal discretization to
recover a discrete-time, state-space model.
A. Finite-Volume Spatial Discretization
The FV method partitions the domain Ωinto a set of Nz
ﬁnite control volumes Vj =
h
zj−1
2 , zj+ 1
2
i
with center j. The
faces of the ﬁnite volumes are located at zi+ 1
2 = (i + 1
2 −
1
2)∆z = j∆z and uniform width ∆z = zj+ 1
2 −zj−1
2 with
length L = Nz∆z. The ith ﬂux-term (1) is approximated by
a volume average over each cell index as

1 + 1 −ε
ε
Ki
 dci,j
dt
= −Ni,j+1/2 −Ni,j−1/2
∆z
.
(12)
The ith ﬂux Ni over each Vj is
Ni,1/2 = vcin,i,
j = 0,
(13a)
Ni,j+1/2 = vci,j + Ji,j+1/2,
j ∈[1, Nz−1] ,
(13b)
Ni,Nz+1/2 = vci,Nz,
j = Nz,
(13c)
which allows for a practical implementation of the boundary
conditions (7) by imposing them directly in terms of the ﬂux.
Fick’s law is discretized by a ﬁrst-order, forward stencil
Ji,j+1/2 = −Di
ci,j+1 −ci,j
∆z
.
(14)
==PAGE:142==
V1
V2
V3
VNe-1 VNe
zl
1=0
zr
Ne-1=zl
Ne
  zl
Ne-1
  zr
3
zr
2=zl
3
zr
1=zl
2
zr
Ne=L
V1
V2
V3
VNz
. . .
1/2
3/2
5/2
7/2
Nz-1/2
Nz+1/2
vCi,in
vCi,Nz
Fig. 2: Top: Finite volume partitioning of Ω. Bottom: DG-FE
partitioning of Ω.
The system may then be recast as a continuous-time,
discrete-space model in (26).
B. Discontinuous-Galerkin Finite-Element Discretization
Consider the spatial domain Ωand partition it into Ne
non-overlapping elements Vk =

zk
l , zk
r

, where zk
l
and
zk
r refers to the left and right boundary node of the kth
element. The local solution on each element is approximated
by an orthonormal Legendre polynomial of order P
=
Np −1 on a Legendre-Gauss-Lobatto grid [13]. The local
solution is represented in a nodal basis {ℓk
i }Np
i=1, where
the Lagrange polynomials {ℓk
i }Np
i=1 satisfy the interpolation
property ℓk
i (zj) = δij (The Kronecker delta function). The
index i is suppressed in the following for convenience of
notation.
Deﬁne g :=
√
D ∂c
∂z and f := vc −
√
Dg. The model (1)
may be recast as
1
ϵ
∂¯c(t, z)
∂t
= −∂f(t, z)
∂z
,
(15a)
g(t, z) =
√
D∂c(t, z)
∂z
.
(15b)
The local, discrete Galerkin approximation is formed by
multiplying (15) with a test-function ℓk
j belonging to the
approximation space of piecewise smooth polynomials
VN
k := {v : vk ∈PN(Vk), ∀Vk ∈Ω},
(16)
and applying Gauss’ Theorem twice. This recovers the
strong, local formulation of the problem (1)
1
ϵ
Z
Vk
∂¯c
∂t ℓk
j dz +
Z
Vk
∂f k
h
∂z ℓk
j dz =

ℓk
j (f k
h −f ∗)
zk
r
zk
l ,
(17a)
Z
Vk
gk
hℓk
j dz +
√
D

ℓk
j (ck
h −c∗)
zk
r
zk
l =
√
D
Z
Vk
∂ck
h
∂z ℓk
j dz,
(17b)
as shown in [11], [12]. The local, strong form (17) is recast
in a semi-discrete form
Mk 1
ε
∂¯ck
h
∂t + Skf k
h =

ℓk
j (f k
h −f ∗)
zk
r
zk
l ,
(18a)
Mkgk
h =
√
DSkck
h −
√
D

ℓk
j (ck
h −c∗)
zk
r
zk
l .
(18b)
Deﬁne the afﬁne transformation
z(r) := zk
l + 1 + r
2
∆z,
(19)
which maps from the Legendre-Gauss-Lobatto grid to phys-
ical space Ωwith equidistant spacing ∆z = zk
r −zk
l . The
integrals in (18) are then approximated by the following
local operators Mk and Sk [13]. The local operators is
the mass matrix Mk := J k  VVT −1 and stiffness matrix
Sk := MDr. The Vandermonde matrix V contains the
orthonormal Legendre basis, and J k is the Jacobian of the
afﬁne map, when transforming the integrals in (17). The
differentiation matrix is deﬁned as Dr := VrV−1, where
Vr is the Vandermonde gradient.
The ﬂuxes are approximated to capture the physical phe-
nomena of the model (1). The notation (−, +) refers to the
interior and exterior of an element [13]. A central ﬂux is
used to approximate
c∗= c−+ c+
2
, k = 1, . . . , Ne.
(20)
on all faces. Given the nature of (4), a sum of convective
and diffusive ﬂux is used to approximate
f ∗= f ∗
conv(c−, c+) + f ∗
diff(g−, g+), k = 2, . . . , Ne,
(21)
= v
2
 c−+ c+ + ˆn ·
 c−+ c+
+
√
D
2
 g−+ g+
,
on all faces, where ˆn is the unit normal. A central ﬂux is
used to approximate
f ∗= f ∗
diff = f −+ f +
2
, k = 1,
(22)
to ease the implementation of the Robin boundary condition
on the leftward face.
The boundary conditions are enforced weakly by deﬁning
exterior ghost states (c+, g+) at the left and right boundary
of Ω. The Robin condition (7a) at the inlet is implemented
by requiring that
c+
h = c−
h ,
f +
h = −f −
h + 2vcin,i.
(23)
The Neumann condition (7b) at the outlet is enforced by
requiring
c+
h = c−
h ,
g+
h = −g−
h .
(24)
Remark 2: The DG-FE formulation in (18) may be assem-
bled in a global form, which leads to the desired continuous-
time, discrete-space formulation as in (26). However, for
any practical application an efﬁcient local implentation [11]
should be considered due to the higher level of redundancy
in the global operators.
C. Temporal Discretization
Let Ts be the sampling time and tk = t0 + kTs for
k ≥0. Then xk = x(tk) = x(t0 + kTs). The input u(t)
is parameterized as a zero-order-hold
u(t) = uk,
tk ≤t ≤tk+1,
k = 0, 1, . . . , N −1.
(25)
The continuous-time representation,
˙x(t) = Acx(t) + Bcu(t),
(26)
==PAGE:143==
is then converted to a discrete-time representation,
xk+1 = Axk + Buk.
(27)
The matrices A and B may be computed ofﬂine using the
matrix exponential function for the expression

A
B
0
I

= exp

Ac
Bc
0
0

Ts

.
(28)
IV. KALMAN FILTERING
The following introduces the stochastic, time-linear, state-
space model. The dynamic and stationary Kalman state
estimation ﬁlters associated to the state-space model are pre-
sented. Given a linear-time, state-space model the stationary
Kalman ﬁlter is the best linear estimator and several of the
matrices are considered static and may be precomputed [18].
A. Stochastic Linear State Space Model
The linear discrete-time stochastic system is
xk+1 = Axk + Buk + Gwk,
(29a)
zk = Cxk,
(29b)
yk = zk + vk.
(29c)
This corresponds to conversion from a continuous-time rep-
resentation to an equivalent discrete-time representation. The
initial state, x0, process, wk, and measurement noise, vk, are
normally distributed as
x0 ∼N(¯x0, P0),
(30a)
wk ∼Niid(0, Q), vk ∼Niid(0, R),
(30b)
with covariances P0, Q and R.
B. Dynamic Kalman Filter
Given that the mean and covariance of the initial state
(30a) are known. The dynamical Kalman ﬁlter equations may
be stated as follows. The one-step ahead prediction of the
state and its covariance are computed as
ˆxk|k−1 = Aˆxk−1|k−1 + Buk−1,
(31a)
Pk|k−1 = APk−1|k−1A′ + GQG′.
(31b)
The one-step ahead prediction of the measurement is com-
puted as
ˆyk|k−1 = Cˆxk|k−1.
(32)
The innovation, ek, is obtained as
ek = yk −ˆyk|k−1,
(33a)
Re,k = CPk|k−1C′ + R,
(33b)
and the state ﬁlter gain is computed by the expression
Kfx,k = Pk|k−1C′R−1
e,k.
(34)
The ﬁltered state, ˆxk|k, and its covariance, Pk|k, are com-
puted as
ˆxk|k = ˆxk|k−1 + Kfx,kek,
(35a)
Pk|k = Pk|k−1 −Kfx,kRe,kK′
fx,k.
(35b)
Remark 3: To ensure that the covariance, Pk|k, is positive
semideﬁnite (35b) is rewritten as
Pk|k = (I −Kfx,kC)Pk|k−1(I −Kfx,kC)′
+ Kfx,kRK′
fx,k,
(36)
since Pk|k−1 and R are positive semideﬁnite.
C. Stationary Kalman Filter
The stationary Kalman ﬁlter is a computationally more
attractive alternative to the dynamic, since the matrices may
be precomputed ofﬂine and it provides the best state-estimate
for linear systems.
The covariance, P, is obtained by solving the discrete
algebraic Ricatti equation
P = APA′ + GQG′ −(APC′)(CPC′ + R)−1(APC′)′,
(37)
which is used to compute the stationary state and the ﬁlter
gains
Re = CPC′ + R,
(38a)
Kfx = PC′R−1
e .
(38b)
The innovation, ek, and ﬁltered state, ˆxk|k, are computed as
ˆxk|k−1 = Aˆxk−1|k−1 + Buk−1,
(39a)
ˆyk|k−1 = Cˆxk|k−1,
(39b)
ek = yk −ˆyk|k−1,
(39c)
ˆxk|k = ˆxk|k−1 + Kfxek.
(39d)
The covariance, Pk|k, is computed as
Pk|k = (I −KfxC)P(I −KfxC)′ + KfxRK′
fx.
(40)
D. Prediction
In the linear-time case the states are predicted as
ˆxk+1+j|k = Aˆxk+j|k + Bˆuk+j|k, j > 0,
(41a)
Pk+1+j|k = APk+j|kA′ + GQG′.
(41b)
The output prediction is
ˆzk+j|k = Cˆxk+j|k,
j > 0,
(42a)
Rz,k+j|k = CPk+j|kC′.
(42b)
E. Disturbance Modeling
In presence of an unmeasured disturbance, a disturbance
model is necessary to guarantee offset-free control of the
ﬁltered states. This topic discussed is discussed extensively
in [10], [19]–[21]. Consider a general linear model on state-
space form
xk+1 = Axk + Buk + Bddk + Gwk,
(43a)
yk = Cxk + Cddk + vk.
(43b)
The disturbance is assumed to evolve as dk+1 = dk + ξk,
where ξk ∼Niid(0, Qξ). The augmented system is then

xk+1
dk+1

=

A
Bd
0
I
 
xk
dk

+

B
0

uk +

G
0
0
I
 
wk
ξk

,
(44a)
yk = [C
Cd]
xk
dk

+ vk.
(44b)
==PAGE:144==
10 -10
10 -8
10 -6
10 -4
10 -2
3.41
4.02
5.38
6.63
8.93
23.0
89.0
267.0
616.0
1155.0
30
60
180
300
420
600
1000
2000
3000
4000
DG-FE Method
Finite Volume Method
Fig. 3: Comparison of the desired tolerance, ϵ, achievable by
the DG-FE and FV method for varying CPU time and DOFs
when simulating the state-space model for k = 20 iterations.
The inlet concentration of the chromatographic cylinder is
typically not known for industrial feed stocks and may
be modeled as an unknown disturbance. Measurements are
taken at the outlet of the cylinder. The disturbance model
(44) then takes the form
xk+1
dk+1

=
A
B
0
I
 xk
dk

+
B
0
0
I
 wk
ξk

,
(45a)
yk = [C
Cd]

xk
dk

+ vk,
(45b)
where C = [0, 0, . . . , 1], Cd = 0 and dk is the unknown
input. The augmented model (45) may then be used to
estimate the states and unknown input simultaneously.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
The numerical case study consists of two parts: 1) To
demonstrate the capability of using high-order methods, the
ﬁrst study compares simulation and ﬁltered state perfor-
mance of the FV and DG-FE method in terms of accuracy,
degrees of freedom and simulation time. 2) The second
study demonstrates the use of the augmented model (45)
in estimating the unknown input under varying inﬂuence of
the disturbance tuning Qξ. The column parameters for both
studies are listed in Table I and resemble a realistic study
in [16]. The concentrations are modiﬁed to avoid unphysical
negative concentrations.
A. Case Comparison: FV vs. DG-FE Method
Figure 3 compares the performance of the FV and DG-FE
method relative to a desired accuracy ϵ. The error is measured
in the standard ℓ2(Ω) norm
ea = ||c −ca||ℓ2(Ω),
(46)
between the computed c numerical and analytical ca [16]
solution.
The simulation ﬁnal time is tf = 2 minutes and the feed
concentrate was injected at tinj = 2 minutes. The time is
10 -10
10 -8
10 -6
10 -4
10 -2
0.0061
0.0559
0.0105
0.0178
0.0344
0.1110
0.7187
3.1819
21.10
65.3113
273.1865
60
120
150
210
270
420
600
1000
2000
3000
4000
DG-FE Method
Finite Volume Method
Fig. 4: Comparison of the desired tolerance achievable by
the DG-FE and FV method for varying CPU time and DOFs
when estimating the ﬁltered states using the dynamic Kalman
ﬁlter for k = 20 iterations. The tolerance, ϵ, corresponds to
the accuracy of the numerical scheme used to compute the
ﬁltered states.
discretized using a sampling time Ts = 0.1 minutes resulting
in k = 20 iterations. The solution is stopped while the
injected concentration band remains inside the column, such
that the L2 error may be evaluated exactly. The FV method
is simulated using Nz ∈[200, 400, . . . , 4000] DOFs and the
DG-FE is simulated using K = 30 elements and polynomial
orders of P ∈[1, 2, . . . , 14].
Figure 3 shows that the DG-FE method offers higher
order accuracy at signiﬁcantly fewer states and computational
effort, when compared to the FV method. This is due
to the spectral convergence property, which is tied to the
smoothness of the solution [13]. For the same accuracy, the
DG-FE method requires far less states than the FV method.
For engineering solutions, such a level of accuracy displayed
by the DG-FE method is typically unnecessary, but seeks to
motivate the use of high-order methods.
Figure 4 compares the performance of the FV and DG-FE
method when estimating the inlet concentration using the
disturbance model with noise covariances Q = R = 0.12
and Qξ = 0.0012 and the dynamic Kalman ﬁlter with initial
covariance matrix set to the unity P0 = I. As expected from
Figure 3 the DG-FE method is signiﬁcantly faster compared
to the FV method in computing the estimated states.
Remark 4: Note, that for increasing number of DOFs,
the matrix exponential becomes increasingly time consuming
to compute. The FV method requires many states to reach
high accuracy and therefore the additional cost of computing
the matrix exponential becomes signiﬁcant. However, this is
not included in the timing, since the matrix exponential is
considered an ofﬂine computation.
B. Case Study: Disturbance Modeling & Input Estimation
The simulation ﬁnal time is tf
= 16 and the feed
concentrate is injected after tinj = 3 minutes. The sampling
==PAGE:145==
Fig. 5: Three different realizations of the estimated input are
displayed for various tuning of the disturbance parameter Qξ.
The disturbance is estimated more aggressively for increasing
tuning Qξ.
TABLE I: Simulation parameters for linear case study.
Parameters
Symbol
Value
Metric
Column Length
L
1
[cm]
Porosity
ϵ
0.4
-
Interstitial velocity
v
1
[cm/min]
Theoretical plates
Nt
250
-
Henry’s constant
K
1
-
Initial concentration
c0
2
g/L
Feed concentration
cf
4
g/L
time is Ts = 0.1 minutes resulting in k = 160 iterations
(time-steps). The simulation results are simulated using the
DG-FE method with K = 30 elements and polynomial order
P = 10. The noise covariances are Q = R = 0.12 and
Qξ ∈[0.0052, 0.0012, 0.00052].
Figure 5 displays the estimated ﬁltered input and output
states for varying disturbance tuning Qξ using the dynamic
Kalman ﬁlter and initial covariance matrix set to the unity
P0 = I. The input is estimated after a natural time delay of
approximately 3 minutes, since the measurements only begin
to appear at the outlet of the column after this period. For
low values of the tuning parameter, the inlet concentration
is estimated as a smooth transition. Increasing the value of
the tuning parameter allows the estimate to capture more of
the discontinuity. However, this is compromised by a more
aggressive estimate, as seen in Figure 5, and naturally a
trade-off in this transition occurs.
VI. CONCLUSION
We have presented a high-order numerical model for
simulation and state estimation of the linear chromatography
problem (10). For the same accuracy, the high-order model
requires far less states than the FV model, and provides fast
and efﬁcient simultaneous estimation of input and output
under uncertain inlet concentrations. The model used for
state estimation represent the ﬁrst steps towards closed loop
control and optimization of the chromatographic process.
REFERENCES
[1] M. S. Hong, K. A. Severson, M. Jiang, A. E. Lu, J. C. Love, and
R. D. Braatz, “Challenges and opportunities in biopharmaceutical
manufacturing control,” Computers & Chemical Engineering, vol. 110,
pp. 106–114, 2018.
[2] G. Guiochon and L. A. Beaver, “Separation science is the key to
successful biopharmaceuticals,” Journal of Chromatography a, vol.
1218, no. 49, pp. 8836–8858, 2011.
[3] A. Puettmann, S. Schnittert, U. Naumann, and E. von Lieres, “Fast
and accurate parameter sensitivities for the general rate model of col-
umn liquid chromatography,” Computers and Chemical Engineering,
vol. 56, pp. 46–57, 2013.
[4] A. K¨upper and S. Engell, “Parameter and state estimation in chro-
matographic SMB processes with individual columns and nonlinear
adsorption isotherms,” in International Symposium on Advanced Con-
trol of Chemical Processes (ADCHEM), Gramado, Brazil, April 2-5
2006, pp. 611–616.
[5] A. K¨upper, M. Diehl, J. P. Schl¨oder, H. G. Bock, and S. Engell,
“Efﬁcient moving horizon state and parameter estimation for SMB
processes,” Journal of Process Control, vol. 19, pp. 785–802, 2009.
[6] A. Sellberg, “Open-loop optimal control of chromatographic separa-
tion processes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Chemical Engineer-
ing, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, 2018.
[7] E. J. Close, J. R. Salm, D. G. Bracewell, and E. Sorensen, “A
model based approach for identifying robust operating conditions
for industrial chromatography with process variability,” Chemical
Engineering Science, vol. 116, pp. 284–295, 2014.
[8] N. Borg, K. Westerberg, N. Andersson, E. von Lieres, and B. Nilsson,
“Effects of uncertainties in experimental conditions on the estimation
of adsorption model parameters in preparative chromatography,” Com-
puters & Chemical Engineering, vol. 55, pp. 148–157, 2013.
[9] N. Borg, K. Westerberg, S. Schnittert, E. von Lieres, and B. Nilsson,
“Numerical analysis of model parameter uncertainties as a result of
experimental uncertainty an example from preparative chromatogra-
phy,” IFAC Proceedings Volumes, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 991 – 995, 2012,
7th Vienna International Conference on Mathematical Modelling.
[10] J. B. Jørgensen, “A critical discussion of the continuous-discrete
extended kalman ﬁlter,” European Congress of Chemical Engineering
- 6, September 2007.
[11] K. Meyer, J. K. Huusom, and J. Abildskov, “High-order approximation
of chromatographic models using a nodal discontinuous Galerkin
approach,” Computers & Chemical Engineering, vol. 109, pp. 68 –
76, 2018.
[12] A. Hørsholt, L. Christiansen, K. Meyer, J. Huusom, and J. B.
Jørgensen, “A discontinuous-galerkin ﬁnite-element method for sim-
ulation of packed bed chromatographic processes,” Ifac-papersonline,
2019.
[13] J. Hesthaven and T. Warburton, Discontinuous nodal Galerkin methods
algorithms analysis and applications.
Springer, 2008.
[14] G. Guichon, A. Felinger, D. Shirazi, and A. Katti, Fundamentals of
Preparative and Nonlinear Chromatography, 2nd ed.
Elsevier, 2006.
[15] P. Danckwerts, “Continuous ﬂow systems. distribution of residence
times,” Chemical Engineering Science, vol. 2, pp. 1–13, 1953.
[16] S. Qamar, J. N. Abbasi, S. Javeed, M. Shah, F. U. Khan, and
A. Seidel-Morgenstern, “Analytical solutions and moment analysis of
chromatographic models for rectangular pulse injections,” Journal of
Chromatography A, vol. 1315, pp. 92 – 106, 2013.
[17] R. J. LeVeque, Finite difference methods for ordinary and partial dif-
ferential equations :. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics,
SIAM,, 2007.
[18] D. Simon, Optimal State Estimation: Kalman, H Inﬁnity, and Nonlin-
ear Approaches.
New York, NY, USA: Wiley-Interscience, 2006.
[19] K. Muske and T. Badgwell, “Disturbance modeling for offset-free
linear model predictive control,” Journal of Process Control, vol. 12,
no. 5, pp. 617–632, 2002.
[20] G. Pannocchia and J. Rawlings, “Disturbance models for offset-free
model-predictive control,” Aiche Journal, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 426–437,
2003.
[21] J. K. Huusom, N. K. Poulsen, S. B. Jorgensen, and J. B. Jorgensen,
“Adaptive disturbance estimation for offset-free siso model predictive
control,” American Control Conference (acc), pp. 2417–2422, 2011.
==PAGE:146==
132
Paper II
==PAGE:147==
A p p e n d i x E
Paper III
State and Input Estimation of Nonlinear Chromatographic
Processes
Authors: Alexander Hørsholt, Lasse Hjuler Christiansen, Tobias Kasper Ritschel,
Kristian Meyer, Jakob Kjøbstad Huusom, John Bagterp Jørgensen.
Submitted to: 3rd IEEE Conference on Control Technology and Applications
(CCTA 2019).
==PAGE:148==
State and Input Estimation of Nonlinear Chromatographic Processes
Alexander Hørsholt, Lasse Hjuler Christiansen, Tobias Kasper Ritschel, Kristian Meyer,
Jakob Kjøbsted Huusom, John Bagterp Jørgensen
Abstract— We investigate two algorithms for state estimation
of nonlinear chromatographic processes: the Extended Kalman
Filter and the Ensemble Kalman Filter. We consider the
Equilibrium Dispersive Model for modeling of packed-bed chro-
matography. The Equilibrium Dispersive Model is governed
by a convection-dominated nonlinear partial differential equa-
tion. The model is discretized by a high-order discontinuous-
Galerkin ﬁnite-element method for accurate and efﬁcient simu-
lation of the chromatographic process. The discretization leads
to a stochastic continuous-discrete model, and we use the
Extended Kalman Filter and the Ensemble Kalman Filter for
state estimation of the packed-bed chromatographic model. The
performance and capabilities of both ﬁlters are demonstrated
in simultaneous estimation of the unknown system states and
uncertain inlet concentration.
I. INTRODUCTION
Packed-bed chromatography is a ubiquitous unit-operation
for downstream processing of biopharmaceutical products
[1]. Practical application of chromatography is a costly
procedure [2] and modeling of chromatographic processes is
an active and extensively studied ﬁeld [3]–[6]. The success
of the separation process is tied to a number of challenges,
among these are: 1) Complex models of chromatographic
processes often require independent determination of many
uncertain model parameters, which may be be costly and
difﬁcult to derive by experiments [7]–[10]. 2) Measurements
of the inlet concentration are typically not possible to obtain
for industrial feed stocks, and information of the process is
therefore entirely tied to the uncertain measurements taken
at the outlet [11]. Before considering optimal control and
optimization [12] of chromatographic processes, it becomes
necessary to address the inherent uncertainties in said pro-
cess.
State estimation is the reconstruction of system states
based on measurements and is a key component in model
predictive control, parameter estimation, monitoring and
prediction [13]. State estimation is widely applied for many
nonlinear chemical processes [14]. Moving horizon state and
parameter estimation has been applied to chromatographic
processes to estimate the adsorption isotherm parameters
[15], [16] and for nonlinear MPC of chromatographic pro-
cesses [17].
There exist a variety of different state estimation algo-
rithms (ﬁlters) for nonlinear systems, among these are: 1)
*A. Hørsholt, L. H. Christiansen, T. K. Ritschel and J. B. Jørgensen
are with the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark. K.
Meyer and J.K. Huusom are with Department of Chemical and Biochemical
Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby.
Corresponding author: J. B. Jørgensen (E-mail: jbjo@dtu.dk)
The Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) and 2) the Ensemble
Kalman Filter (EnKF). The EKF linearizes the dynamics of
the nonlinear model and applies the original Kalman ﬁlter
equations [18]. The EnKF is a particular type of particle
ﬁlter, which uses the Kalman ﬁlter equations and a recursive
least-squares update, based on an ensemble to capture the
probability distribution of the uncertain states [19]. The
ensemble size is a tuning parameter of the EnKF.
In this paper we present the EKF and EnKF for
state estimation of nonlinear chromatographic processes.
The nonlinear chromatographic process is modeled by
the Equilibrium Dispersive Model (EDM) with a non-
linear Langmuir isotherm. The EDM is discretized by a
high-order discontinuous-Galerkin ﬁnite-element (DG-FE)
method [20]–[22] for accurate and efﬁcient numerical sim-
ulation of the governing convection-dominated partial dif-
ferential equations [23]. We investigate a comparative study
of the EKF and EnKF for state estimation. In addition we
demonstrate the capabilities of both ﬁlters for estimating
the uncertain inlet concentrations and states simultaneously
based on noisy measurements at the outlet.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II introduces
the EDM. Section III describes the numerical discretization
of the model by the DG-FE method. Section IV introduces
the stochastic continuous-discrete model which follows from
a spatial discretization of the EDM. Section V describes the
continuous-discrete EKF and EnKF for estimation of the
unknown inlet concentration. Section VI presents a numerical
case study, which compares the performance of the EKF and
EnKF and their capability for estimating the unknown inlet
concentration. Conclusions are given in Section VII.
II. MATHEMATICAL MODEL FOR CHROMATOGRAPHY
Figure 1 shows a conceptual representation of the molec-
ular separation process which occurs in packed-bed chro-
matography. A continuous ﬂow of liquid is injected into the
chromatographic column. This liquid carries each component
in a mobile phase from left to right. However, a fraction of
these molecules may stick to the porous media and form the
stationary phase.
A. The Equilibrium Dispersive Model
The EDM is a nonlinear convection-dominated partial
differential equation in the form (1), that governs the ﬂow
of i = 1, . . . , Nc components occupying a chromatographic
column in mobile, ci, and stationary, qi, phase.
The EDM is a mass-balance equation which is based on
six fundamental assumptions. These assumptions are: 1) The
==PAGE:149==
Component A
Component B
time [s]
concentration [g/L]
tinj
time [s]
concentration [g/L]
A
B
B
A
Convection
Diﬀusion
Polar silica beads (Stationary phase)
High Polarity        Low Polarity
Chromatographic Column
Mobile phase
Fig. 1: Conceptual representation of the molecular separation
that occurs in packed-bed chromatography.
chromatographic process is isothermal, and the transition
between the mobile and stationary phase is modeled by an
equilibrium isotherm with instantaneous reaction kinetics.
2) Band broadening occurs due to axial dispersion. 3) The
chromatographic column is radially homogeneous. 4) The
compressibility of the mobile and stationary phases are
negligible. 5) The mobile and stationary phase of each
component do not interact and 6) the stationary phase is
packed with a porous material of equally sized spherical
particles. A rigorous derivation of the EDM is presented in
[7].
Under the governing assumptions 1) through 6), the EDM
models the multicomponent ﬂow inside the column Ω=
(0, L) of length L > 0 as
∂¯ci(t, z)
∂t
= −∂¯Ni(t, z)
∂z
,
Ω× (0, T),
(1a)
Ni(t, 0) = vcin,i(t),
{0} × (0, T),
(1b)
Ni(t, L) = vci(t, L),
{L} × (L, T),
(1c)
ci(0, z) = c0,
Ω× {0}.
(1d)
Danckwerts boundary condition (1b) is used to model the
inlet concentration, and a zero Neumann condition (1c) is
used to model the outlet concentration [24]. The initial
concentration of the column is (1d). The total concentration,
¯ci, occupying the porous media is
¯ci(t, z) = εci(t, z) + (1 −ε)qi(t, z).
(2)
The porosity of the packing material is denoted ε. The ﬂow
through the porous media is
¯Ni(t, z) = εNi(t, z),
(3)
and the ﬂux, Ni, is a sum of a convective, vci, and diffusive,
Ji, ﬂux
Ni(t, z) = vci(t, z) + Ji(t, z).
(4)
Fick’s law is used to model the dispersive ﬂow
Ji(t, z) = −Di
∂ci(t, z)
∂z
,
(5)
where Di is the ith dispersion coefﬁcient. The dispersion
coefﬁcient is related to the number of theoretical plates, Nt,
in the column as Di =
Lv
2Nt [7]. The ith inlet concentration
cin,i(t) =
(
cf,i,
t1 ≤t ≤t2,
0,
t < t1 and t2 < t,
(6)
with feed concentration cf,i and injection time tinj = t2−t1.
B. Nonlinear Equilibrium Isotherm
The transition from mobile to stationary phase is modeled
by a nonlinear Langmuir isotherm [7]. The reaction kinetics
are assumed inﬁnitely fast, such that the stationary phase
reaches equilibrium instantly. In preparative chromatography,
the equilibrium relationship is typically nonlinear. Therefore
this paper considers the nonlinear Langmuir isotherm given
as
qi =
aici
1 + PNc
s=1 bscs
.
(7)
III. NUMERICAL METHOD
The EDM (1) is discretized using a method-of-lines
approach. This allows for a separate discretization of the
temporal and spatial variables. A high-order, DG-FE method
is used to discretize the linear, convective-diffusive ﬂux in
(1a). The spatial discretization leads to a set of ordinary dif-
ferential equations. The solution to these ODEs are advanced
in time by a Low-Storage, Explicit Runge-Kutta Method
(LSERK) and during each iteration the nonlinear system (2)
is solved by Newton’s method to obtain the concentration.
A rigorous derivation of the DG-FE method is presented in
[20]–[22].
A. The Discontinuous-Galerkin Finite-Element Method
The DG-FE method partitions the spatial domain Ωinto
a set of Ne non-overlapping elements Ωk = [zk
l , zk
r ]. The
left and right boundary nodes of each element are zk
l and
zk
r . On each element a local solution is approximated by
an orthonormal Legendre polynomial of order N = Np −1
on a Legendre-Gauss-Lobatto grid [23]. In each grid point,
the solution is represented in a nodal basis, {ℓk
i }Np
i=1. The
Lagrange polynomials, {ℓk
i }Np
i=1, satisfy the interpolating
property ℓk
i (zj) = δij (the Kroenecker delta function). The
following derivation suppresses the index, i, for convenience.
Deﬁne g :=
√
D ∂c
∂z and f := vc −
√
Dg. The model (1)
may be recast as
1
ϵ
∂¯c(t, z)
∂t
= −∂f(t, z)
∂z
,
g(t, z) =
√
D∂c(t, z)
∂z
.
(8a)
Consider the test-function, ℓk
j , which belongs to the approx-
imation space of piecewise smooth polynomials.
VN
k := {v : vk ∈PN(Ωk), ∀Ωk ∈Ω},
(9)
where PN are polynomials of degree at most N. The local,
discrete Galerkin approximation is formed by multiplying (8)
with ℓk
j and integrating by parts twice
1
ϵ
Z
Ωk
∂¯c
∂t ℓk
j dz +
Z
Ωk
∂f k
h
∂z ℓk
j dz =

ℓk
j (f k
h −f ∗)
zk
r
zk
l ,
(10a)
Z
Ωk
gk
hℓk
j dz +
√
D

ℓk
j (ck
h −c∗)
zk
r
zk
l =
√
D
Z
Ωk
∂ck
h
∂z ℓk
j dz,
(10b)
==PAGE:150==
as shown in [20]–[22]. The variables f k
h, gk
h and ck
h refer
to the local solution on the kth element. Deﬁne the afﬁne
transformation
z(r) := zk
l + 1 + r
2
∆z,
(11)
which maps between the Legendre-Gauss-Lobatto grid,
[−1, 1], and the physical space, Ω, with equidistant spacing,
∆z = zl
r −zk
l . To approximate the integrals in (10), deﬁne
the mass and stiffness matrix [23] as
Mk := J k (VV′)−1 ,
Sk := MkDr.
(12)
The Vandermonde matrix, V, contains the orthonormal Leg-
endre basis functions, and the differentiation matrix, Dr, is
deﬁned as Dr = VrV−1, where Vr is the Vandermonde
gradient. The Jacobian, J k, is a scaling that results from
approximating the integrals (10).
The discrete, local Galerkin operators are used to recast
(10) and recover the local, strong form of (10) as
Mk 1
ε
∂¯ck
h
∂t + Skf k
h =

ℓk
j (f k
h −f ∗)
zk
r
zk
l ,
(13a)
Mkgk
h =
√
DSkck
h −
√
D

ℓk
j (ck
h −c∗)
zk
r
zk
l .
(13b)
B. Flux Approximations and Boundary Conditions
To accurately capture the physical properties of the EDM
(1) the following introduces appropriate numerical ﬂuxes.
The notation (−, +) refers to the interior and exterior of an
element [23]. A central ﬂux is chosen to approximate
c∗= c−+ c+
2
,
(14)
on all faces. In this context a face is the discontinuous
interface between each element. Given the nature of (4),
a sum of a convective and diffusive ﬂux is chosen as
approximation
f ∗= f ∗
conv(c−, c+) + f ∗
diff(g−, g+),
(15)
= v
2
 c−+ c+ + ˆn ·
 c−+ c+
+
√
D
2
 g−+ g+
,
on all faces but the left boundary face. ˆn is the unit
normal. For the leftmost face, a central ﬂux is chosen as
approximation
f ∗= f ∗
diff = f −+ f +
2
,
(16)
to ease the implementation of the Robin boundary condition
at the inlet. The DG-FE method enforces the boundary
conditions weakly [20] by deﬁning exterior ghost states
(c+, g+). The Robin condition (1b) at the inlet requires that
c+
h = c−
h ,
f +
h = −f −
h + 2vcin,i.
(17)
The Neumann condition (1c) at the outlet requires that
c+
h = c−
h ,
g+
h = −g−
h .
(18)
C. Numerical Simulation
The spatial discretization of the EDM model (1) leads to
a semi-discrete scheme
dg
dt (x(t)) = f(x(t), u(t)) = Acx(t) + Bcu(t),
(19a)
g(x(t)) = x(t) + Fq(x(t)).
(19b)
To keep with the notation of relevant litterature [13], [14],
[25], note that x(t) is now the state vector of concentrations,
u(t) is the inlet concentration cin,i(t) in (6), f is the right
hand side resulting from the spatial discretization and the
relations (2) and (19b) are equivalent. The matrices Ac and
Bc are the discretized ﬂux operators obtained by the DG-FE
discretization in (13). A low-storage, explicit, Runge-Kutta
(LSERK) method of the form
p(0) = x(tn),
(20a)
(
k(i) = aik(i−1) + ∆tf(p(i−1), tn + ci∆t),
p(i) = p(i−1) + bik(i),
(20b)
g(x(tn+1)) = p(5).
(20c)
for i ∈{1, . . . , 5} is used to advance the solution to (19a)
in time. Newton’s method is used to solve (2). The solution
to (2) is the concentration x(tn+1). The coefﬁcients for the
LSERK method are given in [26].
IV. CONTINUOUS-DISCRETE EKF AND ENKF
Consider the continuous-discrete stochastic nonlinear sys-
tem
dg(x(t)) = f(x(t), u(t))dt + σ(t)dω(t),
(21a)
g(x(t)) = x(t) + Fq(x(t)).
(21b)
The inlet concentration, u(t), is modeled as an unknown
input, since measurements typically are not available at the
inlet for industrial feed stocks. The process noise, ω(t),
is modeled as a standard Wiener process with incremental
covariance Idt. Knowledge of the initial state x(t0) ∼
N(x0, P0) is assumed and it is assumed that measurements,
y(tk), of the output, z(tk), are available a discrete times, tk,
at the outlet
z(tk) = h(x(tk)) = Cx(tk),
(22)
y(tk) = z(tk) + vk,
(23)
where C = [0, 0, . . . , 1], because the last element of the state
vector is the concentration at the outlet. The measurement
noise, vk = v(tk), follows a normal distribution vk ∼
N(0, Rk).
A. The Extended Kalman Filter
This section describes the extended Kalman ﬁlter. Assume
that the EKF is initialized with mean-covariance pair of the
initial states given as
ˆx0|−1 = x0,
P0|−1 = P0.
(24a)
The EKF for ﬁltering and prediction is then stated as follows.
==PAGE:151==
1) Measurement Update: The one-step ahead prediction
of the measurement and the covariance matrix1 is
ˆyk|k−1 = h(tk, ˆxk|k−1),
(25a)
Rk|k−1 = CkPk|k−1C′
k + Rk,
(25b)
where, Rk, is the measurement noise covariance matrix and
Ck = ∂h
∂x(tk, ˆxk|k−1) = C,
(26)
using that h is linear. The innovation is computed as
ek = yk −ˆyk|k−1,
(27)
where yk = y(tk). The Kalman ﬁlter gain matrix is computed
as
Kfx,k = Pk|k−1C′
kR−1
k|k−1.
(28)
The ﬁltered state and its approximate covariance is computed
as
ˆxk|k = ˆxk|k−1 + Kfx,kek,
(29a)
Pk|k = Pk|k−1 −Kfx,kRk|k−1K′
fx,k.
(29b)
2) Time Update: The one-step ahead propagation of the
mean-covariance pair, ˆxk+1|k = ˆxk(tk+1) and Pk+1|k =
Pk(tk+1), is computed as solutions to the system of ordinary
differential equations
dg
dt (ˆxk(t)) = f(ˆxk(t), u(t)),
(30a)
dP g
k
dt (t) = A(t)Pk(t) + Pk(t)A(t)′ + σ(t)σ(t)′,
(30b)
with initial conditions ˆxk(tk) = ˆxk|k and Pk(tk) = Pk|k in
the time-period t ∈]tk; tk+1]. The process noise is assumed to
affect the inlet concentration u(t), which leads to the choice
σ(t) = Bc. The Jacobian is computed as
A(t) = ∂f
∂x(t, ˆxk(t)) = Ac.
(31)
Since the continuous-discrete dynamics (21), are not given
explicitly in the state, x(t), the covariance update (30b)
requires an additional computation in order to recover the
covariance, Pk+1. To this end, consider the following propo-
sition:
Proposition 1: The EKF may estimate the one-step ahead
propagation of the state and covariance by integrating the
mean-covariance pair in (30). The covariance, P g
k (t), may
be computed by the transformation
P g
k (t) =
 ∂
∂xg(ˆxk(t))

Pk(t)
 ∂
∂xg(ˆxk(t))
′
.
(32)
Recall that the stationary phase q is modeled by the nonlinear
Langmuir isotherm (7). The function g is then bijective.
Hence the existence of the matrix inverse of
∂g
∂x(x(t)) =
I + F ∂q
∂x(x(t)) is guaranteed.
The one-step ahead propagation of the state may then
be computed by ﬁrst solving (30) and recovering Pk+1 =
Pk(tk+1) by solving (32) .
1(·)′ Matlab notation for the transpose.
B. The Ensemble Kalman Filter
This section is based on the approach of [13], [19] and
describes the ensemble Kalman ﬁlter. Assume that the EnKF
is initialized with mean-covariance pair of the initial state
given as
ˆx0|−1 = x0,
P0|−1 = P0.
(33a)
Sample q particles, x(i)
0|−1, from N(x0, P0). The EnKF for
ﬁltering and prediction is then stated as follows.
1) Measurement Update: Compute the output for each
particle
ˆz(i)
k|k−1 = h

tk, ˆx(i)
k|k−1

.
(34)
The state and output means, the covariance, and cross-
covariance are computed by the following
ˆxk|k−1 = Wm
q
X
i=1
ˆx(i)
k|k−1,
(35a)
ˆzk|k−1 = Wm
q
X
i=1
ˆz(i)
k|k−1,
(35b)
Rk|k−1 = Wc
q
X
i=1

ˆz(i)
k|k−1 −ˆzk|k−1
 
ˆz(i)
k|k−1 −ˆzk|k−1
′
+ Rk,
(35c)
Sk|k−1 = Wc
q
X
i=1

ˆx(i)
k|k−1 −ˆxk|k−1
 
ˆz(i)
k|k−1 −ˆzk|k−1
′
.
(35d)
The weights are Wm =
1
q and Wc =
1
q−1. The discrete
measurements are sampled for each particle as
ˆy(i)
k|k−1 = ˆz(i)
k|k−1 + v(i)
k .
(36)
The measurements noise samples, v(i)
k , follow a normal
distribution, v(i)
k
∼N(0, Rk). The innovation, e(i)
k , of the
i’th particle is computed by
e(i)
k
= yk −ˆy(i)
k|k−1,
(37)
and the Kalman ﬁlter gain matrix is
Kfx,k = Sk|k−1R−1
k|k−1.
(38)
For each particle, the states are updated as
ˆx(i)
k|k = ˆx(i)
k|k−1 + Kfx,ke(i)
k .
(39)
The state estimate and covariance matrix are computed as
ˆxk|k = Wm
q
X
i=1
ˆx(i)
k|k,
(40)
Pk|k = Wc
q
X
i=1

ˆx(i)
k|k −ˆxk|k
 
ˆx(i)
k|k −ˆxk|k
′
.
(41)
==PAGE:152==
2) Time-update: The one-step ahead propagation of the
ensemble states, ˆx(i)
k+1|k = ˆx(i)
k|k(tk+1), are given as solutions
to the continuous nonlinear system
dg(ˆx(i)
k (t)) = f(ˆx(i)
k (t), u(t))dt + σ(t)dω(t),
(42a)
g(ˆx(i)
k (t)) = ˆx(i)
k (t) + Fq(ˆx(i)
k (t)),
(42b)
for i = 1, . . . , q with initial condition ˆx(i)
k (t) = ˆx(i)
k|k in the
time-period t ∈]tk; tk+1].
C. Disturbance Modeling
To estimate the unknown input, u(t), a disturbance model
[14], [27]–[29] is proposed, i.e. the model (21) is augmented
with an integrator state, xd(t), modeled as a random walk
dxd(t) = σdωd(t).
(43)
The augmented model is then
d
g(x(t))
xd(t)

=
f(x(t), xd(t))
0

dt +
σ
0
0
σd

d
 ω(t)
ωd(t)

.
(44)
The initial disturbance, ˆxd,0|−1, follows a normal distribu-
tion, ˆxd,0|−1 ∼N(xd,0, P d
0 ). The parameters σd and P d
0 may
be used to tune the ﬁlter. Note that (44) is in the form (21),
so the EKF and EnKF may be used to estimate the states and
unknown input of the augmented model (44) simultaneously.
V. NUMERICAL EXAMPLE
The numerical case study consists of two parts: 1) The
ﬁrst part compares the performance of the EKF and EnKF
in terms of the CPU-time and root-mean-square-deviation
(RMSD) for varying number of ensemble sizes. 2) The
second part demonstrates the capabilities of the EKF and
EnKF for nonlinear, input estimation.
A. Comparison: EKF vs. EnKF
Figure 2 compares the EKF and EnKF for different
ensemble sizes. Each dot represents a simulation with a
ﬁxed ensemble size. This comparison considers ensembles
q ∈[2, 3, 4, 8, 20, 40, 60, 80, 100]. The comparison is made
between the root-mean-square-deviation (RMSD) of the state
variable and the total CPU-time for computing the ﬁltered
states. The RMSD is computed as
RMSD =
 
1
NT + 1
NT
X
k=0
 ˆxk|k −xk
2
! 1
2
,
(45)
where ˆxk|k and xk corresponds the estimated state and
process solution.
The column parameters of each simulation, feed and initial
concentrations are listed in TABLE I. The concentrations
are set as to avoid unphysical negative concentrations. The
polynomial order and elements are chosen as N = 3 and
K = 10. The process and measurement covariances are
Q = ∆t and R = 0.12. The feed concentration is injected
immediately with an injection time of tinj = 2 minutes
and the ﬁnal simulation time is tf
= 8 minutes. The
Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy condition [30] is set at CFL = 0.1
TABLE I: Simulation parameters for nonlinear case study.
Parameters
Symbol
Value
Unit
Column length
L
1
cm
Porosity
ϵ
0.4
-
Interstitial velocity
v
1
cm/min
Theoretical plates
Nt
250
-
Isotherm parameters
a1, b1
1, 0.05
-
Initial concentration
c0
2
g/L
Feed concentration
cf
4
g/L
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
8.5
9
RMSD
10 -3
0.06
0.14
0.22
0.29
0.59
1.65
3.21
4.33
5.70
6.28
CPU - Time [s]
Performance comparison for EKF and EnKF
2
3
4
8
20
40
60
80
100
Ensemble Size
EnKF
EKF
Fig. 2: Comparison of the average CPU-time (seconds) for
one measurement + time update of the EKF and EnKF for
different ensemble sizes.
for numerically stable solutions, this results in a step size
∆t =
CFL
v+ 2D
∆z ∆z. The number of sampling intervals are
NT = 3334, so ∆t ≃6 · 10−4. The initial states, ˆx0|−1,
follow a normal distribution ˆx0|−1 ∼N(c0, P0), where
c0 = 2 and P0 = 0.001.
Figure 2 and TABLE II show that the EKF updates the
estimated states signiﬁcantly faster than the EnKF and able
to produce a reasonably accurate state-estimate in terms of
the RMSD. The EnKF obtains more precise state estimates
for larger ensemble sizes, but consequently also requires
signiﬁcantly more computational time than the EKF. The
computational bottleneck of the EnKF is the propagation
of the equations (42) in the time update. However, these
computations are independent and easily parallelized, which
would lower the computational cost signiﬁcantly without
compromising accuracy.
B. Input Estimation: EKF vs. EnKF
Consider the same column parameters, feed and initial
concentrations as listed in TABLE I. The feed concentration
is now injected after 0.5 minutes with an injection time
of tinj = 7.5 minutes. The feed stream remains active
for the remaining simulation, since tf = 8 minutes. The
polynomial order and elements are chosen as N = 2 and
K = 10. The process and measurement covariances are
Q = ∆t = 0.14 and R = 0.22 when using CFL = 0.3.
Figure 3 compares the EKF and EnKF for estimating the
unknown inlet concentration using the augmented model
(44). The initial states, ˆx0|−1, follow a normal distribution
ˆx0|−1 ∼N(c0, P0), where c0 = 2 and P0 = 0.001. We
consider q = 10 ensembles. The initial disturbance state,
ˆxd,0|−1 follows a normal distribution with mean c0 = 2
==PAGE:153==
TABLE II: Performance comparison of the EKF and EnKF for varying ensemble sizes q.
EKF
q = 2
q = 3
q = 4
q = 8
q = 20
q = 40
q = 60
q = 80
q = 100
RMSD
0.0084
0.0089
0.0078
0.0056
0.0052
0.0049
0.0046
0.0045
0.0045
0.0044
Avg. Meas. Upd. (ms)
0.0241
0.6026
0.6335
0.6812
0.7272
1.3720
1.7391
2.1538
2.6718
2.9308
Avg. Time Upd. (ms)
68.1
147.6
222.2
295.0
595.2
1648.7
3210.3
4330.8
5703.6
6280.5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
2
4
6
Output
Measured Output
Process Output
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Time [min]
0
2
4
6
Input
True Input
Estimated Input EnKF
Estimated Input EKF
Concentration [g/L]
Fig. 3: Nonlinear input estimation for the EKF and EnKF.
and covariance P d
0 = 0.001. The EKF and EnKF require
different tuning parameters, which are chosen as σEKF
d
= 1
and σEnKF
d
= 0.004. Both ﬁlters manage to estimate the
inlet concentration after a natural time delay of 2.5 minutes,
since the measurements only begin to become available
after approximately 2.5 minutes. The current placement of
the sensor therefore represents a worst-case scenario, where
measurements only appear at the outlet which produces a
time delay measurements in the estimated states.
VI. CONCLUSION
We have presented a high-order numerical model for ac-
curate simulation and state estimation of equilibrium-based,
nonlinear chromatographic processes. We have developed
the EKF and EnKF for efﬁcient simultaneous estimation of
the uncertain states and inlet concentration based on noisy
measurements at the outlet. The EKF is signiﬁcantly faster
compared to the EnKF but produced less accurate state
estimates.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Guiochon and L. A. Beaver, “Separation science is the key to
successful biopharmaceuticals,” Journal of Chromatography A, vol.
1218, no. 49, pp. 8836–8858, 2011.
[2] M. S. Hong, K. A. Severson, M. Jiang, A. E. Lu, J. C. Love, and
R. D. Braatz, “Challenges and opportunities in biopharmaceutical
manufacturing control,” Computers & Chemical Engineering, vol. 110,
pp. 106–114, 2018.
[3] S. Leweke and E. von Lieres, “Chromatography Analysis and Design
Toolkit (CADET),” Computers & Chemical Engineering, vol. 113, pp.
274–294, 2018.
[4] A. Puettmann, S. Schnittert, U. Naumann, and E. von Lieres, “Fast
and accurate parameter sensitivities for the general rate model of col-
umn liquid chromatography,” Computers and Chemical Engineering,
vol. 56, pp. 46–57, 2013.
[5] S. Qamar, J. N. Abbasi, S. Javeed, M. Shah, F. U. Khan, and
A. Seidel-Morgenstern, “Analytical solutions and moment analysis of
chromatographic models for rectangular pulse injections,” Journal of
Chromatography A, vol. 1315, pp. 92–106, 2013.
[6] S. Javeed, Q. Shamsul, S. Andreas, and G. Warnecke, “A discontin-
uous Galerkin method to solve chromatographic models,” Journal of
Chromatography A, vol. 1218, no. 40, pp. 7137–7146, 2011.
[7] G. Guichon, A. Felinger, D. Shirazi, and A. Katti, Fundamentals of
Preparative and Nonlinear Chromatography, 2nd ed.
Elsevier, 2006.
[8] E. J. Close, J. R. Salm, D. G. Bracewell, and E. Sorensen, “A
model based approach for identifying robust operating conditions
for industrial chromatography with process variability,” Chemical
Engineering Science, vol. 116, pp. 284–295, 2014.
[9] A. K¨upper and S. Engell, “Parameter and state estimation in chro-
matographic SMB processes with individual columns and nonlinear
adsorption isotherms,” in International Symposium on Advanced Con-
trol of Chemical Processes (ADCHEM), Gramado, Brazil, April 2-5
2006, pp. 611–616.
[10] A. K¨upper, M. Diehl, J. P. Schl¨oder, H. G. Bock, and S. Engell,
“Efﬁcient moving horizon state and parameter estimation for SMB
processes,” Journal of Process Control, vol. 19, pp. 785–802, 2009.
[11] N. Borg, K. Westerberg, N. Andersson, E. von Lieres, and B. Nilsson,
“Effects of uncertainties in experimental conditions on the estimation
of adsorption model parameters in preparative chromatography,” Com-
puters & Chemical Engineering, vol. 55, pp. 148–157, 2013.
[12] A. Holmqvist and F. Magnusson, “Open-loop optimal control of
batch chromatographic separation processes using direct collocation,”
Journal of Process Control, vol. 46, pp. 55–74, 2016.
[13] T. K. S. Ritschel and J. B. Jørgensen, “Nonlinear ﬁlters for state
estimation of UV ﬂash processes,” 2018 IEEE Conference on Control
Technology and Applications (CCTA), pp. 1753–1760, 2018.
[14] J. B. Jørgensen, “A critical discussion of the continuous-discrete
extended Kalman ﬁlter,” European Congress of Chemical Engineering
- 6, September 2007.
[15] A. Kpper, M. Diehl, J. P. Schlder, H. G. Bock, and S. Engell, “Efﬁcient
moving horizon state and parameter estimation for the varicol smb
process,” IFAC Proceedings Volumes, vol. 42, no. 11, pp. 590–595,
2009.
[16] A. Kuepper, L. Wirsching, M. Diehl, J. P. Schloeder, H. G. Bock,
and S. Engell, “Online identiﬁcation of adsorption isotherms in smb
processes via efﬁcient moving horizon state and parameter estimation,”
Computers and Chemical Engineering, vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 1969–1983,
2010.
[17] A. Kpper and S. Engell, “Non-linear model predictive control of the
Hashimoto simulated moving bed process,” Lecture Notes in Control
and Information Sciences, vol. 358, no. 1, pp. 473–483, 2007.
[18] D. Simon, Optimal State Estimation.
John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
[19] S. Gillijns, O. Barrero Mendoza, J. Ch, B. L. R. De Moor, D. S. Bern-
stein, and A. Ridley, “What is the ensemble Kalman ﬁlter and how
well does it work?” 2009.
[20] K. Meyer, J. K. Huusom, and J. Abildskov, “High-order approximation
of chromatographic models using a nodal discontinuous Galerkin
approach,” Computers & Chemical Engineering, vol. 109, pp. 68–76,
2018.
[21] A. Hørsholt, L. Christiansen, K. Meyer, J. Huusom, and J. B.
Jørgensen, “A discontinuous-galerkin ﬁnite-element method for sim-
ulation of packed bed chromatographic processes.”
Elsevier Science
BV, 2019, p. accepted for DYCOPS 2019.
[22] ——, “Spatial discretization and Kalman ﬁltering for ideal packed-
bed chromatography,” European Control Conference (ECC19), p.
submitted, June 25-28 2019.
[23] J. Hesthaven and T. Warburton, Discontinuous nodal Galerkin methods
algorithms analysis and applications.
Springer, 2008.
[24] P. Danckwerts, “Continuous ﬂow systems. Distribution of residence
times,” Chemical Engineering Science, vol. 2, pp. 1–13, 1953.
[25] J. B. Jørgensen, P. G. Thomsen, H. Madsen, and M. R. Kristensen, “A
computational efﬁcient and robust implementation of the continuous-
discrete extended Kalman ﬁlter,” Proceedings of the American Control
Conference, 2007.
[26] C. A. Kennedy and M. H. Carpenter, “Fourth-order 2n-storage Runge-
Kutta schemes,” 1994.
[27] K. Muske and T. Badgwell, “Disturbance modeling for offset-free
linear model predictive control,” Journal of Process Control, vol. 12,
no. 5, pp. 617–632, 2002.
[28] G. Pannocchia and J. Rawlings, “Disturbance models for offset-free
model-predictive control,” AiChe Journal, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 426–437,
2003.
[29] J. K. Huusom, N. K. Poulsen, S. B. Jørgensen, and J. B. Jørgensen,
“Adaptive disturbance estimation for offset-free SISO model predictive
control,” American Control Conference (ACC), pp. 2417–2422, 2011.
[30] R. Brger, P. Mulet, L. Rubio, and M. Seplveda, “Linearly implicit-
explicit schemes for the equilibrium dispersive model of chromatog-
raphy,” Applied Mathematics and Computation, vol. 317, pp. 172–186,
2018.
==PAGE:154==
140
Paper III
==PAGE:155==
Bibliography
[ABFN18] Karolina Arkell, Martin P. Breil, Søren S. Frederiksen, and
Bernt Nilsson.
Mechanistic modeling of reversed-phase chro-
matography of insulins within the temperature range 10-40◦C.
ACS Omega, 3:1946–1954, 2018.
[AC03] Mazen Alamir and Jean Pierre Corriou.
Nonlinear receding-
horizon state estimation for dispersive adsorption columns with
nonlinear isotherm.
Journal of Process Control, 13:517–523,
2003.
[BMRS18] Raimund Bürger, Pep Mulet, Lihki Rubio, and Mauricio
Sepúlveda. Linearly implicit-explicit schemes for the equilib-
rium dispersive model of chromatography. Applied Mathematics
and Computation, 317:172–186, 2018.
[BWA+13] Niklas Borg, Karin Westerberg, Niklas Andersson, Eric von
Lieres, and Bernt Nilsson. Eﬀects of uncertainties in experimen-
tal conditions on the estimation of adsorption model parameters
in preparative chromatography. Computers & Chemical Engi-
neering, 55:148–157, 2013.
[CSBS14] Edward J. Close, Jeﬀrey R. Salm, Daniel G. Bracewell, and
Eva Sorensen. A model based approach for identifying robust
operating conditions for industrial chromatography with process
variability. Chemical Engineering Science, 116:284–295, 2014.
[Dan53] P.V. Danckwerts. Continuous ﬂow systems. distribution of res-
idence times. Chemical Engineering Science, 2:1–13, 1953.
==PAGE:156==
142
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[DAPC15] N. Dejardin, M. Alamir, and J. P. Corriou. Model predictive
control of a simulated moving bed. 2015.
[DGM18] R. Donat, F. Guerrero, and P. Mulet. Implicit–explicit weno
scheme for the equilibrium dispersive model of chromatography.
Applied Numerical Mathematics, 123:22 – 42, 2018.
[GB11] Georges Guiochon and Lois Ann Beaver.
Separation science
is the key to successful biopharmaceuticals. Journal of Chro-
matography a, 1218(49):8836–8858, 2011.
[GBMC+09] S. Gillijns, O. Barrero Mendoza, J. Ch, B. L. R. De Moor,
D. S. Bernstein, and A. Ridley. What is the ensemble kalman
ﬁlter and how well does it work? 2009.
[GFSK06] G. Guichon, A. Felinger, D.G Shirazi, and A.M. Katti. Fun-
damentals of Preparative and Nonlinear Chromatography. Else-
vier, 2nd ed edition, 2006.
[HAH+16] Daniel Haßkerl,
Momin Arshad,
Reza Hashemi,
Sankara-
narayanan Subramanian, and Sebastian Engell.
Simulation
study of the particle ﬁlter and the EKF for state estimation
of a large-scale DAE-system with multi-rate sampling. IFAC-
PapersOnLine, 49(7):490 – 495, 2016. 11th IFAC Symposium
on Dynamics and Control of Process Systems Including Biosys-
tems DYCOPS-CAB 2016.
[HCM+19] Alexander Hørsholt, Lasse Christiansen, Kristian Meyer, Jakob
Huusom, and John Bagterp Jørgensen.
A discontinuous-
galerkin ﬁnite-element method for simulation of packed bed
chromatographic processes. Accepted for DYCOPS, 2019 El-
sevier Science BV, 2019.
[HGG07] Jan S. Hesthaven, Sigal. Gottlieb, and David. Gottlieb. Spectral
methods for time-dependent problems, volume 21. Cambridge
University Press, 2007.
[HLv18] Qiao-Le He, Samuel Leweke, and Eric von Lieres. Eﬃcient nu-
merical simulation of simulated moving bed chromatography
with a single-column solver. Computers & Chemical Engineer-
ing, 111:183–198, 2018.
[HM16] A. Holmqvist and F. Magnusson. Open-loop optimal control of
batch chromatographic separation processes using direct collo-
cation. Journal of Process Control, 46:55–74, 2016.
==PAGE:157==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
143
[HPJJ11] Jakob Kjobsted Huusom, Niels Kjolstad Poulsen, Sten Bay Jør-
gensen, and John Bagterp Jørgensen. Adaptive disturbance es-
timation for oﬀset-free SISO model predictive control. American
Control Conference (ACC), pages 2417–2422, 2011.
[HSH+17] D. Haßkerl, S. Subramanian, R. Hashemi, M. Arshad, and
S. Engell.
State estimation using a multi-rate particle ﬁlter
for a reactive distillation column described by a DAE model.
pages 876–881, July 2017.
[HSJ+18] Moo Sun Hong, Kristen A. Severson, Mo Jiang, Amos E. Lu,
J. Christopher Love, and Richard D. Braatz. Challenges and op-
portunities in biopharmaceutical manufacturing control. Com-
puters & Chemical Engineering, 110:106–114, 2018.
[HW08] J.S. Hesthaven and T. Warburton.
Discontinuous nodal
Galerkin
methods
algorithms
analysis
and
applications.
Springer, 2008.
[Jør07] J. B. Jørgensen. A critical discussion of the continuous-discrete
extended kalman ﬁlter. European Congress of Chemical Engi-
neering - 6, September 2007.
[JQA+13] Shumaila Javeed, Shamsul Qamar, Waqas Ashraf, Gerald War-
necke, and Andreas Seidel-Morgenstern. Analysis and numerical
investigation of two dynamic models for liquid chromatography.
Chemical Engineering Science, 90:17–31, 2013.
[JSAW11] S. Javeed, Q. Shamsul, S.M. Andreas, and G. Warnecke. A dis-
continuous Galerkin method to solve chromatographic models.
Journal of Chromatography A, 1218(40):7137 – 7146, 2011.
[JTMK07] John Bagterp Jørgensen, Per Grove Thomsen, Henrik Mad-
sen, and Morten Rode Kristensen. A computational eﬃcient
and robust implementation of the continuous-discrete extended
Kalman ﬁlter. Proceeding of the American Control Conference,
2007.
[KC94] Christopher A. Kennedy and Mark H. Carpenter. Fourth-order
2n-storage Runge-Kutta schemes. 1994.
[KDE00] Karsten-Ulrich Klatt, Guido Dünnebier, and Sebastian Engell.
Modeling and computational eﬃcient simulation of chromato-
graphic separation processes. Mathematics and Computers in
Simulation, 53:449–455, 2000.
==PAGE:158==
144
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[KDS+09a] Achim Küpper, Moritz Diehl, Johannes P. Schlöder, Hans Georg
Bock, and Sebastian Engell. Eﬃcient moving horizon state and
parameter estimation for SMB processes. Journal of Process
Control, 19:785–802, 2009.
[KDS+09b] Achim Küpper, Moritz Diehl, Johannes P. Schlöder, Hans Georg
Bock, and Sebastian Engell. Eﬃcient moving horizon state and
parameter estimation for the varicol SMB processs. IFAC Pro-
ceedings Volumes, 42(11):590–595, 2009.
[KE06] Achim Küpper and Sebastian Engell. Parameter and state es-
timation in chromatographic SMB processes with individual
columns and nonlinear adsorption isotherms. In International
Symposium on Advanced Control of Chemical Processes (AD-
CHEM), pages 611–616, Gramado, Brazil, April 2-5 2006.
[Kel03] C.T. Kelley. Solving nonlinear equations with Newton’s method.
SIAM, 2003.
[Kop09] David A Kopriva.
Implementing spectral methods for partial
diﬀerential equations. Springer, 2009.
[Lea15] Jensen C Leander. Mathematical Techniques for Reduced Order
Modelling. 2015.
[LeV07] Randall J. LeVeque. Finite diﬀerence methods for ordinary and
partial diﬀerential equations. Society for Industrial and Applied
Mathematics, SIAM, 2007.
[LNE14] Roberto Lemoine-Nava and Sebastian Engell. Individual col-
umn state and parameter estimation in the simulated moving
bed process: an optimization-based method. In Proceedings of
the 19th IFAC World Congress, pages 9376–9381, Cape Town,
South Africa, August 24-29 2014.
[Lv18] Samuel Leweke and Eric von Lieres. Chromatography Analysis
and Design Toolkit (CADET). Computers & Chemical Engi-
neering, 113:274–294, 2018.
[MB02] KR Muske and TA Badgwell. Disturbance modeling for oﬀset-
free linear model predictive control. Journal of Process Control,
12(5):617–632, 2002.
[MG92] Zidu Ma and Georges Guiochon. Shock layer thickness in the
case of wide bands of single components and binary mixtures in
non-linear liquid chromatography. Journal of Chromatography
A, 609(1):19 – 33, 1992.
==PAGE:159==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
145
[MHA18a] Kristian Meyer, Jakob K. Huusom, and Jens Abildskov. Eﬃ-
cient implicit-explicit time stepping for accurate and rapid sim-
ulation of chromatographic models. Computer-aided Chemical
Engineering, pages 853–858, 2018.
[MHA18b] Kristian Meyer, Jakob K. Huusom, and Jens Abildskov. High-
order approximation of chromatographic models using a nodal
discontinuous Galerkin approach. Computers & Chemical En-
gineering, 109:68 – 76, 2018.
[OJVJ10] Dres Foged Olsen, John Bagterp Jørgensen, John Villadsen, and
Sten Bay Jørgensen. Optimal operating points for SCP produc-
tion in the U-loop reactor. IFAC Proceedings Volumes, 43(5):499
– 504, 2010. 9th IFAC Symposium on Dynamics and Control of
Process Systems.
[PR03] G Pannocchia and JB Rawlings. Disturbance models for oﬀset-
free model-predictive control.
AiChe Journal, 49(2):426–437,
2003.
[PSNv13] Andreas Püttmann, Sebastian Schnittert, Uwe Naumann, and
Eric von Lieres. Fast and accurate parameter sensitivities for
the general rate model of column liquid chromatography. Com-
puters & Chemical Engineering, 56:46–57, 2013.
[QAJ+13] Shamsul Qamar, Javeria N. Abbasi, Shumaila Javeed, Munawar
Shah, Farman U. Khan, and Andreas Seidel-Morgenstern. Ana-
lytical solutions and moment analysis of chromatographic mod-
els for rectangular pulse injections. Journal of Chromatography
A, 1315:92 – 106, 2013.
[RJ18] Tobias Kasper Skovborg Ritschel and John Bagterp Jørgensen.
Nonlinear ﬁlters for state estimation of UV ﬂash processes.
2018 IEEE Conference on Control Technology and Applications
(CCTA), pages 1753–1760, 2018.
[Sel18] Anton Sellberg.
Open-Loop Optimal Control of Chromato-
graphic Separation Processes. PhD thesis, Department of Chem-
ical Engineering, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, 2018.
[Sim06] Dan. Simon. Optimal State Estimation. John Wiley & Sons,
2006.
[SSH08] O. Shipilova, T. Sainio, and H. Haario.
Particle trans-
port method for simulation of multicomponent chromatography
problems. Journal of Chromatography a, 1204(1):62–71, 2008.
==PAGE:160==
146
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[TGK16] Aditya Tulsyan, R. Bhushan Gopaluni, and Swanand R. Khare.
Particle ﬁltering without tears: A primer for beginners. Com-
puters and Chemical Engineering, 95:130–145, 2016.
[vA10] Eric von Lieres and Joel Andersson. A fast and accurate solver
for the gerenal rate model of column liquid chromatography.
Computers & Chemical Engineering, 34:1180–1191, 2010.
[van81] Martinus Th. van Genuchten. Analytical solutions for chemical
transport with simultaneous adsorption, zero-order production
and ﬁrst-order decay. Journal of Hydrology, 49(3):213 – 233,
1981.
[VDMAWIJ09] Rudolph Van Der Merwe, Eric A. Wan, and Simon I. Julier.
The unscented Kalman ﬁlter for nonlinear estimation. 2009.
