==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Smartwatch EMA Data Collection and Vi-
sual Analytics
Indsamling og visuel analyse af EMA data fra smart-
watch
Rasmus
Lundsgaard
Christiansen
(s123344)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This master’s thesis explores the different types of data worth collecting and combin-
ing to gain insights and better understand the impact of the different factors that
influences our health, and in particularly sleep.
With the increasing market for affordable and smaller ubiquitous and wearable
technology, self-tracking and personal informatics is no longer limited to the pro-
fessional use in healthcare sector and by enthusiasts, but available to the broader
population of consumers.
The thesis proposes a web-based visual analytics application to combine and
explore multiple dimensions of passive, active and contextual-data from different
sources.
The application aims to enable users with interest in self-tracking, but limited tech-
nical ability to extract and knowledge of statistical methods to analyse the data and
explore temporal trends.
The after several iterations, the prototype is finally tested on eight subjects with dif-
ferent qualifications and technical skill-level.
During three different trials, the subjects is observed and interviewed to continuously
identify and amend for design flaws to validate and improve the usability and use-
fulness of the proposed approaches to better navigate and explore different type of
temporal data.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a Master of Science in Engineering degree in Digital Media
Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, January 22, 2019
Rasmus Lundsgaard Christiansen (s123344)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would first and foremost like to thank my supervisor Jakob Eg Larsen for dedicating
an substantial amount of time discussing the project and quantified self in general.
Furthermore for introducing me to self-tracking during science in the city festival 3.5
years ago, where we both volunteered.
All my testers were only paid in oreos and salted almonds. I really appreciate your
time and inputs.
Also a big thank you to the late Professor Grinstein who inspired me to care about
doing amazing visualizations during my 2018 Massachusetts exchange, before his un-
timely passing.
Finally I would like to thank my parents for supporting me throughout my stud-
ies and in particular during the last phase of the thesis where I have exiled myself in
their house, where they have cooked and motivated me.
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
State Of The Art
3
2.1
Project Foundation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Data Visualizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Existing Dashboard Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Analysis
7
3.1
Personal Informatics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Types of Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Wearable Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Design
15
4.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Iterations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.3
Working with Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5
Implementation
23
5.1
Choosing a Platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Choosing a Tool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3
Cleaning the Data for Increased Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.4
Persistent State . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.5
Additional Tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6
Evaluation
27
6.1
Initial Trial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
==PAGE:9==
Contents
vii
6.2
Primary Trial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.3
Final Trial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.4
Trial Phases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
7
Results
31
7.1
Insights from Initial Trial
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7.2
Insights from Primary Trial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7.3
Insights from Final Trial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7.4
Trial Main Takeaways
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.5
Questionnaire Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
8
Discussion and Conclusion
35
9
Future Work
37
9.1
Minor Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
9.2
Different Scales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
9.3
Major Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
9.4
Comparisons
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
A Evaluation
41
A.1 Evaluation Questionnaire
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
B Prototype
43
C Project Plan
45
Bibliography
47
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Measuring human body vitals for personal insight or healthcare reasons has histori-
cally been limited to personal data enthusiasts (quantified selfers) and professionals
as the equipment was both expensive and inconvenient, often due to it’s size or re-
sources needed to perform the measurments.
This has changed In the recent decade, as hardware producers has successfully begun
to offer ubiquitous and wearable products at a price and form factor more appealing
for the broader consumer market.
This trend has enabled regular people to gain insights about their physical activities,
fitness, nutrition and sleep in order to stay healthy and motivated to keep improving
their lives for the better.
It also enables patients with chronic diseases and illness’ such as diabetics, epileptics,
sleep apnea, allergies, asthma or people suffering PTSD, to gain better knowledge
about their own specific vital reactions when their state is particularly good or bad.
With enough data, this can allow them to identify and even react in situations similar
to previously recorded episodes where the outcome is known. All this without the
immediate involvement of healthcare professionals who might either be far away or
have limited resources, ultimately giving them the possibility to self-diagnose and
hopefully improve their quality of life.
The most common wearable devices, such as sleep and activity-trackers are usually
connected to the users smartphone where the accompanying software application will
intervene if the users behaviour, retrospectively, is less than ideal.
Examples of ecological momentary interventions (EMI [HS10]) are real time notifica-
tions about long periods of physical inactivity, missing steps to achieve a daily goal
or bedtime suggestions in order to get the desired hours of sleep before waking up at
the regular time. The applications also provide overviews of the daily collected data
and inferred metrics.
One thing that is lacking in many of these solutions is a temporal overview allowing
the users to see and investigate long-term trends, and explore different combinations
of values and metrics over time to visually identify potential correlations. Another
feature lacking in most solutions is the ability to include data from other products or
sources in order to compare and correlate it.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
The goal of this master thesis is to investigate existing and novel methods for vi-
sualizing and exploring the combination of three types of three data types (figure ??)
ultimately proposing a single multi-faceted web-based dashboard for visual analytics,
to be used by people with little or no knowledge of statistical analysis, but not limited
to.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
State Of The Art
2.1
Project Foundation
The project started in many ways in spring 2018 during an exchange visit at Univer-
sity of Massachusetts, Amherst (UMass).
One of the projects in the course 696DS Data Science Individualised Study supervised by
Professor Andrew McCallum, aimed to replicate an existing study from Dartmouth
College (StudentLife) where 48 students collected data from their smartphones over
a 10 week period[Wan+14].
The study and released dataset involved sensor data from Android smartphones and
various comprehensive pre- and post-experiment surveys, amongst them: Big Five,
PHQ9 depression scale and perceived stress scale (PSS), but also shorter daily ques-
tionnaires during the 10 week period.
These questionnaires, known as Ecological
Momentary Assessments (EMA) were performed performed directly on the individu-
als smartphone.
The study and available dataset shows how the compliance rate of the EMA’s drops
closing in on the examination period, this trend is further backed up by Intille et
al[Int+16] in a study comparing EMA’s on smartphones and smartwatches, where
the use of smartwatches performs consistently better than smartphones.
As smartwatches and ubiquitus computing devices are becoming more affordable and
houses high frequency sensors such as accelerometer and pulse, UMass’ Center for
Data Science started this project in collaboration with Fitbit Inc, who had half a
year prior released their first smartwatch, the Fitbit Ionic, with support for third-
party application development, in an effort to both compete with smartwatches such
as Apple’s iWatch and Android Wear along with fitness trackers from TomTom and
Garmin[Inc17].
This was interesting because of the potential for real-time sensor analysis with ma-
chine learning, supported by EMA and EMI. The project could also benefit from
lessons learned by the researchers behind the Sensible DTU1 project, which shared
many potential similarities.
The project, STRess Analysis and INtervention (STRAIN) originally aimed to col-
1List of Sensible DTU publications: https://sunelehmann.com/sensibledtu-publications/
==PAGE:14==
4
2 State Of The Art
lect vitals from a Fitbit Ionic smartwatch in real-time, and intervene (EMI) if future
stressful behaviour is predicted on recently collected data.
The original STRAIN project is still in active development by the time of publishing
this thesis.
2.2
Data Visualizations
Using visualization to explore data is nothing new, and something most children learn
in elementry school.
While we keep utilizing the techniques as part of storytelling in highschool and later
using excel at out workplaces, the variety of visualization techniques used, does not
change much.
2.2.1
Most Common
In a study[CLS15] comparing most common visualizations used in 30 videos recorded
at Quantified Self Meetups, Choe et al. found that the vast majority of visualizations
used were Line Chart (71), Bar Chart (33) and Scatter Plots (23).
The fourth most registered were custom charts (21).
2.2.2
Spirals
As part of the Sensible DTU study[Lar13], previously mentioned, Larsen et al. made
an Spiral visualization for smartphones. This visualization is great for spotting tem-
poral trends, but offers limited dimensionality.
The Spiral can be seen in figure 2.1.
2.3
Existing Dashboard Solutions
2.3.1
Quantified Self Dashboards
A study from 2015 explores the availability of existing multi-facet systems, similar to
the one proposed in this thesis[Jon15].
Three of the solutions https://exist.io/, https://tictrac.com/ and https://
zenobase.com seemingly only offers uni-facet visualization, mostly the ones men-
tioned in section 2.2.1.
Exist.io does offer correlation, but in an automated statistical fashion.
==PAGE:15==
2.3 Existing Dashboard Solutions
5
Figure 2.1: Spiral Chart for weekly/monthly/yearly trend spotting.
Another study[Cho+17] Choe et al. proposes the dashboard Visualized Self.
As with the previous mentioned solutions, none of them uses complex visualizations
combining the multi-facet data.
2.3.2
µEMA
Designing EMAs for smartwatches has previously been researched and tested by In-
tille et al. [Int+16].
The commecial product ilumivu offers µEMAs as a service for running behavioral
health interventions or Ecological Momentary Assessment studies.2
2https://ilumivu.com/
==PAGE:16==
6
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Analysis
3.1
Personal Informatics
The concept of Personal Informatics Systems concerns the process of collecting, analysing
and reflecting upon data collected about ourselves. The act is also known as self-
tracking or quatified self.
Li et al. has proposed a five stage model in a paper from 2010[LDF10]. The model
describes an iterative process and its properties (figure 3.1).
The five stages can be described like the following:
• Preparation.
First one needs to figure out what personal data to collect,
and why. The system differentiates between system-driven, user-driven or a
combination.
This thesis involves both user- and system-driven (EMA and
Sensed data, respectively).
• Collection. The collection does not have to be digital. Carrying around a
piece of paper can be just as effective.
• Integration. The data needs to be be systemized in a way that makes it easy
to analyse and reflect upon, whether it being multiple papers summarized in
one, or a relational database system.
• Reflect. Insights comes with reflection. This could be achieved with traditional
descriptive statistics or various types of data visualization techniques.
• Action. When and if one has learned anything from the reflection, one needs
to take action.
The main properties of the process are:
• Iterative. The process is iterative, meaning that each iteration will add new
insights, data, tools or processes. Every reflection will be different.
• Barriers Cascade. Barriers in one stage will cascade into the next, meaning
that unsolve problems will remain problems in later stages.
==PAGE:18==
8
3 Analysis
Figure 3.1: Five Stages of Personal Informatics.
• Uni-faceted vs multi-faceted. Uni-faceted systems only focuses on one as-
pect of the user’s life, such as health, nutrition or sleep. Multi-faceted systems
includes more facets, often with the purpose of discovering weather one influ-
ences another. These systems are more rare because of the increased complexity
in all stages, but particularly collection and reflection.
This project will mainly focus on the reflection stage by proposing a multi-faceted
dashboard solution where a user is able to visually analyse, explore and reflect upon
different facets alone or in combinations.
3.2
Types of Data
As described in previous section, the aim of this thesis is to explore and propose a
prototype capable of multi-faceted visual analytics.
Figure 3.2 shows a venn diagram containing the three different types of data explored
in this thesis.
3.2.1
Passive (Sensor)
Sensor data passively collected with wearable device.
The data collected and metrics inferred varies from device to device.
Depending on the computational capabilities of the device, some metrics might be
edge computed (on the device or smartphone companion app) or in the cloud.
The most common sensor in fitness and sleep devices are:
• Accelerometer
• Orientation
==PAGE:19==
3.2 Types of Data
9
Figure 3.2: Venn-diagram showing the three types of data
• Gyroscope
These three sensed values are often enough to infer states of very high activity (i.e.
running/biking) or very low (i.e. sleeping).
3.2.2
Active - Ecological Momentary Assessments (EMA)
EMAs offers the individuals perceived subjective experience. As people can be self-
deceptive or sensors incorrect, comparing active EMA data with passive, can be very
interesting.
EMAs can either be periodic or triggered by e.g. geofencing or changes in state.
As the compliance rate is significantly better on smartwatches (section ??) it is the
desired collection method, for simpler questions.
MicroEMAs (µEMA) works well with binary questions (Yes/No), multiple-choice (up
to five on the screen widthout scrolling, see figure 3.3) or numerical scales. Examples
of EMAs (the three first is used in this project prototype):
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Analysis
• Sleep quality/restedness
• Supplements (Coffee, Vitamins, Protein etc.)
• Meditation
• Mood
• Glasses of water
• Exercise (mental or physical)
3.2.3
Contextual Data
Contextual data is data that gives context to a person, entity or event.
Examples of contextual data (Air pollution being used in this project prototype):
• Air Pollution
• Geolocation
• Temperature (inside and outside)
• Pressure
• Humidity
• Lunar cycle
• Pollen values
3.3
Wearable Devices
The project initially focused on the Fitbit Ionic as the sole device used for both collec-
tion of EMAs and passive sensor/inferred data. The software for collecting the data,
were developed in collaboration with students at UMass. The Fitbit SDK is relatively
new, and while Fitbit are dedicating many resources to it, it is still immature in many
ways and has proved erroneous especially when collecting sensor data. Due to this
and difficulties collaborating with others with changing goals across the globe, the
focus shifted to the Oura ring for the passive collection.
Fitbit Ionic is still useful for EMAs, but is not a part of this project’s final implemen-
tation.
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Wearable Devices
11
3.3.1
Fitbit Ionic/Versa Sensors
Fitbit Ionic has various sensors mainly used for fitness purposes. Most interstingly is
the Sp02 sensor, that is used for blood oxygen saturation. while the sensor is in the
device, it is still not possible to use it1.
Table 3.1 shows the Fitbit sensors.
Picture 3.3 shows a stress related EMA developed as part of the UMass course
described in section 2.1. The dataflow architecture is shown in picture 3.4.
3.3.2
Oura Ring (v2)
Finnish company Oura started shipping their second ring in June 2018. Then one
used for data collection in this thesis arrived 10th of October 2018.
The ring is mainly used for sleep, but also waterproof and offers metrics related
to physical activities.
The ring is even smaller and more convenient than wearing a smartwatch and are
holds almost the same sensors as the Fitbit Ionic.
Table 3.2 shows the Oura sensors.
Furthermore, Oura provides a wide variety of inferred metrics and scores. Many
og them are used in the prototype. Particularly useful ones are:
1https://community.fitbit.com/t5/Ionic/SPO2-sensor/td-p/2255741
Sensor
Data
Accelerometer
Acceleration and Orientation
Pulse
Heart Rate (BPM)
Barometer
Atmospheric pressure (forecast weather changes)
Orientation
Orientation
Gyroscope
Angular Velocity
Sp02
Blood Oxygen Saturation
Table 3.1: Fitbit Ionic Sensors
Sensor
Data
Accelerometer
Acceleration and Orientation
Pulse
Heart Rate (BPM)
Gyroscope
Angular Velocity
Nocturnal skin temperature
Body temperature
Table 3.2: Ouraring Sensors
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Analysis
Figure 3.3: Picture of the Fitbit Ionic and an awating stress EMA.
Figure 3.4: Diagram of the dataflow between Fitbit Ionic, companion device and
STRAIN backend.
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Wearable Devices
13
• Readiness Score
• Sleep Score
• Heart Rate Variability
• Efficiency Score
Full list and descriptions can be seen at Oura website2,3,4.
2https://cloud.ouraring.com/docs/sleep
3https://cloud.ouraring.com/docs/activity
4https://cloud.ouraring.com/docs/readiness
==PAGE:24==
14
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4
Design
Designing and testing prototypes in the field of human-computer interaction requires
an approach a bit different compared to testing against a null hypothesis using statis-
tics on quantitative data.
While having one or more hypothesis’ is still a necessary and an important part of
the process, a user’s experience using a product can be very subjective and the use
of widespread adopted design patterns might not be intuitive to your particular user
segment.
It is hence important to first understand and outline the user’s needs before building
prototyping.
4.1
Method
A normal approach to prototyping and user-driven design is first prototyping on pa-
per or with wireframes. While this is a powerful technique, this project relies heavily
on the users interaction. DC.js, used in this project offers great complexity, but also
many examples that were useful in the beginning.
The majority of the early prototyping were done in collaboration with thesis supervi-
sor and professor Jakob Eg Larsen (JEL) who has many years of experience collecting,
analysing and building tools for personal informatics. JEL was a continous source of
ideas and inspiration.
One of JEL’s former students, Johan Frolich’s thesis also involved the use of multi-
facet data[Frø18].
His work inspired the process of visualizing many dimensions.
4.2
Iterations
4.2.1
v0.1 to v0.5
The first five versions were mainly tested and discussed with the supervisor during
meetings approximately every second week. While having used D3.js prior to this the-
==PAGE:26==
16
4 Design
sis, DC.js introduced a complexity, especially when trying to implement something
unconventional, that had a steep learning curve.
The heatmap from the first solution (figure 4.1), did not allow change in the size of
each observation, why the Bubblechart (see figure 4.2b) was chosen instead.
In version 0.4 and 0.5. A piechart/donut was introduced, which showed the distri-
bution of the four sleep stages: awake, light, rem and deep-sleep.
DC.js is not built for this kind of aggregation across multiple parameters, why the
solution were customized. See figures 4.3a and 4.3b.
4.2.2
v0.6
In this version, eventually used in the initial user trial, options to change the param-
eters (bubble size and color) were added. Besides the two originally used parameters
total sleep and readiness the visualization now offered the user to change size
and bubble to the following: total bedtime, sleep score, sleep score, efficiency
score, heart rate variability, and latency score.
As all of these parameters had different ranges, the values were normalized using
feature scaling bringing all values into the range of [0,1] (see equation: ??).
X′ =
X −Xmin
Xmax −Xmin
(4.1)
A data table containing the last months entries were also added below the The itera-
tion can be seen in figure 4.4a.
Figure 4.1: v0.1 - Heatmap and barchart
==PAGE:27==
4.2 Iterations
17
(a) v0.2 - Scatter/Bubble plot
(b) v0.3 - Adjusted bubble sizes and new
colorscheme
Figure 4.2: Version 0.2 and 0.3
(a) v0.4 -
(b) v0.5 -
Figure 4.3: Version 0.4 and 0.5
(a) v0.6 - Used for first user trial
(b) v0.7 -
Figure 4.4: Version 0.6 and 0.7
==PAGE:28==
18
4 Design
4.2.3
v0.7 (0.7.1-0.7.3)
After the initial user-test, changes were carried out to make the prototype more user
friendly without out verbal assistance, as experienced necessary in results chapter
(7.1).
A colormap and two interaction helpers were implemented.
Furthermore the different approaches to multi-facet data were implemented, but kept
seperate for the primary test.
Proposal 0.7.1. Shows just a smiley symbol in the middle of each bubble observa-
tion. The smiley icon is to representing an binary EMA such as subjective restedness
(since we are mainly looking at sleep), but also mood. As no EMA data has been
collected throughout the thesis, it is randomly generated in runtime.
Proposal 0.7.2. 4 symbols now surround each observation, although only visible
upon hovering each observation. The three white symbols are binary EMAs (all ran-
domly generated in runtime), and the final is a continuous contextual variable.
Use of symbols has often an individual meaning to people, which was also seen in the
user trials, where people had different opinions and suggestions.
The intended meaning of the symbols is the following:
• Brain Symbol. Daily Meditation [EMA, either present or not]
• Capsule Symbol. Daily Supplement intake [EMA, either present or not]
• Smiley Symbol. Subjective sleep experience [EMA, either positive, negative
or not present]
• Factory Symbol.
Continuous variable, with a colored background scaling
from red (bad) to green (good) representing air pollution (NOX). Data mined
with tool from section 5.5.2 [Contextual]
Proposal 0.7.3 Same as proposal 0.7.2, but every icon is shown (if present) by de-
fault.
Se figures: 4.4b, 4.5, 4.6a and 4.6b.
4.2.4
v0.8 - Final Prototype Version
Having tested with the majority of the test subjects, changes to the usability were
made.
The colors in the piechart were based upon the existing colorscheme, and adjusted
such that deep were the darkest followed by rem and finally light being the lightest.
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Iterations
19
Figure 4.5: v0.7.1 - EMA
(a) v0.7.2 - Scatter/Bubble plot
(b) v0.7.3 -
Figure 4.6: Version 0.7.2 and 0.7.3
==PAGE:30==
20
4 Design
Labels were added to the bubblechart axis’ to avoid any confusion.
An infobar were added to the top of the screen, showing selected parameters and the
menu previously known as settings, now called options placed next to it.
See figure 4.7.
4.3
Working with Time
Working with time in time-series may initially seem straightforward, but that is not
necessarily the case.
Aspects such Daylight-times savings, time-zones and different interpretations in differ-
ent countries, are all things that needs to be considered and addressed when working
with time.
English spoken countries uses dateformatting beginning with the month then date
and switches between AM and PM each for 12 hours, whereas European countries
formats dates beginning with the date then month, and uses the 24-hour timescale.
While it is common and best practise to store all time in UTC (Coordinated Universal
Time) and adjust in the user-interface, to where the developer or the user is located,
it is not always done properly1
Another significant difference is what is considered to be the first day of the week.
1Fitbit’s
incorrect
time
usage:
https://community.fitbit.com/t5/Web-API-
Development/Understanding-how-Fitbit-deals-with-time-time-zones-UTC-etc/td-p/1997835
Figure 4.7: v0.8 - Feedback and bugfixing
==PAGE:31==
4.3 Working with Time
21
According to the international standard ISO 8601, Monday is the first day of the
week, yet USA, Canada and Australia sees Sunday as the first day of the week.
As this project relies heavily on the use of weeks as the main dimensions in the visu-
alization it relies on the built-in javascript date handler and getDay()-method. This
method will return an integer from 0-6 representing the weekday, where zero is Sun-
day and six Saturday.
To mitigate for this, a new getEuDate()-method has been defined in the utility-library
/public/js/utils.js which is then used instead of the existing method.
1 Date.prototype.getEuDay = function() {
2
return (this.getDay() + 6) % 7;
3 }
Listing 4.1: getEuDay()-method
The new method is however not used by the DC.js library and causes the issue seen
in figure 4.8.
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Design
Figure 4.8: BubbleChart adjusted to Monday being the first day of the week, but
DC.js’s use of getDay()-method renders it incorrectly.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation
In this chapter this final implementation and the tools used to create it will be out-
lined.
5.1
Choosing a Platform
Using visualizations for pattern detection in time-series requires enough screen real
estate to view the large amounts of observations simultaneously.
The prototype further makes use of different sizes, colors and symbols to represent
different dimensions and values, so it is important that the user is able to distinguish
between small differences amongst the observations.
While modern smartphones have increasingly larger displays and image resolutions,
they are not suitable for the intended use of this project.
This leaves desktops, laptops and tablets and the choice between native applications
or web-based.
5.1.1
Native
Natively developed applications will always offer the best performance and ability to
use the features provided by the underlying operating system.
Choosing the native approach will either limit the project to one operating system or
require multiple different versions of the same applications to support the different
platforms. The three major ones; Windows, Mac OS and GNU/Linux, additionally
has different preferences for programming languages and SDKs1.
5.1.2
Web
To optimize the relationship between written code and the amount of reachable users,
the web is a popular platform as developers. Using HTML, CSS and Javascript de-
velopers are able to reach the vast majority of users with a computer, assuming they
1Software Development Kits
==PAGE:34==
24
5 Implementation
have a computer bought within the last decade and a internet connection.
Javascript has undergone an huge transformation since it’s beginning in the mid-
nineties where the it was never intended for more than minor browser manipulations.
With the support and optimizations from the engines behind major browsers, in par-
ticular Gecko (Mozilla’s Firefox) and WebKit (Google’s Chrome and Apple’s Safari),
there exists Javascript with thousands of lines of code, both for backend2 and fron-
tend purposes.
The ability to manipulate HTML and CSS in realtime, makes it a powerful choice
for dynamic and seamless manipulation of graphical elements and data, why many
frameworks and libraries for data visualization in the browser exists.
Most notably is D3, but other contestants such as ChartJS, Google Charts and High-
Charts offer the most common charts in a more high-level manner.
5.1.3
Hybrids
The third option is a hybrid between the two previous, a generic application that
runs in a container, supported by multiple platforms.
Xamarin3 is well known for building cross-platform mobile apps for Android and iOS.
Facebook’s React Native4 has been heavily optimized to reach a near-native perfor-
mance on major platforms (e.g. Android and MacOS).
The more recent Google’s Flutter5 shows great promise but with it’s young age, is
still a bit immature for more complex applications.
React Native is a great technology, particularly for converting existing webapplica-
tions to near-native apps, giving them the ability to utilize the underlying platform’s
features (such as use of a persistent filesystem). As the purpose of this project has
been to make a proof-of-concept not a full application, the choice has been to make a
regular website that still offers wide user adoption on desktops, laptops and tablets.
5.2
Choosing a Tool
Two of the major tools for making complex custom visualizations for the web is D3
(Data-Driven Documents) and Tableau. The two’s strengths and weaknesses are com-
pared in a paper from 2017[17].
The main reason for chosing D3.JS6 is experience, and price, D3.js being open-source
and Tableau a commecial product.
2Node.js: https://nodejs.org/
3Xamarin: https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/xamarin/
4React Native: https://facebook.github.io/react-native/
5Flutter: https://flutter.io
6https://d3js.org/
==PAGE:35==
5.3 Cleaning the Data for Increased Performance
25
Crossfilter.js7 is a tool making it easier to use the same data for multiple visual-
izations. It further more keeps track of the selections, reflecting changes in all the
diagrams upon user interactions.
DC.js makes it easy to natively use crossfilter.js and d3.js providing multi-dimensional
charting.
5.2.1
Node.js
While only consisting of Javascript, HTML and CSS. Complex frontend can often
cause problems when testing locally. Due to this and to ease server deploymen, a
simple Node.js server using express.js is used to serve the website despite having no
traditional backend capabilities.
5.2.2
Docker
To simplify deployment to different operating systems for testing and serving, Docker
is used to deploy a virtual machine and automatically install all dependencies.
Read more about using this approach in the README.md file.
5.3
Cleaning the Data for Increased Performance
The data points collected and generated for each day by the oura ring, is quite sub-
stantial, and many of the attributes are not relevant or used in the current prototype.
When D3 is loading the raw oura data from an exported JSON-file, all the data is
loaded in to the computers memory. Modern webbrowsers are already consuming
much RAM8 when many tabs and extensions are running, often causing the website
interactions to feel slow and inresponsive.
The oura dataset used for the prototype consists of three months worth of sleep and
activity-data which amounts to 2.2 megabytes of cleartext data.
The primary computer used in development and testing, a Apple Macbook Pro model
2015, contains a 2.7 GHz Intel i5 CPU and 8 gigabytes of RAM. Despite being is a
powerful computer, quite adequate for intense parallel computing needs, it experi-
enced difficulties when the filtering of data was slow enough for the user to wonder if
the data filtering was registered. On several occasions the browser became unrespon-
sive and the operating system even crashed once.
To circumvent this behaviour a data cleansing script munger.py written in the python
language, has been developed and attach to the project.
It’s main purpose is to remove the two attributes hr_5min and rmssd_5min
which collects heart rate and heart rate variability every five minutes, during the
7https://crossfilter.github.io/crossfilter/
8Random Access Memory
==PAGE:36==
26
5 Implementation
sleep.
This decreases the size of the output JSON-file to just 36 kilobytes for the afore-
mentioned three months period.
The prototype does support the entire unaltered datadump, but offers a signifi-
cantly better user experience when using the stripped version.
5.4
Persistent State
It is not possible to save state in the current implementation, it is however possible
to define preselected parameters using querystring in the url. Example of url setting
parameters: http://http://localhost:3000/?size=activity&color=latency.
5.5
Additional Tools
5.5.1
Oura Cleaner
As previously mentioned, the Oura datadump is quite verbose as two of the parame-
ters are recorded every 5 minutes.
A python script to clean those two parameters has been included in the /tools-
directory.
5.5.2
Airpollution Data
A python notebook has been created and included in the /tools-directory, enabling
scraping data from this page, with possibility to change the location. https://envs2.
au.dk/Luftdata/Presentation/table/Copenhagen/HC%C3%98.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 6
Evaluation
During the main part of the project the evaluation of the prototype and approach has
been in collaboration with the project supervisor Professor Jakob Eg Larsen (JEL)
at frequent meetings.
JEL has many years of experience with self-tracking, supervising students and build-
ing tools for personal informatics and has been a great source of ideas.
As JEL also received a Oura ring wearable used as the projects passive source of data,
the different inferred metrics were discussed a lot.
As the prototype became more mature during the end of the period, an user-study
consisting of three different trials, was designed to test the usability of the prototype.
6.1
Initial Trial
The first trial was a pilot with the main purpose of rooting out the most obvious
errors and shortcomings by a user with previous experience with self-tracking, using
and building visualizations with D3. The iteration tested was version 0.6 (figure 4.4a).
The subject did not fill out the same questionnaire as the following subjects.
6.2
Primary Trial
In the second trial five subjects with various backgrounds were recruited. All of the
subjects were either engineering-students or recently graduated, in the fields of: En-
vironmental (two), Computer Science (Security), Biotechnology and Digital Media
(Data Science).
All the subjects were between 24 and 26 years old and had all completed an in-
troduction course in statistics, and some considerable more experience both using
and building visualizations.
All except for one, did or had previously been self-tracking with the following reasons:
• Nutrition (counting calories)
• Activity tracking (Walking, Running, Biking)
==PAGE:38==
28
6 Evaluation
• Sleep and Steps
• Fitness progress tracking
The subjects were tested using version 0.7 followed by 0.7.1, 0.7.2 and 0.7.3.
6.3
Final Trial
In the final trial the feedback from the previous subjects in the primary trial, had
been reflected upon and necessary changes incorporated into the prototype.
Only two subjects were selected for this trial but specifically picked for the last trial,
as they each represented opposite ends of the envisioned user segment.
Subject 7, a 68 years old male with a bachelor’s degree as an technical architect. While
having worked with computers during his professional career, his technical skill-level
and ability to quickly understand and navigate software is substantial, compared to
the younger subjects. The subject does collect and explore personal data as a hobby.
Subject 8, a 27 years old male currently finishing his PhD in Data Science, mainly
focused on Machine Learning, has extensive knowledge about using and building vi-
sualizations to explore and understand data.
Previously suffering from problems sleeping, has made him knowledgeable about and
interested in sleep theory and his own behaviour.
The subjects were tested using version 0.8 followed by 0.7.1, 0.7.2 and 0.7.3.
6.4
Trial Phases
The evaluation trial consisted of four phases and lasted between 25 and 60 minutes,
depending on the users own engagement.
Prototype version 0.7 (figure 4.4b) and subsequently 0.7.1, 0.7.2, 0.7.3 in the third
phase.
6.4.1
Phase 1
Initially the subject was only told that the data, initially visible, was sleep data.
The subject was then allowed to navigate and explore the application and encouraged
to apply the use of thinking aloud[Wae00] meanwhile.
==PAGE:39==
6.4 Trial Phases
29
6.4.2
Phase 2
When the subject had discovered the initially hidden controls menu and applied filters
both with the BubbleChart and BarChart, they were first asked to explain:
• Each observation/bubble in the BubbleChart represented
• Height of each bar in the BarChart
• What was depicted in the PieChart
The subject were now given three tasks:
6.4.2.1
Task 1
Identify patterns of weekdays with a lot or very little sleep.
Used to evaluate the subjects ability to use the BubbleChart to identify patterns.
6.4.2.2
Task 2
Identify the week with the highest percentage of deep sleep.
The purpose of this task was to evaluate the usefulness of the PieChart.
6.4.2.3
Task 3
Change the visualization to following parameter combinations, and try to explain if
they were interesting and why/why not.
• Sleep Score and Latency (Sleep onset)
• Efficiency and Disturbance
• Heart Rate Variability and Inactivity Alerts
• Steps and Sleep Score
6.4.3
Phase 3
The subject had until now only been exploring the passive sleep and activity data
collected by the Oura ring.
To begin with, proposal 0.7.1 (figure 4.5) was presented to the subject to introduce
the topic of actively collected data (EMA).
The subject was told that the use of symbols increased the dimensionality from three
to four data dimensions.
==PAGE:40==
30
6 Evaluation
Ideally the between subjects experiment design would be used, due to the limited
subject population within subjects[CGK12] was chosen to expose each subject to all
the proposals and eliminate potential bias of the treatment order.
As proposal 0.7.1 presented less dimensions compared to the other two, and was
used as an introduction, each subject had it presented first.
The predetermined order can be seen in table 6.1.
6.4.4
Phase 4
In the fourth phase, the subjects were asked to fill out a post-test questionnaire.
The questionnaire can be found in appendix A.1.
Subject/Trial
First
Second
Third
1 (Initial Run)
Proposal 1
Proposal 2
Proposal 3
2 (Primary)
Proposal 1
Proposal 3
Proposal 2
3 (Primary)
Proposal 1
Proposal 3
Proposal 2
4 (Primary)
Proposal 1
Proposal 2
Proposal 3
5 (Primary)
Proposal 1
Proposal 3
Proposal 2
6 (Primary)
Proposal 1
Proposal 2
Proposal 3
7 (Final)
Proposal 1
Proposal 3
Proposal 2
8 (Final)
Proposal 1
Proposal 2
Proposal 3
Table 6.1: Within Subjects Experiment Design
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 7
Results
The user-tests generally went very well. The approach to initially only tell the subject
that the data was sleep data, forced the subjects to explore and think aloud, and were
openended questions such as ”what do you mean by that?” and ”why do you think
that?”.
Most of the subjects were able to find patterns in the data displayed by default,
but many did not discover the interactive elements before running out of things to do
and nudged in the right direction by implying they still had things to discover, this
was particularly the case for the subjects with the least amount of data science and
statistical background.
7.1
Insights from Initial Trial
The initial trial’s participant already had knowledge about building websites and data
analysis. Despite having a PhD in civil engineering, he had a great understanding
and passion for information technology.
In spite of these skills, he did not manage to scroll and see the content not immedi-
ately visible, nor did he find the parameter controls on his own.
This was a great indicator that more guidance were needed to learn how to use the
tool without being verbally taught. Because of this, the ”settings” and ”scroll down”
indicators shown in figure 4.4b, were introduced.
He also had problems understanding the colorscale, why the colormap was introduced.
Supervisor JEL had also pointed out that there was no week 53 in 2018, why the
mislabeling in the BubbleChart was a coding error. The one day week 53 in the
BarChart is due to the difficulties in handling time, described in section 4.3.
7.2
Insights from Primary Trial
Being more confident that subjects would be able to change parameters without in-
tervention, the primary trial consisting of five subjects began.
All the subjects had an engineering background, but in particular the two subjects
from environmetal department (both bachelor students), still had some difficulties
==PAGE:42==
32
7 Results
understanding parts of the application, without guidance.
This might have partly been because of the remaining subjects who were either re-
cently graduated master’s students or in the very end of their master’s and all self
proclaimed ”data nerds”.
In the second task (section 6.4.2.2), all subjects initially chose a different approach
than intended. The intention were to have the subjects pick one week at the time
in the BarChart, comparing the deep sleep percentage seen in the PieChart to the
previous. Every subject did however look the the deep sleep parameter in the list of
options. One subject tried to find the week by chosing the parameter efficiency score
- an intersting approach.
Some of the subjects seemed to have difficulties identifying the different sleep stages
due to the small amount of rem and deep sleep. To improve this, the awake dimension
was removed, as it did not provide much new information (the difference can easily
be seen comparing the sleep total and sleep duration).
While the PieChart seemed like a good approach to show the distribution of sleep
stages, it might not be that useful after all. It’s functionality can be replaced by a
modified stacked BarChart. This idea is described further in the future work chapter
(section ??).
All subjects initially didn’t know what the bubble color and size meant, because
the information were only available upon activation of the settings menu. Even after
discovering the menu, they often forgot what the current parameters were. An always
visible infobar containing the selected parameters were placed in the top of the screen.
A few of the subjects discovered the ”settings” menu very late or upon a gentle nudge,
despite the arrow indicator. One explained that the naming cause him to think it
had less interesting settings such as show/hide grid, axis labels etc.
The menu was renamed to ”options”, which was also written on top of the activation
button. The menu was removed to the top of the screen, next to the new infobar.
One subject were initially in doubt about the BubbleChart’s x-axis (Week numbers).
Labels were added to both it’s x and y-axis.
7.3
Insights from Final Trial
In the final trial, the two subjects most different from the rest were tested.
The prototype had now reached v0.8 (figure 4.7) and issues such as knowing which
parameters were selected and accessing the options menu were not an issue for either
participants.
It took some extended questioning about what was being displayed before the older
subject (number 7) fully grasped the concept of bubble-size and color. Interestingly
==PAGE:43==
7.4 Trial Main Takeaways
33
enough subject 8 were also not too familiar with the BubbleChart and stated he
would have preferred a regular scatterplot, although he agreed it would be harder to
identify temporal tendencies (more about that in future work, section 9.4.1). Subject
8 identified all symbols correctly, as the only subject, but did not guess the correct
intended meaning of them all, which is also subjective, and should be chosen and
changed to reflect the individual users point of view.
Both enjoyed the experience but both agreed that more guidance were necessary
for the prototype to be a completely self-explanatory system.
”Try clicking this”
upon hovering or animations indicating dynamic elements.
7.4
Trial Main Takeaways
The main takeaways from the users tests can be summed up to the following changes
and ideas.
• Ability to compare two selections. (section 9.4)
• Presets with interesting combinations (section 9.1.1)
• Change PieChart to stacked BarChart, improves ability to compare weeks (sec-
tion 9.4.1)
• A hybrid between proposal 0.7.2 and 0.7.3 (section 9.1.3)
7.5
Questionnaire Results
Subject
Most Preferred
-
Least Preferred
2
1
3
2
3
2
3
1
4
2
1
3
5
2
1
3
6
2
1
3
7
2
1
3
8
2
1
3
Table 7.1: Test Subject’s Preferred Proposals
==PAGE:44==
34
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion and
Conclusion
Having access to increasingly more personal data from multiple sources, wether ac-
tively collecting or not, enables us to explore and find trends and correlations across
different aspects of our lives to improve sleep, health, nutrition, motivation and many
more.
The project has been very interesting and has resulted in a powerful application
that can be used by people to combine multi-facet data from sources such as wear-
ables and IOT1 (pollution) equipment without the technical abilities or knowhow.
The prototype is not intended to be initially easy, but with some training allowing
users to spend time exploring aspects of their lives both according to and in-between
passive sensing, their own subjective opinion (EMA) and surroundings (contextual).
The approach to have three different user-test trials worked very well and the last
trial, involving a highly skilled and low skilled person proved the usefulness of the tool.
During the testing, no subject ranked the experience below 4 (out of 5) and most
of them, expressed that they had fun or that it was interesting (despite investigating
the authors data).
State of The Art shows that similar solutions already exist, but it is very likely a
more complex visual approach, like this, would be able to compete in the market
where the population and popularity is rapidly increasing.
As shown in the Future Work chapter, there are many ideas, and the work will
continue, at a minimum to serve own interest, curiousness and ambition to always
self-improve.
1Internet Of Things
==PAGE:46==
36
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 9
Future Work
While the user trials resulted in interested subjects and new insights (on the arthors
behalf) there is still room for improvements.
Few of the more advanced (in terms of data science experience) subjects had great
ideas, and trough out the thesis JEL has been an increadible source of many ideas,
all written down in various meeting notes.
As time has been a limited factor, there still exists bugs (such as the EU/US first
day of the week issue, described in section 4.3) and a need for minor improvements
to usability, use of existing data and the never-ending opportunity to generalize and
optimize code.
Obvious imprevements is the ability to import especially EMA data, chose own sym-
bols and more guidance via. help menus or hovering tooltips.
9.1
Minor Improvements
9.1.1
Presets
Not all the subjects were equally imaginative when it came to intersting combinations.
One way of peaking their interest is to offer predefined combination preset, perhaps even
based upon an introductory questionnaire about the users ambition and interests.
9.1.2
Colorscales
Only one colorscale has been used in the prototype. It was chosen for it’s simplicity
and low intensity. Other colorscales such as Jet (rainbow) or Viridis might prove
useful for identifying trends in the middle of the spectrum, not just the extremes.
Another reason is better support for various types of colorblindness.
==PAGE:48==
38
9 Future Work
9.1.3
EMA and Contextual Hybrid
Hybrid between 0.7.3 and 0.7.2 with ability to force visibility by selection, wether
days, weeks.
9.2
Different Scales
Currently a normlized scale is used (feature scaling)
It would be intersting to be able to chose different scales, such as the sandard score
normalization (equation 9.1), where normalizing errors when population parameters
are known. Works well for populations that are normally distributed.
Or perhaps logarithmic and quantile-based scales.
X′ = X −µ
σ
(9.1)
9.2.1
Dynamic Colormap Ticks
Dynamic Min/Max/Median-value ticks depending and updated on Bubble-color pa-
rameter choice.
9.2.2
More Contextual Data
DarkSky for local temperature.
9.3
Major Improvements
9.3.1
Statefulness
ReactJS for state saving state, and perhaps the ability to append each save in order
to compare reflections across iterations (similar to jupyter notebook).
9.3.2
Spatial Customizations
Moving components around, especially when more plots are added. Ability to utilize
all screen real estate would make it powerful on the increasingly popular ultrawide
monitors.
==PAGE:49==
9.4 Comparisons
39
9.4
Comparisons
Ability to be able to do multiple selections, and compare in e.g. two different scatter-
plots. Combined with history/notebook would be an interesting way to see if actions
over time, have an effect.
9.4.1
More Plots
• Scatterplot. As preferred and suggested by subject #8, a scatterplat would be
an way to see correlations between parameters (especially including trendlines),
although the ability to identify temporal trends would decrease.
• Spiral. (2.1)
• Themeriver. A great tool for identifying trends over time.
• Stacked Barchart. Instead of the current sleep stage display in the piechart, a
stacked barchart might just aswell display this data, making it easier to compare
weeks.
• Vertical Barchart. A barchart showing aggregated data for each weekday
would greatly support the ability to identify trends depending on weekdays. It
would also improve the usability, by allowing quick selection of all observations
of a given weekday.
9.4.2
Predictive analytics
While visual analytics are great, more descriptive statistics and automated machine
learning could make the tool very powerful for experts and novices.
==PAGE:50==
40
==PAGE:51==
APPENDIX A
Evaluation
A.1
Evaluation Questionnaire
The questionnaire was the last part of the user evaluation. It consisted of 19 questions
related to the prototype follow by six questions related to the paticipant.
The questions answered on the same machine as were used to do the test and the
development. Some of the questions were related to things discussed during the first
phases of the test, so the answers were noted during the phase, so the participant
would not forget.
All the questions were either of three categories:
• Multiple-choice. Fixed answers, apart from one (question 15, ranking the pro-
posals) the choices were binary Yes/No questions.
• Scale. Numerical scale ranging from 1 to 5, where 1 is the least agreeable and
5 the most.
• Text/Describe.
These types encouraged the participant to elaborate on an
opinion or experience.
A.1.1
Prototype Questions
1. How well did you initially understand the upper chart without explanation?
[1-5]
2. How well did you initially understand the barchart without explanation? [1-5]
3. How well did you initially understand the donut without explanation? [1-5]
4. Did you discover the data table on your own? [Y/N]
5. Did you discover the interactivity on your own? [Y/N]
6. How well were you able to change the input parameters via the control-panel?
[1-5]
7. How well did you understand the different control options? [1-5]
==PAGE:52==
42
A Evaluation
8. Did you come up with interesting combinations on your own?
(and which)
[Describe]
9. How well did you understand the coloring of the bubbles? [1-5]
10. Did you use the reset filter selected feature? [Y/N]
11. Would you use a tool like this one, to explore temporal trends, or prefer inter-
vention notifications? [Describe]
12. Which combination did you find most interesting? [Describe]
13. Did you find any patterns in the data? [Describe]
14. Did you understand the icons? [Describe]
15. Did you prefer proposal 0.7.1, 0.7.2 or 0.7.3? (please rank) [Multiple-Choice]
16. Please describe why you liked and disliked the different proposals [Describe]
17. Anything you missed being part of the prototype (charts, descriptions, guidance,
etc..)? [Describe]
18. Were you able to discover the hover interaction in v0.7.2 without help? [Y/N]
19. General suggestions. [Describe]
20. How would you rate the experience? [1-5]
A.1.2
Participant Questions
1. Do you, or have previously used any personal activity/fitness/sleep trackers?
[Describe]
2. If previously, Why did you stop? [Describe]
3. Age [0-99]
4. Educational background [Describe]
5. Statistical/Data Science background (e.g. introstat) [Describe]
6. General computational competencies, compared to you own age group [1-5]
==PAGE:53==
APPENDIX B
Prototype
The prototype can be found and tested online at: http://thesis.backster.dk. As
the data used, is in some ways quite personal, it might be replaced. The site might
also require a password, if/when that happens, the password will be: ”DTU2019”.
==PAGE:54==
44
B Prototype
Figure B.1: Final version of the Prototype used for third and final trial.
==PAGE:55==
APPENDIX C
Project Plan
==PAGE:56==
46
C Project Plan
Figure C.1: Original Project Plan
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[17]
“Interactive Visual Analytics on Big Data: Tableau Vs D3.js”. In: 2017.
[CGK12]
Gary Charness, Uri Gneezy, and Michael A. Kuhn. “Experimental meth-
ods: Between-subject and within-subject design”. eng. In: Journal of Eco-
nomic Behavior and Organization 81.1 (2012), pages 1–8. issn: 18791751,
01672681. doi: 10.1016/j.jebo.2011.08.009.
[Cho+17]
Eun Kyoung Choe et al. “Understanding self-reflection: how people reflect
on personal data through visual data exploration”. In: PervasiveHealth.
2017.
[CLS15]
Eun Kyoung Choe, Bongshin Lee, and M C Schraefel. “Revealing Visu-
alization Insights from Quantified-Selfers’ Personal Data Presentations.”
In: IEEE computer graphics and applications 35 4 (2015), pages 28–37.
[Frø18]
Johan Kristoffer Frølich. “Visualization and Navigation of Personal Data
Time Series”. In: (2018).
[HS10]
Kristin E. Heron and Joshua M. Smyth. “Ecological momentary inter-
ventions: incorporating mobile technology into psychosocial and health
behaviour treatments.” In: British journal of health psychology 15 Pt 1
(2010), pages 1–39.
[Inc17]
Fitbit Inc. Fitbit Launches Ionic, the Ultimate Health and Fitness Smart-
watch. https : / / investor . fitbit . com / press / press - releases /
press-release-details/2017/Fitbit-Launches-Ionic-the-Ultimate-
Health-and-Fitness-Smartwatch/default.aspx. [Online; accessed 10-
November-2018]. 2017.
[Int+16]
Stephen S. Intille et al. “￿EMA: Microinteraction-based ecological mo-
mentary assessment (EMA) using a smartwatch”. In: Proceedings of the
... ACM International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing . UbiComp
2016 (2016), pages 1124–1128.
[Jon15]
Simon L. Jones. “Exploring correlational information in aggregated quan-
tified self data dashboards”. In: UbiComp/ISWC Adjunct. 2015.
[Lar13]
Jakob Eg Larsen. “QS Spiral : Visualizing Periodic Quantified Self Data”.
In: 2013.
==PAGE:58==
48
Bibliography
[LDF10]
Ian Li, Anind K. Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. “A stage-based model of personal
informatics systems”. In: CHI. 2010.
[Wae00]
L. van Waes. “Thinking aloud as a method for testing the usability of
Websites: the influence of task variation on the evaluation of hypertext”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication 43.3 (September
2000), pages 279–291. issn: 0361-1434. doi: 10.1109/47.867944.
[Wan+14]
Rui Wang et al. “StudentLife: assessing mental health, academic perfor-
mance and behavioral trends of college students using smartphones”. In:
UbiComp. 2014.
