==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Simulation of power system balancing 
 
 
Polyneikis Kanellas 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0264 
February 2019 
==PAGE:2==
2
==PAGE:3==
 
 
Author: Polyneikis Kanellas 
Title: Simulation of power system balancing 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0264 
February 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD 
students. Research is conducted within nine research programmes organized 
into three main topics: Wind energy systems, Wind turbine technology and 
Basics for wind energy. 
Project period:  
August 2018 – February 2019 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisors: 
 
Poul E. Sørensen 
Kaushik Das 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
Mette Gamst 
Energinet 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:4==
4
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Contents
i
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Sources of Imbalances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Overview of Software interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
State of the Art
7
2.1
The Nordic energy market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Modelling the Balancing Market
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
The Balmorel Project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methodology
11
3.1
Conventional Generation Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Balancing Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Input Data Description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Scenario of Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.5
Mathematical Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Results
27
4.1
Hour Ahead Imbalance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Counteracting the imbalance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Transmission Ramping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4
Real Imbalance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.5
Hour Ahead and Real Imbalance Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.6
Curtailment and Remaining Imbalances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.7
Cost of Balancing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5
Discussion
49
5.1
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A Objective Function
51
==PAGE:6==
ii
Contents
B Balancing Constrain
53
Bibliography
55
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Today, the main global energy sources are still fossil fuels such as coal,oil and natural
gas. The utilization of these sources have played a significant role in the design of
the energy supply system and its mechanisms of operation. The high environmental
impact and the confined existence of the fossil fuels are two of the most important
reasons of the gradual substitution of this type of energy sources with more sustain-
able and renewable technologies. Electric power generated from wind is expected
to increase and is one of the most promising resources towards the fossil fuel inde-
pendence. Hence, the modernization of the energy system in order to integrate the
electric energy produced from wind is of great importance.
The European Union’s renewable energy directive published in 2009 set the target
of 20% final energy consumption generated from renewable sources by 2020. Contin-
uing in the same direction,the European Council in the frame of the ’2030 Framework
for climate and energy’ agreed to increase the share of renewable energy consumption
at least to 27% by 2030 [1].In line with the aforementioned, the share of wind power in
the European Union’s total installed power capacity increased from 6% in 2005 to 18%
in 2017 demonstrating a tendency of increasing the share of this type of renewable
energy in the grid [2]. Denmark’s policies project even more optimistic scenarios for
the near future renewable energy production. The under implementation plan aims
that by 2035 the residential heat and power consumption will be provided completely
by fossil fuel independent technologies [3].Furthermore, the Danish government con-
firmed the leading role of Denmark towards sustainability in global degree, by setting
the ultimate goal of achieving 100% renewable energy in the energy supply sector by
2050. .
As described, the renewable generation share in the energy mix has already in-
creased and due to the uninterrupted global efforts for reducing the GHG emissions it
is expected to keep growing. The conventional generating units are replaced by wind
farms. The increase of the renewable energy in the grid brings new conditions to the
energy system as it comes with the cost of variability in production and uncertainty
in the relevant forecasts.Power imbalances created from the unpredictability of the re-
newable energy generation, such as wind power, is the main danger for the reliability
and security of a power grid. Having that in mind and with the intention to keep the
power system providing energy of equivalent standards and costs with nowadays , it
==PAGE:8==
2
1 Introduction
is crucial to study and determine the framework in which the maximum integration
of renewable energy can be achieved. Therefore, the Transmission System Operators
must have tools to handle the particularities of the renewable energy technologies and
its effects at the whole energy network. In order to ensure the required reliability,
the operation of a power system is usually simulated and the necessary development
strategies are defined.
All the above mentioned indicate the particular interest of examining the balancing
of the future power systems. The scope of this thesis is to design a model which will
simulate the creation of power imbalances in the system and following will return
an optimized (in terms of minimizing the social economic cost) plan of the actions
required from the generators participating in balancing. The model will be part of
the open source code Balmorel project forming a powerful tool for simulations of both
the Day ahead market and the Hour Ahead balancing.
1.2
Sources of Imbalances
Power system imbalance refers to the state in which the power generated in an energy
system is not equal with the demand.
The first source of imbalances are the conventional generators. Steam turbines,
gas turbines and combined cycle engines are some of the most utilized conventional
generator technologies. As the first scheduling take place in the Day Ahead market,
a plan is created defining generation levels of each producer for one hour intervals of
the next day. Technical specifications are limiting the capability of each generator to
follow the aforementioned plan and thus imbalances are created. Finite ramping rates
are causes of asymmetry in the system as generators are not capable to variate their
production level instantly from the one hour interval to the next. An illustration of
the ’conventional imbalance’ is presented in figure 1.1.
The second cause of imbalances in the system is the uncertainty in forecasting
the real time electrical energy generation from renewable technologies. Solar photo-
voltaics and wind turbines are considered to be two of the most promising energy
technologies towards sustainability but their generation is in a large extend uncon-
trollable. The uncertainty arising from the wind’s nature as a physical phenomenon
make the wind speed forecasts a key factor in the power balance scheduling. High
errors among the wind generation forecasts and the real time generation can force
extreme power system balancing problems [4].
==PAGE:9==
1.3 Overview of Software interaction
3
Figure (1.1)
The conventional imbalance
1.3
Overview of Software interaction
In this part of the thesis a brief overview of the model and the cooperating software
utilized is presented.
The balancing model deals with the adjustment of day ahead schedule in order
potential imbalances to be covered. This is accomplished through an optimization
algorithm with one hour horizon utilizing data of the day ahead market and of the
hour ahead forecasts. Thus, a software performing the day ahead optimization and
concluding in a dispatch plan is used as an input. This software is the Balmorel
open source project run in mode Balbase4. The balancing model was developed in a
specific form and programming language so it can be used as an add-on of Balmorel.
Detailed information regarding the Balmorel project can be found in section 2.3.
In order to calculate the imbalances caused from renewable generation forecasts
error, balancing model collects input data from CorRes software. CorRes is providing
the day ahead and the the hour ahead forecasts as well as the real time wind energy
generation.
A simplified flow chart which illustrates the relations between the software used
in this thesis is presented in 1.2.
==PAGE:10==
4
1 Introduction
Figure (1.2)
Software interaction
1.4
Research Questions
The present thesis attempts to answer the following research questions:
• Will the danish power system of 2020 be able to integrate the desirable amounts
of renewable energy? Are domestic and interconnection reserves enough?
• Are there seasonal effects on the hour ahead and real time imbalance?
1.4.1
Assumptions and limitations
To answer all the research questions set, assumptions had to be made. These assump-
tions are listed bellow:
• The heating sector and its interaction with the electricity sector is not modeled.
For that reason CHP power plants are not considered contributing in the balanc-
ing. In addition only conventional plants already activated from the day ahead
schedule are permitted to participate in balancing. These two assumption are
expected to decrease the domestic balancing reserves.
• The balancing operation of neighboring to Denmark countries is not simulated.
Thus, the model assumes enough support capability in the interconnections.
In addition, is assumed that Denmark exchange electricity with the other con-
nected countries during balancing on the day ahead regional prices. That as-
sumption is expected to affect the total cost of balancing.
• Only the generation coming from wind is considered uncertain. This assumption
is not expected to affect significantly the conclusions since the Danish Energy
System holds small solar capacity.
==PAGE:11==
1.5 Thesis Outline
5
1.5
Thesis Outline
This thesis consists of 4 chapters organized as presented bellow:
• Chapter 1 is the introduction of the thesis where the motivation and the back-
ground are explained. Also a brief description of the software used is provided.
• Chapter 2 is dedicated to the literature review for other approaches of the
problem. The state of the art for modeling of the balancing is presented. In
addition a brief description of Balmorel model is given.
• Chapter 3 describes the methodology used, presents the study case and provides
the mathematical formulation of simulating the balancing. In this chapter the
model for the creation of the conventional imbalance is also explained.
• Chapter 4 is the chapter dedicated to the the results extracted from the simu-
lations. Statistical analyses of results are also included.
• Chapter 5 is where the final conclusions derived from this study are presented
and discussed
==PAGE:12==
6
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
State of the Art
2.1
The Nordic energy market
In this part of the thesis, a brief explanation of the Nordic energy market structure is
provided .The Nordic wholesale consists of four types of markets which differentiate
themselves on the time scale of the trading being made prior to real time delivery [5].
• The Financial Market: In this market transactions take place weeks,months
or even years before the real time energy delivery. These transactions include
price securing contracts in form of bilateral agreements. In particular, traders
are exchanging futures and derivatives settled on future spot market prices. The
main scope of this market is managing risks that participants incur due to the
lack of contractual markets.
• The Day Ahead Market (Elspot): This is the coordinating energy market. All
participants of the market are requested to place their bids until 12:00 at noon
for trading electricity the following day. A bid includes a price for a a certain
volume of energy .The result is a uniform price auction where an equilibrium
price is established for each one hour interval of the day of delivery [6]. In that
sense, the trading horizon is is 12-36 hours ahead. Due to the fact of internal
potential congestions the Nordic exchange area is divided into bidding areas.
Thus, Denmark is participating in Nordpool as two areas.
• The Intra-Day Balancing Market (Elbas): Although this is an centrally or-
ganized market as the previous, trading is taking place in form of bilateral
contracts. In addition Elbas is a pay-as-bid market place in contrast with the
uniform price markets. In Elbas the price of the same amount of energy provided
by different generators will variate depending on their bids. The contracts can
be traded from the time of Day Ahead Market closure until 45 minutes before
the hour of operation.
Elbas is the first level of reflexes of the Nordic En-
ergy Market for dealing with deviations occurring from the day ahead schedule.
However this market is characterized from low liquidity[7].
• The Regulation Market: The last market is divided into two parts. At the first
part, the Transmission System Operator requests from the market participants
to adjust their generation (or consumption) based on the imbalances expected
in the real time operation. Again, this is a pay-as-bid market place. At the
==PAGE:14==
8
2 State of the Art
second part the Transmission System Operator buys (or sells) power from(or to)
the participants in order to neutralize imbalances caused from them. The result
of the trading of the Regulation market is not calculated until the imbalances
are quantified, meaning only after the delivery hour [8].
The Nordic power market structure is illustrated in a time line in figure 2.1.
Figure (2.1)
The Nordic power market structure [Source: Nordpool A/S]
2.2
Modelling the Balancing Market
In an attempt to address the problem of managing the hour by hour electricity system,
several models have been created and can be found in the relevant literature. The
first approach was made in Ref. [9] by formulating an fixed integer unit commitment
model [10]. As a unit commitment algorithm was used the optimization model was
able to decide not only on the generation levels but also on start-ups and shut-downs.
During that period, the forecasts of the demand where not as accurate as today. Thus
the most uncertain parameter related to the simulation was the demand time series.
For that reason, the creation of various models was followed incorporating stochastic
programming and unit commitment models in order to deal with the uncertain in
demand [11].
In more recent years, stochastic programming tools like the one found in Ref.
[12] were employed to study the integration of renewable energy. In this model a re-
optimization is processed every few hours in order to reflect the occasional updating
of the wind forecasts. However, all the models referenced have hourly time resolution
and the do not capture faster wind variations .
Unit commitment models when handling problems with various generators and
many time steps tend to highly increase the complexity of the algorithm and con-
sequently the computational time.
Therefore, models with decoupled hourly and
==PAGE:15==
2.3 The Balmorel Project
9
intra-hourly scheduling were created. The decoupling of these two models provides
the opportunity of formulation of the intra-hour optimization as an economic dispatch
problem were reducing computational time. By doing so the time resolution is pos-
sible not be hours but minutes [13].A model that is studying the impacts of variable
generation at different time scales can be found in Ref. [14]. This model incorporates
several sub-models (day ahead scheduling,intra-hour balancing and second-to-second
automatic generation control) with different update frequencies, time resolutions, and
decision horizons . Despite that the model is taking into account ramp rate restrictions
it does not consider reserve activation rules of the market. Different methodologies
in approaching the uncertainty of the wind include the one found in Ref. [15] where
a unified unit commitment – economic dispatch model was created for Short term
scheduling in power systems with high wind penetration. The proposed model was
able to use variable time resolution and scheduling horizon up to 36 hours and produce
real time decisions which minimize the sensitivity of the system to forecasts errors.
Finally, in Ref. [16] an intra-day unit commitment model with sub-hourly time in-
tervals was employed in order to to commit fast-start units using updated forecasts
and economic dispatch functions with extended horizon. However, the complexities
of combining all these short-term models were also mentioned.
As Denmark is in pioneer position for renewable energy generation and wind
power in particular is also in need of confronting the accompanying challenges of
integrating this kind of energy. That was the motivation of the danish Transmission
System Operator (Energinet) for developing a model which simulates the system’s
balancing (SimBa). The methodology used in SimBa consits of an algorithm which
initiates itself with calculating the Day Ahead Available Power (PDA) by subtracting
the Day Ahead Forecast Error from the Day Ahead Forecasts. Then the Hour Ahead
Forecast Erros are summed with the PDA in order the Hour Ahead Adjustment to be
calculated. The estimation of the errors occurs by identifying it as an independent
Autoregressive–moving-average (ARMA) process. The performance of the balancing
hour ahead model showed a signidicant improvement over the day-ahead results [17].
2.3
The Balmorel Project
As mentioned, the model created for the purpose of this thesis is part of the Balmorel
project.
The future users of the Balmorel model will have the option to include
balancing in their simulations or not. Despite the generality of the mathematical
formulation of balancing the results presented in this thesis are coupled with the
results generated from the day ahead schedule. In this section a brief description of
the Balmorel model is presented.
Balmorel is a bottom-up partial equilibrium energy system optimization model
designed for the electricity and the district heating sectors [18]. The programming
language employed for this model was GAMS (General Algebraic Modeling System).
The structure of Balmorel is generic and provides the opportunity of integrating
add-ons and new features. Currently, there are 4 different modes of Balmorel which
==PAGE:16==
10
2 State of the Art
differentiate themselves with respect to the optimization period and whether endoge-
nous investments are allowed or not [19].
The Balancing Market model will run as part of the Balbase4 mode. In this mode
endogenous investments in technologies and transmission capacities are allowed. In
addition, the optimization of more than one year is possible in contrast with other
modes. Detailed information regarding the structure of Balmorel can be found in Ref.
[20].
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
3.1
Conventional Generation Model
The balancing model uses as input results of the Balmorel optimization. The day
ahead market, as described in section 2.1, results in an hourly dispatch plan. Thus,
the simulation done in Balmorel is in hourly resolution. As the time of the decision is
closer to the result, forecasts are typically more accurate and able to predict the vari-
ation for smaller time intervals. For that reason the intra-hour market aiming in the
short-term balancing of generation and demand is optimized for 5 minute time steps.
Having that in mind, the time series of the day ahead plan regarding the conventional
generation have to be interpolated in order to be utilized in 5 minutes resolution. As
described in section 1.2, conventional generators are also sources of imbalances. By
modelling the conventional generation in 5 minutes time steps the quantification of
the conventional imbalance will be also possible. In the next paragraph the model
created to emulate the operation of conventional technologies and the methodology
for calculating the conventional imbalance are described.
As the time step used is 5 minutes the quantity of energy (MWh) delivered for
each of these 5 minute segments have to be in accordance with the one promised in the
day ahead market. Based on that, the model uses as input the day ahead conventional
dispatch for each hour interval as well as the ramping rates of each technology. With
this information it is possible to calculate the intra-hour conventional operation. The
result is an oscillation of of the generation around the day ahead dispatch levels at the
beginning of each hour until the stabilization. The difference of the generation levels,
during the oscillation, from the day ahead dispatch is the conventional imbalance.
The magnitude of these kind of imbalances is depended on the individual ramping
constrains of each type of generator. For example engines which are considered to
ramp faster than steam turbines create smaller imbalances as they are able to variate
their production from hour to hour scheduled levels easier.
The generation of a conventional unit in 5 minutes resolution as resulting from
the model created is illustrated in figure 4.21. As shown, the day ahead generation
schedule for one individual conventional generator is represented by the step-function
(blue color).
In the other hand, the interpolated conventional generation (orange
color) varies linearly from one production level to the other. The slope of this linear
increase or decrease is defined from the ramping rate of each individual technology.
As explained, the area under the day ahead schedule and the interpolated generation
==PAGE:18==
12
3 Methodology
is equal for every 5 minutes segments.It is worth mentioning, that for the creation of
the conventional model it was assumed that generators start to ramp for adjusting
their production level from the beginning of the new hour.
Figure (3.1)
The conventional imbalance
The imbalance caused from conventional generators is defined in this thesis, as
the subtraction of the conventional day ahead dispatch (DD) from the conventional
interpolated in 5 minutes dispatch (ICD). In other words, positive imbalance occurs
when the ICD is higher than DD.
Conventional
Imbalance = ICDCONV −DDCONV
(3.1)
3.2
Balancing Model
The motivation for the creation of this model is the efficient re-balancing of supply
and demand in the electricity system based on new more accurate forecasts than the
day ahead. The output of the model is a new generation plan adjusted according to
the arising variations. As mentioned, the balancing is organized and coordinated by
the individual Transmission System Operator of each country. The procedure TSOs
are following for concluding in the hour ahead plan for balancing is an optimization
with the objective of maximizing the social welfare or equivalently ,assuming inflexible
demand, of minimizing the total balancing cost. The same idea was also kept for the
optimization of this thesis.
In figure 3.2 the balancing model is illustrated in a form of a flow chart.
As
shown, first an optimization regarding the day ahead dispatch is run with all countries
included in Balmorel. Next, only for Denmark, the conventional generation dispatches
are interpolated in 5 minutes resolution and the conventional imbalance is calculated.
In the same time, based on the hour ahead wind forecasts for Denmark the renewable
imbalance is also found. The hour ahead renewable imbalance is defined in this thesis
==PAGE:19==
3.2 Balancing Model
13
as the result of subtraction of the day ahead wind dispatch (DD) from the hour
ahead wind forecasts (HF). Which means that positive imbalances occur when the
hour ahead forecasts exceed the day ahead plan (eq. 3.2). All these are the inputs
of Hour Ahead optimization which results on the new dispatch plan. The aim of the
optimization is to determine which technologies should adjust their production and
at what levels in order to cover the imbalances based on new forecasts. In the end,
the imbalance between the the realization of the wind and the hour ahead plan is
determined. The formula of calculating the real imbalance is in equation 3.3, where
HD is the hour ahead wind dispatch and RE is the wind realization.
Renewable
Imbalance = HFW ND −DDW ND
(3.2)
Real
Imbalance = REW ND −HDW ND
(3.3)
In the methodology followed by the author of this thesis only generators already
dispatched in the day ahead are considered participating in the balancing. Consider-
ing technologies with start up times longer than an hour the assumption mentioned is
wholly justified. The fact that in reality there are technologies connected to the grid
with shorter start up times makes the aforementioned a simplified assumption. In ad-
dition, the Balmorel model simulates the day ahead planning for both the electricity
and heating sector. The interaction of these two energy sectors results in the inclu-
sion of constrains which are limiting generation of CHP technologies more than their
capacity. The balancing add-on does not include the heating sector but focuses only
in the electricity supply system. Thus, the types of power plants which are considered
contributing in balancing by ramping up or down their generation are only extraction
thermal technologies. By excluding all the other types of conventional plants from
balancing the volume of domestic reserves is expected to be reduced. Moreover, Elec-
tric storage technologies are neglected from participating in the balancing as until
the year 2020 which will be simulated their capacity is insignificant in the generation
mix.
The model is scripted in a generic form and given the data can simulate the balanc-
ing of any country. Balmorel’s users can choose the countries for which the day ahead
simulation will be run and separately which of the countries previously chosen will
be also included in the Balancing simulation. That gives the advantage of simulating
only the balancing of countries of the users preference and reducing computational
time. In this thesis the model was employed to balance only Denmark as concentrates
in the Danish energy system. As known, electricity transmission through intercon-
nections between neighboring countries occurs constantly. So viewing the balancing
of Denmark as being an isolated island was not considered realistic. Thus, the inter-
connection are modelled as exactly as generators but with the assumption that it’s
marginal cost is the day ahead relevant regional price. Interconnection are able to
ramp and contribute to the balancing of Denmark constrained from their ramping
rates. The assumption that they day ahead electricity price is equal the cost of in-
terconnection during balancing has been made because the simulation includes only
==PAGE:20==
14
3 Methodology
Denmark and the balancing price of other countries is not known at the time of the
decision.
Furthermore, an assumption was made regarding the sources of variable genera-
tion. The time series generated from CorRes software, available at the time of writing
this thesis, were including only the hour ahead forecasts of wind. Thus, only wind
technologies were considered as presenting uncertainty in generation. Since the results
presented in this thesis are related to the Danish Energy System which holds small
solar capacity, that assumption is not expected to affect significantly the conclusions.
The model described is linear and is created in the form of deterministic economic
dispatch with one hour optimization horizon.
Figure (3.2)
Balancing model’s flow chart
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Input Data Description
15
3.3
Input Data Description
In this section a description of the input data used in balancing model will be pre-
sented. The balancing model build for the purpose of this thesis is an add-on of the
Balmorel project. Consequently, all time series relevant to the Day Ahead market
are generated from Balmorel model run in the mode Balmbase4.
In order both the interconnection between different counties and the internal con-
gestions to be modeled, the creators of Balmorel split the countries included in regions
as in Ref. [21]. The result is Germany consist of 4 regions, Denmark of 2 (DK West
and DK East), Norway of 5 and the rest counties of 1.Each region includes several ar-
eas where no congestion constrains between them are considered. The same approach
is kept also in the balancing model.
Balmorel and consequently the balancing model are technology oriented. That
means that installed capacities represent the whole contribution of each technology
group and not the capacities of individual power plants.
The fuel and emission prices can be found in Ref.[21]. Based on this reference
the coal price is assumed to be the most stable in the near future. Crude oil and
natural gas price follow similar trends with a slight increase after 2020. Municipal
wastes used as fuel are considered to have negative fuel costs, representing the positive
effects in the society of utilizing this particular kind of fuel. The highest increase is
appeared to be in CO2 emission price. Explicit information regarding the generation
and transmission costs can be also found in Ref [22].
The variable renewable generation time series were generated from CorRes (Cor-
relations in Renewable Energy Sources) software. CorRes is a tool developed by DTU
Wind Energy specialized in renewable generation simulation. Forecasts with resolu-
tion 5 minutes and one hour ahead horizon where existing only for wind, thus the
balancing model considers uncertainty only in wind generation. CorRes uses meteoro-
logical reanlysis techniques in order to generate the wind time series. The reanalysis
data are extracted from the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model [23].
WRF is a mesoscale model and thus downscaling was used to generate the wind speed.
In order the variable generation to be simulated in a more realistic manner fluctua-
tions were added to the reanalysis data. The fluctuations were created based on a
stochastic simulation model found in Ref. [24]. Since the short-term variability in
generation gets more important as the capacity of the wind power park gets larger
and also due to computational limitations, fluctuation were added only for offshore
wind generation.
3.4
Scenario of Simulation
All simulation are done for the Danish energy system in the year 2020.
In order
to reflect the seasonal behaviour of wind and its effects to the power system, four
months of different seasons are simulated (January,April,July,October). The table
3.1 presents the capacity share among different technologies for the Danish Energy
==PAGE:22==
16
3 Methodology
System as used in the simulation. As shown, the system is characterized by high
wind penetration since the aggregated onshore and offshore installed capacity consist
the 17% of whole capacity mix. An other useful conclusion that can be made from
the observation of these tables is the imbalance between the total installed capacity
of DK West and DK East. The west part of Denmark is responsible for generating
the biggest share of energy. In the same time, the level of wind penetration is also
higher in the west compared to the east. For this reason, higher impact of forecasts
errors are expected to be met in west Denmark.
Technology
Fuel
DK West (MW)
DK East (MW)
Onshore Wind
-
3453.476
615.524
Offshore Wind
-
1276.7
423.400
Solar
-
624
228
Steamturbine sub.
Coal
565
-
Steamturbine sub.
Munic. Waste
56
116
Steamturbine sub.
Straw
69
-
Steamturbine sub.
Wood
781
502
Steamturbine sub.
Natural gas
-
3.196
Steamturbine sub.
Oil
-
416.478
IC Engine
Natural gas
717.815
205.482
IC Engine
Biogas
13
-
Gasturbine
Natural gas
87.988
133.294
Gasturbine
Light oil
98.039
189.239
Table (3.1)
Installed capacities for DK west and DK East in the year 2020
Furthermore, in table 3.2 detailed information regarding the transmission intercon-
nection between the two danish regions and the regions of neighboring countries are
collected. As was expected, DK West is more well connected with 4780 MW of trans-
mission capacity. The highest portion of DK West energy exchange is allowed with
Norway and Germany. In the other hand, DK East is connected mainly with Sweden.
The transmission capacity between DK west and DK east is 600 MW, limiting the
maximum contribution of one region to the other in case of higher imbalances.
==PAGE:23==
3.5 Mathematical Formulation
17
Transmission
Capacity
DK West (MW)
DK East (MW)
Germany NW
1640
-
Germany NE
-
600
Netherlands R
700
-
Norway SW
1700
-
Sweden M.
740
-
Sweden S.
-
1700
DK West
-
600
DK East
600
-
Table (3.2)
Transmission capacities for DK west and DK East in the year 2020
3.5
Mathematical Formulation
3.5.1
Nomenclature
The software used for the simulation was GAMS (General Algebraic Modeling Sys-
tem). The GAMS language contains among other elements sets,parameters and vari-
ables. Sets are the equivalent of the indices in an algebraic representation of a model.
The parameters are used to specify exogenous values and they may be fixed directly
by the user or calculated during the simulation from other values. The variables of
the model are endogenous entities that are determined in the simulation by solving
the specified model. The terminology used in this thesis is in accordance with the
GAMS documentation. In the next three tables (3.3-3.4) all the elements used in the
balancing simulation add-on are presented.
Sets
Description
A
Area
S
Week of Simulation
T
Hour of Simulation
TF
Five minute Segment
RB
Regions of Countries in Balancing
RNB
Regions of Countries not in Balancing
WND
Wind Technologies
CONV
Conventional Technologies
Table (3.3)
Sets of the model
==PAGE:24==
18
3 Methodology
Variables
Description
Units
V UP
Ramp Up of Conventional Technologies
MW
V DN
Ramp Down of Conventional Technologies
MW
V TUP
Ramp Up of Interconnection
MW
V TDN
Ramp Down of Interconnection
MW
V WND
The hour ahead dispatch for wind generation
MW
V F
Chage of Fuel Consumption Rate
MW
V T
Electricity Transmission Among DKW and DKE
MW
Table (3.4)
Variables of the model
Parameters
Description
Units
UPCO
Cost of generetor ramping up
Money/MWh
DNCO
Cost of generetor ramping down
Money/MWh
FuelT
Fuel Tax
Money/GJ
FuelP
Cost of Fuel
Money/GJ
OPCO
Operational Cost
Money/MWh
ElP
Day Ahead Region Electricity Price
Money/MW
Coeff_CO2
CO2 Emissions Coefficient
kg/GJ
Coeff_SO2
CO2 Emissions Coefficient
kg/GJ
Coeff_NOx
CO2 Emissions Coefficient
kg/GJ
RampDNcap
Ramping Down Capabilities
% Cap.
RampUPcap
Ramping Up Capabilities
% Cap.
RUPfuelcap
Fuel Ramping Up Capacity
% Cap.
RUPfuelcap
Fuel Ramping Down Capacity
% Cap.
IRAMPupRT
Ramping up rate of interconnection
% Cap.
IRAMPDNRT
Ramping down rate of interconnection
% Cap.
PT
Scheduled in D.A. Transmission
MW
DD
Day Ahead Dispatch
MW
HF
Hour Ahead Forecasts
MW
ICD
Interpolated Conventional Dispatch 5 min
MW
TrnsRate
Transmission Capacity Rating
-
Extrns
Exogenous Transmission Capacity
MW
Caprate
Generation Capacity Rating
-
Excap
Exogenous Generation Capacity
MW
Fuel_rating
Fuel Rating
-
Tax_CO2
CO2EmissionTax
Money/kg
Tax_NOx
NOxEmissionTax
Money/kg
Tax_SO2
SO2EmissionTax
Money/kg
Table (3.5)
Parameters of the model
==PAGE:25==
3.5 Mathematical Formulation
19
3.5.2
Objective Function
The objective function, expressing the problem studied in this thesis, should include
all the costs related to the balancing operation in order to minimize them. It is worth
mentioning, that the balancing cost can be also negative in order to represent savings
from the day ahead plan. In case of high wind generation, the expensive conventional
generators which were dispatched in the day ahead have to be turned down so cheap
wind energy substitute their production.
As explained, the problem is linear and the objective function is a summation of all
costs. For better understanding each sum will be presented separately.The objective
function written in whole, with all the summation together can be found in appendix
A. The first sum in the objective (eq. 3.4) is representing the extra costs associated
with ramping a generator. Costs like these occur in both cases of ramping up or
down. Of course, that cost is proportionate of the contribution of each generator to
the balancing. The summation will be done for all conventional plants in all areas.
The optimization horizon is one hour, thus everything will be summed for the twelve
5 minute segments in the hour optimized.
∑
A,CONV,T F
(
UPCOA,CONV · V PA,CV,S,T,T F +
+DNCOA,CONV · V DNA,CV,S,T,T F
)
(3.4)
Next, are the fuel pre-tax cost (eq. 3.5) and the respective taxes (eq. 3.6). As
shown, the fuel price is defined for every fuel and area. Which means that the price
of each fuel is not uniform across one country. In contrast as fuel taxes are part of the
individual countries energy policies they are the same in every area of a particular
country. Fuel price and tax are parameters given in e2012 per GJ, thus the fuel
consumption rate variable is multiplied with 3.6.
∑
A,CONV,F,T F
FuelPA,F · 3.6 · V FA,CONV,S,T,T F
(3.5)
∑
C,A,CONV,F,T F
FuelTF,C · 3.6 · V FA,CONV,S,T,T F
(3.6)
The third summation are the operational costs of each generator (eq. 3.7). As
mentioned, in the balancing market is possible that in case of excess wind produc-
tion, TSO will ask from a producer to decrease its generation. In that occasion, the
operational costs become negative representing savings from day ahead schedule.
∑
A,CONV,T F
OPCostA,CV ·
(
V PA,CONV,S,T,T F −V DNA,CONV,S,T,T F
)
(3.7)
==PAGE:26==
20
3 Methodology
The next summation (eq. 3.8) is the cost/benefit of ramping up/down an inter-
connection with a neighboring country. The model is build in a way that decides
which interconnection will ramp based on the day ahead regional prices.
∑
RNB,RB,T F
ElPRNB,S,T,T f ·
(
V TUPRNB,RB,S,T,T F −
−V TDNRNB,RB,S,T,T F
)
(3.8)
The last three sums (eq. 3.9) of the objective function express the costs of taxes
corresponding to emissions (CO2, SO2, NOX) produced during balancing. The tax is
given in e2012 per kg, thus the fuel consumption rate is multiplied with the relative
emission coefficient and the constant 3.6 .
∑
C,A,CONV,T F
CO2CfCONV · 3.6 · V FA,CONV,S,T,T F · Tax_CO2C+
+
∑
C,A,CONV,T F
SO2CfCONV · 3.6 · V FA,CONV,S,T,T F · Tax_SO2C+
+
∑
C,A,CONV,T F
NOXCfCONV · 3.6 · V FA,CONV,S,T,T F · Tax_NOXC
(3.9)
3.5.3
Balancing Constraint
The first constraint introduced is responsible for balancing the demand with the
generation taking into account the imbalances occurring.
This equation like the
objective function is a sum of multiple sums.
For easier understanding from the
reader, each sum is presented separately. In order the balance to be met at all times,
all the sums presented bellow will be summed for all regions RB and for all five minute
segments inside an hour. The sum of all sums should be equal with zero.
First is the conventional imbalance, as defined in section 3.1, summed for all
conventional technologies (eq. 3.10) and all areas included in the regions RB.
∑
A∈RB,CONV
(
ICDA,CONV,S,T,T F −DDA,CONV,S,T,T F
)
(3.10)
Next is the subtraction of the wind day ahead dispatch from the variable of hour
ahead wind generation plan summed for all wind technologies (eq. ??). This sum
creates the renewable imbalance.
∑
A∈RB,W ND
(
V WA,W ND,S,T,T F −DDA,W ND,S,T,T F
)
(3.11)
==PAGE:27==
3.5 Mathematical Formulation
21
The next sum (eq. 3.12) is a subtraction of the generators ramp up and ramp
down variables. The ramp variables are defined as positive in order the result of their
subtraction to oppose any imbalance.
∑
RB,T F
[
∑
A∈RB,CONV
(
V PA,CONV,S,T,T F −V DNA,CONV,S,T,T F
)
(3.12)
Following the same way of thinking, the ramp up and down of interconnections
are also introduced in the constrain (eq. 3.13) . Thus, in case of an imbalance the day
ahead scheduled interconnection will adjust based on the hour ahead plan in order to
counteract it.
∑
RNB,RB,T F
(
V TUPRNB,RB,S,T,T f −V TDNRNB,RB,S,T,T f
)
(3.13)
Last, is the sum of the transmission between DKW and DKE which is expressed
through equation 3.14. In this equation V TRB,RB is the exports from region RB
to region RB and consequently V TRB,RB are the imports. The parameter PTRB,RB
symbolizes the scheduled in day ahead imports of region RB from RB and PTRB,RB
the scheduled exports. By subtracting the day ahead scheduled imports and adding
the day ahead schedule exports the model re-optimizes the transmission schedule
during the hour ahead optimization. To give an example, in case of zero imbalance
in order the sum of balancing to be zero the variable V TRB,RB will take the value of
PTRB,RB and the day ahead schedule will remain unchanged.
∑
RB,RB
(
PTRB,RB,S,T,T f −PTRB,RB,S,T,T f+
+V TRB,RB,S,T,T f −V TRB,RB,S,T,T f
)
(3.14)
The balancing constrain written in whole can be found in appendix B.
3.5.4
Transmission Between Balancing Regions
The next constraint controls the transmission between regions of countries that are
included in the Balancing simulation. The amount of energy send have to be less than
the sum of the exogenously given transmission capacity multiplied with a parameter
which symbolizes the transmission rating of each transmission line. This reduction in
transmission capacity may represent forced disconnections for equipment maintenance
or faults. The transmission constraint is illustrated in eq. 3.15.
V TRB,RB,S,T,T F ≤TrnsRateRB,RB,S,T,T F · ExtrnsRB,RB
(3.15)
==PAGE:28==
22
3 Methodology
3.5.5
Wind Hour Ahead Dispatch
As shown in eq 3.16, the wind hour ahead plan is defined to be equal or less than the
hour ahead forecasts. In that way, the wind curtailment is introduced to the model.
In cases where there are not enough down reserves, the hour ahead wind dispatch will
be less than the forecast meaning that wind is curtailed.
V WNDA,W ND,S,T,T F ≤HFA,W ND,S,T,T F
(3.16)
3.5.6
Change of Fuel Consumption Rate
The definition of the fuel consumption rate change V GF_TF of the conventional
power plants is given in eq. 3.17.As shown the fuel consumption rate will be negative
in case of ramping down and will be reflected as negative costs (benefits) in the
objective function. These are costs regarding emissions and fuel consumption which
are reduced as a power plant curtails its generation.
V FA,CONV,S,T,T F = (
V PA,CONV,S,T,T F −V DNA,CONV,S,T,T F
)
/Fuel_eff
(3.17)
3.5.7
Maximum Generator Ramping Constraint
The maximum possible ramp up of each technology is bounded by the exogenous
capacity multiplied with a capacity rating factor. Obviously, that is due to the fact
that is not possible a power plant to produce more than its capacity. The capacity
rating factor is introduced in in order to represent the percentage of the capacity that
a power plant is able to produce for a given date and time. Usually, Caprate is equal
to 1 but rarely is set to lower numbers as a power plant can be under maintenance
and not be able to operate at its maximum levels. .The Constraint described can be
seen in the eq. 3.18.
DDA,CONV,S,T,T F + V PA,CONV,S,T,T F ≤
ExcapA,CONV · CaprateA,CONV,S,T
(3.18)
Additionally, the maximum ramp down of each technology have to be less than
its Day Ahead scheduled generation level (eq. 3.23).
V DNA,CONV,S,T,T F ≤DDA,CONV,S,T,T F
(3.19)
==PAGE:29==
3.5 Mathematical Formulation
23
3.5.8
Maximum Interconnection Ramping Constrain
The ramp up of an interconnection plus its day ahead dispatch cannot be more than
its capacity. That fact is expressed through the eq. 3.21. Again the transmittion
capacity is multiplied with the rating factor.
V TUPRNB,RB,S,T,T F + PTRNB,RB,S,T,T F ≤
TrnsRateRNB,RB,S,T,T F · ExtrnsY,RNB,RB
(3.20)
The day ahead schedule for interconnection transmission may change dramatically
based on the hour ahead forecasts. It is possible, high imbalances in the hour ahead
optimization to change the direction of the energy flow in an interconnection line and
a country that was planned a day ago to export finally to be scheduled to import.
Thus, the maximum ramp down is less than the sum of the lines capacity and its day
ahead dispatch.
V TDNRNB,RB,S,T,T F ≤PTRNB,RB,S,T,T F +
TrnsRateRNB,RB,S,T,T F · ExtrnsY,RNB,RB
(3.21)
3.5.9
Maximum Ramping Rate of Generators
Every type of technology presents different ramping rates based on its technical spec-
ifications. The maximum ramp up of a conventional generator is constrained to be
less a ramp capability factor expressed in percentage of capacity multiplied with the
capacity.
V UPA,CONV,S,T,T F ≤ExcapA,CONV · RampUPcapCONV
(3.22)
The same holds also for the ramping down variable.
V DNA,CONV,S,T,T F ≤ExcapA,CONV · RampDNcapCONV
(3.23)
3.5.10
Maximum Change of Fuel Consumption Rate
As the ramp rates of the conventional generators are bounded from the technical
characteristics of each technology, the fuel rate change for each time step is also
constrained. In other words, a generator is not able to change its fuel consumption
rate infinitely from one time step to the next.That fact in case of ramp up is expressed
with the eq. 3.24.
V FA,CONV,S,T,T F ≤ExcapA,CONV
Fueleff
· RUPfuelcapCONV
(3.24)
In case of ramping down, the consumption rate change is constrained from the
equtaion 3.25.
==PAGE:30==
24
3 Methodology
V FA,CONV,S,T,T F ≥−ExcapA,CONV
Fueleff
· RDNfuelcapCONV
(3.25)
3.5.11
Maximum Ramping Rate of Interconnections
Interconnection lines are also present ramping rate constrains as the flowing is pro-
duced from generators with their own ramping rate limits. For example, in case of
negative imbalance in Denmark, imports from Norway may need to be increased. But
the amount of that increase is limited not only by the transmission line’s capacity but
also from the ramping rates of Norway’s power plants. The ramping rate constrains
for the interconnection lines are presented in eq. 3.26 and 3.27 .
V TUPRNB,RB,S,T,T F ≤IRAMPupRT·
TrnsRateRNB,RB,S,T,T F · ExtrnsY,RNB,RB
(3.26)
V TDNRNB,RB,S,T,T F ≤IRAMPDNRT·
TrnsRateRNB,RB,S,T,T F · ExtrnsY,RNB,RB
(3.27)
3.5.12
Constraining Imports and Exports Change
As explained, the Danish energy system was simulated during balancing alone but
neighboring countries are also able to contribute. Their contribution is expressed
through the ramping of interconnections which can mean change in the imports or
the exports. Because the balancing of these neighboring countries is not simulated,
the regional prices for electricity per MWh during balancing is not known. Thus, the
day ahead price was used as an assumption. This assumption could result in extra
ramping of generators or interconnections, more than the amount needed for covering
the imbalance. For that reason, equations constraining the model from not ramping
up in case of positive imbalances and were added (eq.3.28). Consequently in case of
negative imbalance the ramping down variables are fixed to zero (eq. 3.29).
if Imbalance ≥0
V TUPRNB,RB,S,T,T F = 0
V UPA,CONV,S,T,T F = 0
(3.28)
if Imbalance ≤0
V TDNRNB,RB,S,T,T F = 0
V DNA,CONV,S,T,T F = 0
(3.29)
==PAGE:31==
3.5 Mathematical Formulation
25
3.5.13
Boundaries of variables
The ramping up and down of both the generators and interconnections were defined
as positive variables. The applies also for wind hour ahead dispatch and the elec-
tricity exports among DKW and DKE. The only free variable was the change of fuel
consumption rate. Thus, the following constrains were added to the model.
V TUPRNB,RB,S,T,T F ≥0
(3.30)
V UPA,CONV,S,T,T F ≥0
(3.31)
V TDNRNB,RB,S,T,T F ≥0
(3.32)
V DNA,CONV,S,T,T F ≥0
(3.33)
V WNDA,W ND,S,T,T F ≥0
(3.34)
V TRB,RB,S,T,T F ≥0
(3.35)
−∞≤V FA,CONV,S,T,T F ≤∞
(3.36)
==PAGE:32==
26
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Results
This chapter is dedicated to the results found from the simulations. Statistical anal-
ysis will be complement to the illustrated plots in order to fully understand the
operation of balancing. The results are categorized geographically and seasonally in
order to be compared in both terms.
4.1
Hour Ahead Imbalance
4.1.1
DK West
As explained the optimization procedure starts by taking as input the day ahead
wind dispatch and calculates the renewable imbalance based on the hour ahead wind
forecasts. In this section, the day ahead wind dispatch,the hour ahead wind forecasts
and the resulting renewable imbalance are illustrated for each simulated month in
figures 4.1 and 4.3.
Figure (4.1)
The day ahead wind dispatch,the hour ahead wind forecasts and the
hour ahead imbalance for DKW in January and April 2020.
January is the month with the highest mean wind dispatch (2310 MW). Second
comes October with a mean wind dispatch that reaches 1817 MW. April is third with
1502 MW, followed from July with average wind dispatch 1425 MW. The highest day
ahead wind dispatch was found to be 4457 MW and was reported in January.
==PAGE:34==
28
4 Results
Figure (4.2)
The day ahead wind dispatch,the hour ahead wind forecasts and the
hour ahead imbalance for DKW in July and October 2020.
Based on the graphs presented above, the probability function of wind day ahead
dispatch for each month was calculated. The results of these calculation are illustrated
bellow in figure 4.3 . It is obvious, that January was the month in which the highest
level of day ahead dispatched is met. October wind dispatches are lower but not
significantly. Lastly, July and April found to have similar day ahead dispatches with
high probabilities in much lower generation levels than January.
Figure (4.3)
Probability function of wind day ahead dispatch for DKW for all 4
months simulated.
In figure 4.4, the probability function of the hour ahead imbalance is presented.
As shown, despite the large differences in wind day ahead dispatches, the total hour
ahead imbalances for the four months do not differentiate significantly. Of course,
January holds the higher probabilities for imbalances greater than ±500MW.
In
accordance with the day ahead dispatch order, October is the second month with
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Hour Ahead Imbalance
29
the highest hour ahead imbalances. In the other hand, July and April present larger
probabilities for smaller imbalances. Moreover, January and April peak their proba-
bility function for postitive imbalances. In contrast with July and October, in which
negative imbalance are more probable. These plots for DKW make clear that hour
ahead renewable imbalance is indeed depended to the level of wind day ahead dis-
patch (and consequently to the month and the season) but is more correlated with
the forecast error. In other words, great imbalances can occur even in days with low
wind generation but high forecasts errors.
Figure (4.4)
Probability function of hour ahead imbalance for DKW all 4 months
simulated.
4.1.2
DK East
DK East presents much lower wind capacity than DKW and that can be seen in
figures 4.5 and 4.6.
In January’s plot for DKE, the presence of day ahead wind
curtailment can be found where the dispatch curve gets flat. That happens in the
fourth and twelfth day (around the 100th and 300th hour).
==PAGE:36==
30
4 Results
Figure (4.5)
The day ahead wind dispatch,the hour ahead wind forecasts and the
hour ahead imbalance for DKE in January and April 2020.
Obviously, January again is the month with the highest mean day ahead wind
dispatch (515 MW). The average dispatches for April,July and October are 351 MW,
302 MW and 399MW respectively. The larger wind penetration found is 986 MW
and occurred in January.
Figure (4.6)
he day ahead wind dispatch,the hour ahead wind forecasts and the hour
ahead imbalance for DKE in July and October 2020
Next in figure 4.7, the probability function of day ahead wind dispatches for
DKE is illustrated.
As in DKW, January holds the larger probabilities for wind
dispatch greater than 600MW. Again, January dispatches seem to have more uniform
probabilities,in contrast with April and July in which their probabilities clearly peaks
in small dispatches less than 200 MW.
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Hour Ahead Imbalance
31
Figure (4.7)
Probability function of wind day ahead dispatch for DKE in all 4
months simulated.
The probability function of the hour ahead imbalance for DKE can be found in
figure 4.8. As shown, January is the most probable month for encountering imbalances
around 200MW. It is worth mentioning, that the four months don’t differentiate
significantly in terms of hour ahead imbalance. That could be explained from the
fact that the forecast error is similar in all months. Furthermore, the variation of
imbalance from one month to the other is less than the same quantity in DKW. The
cause for that difference is that DKE hold minor wind generation share in the energy
mix than DKW,
Figure (4.8)
Probability function of hour ahead imbalance for DKE in all 4 months
simulated.
==PAGE:38==
32
4 Results
4.2
Counteracting the imbalance
4.2.1
DK West
The total hour ahead imbalance is calculated by adding the renewable and conven-
tional imbalances. Later, a new schedule for the generation and transmission levels
is prepared in order to counteract the defined imbalance. In figures 4.9 and 4.10 the
ramping up and down for both conventional generators and interconnection lines are
presented for the four months studied. To clarify, ramping up of an interconnection
can both mean increase in exports or decrease in imports to or from a particular
region.
Figure (4.9)
Ramping of conventional power plants and of interconnections for DKW
in January and April 2020
As shown, the contribution in the balancing of the interconnections is incompa-
rably larger than the one coming from domestic conventional plans.That result was
expected based on the assumptions taken for this study. Since only active conven-
tional power plants are able to participate in the balancing and the heating sector
interaction is excluded together with the CHP plants, there are not enough domestic
reserves. However, that assumption is not far from reality as Denmark’s balancing
of the energy system is indeed depended on the interconnection with neighboring
countries and especially Norway. The results of the simulations showed that most of
the time Denmark lacked both up and down reserves. Finally, the technology most
used for the balancing, as it was often active from the day ahead plan, was extraction
thermal power plants using coal as fuel.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Counteracting the imbalance
33
Figure (4.10)
Ramping of conventional power plants and of interconnections for
DKW in July and October 2020 .
4.2.2
DK East
The generation and interconnection transmission adjustments are also plotted for the
case of DKE in figures 4.11 and 4.12.
The east part of Denmark presented even
lower reserves than the west. In the same time, DKE is less well connected with its
neighboring countries than DKW but the imbalances that have to be covered are also
lower. During the months simulated, DKE was found of lacking especially domestic
down reserves as the conventional power plants able to contribute in balancing were
usually not activated from the day ahead schedule.
Figure (4.11)
Ramping of conventional power plants and of interconnections for
DKE in January and April 2020
Observing these plots, it is clear that DKE for all months ramps up its reserves
much more often than ramps down. Having in mind, that the imbalances occurred
in DKE during the period studied had equal probability of being positive or negative,
==PAGE:40==
34
4 Results
the fact that ramping up is much more usual than ramping down demonstrates that
DKE was supporting DKW by sending electricity.
Figure (4.12)
Ramping of conventional power plants and of interconnections for
DKE in July and October 2020
4.3
Transmission Ramping
4.3.1
DK West
Since the interconnection ramping was the dominant method of balancing, diagrams
with detailed information regarding the international transmission were plotted.
Figure (4.13)
Interconnection ramping of DKW for January and April 2020
The graphs of figures 4.13 and 4.14 prove that the interconnection lines had to
operate usually on their full capacity regardless the month and the season. That
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Transmission Ramping
35
obviously suggests that Denmark’s interconnection capacity should expand in the fu-
ture in order to be able to withstand the increased imbalances caused from the wind
penetration. It is also clear that the model preferred to ramp down the transmis-
sion line with Norway and ramp up the interconnection with Germany. AS already
explained, the model chose the level of ramping of each individual interconnection
based on the day ahead market prices. Based on the figures showed, higher ramping
down is expected from the interconnections in January and April when more positive
imbalances are happening in comparison with July and October.
Figure (4.14)
Interconnection ramping of DKW for January and April 2020
4.3.2
DK East
The east part of Denmark is connected only with Sweden and Germany. The bal-
ancing adjustments for these two interconnection are illustrated in figures 4.15 and
4.16.
Figure (4.15)
Interconnection ramping of DKW for January and April 2020
==PAGE:42==
36
4 Results
Similarly with the DKW, the east Denmark often utilizes the full capacity of its
interconnections. That is mainly observed during the first days of July where negative
imbalance occurred and energy from Sweden was needed.
Figure (4.16)
Interconnection ramping of DKE for January and April 2020 .
4.4
Real Imbalance
4.4.1
DK West
The balancing optimization concludes in a hour ahead dispatch plan. Even with that
adjusted schedule, an imbalance will be present in the operational time, as it is created
from the hour ahead forecasts error in comparison with the realization of wind. The
hour ahead wind dispatch and the real time wind generation are illustrated for DKW
in the next two figures (4.17 and 4.18). In the same graphs the real time imbalance
is also plotted.
Figure (4.17)
The hour ahead wind dispatch,the realization of wind and the real
time imbalance for DKW in January and April 2020.
==PAGE:43==
4.4 Real Imbalance
37
As expected, the months with the highest mean wind generation are January and
October with 2258 MW and 1691 MW respectively. July and April presented 1355
MW and 1401 MW of mean wind realization.
Figure (4.18)
The hour ahead wind dispatch,the realization of wind and the real
time imbalance for DKW in July and October 2020.
Next, in figure 4.19, the probability function of the real time imbalance is plot-
ted. By observing the resulting real imbalance, a key conclusions can be made. The
seasonal effects are much lower in case of the real time imbalance compared to the
hour ahead imbalance. Regardless the difference in wind realization levels which is
obvious among the four seasons, the real time imbalance has similar distribution. Jan-
uary’s and October’s real imbalance have slightly larger probability of being greater
than July’s and April’s. Moreover, all distributions of real imbalance are closer to
the normal distribution than the case of hour ahead imbalance. In addition, real
time imbalance probability function demonstrates that the probability of positive
and negative real time imbalances are the same for all months
==PAGE:44==
38
4 Results
Figure (4.19)
Probability function of real time imbalance for DKW for all four
months.
4.4.2
DK East
Next, are the graphs with the hour ahead dispatch and the wind realization for DKE
region.
Figure (4.20)
The hour ahead wind dispatch,the realization of wind and the real
time imbalance for DKE in January and April 2020.
The months with the highest mean wind generation are January and October with
489 MW and 385 MW respectively. July and April presented 286 MW and 334 MW
of mean wind realization.
==PAGE:45==
4.4 Real Imbalance
39
Figure (4.21)
The hour ahead wind dispatch,the realization of wind and the real
time imbalance for DKE in July and October 2020
In the figure bellow the probability function of real time imbalance for DKE is
presented. As in the case of DKW the real time imbalance differentiate from one
month to the other less than the hour ahead imbalance. Figure 4.22 demonstrates
that the correlation between the real time imbalance and the time of the year studied
is insignificant.
Figure (4.22)
Probability function of real time imbalance for DKE for all four
months.
==PAGE:46==
40
4 Results
4.5
Hour Ahead and Real Imbalance Comparison
4.5.1
DK West
In the following figures a comparison between the hour ahead and the real time
imbalances is illustrated.
Figure (4.23)
The hour ahead and the real time imbalance for DKW in January and
April 2020.
Based on the figures 4.23 and 4.24 it is clear, that the mean of real time imbalance
is much lower than the same quantity of hour ahead imbalance. In other words, the
hour ahead optimization improved the day ahead schedule leading to lower real time
imbalances. The reduction of real time imbalance makes is crucial as it is easier to
be covered from the TSO close to the time of operation.
Figure (4.24)
The hour ahead and the real time imbalance for DKW in July and
October 2020.
The next figure shows the probability function of real time imbalance in compari-
son with the hour ahead imbalance for all months studies.This figure proves that real
==PAGE:47==
4.5 Hour Ahead and Real Imbalance Comparison
41
time imbalance ranges between much lower and less values. Thus, by re-optimizing
the generation plan one hour before the delivery time, the real time imbalance is
decreased and much more controllable.
It is also clear that different months and
consequently seasons, have more strong effects on hour ahead imbalance probability
function.
Figure (4.25)
The probability function of hour ahead and real time imbalance in
DKW for each month of the simulations.
The ramp rate of the imbalance is defined as the change of the imbalance from
one time step to the next (RAMP_RATET = ImbalanceT +1 −ImbalanceT ). By
calculating the ramp rate for both imbalances the creation of a duration curve it is
possible. In the figure 4.26, the duration curve of ramp rates of the hour ahead and the
real time imbalance for each month are presented. As shown, the real time imbalance
presents higher probabilities for great ramp rates in all months. That means that
despite the smaller volume of the real time imbalance, the rate of its expansion is
higher. In other words, faster reserves are needed to compensate the larger hourly
gradients of real imbalance. No seasonal patterns can be observed from this figure.
==PAGE:48==
42
4 Results
Figure (4.26)
Duration curves of the hour ahead and real time imbalance ramp rates
in DKW for each month of the simulations.
4.5.2
DK East
In this section, a comparison of hour ahead and real time imbalance for DKE is
presented.
Figure (4.27)
The hour ahead and the real time imbalance in DKE for January and
April 2020.
The figures 4.27 and 4.28 show again that the hour ahead optimization improved
the day ahead schedule. The average of the real imbalance is lower than the average
imbalance an hour ago for all months.
==PAGE:49==
4.5 Hour Ahead and Real Imbalance Comparison
43
Figure (4.28)
The hour ahead and the real time imbalance in DKE for July and
October 2020.
Next in figure 4.29, the probability function of both imbalances are plotted to-
gether for each month separately. As shown, the real imbalance again presents smaller
range and its values are more concentrated compared to the hour ahead imbalance.
Figure (4.29)
The probability function of hour ahead and real time imbalance in
DKE for each month of the simulations.
The duration curves of the imbalances ramp rates for the case of DKE are pre-
sented in the figure bellow. No seasonal effects can be observed on the ramp rates
of both imbalances, meaning that their hourly change is in depended from the time
period of the year. In accordance with the results from DKW, the real imbalance
==PAGE:50==
44
4 Results
presents higher ramp rates.
Figure (4.30)
Duration curves of the hour ahead and real time imbalance ramp rates
in DKE for each month of the simulations.
4.6
Curtailment and Remaining Imbalances
DK West
As explained, Denmark lacks domestic reserves for counteracting the imbalances oc-
curring in the energy system. This inability of the system was enlarged due to the as-
sumption taken in this thesis regarding the technologies able to participate in the bal-
ancing. In the same time, the interconnection lines capacities are also limited.These
limitations are expressed in the problem of balancing with two forms depending on
the imbalance. In case of positive imbalance, if there are not enough reserves wind
generation will be curtailed. In cases of negative imbalance, the system lacks gener-
ation that leads to infeasibilities in the optimization process. In physical term this
infeasibilities are remaining imbalance that couldn’t be covered from the balancing re-
serves and will be handled by the automatic reserves close to the delivery time. These
remaining imbalances were quantified and plotted together with the wind curtailment
for DKW in figure 4.31. As shown, April and October are the months were the most
infeasibilities occur. It is worth mentioning, that April with lower imbalances than
January presents greater remaining imbalances. That result demonstrates the fact
that the system may be unable to manage even small imbalances under certain con-
ditions. These conditions may be fully charged interconnection lines or not activated
==PAGE:51==
4.6 Curtailment and Remaining Imbalances
45
from the day ahead schedule enough and fast domestic reserves. As was expected,
curtailment for DKW was present only in January which was the most windy month
studied.
Figure (4.31)
Remaining imbalance and wind curtailment for DKW .
==PAGE:52==
46
4 Results
DK East
The quantified infeasibilies and the wind curtailment in DKE are shown in figure 4.32.
Figure (4.32)
Remaining imbalance and wind curtailment for DKE .
In contrast with DKW, the presence of curtailment is dominating. The month
with the highest wind curtailment is January. As observed, there are instances in
April where DKE curtailed wind and DKW was lacking generation. These situations
occurred due to the limited transmission capacity between the two regions.
4.7
Cost of Balancing
The balancing of the energy system comes with a cost that can be positive or negative
depended on the imbalance calculated in the hour ahead stage. The assumption made
for this thesis that Denmark exchange electricity for balancing with its neighboring
countries on day ahead market prices is expected to affect the results presented in
this section in terms of absolute values. Especially, if considered that the dominant
method of balancing was ramping the interconnection lines. The hourly balancing
costs for each month are presented in figure 4.33. Observing this graph is clear that
the month where the most extreme cost (positive or negative) was found in January
which was also the month with the greater imbalances in the system. January’s cost
presents also the higher standard deviation (478.370 e). April and October which
were two months with similar results regarding the wind curtailment and the remain-
ing imbalance passed to automatic reserves, present similar cost standard deviation
==PAGE:53==
4.7 Cost of Balancing
47
29265e and 37755 e respectively. Last is July with the least imbalances and the
smallest cost deviation 18711.69 e.
Figure (4.33)
Hourly cost of balancing for each month
==PAGE:54==
48
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
5.1
Conclusions
This thesis performed a study of the balancing of danish energy system in the year
2020 considering high wind penetration. The capability of the system to be balanced
in cases of great imbalances was questioned and the most crucial factors affecting
the balancing procedure were investigated. Moreover the hour ahead and the real
time imbalances were quantified and compared. The existence of seasonal patterns
in the hour ahead balancing and at the real time imbalance were also researched. In
order the research questions set in the start of this thesis to be answered, a model for
the conventional generation in 5 minute resolution and a model for the balancing of
the system were employed. The optimization procedure for the creation of the hour
ahead dispatch schedule was done in the form of deterministic economic dispatch with
one hour optimization horizon. Simulations have been run for four different months
(January, April, July, October) representing the four seasons of the year. The seasonal
effects in the nature of wind were captured by utilizing data exported from CorRes
software.
Part of this thesis was also to incorporate the described models in the
Balmorel open source project.
The complexity of the problem is high as different energy sectors are interacting
with each other to achieve the balancing of generation and demand. In reality, the
heating sector contributes in the balancing of the electricity as they are mutually con-
nected. For the sake of simplicity, the heating sector was not included in balancing
although exists in Balmorel and at the day ahead optimization. That assumption
affected the results as potential domestic CHP reserves had to be excluded from
participating in the balancing. In addition, since the problem formed as economic
dispatch and not as unit commitment, didn’t include start up and shut down costs.
Thus, only already activated generators from the day ahead schedule considered par-
ticipating in the balancing. The absence of enough reserves led to increased ramping
of the interconnections. When the interconnections combined with the domestic re-
serves were insufficient for balancing, wind generation was curtailed or infeasibilities
were occurring in the optimization due to lack of generation to meet the demand.
The electric energy systems of neighboring countries are connected and cooperate
during both the day ahead market and the balancing. Viewing the balancing of Den-
mark as an operation that takes place only inside the danish borders is not realistic
and feasible. Moreover, ass described the need of interconnection in the case study
==PAGE:56==
50
5 Discussion
was enlarged due to the exclusion of the heating sector contribution. Thus, in order
to fully capture the balancing procedure and retrieve the real costs of that operation
is important the energy system of every country participating to be modeled. As
mentioned, the Balmorel project includes all the countries of the Nordic energy mar-
ket during the day ahead optimization but the balancing was run only for Denmark.
The balancing of Denmark’s neighboring countries was not included since hour ahead
wind forecasts time series with 5 minutes time step were needed. This assumption af-
fected quantitatively the results as interconnections were controlled only by Denmark
and there were no extra imbalances coming from other countries. Moreover, by not
simulating the balancing of other countries, their electricity regional prices during the
hour ahead optimization was not known. Thus, the day ahead market price was used
for calculating the cost of exchanging energy during balancing. Of course, that was
a simplified assumption which directly affects the calculation of the total balancing
cost.
The results of this thesis showed that hour ahead planning and taking advantage
of the more accurate forecasts improves the day ahead schedule in terms of real time
imbalances. The probability functions of hour ahead and real imbalance proved that
by adjusting the day ahead schedule according to new forecasts the resulting imbal-
ance is more controllable. The mean of real time imbalance as well as its standard
deviation are reduced compared to the hour ahead for both DKW and DKE.
Regarding the first research question set, the simulations of the danish energy
system in 2020 having in mind the assumptions mentioned, demonstrated the lack
of domestic balancing reserves. The model displayed clearly the dominant role of
interconnection in terms of balancing. That means that wind generation curtailment
in cases of high positive imbalances is inevitable. In the same manner, there were cases
that generation couldn’t meet the demand as there were not enough up reserves in the
balancing and was assumed that these imbalances will be treated by the automatic
reserves close to delivery time.
In relation to the research for seasonal weather patterns in the energy system
imbalances, this thesis showed that they are more important when considering the
hour ahead imbalance. The probability of great hour ahead imbalances is increased
in months with high wind penetration. Statistical analysis methods,utilized for that
thesis, presented that the volume of real imbalance is not correlated with the time of
the year considered. That points to the fact that real time imbalance is dependent
only on the forecast error.
To conclude, this thesis demonstrated the importance of the hour ahead planning
for improving the day ahead schedule as the wind penetration increases throughout
the years. Greater system imbalances will have to be counteract in the near future
making the study of balancing the system necessary. By utilizing tools like the one
proposed in this thesis, the real time imbalances passing to the automatic reserves
can be minimized or even eliminated. In addition, the seasonal wind patterns that
may affect the hour ahead imbalance are not influencing the volume of the real time
imbalance.
==PAGE:57==
APPENDIX A
Objective Function
Min.Z =
∑
A,CONV,T F
(
UPCOA,CONV · V PA,CV,S,T,T F +
+DNCOA,CONV · V DNA,CV,S,T,T F
)
+
+
∑
A,CONV,F,T F
FuelPA,F · 3.6 · V FA,CONV,S,T,T F +
+
∑
C,A,CONV,F,T F
FuelTF,C · 3.6 · V FA,CONV,S,T,T F +
+
∑
A,CONV,T F
OPCostA,CV ·
(
V PA,CONV,S,T,T F −V DNA,CONV,S,T,T F
)
+
∑
RNB,RB,T F
ElPRNB,S,T,T f ·
(
V TUPRNB,RB,S,T,T F −
−V TDNRNB,RB,S,T,T F
)
+
+
∑
C,A,CONV,T F
CO2CfCONV · 3.6 · V FA,CONV,S,T,T F · Tax_CO2C+
+
∑
C,A,CONV,T F
SO2CfCONV · 3.6 · V FA,CONV,S,T,T F · TaxSO2C
+
∑
C,A,CONV,T F
NOXCfCONV · 3.6 · V FA,CONV,S,T,T F · Tax_NOXC
(A.1)
==PAGE:58==
52
==PAGE:59==
APPENDIX B
Balancing Constrain
∑
RB,T F
[
∑
A∈RB,CONV
(
ICDA,CONV,S,T,T F −DDA,CONV,S,T,T F
)
+
+
∑
A∈RB,W ND
(
V WA,W ND,S,T,T F −DDA,W ND,S,T,T F
)
+
+
∑
A∈RB,CONV
(
V PA,CONV,S,T,T F −V DNA,CONV,S,T,T F
)
+
+
∑
RNB,RB,T F
(
V TUPRNB,RB,S,T,T f −V TDNRNB,RB,S,T,T f+
+
∑
RB,RB
(
PTRB,RB,S,T,T f −PTRB,RB,S,T,T f+
+V TRB,RB,S,T,T f −V TRB,RB,S,T,T f
)]
= 0
(B.1)
==PAGE:60==
54
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
(2014). European council (23 and 24 october 2014)￿conclusions, [Online]. Avail-
able: http://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-169-2014-
INIT/en/pdf.
[2]
I. Pineda, “Wind in power 2017, annual combined onshore and offshore wind
energy statistics,” Wind Europe, 2018.
[3]
S. Jamet, “Towards green growth in denmark: Improving energy and climate
change policies,” OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 974, OECD
Publishing, Paris, 2012.
[4]
A. Basit, A. Hansen, M. Altin, P. Sørensen, and M. Gamst, “Compensating
active power imbalances in power system with large-scale wind power penetra-
tion,” Springerlink.com, 2015.
[5]
C. Bang, F. Fock, and M. Togeby. (2014). The existing nordic regulating power
market, [Online]. Available: http://www.ea- energianalyse.dk/reports/
1027_the_existing_nordic_regulating_power_market.pdf.
[6]
Schaumburg-Müller, C. Clausen, and H. V. J. Ravn, “Mathematical models
and methods for analysis ofdistributed power generation on market conditions,”
IMM-PHD-2008-177, 2008.
[7]
P. Nyeng, “System integration of distributed energy resources,” Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark, Department of Electrical Engineering, 2010.
[8]
Energinet. (2017). Regulation c2: The balancing market and balance settlement,
[Online]. Available: https://en.energinet.dk/Electricity/Rules- and-
Regulations/Market-Regulations.
[9]
L. Garver. (1962). Power generation scheduling by integer programming-development
of theory.
[10]
R. Brandenberg, M. Huber, and M. Silbernagl, “The summed start-up costs in
a unit commitment problem,” EURO Journal on Computational Optimization,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13675-016-0062-2, 2017.
[11]
M. P. Nowak and W. Römisch, “Stochastic lagrangian relaxation applied to
power scheduling in a hydro-thermal system under uncertainty,” W. Annals of
Operations Research (2000) 100: 251. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1019248506301,
==PAGE:62==
56
Bibliography
[12]
C. Weber, P. Meibom, R. Barth, and H. Brand, “Wilmar: A stochastic program-
ming tool to analyze the large-scale integration of wind energy. in: J. kallrath
, p. m. pardalos, s. rebennack, scheidt m.,” (eds) Optimization in the Energy
Industry. Energy Systems. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,
[13]
J. Andersen. (2015). Modeling and optimization of renewable energy systems.
[14]
E. Ela and M. O’Malley. (2012). Studying the variability and uncertainty im-
pacts of variable generation at multiple timescales.
[15]
E. Bakirtzis, A. Ntomaris, E. Kardakos, C. Simoglou, P. Biskas, and A. Bakirtzis,
“A unified unit commitment — economic dispatch model for short-term power
system scheduling under high wind energy penetration,” May 2014, pages 1–6,
isbn: 978-1-4799-6095-8. doi: 10.1109/EEM.2014.6861258.
[16]
K. Cheung and R. Rios-Zalapa, “Smart dispatch for large grid operations with
integrated renewable resources,” Iin Proc. 2011 nnovative Smart Grid Technol-
ogy (ISGT) Conf., Jan. 2011,
[17]
M. Litong-Palima, N. Cutululis, N. Detlefsen, and P. Sørensen, “Wind-induced
day-ahead and hour-ahead imbalances in a power system with a significant wind
mix: Simulations in the danish experience,” Poster session presented at EWEA
2012 - European Wind Energy Conference Exhibition, Copenhagen, Denmark,
[18]
H. Ravn, M. Hindsberger, M. Petersen, R. Schmidt, R. Bøg, P. P. Gronheit,
H. V. Larsen, J. Munksgaard, J. Ramskov, M. Esop, G. Klavs, A. Galinis, R.
Paprocki, M. Wawrzyszczuk, and A. Gloukhov. (2001). A model for analyses
of the electricity and chp markets in the baltic sea region, [Online]. Available:
www.balmorel.com/images/downloads/balmorel-a-model-for-analyses-
of-the-electricity-and-chp-markets-in-the-baltic-sea-region.pdf.
[19]
F. Wiese, R. Bramstoft, H. Koduvere, R. Pizarro, O. Balyk, J. Kirkerud, and H.
Ravn, “Balmorel open source energy system model,” Energy Strategy Reviews,20,26-
34. DOI:10.1016/j.esr.2018.01.003,
[20]
H. Ravn. (2016). The balmorel model structure, [Online]. Available: http://
balmorel.com/images/downloads/model/BMS303-20160907.pdf.
[21]
(). Nordic energy technology perspectives 2016 report: [Online]. Available: http:
//www.nordicenergy.org/project/nordic-energytechnology-perspectives/.
[22]
M. Koivisto and J. Gea-Bermúdez. (2018). Nson-dk energy system scenarios –
edition 2, [Online]. Available: http://orbit.dtu.dk/files/160234729/NSON_
DK_WP2_D2.1.Ed2_FINAL.pdf.
[23]
W. Skamarock, J. Klemp, J. Dudhia, D. G. D. Barker, M. Duda, X. Huang,
W. Wang, and J. Powers, “Description of the advanced research wrf version 3,”
Boulder, Colorado, USA, 2008.,
[24]
P. E. Sørensen, A. Hansen, and P. Rosas, “Wind models for simulation of power
fluctuations from wind farms,” Journal of Wind Engineering Industrial Aero-
dynamics, vol. 90, no. 12-15, pp. 1381-1402, 2002,
