==PAGE:1==
Human factors analysis of the
relationship between colored parts of
the Jext
® adrenaline auto-injector
and the occurrence of human errors
Master Thesis, February 01, 2019
Emma Kjær Bertelsen, s134638
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Emma Kjær Bertelsen, s134638
Human factors analysis of the relationship between
colored parts of the Jext
® adrenaline auto-injector
and the occurrence of human errors
Master Thesis, February 01, 2019
Supervisors:
Jens E. Wilhjelm, Professor at DTU Health Technology
Rolf Singer, Senior Director of Device Development & Support, ALK-Abelló A/S
DTU - Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby
ALK-Abelló A/S, Hørsholm
==PAGE:4==
Human factors analysis of the relationship between colored parts of the Jext®
adrenaline auto-injector and the occurrence of human errors
This report was prepared by:
Emma Kjær Bertelsen, s134638
Supervisors:
Jens E. Wilhjelm, Professor at DTU Health Technology
Rolf Singer, Senior Director of Device Development & Support, ALK-Abelló A/S
DTU Health Technology
Ørsteds plads, building 349
2800 Kongens Lyngby
Denmark
Project period:
August 22nd 2018 – February 1st 2019
ECTS:
32.5
Thesis Degree:
MSc
Field:
Biomedical Engineering
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
Motivation og formål: Allergier er en del af hverdagen for ﬂere og ﬂere mennesker
verden over. Ved alvorlige livstruende allergiske reaktioner, anafylaksi, er behandling med
adrenalin en absolut nødvendighed. Jext® er en adrenalin autoinjektor (AAI) fremstillet og
distribueret af allergivirksomheden ALK-Abelló A/S. Jext® sikrer hurtig administration
af adrenalin, hvis den anvendes korrekt.
Der er dog kendte problemer ved brugen af
AAIen, bl.a. omvendt retning ved brug. Formålet med dette projekt er at undersøge, om
simple ændringer ved Jext® kan reducere antallet af brugsfejl. Ændringerne består af en
farveændring af sikkerhedshætten (SC) og nål-beskyttelsen (NP) på AAIen.
Metoder: Et formativt brugerstudie er blevet udført med 70 testpersoner uden tidligere
erfaring med selvinjektion. Testpersonerne rangerede fra 12 til 80 år med 38 (54,29%)
kvinder og 32 (45,71%) mænd.
Studiet blev udført med en træningsudgave af Jext®,
der hverken indeholder medicin eller nål. Hver testperson blev givet én af tre versioner
af Jext® Træner og bedt om at simulere selv-injektion. De tre versioner bestod af den
nuværende farvekombination med sort NP og gul SC (AAI #1), en EpiPen®-lignende
version med orange NP og lyseblå SC (AAI #2), samt en version med rød NP og mørkeblå
SC (AAI #3). Ud over farverne i enderne var de tre versioner ens. For at gøre situationen
mere virkelighedstro blev testpersonerne timet. Grundlaget for studiet samt analysen af
resultaterne er brugbarhedsdesign, herunder FDA-retningslinjer og relevante internationale
standarder.
Resultat: Ud af 70 testpersoner var 23 personer i stand til at demonstrere korrekt brug.
Andelen af deltagere, der korrekt demonstrerede anvendelsen af AAIen, var henholdsvis
31,7% AAI #1, 24% AAI #2 og 43,5% AAI #3 (p > 0,2). Der var ingen signiﬁkant forskel
i tidsforbruget for de tre versioner af Jext® (p > 0,2) eller på antallet af injektioner i ﬁnger
eller hånd (p > 0,2).
Konklusion: Dette studie har vist at farverne på NP og SC på Jext® har begrænset
indﬂydelse på antallet af brugerfejl. Det har også vist vigtigheden i at inkludere brugerne
fra begyndelsen af udviklingen af et medicinsk produkt.
i
==PAGE:6==
ii
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
Motivation and purpose: Allergies are becoming part of everyday life for more and more
people around the world. In case of severe life-threatening allergic reactions, anaphylaxis,
treatment with adrenaline is an absolute necessity. Jext® is an adrenaline auto-injector
(AAI) manufactured and distributed by the allergy company ALK-Abelló A/S. Jext®
ensures rapid administration of adrenaline if used correctly. However, there are known use
problems with the AAI, i.e. misorientation. The purpose of this project is to investigate
whether simple changes to the Jext® AAI can reduce the number of use errors.
The
changes consist of a color change of the Safety Cap (SC) and the Needle Protection (NP)
on the auto-injector.
Methods: A formative usability study has been performed with 70 test participants
without previous self-injection experience. The test participants ranged from 12 to 80 years
with 38 (54.29%) women and 32 (45.71%) men. The study was carried out with a training
version of Jext®, which contains neither medicine nor needle. Each test participant was
given one of three versions of the Jext® Trainer and asked to simulate self-injection. The
three versions consisted of the current color combination with black NP and yellow SC
(AAI #1), an EpiPen®-like version with orange NP and light blue SC (AAI #2), and
a version with red NP and dark blue SC (AAI #3). Other than these colors, the three
versions were alike. To simulate a real stressful use scenario, the test participants were
timed. The basis for the study and the analysis of the results were usability engineering,
including FDA guidelines and relevant international standards.
Result: Of 70 test participants, 23 were able to demonstrate correct use of the AAI. The
percentage of participants who properly demonstrated correct use was 31.7% for AAI #1,
24% for AAI #2 and 43.5% for AAI#3 (p > 0.2). There was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in
the time spent on the three versions of Jext® (p > 0.2) or on the number of injections in
digit or hand (p > 0.2).
Conclusion: The current study has shown that the colors of the NP and SC have limited
inﬂuence on the occurrence of use errors. The study has also shown the importance of
including users from the beginning of medical device product development.
iii
==PAGE:8==
iv
==PAGE:9==
Preface & Acknowledgements
This project is a part of the requirement to obtain a Master of Science degree in Biomedical
Engineering from the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The project is conducted
in cooperation between DTU Health Technology and ALK-Abelló A/S from August 22nd
2018 to February 1st 2019.
I would like to direct special thanks to my main supervisors Professor Jens E. Wilhjelm and
Rolf Singer, Senior Director of Device Development & Support, for inspiration, guidance,
and feedback throughout the entire project. Also a large thank you to the Device Devel-
opment & Support department at ALK-Abelló A/S for their hospitality, encouragement
and for answering all of my questions regarding Jext®. Thank you also to Tine Schrøder
Albeck for being tough but fair when "quality assuring" my thesis.
I would also like to thank all test participants for "playing along" and for valuable conver-
sations.
The months spent working with the current thesis have been intense and challenging. The
holistic and multidisciplinary character of the project has been truly inspiring and I hope
that this project can help to emphasize the need for including Human Factor Engineering
and Usability from the very beginning of the medical device development process.
Thank you to my family, friends and Jeppe for always supporting me and bearing with
me, even in the hectic parts of the project.
Emma Kjær Bertelsen, s134638
v
==PAGE:10==
vi
==PAGE:11==
Nomenclature
List of Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Meaning
AAI
Adrenaline Auto-injector
ALARP
As Low As Reasonably Practical
CFR
Code of Federal Regulations
EAI
Epinephrine Auto-injector (equivalent to AAI)
FDA
Food and Drug Administration
FMEA
Failure Modes and Eﬀects Analysis
IEC
International Electrotechnical Commission
IgX
Immunoglobulin X (IgE, IgG, IgM)
IL
Interleukin
ISO
International Organization for Standardization
MDD
Medical Device Directive
MDR
Medical Device Regulation
RCM
Risk Control Measures
SOP
Standard Operating Procedures
vii
==PAGE:12==
Deﬁnitions
Term
Deﬁnition
Climatic Zone 4 Country
To enable stability studies of a pharmaceutical drug the world has
been divided into ﬁve diﬀerent zones; I, II, III, IVa, and IVb. The
zones are created due to diﬀerences in humidity and temperature.
Zone IVa and IVb are described as hot humid/tropical zone and
hot/higher humidity.
Close call
Instance in which a user experience confusion, misinterpretation,
or error that would result in mistreatment or harm, but the user
recovers and no actual performance failure occurs [19].
Correct use
Normal use without use error.
Hazard-related use scenario
Use scenario that could lead to a hazardous situation or harm. A
hazard-related use scenario can often be linked to a potential use
error and is not related to a failure of the medical device unless the
medical device failure was caused by a use error. The hazard-related
use scenarios are the scope of the usability evaluation and must be
identiﬁed both in the risk analysis and in the usability evaluation
reports, with a ranking in terms of severity and likeliness.
Human factors
Also called ergonomics, is the application of psychological and phys-
iological principles to the design of products, processes, and sys-
tems.
Medical device
Apparatus for treatment of disease in the human body that does
not achieve its primary intended action by pharmacological means
(shortened deﬁnition from [17]).
Mental model
The description of the test participant’s thought process about how
something works in the real world. It is a representation of the
surrounding world, the relationships between its various parts and
the test participant’s intuitive perception about own acts and their
consequences.
Risk
The likelihood that a person may be harmed or suﬀers adverse
health eﬀects if exposed to a hazard.
Safety
Freedom from unacceptable risk. Unacceptable risk can arise from
use error, which can lead to exposure to direct physical hazards or
loss or degradation of clinical functionality.
Task
Task is deﬁned as one or more user interactions with a medical de-
vice to achieve the desired result. A task description should include
the allocation of activities and operational steps between the user
and the medical device.
Usability
The ease of use and learnability of a human-made object such as a
tool or device.
Use Error
User action or lack of user action while using the medical device that
leads to a diﬀerent result than that intended by the manufacturer or
expected by the user. Includes the inability of the user to complete
a task [16].
Use scenario
Speciﬁc sequence of tasks performed by a speciﬁc user in a speciﬁc
use environment and any resulting response of the medical device.
viii
==PAGE:13==
ix
==PAGE:14==
x
==PAGE:15==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Reading guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Introduction to Jext®
5
3
Medical background
9
3.1
Type I Immediate Hypersensitivity Disorders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.1
Anaphylaxis (allergic shock) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
State of The Art
15
4.1
Prevalence and consequences of anaphylaxis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Availability of AAI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Failures and design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.4
Other existing adrenaline auto-injectors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Human factor engineering
21
5.1
Human Factor Engineering as part of the development process . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.1
Distinction between usability and Human Factor Engineering . . . .
23
5.1.2
Adrenaline auto-injectors and usability requirements . . . . . . . . .
24
6
Human-centered design
27
6.1
Color perception
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7
Study Design
31
7.1
Study Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7.2
Study Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.2.1
Study session outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7.3
Study participants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
xi
==PAGE:16==
8
Results
39
8.1
Result of test session . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
8.1.1
Observed use errors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
8.1.2
Observed close calls
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8.1.3
Observed correct use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
8.1.4
Other diﬃculties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
8.1.5
Preference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
8.1.6
Use errors and hazard-related use scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
9
Discussion
49
9.1
Design of the adrenaline auto-injector
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
9.1.1
Designed like a pen or a marker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
9.2
Recommendation for color combination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
9.2.1
Standardization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
9.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
10 Conclusion
55
References
57
Appendices
63
A Appendix
65
A.1 p-values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.2 Formative usability test protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
xii
==PAGE:17==
1
Introduction
Allergy is becoming part of everyday life for more and more people all over the world.
Most allergic reactions can be controlled with anti-histamine, corticosteroids or similar,
but with severe, life-threatening reactions called anaphylaxis, treatment with adrenaline is
necessary. The onset may be unpredictable and the importance of fast administration of
adrenaline to a patient experiencing anaphylaxis cannot be stressed enough and is crucial
to ensure survival. In Denmark, anaphylaxis is the main cause of 10-20 deaths per year [7].
Jext® is a single use adrenaline auto-injector (AAI) marketed by the allergy company
ALK-Abelló A/S. Each Jext® injects a pre-measured single dose of adrenaline for the
emergency treatment of anaphylaxis and ensures fast administration of adrenaline if used
correctly.
Jext® is provided in two versions; the Jext® 150 is intended to be administered in pa-
tients weighing between 15 and 30 kg and the Jext® 300 is intended to be administered in
patients weighing from 30 kg and up. The intended user of Jext® is considered to be the
administrator of Jext®. This may or may not be the patient experiencing anaphylaxis,
but can be a caretaker, healthcare professional or a passer-by. The two versions of Jext®
can be seen in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Yellow Jext® 150 (junior) and red Jext® 300 (adult). The labels have recently been
modiﬁed but same colors represent junior and adult versions of Jext®.
1
==PAGE:18==
2
CHAPTER 1.
INTRODUCTION
In spite of training of patients, caretakers and healthcare professionals, unintentional self-
injection injury is among the most reported use errors. Use errors from trained users can
be caused by the induced stress in the emergency situation, but can also be caused by
a lack of adequate training and education or in some cases no training at all. Knibb et
al.[21] conducted a study comparing the three AAIs available in the United Kingdom,
showing that 0% of untrained users were able to demonstrate correct use with the Jext®
AAI. When an AAI is prescribed by a physician, the person with an allergy should be
instructed by a health care professional in the correct use of the product. But there are
no formal requirements ensuring that the patient has been given this training and train-
ing can thus not be guaranteed. There is also no guarantee that the person experiencing
anaphylaxis will be self-administering adrenaline. The person might not be capable and a
passer-by with no experience has to perform the injection. The latter is a risk that is hard
to mitigate. Jext®, as mentioned, contains a single dose of adrenaline, so the consequences
of use errors can be fatal for the anaphylactic patient if the dose is wasted.
Use errors could also be related to the way the auto-injector is designed and the level
of usability of the product. When Jext® was initially developed there were no formal
requirements regarding the usability of a medical device. Guidelines and standards have
later been established and part of the continuing development of Jext® is to meet the
highest standards of utility and usability.
The purpose and motivation of this project are to investigate whether simple changes to
the Jext® AAI can improve usability and thus decrease the number of use errors. The
minor changes consist of a change in color of the Safety Cap and the Needle Protection
of the AAI. Three diﬀerent versions will be tested in a formative usability study. The
current version of Jext® can be seen in Figure 1.1 with a yellow safety cap and black
Needle Protection.
1.1
Reading guide
This report documents the work conducted throughout the master thesis project. The
project consists of many parts and this reading guide is provided to give the reader an
overview of the structure of the report.
Chapter 2 introduces the Jext® AAI including intended use, intended user and the func-
tions of the auto-injector when in use.
Chapter 3 contains the biological and medical background for this project, ﬁrst describing
allergy in general, then covering type I (immediate hypersensitivity disorders) and ana-
phylaxis more thoroughly.
In Chapter 4 a current state of the art on AAIs is presented. This chapter describes the
most common causes of anaphylaxis, the need for auto-injectors, and also comments on
the availability. At the end of this chapter, an overview of competing products is provided.
1.1.
READING GUIDE
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 1.
INTRODUCTION
3
Chapter 5 covers the necessary aspects of human factor engineering in order to understand
why human factor engineering and usability is part of the design process. This chapter
has an underlying basis in Design Control, Risk Management, and relevant international
standards. A distinction between usability and human factors is also presented.
Chapter 6 introduces human-centered design and the tools and agents available when de-
signing for humans.
In Chapter 7 assorted aspects of the formative usability test protocol are elaborated, also
according to the methods described in Chapter 5 and Chapter 6. The full test protocol
can be seen in Appendix A.2.
Chapter 8 presents the results from the usability study. The results are brieﬂy discussed,
but a more in-depth discussion of the results is seen in Chapter 9. Other aspects regarding
the AAI will also be discussed. Thoughts about future work and further development of
AAIs are presented at the end of Chapter 9.
Finally, in Chapter 10 a conclusion on the master thesis project will be given as well as a
recommendation of choice of colors on the AAI.
1.1.
READING GUIDE
==PAGE:20==
4
CHAPTER 1.
INTRODUCTION
1.1.
READING GUIDE
==PAGE:21==
2
Introduction to Jext
®
The current chapter is meant to provide an overview of the intended use and the functions
of the Jext® AAI when in use. The mechanics and detailed functional sequence will not
be elaborated since this has not been the scope of the project.
Jext® is an adrenaline preﬁlled drug delivery system designed for intramuscular injection
for single use only. The pre-ﬁlled device is a needle-based auto-injector with a cartridge
containing the 1 mg/mL solution adrenaline for injection.
Jext® is intended for emergency self-administration, administration by parents or respon-
sible caretakers, healthcare professionals or passers-by. The Jext® AAI is intended to be
carried and used at any time in case of an emergency situation. The administration of
adrenaline can be performed through normal clothing or against bare skin.
The intended patient population for Jext® AAI is any patient above 15 kg who has been
evaluated to be at risk for anaphylaxis by a medical doctor. There are no absolute con-
traindications to the use of Jext® during an allergic emergency. The Jext® AAI comes in
a protective Carry Case that needs to be removed before administration. The other parts
of Jext® that the user is to interact with is seen in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Parts of Jext® that involves the user.
A ﬂowchart of the tasks deﬁning the intended way of use can be seen in Figure 2.2. By
each box, the related functional state of the AAI is shown. The functions of the Jext®
AAI is further described below.
5
==PAGE:22==
6
CHAPTER 2.
INTRODUCTION TO JEXT®
Figure 2.2: Flowchart of intended way of use for the Jext® AAI. The green boxes are phases of
preparing the AAI for injection, the blue boxes are phases of performing injection.
1. Grasp the Jext® injector in your dominant hand
After the AAI is removed from the Carry Case it is still secured against unintended
activation, ensured by the Safety Cap.
The pin of the Safety Cap prevents the
internal elements from moving.
2. Pull oﬀthe yellow cap with your other hand
When the Safety Cap is removed the Jext® AAI is armed and ready to use. It is
still possible to disarm the Jext® AAI by reattaching the Safety Cap.
3. Place black injector tip against your outer thigh, holding the injector at
a right angle (approx 90°) to the thigh.
4. Press the black tip ﬁrmly into your outer thigh until you hear a "click"
conﬁrming the injection has started, then keep it pushed in.
As the user presses the Jext® AAI against the thigh of the patient the force to the
Needle Protection initiates activation and injection of adrenaline.
5. Hold injector in place for 10 seconds.
The user is instructed to keep the Jext® AAI in place for a speciﬁc time after the
"click" sound to ensure complete delivery of the adrenaline dose.
6. Remove the Jext® injector.
When the AAI is activated the Needle Protection is also unlocked. When the Jext®
AAI is removed from the patient thigh the Needle Protection moves forward, covering
the needle and enters its safe mode immediately. In this mode, the Needle Protection
resists speciﬁed forces to prevent unintended exposure to the needle.
Since Jext® is a single use AAI it is not possible to use the device to practice for a real
emergency situation where injection with adrenaline is needed. Instead a Jext® Trainer
has been developed. The Jext® Trainer contains no needle nor medication and can be
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2.
INTRODUCTION TO JEXT®
7
seen in Figure 2.3. The Jext® Trainer functions in the same way as the Jext® AAI but
can be re-loaded for further training.
Figure 2.3: The Jext® Trainer containing no needle nor drug. Image from [31].
Jext® is a product consisting of a device constituent and a drug constituent. In the EU,
Jext® is classiﬁed as a drug it is viewed as a medicinal product (drug) with an integrated
delivery system (device). If Jext® was marketed in the United States it would be classiﬁed
by the FDA as a class II combination product. Even though it is classiﬁed as a drug, ALK-
Abelló A/S has decided to follow regulations as if it was classiﬁed as both a medical drug
and a medical device (cf. Deﬁnitions). This ensures that both classiﬁcation regulations
are covered since it is the device part that is responsible for delivering the medicinal drug.
In this master thesis, Jext® will be handled as a medical device and the medicinal drug
will not be considered.
==PAGE:24==
8
CHAPTER 2.
INTRODUCTION TO JEXT®
==PAGE:25==
3
Medical background
The immune system is a defense network that has evolved to protect against invading
microorganisms, prevent the proliferation of cancer cells and mediate healing of damaged
tissue. The immune system can become overly active and thereby cause an exaggerated
response to foreign substances or perceived foreign substances. Instead of protecting the
body, the immune system will end up harming the body.
Hypersensitivity, or allergy, is a condition found in humans and animals, aﬀecting the
immune system when in contact with one or more foreign substances, called allergens, oth-
erwise tolerated by healthy subjects [26]. Allergy falls under the category of immunological
diseases due to the fact that the organism has formed either antibodies (immunoglobulin)
or special white blood cells (T-lymphocytes) that are speciﬁc for the non-tolerable sub-
stance.
Allergies are reactions to molecules from outside the body that most people do not react to.
It is speciﬁc molecules that the body is exposed to through inhalation, ingestion, injection
or skin contacts. These speciﬁc molecules are also called antigens that, when causing an
allergic reaction, is referred to as allergens.
A distinction is made between four diﬀerent types of allergic reactions [30]:
• Type I, Immediate Hypersensitivity Disorders.
Type I is an immunoglobulin E
(IgE) mediated response where symptoms develop within minutes. These reactions
are common and include hay fever, hives, itching, and asthma. In severe cases, whole
organ systems can be involved as well as an allergic shock. Type I will be covered
more thoroughly in the following section.
• Type II, Antibody-Mediated Disorders.
Type II disorders involve an antibody-
mediated response against cell surface or extracellular matrix antigens that result
in inﬂammation, cell injury, and phagocytosis mediated by a complement system of
the body. This means that antibodies like IgG or IgM that are usually beneﬁcial for
the body, are placed on the bodies own cells, causing them to be destroyed. These
types of reactions are less common than type I reactions and can present as acute,
severe anemia, most often after ingestion of certain drugs.
9
==PAGE:26==
10
CHAPTER 3.
MEDICAL BACKGROUND
• Type III, Immune Complex-Mediated Disorders. Type III reactions are also quite
rare.
In type III reactions circulating antigens and antibodies (usually IgG) are
formed in the blood and trigger the recruitment and activation of inﬂammatory cells
that release tissue-damaging products. Type III reactions are rare and can present
as serum sickness after injection of serum products.
• Type IV, Cell-Mediated Hypersensitivity Disorders. Type IV disorders involve tissue
damage in which cell-mediated immune responses with sensitized T-lymphocytes
cause cell and tissue injury. Type IV reactions are, like type I, frequent and can
present as eczema after skin contact (e.g. perfume allergy).
The following section focuses on the pathophysiology of type I hypersensitivity disorders.
It is these reactions that potentially can lead to anaphylactic reactions where the admin-
istration of adrenaline is necessary.
3.1
Type I Immediate Hypersensitivity Disorders
Type I hypersensitivity disorders are caused by a combination of genetic predisposition
and environmental impact. Hay fever, allergic asthma, and atopic dermatitis are common
examples of disorders caused by genetic predisposition. People with a genetic disposition
have certain genes that cause their T-helper cells to be more hypersensitive to certain anti-
gens. The environmental impact is reﬂected in the fact that the risk of pollen allergy is
increased for children born just before a pollen season [36]. Allergy is most common in the
industrialized countries, with an increasing number of incidences. The cause is not known
for sure, but pollution, as well as altered building style with poorly ventilated homes, are
among the suspected causes.
Type I hypersensitivity disorders are IgE-mediated reactions that have a rapid onset, often
within minutes after the antigen has been introduced. Most allergies are type I hypersen-
sitivity reactions. The most common allergens include proteins in plant pollen, house dust
mites, animal dander, foods, and chemicals often found in medicine like penicillin [7].
An allergic reaction occurs in two steps; a sensitization step (ﬁrst exposure) and a subse-
quent exposure. A visualization of the two steps is seen in Figure 3.1.
1. The ﬁrst time the body is exposed to an allergen it does not present with an allergic
reaction. When an allergen is introduced for the ﬁrst time it binds to the antigen
presenting cell, which activates TH2 lymphocytes, which then activates the B-cells.
The B-cells diﬀerentiate into plasma cells that produce antibodies, in this case, IgE.
Allergen-speciﬁc IgE antibodies then bind to mast cells, making them sensitized.
Mast cells are usually distributed in connective tissue, especially in areas beneath the
3.1.
TYPE I IMMEDIATE HYPERSENSITIVITY DISORDERS
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3.
MEDICAL BACKGROUND
11
skin and mucous membranes of the respiratory, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary
tracts and adjacent blood and lymph vessels [30].
2. When the body is re-exposed to the antigen, the antigen will bind on to the allergen-
speciﬁc antibodies on the mast cell. This will cause the mast cell to degranulate,
releasing inﬂammatory mediators, including histamine.
Histamine can bind to H1 receptors on nerve endings causing symptoms of itching and
burning and to H2 receptors on vessel walls causing vasodilation, increased vascular per-
meability, and edema. The release of histamine will thus create an allergic response with
rapid onset; an initial-phase response. This kind of response occurs within 5 to 30 min-
utes of exposure of an antigen. The most severe initial-phase response is allergic shock,
anaphylaxis, which is covered in Section 3.1.1.
3.1.
TYPE I IMMEDIATE HYPERSENSITIVITY DISORDERS
==PAGE:28==
12
CHAPTER 3.
MEDICAL BACKGROUND
Figure 3.1: Type I hypersensitivity explained. The ﬁrst introduction (1) of an antigen causes
secretion of IgE antibodies leading to sensitization of mast cell. A subsequent exposure (2) causes
degranulation and release of mediators (early response) and cytokines and phospholipids (late
reponse). Figure modiﬁed from [30, p. 347].
3.1.
TYPE I IMMEDIATE HYPERSENSITIVITY DISORDERS
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3.
MEDICAL BACKGROUND
13
3.1.1
Anaphylaxis (allergic shock)
Anaphylaxis is a systemic life-threatening hypersensitivity reaction characterized by widespread
edema, diﬃculty breathing and vascular shock due to vasodilation [30]. Anaphylaxis is a
condition with a rapid onset and may aﬀect several organ systems. Within minutes of ex-
posure to the antigen itching, hives, and skin erythema develop, followed by bronchospasms
and respiratory distress. The person may go into circulatory shock, anaphylactic shock,
which ultimately can result in death unless treated eﬀectively. Anaphylactic shock is the
result of an immunologically mediated reaction in which vasodilator substances such as
histamine are released into the blood. The substances cause vasodilation of the arterioles
and venules along with increased capillary permeability.
The onset and severity of anaphylaxis depend on the sensitivity of the involved person
and the rate and quantity of antigen exposure. The signs and symptoms associated with
anaphylaxis include abdominal cramps, warm or burning sensation of the skin, itching,
urticaria, coughing, choking, wheezing, chest tightness, and diﬃculty breathing. There
is a drop in blood pressure due to vasodilation and the pulse can become very weak.
Life-threatening airway obstruction arises as a consequence of laryngeal angioedema or
bronchial spasm. The most common triggers of anaphylaxis are exposure to certain foods,
medication, insect venom or allergy immunotherapy [7].
Treatment of anaphylaxis includes discontinuation of the triggering allergen, close moni-
toring of the cardiovascular and respiratory system, and maintenance of respiratory gas ex-
change, cardiac output, and tissue perfusion. The initial treatment of anaphylaxis focuses
on the establishment of stable airways and the administration of adrenaline. Adrenaline
is given due to its ability to constrict blood vessels and relax smooth muscle in the bron-
chioles, thus restoring cardiac and respiratory function. Intravenous ﬂuids can also be
given to help ﬁll the vascular space. Adrenaline injected into the upper outer thigh, the
anterolateral thigh, is the ﬁrst choice drug for the emergency treatment of anaphylaxis
since it works quickly (3-5 minutes) to reverse the symptoms and life-threatening situation
of an anaphylactic reaction. The rate of absorption (time to maximum concentration in
the serum) is far quicker than if the drug was given subcutaneously. The rich vasculature
of the thigh muscle enables fast distribution the medication into the bloodstream [23] and
thus fast recovery.
Anaphylactic shock falls under the category of distributive shock, visualized in Figure 3.2,
which is characterized by loss of blood vessel tone, enlargement of the vascular compart-
ment, and displacement of the vascular volume away from the heart and central circula-
tion [30].
Once a person has been sensitized to an antigen, the risk of repeated anaphylactic reactions
3.1.
TYPE I IMMEDIATE HYPERSENSITIVITY DISORDERS
==PAGE:30==
14
CHAPTER 3.
MEDICAL BACKGROUND
Figure 3.2: Normal cardiac function to the left and the cardiac function in distributive shock to the
right. Distributive shock is characterized by loss of blood vessel tone and enlargement of vascular
compartments. The dotted lines in the ﬁgure to the right indicate the enlargement of the vascular
compartments, and the arrows indicate the direction of blood ﬂow. Figure modiﬁed from [30, p.
501]
with subsequent exposure is high [30]. Anaphylaxis can manifest diﬀerently in the same
person, even when triggered by the same allergen [9] and it is not possible to predict how
an allergic person will react at next exposure. The prevention of anaphylactic shock is
thus preferable to treatment. Prevention could consist of eliminating the exposure of the
triggering allergen as much as possible. Some allergic reactions can be prevented through
immunotherapy, or hyposensitization, which induces tolerance by exposing the patient to
small, gradually increasing amounts of the triggering allergen either through subcutaneous
injections or sublingual tablets.
3.1.
TYPE I IMMEDIATE HYPERSENSITIVITY DISORDERS
==PAGE:31==
4
State of The Art
The purpose of a literature study is to account for previous studies, conducted within the
ﬁeld of interest, in this case, AAIs. It is important to know what areas regarding AAIs
have previously been explored to gain knowledge of what to do and what not to do when
developing a life-saving medical device.
This literature study focuses on anaphylaxis and the use of AAIs. More speciﬁcally, the
study focuses on the demographics of the patients, the availability of AAI in diﬀerent areas
of the Western world1, the design of the AAI and the human failures during administration.
Many articles have been read and analyzed in the conducted literature study. This chapter
summarizes only the most signiﬁcant and important articles in the ﬁeld of interest.
4.1
Prevalence and consequences of anaphylaxis
Allergies are part of everyday life for millions of people worldwide. Fromer [12] states that
allergies are the 6th leading cause of chronic illness in the United States with a lifetime
prevalence of anaphylaxis in 1.6% to 5.1% of all people. This prevalence is supported
by Turner et al. [38], who states that 5% of the American population has suﬀered ana-
phylaxis. Fromer [12] also states that the incidence of anaphylaxis in the United States
is 49.8 people in 100,000 people per year. When having experienced anaphylaxis once,
Fromer [12] reports a risk of 30-43% of anaphylaxis recurrence. It is thought [27] that
anaphylaxis is underreported or reported as another pathological event. It is hard to know
when the experienced symptoms represent anaphylaxis and when it is something else, like
a myocardial dysfunction.
Ma et al. [24] reports of a mortality rate of 0.65%-2% of all anaphylactic shocks in the
United States. This rate is supported by Golden [13] who reports a fatal outcome in 0.3%-
2% of all anaphylactic reactions.
Ma et al. [24] state that from 1999 to 2009, the annual number of anaphylaxis-related
hospitalizations in the United States increased from 21 people in 1,000,000 people to 25.1
people in 1,000,000 people with an annual increase of 2.23%. Even though the number
1Western world as deﬁned by Samuel P. Huntington in the bookThe Clash of Civilizations?
15
==PAGE:32==
16
CHAPTER 4.
STATE OF THE ART
of hospitalizations increased, the in-hospital mortality, due to anaphylaxis, over the same
period of time decreased by 2.35%. Motosue et al. [27] states that anaphylaxis accounts for
1% of all emergency department visits and made a study that showed an increase by 101%
in overall emergency department visits due to anaphylaxis over a ten year study period.
The importance of adrenaline as ﬁrst-line treatment for anaphylaxis is an emphasized point
in most studies. Waserman et al. [40] and Fromer [12] also emphasize that adrenaline is
the only real eﬀective ﬁrst-line treatment since adrenaline has a fast peak eﬀect, where
other treatments, such as anti-histamine and steroids, have a peak eﬀect after at least
one hour. First-line treatment with other drugs than adrenaline can thus lead to fatal-
ity. Golden [13] suggests the best way to prevent anaphylaxis is to eliminate the cause.
Prevention of anaphylaxis could be improved by education of physicians and patients to
recognize risk factors. When able to recognize the risk factors it is easier to give the right
treatment.
After an anaphylactic reaction patients are encouraged to seek medical attention, even
if the symptoms have improved. According to Chooniedass et al. [9] patients are often
discharged without a prescription for an AAI. Chooniedass et al. [9] also reports that 40%
of all anaphylactic deaths did not receive timely administration of adrenaline. Golden [13]
states that delayed administration of adrenaline is the number one cause of fatal ana-
phylaxis.
Chooniedass et al. [9] conducted a study including 13 children experiencing
anaphylaxis; six cases were fatal, all with delayed adrenaline administration, and seven
survivors who all received adrenaline within ﬁve minutes of reaction onset. Delayed ad-
ministration is deﬁned as an administration longer than 20 minutes after reaction onset.
Fromer [12] suggests having two AAI at all times in case of a biphasic reaction, where a
second reaction can occur without re-exposure of a triggering allergen. Simons et al. [37]
deﬁnes a biphasic reaction when symptoms reoccur 1-72 hours after exposure. By carrying
two AAIs, timely administration of adrenaline during both phases is possible.
According to Turner et al. [38] drugs are the most common reason for anaphylaxis in
several countries, including Australia, New Zealand, United Kingdom, Brazil, and the
United States. Risk factors are cause-speciﬁc, although increased age and cardiovascular
comorbidity are common risk factors. The results from this study are supported by Wood
et al. [43] who lists three factors accounting for 85% of all cause-speciﬁc anaphylactic cases;
medication (34%), foods (31%) and insect venom (20%).
There is generally an increase in medication-induced anaphylaxis. The rate of medication-
related anaphylaxis has increased 212% over a ten year study period from 2005 to 2014.
The highest increase in medication-induced anaphylaxis was in patients aged 0-4 years
(479%).
In the study by Motosue et al. [27] medication-related anaphylaxis was most
common for fatalities. Motosue et al. [27] also reports of an increase of 124% in food-
4.1.
PREVALENCE AND CONSEQUENCES OF ANAPHYLAXIS
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4.
STATE OF THE ART
17
related anaphylaxis amongst all age groups with Grabenhenrich et al. [15] reporting food
as the major elicitor of anaphylaxis in children.
4.2
Availability of AAI
Simons [35] made a study where they found that of 44 countries an AAI was only available
in 26 countries (59.1%). The countries with no access to an AAI was primarily located in
Asia, the Middle East, Africa and Latin America (in climatic zone 4 countries). When the
study included all countries in the World, it showed that an AAI is available in 39 out of
the 195 countries (20%). Chooniedass et al. [9] claims that 30% of countries in the world
do not have an anaphylaxis guideline, which can lead to barriers when treating anaphy-
laxis. Generally, there is a lack of ﬁrst-hand anaphylaxis experience due to the relatively
low prevalence. In countries with no AAI available, there are alternative methods. Pepper
et al. [29] suggest ampules with an empty syringe or preﬁlled syringes. Simons [35] also
suggests inhalers or ampules. These alternatives can give tailored doses, but requires more
skill from the user and need to be replaced every 2nd or 3rd month due to the degradation
of adrenaline.
Even if an AAI is marketed in a speciﬁc country the price can be a limiting factor. An
article from 2017 by Shaker et al. [32] states that two double adrenaline packs each year
over 20 years in the United States will cost 58,667$ for EpiPen® and 45,588$ for USP
auto-injector (generic AAI produced by EpiPen®). Pepper et al. [29] reports of a price
of 730.33$ for a pack of two AAIs with a shelf life of 18 months. The price of an AAI is
compromising since adrenaline is the only choice of life-saving medication.
4.3
Failures and design
Leach et al. [22] conducted a study where young people aged 13-18 years, prescribed an
AAI for severe allergic reactions, were invited to participate in in-depth, semi-structured,
face-to-face interviews about AAI design. The results showed seven major themes; 1) ac-
cessibility and carriage, 2) comprehensibility of instructions, 3) indication that the device
has been correctly administered, 4) safety, 5) speed of administration, 6) visibility and
identiﬁcation and 7) precise drug delivery. The participants were torn between wanting
emergency colors, clearly indicating an important medical device, but also wanting a dis-
crete device. These results are supported in a study made by Frew [11]. He describes the
ideal AAI as a device that 1) delivers adrenaline to the correct tissue, 2) delivers the cor-
rect dose, 3) delivers adrenaline within the correct timeframe, 4) has a robust and reliable
design in a real-life setting and 5) is easy, convenient and safe for patients and carers. He
suggests a standardization of training with legislation on color-coding of devices, injection
techniques, etc.
It is important that a prescribed AAI is carried at all times since it is impossible to know
4.2.
AVAILABILITY OF AAI
==PAGE:34==
18
CHAPTER 4.
STATE OF THE ART
when it will be needed. Frew [11] reports that in spite of this, 30-70% of patients with
a prescribed AAI did not carry them at all times. He also reported that only 30-44% of
patients with a prescribed AAI were able to demonstrate correct use. Knibb et al. [21]
made a study that showed that half of the untrained participants were unable to correctly
use an AAI training device even after instruction.
Umasunthar et al. [39] made a study comparing diﬀerent AAIs. They deﬁned a successful
adrenaline administration as the primary outcome of an AAI. Success was deﬁned by four
criteria; 1) removal of all safety caps, 2) placement of the correct end of the device on the
thigh, 3) activation of the device, and 4) holding device in place for adrenaline delivery
≥5 seconds. The study showed that fewer mistakes were made with a device with audio
instructions when no training had been performed.
Knibb et al. [21] made a similar study comparing the three AAIs available in the United
Kingdom; Jext®, EpiPen® and Emerade®. This study showed that when no training was
received 0% of participants were able to use Jext® or Epipen® correctly, where 82% were
able to use Emerade® correctly. With instructions the number increased to 64% correct
use with Jext®, 33% correct use with EpiPen® and 100% correct use with Emerade®.
4.4
Other existing adrenaline auto-injectors
The initial development of adrenaline auto-injectors was based on the ComboPen devel-
oped for the U.S military in the 1970s originally containing nerve gas antidote. Since then
various versions of AAIs have been developed, including Jext®. Jext® was introduced
in 2011 and is currently marketed in most European countries and few countries in the
Middle East and Asia2.
In Europe the marketed adrenaline auto-injectors are Jext®, EpiPen®, Anapen®, and
Emerade®. In the United States Adrenaclick® (USP), EpiPen®, and Auvi-Q® are avail-
able.
The various AAIs have diﬀerent tasks for performing successful adrenaline administration.
Table 4.1 gives an overview of the tasks for each type of injector.
2Jext® is marketed in BE, NE, LUX, ES, FR, IT, DE, AT, the UK, IE, DK, IS, NO, SE, FI,
and SK, CH, and HK. Jext® is also sold as imported foreign medicine to KR, KSA, and Israel.
4.4.
OTHER EXISTING ADRENALINE AUTO-INJECTORS
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4.
STATE OF THE ART
19
Table 4.1: Steps for successful injection with other brands of AAIs. Information from respective
webpages.
Name of device
Procedure of use
Image
Adrenaclick®
Pull oﬀblue end caps - red tip appears.
Red
tip against outer thigh, press down hard and hold
ﬁrmly for 10 seconds. Cover needle with the car-
rying case.
Anapen®
Remove needle protection, remove safety cap, hold
to thigh for 10 seconds, press red button under
safety cap until click. Cover needle after use.
Auvi-Q®
Pull up from the outer case. Pull red safety guard
down and oﬀof Auvi-Q. Place black end against
outer thigh, push ﬁrmly until you hear a click and
hiss sound. Hold for 2 seconds.
Emerade®
Remove needle shield, press against outer thigh,
hold for 5 seconds.
EpiPen®
Remove safety cap, place against thigh, "swing
and jab" until it clicks, hold for 3 seconds.
Jext®
Remove safety cap, place against thigh, press until
it clicks, hold for 10 seconds.
Twinject®
Remove caps on each end, place red tip against
thigh and press hard. Hold the pen for 10 seconds.
Contains a second dose.
4.4.
OTHER EXISTING ADRENALINE AUTO-INJECTORS
==PAGE:36==
20
CHAPTER 4.
STATE OF THE ART
4.4.
OTHER EXISTING ADRENALINE AUTO-INJECTORS
==PAGE:37==
5
Human factor engineering
Human Factor Engineering (HFE) is part of the Medical Device Risk Management, de-
scribed in the international standard ISO 14971:2012 [18].
The purpose of Medical
Device Risk Management is to systematically identify and reduce risks as far as possible.
Risk Management applies to the whole life cycle of a product and manages hazards that
may cause harm to the patient, user and, where applicable, other persons.
Medical Device Risk Management consists of several activities, including risk assessment
with risk analysis, risk evaluation, and risk control.
During risk analysis, the hazards and associated hazardous situations are identiﬁed. In
this activity, the intended use of the product and possible use errors are taken into account,
as well as the severity of the harm and possibility of occurrence.
During risk evaluation, the risk of individual hazards is evaluated against a number of
established acceptability criteria.
During risk control, the risk control measures (RCMs) are chosen. RCMs include actions
that can be taken to reduce the potential of exposure to the hazard, remove the hazard, or
reduce the likelihood of the risk of the exposure to that hazard being realized. The residual
risk of each hazard after the RCMs have been applied is evaluated and any new hazards
due to RCMs are identiﬁed. Whether the estimation of other hazards may be aﬀected by
the RCMs is also evaluated.
Hazard analysis ﬁnds risks and hazards that might aﬀect the user when using the medical
device. Potential risks must be continuously managed throughout the development process,
and also through the lifetime of the product. If risk management is carried out from the
very beginning of the development, potential hazards can be mitigated early in the process.
Early mitigation of risk could potentially lower the cost of the development process since
larger changes to the product would not have to be carried out at a later, more complex
state of the development process.
ISO 14971:2012 [18] describes the application of
risk management with regards to medical devices. The standard describes how a hazard
analysis serves to identify possible risks and classify them by probability of occurrence and
severity. A risk is a combination of these two parameters and can be either acceptable,
21
==PAGE:38==
22
CHAPTER 5.
HUMAN FACTOR ENGINEERING
non-acceptable or as-low-as-reasonably-practical (ALARP). If a risk is considered non-
acceptable then actions must be taken to reduce the risk; either by reducing the severity
or the probability of occurrence. No standard deﬁnes an acceptable risk and all risks should
be assessed on a case-by-case basis.
5.1
Human Factor Engineering as part of the development
process
A medical device is only a proper device if the user is able to use it correctly. When the
concept of regulated Design Control was ﬁrst introduced no requirements for human factors
or usability were present. The concept of human factors was implied under the concept of
risk management, but often risk management was concentrated around the mechanics of
the device itself and not concerning the possibility of incorrect usage. The ﬁrst standard
on usability engineering, IEC 62366, was introduced in 2007. After the introduction of
IEC 62366 HFE went from nice-to-have to need-to-have when wanting to obtain market
approval for a new product. HFE seeks to understand the interactions of human stake-
holders with the organizational and technological components of the system [8].
HFE focuses on the design and analysis of interactive systems that involve people, techni-
cal equipment and use environments. The goal is to optimize the medical device or system
to maximize safety and eﬃciency [33]. HFE takes into account that humans inevitably
will make mistakes and that the systems should be designed to help anticipate, mitigate
and counteract these human errors.
HFE should be used when appropriate as a tool to develop a proper ﬁnal design output. It
applies to all aspects of devices with which humans interact and to all tasks that a human
might perform with a device. HFE is thus the application of informed knowledge about
human characteristics, capabilities (physical, emotional and intellectual), and limitations
to the design and implementation of devices, processes, and systems. A successful ap-
plication of HFE can signiﬁcantly improve user safety in ways not always covered by the
customary risk management that usually focus on the risk associated with the mechanics of
the device [41]. HFE is a multivariate discipline including psychology, engineering, design,
statistics, ethnography, and anthropometry. A human factor is deﬁned as any physical,
cognitive, perceptual, or behavioral aspect of a human being that impacts a technological
system or environment [20]. Human factor studies show how individuals interact with
technology, which can be utilized and applied to the design and development of technolo-
gies to better ﬁt human behaviors, needs, and limitations.
The most important beneﬁt of HFE is the increase in patient safety. This safety comes in
the form of reduced patient risk through a design that has been heavily tested throughout
the development process with representative users in its intended use environment in order
5.1.
HUMAN FACTOR ENGINEERING AS PART OF THE DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5.
HUMAN FACTOR ENGINEERING
23
to eliminate design ﬂaws. Secondary beneﬁts of a systematic HFE approach may include
reducing or eliminating the need for costly modiﬁcations after product launch, reducing
the likelihood of product recalls due to design ﬂaws, and improving the overall ease of use.
All beneﬁts from a systematic HFE process combined will result in a medical device with
a patient experience that is safer, more eﬃcient, and more satisfying.
Human factor activities are conducted throughout all phases of device design and devel-
opment, from the preliminary analysis and usability inspection to formative evaluation
and summative validation testing in simulated use. In the very beginning, a use failure
modes and eﬀects analysis (FMEA) can be performed to understand the use-related risks.
The backbone of this FMEA is a detailed task analysis of everything a user can do when
interacting with a device. The possible failure modes of each task will, as a regular FMEA,
be identiﬁed and rated according to severity, the probability of occurrence and likelihood
of detection. The results of the risk analysis identify areas of weakness in the device, la-
beling and/or training material. The tasks that resulted in these failure modes can then
be included in formative and summative user testing protocols.
Formative evaluation can be used when testing one or more functional prototypes. The
goal of formative evaluation is to have the user interact with the device in realistic tasks
and scenarios, identiﬁed as critical in the use FMEA.
A summative evaluation is the ﬁnal validation of a device intended to demonstrate that
all risks have been identiﬁed and adequately addressed and that the impact of the resid-
ual risks is minimized or acceptable. A summative evaluation will be performed after the
ﬁnal design changes have been made and a production-ready model of the device has been
produced. More participants are included in the summative evaluation than the formative
evaluation [19].
5.1.1
Distinction between usability and Human Factor Engi-
neering
Human Factor Engineering is the application of knowledge about human capabilities and
limitations to the design and development of tools, devices, systems, environments, and
organizations.
Usability is the characteristics of the user interface that establishes eﬀectiveness, eﬃciency,
ease of user learning and user satisfaction. Medical usability diﬀers from general usability
in the context of risk management. Usability improvements make the device more pleasant
to use and quicker to learn; in a medical device, they also reduce the risk to the patient.
Usability engineering is an iterative process and shall analyze, specify, design, verify and
validate usability as it relates to safety and eﬀectiveness of the device [6].
5.1.
HUMAN FACTOR ENGINEERING AS PART OF THE DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
==PAGE:40==
24
CHAPTER 5.
HUMAN FACTOR ENGINEERING
Usability is hard to measure in statistical terms, but it is possible to create sets of rules
and measurements as statistical signiﬁcant.
The eﬀectiveness can be measured as a pass/fail of whether the user has managed to
complete the task successfully. The percentage of users that manage to complete a task
successfully becomes a measure of the design’s eﬀectiveness.
The eﬃciency of the device can be measured by timing the user on task during the us-
ability testing. The average task completion time of all the users participating in the test
becomes a measure of eﬃciency.
Using these simple techniques it is possible to obtain data which reveals (in a quantiﬁed
way) how usable the medical device was found to be during usability testing.
Good usability is no guarantee that a device will be useful or eﬃcient since human in-
teraction is still a factor. Poor usability, on the other hand, makes devices prone to use
errors and the corresponding negative safety outcomes. The International Electrotechnical
Commission (IEC) deﬁnes a use error as a user action or lack of user action while using
the medical device that leads to a diﬀerent result than the intended by the manufacturer
or expected by the user [42]. Good usability can mitigate some use errors but because of
human interactions, a guarantee of total elimination is about impossible.
An example of the distinction between the two concepts; the power required from the user
to remove the Safety Cap is a human factor issue, where it is a usability issue to make sure
that the user knows to remove the Safety Cap.
5.1.2
Adrenaline auto-injectors and usability requirements
Adrenaline is the only medicinal treatment option when experiencing anaphylaxis. AAIs
must thus be easy and intuitive to use. A medical device design must allow it to be used
by people with no or only minimal medical training and the design must focus on the
intended user and the intended context of use.
In the European Union (EU), the development of medical devices is subject to the Medical
Device Directive (MDD) (from 2020 changed to the Medical Device Regulation (MDR)).
The MDD has a set of harmonized standards that must be met to assure approval of the
product. ISO 13485:2016 [17] on Quality management systems is a voluntary standard
that contains section 7.3 Design and Development recommending which procedures should
be put in place by manufacturers in order to have a quality system that will comply with
the obligatory MDD 93/42/EEC concerning medical devices.
If Jext® was to be classiﬁed as a medical device it would, according to MDD Annex
IX Rule 6, be a Class IIb device. Jext® falls under this rule as it is used transient as a
surgically invasive device, intended to administer medicine by means of a delivery system,
5.1.
HUMAN FACTOR ENGINEERING AS PART OF THE DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5.
HUMAN FACTOR ENGINEERING
25
where the administration is done in a manner that is potentially hazardous taking account
of the mode of application. It is surgically invasive because it penetrates the skin and the
self-administration makes the mode of application potentially hazardous.
In the current MDD, the word safety appears 40 times, wherein the new MDR it appears
290 times. As the MDR is introduced, the requirements for products with both a device
constituent and a drug constituent will change. MDR Article 117 addresses drug deliv-
ery devices and the appertaining changes in requirements. MDR Article 117 refers to
MDR Article 1(9) which states that a device intended to administer a medicinal product
and is marketed as a single integral product which is not reusable, needs to comply with
the relevant general safety and performance requirements for the device part of the single
integral product. This means that the manufactures need to either obtain certiﬁcation
that would enable CE-marking of the device or identify a notiﬁed body1 to provide an
opinion on the conformity of the device to the MDR. This also means that the device
part of a drug product needs to comply with IEC 62366 [16] concerning the application
of usability engineering in medical devices. These requirements will be applicable for new
medical devices as well as already existing medical devices.
In the United States, the Jext® AAI would be classiﬁed as a combination product since
it is a product comprised of two regulated components; a drug and a device. The product
would thus be regulated under FDA Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Title 21 Part 4
which states that the drug constituent should comply with 21 CFR 210+211 whilst the
device constituent should comply with 21 CFR 820.30 [1] on Design Control. The device
constituent would according to 21 CFR 880.5860 be classiﬁed as a general pen injector
and found to be a Class II device. The CFR identiﬁes the device with the product code
NSC (pen injector for general use).
Design Control, described in the regulations 21 CFR 820.30 [1] and ISO 13485:2016
[17], is a set of quality practices and procedures that applies during the development of
design for new products and during development of design changes to already existing
products in the categories medical devices, in vitro diagnostic devices and the device con-
stituent part of drug/device combination products. Design Control is part of the design
process and assures that the device meets user needs, intended needs and the speciﬁed
requirements, and is an application of a formal methodology when conducting product
development activities. The Design Control process consists of design and development
planning, design input, design output, design transfer, design veriﬁcation, and design val-
idation, design review, design change, and design documentation.
1A notiﬁed body is an organization designated by an EU country to assess the conformity of
certain products before being placed on the market.
5.1.
HUMAN FACTOR ENGINEERING AS PART OF THE DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
==PAGE:42==
26
CHAPTER 5.
HUMAN FACTOR ENGINEERING
Overall, the Design Controls, whether required by the EU or the FDA, demonstrate that
a medical device is safe, eﬀective and meet the indications for use. Risk management and
usability engineering are linked to all process elements throughout.
5.1.
HUMAN FACTOR ENGINEERING AS PART OF THE DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
==PAGE:43==
6
Human-centered design
HFE is a risk management tool that aims to improve human performance by designing
hardware, software, and facilities compatible with the abilities of a particular group of
users, and is thus the basis of human-centered design (or user-centered design) [34] [14].
Human-centered design (HCD) is an approach that, like usability engineering, puts hu-
man needs, capabilities, and behavior ﬁrst and then designs to accommodate those needs,
capabilities, and behaviors. The diﬀerence between the two is that there are no formal
requirements for HCD and medical devices. HCD is a design philosophy, starting with a
good understanding of people and the needs that the design is intended to meet. This
understanding comes primarily through observation since the intended users themselves
often are unaware of their true needs and the diﬃculties they are encountering.
HCD is the process of creating things deeply based on general natural characteristics and
peculiarities of human psychology and perception. A successful human-centered design
will not only be pleasant for the user but will also be functional according to psychological
traits and features typical for large groups of users. HCD tries to map peoples intuition
and how a product is ﬁrst perceived by putting people at the core of its products and focus
upon the people that the product is intended for; it is about designing with and not just
for the end user.
The need for more participatory approaches has long been recognized, but there are still
issues with products being designed for problems instead of designed for people. Includ-
ing the intended user in the development of products can help the developers thoroughly
understand the problem which is key prior to developing a solution. This process involves
the collection of qualitative data, which can be turned into deep insights about a target
audience and then used to design a set of workable, personalized, data-driven solutions.
This means that the solution is inherently built from what works in a given context instead
of trying to adapt an existing solution to ﬁt unique circumstances. But HCD is a complex
matter; a device that is easy for one person to use safely and eﬀectively might present
problems for another person.
The basic ideas behind HCD were formalized in ISO 13407:1999 Human-centered
27
==PAGE:44==
28
CHAPTER 6.
HUMAN-CENTERED DESIGN
design processes for computer-based interactive systems (later replaced by ISO
9241-210:2010) and have since found widespread application in many situations. The
methods mentioned are not exclusive for computer-based systems, but can be applied in
both hardware and software design. Although there is no formal connection between HCD
and HFE, they complement each other and many advantages in incorporating HCD in the
medical device design process can be found. A combination of HCD and HFE ensures
eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness and counteracts possible adverse events.
When people are ﬁrst introduced to a product it is necessary for them to ﬁgure how to work
the product before a correct interaction can take place. This includes discovering what
the product does, how it works, and what operations are possible. This process is called
discoverability. Discoverability is a result of the application of 6 psychological concepts;
aﬀordance, consistency, constraints, feedback, mapping, and visibility [28]. These terms,
deﬁned by Donald Norman, are listed below.
• Aﬀordance.
A term that refers to attributes allowing users to understand the
means of the use of a product or design element. The design should give clues of
usage to provide the user of the correct mental model of how something should be
used or how it is operated.
• Consistency. Principle about giving the user the possibility to get used to the sys-
tem or product. Consistency in a product can be provided by using design elements
that are commonly used in the target environment, but also using the same means
of use throughout the product. If a user receives consistent results every time the
same or similar action is performed it is easier for the user to create a mental model
of how the product operates.
• Constraints. With constraints the possible ways of usage can be minimized. It
can be used to help the user to not make the wrong choice by using constraints to
make it impossible to do them at all.
• Feedback. Implies giving information back to the user after an action. Through
feedback provided the user is informed about what action has been performed and
the result yielded.
• Mapping. Refers to the relationship between techniques and their eﬀect on the
world. Mapping can appear in diﬀerent ways. One type of mapping, called natural
mapping, refers to relations which are build up from physical analogies and cultural
standards. If natural mappings are used correctly, the user will directly understand
how to use the product.
• Visibility. Helps to clarify basic functions. The visible functions should help the
user to understand how something works and what action should be done next.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6.
HUMAN-CENTERED DESIGN
29
Visibility is also about making the information needed by the user visible while
hiding redundant information which might lead to confusing the user.
These six psychological concepts can be utilized in order to alter the conceptual model and
thereby the mental models formed by an individual. A conceptual model is a representation
of a system, made of the composition of concepts which are used to help people know,
understand, or simulate a subject the model represents. Mental models are the conceptual
models in people’s minds that represent their understanding of how things work. Diﬀerent
people may hold diﬀerent mental models of the same object. A single person might have
diﬀerent models concerning the same item, each dealing with a diﬀerent aspect of its
operation [28].
Usually, the model is constructed by experience, which often makes it
erroneous and can lead to diﬃculties in using the device. All six concepts have a great
inﬂuence on the perceived structure and give major clues to how things work.
New technologies oﬀer ways to make life easier and more enjoyable. At the same time,
added complexities increase the level of skill needed to operate technology. The continuing
discovery of new forms of technologies increases the need for correct conceptual models,
enabling as many groups of users as possible to beneﬁt from the new technologies.
There are basic conditions of general physical human abilities, color perception, contrast
perception, readability, and interaction with a product in diﬀerent environments that are
typical for the vast majority of people. The main focus of this thesis is how the colors
of a medical device can inﬂuence the mental model of the users and the concept of color
perception will be introduced below.
6.1
Color perception
Few people see two colors exactly alike and the perception and association of a speciﬁc
color are often based on personal preference, experiences, upbringing, culture, age, and
context. The way a person perceives colors can change over the course of a lifetime since
new experiences will alter previous associations.
People attach diﬀerent emotions and meanings to colors and the psychological basis for
understanding color and its inﬂuence on emotions is not well understood. There is no
simple explanation for the interaction of color and the corresponding emotional response.
It is thus not possible to give concrete answers when asked what speciﬁc colors represent.
Even though it is not possible to make a general assumption of how certain colors are per-
ceived, there are certain theories that have been adapted by society and the perception of
color is generally based on learned meaning. As an example, it is a common understanding
that a red traﬃc light means stop while a green traﬃc light means go.
Color associations are complex. The value and intensity of a color can change associations
6.1.
COLOR PERCEPTION
==PAGE:46==
30
CHAPTER 6.
HUMAN-CENTERED DESIGN
and the speciﬁc meaning and the perception of color will cause an automatic evaluation by
the person perceiving. This evaluation will force color-motivated behavior and the inﬂuence
of color will thus exert automatically. Customers generally make an initial judgment on
a product within 90 seconds of interaction with that product and about 62%-90% of that
judgment is based on color [4].
The context of which the color is perceived also plays a great role in the eﬀect of the color.
In one study, people in a blue-green room felt the room was several degrees colder than
people in a red-orange room, even though the two rooms had the exact same temperature.
It has also been reported that the color of placebo pills can be a factor in their eﬀectiveness,
with pills in a warm color working better as stimulants and pills in a cool color working
better as depressants [2].
6.1.
COLOR PERCEPTION
==PAGE:47==
7
Study Design
This section covers the preparation and execution of the study protocol. The full protocol
can be seen in Appendix A.2. In the following, selected parts of the protocol are explained
and reasoned more thoroughly, as well as a description of the demographics of the study.
The objective of the formative human factor study was to explore whether the colors of
the Needle Protection and Safety Cap of the Jext® AAI could inﬂuence the occurrence of
human errors, including misorientation of the device.
The study was carried out according to guidelines provided by the FDA, the EU and in
Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) by ALK-Abelló A/S.
The study focuses on the worst case scenario with untrained users with no previous expe-
rience with auto-injectors and only access to the injector and the onboard label.
7.1
Study Materials
The devices used were three standard Jext® Trainers. One of the devices was with original
colors, the two others were modiﬁed with diﬀerent colors for the Safety Cap and the Needle
Protection. The three diﬀerent auto-injectors can be seen in Figure 7.1. The diﬀerent
design approaches are described in Table 7.1. It was essential that the only diﬀerence
between the three pens was, in fact only, the colors of the Needle Protection and the
Safety Cap and the label was thus kept the same on all three versions, only altered to
match the colors of the Safety Cap and Needle Protection in each particular case.
In
order to be able to compare the AAIs equally the instructions for use and the pictograms
remained the same. The label was the British version with Danish text. The label was in
Danish to ensure that the language would not be a barrier for the test participants.
The primary measures of success were whether the test participants were able to orient
the AAI correctly as well as having an understanding of how the device was to be used.
31
==PAGE:48==
32
CHAPTER 7.
STUDY DESIGN
Figure 7.1: Three diﬀerent versions of the adrenaline auto-injector. From the top; AAI #1 Jext®,
AAI #2 EpiPen® and AAI #3 Custom.
Table 7.1: Summary of color design approaches
AAI #1 - Current
Jext® design
The current color combination with black Needle Pro-
tection and yellow Safety Cap was used as a control
reference.
AAI #2 - Design
similar to EpiPen®
The color combination used on the AAI dominating the
market, the EpiPen®, with orange Needle Protection
and light blue Safety Cap.
AAI #3 - Based on
assumed color psy-
chology
Strong red color of the Needle Protection representing
danger and something that should not be touched. Dis-
crete dark blue Safety Cap representing something that
should not attract too much attention.
7.1.
STUDY MATERIALS
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 7.
STUDY DESIGN
33
7.2
Study Methodology
The study was a simulated-use usability study. The data obtained through the study is
both quantitative and qualitative, but the study is essentially a qualitative method since
the sample sizes are too small for valid statistical analysis. The study data are the ob-
served actions of participants and their unprompted statements. The analysis of the result
is qualitative, looking for patterns of misinterpretation or ambiguity. The goal of the for-
mative usability study is to gain insights into why certain behaviors or use errors were
observed, enabling a root cause analysis.
The study was conducted as a formative usability test since the intent was to explore the
user interface design strengths and weaknesses. The purpose was to clarify all use errors,
close calls and unanticipated use errors, and operational diﬃculties for each of the three
versions of the Jext® Trainer used to simulate delivery of an emergency intramuscular
injection of adrenaline. Each version was to be tested individually and the number of use
errors, close calls, and correct uses logged for each version.
The test participants were introduced to an emergency scenario with themselves experienc-
ing an anaphylactic reaction. The test participants were asked to use one of three versions
of the Jext® Trainer as if to administer the drug into themselves. Only the device with its
onboard label was provided and no further instructions were given other than they were
to use it as they saw ﬁtting. The test participants were told that they had 30 seconds to
complete the task. The timing of the session was used to induce a further element of stress.
The test participants were not encouraged to verbalize their thoughts while performing the
task, as this might interrupt their thought-process and slow down task completion.
The participants were video recorded enabling awareness by the moderator throughout the
test. The video showed every move of the participant, also the ones that the moderator
might have missed if only notes were taken during the session. The test participants were
recorded from the neck down to ensure somewhat anonymity.
Each test participant’s study session was analyzed individually before drawing overall
conclusions. After task execution, a semi-structured interview enabled further investigation
of the mental model behind each speciﬁc situation. The test participant was also asked
about their associations regarding the colors and the color combination of the AAI.
The outcome of each test was categorized in one of three deﬁnitions of use; use error,
close call, and correct use. These were based on deﬁnitions in IEC 62366-1:2015 (see
Nomenclature). The category each test participant was placed in was based on their ability
to complete six tasks, deﬁning a correct use of the Jext® Trainer. Whether the participant
noticed or read the onboard label was also noted. The six tasks were
7.2.
STUDY METHODOLOGY
==PAGE:50==
34
CHAPTER 7.
STUDY DESIGN
1. Remove Safety Cap
2. Select outer thigh as injection site
3. Place needle end onto the injection site
4. Press to activate
5. Hold Jext® Trainer in place for 10 seconds (≥3 seconds accepted as correct use)
6. Remove Jext® Trainer
Scoring of each task for each participant was made enabling analysis of the task with the
highest occurrence of errors. The task with the most use errors indicates where in the
process altering is needed.
The primary study parameter was the correct demonstration of AAI use, while the sec-
ondary study parameters were time to administer, mean of total scoring and presumptive
self-injection into digit or hand.
7.2.1
Study session outline
Each session had a duration of maximum 20 minutes. The following activities were to be
performed during the study session for each test participant:
1. Introduction to the test participant. Meet and greet, consent, walk-through
of health and safety information regarding the test (no needle and no medication),
data collection (name, age, gender, level of education), switching on video camera.
2. Scenario setting by moderator. Not rushed, but made clear that the task is
time pressured. Not providing any clues about how to use the device, but provide
concrete usage scenario. The moderator explicitly avoided using the word “pen”.
3. Simulated injection by test participant under evoked stress from timer.
The participant was seated in a chair with a table in front and space to assume any
position for injection. The device was placed horizontally to the test participant on
the table and the timer was started. The simulation ended at the simulated "ﬁring"
of the device and after the moderator assumed the test participant’s perception of
the "10 seconds holding time" had ended. The Jext® Trainer was taken from the
test participant and placed out of sight.
4. Discussion of simulated use test and follow-up questions to test partic-
ipant by moderator.
Through semi-structured interview insight into the test
participant’s understanding and mental models was gained. For root cause anal-
ysis, non-leading questions were asked about (if any) use errors, close calls (incl.
confusions, mistaken assumptions or intent), etc.
7.2.
STUDY METHODOLOGY
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 7.
STUDY DESIGN
35
5. Discussion of color combination. All versions of the Jext® Trainer were shown
to the test participant. Questioning on comparison and preferences between the
designs, i.e. the participants were asked which of the color combinations they re-
membered to have used and what preference in color combination they had of the
three combinations.
7.3
Study participants
All test participants were untrained users and intrinsic usability of the device was explored.
They were recruited by the author, who also acted as moderator. Recruitment of partic-
ipants and organizing meeting times and locations were all handled by the author. In a
professional study, this process would most likely be outsourced to a trained company,
since this is a very time-consuming task and does not directly have anything to do with
the formative study itself.
In the study protocol, the sample size was chosen to be 30 in each age group (90 in total).
The three age groups were from 12-16 years, from 17-40 years and from 41 years and up.
Children can also suﬀer from anaphylaxis and at a certain age, it can be expected of them
to be responsible for their own safety and thus emergency medication. Prior to this age
the parents and caretakers are the main responsible. It was thus decided that the study
should include children from the age of 12 and not below. ALK-Abelló A/S has deﬁned
age groups where, when you reach the age of 12, the category changes from “child” to
“adolescent”. When you reach 17 years, the category changes to "adult". The age group
of 41 years and up was based on the assumption that this is the age where a person sight
starts to degenerate, inﬂuencing the discoverability of a new object1.
The chosen sample size is large for a formative usability study that normally has 20 or
fewer participants in each population group. The initial large number of participants left
room for exclusion of participants and no-shows and the possibility to obtain more data
to support discussions and conclusions.
During the limited period of time that the master thesis project lasted, it was possible
to recruit and test 70 participants. Participants were recruited to match the proﬁle of
intended users for this particular study. All participants were volunteers and provided
their written informed consent prior to participation.
The aim was to have an as diverse population group as possible with an equal number of
men and women ranging in ages 12 and up with an even distribution. The participants’
level of education was also included to ensure diversity.
Figure 7.2 shows the distribution of gender in each population group. Of 70 total partici-
1Information
from
http://www.optikerforeningen.dk/Mit-syn/Fakta-om-synet/%C3%98jet-
gennem-%C3%A5rene.aspx
7.3.
STUDY PARTICIPANTS
==PAGE:52==
36
CHAPTER 7.
STUDY DESIGN
pants, 38 (54.3%) were female and 32 (45.7%) were male.
Figure 7.2: Distribution of test participants according to gender
Figure 7.3 shows the age distribution in each population group. The participants ranged
from 12 years old to 80 years old. The mean age of all participants was 33 years (±19.24
years).
Figure 7.4 shows the distribution of the participants’ level of education. Naturally, the
younger participants’ education level is lower than the remaining participants’. The mean
level of education was 4.2 with Education Level 1 being currently in primary school and
Education Level 8 being higher than a Master’s degree. The majority of participants have
a completed Bachelor’s degree. Many participants were still attending primary school,
high school or other further education and the educational potential was not included.
The auto-injector with which each study participant was tested was randomly selected,
keeping in mind an equal distribution between gender and age group. The distribution of
tested auto-injectors can be seen in Table 7.2.
Table 7.2: Distribution of test AAIs
AAI #1
AAI #2
AAI #3
F
M
F
M
F
M
12-16
3
2
4
3
3
3
17-40
5
5
6
4
6
4
41≤
3
4
4
4
4
3
Total
22
25
23
7.3.
STUDY PARTICIPANTS
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 7.
STUDY DESIGN
37
Figure 7.3: Distribution of test participants’ age group
Figure 7.4: Distribution of test participants’ education level
7.3.
STUDY PARTICIPANTS
==PAGE:54==
38
CHAPTER 7.
STUDY DESIGN
7.3.
STUDY PARTICIPANTS
==PAGE:55==
8
Results
In this chapter, the obtained data from the formative usability study will be presented and
analyzed. Mental models of participants performing correct use, close call and use error
will also be presented. A root cause use scenario hazard analysis can be seen at the end
of the current chapter.
8.1
Result of test session
Each test performance was categorized as either correct use, close call or use error. The
result can be seen in Figure 8.1. The bars have been divided according to test AAI.
Figure 8.1: Distribution of number of correct use, close call and use error according to tested AAI.
Of all 70 test participants 67.14% performed use error, 14.29% performed close call and 18.57%
performed correct use.
In general, there is a large overweight of use error. The number of correct use is just
about the same for each test AAI (5 for AAI #1, 4 for AAI #2 and 4 for AAI #3). When
comparing the three test AAIs there is more close call with AAI #3 than with the other
two (2 for AAI #1, 2 for AAI #2 and 6 for AAI #3).
With the binary parameters of whether or not the participant would have received adrenaline
39
==PAGE:56==
40
CHAPTER 8.
RESULTS
close call and correct use is combined resulting in 7 participants for AAI #1, 6 participants
for AAI #2, 10 participants for AAI #3 receiving adrenaline.
The test participants were scored according to the completion of each task. The tasks
deﬁning correct use is listed in Section 7.2. A score of 0 was given when not completing
the task, a score of 0.5 was given when the task was completed with corrections underway,
and a score of 1 was given when the task was completed according to the intended use.
The assessment of the 6 steps is included in Table 8.1 as well as whether or not the partic-
ipant noticed the onboard label. The task that participants struggled with the most was
to keep the AAI in place for 10 seconds (38 participants, 54.29%). Misorientation of the
AAI was present with 22 of the 70 test participants (31.42%). As the included p-values
indicate1, no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the three AAIs was detected on any parameter.
The parameters were tested on a level of signiﬁcance of 0.05 and all p-values were larger
than 0.2.
Table 8.1: Comparison of study parameters between the three AAI groups. The succes criteria
was to simulate injection of adrenaline and the results for close call and correct use have been
combined. The total score refers to the mean of the sum of the scoring of each task for each
participant.
AAI #1,
AAI #2,
AAI #3,
p-value
n = 22
n = 25
n = 23
Primary study parameter
Correct demonstration of AAI use, n (%)
7 (31.7)
6 (24.0)
10 (43.5)
p >0.2
Secondary study parameters
Time to administer (mean ± sd)
29.2 ± 20.1
27.3 ± 14.8
24.49 ± 11.5
p >0.2
Total score (mean ± sd)
0.63 ± 0.32
0.63 ± 0.31
0.66 ± 0.33
p >0.2
Presumptive self-injection into hand, n (%)
7 (31.7)
8 (32.0)
7 (30.4)
p >0.2
Assessment steps
Notice/read label, n (%)
18 (81.8)
18 (72.0)
17 (73.9)
p >0.2
Removed Safety Cap, n (%)
20 (90.9)
24 (96.0)
20 (87.0)
p >0.2
Select outer thigh as in injection site, n (%)
14 ( 63.6)
18 (72.0)
16 (69.6)
p >0.2
Place needle end into injection site, n (%)
15 (68.2)
16 (64.0)
17 (73.9)
p >0.2
Pressed to activate, n (%)
13 (59.1)
15 (60.0)
15 (65.2)
p >0.2
Held pen for ≥3 s, n (%)
9 (40.9)
10 (40.0)
13 (56.5)
p >0.2
Removal of AAI, n (%)
6 (27.3)
17 (68.0)
13 (56.5)
p >0.2
The large standard deviations present in Time to administer are due to some participants
whilst examining the AAI accidentally pressing the Needle Protection, ﬁring the AAI and
thus not using very long time. Some test participants were not aﬀected by the timing
factor and spent a long time on the simulated use.
In the following section, mental models of participants performing correct use, close call
1The exact p-values and methods for calculation can be seen in Appendix A.1 and in Table A.1
8.1.
RESULT OF TEST SESSION
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 8.
RESULTS
41
and use error are presented. The selected examples are ﬁrst described by observations
from the recordings which are then commented on with a ﬁnal root cause analysis of the
(possible) errors.
8.1.1
Observed use errors
Test participant 6b. Injection into thumb.
Female, 25 years old, Master’s degree, AAI #2 EpiPen®.
Observations: The test participant examines the AAI by pulling and twisting both ends.
She then notices the instructions and pulls the Safety Cap oﬀ. She moves the chair back
and prepares for injection in her thigh. She grabs the AAI and presses the Needle Protec-
tion with her thumb as if it was a button and injection into thumb occurs.
The test participant clearly expected that the injection was to be performed by pressing
a button. When no button appeared after removing the Safety Cap she rationalized that
the other end was the button. The test participant even mentions that she read "needle",
but still she pressed the assumed button.
Root cause analysis: The mental models of the test participants inﬂuence their way of han-
dling the AAI. In this case, the test participant was sure that she was to press a button to
allow administration. It was not possible to change the pre-assumed mental model, even
though she read the instructions. Because the Needle Protection looked like a button, the
medication would emerge from the opposite end of the device.
Overall 21 test participants experienced injection into digit or hand. Some injections oc-
curred during the initial examination of the product while others occurred when trying to
perform the injection but had misoriented the AAI.
Test participant 18c. Failure to remove Safety Cap.
Female, 65 years old, bachelor’s degree, AAI #1 Current Jext®.
Observations: The test participant initially turns the AAI upside down, then notices the
instructions and turns the AAI around. Her thumb is covering the top of the instructions.
She reads the label and places the needle end against her thigh, presses and holds for a
couple seconds (≥3 seconds).
The test participant holds her ﬁnger so it covers the ﬁrst pictogram and she starts reading
the text under the second pictogram. She only reads the text and do not use the pictogram
and thus do not see the circled "2" indicating the second step of use. When asked why
8.1.
RESULT OF TEST SESSION
==PAGE:58==
42
CHAPTER 8.
RESULTS
she didn’t read the ﬁrst section she answers, that she assumed same operational pattern
as with an insulin pen, which she is familiar with.
Root cause analysis: The test participant does not think that the AAI is a functional
device. She reads that a click should be heard when activated, but does not think that
this counts with a training device. The participant is familiar with an insulin pen and
her mental model is channeled to the same operational tasks as an insulin pen, where no
Safety Cap is to be removed.
Overall 5 test participants did not remove the Safety Cap.
Test participant 9a. Wrong injection site.
Female, 20 years old, ﬁnished high school, AAI #2 EpiPen®.
Observations: The ﬁrst thing the test participant does is to remove the Safety Cap. She
then glances at the instructions where she "gets an idea of what is to be done". She looks
at other parts of the AAI before glancing at the instructions again. She grabs the AAI and
places her thumb where the Safety Cap was located. She places the needle end against
her inner wrist and presses down until the AAI ﬁres. The AAI is immediately removed.
Afterward, she looks at the label again and says: "Maybe not there. I think I would do it
in the thigh instead".
The test participant clearly noticed the instructions. When asked why she chose the wrist
as the injection site, she answered that it was due to confusion. Afterward, she could tell
that the injection was to be performed in the thigh. When asked why she did not hold the
AAI in place for a longer period of time, she answered that she thought the administration
would be a quick poke "like when you measure blood sugar". She mentioned that the AAI
reminded her of a pen used by people with diabetes in regards to where pressure should
be put. She noticed the pictogram and that it said "click".
Root cause analysis: When only glancing at the instructions it is not clear in which body
part the injection should be given.
Overall 22 test participants did not choose the correct injection site. This number does
not include the cases where the injection was performed on other areas of the thigh. There
is no clear pattern why the wrong injection site is chosen. There are cases where it is
because they misinterpret the second pictogram, cases where participants do not read the
label fully and where they do not read the text correctly (e.g. inner thigh instead of outer
thigh).
8.1.
RESULT OF TEST SESSION
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 8.
RESULTS
43
Test participant 15a. Failing to hold for 10 seconds.
Male, 15 years old, in primary school, AAI #2 EpiPen®.
Observations: The participant tries to unscrew the Safety Cap, realize that it needs to
be pulled oﬀ. Looks at the opening under the Safety Cap, turns the AAI around and is
about to put his thumb on the orange Needle Protection when he sees the opening in the
Needle Protection. Then he notices the label. Asks the moderator whether to perform
the injection in the thigh or in the arm, before reading the label again. He then places
the orange Needle Protection against his thigh, presses with his thumb on the area under
the Safety Cap, lifts the AAI, then presses the orange Needle Protection against his thigh.
The AAI is removed as soon as he hears the ﬁring sound.
It was clear that the test participant noticed the label and glanced at it several times.
When asked how he used the label, the answer was that he only read "orange end against
thigh". When asked if he noticed the 10-second illustration he answers that he noticed it
afterward, but did not think he could hold it against the thigh again once it was already
removed.
Root cause analysis: The test participant was time pressured and did not read the label
all the way through. The test participant only read "place orange tip against outer thigh"
and then he took action. The test participant was in a stressed situation and thought the
instructions were too long to read all the way.
Overall 34 test participants did not hold the AAI against the injection site for 10 seconds
(≥3 seconds accepted).
8.1.2
Observed close calls
Test participant 15b. Wrong orientation of AAI.
Female, 25 years old, ﬁnished high school, AAI #3 Custom.
Observations: The test participant starts the session by looking at both ends. She then
reads the label, pulls oﬀthe Safety Cap, moves the chair back and pushes the opposite
end of where the needle is (the Safety Cap end) hard in her upper thigh. She reads the
label upside down while holding the AAI in place and exclaims "oh, the red tip", turns
the AAI around and presses against her upper thigh, so the AAI ﬁres. The AAI is held in
place for 13 seconds.
The test participant reads the label, but her actions are a good image of how she expects
the AAI to function. When asked why she initially turned the AAI upside down she an-
8.1.
RESULT OF TEST SESSION
==PAGE:60==
44
CHAPTER 8.
RESULTS
swered that for her "it was intuitive that the end from which a lid was removed was the
end to be used". She also mentioned that she still, after correct administration, did not
know why the blue Safety Cap needed to be removed. Her mental model of the process was
that "you take the blue cap oﬀ, so the needle must be underneath. It is counterintuitive
that something is removed and then nothing more happens to that end".
Root cause analysis: The test participant was able to correct herself and complete the
injection. She and several other test participants mentioned that it was not intuitive to
them that it was necessary to remove the Safety Cap when the other end was where the
needle was placed.
Test participant 5b. Confusion about activation of AAI.
Female, 22 years old, Bachelor’s degree, AAI #1 Current Jext®.
Observations:
The test participant starts by reading the label. She pulls oﬀthe Safety Cap, reads the
label again, places the correct end against her thigh and presses with her thumb on top
of the AAI (where the Safety Cap was). She says that she thinks she heard a click and
she then removes the AAI and reads the label. "It says to hold it in place for 10 seconds"
after which she places the AAI against her thigh again, presses down and the AAI ﬁres.
The AAI is held for 10 seconds with the test participant counting out loud.
Root cause analysis: The test participant is not sure when the AAI is activated. She is
aware that a click-sound indicates activation but is in doubt if there has been a sound or
not. She mentioned that when she ﬁrst tried to activate the AAI by pressing on the top
she heard a small click sound. When she tried again she realized that a loud click sound
indicates activation.
Close call was demonstrated by 10 out of 70 people (8a, 16a, 1b, 5b, 15b, 16b, 28b, 30b,
11c, 16c).
8.1.3
Observed correct use
Test participant 8b. Example of participant using Jext® correctly.
Male, 24 years old, bachelor’s degree, AAI #1 Current Jext®.
Observations:
The test participant starts by reading the label. He pulls oﬀthe Safety Cap, reads the
label again, presses the AAI against outer thigh and holds it in place for 7 seconds. He
then reaches for his phone in his pocket to simulate calling an ambulance.
8.1.
RESULT OF TEST SESSION
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 8.
RESULTS
45
When asked what he ﬁrst noticed by the AAI he mentioned the instructions. He also men-
tioned that it was hard to determine which end was for injection and only knew because
of the label.
Correct use was demonstrated by 13 out of 70 people (11a, 14a, 7b, 8b, 11b, 12b, 13b, 17b,
25b, 27b, 1c, 12c, 20c).
8.1.4
Other diﬃculties
Not reading the label:
17 participants did not read the label. All participants that did not read the instructions
performed in the category "use error".
AAI looking like an inhalation device:
Two participants (29b and 5c) thought of the AAI as an inhalation device. They both did
not read the instructions. 5c thought of the Needle Protection as a mouthpiece, and after
"priming" by removing the Safety Cap, he began inhalation. The moderator stopped him
after several inhalation tries.
29b also thought the Needle Protection looked like a mouthpiece. She later saw the label
where it said "injection". She was then able to remove the Safety Cap, but whilst examining
the AAI she pressed the Needle Protection and injected into the thumb.
8.1.5
Preference
After completion of the test session, the participants were shown all three AAIs. They
were shown correct use and asked which version they would prefer. The results are seen
in Table 8.2.
Table 8.2: Test participant AAI preference
AAI #1
AAI #2
AAI #3
12-16
1
4
12
17-40
10
3
15
41≤
1
5
11
Total
12 (19.4%)
12 (19.4%)
38 (61.2%)
8 test participants were indiﬀerent in preference of AAI (12-16: 1, 17-40: 2, 41≤: 5). Their
arguments included that the colors were "just colors" and had no inﬂuence on how they
8.1.
RESULT OF TEST SESSION
==PAGE:62==
46
CHAPTER 8.
RESULTS
handled the device. None of the participants that were indiﬀerent in preference were able
to correctly simulate injection.
When asked why the test participants preferred the version they did there were many
diﬀerent reasons.
Some liked AAI #1 because it was neutral in one end (the Needle Protection).
They
thought too many colors were confusing and provoke doubt about which end is to be
touched. The contrast between black and yellow is more pronounced than with the other
two AAIs and the signal color is in the end where the ﬁrst action should be taken.
Some disliked AAI #1 since they thought the black Needle Protection looked like a button.
Participants argued that the yellow Safety Cap was the main reason for misorientation of
the device. It was mentioned that AAI #1 looked like a marker and many said that the
colors did not appeal to them.
The ones that chose AAI #2 as their preference said the AAI #2 was the one that looked
the most like a medical device. They mentioned that the orange color made it look serious
and that this color was less scary than the red Needle Protection. Associations with health
and safety, alarming expression, emergency and "watch me in traﬃc" were made.
The ones that disliked AAI #2 said that the colors were too calm for an emergency de-
vice. It was mentioned that it looked like a high lighter and that it reminded them of candy.
The majority of the test participants chose AAI #3 as their preference. Arguments were
that the red Needle Protection was a warning and indicated something scary.
It was
argued that the signal color should be in the end where the needle was and that the other
end should be in a neutral color. Some mentioned that they found it less logical to press
something in a red color. It was also mentioned that the red color was more noticeable on
the pictograms than the colors of the other AAIs. Associations with words like importance,
alarm, professional, blood, danger and attention were made.
The participants that did not prefer AAI #3 argued that it looked like a whiteboard marker
and that the red color caught attention as if to grab this end.
8.1.6
Use errors and hazard-related use scenarios
Initially, only the use-scenarios related to the Safety Cap and Needle Protection was evalu-
ated. As the study progressed it became apparent that the hazard related use scenario was
strongly dependent on whether or not the test participant read the label or not. Table 8.3
is a modiﬁed table from the hazard-related use scenario analysis devised in the Use Risk
Analysis for Jext® covering all the user tasks. The observed use errors have been placed
in the respective boxes and separated in whether or not the label was used. It is seen that
only participants using the label made it to "performing the injection". The use errors not
8.1.
RESULT OF TEST SESSION
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 8.
RESULTS
47
able to be categorized in the earlier deﬁned use scenarios have been covered previously in
the current chapter.
It should be noted that the same test participant can appear in more than one place if
several hazardous situations were observed.
8.1.
RESULT OF TEST SESSION
==PAGE:64==
48
CHAPTER 8.
RESULTS
Table 8.3: Occurrences of use errors according to the use scenario hazard analysis. The red numbers refer the participants that did not read the label and
the blue numbers refer the participants that did read the label.
Use phase
Task(s)
Use error (and cause)
Hazardous situation
Hazard
(most severe)
Occurrences
Preparing the pen
for injection
Grasp the Jext® injector
Misinterprets the info on the
label on orientation of the pen
and therefore holds the injector
upside down
Exposure of thumb to
needle end
No dose
12/9
Find injection site
Does not understand the pictogram
showing injection site
Wrong injection site located
Wrong dose
6/7
Pull oﬀthe safety cap
Does not understand the pictogram
showing how to pull oﬀthe safety
cap
Injector not activated
No dose
5/3
Place the injector tip
against outer thigh
Does not understand the pictorgram
showing how and where to place the
injector tip
No force against injector tip
No dose
0/4
Performing injection
Push the injector tip ﬁrmly
and with force into outer thigh
until you hear a "click"
conﬁrming the start of injection
Does not hear or understand the click
Removal of injector before
time or not enough pressure
put on the injector
Wrong dose
0/2
Keep the injector tip pushed in
Does not apply enough pressure on
the injector top
Depth of injection not deep
enough
Wrong dose
0/1
Hold the injector ﬁrmly in place
against the thigh for 10 seconds
Does not count to the required
10 seconds
Removal of injector prior to
dose delivered
Wrong dose
0/13
Remove Jext® from injection site
Too late removal of injector
Injury to skin
0/1
8.1.
RESULT OF TEST SESSION
==PAGE:65==
9
Discussion
The purpose of this project is to investigate whether simple changes to the Jext® AAI can
improve usability and thus decrease the number of use errors. The minor changes consist
of a change in the color of the Safety Cap and the Needle Protection of Jext®.
In this chapter, the results and ﬁndings presented in Chapter 8 will be discussed as well
as the qualitative observations regarding the choice of color. Thoughts about future work
and further development of AAIs are presented in the end.
9.1
Design of the adrenaline auto-injector
In this study, only three diﬀerent color combinations were tested. There is an endless
number of color combinations that could have been tested but that is not conceivable.
The combinations chosen for this study was partly based on products already on the mar-
ket. The reference AAI with the yellow/black combination was included to secure the
possibility of showing a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the number of correct uses compared to
the product currently marketed. This is necessary to make costly, potential design changes
reasonable.
The orange/light blue combination was chosen since this is the color combination of the
largest competitor on the market; the EpiPen®. EpiPen® has the vast majority of the
world market share and it is interesting to test this combination against other combina-
tions to see whether EpiPen® has a strong human factor business case or not. Another
aspect is that AAIs are prescribed interchangeably depending on availability in diﬀerent
countries. There is an argument that a standardization of the colors on a life-saving device
could be an advantage for the user, and the EpiPen® is thus included to clarify if its color
combination would be a solid choice for standardization. This will be discussed further in
Section 9.2.1.
A combination with green Safety Cap and red Needle Protection was considered as the
third version of AAI. The thought behind this was that green is usually associated with
something where action is needed whereas red is associated with something where an ac-
tion is not needed, again exempliﬁed with a traﬃc light at a crosswalk.
49
==PAGE:66==
50
CHAPTER 9.
DISCUSSION
Whether this combination would have had a higher success rate is not possible to tell.
7% of the male population worldwide (0.4% of females) [25] have trouble diﬀerentiating
between red and green colors, and this is too large a prevalence to be ignored. If good
results were seen with this combination the associated risk would be too high.
Instead of the green color for the Safety Cap, a calm dark blue was chosen. The contrast
between the ﬁery red and the subtle dark blue is thought to map and visualize that the red
end is where the needle is and that this is the end to be more careful with. This version
uses colors in the opposite way than the reference AAI where the Needle Protection is in
a neutral color and the Safety Cap is in a signal color.
9.1.1
Designed like a pen or a marker
The industry standard of referring to AAIs has become either "adrenaline pen", "EpiPen"
or just "pen". During the current formative study, when asking the test participants what
they remember, many say "it looked like a pen" or "it looked like a marker".
In general, there are two types of ball pens; one where a lid is removed and the tip revealed
and one, where a button is pressed on top, revealing the tip, see Figure 9.1.
The current auto-injector uses none of these mechanisms. For many participants, it is
counter-intuitive that the Safety Cap is to be removed and then no action with that end
is required. At the same time, many associates the shape of the Needle Protection with
the shape of the button on the second version of a ball pen.
(a) Pen with cap
(b) Pen with button
Figure 9.1: Two types of ballpoint pens. With pen (a) the tip is exposed by removing a cap, with
pen (b) the tip is exposed by clicking a button.
When an adrenaline auto-injector is referred to as a "pen", associations are constructed in
people’s mind. They know that it is a "pen" that is handed to them and they expect the
actions of the device to be the same as for a pen. With the Jext® Trainer they experience
inconsistency in how the actions are performed which causes them to act irrationally. In
combination with the stress from the timing factor, this leads to use errors and incorrect
simulated use.
9.1.
DESIGN OF THE ADRENALINE AUTO-INJECTOR
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 9.
DISCUSSION
51
The design of the Needle Protection can clearly be confused with a button and the design
of the top of the device once the Safety Cap is removed can clearly be confused with a
needle housing. These beliefs support each other in the sense that with a button in one
end, then the other end must be where the needle emerges. The design of the Jext® might
explain some of the incidences of accidental injection into digits or hands. The aspects of
the design should be explored further as there are design changes that could address these
issues.
9.2
Recommendation for color combination
From the results it is apparent that the colors of the Needle Protection and Safety Cap
alone is not suﬃcient to ensure safe and eﬀective use of the Jext® AAI.
The results from the conducted study do not give a clear image of which color combina-
tion causes least use errors. Other color combinations might provide a diﬀerent image, but
there are no indications that this should be the case.
Instead, there are indications that design changes to the product would make a greater
impact on the occurrence of use errors. Knibb et al. [21] showed that Emerade® had a far
better success rate with naive users than Epipen® and Jext®. This could be due to the
fact that Emerade® has only one business end, whereas both Jext® and EpiPen® has two.
The results do not indicate that it is worth going through the design control process (and
design change process) that would be required if the colors should be changed. However,
when the test participants were asked which Jext® Trainer they were exposed to they
often referred to "the one with the red", "the orange one", or "the one with yellow on
top". The signal colors are what they remember and notice the most. This is interesting
and could denote that the colors do have an inﬂuence, if not on the usage, then on how to
remember what kind of medical device they have on hand.
If it was decided to make other design changes, further studies on the optimal choice of
color should also be made, but as of right now there is nothing indicating that a change
in color combination would make a diﬀerence in the number of use errors.
9.2.1
Standardization
Standardization refers to consistency, including the design of medical devices and the re-
lated processes. The advantage of consistency is that it minimizes errors that occur because
of alterations in workﬂow or lack of familiarity with the device. The standardization of
processes is equally important. When the same steps are consistently followed and varia-
tion between the diﬀerent brands is minimized, error rates decrease and the eﬃciency and
9.2.
RECOMMENDATION FOR COLOR COMBINATION
==PAGE:68==
52
CHAPTER 9.
DISCUSSION
safety of the device is improved [33].
Even though the current study does not give a clear indication that one color combination
is preferable there are still arguments for standardization of AAIs containing life-saving
medication. Of all AAIs sold only about 5% are used in emergency situations [10]. Many
AAIs are bought, stored until reaching the expiration date and then discarded. The pa-
tients do not necessarily receive training everytime a new AAI is prescribed and years can
go by without refreshing how to use the AAI correctly.
Since this is life-saving medication the patient is to carry an AAI at all times. In case of
a drug shortage, another brand than the one that the patient is familiar with might be
prescribed. The diﬀerent brands of AAI have diﬀerent designs, operation procedures, and
colors, cf. Table 4.1.
The Needle Protection and the Safety Cap is not the only parts of Jext® that are colored.
The label also has a color, representing the amount of adrenaline in the auto-injector. The
Jext® with the yellow label is for Juniors (150 µg) and the Jext® with the red label is for
Adults (300 µg).
EpiPen® is the AAI that most users are familiar with. The EpiPen® Junior has a green
label and the EpiPen® Adult has a yellow label, as seen in Figure 9.2. If a patient is
prescribed EpiPen® instead of his regular Jext® the new color of the label is also a factor
that needs attention. It is clear that the Jext® Junior can easily be confused with the
EpiPen® Adult.
Figure 9.2: The EpiPen® where the green AAI is for juniors and the yellow is for adults. Image
from [5].
A life-saving product, like an AAI, should be easy, convenient and safe for patients and
carers since it is often used in a stressful situation. Frew [11] suggests a standardization
of training with legislation on color-coding of devices and injection techniques. If all AAIs
had the same procedure of use and the same colors for label and needle end, a drug shortage
from one company would not be as worrying for the user as it currently is.
If standardization was to happen without legislation all companies marketing an AAI would
9.2.
RECOMMENDATION FOR COLOR COMBINATION
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 9.
DISCUSSION
53
have to agree on a standard for colors and procedure of use. This is highly unlikely to
happen since they all, besides the ethical agenda, also have an important economic agenda
that needs to be considered. A change in design is very costly for a company since the
product would need to go through the approval process once again. However, there is no
doubt that standardization would be beneﬁcial from a patient and user point of view.
9.3
Future work
The current study was conducted with naive test participants. To have a study with ex-
perienced test participants would be interesting to see if this provided the same results.
The aim of this project was to investigate whether or not the colors of the Needle Protec-
tion and the Safety Cap could inﬂuence the number of use errors. The number of possible
color combinations of the Needle Protection and Safety Cap is somewhat inﬁnite but it
would be interesting to see how test participants would react to an AAI with the Needle
Protection and Safety Cap both in signal colors. It was suggested by a couple of test
participants that they would prefer to have a red Needle Protection and a yellow Safety
Cap.
The current EpiPen® has a diﬀerent, ﬂatter shape than Jext®. A study with trainer ver-
sions of competing products might show diﬀerent results in how the test participants react
due to other design features.
The way the Jext® Trainer is introduced to the test participant might inﬂuence the sim-
ulated use. In the current study, the Carry Case was not included. Instead, the Jext®
Trainer was placed horizontally in front of the test participant by the moderator. The
Jext® AAI comes in a protective Carry Case and is slid out prior to use. The way the
Jext® AAI exits the Carry Case could be a consideration of aﬀordance that might alter
the initial conception of how the product is to be used according to how the Jext® AAI
lands in the user’s hand.
The Jext® AAI is a complex device with high demands to the user. Many other aspects of
the device would beneﬁt from formative usability studies, like the label and the Carry Case.
These studies are however costly and a clear result should be in sight in order to justify
the use of money according to the business model. As mentioned, Jext® was developed
before any usability requirements existed. The whole design control process could beneﬁt
from starting over and rethinking how the AAI meets user needs while still being eﬀective,
safe and reliable.
9.3.
FUTURE WORK
==PAGE:70==
54
CHAPTER 9.
DISCUSSION
9.3.
FUTURE WORK
==PAGE:71==
10
Conclusion
The purpose of the present thesis was to investigate whether or not the choice of colors
of the Jext® AAI could inﬂuence the occurrence of use errors and enhance the number of
naive users able to simulate correct injection.
A formative usability study with 70 test participants ranging from 12 to 80 years of age
was conducted. The test participants were each asked to simulate injection with one of
three versions of the Jext® Trainer. The three versions of Jext® diﬀered in colors of the
Needle Protection and the Safety Caps. The simulated injection was followed by a semi-
structured interview establishing the mental models behind the test participants’ actions.
The scope of the study was to elucidate if one version of Jext® made a larger number of
test participants perform correct use than other versions.
The three diﬀerent versions of the Jext® Trainer included the current marketed color com-
bination with black Needle Protection and yellow Safety Cap (AAI #1), the EpiPen®-like
version with orange Needle Protection and light blue Safety Cap (AAI #2), and a custom
version with red Needle Protection and dark blue Safety Cap (AAI #3). The study showed
no signiﬁcant diﬀerence (p > 0.2) between three AAIs and the corresponding number of
correct use with 31.7%, 24%, and 43.5% of test participants, respectively.
Generally, test participants had trouble grasping how the AAI was to be operated. Many
participants’ associations with a ball pen did not correspond to what they experienced
with the AAI. This confusion led to incorrect handling including accidental injection into
a digit and too early activation while examining the product.
No test participants were able to simulate correct administration without consulting the
onboard label with instructions. Even some test participants noticing the instructions had
trouble interpreting the steps for correct use. From the current study, it is apparent that
the design of the information label on the Jext® AAI needs further information design
work.
Users will typically remain in their initial belief state. No evidence of the participants
changing their beliefs through interaction with the device was seen in this study.
The design of the device is implicated in the creation and maintenance of these beliefs
55
==PAGE:72==
56
CHAPTER 10.
CONCLUSION
and the colors of the Needle Protection and Safety Cap have limited inﬂuence on their
elimination. A change in users’ beliefs is more plausible by altering the operation sequence
and design of Jext®.
The current study showed the importance of including Human Factor Engineering and
usability from the very beginning of the medical device design process.
Many of the
observed issues with the current Jext® might have been mitigated if the users had been
included from the beginning of the design phase.
The focus should be on human-centered design, and a competitor analysis prior to design
freeze could address some of the ethical considerations when developing an utter necessary,
life-saving medical device.
==PAGE:73==
References
[1] 21CFR820.30,
“Design
Controls,”
Code
of
Federal
Regulations,
Tech.
Rep.,
2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/
CFRSearch.cfm?CFRPart=820{&}showFR=1{&}subpartNode=21:8.0.1.1.12.3
[2] L. Adler,
“Responding To Color,”
pp. 1–4,
1999. [Online]. Available:
http:
//www2.ca.uky.edu/HES/fcs/FACTSHTS/HF-LRA.151.PDF
[3] D. G. Altman, Practical statistics for medical research, 1st ed.
Chapman & Hall,
1991.
[4] A. Arhipova, “Color in Design: Inﬂuence on Users’ Actions.” [Online]. Available:
https://tubikstudio.com/color-in-design-inﬂuence-on-users-actions/
[5] ASCIA,
“Anaphylaxis
emergency
medication
storage,
expiry
and
dis-
posal,”
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.allergy.org.au/hp/anaphylaxis/
adrenaline-autoinjector-storage-expiry-and-disposal
[6] L. T. Axelsson, R. Singer, and T. S. Albeck, “SOP58429 Usability Engineering,”
ALK-Abelló A/S, Hørsholm, Tech. Rep., 2017.
[7] E. M. Bladbjerg, A. Sandbæk, and B. M. Stallknecht, Sygdomslære for ikke-klinikere,
1st ed.
Copenhagen: Munksgaard, 2012.
[8] L. Chadwick and S. Jeﬀcott, “A brief introduction to human factors engineering,”
Transfusion, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 1166–1167, 2013.
[9] R. Chooniedass, B. Temple, and A. Becker, “Epinephrine use for anaphylaxis: Too
seldom, too late: Current practices and guidelines in health care,” Annals of Allergy,
Asthma and Immunology, vol. 119, no. 2, pp. 108–110, 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.anai.2017.06.004
[10] G. Du Toit, G. Roberts, P. H. Sayre, H. T. Bahnson, S. Radulovic, A. F.
Santos,
H. A. Brough,
D. Phippard,
M. Basting,
M. Feeney,
V. Turcanu,
M. L. Sever,
M. G. Lorenzo,
M. Plaut,
and G. Lack,
“Randomized Trial
57
==PAGE:74==
58
REFERENCES
of Peanut Consumption in Infants at Risk for Peanut Allergy,”
New England
Journal of Medicine, vol. 372, no. 9, pp. 803–813, feb 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMoa1414850
[11] A. J. Frew, “What are the ’ideal’ features of an adrenaline (epinephrine) auto-injector
in the treatment of anaphylaxis?” Allergy: European Journal of Allergy and Clinical
Immunology, vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 15–24, 2011.
[12] L. Fromer, “Prevention of Anaphylaxis: The Role of the Epinephrine Auto-Injector,”
American Journal of Medicine, vol. 129, no. 12, pp. 1244–1250, 2016. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amjmed.2016.07.018
[13] D. B. Golden, “Anaphylaxis: Recognizing Risk and Targeting Treatment,” Journal
of Allergy and Clinical Immunology: In Practice, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 1224–1226, 2017.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2017.06.028
[14] J. Gosbee, “Human factors engineering and patient safety,” Quality and Safety
in
Health
Care,
vol.
11,
no.
4,
pp.
352–354,
2002.
[Online].
Available:
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/lookup/doi/10.1136/qhc.11.4.352
[15] L. B. Grabenhenrich, S. Dölle, A. Moneret-Vautrin, A. Köhli, L. Lange, T. Spindler,
F. Ruëﬀ, K. Nemat, I. Maris, E. Roumpedaki, K. Scherer, H. Ott, T. Reese, T. Mus-
takov, R. Lang, M. Fernandez-Rivas, M. L. Kowalski, M. B. Bilo, J. O. Hourihane,
N. G. Papadopoulos, K. Beyer, A. Muraro, and M. Worm, “Anaphylaxis in children
and adolescents: The European Anaphylaxis Registry,” Journal of Allergy and Clini-
cal Immunology, vol. 137, no. 4, pp. 1128–1137.e1, 2016.
[16] IEC TR 62366-1:2015, “Medical devices – Part 1 : Application of usability engineering
to medical devices,” International Electrotechnical Commission, Tech. Rep., 2015.
[17] ISO 13485:2016, “Medical devices – Quality management systems – Requirements
for regulatory purposes,” International Organization for Standardization, Tech. Rep.,
2016.
[18] ISO 14971:2012, “Medical devices – Application of risk management to medical de-
vices,” International Organization for Standardization, Tech. Rep., 2012.
[19] R. Kaye and J. Crowley, “Guidance for Industry and FDA Premarket and Design Con-
trol Reviewers Medical Device Use-Safety: Incorporating Human Factors Engineering
into Risk Management Additional Copies,” Center for Devices and Radiological
Health, Tech. Rep., 2000. [Online]. Available: http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/
DeviceRegulationandGuidance/GuidanceDocuments/ucm094460.htm
[20] P. H. King, R. C. Fries, and A. T. Johnson, Design of Biomedical Devices and Systems,
3rd ed.
Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2015.
REFERENCES
==PAGE:75==
REFERENCES
59
[21] R. Knibb and K. Morton, “Accuracy in use of adrenalin auto-injectors in a simulated
emergency situation:
a comparison of JEXT, EpiPen and Emerade,”
Clinical
and Translational Allergy, vol. 5, no. Suppl 3, p. O5, 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://ctajournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/2045-7022-5-S3-O5
[22] L. Leach, H. Smith, C. Brown, M. Davies, and C. Jones, “Young People’s Views on
the Design of Adrenaline Auto-Injectors: A Qualitative Study,” vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–6,
2018.
[23] D. K. Ledford, “Lateral thigh epinephrine.” [Online]. Available: https://www.aaaai.
org/ask-the-expert/lateral-thigh-epinephrine
[24] L. Ma, T. M. Danoﬀ, and L. Borish, “Case fatality and population mortality
associated
with
anaphylaxis
in
the
United
States,”
Journal
of
Allergy
and
Clinical Immunology, vol. 133, no. 4, pp. 1075–1083, 2014. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2013.10.029
[25] A. Mandal,
“Color Blindness Prevalence.”
[Online]. Available:
https://www.
news-medical.net/health/Color-Blindness-Prevalence.aspx
[26] H.
Mosbech,
“Allergi,”
2009.
[Online].
Available:
http://denstoredanske.dk/
Krop,{_}psyke{_}og{_}sundhed/Sundhedsvidenskab/Medicinske{_}overf{\T1\
o}lsomhedssygdomme/allergi
[27] M. S. Motosue, M. F. Bellolio, H. K. Van Houten, N. D. Shah, and R. L. Campbell,
“Increasing Emergency Department Visits for Anaphylaxis, 2005-2014,” Journal of
Allergy and Clinical Immunology: In Practice, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 171–175.e3, 2017.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2016.08.013
[28] D. Norman, The Design of Everyday Things, revised ed.
Basic Books, 2013.
[29] A. N. Pepper, E. Westermann-Clark, and R. F. Lockey, “The High Cost of
Epinephrine Autoinjectors and Possible Alternatives,” Journal of Allergy and Clinical
Immunology:
In Practice, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 665–668, 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2016.12.018
[30] C. M. Porth, Essentials of Pathophysiology, 3rd ed.
Milwaukee: Lippincott Williams
& Wilkins, 2011.
[31] Royal
Life
Saving
Society
Direct,
“Anaphylaxis
Training
Pens.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.rlssdirect.co.uk/categories/First+Aid/products/TE3402/
Anaphylaxis+Training+Units/
[32] M. Shaker, K. Bean, and M. Verdi, “Economic evaluation of epinephrine auto-injectors
for peanut allergy,” Annals of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology, vol. 119, no. 2, pp.
160–163, 2017. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.anai.2017.05.020
REFERENCES
==PAGE:76==
60
REFERENCES
[33] B. Siewert and M. G. Hochman, “Improving Safety through Human Factors
Engineering,” RadioGraphics, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 1694–1705, 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://pubs.rsna.org/doi/10.1148/rg.2015150107
[34] M. R. Signori and R. Garcia, “Clinical Engineering - Incorporating Human Factors
Engineering into Risk Management,” IFMBE Proceedings, vol. 25, pp. 449–452, 2009.
[35] F. E. R. Simons, “Epinephrine auto-injectors:
First-aid treatment still out of
reach for many at risk of anaphylaxis in the community,”
Annals of Allergy,
Asthma and Immunology, vol. 102, no. 5, pp. 403–409, 2009. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1081-1206(10)60512-1
[36] F. E. R. Simons, L. R. Ardussob, V. Dimov, M. Ebisawa, Y. M. El-Gamalf, R. F.
Lockey, M. Sanchez-Borges, G. E. Senna, A. Sheikh, B. Y. Thong, and M. Worm,
“World allergy organization anaphylaxis guidelines: 2013 update of the evidence base,”
International Archives of Allergy and Immunology, vol. 162, no. 3, pp. 193–204, 2013.
[37] F.
E.
R.
Simons,
S.
Clark,
and
C.
A.
Camargo,
“Anaphylaxis
in
the
community:
Learning from the survivors,”
Journal of Allergy and Clinical
Immunology,
vol. 124,
no. 2,
pp. 301–306,
2009. [Online]. Available:
http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2009.03.050
[38] P. J. Turner, E. Jerschow, T. Umasunthar, R. Lin, D. E. Campbell, and R. J.
Boyle, “Fatal Anaphylaxis: Mortality Rate and Risk Factors,” Journal of Allergy
and Clinical Immunology: In Practice, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 1169–1178, 2017. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2017.06.031
[39] T. Umasunthar, A. Procktor, M. Hodes, J. G. Smith, C. Gore, H. E. Cox, T. Marrs,
H. Hanna, K. Phillips, C. Pinto, P. J. Turner, J. O. Warner, and R. J. Boyle, “Patients’
ability to treat anaphylaxis using adrenaline autoinjectors: A randomized controlled
trial,” Allergy: European Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, vol. 70, no. 7,
pp. 855–863, 2015.
[40] S. Waserman, E. Avilla, M. Ben-Shoshan, L. Rosenﬁeld, A. B. Adcock, and M. Green-
hawt, “Epinephrine Autoinjectors New Data, New Problems,” Journal of Allergy and
Clinical Immunology: In Practice, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 1180–1191, 2017.
[41] M. Weinger and D. Gaba, “Human factors engineering in patient safety,” Anesthesi-
ology, vol. 120, no. 4, pp. 801–806, 2014.
[42] T. Weinhold, M. D. Zotto, J. Rochat, J. Schiro, S. Pelayo, and R. Marcilly,
“Improving
the
safety
of
disposable
auto-
injection
devices:
a
systematic
review
of
use
errors,”
AAPS
Open,
no.
4:7,
2018.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1186/s41120-018-0027-z{%}0AAAPS
REFERENCES
==PAGE:77==
REFERENCES
61
[43] R. A. Wood, C. A. Camargo Jr, P. Lieberman, H. A. Sampson, L. B. Schwartz,
M. Zitt, C. Collins, M. Tringale, M. Wilkinson, J. Boyle, and F. E. R. Simons,
“Anaphylaxis in America: The prevalence and characteristics of anaphylaxis in the
United States,” Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, vol. 133, no. 2, pp.
461–467, 2014. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2013.08.016
REFERENCES
==PAGE:78==
62
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
==PAGE:79==
Appendices
63
==PAGE:80==
==PAGE:81==
A
Appendix
A.1
p-values
p-values have been calculated in order to compare if the diﬀerence between the three AAIs
is signiﬁcant. It has been tested with a signiﬁcance level of 0.05, since this is the common
standard [3].
In the cases with nominal, unordered data, the p-values have been based on calculated χ2
by Pearson Chi-square.
The χ2 has been calculated using the formulation below from [3], where ni is the number
of subjects in group i, of whom ri have the characteristic of interest.
χ2 =
Pk
i=1
r2
i
ni −R2
N
P(1 −P)
(A.1)
R is the total number with the characteristic (R = P ri), N is the total sample size and
P = R/N. The χ2 has been compared to the Chi squared distribution with k −1 degrees
of freedom. The exact p-value has been determined using MatLAB.
In the cases without nominal, unordered data, the p-values have been determined using
ANOVA and Sum of Squares by Fisher’s Exact test. The resulting F-number has been
compared to the F-distribution. The exact p-value has been determined using MatLAB.
The p-values from the study parameters, presented in Table 8.1, can be seen as exact
numbers in Table A.1 below.
65
==PAGE:82==
66
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX
Table A.1: Exact (rounded to two decimals) p-values, cf. Table 8.1
p-value
Primary study parameter
Correct demonstration of autoinjector use, n (%)
p = 0.35
Secondary study parameters
Time(s) to administer (mean ± sd)
p = 0.60
Total score (mean ± sd)
p = 0.94
Presumptive self-injection into hand, n (%)
p = 0.99
Assessment steps
Notice/read label, n (%)
p = 0.71
Removed safety cap, n (%)
p = 0.53
Select outer thigh as in injection site, n (%)
p = 0.82
Place needle end into injection site, n (%)
p = 0.76
Pressed to activate, n (%)
p = 0.90
Held pen for ≥3 s, n (%)
p = 0.45
Removal of AAI, n (%)
p = 0.44
A.2
Formative usability test protocol
The formative usability test protocol is seen below. Minor alterations to the protocol were
made during the formative study. These changes have been discussed in Chapter 7 but
left unchanged in the protocol.
A.2.
FORMATIVE USABILITY TEST PROTOCOL
==PAGE:83==
Jext®Usability Formative Test Protocol - Color of plastic
parts
Emma Kjær Bertelsen
September
2018
Contents
1
Introduction and Motivation
3
2
Purpose and Scope
3
2.1
Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Deﬁnitions
3
4
Roles and Responsibilities
4
5
Color update and User Interface Evaluation
5
6
Usability Study Design and Setup
5
6.1
Test Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
6.2
Materials and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
6.3
Schedule and Location of Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
6.4
Study Session Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
6.4.1
Simulated use test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
6.4.2
Follow-up interview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
6.5
Use Scenarios and Usability Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
6.5.1
Use scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
6.5.2
Coding of task performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
6.5.3
Study success criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
6.6
Data Acquisition and Reporting Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
7
Ethics and Participant Safety
11
References
12
Appendices
12
A Data collection sheet and questionnaire
12
1
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX
67
A.2.
FORMATIVE USABILITY TEST PROTOCOL
==PAGE:84==
B Moderator’s guide
12
2
68
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX
A.2.
FORMATIVE USABILITY TEST PROTOCOL
==PAGE:85==
1
Introduction and Motivation
When suﬀering from severe allergies with risk of anaphylaxis, adrenaline auto-injectors (AAI)
are often prescribed to patients as emergency medication. The importance of timely adminis-
tration of adrenaline to a patient experiencing anaphylaxis cannot be stressed enough and is
crucial in order to ensure survival.
In spite of training of the patients, the caregivers and the health care professionals, uninten-
tional self-injection injury is among the most reported use errors. These use errors can be
caused by lack of adequate training and education, but could also be related to the way the
auto-injector is designed.
This protocol describes a study where the goal is to investigate whether simple changes to
the Jext®auto-injector can reduce the number of use errors. The simple changes consist of a
change in color for the safety cap and the needle protection. Each person has an individual per-
ception of what colors represent, but in this study it is sought to ﬁnd whether one combination
is better or worse than others.
2
Purpose and Scope
2.1
Purpose
The purpose of this formative study is to test and compare the usability of the current color
combination of the Jext®preﬁlled auto-injector with two other color combinations in order
determine which color combination induced the least amount of use errors.
2.2
Scope
The scope is to test and compare the usability of three diﬀerent color combinations:
• The current Jext®pre-ﬁlled auto-injector with yellow safety cap and black needle pro-
tection, seen in the middle of Figure 1.
• The EpiPen-like version of Jext®pre-ﬁlled auto-injector with light blue safety cap and
orange needle protection, seen in the top of Figure 1.
• The new proposed version of Jext®pre-ﬁlled auto-injector with dark blue safety cap and
red needle protection, seen in the bottom of Figure 1
3
Deﬁnitions
The deﬁnitions of selected terms used throughout this protocol can be seen in Table 1.
3
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX
69
A.2.
FORMATIVE USABILITY TEST PROTOCOL
==PAGE:86==
Table 1: Deﬁnitions
Term
Deﬁnition
Formative test
User interface evaluation conducted with the intent to explore User Inter-
face design strengths, weaknesses, and unanticipated Use Errors. The scope
of formative evaluation is to identify all Use Errors, close calls, unantic-
ipated Use Errors, and operational diﬃculties and planning of mitigating
activities and analysis of diﬀerentiation, based on cognitive walk-through,
simulated use testing and actual use testing. Formative evaluation is gener-
ally performed iteratively throughout the design and development process,
but prior to summative evaluation, to guide user interface design as neces-
sary. There are no formal acceptance criteria. The recommended minimum
sample size for each test group is 5-8 users.
Summative test
User Interface evaluation conducted at the end of the User Interface devel-
opment with the intent to obtain objective evidence that the User Interface
can be used safely by the intended users in the expected use environments.
The scope of summative evaluation is validation of all use scenarios that are
critical for users to ensure safe and eﬀective use of the device, incl. packag-
ing and labelling. There are formal acceptance criteria. The recommended
minimum sample size for each test group is 15-20 users.
Use scenario
Speciﬁc sequence of tasks performed by a speciﬁc user in a speciﬁc use
environment and any resulting response of the medical device.
Task
Task is deﬁned as one or more user interactions with a medical device to
achieve a desired result. A task description should include the allocation of
activities and operational steps between the user and the medical device.
Hazard-related use
scenario
Use scenario that could lead to a hazardous situation or harm. A hazard-
related use scenario can often be linked to a potential Use Error, and is not
related to a failure of the medical device, unless the medical device failure
was caused by a Use Error. The hazard-related use scenarios are the scope
of the usability evaluation, and must be identiﬁed both in the risk analysis
and in the usability evaluation reports, with a ranking in terms of severity
and likeliness.
Cognitive model
The description of the test participant’s thought process about how some-
thing works in the real world.
It is a representation of the surrounding
world, the relationships between its various parts and the test participant’s
intuitive perception about own acts and their consequences.
4
Roles and Responsibilities
This formative study will be conducted by the author. The author will act as moderator, data
logger, test observer and will perform the data analysis.
The author will receive sparring from the Device Development & Support department at ALK
Abell´o in Hørsholm, Denmark.
4
70
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX
A.2.
FORMATIVE USABILITY TEST PROTOCOL
==PAGE:87==
5
Color update and User Interface Evaluation
The change of Jext®user interface is in this study only related to the colors of the safety cap
and the needle protection. The User Interface Evaluation will thus be limited to the steps
deﬁning a correct use where these elements are included. The label will be the same for all
variants and only modiﬁed to match the colors of each respective variant.
The diﬀerent colored pens can be seen in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Look of the three pens used in the formative usability study
6
Usability Study Design and Setup
The eﬀect of the change in Jext®user interface with the diﬀerent color combinations will be
tested in a formative study as a simulated-use test with follow-up interview.
The primary study data is the observed number of correct use, close calls, and use errors and
the following root cause analysis.
The secondary data is the observed actions of participants and their unpromted statements.
The results will be qualitative and quantitative. The simulated use testing is performed to
obtain the number of close calls/use errors/correct use, and the follow-up interview is to obtain
insights into why certain behaviours or use errors were observed. The interview works as a root
cause analysis and as a way to get insight into which of the three designs each test participant
prefers.
The usability study is based on the worst case scenario, with no training or guidance be-
forehand by the moderator and only one version of the Jext®pen available. The three pens
will be compared equally against each other.
5
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX
71
A.2.
FORMATIVE USABILITY TEST PROTOCOL
==PAGE:88==
6.1
Test Participants
The target criteria and sample sizes for the test participants are speciﬁed in the following. All
test participants are recruited by outreaching work done by the author.
Exclusion criteria are previous training on the use of adrenaline auto-injectors, and having an
adrenaline auto-injector for self or a family member used currently or previously. Thus, all test
participants should be naive users.
Table 2: User populations and proﬁles for formative test
User population
User proﬁles
Sample size for tests (n)
Adolescents
Untrained user, age 12-16 years
30 participants
Young adults
Untrained user, age 17-40 years
30 participants
Older adults
Untrained user, age 41 years and up
30 participants
• User population: Adolescents
Recruite a total of Nadolescents = 30 from general population as deﬁned below
– n = 30 participants must not have previous experience with an andrenaline auto-
injector
– Male/female ratio must be near 50/50
– Range of age must be 12 to 16 years
• User population: Young adults
Recruite a total of Nyoung = 30 from general population as deﬁned below
– n = 30 participants must not have previous experience with an andrenaline auto-
injector
– Male/female ratio must be near 50/50
– Range of age must be 17 to 40 years
– Range of educational attainment
• User population: Older adults
Recruite a total of Nolder = 30 from general population as deﬁned below
– n = 30 participants must not have previous experience with an andrenaline auto-
injector
– Male/female ratio must be near 50/50
– Range of age must be 41 years and up
– Range of educational attainment
6
72
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX
A.2.
FORMATIVE USABILITY TEST PROTOCOL
==PAGE:89==
6.2
Materials and Equipment
The product to be used in the formative test is the Jext®Trainer pen. Three diﬀerent pens will
be used, where modiﬁcations have been made on two pens. The Jext®Trainer pen functions in
the same way as the Jext®pre-ﬁlled auto-injector, but does not contain drug or needle. There
will be two of each version of the Jext®Trainer pen. The pens will be reused.
Table 3: List of materials and equipment needed to conduct the formative test
Materials & equipment
Units
Trainer pen with yellow safety cap, black needle protection
2
Trainer pen with light blue safety cap, orange needle protection
2
Trainer pen with dark blue safety cap, red needle protection
2
Timing device
1
Video camera
1
6.3
Schedule and Location of Testing
The formative usability test will be conducted during the months of October and November
2018. The location will be where the test participants are, preferably in a neutral room without
any distractions. Some tests may also take place at DTU, 2800 Kongens Lyngby.
The 90 test participants are expected to be tested and interviewed within 15-20 minutes
each, resulting in a total test time of 90 · 20 minutes = 1800 minutes or 30 hours. A more
detailed schedule will be made when all test participants have been recruited.
6.4
Study Session Outline
Each test participant session has a duration of maximum 20 minutes. The following activities
will be performed during the study session for each test participant:
1. Introduction to the test participant. Meet and greet, walk-through of health and
safety information regarding the test, minimal data collection (name, age and sex of the
test participant), switching on video camera.
2. Scenario setting by moderator. Must not be rushed, nor provide any clues about
how to use the device, but provide concrete usage scenario. Must make clear that the
task is time pressured (explain the timer).
3. Simulated injection by test participant under evoked stress from timer. The
test is time pressured. The participant is seated in a chair with a table in front and
space to assume any position for injection. The device is placed horizontally to the test
participant on the table by the moderator. The simulation ends at the simulated ”ﬁring”
of the device and after the moderator assumes the test participant’s perception of the ”10
seconds holding time” has ended. The trainer pen is taken from the test participant and
placed out of sight.
7
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX
73
A.2.
FORMATIVE USABILITY TEST PROTOCOL
==PAGE:90==
4. Discussion of simulated use test and follow-up questions to test participant
by moderator. Through structured interview, see Appendix B, insight into the test
participant’s understanding and cognitive models is gained. For root cause analysis, non-
leading questions are asked about (if any) use errors, close calls (incl. confusions, mistaken
assumptions or intent), etc.
5. Discussion of color combination. All versions of the Jext®Trainer pen are shown to
the test participant. Questioning on comparison and preferences between the designs, i.e.
the participants are asked which of the color combinations they remember to have used
and what preference in color combination they have for the three combinations.
6. Thank you and show the test participant out.
6.4.1
Simulated use test
The simulated use test involves the test participants to perform intended use of Jext®pre-
ﬁlled auto-injector in a simulated use environment using a Trainer pen with diﬀerent color
combinations of the safety cap and the needle protection, including the in-use combination. 10
participants (33% of total) from each user population will be tested with each pen.
6.4.2
Follow-up interview
The follow-up interviews are held right after the test participant has ﬁnalised the simulated
test. For follow-up interview questionnaire, see Appendix B.
6.5
Use Scenarios and Usability Metrics
6.5.1
Use scenarios
The change in User Interface for Jext®is limited to the colors of the needle protector and the
safety cap. Only hazard-related use scenarios covered by the change will be tested. These use
scenarios cover preparation for injection and performing the injection. The scenarios are chosen
based on the Use Risk Analysis [1] that has been performed for Jext®and covers all user tasks.
The use scenario analysis can be seen in Table 4.
8
74
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX
A.2.
FORMATIVE USABILITY TEST PROTOCOL
==PAGE:91==
Table 4: Use scenario analysis
Hazard-
related use
scenario
Task(s)
User/Use environment
Use error (and cause)
Hazardous situation
Hazard
Harm
(worst
case)
Preparing
the pen for
injection
While
attempting
to:
grasp the Jext®injection
The
patient/
caregiver/
bypasser in case of ana-
phylaxis (stress situation)
in home use or hospital use
environment.
Misinterprets the info on the label on
orientation of the pen and therefore
holds the injector upside down, which
leads to...
Exposure of thumb to nee-
dle end, resulting in...
Needle
into
thumb - no
dose.
Death to pa-
tient
While attempting to: Find
injection site
Does not understand the pictogram
showing injection site, which leads to...
Wrong injection site lo-
cated, resulting in...
Wrong dose
Death to pa-
tient
While attempting to: Pull
oﬀthe safety cap
Does not understand the pictogram
showing how to pull oﬀthe safety cap,
which leads to...
Injector not activated, re-
sulting in...
No dose
Death to pa-
tient
While
attempting
to:
Place
the
injector
tip
against outer thigh (injec-
tion site)
Does not understand the pictogram
showing how and where to place the in-
jector tip, which leads to...
No force against injector
tip, resulting in...
No dose
Death to pa-
tient
While
attempting
to:
Hold
the
injector
at
a
right angle (approx. 90o)
to the thigh.
Does not understand the pictogram
showing angle of the injector, and thus
hold the injector in a too small/large
angle, which leads to...
Needle inserted in wrong
angle, resulting in...
Wrong dose
Performing
injection
While
attempting
to:
Push
the
injector
tip
ﬁrmly and with force into
outer thigh until you hear
a ”click” conﬁrming the
injection has started
The
patient/
caregiver/
bypasser in case of ana-
phylaxis (stress situation)
in home use or hospital use
environment.
Does not hear or understand the click,
which leads to...
Removal of injector before
time or not enough pres-
sure put on the injector,
resulting in...
Wrong dose
Death to pa-
tient
While
attempting
to:
Keep
the
injector
tip
pushed in
Does not apply enough pressure on the
injector top, which leads to...
Depth
of
injection
not
deep
enough,
resulting
in...
Wrong dose
Death to pa-
tient
While
attempting
to:
Hold the injector ﬁrmly in
place against the thigh for
10 seconds (a slow count
to 10)
Does not count to the required 10 sec-
onds, which leads to...
Removal of injector prior
to dose delivered, resulting
in...
Wrong dose
Death to pa-
tient
While attempting to: Re-
move Jext®from injection
site
Or too late removal of in-
jector, resulting in...
Injury
to
skin
9
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX
75
A.2.
FORMATIVE USABILITY TEST PROTOCOL
==PAGE:92==
6.5.2
Coding of task performance
The performance of the test participants with regards to the diﬀerent tasks will be coded as
either correct use, close call or use error according to whether a potential hazardous situation
or deviation from correct use is observed. Correct use, close call and use error are, in this study,
deﬁned as follows:
• Correct use
The correct use of the auto-injector is deﬁned as follows:
1. Removal of safety cap
2. Selecting outer thigh as injection site
3. Place needle end into outer thigh
4. Press to activate auto-injector without moving it from the injection site
5. Holding the auto-injector in place for 10 seconds (≥3 seconds to be correct use)
6. Removal of the auto-injector from the injection site (outer thigh)
• Close call
A close call is deﬁned as correct use with use error, i.e. the user performs a task that
is not part of the correct use, but leads to the result intended by the manufacturer or
expected by the user.
• Use error
User action or lack of user action while using the AAI that leads to a diﬀerent result
than intended by the manufacturer or expected by the user. A use error includes the
inability of the user to complete a task, and can result from a mismatch between the
characteristics of the user, the user interface, task, or use environment. Users might be
aware or unaware that a use error has occured.
6.5.3
Study success criteria
The success criteria for the study is based on the success rate, i.e. the frequency of participants
performing the injection as correct use. The comparison between the three color combinations
will be based on the success rate for each version.
The study will be succesful if a diﬀerence in success rate is seen between the three color
combinations; either with one combination having a much lower success rate or with one com-
bination having a much higher success rate.
Each user’s performance will be logged in an
Excel-sheet, described in Appendix A, and classiﬁed as either a correct use, close call or use
error. Each close call or use error will be evaluated on the basis of the root cause analysis,
according to the steps for correct use, which decides if it was a successful test or not.
6.6
Data Acquisition and Reporting Methods
All sessions will be video recorded with the participant’s consent. After the usability test, all
videos will be evaluated and numbers of correct use, use errors and close calls will be counted.
All data will then be analyzed and concluded.
10
76
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX
A.2.
FORMATIVE USABILITY TEST PROTOCOL
==PAGE:93==
7
Ethics and Participant Safety
The test participants will be exposed to a stress factor induced by a timer during the perfor-
mance of tasks to simulate the time pressure present in a real world situation of administering
a Jext®pen in case of anaphylaxis. All test participants will be informed about this and asked
to read and sign an informed content form. In addition, they will be told that they can stop
the test and leave at any time.
The Jext®Trainer pen contains no drug nor needle and the test participants will only, worst
case scenario, be exposed to a ”sting” by a plastic rod.
11
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX
77
A.2.
FORMATIVE USABILITY TEST PROTOCOL
==PAGE:94==
References
[1] M. Andersen, S. K. Hansen, R. Singer, and T. S. Albeck, “Jext Use Risk Analysis,” ALK
Abello, Hørsholm, Tech. Rep., 2016.
Appendices
A
Data collection sheet and questionnaire
The data collection sheet will be performed in Excel and will consist of the following ﬁelds
covering test subject details:
• Subject number
• Age
• Gender
• Level of education
• Version of Jext®Trainer pen
The sheet will also include timing of the test participant and a scoring system based on the
tasks described in the deﬁnition of correct use.
B
Moderator’s guide
Action 1: Setting the scene
• First, I am going to describe to you an imaginary situation and please feel free to ask me
any questions. Remember, this is only a simulated use scenario and there is no danger,
drug or needle involved.
• I want you to imagine that you suﬀer from a VERY VERY serious food allergy and you
ALWAYS carry with you this device with emergency medicine in it.
• In this scenario you are at a get-together with friends and you unknowingly eat some food
from which you get a very serious allergic reaction and thus you need to use your device
containing the emergency medicine. If you do not get this medicine within the ﬁrst 30
seconds, the consequences can be fatal.
• Do you have any questions so far?
• So when you are ready, I will say ’go’, hand you the device, and start a timer with 30
seconds on it.
• I cannot answer any questions before after the test, is that okay?
12
78
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX
A.2.
FORMATIVE USABILITY TEST PROTOCOL
==PAGE:95==
Action 2: Moderator to answer participant’s questions, if any. Ask if the test participant is
in full understanding of the situation. Give them a chance to answer and then say ’go’.
Action 3: Observe the test subject performing the following user task and note comments on
correct use/close call/use errors.
Action 4: When the test participant has performed the tasks (either correct or with errors)
the moderator takes the auto-injector from the participant and place it out of sight for the
participant.
Follow-up interview questionnaire:
Q1 Can you tell me, very brieﬂy, what you did as if you had to teach someone else to use the
device?
Q2 What was the ﬁrst thing on the device that caught your attention? What can you recall
about the device, e.g. colors, pictograms, numbers etc.?
Q3 Was it clear which end the needle was?
Action 5: After these questions, the moderator takes out all three versions of the auto-injector
and give to the test participant.
Q4 Can you tell me which one you used? And why do you think it is that one (what do you
remember from it)?
Q5 Can you tell me which design you would prefer and why?
Action 6: In case of use errors or close calls, moderator to ask:
Q6 I saw that you did [deviation from correct use], what do you think made you do that?
13
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX
79
A.2.
FORMATIVE USABILITY TEST PROTOCOL
