==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Performance analysis and benchmarking
of Danish commercial pension funds
Hafþór Hákonarson (s161287)
Óttar Pétur Kristinsson (s161289)
Copenhagen 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Pension funds play an important role in most peoples lives by managing there pension
savings, which will ultimately decide living standards during retirement age. Most
people lack the interest or knowledge to manage their own pension savings and quite
happily give the responsibility to the pension funds, while others are not comfortable
giving control of their future living standards to the pension funds and would like to
control their own pension savings.
The Danish pension system is one of the best in the world and the capital under
management amounts to 46.4 % of the Danish GDP. [OEC18b]
The thesis is in two parts, the first part will be focused on performance analysis of
seven Danish commercial pension funds and comparing their performance measures.
The most important measures we look into are the Sharpe ratio and the Conditional
Value-at-Risk.
In the second part we implement different portfolio optimization models (CVaR,
Equal-weights, Mean reversion and Momentum) on a universe of ETFs. With these
strategies the aim is to produce similar results to the pension funds in terms of risk-
adjusted rate of return.
The pension funds produced a higher return than the implemented ETF strategies
and have higher Sharpe ratios, but comparing the risk metrics of the two groups the
ETF strategies yield better results. The conclusion is that the pension funds produce
higher return by taking on more risk than the implemented ETF strategies.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This 30 ECTS points thesis was prepared at DTU Compute, the department of Ap-
plied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark
in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Mathematical Mod-
elling and Computation.
Copenhagen, January 27, 2019
Hafþór Hákonarson (s161287)
Óttar Pétur Kristinsson (s161289)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisor, Kourosh Marjani Rasmussen, Professor at
DTU Management Engineering department, for our regular meetings and his guidance
during the thesis.
We would also like to thank our friend, Hringur Daðason, for
proofreading our thesis.
Hafþór: Firstly I would like to thank my colleague, Óttar, for the collaboration
during the thesis. I would also like to thank my family and friends for emotional
support during my studies.
Óttar: Firstly I would like to thank my colleague, Hafþór, for the collaboration
during the thesis. I would also like to thank my family, my friends and my girlfriend,
Gunnhildur, for emotional support during my studies.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Problem objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
Delimitations, limitations and assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Pension funds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.1
Danish pension system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Exchange-traded funds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Methods
9
2.1
Performance analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.1
Average return . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.2
Historical Volatility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.3
Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.4
Skewness and Kurtosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.5
Sharpe Ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.6
Maximum Drawdown
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.1.7
Treynor Ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.1.8
Jensen’s Alpha . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1.9
Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Portfolio optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.1
Hierarchical clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.2
Scenario Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.3
Equally Weighted Portfolio
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.4
Strategy I - CVaR Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.5
Strategy II - Mean Reversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.2.6
Strategy III - Momentum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
3
Results
29
3.1
Performance Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.1
Risk adjusted return . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.1.2
Risk Measures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2
Portfolio optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.1
Hierarchical Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2.2
CVaR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.2.3
Mean Reversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.2.4
Momentum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.3
Performance Comparison of pension funds and ETF strategies . . . . .
48
4
Discussion
53
4.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5
Conclusion
57
A An Appendix
59
A.1 Performance Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.1.1
Analysis of AP active and Top Denmark, period 2003-2018
. .
59
A.1.2
Analysis of all funds, period 2012-2018 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.2 Portfolio Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.2.1
CVaR maximizing expected return with CVaR limit 1/N
. . .
64
A.2.2
CVaR minimizing CVaR with expected return limit 1/N . . . .
70
A.2.3
CVaR maximizing expected return with CVaR limit 1/N for top 5 76
A.2.4
Mean Reversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.2.5
Momentum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
A.3 GAMS code and python code models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
A.3.1
CVaR maximizing expected return with CVaR limit 1/N
. . . 101
A.3.2
CVaR minimizing CVaR with expected return limit 1/N . . . . 105
A.3.3
CVaR maximizing expected return with CVaR limit 1/N for top 5111
A.3.4
Mean Reversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
A.3.5
Momentum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
A.3.6
Scenario Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
Bibliography
123
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In this chapter we will introduce pension funds, the Danish pension system, exchange
traded funds (ETFs), the motives dor the risk performance analysis of the pension
funds and for analysing different investment strategies to compare to the pension
funds. We also describe the assumptions, delimitations and limitations made for the
purpose of the thesis.
1.1
Problem description
In economics the transfer of wealth to later stages in life is a known phenomenon.
This is done by saving up in earlier stages of life to keep up living standards in
retirement when income from employment stops. The estimated average working life
in Denmark for an individual that is 15 years old is 39.6 years [Eur18]. The Danish
retirement age is 65, while life expectancy is 80.7 years [Bje18]. The biggest source
of retirement income is through savings in the pension fund system.
The Danish pension fund system is one of the best in the world and manages a
great amount of capital. In 2017 the capital from pension contributors amounted to
46.4 % of the Danish GDP [OEC18b]. The pension funds are responsible for managing
the wealth of the contributors and their main function is to invest their contributors
pension as optimally as possible with regards to risk and return. Most funds offer a
variety of products so it is also up to the contributors and their risk appetite.
Most people lack the interest or the knowledge to manage their retirement savings
themselves, moving the responsibility to the pension funds. The pension funds have a
lot of knowledge and experience in markets and investing so higher return on capital
is more likely through a pension fund than what an individual investor would be able
to generate themselves. Another advantage for the pension funds is the economies of
scales, as lower transaction costs and the magnitude of information processed could
lead to better performance. The pension funds are compensated with a management
fee which is deducted from the funds returns.
There are people that are not comfortable with giving up control of such a big
part of their retirement savings and feel that the pension funds do not handle their
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
responsibility appropriately. Given the size and importance of the capital in the funds
they adhere to strong legal regulations about the way they compose their portfolio.
In this thesis we will look into how well the commercial pension funds are performing
as well as how an individual investor could manage their own savings and generate
higher returns than the pension funds.
1.1.1
Problem objective
The main focus of this thesis is to analyse, and compare the performance of the
Danish commercial pension funds, looking into how they perform compared to each
other as well as compared to the market. Furthermore we will look into some widely
used investment strategies and apply them on exchange traded funds to test their
performance. The seven commercial pension funds covered in this thesis are: AP
Active, Nordea Active, Nordea Index, PFA+ Profile B, Skandia Basic 2, Skandia
Match 3 and Top Denmark II, all of which are categorized as medium risk funds.
The models we will look at are known as Equal weights model, Conditional Value-at-
Risk model, Mean reversion and Momentum. We will look to answer the following
questions:
• How well are the commercial pension funds in Denmark performing with regards
to risk and return? What fund is performing the best? Why is there difference
in performance?
• Can an individual investor managing his own pension compete with the pension
funds, in terms of return and risk, with relatively simple models? What model
performs best?
1.1.2
Delimitations, limitations and assumptions
1.1.2.1
Delimitations
The historical data for the seven pension funds listed in the problem description con-
tains monthly return of the funds, the earliest going back to May 2003 for two funds,
AP active and Top Denmark II. It was not until February 2012 that monthly data
was collected for all seven funds. These returns are before the removal of the pension
funds’ management fee but after the removal of fees incurred by the underlying assets.
The historical ETF data consists of daily adjusted closing price of 727 exchange
traded funds from February 2009 to April 2018. This data and the historical data on
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Problem description
3
the pension funds was collected by Morningstar. Morningstar is a global investment
research and management firm and their Denmark offices are in collaboration with
DTU.
The performance analysis of the pension funds will be comprised of two different
time periods, which are dependent on the data available for each pension fund. The
first research period spans from May 2003 to April 2018 and includes only portfolios
from two pension funds, AP Active and Top Denmark. The second research period
spans from February 2012 to April 2018 and includes all available pension funds in
the data-set.
The motivation for the analysis of the former period is that an investment in
pension funds is generally a long term investment where the horizon is decades there-
fore we wanted to analyze a longer period than just a few years. The former period
spans fifteen year and gives a long term idea of the pension funds in different market
circumstances, including the financial crises of 2008 and the European debt crises.
The benchmarks used in the Results chapter, a selection of funds with a risk
performance criteria, will be from the latter research period.
The time period is
considered to be sufficiently long for comparison to the ETF strategies in chapter 2.2
1.1.2.2
Assumptions and limitations
• In the performance analysis, when comparing the risk-adjusted rate of return
to a rate of return of a risk-free asset, known as the risk-free rate, the rate used
is this thesis is 0.5%.
• Because the investment strategies we later describe and apply to the ETFs are
investing pension savings like the pension funds we assume that the we do not
have to pay capital gain tax.
• When we model the strategies to invest in ETFs we ignore the bid-ask spread
and use a constant transaction cost of 0.1%.
• The ETF prices we received from Morningstar have been adjusted for dividends
payments, so paying of dividends will be ignored in this thesis.
• Foreign exchange risk and foreign exchange rates are ignored, even though ETFs
are not all in the same currency.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
1.2
Pension funds
Pension funds are investment funds, managing and investing contributions paid by
active employees, to provide income in retirement. Pension funds are major players in
the market and typically have large amounts of money to manage. In 2017 the pension
assets for the 22 major markets grew to $41.3tn, the highest figure since reporting
began. [Rob18]. There are two types of pension funds, Defined benefit funds and
Defined contribution funds. Defined benefit funds promise an employee a specified
predetermined amount paid out in retirement based on the employee’s earnings, age
and other factors rather than depending on the investment returns of the fund.
The pension funds that will be covered in this thesis are Defined contribution funds.
In a defined contribution plan the employer and employee pay a fixed contribution
to a individual account.
The benefits paid out in retirement are based on these
contributions and how the pension fund performed in investing the money, therefore
the future payout can fluctuate with the fund’s performance. Pension funds are risk
averse and aim to generate long term returns with minimal risk to provide pension
to contributors in retirement.
1.2.1
Danish pension system
The Danish pension system is considered to be one of the best in the world. From
2012-2017 it ranked number one on the Melbourne Mercer Global Pension Index
which is published yearly by the Mercer consulting group. [MER18], dropping to
second place behind the Netherlands in 2018.
The Danish pension sector consists of three pillars: The first pillar is the state
pension. The Danish state pension, or the people’s pension is a defined benefit prod-
uct, administered by Udbetaling Denmark, where all pension payouts are financed
with taxes and minimum pension payouts are ensured a to all retired individuals re-
gardless of salary. To be eligible for the state pension three conditions must be met:
be a Danish citizen, reside permanently in Denmark and have lived in Denmark for
at least three years from the age 15-65 years old. To be eligible for the full pension
one needs to have lived in Denmark for 40 years from the age of 15-65, anything less
than that will result in a proportionally reduced rate.
The second pillar consists of Labour market- and commercial pension funds, de-
fined contribution funds, which cover the work related pensions where people are
actively employed.
Whether you are a contributor to a labour market fund or a
commercial fund depends on your employment. If you are working as a teacher for
example you will be a contributor in Lærernes Pensionskasse, meaning the Teacher’s
pension fund, and so fourth. For the commercial pension funds it depends more on
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Pension funds
5
whether your employer has a contract with a specific fund. In this second pillar both
the employer and employee pay a monthly contribution, which is invested by the
pension fund and then payed out to the employee with interest at retirement. This
thesis will focus on the commercial funds in this pillar.
The third pillar covers personal pension savings or the voluntary individual pay-
ments which are independent of employment. This multi-pillar system provides wel-
fare to pensioners from three segments, which ensures more diversification than only
relying on one fund.
Figure 1.1: The three pillars of the Danish pension system.
Since the investment strategies implemented are decided by the funds themselves
they have to follow regulations from Denmark and the EU. These regulations are to
protect the savings of the contributors. The main regulation of interest for this thesis
is a regulation from the Danish FSA about the limits of the portfolio composition.
[OEC18a]
Table 1.1: Limitations on portfolio composition from 2017.
Investment regulations
Equity
≤70%
Real estate
≤100%
Public bills and bonds
≤100%
Private bonds
≤100%
Retail investment funds
≤70%
Private investment funds
≤10%
Loans
≤100%
Bank deposits
≤100%
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
1.3
Exchange-traded funds
Exchange-traded funds, ETFs, are investment vehicles designed to track an index,
commodity, bond or a basket of assets. ETFs are traded like common stocks where
the price of an ETF is determined by supply and demand on a stock exchange which
distinguishes ETFs from other types of funds. ETF investors are indirectly investing
in the underlying assets where the ETF owns the assets and divides ownership of their
assets into shares, therefore ETF investors share the capital gain the fund receives
from it’s assets, such as earned interest and dividend.
ETFs have become increasingly popular amongst investors in recent years, as of
July 2017 ETFs accounted over 8% of the $26 trillion US stock market.[Invi] The main
attraction to ETFs is low annual cost, tax efficiency and transparency compared to
other types of funds. Majority of ETFs are passively managed where the ETF is
designed to track an index or a portfolio of assets with predefined rules to govern the
holdings and specific dates where the portfolio can change therefore there is no need
for a portfolio manager which decreases annual expenses.
ETFs are traded on a stock exchange therefore the purchase and selling of shares
has to go through a broker, that charges brokerage fees. ETFs are purchased at a
brokers ask price and sold on a bid price that is lower then the ask price which creates
implicit cost, bid-ask spreads, as for stocks. Brokerage fees and bid-ask spreads are
the main cost factors when investing in ETFs.
In 2016 the average annual expense ratio for stock ETFs and bond ETFs were
0.23% and 0.2%. The annual expense ratio is highly depended on the ETFs liquidity,
for illiquid ETFs the ask-bid spreads are higher which results in higher cost, some of
the largest indexed ETFs have annual expense near 0.10%.[Invb]
Most ETFs are not actively managed, as mentioned above, which results in a
low turnover rate in the portfolio, change in an ETF portfolio occurs through a
process called creation and redemption, which will be discussed later, with this process
investors do not have direct capital gain or loss from the portfolio change and are
therefore not taxed. ETFs are also more tax efficient because they are traded on
an exchange, when an investor liquidates shares in an ETF they are sold to other
investors on the exchange eliminating trading related capital gains, that are taxable,
for the fund it self and the remaining investors.[Maz14]
ETF shares are created and regulated with a mechanism called creation and re-
demption executed by authorized participants, e.g financial institutions and large
institutional investors such as market makers or broker-dealers. Given the nature of
ETFs there can be discrepancies between the market price and the net asset value of
the underlying assets and the ETF can be trading at a premium or discount, giving
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Exchange-traded funds
7
an arbitrage opportunity. Creation and redemption are to restore the equilibrium
market price of ETFs.
Creation is the process used when an ETF is being traded at a premium, the
market price of the ETF is higher than the market price of the underlying assets.
The authorized participants buy shares the ETF wants to hold in it’s portfolio and
sell them to the fund in exchange for shares in the ETF, increasing the number of
shares on the market which should reduce the share price of the ETF and bring it
closer to the net asset value.
Redemption is the process used when an ETF is being traded at a discount, the
market price of the ETF is lower than the market price of the underlying assets. The
authorized participants buy shares of the ETF and sell them back to the fund in
exchange for shares of the ETF’s underlying assets, decreasing the number of shares
on the market which should increase the price of the ETF and bring it closer to the
net asset value.[Maz14]
==PAGE:18==
8
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Methods
In this section the theory and methods used to solve the objectives of this thesis are
explained. We start by looking into the performance of the pension funds, looking
into their return and risk-adjusted return. Furthermore we look into their different
risk factors to get good measures to compare to alternative strategies. The theory and
methods for clustering and data gathering used for all these strategies are explained
and finally the strategies are explained. The methods are explained in the same order
as used in the thesis.
• Hafþór:
Volatility, Treynor, scenario generation, equally weighter portfolio,
CVaR optimization
• Óttar: Average return, Distribution, skewness and kurtosis, Sharpe ratio, Max-
imum drawdown, CVaR, Hierarchical clustering, Mean reversion and Momen-
tum.
2.1
Performance analysis
2.1.1
Average return
When analyzing and working with financial data, the average return or mean return
is important when assessing historical performance of an investment. In financial
analysis there are two main methods used for calculating averages, Arithmetic and
Geometric, which will be explained and compared in this chapter.
• Arithmetic mean:
The Arithmetic mean, usually just called ”mean” or ”average”, is where all elements
are added up and divided by the number of elements:
Arithmetic mean = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
ri
(2.1)
Example:
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Methods
rarithmetic = 0.30 + (−0.20) + 0.30 + (−0.20) + 0.30 + (−0.20)
6
= 0.05
rarithmetic = 5%
• Geometric mean:
For the Geometric mean the operation is similar as for the Arithmetic mean but
instead of summing up the numbers they are combined with a product and then split
up again with a root so the return is compounded over each period and put in the
power of one against number of periods. [Invc].
Geometric mean = (
n
∏
i=1
(1 + ri))1/n −1
(2.2)
Using the same example return before:
rgeometric = (1.3 ∗0.8 ∗1.3 ∗0.8 ∗1.3 ∗0.8)
1
6 = 1.0198
rgeometric = 1.98%
This example shows misleading results from the Arithmetic method while the
Geometric takes into account the compounding of returns and thus gives a more
accurate result of the actual return an investor could expect.
2.1.2
Historical Volatility
Historical volatility is a statistical measure of return dispersion of an asset or portfolio
of assets over a time period and is widely used as an indicator of price movements of
assets. The use of standard deviation as historical volatility is very common, but is
not the only method that is used. Historical volatility is calculated by determining
the average deviation from the average return of an asset.
Volatility can be utilized to identify up- and downward trends in markets, it can
also be used to indicate the risk level of assets. High historical volatility means high
fluctuation in the average return of an asset.
Assets with high volatility are not
necessarily something investors want to avoid, with high volatility usually comes a
higher chance of larger capital gains, but the chance of capital losses increases as
well.[Invl]
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Performance analysis
11
2.1.3
Distribution
Despite empirical evidence showing otherwise and it being widely recognized as being
an oversimplification, normal distribution in asset returns is still the most assumed
distribution in financial theory.
One of the reasons is that many of the risk- or
performance measures introduced in the mid-20th century are still widely used be-
cause of their easy application and they all assume normality. For example Harry
Markowitz’s Modern Portfolio Theory and William F. Sharpe’s risk adjusted return
method Sharpe ratio.
Later in this chapter methods in performance analysis will be described which
assume normal distribution of asset returns. Because of that the results from the
pension performance analysis will be plotted as a histogram and a Jarque-Bera test
applied to the returns. If the results from the normality test imply non-normal returns
we realize there might be additional risk but feel the measures are good enough for
performance comparison.
2.1.3.1
Normality test
The main methods of testing for normality are the methods of graphical estimation
and numerical goodness of fit testing.
In graphical estimations histograms of the
return distribution is compared to the normal probability curve.
The histogram
should be symmetrical and bell shaped. With the histogram another graphical tool
to estimate normality is the quantile-quantile plot, usually referenced as a QQ-plot.
A QQ-plot plots the standardized data against the standard normal distribution, and
the correlation measures the goodness of fit of the normal distribution. For normalized
data these should fall approximately on a straight line.
The goodness of fit test we applied for the analysis is the Jarque-Bera test. The
Jarque-Bera tests the hypothesis:
H0 : Data is normal
H1 : Data is not normal
The formula for calculating the JB can be written as [JB80]:
JB = n −k + 1
6
(S2 + 1
4(C −3)2)
(2.3)
Where S is the skewness and C is the kurtosis, these concepts will be covered more
in the next section. n is the degrees of freedom and k is the number of regressors.
The hypothesis is that skewness is zero and that excess kurtosis is zero, the same as
for normally distributed data. Using the p-value, which is the calculated probability
of finding the observed results when the hypothesis is true, we reject the hypothesis
if p < 0.05.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Methods
2.1.4
Skewness and Kurtosis
Chapters 2.1.1 and 2.1.2 cover the first two statistical moments, mean and variance,
which provide information on the spread and dispersion of the set of numbers. The
third and fourth moments are skewness and kurtosis.
Skewness of a distribution measures the asymmetry of the probability distribution and
can be positive, negative or undefined. If the distribution is symmetric the skewness
is zero.
A long tail in the positive direction results in a positive skewness and a
long tail in the negative direction results in negative skewness. [Nor94] In finance a
negatively skewed distribution means more risk since the negative tail is much longer.
Skewness[X] = E
[(X −µ
σ
)3]
= µ3
σ3
(2.4)
Kurtosis measures the flatness or ”tailedness” of the probability distribution [Nor94].
A flat distribution has negative kurtosis and is referred to as a ”platykurtic distribu-
tion” while a peaked distribution has positive kurtosis and is called a ”leptokurtic
distribution”.
Kurtosis[x] = E
[(X −µ
σ
)4]
= µ4
σ4
(2.5)
2.1.5
Sharpe Ratio
Sharpe ratio is the most used method to calculate the risk adjusted returns received
by an investor either for a portfolio or an asset. It calculates the excess return of
additional volatility compared to the risk free rate. The formula for the Sharpe ratio
is:
Sharpe Ratio = rp −rf
σp
(2.6)
Where rp is the mean return of the portfolio, rf is the return of a risk free asset,
σp is the standard deviation of the portfolio’s excess return. [Invh].
In our calculations we use the yearly geometric average return, annualized stan-
dard deviation and for the risk-free rate we use 0.5%.
The Sharpe ratio may not be the most accurate measure of risk adjusted return
when the expected returns of the portfolio or assets are not normally distributed. The
Sharpe ratio assumes normality of returns and thus when we experience skewness and
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Performance analysis
13
kurtosis in the return distribution the Sharpe ratio fails to address that because the
standard deviation assumes the same risk for negative and positive skewness and
punishes positive volatility.
2.1.6
Maximum Drawdown
Maximum drawdown is a risk measure used to assess downside risk over a time period.
It measures the maximum drop in value of an asset or a portfolio as the maximum
relative drawdown from a peak to a trough of the return series before a new peak is
attained. [Invf]. The formula for Maximum drawdown is as follows,
Maximumdrawdown = valuetrough −valuepeak
valuepeak
.
(2.7)
A low Maximum drawdown is important for any investor because of the gain
needed to recover. As an example: If an investor suffers a drawdown of 10% the gain
required to break even is 11%, for a drawdown of 25% the return required to reach
the break even point is 33%, the reason for this is that the rate of return compound
geometrically going forward so losses are more costly to an investor than gains are
beneficial. A high Maximum drawdown can also be really emotionally difficult for an
investor.
2.1.7
Treynor Ratio
Treynor ratio is a risk-adjusted investment performance measurement of return, simi-
lar to the Sharpe ratio. The Treynor ratio uses market risk as the risk factor which is
measured by beta. Beta measures how asset’s return responds to swings in the mar-
ket and is calculated by regression analysis of historical price movements compared
to the movements of a relevant benchmark index. The formula for Treynor ratio is
defined in equation 2.8.
Treynor Ratio = rp −rf
βp
(2.8)
Where βp = Cov(ri,rm)
V ar(rm) , rm is the average market return, rp is the average return
of the portfolio, rf is the return of a risk free asset and βp is the beta value of the
portfolio.
The difference of Sharpe and Treynor ratio is the risk type, The Sharpe ratio uses
total risk, standard deviation, of the portfolio while the Treynor ratio incorporates
market risk to measure volatility of the portfolio.
The Treynor ratio’s accuracy to measure risk-adjusted return is highly dependent
on the selection of the benchmark index, the better the benchmark index represents
the portfolio the higher the accuracy of beta and the Treynor ratio.
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Methods
The Treynor ratio has no defined dimension to rank the ratio therefore it is used
to compare similar investments to determine which has produced higher excess return
per unit of risk in the past.[Invj]
2.1.8
Jensen’s Alpha
Jensen’s Alpha measures the risk-adjusted average return of a portfolio or asset above
or below the predicted return by the Capital Asset Pricing Model [Inve]. To do so
the Jensen’s Alpha uses the beta of the portfolio and the average market return. The
formula to calculate the Alpha is:
α = rp −(rf + β ∗(rm −rf))
(2.9)
Where we have the same variables as in equation 2.8. A positive Alpha shows out-
performance and a negative Alpha shows poor asset picking and underperformance.
2.1.9
Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR)
Conditional value at risk (CVaR), also known as the expected shortfall, is a risk
measure used to assess the tail risk of a portfolio. It estimates the risk of an investment
in a conservative way because it focuses on ”worst case” outcomes. The CVaR method
is derived from the risk measure Value-at-Risk (VaR). To derive the formula for CVaR,
VaR has to be defined.
The most widely used risk measure in financial analysis is Value-at-risk, introduced
in the 1990s by J.P. Morgan & Co. VaR is defined as the loss level that will not be
exceeded with a certain confidence level during a certain period of time, assuming
normality in return distribution. [Invk] The mathematical definition for VaR for a
random variable X and a probability confidence level 0 ≤α ≤1 can be written as:
V aRα(X) := min{z|Fx(z) ≤α}.
(2.10)
Where Fx is the cumulative distribution function of X.
Although a widely used risk measure Value-at-Risk can be misleading and tends to
underestimate risk by ignoring ”worst case” losses exceeding the VaR value, another
flaw found in this method is that it is non-coherent [Sim16]. For a risk measure to be
coherent it needs to satisfy properties of monotonicity, sub-additivity, homogeneity
and translational invariance. Value-at-Risk does not satisfy the sub-additivity prop-
erty and because of that portfolio diversification can result in higher VaR. Investors
and regulators have realized these limitations of the VaR method, many of which now
focus more on the CVaR as it is now considered a superior method as it captures more
information about the moments of the return distribution. CVaR is defined as the
expected loss given that the return is worse then the VaR value [Inva]. The formula
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Portfolio optimization
15
for CVaR can then be written as:
CV aRα = −
1
1 −α
∫α
0
V aRγ(X)dγ
(2.11)
Figure 2.1: 95% VaR and CVaR from [Mac16].
2.2
Portfolio optimization
2.2.1
Hierarchical clustering
When putting together a portfolio of financial assets diversification is very impor-
tant. Before implementing the strategies from (sec 2.2.3) - (sec 2.2.6), a hierarchical
clustering algorithm was applied on the ETF data to insure diversification.
Hierarchical clustering aims to sort data into internally coherent clusters, meaning
that items inside a cluster should be similar while being as dissimilar as possible from
the entities in another cluster.
The agglomerative approach which we use begins
with each observation as its own cluster and then merges pairs of clusters until all
observations have been merged in one cluster. In this thesis the hierarchical clustering
algorithm groups the ETFs into clusters using the correlation of the funds’ returns as
a similarity measure.
In the following subsection the clustering analysis will be covered more deeply by
first looking into the similarity matrix and how the dissimilarity is measured with
the correlation. That is then used to calculate the Euclidean distance. Secondly the
grouping part of the clustering will be covered and the linkage method explained.
Thirdly the dendogram, or the cluster tree, will be partitioned and performance
criteria applied to each cluster which tells us where to invest.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Methods
2.2.1.1
Similarity
In this first part of the clustering we start by calculating the Pearson correlation
matrix for the return of the funds. The Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) is the
covariance of the two variables divided by the product of their standard deviation,
where the standard deviation is nonzero. The calculation can be written as follows:
Correlation(i, j) = ρij = σij
σiσj
=
∑n
k=1(yi,k −y)(yj,k −yj)
√∑n
k=1(yi,k −y)2(yj,k −yj)2
(2.12)
The PCC is a dimensionless value between [-1,1] and is an indication of the predictive
relationship between two variables. Correlation of ρ = 1 indicates a strong positive
relationship, ρ = 0 indicates no relationship and ρ = −1 indicates a strong nega-
tive relationship. Having calculated the correlation matrix for all the funds we can
calculate the Pearson dissimilarity measure:
d(i, j) = 1 −|ρij|
(2.13)
Taking the absolute value of the correlation matrix means that both strong nega-
tive and strong positive correlation will be grouped into the same cluster. With this
the Euclidean distance can be calculated as:
Dist(i, j) =
v
u
u
t
n
∑
l=1
((d(i, l) −d(j, l))2
(2.14)
2.2.1.2
Ward’s linkage method
The method used for grouping the ETFs is the Ward’s linkage method. The Ward’s
linkage method clusters the assets by minimizing the increase in variance within each
cluster. The increase in variance is proportional with the Euclidean distance between
the centers of the clusters.[ML14]
In this agglomerative method, initially N-1 clusters are created, one cluster with
two assets and the rest with only one. The two assets in the initial cluster are chosen
as the pair with the smallest error sum of squares value.
The function which is
minimized is the increase in the variance within each cluster for each agglomerative
step is:
δ2(ci, cj) =
|ci||cj|
|ci| + |cj|||ci −cj||2 =
|ci||cj|
|ci| + |cj|Dist(i, j)2
(2.15)
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Portfolio optimization
17
This measures the change in variance which results from the fusion of clusters ci
and cj. [ML14]. The cluster update formula used is a variation of the cluster update
formula from Lance-Williams method called Ward2. The formula is written as:
δ2(ci ∪cj, ck) =
wi + wk
wi + wj + wk
δ2(ci, ck)
+
wj + wk
wi + wj + wk
δ2(cj, ck) −
wk
wi + wj + wk
δ2(ci, cj)
(2.16)
Where the left side is the squared Euclidean distance and the right side is the weighted
sum of squared error.
Figure 2.2: Cluster dendogram with cut-off line for 10 clusters.
Figure 2.2 is a dendogram demonstrating the results of hierarchical clustering
where the y-axis measures the distance of clusters or objects. The black horizontal
line, called the cut-off line, determines how many clusters we end up with by counting
the vertical lines it intercepts.
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Methods
2.2.1.3
Partition- and performance criteria
Now that the clustering is done we need to partition the data and decide on the
number of clusters by cutting of the dendogram.
We then apply a performance
criteria for each cluster to decide which asset to choose. We chose two criteria, the
first criteria we chose is the Sharpe ratio, covered in section 2.1.5, so the ETF with
the highest Sharpe ratio in each cluster is chosen for the portfolio. Also a criteria is
the representativeness, where the asset closest to the median of the cluster is chosen.
2.2.2
Scenario Generation
A set of future scenarios had to be generated for the implementation of the CVaR
model, which represent the possible future return of the ETFs in the universe. The
ETF universe consists of 13 ETFs with daily returns from January 2009 to April 2018.
The monthly scenarios are generated with a test period of 3 years where the return
of 21 random days are picked and compounded to make a scenario for one month.
The random sampling is executed to generated 250 scenarios for each month, the
training period is then rolled forward one month until the end of test period, which
is 75 months. The scenario generation algorithm is implemented in python and the
code can be seen in appendix A.3.6. A psuedo code for the scenario generation can
be seen below.
Algorithm 1 Scenario Generation
Data: ETF daily return
Result: 250 scenarios of monthly return for each month in period
forall month in test period (m) do
last day train period = test period - one month
first day train period = last day train period - 3 years
forall scenarios (scen) do
scenario return = 1
forall 21 days do
x = random day(first day train period, last day train period) ;
scenario return = scenario return * return(x)
end
return(m, scen) = scenario return
end
end
The scenario generation above is executed for all 13 ETFs ten times to make
scenarios for ten simulations of the CVaR model.
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Portfolio optimization
19
2.2.3
Equally Weighted Portfolio
Equally weighted is a simple strategy where the budget of the portfolio is invested
equally among the assets and is kept the same through the entire investing period.
The purpose of the equally weighted portfolio in this thesis will mainly be to use as
a benchmark when developing the other strategies. The trading cost is assumed to
be fixed for all assets. The Equally weighted portfolio is calculated as equation 2.17
xi = budget ∗1
N ∗(1 −cost)
(2.17)
Where N is the number of assets in the portfolio.
2.2.4
Strategy I - CVaR Optimization
The fist strategy that will be applied on the selected ETF universe from chapter
2.2.1, is a Conditional Value-at-Risk, CVaR, optimization model. We will now give a
description of the CVaR model for portfolio optimization application.
The expected return of a portfolio is defined as the weighted average of individual
assets returns in the portfolio and is calculated as equation 2.18
E[R] = Rp =
N
∑
i=1
xiyi = xT y
(2.18)
where xi, i = 1, ..., N is the amount invested in each asset out of the total budget,
yi is the expected return of each asset and N is the total number of assets.
Let f(x, y) be a function defining the loss associated with the decision vector x
and a random vector y represents market uncertainties like expected return of assets
in a portfolio.
The probability distribution of y will be assumed to have density
denoted p(y).[RU00]
The Portfolio loss function can be defined as the negative expected return of the
portfolio stated in equation 2.18.
f(x, y) = −
N
∑
i=1
xiyi = −xT y
(2.19)
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Methods
The probability of f(x, y) not exceeding a certain level α is defined as equation
2.20
Ψ(x, α) =
∫
f(x,y)≤α
p(y)dy
(2.20)
For a fixed portfolio x, Ψ(x, α) is the cumulative distribution function for the
loss of portfolio x. The cumulative distribution function of x, Ψ(x, α), controls the
behaviour of the random variable, y, and is essential in determining the VaR and
CVaR. The assumption is made that Ψ(x, α) is continuous with respect to α, to make
the math less complicated.
αβ(x) and ϕβ(x) will be denoted as the functions to calculate β-VaR and β-CVaR
corresponding to the loss random variable related to x for a specified level of β ∈(0, 1).
The functions are given as 2.21 and 2.22. [RU00]
αβ(x) = min{α ∈R : Ψ(x, α) ≥β}
(2.21)
ϕβ(x) = (1 −β)−1
∫
f(x,y)≥αβ(x)
f(x, y)p(y)dy
(2.22)
The assumption that the function Ψ(x, α) is continuous and non-decreasing with
respect to α leads to Ψ(x, α) = β and therefore the probability of f(x, y) ≥αβ(x) is
equal to 1 −β. ϕβ(x) is then the conditional expectation of the loss associated with
portfolio x being greater than or equal to αβ(x).
Now αβ(x) and ϕβ(x) can be rewritten in terms of the function Fβ(x, α) on
X ∈R.
Fβ(x, α) = α + (1 −β)−1
∫
y∈Rm[f(x, y) −α]+p(y)dy
(2.23)
Where the function is defined as [t]+ = t when t > 0 and [t]+ = 0 when t ≤0.
The assumptions made above make Fβ convex which eliminates the possibility of local
minimum being different form global minimum.
From equation 2.23 the β-CVaR of loss associated with any x ∈X can be deter-
mined by equation 2.24.
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Portfolio optimization
21
ϕβ(x) = min
α∈R Fβ(x, α)
(2.24)
In equation 2.24, the set consisting of the values of α for which the minimum is
attained, namely
Aβ(x) = argmin
α∈R
Fβ(x, α).
(2.25)
Equation 2.25 is a nonempty closed interval.[RU00] The β-VaR of the loss, αβ(x),
is the left most endpoint of Aβ(x) which leads to the equation 2.26.
αβ(x) ∈argmin
α∈R
Fβ(x, α)
and
ϕβ(x) = Fβ(x, αβ(x))
(2.26)
The integral from equation 2.23 can now be approximated if vectors (y1, .., yq)
are generated by sampling from the density of the probability distribution for y, the
approximation of Fβ(x, α) becomes equation 2.27.
˜F(x, α) = α +
1
q(1 −β)
q
∑
k=1
[f(x, yk) −α]+
(2.27)
The expression ˜F(x, α) is convex and piecewise linear with respect to α. Linear
programming or line-search techniques can now be used to minimize equation 2.27
even though the equation is not differentiable.[RU00]
Minimizing the β-CVaR of the loss associated with x over all x ∈X is equal to
minimizing Fβ(x, α) over all (x, α) ∈X × R like equation 2.28.
min
x∈X ϕβ(x) =
min
(x,α)∈X×R Fβ(x, α)
(2.28)
Where a pair (x∗, α∗) achieves the second minimum if and only if x∗achieves the
first minimum and α∗∈Aβ(x∗). In most cases the interval Aβ(x∗) reduces to a single
point then the minimization of F(x, α) over (x, α) ∈X × R produces a pair (x∗, α∗)
such that x∗minimizes the β-CVaR and α∗gives the corresponding β-VaR.[RU00]
The CVaR optimization problem is solved using the General Algebraic Modeling
System, GAMS. GAMS is a high level mathematical optimization system designed
for modeling and solving complex, large-scale optimization problems utilizing a group
of third-party optimization solvers for example CPLEX. The GAMS models imple-
mented in this thesis can be seen in appendix A.3.
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Methods
2.2.4.1
Parameters for implementation of GAMS model
Before giving a mathematical description of the CVaR models implemented in GAMS,
we need to define a few parameters used in the models.
• xi - Investment in asset i
• x_previousi - Investment in asset i at the end of previous period
• return_scen(scen,i) - Expected return of asset i for scenario scen
• buyi - Amount bought of asset i
• selli - Amount sold of asset i
• bid_ask_spread - Trading cost in %
• budget - Total budget that can be invested, budget=1.
• N - Total number of assets in universe
• T - Total number of periods for future test period
• q - Total number of monthly generated scenarios
• V aR_devscen - Positive auxiliary variable
• lossscen - Expected loss of scenario scen
• V aR - Portfolio Value-at-risk
• α - probability threshold, 95%
• pr - probability of scenario, equal probability of each scenario 1
q
We have made a few name changes to the functions in the mathematical descrip-
tion of CVaR model when implemented in GAMS. Now the portfolio Value-at-Risk
is defined as VaR instead of α in the description in chapter 2.2.4, The probability
threshold is now α instead of β and the loss function from equation 2.19 given a
portfolio composition x is called lossscen.
Estimating the Conditional Value-at-Risk scenario generation is needed, the ap-
proximation function from equation 2.26 is equivalent to the linear expression in
equation 2.29, introducing a new positive auxiliary variable V aR_devscen
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Portfolio optimization
23
CV aRα = ϕα(x) = V aR +
pr
(1 −α)
q
∑
scen=1
V aR_devscen
(2.29)
subject to linear constraints
V aR_devscen ≥0
∀scen = 1, ..., q
(2.30)
V aR_devscen ≥lossscen −V aR
∀scen = 1, ..., q
(2.31)
Equations 2.29, 2.30 and 2.31 will be used in the CVaR model implementation in
GAMS to determine the CVaR of the decision portfolio.
2.2.4.2
Implementation of CVaR Model Maximizing Return
Objective function:
max
x
expected_return =
q
∑
scen=1
pr
N
∑
i=1
(return_scenscen,i∗xi)∗(1−bid_ask_spread)
(2.32)
Constraints:
xi = x_previousi + buyi −selli
∀i = 1, ..., N
(2.33)
N
∑
i=1
(buyi ∗(1 + bid_ask_spread)) =
N
∑
i=1
(selli ∗(1 −bid_ask_spread))
(2.34)
lossscen = budget −
N
∑
i=1
return_scen(scen,i) ∗xi
∀scen = 1, ..., q
(2.35)
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Methods
CV aR = V aR +
pr
(1 −α)
q
∑
scen=1
V aR_devscen
(2.36)
CV aR ≤CV aR_limit
(2.37)
V aR_devscen ≥returnscen −V aR
∀scen = 1, ..., q
(2.38)
xi ≥0,
∀i = 1, ..., N
(2.39)
V aR_devscen ≥0
∀scen = 1, ..., q
(2.40)
The CVaR model described above is formulated as a monthly portfolio revision
model for the entire test period, February 2012 to April 2018, where the initial port-
folio is the equally weighted portfolio. The model maximizes the expected return for
each period with an upper limit on the portfolios CVaR, CVaR_limit equation 2.37.
The CVaR_limit is the CVaR of the equally weighted portfolio for each test period.
The portfolio composition is revised monthly where the portfolio value is updated
with the actual returns of each period.
2.2.4.3
Implementation of CVaR Model Minimizing CVaR
Objective function:
min
x
CV aR = V aR +
pr
(1 −α)
q
∑
scen=1
V aR_devscen
(2.41)
Constraints:
xi = x_previousi + buyi −selli
∀i = 1, ..., N
(2.42)
N
∑
i=1
(buyi ∗(1 + bid_ask_spread)) =
N
∑
i=1
(selli ∗(1 −bid_ask_spread))
(2.43)
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Portfolio optimization
25
lossscen = budget −
N
∑
i=1
return_scen(scen,i) ∗xi
∀scen = 1, ..., q
(2.44)
expected_return_limit ≤expected_return
(2.45)
V aR_devscen ≥lossscen −V aR
∀scen = 1, ..., q
(2.46)
expected_return =
q
∑
scen=1
pr
N
∑
i=1
(return_scenscen,i ∗xi) ∗(1 −bid_ask_spread)
(2.47)
xi ≥0,
∀i = 1, ..., N
(2.48)
V aR_devscen ≥0
∀scen = 1, ..., q
(2.49)
The CVaR model described above is formulated as a monthly portfolio revision
model for the entire test period, February 2012 to April 2018, where the initial port-
folio is the equally weighted portfolio, like the one described in chapter 2.2.3. This
model however minimizes the CVaR of the portfolio for each period with a lower limit
on the expected return of the portfolio, expected_return_limit equation 2.45. The
expected_return_limit is the expected return of the equally weighted portfolio for
each test period. The portfolio composition is revised monthly where the portfolio
value is updated with the actual returns of each period.
2.2.5
Strategy II - Mean Reversion
One of the most widely used investment strategies is the Mean-reversion strategy.
This strategy, like the name suggests assumes that the price of a security will even-
tually return to its long run historical average. [Invg]
The aim is then to take long positions in securities which are under performing
compared to their historical mean and taking a short or no position in securities which
have been performing better than the historical mean and thus exploiting market
==PAGE:36==
26
2 Methods
inefficiencies. This strategy performs best in a bull market, where the market goes
aggressively up for a period of time, a bear market where the market goes aggressively
down for a period of time and a sideways market where the price of a security trades
within a certain range not forming a trend.
Before implementing a mean reversion strategy the universe of assets has to be
chosen. For optimal performance the universe should consist of cointegrated assets or
asset pair where the prices are a stationary series. Price series are rarely stationary,
a price series is stationary if the mean and variance are constant over time, but a
portfolio with more than one cointegrated assets can be stationary. Two or more
assets are considered cointegrated if some linear combination of them has a lower
order of integration then their individual integration. [EG87]
The long only mean reversion strategy implemented for the purpose of this thesis
uses historical 10-day and 30-day moving averages of the individual assets chosen
using the hierarchical clustering from chapter 2.2.1. If the 10-day moving average
price of an asset goes below the longer term 30-day moving average we take a long
position and if the 10-day moving average goes above the 30-day moving average we
drop the position(sell) 2.3. To avoid a large downward trends since this is a long only
strategy we added an exit signal, where we looked at the historical price and if:
Downtrend : Price(t) ≤Price(t −5) ≤Price(t −10)
(2.50)
Then we have a downwards trend, stopping a buy order or dropping the position.
This strategy was implemented for the period 01.02.2012 −21.08.2018 splitting
the initial budget evenly between all assets.
Figure 2.3: Example of simple moving average crossover, green dots mark a buy
signal and red dots a sell signal .
==PAGE:37==
2.2 Portfolio optimization
27
A long/short version of the same strategy was implemented as well for comparison.
The same triggers were used for buying, selling and downtrend stopping but now
when shorting is allowed we have additional uptrend risk. We added an exit signal
preventing shorting in a long term uptrend, which is defined as:
Uptrend : Price(t) ≥Price(t −5) ≥Price(t −10)
(2.51)
2.2.6
Strategy III - Momentum
The next strategy implemented for comparison is the so called Momentum strategy,
which is along with the Mean reversion the most widely used investment strategy.
Momentum in finance is the tendency of asset prices which are rising to keep going
up and falling prices to continue to fall. So unlike the mean reversion strategy where
we assume prices will revert back to their mean we assume that securities will continue
to follow their existing trend. [Invd]
The aim is to take long positions in securities that have had positive returns
over some period and sell or take a short positions in securities that have not been
performing well over the same period. Like in the mean reversion strategy we use
simple moving average crossover to trigger orders but now look for the shorter period
moving average to be higher than the long term moving average.
The long only momentum strategy was implemented for longer periods than the
mean reversion, now using the 30-day historical simple moving average for short term
and the 150-day simple moving average for the long term, using the same assets as
the other strategies. When the short term simple moving average rises above the long
term simple moving average we buy and when it goes below we sell 2.4. As in the
mean reversion we added a downtrend factor to avoid taking a position to avoid large
losses, in this strategy we defined a short downtrend as:
Downtrend : Price(t) ≤Price(t −5)
(2.52)
==PAGE:38==
28
2 Methods
Figure 2.4: Example of simple moving average crossover, green dots mark a buy
signal and red dots a sell signal.
The long/short version of the momentum strategy uses the same order triggers but
now we allow short positions instead of selling when the short term simple moving
average is lower than the long term.
In this version of the strategy we use the
downtrend stopper from the long only version but now we also have the risk of an
uptrend when shorting, therefore we added a an uptrend signal, to avoid large losses
in short positions, defined as:
Uptrend : Price(t) ≥Price(t −5)
(2.53)
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3
Results
In this chapter the main results of the thesis are presented. The hope is, by the
end of this chapter, to be able to use the results to determine the best performing
pension funds to use as a benchmark, selected using risk adjusted returns and other
risk measurements. These results can be seen in the first section, 3.1
In 3.2 the results from the portfolio optimization and investment strategies we
applied to the selected ETFs will be covered. Graphs and tables are displayed for
result comparison. The benchmarks from chapter 3.1 will then be compared to the
different investment strategies implemented on ETFs in the 3.3.
• Hafþór: Performance analysis, CVaR optimization, Momentum, Mean reversion
and performance comparison.
• Óttar: Performance analysis, Hierarchical clustering, Momentum and Mean
reversion.
3.1
Performance Analysis
In this chapter the performance analysis of the pension funds is carried out on the
two research periods prior discussed. We will compare the returns of the pension
funds and explore different risk measures to determine if some funds perform better
then others. The return and the risk that comes with it are usually the factors of
most interest to investors when determining which investments to include in their
portfolio. In this chapter we look at how the pension funds are performing in terms
of these factors, looking at return, volatility, looking into likeliness of potential losses
and the magnitude of these losses with CVaR and Maximum drawdown. Lastly we
take a brief look at systematic risk by looking into risk measures that compare the
funds to a market index.
When comparing the performance of the pension funds we utilize visualization in
the form of graphs and tables. We plotted graphs of the cumulative return over the
periods. We also present the annualized return on a box plot to give an indication of
the range of the pension funds’ yearly returns. Tables below the graphs show how the
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Results
funds perform in terms of risk adjusted returns using the Sharpe ratio, the statistical
moments of the return distribution and results of a Jarque Bera normality test.
We then select two of the pension funds as benchmarks based on the above men-
tioned results. The measurements we use for benchmarking are: return, standard
deviation, Sharpe ratio, CVaR and Maximum drawdown.
3.1.1
Risk adjusted return
We start by comparing the annual returns of AP Active and Top Denmark in the
period May 2003 to April 2018.
Figure 3.1: Cumulative return and boxplots for AP Active and Top Denmark in the
period from May 2003 to April 2008.
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Performance Analysis
31
Table 3.1: Results for Sharpe ratio, statistical moments and normality tests for AP
Active and Top Denmark from May 2003 to April 2018.
JB-test
µ(%)
σ(%)
SR
skewness
kurtosis
p-value
AP Active
6.797
5.952
1.058
-0.985
3.465
2.2e-16
Top Denmark II
5.684
5.306
0.977
-1.490
5.531
2.2e-16
From the left side of figure 3.1 it can be concluded that AP Active have better
average annual returns (µ) over the time period than Top Denmark and the two funds
seem to be highly correlated, therefore it is likely the funds have a similar portfolio
composition or investment strategy, we see that AP Active rebounded better from the
2008 crash suggesting they were more efficient in their trading or managing of their
portfolio risk. There are a few downward trends in the returns, the biggest being the
financial crisis of 2008 where both funds start declining in the beginning of 2008 and
keep on declining for a year, until beginning of 2009. We observe another downward
trend starting in mid 2011 but on a much smaller scale then in 2008 and for a shorter
time period, the cause could be the European debt crisis. These trends indicate the
two pension funds are effected by large market movements as would be expected and
therefore not immune to market conditions.
AP Active have a higher annual average return then Top Denmark over the period
as can be seen in table 3.1. Although AP Active have higher average annual returns
they have a larger spread suggesting AP Active take on riskier investments as seen in
the right side figure 3.1, excluding the minimum annual return of both funds which
happened under extreme market conditions in 2008. From table 3.1 we see that Top
Denmark has a lower standard deviation (σ) but AP Active has a higher Sharpe ratio
(SR) and thus produces more return for the same amount of risk as Top Denmark.
Higher skewness and kurtosis is observed for Top Denmark’s returns, see figures
in appendix A.1.1, from these graphs neither of the distributions are normal. High
negative skewness could mean a higher probability of tail risk.
Additionally the
Jarque-Bera test was implemented and the results can be seen in table 3.1.
Both funds get a p-value smaller than 0.05 so we reject the hypothesis that the data
is normal. These results are not surprising having looked at the histogram and the
QQ-plots in appendix A.1.1 and the results from the statistical moments.
Now we include the other pension funds from the data-set, for comparison and
selection of a return benchmark for the time period from February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Results
Table 3.2: Results for Sharpe-ratio, statistical moments and normality tests for the
seven pension funds from February 2012 to April 2018.
JB-test
µ(%)
σ(%)
SR
skewness
kurtosis
p-value
PFA+ Profile B 30 year
8.334
4.272
1.657
-0.488
0.508
0.216
AP Active
6.678
3.895
1.586
-0.825
1.652
0.00047
Top Denmark II
6.484
4.170
1.435
-0.468
0.763
0.144
Nordea Active
6.844
4.566
1.389
-0.857
1.025
0.0042
Nordea Index
7.611
5.365
1.326
-0.694
1.359
0.0074
Skandia Match 3
6.267
5.761
1.001
0.00562
0.0162
0.9802
Skandia Basic 2
5.167
5.097
0.916
-0.542
1.245
0.0261
Figure 3.2: Boxplots of annual return for the seven pension funds for the period
February 2012 to April 2018.
From figure 3.2 and table 3.2 it can be determined that PFA+ has the highest
average annual return of the pension funds. The annual return of PFA+ has a low
deviation from the average annual mean compared to the other funds, which suggest
less risk in the investment. The spread of annual return for the period ranges from
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Performance Analysis
33
a maximum of 10.441% to a lower fence of 6.584%, except for the minimum value of
-0.945% which is the first four months of 2018 where all the funds have around zero
return, table can be seen in appendix A.1.2. We see from table 3.2 that PFA+ is has
the highest Sharpe ratio, 1.657.
From table 3.2 we see that the return distribution of the funds have smaller skew-
ness than the two funds previously looked at for the shorter period. Skandia Match,
Top Denmark and PFA+ have skewness between −0.5 and 0.5 so they are approxi-
mately symmetric with low excess kurtosis, while the others are moderately negatively
skewed with higher excess kurtosis. This was also visualized with histograms and QQ-
plots and can be seen on figures in appendix A.1.2. These plots look more similar
to the normal distribution than the ones for the two funds going back to 2003, on
both the histograms and the QQ-plots, figures in appendix A.1.1. From these results
we reject the hypothesis of normality for AP Active, Skandia Basic 2, Nordea Active,
Nordea Index. While failing to reject the hypothesis for Top Denmark, Skandia Match
and PFA+.
Figure 3.3: Cumulative return for all pension funds in the data-set from February
2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Results
PFA+ has the highest cumulative return of all the funds over more than half the
period, as can be seen on figure 3.3. Skandia Match 3 starts by performing well in
the beginning of the period and have the highest cumulative return in 2012. In the
beginning of 2013 Skandia Match 3 starts to drop while Top Denmark and PFA+ are
steadily increasing their returns and both exceed Skandia Match 3 in mid 2013. Top
Denmark slowly decreases in return for the rest of the period and ends the period in
the lower range of return out of all the funds. In late 2014 Nordea Index takes a fairly
large upswing compared to the other funds and has the second highest return for the
rest of the period. Skandia Basic 2 has the lowest cumulative returns for most of the
period. The pension funds, seem to be some what correlated, most of them have very
similar up- and downswings but at different magnitudes. In mid 2015 all the funds
go through a turbulence likely caused be unfavorable market conditions. Beginning
of 2018 all the funds have a downward movement and most of them have negative
return for the first four months of 2018.
3.1.2
Risk Measures
Continuing our risk analysis the next step is to analyse the potential loss the funds
may sustain. The methods used for this are Maximum drawdown and Conditional
Value-at-Risk. The results can be seen below in table 3.3
Table 3.3: Risk measures for AP Active and Top Denmark in the period from May
2003 to April 2018.
Max. drawdown (%)
CVaRα=95%(%)
CVaRα=99%(%)
AP Active
23.181
-4.199
-6.576
Top Denmark II
23.447
-3.552
-6.306
Top Denmark had a larger Maximum drawdown than AP Active in the observation
period with a Maximum drawdown of 23.447% compared to AP Active’s 23.181 %,
very similar results, both during approximately the same drawdown period, which as
expected, was during the financial crisis in 2008. Looking at CVaR, Top Denmark
has a lower expected shortfall both for α = 95% and α = 99%. These results would
be considered conservative when looking at a 15 year period but is to be expected
from pension funds that have a limited risk appetite.
Having compared the funds only with each other we finally compare them to a market
index to see the performance with regard to systematic and unsystematic risk with
the S&P500 index representing the market. In this analysis we calculate the Treynor
ratio and Jensen’s Alpha, both methods described in the previous chapter, these
results can be seen in table 3.4
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Performance Analysis
35
Table 3.4: Risk measures for AP Active and Top Denmark in the period from May
2003 to April 2018.
Beta
Treynor
Jensen’s Alpha
AP Active
0.221
0.262
0.0425
Top Denmark II
0.215
0.218
0.0318
In this comparison AP Active outperforms Top Denmark in both the Treynor
ratio and Jensen’s alpha meaning that the fund has higher returns when we include
the market index and a risk free fixed income security.
Reflecting on these results we see that AP Active is performing better than Top
Denmark. AP has higher risk-adjusted return measured by the Sharpe ratio, lower
Maximum drawdown, a measure of potential loss, and better results in systematic
risk calculations.
Now we perform the same analysis for seven pension funds, for the period 2012-
2018. Again comparing Maximum drawdown and CVaR for potential loss risk and
finally Treynor ratio and Jensen’s Alpha for systematic risk. These results can be
seen in tables 3.5 and 3.6 below where the best results for each measure is in bold.
Table 3.5: Risk measures for pension funds in the period from February 2012 to
April 2018.
Max. drawdown (%)
CVaRα=95%(%)
CVaRα=99%(%)
Skandia Match 3
6.132
-2.891
-4.320
Skandia Basic 2
9.242
-3.120
-4.372
Nordea Index
7.586
-3.259
-4.733
Nordea Active
6.650
-2.694
-3.925
AP Active
4.733
-2.331
-3.312
PFA+ Profile B
5.120
-2.519
-3.549
Top Denmark II
6.306
-2.415
-2.947
From this table we see that AP Active performs well for these measures, having
both the lowest maximum drawdown and CVaRα=95%. PFA+ has the second lowest
Maximum drawdown and the third lowest CVaR. Poor performers here are noticably
Skandia Basic, with 9.242% drawdown and the second highest CVaR, and Nordea
Index with high values for CVaR and Maximum drawdown.
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Results
Table 3.6: Systematic risk measures for pension funds in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
Beta
Treynor
Jen. Alpha
Skandia Match 3
0.197
0.268
0.0227
Skandia Basic 2
0.296
0.141
-0.00354
Nordea Index
0.260
0.254
0.0265
Nordea Active
0.266
0.220
0.0179
AP Active
0.214
0.265
0.0241
PFA+ Profile B
0.247
0.297
0.0356
Top Denmark II
0.216
0.253
0.0218
When we look at the Treynor ratio and Jensen’s Alpha values we look for the
highest values. Here PFA+ has the highest values for both. This means PFA+ has
bigger edge on the market than the other funds.
From these results and the results from table 3.2, we choose the two pension funds
best performing in these measures to use for benchmarks.
PFA+ Profile B was chosen because it has the highest Sharpe-ratio, little skewness,
low CVaR and the highest values for Treynor and Jensen’s Alpha.
AP Active was chosen because of its low standard deviation, high sharpe ratio
and good results for Maximum drawdown and CVaR. The measures for the chosen
benchmarks can be seen in table 3.7 below.
Table 3.7: Pension funds used for benchmarking for the period 2012-2018.
µ(%)
σ(%)
SR
CVaR95%
Max. drawdown (%)
AP Active
6.678
3.895
1.586
-2.331
4.733
PFA+ Profile B
8.334
4.727
1.657
-2.519
5.120
3.2
Portfolio optimization
In this chapter the results from the implementation of the strategies in chapter 2.2
will be presented. We start by showing the ETFs selected in the clustering, these
ETFs will form our universe on which we implement our strategies on.
The first strategies we implemented were the two CVaR optimization models de-
scribed in 2.2.4, one maximizing the expected return with limit on the CVaR and the
later minimizing the CVaR with a lower expected return limit. The results for these
strategies that we are interested in are the same measures as our pension fund bench-
marks chosen in the final section of 3.1. Chapters 3.2.3 and 3.2.4 show the results
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Portfolio optimization
37
for the Mean reversion and Momentum strategies respectively. For these strategies
we apply them for only long positions and if short selling was allowed as well. The
benchmark measures for each strategy are shown in tables in the following sections.
Finally this is all brought together in the Performance comparison section 3.3
where the pension fund benchmarks with results from the CVaR optimization, Mean
reversion, Momentum strategies and equally weighted portfolio all compared.
3.2.1
Hierarchical Clustering
The hierarchical clustering was applied to a universe of 727 international ETFs. We
chose to cut off at 12 clusters to end up with 12 assets. The risk free rate used for
Sharpe ratio calculations is rf = 0.5%. The ETFs selected from the clustering can be
seen in table 3.8 below. Marked with a ’*’ is the SPDR Gold Shares ETF which was
added to the universe after the clustering to increase diversification as there were no
commodities in the universe. Figure 3.4 is a time series plot of the cumulative returns
of the selected ETFs for the period. We see from that figure that the performance
varies a lot, RHS and VTI, both US equity ETFs have a good return over the period
while GLD and FXB, precious metal and currency ETFs are not showing good returns
in the period.
Table 3.8: ETFs selected from the clustering.
Ticker
Description
iShares Core US Aggregate Bond ETF
AGG
Intermediate term Bond
Invesco DB G10 Currency Harvest
DBV
Developed market currencies
WisdomTree International SmallCp ETF
DLS
Small-cap Equity
WisdomTree International Equity ETF
DWM
International Equity
Invesco CcyShrs British Pound Stlg
FXB
GDP currency
SPDR Gold Shares *
GLD
Commodities - Precious metals
Invesco S&P 500 Eql Wt Cnsm Stapl ETF
RHS
Large cap US Equity
Invesco S&P 500 Equal Weight Utilts ETF
RYU
Large cap US Equity
iShares 1-3 Year Treasury Bond ETF
SHY
US Treasury Bond - Short Term
iShares TIPS Bond ETF
TIP
US Treasury inflation-protected securities
Vanguard Consumer Staples ETF
VDC
US Consumer staples
Vanguard Total Stock Market ETF
VTI
US Equity
Energy Select Sector SPDR ETF
XLE
US Equity - Energy
==PAGE:48==
38
3 Results
Figure 3.4: ETFs from the clustering.
3.2.2
CVaR
There were two CVaR models implemented, one where the expected return of the
portfolio is maximized with an upper limit on the CVaR of the portfolio, model from
chapter 2.2.4.2, and in the other model the CVaR of the portfolio is minimized with
a constrain on the lower limit of the expected return, model from chapter 2.2.4.3.
Table 3.9: Performance measures for the CVaR models in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
µ(%)
σ(%)
SR
CVaR model - max. return sim. 9
3.637
6.937
0.452
CVaR model - max. return sim. 2
3.635
7.415
0.423
CVaR model - min. CVaR sim. 6
1.131
4.058
0.156
CVaR model - min. CVaR sim. 3
1.098
3.960
0.151
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Portfolio optimization
39
Table 3.10: Risk measures for the CVaR models in the period from February 2012
to April 2018.
Max. drawdown (%)
CVaRα=95%(%)
CVaR model - max. return sim. 9
6.822
-3.737
CVaR model - max. return sim. 2
9.058
-4.352
CVaR model - min. CVaR sim. 6
5.023
-2.550
CVaR model - min. CVaR sim. 3
4.593
-2.663
In tables 3.9 and 3.10 the main performance measures used to compare the ETFs
to the pension funds are presented for the two median simulations, from figures 3.5
and 3.6, for both CVaR models, described in chapters 2.2.4.2 and 2.2.4.3. As expected
the CVaR model maximizing the expected return has higher average yearly return,
volatility and CVaR then the CVaR model where the CVaR value is minimized.
Figure 3.5: Actual growth of potfolio value for CVaR model where expected return
is maximized.
On figure 3.5 the actual growth of the portfolio selected by the CVaR model
==PAGE:50==
40
3 Results
where expected return is maximized, CVaR model from chapter 2.2.4.2, can be seen
for median simulations, a figure with all simulations can be seen in appendix A.2.1.
The actual portfolio value at the end of the test period, end of April 2018, for the
ten simulations has a high value of 137.1 in simulation 1 and a low value of 121.3 in
simulation 6 as can be seen in appendix A.2.1. The two median simulations have an
actual growth of 124.5 in simulation 9 and simulation 2. The portfolio composition
for all ten simulations for both CVaR models can be seen in appendix A.2.1.
Figure 3.6: Actual growth of potfolio value for CVaR model where CVaR is mini-
mized.
On figure 3.6 the actual growth of the portfolio selected by the CVaR model where
the CVaR value of the portfolio is minimized, CVaR model from chapter 2.2.4.3, can
be seen for the median simulations, a figure with all simulations can be seen in
appendix A.2.2. The actual portfolio value at the end of the test period, end of April
2018, for the ten simulations has a high value of 111.4 in simulation 5 and a low
value of 104.0 in simulation 2, as can be seen in appendix A.2.2. The two median
simulations have a portfolio value of 107.1 in simulation 6 and 106.9 in simulation 3.
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Portfolio optimization
41
The portfolio composition for all ten simulations for both CVaR models can be seen
in appendix A.2.2.
The actual value growth of the portfolio in the CVaR model where expected return
is maximized was lower then expected and observing the portfolio composition, in
appendix A.2.1 the model is more conservative towards risk then was expected. For
the majority of the time period in most simulations the model invests a large part of
the budget in SHY, US Treasury inflation-protected securities, which has relatively
low return and low risk, seen in figure 3.4. To push the CVaR model, from chapter
2.2.4.2, to be more risk neutral the upper limit on CVaR value constraints is changed.
Instead of using the 1/N portfolio as an upper limit on CVaR, the 5 ETFs having the
highest return over the period are picked to be the 1/N portfolio and the new upper
limit on the CVaR value, which should make the model more prone to invest more
of the budget in the ETFs having higher return and therefore make the model more
risk neutral.
Table 3.11: Average annual return, historical volatility and Sharpe ratio for CVaR
model, where expected return is maximized with CVaR upper limit as
the portfolio of the 5 ETFs with the highest return, in the period from
February 2012 to April 2018.
µ(%)
σ(%)
SR
CVaR model - max. return sim. 6
7.277
10.208
0.664
CVaR model - max. return sim. 3
5.821
10.387
0.512
Table 3.12: Risk measures for CVaR model where expected return is maximized,
with CVaR upper limit as the portfolio of the 5 ETFs with the highest
return, in the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
Max. drawdown (%)
CVaRα=95%(%)
CVaR model - max. return sim. 6
10.374
-5.045
CVaR model - max. return sim. 3
11.231
-5.520
In tables 3.11 and 3.12 the main performance measures used to compare the ETFs
to the pension funds are presented for the two median simulations, from figure 3.7,
for the CVaR models with the changed upper limit on CVaR, described in chapters
2.2.4.2. As expected the model has higher average annual return, volatility and CVaR
than previous models.
==PAGE:52==
42
3 Results
Figure 3.7: Actual growth of portfolio value for CVaR model where expected return
is maximized with CVaR upper limit as the portfolio of the 5 ETFs with
the highest return.
On figure 3.7 the actual growth of the portfolio selected by the CVaR model where
expected return is maximized with the new upper limit on the portfolio’s CVaR value,
CVaR model from chapter 2.2.4.2, for the two median simulations, figure with all ten
simulations can be seen in appendix A.2.3. The actual portfolio value at the end of
the test period, end of April 2018, for the ten simulations has a high value of 183.6
in simulation 4 and a low value of 108.2 in simulation 5 as can be seen in appendix
A.2.3. The two median simulations have an actual growth of 146.9 in simulation 2
and 141.6 simulation 3.
The portfolio value at the end of the test period has more variability between
simulations than in the previous models, the portfolio values are also higher for most
of the simulations indicating a more risk neutral model.
Observing the portfolio
compositions for the ten simulations, figures in appendix A.2.3, the model has more
tendency to pick the ETFs which have a high return in the test period and invest the
entire budget in just one asset, strengthening the indication of a more risk neutral
model.
==PAGE:53==
3.2 Portfolio optimization
43
3.2.3
Mean Reversion
Now we present the results for the Mean reversion strategy for the test period, from
February 2012 to April 2018. The mean reversion strategy is implemented with long
positions only and allowing both long and short positions.
Table 3.13: Average annual return, historical volatility and risk measures for Mean
reversion in the period from February 2012 to April 2018, all numbers
are in percentage except for the Sharpe ratio.
µ(%)
σ(%)
SR
Max. drawdown
CVaRα=95%
Mean rev. - long
2.165
3.218
0.517
6.269
-2.166
Mean rev. - long/short
2.786
3.910
0.585
9.655
-2.223
In table 3.13 the main performance measures used to compare the ETFs to the
pension funds are presented for Mean reversion allowing only long positions and Mean
reversion allowing both long and short positions. Both strategies have relatively low
average annual return and volatility, but the Mean reversion with long and short
positions has a maximum drawdown of 9.655% which is relatively high.
==PAGE:54==
44
3 Results
Figure 3.8: Actual growth of portfolio value for Mean reversion with long positions
only.
On figure 3.8 the actual value of the portfolio for Mean reversion when long
positions are only allowed, along with the value growth of two ETFs for the Mean
reversion method, from chapter 2.2.5. The portfolio value at the end of April 2018 is
114.3. The Mean reversion with only long positions is able to capture the short term
trends well in some of the assets but not as well in others as can be seen on figure 3.8,
and figures in appendix A.2.4. The ETFs with high return in the test period, figure
3.4, seem to have high returns for the Mean reversion, with the exception of DLS.
DLS has a fairly high value at the end of April 2018 but when trying to capture the
short term Mean reversion trend the value decreases.
==PAGE:55==
3.2 Portfolio optimization
45
Figure 3.9: Actual growth of portfolio value for Mean reversion with long and short
positions.
On figure 3.9 the actual value of the portfolio for Mean reversion when long and
short positions are allowed, along with the value growth of two ETF for the Mean
reversion method, from chapter 2.2.5, can be seen. The value growth for each ETF
can be seen in appendix A.2.4. The portfolio value at the end of April 2018 is 118.5.
Allowing long and short positions we observe more movement in the ETF’s returns.
The Mean reversion still captures the short term trend better in some of the ETFs.
Again DLS performs poorly and has an end value of 93.0. GLD has the lowest value
at end of April 2018, figure 3.4, but with the Mean reversion the end value over the
test period is the second highest, as can be seen in figure 3.9.
3.2.4
Momentum
Now we present the results for the Momentum strategy for the test period, from
February 2012 to April 2018. Like for the Mean reversion strategy the Momentum
==PAGE:56==
46
3 Results
strategy is implemented with long positions only and allowing both long and short
positions.
Table 3.14: Average annual return, historical volatility and risk measures for Mo-
mentum in the period from February 2012 to April 2018, All numbers
are in percentage except for the Sharpe ratio.
µ(%)
σ(%)
SR
Max. draw.
CVaRα=95%
Momentum- long
2.638
2.476
0.864
1.851
-1.289
Momentum - long/short
3.736
2.903
1.114
4.085
-1.257
In table 3.14 the main performance measures used to compare the strategy to
the pension funds are presented for Momentum allowing only long positions and
Momentum allowing both long and short positions, both strategies have low average
annual return and volatility and the risk metrics are low as well.
Figure 3.10: Actual growth of portfolio value for Momentum with long positions
only.
==PAGE:57==
3.2 Portfolio optimization
47
On figure 3.10 the actual value of the portfolio for Momentum when long positions
are only allowed, along with the value growth of three ETFs for the Momentum
strategy, from chapter 2.2.6, can be seen. The portfolio value at the end of April 2018
is 117.7. The Momentum with only long positions is able to capture the Momentum
trends well in some of the assets but in some ETFs there is no upward long trend
for the Momentum strategy to utilize as can be seen on figures in appendix A.2.5.
Observing GLD on figure 3.4 and 3.10 it is clear that there is little to no upward
trend in the ETF for this period and therefor it is not suitable for the Momentum
long only strategy. SHY has little to no upward or downward movement therefor
there is not much to gain from utilizing a Momentum strategy on a series with little
movement.
Figure 3.11: Actual growth of portfolio value for Momentum with long and short
positions.
On figure 3.11 the actual value of the portfolio for Momentum when both long and
short positions are allowed, along with the value growth for DLS. The value growth
of the other ETFs for the momentum strategy can be seen in appendix A.2.5. The
==PAGE:58==
48
3 Results
portfolio value at the end of April 2018 is 125.9. The Momentum strategy allowing
both long and short positions can utilize downward trends for capital gains as well
as upward trends giving the strategy more options of gaining returns but with the
possibility of higher returns comes higher risk. Most of the ETFs seem to have a fair
performance, return wise, except for SHY for the same reason as mentioned before.
Observing DLS on figure 3.8 we can see it has the highest value at the end of the test
period but the lowest for the Mean reversion.
3.3
Performance Comparison of pension funds and
ETF strategies
In this section we will compare performance measures for the best performing pension
funds, the funds picked as benchmarks at the end of the performance analysis in sec-
tion 3.1, to the ETF strategies implemented in the section, 3.2, portfolio optimization.
For the CVaR models we use the median of the 10 simulations executed to compare
to the other models and the pension funds.
Table 3.15: Performance measures for the pension funds and ETF strategies 2012-
2018.
Return(%)
Volatility(%)
Sharpe
CVaR95%
Max. draw.(%)
PFA+ Profile B
8.334
4.727
1.657
-2.519
5.120
AP Active
6.678
3.895
1.586
-2.331
4.733
Equally weighted
2.707
5.917
0.373
-3.624
9.628
Momentum long/short
3.736
2.903
1.114
-1.257
4.085
Momentum long
2.638
2.476
0.864
-1.289
1.851
Mean rev. long/short
2.786
3.910
0.585
-2.223
9.655
Mean rev. long
2.165
3.218
0.517
-2.166
6.269
CVaR model 3 - sim. 6
7.277
10.208
0.664
-5.045
10.374
CVaR model 1 - sim. 9
3.637
6.937
0.452
-3.737
6.822
CVaR model 2 - sim. 6
1.131
4.058
0.156
-2.550
5.023
In table 3.15 CVaR model 1 - sim. 9 refers to 9th simulation of the CVaR model
where expected return is maximized with upper limit on the CVaR value of the
portfolio as the CVaR of the 1/N portfolio, CVaR model 2 - sim. 6 refers to the 6th
simulation of the CVaR model where CVaR is minimized with lower limit on expected
return as the expected return of the 1/N portfolio and CVaR model 1 - sim. 6 refers
to the 6th simulation of the CVaR model where expected return is maximized with
upper limit on the CVaR value of the portfolio as the CVaR of the 1/N portfolio of
the 5 ETFs with the highest return.
==PAGE:59==
3.3 Performance Comparison of pension funds and ETF strategies
49
We can conclude from table 3.15 that the pension funds have higher average annual
return than the implemented ETF strategies as was observed from figure 3.12 except
for CVaR model 3 - sim. 6 which is the models that comes closes to the retuns of the
pension funds. CVaR model 3 would not be applicable in the real world since we use
future knowledge about the ETFs actual growth to determine the model’s upper limit
on CVaR. This model is mainly done to inspect if we could produce similar returns
as the pension funds from our ETF universe. The momentum strategy allowing both
long and short positions has the highest average annual return out of all the ETF
strategies that where implemented.
Observing the risk measures in table 3.15 there is variability between methods for
the different risk measures. The CVaR model 2 has the lowest CVaR value out of the
CVaR models which was expected since the model minimizes the portfolio’s CVaR,
the model has low average annual return and relatively high volatility resulting in the
worst Sharpe ratio out of all the portfolios compered in table 3.15. CVaR model 3
has the highest risk measures, other then Sharpe ratio, compared to the other CVaR
models which was also our expectation since the model is pushed to be more risk
neutral.
The momentum strategies have the lowest volatility, CVaR and Maximum draw-
down values of all the portfolios compared in table 3.15, therefore it is concluded that
Momentum is the most risk averse strategy for this ETF data-set. The momentum
strategy allowing both short and long positions is the ETF strategy which has the
closest Sharpe ratio to the pension funds.
The Mean reversion strategies have lower risk measures than the pension fund
benchmarks except for the Shrape ratio and Maximum drawdown, which occurs at
the end of 2013 where most of the portfolios suffer a downturn. Interestingly the
momentum and Mean reversion strategies have a lower CVaR value then all the CVaR
models. The Mean reversion strategy implemented for this thesis is also concluded
to be risk averse, according to the risk metrics in table 3.15, like the momentum for
this ETF data-set.
==PAGE:60==
50
3 Results
Figure 3.12: Actual growth of portfolio value for ETF strategies and pension funds.
On figure 3.12 the actual growth over the test period, from February 2012 to April
2018, for the ETF portfolios and for the selected pension funds can be seen. We first
observe that all the selected pension funds have higher portfolio values, at the end
of the period, than the ETF strategies except for one strategy. The ETF strategy
that is close to the pension funds in portfolio value is the CVaR model maximizing
expected return with an upper limit on CVaR as the 1/N portfolio of the 5 ETFs with
the highest return for the period. This model would of course not be applicable in the
real world as we are using future information about the ETF’s returns which would
not be known. This model was mainly implemented to see if we could come close to
the portfolio value of the pension funds using the ETFs with the highest return to
push the CVaR model to be more risk neutral.
There are only three out of seven ETF strategies that have a portfolio value higher
than the 1/N portfolio, equally weighted portfolio, not including the CVaR model
which utilizes the ETFs with the highest return as a upper limit. The three ETF
strategies over the equally weighted portfolio are the CVaR model where expected
return is maximized with a portfolio value of 124.5, momentum allowing long and
==PAGE:61==
3.3 Performance Comparison of pension funds and ETF strategies
51
short positions with a portfolio value of 125.8 and Mean reversion allowing long and
short positions with a portfolio value of 118.7. The Mean reversion portfolio value is
only slightly above the portfolio value of the equally weighted with a value of 118.2.
Observing figure 3.12 there seems to be some correlation between ETF strategies
in certain periods, mostly between alike strategies for example the Mean reversion al-
lowing long positions only and Mean reversion allowing long and short positions seem
to be correlated in the beginning of the period and until 2016. The two momentum
strategies also seem to be correlated for a part of the test period. We should expect
correlation in strategies that are alike like the ones mentioned above.
==PAGE:62==
52
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 4
Discussion
In this chapter we look into the results, reflect on our assumptions and what we have
learned. In the future work section we explain where these results lead us and what
would be the next steps to improve and expand the research.
We see a lot of similarities from analysing and comparing the monthly returns of
AP active and Top Denmark for the longer period from 2003-2018. These similarities
in the return distribution could be because both funds are under the same regulations
on portfolio composition. Both funds yield a decent return, AP active with 6.8% and
Top Denmark with 5.7% average yearly return through the entire cycle with Sharpe
ratios just below 1.
We saw the funds suffer when looking into the loss analysis for the period which was
to be expected given the financial crisis when both funds experienced their maximum
draw down, managing to rebound from it the following years.
We see from analysing the seven funds for the short period that the average
yearly returns are very similar to the ones for the longer period, which could come
as a surprise when we think of the period of 2012-2018 in which the market has been
going up. It is in the risk measures we see a clear difference, higher Sharpe ratios,
lower drawdowns and lower expected shortfalls for all funds. This difference indicates
that further analysis for a full cycle would give a more accurate representation of the
risk involved. For this period there were some clear winners, AP active and PFA+
Profile B, our benchmarks, both had high Sharpe ratios and low expected shortfall.
For the portfolio optimization we see, and have already noted, that the way we
chose assets with hierarchical clustering may not have been optimal for all strategies
as the criteria for them is not the same. However it managed to select ETFs showing
diverse behaviour.
The scenario generation is sampling from the test period, 2009-2018, which is a
period where the financial markets are recovering from the financial crisis in 2008.
The period is characterized by expansion and prosperity, which should suggest too
optimistic scenarios. Observing the scenarios we can conclude that the scenarios are
not too optimistic but could be too pessimistic, but we also noticed the results from
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Discussion
the clustering that not all the selected ETFs have an upward trend for the whole
period some of the ETFs suffer in the later years of our test period.
The two CVaR models implemented, one where the expected return of the port-
folio is maximized and other where the CVaR of the portfolio is minimized, in this
thesis generated a relatively low average annual return and a low Sharpe ratio. Ob-
serving the portfolio composition chosen by the two models we noticed a large part
of the budget is invested in SHY, which is an ETF for short term US Treasury bonds.
SHY has relatively small upward and downward trends for the observed period and
analysing the risk measures calculated for the models, leads us to the conclusion that
the two CVaR models are risk averse. Another CVaR model was implemented, we
changed The upper limit of the portfolio’s CVaR value for the model where expected
return is maximized to try pushing the model to take on more risk neutral. The model
generated higher return and higher risk measures as we expected. This model would
of course not be applicable in the real world because we utilize future information
to decide the portfolio’s CVaR upper limit and is mainly done to see if the actual
portfolio return could be increased.
In the implementation of the Mean reversion and the Momentum strategies we
realized that the 13 ETFs, selected in the clustering, are not all well suited for the
strategies. We noticed that for some of the ETFs there are little to no trends for the
strategies to utilize, while in other ETFs there are a lot of upward and downward
trends which give mixed results depending on the strategy. The strategies produced
mediocre results at best, the average annual return is low but the risk measures fair
leading us to the conclusion that the strategies are conservative for these assets in
the observed period.
When using Mean reversion we learned that a more sophisticated way of applying
triggers and choosing assets was necessary, neither the long only or the long/short
strategy could compete with the pension funds, Momentum investing came closer in
the long/short managing a Sharpe ratio of 1.114.
We see from our comparison of the pension funds and the ETF strategies, that the
pension funds are doing a fair job of managing the pensioners capital and could not be
beaten with simple ETF strategies implemented for this thesis. The observed period,
February 2012 to April 2018, has been a period of uptrend in the financial markets
like mentioned, which should have been beneficial for both the ETF strategies and the
pension funds but the pension funds seem to take better advantage of the uptrends
in the period. We noticed that the ETF strategies seem to be more conservative then
the pension funds, increasing the possibility of higher returns for the pension funds.
==PAGE:65==
4.1 Future work
55
4.1
Future work
In both the performance analysis and portfolio optimization there are many tests
to apply and factors to add that were left for future work which could improve and
expand the research.
In this thesis there was an emphasis on the optimization and investment strategies
without looking to much into the assets we apply them on. Hierarchical clustering
was applied on the large data set with the same criteria, creating a universe of assets
used for all strategies. Creating separate sub-universes for each strategy based on
the their required criteria should definitely give better results. For example create a
universe of cointegrated assets for Mean reversion.
In the Mean reversion and Momentum strategies the portfolio composition of the
ETFs are equally weighted, it would be interesting to see if the performance could be
approved by implementing a portfolio optimization algorithm to select the weights of
each asset in the portfolio for example a mean-variance model.
For a more detailed comparison it could be interesting to look more into the
regulations on the pension funds with regards to portfolio composition and see if we
could get similar returns under the same regulations.
In the introduction we mentioned the assumptions made and limitations encoun-
tered during the course of the thesis. Before doing further research we would like
to re-run our analysis including more factors such as exchange rates for assets in
different currencies and the bid-ask spread for ETFs that where either simplified or
ignored in this analysis.
==PAGE:66==
56
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
The objective of this thesis was to analyse and compare the performance of the Dan-
ish commercial pension funds. Look into which funds were performing well, which
funds were performing badly and possible reasons for performance differences. Hav-
ing looked into these results we wanted to try to challenge these funds by getting
close to their performance attributes by implementing different investment strategies
on a universe of ETFs.
In the beginning of the thesis we were optimistic of receiving more detailed data
for the Danish pension funds. We felt more data was needed to dive deeper into
reasons for difference in performance. Unfortunately we could not acquire more data
regarding the pension funds than what we received in the beginning from Morningstar.
The two funds we used for our analysis for the 15 year period had very similar
performance and it is hard to determine which one is optimal because it would depend
on the risk appetite of the individual contributors. For the period 2012-2018 our
analysis showed that for the 7 funds, all described as medium risk funds, performance
varied a lot. We saw average yearly return going from the highest of 8.334% (PFA+)
down to the lowest, 5.167% (Skandia Basic), where PFA+ has a Sharpe ratio of 1.657
and Skandia a much lower Sharpe ratio of 0.916. From all our analysis PFA+ andAP
Active were clearly the best in terms of risk and return and were therefore chosen
as the ones to beat for our investment strategies. To look more into reasons for the
difference in performance more detailed data would be needed.
Out of these strategies only one of them managed to come close to the average
yearly returns of the pension funds, that was the CVaR model in which we maximized
the return with a CVaR limit of the 5 ETFs with the highest return, unfortunately
this return value suffers because of very high volatility risk, ending up with a Sharpe
ratio of only 0.664. The only strategy managing a Sharpe ratio of more than 1 was
the Momentum strategy when both long and short positions are allowed. Although
with lower return than the pension funds it is fairly conservative. It is also important
to note that the returns from the pension funds are reported before the withdrawal
of management fees so in reality the difference is not as big.
Even though our attempt at creating better performing strategies than the best
pension funds was not successful we were not far from it and came very close if we were
==PAGE:68==
58
5 Conclusion
to compare to the least performing funds. These results could be alarming to pension
contributors, seeing the vast difference between the return of investments of these
funds and to the pension funds when more and more people claim the responsibility
and control of their pension savings.
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
A.1
Performance Analysis
A.1.1
Analysis of AP active and Top Denmark, period 2003-2018
Figure A.1: Return for AP Active and Top Denmark in the period from May 2003
to April 2018.
Table A.1: Mean, median, maximum value and minimum value of average annual
return for AP Active and Top Denmark in the period from May 2003 to
April 2018.
Mean(%)
Median(%)
Min(%)
Max(%)
AP Active
6.797
7.800
-14.645
21.718
Top Denmark II
5.684
7.732
-18.5087
16.878
==PAGE:70==
60
A An Appendix
Figure A.2: Histogram of pension funds from May 2003.
Figure A.3: Distribution of individual waiting times.
==PAGE:71==
A.1 Performance Analysis
61
A.1.2
Analysis of all funds, period 2012-2018
Figure A.4: Return for All funds in the data-set in the period from February 2012
to April 2018.
Table A.2: Mean, median, maximum value and minimum value of average annual
return for pension funds in the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
Mean(%)
Median(%)
Max(%)
Min(%)
Skandia Match 3
6.267
6.550
9.293
-0.629
Skandia Basic 2
5.167
6.166
8.453
-1.647
Nordea Index
7.611
7.444
14.040
-0.890
Nordea Active
6.844
5.994
10.444
-0.359
AP Active
6.678
6.937
9.515
0.176
PFA+ Profile B 30 Y.
8.334
8.473
10.441
-0.945
Top Denmark II
6.484
4.499
12.503
0.184
==PAGE:72==
62
A An Appendix
Figure A.5: Histogram of pension funds from February 2012.
Figure A.6: Distribution of individual waiting times.
==PAGE:73==
A.1 Performance Analysis
63
Figure A.7: Cumulative log return of all the funds with the market indices, S&P
500 and Nasdaq OMX 120.
==PAGE:74==
64
A An Appendix
A.2
Portfolio Optimization
A.2.1
CVaR maximizing expected return with CVaR limit 1/N
Figure A.8: Actual Growth of portfolio value for CVaR model where expected re-
turn is maximized in the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:75==
A.2 Portfolio Optimization
65
Figure A.9: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where expected return is maxi-
mized in the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.10: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where expected return is max-
imized in the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:76==
66
A An Appendix
Figure A.11: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where expected return is max-
imized in the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.12: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where expected return is max-
imized in the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:77==
A.2 Portfolio Optimization
67
Figure A.13: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where expected return is max-
imized in the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.14: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where expected return is max-
imized in the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:78==
68
A An Appendix
Figure A.15: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where expected return is max-
imized in the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.16: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where expected return is max-
imized in the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:79==
A.2 Portfolio Optimization
69
Figure A.17: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where expected return is max-
imized in the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.18: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where expected return is max-
imized in the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:80==
70
A An Appendix
A.2.2
CVaR minimizing CVaR with expected return limit 1/N
Figure A.19: Actual Growth of portfolio value for CVaR model where CVaR is
minimized in the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:81==
A.2 Portfolio Optimization
71
Figure A.20: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where CVaR is minimized in
the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.21: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where CVaR is minimized in
the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:82==
72
A An Appendix
Figure A.22: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where CVaR is minimized in
the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.23: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where CVaR is minimized in
the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:83==
A.2 Portfolio Optimization
73
Figure A.24: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where CVaR is minimized in
the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.25: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where CVaR is minimized in
the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:84==
74
A An Appendix
Figure A.26: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where CVaR is minimized in
the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.27: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where CVaR is minimized in
the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:85==
A.2 Portfolio Optimization
75
Figure A.28: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where CVaR is minimized in
the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.29: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where CVaR is minimized in
the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:86==
76
A An Appendix
A.2.3
CVaR maximizing expected return with CVaR limit 1/N for
top 5
Figure A.30: Actual Growth of portfolio value for CVaR model where expected
return is minimized with limit on CVaR 1/N of top 5 assets in the
period from February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:87==
A.2 Portfolio Optimization
77
Figure A.31: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where expected return is min-
imized with limit on CVaR 1/N of top 5 assets in the period from
February 2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.32: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where expected return is min-
imized with limit on CVaR 1/N of top 5 assets in the period from
February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:88==
78
A An Appendix
Figure A.33: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where expected return is min-
imized with limit on CVaR 1/N of top 5 assets in the period from
February 2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.34: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where expected return is min-
imized with limit on CVaR 1/N of top 5 assets in the period from
February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:89==
A.2 Portfolio Optimization
79
Figure A.35: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where expected return is min-
imized with limit on CVaR 1/N of top 5 assets in the period from
February 2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.36: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where expected return is min-
imized with limit on CVaR 1/N of top 5 assets in the period from
February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:90==
80
A An Appendix
Figure A.37: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where expected return is min-
imized with limit on CVaR 1/N of top 5 assets in the period from
February 2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.38: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where expected return is min-
imized with limit on CVaR 1/N of top 5 assets in the period from
February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:91==
A.2 Portfolio Optimization
81
Figure A.39: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where expected return is min-
imized with limit on CVaR 1/N of top 5 assets in the period from
February 2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.40: Portfolio composition for CVaR model where expected return is min-
imized with limit on CVaR 1/N of top 5 assets in the period from
February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:92==
82
A An Appendix
A.2.4
Mean Reversion
Figure A.41: Actual value Growth of ETFs for the Mean reversion where long po-
sitions are allowed in the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:93==
A.2 Portfolio Optimization
83
Figure A.42: Actual value Growth of ETFs for the Mean reversion where long po-
sitions are allowed in the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.43: Actual value Growth of ETFs for the Mean reversion where long po-
sitions are allowed in the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:94==
84
A An Appendix
Figure A.44: Actual value Growth of ETFs for the Mean reversion where both long
and short positions are allowed in the period from February 2012 to
April 2018.
Figure A.45: Actual value Growth of ETFs for the Mean reversion where both long
and short positions are allowed in the period from February 2012 to
April 2018.
==PAGE:95==
A.2 Portfolio Optimization
85
Figure A.46: Actual value Growth of ETFs for the Mean reversion where both long
and short positions are allowed in the period from February 2012 to
April 2018.
Figure A.47: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:96==
86
A An Appendix
Figure A.48: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.49: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:97==
A.2 Portfolio Optimization
87
Figure A.50: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.51: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:98==
88
A An Appendix
Figure A.52: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.53: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:99==
A.2 Portfolio Optimization
89
Figure A.54: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.55: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:100==
90
A An Appendix
Figure A.56: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.57: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:101==
A.2 Portfolio Optimization
91
Figure A.58: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
A.2.5
Momentum
Figure A.59: Actual value Growth of ETFs for the Momentum where long positions
are allowed in the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:102==
92
A An Appendix
Figure A.60: Actual value Growth of ETFs for the Momentum where long positions
are allowed in the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.61: Actual value Growth of ETFs for the Momentum where long positions
are allowed in the period from February 2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:103==
A.2 Portfolio Optimization
93
Figure A.62: Actual value Growth of ETFs for the Momentum where both long and
short positions are allowed in the period from February 2012 to April
2018.
Figure A.63: Actual value Growth of ETFs for the Momentum where both long and
short positions are allowed in the period from February 2012 to April
2018.
==PAGE:104==
94
A An Appendix
Figure A.64: Actual value Growth of ETFs for the Momentum where both long and
short positions are allowed in the period from February 2012 to April
2018.
Figure A.65: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:105==
A.2 Portfolio Optimization
95
Figure A.66: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.67: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:106==
96
A An Appendix
Figure A.68: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.69: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:107==
A.2 Portfolio Optimization
97
Figure A.70: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.71: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:108==
98
A An Appendix
Figure A.72: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.73: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:109==
A.2 Portfolio Optimization
99
Figure A.74: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.75: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:110==
100
A An Appendix
Figure A.76: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
Figure A.77: ETF price with moving average of prices in the period from February
2012 to April 2018.
==PAGE:111==
A.3 GAMS code and python code models
101
A.3
GAMS code and python code models
A.3.1
CVaR maximizing expected return with CVaR limit 1/N
1 $TITLE Portfolio Optimization with monthly portfolio revision
2 $eolcom //
3 option iterlim=999999999;
// avoid limit on iterations
4 option reslim=300;
// timelimit for solver in sec.
5 option optcr=0.0;
// gap tolerance
6 option solprint=ON;
// include solution print in .lst file
7 option decimals=8;
8
9 $INCLUDE "Assets.inc"
10 display Tickers;
11 alias(Tickers,i);
12
13
14 $INCLUDE "Dates.inc"
15 display date;
16 alias(date,m);
17
18 set
19
scen /scen_1*scen_250/
20
sim /sim_1*sim_10/
21 ;
22
23 Parameter
24
month_scenarios(sim,m,scen,i)
25
actual_return(m,i)
26 ;
27
28 * Load monthly return scenarios
29 $GDXIN MonthReturnSim.gdx
30 $LOAD month_scenarios
31 $GDXIN
32
33 $GDXIN actual_return_month.gdx
34 $LOAD actual_return
35 $GDXIN
36
37 display actual_return, month_scenarios;
38 *$ontext
39 Scalars
40
budget
'Portfolio Budget'
41
alpha
'Confidence level'
42
pr
'Probability of each scenario'
43
bid_ask_spreed
44 ;
45
46 budget = 1;
47 Alpha = 0.95;
48 pr = 1/card(scen);
49 bid_ask_spreed = 0.001
50
==PAGE:112==
102
A An Appendix
51 Parameter
52
return_scen(scen,i) 'Return of scenarios scen for asset i'
53
CVaR_limit
'Limit CVaR to the CVaR of benchmark pension
fund'
54
x_previous(i)
'Holding of assets i in previous period'
55
portfolio_size
56
top_portfolio(i)
57
/
58
DWM
0
59
RYU
0.2
60
TIP
0
61
VTI
0.2
62
XLE
0
63
DBV
0
64
FXB
0
65
SHY
0
66
VDC
0.2
67
GLD
0
68
AGG
0
69
DLS
0.2
70
RHS
0.2
71 /
72 ;
73
74 Positive Variables
75
x(i)
'Holdings of assets i'
76
buy(i)
'Assets i bought'
77
sell(i)
'Assets i sold'
78
VaR_dev(scen) 'Measure of the deviation from VaR'
79 ;
80
81 Variables
82
VaR
'Value of Risk'
83
CVaR
'Conditinal Value of Risk'
84
loss(scen)
'Mesure of losses'
85
expected_return
'expected_return of the portfolio'
86 ;
87
88 Equations
89
portfolio_budget 'Equation defining the portfolio budget
constraints'
90
portfolio_balance(i) 'set equal in and out positions in assets'
91
portfolio_budget_initial
'budget constraint for first period'
92
portfolio_balance_initial(i) 'equal in and out positions first
period'
93
loss_def(scen)
'Equation defining the losses'
94
CVaR_def
'Equation defining the CVaR of the portfolio'
95
CVaR_con
'defining CVaR constraint'
96
VaR_dev_con(scen)
'Equation defining the VaR deviation
constraints'
97
final_portfolio_value 'Objective function'
98
expected_return_port 'Objective function'
99
equal_weight(i)
100
equal_weight_top(i)
101
x_over_zero(i)
==PAGE:113==
A.3 GAMS code and python code models
103
102 ;
103
104 portfolio_budget..
sum(i, buy(i)*(1 + bid_ask_spreed)) =E= sum(i, sell
(i)*
105
(1 - bid_ask_
spreed));
106 portfolio_balance(i)..
x(i) =E= x_previous(i) + buy(i) - sell(i);
107 portfolio_budget_initial..
budget =E= sum(i, x(i)*(1 + bid_ask_spreed));
108 loss_def(scen)..
loss(scen) =E= budget - sum(i, return_scen(scen,i)* x
(i));
109 CVaR_def..
CVaR =E= VaR + pr * sum(scen, VaR_dev(scen)) /
110
(1 - alpha);
111 CVaR_con..
CVaR =L= CVaR_limit;
112 equal_weight(i)..
x(i) =E= portfolio_size/card(i);
113 equal_weight_top(i)..
x(i) =E= top_portfolio(i);
114 VaR_dev_con(scen)..
VaR_dev(scen) =G= loss(scen) - VaR;
115 *x_over_zero(i)..
x(i) =G= 0;
116 expected_return_port..
expected_return =E= sum(scen, pr*(sum(i,
117
return_scen(scen,i)*x(i)*(1-bid_ask_spreed))));
118
119
120
121 MODEL initial_CVaR_max_return 'CVaR model first period'
122 / portfolio_budget_initial, loss_def, CVaR_def, CVaR_con,
123 VaR_dev_con, expected_return_port, portfolio_balance /;
124
125 MODEL CVaR_max_return 'CVaR model' /portfolio_budget, portfolio_balance,
126 loss_def, CVaR_def, CVaR_con, VaR_dev_con, expected_return_port /;
127
128 MODEl CVaR_min_CVaR 'CVaR min model' /loss_def, CVaR_def, VaR_dev_con,
129 equal_weight, expected_return_port /;
130
131 *MODEL CVaR_min_CVaR 'min CVaR' / /;
132
133
134 Parameter
135
max_return_x(sim,m,i)
136
max_return_buy(sim,m,i)
137
max_return_sell(sim,m,i)
138
max_return_expected(sim,m)
139
max_return_portfolio_value(sim,m)
140
max_return_CVaR(sim,m)
141
max_return_VaR(sim,m)
142
max_return_VaR_dev(sim,m,scen)
143
min_return_CVaR(sim,m)
144
min_return_VaR(sim,m)
145
max_return_scen(sim,m,scen)
146 ;
147
148 *CVaR_limit = 1;
149 portfolio_size = 1;
150 * Starting portfolio
151 *$ontext
152 loop(sim,
153
x_previous(i) = 1/card(i);
==PAGE:114==
104
A An Appendix
154
155
return_scen(scen,i) = month_scenarios(sim,'29-2-2012',scen,i);
156
157
SOLVE CVaR_min_CVaR MINIMIZE CVaR using LP;
158
min_return_CVaR(sim, '29-2-2012') = CVaR.l;
159
min_return_VaR(sim, '29-2-2012') = VaR.l;
160
CVaR_limit = CVaR.l;
161
162
SOLVE initial_CVaR_max_return MAXIMIZING expected_return Using LP;
163
164
max_return_x(sim,'29-2-2012',i) = x.l(i);
165
max_return_buy(sim,'29-2-2012',i) = buy.l(i);
166
max_return_sell(sim,'29-2-2012',i) = sell.l(i);
167
max_return_expected(sim, '29-2-2012') = expected_return.l;
168
max_return_portfolio_value(sim,'29-2-2012') = sum(i,
169
max_return_x(sim,'29-2-2012',i));
170
max_return_CVaR(sim,'29-2-2012') = CVaR.l;
171
max_return_VaR(sim, '29-2-2012') = VaR.l;
172
max_return_VaR_dev(sim, '29-2-2012', scen) = VaR_dev.l(scen);
173 *max_return_scen(sim,'29-2-2012', scen) = return.l(scen);
174
175 );
176
177 display max_return_x, max_return_buy, max_return_sell, max_return_expected,
178
max_return_portfolio_value, max_return_CVaR, min_return_CVaR,
179
max_return_VaR, min_return_VaR, max_return_VaR_dev;
180 *$offtext
181
182 *$ontext
183 loop(sim,
184
loop(m$(ord(m)>1),
185
return_scen(scen,i) = month_scenarios(sim,m,scen,i);
186
187
portfolio_size = sum(i, max_return_x(sim,m-1,i) *
188
actual_return(m-1,i));
189
top_portfolio(i) = top_portfolio(i) * actual_return(m-1,i);
190 *budget = sum(i, top_portfolio(i));
191
budget = portfolio_size;
192
solve CVaR_min_CVaR MINIMIZE CVaR using LP;
193
min_return_CVaR(sim,m) = CVaR.l;
194
min_return_VaR(sim,m) = VaR.l;
195
CVaR_limit = CVaR.l;
196
197
x_previous(i) = max_return_x(sim,m-1,i) * actual_return(m
-1,i);
198
budget = sum(i, x_previous(i));
199
solve CVaR_max_return MAXIMIZING expected_return Using LP;
200
201
max_return_x(sim,m,i) = x.l(i);
202
max_return_buy(sim,m,i) = buy.l(i);
203
max_return_sell(sim,m,i) = sell.l(i);
204
max_return_expected(sim,m) = expected_return.l;
205
max_return_portfolio_value(sim,m) = sum(i,
206
max_return_x(sim,m,
i));
==PAGE:115==
A.3 GAMS code and python code models
105
207
max_return_CVaR(sim,m) = CVaR.l;
208
max_return_VaR(sim,m) = VaR.l;
209
max_return_VaR_dev(sim,m,scen) = VaR_dev.l(scen);
210
211
212
);
213 );
214
215 display max_return_x, max_return_buy, max_return_sell, max_return_expected,
216
max_return_portfolio_value, max_return_CVaR, min_return_CVaR,
217
max_return_VaR, min_return_VaR;
218 *$offtext
219
220 *$ontext
221 parameters
222 SummaryReportMix(*,*,*)
223 SummaryReportValue(*,*)
224 SummaryReportCVaR(*,*)
225 SummaryReportCVaRLimit(*,*)
226 ;
227
228 SummaryReportMix(sim,m,i) = max_return_x(sim,m,i);
229 SummaryReportValue(sim,m) = max_return_portfolio_value(sim,m);
230 SummaryReportCVaR(sim,m) = max_return_CVaR(sim,m);
231 SummaryReportCVaRLimit(sim,m) = min_return_CVaR(sim,m);
232
233 EXECUTE_UNLOAD 'SummaryMix.gdx', SummaryReportMix;
234 EXECUTE 'gdxxrw.exe SummaryMix.gdx O=CVaR_result_max_return_with_cost.xls
par=SummaryReportMix rng=CVaRMix!a1';
235
236 EXECUTE_UNLOAD 'SummaryValue.gdx', SummaryReportValue;
237 EXECUTE 'gdxxrw.exe SummaryValue.gdx O=CVaR_result_max_return_with_cost.xls
par=SummaryReportValue rng=CVaRValue!a1';
238
239 EXECUTE_UNLOAD 'SummaryCVaR.gdx', SummaryReportCVaR;
240 EXECUTE 'gdxxrw.exe SummaryCVaR.gdx O=CVaR_result_max_return_with_cost.xls
par=SummaryReportCVaR rng=CVaR!a1';
241
242 EXECUTE_UNLOAD 'SummaryCVaRLimit.gdx', SummaryReportCVaRLimit;
243 EXECUTE 'gdxxrw.exe SummaryCVaRLimit.gdx O=CVaR_result_max_return_with_cost.
xls par=SummaryReportCVaRLimit rng=CVaRLimit!a1';
244
245
246 *$offtext
.
A.3.2
CVaR minimizing CVaR with expected return limit 1/N
1 $TITLE Portfolio Optimization with monthly portfolio revision
2 $eolcom //
3 option iterlim=999999999;
// avoid limit on iterations
4 option reslim=300;
// timelimit for solver in sec.
==PAGE:116==
106
A An Appendix
5 option optcr=0.0;
// gap tolerance
6 option solprint=ON;
// include solution print in .lst file
7 option decimals=8;
8
9 $INCLUDE "Assets.inc"
10 display Asset, Tickers;
11 alias(Tickers,i);
12
13
14 $INCLUDE "Dates.inc"
15 display date;
16 alias(date,m);
17
18 set
19
scen /scen_1*scen_250/
20
sim /sim_1*sim_10/
21 ;
22
23 Parameter
24
month_scenarios(sim,m,scen,i)
25
actual_return(m,i)
26 ;
27
28 * Load monthly return scenarios
29 $GDXIN MonthReturnSim.gdx
30 $LOAD month_scenarios
31 $GDXIN
32
33 $GDXIN actual_return_month.gdx
34 $LOAD actual_return
35 $GDXIN
36
37 display actual_return, month_scenarios;
38 *$ontext
39 Scalars
40
budget
'Portfolio Budget'
41
alpha
'Confidence level'
42
pr
'Probability of each scenario'
43
bid_ask_spreed
44 ;
45
46 budget = 1;
47 Alpha = 0.95;
48 pr = 1/card(scen);
49 bid_ask_spreed = 0.001
50
51 Parameter
52
return_scen(scen,i) 'Return of scenarios scen for asset i'
53
CVaR_limit
'Limit CVaR to the CVaR of benchmark pension
fund'
54
x_previous(i)
'Holding of assets i in previous period'
55
portfolio_size
56
period(m)
57
count
58
return_limit
==PAGE:117==
A.3 GAMS code and python code models
107
59
top_portfolio(i)
60
/
61
DWM
0
62
RYU
0.2
63
TIP
0
64
VTI
0.2
65
XLE
0
66
DBV
0
67
FXB
0
68
SHY
0
69
VDC
0.2
70
GLD
0
71
AGG
0
72
DLS
0.2
73
RHS
0.2
74
/
75 ;
76
77 Positive Variables
78
x(i)
'Holdings of assets i'
79
buy(i)
'Assets i bought'
80
sell(i)
'Assets i sold'
81
VaR_dev(scen) 'Measure of the deviation from VaR'
82 ;
83
84 Variables
85
VaR
'Value of Risk'
86
CVaR
'Conditinal Value of Risk'
87
loss(scen)
'Mesure of losses'
88
expected_return
'expected_return of the portfolio'
89 ;
90
91 Equations
92
portfolio_budget 'Equation defining the portfolio budget
constraints'
93
portfolio_balance(i) 'set equal in and out positions in assets'
94
portfolio_budget_initial
'budget constraint for first period'
95
portfolio_balance_initial(i) 'equal in and out positions first
period'
96
loss_def(scen)
'Equation defining the losses'
97
CVaR_def
'Equation defining the CVaR of the portfolio'
98
CVaR_con
'defining CVaR constraint'
99
VaR_dev_con(scen)
'Equation defining the VaR deviation
constraints'
100
final_portfolio_value 'Objective function'
101
expected_return_port 'Objective function'
102
equal_weight(i)
103
equal_weight_top(i)
104
expected_return_con
105 ;
106
107 portfolio_budget..
sum(i, buy(i)*(1 + bid_ask_spreed)) =E= sum(i, sell
(i)*
108
(1 - bid_ask_
spreed));
==PAGE:118==
108
A An Appendix
109 portfolio_balance(i)..
x(i) =E= x_previous(i) + buy(i) - sell(i);
110 portfolio_budget_initial..
budget =E= sum(i, x(i)*(1 + bid_ask_spreed));
111 loss_def(scen)..
loss(scen) =E= budget - sum(i, return_scen(scen,i)* x
(i));
112 CVaR_def..
CVaR =E= VaR + sum(scen, pr * VaR_dev(scen)) /
113
(1 - alpha);
114 CVaR_con..
CVaR =L= CVaR_limit;
115 *equal_weight(i)..
x(i) =E= 1/card(i);
116 equal_weight(i)..
x(i) =E= portfolio_size/card(i);
117 equal_weight_top(i)..
x(i) =E= top_portfolio(i);
118 VaR_dev_con(scen)..
VaR_dev(scen) =G= loss(scen) - VaR;
119 expected_return_port..
expected_return =E= sum(scen, pr*(sum(i,
120
return_scen(scen,i)*x(i)*(1-bid_ask_spreed))));
121 expected_return_con.. return_limit =L= expected_return;
122
123
124 MODEL initial_CVaR_min_CVaR 'CVaR model first period'
125 / portfolio_budget_initial, loss_def, CVaR_def, expected_return_con,
126 VaR_dev_con, expected_return_port, portfolio_balance /;
127
128 MODEL CVaR_min_CVaR 'CVaR model' /portfolio_budget, portfolio_balance,
129 loss_def, CVaR_def, expected_return_con, VaR_dev_con, expected_return_port /
;
130
131 MODEl CVaR_max_return_n_port 'CVaR max return model' /loss_def, CVaR_def,
132 VaR_dev_con, equal_weight, expected_return_port /;
133
134 *MODEL CVaR_min_CVaR 'min CVaR' / /;
135
136
137 Parameter
138
max_return_x(sim,m,i)
139
max_return_buy(sim,m,i)
140
max_return_sell(sim,m,i)
141
max_return_expected(sim,m)
142
max_return_portfolio_value(sim,m)
143
max_return_CVaR(sim,m)
144
max_return_VaR(sim,m)
145
max_return_VaR_dev(sim,m,scen)
146
min_return_CVaR(sim,m)
147
min_return_VaR(sim,m)
148
min_return_expected(sim,m)
149
max_return_scen(sim,m,scen)
150 ;
151
152 *CVaR_limit = 1;
153 portfolio_size = 1;
154 * Starting portfolio
155
156 *sim = 'sim_1';
157 *$ontext
158 loop(sim,
159
x_previous(i) = 1/card(i);
160
161
return_scen(scen,i) = month_scenarios(sim,'29-2-2012',scen,i);
==PAGE:119==
A.3 GAMS code and python code models
109
162
163
SOLVE CVaR_max_return_n_port MAXIMIZE expected_return using LP;
164
min_return_CVaR(sim, '29-2-2012') = CVaR.l;
165
min_return_VaR(sim, '29-2-2012') = VaR.l;
166
min_return_expected(sim, '29-2-2012') = expected_return.l;
167
return_limit = expected_return.l;
168
169
SOLVE initial_CVaR_min_CVaR MINIMIZING CVaR Using LP;
170
171
max_return_x(sim,'29-2-2012',i) = x.l(i);
172
max_return_buy(sim,'29-2-2012',i) = buy.l(i);
173
max_return_sell(sim,'29-2-2012',i) = sell.l(i);
174
max_return_expected(sim, '29-2-2012') = expected_return.l;
175
max_return_portfolio_value(sim,'29-2-2012') = sum(i,
176
max_return_x(sim,'29-2-2012',i));
177
max_return_CVaR(sim,'29-2-2012') = CVaR.l;
178
max_return_VaR(sim, '29-2-2012') = VaR.l;
179
max_return_VaR_dev(sim, '29-2-2012', scen) = VaR_dev.l(scen);
180
181 );
182
183 display max_return_x, max_return_buy, max_return_sell, max_return_expected,
184
max_return_portfolio_value, min_return_expected, max_return_CVaR,
min_return_CVaR,
185
max_return_VaR, min_return_VaR, max_return_VaR_dev;
186 *$offtext
187
188 *$ontext
189 loop(sim,
190
loop(m$(ord(m)>1),
191
return_scen(scen,i) = month_scenarios(sim,m,scen,i);
192
193
portfolio_size = sum(i, max_return_x(sim,m-1,i) *
194
actual_return(m-1,i));
195
top_portfolio(i) = top_portfolio(i) * actual_return(m-1,i);
196 *budget = sum(i, top_portfolio(i));
197
budget = portfolio_size;
198
SOLVE CVaR_max_return_n_port MAXIMIZE expected_return using
LP;
199
min_return_CVaR(sim,m) = CVaR.l;
200
min_return_VaR(sim,m) = VaR.l;
201
min_return_expected(sim, m) = expected_return.l;
202
return_limit = expected_return.l;
203
204
x_previous(i) = max_return_x(sim,m-1,i) * actual_return(m
-1,i);
205
budget = sum(i, x_previous(i));
206
SOLVE CVaR_min_CVaR MINIMIZING CVaR Using LP;
207
208
max_return_x(sim,m,i) = x.l(i);
209
max_return_buy(sim,m,i) = buy.l(i);
210
max_return_sell(sim,m,i) = sell.l(i);
211
max_return_expected(sim,m) = expected_return.l;
212
max_return_portfolio_value(sim,m) = sum(i,
==PAGE:120==
110
A An Appendix
213
max_return_x(sim,m,
i));
214
max_return_CVaR(sim,m) = CVaR.l;
215
max_return_VaR(sim,m) = VaR.l;
216
max_return_VaR_dev(sim,m,scen) = VaR_dev.l(scen);
217
218
);
219 );
220
221 display max_return_x, max_return_buy, max_return_sell, max_return_expected,
222
min_return_expected, max_return_portfolio_value, max_return_CVaR,
223
min_return_CVaR, max_return_VaR, min_return_VaR;
224 *$offtext
225
226 *$ontext
227 parameters
228 SummaryReportMix(*,*,*)
229 SummaryReportValue(*,*)
230 SummaryReportCVaR(*,*)
231 SummaryReportExpRet(*,*)
232 SummaryReportExpRetLimit(*,*)
233 ;
234
235 SummaryReportMix(sim,m,i) = max_return_x(sim,m,i);
236 SummaryReportValue(sim,m) = max_return_portfolio_value(sim,m);
237 SummaryReportCVaR(sim,m) = max_return_CVaR(sim,m);
238 SummaryReportExpRet(sim,m) = max_return_expected(sim,m);
239 SummaryReportExpRetLimit(sim,m) = min_return_expected(sim,m);
240
241 EXECUTE_UNLOAD 'SummaryMix.gdx', SummaryReportMix;
242 EXECUTE 'gdxxrw.exe SummaryMix.gdx O=CVaR_result_min_CVaR_with_cost.xls par=
SummaryReportMix rng=CVaRMix!a1';
243
244 EXECUTE_UNLOAD 'SummaryValue.gdx', SummaryReportValue;
245 EXECUTE 'gdxxrw.exe SummaryValue.gdx O=CVaR_result_min_CVaR_with_cost.xls
par=SummaryReportValue rng=CVaRValue!a1';
246
247 EXECUTE_UNLOAD 'SummaryCVaR.gdx', SummaryReportCVaR;
248 EXECUTE 'gdxxrw.exe SummaryCVaR.gdx O=CVaR_result_min_CVaR_with_cost.xls par
=SummaryReportCVaR rng=CVaR!a1';
249
250 EXECUTE_UNLOAD 'SummaryExpRet.gdx', SummaryReportExpRet;
251 EXECUTE 'gdxxrw.exe SummaryExpRet.gdx O=CVaR_result_min_CVaR_with_cost.xls
par=SummaryReportExpRet rng=CVaRExpRet!a1';
252
253 EXECUTE_UNLOAD 'SummaryExpRetLimit.gdx', SummaryReportExpRetLimit;
254 EXECUTE 'gdxxrw.exe SummaryExpRetLimit.gdx O=CVaR_result_min_CVaR_with_cost.
xls par=SummaryReportExpRetLimit rng=CVaRExpRetLim!a1';
255
256
257 *$offtext
.
==PAGE:121==
A.3 GAMS code and python code models
111
A.3.3
CVaR maximizing expected return with CVaR limit 1/N for
top 5
1 $TITLE Portfolio Optimization with monthly portfolio revision
2 $eolcom //
3 option iterlim=999999999;
// avoid limit on iterations
4 option reslim=300;
// timelimit for solver in sec.
5 option optcr=0.0;
// gap tolerance
6 option solprint=ON;
// include solution print in .lst file
7 option decimals=8;
8
9 $INCLUDE "AssetsTop5.inc"
10 display Tickers;
11 alias(Tickers,i);
12
13
14 $INCLUDE "Dates.inc"
15 display date;
16 alias(date,m);
17
18 set
19
scen /scen_1*scen_250/
20
sim /sim_1*sim_10/
21 ;
22
23 Parameter
24
month_scenarios(sim,m,scen,i)
25
actual_return(m,i)
26 ;
27
28 * Load monthly return scenarios
29 $GDXIN MonthReturnSimTop5.gdx
30 $LOAD month_scenarios
31 $GDXIN
32
33 $GDXIN actual_return_month_top_5.gdx
34 $LOAD actual_return
35 $GDXIN
36
37 display actual_return, month_scenarios;
38 *$ontext
39 Scalars
40
budget
'Portfolio Budget'
41
alpha
'Confidence level'
42
pr
'Probability of each scenario'
43
bid_ask_spreed
44 ;
45
46 budget = 1;
47 Alpha = 0.95;
48 pr = 1/card(scen);
49 bid_ask_spreed = 0.001
50
51 Parameter
==PAGE:122==
112
A An Appendix
52
return_scen(scen,i) 'Return of scenarios scen for asset i'
53
CVaR_limit
'Limit CVaR to the CVaR of benchmark pension
fund'
54
x_previous(i)
'Holding of assets i in previous period'
55
portfolio_size
56 ;
57
58 Positive Variables
59
x(i)
'Holdings of assets i'
60
buy(i)
'Assets i bought'
61
sell(i)
'Assets i sold'
62
VaR_dev(scen) 'Measure of the deviation from VaR'
63 ;
64
65 Variables
66
VaR
'Value of Risk'
67
CVaR
'Conditinal Value of Risk'
68
return(scen)
'Mesure of losses'
69
expected_return
'expected_return of the portfolio'
70 ;
71
72 Equations
73
portfolio_budget 'Equation defining the portfolio budget
constraints'
74
portfolio_balance(i) 'set equal in and out positions in assets'
75
portfolio_budget_initial
'budget constraint for first period'
76
portfolio_balance_initial(i) 'equal in and out positions first
period'
77
return_def(scen)
'Equation defining the losses'
78
CVaR_def
'Equation defining the CVaR of the portfolio'
79
CVaR_con
'defining CVaR constraint'
80
VaR_dev_con(scen)
'Equation defining the VaR deviation
constraints'
81
final_portfolio_value 'Objective function'
82
expected_return_port 'Objective function'
83
equal_weight(i)
84
equal_weight_top(i)
85
x_over_zero(i)
86 ;
87
88 portfolio_budget..
sum(i, buy(i)*(1 + bid_ask_spreed)) =E= sum(i, sell
(i)*
89
(1 - bid_ask_
spreed));
90 portfolio_balance(i)..
x(i) =E= x_previous(i) + buy(i) - sell(i);
91 portfolio_budget_initial..
budget =E= sum(i, x(i)*(1 + bid_ask_spreed));
92 return_def(scen)..
return(scen) =E= sum(i, return_scen(scen,i)* x(i));
93 CVaR_def..
CVaR =E= VaR + pr * sum(scen, VaR_dev(scen)) /
94
(1 - alpha);
95 CVaR_con..
CVaR =L= CVaR_limit;
96 equal_weight(i)..
x(i) =E= portfolio_size/card(i);
97 *equal_weight_top(i)..
x(i) =E= top_portfolio(i);
98 VaR_dev_con(scen)..
VaR - return(scen) + VaR_dev(scen) =G= 0;
99 *x_over_zero(i)..
x(i) =G= 0;
100 expected_return_port..
expected_return =E= sum(scen, pr*(sum(i,
==PAGE:123==
A.3 GAMS code and python code models
113
101
return_scen(scen,i)*x(i)*(1-bid_ask_spreed))));
102
103
104
105 MODEL initial_CVaR_max_return 'CVaR model first period'
106 / portfolio_budget_initial, return_def, CVaR_def, CVaR_con,
107 VaR_dev_con, expected_return_port, portfolio_balance /;
108
109 MODEL CVaR_max_return 'CVaR model' /portfolio_budget, portfolio_balance,
110 return_def, CVaR_def, CVaR_con, VaR_dev_con, expected_return_port /;
111
112 MODEl CVaR_min_CVaR 'CVaR min model' /return_def, CVaR_def, VaR_dev_con,
113 equal_weight, expected_return_port /;
114
115 *MODEL CVaR_min_CVaR 'min CVaR' / /;
116
117
118 Parameter
119
max_return_x(sim,m,i)
120
max_return_buy(sim,m,i)
121
max_return_sell(sim,m,i)
122
max_return_expected(sim,m)
123
max_return_portfolio_value(sim,m)
124
max_return_CVaR(sim,m)
125
max_return_VaR(sim,m)
126
max_return_VaR_dev(sim,m,scen)
127
min_return_CVaR(sim,m)
128
min_return_VaR(sim,m)
129
max_return_scen(sim,m,scen)
130 ;
131
132 *CVaR_limit = 1;
133 portfolio_size = 1;
134 * Starting portfolio
135 *$ontext
136 loop(sim,
137
x_previous(i) = 1/card(i);
138
139
return_scen(scen,i) = month_scenarios(sim,'29-2-2012',scen,i);
140
141
SOLVE CVaR_min_CVaR MINIMIZE CVaR using LP;
142
min_return_CVaR(sim, '29-2-2012') = CVaR.l;
143
min_return_VaR(sim, '29-2-2012') = VaR.l;
144
CVaR_limit = CVaR.l;
145
146
SOLVE initial_CVaR_max_return MAXIMIZING expected_return Using LP;
147
148
max_return_x(sim,'29-2-2012',i) = x.l(i);
149
max_return_buy(sim,'29-2-2012',i) = buy.l(i);
150
max_return_sell(sim,'29-2-2012',i) = sell.l(i);
151
max_return_expected(sim, '29-2-2012') = expected_return.l;
152
max_return_portfolio_value(sim,'29-2-2012') = sum(i,
153
max_return_x(sim,'29-2-2012',i));
154
max_return_CVaR(sim,'29-2-2012') = CVaR.l;
155
max_return_VaR(sim, '29-2-2012') = VaR.l;
==PAGE:124==
114
A An Appendix
156
max_return_VaR_dev(sim, '29-2-2012', scen) = VaR_dev.l(scen);
157
max_return_scen(sim,'29-2-2012', scen) = return.l(scen);
158
159 );
160
161 display max_return_x, max_return_buy, max_return_sell, max_return_expected,
162
max_return_portfolio_value, max_return_CVaR, min_return_CVaR,
163
max_return_VaR, min_return_VaR, max_return_VaR_dev, max_return_scen
;
164 *$offtext
165
166 *$ontext
167 loop(sim,
168
loop(m$(ord(m)>1),
169
return_scen(scen,i) = month_scenarios(sim,m,scen,i);
170
171
portfolio_size = sum(i, max_return_x(sim,m-1,i) *
172
actual_return(m-1,i));
173
174
solve CVaR_min_CVaR MINIMIZE CVaR using LP;
175
min_return_CVaR(sim,m) = CVaR.l;
176
min_return_VaR(sim,m) = VaR.l;
177
CVaR_limit = CVaR.l;
178
179
x_previous(i) = max_return_x(sim,m-1,i) * actual_return(m
-1,i);
180
solve CVaR_max_return MAXIMIZING expected_return Using LP;
181
182
max_return_x(sim,m,i) = x.l(i);
183
max_return_buy(sim,m,i) = buy.l(i);
184
max_return_sell(sim,m,i) = sell.l(i);
185
max_return_expected(sim,m) = expected_return.l;
186
max_return_portfolio_value(sim,m) = sum(i,
187
max_return_x(sim,m,
i));
188
max_return_CVaR(sim,m) = CVaR.l;
189
max_return_VaR(sim,m) = VaR.l;
190
max_return_VaR_dev(sim,m,scen) = VaR_dev.l(scen);
191
192
193
);
194 );
195
196 display max_return_x, max_return_buy, max_return_sell, max_return_expected,
197
max_return_portfolio_value, max_return_CVaR, min_return_CVaR,
198
max_return_VaR, min_return_VaR;
199 *$offtext
200
201 parameters
202 SummaryReportMix(*,*,*)
203 SummaryReportValue(*,*)
204 SummaryReportCVaR(*,*)
205 SummaryReportCVaRLimit(*,*)
206 ;
207
==PAGE:125==
A.3 GAMS code and python code models
115
208 SummaryReportMix(sim,m,i) = max_return_x(sim,m,i);
209 SummaryReportValue(sim,m) = max_return_portfolio_value(sim,m);
210 SummaryReportCVaR(sim,m) = max_return_CVaR(sim,m);
211 SummaryReportCVaRLimit(sim,m) = min_return_CVaR(sim,m);
212
213 EXECUTE_UNLOAD 'SummaryMix.gdx', SummaryReportMix;
214 EXECUTE 'gdxxrw.exe SummaryMix.gdx O=CVaR_result_max_return_top_5_with_cost.
xls par=SummaryReportMix rng=CVaRMix!a1';
215
216 EXECUTE_UNLOAD 'SummaryValue.gdx', SummaryReportValue;
217 EXECUTE 'gdxxrw.exe SummaryValue.gdx O=CVaR_result_max_return_top_5_with_
cost.xls par=SummaryReportValue rng=CVaRValue!a1';
218
219 EXECUTE_UNLOAD 'SummaryCVaR.gdx', SummaryReportCVaR;
220 EXECUTE 'gdxxrw.exe SummaryCVaR.gdx O=CVaR_result_max_return_top_5_with_cost
.xls par=SummaryReportCVaR rng=CVaR!a1';
221
222 EXECUTE_UNLOAD 'SummaryCVaRLimit.gdx', SummaryReportCVaRLimit;
223 EXECUTE 'gdxxrw.exe SummaryCVaRLimit.gdx O=CVaR_result_max_return_top_5_with
_cost.xls par=SummaryReportCVaRLimit rng=CVaRLimit!a1';
224
225
226 *$offtext
.
A.3.4
Mean Reversion
1 import numpy as np
2 import pandas as pd
3 import datetime as dt
4 import plotly.plotly as py
5 import plotly.tools as tls
6 import plotly.graph_objs as go
7 import datetime as dt
8 import seaborn
9 import copy
10 from plotly.offline import download_plotlyjs , init_notebook_mode , plot,
iplot
11 from dateutil.relativedelta import *
12
13 init_notebook_mode(connected=True)
14
15 df = pd.read_csv(r'C:\Users\hafth\Documents\DTU\master_thesis\python\
etf_data.csv')
16 df.index = df["Unnamed: 0.1"].rename(index='index')
17 assets = ['AGG', 'DBV', 'DLS', 'DWM','FXB','GLD','RHS','RYU','SHY','TIP','
VDC','VTI','XLE']
18 df = df.drop(columns=['Unnamed: 0.1', 'Unnamed: 0'])
19 df.index = df.index.map(lambda x: dt.datetime.strptime(x, '%Y-%m-%d').date()
)
20 df = df.drop_duplicates()
21
==PAGE:126==
116
A An Appendix
22 def moving_ave_meanrev(df,etf):
23
df_etf = pd.DataFrame(index=df.loc[(df.index >= dt.date(2012,2,1)) & (df
.index <=dt.date(2018,4,30))].index,
24
columns=['price', '10_mean', '30_mean'])
25
df_etf['price'] = df.loc[:,etf]
26
df_etf['10_mean'] = df.loc[:,etf].rolling(10).mean()
27
df_etf['30_mean'] = df.loc[:,etf].rolling(30).mean()
28
return df_etf
29
30 etf_dict_meanrev = dict()
31 for col in df.columns:
32
etf_dict_meanrev[col] = moving_ave_meanrev(df, col)
33
34 etf_dict_meanrev_long_short = copy.deepcopy(etf_dict_meanrev)
35 for key, value in etf_dict_meanrev_long_short.items():
36
value['ratio'] = (value.loc[:,'30_mean']-value.loc[:,'10_mean'])/value.
loc[:,'30_mean']
37
value['long'] = False
38
value['short'] = False
39
40
for date in value.index:
41
42
if value.loc[date, 'ratio'] > 0:
43
value.loc[date, 'long'] = True
44
if value.loc[date, 'ratio'] < 0:
45
value.loc[date, 'short'] = True
46
pos_date = value.index.get_loc(date)
47
if date >= dt.date(2012,2,22):
48
if value.loc[date, 'long'] == True and (value.iloc[pos_date, 0]
<= value.iloc[(pos_date - 5), 0]
49
>= value.iloc[(pos_date
- 10), 0]):
50
value.loc[date, 'long'] = False
51
if value.loc[date, 'short'] == True and (value.iloc[pos_date, 0]
>= value.iloc[(pos_date - 5), 0]
52
>= value.iloc[(pos_date
- 10), 0]):
53
value.loc[date, 'short'] = False
54
if value.loc[date, 'long'] == True or (value.iloc[pos_date, 4] ==
False and value.iloc[(pos_date -1), 4] == True):
55
value.loc[date, 'long_price'] = value.loc[date, 'price']
56
if value.loc[date, 'short'] == True or (value.iloc[pos_date, 5] ==
False and value.iloc[(pos_date -1), 5] == True):
57
value.loc[date, 'short_price'] = value.loc[date, 'price']
58
59
value['long_return'] = np.log(value.long_price/value.long_price.shift())
60
value['short_return'] = np.log(value.short_price/value.short_price.shift
())
61
for date in value.index:
62
pos_date = value.index.get_loc(date)
63
if value.iloc[pos_date, 14] == 0 and value.iloc[(pos_date - 1), 14]
!= 0:
64
value.iloc[(pos_date - 1), 14] *= 1.001
65
if value.iloc[pos_date, 14] != 0 and value.iloc[(pos_date - 1), 14]
== 0:
==PAGE:127==
A.3 GAMS code and python code models
117
66
value.iloc[pos_date, 14] *= 0.999
67
if value.iloc[pos_date, 13] == 0 and value.iloc[(pos_date - 1), 13]
!= 0:
68
value.iloc[(pos_date -1), 13] *= 0.999
69
elif value.iloc[pos_date, 13] != 0 and value.iloc[(pos_date - 1),
13] == 0:
70
value.iloc[(pos_date -1), 13] *= 1.001
71
72 assets = list(etf_dict_meanrev_long_short.keys())
73 mean_rev_long_short_return = pd.DataFrame(index=etf_dict_meanrev_long_short[
'AGG'].index, columns= assets)
74 mean_rev_long_short_return['mean_rev_long_short'] = 0
75 mean_rev_long_return = pd.DataFrame(index=etf_dict_meanrev_long_short['AGG'
].index, columns= assets)
76 mean_rev_long_return['mean_rev_long'] = 0
77
78 for asset in assets:
79
80
# long only
81
etf_df = etf_dict_meanrev_long_short[asset]
82
etf_df = etf_df.fillna(0)
83
mean_rev_long_return[asset] = etf_df.long_return
84
mean_rev_long_return['mean_rev_long'] += mean_rev_long_return[asset]/
mean_rev_long_return.shape[1]
85
86
# long & short
87
etf_df = etf_dict_meanrev_long_short[asset]
88
etf_df = etf_df.fillna(0)
89
mean_rev_long_short_return[asset] = etf_df.long_return + (-etf_df.
short_return)
90
mean_rev_long_short_return['mean_rev_long_short'] +=
mean_rev_long_short_return[asset]/mean_rev_long_short_return.shape
[1]
91 mean_rev_to_csv = pd.concat([mean_rev_long_short_return.loc[:,['
mean_rev_long_short']],
92
mean_rev_long_return.loc[:,['mean_rev_long']]],
axis=1)
93
94 mean_rev_to_csv.to_csv(r'C:\Users\hafth\Documents\DTU\master_thesis\Python\
mean_rev_return.csv', sep=';')
.
A.3.5
Momentum
1 import numpy as np
2 import pandas as pd
3 import datetime as dt
4 import plotly.plotly as py
5 import plotly.tools as tls
6 import plotly.graph_objs as go
7 import datetime as dt
8 import seaborn
==PAGE:128==
118
A An Appendix
9 import copy
10 from plotly.offline import download_plotlyjs , init_notebook_mode , plot,
iplot
11 from dateutil.relativedelta import *
12
13 init_notebook_mode(connected=True)
14
15 df = pd.read_csv(r'C:\Users\hafth\Documents\DTU\master_thesis\python\
etf_data.csv')
16 df.index = df["Unnamed: 0.1"].rename(index='index')
17 assets = ['AGG', 'DBV', 'DLS', 'DWM','FXB','GLD','RHS','RYU','SHY','TIP','
VDC','VTI','XLE']
18 df = df.drop(columns=['Unnamed: 0.1', 'Unnamed: 0'])
19 df.index = df.index.map(lambda x: dt.datetime.strptime(x, '%Y-%m-%d').date()
)
20 df = df.drop_duplicates()
21
22 def moving_ave_momentum(df,etf):
23
#df = df.loc[df.index >= dt.date(2018,2,1)]
24
df_etf = pd.DataFrame(index=df.loc[(df.index >= dt.date(2012,2,1)) & (df
.index <=dt.date(2018,4,30))].index,
25
columns=['price', '30_mean', '150_mean'])
26
df_etf['price'] = df.loc[:,etf]
27
df_etf['30_mean'] = df.loc[:,etf].rolling(30).mean()
28
df_etf['150_mean'] = df.loc[:,etf].rolling(150).mean()
29
30
#df_etf['price'] = df_etf[etf]
31
#df_etf['30-day ma'] = df_30.loc[:,etf]
32
#df_etf['150-day ma'] = df_150.loc[:,etf]
33
#df_etf_2012 = df_etf.loc[df_etf.index > '2012-01-31']
34
return df_etf
35
36 #print(moving_ave_momentum(df, 'AGG'))
37 etf_dict_momentum = dict()
38 for col in df.columns:
39
etf_dict_momentum[col] = moving_ave_momentum(df, col)
40
41 def moving_ave_momentum(df,etf):
42
df_etf = pd.DataFrame(index=df.loc[(df.index >= dt.date(2012,2,1)) & (df
.index <=dt.date(2018,4,30))].index,
43
columns=['price', '30_mean', '150_mean'])
44
df_etf['price'] = df.loc[:,etf]
45
df_etf['30_mean'] = df.loc[:,etf].rolling(30).mean()
46
df_etf['150_mean'] = df.loc[:,etf].rolling(150).mean()
47
return df_etf
48
49 etf_dict_momentum = dict()
50 for col in df.columns:
51
etf_dict_momentum[col] = moving_ave_momentum(df, col)
52
53 etf_dict_momentum_long_short = copy.deepcopy(etf_dict_momentum)
54 for key, value in etf_dict_momentum_long_short.items():
55
value['ratio'] = (value.loc[:,'30_mean']-value.loc[:,'150_mean'])/value.
loc[:,'30_mean']
56
value['long'] = False
==PAGE:129==
A.3 GAMS code and python code models
119
57
value['short'] = False
58
59
for date in value.index:
60
61
if value.loc[date, 'ratio'] > 0:
62
value.loc[date, 'long'] = True
63
if value.loc[date, 'ratio'] < 0:
64
value.loc[date, 'short'] = True
65
pos_date = value.index.get_loc(date)
66
if date >= dt.date(2012,2,22):
67
if value.loc[date, 'long'] == True and (value.iloc[pos_date, 0]
<= value.iloc[(pos_date - 5), 0]):
68
value.loc[date, 'long'] = False
69
if value.loc[date, 'short'] == True and (value.iloc[pos_date, 0]
>= value.iloc[(pos_date - 5), 0]):
70
value.loc[date, 'short'] = False
71
if value.loc[date, 'long'] == True or (value.iloc[pos_date, 4] ==
False and value.iloc[(pos_date -1), 4] == True):
72
value.loc[date, 'long_price'] = value.loc[date, 'price']
73
if value.loc[date, 'short'] == True or (value.iloc[pos_date, 5] ==
False and value.iloc[(pos_date -1), 5] == True):
74
value.loc[date, 'short_price'] = value.loc[date, 'price']
75
76
value['long_return'] = np.log(value.long_price/value.long_price.shift())
77
value['short_return'] = np.log(value.short_price/value.short_price.shift
())
78
for date in value.index:
79
pos_date = value.index.get_loc(date)
80
if value.iloc[pos_date, 14] == 0 and value.iloc[(pos_date - 1), 14]
!= 0:
81
value.iloc[(pos_date - 1), 14] *= 1.001
82
if value.iloc[pos_date, 14] != 0 and value.iloc[(pos_date - 1), 14]
== 0:
83
value.iloc[pos_date, 14] *= 0.999
84
if value.iloc[pos_date, 13] == 0 and value.iloc[(pos_date - 1), 13]
!= 0:
85
value.iloc[(pos_date -1), 13] *= 0.999
86
elif value.iloc[pos_date, 13] != 0 and value.iloc[(pos_date - 1),
13] == 0:
87
value.iloc[(pos_date -1), 13] *= 1.001
88
89 assets = list(etf_dict_momentum_long_short.keys())
90 momentum_long_short_return = pd.DataFrame(index=etf_dict_momentum_long_short
['AGG'].index, columns= assets)
91 momentum_long_short_return['momentum_long_short'] = 0
92 momentum_long_return = pd.DataFrame(index=etf_dict_momentum_long_short['AGG'
].index, columns= assets)
93 momentum_long_return['momentum_long'] = 0
94
95 for asset in assets:
96
97
# long only
98
etf_df = etf_dict_momentum_long_short[asset]
99
etf_df = etf_df.fillna(0)
100
momentum_long_return[asset] = etf_df.long_return
==PAGE:130==
120
A An Appendix
101
momentum_long_return['momentum_long'] += momentum_long_return[asset]/
momentum_long_return.shape[1]
102
103
# long & short
104
etf_df = etf_dict_momentum_long_short[asset]
105
etf_df = etf_df.fillna(0)
106
momentum_long_short_return[asset] = etf_df.long_return + (-etf_df.
short_return)
107
momentum_long_short_return['momentum_long_short'] +=
momentum_long_short_return[asset]/momentum_long_short_return.shape
[1]
108
109 momentum_to_csv = pd.concat([momentum_long_short_return.loc[:,['
momentum_long_short']],
110
momentum_long_return.loc[:,['momentum_long']]],
axis=1)
111
112 momentum_to_csv.to_csv(r'C:\Users\hafth\Documents\DTU\master_thesis\Python\
momentum_return.csv', sep=';')
.
A.3.6
Scenario Generation
1 import pandas as pd
2 import datetime as dt
3 import numpy as np
4 from dateutil.relativedelta import *
5
6 from ETF_EW import equal_weight_month_return , last_day_month
7
8 def scenario_bootstrap_month(data, start_date=dt.date(2012,2,1),
9
end_date=dt.date(2018,4,30)):
10
num_list = list(range(250))
11
scenarios = ['scen_{num}'.format(num=i+1) for i in num_list]
12
zero_list = [0]*len(scenarios)
13
test_period = data.loc[(data.index >= start_date) & (data.index <=
end_date)]
14
scenario_df = pd.DataFrame({k: zero_list for k in test_period.index.map(
15
lambda x: last_day_month(x)).unique()}, index=scenarios)
16
17
count = 0
18
for col in scenario_df.columns:
19
train_period = data.loc[(data.index <= last_day_month(col - dt.timedelta
(weeks=5))) & (
20
data.index >= (data.index[0] + relativedelta(months=count)))]
21
for index in scenario_df.index:
22
rand_num = np.random.randint(0, train_period.shape[0]-1, 21)
23
scen_return = 1
24
for num in rand_num:
25
scen_return = scen_return * (1 + train_period.iloc[num, 0])
26
scenario_df.loc[index, col] = scen_return
27
count += 1
==PAGE:131==
A.3 GAMS code and python code models
121
28
29
return scenario_df
.
==PAGE:132==
122
==PAGE:133==
Bibliography
[Bje18]
Jens Bjerre. Life Expectancy. Statistics Denmark, 2018. url: https://
www.dst.dk/en/Statistik/emner/befolkning-og-valg/doedsfald-
og-middellevetid/middellevetid.
[EG87]
Robert Engle and C.W.J. Granger. Co-integration and error correction:
Representation, estimation and testing. March 1987. doi: 10.2307/1913236.
url: https://www.jstor.org/stable/1913236.
[Eur18]
Eurostat. Duration of working life - statistics. Eurostat, 2018. url: https:
/ / ec . europa . eu / eurostat / statistics - explained / index . php /
Duration_of_working_life_-_statistics#Overall_country_results_
in_2017.
[Inva]
Investopedia. Conditional Value-at-Risk. url: https://www.investopedia.
com/terms/c/conditional_value_at_risk.asp.
[Invb]
Investopedia. Exchange-Traded Fund (ETF). url: https://www.investopedia.
com/terms/e/etf.asp.
[Invc]
Investopedia. Geometric mean. url: https://www.investopedia.com/
terms/g/geometricmean.asp.
[Invd]
Investopedia. Introduction to momentum trading. url: https://www.
investopedia.com/trading/introduction-to-momentum-trading.
[Inve]
Investopedia. Jensen’s alpha. url: https://www.investopedia.com/
terms/j/jensensmeasure.asp.
[Invf]
Investopedia. Maximum Drawdown. url: https://www.investopedia.
com/terms/m/maximum-drawdown-mdd.asp.
[Invg]
Investopedia. Mean reversion. url: https://www.investopedia.com/
terms/m/meanreversion.asp.
[Invh]
Investopedia. Sharpe-ratio. url: https : / / www . investopedia . com /
terms/s/sharperatio.asp.
[Invi]
Investopedia. Stock Exchange-Traded Fund (ETF). url: https://www.
investopedia.com/terms/e/etf.asp.
[Invj]
Investopedia. Treynor ratio. url: https://www.investopedia.com/
terms/t/treynorratio.asp.
==PAGE:134==
124
Bibliography
[Invk]
Investopedia. Value-at-Risk. url: https://www.investopedia.com/
terms/v/var.asp.
[Invl]
Investopedia. Volatility. url: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/
h/historicalvolatility.asp.
[JB80]
Carlos M. Jarque and Anil K. Bera. Efficient tests for normality, ho-
moscedasticity and serial independence of regression residuals. October
1980. doi: 10.24135/afl.v3i2.23. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/0165176580900245?via%3Dihub.
[Mac16]
Delaney Mackenzie. Quantopian Lecture Series: VaR and CVaR (Ex-
pected Shortfall). 2016. url: https://www.quantopian.com/posts/
quantopian-lecture-series-var-and-cvar-expected-shortfall.
[Maz14]
Imtiaz Mazumder. Investing In Exchange Traded Funds. November 2014.
doi: 10.24135/afl.v3i2.23. url: https://ojs.aut.ac.nz/applied-
finance-letters/article/view/23.
[MER18]
MERCER. MELBOURNE MERCER GLOBAL PENSION INDEX 2018.
OECD, 2018. url: https://info.mercer.com/rs/521- DEV- 513/
images/Mercer%20-%20MMGPI%20Report%202018%20Summary.pdf.
[ML14]
Fionn Murtagh and Pierre Legendre. Ward’s Hierarchical Agglomerative
Clustering Method: Which Algorithms Implement Ward’s Criterion? Oc-
tober 2014. url: http://adn.biol.umontreal.ca/~numericalecology/
Reprints/Murtagh_Legendre_J_Class_2014.pdf.
[Nor94]
Norman L. Johnson, Samuel Kotz and N. Balakrishnan. Continuous Uni-
variate Distributions. Wiley, 1994.
[OEC18a]
OECD. OECD SURVEY OF INVESTMENT REGULATION OF PEN-
SION FUNDS. OECD, 2018. url: https://www.oecd.org/daf/fin/
private-pensions/2018-Survey-Investment-Regulation-Pension-
Funds.pdf.
[OEC18b]
OECD. Pension Funds in Figures. OECD, 2018. url: https://www.
oecd.org/daf/fin/private-pensions/Pension-Funds-in-Figures-
2018.pdf.
[Rob18]
Annie Roberts. Global pension assets reach record level in 2017. Willis
Towers Watson, 2018. url: https://www.willistowerswatson.com/
en/press/2018/02/global-pension-assets-reach-record-level-
in-2017.
[RU00]
R. Tyrrell Rockafellar and Stanislav Uryasev. Optimization of Condi-
tional Value-at-Risk. 2000.
[Sim16]
Simona Roccioletti. Backtesting value at Risk and Expected Shortfall.
Springer, 2016.
