==PAGE:1==
Using Virtual Reality Games for
Teaching Elementary School
Biology
Lasse Voss Overby
Supervisor Helle Rootzén
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The goal of the thesis is to create a cooperative virtual reality game that can
be used as a teaching tool or an additional side activity for select students that
would benet. The game teaches about the human circulatory system.
The primary motivation for undertaking the project, is to increase elementary
school student engagement. The hope was that by increasing engagement. Stu-
dents will better retain the knowledge presented and gain an internal motivation
for learning.
Through the project a prototype for this game was developed. using the unity
editor targeting the Google Cardboard platform. In order to gain information
about how the students would interact with game. An automatic system for
collecting event and game state data was implemented. In the end the project
failed to perform sucient validation and testing.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fullment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Digital Media Engineering.
The thesis deals with the preliminary development of a Virtual Reality Game
that can be used as a tool when teaching about the human circulatory system.
Including initial work into estimating player mastery and knowledge acquisition
based on automatically collected data.
The thesis consists of rst introduction that denes the projects scope and moti-
vation. The next chapter outlines a game design and some of the considerations
that have been made with respect to Human Computer Interaction. From there
select implementation details are given as a form of documentation in case of
further development. Lastly, testing and data analysis is performed and dis-
cussed.
The intended audience, unless otherwise specied, expected to have general
software development knowledge, be familiar with User experience engineering,
and have a surface level understanding of game development using the Unity
Game Engine.
Lyngby, 01-February-2019
Lasse Voss Overby
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
My thanks go out to my thesis current supervisor Helle Rootzén. and before
that Charlotte Lærke Weitze.
Also i would like to thank my fellow students, friends, and family. That have
helped throughout the process.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Virtual Reality in Teaching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Games in Teaching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Subject Matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Target Audience
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Metrics for success . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Design
5
2.1
Game Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Human Computer Interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Putting it all together . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Implementation
15
3.1
Unity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Optimising for Virtual Reality on Mobile Platform . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Networking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Iteration 1
21
4.1
Automatic metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Discussion
27
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
6
Conclusion
29
Bibliography
31
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This thesis aims create a cooperative virtual reality game that can be used as a
teaching tool, or an additional side activity for select students. The project is
therefore positioned in the areas of Teaching technology.
The primary motivation for undertaking the project, is to increase elementary
school student engagement. The hope is that by increasing engagement. Stu-
dents will better retain the knowledge presented and gain an internal motivation
for learning.
The following sections deals with reasoning for the use of specic technologies
and topics. while also positioning this project in relation to other works, that
dealing with similar areas.
1.1
Virtual Reality in Teaching
Virtual Reality places the user in a virtual world. Not as an outside observer
acting upon the virtual world. But immerses the user in the world as an di-
rect actor in the. Witch can have a positive impact on since it provide situated
learning [Dede, 2009]. A recent meta analysis [Papanastasiou et al., 2018] found
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
that : "According to the literature, there are promising results indicating that
VR(Vitual Reality)/ AR (Augmented Reality) environments improve learning
outcomes and present numerous advantages of investing time and nancial re-
sources in K-12, higher and tertiary educational settings.". One of the articles
included [Pantelidis, 2010], state that one advantage of using virtual reality is:
"VR allows a learner to learn by doing, a constructivist approach. VR provides
experience with new technologies through actual use"
With this in mind Virtual reality will play a prominent feature in this project.
Utilizing virtual reality would also provide additional benets. The virtual world
need not be a realistic place. It could facilitate experiences not found in the
real world. Be this due to cost, or simply the limits of reality. For example a
eld trip to the stars. Or being shrunk and placed on the surface of a kitchen
counter top. These shared experiences can then facilitate class discussion.
1.2
Games in Teaching
The primary problem this project is trying to combat is a lack of motivation
and engagement. To do this the solution will be in the form of a game that is
going stealthily "trick" students into learning[Sharp, 2012].
The important thing is that the game should provide fun rst and foremost. As-
signed games as homework would enforce extrinsic motivation. what we are in-
terested in is foster intrinsic motivation through positive aect[Isen and Reeve, 2005].
1.3
Subject Matter
In order to reduce the scope the subject is constrained to teaching about circu-
latory and respiratory system of the human body. This subject was chosen from
the curriculum of the danish elementary school system1. In grade 3-4 the stu-
dents must be able to use dierent models that ilustrates the circulatory system.
The intent is for this project to fabricate an abstracted simulation of the human
circulatory system. That would take the form of a game. This could then be
used as an interactive model by the students. Enabling them to compare and
relate experiences gained within the game to the broader curriculum.
1https://www.emu.dk/omraade/gsk-l%C3%A6rer/ffm/naturteknologi/3-4-klasse/
modellering-obligatorisk
==PAGE:13==
1.4 Target Audience
3
1.4
Target Audience
This project have three distinct audiences that have to be accounted for.
The obvious one is the elementary school students that will be playing the game.
Since the subject matter is taken from the Danish grade 3-4. One can expect
the students to be in the range of 9 to 11. But is properly ot all students that
will benet fully from this kind of teaching method. So the game should not be
given to an entire class and the be expected to perform optimally. This is wher
the Teacher plays an important role.
Teachers need to be willing to use the solution in their teaching. so some thought
have to be given to how the teacher is going to incorporate the game with their
other teaching tools. As to most eective.
Municipalities and school administration needs to pay for acquiring a potential
nal project. So to ease adoption the cost and required set-up should be kept
at a minimum.
1.5
Metrics for success
This section outlines what metrics the nal solution will be measured on. The
primary metric for success will be increased engagement of students. While still
ensuring that learning goals are fullled.
The idea is to device some automatic data collection that can be used to estimate
players mastery of game mechanics. And by mapping the mechanics to learning
goals. Hopefully some insight into the students learning could be gained. These
insights could also be of interest to teachers when assessing student development.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Design
This chapter will take the scope dened in the introduction, and from that
craft a "design document". This "document" further narrows the scope until
it is at a level were the initial implementation can begin. Features, systems,
requirements, and interactions will all be outlined. Including what is required
for a minimum horizontal slice used as an initial minimal viable product that
can be used for validating the solution.
To summarize the scope dened in the introduction. Some requirements that
will directly inuence the design are listed below.
• Solution will be designed as a game rst and a teaching tool
second. But knowledge acquisition will be the metric for success.
• Solution will use Virtual Reality.
• Final product should run on low cost hardware.
• Should to some extend simulate the human circulatory system
So that it can be used as a model in the Danish elementary school grades
3 and 4.
In addition to these, some additional decisions have to be made concerning
dierent aspects of the solution. The next sections dene these additional de-
==PAGE:16==
6
Design
cisions, their alternatives, and most importantly what the consequences of the
choices will be.
2.1
Game Design
One of the rst tasks is to design a game, that will facilitate the learning. This
will be used to guide further choices based on the need of the game design.
"Elevator Pitch":
In the game, players are transported into the human body.
Here they have to work together in order to control the body.
The body is divided into multiple locations, see gure2.1 each with their own
function. For instance the location corresponding to the lungs, has facilities to
provide red blood cells with oxygen. That can then be used in other locations to,
for instance, move the body. Players have to move between locations in order to
operate facilities in the dierent locations and thereby making the body function
and move.
Tying together the dierent locations in the body. Is the circulatory system that
transports dierent resources required to operate locations. Players can pick up
resources in order to place them into machinery and theby operate dierent
parts of the body. For instance oxygen is required to operate the muscels in the
legs and therby move that body around.
As a way to put some pressure on the players and provide a goal to achieve.
Players have to control the body they inhabit around a Hexagonal grid. Towards
an objective.
While avoiding an enemy that chases the players in order to
provide a form of time pressure and challenge.
Possible Design Space
While the scope of this project is limited to only include modelling of the human
circulatory system. As per the introduction. This concept of controlling the
body could be expanded to include other subjects like nutrition, waste disposal,
and immunology.
Additionally more complexity could be added to the operation of each location.
Resulting in an increase in diculty.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Game Design
7
Hex Grid
Body Internals
Player/Cadet
Locations
Point of intrest
Red Blood Cell
Circulatory System
Replenish Oxygen
Use Oxygen
Steer Body On Hex Grid
Goal To Reach
Enemy To Avoid
Representation Of Body
Activate Lungs
Figure 2.1: Sketch of how the dierent game mechanics t together
The hexagonal grid concept can be replaced and or upgraded to include. for
example the need to move around to pick up food and other objects. Or some
form of problem solving
==PAGE:18==
8
Design
2.2
Human Computer Interaction
In the introduction it was decided that the solution should be build to use virtual
reality, This choice of medium have a great impact on what kind of interactions
are available for the user. Therefore the rst order of business i deciding what
virtual reality hardware platform to target. Once this is done the actual options
for interaction can be considered.
Choice of VR Hardware
This section will outline and weigh the dierent commercial virtual reality plat-
form options. At the time of writing there are multiple enthusiast grade com-
mercial platforms.
In varying price ranges and with dierent features.
One
would assume that the market will continue to mature. And move more into a
general consumer grade. Custom build set-ups are an other option. It Would
give a greater exibility compared to existing commercial products. That mostly
fall in the head mounted display category. But Creating a custom set-up has
been discarded. Mainly due to time constraints, and secondarily it would limit
the possible spread. It is easier to tell a potential user to invest in an existing
commercial product with multiple other uses. Than to have them invest in a
custom build solution with a single use case.
When considering hardware an important concept is the degrees of freedom that
the platform oers as well as the number of buttons and other controls. Degrees
of freedom (DoF) refers to how many independent variables the hardware tracks.
For instance Tracking the users head position in three dimensions gives 3 degrees
of freedom.
One for each of the 3 axis x, y, and z.
By also tracking the
orientation of the head, where the person is looking another 3 degrees are added.
Corresponding to the pitch, yaw , and roll.
The HTC Vive and Oculus Rift
are both examples of head mounted dis-
plays that require a quite powerful Pc in order to function. Additionally the
headsets them selves are relatively expensive, ranging from ∼3500DKK to
∼5200DKK. Meaning that a very rough estimate would put the unit price at
∼12000DKK. Way out of the requirement set above.
On the plus side the headsets position and orientation can be tracked in a limited
space. Resulting 6 degrees of freedom. And as a consequence the user is able to
freely move around inside a limited area. Leading to increased immersion. They
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Human Computer Interaction
9
also include 2 controllers each with 6 degrees of freedom and a set of dierent
buttons. That would increase the amount of options available.
Phone Powered
options use the sensors and processing power available in
current smart phones. By placing the phone in a head mounted viewer contain-
ing lenses. the phone then splits the screen and show stereoscopic images to
each eye, creating the illusion of. see gure 2.2. Here the headset varies wildly
in price and some are locked to specic vendors agship phones. For instance
Samsung Gear Vr and Google Daydream. Others are less phone specic like
Google Cardboard.
In order to track the head position most of these platforms use phones gyroscope.
So the delity of the tracking is linked to the quality of the sensor.
While
also introducing the problem of accumulating errors leading to drifting.
All
dependent on what phone is used.
Figure 2.2: Google Daydream View
Standalone
headsets are self-contained specialised hardware that provide Vir-
tual reality. Without the need for external processing power, like the options
above. This removes some of the problems mentioned above and allows the user
to move without being thethered to a pc. This comes at the cost of the hardware
==PAGE:20==
10
Design
only having one use case. Exsamples include Oculus Go and Google Daydream
Standalone
While cross platform development is possible. Each additional platform would
ideally require its own custom control scheme. And/Or additional testing time.
The time constraint in this project therefore necessitate that a single platform
be chosen
Google Cardboard
For this project the Google Cardboard platform will be used. This is primarily
due to cost and mobility. If the solution is to be adopted into the classroom.
It need to have a low barrier to entry and the cheapest Cardboard viewers are
literal folded cardboard and plastic lenses. Meaning that if students use their
own smart phones. The cost to try out the application would be really low.
And perhaps more palatable for municipalities and administration.
The Google Cardboard platform is designed to be used with a wide veriety of
phones and viwers. As a result interactions is limited to one button. And using
the gyroscope to track head orientation with 3 degrees of freedom. These limits
and their impact will be addressed in the next section.
Virtual Reality Interaction Design
Virtual reality falls under the 3D interface category. where traditional computer
interfaces are primarily 2D. For instance a mouse to control a pointer on a 2D
surface.
Or touch surfaces on smart phones, tablets and track pads.
This
3 Dimensional nature means that a lot of the conventional thinking does not
apply. For instance even though a mouse and keyboard is quite an abstract
way of interacting with a computer. the fact that this form of interaction is
ubiquitous. means that one can reliably assume that user will be familiar with
this control scheme and the accompanying cultural shorthands like software
buttons, input elds, left, and right clicks.
However if one takes a step back and moves up an abstraction level there are
some so-called "universal tasks"[Bowman, Dough A., 2019]:
• Travel How the user navigates around in the application.
• Selection How the user selects objects
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Human Computer Interaction
11
• Manipulation How the user manipulates selected objects
• System Control Is not really used in this project
Aside from System Control. Each of these a actions needs to be mapped to
some interaction with the Cardboard Viewer.
Selection
Selection is mapped to the head orientation.
Or rather where the player is
looking.
By giving the player a reticle in the middle of their eld of view.
They can select a game object by placing the reticle on top of it. In eect a
laser-pointer strapped to their head.
Manipulation
Once the player have selected an object they can interact with it by pressing the
one button on the headset. This interaction will have to be heavily context de-
pendent, in order to provide access to a lot of dierent functionality. Something
that have to be taken into account.
Virtual Reality Travel
Some of dierent methods for moving the player in virtual reality have been
listed below[Marshall, Matt, 2017]. These does not include methods that require
physical movement since the chosen hardware have limited degrees of freedom.
• The Diegetic Room The user is placed inside a xed space. And controls
for moving this space are diegetic. Meaning that they belong there. An
exsample include an elevator that the player cannot leave. But it can move
the elevator by pressing oor buttons in the virtual world.
• World Manipulation Move the entire world around the user.
• Astral Body The user can change perspective in order to travel to other
locations.
For instance leaving an avatar and going into a 3th person
perspective. Then picking up their avatar and placing it in a new location.
==PAGE:22==
12
Design
• Teleportation A popular method used allot in commercial games. Play-
ers Move instantly ot a position indicated with a pointer.
• Continuous Movement A straight forward approach where the user
moves along terrain in an indicated direction.
• Node Based Movement[Jacob Habgood et al., 2018] Players move be-
tween xed nodes.
Since all available methods of interaction have been taken up by Selection and
Manipulation Travel will have to be enabled by these other actions. Therefore
this project will use a hybrid between teleportation and node based movement.
The places that the player can occupy are predened and appear as ethereal
nodes in the world. By selecting and then interacting with a node at a location
the player teleports instantly to the location indicated.
2.3
Putting it all together
This section will sum up all the decisions and considerations made above and
combine them into the nal design for a Vertical Functional Prototype.
The solution is going to be designed as a Google Cardboard application. It
is going to be a game rst and a teaching tool second. The primary learning
objective is to teach the location and general function of the human circulatory
system.
Game Systems Glossary
The game has a lot of systems, therms, and concepts that constitutes its do-
main. This following section attempts to provide a glossary of these systems
and concepts. words marked in Bold reference other items in this glossary. The
glossary also functions as a set of functionality that should be implmented in
later sections.
Cadet/Player
an avatar representing a player in the game world. they can
manipulate Red Blood Cells, activate Action Objects, and move between
Points of Interest in the Body.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Putting it all together
13
Circulatory System
distributes Red Blood Cells to the dierent Lo-
cations. It also has the responsibility for spawning new Red Blood Cells as
needed.
Red Blood Cells
can either have oxygen or not. as endicated by their
colour.
Alveoli
Replenish depleted oxygen in Red Blood Cells when triggered.
Locations
• Brain has the trigger for drawing a breate and activating the Alveoli in
the lungs.
• Lungs contains Alveoli
• Legs Have controls for moving the body and an Oxygen Drain
Oxygen Drain
drains Red Blood Cells of oxygen in order to move the
Body
Points of Interest
are places that Cadets can occupy, the nodes indi-
cated in the travel sections above. Only one cadet can occupy a point of interest
at a time. Teleportation between Points Of Interest are the sole method of
locomotion available to the players.
==PAGE:24==
14
Design
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Implementation
This chapter outlines out some of the choices made during the implementation.
These decisions are fundamental to the solution and therefore common across
all iterations, unless otherwise specied.
3.1
Unity
The application will be build using the Unity game engine. The primary reason
for this choice is that the project team has previous experience using this tool.
Meaning that development of the rst technical prototype can begin immedi-
ately. Without the need for aquireing new knowledge and experience. Unity
also has a big user base resulting in a big body of knowledge, tutorials, and
libraries. Additionally Unity supports multiple build targets meaning that the
same code base can be used across dierent platforms. Including other virtual
reality platforms mentioned before.
The primary features that will be used are real-time graphics rendering and
scripting in C#. All of which the team has previous knowledge of. It is assumed
that the reader will have an understanding of the fundamental unity concepts.
For instance the Componets, GameObjects, Behaiviours, Materials, Meshes,
==PAGE:26==
16
Implementation
Figure 3.1: Screenshot from a Google Cardbord Demo App, showing the split
screen and applied distortion
and so on.
Since the design calls for collaborative multiplayer a form of networking will
have to be used. As a start the High Level Networking API (HLAPI), that
ships with unity, is used. This API have however been marked as deprecated1
and will be replaced in the future by a, as of the time of writing, unreleased
replacement. Support is stated to end well after the conclusion of the project.
But with this in mind and depending on the the limits of the current API. A
custom implementation might have to be implemented in the future. Further
discussion on the workings of the HLAPI and alternatives can be found in section
3.3.
GoogleVR SDK
Google provides a Unity SDK (Software Development Kit) for developing ap-
plications targeting their virtual reality platforms; Daydream and Cardboard.
The SDK Makes sure that the app is displayed correctly on the phone screen,
that the gyroscope sensor data is applied to the camera, and that taps on the
screens are sent to the unity event system.
1https://support.unity3d.com/hc/en-us/articles/360001252086-UNet-Deprecation-FAQ
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Optimising for Virtual Reality on Mobile Platform
17
The displaying is done by splitting the screen and showing an oset stereoscopic
image for each eye as shown in gure 3.1. Additionally a barrel distortion is
applied to the images in order to invert the distortion caused by the lenses in
the viwer.
The phones orientation, infered from the gyrscope is automatically applied to
the game camera in order to sync the in displayed images with the orientation
of the headset.
The SDK also includes examples and demos that will be used as a base and
then evolved into the rst prototypes. These initial prototypes will also heavily
use assets from these demos as placeholders.
3.2
Optimising for Virtual Reality on Mobile Plat-
form
Since Low frame rates might induce simulation sickness and reduce immersive-
ness 2. Some thought have to be given to optimization of the application. In
order to maintain a consistently high number of frames per second.
Performance optimisation have not been a major factor during development.
But some general percausions have been adopted:
• Assets are kept at a relatively low polygon count.
• When assets do use textures, they generally and include baked in lighting.
And where real-time lighting is necessary only simple shaders are used
without texture lookups.
• And where possible allocation of new objects are kept to a minimum during
game-play.
As a baseline, development is done using a Xiaomi Mi A1 3. It is a midrange
but relatively new phone. So as long as it is able to perform at suciently.
No major actions will be taken to optimize. But it is important to note that a
major refactoring and restructure might be necessary in the future.
2https://developers.google.com/vr/develop/best-practices/perf-best-practices
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xiaomi_Mi_A1
==PAGE:28==
18
Implementation
3.3
Networking
As previously mentioned the solution will use the High Level Networking API
(HLAPI). This section outlines how this specic application uses this API. Not
the general usage of the API.
The High Level Networking API operates on a client server basis. In the cong-
uration used by this project. The hosting client also acts a the server for other
connecting clients.
Servers and clients each have a copy of the same unity scene including all the
game objects in the scene. some game objects can be given a Network Identity
meaning that they will be under the authority of either the server or connected
clients. When a client or server mutates a game object that they have author-
ity over. This change is synchronized automatically across the network. For
instance, if the server moves one of the game objects. The change in position is
sent to the clients ensuring that all players see the same thing.
Per default the server has authority over game objects.
The server therfor
aintains and updating the game state.
Based on the games mechanics and
actions of the clients. Clients have local authority over their player object, in
this case the Cadet that represent the user. Cince the clients only have autorety
over player object. They have to communicate to server when they for instance
want to pick up a Red Blod Cell. The is done using Remote Procedure Calls
(RPC).
The HLAPI Uses two kinds of RPC. Commands and ClientRPCs. Clients can
send Commands from their player object, with local authority, to the server.
Whereas the server call ClientRPCs on objects in the clients.
As an example of how RPCs are used. The process for a Player Teleporting
to a new Point of interest (Poi) is descriped below. see also gure 3.2.
1 To avoid Race Conditions where two players en up occupying the same Poi.
All Teleportation has to go through the server that maintains the canonical
state of occupied and free Pois. Therefore a client sends a Command to
the server and requests for a teleportation.
2 When the server receives a request for Teleportation. It checks that the
requested target is free. The targeted Poi is the set to occupied. and a
ClientRPC is sent back to the client allowing the player to teleport.
2.5 Once the occupation state of the Poi changes it is synchronised out to the
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Networking
19
clients.
3 Since the player have Local authority it changes its position when it recives
the RPC call from the server and its new position is the synchronised to
the other clients via the server.
In general commands are used by clients to communicate, actions done by the
user, to the server. And the server sends updates to the clients via ClientRPC.
Device 1
Client 1
Poi
Position
Free
Cadet
Position
Device 2
Client 2
Poi
Position
Free
Cadet
Position
Server
Poi
Position
Free
Cadet
Position
1: Request Teleport Command
2: RPC Teleport Ok
!
!
!
2.5: Sync Poi
3: Change Position
<
Figure 3.2: Example of the call structure for a Cadet teleporting to a new Poi
As a starting point connection between server and client is done via peer to peer.
meaning that the client must know the Ip address of the server.
Optimally
this would be done via some form of network discovery, allowing clients to
automatically nd a servers Ip address on the local area network.
For now
though this has to be entered manually in the unity editor and is then locked.
While this is not optimal it is quite reliable. And by bringing a LAN-Switch that
assigns a static Ip address to the server this can be somewhat worked around
when setting up a testing scenario.
As a technical side note. Development have been done on a older beta version
(2018.3.0bf) of the unity editor since newer versions caused problems with the
HLAPI.
==PAGE:30==
20
Implementation
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4
Iteration 1
While the development process have been going through multiple tiny iterations.
This is chapter describes the rst iteration that is able to collect signicant data.
A short video recording of the prototype running on a pc can be found at:
https://youtu.be/bezDbQ2-xt4.
Figure 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3 are Screen-shots
taken from an android phone.
Assets
It quickly became apparent that the project team did not have the
required competences needed to create high delity assets for the project. This
being the 3D models and accompanying textures. Therefore most of the assets
used in the prototype are placeholders. That have been borrowed from the demo
projects that were shipped with the GoogleVR SDK. This lack of a dedicated
3D artist severely limits the expression possibilities. Resulting in some very
abstract interpretations of what the body looks like.
Hexagonal Grid
The grid is dynamically generated and given random colours.
The Bear/Enemy Has a Extremely simplistic Ai that chases the players around
the board using Dijkstra path nding. A* was disregard as the graph is quite
small so the increased complexity of using a heuristic was not worth the potential
minimal speed-up.
==PAGE:32==
22
Iteration 1
Figure 4.1: A sample of data collected to show o the ideal usage
Figure 4.2: A sample of data collected to show o the ideal usage
4.1
Automatic metrics
In order to collect the data required to get insights into the users mastery of
game mechanics. A system for logging events to a csv le has been developed.
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Automatic metrics
23
Figure 4.3: A sample of data collected to show o the ideal usage
it is independent from the game and ui code and can be switched o or be given
dierent logging targets.
For each event the system loogs the time since the application started, What
type of event was logged, and what object caused the event. Additional data can
also be appended for special events. Some events are triggered by the logging
system regularly. With aim of logging continuous data. Like the users head
orientation, or information about the game state.
Figure 4.4 shows how ideal ussage would look.
The top boxplot show The
distribution of times between the user clicked on a game object that accepts
click interations. The plot below shows a timeline of events. Black dots shows
the fraction red blood cells that have oxygen starting out at full. Then dropping
the user moves the body around. Gray points are click events. Showing a urry
of activity when the oxygen levels drop. The coloured point indicate that the
user teleported to a new location: Red = Brain, Green = Legs, and Blue =
Lungs.
==PAGE:34==
24
Iteration 1
Figure 4.4: A sample of data collected to show o the ideal usage
4.2
Testing
A big testing session was planed but time pressure resulted in limited time for
testing. And additionally there was connection problems. which resulted in
the test person performing the test solo. The test person received extensive
explanation about the game and had tried virtual reality before. Figure 4.5
show the data that was logged.
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Testing
25
Figure 4.5: Plot of data from the test person
==PAGE:36==
26
Iteration 1
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 5
Discussion
Testing throughout the project leaves a lot to be desired. It would have been
interesting to be able to test correctly on a bigger pool. Without a more thor-
ough validation process it is very hard to comment on the eectiveness of the
nal product.
But the results that does exists show some promise towards actually seeing pat-
terns in the data showing how players interact with the game. But to really get
anywhere. The automatically collected data should be correlated with subjec-
tive data collected from the test persons. In order to verify that the observed
reality corresponds to the subjective experience.
One thing that was overlooked throughout the project was validation the as-
sumptions about subject matter. Especially with regards to if teachers would
see any potential for the tool in their teaching. Essentially showing that the
project is heading in the right direction. Along these lines, some time have to
be given to guring out if the material presented in the game. is appropriate
for the targeted age group. It is very possible that this solution aims at to high
concepts.
On a technical note. The testing showed that the networking is wrought with
problems. Disconnects being one of them. but even when it is working. The rate
at which positions are synchronised leads to stuttering on the clients. Combined
==PAGE:38==
28
Discussion
with imminent deprecation of the Unitys High Level API. Some alternative
would have to be implemented.
The lack of proper assets also lead to a lot of confusion for the test persons.
Leading to a lot of explanation in order to even get the point of the game
across. Some of this could be alleviated by appropriate visuals. But in general
explaining and communicating the concept of the game has not been an easy
task. So some addition of tutorials and explanations might be in order.
Concerning the success of the project as a whole. Yes to an extend the goal was
fullled. As in a virtual reality game was created. But the big question is if it
can be used as a teaching tool. Here the the answer is no. Not in the current
state. So in this respect, the project fell way short of the goal line. And one
might be tempted to say that is only in the starting phase. A start for further
throughout work.
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
To Conclude: This project started out with the goal of creating a cooperative
virtual reality game that can be used as a teaching tool or an additional side
activity. With The primary metric for success will be increased engagement
of students. While still ensuring that learning goals are fullled. The project
did not achieve this goal. Not in that it did not create a game. But in that
it, mainly du to a lack of validation, is unable to verify that it succeeded in
increasing the engagement of the students.
==PAGE:40==
30
Conclusion
==PAGE:41==
Bibliography
[Bowman, Dough A., 2019] Bowman,
Dough
A.
(2019).
The
Encyclo-
pedia of Human-Computer Interaction,
Chapter 32:
3D User Inter-
faces,
2nd
Ed.
https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/
book/the-encyclopedia-of-human-computer-interaction-2nd-ed/
3d-user-interfaces. [Online; accessed 29-January-2019].
[Dede, 2009] Dede, C. (2009). Immersive interfaces for engagement and learn-
ing. Science, 323(5910):6669.
[Isen and Reeve, 2005] Isen, A. M. and Reeve, J. (2005). The inuence of pos-
itive aect on intrinsic and extrinsic motivation: Facilitating enjoyment of
play, responsible work behavior, and self-control. Motivation and Emotion,
29(4):297325.
[Jacob Habgood et al., 2018] Jacob Habgood, M. P., Moore, D., Wilson, D.,
and Alapont, S. (2018). Rapid, continuous movement between nodes as an
accessible virtual reality locomotion technique. 25th Ieee Conference on Vir-
tual Reality and 3d User Interfaces, Vr 2018 - Proceedings, pages 8446130,
371378.
[Marshall, Matt, 2017] Marshall,
Matt
(2017).
Get
Moving:
Loco-
motion
in
Virtual
Reality.
https://medium.com/pixel-tours/
get-moving-locomotion-in-virtual-reality-dbfbb08ab867.
[Online;
accessed 31-January-2019].
[Pantelidis, 2010] Pantelidis, V. S. (2010).
Reasons to use virtual reality in
education and training courses and a model to determine when to use virtual
reality. Themes in Science and Technology Education, 2(1-2):5970.
==PAGE:42==
32
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Papanastasiou et al., 2018] Papanastasiou, G., Drigas, A., Skianis, C., Lytras,
M., and Papanastasiou, E. (2018). Virtual and augmented reality eects on k-
12, higher and tertiary education students' twenty-rst century skills. Virtual
Reality.
[Sharp, 2012] Sharp, L. (2012). Stealth learning: Unexpected learning oppor-
tunities through games. Journal of Instructional Research, 1:4248.
