==PAGE:1==
Feasibility Study of Software in
the Loop Testing for SMArDT
Jonas Kohlschmidt
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
i
This thesis was carried out in cooperation with the BMW Group. However,
the results, opinions, and conclusions expressed in this thesis are not
necessarily those of the BMW Group.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary
Testing is essential to successfully develop reliable automotive software.
To
develop and test software the BMW Group uses a model-based approach and
a specication method for architecture, requirements, design, and test, called
SMArDT. To eliminate error-prone manual test creation, tests are derived au-
tomatically from the models specied in the model-based approach using a test
case generator. This thesis assesses the feasibility of software in the loop testing
using the test case generator in context of SMArDT. A software in the loop
tool chain is developed by translating the software in the loop concept to the
SMArDT framework. A tool chain prototype is further implemented by selecting
appropriate software tools and developing a concept of usability. A software tool
is developed to enhance the tool chains operability. Ultimately, the developed
tool chain prototype is successfully evaluated through hands-on testing.
==PAGE:6==
iv
Summary
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fullment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with software in the loop testing, model-based software devel-
opment, and automated test generation in the automotive section.
The thesis consists of a written part and software code.
Munich, 18-February-2019
Jonas Kohlschmidt
==PAGE:8==
vi
Preface
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
iii
Preface
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation and Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Foundations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
Systems Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.2
SMArDT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.3
SysML . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.4
Test Case Generator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2.5
Software in the Loop in context of automotive testing
. .
12
1.3
Outline of Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2
Tool Chain Development
17
2.1
Concept for SiL testing within SMArDT . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2
Tool Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3
Testing Tool Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Tool Chain Automation
25
3.1
Tool Chain Problem Denition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Connection Tool Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Evaluation
43
4.1
Tool Chain Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2
Connection Tool Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Related Work
53
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
6
Outlook & Conclusion
57
6.1
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
Bibliography
61
List of Figures
66
List of Listings
68
List of Abbrevations
69
Abbrevations
71
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation and Goal
Quantity and complexity of software used in modern automobiles are steadily
increasing. Present state-of-the-art vehicles contain up to 70 interacting elec-
tronic control units that accommodate highly convoluted software [EJ09]. Si-
multaneously shorter development cycles are needed to satisfy a demand for a
smaller time-to-market [Pra97] and costs need to be reduced to keep a constant
price level despite ination [MMK19]. These tougher market conditions call for
improved methods of automotive software development and testing.
The BMW Group answers this call by using a specication method for architec-
ture, requirements, design and test (SMArDT) [DHG+19]. SMArDT describes
a semi-formal specication for requirement, design, and testing of systems engi-
neering artefacts according to an international standard for functional safety of
road vehicles, ISO 26262 [Int18]. This model-based strategy is used to develop
new functionalities for the electric drive system [KMS+17]. For implementation,
SMArDT uses a top-down approach with four dierent abstraction layers. Each
layer comprises requirements of dierent levels of abstraction. These require-
ments are modelled with a subset of the Systems Modeling Language (SysML).
A test case generator eases the verication and validation of the requirements
and creates test cases that can be executed in hardware in the loop and vehicle
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
in the loop.
The use of the test case generator shall now be enhanced by software in the loop
testing to further reduce testing costs, allowing for shorter and fewer develop-
ment cycles as well as virtual integration of software modules [MHS06, Jun16,
TSB10]. The goal of this master thesis is to asses the feasibility of testing the
SysML models in software in the loop in context of SMArDT and by using the
test case generator.
1.2
Foundations
The following subsections will give an overview of the topics relevant to following
and understanding this project. Namely, these topics are systems engineering
1.2.1, SMArDT 1.2.2, the Systems Modeling Language, test case generation
1.2.4 and software in the loop 1.2.5.
1.2.1
Systems Engineering
Systems engineering is an integrative approach to develop solutions to com-
plicated and convoluted engineering problems. A system is a set of elements
interacting with each other and as a whole, interacting with its environment.
Todays engineering problems are more complex than in the past.
A phone
should not only have the ability to make a call, but it is also expected to be an
entertainment and working device including internet access, touch screen, and
camera. Cars are soon expected to drive autonomously and connect to other
cars instead of only being able to use cruise control. This development increases
the complexity of systems. To keep up with this increasing complexity, system
engineering could be used. Systems engineering provides guidelines on how to
develop systems, consisting of technical and management activities. Technical
activities include specifying, designing and building the desired system. Manage-
ment activities include planning the eort, observing the technical performance,
managing the risk, and controlling the technical standard of the system. Gener-
ally, systems engineering includes activities to institute top-level goals, specify
system requirements, incorporate alternative designs, integrate components and
to verify systems requirements [FMS08]. Examples of applied systems engineer-
ing are, inter alia, model-based design and the SMArDT framework which will
be presented in the ensuing section.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Foundations
3
1.2.2
SMArDT
The following section describes the idea and realization of SMArDT, as currently
used by the BMW Group. SMArDT is a model-based specication method of
systems engineering. The method makes use of the V-model and model-based
approaches for requirements specication, which will both be explained below.
The V-model is a process model, giving a structure on how to realize complex
projects. Comparable approaches for project realization are the waterfall model
or agile software development [Coc07, Boe88].
The V-model is designed as
advice for planning and executing development projects [.2004] and used in
the software development process of applications in elds like automotive and
military [RCT09, .2004]. SMArDT consists of multiple layers of V-models.
The name V-model derived from its graphical representation, depicting the let-
ter 'V' (see Graphic 1.1). The model has a horizontal and a vertical graduation
structure. On a horizontal level, the left side describes the project denition,
i.e.
the creation of system specications and the decomposition of require-
ments. The right side describes the project testing and implementation, i.e. the
integration of developed components and their verication and validation. On a
vertical level, the V-model describes the abstraction or decomposition of speci-
cations, going from abstract to precise top-to-bottom. Each left-sided denition
layer comprises a corresponding testing step on the right-sided integration layer
[HKK+18].
For example, a project to develop a software module for a loading hatch to
charge the battery of an electric car will start on the top left of the V-model
dening system requirements from the costumers' point of view, e.g. being able
to open or close the hatch electronically. These requirements get more precise
following the left side to the bottom, where they are clear enough to transform
them into software code. Precise requirements denition would be which signal
has to be adjusted and in which way to control the motor responsible for opening
and closing the hatch. The software code is subsequently created from the model
and tested on each abstraction layer, following the right part of the V-model
until the project nishes at the top.
The V-models structure has several advantages in product development: Im-
proved transparency and planability minimize project risks, the standardized
process model ensures complete results in expected quality, as well as transpar-
ent and controllable cost calculation and the description of all relevant elements,
increases communication between all stakeholders.[.2004]
On the other hand, the V-model is prone to errors if not combined with auto-
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
Idea
Product
Abstraction
Validation 
Validation 
Validation 
Development
Implementation
Figure 1.1: Process from idea to product in the V-model
mated test generation. This could lead to inconsistencies between specications
dened on the left side of the V-model and testing on the right side of the
V-model. Additionally, tests need to be altered manually if specications are
changed or updated. Often specications are only updated on the lower and
more precise layers, leading to disparity to upper abstraction layers.[HKK+18]
Another essential part of SMArDT is the model-based approach. Model-based
design has been subject to extensive research [EKB+08, GKL+10, Ric93]. Its
principle is to dene models representing the required functionality in an ex-
ecutable form instead of specifying requirements through e.g.
programming
language artefacts or in a natural language like specication books. These mod-
els are used as a common language coherent to all engineers involved in the
development [BK08]. This requires the development of detailed models early in
the process, which is more time-demanding and work-intensive in the rst step.
This strategy of increasing the eort early in the process is called frontloading.
Frontloading ensures project verication and validation early in the process,
eases information ow and communication between interdisciplinary teams and
reduces dierences between requirements [KMS+17].
As requirements can be dicult to specify early in the development, they are
mostly rened during the process, resulting in continuously evolving models
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Foundations
5
bridging the gap between highly abstracted requirements and low-level details.
This ensures the ability to go back and forth between high-level and low-level
requirements in the design process.[KMS+17, EKB+08]
The standard for functional safety of road vehicles introduced in 2011, ISO
26262 [Int18], called for a new specication approach for safety-relevant auto-
motive functions. Following this demand, SMArDT was developed [HKK+18],
combining V-model and model-based design to a frame tailored for software
development and automated model-based testing. Due to its widespread use,
support through professional tools and clear language, a domain specic form of
SysML was developed as modelling language [KRM+18]. SMArDT consists of
horizontal layers for project denition, and project testing and implementation.
It also consists of four vertical abstraction layers (see graphic 1.2).
The abstraction layers are designed as followed:
Layer 1 Object of reection: The rst layer consists of the function under review
and displays its boundaries from a customers point of view.
Layer 2 Logical layer: The second layer consists of functional specications without
insights of their technical realization.
Layer 3 Technical Concept: The third layer consists of detailed technical concepts
including software architecture, the architecture of the on-board power
network, and a mapping between these. It provides information about
which requirements will be implemented in software and which will be
implemented in hardware.
Layer 4 Hardware and Software realization: The fourth layer consists of the soft-
ware and hardware pieces implemented in the system. [KRM+18, DHG+19]
Similar to the V-model each development abstraction layer is tested on the
equivalent implementation side.
SMArDT targets the above-mentioned weaknesses of the V-model by using
model-based design to automatically generate test cases [DHG+19] (more in
1.2.4) and provides a clear, consistent language using a subset of SysML. Due
to these well-dened rules on how to use SysML for function modelling SMArDT
is able to manufacture those cases from activity diagrams and state charts.
Automatically creating tests establishes consistency between specications on
the development side and testing on the implementation side. Furthermore, the
tests do not need to be altered by hand, once the model has been changed.
SMArDT tackles both, the consistency and automation. The code generated
==PAGE:16==
6
Introduction
from layer 4 models can be tested against tests created from models on abstrac-
tion layers 2 to 4 [DHG+18] (see Graphic 1.2). This, on the one hand, comprises
the advantage that the code can be tested against all abstraction layers which
ensures that all functionalities are covered. And, on the other hand, tests and
code are not generated from the same model. This means testing does not rely
on a generator versus generator concept. Automatic test case generation does
not only establish consistency between left and right side of the SMArDT model,
it also establishes consistency on a vertical level, between each abstraction layer
as the test cases on the right side are derived from higher abstraction layers.
The established consistency within SMArDT eliminates the disparity in the pro-
cess. Having a rened test case generator (see again 1.2.4) allows to generate
and execute more meaningful tests than it could be done by hand.
1st layer
2nd layer
Req
Req
Object of reflection
Logical layer
3rd layer
Req
4th layer
Req
Technical concept
HW+SW realization
Req
Structural 
refinement validation
Dxth
SysML diagrams xth layer
Req
Textual requirements
Trace link
Manual transformation
Automatically generated
Product
Artifact
deployment
Test1’’’
Test2’’’
Test3’’
Test4’
product
Automatically transformed
New in
SMArDT
D
D
Sys1  
Test1
D
D
Sys2
Test1’
Test2
D
D
Sys3
Test1’’
Test2’
Test3
D
D
Code4
Test1’’’
Test2’’
Test3’
Test4
Classical
V-Model
original
Figure 1.2: SMArDT Method [DHG+19]
1.2.3
SysML
The SysML is a graphical modeling language based on the Unied Modeling
Language (UML) to ease the use of the model-based approach.
UML is an
object-oriented modelling language created in the mid-nineties.
During this
time the success of object-oriented programming languages called for an object-
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Foundations
7
oriented modelling language as analysis and design complexity of software de-
velopment increased. UML became and is the standard language for writing
software schemes, modelling behaviour, and structure of systems, as it is so-
phisticated, thought-through and established [BRJ04].
A subset of UML was extended to assist systems engineering tasks, resulting
in the SysML. SysML contains nine diagrams, whereas SMArDT does operate
with a subgroup of them.
Each diagram has the purpose of representing a
certain aspect of the model and can be connected with other diagrams, thus,
dierent layers and views of the model can be represented [FMS08].
This section will elaborate two project-relevant SysML diagrams, used in the
SMArDT framework, namely the activity diagram and the statechart diagram.
These two diagrams are qualied to be used by the test case generator for test
case generation.
A statechart diagram is used to describe the dynamic behaviour of an object
in a system and is part of the group of behavioural diagrams [RJB03]. The
behavior is analyzed and represented as a series of events that can occur. It
is a view of an object that isolates it from the rest of the world. A statechart
diagram consists of a nite number of states and transitions. A state describes
the condition an object is in for a period of time and can contain actions, often a
simple computation or assignment. The state actions can be divided into entry
actions, which are executed when the state is entered, and exit actions, which
are executed when the state is left. A statechart diagram can contain several
types of states, e.g. simple states, initial state, nite state, submachine states,
and composite states. A simple state is a state with no substructure, the initial
and nite states are pseudostates that indicate start and nish of the statechart.
A composite state is a simple state that has been decomposed into sequential or
concurrent substates. A submachine state is a reference to another statechart.
States are connected by transitions.
Transitions can contain event triggers,
guard conditions, and actions. An event trigger is an event that enables the
transition. When the transition is enabled, a possible guard condition is eval-
uated.
The transition is only taken if the event is triggered and the guard
condition holds true. An action is executed when the transition is taken.
Figure 1.3 shows an exemplary statechart diagram representing the logic of a
pedestrian trac light.
It consists of an initial state, depicted by the black
dot, two simple states depicting the states Red Light and Green Light, and a
nal state. The transition from initial state to Red Light has no event trigger,
leading to that the transitions event is triggered constantly. When the guard
condition lights turned on holds true, the transition is taken and the active
state switches to the next one. The transition from Red Light to Green Light
==PAGE:18==
8
Introduction
is taken when 30 seconds have passed and the pedestrian lights button was
pressed. After another 30 seconds, active state changes back to Red Light. In
case the condition lights turned off holds true, the transition from Green
Light to the nal node is taken.
Red Light
Green Light
[waited 30s &&
Button was pressed]
[waited 30s]
[Lights turned
On]
[Lights turned
Off]
Figure 1.3: Statechart diagram
An activity diagram is a special form of statechart and is also part of the be-
havioural diagram group. It is designed to model computations and workow
[RJB03] and consists of multiple node types and edges, connecting the nodes.
An activity diagram can contain three main types of nodes:
• Action nodes to model to model concrete actions, represented by rectangles
with rounded corners
• Item ows to model concrete objects, represented by rectangles
• Control nodes to model start and termination of the diagram, as well as
sequential, concurrent and branched ows
Edges are represented by arrows describing control and data ow between nodes.
Figure 1.4 depicts an exemplary activity diagram representing the logic of an
ATM. The rst action node in the example is PIN entered with an edge leading
to a decision node. The decision node has two branches, guarded by PIN ==
correct and PIN == incorrect.
If the correct PIN was entered, the ATM
will reduce the amount of money on the user's account and issue the money
in concurrent actions. Subsequently, the nal node of the activity diagram is
reached. If the incorrect PIN was entered the user is supposed to re enter his
code.
The SMArDT specication method uses a subset of the SysML diagrams and
stricter modelling guidelines to ensure consistent modelling and seamless au-
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Foundations
9
PIN entered
Issue Money
Reduce 
Account
[PIN ==
Correct]
[PIN == Not Correct]
Figure 1.4: Activity diagram
tomated test generation. To give an idea in how far the SMArDT modelling
guidelines restrict the SysML modelling, some exemplary guidelines for activity
diagrams are described below:
• Every information used in a diagram has to be dened explicitly
• Every diagram can contain only one initial and one nal node and at least
one path connecting those
• Every exit of a decision node needs to contain a guard condition. Should
logic-wise no guard condition be needed, the guard is [else]
1.2.4
Test Case Generator
The BMW Group has developed a test case generator to automatically create
test cases from statechart and activity diagrams within the SMArDT framework
to avoid the error-prone manual test case creation. This subsection gives an
insight in the functioning of the test case generator on basis of [DHG+18]. This
is explained by using the example of an activity diagram. The test case creation
for statechart diagrams works in a similar fashion and will therefore not be
presented.
The test case creator produces test cases using activity diagrams modelled in
the SMArDT subset of the SysML. The SMArDT models are exported to a
diagram conforming to UML/P. UML/P is a subset of the UML with focus on
programming applications [Rum16] which will be used as an input for the test
case generator. Continuing from the UML/P diagram the test case generator
applies two applications to subsequently continue with a path calculation algo-
rithm. These applications are called hierarchy resolution and fork attening.
==PAGE:20==
10
Introduction
Hierarchy resolution resolves nested activities, which are activity diagrams within
activities. To achieve this, the nested activities are integrated into the upper-
most activity. Initial and nal node of the nested diagram are removed and
the rst and last activities are connected to the parent diagram. Figure 1.5 de-
picts an activity diagram containing a nested activity before and after hierarchy
resolution.
Activity 1
Activity 2
Activity 1
Activity 2
Nested Activity
1)
2)
Figure 1.5: A nested activity before 1) and after 2) hierarchy resolution
Fork attening resolves parallel ows by rearranging them to a sequential ow.
Since forks simulate concurrent ows, their order is changeable as long as the
sequence of each individual ow is kept. In addition, parallel ows can be as-
sumed as linearly independent due to the degree of abstraction used in SMArDT
abstraction layer 3. Figure 1.6 shows an activity diagram before and after fork
attening.
Subsequently to the application of hierarchy resolution and fork attening sym-
bolic signals and all the symbolic values they can take are collected from the
diagram. The symbolic values signals can take within the activity diagram is
determined through assignments and guard conditions. In a next step every
path of the diagram is traversed using a depth rst search. Knowing the val-
ues each signal can take the test case generator can determine which paths of
the diagram are reachable. Each valid execution path of the activity diagram
will result in a single test case. Therefore a plurality of test cases can be gen-
erated by a single diagram. Going back to the activity diagram of an ATM
presented in 1.4, the test case generator will nd two valid and zero non-valid
paths and hence produce two test cases. Assuming the fork attening is carried
out, one path will go from PIN entered straight to the nal node and the other
path will go from PIN entered to Issue Money, then to Reduce Amount and
==PAGE:21==
1.2 Foundations
11
Activity 1
Activity 2
Activity 1
Activity 2
1)
2)
Figure 1.6: A parallel ow before 1) and after 2) fork attening
subsequently to the nal node.
A test case consists of one ore more test steps. The test case generator can
produce two kinds of test steps, status and control. Status will read the value of
a signal and control will write the value of a signal. The goal is to execute the
test case in a simulation environment, thus the test case generator creates test
steps to enable the environment to step through the case. If the environment is
supposed to execute an action, this action will be evaluated in test step, a status
step is created. Example for this is an action node. In case the environment
needs a specic signal to continue stepping through the desired test, the signal
is changed in the testing environment, a control step is created. Example for
this is a guard condition. Going back to the ATM diagram, the two created test
case will consequently look as followed:
Listing 1.1: Path one ATM test case
1
Status: PIN
entered
2
Control: PIN = Not
Correct
Listing 1.2: Path two ATM test case
1
Status: PIN
entered
2
Control: PIN = Correct
3
Status: Issue
Money
4
Status: Reduce
Account
==PAGE:22==
12
Introduction
1.2.5
Software in the Loop in context of automotive test-
ing
As mentioned above present vehicles can contain numerous electronic control
units (ECUs) and these ECUs need to be programmed, i.e. ashed with embed-
ded software. Each ECU software is a complex system that needs to be assessed
and improved in a variety of ways until safe and ready for the market [GRR16].
Thus, testing represents an integral part of ECU software development. This
section will give a deeper insight on what an ECU is, elaborate on dierent test-
ing strategies in the automotive sector, and present each strategies advantages
and disadvantages. A special focus is put on software in the loop (SiL) testing.
Electronic Control Unit
An ECU is a programmed controlling and operating system implemented in a
car or other machines [DSBR16]. A vehicle contains up to 70 ECUs [EJ09] to
control functions like anti-lock braking system or speed control. Sensors detect a
physical parameter (e.g. speed) and a controller compares it with a target value.
If measured value and target values do not match, the physical process gets read-
justed by the ECUs actuators to correct the running process (e.g. the speed gets
increased). Thus, an ECU is a sensor, controller and actor tailored to monitor
specic functions. The embedded system consists of a hardware part containing
a microprocessor among other electronic components and a software part, con-
taining the rmware. The microprocessor can be reprogrammed, meaning the
ECU gets equipped with new or updated software, to implement or improve e.g.
control algorithms or functions. The software developed within the SMArDT
framework is ECU rmware for the BMW Groups electric drive train.
Test Drives
An intuitive approach to assess the functionality of ECU software is to perform
eld tests in form of test drives [BK08]. Field tests are a conclusive type of
testing, determining the functionality under real conditions. Taking the example
of an ECU controlling the loading hatch for charging an electric vehicle. A test
drive could determine its functionality under dierent external conditions. It
could determine if the loading hatch opens under the inuence of heavy wind
or how the loading hatch would handle a crash. Field tests usually are the last
form of testing and determine if a product is ready for the market. Field tests,
however, are also a cost-intensive and low-frequent form testing, since the tests
run in real-time and test driver and proong ground need to be provided.
==PAGE:23==
1.2 Foundations
13
Vehicle in the Loop
Another testing approach is vehicle in the loop (ViL). ViL testing is usually car-
ried out a step ahead of eld tests. Proong ground and test driver are replaced
by simulated driving conditions and a driver model [BNF16]. The system states
the ECU is supposed to handle are emulated, having the advantage of being less
resource demanding then test drives and providing higher testing frequency. In
the example of the loading hatch, the functionality will be tested under safe
conditions, usually indoors. ViL testing gives evidence how the loading hatch
ECU performs in a completed vehicle before tested in external conditions. It
could give insight into how the ECU works in combination with the tachometer,
displaying whether the hatch is opened or closed.
Hardware in the Loop
Yet another testing approach is hardware in the loop (HiL).
This approach
focuses on certain subsystems of the vehicle rather than the vehicle itself, which
leads to a reduction of physical components. Instead of testing the ECU while
being embedded in the vehicle, the control unit is tested separately [Jai09].
Going back to the example of the loading hatch for HiL testing. The loading
hatch ECU, the loading hatch itself, and the connecting bus system are removed
from the vehicle. Signals from other ECUs needed for testing are emulated by a
real-time simulation interacting with the remaining physical parts. To simulate
missing physical parts, their behaviour is described in a model, further called
plant model.
The plant model quality is the key feature deciding how well
the parts can be emulated [TSB10].
HiL still represents an actual software
implementation on the target ECU and the testing is carried out in real-time.
The loading hatch software's functionality would rst be tested on hardware in
HiL. However, despite not being as close to real test conditions as eld tests and
ViL, HiL provides a safer, cheaper and quicker way of testing than the afore-
mentioned strategies. Together with ViL, HiL is part of the so-called ECU based
development step.
Software in the Loop
SiL is a form of testing that is carried out solely on a personal computer, mean-
ing that every physical component in charge of testing is removed from the
equation and replaced by a simulation component emulating its behaviour. The
ECU is replaced by a so-called virtual ECU (vECU), which is a solution to test
ECU software without hardware components. A vECU, inter alia, consists of an
==PAGE:24==
14
Introduction
emulated microprocessor, and provides a realistic scheduling behaviour for its
functionalities and connection to simulated buses. A simulation environment,
further called co-simulation tool, simulates the behaviour of the physical compo-
nents, their functionalities, and their interaction with each other in closed-loop
[Jai09]. The co-simulation tool is able to execute plant model, vECU, the soft-
ware in charge of testing in compliance with eventual safety regulations. Usually,
a testing tool is needed to inject the test cases that should be carried in the co-
simulation tool and evaluating the results. The environment of SiL testing as
described is pictured in Figure 1.7. The parts of a SiL environment are backed
up by technical literature, see also Section Related Work 5. In the example of
the loading hatch, SiL testing gives evidence in how far the written code matches
the expected functionalities. It could be tested if a signal for opening the hatch
is followed by according processes in the vECU.
vECUs
Safety 
Regulations
Co-Simulation Tool
Software to 
Test
Test Cases
Plant Model
Testing Tool
Figure 1.7: Components in a SiL Environment
SiL testing provides great benets. As it is completely software-based no expen-
sive and space-demanding physical components are needed, it can be executed
on a standard personal computer, thus the testing costs are reduced. The speed
of execution is not bound to real-time, it depends on the processor speed of
the computer to be used. This provides a high testing frequency to increase
the systematic testing volume. The simulation can be stopped at any time and
being stepped through, which allows debugging. Faults can be entered in the
simulation to verify how the system behaves in situations that cannot be tested
in ViL or HiL, e.g. extreme temperatures. SiL also eases virtual integration,
bringing all partners working on the project closer together by being able to
share test environments online. [MHS06, SLH12, Jun16]
==PAGE:25==
1.3 Outline of Structure
15
However, SiL testing requires the work-intensive tasks of creating a vECU and
a detailed plant model.
Model in the Loop
A rst form of testing ECU software is model in the loop (MiL). During the
MiL phase, usually fragments of the software are tested on mathematical and
physical models of the plant, or in this case the vehicle. The software design
is tested, as hardware independent and not the ECU specic properties. MiL
represents a rst step in testing ECU software.
1.3
Outline of Structure
This section justies the problem to be solved in this project and afterwards
gives an outline of how the following parts of the thesis are structured.
Outline of Problem
Section 1.2.2 presented model-based automated test generation as an essential
part of the SMArDT framework. Section 1.2.4 introduced a sophisticated tool to
automatically create test cases from SysML models and section 1.2.5 highlighted
the benets of SiL in context of automotive testing. As of today, the SMArDT
framework does contain a methodology to enable HiL testing, but not to enable
SiL testing.
However, implementing a method for SiL testing would further
improve testing within the SMArDT framework. Hence, the goal of this thesis
is to assess whether or not it is feasible to implement SiL testing of ECU software
with the existing test case generator in the SMArDT environment. This means
to determine how a SiL tool chain in conext of SMArDT has to be designed and
to create a tool chain prototype.
The problem to solve can be divided in two sub-problems:
(1) How to develop a tool chain for SiL in context of SMArDT?
(2) How to automate the implemented tool chain to increase usability?
==PAGE:26==
16
Introduction
The solution to problem (1) is presented in Chapter 2 and the solution to prob-
lem (2) is presented in Chapter 3.
The implementation of the SiL tool chain within SMArDT will further answer in
how far the in-house developed test case generator is capable of producing test
cases suitable for SiL, and, concluding, in how far it should thus be enhanced.
It will also be examined what information the system models on abstraction
layer 3 should contain to enable the test case generator to produce meaningful
SiL tests, since this abstraction layer is used for test generation.
Further Structure
Subsequently, the implemented solutions will be tested and evaluated in chapter
4. Further evaluation is carried out in chapter 5 when the presented solution
is compared to related work. Chapter 6 introduces future work and draws a
conclusion.
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 2
Tool Chain Development
The following chapter shows how the concept of a SiL testing is transferred to
the SMArDT environment and the developing of a tool chain using the test case
generator. In a rst step, a concept for SiL testing within SMArDT is developed
(2.1), subsequently, actual tools are selected and their connections established
(2.2), and in the last step, a structure within the tools is developed (2.3).
2.1
Concept for SiL testing within SMArDT
Figure 1.7 depicts the components of a SiL environment.
This environment
was translated to the SMArDT framework. The result is pictured in Figure
2.1. The system model is the origin for both, the test cases produced by the
test case generator and the software in charge of being tested.
The system
model represents a SysML model on abstraction layer 3, which is used for test
generation. Reason for this is that on abstraction layer 3 the decision is made
which requirements will be implemented in software and which in hardware. In
conclusion, the models need to be further specied to abstraction layer 4 to
generate the software to test. This step is indicated by the screw head. The
tests used to verify the software are created by the test case generator. The
implementation of the test cases in the SiL environment is done manually in a
==PAGE:28==
18
Tool Chain Development
testing tool. This step is also indicated by a screw head. Similar to Figure 1.7
a co-simulation tool is needed to run plant model, vECUs, software to test in
closed-loop and according to the safety regulations dened in ISO 26262.
Test Platform
vECUs
ISO 26262
Regulations
Co-Simulation Tool
Software to 
Test
System Model
Test Case 
Generator
Plant Model
Figure 2.1: Components in a SiL Environment within the SMArDT framework
The adapted SiL environment is further broken down to determine which tools
are needed for a tool chain. The objective of the SiL tool chain is to execute
and evaluate tests derived from SysML models. Developing the software to test
is therefore not part of the tool chain. The tools needed are a modelling tool
(1), the test case generator (2), a testing tool (3), and a co-simulation tool(4).
This tool chain is shown in Figure 2.2.
Test Case Generator
Co-Simulation Tool
Modelling Tool
Testing Tool
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Figure 2.2: Tools in the SiL tool chain
In a next step, the required functionalities for each tool in the tool chain were
determined. This is illustrated in Figure 2.3. The modelling tool needs to create
activity diagrams and state charts to model the desired behaviour of the ECU.
The test case generator grasps the SysML diagram logic and transforms it into
test patterns, led in test cases. A testing tool serves multiple purposes. It reads
the test pattern generated by the test case generator and alters the pattern if
necessary. It further passes the test logic on to a simulation device. And it reads
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Tool Selection
19
and evaluates the results fabricated by the simulation device. It is also capable
of working with dierent simulation devices, e.g. test rigs for HiL testing and
co-simulation tools for SiL testing, to guarantee a wide range of applications.
As described earlier in section 1.2.5 the co-simulation tool serves the purpose of
co-simulating vECUs, plant model and the software artefact in charge of testing.
It is responsible for executing the test cases dened in the testing tool.
Test Case Generator
Test Case Creation
Co-Simulation Tool
Test Execution
Modelling Tool
Activity Diagram 
Creation
Testing Tool
Test Logic Translation
Test Evaluation
(1)
(4)
(3)
(2)
Figure 2.3: Tools and corresponding function in the tool chain
The next section (2.2) presents tools that satisfy the determined functionalities,
and shows how these tools were connected.
2.2
Tool Selection
The tools in the tool chain, their functionalities, and their connection are shown
in Figure 2.4. A modeller established in the BMW Groups electric drive system
testing department was chosen as modelling tool. The tool bears the advan-
tage that test engineers do not have to familiarize themselves with a new tool.
Additionally, a connection between the chosen modelling tool and the test case
generator has already been implemented, as presented in section 1.2.4. Dia-
grams conforming to the SMArDT modelling guidelines can be exported from
the modelling tool to Extensible Markup Language (XML) les processable by
the test case generator. This ensures a quick and reliable connection between
tool number one and two in the tool chain.
The test case generator is a house-internal tool. Its output is a test case, con-
sisting of one or more testing steps, in form of an XML le. The test cases
have to be enhanced manually to be executable in the testig tool for the spe-
cic testing environment. The selected testing tool is a proven third-party tool
specialized for ECU testing, meaning that it provides application programming
interfaces (APIs) to support a range of test independent simulation and execu-
tion devices, e.g. for HiL and SiL testing. The selected tool is able to specify,
implement and assess test cases. Section 2.3 gives more insight into the chosen
structure within the test case implementation. Test cases and additional infor-
==PAGE:30==
20
Tool Chain Development
mation are stored in XML les, similar to the output of the test case generator.
XML is a platform- and implementation independent language, which provides
the opportunity to manipulate the test cases outside of the testing tool. The
importance of XML is further presented in Chapter 3. This presents more pos-
sibilities to automate the connection of test case generator and testing tool. As
the selected testing tool provides all functions necessary, especially guaranteeing
exibility in terms of the simulation environment, and is already established, it
was refrained from developing a new tool from scratch.
Test Case Generator
Test Case Creation
Co-Simulation Tool
Test Execution
Modelling Tool
Activity Diagram 
Creation
Testing Tool
Test Logic Translation
Test Evaluation
(1)
(4)
(3)
(2)
Export 
Script
Manual
Adaption
Tool 
APIs
Figure 2.4: Tools, corresponding function, and connection in the tool chain
As tool number four, a co-simulation tool was chosen that already proved to
satisfy the BMW Group's standards in other projects.
This tool provides
the features of generating and driving vECUs on a personal computer.
Ad-
ditionally, it uses automotive standards like AUTOSAR, A2L, MDF, CAN and
XCP ([PZ16, Sch15, Vos10, ASA14]) and is delivered with already implemented
vECUs. This is important, as the step of developing a vECU is already carried
out. Additionally, an existing plant model and the code to test were already
available within the selected co-simulation tool. To connect testing tool and co-
simulation tool their APIs were used. A so-called test bench conguration was
created to generate ports to address the co-simulation tools software. A second
test conguration was created to connect these ports to testing tool internal
variables. This allows the user to access internal ECUs, in this case vECUs,
variables using shorter signal names. Hence, communication with the vECU
is possible using signal names instead of memory addresses.
This is accom-
plished using a description le, called A2L le. An A2L le is an information
le dening the implementation of an ECU [ASA]. It contains all relevant data
information in the control unit. This information is, inter alia, memory address
and data type for parameters and real and virtual measured variables. Using the
test bench and the test congurations allowed for seamless connection between
testing tool and co-simulation tool in both directions.
After reasoning for the selected tools and enabling interconnections, the next
section gives a deeper insight into the chosen structure within the tools. More
precisely an inner structure of the testing tool is presented.
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Testing Tool Structure
21
2.3
Testing Tool Structure
As described in section 1.2.2, the SysML models represent the required function-
ality of the nal product in several layers of abstraction. For this thesis, models
of abstraction layer 3, the technical concept layer, will be used. The technical
concept layer provides information on which requirements will be integrated into
software and which will be integrated into hardware. This information is neces-
sary for software testing. Layer 4 is used to generate the ECU software. As not
the lowest abstraction layer is used to generate test cases, not all information
necessary for testing will be available in the model and therefore in the testing
pattern generated by the test case generator. The missing information needs to
be added to the generated tests.
The SysML models on abstraction layer 3 are described in symbolic terms,
further called symbolic signals and symbolic values. An example for assigning
a symbolic value to a symbolic signal could be the test step of opening the
loading hatch with the term HatchPosition = open, whereby hatchPosition
represents a symbolic signal and open a symbolic value.
To bridge the gap
from modelling tool, over testing tool to co-simulation tool two mappings are
necessary. First, a mapping from symbolic signals to the actual signals in the
simulation model. This mapping is further called global mapping. Second, a
mapping from actual signals, further just signals, to the memory addresses used
by the co-simulation tool. This is done with the A2L-le. The whole mapping
chain from symbolic signal to memory address is depicted in Figure 2.5.
Symbolic Signal
Memory Address
Signal
Global 
Mapping
A2L
Modelling Tool
Testing Tool
Co-Simulation 
Tool
Figure 2.5: Mapping from symbolic signal to memory address in the SiL tool
chain
To add the missing information on layer 3 the symbolic signal loading hatch
needs to be mapped to the corresponding signal in the simulation model, which
could e.g.
be the output of a sensor measuring the position of the loading
==PAGE:32==
22
Tool Chain Development
hatches lock. This can be done within the testing tool. The testing tool therefore
contains two mapping les, the global mapping, and the A2L-le.
An easy-to-change global mapping allows to easily connect to dierent A2L-
les, and therefore to easily switch between, e.g. SiL testing and HiL testing
using the same test case. Hence, the test case is reusable. The symbolic signal
loading hatch might be mapped to a dierent signal in a dierent A2L-le
for SiL testing than for HiL testing. Therefore, the global mapping determines,
testing tool internal, on which platform the test should be carried out. Figure
2.6 depicts the global mapping.
SiL
HiL
ViL
mapping
symbolic signal → signal
Test 
Case 
Logic
Figure 2.6: Global mapping of symbolic signals to signals
Similar to the global mapping, linking to signals, a parameter mapping is nec-
essary to add information to the test cases generated from abstraction layer 3.
The parameter names in the SysML models are also dened in natural language,
the afore introduced symbolic values. The symbolic values need to be mapped
to actual values the signals can take, further called signal values. This can also
be done within the testing tool. An easy-to-change parameter mapping allows
to easily adapt to dierent scenarios using the same test case. Going back to
the example of loading hatch = open, the symbolic value open needs to be
mapped to a signal value.
In case the signal loading hatch represents the
position of the loading hatch of the vehicle, the symbolic value open could be
the output of a sensor measuring the position of loading hatch. Therefore the
parameter open needs to be mapped to a signal value indicating an open hatch
as measured by the sensor. This could be a certain voltage level or a certain
degree represented as oating point number. Another scenario could test the
loading hatch opening to a normal degree and another one could test the loading
hatch opening to a greater degree. Figure 2.7 shows the mapping from test case
logic to dierent scenarios using the parameter mapping.
How each mapping benets the testing structure is shown above.
The test
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Testing Tool Structure
23
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
mapping
symbolic value → signal value
Test 
Case 
Logic
Figure 2.7: Parameter mapping of symbolic values to signal values
engineer can manually create global mapping and parameter mapping les sep-
arately next to the test case les within the chosen testing tool. This allows
creating an interchangeable mapping structure, making the generated test cases
reusable and adaptable to a broad range of applications.
Figure 2.8 depicts
the possibilities of using two independent mappings as used in the tool chain
designed.
SiL
HiL
ViL
mapping
symbolic signal → signal
Test 
Case 
Logic
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
mapping
symbolic value → signal value
Figure 2.8: Global mapping and parameter mapping within the testing tool
A rst prototype of the SiL tool chain was developed by determining the needed
functionalities and choosing the corresponding tools accordingly. Additionally,
a testing tool internal structure was introduced to easily adapt the tool chain
to other applications and add the information missing on abstraction layer 3.
The following chapter 3 will further enhance the tool chain by automating steps
currently carried out by hand.
==PAGE:34==
24
Tool Chain Development
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
Tool Chain Automation
Section 2 explained how a rst prototype of the SiL tool chain was build con-
necting chosen tools. It can execute and evaluate software tests derived from
SysML models, enabling automated generation of SiL tests within the SMArDT
framework. Additionally, it provides re-usability and adaptability of the gen-
erated test cases. Nevertheless, the handling of the tool chain provides room
for improvement. This task is tackled in the following chapter. Section 3.1 de-
termines the part of the tool chain with the highest potential for improvement
in form of automation and introduces a solution on how to tap this potential.
Section 3.2 describes the implementation of said solution.
3.1
Tool Chain Problem Denition
An approach to ensure smooth operation of the tool chain is to increase the
automation. This means to minimize the amount of manual and human-assisted
steps in the process. Section 2 already mentioned steps currently carried out by
hand. These manual steps are:
• Adapt the test cases created by the test case generator to the testing tool
==PAGE:36==
26
Tool Chain Automation
• Create a global mapping le to map symbolic signals to signal
• Create a parameter mapping le to map symbolic values to signal values
All three steps are part of the connection between test case generator and testing
too in the tool chain. This reveals that said section of the tool chain as the one
with the most potential for improvement. Therefore, the thesis continues with
improving this connection.
To close the gap between test case generator and testing tool a new tool was
developed, further called connection tool. Figure 3.1 depicts the new tool chain
including the new connection between test case generator and testing tool.
Test Case Generator
Test Case Creation
Co-Simulation Tool
Test Execution
Modelling Tool
Activity Diagram 
Creation
Testing Tool
Test Logic Translation
Test Evaluation
(1)
(4)
(3)
(2)
Export 
Script
Connection 
Tool
Tool 
APIs
Figure 3.1: Tools, corresponding function, and automated connections in the
tool chain
The implementation of the connection tool and its functionalities are presented
in the following chapter.
3.2
Connection Tool Implementation
The connection tool implements the following features to simplify the connection
between test case generator and testing tool and to improve the usability of the
tool chain:
(1) Fluent and automated connection between test case generator and testing
tool
(1.1) Automate test case enhancement
(1.2) Automate parameter mapping generation
(1.3) Automate global mapping generation
(2) Oer tool chain usability to users with little knowledge of the testing tool
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Connection Tool Implementation
27
(3) Support of collaborative work
(4) Graphical user interface for intuitive and easy operation
(5) Transparency of actions carried out
(6) Point out false use of connection tool
(7) Adaptability for future testing tool versions
The connection tool is written in Python 3.7. Python was chosen as a pro-
gramming language due to its clean syntax, its extensive support libraries, good
documentation, and its high level, general approach programming style. Ad-
ditionally, Python enables easy integration of the connection tool into the test
case generator or the testing tool, which can be processed in the future.
The developed tool processes, alters, and creates XML les to make them pro-
cessable by the testing tool. An XML le is structured in nodes called elements.
Elements can contain attributes, text and other child elements, which can con-
tain attributes, text and child elements themselves. Listing 3.1 gives an example
of the XML structure. The element with the tag CAR contains the attribute
brand with the value BMW. Additionally, it contains the child element LOOK con-
taining more child elements. The element PRICE contains the text information
634.450 DKK.
Listing 3.1: XML example
1
<CAR brand="BMW">
2
<LOOK
model="X6">
3
<PAINTING
colour="silver" finish="glossy"/>
4
<PRICE >634.450
DKK</PRICE >
5
</LOOK >
6
</CAR>
Additionally, XML les enable the assignment of attributes or element tags to
namespaces. A namespace can be identied by its prex which is linked to a
unique name, e.g.
an Uniform Resource Locator (URL).
Namespaces allow
for distinct dierentiation between attributes or element tags between dierent
XML sources. Listing 3.2 shows an example of a namespace used. The attribute
model is assigned to a unique namespace associated with an URL.
==PAGE:38==
28
Tool Chain Automation
Listing 3.2: XML namespace example
1
<MOTORBIKE
xmlns:prefix="http :// www.bmw -motorrad.com/com/
index.html">
2
<LOOK
prefix:model="R nineT
Racer"\>
3
</MOTORBIKE >
An XML le can be accessed and manipulated by a parser. An XML parser
is a program that reads and analyses XML structures and provides the in the
le contained information for further processing.
Thus the parser reads the
information in every element. In general, a distinction can be made between
two parser types. The SAX parser and the DOM parser. The SAX parser is
event-driven. It reads the le as a sequential stream of data until it encoun-
ters information that triggers a priorly dened callback function. For example:
A callback function has been dened to return the text information stored in
PRICE. The SAX parser reads the XML le until it nds PRICE, and calls the
dened function to return the text information. The DOM parser, on the other
hand, is a tree-based parser. The entire XML le is parsed and returned as a
tree of nodes for further processing. As the SAX parser only makes a search
through the le until an event is triggered and the DOM parser searches through
the whole le, the SAX parser has a higher processing speed. The DOM parser
on the other side enables the user to navigate through an already parsed tree of
nodes. Thus, manipulating XML documents is more convenient using the DOM
parser.
For this project, the DOM based parser ElementTree [Lun18] has been chosen
due to the advantage of tree navigation. ElementTree provides benecial func-
tions to save an XML or string le in a tree, which can be searched through
starting from any element present. Additionally, it provides functions to ma-
nipulate the XML les elements, attributes or text information and to insert or
delete whole elements.
Feature 1: Fluent and automated connection between test case gen-
erator and testing tool
The purpose of the connection tool is to simplify the link between test case
generator and testing tool while maintaining the exible mapping structure
presented in section 2.3. To achieve this, three sub-features have been imple-
mented in the connection tool, whose realisation is presented subsequently. The
rst part presents the test case enhancement, the second part presents the gen-
eration of a parameter mapping le and the third part presents the generation
of a global mapping le.
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Connection Tool Implementation
29
Feature 1.1: Test case enhancement
A le readable by the testing tool containing test steps is called package. Pack-
ages can be nested, meaning a test step dened in a package can simply be a
link to another package containing the relevant test step information, e.g. check
the status for HatchPosition = open.
The test case generator makes use of package nesting. It creates a meta package
containing test steps extracted from the SysML model, which point to a package
supposed to implement said test step, further called implementation package.
As the implementation package is not generated by the test case generator,
it needs to be created manually. Listing 3.3 shows a test step generated by
the test case generator. The element TESTSTEP is the root of the step. The
symbolic signal, in this example HatchPosition, is stored in the dictionary of
the element VARIABLE-NAME in line 3. The symbolic signal value, here open, is
stored in the element DVALUE in line 4. The implementation package in charge
is referenced in the text information of element VALUE in line 8, here Status:
HatchPosition.pac. The test case created by the generator is a stringing of
such test steps.
Listing 3.3: Test step as generated by the test case generator
1
<TESTSTEP
format -rev="2" xsi:type="tsPackage">
2
<VARIABLE -REFS >
3
<VARIABLE -NAME dkey="HatchPosition ">
4
<DVALUE xsi:type="unicode">open </DVALUE >
5
</VARIABLE -NAME >
6
</VARIABLE -REFS >
7
<PACKAGE -REFERENCE
format -rev="1" xsi:type="
valueBaseExpression ">
8
<VALUE xsi:type="unicode">Status: HatchPosition .pac</
VALUE >
9
</PACKAGE -REFERENCE >
10
</TESTSTEP >
One condition to execute the test case is the existence of the referenced imple-
mentation packages. The connection automatically creates an implementation
package for each test step dened in the test case. In a rst step, the name of
the referenced packages is changed to a valid le name. Status:
HatchPosi-
tion.pac is changed to StatusHatchPosition.pac. Next, the tool grasps the
necessary information from each test step from the case, namely symbolic signal,
symbolic value, referenced package name and test step kind, meaning if a status
or control package is referenced. This is done by recursively iterating through
==PAGE:40==
30
Tool Chain Automation
the XML tree and grasping the information from the relevant elements. The
data is stored in a matrix, further called information matrix. The information
matrix for the HatchPosition step is shown below.
1
HatchPosition
2
open
3
StatusHatchPosition .pac
4
Status
In a next step, the information is utilized to ll a template to create the imple-
mentation packages. The template to create a status package consists of three
parts. A part for parameter mapping, a part for global mapping, and a part
for the actual test step.
The parameter mapping part is a package internal
mapping. The parameter mapping is shown in Listing 3.4.
Listing 3.4: Status template parameter mapping
1
<VARIABLES
xsi:type=" variableContainer ">
2
<VARIABLE
format -rev="1" in="true" out="true" xsi:type="
variable">
3
<NAME xsi:type="unicode">__symbolic_value__ </NAME >
4
<DESCRIPTION
xsi:type="unicode"/>
5
<DEFAULT -VALUE format -rev="1" xsi:type="value">
6
<DATA xsi:type="integer">__signal_value__ </DATA >
7
</DEFAULT -VALUE >
8
</VARIABLE >
9
</VARIABLES >
The text information of the element NAME in line 3 holds the symbolic value
and the text information of the element DATA in line 6 holds the signal value.
The tool nds these elements by iterating through the template looking for
the keywords __symbolic_value__ and __signal_value__. The keyword _-
_symbolic_value__ is subsequently replaced by the symbolic value stored in
the information matrix, in this case by open. The symbolic value is read from
a parameter mapping table, which is an input le for the tool.
This table
provides the information which symbolic value is mapped to which signal value.
An example is shown in Table 3.1. The symbolic values open and closed are
mapped to the signal values 5 and 0
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Connection Tool Implementation
31
Table 3.1: Parameter mapping table
open
5
close
0
The tool uses the Python package openpyxl [GC19] to utilize the parameter
mapping table. openpyxl is a library tailored to read and manipulate spread-
sheets. Its functions enable, inter alia, searching the spreadsheet for specic
terms or values and alter the input cells. The tool nds the signal value corre-
sponding to the symbolic value stored in the information matrix and replaces
the keyword __signal_value__ in the template.
The global mapping template of a status test step is shown in Listing 3.5. The
text information of the element ID in line 3 holds the symbolic value and the
text information of the element VARIABLE-PATH in line 6 holds the signal value.
The tool uses the same procedure as described above to ll the global map-
ping template. The keyword __symbolic_signal__ is replaced by the symbolic
signal name stored in the information matrix and the keyword __signal__ is
replaced by the corresponding signal name found in a global mapping table.
Listing 3.5: Status template global mapping
1
<MAPPING format -rev="1" xsi:type=" localMappingSpace ">
2
<MAPPING -ITEM format -rev="1" xsi:type="mappingItem">
3
<ID xsi:type="unicode">__symbolic_signal__ </ID>
4
<XACCESS
format -rev="2" xsi:type=" xaModelSignal ">
5
<MAPPING -ENUM xsi:type="vtabInfoEmpty "/>
6
<VARIABLE -PATH xsi:type="unicode">__signal__ </VARIABLE
-PATH >
7
</XACCESS >
8
</MAPPING -ITEM >
9
</MAPPING >
The test step part of the template is shown in Listing 3.6.
The text infor-
mation of the element MAPPING-REF in line 1 holds the symbolic signal, the
element NAME in line 6 holds symbolic value, and the element RELATION holds
the relation between symbolic signal and symbolic value. The test case gen-
erator exclusively creates test cases with the relation being "=", therefore this
part of the template is untouched. The tool uses the information matrix to re-
place the keywords __symbolic_signal__ and __symbolic_value__ with the
corresponding information.
==PAGE:42==
32
Tool Chain Automation
Listing 3.6: Status template test step
1
<MAPPING -REF xsi:type="unicode">__symbolic_signal__ </MAPPING
-REF>
2
<EXPECTATION
xsi:type=" timelessOption ">
3
<EXPRESSION
xsi:type=" builtNumericExpression ">
4
<RELATION
xsi:type="unicode">==</RELATION >
5
<VALUE xsi:type=" varBaseExpression ">
6
<NAME xsi:type="unicode">__symbolic_value__ </NAME >
7
</VALUE >
8
</EXPRESSION >
9
</EXPECTATION >
The control template diers slightly from the status template, but the concept
the implementation tool is using remains the same. Therefore, an elaboration
about lling the the control template will not be explained in detail.
By lling the complete template the test step is executable in the testing tool.
However, it is yet not callable from the test case. In order to evaluate the success
of the test step, the test case needs to contain information about which variables
the implementation package will send. These variables are the symbolic values
and the same XML structure as shown in the parameter mapping template,
Listing 3.4, is used. Therefore, the test case is enhanced by an parameter map-
ping template for each symbolic value the case contains. The template is lled
with the according information, symbolic value and signal value, subsequently.
The test case is enhanced by an internal parameter mapping.
The connection tool alters the test case created by the test case generator and
links each test step to a created implementation package. Every le is stored in
a location specied by the user and the altered test case is ready for execution
in the testing tool. Additionally, each implementation package is executable on
its own.
Feature 1.2: Parameter mapping generation
Similar to Feature 1.1: Test case enhancement, the package internal parameter
mapping is, as the name indicates, only applied to a single package, or in our
case to a single test step. This represents a quick and easy-to-use possibility of
mapping the parameters but sacrices adaptability and re-usability of the map-
ping. Adaptability, because each implementation packages internal parameter
mapping needs to be altered separately for testing a dierent scenario.
Re-
usability, because the internal parameter mapping cannot be conveyed to other
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Connection Tool Implementation
33
implementation packages without manually changing their internal mapping. To
comply with the mapping structure presented in section 2.3 and to solve the just
mentioned challenges an external parameter mapping that overshadows the in-
ternal is needed. This le, further also just called parameter mapping, contains
solely the information which symbolic signal value is mapped to which signal
value. One parameter mapping le represents one test scenario, and it can be
applied to any number of packages. Taking the example of HatchPosition =
open being a rst test step, the internal mapping might map open to the value
10. The external mapping can overshadow this mapping, and map open to the
value 200 to test a rst scenario. HatchPosition = close might be a second
test step in the test case and the same external mapping maps close to the
value 0. The external parameter mapping is applied to a whole test case, and
by changing it, dierent scenarios can be tested quick and seamless. Instead
of creating the parameter mapping le by hand, the connection tool automates
this process.
In a rst step, the symbolic signal value and the corresponding signal value
are read from the parameter mapping table introduced in Feature 1.1: Test
case enhancement. In a second step, this parameter mapping information is
inserted in a parameter mapping template. The template is shown in Listing
3.7 and consists of one mapping. The element NAME in line 4 holds the text
information representing the symbolic value and the element VALUE in line 6
holds the text information representing the signal value. The tool nds these
elements by iterating recursively through the root element PACKAGE-PARAMETER-
DATA searching for the keywords __symbolic_value__ and __signal_value_-
_.
These keywords are subsequently replaced by information read from the
parameter mapping table.
To create a parameter mapping le consisting of
more than one mapping, lled templates are stringed to one XML le.
Listing 3.7: Parameter mapping template
1
<?xml
version ="1.0"
encoding ="utf -8"?>
2
<PACKAGE -PARAMETER -DATA
xmlns:xsi="http :// www.w3.org /2001/
XMLSchema -instance">
3
<PARAMETER
xsi:type=" parameterEntry ">
4
<NAME xsi:type="unicode">__symbolic_value__ </NAME >
5
<VALUE format -rev="1" xsi:type=" valueBaseExpression ">
6
<VALUE xsi:type="integer">__signal_value__ </VALUE >
7
</VALUE >
8
</PARAMETER >
9
</PACKAGE -PARAMETER -DATA >
The resulting parameter mapping le is saved in a preselected location and can
==PAGE:44==
34
Tool Chain Automation
be used within the testing tool.
Feature 1.3: Global mapping generation
Similar to the internal parameter mapping the internal global mapping is only
applied to a single package, or in our case to a single test step. For the same
reasons, as described above, an external global mapping provides a higher adapt-
ability and re-usability.
The tool applies the same procedure as described in Feature 1.2: Parameter
mapping generation to ll a global mapping template. The text information
__symbolic_signal__ in element ID and __signal__ in element VARIABLE-
PATH are replaced with mapping information from a global mapping table. An
example of a global mapping table is given in Table 3.2. The symbolic signals
HatchLock and HatchPosition are in charge of being mapped to the real signal
names BMW_HatchLock_Sens1 and BMW_HatchPosition_Sens1.
Listing 3.8: Global mapping template
1
<?xml
version ="1.0"
encoding ="utf -8"?>
2
<MASTER -MAPPING
format -rev="1" xmlns:xsi="http :// www.w3.org
/2001/ XMLSchema -instance">
3
<MAPPING -ITEM format -rev="1" xsi:type="mappingItem">
4
<ID xsi:type="unicode">__symbolic_signal__ </ID>
5
<XACCESS format -rev="2" xsi:type=" xaModelSignal ">
6
<MAPPING -ENUM xsi:type="vtabInfoEmpty "/>
7
<VARIABLE -PATH xsi:type="unicode">__signal__ </VARIABLE
-PATH >
8
</XACCESS >
9
</MAPPING -ITEM >
10
</MASTER -MAPPING >
Table 3.2: Global mapping table
HatchLock
BMW_HatchLock_Sens1
HatchPosition
BMW_HatchPosition_Sens1
The resulting global mapping le is also saved in a preselected location subse-
quently and can be used within the testing tool.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Connection Tool Implementation
35
Figure 3.2 shows the inputs and outputs of the connection after implementation
of the described features. An enhanced test case, connected implementation
packages, and global and parameter mapping les are created. This is achieved
by using the test case created by the generator, global and parameter mapping
tables as an inputs, and templates.
Test Case
Parameter 
Mapping table
Global Mapping 
table
Connection Tool
Templates
Parameter 
Mapping file
Global Mapping 
file
Implementation 
package 1
Implementation 
package 2
Implementation 
package x
●●●
Enhanced Test 
Case
Figure 3.2: File creation by the connection tool as described in section Feature
1: Fluent and automated connection between test case generator
and testing tool
Feature 2: Usable by testing tool users of any experience
The altered test case produced by the test case generator, the implementation
packages, the parameter mapping le and the global mapping le are the build-
ing blocks needed to assemble an executable test case complying to the desired
mapping structure. Users familiar with the use of the testing tool are able to use
parts of the created les to integrate them into other test cases or alter the les
to their use. For example, a test step implementation le could be integrated
into another test case or a parameter mapping can be used for test cases already
executed for other scenarios. The modular nature of the created les allows for
exibility within the testing procedure. However, feedback from test engineers
showed that not everyone is willing to use the testing tool in this way. Thus,
the connection tool oers the possibility to create a test case that can be run
out of the box with all building blocks already assembled and still comply to
the desired mapping structure (see Figure 3.3). No testing tool experience is
required, the set-up and execution combined can be carried out with one click.
The testing tool oers the option to integrate the mapping les as well as the
implementation packages in a test frame, further called project le. A project
==PAGE:46==
36
Tool Chain Automation
Implementation 
package 1
Implementation 
package 2
Implementation 
package x
●●●
Parameter 
Mapping file
Global 
Mapping file
Enhanced Test 
Case
Project file
Figure 3.3: Building blocks and their connection within a project le
le can contain one or more packages that can be executed under use of the
mappings dened in the mapping les. This enables on the one hand that one
mapping le can be applied to many packages. On the other hand, the mapping
can easily be altered by exchanging the mapping les. To create a project le
the testing tool makes again use of a template. This template is shown in Listing
3.9. To ll the template the tool is recursively iterating through the template
to nd and replace relevant keywords. It is the same procedure as described
earlier. __project_name__ is replaced by a name generated from the test case
input le to indicate which case this projects executes.
__testcase_name_-
_ is replaced by the name under which the enhanced test case is stored. __-
testcase_location__, __global_location__, and __parameter_location_-
_ are replaced by the paths indicating the location of the enhanced test case,
and the global and parameter mapping les. The resulting project le is also
saved in a preselected location subsequently.
Listing 3.9: Project template
1
<?xml
version ="1.0"
encoding ="utf -8"?>
2
<PROJECT format -rev="10" xmlns:xsi="http :// www.w3.org /2001/
XMLSchema -instance">
3
<NAME xsi:type="unicode">__project_name__ </NAME >
4
<ENABLED xsi:type="boolean">True </ENABLED >
5
<REPORTING
xsi:type="boolean">True </REPORTING >
6
<COMPONENTS >
7
<COMPONENT
format -rev="5" xsi:type="packageTest">
8
<NAME xsi:type="unicode">__testcase_name__ </NAME >
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Connection Tool Implementation
37
9
<ENABLED
xsi:type="boolean">True </ENABLED >
10
<REPORTING
xsi:type="boolean">True </REPORTING >
11
<COMPONENTS/>
12
<PACKAGE -REF format -rev="1" style="relative" xsi:type=
"packageRef">
13
<PACKAGE -PATH xsi:type="unicode">
__testcase_location__ </PACKAGE -PATH >
14
</PACKAGE -REF>
15
</COMPONENT >
16
</COMPONENTS >
17
<MAPPING -FILES >
18
<ELEMENT
xsi:type="unicode">__global_location__ </ELEMENT
>
19
</MAPPING -FILES >
20
<PARAMETER -DATA xsi:type=" packageParameterData ">
21
<REFERENCED -FILE xsi:type="unicode">
__parameter_location__ </REFERENCED -FILE >
22
</PARAMETER -DATA >
23
</PROJECT >
Feature 3: Support collaborative work
The task of testing the ECU software within the electric drive system depart-
ment is carried out by a group of engineers. To guarantee a collaborative work
ow, test case sharing is essential. Within the department, the test cases are
shared through a common folder in the testing tool workspace directory. Ev-
ery authorized test engineer can access this shared folder to add, remove or
manipulate les.
The connection tool creates an implementation package for each test step. The
implementation packages are not necessarily unique. The same test case le,
produced by the test case generator, could have been used before in combination
with the testing tool by dierent engineers. Additionally, dierent test cases
can share the same test steps. To prevent the problem of re-creating already
existing implementation packages the connection tool provides a feature to look
for duplicates.
If the option to check for duplicates is enabled, the connection tool will auto-
matically nd the shared folder in the directory tree of the user. A function
was written to nd the according path by iterating through the folder structure.
The root of the folder structure is the user directory of the current user. This
structure is searched for the path ending testingtool/workspace.
==PAGE:48==
38
Tool Chain Automation
The shared folder is further browsed for package names being identical to the
implementation packages the connection tool intends to create.
Every iden-
tical test step will have the same implementation package name, as it solely
consists of the package kind and the symbolic signal name.
Taking the ex-
ample of HatchPosition=open, the resulting implementation package checking
the status of HatchPosition will be named StatusHatchPosition. Hence, the
implementation package name is a valid choice of identication.
Figure 3.4 illustrates the decisional behaviour of the connection tool in case a
duplicate is found within the shared folder. Providing a duplicate is detected,
the user is asked through a message box to continue the creation. A reason to
continue the package creation might be that the user is not saving the package in
the shared folder, therefore creating a duplicate will not aect the collaborative
work. A reason to abort the creation might be, that the user was not aware of the
existence of a duplicate. In case the user continues the creation, the connection
tool compares the target directory of the package in charge of creation and
the duplicate.
If the directory is not identical, the implementation package
is created. Otherwise, the user is asked if the duplicate shall be overwritten.
This option is implemented to make sure the user is aware that she or he is
overwriting a le that is shared with other engineers.
In case the answer is
yes, the package is created, otherwise not. As described, the implementation
ensures the support of collaborative work by helping to prevent the creation of
test package duplicates.
Duplicate found
Ask user to 
create anyway
Compare target 
and duplicate 
directories
Ask user to 
overwrite
Create package
Do not create 
package
[Answer == No]
[Answer == Yes]
[Not the same 
directory]
[Same directory]
[Answer == No]
[Answer == Yes]
Figure 3.4: Decisional behaviour of connection tool for found duplicate
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Connection Tool Implementation
39
Feature 4: Intuitive operation
To assure a smooth connection between the test case generator and testing tool
the connection tool is designed to be of easy use. To provide quick, ecient and
intuitive operation, a graphical user interface (GUI) is implemented.
Figure 3.5 depicts the user interface of the connection tool. The directories of
test case generator le, global mapping le and parameter mapping le have to
be selected. Accordingly, a target path has to be chosen to indicate the location
the output les should be saved in. Further, the user can choose to create a
project le or check for existing packages. A run button starts the creation of
the output les.
Figure 3.5: GUI of the connection tool
Feature 5: Transparency of actions carried out
The connection tool is a black box for the test engineer. Without transparency
of the inside processes carried out some results might not be comprehensible by
the user. Additionally, full transparency of which step the connection tool is
computing at any time is necessary to further enhance the tool in the future.
To solve this problem a logger is implemented. The logger records the steps
carried out and saves them to a log le, which can be inspected subsequently.
To implement said logger the Python package logging is used [Saj19].
Listing 3.10 shows one line from the log le created by the connection tool,
indicating that the symbolic signal HatchPosition is inserted in the parame-
ter mapping template. The rst part of the line is a time stamp, the second
==PAGE:50==
40
Tool Chain Automation
part, INFO, shows the logging level. The implemented logger provides several
logging levels in hierarchical order like INFO, WARNING, DEBUG, and ERROR to
set a threshold to what point logging should be carried out. If the threshold
is set to INFO all log commands carrying the tag INFO will be printed, if the
threshold is set to DEBUG all log commands carrying the tags INFO, WARNING and
DEBUG will be printed. The connection tool is set that logs on every level will
be printed. The user can then use the logging level info in the logger to decide
if the line is useful for him or not. Besides the logging level, the log le con-
tains the function the log was executed in, here globalMapping_function and
the information which step was executed, here Inserted symbolic signal in
template :
HatchPosition
Listing 3.10: Excerpt from the logle
1
2019 -02 -03
15:27:01 ,017: INFO: globalMapping_function :
Inserted
symbolic
signal in template : HatchPosition
Analysing the log le enables the user to understand and comprehend the actions
carried out by the connection tool and provides bases to enhance the tool in the
future.
Feature 6: Point out false use of connection tool
If used improperly the connection tool will not function the way it is intended.
Besides creating the log le to resolve problems the connection tool will also
issue warnings in form of message boxes during usage.
These warnings give
immediate feedback to the user and therefore provide help in the use of the
tool.
The following set of warnings is implemented:
• Non-existent parameter mapping: In case the symbolic value is not
existent in the parameter mapping, the user is informed that the test step
in charge will not be implemented
• Non-existent global mapping: In case the symbolic signal is not exis-
tent in the global mapping the user is informed that the test step in charge
will not be implemented
• Incorrect paths: The tool will check for existence and access permission
of the selected path and issue a warning in case the target path cannot be
used
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Connection Tool Implementation
41
• Workspace not found: In case the tool is unable to nd the testing tool
workspace, the user is informed that the duplicate check cannot be carried
out
• Duplicate found: As described in Feature 3: Support collaborative work,
as set of warnings is issued if a duplicate is found
• Templates not found: In case one or more templates have been removed
from the tools application folder, the user is informed which templates have
to be recreated
Feature 7: Adaptability for future testing tool versions
The template-based le creation was chosen to make the connection tool adapt-
able to future testing tool versions. The development of the testing is not in
the hand of the BMW Group, thus, any changes have to be adapted to. The
templates guarantee to easily adapt to future changes in the structure of the
testing tool by exchanging the existing templates. Using new templates in the
connection tool can be achieved by simply exchanging the template les read by
the tool, and adapting the new XML le elements that hold the keywords to be
replaced. The structure and general functioning of the connection tool remain
untouched. The connection tool is able to keep up with testing tool updates
and is, therefore, sustainable.
The tool chain developed in Chapter 2 has been improved by rening the con-
nection between test case generator and testing tool. The developed connection
tool enables automated le generation, transparency of actions executed and
intuitive operation.
==PAGE:52==
42
Tool Chain Automation
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4
Evaluation
This chapter evaluates the developed tool chain. Section 4.1 evaluates the tool
chain as a whole. As a part of that the connection tools functionalities nec-
essary for the functioning of the tool chain will be evaluated. The remaining
functionalities of the connection tool will be evaluated in Section 4.2.
4.1
Tool Chain Evaluation
The tool chain is evaluated by testing the functionality described in a model in
SiL. The model is created in the modelling tool. The test case generator trans-
fers the functionality to a test case which is further enhanced by the connection
tool. The enhanced test case is, subsequently, loaded into the testing tool and
executed in the co-simulation tool. The test results are evaluated back in the
testing tool.
The functionality to test the tool chain is the opening of a loading hatch for
an electric vehicle. The steps carried out are shown in an activity diagram in
Figure 4.1. To open the loading hatch the lock needs to be unlocked and the
position of the hatch needs to be adjusted. These steps are described by setting
the symbolic signal HatchLock to the symbolic value unlocked and the symbolic
signal HatchPosition to the symbolic value open. Each action carried out is
==PAGE:54==
44
Evaluation
evaluated in the simulation before the continuation. Figure 4.1 depicts the logic
of the test steps which should be created. However, the actual diagram created
in the modelling tool used to generate the test steps diers for two reasons.
One, the test case generator creates request-specic test cases. As described in
Section 1.2.4, a control step is created for every guard and a status step is created
for every action. Hence, the diagram used to create the test case has a switched
sequence of actions and guards. Two, the SMArDT modelling guidelines always
demand one unguarded transition that can be taken. To avoid confusion and
simplify the example, the logic of the generated test case is presented and not
the actual diagram used.
HatchPosition = 
open
HatchLock = 
unlocked
HatchLock == 
unlocked
HatchPosition == 
open
Figure 4.1: Activity Diagram to test the tool chain
As described in section 1.2.4, the model can be exported from the modelling tool
using an integrated export script. The test case generator nds one valid path
in the diagram, thus creating one test case. The generated test case contains
four test steps. Two control steps to write signals in the simulation, HatchLock
= unlocked and HatchPosition = open, and two according status steps to
read signals in the simulation. Listing 4.1 shows the XML representation of
the control step HatchLock = unlocked as created by the test case generator.
The text information of the element VALUE in line three holds the referenced
implementation package, element ASSIGNMENT in line 6 contains the symbolic
signal expected to be changed by the implementation package, and element
NAME in line 8 the symbolic value accordingly.
Listing 4.1: Control test step as created by the test case generator
1
<TESTSTEP
format -rev="2" xsi:type="tsPackage">
2
<PACKAGE -REFERENCE
format -rev="1" xsi:type="
valueBaseExpression ">
3
<VALUE xsi:type="unicode">Control: HatchLock.pac</VALUE
>
4
</PACKAGE -REFERENCE >
5
<PARAM -ASSIGNMENTS >
6
<ASSIGNMENT
dkey="HatchLock">
7
<DVALUE xsi:type=" varBaseExpression ">
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Tool Chain Evaluation
45
8
<NAME xsi:type="unicode">unlocked </NAME >
9
</DVALUE >
10
</ASSIGNMENT >
11
</PARAM -ASSIGNMENTS >
12
</TESTSTEP >
Listing 4.2 shows the status step of HatchLock = unlocked as created by the
test case generator. Implementation package name, symbolic value and symbolic
signal can be found in lines 8, 4 and 3.
Listing 4.2: Status test step as created by the test case generator
1
<TESTSTEP
format -rev="2" xsi:type="tsPackage">
2
<VARIABLE -REFS >
3
<VARIABLE -NAME dkey="HatchLock">
4
<DVALUE xsi:type="unicode">unlocked </DVALUE >
5
</VARIABLE -NAME >
6
</VARIABLE -REFS >
7
<PACKAGE -REFERENCE
format -rev="1" xsi:type="
valueBaseExpression ">
8
<VALUE xsi:type="unicode">Status: HatchLock.pac</VALUE >
9
</PACKAGE -REFERENCE >
10
</TESTSTEP >
Subsequently, the connection enhances the test case and makes it executable
in the testing tool. The used global and parameter mapping table is shown in
Table 4.1. The symbolic signals are mapped to actual signal names as used in
the simulation model and the symbolic values are mapped to actual values.
Table 4.1: Global mapping and parameter mapping table
HatchLock
BMW_HatchLock_Sens1
HatchPosition
BMW_HatchPosition_Sens1
unlocked
80
open
5
Listing 4.3 shows the internal parameter mapping added to the test case. As
described in section 3.2, this mapping is necessary to call the implementation
packages from the test case. Testing tool internal guidelines demand an internal
parameter mapping for each package, including the test case.
The elements
NAME and DATA hold the information of symbolic value and signal value.
==PAGE:56==
46
Evaluation
Listing 4.3: Internal parameter mapping of the enhanced test case
1
<VARIABLES
xsi:type=" variableContainer ">
2
<VARIABLE
format -rev="1" in="true" xsi:type="variable">
3
<NAME xsi:type="unicode">unlocked </NAME >
4
<DESCRIPTION
xsi:type="unicode" />
5
<DEFAULT -VALUE format -rev="1" xsi:type="value">
6
<DATA xsi:type="integer">80</DATA >
7
</DEFAULT -VALUE >
8
</VARIABLE >
9
<VARIABLE
format -rev="1" in="true" xsi:type="variable">
10
<NAME xsi:type="unicode">open </NAME >
11
<DESCRIPTION
xsi:type="unicode" />
12
<DEFAULT -VALUE format -rev="1" xsi:type="value">
13
<DATA xsi:type="integer">5</DATA >
14
</DEFAULT -VALUE >
15
</VARIABLE >
16
</VARIABLES >
Listing 4.4 shows the new reference to the altered implementation package name,
ControlHatchLock.pac. This step is also carried out for every other test step.
Listing 4.4: Implementation package reference in the enhanced test case
1
<VALUE xsi:type="unicode">ControlHatchLock .pac</VALUE >
Listing 4.5 shows the variable denition of the implementation package created
by the connection tool for the rst control test step. The symbolic signal, here
HatchLock, needs to be treated as a variable as well to become available for
exchange with other packages, in this case the enhanced test case.
Listing 4.5: Parameter mapping denition in the implementation package
1
<VARIABLES
xsi:type=" variableContainer ">
2
<VARIABLE
format -rev="1" in="true" out="false" xsi:type="
variable">
3
<NAME xsi:type="unicode">unlocked </NAME >
4
<DESCRIPTION
xsi:type="unicode" />
5
<DEFAULT -VALUE format -rev="1" xsi:type="value">
6
<DATA xsi:type="integer">80</DATA >
7
</DEFAULT -VALUE >
8
</VARIABLE >
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Tool Chain Evaluation
47
9
<VARIABLE
format -rev="1" in="true" out="false" xsi:type="
variable">
10
<NAME xsi:type="unicode">HatchLock </NAME >
11
<DESCRIPTION
xsi:type="unicode" />
12
<DEFAULT -VALUE format -rev="1" xsi:type="value">
13
<DATA xsi:type="integer">0</DATA >
14
</DEFAULT -VALUE >
15
</VARIABLE >
16
</VARIABLES >
Listing 4.6 shows the implementation packages internal global mapping. The
text information of the elements ID and VARIABLE-PATH hold the symbolic signal
name HatchLock and the according signal BMW_HatchLock_Sens1.
Listing 4.6: Internal global mapping in the implementation package
1
<MAPPING format -rev="1" xsi:type=" localMappingSpace ">
2
<MAPPING -ITEM format -rev="1" xsi:type="mappingItem">
3
<ID xsi:type="unicode">HatchLock </ID>
4
<XACCESS
format -rev="2" xsi:type=" xaModelSignal ">
5
<MAPPING -ENUM xsi:type="vtabInfoEmpty " />
6
<VARIABLE -PATH xsi:type="unicode">BMW_HatchLock_Sens1 <
/VARIABLE -PATH >
7
</XACCESS >
8
</MAPPING -ITEM >
9
</MAPPING >
Listing 4.7 shows the control test step in the implementation package. This is in-
dicated by dictionary info "tsWrite" of element TESTSTEP. Elements MAPPING-
REF and NAME contain the symbolic signal in charge of controlling, HatchLock
and the according symbolic value, unlocked.
Listing 4.7: Control test step in the implementation package
1
<TESTSTEPS
xsi:type="testCase">
2
<TESTSTEP id="21814472070" xsi:type="tsWrite">
3
<MAPPING -REF xsi:type="unicode">HatchLock </MAPPING -REF>
4
<VALUE xsi:type=" expressionValue ">
5
<DATA xsi:type=" varBaseExpression ">
6
<NAME xsi:type="unicode">unlocked </NAME >
7
</DATA >
8
</VALUE >
9
</TESTSTEP >
==PAGE:58==
48
Evaluation
10
</TESTSTEPS >
The connection tool successfully altered the test case by adding the needed
variables and changing the names of referenced packages. Additionally, an im-
plementation package containing necessary variables, internal parameter and
global mapping, and the command for execution was created for every test step.
The created les are then used in the testing tool to execute the test case. The
representation of the enhanced test case in the testing tool is shown in Figure
4.2. The reference to each implementation package as one test step is shown.
Thereto the control steps show the symbolic signal and the symbolic value that
should be taken. The status steps show the expected value.
Figure 4.2: Altered test case in the testing tool
An implementation packages representation in the testing tool is shown in Fig-
ure 4.3, depicting the ControlHatchLock step. The symbolic value HatchLock
is mapped to the according memory address in the model in the co-simulation
tool via global mapping and A2L-le. By executing the test, the closed-loop
simulation of plant model, vECU, and software in the co-simulating tool is
started. Each control test step changes a signal value in the closed-loop simula-
tion, and each status test step checks one. The step MODEL-Write:
HatchLock
changes the signal mapped to HatchLock, here BMW_HatchLock_Sens1, in the
co-simulation to the value mapped to unlocked, here 5.
Figure 4.3: Implementation package ControlHatchLock
Figure 4.4 shows the evaluation of the executed test case. The evaluation shows
each referenced implementation package and the test steps contained in these
packages. The package ControlHatchLock contains the test step MODEL-WRITE:
HatchLock as shown in Figure 4.3.
It is shown that the signal mapped to
HatchLock was changed to the value 80. Step 4.1 reads the signal mapped to
HatchLock and compares it to the expected value. The actual and expected
values are the same and a SUCCESS message is issued. Same is done for the
HatchPosition steps. The co-simulation works as intended.
The tool chain evaluation proofed that signals can be manipulated and read
within the SMArDT environment using SiL testing. Each tool and connection
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Tool Chain Evaluation
49
Figure 4.4: Test case evaluation after execution
works as intended. The connection tool proofed to remove manual steps from the
equation by successfully enhancing the test case and creating implementation
packages mappings automatically.
The co-simulation, containing the closed-loop simulation of plant model, vECU,
and software to test, can be seen as a black box. This black box has inputs and
outputs. To use SiL testing in an industrial context, a test needs to manipulate
the inputs, read the outputs, and compare them to an expected result (see Figure
4.5). This closed-loop simulation is necessary to validate the functionality of the
software.
vECUs
Software to 
Test
Plant Model
Co-Simulation
Manipulate 
Signals
Measure
Signals
Figure 4.5: Test execution in the co-simulation tool as desired
The tool chain evaluation carried out in this section manipulates a signal and
then measures the same signal. This veries the connection between testing
tool and co-simulation tool, in a way that it is feasible to write and read signals.
However, it does not verify the functionality of the software to test.
To do
so, an unambiguous mapping from symbolic signals to each signal in the plant
model and software is needed. As of today, this complete mapping does not
exist for every signal used in the co-simulation. Hence, there is no ambiguous
information about which signal manipulation will cause which signal changes.
The software cannot be veried using the tool chain as it is. More on this topic
is covered in the future work section (6.1).
==PAGE:60==
50
Evaluation
4.2
Connection Tool Evaluation
This section covers the evaluation of the connection tool features not assessed
in the previous section. To evaluate the creation of project, global mapping,
and parameter mapping le a project containing the mapping les is created
and executed. To test these functionalities the test case created by the test case
generator from the previous section was used (see Listings 4.1 and 4.2). It will
be evaluated in how far the project le can be used within the testing tool. It
was refrained from using a more complex example. The principle of a simple
and complex example is the same, it is a combination status and control test
steps. A more complex example would evaluate the connection tool in the same
way as a simple example does but would be less comprehensible.
After enabling the project le creation function the connection tool was exe-
cuted. The resulting project le is shown in Listing 4.8. Element NAME in line
3 contains the name of the project le. It is an assembly of project_ and the
name of the enhanced test case, here testcase_loadinghatch. Further, the
used test case name was inserted in element NAME in line 9 and its path in el-
ement PACKAGE-PATH. The paths of the attached mapping les are inserted in
element ELEMENT, line 20, and element REFERENCED-FILE, line 23. The three
attached les, enhanced test case, global mapping le, and parameter mapping
le, are each saved under a name originating from the test case name used
as input for the connection tool. In this case, the globalmapping le is saved
under the name globalmapping_testcase_loadinghatch and the parameter
mapping is saved under the name parametermapping_testcase_loadinghatch
and the according le endings. The paths of each attached le was determined
by combining the target path chosen by the tool user and the le names.
Listing 4.8: Project le created by the connection tool
1
<?xml
version ="1.0"
encoding ="utf -8"?>
2
<PROJECT format -rev="10" xmlns:xsi="http :// www.w3.org /2001/
XMLSchema -instance">
3
<NAME xsi:type="unicode">project_testcase_loadinghatch </
NAME >
4
<ENABLED xsi:type="boolean">True </ENABLED >
5
<REPORTING
xsi:type="boolean">True </REPORTING >
6
<ID xsi:type="unicode">a70fdd702adb11e98e37b05ada3de14e </
ID>
7
<COMPONENTS >
8
<COMPONENT
format -rev="5" xsi:type="packageTest">
9
<NAME xsi:type="unicode">testcase_loadinghatch </NAME >
10
<ENABLED
xsi:type="boolean">True </ENABLED >
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Connection Tool Evaluation
51
11
<REPORTING
xsi:type="boolean">True </REPORTING >
12
<ID xsi:type="unicode">
b861274f2adb11e9aa32b05ada3de14e </ID>
13
<COMPONENTS/>
14
<PACKAGE -REF format -rev="1" style="relative" xsi:type=
"packageRef">
15
<PACKAGE -PATH xsi:type="unicode">C\User\testingtool\
workspace\ testcase_loadinghatch .pac</PACKAGE -PATH
>
16
</PACKAGE -REF>
17
</COMPONENT >
18
</COMPONENTS >
19
<MAPPING -FILES >
20
<ELEMENT
xsi:type="unicode">C\User\testingtool\workspace
\ globalmapping_testcase_loadinghatch .glo</ELEMENT >
21
</MAPPING -FILES >
22
<PARAMETER -DATA xsi:type=" packageParameterData ">
23
<REFERENCED -FILE xsi:type="unicode">C\User\testingtool\
workspace\ parametermapping_testcase_loadinghatch .par<
/REFERENCED -FILE >
24
</PARAMETER -DATA >
25
</PROJECT >
The attached test case le has already proven to work in section 4.1 and will not
be evaluated in detail again in this section. One mapping in the generated global
mapping is shown in Listing 4.9. The according symbolic signal HatchLock and
signal BMW_HatchLock_Sens1 have been inserted in lines 2 and 5.
Listing 4.9: Global mapping created by the connection tool
1
<MAPPING -ITEM format -rev="1" xsi:type="mappingItem">
2
<ID xsi:type="unicode">HatchLock </ID>
3
<XACCESS
format -rev="2" xsi:type=" xaModelSignal ">
4
<MAPPING -ENUM xsi:type="vtabInfoEmpty " />
5
<VARIABLE -PATH xsi:type="unicode">BMW_HatchLock_Sens1 </
VARIABLE -PATH >
6
</XACCESS >
7
</MAPPING -ITEM >
Listing 4.10 shows one mapping in the generated parameter mapping le. The
symbolic signal value unlocked and the signal value 80 are inserted in lines 2
and 4.
==PAGE:62==
52
Evaluation
Listing 4.10: Parameter mapping created by the connection tool
1
<PARAMETER
xsi:type="parameterEntry ">
2
<NAME xsi:type="unicode">unlocked </NAME >
3
<VALUE format -rev="1" xsi:type=" valueBaseExpression ">
4
<VALUE xsi:type="integer">80</VALUE >
5
</VALUE >
6
</PARAMETER >
The project representation in the testing tool is shown in Figure 4.6.
The
enhanced test case and the mapping les are attached to the project le. In that
way the enhanced test case can be executed under usage of the external mapping
les. A successful execution proved the project generation of the connection tool
to be working as intended.
Figure 4.6: Project representation in the testing tool
The duplicate nder feature was successfully tested on dierent computers. The
testing tool workspace could be found automatically and the message boxes as
shown in Figure 3.4 were displayed. However, the running speed was reduced
when the duplicate check was enabled.
On one hand, this due to iterating
through the folder structure to nd the workspace. On the other hand does
the shared folder contain more than 45.000 test cases which have to be checked
for duplicates. The computing time for a test case containing 4 steps increased
from 1 to 6 seconds. The dierence becomes larger for test cases containing
more test steps.
The GUI and the logger proved to work reliable during testing, as well as the
warning message boxes presented in Feature 6: Point out false use of connec-
tion tool. The warnings were tested by purposely triggering them. To trigger
the non-existent mapping warnings, mappings were removed from the mapping
tables. Incorrect target or input paths were entered to trigger these warnings.
To trigger the workspace not found warning, the workspace search criteria in
the code was changed. And templates were removed from the application folder
to trigger the template warning.
The adaptability for future testing tool versions could not be tested, as no change
in the XML le structure of the testing tool les occurred during the time of
this thesis and or in older versions. The features of the connection tool proved
to work as intended. However, section 6.1 will highlight approaches to further
enhance the tool in the future.
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5
Related Work
The following chapter compares the implemented tool chain to related work.
Considered as related work are other approaches in the automotive industry
that implemented a SiL testing tool chain to improve the development process
of ECU software. There exist various dierent approaches that focus on parts
of the SiL tool chain, e.g. automatic test case generation from UML diagrams
[HKC08, SSK11, VHN15, LJX+04, JSM14], or model-based testing in general
[Pel18, SLH12]. However, the implemented tool chain will be evaluated in its
entirety. Reason for this is that the goal of this thesis is to assess the feasibility
of the tool chain as a whole product.
[Jai09] presents an approach integrating, MiL, SiL, HiL testing, and model-based
software development in one tool chain to develop ECU code. An integration
platform is used to integrate the plant model in a tool responsible for software
specication modelling, co-simulation, and test evaluation. Together with au-
tomatically created test cases, this tool chain, depicted in Figure 5.1, enables
MiL testing.
To enable SiL testing, another, more comprehensive co-simulation tool is used to
integrate vECUs. However, the test evaluation is still done in the rst tool and
the integration tool still remains the x-point of the tool chain. This is depicted
in Figure 5.2.
The integration tool combines software and plant model and
provides it to the co-simulation tool. The simulation is subsequently evaluated
==PAGE:64==
54
Related Work
Tool 1
Modelling
Co-Simulation
Test Evaluation
Integration Tool
Tool 2
Plant Model
Figure 5.1: MiL testing tool chain as presented by [Jai09]
in the rst tool.
Tool 1
Modelling
Integration Tool
Tool 2
Plant Model
Tool 3
Co-Simulation
Test Evaluation
Figure 5.2: MiL testing tool chain as presented by [Jai09]
For HiL testing another tool is integrated into the tool chain to translate test
cases for HiL test execution. The integration of this testing tool allows creating
test cases on an abstract level that can then be mapped to dierent testing en-
vironments. This approach is similar to the SMArDT tool chain, which can also
be used for HiL testing. However, the integrated approach presented by [Jai09]
does not provide clearly structured abstraction layers. The test cases may be
created on a more abstract level than the code, but the SMArDT framework
provides automated test case creation on several abstraction layers to ensure
consistency between test requirements and specications on each software de-
velopment step. Thus, the methodology presented by [Jai09] cannot be directly
translated into the the tool chain presented in this thesis.
Yet, section 6.1
presents an idea of how to further bridge the gap between SiL and HiL testing
within the SMArDT framework using the test case generator.
[Mau09] presents the development process of a dual clutch transmission (DCT)
ECU software using, inter alia, a model-based approach and SiL testing.
A
DCT is a highly complex vehicle transmission system consisting, as the name
indicates, of two clutches. It enables the driver to shift gears without pressing a
clutch pedal, as usual in a manual transmission system, and without increased
fuel demand, as usual in automatic transmission systems. A SiL tool chain,
consisting of two tools, is part of the development process. Tool one is used as a
modelling tool as well as a co-simulation tool, wherein tool two is used as a test
case creator and a testing tool. Figure 5.3 depicts the tool chain. The models
==PAGE:65==
55
determining the software specications are created in tool one. A second tool
uses the models to create test cases, which are co-simulated in tool one and can
subsequently be evaluated in tool two. The advantage of this tool chain is the
reduced amount of tools used to ensure smoother transitioning and a reduced
training period.
Tool 2
Test Case Creation
Test Evaluation
Tool 1
Modelling
Co-Simulation
Figure 5.3: SiL testing tool chain of dual clutch transmission system software
The main dierence between the tool chain presented in this thesis and the DCT
tool chain lays in the testing. The co-simulation containing the software to test,
plant model, and more is treated as a black box containing inputs and outputs, as
presented in this thesis. However, unlike the SMArDT tool chain, the test cases
are created by automatically tuning the input parameters of the co-simulation
to a huge number of combinations to detect as many critical system states as
possible. These critical system states are subsequently in charge of investigation.
The testing is completed if no more critical system states are detected. This
form of testing, however, does not guarantee to cover every system state as
it relies on statistical methods and therefore leaves room for uncertainty. On
the other hand, the test cases are not created from the requirements dened in
the models used to create the software and therefore creating disparity between
software specication and testing. Eliminating this disparity is a keystone of
the SMArDT framework. Additionally, in the presented tool chain test cases are
created on the same abstraction level as the code. Therefore testing relies on
a generator versus generator principle which the SMArDT frame work actively
prevents. Thus, the advantage of the DCT tool chain cannot be translated into
the SMArDT tool chain. However, the automatic parameter generation [Mau09]
presents is an interesting approach which will be given more attention in 6.1.
[RTT07] presents an approach of development and validation of cornering brake
control (CBC) logic using SiL testing. CBC is a braking control logic and ex-
pansion of the anti-lock braking system. It works by applying asymmetrical
breaking pressure to the wheels to counter centrifugal forces in curves and pre-
vent drifting. The tool chain applied to test the CBC ECU software consists of
only one tool. This tool is depicted in 5.4 and takes the job of test case creation,
co-simulating, and test evaluation. It is used for comparison as running the test
cases can be executed in closed-loop.
==PAGE:66==
56
Related Work
Tool 1
Test Case Creation
Co-Simulation
Test Evaluation
Figure 5.4: SiL testing tool chain of cornering brake control software
In the CBC tool chain test cases are created manually, and do not take the form
of a single case. Instead, the cases are created to function as a driver model
which is fed in the co-simulation. Depicting the co-simulation as a black box
with several inputs and outputs, the driver model acts as a sensor, controller,
and actor, measuring the outputs and tuning the inputs accordingly. Inputs
are speed and steering angle, outputs are, inter alia, lateral acceleration. This
allows testing the driver model, or test cases, in closed-loop, which allows to test
long term scenarios without creating complicated test cases. A similar approach
using a slim tool chain is presented by [VCC+14].
The comparison to related work shows that other SiL tool chain implementations
do provide certain advantages.
However, these benets are not translatable
to the tool chain presented in this thesis if the advantages of the SMArDT
framework shall be fully utilized.
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 6
Outlook & Conclusion
The following chapter gives an outlook on future work that can be built upon
this thesis and, subsequently, draws a conclusion on the topic.
6.1
Outlook
Several tasks could be subject to future work to improve the implemented SiL
tool chain.
Currently, there exists no uniformly dened mapping from symbolic signal names
to the plant model. A uniform mapping catalogue, however, could improve the
tool chain on dierent levels. The now manually dened global mapping in the
table could be automated, by searching the mapping catalogue and suggesting
the according global mapping when using the connection tool. Already existing
global mappings could be changed automatically in case the mapping catalogue
updates. This would highly increase consistency among the tests created and
carried out. Additionally, a mapping catalogue holding information about SiL
and HiL specic mapping would bridge the gap between these test strategies
and move towards an integrated approach as described in Chapter 5 by [Jai09].
The connection tool could create SiL and HiL test cases simultaneously and
provide exibility in the choice of execution platform as well as uniform testing.
==PAGE:68==
58
Outlook & Conclusion
Another solution to implement a uniform mapping could be to link the models
on abstraction layer 3 and 4. Every symbolic signal on layer 3 would have a
direct link to the actual signal used in layer 4.
Besides the global mapping, the parameter mapping can also be subject to
automation. As presented in Chapter 5, the method used by [Mau09] automati-
cally generates a huge amount of parameter mappings to detect as many system
states as possible. While in the SMArDT framework all reachable system states
are covered using the test case generator, the idea of automated parameter map-
ping generation could replace the manual mapping. This would further reduce
the human-assisted tasks using the tool chain.
The connection tool can be seen as an extension to the test case generator. A
next logical step could, therefore, be the integration of the connection tool into
the test case generator and remove another manual step.
The created SiL tool chain is a rst step into SiL testing within the SMArDT
framework and provides manifold possibilities for further adjustments and en-
hancements for customization.
6.2
Conclusion
This thesis has introduced an approach to implement a tool chain for SiL testing
of ECU software within the SMArDT framework using the test case generator.
The implementation was divided into two tasks. In a rst step, a tool chain was
developed. The SiL testing concept introduced was translated to the SMArDT
framework, according to the new concept the necessary tools were determined
and selected. Subsequently, a structure within the testing tool was proposed to
ensure exible and reusable usage of the generated test cases. In a second step,
actions were taken to automate the developed tool chain in order to provide a
quicker, more consistent and easier use. A connection tool was developed to
bridge the gap from test case generator to testing tool. The connection tool
provides XML les tailored for further use within the testing tool and replace
manual steps in the tool chain. The les are created using test cases generated
by the test case generator, mapping tables, and template les. The implemented
tool chain has been evaluated with close to reality example and proven to work.
It has further been compared to other SiL implementations in the automotive
sector from a structural point of view.
Additionally, it was shown that the test case generator developed by the BMW
Group is capable of generating test cases usable for SiL testing. This, in com-
==PAGE:69==
6.2 Conclusion
59
bination with the developed tool chain is basis to further approximate SiL and
HiL within the SMArDT framework. It was also shown that the SysML models
on abstraction layer 3 will need explicit mapping from symbolic signal names to
signals used in the co-simulation platform to ensure a seamless use of the SiL
tool chain.
The implemented tool chain is a functional prototype, which can be either used
out-of-the-box or enhanced by further functionalities, as introduced above. It
has been proven that SiL testing within the SMArDT framework with use of
the test case generator is feasible.
==PAGE:70==
60
Outlook & Conclusion
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[.2004]
V-modell
xt:
Part
1:
Fundamentals
of
the
v-
modell,
2004.
URL:
ftp://ftp.heise.de/
pub/ix/ix_listings/projektmanagement/vmodell/
V-Modell-XT-Gesamt-Englisch-V1.3.pdf.
[ASA]
ASAM - Association for Standardization of Automation and Mea-
suring Systems.
Mcd-2 mc.
URL: https://www.asam.net/
standards/detail/mcd-2-mc/wiki/.
[ASA14]
ASAM - Association for Standardization of Automation and Mea-
suring Systems.
Mdf, 2014.
URL: https://www.asam.net/
standards/detail/mdf/.
[BK08]
Eckard Bringmann and Andreas Kr. Model-based testing of auto-
motive systems. In 2008 International Conference on Software Test-
ing, Verication, and Validation, pages 485493. IEEE, 09.04.2008
- 11.04.2008. doi:10.1109/ICST.2008.45.
[BNF16]
Guy Berg, Verena Nitsch, and Berthold Färber.
Vehicle in the
loop.
In Hermann Winner, Stephan Hakuli, Felix Lotz, and
Christina Singer, editors, Handbook of Driver Assistance Systems,
pages 199210. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2016.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-12352-3_10.
[Boe88]
B. W. Boehm. A spiral model of software development and enhance-
ment. Computer, 21(5):6172, 1988. doi:10.1109/2.59.
==PAGE:72==
62
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[BRJ04]
Grady Booch, James Rumbaugh, and Ivar Jacobson. The unied
modeling language user guide.
Addison-Wesley object technology
series. Addison-Wesley, Boston, 12. printing edition, 2004.
[Coc07]
Alistair Cockburn.
Agile software development: The cooperative
game / Alistair Cockburn. The Agile software development series.
Addison-Wesley, Harlow, 2nd ed. edition, 2007.
[DHG+18] Imke Drave, Steen Hillemacher, Timo Greifenberg, Bernhard
Rumpe, Andreas Wortmann, Matthias Markthaler, and Stefan
Kriebel. Model-based testing of software-based system functions.
pages 146153, 2018. doi:10.1109/SEAA.2018.00032.
[DHG+19] Imke
Drave,
Steen
Hillemacher,
Timo
Greifenberg,
Stefan
Kriebel, Evgeny Kusmenko, Matthias Markthaler, Philipp Orth,
Karin Samira Salman, Johannes Richenhagen, Bernhard Rumpe,
Christoph Schulze, Michael von Wenckstern, and Andreas Wort-
mann. Smardt modeling for automotive software testing. Software:
Practice and Experience, 49(2):301328, 2019. doi:10.1002/spe.2650.
[DSBR16]
Kevin Diami, Mustafa Saed, Scott Bone, and John Robb. Securing
vehicle's electronic control units. The Twelfth International Confer-
ence on Networking and Services, 2016. URL: http://thinkmind.
org/index.php?view=instance&instance=ICNS+2016.
[EJ09]
Christof
Ebert
and
Capers
Jones.
Embedded
software:
Facts,
gures,
and
future.
Computer,
42(4):4252,
2009.
doi:10.1109/MC.2009.118.
[EKB+08] M. S. Erden, H. Komoto, T. J. Beek, V. D'Amelio, E. Echavar-
ria,
and
T.
Tomiyama.
A
review
of
function
modeling:
Approaches and applications.
AI EDAM, 22(02):443,
2008.
doi:10.1017/S0890060408000103.
[FMS08]
Sanford Friedenthal, Alan Moore, and Rick Steiner.
A prac-
tical guide to SysML: Systems Model Language.
The MK /
OMG Press. Elsevier/Morgan Kaufmann, Burlington, Mass, 2nd
edition, 2008.
URL: http://site.ebrary.com/lib/alltitles/
docDetail.action?docID=10251182.
[GC19]
Eric Gazoni and Charlie Clark. openpyxl - a python library to read-
/write excel 2010 xlsx/xlsm les, 2019. URL: https://openpyxl.
readthedocs.io/en/stable/.
[GKL+10] Holger Giese, Gabor Karsai, Edward A. Lee, Bernhard Rumpe, and
Bernhard Schätz. Model-Based Engineering of Embedded Real-Time
==PAGE:73==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
63
Systems: International Dagstuhl Workshop, Dagstuhl Castle, Ger-
many, November 4-9, 2007. Revised Selected Papers. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science / Programming and Software Engineering Ser.
Springer, New York, Oct. 2010.
[GRR16]
Clemens Gühmann, Jens Riese, and Klaus Rüden. Simulation and
Testing for Vehicle Technology: 7th Conference, Berlin, May 12-13,
2016. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2016.
[HKC08]
Abdelkamel Hettab, Elhillali Kerkouche, and Allaoua Chaoui. A
graph transformation approach for automatic test cases genera-
tion from uml activity diagrams.
In Bipin C. Desai and Mo-
tomichi Toyoma, editors, Proceedings of the Eighth International C*
Conference on Computer Science & Software Engineering - C3S2E
'15, pages 8897, New York, New York, USA, 2008. ACM Press.
doi:10.1145/2790798.2790801.
[HKK+18] Steen Hillemacher, Stefan Kriebel, Evgeny Kusmenko, Mike Lo-
rang, Bernhard Rumpe, Albi Sema, Georg Strobl, and Michael
von Wenckstern.
Model-based development of self-adaptive au-
tonomous vehicles using the smardt methodology.
In Proceed-
ings of the 6th International Conference on Model-Driven Engi-
neering and Software Development, pages 163178. SCITEPRESS
- Science and Technology Publications, 22.01.2018 - 24.01.2018.
doi:10.5220/0006603701630178.
[Int18]
International Organization for Standardization. Iso/dis 26262 road
vehicles-functional safety, part 1-10, 2018. URL: www.iso.org.
[Jai09]
Vivek Jaikamal.
Model-based ecu development  an integrated
mil-sil-hil approach.
SAE Paper,
(No. 2009-01-0153,),
2009.
doi:10.4271/2009-01-0153.
[JSM14]
Ajay Kumar Jena, Santosh Kumar Swain, and Durga Prasad Mo-
hapatra. A novel approach for test case generation from UML ac-
tivity diagram: 7 - 8 Feb. 2014, Ghaziabad, India. IEEE, Piscat-
away, NJ, 2014.
URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/servlet/
opac?punumber=6767437, doi:10.1109/ICICICT.2014.6781352.
[Jun16]
Andreas Junghanns. Virtual integration of automotive hard- and
software with silver, 2016. URL: https://www.qtronic.de/doc/
SilverIntro.pdf.
[KMS+17] Kriebel, Moyses, Strobl, Richenhagen, Orth, Pischinger, Schulze,
Greifenberg, and Rumpe. The next generation of bmw's electried
powertrains: Providing software features quickly by model-based
==PAGE:74==
64
BIBLIOGRAPHY
system design.
26th Aachen Colloquium Automobile and Engine
Technology, 2017.
[KRM+18] Stefan Kriebel,
Johannes Richenhagen,
Matthias
Markthaler,
Karin Samira Salman, Timo Greifenberg, Steen Hillemacher, Bern-
hard Rumpe, Christoph Schulze, Andreas Wortmann, and Philipp
Orth. Improving model-based testing in automotive software engi-
neering. In Frances Paulisch and Jan Bosch, editors, Proceedings of
the 40th International Conference on Software Engineering Software
Engineering in Practice - ICSE-SEIP '18, pages 172180, New York,
New York, USA, 2018. ACM Press. doi:10.1145/3183519.3183533.
[LJX+04]
Wang Linzhang, Yuan Jiesong, Yu Xiaofeng, Hu Jun, Li Xuandong,
and Zheng Guoliang. Generating test cases from uml activity di-
agram based on gray-box method. In 11th Asia-Pacic Software
Engineering Conference, pages 284291. IEEE, 30-03 Nov. 2004.
doi:10.1109/APSEC.2004.55.
[Lun18]
Fredrik Lundh. xml.etree.elementtree  the elementtree xml api,
2018. URL: https://docs.python.org/3.7/library/xml.etree.
elementtree.html.
[Mau09]
Jakob Mauss.
Test-driven development of dct control software.
8th International CTI Symposium Innovative Automotive Transmis-
sions, 2009.
[MHS06]
Olaf Maibaum, Anita Herrmann, and Holger Schumann.
Ab-
schlussbericht des projekts silest: Software in the loop for embed-
ded software test, 2006.
URL: https://elib.dlr.de/54340/1/
BMBF01ISC12A.pdf.
[MMK19]
Mohr,
Müller,
and
Krieg.
The
road
to
2020
and
be-
yond:
What's
driving
the
global
automotive
indus-
try?
2019.
URL:
https://www.mckinsey.com/
industries/automotive-and-assembly/our-insights/
the-road-to-2020-and-beyond-whats-driving-the-global-automotive-industry.
[Pel18]
Jan Peleska.
Model-based avionic systems testing for the airbus
family:
ETS 2018 :
May 28-June 01, 2018, Bremen, Ger-
many : proceedings.
IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, 2018.
URL: http:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/servlet/opac?punumber=8392663,
doi:10.1109/ETS.2018.8400703.
[Pra97]
Biren Prasad.
Analysis of pricing strategies for new product in-
troduction.
Pricing Strategy and Practice, 5(4):132141, 1997.
doi:10.1108/09684909710184626.
==PAGE:75==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
65
[PZ16]
Andreas
Patzer
and
Rainer
Zaiser.
Xcp

the
stan-
dard
protocol
for
ecu
development,
2016.
URL:
https:
//assets.vector.com/cms/content/application-areas/
ecu-calibration/xcp/XCP_ReferenceBook_V3.0_EN.pdf.
[RCT09]
Anton Rink, Emmanuel Chrisofakis, and Mugur Tatar. Automating
test of control software. ATZelektronik worldwide, 4(6):2427, 2009.
doi:10.1007/BF03242245.
[Ric93]
J. Richalet.
Industrial applications of model based predictive
control.
Automatica, 29(5):12511274, 1993.
doi:10.1016/0005-
1098(93)90049-Y.
[RJB03]
James Rumbaugh, Ivar Jacobson, and Grady Booch. The unied
modeling language reference manual:
The denitive reference to
the UML from the original designers. The Addison-Wesley object
technology series. Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 5. print edition,
2003.
[RTT07]
Riccardo Russo, Mario Terzo, and Francesco Timpone. Software-
in-the-loop development and validation of a cornering brake
control logic.
Vehicle System Dynamics, 45(2):149163, 2007.
doi:10.1080/00423110600866491.
[Rum16]
Bernhard Rumpe.
Modeling with UML: Language, Concepts,
Methods.
Springer International Publishing,
Cham and s.l.,
2016.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-33933-7,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-33933-7.
[Saj19]
Vinay Sajip. 15.7. logging  logging facility for python, 2019. URL:
https://docs.python.org/2/library/logging.html.
[Sch15]
Oliver Scheid. AUTOSAR compendiumnPart 1. Scheid, Bruchsal,
edition 1.0.1 [based on ar4.0.3] edition, 2015.
[SLH12]
M. Shahbakhti, J. Li, and J. K. Hedrick.
Early model-based
verication of automotive control system implementation:
27
- 29 June 2012, Montreal, QC, Canada.
IEEE, Piscataway,
NJ, 2012.
URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/servlet/opac?
punumber=6297579, doi:10.1109/ACC.2012.6314852.
[SSK11]
Mahesh Shirole, Amit Suthar, and Rajeev Kumar. Generation of
improved test cases from uml state diagram using genetic algorithm.
In Arun Bahulkar, K. Kesavasamy, T. V. Prabhakar, and Gautam
Shro, editors, Proceedings of the 4th India Software Engineering
Conference on - ISEC '11, pages 125134, New York, New York,
USA, 2011. ACM Press. doi:10.1145/1953355.1953374.
==PAGE:76==
66
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[TSB10]
Tatar, Schaich, and Breitinger. Automated test of the amg speed-
shift dct control software. 9th International CTI Symposium Inno-
vative Automotive Transmissions, 2010. URL: https://qtronic.
de/doc/TestWeaver_CTI_2010_paper.pdf.
[VCC+14] Gabriele Vandi, Nicolò Cavina, Enrico Corti, Giorgio Mancini,
Davide Moro,
Fabrizio Ponti,
and Vittorio Ravaglioli.
De-
velopment of a software in the loop environment for automo-
tive powertrain systems.
Energy Procedia, 45:789798, 2014.
doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2014.01.084.
[VHN15]
Thi-Dao Vu, Pham Ngoc Hung, and Viet-Ha Nguyen. A method
for automated test data generation from sequence diagrams and
object constraint language.
In Huynh Quyet Thang, Le Anh
Phuong, Luc de Raedt, Yves Deville, Marc Bui, Truong Thi Dieu
Linh,
Nguyen Thi Oanh,
Dinh Viet Sang,
and Nguyen Ba
Ngoc, editors, Proceedings of the Sixth International Symposium
on Information and Communication Technology - SoICT 2015,
pages 17,
New York,
New York,
USA, 2015. ACM Press.
doi:10.1145/2833258.2833294.
[Vos10]
Wilfried Voss. A comprehensible guide to controller area network.
Copperhill Media, Greeneld, Mass., 2. ed. edition, 2010.
==PAGE:77==
List of Figures
1.1
Process from idea to product in the V-model
. . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
SMArDT Method [DHG+19]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Statechart diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Activity diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5
A nested activity before 1) and after 2) hierarchy resolution . . .
10
1.6
A parallel ow before 1) and after 2) fork attening
. . . . . . .
11
1.7
Components in a SiL Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1
Components in a SiL Environment within the SMArDT framework 18
2.2
Tools in the SiL tool chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3
Tools and corresponding function in the tool chain . . . . . . . .
19
2.4
Tools, corresponding function, and connection in the tool chain .
20
2.5
Mapping from symbolic signal to memory address in the SiL tool
chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
==PAGE:78==
68
LIST OF FIGURES
2.6
Global mapping of symbolic signals to signals . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.7
Parameter mapping of symbolic values to signal values . . . . . .
23
2.8
Global mapping and parameter mapping within the testing tool .
23
3.1
Tools, corresponding function, and automated connections in the
tool chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
File creation by the connection tool as described in section Fea-
ture 1: Fluent and automated connection between test case gen-
erator and testing tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3
Building blocks and their connection within a project le
. . . .
36
3.4
Decisional behaviour of connection tool for found duplicate
. . .
38
3.5
GUI of the connection tool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1
Activity Diagram to test the tool chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2
Altered test case in the testing tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3
Implementation package ControlHatchLock
. . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.4
Test case evaluation after execution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.5
Test execution in the co-simulation tool as desired
. . . . . . . .
49
4.6
Project representation in the testing tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.1
MiL testing tool chain as presented by [Jai09] . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.2
MiL testing tool chain as presented by [Jai09] . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.3
SiL testing tool chain of dual clutch transmission system software
55
5.4
SiL testing tool chain of cornering brake control software . . . . .
56
==PAGE:79==
Listings
1.1
Path one ATM test case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.2
Path two ATM test case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1
XML example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
XML namespace example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
Test step as generated by the test case generator . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4
Status template parameter mapping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.5
Status template global mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.6
Status template test step
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.7
Parameter mapping template . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.8
Global mapping template
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.9
Project template . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.10 Excerpt from the logle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1
Control test step as created by the test case generator . . . . . .
44
4.2
Status test step as created by the test case generator . . . . . . .
45
4.3
Internal parameter mapping of the enhanced test case . . . . . .
46
4.4
Implementation package reference in the enhanced test case . . .
46
4.5
Parameter mapping denition in the implementation package . .
46
4.6
Internal global mapping in the implementation package
. . . . .
47
4.7
Control test step in the implementation package
. . . . . . . . .
47
4.8
Project le created by the connection tool . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.9
Global mapping created by the connection tool . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.10 Parameter mapping created by the connection tool . . . . . . . .
52
==PAGE:80==
70
LISTINGS
==PAGE:81==
Abbrevations
API
application programming interface
CBC cornering brake control
DCT dual clutch transmission
ECU electronic control unit
GUI graphical user interface
HiL
hardware in the loop
HW
hardware
MiL
model in the loop
SiL
software in the loop
SMArDT specication method for architecture, requirements, design and test
SVN Apache Subversion
SW
software
SysML Systems Modeling Language
UML Unied Modeling Language
URL Uniform Resource Locator
vECU virtual ECU
ViL
vehicle in the loop
==PAGE:82==
72
Abbrevations
V&V verication and validation
XML Extensible Markup Language
