==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
MSc in Mathematical Modelling and Computation
Machine Learning Driven Quality Assessment of
Stained Histopathological Slides
Written by:
Josephine Perch Nielsen (s134608)
Tinna Stokholm Larsen (s134577)
Supervisors:
Anders Bjorholm Dahl
Vedrana Andersen Dahl
Cooperativ corporation:
Visiopharm A/S
Contacts:
Jeppe Thagaard
Andreas Schønau
Michael Lippert
February 3rd 2019
==PAGE:2==
CONTENTS
Contents
1
Abstract
3
2
Introduction
4
2.1
Problem description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Related work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Data
10
3.1
Quality assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Data selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
The scoring process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Preprocessing of the digital images
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5
Colour deconvolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Theory
16
4.1
Feature extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.1.1
Global features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.1.1.1
Haralick texture features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.1.2
Bag-of-visual-words . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1.2.1
BoVW feature extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.1.2.2
Forming the codebook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.2.3
Codebook frequency histogram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Supervised regression learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.1
Model complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.2
ℓ1-regularised linear regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.3
Random forest
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Method and implementation
24
5.1
Feature extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.1.1
Global features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.1.2
Bag-of-visual-words . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1.2.1
BoVW feature extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1.2.2
Forming the codebook using K-means clustering
. . . . . . .
27
5.1.2.3
Codebook frequency histogram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1.3
The cell line core problem using local features . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1.4
The staining quality score problem using local features . . . . . . .
28
5.2
Supervised regression learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2.1
ℓ1-regularised linear regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2.2
Random forest
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Results
31
6.1
The staining quality score problem using global features . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.2
The cell line core problem using local features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.3
The staining quality score problem using local features
. . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.3.1
Data exploration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
1
==PAGE:3==
CONTENTS
7
Discussion
43
7.1
The staining quality score problem using global features . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.2
The cell line core problem using local features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.3
The staining quality score problem using local features
. . . . . . . . . . .
43
8
Conclusion
47
9
Bibliography
48
10 Appendices
53
2
==PAGE:4==
1. ABSTRACT
1
Abstract
The level of PD-L1 expression in tumours can be used as a biomarker for selection of
cancer patients for this speciﬁc immunotherapy.
To make the most accurate decision
about whether or not a patient is eligible for treatment, the staining quality of the tumour
tissue must be optimal. Only specialised pathologists with experience in PD-L1 staining
can asses this.
Therefore, it is of importance to investigate the possibility of using image analysis to
support the pathologists. More speciﬁcally, we have looked at images of cell lines as these
are easier to get access to than tumour tissue and as the PD-L1 expression levels can be
engineered, so they are known in advance. We investigated if the cell line images and
their corresponding staining quality scores can be used to ﬁnd features that describe a
poor or an optimal staining. We considered images from two quality organisation and
used an approach that included extraction of image features and regression.
Using a global or local feature extraction of the cell line cores and a subsequent re-
gression, it was not possible for us to predict the quality scores. However, we cannot rule
out that the cell line cores can be used for determining the staining quality. Our results
suggest that it might be a good idea to only consider a single vendor and clone in the
model, and that more data is needed. Furthermore, samples with artefacts and damaged
cells should be excluded from data before creating the model.
3
==PAGE:5==
2. INTRODUCTION
2
Introduction
Cancer is globally one of the leading causes of death and is the cause of every ﬁfth death in
the European Region [47]. In general, the term cancer covers abnormal and uncontrollable
cell growth often leading to tumours [29]. There are several types of cancer that can
emerge almost anywhere in the human body. Lung cancer is one of the most common
types of cancer and is responsible for most new cases and deaths worldwide [46].
For a problem of this size it is crucial to ﬁnd functioning treatments.
The most
common cancer treatments are surgery and radiation therapy, where whole tumours are
removed or killed, and chemotherapy where cancer cells throughout the body are killed
using speciﬁc drugs [46]. However, these treatments come with sever side eﬀects which
reduce the quality of life for the patients.
Therefore, immunotherapy is becoming a
more integrated part of cancer treatment. Immunotherapy helps improve the functions
of the body’s immune system to boost the natural defence against the cancer cells [6]. In
practice, this is done using immunoregulatory antibody pharmaceuticals.
The programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) receptor is a protein expressed on the surface
of activated cytotoxic T-cells, preventing them from attacking cells in the body [1]. The
programmed cell death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) is a transmembrane protein found on both nor-
mal cells and tumour cells [1]. When the PD-L1 protein on a normal cell binds to the
PD-1 receptor, damage to the healthy tissue is limited. However, when the PD-L1 protein
is located on a tumour cell, the binding inhibits the T-cells in combating these and the
pathway becomes harmful [1]. Therefore, PD-L1 is often expressed massively on tumour
cells to prevent the cytotoxic T-cells from detecting and undermining them.
To combat this, patients can be treated with pharmaceuticals to block the PD-1/PD-
L1 pathway. The expression status, and correspondingly predictive and prognostic values
of PD-L1, vary with diﬀerent treatments [15]. A very successful study on this particular
issue was performed on melanoma patients [36]. This led to further studies, and in August
2018 a new drug for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients was approved by the
EU [19]. In Denmark there are 4500 new cases of NSCLC, which is the most frequent
type of lung cancer, each year, and it is estimated that around one third of these would
beneﬁt from the drug [18]. There are cases of total recovery from the treatment, and in
general the side eﬀects are much lighter than in other treatments, providing the patients
with a longer life and an improvement in their quality of life [18].
Recent studies propose to use the level of PD-L1 expression in tumours as a predictive
biomarker for the selection of cancer patients for anti PD-1/PD-L1 therapies [28]. This
selection is done using immunohistochemistry. In immunohistochemistry tumour tissue
samples are stained so that pathologists can distinguish PD-L1 positive cells from PD-L1
negative cells. Hereafter, it is decided whether the patient is eligible for treatment. To
be able to provide the treatment that gives the patient the best outcome, it is therefore
important to ensure a good staining quality of the samples.
4
==PAGE:6==
2. INTRODUCTION
2.1
Problem description
Several immunohistochemistry quality organisations exist worldwide. They strive to en-
sure standardisation across laboratories and routines. In this project, we have worked
with data provided by Visiopharm who collaborates with the two quality organisations,
UK Neqas and NordiQC [44], [31]. At both organisations the assessment of immunohis-
tochemically stained slides, including the PD-L1 stain, is done manually. This is a time
consuming and cumbersome process that can only be performed by specialised pathol-
ogists with speciﬁc knowledge of and experience with the PD-L1 marker. This scoring
process is described further in Section 3.3.
The organisations would like to investigate the possibility of using image analysis to
support the pathologists in their work.
More speciﬁcally, samples from cell lines are
included on the slides. Cell lines are easier to get access to than actual samples from
tumour tissue, they appear more homogeneous and the approximate PD-L1 expression
level is known. The hope is to be able to use the cell line images to not only predict the
quality of the staining, but also ﬁgure out what makes the staining quality good and what
makes it poor. This feedback is important for the laboratories to improve their staining
procedures.
To describe the extent and complexity of the problem, we have included Figure 1 and
2. Figure 1 displays examples of cell lines stained using the same general method but with
diﬀerent scores assigned by the pathologists. For the UK Neqas data the given quality
scores are between 1 and 5, and a score below 3 is unacceptable. To us there is no apparent
visual diﬀerence between the optimally and badly stained samples. In Figure 1, the cells
in the poorly stained third core look more brown and less distinguished than those of the
well stained core. However, these small diﬀerences between the images are not always
consistent in other examples. Another example of two diﬀerently scored samples from the
vendor Dako is seen in Figure 2, but here there is no visual diﬀerence in the amount of
brown staining. In Appendix A we have included histograms of the intensities in the two
colour channels for the images in Figure 1 and 2, but there were no obvious diﬀerences
here either.
In spite of this, we hope that we can create a model that will be able to indicate how
the images diﬀer. Therefore, we want to see if it is possible to extract image features
and train a model to discriminate between images of diﬀerent staining quality. At best,
we will be able to interpret what is emphasised in the model. This is done by extracting
relevant image features and performing supervised regression.
Many recent successes in image analysis and machine learning are based on deep
learning [17], [22], [26]. Therefore, we want to justify why we have chosen not to use
a neural network.
An obvious choice would have been to use a convolutional neural
network, where the features, that are important for the predictions, are learned in a
number of feature maps [21]. Further interpretation of what is learnt in the network is
also possible. For instance, backward propagation techniques can be used to consider
what passes through certain neurons or feature maps [27]. Another idea is to construct a
heatmap that points out the pixels that play a role in the model.
Therefore, we did not deselect deep learning because it is not useful. We made a
deliberate choice not to use neural networks, and we wanted to see what we could achieve
without it. Our ﬁrst approach was to try to use information collected when observing a
scoring process to see if this could be used to design an appropriate model.
5
==PAGE:7==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 1: Images from UK Neqas run 122 using the clone SP263 from the vendor Ventana.
The ﬁgures (a) and (b) are examples of cell line core 1, (c) and (d) of core 2, (e)
and (f) of core 3 and (g) and (h) of cell line core 4. The left images have a score
of 2, and the right images have a score of 5.
==PAGE:8==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 2: Images from UK Neqas run 123 using the clone 22C3 from the vendor Dako. The
ﬁgures (a) and (b) are examples of cell line core 1, (c) and (d) of core 2, (e) and
(f) of core 3 and (g) and (h) of cell line core 4. The left images have a score of
2.25, and the right images have a score of 4.75.
==PAGE:9==
2. INTRODUCTION
2.1.1
Strategy
Our overall approach can be divided into three steps. In the ﬁrst step the feature extrac-
tion is performed, in the second step we perform supervised regression on the obtained
data, and if the prediction was successful, we wish to interpret our results in the last step.
A visualisation of the method is seen in Figure 3.
Figure 3: In our method we start by extracting features from a data set. Hereafter, super-
vised regression is performed on the computed data matrix. If we are satisﬁed
with the prediction ability, we retrieve the most important features in our data
set from the regression. We interpret the ﬁndings by combining the important
features and the raw images.
As an initial approach, we based the feature extraction on global features in the images.
By global features we refer to features dependent on the entire image. The original idea
was therefore to choose easy-to-interpret global features to describe the overall image.
This problem is referred to as The staining quality score problem using global features in
the remainder of the thesis.
However, after a while it became clear that it was diﬃcult to ﬁnd relevant descriptive
global features which could meet our requirement of being interpretable as well.
We
therefore chose to examine if the bag-of-visual-words model could be used to solve our
problem. Here local features were extracted in a pre-determined grid in each image to
retrieve more information from the images.
We ﬁrst created a test problem where we wished to distinguish between the cell line
cores based on their PD-L1 expression. In other words, we wish to predict if a new image is
core 1, 2, 3, or 4. We chose this problem as there are rather large visual diﬀerences between
the four cores which hopefully makes it an optimal problem to test our approach on. This
problem is referred to as The cell line core problem using local features throughout the
thesis.
After having tested our chosen method on a simpler problem, we again considered
our original problem but with the tested local feature extraction. In the remainder of the
thesis this problem is referred to as The staining quality score problem using local features.
8
==PAGE:10==
2. INTRODUCTION
2.2
Related work
According to our own investigations nothing has been published on using image analysis
to examine if cell line cores alone can be used to determine the quality of immunohisto-
chemically stained slides. In this context, we are therefore ”breaking new ground”.
The potential of using image analysis to measure the amount of PD-L1-positive cells
in tissue from patients with NSCLC, and from this decide if a patient was eligible for
treatment, was investigated by Silva et al. (2018) [40]. However, the quality of the staining
was not one of the main issues here. In a study by Scheel et al. (2017), the reproducibility
of staining patterns across diﬀerent laboratories was examined using image analysis [38].
Here cell lines were included as an aid in determining the PD-L1 expression level.
In general, extraction of image features and applying machine learning algorithms to
ﬁnd important features is not a new approach and has shown good results. Some examples
are described in [33] and [35].
9
==PAGE:11==
3. DATA
3
Data
This section is mainly based on our observations and experiences at Visiopharm and UK
Neqas in London and on our conversation with Mogens Vyberg from NordiQC.
3.1
Quality assessment
In this project we have used data provided by the two quality organisations UK Neqas
and NordiQC. These quality organisations specialise in assessing immunohistochemically
stained slides from diﬀerent laboratories. Their process is to initially distribute unstained
slides to participating laboratories who are asked to stain them. Each new distributed
collection of slides is called a run.
The laboratory submits a slide after staining and must specify which protocol has
been used. The protocol is a description of their routine PD-L1 staining method, i.e.
how the slide is prepared and stained, and which antibody clone, binding to the PD-
L1 ligand on the cells, that has been used. When the staining procedure is ﬁnished, the
laboratories send the slides back. Now the organisations assess each of the stained samples
on the slides to ensure that the protocols used in the laboratories are of a certain quality.
Each laboratory obtains a score and receives comments on their staining protocol to help
improve the staining quality in the next run.
3.2
Data selection
The slides can contain both mandatory and optional samples. In the data we have used,
a sample includes tonsils, non-small cell lung carcinomas, placenta, other tumour tissue,
and four cell line cores with diﬀerent PD-L1 expression levels. These eight samples are
all mandatory. An example of a stained slide is seen in Figure 4.
Figure 4: An example of an entire stained slide. The cores marked with A, B, C and D are
from diﬀerent tissues and the cores E, F, G and H are the cell lines. The samples
on the right hand side of the dotted line are so called in house samples that the
laboratories can enclose for their own interest.
10
==PAGE:12==
3. DATA
In this project, we only use the cell line cores from the slides. A cell line is a cell culture
that multiplies given the suitable medium and space [45]. Cell lines will only consist of one
type of cell which makes the structure of the core more homogeneous than that of natural
tissue. The cell lines are bought from another company [30]. The ﬁrst core from NordiQC
is PD-L1 negative, the second has a low positive percentage, the third is intermediately
positive and the last core is strongly positive [12]. The four cores of cell lines from UK
Neqas have similar expression levels. In Figure 5, an example of an observation including
four cores with diﬀerent expression levels is shown.
Figure 5: Four cell line cores from the same slide with an increasing level of PD-L1 expression
from left to right.
The PD-L1 antibody is colourless and is therefore coupled with a molecule called 3,3’-
diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (DAB). DAB is a chromogen reagent that when
oxidised with hydrogen peroxide generates a dark brown colour [34]. When the antibody
binds to the ligand, PD-L1, in the membrane of the cell, it will appear brown. To be able
to see the cells more clearly, hematoxylin is used as a counterstain. Hematoxylin binds
mainly to the cell nuclei, making them appear blue.
Each laboratory stains the samples based on a protocol. These protocols can be varied
in a number of ways aﬀecting the ﬁnal staining. We found that the slides could look very
diﬀerent when prepared by diﬀerent protocols. After careful examination of our data, we
could see that especially the chosen vendor and clone had an impact on the appearance
of the samples after staining. By vendor we here refer to the speciﬁc company making
and selling the staining solution. Likewise, the machine used for staining and the solution
of the clone, i.e. if it was concentrated or ready-to-use, have an impact. To limit our
project, we chose to partition the data based on the chosen vendor and clone, since these
were the most obvious diﬀerences when we considered the images.
To get an overview, we therefore looked at the data in the project according to quality
assessment organisation, run, vendor and clone.
We considered data from three runs
performed by UK Neqas, run 121, 122 and 123, and two runs performed by NordiQC, run
C1 and C2. We have chosen only to consider the two vendors named Dako and Ventana
since they appear most frequently in data. The remaining vendors are gathered in Other
vendors, and we have not speciﬁed their clones explicitly. In this data Dako provides the
clones 28-8 and 22C3 while Ventana provides the clones SP142 and SP263 [41]. Figure 6
yields an overview of data. The ﬁgure also includes the number of samples obtained from
each clone. It can be seen that most data is provided for the vendor Dako and clone 22C3
and for the vendor Ventana and the clone SP263, and we will mainly focus on these.
11
==PAGE:13==
Figure 6: From left to right this ﬁgures shows how we have chosen to deal with some of the
choices in the protocol. In the outer right boxes in parentheses the number of
images are speciﬁed.
==PAGE:14==
3. DATA
3.3
The scoring process
We were lucky to be invited to the assessment scoring of run 123 by UK Neqas in Farring-
don, London. This was a unique opportunity for us to be able to observe a scoring process
and listen to the discussions between the pathologists. Our attendance both helped us
understand the challenges when scoring the slides and also the complexity of the problem.
UK Neqas had invited four pathologists from around Europe, who are specialised in
the immunohistochemical staining of PD-L1. These pathologists are either third party or
representatives from laboratories participating in the given run. Therefore, the samples
are given new ID numbers in order to avoid any bias from the pathologists. The patholo-
gists were placed around a multi-headed microscope together with a representative from
UK Neqas, who handled the slides and led the microscope. The setup is seen in Figure 7.
Figure 7: The four men located in each corner are the pathologists. The UK Neqas repre-
sentative is placed in the middle to the right, and Josephine and a non-scoring
pathologist are located to the left.
The ﬁrst step in the process was to look at provided reference images for a speciﬁc vendor
and clone enabling the pathologists to agree on what staining expression to expect. New
reference slides were provided for every new vendor and clone. The samples in run 123
consist of two tonsil cores, two tumour tissue cores and four cell line cores, and it is the
staining quality of these eight cores together that determined the ﬁnal score. The tonsils
were marked Acceptable or Not acceptable and the percentage of PD-L1 stained cells were
noted for the rest of the samples. The possible percentages are in the ranges {0, 1-4, 5-9,
10-24, 25-49, 50-79, 80-100}.
Each of the four pathologists were logging their individual assessments of each core
in an online program provided by Visiopharm called Qualitopix. The work process for a
13
==PAGE:15==
3. DATA
pathologist was therefore to look at a core in the microscope, examine and asses the core,
type in a mark in Qualitopix and start over with the next core. In the beginning this
process took around 15 minutes per slide, but eventually it only took around one or two
minutes. In total, it took the four pathologists two full days to assess the 100 samples in
run 123.
When all cores were examined, the slide was given an overall score. The ﬁnal score for
the slide was then computed as the average of the scores given by the four pathologists.
Sometimes it was discussed that on the same slide the staining in one core was good while
the staining in another was poor. We also observed that some cores were assessed faster
than others. Especially, the two middle cell line cores were harder to mark than the rest
of the cores as the PD-L1 percentage was often right between two ranges. Despite this,
a single overall score was still given. As mentioned, for UK Neqas the overall score is a
number between 1 and 5, where 3 and above is acceptable and below 3 is unacceptable.
However, in practice a slide is almost never assigned the score 1. If the marks of a single
core or the ﬁnal score were too diﬀerent, the pathologists had to discuss the speciﬁc case
and reach some kind of agreement.
We also had a meeting with the director of NordiQC, Mogens Vyberg, to obtain further
information about their scoring process. Without going into details about this, the most
obvious diﬀerence between the two scoring processes is that NordiQC does not consider
the cell line cores when scoring a slide. Instead, they score the rest of the cores and hope
that the quality of the staining is similar for the entire slide. In this way they would be
able to use the cell lines instead of tissue. Another diﬀerence is that NordiQC scores the
samples using the categories Optimal, Good, Borderline and Poor, instead of using a scale
from 1 to 5.
3.4
Preprocessing of the digital images
The slides were scanned into a computer to prepare the data for image analysis. This
was done using special whole slide scanners that produce high-resolution digital images.
NordiQC used a Hamamatsu C9600-12 scanner with a standard resolution of 0.45µm per
pixel [14]. The UK Neqas images in run 121 has a resolution of 0.39µm per pixel, and
0.44µm per pixel in run 122 and 123. The images from the scan are very large, around
50,000 × 350,000 pixels, as they consist of the whole slide.
To be able to build a model on these high-resolution images, they were de-arrayed using
the VIS software from Visiopharm. That is, part of an image containing the individual
core was cropped out providing a separate image for each core. Hereby, we obtained four
separate images of cell line cores for each slide. The cropped out images were exported
to .tif ﬁles at 20x for the NordiQC runs. The images from UK Neqas were exported at
respectively 17.2x and 19.5x corresponding to their resolution to obtain a similar image
quality across runs.
UK Neqas
NordiQC
Run 121
Run 122
Run 123
Run C1
Run C2
38
76
92
65
137
Table 1: The table holds a data overview showing the number of images in each run.
14
==PAGE:16==
3. DATA
All images were reviewed before exporting them. If we were unable to recognise the cells
in a large part of the four cell line cores, the entire set of images were discarded. In Table
1 an overview of the ﬁnal number of images in each run is shown.
For each core, a region of interest was then found and exported in VIS. In the region
of interest, all pixels belonging to the core are assigned to one label and the remaining
background pixels in the image are assigned to another label. Using this region, an area
of 500 × 500 pixels in its centre was chosen. The diameter of a cell line core is around
4,000 pixels and most cells have a diameter of around 30 pixels. Therefore, we estimated
that a size of 500 × 500 pixels would be suﬃcient to represent the image. Furthermore,
this size was more computationally convenient to work with. An example of an image of
this size is shown in Figure 8. We are aware of the possibility that this choice can have
consequences for the apparent amount of PD-L1 positive cells in an image, especially for
the second core that has a small positive percentage.
Figure 8: This ﬁgure shows a partially blurred image region of 500 × 500 pixels.
Furthermore, many of the digital images have small or large blurred areas mostly in the
periphery obtained from the scan. Therefore, the region was extracted from the centre of
the image to try to avoid the blurriness. Especially in run C1 and partly in C2, there are
many blurred areas. An example of this can be seen in Figure 8.
3.5
Colour deconvolution
The exported .tif ﬁles are RGB images. This means that they consist of three colour
channels; a red, a green and a blue. As we consider slides stained with two distinctive
colours, DAB and hematoxylin, we wish to separate the information into these two speciﬁc
colour channels to better quantify the coloured structures.
In the article by Ruifrok and Johnston (2001), a colour deconvolution that maps RGB
images to the colours of the three stains hematoxylin, eosin and DAB is described [37].
We used the approach from this article in our data processing. This gave us an image
with three new colour channels. As we only use the hematoxylin and DAB stains, the
eosin channel was discarded.
15
==PAGE:17==
4. THEORY
4
Theory
4.1
Feature extraction
4.1.1
Global features
4.1.1.1
Haralick texture features
Haralick features contain information about the texture of an image.
To extract the
features, a Gray Level Co-occurence Matrix (GLCM) must be computed from an image
[10]. In a constructed toy example, we have an image with the pixel values 1, 2, 3 or 4.
Figure 9 shows the structure of the gray level co-occurrence matrix of the same size.
(1,1)
(1,2)
(1,3)
(1,4)
(2,1)
(2,2)
(2,3)
(2,4)
(3,1)
(3,2)
(3,3)
(3,4)
(4,1)
(4,2)
(4,3)
(4,4)
Figure 9: An example of the structure of a gray level co-occurence matrix.
The GLCM entry (i, j) holds the number of times two pixels with pixel values i and j
occur within a given neighbourhood and with a certain pixel distance between them. In
this example, the GLCM has size 4×4. Often the intensity range is divided into a number
of equally distant bins if the pixel values are not integers.
If P denotes the GLCM, the energy or angular second moment is the sum of squares
of the normalised GLCM, p = P
R. Here R = Ng
2 is the number of entries in the GLCM,
and Ng is the number of bins or pixel values. The energy is given by
energy =
Ng
X
i=1
Ng
X
j=1
p(i, j)2.
(1)
The energy is high when the same pixel pairs occur often in the image. The homogeneity
or inverse diﬀerence moment is found as
homogeneity =
PNg
i=1
PNg
j=1 p(i, j)
1 + (i −j)2
.
(2)
The homogeneity is high when pixels are similar. The contrast is the sum of the squared
intensity distances times the entries in the normalised GLCM,
contrast =
Ng
X
i=1
Ng
X
j=1
(i −j)2p(i, j).
(3)
The contrast is higher for large pixel value diﬀerences.
The correlation measures the
linear dependency of pixel values in the GLCM,
correlation =
PNg
i=1
PNg
j=1(ij)p(i, j) −µxµy
σxσy
.
(4)
16
==PAGE:18==
4. THEORY
Above µx and σx are the mean value and standard deviation of the marginal probability
vectors, px, given by
px(i) =
Ng
X
j=1
p(i, j).
(5)
The same applies for py.
4.1.2
Bag-of-visual-words
The bag-of-words (BoW) model was originally used as a tool to classify documents. In this
method, a document could be turned into a bag of words using a vocabulary. As an ana-
logue to the bag-of-words model the bag-of-visual-words (BoVW) model was introduced
in computer vision [39].
The BoVW model can be used to construct a histogram of feature frequencies in an
image based on a pre-deﬁned codebook. This takes place in two steps. In the ﬁrst step the
codebook is created. The codebook is the visual representation of a chosen set of images
[4], and it consists of so called codewords that correspond to image features. Features are
extracted based on chosen patches, and then the codebook is created using clustering. In
the second step in the BoVW model, features are extracted from a new image or a new
set of images, and the frequency of each element in the codebook is found. The BoVW
process is displayed in Figure 10.
Figure 10: The bag-of-visual-words process described using a hypothetical example. The
ﬁrst step is described in (a)-(c) and the second step is described in (d)-(e).
(a) Chosen images for the codebook are divided into patches. (b) The features are
extracted as vectors. (c) The feature vectors are clustered to form the codebook.
(d) Features from patches are extracted in a new image.
(e) The frequency
histogram for the new image is constructed from the codebook.
17
==PAGE:19==
4. THEORY
4.1.2.1
BoVW feature extraction
The area from where the feature should be extracted is deﬁned as a patch. The patches
used for feature extraction can be chosen in a number of ways [42] and are typically chosen
based on keypoints in the image. This means that a number of features, corresponding
to the chosen number of patches, are extracted from an image. The feature extraction is
performed on a suitable amount of images to ensure that the codebook is representative
of the problem.
SIFT
Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) is a feature generation method originally used
for object recognition [24].
The SIFT features are extracted from an image and are
invariant to scaling, translation, rotation, and partially invariant to illumination changes
and aﬃne or 3D projection in the image.
The overall idea in the SIFT approach is to ﬁnd location, scale and orientation of
speciﬁc keypoints in the image and compute the descriptor representation. The image
gradients are sampled in 4 × 4 quadratic subregions around the centre of the keypoint,
known as the descriptor, using the obtained scale level.
A Gaussian window is used
to weight the sampled gradients to smooth the transition between gradients and put
more emphasis on the gradients closest to the centre. In each subregion, a histogram
of eight orientation bins is found. For each descriptor describing the image this forms a
128-dimensional feature vector that is normalised to unit length. An example hereof is
displayed in Figure 11.
Figure 11: The ﬁgure shows the 4 × 4 quadratic subregions around the keypoint centre
marked with red. Each subregion contains eight orientation bins, and together
they form the SIFT feature vector.
The dense SIFT method is closely related to the regular SIFT method. The diﬀerence
between the two methods lies in the identiﬁcation of keypoints. In regular SIFT, the
keypoints are found as extrema points at multiple scales, discarded if the contrast is low
18
==PAGE:20==
4. THEORY
or the location is imprecise and rotated relative to their orientation. In dense SIFT the
keypoint locations are deﬁned over the image in a predetermined grid. Therefore, the
dense SIFT features are not invariant to scale, rotation and orientation. The size of the
descriptor can be chosen based on the image. However, the descriptor representation
is found in the same way as a 128-dimensional vector that describes the gradients in a
speciﬁc image patch.
4.1.2.2
Forming the codebook
After the feature extraction, the codebook can be created. Again, there are several ways of
doing this. The most frequently used method is to use the K-means clustering algorithm
to cluster features in the codebook [42]. Regardless of the method, the codebook will after
clustering consist of K codewords to describe the remainder of the images. A codeword
in the codebook corresponds to a feature obtained from the chosen clustering algorithm.
K-means clustering
The unsupervised K-means clustering algorithm iteratively groups N observations into
K clusters [11].
The algorithm starts with K initial cluster centres which can either
be chosen randomly among the observations or using another clustering algorithm. The
algorithm stops when the centre locations no longer change, or the speciﬁed maximum
number of updates, maxIter, is reached. The K-means clustering algorithm is speciﬁed
in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 K-means clustering algorithm
Choose K initial cluster centres.
repeat
1. Assign each observation to the nearest cluster.
2. Compute the new cluster centres as the mean of the grouped observations.
until Convergence or reaching maxIter.
The locations of the resulting K cluster centres depend on their initialisation. Diﬀerent
distance measures can be used when ﬁnding the nearest cluster centre. The best choice
of distance measure depends on the data set.
4.1.2.3
Codebook frequency histogram
Once the codebook is created from a collection of images, a new image or a new set of
images is considered. As when creating the codebook, the features are extracted from
the new image. Hereafter, each feature is assigned to the nearest cluster centre in the
codebook, i.e. a speciﬁc codeword is assigned, using a chosen distance measure.
This means that each patch in the image obtains a new index, which is simply the
cluster number, i.e. a discrete value in the set {1, ..., K}. From these values, the frequency
histogram is computed. Therefore, the frequency histogram clariﬁes how many times a
speciﬁc codeword occurs in the new image.
19
==PAGE:21==
4. THEORY
4.2
Supervised regression learning
This section is based on the book ”The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining,
Inference, and Prediction” by Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani and Jerome Friedman [11].
In supervised learning, the goal is to learn a function or an algorithm that maps an input
to an output. This can be done when a data set, consisting of pairs of input and output
values, is available. The hope is that if a new input-output pair is given, the model will,
to some extent, be able to predict the output from the input. For this to happen, the
data must be representative of the given problem, and the learned model must generalise
well to the data. Depending on the data in the problem, a regression or a classiﬁcation
model can be used. Only regression models are considered here.
4.2.1
Model complexity
In supervised learning, the model is trained by minimising a cost function so that the
predicted value approaches the actual output value. To quantify how well the trained
model generalises, the test error can be computed. The test error should be assessed on
an independent test data set, and if it is found for multiple independent data sets, it can
be averaged to yield the estimated expected test error. This is often the best estimate of
the expected test error, Err, and thereby also of the actual model ﬁt. The expected test
error can be written
Err = irreducible error + bias2 + variance.
(6)
The irreducible error is the ﬁxed natural variance of the output. The squared bias is a
measure of how accurate the model is on average, compared to the true mean, and the
variance describes how much the output varies around the true mean. Making the model
more complex by ﬁtting it closer to the training data, decreases the bias but increases
the variance, whereas a decrease in model complexity reduces the variance but increases
the bias. Therefore, the best degree of model complexity must be found as a trade-oﬀ
between variance and bias, so that the model does not overﬁt to the noise in the training
data and also does not fail to capture the important structures in the data.
4.2.2
ℓ1-regularised linear regression
The linear regression model is linear in the input variables, Xj, and can be written on the
form
f(X) = β0 +
p
X
j=1
Xjβj.
(7)
Here the input vector is XT = (X1, X2, ..., Xp), and p is the number of variables. We
wish to determine the coeﬃcients βj so that the predicted values f(X) are as close as
possible to the actual output values, Y . This can be done by minimising the residual sum
of squares
RSS(β) =
N
X
i=1
(yi −f(xi))2.
(8)
20
==PAGE:22==
4. THEORY
Here N is the number of observations. The expression in (8) can be minimised by writing
the problem on matrix form, diﬀerentiating by β and setting the ﬁrst derivative equal to
zero. This results in the unique solution
ˆβ = (XTX)−1XTy.
(9)
In some cases, a problem, where the number of variables are considerably larger than
the number of observations, is considered. In these situations, the model will not have a
unique solution. To avoid such cases, feature selection can be used.
An example of this is regularisation, also called shrinkage. Here a penalty is added to
the size of the coeﬃcients. This is also done to manage the variance in the model. If the
variables in a linear regression model are very correlated, it will be diﬃcult to determine
the coeﬃcients well. They will tend to be very large or very small to overﬁt the model.
In ℓ1−regularisation the size of the coeﬃcients is computed using the ℓ1−norm. The
problem can be written
ˆβ = min
β
 N
X
i=1
(yi −β0 −
p
X
j=1
xijβj)2 + λ
p
X
j=1
|βj|
!
.
(10)
λ ≤0 is the regularisation parameter that controls the amount of regularisation. If λ
is small, the model variance will be large and overﬁtting can happen. If λ is large, the
variance is small but the model bias will increase. Therefore, it is important to ﬁnd the
most appropriate λ-value to obtain the best model.
ℓ1−regularisation shrinks the coeﬃcients to zero providing a more sparse solution, as
opposed to ℓ2−regularisation where the coeﬃcients only rarely become zero after shrink-
age. This means that ℓ1−regularisation can be used for feature selection.
4.2.3
Random forest
Random forest is a supervised learning algorithm that can be used both for regression and
classiﬁcation problems. The method includes both decision trees and a technique called
bagging.
In the decision tree model, the variables are split recursively into two or more regions
until a stop criterion is met. In a regression problem, a decision tree can also be referred
to as a regression tree. For regression trees the region is split in two. The split variable,
j, and split point, s, are chosen to minimise the sum of squared residuals between the
predicted values and the outcome values, given in equation (8). The predicted values are
constant in each region. The two regions, R1 and R2, are deﬁned by the split variable
and split point as
R1(j, s) = {X|Xj ≤s} and R2(j, s) = {X|Xj > s} .
(11)
It can be shown that for a speciﬁc split, the predicted value, that minimises the sum of
squared residuals, is given by the average of the outcomes, c, in the region
c1 = mean(yi|xi ∈R1(j, s)) and c2 = mean(yi|xi ∈R2(j, s)).
(12)
21
==PAGE:23==
4. THEORY
Therefore, the search for the best split can be done by, for each variable, going through all
possible splitting points and choosing the pair that minimises the sum of squared residuals
min
j,s


X
xi∈R1(j,s)
(yi −c1)2 +
X
xi∈R2(j,s)
(yi −c2)2

.
(13)
After the best split is found, the tree is extended with a new node and two corresponding
branches, and the search for the next split continues.
The size of the tree should be tuned, since a large tree will likely overﬁt to the data
and a small one is likely to underﬁt. One way to do this is to grow the tree until every
leaf node has less than a speciﬁed minimum number of observations, qmin, and then prune
the tree by collapsing nodes when a split does not improve the model enough.
In bagging the predicted value is computed as an average of the output from a col-
lection of models build on bootstrap samples of the data set. A bootstrap sample is a
random resampling with replacement from the original data set. When the models are
averaged, the variance decreases. If bagging is done using regression trees, it will result
in a collection of very diﬀerent trees. The prediction, fbag(x), for a given observation x
is found by, for each tree, ﬁnding the corresponding prediction, f b(x), and averaging all
these predictions
fbag(x) = 1
B
B
X
b=1
f b(x).
(14)
B is the number of bootstrap samples. As this technique can reduce the variance, but
not the bias, models with high variance and low bias, like decision trees, are preferred.
The random forest algorithm is an extension of bagging where the chosen model is a
decision tree. The random forest algorithm is speciﬁed in Algorithm 2 and displayed in
Figure 12.
Algorithm 2 Random forest algorithm
for b = 1 to B do:
1. Randomly select a bootstrap sample from the training data.
2. For each terminal node grow a tree by following the below steps until the number
of observations belonging to it is equal to or below the minimum leaf node size,
qmin.
(a) Randomly choose m variables out of p.
(b) Find the best variable and splitting point pair.
(c) Grow two new branches.
The idea is to decorrelate the bootstrap trees to reduce the variance further. This is
achieved by randomly choosing m out of p variables as potential candidates when ﬁnding
each split. The following formula describes the variance of the average tree
ρσ2 + 1 −ρ
B
σ2.
(15)
22
==PAGE:24==
4. THEORY
It is assumed that the pairwise correlation, ρ, is positive and that the trees are identically
distributed with variance σ2. From the formula, it can be seen that increasing the number
of trees, B, decreases the second term, but to reduce the variance further the correlation
must be reduced as well.
Out-of-bag (OOB) samples are found for each tree as the observations not included
in the bootstrap samples. They can be used to ﬁnd the out-of-bag error and determine
when the algorithm should be stopped while running it. As the trees are averaged to ﬁnd
the predicted value in the random forest model, it will not overﬁt to the data no matter
how many trees are included [5]. The OOB error is estimated from the prediction which is
computed by averaging the prediction from trees where the observation was not included
in the bootstrap samples [5].
Figure 12: An overview of the random forest method using bootstrap samples.
The OOB samples can also be used to measure the variable or feature importance in the
model. For each feature the OOB sample, corresponding to a speciﬁc tree, is permuted
and the sample is used for prediction. Feature importance can then be computed as the
increase in MSE from the prediction using the non-permuted OOB sample. The idea is
that features that are important for the prediction abilities of the model will have a larger
increase in MSE.
23
==PAGE:25==
5. METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
5
Method and implementation
The overall approach was to extract relevant features from the images and then create a
regression model that could discriminate between the corresponding quality scores. If this
was possible, the coeﬃcients from the regression model would indicate what features are
important in the scoring process. From this, we would be able to map these important
features back on the original images and report our ﬁndings.
We have used the mathematical software Matlab version R2017a as our preferred
computational tool throughout this thesis.
5.1
Feature extraction
5.1.1
Global features
The global features were mainly chosen based on our experience of what might be impor-
tant when scoring the images. Especially, we observed that the pathologists at UK Neqas
often considered the amount of PD-L1 positive cells in their evaluation of the samples.
Also in the literature it is described that the PD-L1 expression level is used as an impor-
tant control of the staining quality [38]. Therefore, we included two features to describe
the amount of PD-L1 positive cells in the image. Furthermore, we chose four texture
features described by Haralick et al. (1973) [10] and three simple colour features for both
the DAB and hematoxylin colour channel. This summed to a total of 12 features for each
image.
The two PD-L1 features were extracted using the Visiopharm software VIS. The fea-
tures include a count of the number of PD-L1 positive cells and a count of the number of
PD-L1 negative cells for each cell line core. We chose not to consider the method used in
the software for labelling the cells and the assumptions made in this process. However, we
observed that the algorithm had problems labelling the cells when an image was blurred.
An example of this can be seen in Figure 13 where PD-L1 positive labelled cells are red
and PD-L1 negative cells are blue. Here we can see that even though all cells should be
positive, a great deal of the cells in the blurred area are labelled negative.
Figure 13: An example of an image with cells labelled by the software. The PD-L1 positive
labelled cells are red and PD-L1 negative cells are blue.
24
==PAGE:26==
5. METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
The four texture features energy, homogeneity, contrast and correlation were calculated
using the Matlab functions graycomatrix and graycoprops. The graycomatrix
function calculates the GLCM by counting how often a pixel value i occurs horizontally
adjacent to a pixel with the value j. The Matlab function default is to divide the range
between the minimum and maximum pixel intensity into eight bins and hereby create
an 8 × 8 GLCM. The texture features are computed from the GLCM using the function
graycoprops. The Haralick features were chosen as they are easy to interpret and to
examine if simple texture features can be used to discriminate between the diﬀerently
scored images.
As colour features we computed the standard deviation, mean and median value of the
intensities in each of the two colour channels. These were among other included to examine
if over- or understaining the tissue have an impact on the scores. For example, if an image
is heavily stained with DAB, we can sometimes observe a light brown discolouration of
the background.
The global features were extracted on the entire cell line core and not only on the
500 × 500 image. For each observation the 12 features per core were included in the
data, providing a 48-dimensional vector. The features were extracted for all images in
the UK Neqas data set and saved in a matrix of size #obs × 48. We chose not to use
the NordiQC images, since many of these had blurred areas, and we wanted to see if the
approach worked on the most promising data set ﬁrst. ℓ1−regularised linear regression
was performed on the data matrix and the corresponding scores.
5.1.2
Bag-of-visual-words
5.1.2.1
BoVW feature extraction
We created the codebook using a minor share of the images from either UK Neqas or
NordiQC and such that it was representative of the obvious segments in the data. From
the overview in Figure 6, we can see the number of images of a speciﬁc vendor and clone
for each run. As mentioned, the largest similar groups of observations or segments consist
of the clone 22C3 with vendor Dako and the clone SP263 with Ventana.
In practice, we chose two observations from each segment based on run, clone and
score, one with a good and one with a poor score.
To represent the data from the
remaining vendors, we chose a single observation from this segment.
After having chosen the images for the codebook, the features in these images were
extracted. The patches used for the feature extraction were deﬁned on two diﬀerent grids.
The ﬁrst grid is a simple uniform, dense grid, hereafter referred to as the simple grid. The
second grid is similar to the ﬁrst, but includes half overlapping patches as well, hereafter
referred to as the overlapping grid. Examples of the two types of grids are displayed in
Figure 14 where the dots and crosses show the location of the patch centres.
25
==PAGE:27==
5. METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
Figure 14: The centres of the two used grid types are represented by dots and crosses in
the ﬁgure. (a) Centres of patches in a 5 × 5 simple grid is marked in red. (b) In
the overlapping grid of 9 × 9 patches, the red centres from the simple grid are
repeated and the centres marked by blue crosses are added.
We used two diﬀerent approaches to obtain a feature vector for the patch, patches and
SIFT. The ﬁrst and most simple approach, called patches, was to use the intensities in the
patch as a descriptor hereof. In this approach, a patch size of 25×25 pixels was used. We
have chosen this patch size as the cells in the images have a size of approximately 20-80
pixels which allows for a patch to partially cover a single cell. In this way, our expectation
was that we would be able to capture relevant structural features in the images.
In the second approach, we computed the dense SIFT descriptor as the feature. We
believe that dense SIFT is to prefer in images without any special characteristics or in
images that contain homogeneous patterns as is the case in our data. The regular SIFT
would not ﬁnd as many keypoints in such images. Choosing the dense SIFT descriptors
can introduce an amount of redundancy compared to the regular SIFT descriptors, but
since we do not necessarily know the features we are looking for, we do not consider
redundancy as a bad thing. We might even end up with important features obtained by
the dense SIFT approach that would not have been chosen as a regular SIFT descriptor.
Besides, our regression models can deal with unnecessary redundancy. In the dense SIFT
approach, we use a patch size of 24 × 24 pixels.
As we use diﬀerent patch sizes in the two approaches to obtain appropriate indexations,
the number of features is also diﬀerent in each approach. The number of features for each
of the grid types and each of the approaches, in the 500 × 500 image, is seen in Table 2.
#features
Patches
SIFT
Simple grid
400
441
Overlapping grid
1521
1681
Table 2: The number of features dependent on the grid type and the feature extraction
approach.
We used the same patch location in both the hematoxylin and the DAB image to extract
one coherent feature. Therefore, the patch features have a length of 252 ·2 = 1250 and the
dense SIFT features have a length of 128 · 2 = 256. When all the features were extracted,
the vectors were collected in a matrix of dimension feature length × #features.
26
==PAGE:28==
5. METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
5.1.2.2
Forming the codebook using K-means clustering
We chose to use the K-means clustering algorithm to form our codebook. The build-
in function kmeans in Matlab was used to compute the cluster centroids.
We tried
computing the ﬁnal predicted output values for diﬀerent varieties of the number of cluster
centres K in the range [400; 1400]. After reaching a certain number of cluster centres, we
observed that the test error did not change much. We chose to use 650 cluster centroids
in our models, i.e. K = 650. However, we wish to make clear that we have not made a
complete examination for choosing K.
The kmeans function in Matlab initialises the centroids using a heuristic introducing
another algorithm called k-means++ that we will not go further into details with. The
algorithm is described in [2]. In the K-means algorithm, each observation is assigned
to the nearest cluster centre based on the Euclidian distance measure. As output the
function provides the descriptor centroids.
To prevent our algorithm from accidentally converging to an unfortunate clustering,
we performed the algorithm ﬁve times, each with a new initialisation. After this, we chose
the clustering with the lowest within-cluster sum describing the sum of distances between
the points in the clusters and the corresponding centroid. Thereby, our codebook was
formed.
5.1.2.3
Codebook frequency histogram
When the codebook was created, we computed the frequency histograms for the additional
images. After the features were extracted from the new images, they were assigned to
the nearest cluster based on the Euclidian distance measure. In this way, we obtained an
index matrix for each new image containing discrete values in the set {1, ..., 650}. From
this, the frequency histogram was made resulting in a 1 × 650 dimensional frequency
vector for each image.
We concatenated the frequency vectors for all the new observations resulting in a
matrix of dimension #obs×#features. Ultimately, this provided us with a matrix where
every row holds the feature frequencies for an image in the data set, which we call the
data matrix. The regression was performed on this particular matrix.
5.1.3
The cell line core problem using local features
In this problem, we wanted to test our BoVW model on an less complex problem. Each
observation in this problem consists only of one cell line core, and the aim was to predict
which core. This means that we obtained a data matrix of dimension #obs×650. For
core 1, the output value was set to -1.5, for core 2 to -0.5, for core 3 to 0.5 and for core
4 to 1.5. This was done to make an interpretation of the coeﬃcients in the ℓ1-regularised
linear regression easier. We tested this model on all data from UK Neqas as it is our
assumption that this data set is the most complex of the four UK Neqas data sets in
Figure 3, and because it contains fewer blurred images than the NordiQC data.
27
==PAGE:29==
5. METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
5.1.4
The staining quality score problem using local features
The staining quality score problem is the actual problem of interest. Here, one new ob-
servation consists of all four cores. Therefore, we concatenated the four feature frequency
vectors such that we obtained a 2,600 dimensional vector for each observation.
This
provided us with a data matrix of dimension #obs×2600.
We have trained our BoVW model on eight diﬀerent the data sets listed in Table 3.
The table also shows the number of observations. Those allocated to the codebook are
denoted in parentheses.
UK Neqas
#obsnew(#obscb)
NordiQC
#obsnew(#obscb)
All data
191 (15)
All data
192 (10)
Run 122 + 123
158 (10)
All data, Dako
84 (4)
Run 122 + 123, Dako
44 (4)
Run C2
132 (5)
Run 122 + 123, Ventana
83 (4)
Run C2, Dako
61 (2)
Table 3: The table displays the eight diﬀerent sets of data we have modelled using the
bag-of-visual-words method. The table also includes the number of new observa-
tions, #obsnew, and the number of observations used for the codebook, #obscb, in
parentheses.
We chose not to consider a combined model of all data from both organisations since
their scoring processes were diﬀerent. As can be seen later in the results in Section 6.3.1
Figure 24 and 26, run 121 in the data from UK Neqas stood out, and therefore we tried
excluding it. From our visit to London we also observed that each clone type was scored
based on a speciﬁc standard, which was the reason we divided according to this segment.
As we wanted to construct the largest data sets despite only using a single clone, Dako
here refers to the 22C3 clone and Ventana refers to the SP263 clone.
Regarding the data from NordiQC, we chose to model run C2 separately as a larger
part of the data from run C1 was blurred. We did not model the Ventana data from
NordiQC separately, since there were very few observations of poor staining quality. Using
this data separately would therefore not have given a fair picture of the model. The
distribution of score values for each partition of data can be seen on the histograms in
Appendix B.
28
==PAGE:30==
5. METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
5.2
Supervised regression learning
After creating the data matrix, the next step was to construct a regression model to
predict the scores. The idea was that if the model showed good results, it could be used
to ﬁnd the most important features.
5.2.1
ℓ1-regularised linear regression
We chose to use linear regression as our basis model as it is simple and easy to interpret.
Furthermore, when using ℓ1−regularisation, the model can handle data sets, as ours,
with more variables than observations. ℓ1−regularisation also accentuates the important
features from the BoVW model which is helpful when interpreting the solution.
The ℓ1−regularised linear regression coeﬃcients were computed using the Matlab func-
tion lasso. Before creating the model, the observations and corresponding scores were
randomly permuted to avoid learning speciﬁc patterns in data. In the Matlab function,
the data is standardised to have zero mean and a variance of one. This is done to be able
to compare the coeﬃcients.
Recall that the scores from the UK Neqas data set are real numbers between 1 and 5
and the scores from the NordiQC data set are either optimal, good, borderline or poor. To
build the regression model, optimal was mapped to the value 1.5, good to 0.5, borderline
to −0.5 and poor to −1.5. This was done so that the ordinal property of the scores was
kept.
To ﬁnd the regularisation parameter, λ, 10-fold cross validation was used in an inner
cross validation layer. In every fold, a model was trained for a number of diﬀerent λ-values
using the training data. The test data set in each of these folds was used to compute the
mean squared error for every one of these models. In this way, the λ-value with the lowest
mean squared error determined the complexity of the model. Using the one-standard-
error-rule [11], the largest λ-value within one standard error was chosen. This was done
to get a more simple, but not signiﬁcantly worse, model.
We wanted to estimate the expected test error to be able to compare diﬀerent models.
To estimate the expected test error, an outer 10-fold cross validation layer was used. In
every fold, the output values for the test set were predicted. The relative root mean
squared error, rRMSE, can be computed by comparing the predicted output, ˆyi, to the
true output values, yi, using the formula
rRMSE =
q
1
N
PN
i=1(yi −ˆyi)2
r
1
N
PN
i=1

yi −( 1
N
PN
j=1 yj)
2.
As an estimate of the expected test error we could also have chosen the more common
mean squared error. The reason for using the relative root mean squared error is that it
is relative to the error, in the numerator. The expression in the numerator measures the
error for a model that predicts all observations to be the mean of the true output value.
This means that a model that is no better than the mean value will have an error close
to 1. The better the model, the lower the error. Furthermore, this error measure makes
it easier to compare diﬀerent models.
If the rRMSE showed good results, we considered the λ-values in each fold. If they
were similar, their mean value was computed and used to build a new model on the
29
==PAGE:31==
5. METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
entire data set.
If the λ-values had one or two very diﬀerent values, the mean value
was computed for the remaining values. This value was used in the ﬁnal model, and
the 10 largest coeﬃcients indicated which variables were most important in the model.
For data from the BoVW model, a large coeﬃcient indicated that the frequency of the
corresponding feature was important in the model.
5.2.2
Random forest
We have chosen random forest as our extended regression model as it is a non-linear model
that has shown good performance [11], [9]. In addition to this, the variable importance
can be measured, and the model can be used when the number of observations is smaller
than the number of variables [11].
As when performing ℓ1−regularised linear regression, the observations in the data
matrix and the corresponding scores were permuted before training the model. To be
able to compare the two regression methods, this was done using the same random seed.
Again the ordinal scores in the NordiQC data were mapped to the values 1.5, 0.5, -0.5
and -1.5.
The model was computed using the Matlab function TreeBagger. As in Breiman
(2001), we chose not to prune the trees, and the bootstrap sample for each tree was chosen
to be the same size as the training data [5].
The number of randomly picked variables in each split was chosen to m = 800 in the
staining quality score problem and m = 200 in the cell line core problem, according to
the rule m = p/3 described in [11] and after trying diﬀerent values close to this. The
algorithm was run until we saw that the OOB error did not change considerably. This
happened in all cases within using 300 trees.
To estimate the expected test error, we used the OOB samples to make a prediction
and computed the relative root mean square error. In Hastie et al. (2009) it is claimed that
”An OOB error estimate is almost identical to that obtained by N-fold cross-validation”
[11]. Therefore, we can compare the error estimates obtained in the random forest model
with those from the ℓ1−regularised linear regression.
When considering the variable importance, the increase in MSE was stored for each
feature and each tree. The average increase for each feature was computed and divided by
the standard deviation. The 10 features with the highest increase in MSE were considered
to be the most important.
30
==PAGE:32==
6. RESULTS
6
Results
6.1
The staining quality score problem using global features
In the initial approach, we extracted global features from the full size images. We then
used ℓ1−regularised linear regression to see if it was possible to predict the quality scores
from the UK Neqas data set. The results are seen in Figure 15.
Figure 15: The ﬁgure shows the predicted values as blue crosses. The optimal ﬁt is shown
by a red line and the mean value of the true values by a dotted line.
In Figure 15, we have included the predictions, a line displaying the optimal ﬁt, and a
dotted line displaying the mean of the true values. If the model was useful in predicting
the staining quality scores, the blue crosses would have been distributed along the red
line. However, as can be seen, this is not the case. It seems like the model merely predicts
the mean value. This result is supported by the rRMSE value of 0.99 indicating that the
model error is no better than simply predicting all observations as the mean score.
31
==PAGE:33==
6. RESULTS
6.2
The cell line core problem using local features
In this problem, we wanted to use our data set and the BoVW model on a more straight-
forward problem to test the overall approach. Furthermore, we wanted to show how the
results from the approach can be interpreted. This was done on all data from UK Neqas.
When using the model to predict the cell line cores, we obtained the results seen in
Figure 16. From this ﬁgure, it is seen that the best result was obtained when using the
model with regular patches as features and the random forest algorithm for regression.
In this problem, the features were only extracted in the simple grid.
Figure 16: The ﬁgure shows the rRMSE from the four examined models on all UK Neqas
data. We have modelled the data using both SIFT features and patches and
using both ℓ1−regularised linear regression (l1) and random forest (RF).
We notice in Figure 16 that, when using SIFT descriptors, the errors are not that diﬀerent
in the regression methods. On the other hand, the regular patches describe both our worst
and best model. The prediction results obtained using regular patches and both regression
methods are seen in Figure 17.
Figure 17: The ﬁgure shows the predicted cores using the model with patches. To the left
the results from our worst model is shown and to the right the results from our
best model.
32
==PAGE:34==
6. RESULTS
From the boxplots in Figure 17 it is seen that the model predicts the diﬀerent cell line cores
relatively well but also includes some outliers. It is seen that there is only little diﬀerence
between our best and worst model, but that our best model is able to distinguish better
between core 1 and core 2.
Since we ﬁnd the prediction of the model satisfying, we considered the 10 most impor-
tant features using both regression methods for regular patches. This is seen in Figure
18.
Figure 18: The 10 most important features using the ℓ1−regularised linear regression to the
left and using random forest to the right.
In Figure 18, the variable number, out of the 650 variables, is speciﬁed on both of the x-
axes. The left plot shows the 10 largest coeﬃcients in the ℓ1−regularised linear regression.
The right plot shows the 10 most important features in the random forest model where
the importance is the increase in the error.
We can see that the two regression methods do not choose any of the same features to
be important. This means that the methods do not consider the same 10 features to be
relevant in the images. Given the large number of variables, this might be due to several
features describing almost the same.
Figure 19 was created to show what the 10 most important features look like. For each
centroid representing a feature, the ﬁve nearest patches were found by searching through
all patches in all images. The top row corresponds to the most important feature, the
next row corresponds to the second most important and so on. Therefore, for a speciﬁc
regression method, the patches in the same row have a similar pattern.
In the left plot in Figure 18, the ﬁrst, seventh and tenth coeﬃcient are negative which
means that when multiplied with the frequency of a feature, they pull the predictions
in the negative direction. Therefore, these coeﬃcients help predict core 1 and core 2. If
we compare this to the corresponding ﬁve nearest patches from the ℓ1−regularised linear
regression in Figure 19, we observe that the patches in row 1, 7 and 10 consist of parts
of blue cells and background. This makes sense as there are most blue structures in core
1 and 2. The patches in the other rows contain mostly brown structures and background
which are most often seen in core 3 and 4. This shows that the method can be used to
point to important features so that an interpretation of their signiﬁcance can be made.
33
==PAGE:35==
6. RESULTS
(a) ℓ1−regularised linear regression.
(b) Random forest.
Figure 19: The ﬁve nearest patches for each of the 10 most important variables.
The right image in Figure 19 shows the ﬁve nearest patches chosen by the random forest
algorithm.
Here it is not possible to make the same interpretation of the important
variables. Nevertheless, it seems like the patches represent mostly background and weakly
distinguished features.
To compare the interpretation possibilities for the two choices of local features, the
corresponding ﬁve nearest SIFT features can be visualised as well. The SIFT descriptors
for ℓ1−regularised linear regression and for each of the two colour channels are shown in
Figure 20. Here it is more diﬃcult to interpret exactly what the descriptors represent. As
the descriptors were normalised, the intensity diﬀerences are not captured here. Instead,
the texture or structure in each feature can be seen.
34
==PAGE:36==
6. RESULTS
(a) The hematoxylin colour channel.
(b) The DAB colour channel.
Figure 20: The ﬁve nearest patches for each of the 10 most important variables chosen by
ℓ1−regularised linear regression.
Figure 21 displays an example of four cell line cores in an observation. Each patch in the
image was assigned to the nearest cluster centre. For the 10 most important variables,
the corresponding assigned patch is shown as a coloured square. We have used the 10
most important features found by performing random forest as shown in the right part of
Figure 18. The colourbar shows the variables in order with the most important feature
in the bottom.
Considering core 1, we almost only see dark green squares corresponding to variable
3. In core 2, there are dark green squares as well, but also purple, 5, and light purple, 6,
squares. In core 3, we see a mix of variable 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, and in core 4 there are
very few squares, mostly those corresponding to variable 1 and 4. This agrees with the
cores having increasing PD-L1 positive percentages, and that the type of feature in the
images change slowly per image.
Furthermore, it can be seen that variable 3 represents background without brown
structures as it takes up most of the space in core 1 and core 2. This also is consistent
with how the feature is displayed in Figure 19b. In core 3, the diﬀerently coloured squares
show accurately that the image is a mixture of patch types from core 1, 2 and 4. For
example, it can be seen that variable 4 in core 3 and 4 describes a patch with brown stain
in the lower left corner as seen in Figure 19b. Therefore, the ﬁgure indicates well how
the BoVW model and the subsequent regression capture the important structures in the
images. Furthermore, it is an example of how the patches can be plotted back on the
images to show what structures are important for the prediction.
35
==PAGE:37==
6. RESULTS
Figure 21: An example of four cell line cores in an observation. The coloured squares show
the location of the 10 most important patches in the random forest model using
regular patches.
36
==PAGE:38==
6. RESULTS
6.3
The staining quality score problem using local features
In this staining quality score problem, we extracted local features, as described in the
BoVW model, and tested if the two regression methods could use these to predict the
quality scores. In Figure 22, the rRMSE values for the eight diﬀerent data sets, using
ℓ1−regularised linear regression or random forest and a simple or an overlapping grid,
are plotted. The blue bars indicate that SIFT was used and the green bars indicate that
regular patches was used.
Figure 22: The ﬁgure shows the rRMSE values from the examined models on both UK
Neqas data and NordiQC data. The ﬁrst four errors shown in blue bars are
when using SIFT and the last four green bars are when using regular patches.
It is indicated in the legend whether the simple grid or the overlapping grid
was used and if ℓ1−regularised linear regression (l1) or random forest (RF) was
performed.
It can be seen in Figure 22 that the rRMSE values are all very close to 1. This suggests
that none of the models are much better than just predicting the scores as the mean. The
lowest error is 0.80 obtained with the data from run 122 and 123 with Ventana SP263
images. Here regular patches were extracted in the overlapping grid and random forest
regression was performed. The predictions obtained from this model is seen in Figure 23.
From Figure 23 it is seen that there is a very small trend following the optimal ﬁt.
However, we do not think the model predicts the scores suﬃciently. As none of the errors
in Figure 22 suggest that the model succeeds in predicting the quality scores, there is no
reason to try to interpret what the most important features signify. Instead, we took one
step back and looked at what the data matrix could tell us.
37
==PAGE:39==
6. RESULTS
Figure 23: The ﬁgure shows the predicted values as blue crosses. The optimal ﬁt is shown
by a red line and the mean value of the true values by a dotted line.
6.3.1
Data exploration
Distance matrix
We computed a distance matrix by comparing each observation to the other observations
in the data matrix using the χ2 distance measure [8]. We chose the χ2 distance as this
is a more appropriate similarity measure when comparing histograms than for instance
the Euclidian distance [13]. The distance matrix for observations extracted as regular
patches from the overlapping grid on all UK Neqas data can be seen in Figure 24. The
right matrix is partitioned into the three runs by red lines and into vendor and clone by
the pink lines. Furthermore, the observations are sorted in ascending order according to
score within each of these partitions.
Figure 24: The distance matrix for observations extracted as patches from the overlapping
grid on all UK Neqas data to the left. The distance matrix including red lines
to partition it into the three runs, and the pink lines to partition each run into
Ventana, Dako and other is displayed to the right.
38
==PAGE:40==
6. RESULTS
It can be seen that the distance generally is smallest between observations within the
same run. Especially, the Ventana SP263 observations, which are sorted to occur ﬁrst in
each run, have a smaller distance between them. Apart from this, the most distinctive
trend is that the ﬁrst run, run 121, is not very similar to the two remaining runs.
In Figure 24 it is also seen that observation 158 has the largest distance to the other
observations and it is therefore considered an outlier. In Figure 25, the four cores from
this observation are displayed.
Core 1
Core 2
Core 3
Core 4
Figure 25: Outlier from run 123 from the vendor Dako with a score of 3.5.
In Figure 25 almost only the blue cell cores are visible, and the cells look distorted. The
cells also appear diﬀerent from those in the other images, for example compared to the
cells in Figure 1 and 2.
The distance matrix for observations extracted as SIFT descriptors from the overlap-
ping grid on all UK Neqas data can be seen in Figure 26. Here we see the same trends as in
Figure 24 where run 121 is not very close to run 122 and 123, and the closest observations
are within each run and speciﬁc vendor and clone.
Figure 26: The distance matrix for observations extracted as SIFT features from the over-
lapping grid on all UK Neqas data to the left. The distance matrix including
red lines to partition it into the three runs, and the pink lines to partition each
run into Ventana, Dako and other is displayed to the right.
Furthermore, in Figure 26 observation 116 has the largest distance to the other obser-
vations, but observation 158 from the other distance matrix does not seem to stand out
here. Conversely, observation 116 also seems to be an outlier in Figure 24. In Figure 27,
the four cores from observation 116 are displayed.
39
==PAGE:41==
6. RESULTS
Core 1
Core 2
Core 3
Core 4
Figure 27: Outlier from run 123 from the vendor Ventana with a score of 3.25.
It is clear to see that this observation is an outlier as there are no cells in the 500 × 500
image of core 4. When looking at the whole image of core 4, only a partial core was found.
In Section 3.4, an explanation of how the 500×500 image was selected, from the centre of
the region of interest containing the core, was given. Unfortunately, in this one example
this approach failed.
Principal component analysis
We have used principal component analysis (PCA) to examine the variance in our data
[3]. As before we obtained diﬀerent outliers in data to help explain some of the patterns
in the data matrix. In the following, the data points are coloured according to score. We
have tried to colour the data according to run and vendor as well but this did not show
any new tendencies.
In general, the ﬁrst two principal components in the PCA described more variance
in data when using regular patches than when using SIFT. The highest variance for
SIFT was 37%. For the regular patches the percentages were generally somewhat higher.
We obtained the highest percentage of 81.7% when using run 122 and 123 and Ventana
SP263. The ﬁrst and second principal components for this data set are seen in Figure 28a.
There is no obvious visual relationship between the described variance and the staining
quality scores. Unfortunately, the same was seen when performing PCA on the other data
matrices.
(a)
(b)
Figure 28: The two ﬁrst components from the principal component analysis. In (a) the
PCA is performed on all Ventana data from UK Neqas and in (b) on the same
data excluding the outlier.
40
==PAGE:42==
6. RESULTS
Even though much of the variance in data is explained by the principal components shown
in Figure 28a, there is a clear outlier in the top of the plot. The outlier is displayed in
Figure 27 and is the same as found in the distance matrices. After removing this outlier
from our data, we performed a new PCA. Now, the ﬁrst two principal components explain
85.9% of the variance as can be seen in Figure 28b.
Two fairly clear clusters are now seen in Figure 28b, but it can be argued that the two
data points in the bottom of the Principal component 2-axis are outliers. We therefore
tried looking at these outliers. Especially one of the outliers stood out and can be seen
in Figure 29.
Core 1
Core 2
Core 3
Core 4
Figure 29: Outlier from run 123 from the vendor Ventana with a score of 2.5.
The cells in Figure 29 appear deform and especially in core 4 it is clear that there are
many small brown objects which are not cells. However, the most signiﬁcant ﬂaws in this
observation are the water-like splotches in core 1 and 3.
After having removed these two outliers as well, 87.2% of the variance can be explained
by the ﬁrst two principal components and there are no more obvious outliers. We examined
how our regression models performed using this new data matrix. The rRMSE did not
change for the ℓ1−regularised linear regression, and it only changed a little for the random
forest regression, i.e. from 0.80 to 0.79.
Comparing images based on χ2 distance
We chose to look a little closer at a randomly chosen observation from run 122 with a
staining quality score of 2 which is seen in Figure 30. We wished to examine the obser-
vations close to and far from this observation, and the quality scores they had obtained.
The χ2 distance was used to compare the feature frequency for each observation.
In Figure 31, one of the closest observations, with a quality score of 4.25, is seen.
These two observations are both from Ventana SP263 and look much alike but they have
obtained very diﬀerent scores. Apart from the overall outliers, the observation in Figure
32 was furthest away from our chosen observation. This observation is from one of the
other vendors we have not distinguished between, and it is clear to see that the colours
are very diﬀerent in these two observations. However, it is noticeable that the scores are
very close to each other.
41
==PAGE:43==
6. RESULTS
Core 1
Core 2
Core 3
Core 4
Figure 30: An observation with a score of 2 from run 122.
Core 1
Core 2
Core 3
Core 4
Figure 31: An observation with a score of 4.25 from run 122.
Core 1
Core 2
Core 3
Core 4
Figure 32: An observation with a score of 2.75 from run 123.
42
==PAGE:44==
7. DISCUSSION
7
Discussion
7.1
The staining quality score problem using global features
We were not able to predict the staining quality scores from the global features using
the ℓ1−regularised linear regression. However, we would have expected that especially
using features describing the PD-L1 expression level and the colour intensities would
have worked better for the scoring problem than it did. We found using both of these
characteristics to be well justiﬁed since these are the main things the pathologists are
considering when assessing the stained slides.
The two PD-L1 features were extracted using the software from Visiopharm. We have
not looked into the speciﬁcs of the algorithm, but we experienced that it was very sensitive
to blurred areas as seen in Figure 13. In addition, diﬀerent DAB colours, as is seen for
diﬀerent vendors, and other diﬀerences in the protocol also had an impact on how the
positive and negative cells were labelled. An idea could therefore be to make an individual
algorithm for each protocol.
The reason why the colour features were not discriminative enough in the model might
be that they were too simple. We also looked at the histograms of the intensities in the two
colour channels, found in Appendix A, and compared them for good and poor stainings,
but it was not possible for us to detect a diﬀerence. Therefore, we decided not to pursue
this any further. Our belief is that the same is true for the texture features. These as well
were too simple to discriminate between images of diﬀerent staining quality. Naturally,
we could have tried to include more advanced global features, but we chose not to since
it might have aﬀected the interpretability.
7.2
The cell line core problem using local features
In our constructed test problem, where we wanted to predict the core number, the results
were good. Therefore, we used the problem to show what features were important for the
prediction and how to illustrate this. As expected the most important in the model was
the amount of blue cell cores and white background in core 1 and 2, and brown edges
in core 3 and 4. Probably because of the clear visual diﬀerences from core 1 to 4, using
patches combined with random forest gave the best result.
7.3
The staining quality score problem using local features
In Figure 22 in the result section, we saw that none of the models performed much better
than simply predicting the mean. Therefore, unfortunately it did not make sense to try
and analyse what features were important in the models. So why is the performance not
better?
Models
The BoVW model works by describing each observation as a histogram of diﬀerent fea-
tures. Therefore, our method will only work well if the diﬀerences in the histograms can
be used to distinguish between the corresponding output values. That is, if certain types
of features are often present in optimally stained images and other types of features are
43
==PAGE:45==
7. DISCUSSION
present in poorly stained images. It might be that many diﬀerent features make a stain-
ing optimal or poor, so that the diﬀerences are not consistent across samples, or perhaps
rare structures in the images are important for the quality score, making it diﬃcult to
detect in the BoVW model. It might simply be that the images are too diﬀerent across
protocols, which may drown the signal we are trying to ﬁnd.
We chose to use ℓ1−regularised linear regression and random forest to see if these
models could utilise the diﬀerence in the feature frequency vectors to describe the staining
quality diﬀerences in the images. They were chosen as they are both good at handling data
sets with few observations and many variables, and to include both a linear and a non-
linear model. An obvious suggestion could have been to instead consider the correlation
between the variables in the data matrix and the scores. However, in the best case we
had 13 times as many variables as observations. This poses a challenge as we might have
ended up ﬁnding high correlations simply by coincidence [16]. Therefore, this machine
learning approach, where the error is found on an independent test set, is useful.
The reason why we have so many variables is that we have chosen a large number
of clusters, K = 650, for each core image. As mentioned, we did not make a thorough
investigation to ﬁnd the optimal K. When considering the diﬀerent feature centroids, it
seems like there is a fair amount of redundancy, i.e. several features describe the same
structure. This was done by choice to make it easier to be able to see the exact structure
a feature describes.
Considering the choice of descriptors, there are very little diﬀerence in the results for
SIFT and patches. Even though we ﬁnd that the regular patches provide results that are
slightly better in one case, it is diﬃcult to say if using patches is also better in general or
if the lower error is just a coincidence. It could be that patches are just more useful when
having to distinguish images mainly based on colours, as is the case in the cell line core
problem, whereas SIFT is more useful when distinguishing images based on texture.
When using the overlapping grid, as opposed to using the simple grid, almost four
times as many descriptors are extracted from the image. The results however show that
this only decreases the error very little. Therefore, we expect that an even denser grid
would not improve the results very much. An idea might be to use the simple grid to
extract features in a four times bigger image. Then the amount of features are the same
as in the overlapping grid, but we include a bigger area.
Another choice was not to use a neural network to try and solve the problem. One
can argue that the combination of BoVW and random forest is not very diﬀerent from
using a convolutional neural network. In both cases, we look at patches in the image and
try to learn important features to predict the output. However, we wanted to have an
impact on the model, we created, even though it may not have been the most straight
forward approach.
In the data exploration part of the result section, we were able to ﬁnd outliers in the
data matrix. In these, the cells looked damaged or there were artefacts in the images
making them look very diﬀerent from those of normal cell line cores. As this does not
have anything to do with the staining quality of the samples, it might be easier to make
a prediction without these images disturbing the signal. Therefore, a model that can tell
whether or not a cell line core looks normal might be useful. After excluding these images,
it might be easier to predict the staining quality scores.
44
==PAGE:46==
7. DISCUSSION
Data overview
In Figure 6 in Section 3.2, we presented an overview of our data. According to this, we
have chosen to distinguish between images from diﬀerent staining quality organisations,
runs, the two vendors and one of their corresponding clones. Recall that the partitions of
the data sets are presented in Table 3.
The raw data also included details on several clones, custom made protocols and
staining machines. As an example, there were 14 diﬀerent clone producers, or so called
Other vendors in Figure 6 each providing one or more clones, and 12 diﬀerent machines
used for staining in the NordiQC data for run C2. This means that the SP263 clone from
Ventana could be stained on the Dako Autostainer Link 48 + machine, which can be
quite confusing. Knowing the importance of many of these technical diﬀerences require
a medical background. Therefore, we might have made unsuitable choices even though
they were made to the best of our knowledge.
We justify our choices in the data selection by our experiences throughout the process
of getting to know the data. First of all, there are visible diﬀerences in the data stained
by diﬀerent vendors and clones which determined the large partition. Furthermore, we
based the partition on where we would obtain large enough data sets for us to work with.
We tried balancing the partitioning between the image content, relatable segments and
the amount of data. The rRMSE was lowest when using run 122 and 123 and the Ventana
SP263 clone, which was also were we had the most data observations within one vendor
and clone. This might be coincidental, but it would be nice to see if having even more
images from this segment would decrease the error further.
The digital images
The image quality of the data was one of the most critical issues. The pathologists are
looking at the physical samples when scoring them, and we are using the digital images.
The raw samples can be quite diﬀerent from the scanned image data depending on how
they were scanned.
The general quality of the scanned images were diﬀerent in each run. As mentioned,
especially the NordiQC data was very dominated by larger or minor blurred parts in
the images. This is critical as it might aﬀect our results. In a study, where it was also
considered to use image analysis on scanned immunohistochemically stained images, a
scan standard for the images was imposed [40]. In this way, the images were rescanned
until they fulﬁlled this given standard. A similar criterion for the scans could be an idea
to introduce in this problem as we believe it would improve the results to have more data.
Furthermore, to try to avoid the blurred areas and to make it easier to work with,
we have only chosen to extract a window of 500 × 500 pixels from each core. In Section
3.4 we have explained why we ﬁnd this suﬃcient based on the size of the cells. It can be
discussed whether we are right in this assumption or not. However, we were able to show
good results in distinguishing the cell line cores with this data, and since we are really
using the four cores combined, we actually model images of size 500 × 2000.
Another critical issue was that the pathologists were easily able to recognise and
ignore possible artefacts or foreign objects on a sample. However, this would be diﬃcult
to implement in a model. An example can be seen in Figure 33 where a dark brown
artefact in core 1 is displayed.
45
==PAGE:47==
7. DISCUSSION
Core 1
Core 2
Core 3
Core 4
Figure 33: The ﬁgure shows an example of an outlier from run 121.
The scoring process
Despite the fact that there can be large staining quality diﬀerences between the individual
cores in a slide, UK Neqas provides an overall score for the whole slide. We suggest that
the cell line cores obtain an individual score and that the remaining samples also obtain
an individual score. In this way, the ﬁrst indication of the quality of a slide would be
based on whether or not the score of the cell line cores agreed with the score from the
tissue cores. It could also be an idea for UK Neqas to use the same approach as NordiQC
and simply ignore the cell line cores in the scoring process before knowing whether or not
they are usable.
When observing the scoring process at UK Neqas, we took special notice of the cases
where the pathologists disagreed. As mentioned the pathologists had to agree on a quality
score for each slide which often meant that it ended up with an intermediate score. This
could also be the reason that the entire scale of scores are not used. We suggest that the
pathologists score the samples individually. If a slide is then scored diﬀerently, it should
be discarded from the data set.
46
==PAGE:48==
8. CONCLUSION
8
Conclusion
In this thesis, we examined the use of immunohistochemically stained cell line core samples
for determining quality scores. Using data from two independent quality organisations,
we extracted image features and used two diﬀerent regression models for prediction. The
hope was that a model with good prediction abilities could be used to indicate what
features are important in optimally and poorly stained samples.
Our strategy was initially to extract global features from the digital images to try an
solve the problem. This turned out to be a hard problem and we can conclude that our
chosen global features did not provide any useful results.
In the cell line core problem using local features, we introduced the bag-of-visual-words
model for feature extraction. Our hope was that the local features would capture similar
characteristics in images of similar staining quality. We can conclude that our chosen
model works well on this problem. We solved the problem using the largest data set from
UK Neqas. Here we did not distinguish between the runs and vendors, and our model
still provided good results. In this particular problem, we obtained the lowest rRMSE
of 0.37 using a model with features extracted from regular patches on the regular grid
and using the random forest regression model. When considering the 10 most important
features, mapped back on an original observation, it was clear that the colours were the
most expressed features for this problem.
Lastly, we approached our initial problem using the local feature extraction. After
having tried to solve this problem for eight diﬀerent data sets, some of them only holding
data from a single vendor and clone, we can conclude that our model does not work for
this problem. We obtained the lowest rRMSE of 0.80 when using the Ventana SP263
data and the BoVW model including regular patches on an overlapping grid and random
forest regression.
We cannot conclude whether or not the immunohistochemically stained cell line cores
can be used in determining the quality scores. However, the approach used in this master
thesis does not provide good results.
The discussion holds issues regarding the models and the data which gives a suggestion
for how to improve the results if the problem is to be investigated further. In any future
work, we especially suggest to use a larger amount of data and to partition it according
to both quality organisation, run, vendor and clone. Furthermore, samples with artefacts
or damaged cells should be excluded from the data.
47
==PAGE:49==
9. BIBLIOGRAPHY
9
Bibliography
[1] Alsaab, H. O. et al. (2017). PD-1 and PD-L1 Checkpoint Signaling Inhibition for
Cancer Immunotherapy: Mechanism, Combinations, and Clinical Outcome. Frontiers
in Pharmacology, Volume 8, p. 561.
doi: 10.3389/fphar.2017.00561
[2] Arthur, D. and Vassilvitskii, S. (2007). k-means++: The Advantages of Careful Seed-
ing. Proceedings of the Annual Acm-siam Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, Volume
07-09-, pp. 1027-1035.
doi: 10.3389/fphar.2017.00561
[3] Bishop, C. M. (2006).
Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning.
Springer, pp.
561-570.
[4] Bosch, A., Munoz, X. and Marti, R. (2007). Which is the best way to organize/classify
images by content? Image and Vision Computing, Volume 25, Issue 6, pp. 778-791.
doi: 10.1023/A:1010933404324
[5] Breiman, L. (2001). Random forests. Machine Learning, Volume 45, Issue 1, pp. 5-32.
doi: 10.1023/A:1010933404324
[6] Cancer.Net. Doctor-Approved Patient Information from ASCO (2018). Understand-
ing Immunotherapy. [online] Available at:
https://www.cancer.net/navigating-cancer-care/how-cancer-treated/immunotherapy-and-
vaccines/understanding-immunotherapy
[Accessed November 16th 2018].
[7] Csurka, G. et al. (2004). In Workshop on Statistical Learning in Computer Vision,
ECCV. Prague, Springer.
[8] Department of Statistics, Stanford University (2008). Chapter 4. Measures of distance
between samples: Euclidean. [online] Available at:
http://www.econ.upf.edu/ michael/stanford/maeb4.pdf
[Accessed January 21st 2019].
[9] Do, T., Lenca, P. and Lallich, S. (2015).
Classifying many-class high-dimensional
ﬁngerprint datasets using random forest of oblique decision trees. Vietnam Journal of
Computer Science, Volume 2, Issue 1, pp. 3-12.
doi: 10.1007/s40595-014-0024-7
[10] Haralick, R. M., Shanmugam, K. and Dinsteinm, I. (1973).
Textural Features for
Image Classiﬁcation. Ieee Transactions on Systems Man and Cybernetics, Volume
SMC3, Issue 6, pp. 610-621.
[11] Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R. and Friedman, J. (2009). The Elements of Statistical Learn-
ing: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction. Springer.
48
==PAGE:50==
9. BIBLIOGRAPHY
[12] Horizon. Inspired Cell Solutions (2018). CD274 (PD-L1) Expression IHC Reference
Standard [DISCONTINUED]. [online] Available at:
https://www.horizondiscovery.com/cd274-pd-l1-expression-ihc-reference-standard-hd788
[Accessed January 16th 2019].
[13] Huong, V. T. L. et al.
(2009).
Centroid neural network with chi square distance
measure for texture classiﬁcation. Computer Vision-eccv 2010, Pt II, Volume 6312,
Issue 2, pp. 749-762.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-15552-9 54
[14] Imaging & Microscopy (2009). NanoZoomer. Digital Pathology System C9600. [on-
line] Available at:
https://www.imaging-git.com/products/nanozoomer-digital-pathology-system-c9600
[Accessed November 13th 2018].
[15] Kim, H. et al. (2017). PD-L1 Immunohistochemical Assays for Assessment of Ther-
apeutic Strategies Involving Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors in Non-small Cell Lung
Cancer: A Comparative Study. Oncotarget, Volume 8, Issue 58, pp. 98524-98532.
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.21567
[16] Kjeldahl, K. and Bro, R. (2010). Some common misunderstandings in chemometrics.
Journal of Chemometrics, Volume 24, Issue 7-8, pp. 558-564.
doi: 10.1002/cem.1346
[17] Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I. and Hinton, G. E. (2012). ImageNet classiﬁcation with
deep convolutional neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, Volume 2, pp. 1097-1105.
[18] Kræftens Bekæmpelse (2017). Immunterapi p˚a vej til danske lungekræftpatienter. [on-
line] Available at:
https://www.cancer.dk/nyheder/immunterapi-pa-vej-til-danske-lungekraeft-patienter/
[Accessed January 16th 2019].
[19] Kræftens Bekæmpelse (2018). Godkendt kræftmedicin man kan søge om i Danmark.
[online] Available at:
https://www.cancer.dk/hjaelp-viden/kraeftbehandling/ny-kraeftmedicin/cancermedcin-
paa-vej/
[Accessed November 16th 2018].
[20] Law, M. T., Thome, N. and Cord, M. (2014). Bag-of-Words Image Representation:
Key Ideas and Further Insight. Advances in Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, Volume 64, pp. 29-52.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-05696-8 2
[21] LeCun, Y. and Bengio, Y. (1995). Convolutional Networks for Images, Speech, and
Time-Series. In M. A. Arbib, editor, The Handbook of Brain Theory and Neural
Networks. MIT Press.
doi: 10.1.1.32.9297
49
==PAGE:51==
9. BIBLIOGRAPHY
[22] Li, Q. et al. (2014). Medical Image Classiﬁcation with Convolutional Neural Network.
International Conference on Control, Automation, Robotics & Vision, pp. 844-848.
[23] Lindeberg, T. (1996).
Scale-space: A framework for handling image structures at
multiple scales. Cern Reports, Volume 96, Issue 8, pp. 27-38.
doi: 10.5170/CERN-1996-008.27
[24] Lowe, D. G. (1999). Object Recognition from Local Scale-Invariant Features. Pro-
ceedings of the Ieee International Conference on Computer Vision, Volume 2, pp.
1150-1157.
doi: 10.1109/ICCV.1999.790410
[25] Lowe, D. G. (2004). Distinctive Image Features from Scale-Invariant Keypoints. In-
ternational Journal of Computer Vision, Volume 60, Issue 2, pp. 91-110.
doi: 10.1.1.217.122
[26] Matsugu, M. et al.
(2003).
Subject independent facial expression recognition with
robust face detection using a convolutional neural network. Neural Networks, Volume
16, Issue 5-6, pp. 555-559.
doi: 10.1016/S0893-6080(03)00115-1
[27] Montavon, G., Samek, W. and M¨uller, K. R. (2018). Methods for interpreting and
understanding deep neural networks. Digital Signal Processing, Volume 73, pp. 1-15.
doi: 10.1016/j.dsp.2017.10.011
[28] Muenst, S. et al. (2014). The PD-1/PD-L1 Pathway: Biological Background and Clin-
ical Relevance of an Emerging Treatment Target in Immunotherapy. Expert Opinion
on Therapeutic Targets, Volume 19, Issue 2, pp. 201-211.
doi: 10.1517/14728222.2014.980235
[29] National Cancer Institute (2015). What Is Cancer?. [online] Available at:
https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/understanding/what-is-cancer
[Accessed January 16th 2019].
[30] NordiQC (2017). Assessment Run C1 2017. PD-L1. [online] Available at:
http://www.nordiqc.org/downloads/assessments/96 102.pdf
[Accessed October 26th 2018].
[31] NordiQC. Immunohistochemical Quality Control (2019). [online] Available at:
http://www.nordiqc.org
[Accessed January 17th 2019].
[32] Olgun, M. et al. (2016). Wheat Grain Classiﬁcation by using Dense SIFT Features
with SVM Classiﬁer. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, Volume 122, pp. 185-
190.
doi: 10.1016/j.compag.2016.01.033
[33] Paramkusham, S. et al. (2015). A New Features Extraction Method based on Poly-
nomial Regression for the assessment of Breast Lesion Contours. 2015 International
Conference on Industrial Instrumentation and Control (icic), pp. 579-583.
doi: 10.1109/IIC.2015.7150808
50
==PAGE:52==
9. BIBLIOGRAPHY
[34] Phillips, T. et al. (2015). Development of an Automated PD-L1 Immunohistochemistry
(IHC) Assay for Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer. Applied Immunohistochemistry and
Molecular Morphology, Volume 23, Issue 8, pp. 541-549.
doi: 10.1097/PAI.0000000000000256
[35] Powell, R. T. et al. (2017). Identiﬁcation of histological correlates of overall survival in
lower grade gliomas using a bag-of-words paradigm. Journal of Pathology Informatics,
Volume 8, Issue 1, p. 19.
doi: 10.4103/jpi.jpi 43 16
[36] Roberts, C. et al. (2015). Pembrolizumab versus Ipilimumab in Advanced Melanoma.
New England Journal of Medicine, Volume 372, Issue 26, pp. 2521-2532.
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1503093
[37] Ruifrok, A. C. and Johnston, D. A. (2001). Quantiﬁcation of histochemical staining
by color deconvolution. Analytical and Quantitative Cytology and Histology, Volume
23, Issue 4, pp. 291-299.
[38] Scheel, A. H. et al. (2017). Interlaboratory concordance of PD-L1 immunohistochem-
istry for non-small-cell lung cancer. Histopathology, Volume 72, Issue 3, pp. 449-459.
doi: 10.1111/his.13375
[39] Sivic, J. and Zisserman, A. (2003).
Video Google: A Text Retrieval Approach to
Object Matching in Videos. Proceedings of the Ninth IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision, Volumes I and II, pp. 1470-1477.
[40] Silva, M. A. et al. (2018). PD-L1 immunostaining scoring for non-small cell lung
cancer based on immunosurveillance parameters. Plos One, Volume 13, Issue 6, p.
e0196464.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0196464
[41] Teixido, C. et al. (2018). PD-L1 expression testing in non-small cell lung cancer.
Therapeutic Advances in Medical Oncology, Volume 10.
doi: 10.1177/1758834018763493
[42] Tsai, C. F. (2012). Bag-of-Words Representation in Image Annotation: A Review.
ISRN Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Volume 2012, p. 376804.
doi: 10.5402/2012/376804
[43] Udall, M. et al. (2018). PD-L1 Diagnostic Tests: A Systematic Literature Review
of Scoring Algorithms and Test-validation Metrics. Diagnostic Pathology, Volume 13,
Issue 1, p. 12.
doi: 10.1186/s13000-018-0689-9
[44] UK NEQAS. International Quality Expertise (2019). [online] Available at:
https://ukneqas.org.uk
[Accessed January 17th 2019].
[45] Ulrich, A. B. and Pour, P. M. (2001). Encyclopedia of Genetics. Elsevier. Chapter:
Cell Lines, pp. 310-311.
51
==PAGE:53==
9. BIBLIOGRAPHY
[46] World Health Organisation (2019). Cancer. [online] Available at:
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/cancer
[Accessed January 17th 2019].
[47] World Health Organisation. Regional Oﬃce for Europe (2019). Data and statistics.
[online] Available at:
http://www.euro.who.int/en/health-topics/noncommunicable-diseases/cancer/data-and-
statistics
[Accessed January 15th 2019].
[48] Zou, W., Wolchok, J. D. and Chen, L. (2016). PD-L1 (B7-H1) and PD-1 Pathway
Blockade for Cancer Therapy: Mechanisms, Response Biomarkers, and Combinations.
Science Translational Medicine, Volume 8, Issue 328, p. 328rv4.
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aad7118
52
==PAGE:54==
10. APPENDICES
10
Appendices
Appendix A - Histograms of pixel intensity values
This appendix holds histograms of the pixel intensity values for the four observations
mentioned in Figure 1 and 2.
Figure 34: Histograms of the pixel intensity values in images from UK Neqas run 122 using
the clone SP263 from the vendor Ventana.
53
==PAGE:55==
10. APPENDICES
Figure 35: Histograms of the pixel intensity values in images from UK Neqas run 123 using
the clone 22C3 from the vendor Dako.
54
==PAGE:56==
10. APPENDICES
Appendix B - Histograms of score values
This appendix holds histograms of the score values for our eight chosen data sets and for
two data sets that were not chosen.
All UK Neqas data.
UK Neqas data from run 122 and 123.
UK Neqas data from run 122 and 123
using the vendor Ventana.
UK Neqas data from run 122 and 123
using the vendor Dako.
55
==PAGE:57==
10. APPENDICES
All NordiQC data.
NordiQC data from run C2.
All NordiQC data using the vendor
Dako.
NordiQC data from run C2 using the
vendor Dako.
UK Neqas data sets that were not chosen:
All NordiQC data using the vendor Ven-
tana.
NordiQC data from run C2 using the
vendor Ventana.
56
