==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Unravelling the genomic aetiology
of intellectual disability
Rebeca Garc´ıa Gonz´alez
Supervisors:
Jos´e Mar´ıa Gonz´alez-Izarzugaza - Associate Professor at DTU
Lasse Westergaard Folkersen - Lead Scientist at IBP
Kongens Lyngby
February 2019
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Unravelling the genomic aetiology
of intellectual disability
Author
Name:
Rebeca
Last name:
Garc´ıa Gonz´alez
Student number:
s170084
Supervisors
Jos´e Mar´ıa Gonz´alez-Izarzugaza - Associate Professor at DTU
Lasse Westergaard Folkersen - Lead Scientist at IBP
Project period:
September 2018 - February 2019
ECTS:
30
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Bioinformatics and Systems Biology
University:
Technical University of Denmark
Place:
Kongens Lyngby
In collaboration with:
Institute of Biological Psychiatry
Date:
February 15, 2019
==PAGE:4==
DTU Bioinformatics
Department of Bio and Health informatics
Technical University of Denmark
Kemitorvet
Building 208
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
info@bioinformatics.dtu.dk
www.bioinformatics.dtu.dk/
Institute of Biological Psychiatry
Research Institute of Biological Psychiatry
Sct. Hans Psychiatric Hospital
Boserupvej 2
4000 Roskilde, Denmark
Phone +45 3864 2283
www.biopsyk.dk
==PAGE:5==
No te rindas, a´un est´as a tiempo
de alcanzar y comenzar de nuevo,
aceptar tus sombras,
enterrar tus miedos,
liberar el lastre,
retomar el vuelo.
No te rindas que la vida es eso,
continuar el viaje,
perseguir tus sue˜nos,
destrabar el tiempo,
correr los escombros,
y destapar el cielo.
No te rindas, por favor no cedas,
aunque el fr´ıo queme,
aunque el miedo muerda,
aunque el sol se esconda
y se calle el viento,
a´un hay fuego en tu alma,
a´un hay vida en tus sue˜nos.
Porque la vida es tuya y tuyo tambi´en el deseo.
Porque lo has querido y porque te quiero.
Porque existe el vino y el amor, es cierto.
Porque no hay heridas que no cure el tiempo.
Abrir las puertas, quitar los cerrojos,
abandonar las murallas que te protegieron,
vivir la vida y aceptar el reto,
recuperar la risa, ensayar un canto,
bajar la guardia y extender las manos,
desplegar las alas e intentar de nuevo,
celebrar la vida y retomar los cielos.
No te rindas, por favor no cedas,
aunque el fr´ıo queme,
aunque el miedo muerda,
aunque el sol se ponga
y se calle el viento,
a´un hay fuego en tu alma,
a´un hay vida en tus sue˜nos.
Porque cada d´ıa es un comienzo nuevo.
Porque esta es la hora y el mejor momento.
Porque no est´as solo, porque yo te quiero.
Autor desconocido
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
AC K N OW L E D G E M E N T S
First of all, I would like to thank the whole IBP research group for hiring me as a student research
assistant, and for hosting and teaching me. I would like to thank all of you for inspiring meetings
Tuesdays and Thursdays, giving me a great insight into the research environment. Specially, I
would like to thank the people I have been actively working with for the past months. Lasse
Folkersen, the primary supervisor of this thesis and my supervisor at work for almost a whole
year, thank you for always giving me the freedom to decide on what I thought it was best, but
also helping me when I was struggling. Thank you, for drawing so many times a funnel so I
could systematically explore the genetics. Thank you, Alfonso Buil, for giving me the chance
of working at IBP and leading me during the ﬁrst months. Thank you, Vivek Appadurai, Ron
Nudel and Andrew Schork for never hesitating to help me with technical assistance and my many
doubts at the beginning. Thank you, Xabier Calle, for all your coffee breaks in which you were
always interested in knowing how my project was going, giving me new ideas and helping to
justify mines.
Likewise, I would like to thank Jos´e Mar´ıa Gonz´alez-Izarzugaza, my supervisor at DTU, who
contributed with ideas, and his experience and time. Also, thanks to Anders Gorm for the initial
reinforcement to take this project and for making sure that my thesis could be completed on time.
I would also like to thank my friends at DTU, those who have been listening to my hurdles
and sharing theirs, those who have been looking for me at “my seat” at the library, and those
who I have shared many experiences and social events with. Thank you to my friends from
Bioinformatics, for helping me during the lectures and enjoying events together.
I am also
thankful to my colleagues and friends from my previous work in Spain, for caring when I decided
quitting my job and coming to Denmark to study. To my unconditional friends in Toledo, thank
you for always, always, being there for me...
Last but not least, big thanks to my beloved family, always cheering when I am there. Certainly to
my parents, V´ıctor and Marisol, and my sister Carolina, for constantly showing me your support.
iii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
P R E FAC E
This project represents the ﬁnal assignment of my master education on Bioinformatics and
Systems Biology at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The research described herein
was conducted under the supervision of lead scientist Lasse Folkersen and Associate Professor
Jos´e Mar´ıa Gonz´alez-Izarzgaza. Fulﬁlling the requirements, it was carried out from September
2018 to February 2019, and it covers the work equivalent to 30 ECTS.
The Master Thesis was carried out in collaboration with the Institute of Biological Psychiatry,
headed by Professor and Research Director Thomas Werge and based at the Psychiatric Hospital
of Sct. Hans, in Roskilde. The data used in this project became available from The Lundbeck
Foundation Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric Research (iPSYCH), which is stored and analysed
at the Computerome HPC facility (http://www.computerome.dtu.dk/).
Worldwide collaborations in large consortium are showing promising results in identifying genetic
loci that contribute to the risk of complex disorders and diseases using large sample sizes. The
comprehensive Danish registers provide a unique opportunity to investigate genetic and envi-
ronmental factors involved in the aetiology of many diseases. Hence, the aims of this project
was to identify common variants that increase the risk of intellectual disability, using association
analysis in individuals with European ancestry and to conﬁrm and/or detect new genes that help
us to understand the pathways that are disrupted in individuals with intellectual disability.
v
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
S U M M A RY
Intellectual disability (ID) is an early-onset disorder deﬁned as a combination of low intellec-
tual performance and poor adaptation to social behaviors that affects around 1% of individuals
worldwide, where co-morbidity and premature mortality are typical. The aetiology of ID is
very diverse, implicating genetic and environmental risk factors during development and early
life that affect the correct development and functioning of the nervous system. The brain is an
extremely complex organ made up of innumerable interconnected cells. Many proteins need to be
functionally active at the right place during the right time and in the right amount. Consequently,
it is not unexpected that a change affecting any gene encoding these proteins can have serious
consequences for brain development or functioning.
Despite the rapid increase in the number of ID genes identiﬁed, most ID cases remain un-
explained, as many of the genes involved in ID have not yet been discovered. The clinical,
phenotypic and genetic heterogeneity of ID presents a major challenge for diagnosis and treat-
ment. However, new technologies that allow us expanding the search area in the genome and
maps of regulatory annotations have been crucial to reveal an underlying common disturbed
pathway implicated in synaptic transmission and epigenetic mechanisms that modify genomic
DNA. Modulation of disturbed networks by drugs can become a realistic approach to improve the
quality of life for patients with ID and their relatives.
Epidemiological studies have demonstrated that individuals with ID have higher prevalence of
neurological conditions and behavioral problems, and shorter life expectancy than the general
population.
No reliable literature exists on the heritability of ID. Patient-parent trio exome
sequencing has become the most used study design to identify genetic variation in ID. While
previous studies have identiﬁed a prominent role of de novo variants and speciﬁc copy number
variations (CNVs) to ID susceptibility, no common variants have been robustly associated with
ID in genome-wide association studies (GWAS).
This dissertation is divided into three parts. In the ﬁrst part, exploratory, statistical and survival
analyses are carried out to corroborate the large clinical and phenotypic heterogeneity of the
disorder, and to show how environmental factors are an important source of complexity in the
aetiology of ID. The second part reports the results from several genome-wide association anal-
yses approaches of circa 3,500 patients diagnosed with ID from a cohort of 65,534 non-related
individuals with European ancestry, identifying the ﬁrst genome-wide signiﬁcant loci for ID. The
genetic architecture of ID is further examined by investigating the genetic correlation with other
traits and SNP heritability. In the last part, the contribution of variants to the phenotype is studied
with ﬁne-mapping and annotations techniques in order to ﬁnd evidences of causality and genes
involved in neuronal pathways.
vii
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
A B S T R AC T
In a random population approximately 30% of patients with intellectual disability have also
a diagnosis of autism or ADHD. The study herein presented supports that patients with ID
were severely affected by environmental factors during gestation, such as shorter gestational
time and maternal smoke abuse, and complications during the perinatal period. ID is strongly
inﬂuenced by social and other environmental factors, but genetic factors are strongest mediators.
Hence, to elucidate the genetics of ID, the ﬁrst genome-wide association study (GWAS) of circa
3,500 patients diagnosed with ID from a cohort of 65,534 non-related individuals with European
ancestry is accomplished using SNP-array. Variants surpassing the genome-wide signiﬁcance
threshold are scattered in 69 independent loci, of which 13 are prioritized for being in genomic
regions known to have an important role in biological pathways involved in the development of
a functional brain and/or in regions preferentially expressed in neural tissues. Special attention
is in BRINP3, CNTNAP2, CLN5, KLHL1, GNAO1 and members of the GABA- receptor family.
Analysis of SNP heritability shows that only a small proportion of the heritability of ID can be
explained by common variants (h2
SNP = 5.84%). Genetic correlations with childhood obesity,
intelligence, years of education and other phenotypes suggest a strong genetic similarity between
ID and these traits.
ix
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
C O N T E N T S
Acknowledgements
iii
Preface
v
Summary
vii
Abstract
ix
I
I N T RO D U C T I O N
1
1
I N T E L L E C T UA L D I S A B I L I T I E S
3
1.1
Epidemiology and clinical features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Diverse aetiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
The role of heritability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Associated conditions and co-morbidities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Assessment and clinical diagnostic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
Prospects for therapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
G E N E T I C T E S T I N G F O R I N T E L L E C T UA L D I S A B I L I T Y
7
2.1
Technologies used to identify genetic variants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Study designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
T H E I P S Y C H C O H O RT
9
3.1
The Danish registries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
iPSYCH case-cohort sample selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
DNA extraction, genotyping and imputation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
iPSYCH sample for this study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
II
M AT E R I A L S A N D M E T H O D S
13
4
DATA BA S E A S S E M B LY A N D E X P L O R ATO RY A NA LY S I S
15
4.1
Database assembly
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Statistical hypothesis testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3
Survival analysis techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.4
Principal Component Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
G E N E T I C VA R I AT I O N A N D F U N C T I O NA L A N N OTAT I O N
18
5.1
Genome-wide association studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.1.1
Approaches for the genome-wide association studies . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.1.2
Deﬁning genome-wide signiﬁcant loci . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2
Linkage disequilibrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2.1
SNP-based heritability using LDSC method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2.2
Genetic correlations between traits using LDSC method
. . . . . . . . .
23
5.2.3
Set of variants with probable causal effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.3
Biological annotation of variants with probable causal effect
. . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3.1
Functional consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3.2
Expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
xi
==PAGE:16==
xii
Contents
5.3.3
Gene expression levels on tissues
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.3.4
Other databases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
III
R E S U LT S
29
6
E X P L O R ATO RY A NA LY S I S
31
6.1
Changes in diagnoses between follow-up times
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.2
Overlap between diagnostic groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.3
Descriptive statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.4
Principal Component Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7
G E N O M E- W I D E S I G N I F I C A N T LY A S S O C I AT E D I D R I S K L O C I
36
7.1
Genome-wide association studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7.2
Genome-wide SNP heritability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7.3
Genetic correlation with other traits
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
8
B I O L O G I C A L A N N OTAT I O N O F VA R I A N T S A N D G E N E S
39
8.1
Set of variants and genes with probable causal effect
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
8.2
Pinpointing biologically and functionally relevant variants
and genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
IV
D I S C U S S I O N
45
9
D I S C U S S I O N
47
V
A P P E N D I C E S
51
10 S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
53
Supplementary Text . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
Supplementary Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
Supplementary Figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
Supplementary Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
List of Figures
79
List of Tables
80
Abbreviations
81
Bibliography
89
==PAGE:17==
Part I
I N T RO D U C T I O N
==PAGE:18==
==PAGE:19==
1
I N T E L L E C T UA L D I S A B I L I T I E S
Intellectual disability is a very diverse and early-onset disorder deﬁned as a combination of low
intellectual performance and poor adaptation to social behaviors. The aetiology of ID is very
diverse, including genetic and environmental factors (such as maternal infections or alcohol abuse
during pregnancy, birth complications, etc.) during development and early life, which affect the
correct development and functioning of the nervous system. Co-morbidity in ID is typical. The
clinical and genetic heterogeneity of ID presents a major challenge for diagnosis. Analyses of
the hundreds of genes involved in ID have revealed common cellular pathways; notably, genes
implicated in synaptic transmission and epigenetic mechanisms that modify genomic DNA. Mod-
ulation of disturbed networks by drugs can become a realistic approach to improve the quality of
life for patients with ID and their relatives. This chapter elaborates on these ideas.
1.1
E P I D E M I O L O G Y A N D C L I N I C A L F E AT U R E S
Intellectual disability is a relatively worldwide common disorder which originates during the
developmental period. It is characterized by signiﬁcant limitations in both intellectual functioning
and adaptive behaviors, affecting many of the everyday social and practical skills. The World
Health Organization (WHO) deﬁnes ID as signiﬁcantly reduced ability to understand new or
complex information and to learn and apply new skills, resulting in a reduced ability to cope
independently (impaired social functioning). ID belongs to a group of neuropsychiatric deﬁcits
diagnosed during early childhood known as neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). The list of
NDDs is long and heterogeneous, but the most recognized ones are intellectual disability, autism
spectrum disorder (ASD), attention deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), speciﬁc learning dis-
orders, communication disorders, motor disorders, and tic disorders.
A diagnostic of ID must meet three criteria: the patient must have intelligence quotient (IQ)
below 70 (which is two or more standard deviations below the mean), signiﬁcant limitations in
one or more areas of adaptive behavior given the age (e.g. communication, self-care, decision
making, etc.) and evidence that the limitations manifested before the age of 18. Depending on the
aetiology, the phenotype may be observable from early life or show a more delayed onset. The
severity and phenotypes are highly variable, making diagnosis very challenging. It is useful to
distinguish syndromic from non-syndromic forms of ID, depending on the presence (or absence)
of distinctive physical characteristics (i.e. malformations). A further categorization of ID is made
based on the level of the mental abilities: mild (IQ of 50-55 to 70), moderate (IQ of 35-40 to
50-55), severe (IQ of 20-25 to 35-40) and profound (IQ of less than 20-25).
3
==PAGE:20==
4
I N T E L L E C T UA L D I S A B I L I T I E S
The worldwide population prevalence of ID as estimated in 2010 is 1.04% (95% CI 9.55–11.18
per 1000 population) [1], although a later study in 2016 reported that the global prevalence may
be indeed lower than 1% [2]. The same study argued that, in the case of ID, the incidence rate
may be more indicative of access to diagnosis than actual risk of the disorder, which makes the
cumulative incidence estimates a proxy for prevalence. The cumulative incidence reported for
Denmark in 2014 was 1.58% for males and 0.96% for females [3]. In general, ID is more common
in male individuals and in low-income countries.
1.2
D I V E R S E A E T I O L O G Y
ID can be caused by a variety of genetic and environmental factors during gestation and early
life, which often combined with each other, affect the development and correct functioning of
the nervous system. The majority of factors exert their effects before birth, during the prenatal
period. Here, congenital anomalies and genetic defects, such as chromosome aberrations, single
gene mutations or deletions, give rise to the most common forms of ID – Down’s syndrome (tri-
somy 21), Fragile X syndrome, Prader-Willi syndrome, William-Beuren syndrome, etc. Maternal
exposure to toxic substances during pregnancy (e.g. drugs and alcohol abuse), infections and
conditions (e.g. HIV, rubella, toxoplasmosis, diabetes, placental insufﬁciency), and malnutrition
are examples of environmental factors during the prenatal period that can lead to ID in the
newborn. Complications during the perinatal period, such as birth asphyxia or injury during
labor, or infections during that period, are other environmental causes of ID in children. Postnatal
causes, such as child malnutrition or viral infections, can also lead to ID. The recurrence of
environmental factors varies among the different countries, as it depends greatly on health-care
quality and on maternal lifestyle.
Genetic aberrations contributing to ID range from full chromosomal aneuploidies (e.g. tri-
somy 21), to large chromosomal defects as in copy number variants (CNVs), to single gene defects
identiﬁed as single nucleotide variants (SNVs) [4]. Over 700 genes have now been identiﬁed to
either isolated, non-syndromic form of ID, or to a disorder that includes ID as one of its major
features [5]. The large number of different processes that are triggered are usually complex and
often not completely understood. The molecular aetiology of genes responsible for ID can be
understood in terms of modules of several genes acting together in a single pathway, either through
direct interactions or as part of more complex interaction networks, resulting in comparable
phenotypes when mutated [6]. Several molecular and cellular mechanisms belong to the said path-
way, inclined towards the development of a functional brain, including neurogenesis1, neuronal
migration2, synaptic functions3, cellular signaling and transcriptional regulation or epigenetics4.
Despite the enormous genetic heterogeneity of ID, disruption, deﬁciency or changes in these
mechanisms are commonly observed in brain tissue of patients with ID [6].
1 Neuron cell proliferation and differentiation; suggested role in cognition and brain repair [7, 8].
2 Neurons move from their sites of origin to the loci within the central nervous system, where they will reside for life [9].
3 Release of chemical neurotransmitters to propagate signals from one neuron to another [10].
4 Reversible modiﬁcations to nucleotides or chromosomes that do not change the (DNA) sequence but can alter gene
expression and phenotypes, such as DNA methylation, some histone modiﬁcations, and the binding of non-coding
RNA to DNA [4].
==PAGE:21==
1.3 T H E RO L E O F H E R I TA B I L I T Y
5
1.3
T H E RO L E O F H E R I TA B I L I T Y
These genetic defects can be transmitted with X-linked, autosomal dominant or autosomal reces-
sive models of inheritance, but may also appear as de novo mutations found only in the affected
children [11]. Heritability analyses are entitled to show that phenotypes have a genetic basis
by measuring the proportion of phenotypic variation explained by genetics [12, 13]. Heritability,
divided into broad and narrow sense heritability, is usually estimated from phenotypic records
of related individuals (family members). Broad-sense heritability (H2) reﬂects all genetic con-
tributions to phenotypic variance including epistatic (GxG interactions), dominant and additive
effects, while narrow-sense heritability (h2) captures the total amount of additive genetic variance
in the population, regardless the distribution of allele frequency and effect size [14]. The remaining
part of the phenotypic variance is usually attributed to environmental variance [13]. Yet, another
measure of heritability is the common variant risk, more often referred as the SNP heritability
(h2
SNP), estimated from unrelated individuals. SNP heritability captures the proportion of pheno-
typic variance explained by all the genotyped and imputed variants. Random pairs of unrelated
individual would match for some, although small, genetic variation shared by distant ancestors,
but it is unlikely that they match for the same SNPs. Therefore, if individuals with a particular
variant tend to have a given phenotype, then the phenotypic similarity must be due to this speciﬁc
SNP, rather than being due to a different source of genetic variation correlated with this SNP [15].
For the general cognitive function (the g factor) several twin studies have estimated the heritabil-
ity around 50-60% [11] and the SNP heritability in 21.5% [16]. It is also known that intelligence is
highly heritable and that autosomal recessive form of ID is primarily limited to consanguineous
populations, but no reliable literature exists on the heritability of ID itself [5]. However, given its
large heterogeneity, one may think that ID also has a complex pattern of inheritance.
1.4
A S S O C I AT E D C O N D I T I O N S A N D C O- M O R B I D I T I E S
Mutations in many genes contribute to variations in the risk of different diseases and give rise to a
high degree of clinical variability. ID can occur in isolation, but it is often associated with variable
co-morbid conditions and behavioral problems. These may include other neurological features,
such as sensory impairment (mostly vision and hearing problems), ASD, and seizures and/or
epilepsy, and motor skills impairment, mood disorders, etc. Some conditions are associated with
speciﬁc forms of ID. For example heart defects in Down’s syndrome, or deafness and blindness in
Rubella syndrome, affective psychosis in Prader-Willi syndrome, and aggression or self-injury in
Smith-Magensis syndrome [17]. Nevertheless, people with ID have signiﬁcantly more psychiatric
disorders and health problems than the general population, and shorter life expectancy and higher
mortality rates [18, 19, 20].
The observation that intellectual disability has a high co-morbidity with other neurodevelop-
mental and neuropsychiatric diseases has stimulated the hypothesis that these diseases might, in
part, have shared genetic backgrounds and thus alterations in the same pathways [21]. In fact, very
few of the many genes identiﬁed for ID have an isolated role in ID.
==PAGE:22==
6
I N T E L L E C T UA L D I S A B I L I T I E S
1.5
A S S E S S M E N T A N D C L I N I C A L D I AG N O S T I C
The clinical heterogeneity of ID makes its diagnosis very difﬁcult, since the symptoms and
co-morbidities may be mistakenly attributed. Diagnosis is more likely when ID is severe or
profound and/or syndromic, since some individuals may never acquire or understand language and
some may not acquire motor skills, such as walking. Some forms of ID are apparent at birth (e.g.
Down’s syndrome), and while moderate forms of ID become evident within the ﬁrst year of life,
mild ID can be ﬁrst identiﬁed at school, after difﬁculties have been detected in reading, writing
and arithmetic. Hence, after clinical assessment, which usually includes physical examination,
psychological tests and family history, genetic testing is highly advised. In fact, comprehension
of the genetic context (recessive/dominant and familial/sporadic) facilitates reaching a diagnosis.
Uncovering the genetic cause in each patient enables genetic counseling and speciﬁc planning for
healthcare needs. Genetic studies have revealed a strong relationship between the number of genes
affected by rare CNV and the severity of the disorder [22]. In addition, rare de novo mutations have
been shown to be a major cause of severe ID and associated developmental disorders, while more
common and complex forms of inheritance are expected to underlie the milder forms of ID [5].
However, at present, much less is known about the genetics underlying the mild form of ID.
1.6
P RO S P E C T S F O R T H E R A P Y
For many years, ID has been considered a neurodevelopmental disorder with irreversible cognitive
(and cellular) damage. Therefore, much of the treatment has focused on environmental improve-
ment, such as individualized education plans, and on minimizing the impact of the co-morbidities
(e.g. visual impairment, lack of sleep, etc.). In addition to the potential safety risks, the lack
of a speciﬁc causative gene makes it commercially unappealing to design single gene-based
therapeutic interventions. However, as explained before, many ID genes converge into a common
molecular and cellular pathway, hence knowledge of the affected mechanisms may point to
important targets for therapy development, as it has long been hypothesized that NDDs caused
by genes in the same network may be targeted by a central node in the system [5]. It has being
argued that the GABAergic system is a key candidate target for therapeutic intervention, and
animal models and clinical trials have been set up [23]. Successful experiments in animal models
have shown that improvement of symptoms and amelioration of some neurological effects is not
impossible for some forms of ID [23].
==PAGE:23==
2
G E N E T I C T E S T I N G F O R I N T E L L E C T UA L D I S A B I L I T Y
There are many applications for genetic testing, from identifying plausible causal genetic variants
in patients to improving diagnosis and therapy. Next-generations sequencing (NGS) technologies
have revolutionized gene discovery in patients with ID, leading to an expansion in the number
of genes implicated in this disorder [24]. However, despite the fact that the number of ID genes
identiﬁed is increasing rapidly, the majority of cases with ID remain unexplained because many
of the genes implicated in ID have not yet being discovered [5]. Novel gene discovery is outpacing
our understanding of the biological mechanisms that are disrupted when these genes are mutated,
which ultimately facilitates the development of therapeutic targeting options. This chapter dis-
closes the study designs and technologies that have been traditionally used to identify the genetic
architecture of ID.
2.1
T E C H N O L O G I E S U S E D TO I D E N T I F Y G E N E T I C VA R I A N T S
Genetic diagnosis of ID started with cytogenic banding technologies. G-banded karyotyping
has been historically the routine standard diagnostic test for searching genetic imbalance (e.g.
trisomy 21 in Down’s syndrome) in patients with developmental disorders. Targeted ﬂuores-
cence in situ hybridization (FISH) and comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) have been
widely used to detect a wide range of recurrent chromosomal abnormalities (e.g.
transloca-
tion, inversion) and microdeletions and duplications, such as in Prader-Willi and Angelman syn-
dromes (15q11.2), William-Beuren syndrome (7q11.23), Smith-Magenis syndrome (17p11.2)
or DiGeroge syndrome (22q11.2). Later, with the introduction of genomic microarrays, array
comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) allowed the detection of CNVs at a better resolu-
tion, hence replacing G-banded karyotyping as the ﬁrst-tier test for ID [5]. Numerous recur-
rent de novo CNVs have now been identiﬁed in ID as autosomal-dominant causes, but still the
number of autosomal-dominant ID genes is small relative to the more than 100 X-linked ID
genes [5]. Cytogenetic alterations visible on standard karyotype, including aneuploidies, dupli-
cations, deletions, translocations and inversions, account for approximately 5% of ID cases, and
smaller CNVs detected by aCGH explain a further 14% of cases [24].
The introduction of NGS technologies ten years ago has allowed the generation of data for
the entire genome simultaneously, causing the identiﬁcation of new ID genes in rapid succession.
Whole exome sequencing (WES) is the most widely used approach to explain genetic variability
in ID. WES has allowed the identiﬁcation of de novo mutations and de novo CNVs present in the
exomes of patients with overlapping clinically deﬁned form of ID. The second most widely used
approach is sequencing of extensive gene panels, as it offers targeted sequencing for mutations
7
==PAGE:24==
8
G E N E T I C T E S T I N G F O R I N T E L L E C T UA L D I S A B I L I T Y
in the exomes of genes known (or suspected) to cause ID. However, not many studies have used
whole genome sequencing (WGS) for identifying mutations in patients, despite having the power
to identify variations almost anywhere in the genome, including non-coding DNA. A recent
study [25] demonstrated the power of WGS as it leaded to conclusive genetic diagnosis in 42% of
patients in whom both microarray-based CNV and WES failed to identify a molecular diagnosis.
Yet, most studies using WGS fail to report pathogenic non-coding mutations, illustrating that
variant elucidation outside of genes is (still) ambiguous.
2.2
S T U DY D E S I G N S
Trio-based exome sequencing has become the most used study design for the identiﬁcation of
de novo mutations in ID, followed by larger family exome sequencing. Likewise, studies using
WGS are assessed in trio- or family-based designs. Recessive inheritance is a key cause of ID in
inbred populations, hence some studies use homozygosity mapping in consanguineous families.
To date, no large scale genome-wide association analysis (GWAS) with independent individuals
clinically diagnosed with ID has been designed. Many studies have done so in related traits, such
as intelligence [26, 27, 28] and the g factor [16].
==PAGE:25==
3
T H E I P S Y C H C O H O RT
The iPSYCH initiative, established in 2012, is a retrospective study that initially centered it
attention in ﬁve mental disorders: autism, ADHD, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and depression.
However, given that it takes advantage on comprehensive Danish civil and health registries to
provide population structure and clinical information, and on a nationwide biobank to provide
genetic material, almost any research is possible. Currently, the initiative have generated high
density SNP-array on 80,000 DNA samples to be combined with extensive register-data on en-
vironmental exposures and phenotypic data from hospital registers [29]. This makes iPSYCH a
thorough data source for unravelling the genetic and environmental architecture underlying the
complex and severe mental disorders.
3.1
T H E DA N I S H R E G I S T R I E S
People born or living in Denmark from 1968 are assigned an unique identiﬁcation number (CPR-
number), which is stored in the Danish Civil Registration System (DCRS) [30].
The DCRS
contains personal information such as gender, date and place of birth, citizenship, identity of
parents, vital status, etc. The CPR-number is used in all contacts with both private and public
sector, including hospital contacts. Multiple registries hold information on many of these contacts,
which were used by iPSYCH to add information on all individuals and their relatives.
Of great importance here are the hospital records. In addition to the information from the
DCRS, the consortium have access to three hospital registries. The Danish National Patient
Register (DNPR) [31] holds information on patients who have been admitted to somatic hospital
since 1977 and ambulatory and emergency departments since 1995. The Danish Psychiatric
Central Research Register (DPCRR) [32] holds information on patients who have been admitted
to psychiatric hospital or psychiatric departments, either for assessment or treatment, since 1969.
The Danish Medical Birth Register (DMBR) [33] holds information from birth reports (such as
parity or newborn’s weight) since 1973. Additionally, since 1981 blood sample is taken from
the heel of all newborns in Denmark for screening purposes. After testing, the dried blood are
preserved in ﬁlter papers (Guthrie cards), which are stored in the Danish Newborn Screening
Biobank (DNSB). Samples from this national biobank can be matched with any Danish register
through the CPR-number.
9
==PAGE:26==
10
T H E I P S Y C H C O H O RT
3.2
I P S Y C H C A S E- C O H O RT S A M P L E S E L E C T I O N
The iPSYCH population base included in the study consist of 86,189 individuals in a case-cohort
design from singletons born in Denmark between May 1, 1981, and December 31, 2005, who
were resident in Denmark on their ﬁrst birthday, and for whom the mother was known
(n=1,472,762 individuals) [34].
The cases were selected so that individuals carried a speciﬁc but not exclusive phenotype:
schizophrenia (n=3,540),
autism (n=16,146),
ADHD (n=18,726) and affective disorder
(n=26,380, of which n=1,928 had bipolar disorder). Cases were diagnosed according to the 10th
revision of the International Statistical Classiﬁcation of Diseases and Related Health Problems
(ICD-10 codes), allowing a systematic recording of diagnoses.
These were identiﬁed using
the information from the DPCRR, which at that time contained all psychiatric contacts until
December 31, 2012. The random sample subcohort (n=30,000) was a random sample of the
total singletons born in Denmark between the above dates, i.e. chosen without regard to outcome.
Therefore, some of those individuals may also have the disorders of interest. Within the 86,189
individuals, a total of 57,377 had at least one of the aforementioned mental disorders.
3.3
D NA E X T R AC T I O N, G E N OT Y P I N G A N D I M P U TAT I O N
DNA from the individuals in the iPSYCH population base was extracted from the neonatal ﬁlter
papers using the Illumina Inﬁnium PsychChip v1.0 array. Analysing dried blood spot samples
may be challenging, due to the limited amount of biological material available compared to serum
samples. After DNA was extracted and hybridized to microarrays, genotyping was carry out at
the Broad Institute (Boston, MA, USA) in 23 waves (approximately according to birth year) and
it was successful for more than 90% of the sample [34]. Details on DNA extraction and microarray
analysis can be found in The iPSYCH2012 case–cohort sample, C. B. Pedersen et al., 2018. The
release of array data from the Broad Institute in February 2016 included 78,050 subjects and
554,360 SNPs genotyped. Once alleles were assigned to genotyped SNPs across individuals,
in-house quality control (QC) measures, phasing and imputation of the genotyped array data were
implemented. Only a set of high-conﬁdence SNPs were used for imputation (those that passed
QC measures) while subject censoring was perform after imputation. All genome positions are
according to human genome assembly GRCh37 (hg19).
The high-conﬁdence SNPs subject to imputation were a subset of the originally 554,360 SNPs
genotyped after removing SNPs with: MAF < 1%, Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium p > 10e−6,
non-SNP alleles (e.g. indels), SNPs with more than two alleles, and non-autosomal positions (e.g.
chromosome X). The SNPs passing these ﬁlters were aligned to the 1000 genome reference [35]
and alleles were corrected in accordance, which resulted in 246,369 SNPs. Phasing (estimation
of haplotypes) was carried out using the SHAPEIT3 algorithm [36] and imputation (ﬁlling in geno-
types not assayed in the current study) was carried out with IMPUTE2 software [37] using the 1000
genomes phase 3 variants as the reference. In total, 80,707,375 variants were imputed but only
11,601,089 variants were kept after applying post-imputation QC ﬁlters. These post-imputation
QC ﬁlters were excluding SNPs with an imputation INFO score < 0.2 and MAF < 0.1% or
==PAGE:27==
3.4 I P S Y C H S A M P L E F O R T H I S S T U DY
11
removing SNPs signiﬁcantly associated with genotyping waves and imputation batches, among
others.
The imputed genotype probabilities were converted to “best guess” genotypes, which were
assigned by setting individual genotypes to the highest probability call, conditional on the best
guess having greater than 90% probability. Individual genotypes with a best guess less than 90%
were set to missing. Genotype probabilities were also converted to “dosage” format. For each
individual genotype the expected dosage of A2 was computed as:
P(A1 × A1) × 0 + P(A1 × A2) × 1 + P(A2 × A2) × 2
where P(A*A*) represents the imputed genotype probability.
3.4
I P S Y C H S A M P L E F O R T H I S S T U DY
Several sample QC measures were also applied to the 78,050 genotyped subjects. Individuals
were ﬂagged as failing basic QC if, for example, they had deviation in heterozygosity levels
or a discordance between annotated sex and expected levels of X chromosome heterozygosity.
Individuals were also ﬂagged if they did not have an homogeneous genetic ancestry from Eu-
ropean population and if they had a 2nd degree (or closer) relative in the sample (leaving one
of the pair). These ﬂagged individuals were removed before the analysis presented here, leaving
65,534 individuals, which are expressed here as the iPSYCH2012 population. From those, 21,706
individuals were from the random sample, of which 20,800 did not have any of the ﬁve psychiatric
disorders used for case selection.
==PAGE:28==
==PAGE:29==
Part II
M AT E R I A L S A N D M E T H O D S
==PAGE:30==
==PAGE:31==
4
DATA BA S E A S S E M B LY A N D E X P L O R ATO RY A NA LY S I S
4.1
DATA BA S E A S S E M B LY
The different registries and variables of interest here explained were linked in a single longitudinal
database. All diagnoses associated with an ICD-10 code were given in the registries by diagnostic
date, for both the individuals and the parents, so it was possible to calculate the age of the
patient when a given diagnosis was presented, since the birth date was also available (for both
the individuals and the parents). Most of the information from the DNPR contained all hospital
contacts, not limited to the last one (i.e. if a patient had been admitted twice to a hospital due to
a viral infection, both dates were available).
Individuals were followed at two different times. The ﬁrst follow-up time registered all diag-
noses from the DPCRR complete until 2013 and from the DNPR complete until 2012. The second
follow-up time registered all diagnoses from both registries complete until 2016. However, not
all the diagnoses were requested for an update in the second follow-up. Information from the
DMBR was not updated in the second follow-up time, since the last individual was born in 2005.
Information from the DCRS on whether the individual was decease (and when) or not was updated
in the second follow-up.
The variables used for inclusion of individuals as cases in the iPSYCH case-cohort design
were kept, i.e. if the subject, according to the DPCRR, had a record of schizophrenia (ICD-10:
F20), autism (ICD-10: F84.0, F84.1,F84.5, F84.8 or F84.9), ADHD (ICD-10: F90), affective
disorder (ICD-10: F30-F39) or bipolar (ICD-10: F30-F31) before December 31, 2012. These
variables remained invariant to time. However, the following diagnoses from the DPCRR were
also used, in relation to the follow-up time: schizophrenia (ICD-10: F20), autism (ICD-10: F84.0,
F84.1,F84.5, F84.8 or F84.9), ADHD (ICD-10: F90), single and recurrent depressive disorder
(ICD-10: F32-F33) and bipolar (ICD-10: F30-F31). Intellectual disability diagnosis (ICD-10:
F70-F79) was available in both DPCRR and DNPR. Therefore, a new variable was created that
included all the ID records, choosing the ﬁrst date of diagnosis.
In order to evaluate whether there were signiﬁcant differences in birth factors between individ-
uals with and without an ID diagnosis, several variables were collected. These and many other
diagnoses were later used in Principal Component Analysis (PCA). A detailed description of the
variables can be found in Supplementary Text.
15
==PAGE:32==
16
DATA BA S E A S S E M B LY A N D E X P L O R ATO RY A NA LY S I S
4.2
S TAT I S T I C A L H Y P OT H E S I S T E S T I N G
In Section 6.3 several comparisons were made to evaluate whether there were actual differences
between groups —individuals with and without intellectual disability in most of the cases, for
which a statistical test was needed.
Independent two sample t-test can be used to compare the average values of a numeric variable
based on a binary factor.
The null hypothesis being tested is the assumption that there are
no differences in the average values of the two groups. This was the test used for assessing
differences on average age at ID diagnosis regarding the gender and differences on birth weight
regarding if the individual had ID, for example. It was done in the R [38] software using the
t.test function with a two-sided alternative. In the situation where there were more than
two groups, as in assessing differences on average age at ID diagnosis regarding the different
degrees of impairment, Kruskal-Wallis test was used (kruskal.test), since the data failed
the tests for normality and common variance. Normality was assessed both visually and using
shapiro.test, and homogeneity of variance with leveneTest.
Fisher Exact test can be used to determine if there are nonrandom associations between two
categorical variables. The null hypothesis being tested is independence of rows and columns in a
contingency table. This was the test used for assessing association between a mother smoking
during the pregnancy and the individual being later diagnosed with ID, and between having
pregnancy complications and the individual being later diagnosed with ID, for example. It was
done using the fisher.test function with a two-sided alternative.
4.3
S U RV I VA L A NA LY S I S T E C H N I Q U E S
Survival analysis was carried out in order to compare the time until decease of individuals di-
agnosed with intellectual disability to that of individuals without intellectual disability. Rather
survival analysis of three groups was assessed, for individuals born between 1982 and 1996:
individuals that were diagnosed with ID, alone or with comorbidities, in the 20 years following
their birth (n=1,857), individuals that were diagnosed with any of the ﬁve mental disorders
co-investigated, alone or with comorbidities but no ID, in the 20 years following their birth
(n=19,842) and individuals that were not diagnosed with any of the above in the 20 years follow-
ing their birth (n=24,591). Using the registries, it was possible to monitor the vital information
(active or deceased) of these subjects 20 years after their birth and note the time they lived, limited
to those 20 years.
Survival analysis, which is more appropriately called time-to-event analysis, makes it possible
to calculate the incidence rate of any event not limited to death, such us ﬁnding a job after
graduation or recovery from a disease or myocardial infarction [39]. The Kaplan-Meier method [40]
is a non-parametric statistic that estimates the survival function and gives the probability that an
==PAGE:33==
4.4 P R I N C I PA L C O M P O N E N T A NA LY S I S
17
individual survive past a speciﬁc time, here t=20 years. The Kaplan-Meier estimator, also called
the product-limit estimator, is given by:
ˆS(t) = ∏
ti≤t

1 −di
ni

,
where ni is the number of individuals known to survive prior to ti and di is the number of events
(e.g. deaths) that happened at time ti. At time t=0 (for t ∈[0, t(1))) the Kaplan-Meier estimator
is 1 and with time going to inﬁnity, the estimator goes to 0.
Comparing the survival curves of the three groups was done with the log-rank test [41] and the
Cox proportional hazards model [42], to test the hypothesis H0 : S1(t) = S2(t) = S3(t) for all
0 ≤t ≤20. The library survival [43], for the analysis, and the library survminer [44], for
the forest plot, were loaded in R. The Surv() function was used to create a survival object from
the time and status variables, which was passed to the survfit() function to create the survival
curves and to the coxph() function to ﬁt the Cox model. Testing for differences between the
survival curves with the log-rank test was done with survdiff().
4.4
P R I N C I PA L C O M P O N E N T A NA LY S I S
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a widely applicable technique where the goal is to ﬁnd
a lower dimensional representation of a high dimensional dataset while retaining most of the
information. Before applying PCA some variables were transformed (as explained below) and
restricted to latest diagnosis date 31/12/2012. Intellectual disability diagnosis was not taking into
account in the analysis. PCA was done using the R library pcaMethods[45] to allow missing
values using the method “svdImpute” and using the center and scale unit variance options.
Discrete variables with missing values, such as if the mother smoked during the pregnancy,
were transformed using the one-out-of K coding. Continuous variables with missing values, such
as length at birth or father age, were imputed to the average of the given variable. Diagnoses
related to the gestational time, such as mother infections or pregnancy complications, and during
birth although diagnosed at any time, such as congenital infection or congenital anomalies, were
converted to binary variables (0/1, either diagnosed or not, regardless the time). Other diagnoses
date (from bipolar disorder to autoimmune diseases) from the subjects were calculated as how
long after birth were diagnosed, while from the parents were calculated as how long before the
time of the pregnancy.
==PAGE:34==
5
G E N E T I C VA R I AT I O N A N D F U N C T I O NA L A N N OTAT I O N
5.1
G E N O M E- W I D E A S S O C I AT I O N S T U D I E S
Association analyses aim to identify genetic variants where one allele is signiﬁcantly more com-
mon in cases (individuals affected by the investigated disease or disorder) than controls (unaf-
fected individuals). Numerous association tests can be computed, depending on the studied trait
(i.e. quantitative trait or disease trait) and the aim and design of the study (case/control, dominant
genetic models, account for confounders, etc.). The basic association test is for a disease trait and
it is based on comparing allele frequencies between cases and controls with a chi-square test for
independence of rows and columns. For the aim of this study, logistic regression models including
covariates were computed.
A small degree of population substructure is expected in the majority of the cohorts and within
it, population stratiﬁcation is a major concern in genome-wide association analyses, as it can
lead to false positives (type I errors). If some individuals originate from different geographical
subpopulations and by coincidence are categorized as cases, then SNPs, which frequencies dif-
fered due to ancestry, will falsely associate with case-control status and generate false-positive
associations [46]. The most popular method to correct for population stratiﬁcation is including
the ﬁrst n vectors from a principal component analysis done on the genotypes of the individuals
(genetic relationship matrix – GRM) as covariates in the association model. Other covariates
such as age and gender are also included as covariates to adjust for non-trait related phenotypic
heterogeneity in the cohort [46].
Logistic regression is an extension of linear regression where the outcome of a linear model is
transformed using a logistic function that predicts the probability of the trait given a genotype [47].
Let Yi be the phenotype for individual i (in disease trait models Yi = 1 for cases and Yi = 0
for controls). Let Xi be the genotype of individual i at a particular SNP (either allele dose or
best-guess genotype). Let pi be the expected value of a phenotype given a genotype and covariates,
i.e. pi = E(Yi|Xi, C1, C2, . . . ) and deﬁne log(pi) = log(pi/(1 −pi)). The logistic regression
model with n covariates is given by:
log(pi) ∼β0 + β1X1 + β2C1 + β3C2 + · · · + βn−1Cn + ϵ
An estimate of the odds ratio (OR) is given by exp(β1), which can be interpreted as the increase
in the odds of being a case for each additional copy of the reference allele.
18
==PAGE:35==
5.1 G E N O M E- W I D E A S S O C I AT I O N S T U D I E S
19
A p-value is generated for each statistical test. The null hypothesis of no association is rejected
if the p-value falls below a predeﬁned alpha value. However, given that in GWAS hundreds of
thousands to millions of tests are conducted simultaneously under the same null hypothesis, the
cumulative likelihood of ﬁnding one or more false positives over the entire genome-wide associa-
tion analysis is much higher than for a single statistical test [47]. There are several approaches to
correct for multiple testing (Bonferroni correction and the false discovery rate (FDR) as the most
recognized). Yet, the most commonly strategy used is rejecting the null of no association when
the p-value fall behind the genome-wide signiﬁcant threshold 1, established in 5 × 10−8.
Meta-analysis approaches allow the synthesis of results from multiple GWAS, as long as all
studies included examined the same hypothesis and the sample sets across all studies are indepen-
dent. By combining the results from two or more studies, a meta-analysis can increase statistical
power and provide a single numerical value of the overall effect [48]. The general design of each
included study should be similar and with consistent adjustment of covariates, and SNP quality
control procedures should be rigorous (see H. Israel and R. Richter (2011) and E. Zeggini and
J.P. Ioannidis (2009) for excellent reviews). Heterogeneity, the degree to which studies differ,
is often statistically quantiﬁed with the Cochran Q test and the I2 index. The Cochran Q tests
whether the individual studies effects are farther away from the common effect, beyond what is
expected by chance, while the I2 index quantiﬁes how much heterogeneity is present. Coefﬁcients
resulting from a meta-analysis have variability (or error) associated with them, and the I2 index
represents the approximate proportion of this variability that can be attributed to heterogeneity
between studies [47], falling into low (I2≤25%), medium (25%<I2<75%) and high (I2≥75%)
heterogeneity. The two most frequently used models to conduct a meta-analysis are the ﬁxed-
and random-effects models, which differ in the assumptions related to the observed differences
among study results. The ﬁxed-effect model assumes that there is a common effect among the
studies and between-study differences occur by chance. Hence, larger studies are given greater
weight than smaller studies. The random-effect model assumes that the studies were drawn from
populations that differ from each other and that the effect falls along a range of values, since the
effect size may be positive for some populations but negative or harmful for others. Hence, larger
studies are given proportionally less weight than smaller studies.
5.1.1
Approaches for the genome-wide association studies
Figure 1 depicts the multiple GWAS approaches that were conducted in this project with different
designs. The ﬁrst distinction was supported by the use of best-guess imputed genotype, which
ignores the uncertainty in the imputed genotype, or the use of the imputed allele dosage score. The
second distinction rested on the use of diagnoses given at the ﬁrst follow up time or at the second.
Some of the individuals considered GWAS-controls in the ﬁrst follow-up time (those who were
not diagnosed with intellectual disability) were actually cases in the second follow-up time. The
1 “In 2005 the International HapMap Consortium used permutation testing of genotypes in 10 densely genotyped
Encyclopedia of DNA Elements genomic regions to estimate the number of common independent variants (MAF≥5%)
to be 150 per 500 kb in European population. Extrapolating to all the genome (∼3.3 Gb) suggested a signiﬁcance
threshold of 5 × 10−8. Since then, this WGS threshold became a standard for reporting genome-wide association
signiﬁcance hits for European ancestry populations.” (Fadista J. et al. 2010)
==PAGE:36==
20
G E N E T I C VA R I AT I O N A N D F U N C T I O NA L A N N OTAT I O N
third distinction was supported by the incorporation of the ﬁve co-investigated mental disorders as
binary covariates (not mutually exclusive) in the GWAS or handling each comorbidity in separate
studies (mutually exclusive) to later conduct a meta-analysis. Given that in the meta-analysis the
sample must be independent, the separate studies of the comorbidities were designed to contain
individuals that were diagnosed with only one of the ﬁve mental disorders, several of them or
none (n=7 studies). The fourth and last distinction rested on the use of the variables used for
inclusion of individuals as cases in the iPSYCH case-cohort design or the use of the diagnoses (as
described in Section 4.1).
Figure 1: Conﬁguration of the different GWAS conducted.
Boxes in red and blue represent
association studies on the entire iPSYCH2012 population (n=65,534). Boxes in green
and yellow hues represent association studies on sub-populations and the later synthesis
of results in a meta-analysis (n=65,534).
Genome-wide association analysis were performed separately for 64 approaches with a logistic
regression model (ID coded as a dichotomous variable) using PLINK v1.9 beta 3 [49, 50] with
the ten ﬁrst principal components, age and gender included as covariates. Only variants with
imputation quality INFO score≥0.2 and MAF≥0.001 were included. Subsequently, the results
from 56 studies were meta-analyzed in groups of 7 studies (following their approach) using ﬁxed
effect models in PLINK v1.9 beta 3 [49, 50], resulting in 8 meta-analyses.
5.1.2
Deﬁning genome-wide signiﬁcant loci
Any variant that surpassed the genome-wide signiﬁcant threshold in any of the different 72
approaches was reported in Supplementary Data 1, with the corresponding p-value. More than
half of the variants (n=80) were genome-wide signiﬁcant in more than one approach. In those
cases, for simplicity, the variant with the smallest p-value (the most signiﬁcant) was used to deﬁne
the different loci. This was far from intentionally inﬂating the multiple testing burden or falling
into p-hacking techniques, since all the results across different approaches were fully reported.
Lifting out the “fake-best” was only done as an intermediate step for deﬁning independent loci.
==PAGE:37==
5.2 L I N K AG E D I S E Q U I L I B R I U M
21
Hence, independent loci were identiﬁed starting with the most signiﬁcant associated variant as the
ﬁrst lead variant and labeling variants as being part of the same locus if they were within 500 kb
from that index variant.
5.2
L I N K AG E D I S E Q U I L I B R I U M
Linkage disequilibrium (LD) describes the degree to which an allele of one SNP is inherited
or correlated with an allele of another SNP [47] (i.e. alleles at two different loci on the same
chromosome). Recombination events during meiosis break apart chromosomal segments and
this effect is ampliﬁed through generations, hence LD decay over time. In the presence of LD
indirect association arise. Imagine a disease susceptibility locus (DSL) and a variant that was
found statistically associated to the phenotype. If there is high LD between the variant and the
DSL, we can expect to see a relationship between the variant and the phenotype [51].
Various measures of LD have been proposed, but they all depend on the difference between the
observed joint frequency of co-ocurrence for two alleles on the same haplotype and the frequency
expected if the two markers were independent (i.e. what it is expected by chance) [47]. LD is
generally reported in terms of r2, which estimates the correlation coefﬁcient between two loci.
Let the alleles at two markers be denoted A,a and B,b. Let the allele frequencies at each marker
be pA, pa, pB, pb and let pAB, pAb, paB, pab denote the frequencies of the four possible haplotypes
(e.g. pAB denotes the frequency of a randomly selected haplotype from the population with alleles
A and B observed at the two loci). If independence holds, the haplotype frequencies are given by
the product of the corresponding allele frequencies. The correlation coefﬁcient is given by:
r2 = (pAB −pApB)2
pApBpapb
High r2 values indicate that two variants convey similar information. An r2 = 1 implies perfect
predictability; knowledge of an allele at one locus can be used to predict the allele at a second
locus, so only one of the two SNPs needs to be genotyped to capture the allelic variation [47].
LD Score regression method (LDSC) [52] does not require individual level genotype data to
calculate SNP heritability (h2
SNP) and genetic correlation between traits (rg), but instead uses
GWAS summary statistics (estimated SNP effects and their SE) and an LD Score matrix. The
LD Score of a SNP is the sum of LD given by r2 between the target SNP and all the other SNPs
(including the target SNP itself), and it can be calculated in a reference sample (for example, the
1000 Genomes Project). Hence, the LD Score of a variant j is deﬁned as:
ℓj =
M
∑
k=1
r2
jk
5.2.1
SNP-based heritability using LDSC method
The method presented relies on the fact that the GWAS effect size estimate for a given SNP
incorporates the effects of all SNPs in linkage disequilibrium with that SNP and hence, for a
==PAGE:38==
22
G E N E T I C VA R I AT I O N A N D F U N C T I O NA L A N N OTAT I O N
polygenic trait, SNPs with high LD will have higher χ2 statistics on average than SNPs with low
LD [52]. Following the approach described in Bulik-Sullivan et al., for each variant j = 1, . . . , M
given a sample size N and deﬁning h2
SNP/M as the mean variance explained per SNP, the
expected χ2 statistic of variant j is:
E[χ2
j ] ≈Nh2
SNP
M
ℓj + 1
If there is an inﬂation in the test-statistic due to population structure there will be an extra term a
which is not proportional to LD, so the expected χ2 statistic of variant j becomes:
E[χ2
j ] = Nh2
SNP
M
ℓj + Na + 1
Hence, under a polygenic model, from a regression analysis of the observed χ2 values against
their LD Scores (as in E[χ2
j ] = β0 + β1ℓj) we can test whether there is inﬂation due to population
stratiﬁcation by testing whether the regression intercept β0 (here Na) is signiﬁcantly different
from 1 (i.e. Na is an estimator of the contribution of confounding bias to the inﬂation of the
chi-square statistics [53]), and also estimate h2
SNP from the regression slope [54].
LDSC method was used to estimate intellectual disability h2
SNP and the intercept in a LD Score
regression (to assess whether the results exhibited signs of population stratiﬁcation) in eight
of the studies (see below). Analyses were performed using the pre-computed LD Scores from
European ancestry samples in the 1000 Genomes Project (“eur w ld chr” available https://
data.broadinstitute.org/alkesgroup/LDSCORE/ by Finucane, H. K. et al.
[55])
and summary statistics for the eight studies with the LDSC python software package. Before
regressing the χ2 statistics from GWAS against the pre-computed LD Scores, the software ﬁltered
out variants with MAF≤0.01 and INFO≤0.9. Further, the reference panel with pre-computed
LD Scores from European ancestry samples in the 1000 Genomes Project contained 1.3 million of
SNPs. Hence, approximately 928,000 SNPs remained for regression. Conversion of the h2
SNP to
liability scale was computed assuming a 0.74% population prevalence of ID in the ﬁrst follow-up
and 0.90% in the second follow-up (estimated from the number of individuals with ID within the
random subcohort), and 5.11% and 5.51% of sample prevalence, respectively.
The eight studies for which SNP heritability was estimated were those GWAS or meta-analyses
conducted on the total iPSYCH2012 population using diagnoses as comorbidities (designs in blue
and orange boxes in Figure 1):
• BG-CC-13: best-guess genotypes and diagnoses of mental disorders at the ﬁrst follow-up
as covariates in the covariates-corrected approach.
• DO-CC-13: dosage genotypes and diagnoses of mental disorders at the ﬁrst follow-up as
covariates in the covariates-corrected approach.
• BG-CC-16: best-guess genotypes and diagnoses of mental disorders at the second follow-up
as covariates in the covariates-corrected approach.
• DO-CC-16: dosage genotypes and diagnoses of mental disorders at the second follow-up
as covariates in the covariates-corrected approach.
• BG-MA-13: meta-analysis of seven studies (individuals diagnosed with only one of the ﬁve
mental disorders, several or none at the ﬁrst follow-up) using best-guess genotypes.
==PAGE:39==
5.2 L I N K AG E D I S E Q U I L I B R I U M
23
• DO-MA-13: meta-analysis of seven studies (individuals diagnosed with only one of the
ﬁve mental disorders, several or none at the ﬁrst follow-up) using dosage genotypes.
• BG-MA-16: meta-analysis of seven studies (individuals diagnosed with only one of the ﬁve
mental disorders, several or none at the second follow-up) using best-guess genotypes.
• DO-MA-16: meta-analysis of seven studies (individuals diagnosed with only one of the
ﬁve mental disorders, several or none at the second follow-up) using dosage genotypes.
5.2.2
Genetic correlations between traits using LDSC method
A similar relationship as above holds if we replace the χ2 statistics for a single trait with the
product of the Z-scores from two studies of traits [56], to test whether the traits are being controlled
by the same, overlapping, linked genetic loci. Following the approach described in Bulik-Sullivan
et al. for cross-trait LD Score regression, under a polygenic model the expected value of z1jz2j
for a SNP j = 1, . . . , M is:
E[z1jz2j] =
√N1N2ρg
M
ℓj +
ρNs
√N1N2
,
where Ni is the sample size for study i, Ns is the number of individuals included in both studies, ρg
is the genetic covariance and ρ is the phenotypic correlation among the Ns overlapping samples.
The regression intercept β0 corresponds to ρNs/√N1N2. An estimate of the genetic covariance is
obtained by regressing z1jz2j against ℓj
pN1jN2j (where Nij is the sample size for SNP j in study
i) and then multiplying the resulting slope by M. Normalizing the estimated genetic covariance
by SNP heritabilities yields genetic correlation:
rg =
ˆρg
q
h2
1h2
2
LDSC method was used to estimate pairwise rg of intellectual disability with other traits in four
of the studies (BG-CC-13, DO-CC-13, BG-MA-13, DO-MA-13, as described in Section 5.2.1).
Analyses were performed using 61 phenotypes of potential relevance with publicly available
GWAS results with European ancestry individuals through the LD Hub [57] pipeline. Several
quality control analyses were automatically conducted before estimating genetic correlation be-
tween pair of traits (as detailed in Zheng J. et al. and the LD Hub Test Center).
5.2.3
Set of variants with probable causal effect
For the 151 genome-wide signiﬁcant variants, pairwise linkage disequilibrium with the rest of
the imputed variants (after QC) was calculated to identify a set of variants with probable causal
effect. Observed LD in terms of r2 with each of the risk variants were computed using imputed
best-guess genotype data with PLINK v1.9 beta 3 [49, 50] based on genotype allele counts. Since
LD extends only for a short distance, the average r2 was practically null for SNPs further than
500 kb (Supplementary Figure S15). Plotting all correlations with r2 > 0.2 demonstrated that
for variants more than 500 kb apart, LD gradually decreases (Figure 2). An estimate of the
==PAGE:40==
24
G E N E T I C VA R I AT I O N A N D F U N C T I O NA L A N N OTAT I O N
conditional mean function (i.e. estimate of the mean r2 conditional on the physical distance) was
used to approximately set the r2 threshold in 0.6. Hence, for each of the 151 risk variants, variants
within 500 kb and with r2 > 0.6 were included in the set of variants with probable causal effect.
These new 285 probable causal variants were labeled into the 69 independent loci. For each
variant in LD with a genome-wide signiﬁcant variant, the distance to it locus index variant was
determined. The new variant was assigned to the locus where the distance to the index variant was
smallest. If the distance was the same for two loci, the variant was assigned to the locus where
the LD with a risk variant was largest.
Figure 2: LD in terms of r2 and physical distance for the 151 genome-wide signiﬁcant variants
against all the other imputed variants, included the target variants – only shown r2 > 0.2
and distance < 2, 000 kb. Higher values of LD are shown with darker colors. The
smooth function represents an estimate of the conditional mean function, ﬁtting a
generalized additive model (GAM) to the data.
5.3
B I O L O G I C A L A N N OTAT I O N O F VA R I A N T S W I T H P RO BA B L E C AU S A L E F F E C T
The variants with probable causal effect were mapped to all adjacent genes in a range of 2 Mb.
Gene data was retrieved from the UCSC Human Genome Table Browser [58] using Reference
Sequence (RefSeq) gene predictions from NCBI [59] with the hg19 (GRCh37) assembly (down-
loaded on November 30, 2018). Two tables were retrieved in BED format: whole gene (one
record per gene) and exons (one record per exon). The processing and the calculation of position
intersections with the variants was computed using bedtools [60], allowing for a 2 Mb window.
The variants in the set of variants with probable causal effect, and the genes they were mapped
to, were annotated based on external reference databases in order to illustrate the biological
mechanisms while evaluating their potential functional consequences. The annotation as a whole
served as a prioritization for ﬁnding the most likely variants and genes whose perturbation leaded
to the association signals seen. Each of the coming subsections describes a particular annotation
method.
==PAGE:41==
5.3 B I O L O G I C A L A N N OTAT I O N O F VA R I A N T S W I T H P RO BA B L E C AU S A L E F F E C T
25
5.3.1
Functional consequences
The coding effect and regulatory consequences of the variants were determined using Ensembl
Variant Effect Predictor (VEP [61]) for genome build GRch37 (hg19) and RefSeq transcripts,
including upstream and downstream consequences up to 2 Mb distance (to match the genes that
were mapped before). The biotypes of the overlapping transcripts, the Combined Annotation
Dependent Depletion scores (CADD [62]) and the Loss-of-function scores (LoF [63]) were also
annotated. When the variant overlapped more than one transcript, results were restricted to one
consequence per gene, reﬂecting the most severe impact among all the gene transcripts – deﬁned
by the web server. SIFT [64] was used to predict the impact of variants located in coding regions
on the structure and function of the protein product.
There were three variants in coding regions, but with no resulting change to the encoded
amino acid (synonymous variants), one variant in a 3’-untranslated region, which often contains
regulatory regions that post-transcriptionally inﬂuence gene expression, a splice site mutation,
and seventeen variants in identiﬁed regulatory regions. It is often assumed that nonsynonymous
variants, those that change the composition and properties of the encoded protein, are more likely
to inﬂuence phenotypes than variants that fall far from all known genes (intergenic variants) [53].
However, variants in non-coding regions are often involved in the regulation of gene products,
but many mechanisms of gene regulation are still not well understood. It is in fact likely that
most signals from genome-wide association analyses are due to variants affecting regulation as
opposed to encoding differences in protein composition [53].
5.3.2
Expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL)
Expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) mapping is a relatively recent technique for testing
associations between mRNA transcript levels (commonly known as gene expression) and the
genotype at speciﬁc genetic markers, assuming an additive model with linear regression analysis.
Hence, eQTLs are variants which genotype have been shown to be associated with the abundance
of a certain transcript, which indirectly correlates with the abundance of a protein in the cell.
eQTLs are divided into two classes: cis and trans. In cis-eQTL, the variation controlling transcript
levels is assumed to lie within or in close proximity to the gene, as opposed to trans-eQTLs, where
the distance to its regulated gene is longer. This implies that the observed eQTL represents the
position of a locus that regulates the expression of the target gene [65]. Since numerous studies
have identiﬁed an enrichment of cis-eQTLs among genome-wide signiﬁcant variants, there has
been a general agreement that the gene transcript abundance may act as a useful intermediate
feature to assess the effect of genetic variation on a clinical phenotype [66, 67].
Thus, variants identiﬁed as eQTLs in human neural tissue are promising candidates for causative
associations with intellectual disability. For that reason, the potential association between proba-
ble causal variants and the expression of nearby genes was evaluated. Here, three data cis-eQTL
repositories (CommonMind [68], UKBEC [69] and GTEx [70], explained in the next paragraph)
were used to look for the 436 variants in the set of probable causal variants. One variant showed
signiﬁcant eQTL association with AC004448.5 (non-coding transcript) in the hippocampus region
==PAGE:42==
26
G E N E T I C VA R I AT I O N A N D F U N C T I O NA L A N N OTAT I O N
of the brain (from the GTEx repository) and nine variants with BRINP3 in the cerebellar cortex,
the hippocampus and two of them also in the primary visual cortex (from the UKBEC repository).
The eQTL repository in the CommonMind Consortium [68] (release 1.2) was derived from
467 Caucasian donors (209 cases of schizophrenia, 52 cases of bipolar or affective disorder, and
206 controls) from the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex tissue across the 6.4 million genotyped and
imputed markers with imputation score > 0.8 and MAF ≥0.05. After the regression models for
eQTL discovery (one model adjusted for 20 PCs and the other without it), the data was ﬁltered at
FDR < 0.02. The summary results contained 3.7 and 1.7 million of signiﬁcant variant-gene pairs
associations, respectively. The eQTL repository in the Genotype-Tissue Expression project
(GTEx) [70] (V7 release) was derived from 7 different non-diseased brain tissues from 620 donors
of different races. The regression models for eQTL discovery was conducted on 10.5 million of
variants with MAF ≥0.01 and FDR threshold of < 0.05 was applied to identify genes with
a signiﬁcant eQTL. The summary result contained 8.6 million of signiﬁcant variant-gene pair
associations. The eQTL repository in the UK Brain Expression Consortium (UKBEC) [69]
was derived from 134 human brains free of neurodegenerative disorders, from 10 different brain
tissues across the 5.8 million genotyped and imputed markers with imputation score > 0.5
and MAF ≥0.05. After the regression models for eQTL discovery, the data was ﬁltered at
FDR < 0.01. The signiﬁcant variant-gene pair associations were retrieved from the web server
Braineac (http://www.braineac.org/).
5.3.3
Gene expression levels on tissues
As before, gene expression levels can be measured by assaying the abundance in the cell of
mRNA transcripts that map to that gene. Gene expression analyses provide insights into the
underlying molecular events, and since tissue-speciﬁc transcription is typically dominated by a
few genes depending on the tissue [71], the aim was to characterize the mapped genes that were
differential highly expressed on human neural tissues. Besides, the expression level of a gene
usually varies across time, depending on the extent to which the gene product is needed at a
particular stage in development [53]. Hence, one could infer that, given elevated expression levels
during a particular temporal window, developmental events taking place during that window play
a role in the phenotypic variations observed in e.g. association studies. For that reason, temporal
expression patterns on human neural tissues was also investigated.
Gene expression analysis was carried out in parallel in two separate set of genes. On one hand,
all the genes in which variants with probable causal effect lied within (this was called the inner set,
n=76). On the other hand, all the genes that did not carry any variant with probable causal effect
but were annotated for being in close proximity (this was called the outer set, n=2,756). Gene
transcription levels across different body tissues were collected from GTEx [70] and temporal
gene transcription levels across neural tissues were collected from the BrainSpan Atlas of the
Developing Human Brain project [72].
The mRNA transcript levels from GTEx (v7 release) were obtained from the median TPM
by tissue ﬁle (v1.1.8), which included 54,271 genes (56,202 transcripts) and 53 body sites, 13 of
==PAGE:43==
5.3 B I O L O G I C A L A N N OTAT I O N O F VA R I A N T S W I T H P RO BA B L E C AU S A L E F F E C T
27
which are brain tissues, although two are duplicated regions: Cerebellum - Cerebellar Hemisphere
and Cortex - Frontal Cortex. Here, we refer to cerebellum and frontal cortex for the pair of
duplicated regions.
For genes with more than one transcript, the transcript with the highest
expression across all the tissues was included in the analysis. Only the genes that were mapped
to the variants with probable causal effect were included (n=63 in inner set, n=2,125 outer set).
The expression values were log2 transformed and normalize (zero mean normalization of the log2
transformed expression) to ﬁnd the relative expression of the genes throughout tissues.
The RNA-Seq RPKM averaged to genes ﬁle from the BrainSpan project (v10 release) included
normalized expression from 47,708 genes (52,376 transcripts) and 524 samples (from 42 donors
in up to 16 brain regions at different at different ages). For genes with more than one transcript,
the transcript with the highest expression across all the tissues was included in the analysis. Only
the genes that were mapped to the variants with probable causal effect were included (n=55 in
inner set, n=2,037 outer set).
The expression levels were averaged per developmental stage
across all brain regions. The eight developmental stages (see Supplementary Table S9) were
deﬁned similarly as in the BrainSpan Developmental Transcriptome technical white paper. The
expression values were log2 transformed and normalize (zero mean normalization of the log2
transformed expression) to ﬁnd the relative expression of the genes throughout developmental
stages.
5.3.4
Other databases
Large-scale initiatives and existing web services have increased publicly available resources for
annotation of variants and genes. But these databases still provide only a small portion of all
the plausible disease-gene associations, once the rapid growth of scientiﬁc publications are being
considered. As a result, a number of databases and text mining analyses were considered as
independent steps to search for relationships between the genes mapped here and intellectual
disability in the literature.
A. GWAS Catalog. The EBI GWAS Catalog [73] contains a systematic collection of phenotypes
and associated SNPs and genes from more than 2,000 studies. All associations were downloaded
(v1.0.2, on December 18, 2018) and only the genes that were mapped to the variants with probable
causal effect were considered (n=1,629).
B. OMIM. The Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) [74] provides a comprehensive
catalog of human genes and genetic disorders. A synopsis of phenotypes associated with the
genes was downloaded (morbidmap database, on December 11, 2018) and only the genes that
were mapped to the variants with probable causal effect were considered (n=528).
C. Panel of previously reported ID genes. A compilation of 1,095 genes previously associated
with ID (excluding the X chromosome) were put together. The genes were obtained from the fol-
lowing sites. Chiurazzi et al. [75] obtained in 2015 a gene list by using OMIM and the NCBI Gene
databases to identify most genes reported with ID conditions. H. van Bokhoven [6] obtained in
2011 a gene list based on a systematic literature review of molecular networks involving ID genes.
==PAGE:44==
28
G E N E T I C VA R I AT I O N A N D F U N C T I O NA L A N N OTAT I O N
D. Grozeva et al. [76] obtained in 2015 a gene list based on two other studies (DDDG2P [77] and
Gilissen et al. [25]) and in-house data. An additional list was obtained by text mining the OMIM
database for genes under the following phenotypes: “intellectual disability”, “developmental
delay”, “mental retardation”, “cognitive impairment”, “intellectual developmental disorder” and
“neurodevelopmental disorder”. The total 1,095 genes in the panel were annotated as “known”
(n=377) and “candidate” (n=718) genes. In order for the gene to be considered as a known gene
for ID, the gene had to be in the OMIM gene list or it had to be annotated as known in the Grozeva
et al. study or it had to be annotated in several of the aforementioned studies.
All the annotations have been made available in Supplementary Data 2. Once some of the genes
were prioritized based on the above annotations, further evidences were sought in ClinVar [78],
dbGaP [79], and GeneCards [80]. Biological process and molecular function was assessed in the
Gene Ontology Consortium (GO) [81].
==PAGE:45==
Part III
R E S U LT S
==PAGE:46==
==PAGE:47==
6
E X P L O R ATO RY A NA LY S I S
In this chapter the reader can observe the changes in diagnoses that took place between two
follow-up times regarding intellectual disability and the ﬁve speciﬁc mental disorders that iPSYCH
initially focused on (ADHD, bipolar disorder, depression, schizophrenia and autism). It also
presents the arrangement of overlapping diagnoses during the ﬁrst follow-up time. The last two
sections show data analysis, such as age at which ID was diagnosed and mortality rates, among
others, and principal component analysis with more than 100 variables.
The database used throughout this project consists of 65,534 non-related subjects with Euro-
pean ancestry, as explained in chapter 3. The distinction between this whole case-cohort set
(n=65,534) and just the random sample (n=21,706) will be sometimes used and compared in
this chapter. If not speciﬁed otherwise, assume the whole set as the reference one for the given
analyses.
6.1
C H A N G E S I N D I AG N O S E S B E T W E E N F O L L OW- U P T I M E S
Most of the diagnostic information used later in this chapter refers to information from the
Danish Psychiatric Central Research Register (DPCRR) complete until 2013 and from the Danish
National Patient Register (DNPR) complete until 2012. These diagnoses were later updated up to
2016. The shufﬂing and increase in diagnoses, although not extreme, are worth to mention. As
it will be shown in section 7.1, these changes can impact the genome-wide association analyses
results.
According to the registries in the ﬁrst follow-up time (diagnostic information from PCRR until
2013 and LPR until 2012), there were 131 patients with an ID diagnosis only (i.e. where none
of the ﬁve mental disorders aforementioned were also diagnosed). The registries in the second
follow-up time (after including information from both registries until 2016 included) showed that
10 of these patients were further diagnosed with other mental disorder and 29 new patients were
diagnosed with ID only, giving 150 patients with an ID diagnosis only. The registries in the ﬁrst
follow-up time showed 3,220 patients with an ID diagnosis together with one or more mental
disorders. About three years later the registries showed 3,462 patients with the same diagnosis.
Table 1 illustrates these changes in diagnoses.
Approximately 5% of patients who as in the ﬁrst follow-up time were diagnosed with only
one mental disorder (e.g. schizophrenia or ADHD) become diagnosed with more than one mental
disorder by the end of 2016 - it ranges from 4.6% for patients with autism to 7.6% for patients with
31
==PAGE:48==
32
E X P L O R ATO RY A NA LY S I S
bipolar disorder. At that second follow-up time, 0.9% of patients who as in the ﬁrst follow-up time
were diagnosed with only ADHD or only autism were further diagnosed with ID. These are the
two mental disorders incurring the highest risk of the individual’s being diagnosed with intellec-
tual disability later on time, followed by patients initially diagnosed with several mental disorders.
These and other estimates can be found in Supplementary Figure S1 and Supplementary Table S1.
Table 1: Intellectual disability and mental disorders diagnoses at two different follow-up times.
Individuals who neither had a diagnosis of mental disability nor a diagnosis of one of the
ﬁve mental disorders are indicated as “remaining population”.
2016
2013
ID only
ID + mental disorder
mental disorder
remaining population
Total
ID only
121
10
0
0
131
ID + mental disorder
0
3,213
7
0
3,220
mental disorder
29
8
541
22,711
23,289
remaining population
0
231
38,634
29
38,894
Total
150
3,462
39,182
22,740
65,534
6.2
OV E R L A P B E T W E E N D I AG N O S T I C G RO U P S
As discussed in Section 1.4, intellectual disability, as many other disorders, diseases and condi-
tions, is highly inﬂuenced by other comorbidities. Hence, it is important to observe the overlap-
ping distribution between intellectual disability and the ﬁve speciﬁc mental disorders.
The sample prevalence at the ﬁrst follow-up time was as follow: 0.2% cases with only ID (131
patients), 0.8% cases with only bipolar disorder (512 patients), 1.8% cases with only schizophre-
nia (1,150 patients), 11.2% cases with only autism (7,356 patients), 14.3% cases with only ADHD
(9,373 patients), 22.3% cases with only depression (14,642 patients), 13.9% cases with several of
the aforementioned disorders (9,081 patients) and 35.5% cases with none of the above (23,289
patients). The plot on the left in Figure 3 represents these allocations.
However, as was already shown in Table 1, most of the patients with ID were also diagnosed
with one or more mental disorders. The most prevalent mental disorder diagnosed with ID was
autism (1,362 patients) followed by ADHD (921 patients), single and recurrent depression (269
patients), schizophrenia (55 patients) and bipolar disorder (12 patients). Also, 601 patients with
ID were also diagnosed with several of the aforementioned mental disorders. The plot on the right
in Figure 3 represents these allocations. Sample prevalences and comorbidities for the random
sample can be seen in Supplementary Figure S2, where the diagnosis of these mental disorders
together with ID took place in the same order, although slightly different magnitudes.
==PAGE:49==
6.3 D E S C R I P T I V E S TAT I S T I C S
33
Figure 3: Allocation of ID and mental disorder diagnoses during the ﬁrst follow-up time. Left:
Total sample prevalence of ID and mental disorders. When a particular diagnosis is
pointed out, it stands for diagnosis of that disorder only (i.e. no comorbidities with any
of the other ﬁve disorders shown). “Several” and “None” stand for patients with several
or none of the six diagnoses shown, respectively. Right: Patients diagnosed with either
only ID or with ID and one or more (“Several + ID”) mental disorders.
6.3
D E S C R I P T I V E S TAT I S T I C S
It is convenient to recall that the iPSYCH2012 case-cohort consists of subjects born in Denmark
between 1981 and 2005. The ﬁrst ID diagnosis was registered in 1988 in a 6 years old patient.
This section introduce several statistics regarding age, such as age at which ID was diagnosed
over the years, differences on age between males and females with ID, age of parents at patient’s
birth and survival analysis. Other analyses introduced here give information about the different
degrees of impairment and variables at birth that might have an impact on ID unfolding.
Among the 3,351 patients diagnosed with ID at the ﬁrst follow-up time, 1,896 patients had a
diagnosis of mild ID (56.6%), 467 of moderate ID (13.9%), 116 of severe ID (3.5%) and 13 of
profound ID (0.4%). The rest of the patients (n=859, 25.6%) did not have an impairment degree
speciﬁed. As suspected from the plot on the left in Figure 4, differences on average age at ID
diagnosis regarding the different degrees of impairment were not statistically signiﬁcant (p =
0.815). However, difference on average age at ID diagnosis regarding the gender was statistically
signiﬁcant (p < 2.2e−16). Whereas for males the average age at the time of ID diagnosis was
almost 10 years old, for females it was 12 years old (see plot on the right in Figure 4). In average,
the vast majority of ID cases were diagnosed when the patient was between 4 and 15 years old.
Supplementary Text contains a section with a short discussion on age at diagnosis regarding the
year in which the patients were born. Although small, there was statistically signiﬁcant difference
(p = 8.4e−5) between the average age at the time of gestation of mothers of patients with ID
(26.2 years old) and mothers of patients without ID (27.8 years old). The difference between
father’s age was not statistically signiﬁcant (p = 0.059).
==PAGE:50==
34
E X P L O R ATO RY A NA LY S I S
Figure 4: Patients with ID diagnosis at the ﬁrst follow-up time within the whole case-cohort. Left:
Boxplot of patients’ age at time of ID diagnosis by degree of impairment speciﬁed in
the registries. Right: Distribution of patients’ age at time of ID diagnosis by gender.
The probability of living more than 20 years on patients diagnosed with ID within the ﬁrst 20
years after birth is 99.0%. Patients diagnosed with one or more of the aforementioned mental
disorders, but no ID, within the ﬁrst 20 years after birth have 99.7% chances of surviving more
than 20 years. The remaining population (without a diagnosis of the aforementioned disorders)
have 99.8% chances of surviving more than 20 years. Kaplan-Meier survival curves can be seen
in Supplementary Figure S5. The log-rank test concluded that the survival distribution of patients
diagnosed with ID is different than the survival distribution of patients diagnosed with a mental
disorder (p = 4e−5) and different than the survival distribution of the remaining population
(p = 2e−10). Also, the survival distributions of patients diagnosed with a mental disorder and
of the remaining population are signiﬁcantly different (p = 3e−3). Accordingly, Hazard ratios
(Supplementary Figure S6) showed that patients diagnosed with ID within the ﬁrst 20 years after
birth have a signiﬁcant increased risk of deceasing over the remaining population and also higher
than patients diagnosed with one or more mental disorder.
Differences in gestational age, birth length, birth weight, and APGAR score 5 minutes after
birth of subjects with and without ID diagnosis were statistically signiﬁcant.
Subjects later
diagnosed with ID were, on average, shorter time in the mother’s uterus and therefore, they were
smaller at birth (both in terms of length and weight) than subjects without ID diagnosis 20 years
after birth. The 5 minutes after birth APGAR score was also lower for those who were later
diagnosed with ID. There was also evidence of statistically signiﬁcant differences between the
two groups (i.e. between the subjects later diagnosed or not with ID) in the proportion of:
• subjects with malformation present or suspected at birth (p = 2.3e−6)
• subjects whose mothers smoked during pregnancy (p = 3.7e−3)
• subjects born with congenital anomalies (p = 2.2e−16)
• subjects born after pregnancy complications (p = 2.6e−8)
==PAGE:51==
6.4 P R I N C I PA L C O M P O N E N T A NA LY S I S
35
The odds of intellectually disabled patients born with malformation was 2.1 times the odds of
intellectually disabled patients born without malformation. The odds of intellectually disabled
patients born from mothers who smoked during pregnancy was 1.2 times the odds of intellectually
disabled patients born from mothers who did not smoked during pregnancy. The odds of intellectu-
ally disabled patients diagnosed with congenital anomalies was 2.9 times the odds of intellectually
disabled patients born without congenital anomalies. The odds of intellectually disabled patients
born after pregnancy complications was 2.3 times the odds of intellectually disabled patients born
without complications. Group average, test p-values and two-way frequency tables can be found
in Supplementary Tables S2 to S6.
6.4
P R I N C I PA L C O M P O N E N T A NA LY S I S
Given the large amount of diagnoses available, PCA was implemented with the aim of ﬁnding
a few components that accounted for as much of the variability in the data as possible. Prior to
compute PCA the database was processed as detailed in Section 4.4.
However, the variation explained by the ﬁrst two components was only 14% and it required 23
components to account for 80% of the variation in the data. The attributes that most contributed
to the ﬁrst two components were the weight and the length of the subject at birth, whether
the subject had a malformation present or suspected at birth and whether the mother smoked
during the pregnancy of the given subject. The patients projected onto the ﬁrst two principal
components space did not discriminate the patients diagnosed with ID. These results are displayed
in Supplementary Figures S7, S8 and S9.
==PAGE:52==
7
G E N O M E - W I D E S I G N I F I C A N T LY A S S O C I AT E D I D R I S K L O C I
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) aim to identify genetic variants associated with certain
phenotypes, usually complex traits and common diseases such as psychiatric disorders. It does so
by ﬁnding signiﬁcant differences between affected and unaffected individuals in polymorphism
on loci that might then have a role in increasing (risk alleles) or decreasing (protective alleles) the
risk of being affected with the disease or disorder investigated [13]. Single variant association tests
assess the marginal correlation between the genotypes of each SNP across the genome and the
trait of interest. The approach works well for identifying common variants with sufﬁciently-large
effects. However, for complex traits, most variants have small effects, making them difﬁcult
to identify even with large sample sizes [82]. Herein, several GWAS with different designs were
accomplished in order to identify the most number of associations with ID.
There are several applications of the summary statistics resulting from GWAS (the effect sizes
and their p-values). To mention some, functional enrichment analysis identiﬁes over-represented
genes or proteins, and polygenic risk scores establish each individual’s risk for a given disease.
Below, genetic correlation and SNP heritability were investigated.
7.1
G E N O M E- W I D E A S S O C I AT I O N S T U D I E S
Prior to the analysis, following the GWAS protocols, rigorous quality control procedures were per-
formed in the imputed genotypes and individuals, as described in Section 3.3 and 3.4. Non-related
individuals and with European ancestry were kept, and variants with imputation INFO score < 0.2
and MAF < 0.1% were excluded.
Yet, different sources recommend different threshold to
exclude poorly imputed genotypes and rare variants preceding the GWAS. However, with the
application of stricter ﬁlters, such as INFO < 0.8 and MAF < 5%, potential true association
signals could be missed since the number of variants to test drastically plunge – from 11.6 millions
to 6.3 millions here. No further ﬁlters were thereby imposed for the association studies herein
presented.
In total, 64 GWAS for intellectual disability were conducted using PLINK v1.9 [49, 50] on
different populations, with different covariates, at different follow-up times, or with different
genotypes format, using logistic regression. The 10 ﬁrst principal components were always in-
cluded as covariates to correct for population stratiﬁcation, together with age and gender to adjust
for non-trait related phenotypic heterogeneity. Some of the GWAS were then meta-analyzed
using ﬁxed effects model, resulting in 8 additional studies (n=72 approaches). Details on these
36
==PAGE:53==
7.2 G E N O M E- W I D E S N P H E R I TA B I L I T Y
37
association studies can be read in Section 5.1.1. The association analyses were conducted either
with the entire iPSYCH2012 population (n=65,534) or with sub-populations selected by comor-
bidities. Association analyses using only the random sample (n=21,706) were not possible since
the number of cases with ID was too small (n=161, as in the ﬁrst follow-up time) to achieve
appropriate statistical power.
The rationale behind generating multiple (and somehow different) association analysis was
based on the premise that the p-values may change according to the sampling scheme and the
covariates introduced, and as a result the ranking of SNPs associated with ID may change [83, 84].
Hence, the aim was to conduct various but consistent associations studies to combine the true
associations, which would allow for a broader inspection of probable causative genes.
In total, 151 different variants in 69 loci surpassed the genome-wide association threshold
for signiﬁcance (p < 5 × 10−8) in 41 of the 72 approaches. Less than half of the variants
(n=71) were genome-wide signiﬁcant in only one of the GWAS approaches, where 30 of them
lied alone in a locus. Altogether, one third of the loci (n=23) had two or more variants (see
Supplementary Figure S10). Manhattan plots for two of these approaches can be seen in Supple-
mentary Figure S11 and S12. Variability in the effect of the variants across studies within each
meta-analysis was found in half of the variants (see heterogeneity of effects in Supplementary
Text). The effect size estimates for the signiﬁcant variants in Supplementary Figure S12 can
be seen in Supplementary Figure S14. In general, the number of different variants and different
effect sizes helped to show that there was large genetic heterogeneity within intellectual disability,
as also seen in the preceding comorbidity plot displayed in Figure 3. All the signiﬁcant variants
(n=151) were at this point considered risk variants for intellectual disability unfolding.
7.2
G E N O M E- W I D E S N P H E R I TA B I L I T Y
To assess how much of the additive genetic variation in intellectual disability could be attributed
to and explained by common genetic variants, SNP heritability (h2
SNP) was estimated using
LD Score regression method (LDSC) [52] in eight of the studies. As seen in Supplementary
Table S7, SNP heritability estimates in liability scale ranged from 0.0467 (SE=0.0230) to 0.0584
(SE=0.0229). This value for h2
SNP was notable low, meaning that the variants subject to LD Score
regression only accounted for a very small proportion of the variation in ID. However, it is
unknown how much of the total genetic variation in ID is due to causal variants with allele
frequencies less than 1%.
7.3
G E N E T I C C O R R E L AT I O N W I T H OT H E R T R A I T S
Genetic correlation (rg) is a key parameter that describes the shared genetic architecture of com-
plex traits and diseases [85]. Identifying genetic correlations between traits can help to determine
causal relationships and provides aetiological comprehension of the disorders. In order to examine
potential traits that overlap with the genetic architecture of ID, pairwise genetic correlations were
estimated for 61 phenotypes of potential relevance in four of the studies using LD Hub [57].
==PAGE:54==
38
G E N O M E- W I D E S I G N I F I C A N T LY A S S O C I AT E D I D R I S K L O C I
Figure 5 shows the genetic correlation and the 95% conﬁdence interval of ID with traits in
which the p-value of the test was bellow 0.1 in at least one of the four studies. Eight phenotypes
demonstrated signiﬁcant genetic overlap with ID. Connotative positive correlations were found
with disease-related traits within the neurological, kidney, anthropometric and autoimmune cate-
gories. Nominal signiﬁcant positive genetic correlations were observed along all the approaches
with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [86] and albuminuria (i.e. elevated concentrations of albumin in
the urine, a hallmark of diabetic kidney disease) in patients without diabetes [87]. Moderate posi-
tive genetic correlation was also observed with childhood obesity [88] and rheumatoid arthritis [89].
Connotative negative correlations were found within the education and cognitive categories. As
expected, strong nominally-signiﬁcant negative genetic correlations were observed with years of
schooling [53] and intelligence [90] along all approaches. ID was also found to be negatively
genetically correlated with childhood IQ [91] and the size of a subcortical brain structure [92]
(the globus pallidus, a structure in the brain involved in the regulation of voluntary and coor-
dinate movement [93, 94]). The negative genetic correlation with major depressive disorder [95] and
neo-openess to experiences [96] were not signiﬁcant (p > 0.05) in any of the approaches. Full
results can be seen in Supplementary Table S8 and Supplementary Data 1 (additional ﬁle).
Figure 5: Genetic correlations between ID and other traits using the GWAS results from four dif-
ferent studies: best guess genotypes and diagnoses of mental disorders as covariates in
the covariates-corrected approach (BG-CC), dosage genotypes and diagnoses of mental
disorders as covariates in the covariates-corrected approach (BG-CC), meta-analysis
from best guess genotypes using diagnoses of mental disorders as separates studies
(DO-MA), and meta-analysis from dosage genotypes using diagnoses of mental disor-
ders as separates studies (DO-MA) – all used the phenotypes given at the ﬁrst follow-up.
Nominally signiﬁcant genetic correlations (p < 0.05) are shown with triangles. Error
bars indicate 95% conﬁdent limits. The GWAS from the shown traits were reported
to include individuals with European ancestry only. Results were omitted for genetic
correlations with p > 0.1.
==PAGE:55==
8
B I O L O G I C A L A N N OTAT I O N O F VA R I A N T S A N D G E N E S
This chapter ventures the sentence “association does not imply causation” and by means of
several analysis and annotations tries to elucidate the biological mechanisms through which likely
causal variants and genes might inﬂuence intellectual disability. Causal variants and genes are
those that have biological effect on the phenotype. Variants responsible for association signals in
genome-wide association analyses may be responsible for the downstream phenotypic variation
themselves, but the signal may also be a result of nonrandom associations with the true causal
variant(s). The type of effect cannot as such be deduced from the association analysis [13]. Hence,
variants in LD with any of the 151 risk variants resulted from the different GWAS were harbored.
Once a set of variants with probable causal effect has been determined, the genes in which they
may act can be identiﬁed. However, while a variant within a coding region is usually assumed
to affect that gene, more than 90% of the trait-associated variants discovered by GWAS map to
non-coding or intergenic regions [97], which makes determining the genes they affect difﬁcult, and
by extension, learning their molecular contribution to the phenotype [98]. Additionally, only about
one third of the true causal genes are the nearest genes to the variants [14], but there is no consensus
as to the distance cutoff that should be implemented when mapping genes to variants [98]. Hence,
all the variants in the set of probable causal effect were mapped to genes within a pre-deﬁned
distance. Successive ﬁne-mapping analyses were conducted in all these genes and variants to ﬁnd
evidences of causality that pointed to molecular mechanisms behind intellectual disability.
8.1
S E T O F VA R I A N T S A N D G E N E S W I T H P RO BA B L E C AU S A L E F F E C T
A limitation of the risk variants from genome-wide association analysis is that there is a reason-
able chance that are not the causal variants [97]. In an attempt to identify the causal variants
responsible for the observed association signals and the affected genes, a set of variants and genes
with probable causal effect was assembled. First, variants in linkage disequilibrium with the 151
risk variants that were found signiﬁcantly associated with intellectual disability were identiﬁed.
Following, the total candidate variants were mapped to genes that extended up to 2 Mb.
Over the years, some studies have examined the genome to try to come with a threshold on
the distance that should be used when calculating LD between pair of variants. However, as seen
from the 1000 Genomes Project [35], there is not “true” value for it, as it changes throughout the
genome. Hence, several thresholds of LD were tested against physical distance to ﬁnd the most
suitable boundaries given the imputed set of variants (Section 5.2.3 in Materials and Methods).
39
==PAGE:56==
40
B I O L O G I C A L A N N OTAT I O N O F VA R I A N T S A N D G E N E S
For each of the 151 genome-wide signiﬁcant variants, variants within 500 kb and in LD with
correlation r2 > 0.6 were included in the set of variants with probable causal effect. In total, the
set of variants with probable causal effect contained 436 variants: 151 genome-wide signiﬁcant
variants and 285 variants in LD with any of the previous ones.
These 436 variants were mapped to all adjacent genes in a range of 2 Mb using the NCBI
RefSeq database [59]. Variants mapped between 3 to 129 different genes, with an average of 30
genes per variant. It added up to 2,826 different genes – some mapped a single variant while
others mapped up to 43 variants. Within the 436 variants, 152 lied within genes (coding or
intragenic regions). Since variants could map more than one gene, a distance ranking was added.
The variants and gene have been made available in Supplementary Data 2.
8.2
P I N P O I N T I N G B I O L O G I C A L LY A N D F U N C T I O NA L LY R E L E VA N T VA R I A N T S
A N D G E N E S
A given causal site will exert its phenotypic effect through altering the composition of a gene
product or regulating its expression [53]. Therefore, the aim was to evaluate the potential impact
of the variants in genes that, given its molecular mechanism, may be involved in intellectual
disability unfolding if they were disrupted. However, progressing from statistical associations to
understanding the functional genetic variants that inﬂuence traits is often a complex process [97].
To prioritize variants and genes that may inﬂuence intellectual disability, biological and functional
annotations of the 436 variants in the set of variants with probable causal effect, and the genes
they were mapped to, were considered. In particular, the following were identiﬁed:
(a) Functional and regulatory consequences of the variants annotated by VEP [61].
(b) The impact of the variants on the structure and function of the protein product annotated by
SIFT [64] and other pathogenicity predictions on variants and genes (CADD [62] and LoF [63]
scores).
(c) Variants which allelic variation alters the expression of a gene, using eQTL data from
CommonMind [68], UKBEC [69] and GTEx [70].
(d) Genes higher expressed in the human brain than other tissues, using gene transcript levels
from GTEx [70] and temporal expression patterns from BrainSpan [72].
(e) Previously reported genes as having an effect in intellectual disability unfolding, from a
collection of studies.
(f) Other evidences in reference databases, such as OMIM [74], GWAS Catalog [73] or GO [81].
This genetic annotation facilitated the prioritization of the most likely causal variants and genes,
which are highlighted here given the strength of the evidences. Details for the analyses are given
in Materials and Methods (Section 5.3). Especial attention was given to the genes that, according
to the analysis in (d), were relative higher expressed in brain tissues. Figure 6 displays the top
genes, given that a variant with probable causal effect lied within it (what was called the inner set
in Section 5.3.3). The outer set and temporal expression patterns can be found in Supplementary
Figures S19 to S21. Regional association plots for the loci with the strongest evidences are
displayed in Supplementary Figures S22 to S23.
==PAGE:57==
8.2 P I N P O I N T I N G B I O L O G I C A L LY A N D F U N C T I O NA L LY R E L E VA N T VA R I A N T S A N D G E N E S
41
Figure 6: Gene expression levels across different body tissues collected from GTEx. The expression values shown are log2 transformed and zero
mean normalized. Only the genes from the inner set that had in average higher expression in brain tissues than in the rest of the tissues are
displayed (n=27). Gray grids stand for TPM=0 before the logarithm transformation.
==PAGE:58==
42
B I O L O G I C A L A N N OTAT I O N O F VA R I A N T S A N D G E N E S
The expression level of BRINP3, located in one locus on chromosome 1, was associated with
nine variants (eQTLs) and it was the nearest gene for twenty-two variants, despite the closest
distance from a variant to this gene was 338 kb. BRINP3 inhibits neuronal cell differentiation by
negative regulation of the cell cycle transition and participates in the central nervous system (CNS)
development. It has been reported in traits such as body mass index (BMI), depressive symptoms,
subjective well-being, major depressive disorder and educational attainment. Comorbidity of ID
with obesity and depression is common [99, 100, 101].
Three loci on chromosome 7 pointed to genes supporting the causality. CNTNAP2 was the
nearest gene for seven variants (situated indeed within the intragenic region). It was categorized
as a known gene in the panel of previously reported ID genes and it was shown to be relative higher
expressed in brain tissues and during the early prenatal brain developmental period. CNTNAP2 is
involved in several process and activities regarding the CNS, such as learning and social behavior,
language impairment and brain development. It encodes a member of the neurexin family which
functions in the nervous system as cell adhesion molecules and receptors, connecting neurons at
the synapse. It also mediates interactions between neurons and non-neuronal cells during nervous
system development. The gene is regulated by FOXP2, a transcription factor required for proper
development of speech and language regions of the brain during embryogenesis. CNTNAP2 has
been associated with multiple neurodevelopmental disorders, including Pitt-Hopkins syndrome,
Gilles de la Tourette syndrome, epilepsy, intellectual disability, schizophrenia, autism, bipolar
disorder and Alzheimer’s disease.
Other diseases and traits include self-reported math abil-
ity, adolescent idiopathic scoliosis, hearing impairment, diabetic kidney disease, cholesterol and
obesity-related traits. CTTNBP2, located 125 kb from the closest variant, regulates the dendritic
spines, which receive most excitatory connections in neurons. It was categorized as a candidate
gene in the panel and it has been reported in GWAS for depression, neuroticism and educational
attainment, among others. INHBA-AS1, in the same chromosome, was relative higher expressed
across brain tissues, but no other evidences were found for this gene.
A locus on chromosome 13 was lying within the intragenic region and nearby CLN5, a gene in-
volved in neurogenesis (generation of cells within the nervous system) and brain development. It
was annotated as a candidate gene in the panel. CLN5 is one of the genes identiﬁed in association
with neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCL), a group of conditions that affect the nervous system
which are collectively referred to as Batten disease. The neurodegenerative disorders affect mainly
children. Intellectual disability, mental deﬁciency and deterioration, seizures and visual loss
are common. Another locus on the same chromosome was lying within KLHL1, which was
expressed primarily in brain tissues and higher expression levels were found during the distinct
stages of prenatal brain development. KLHL1 plays a role in brain development, speciﬁcally in the
cerebellar Purkinje cell layer development. Diseases associates with impairment of Purkinje cells
include spinocerebellar ataxia (neurodegenerative disorder) and cerebellar hypoplasia (reduced
cerebellar volume). Gene expression in developing Purkinje cells has been recently fount to
predict autism and ID [102]. Other diseases and traits associated with KLHL1 are amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (a trait that was found genetically correlated with ID), adolescent idiopathic
scoliosis, cognitive performance, verbal declarative memory, cholesterol and obesity.
==PAGE:59==
8.2 P I N P O I N T I N G B I O L O G I C A L LY A N D F U N C T I O NA L LY R E L E VA N T VA R I A N T S A N D G E N E S
43
Three loci on chromosome 12, 17 and 18 carried synonymous variants located in the exons
of four protein coding genes, although with limited additional annotations. KRT85, located on
chromosome 12, was annotated as a candidate gene in the panel. TOP3A, located on chromo-
some 17, was relative higher expressed during the early stage of prenatal brain development. It
has been previously associated with multiple sclerosis and microcephaly, a medical condition
that often leads to intellectual disability. The only further evidence found for ZNF286B, also in
chromosome 17, was that the gene has been associated with cholesterol and diabetes, a trait that
showed high genetic similarity with ID. The fourth gene with a synonymous variant was GRP,
located on chromosome 18, which is involved in neuropeptide signaling pathways. It encodes a
member of the bombesin-like family, a potent neuroregulator for several functions of the CNS.
GRP was relative higher expressed during the late prenatal and infant brain developmental period
and it has been associated with other traits such as BMI. The gene product of CCBE1, which was
located in the same locus as GRP, is required for the formation of lymphatic vessels during em-
bryogenesis. Impaired or excessive lymphatic vessel formation, and by extension modiﬁcations
in the product protein of CCBE1, has been implicated in a number of pathological conditions
and disorders including rheumatoid arthritis (a trait that was found genetically correlated with ID)
and Hennekam Syndrome. The latest is often noticeable at birth and affected individuals usually
suffer from mild intellectual disability, among other comorbidities. The gene was annotated as a
candidate gene in the panel and it was relative higher expressed in prenatal brains.
Chromosome 3 is overrepresented and most of the loci found have some biological anno-
tations supporting the colocalized genes.
MYH15 had an insertion within the region of the
splice site and it was relative higher expressed in brain tissues, becoming more active in later
stages of the developmental period. Traits previously associated with MYH15 include cognitive
performance, educational attainment, general cognitive ability and intelligence. RAB6B, which
was relative higher expressed in brain tissues, has a role in retrograde transport (movement of
molecules/organelles away from the neuronal cells toward the cell body). This gene, which had
variants within intragenic regions, was predicted with a very low LoF score (0.0794), showing
high intolerance to genetic variation. SYNPR, located around 1.1 Mb from one genome-wide
signiﬁcant variant and it thirty-four variants in LD, was relative higher expressed in brain tissues.
It has been previously reported in GWAS with general cognitive ability and major depressive
disorder. Two members of the ZIC family were annotated within 600 kb to 800 kb away from
eight variants. ZIC1 and ZIC4 were relative higher expressed in brain tissues, primarily in the
cerebellum. ZIC1 plays important roles in the early stage of development of the CNS, as well
as during dorsal spinal cord development and maturation of the cerebellum. Diseases associated
with ZIC1 and ZIC4 include craniosynostosis and Dandy-Walker malformation, a condition and
a syndrome which often lead to intellectual disability, reduction in IQ, or learning disabilities.
Annotations at some loci of chromosomes 5, 9, 10, 16, 19 and 20 were more diverse. Five genes
which encode a gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor were annotated from 0.6 to 1.4Mb
from six variants: GABRA6, GABRA1, GABRB2 and GABRG2, on chromosome 5, and GABBR2,
on chromosome 9. GABA is the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the mammalian brain, re-
ducing neuronal excitability throughout the nervous system. GABA receptors are responsible for
mediating the inhibitory effects of GABA. These genes were indeed relative higher expressed in
human neural tissues than in other tissues. Only one of these ﬁve genes, GABRA1, was annotated
==PAGE:60==
44
B I O L O G I C A L A N N OTAT I O N O F VA R I A N T S A N D G E N E S
as a candidate gene in the panel. Diseases and traits previously associated with these genes include
several forms of epilepsy (e.g. early infantile epileptic encephalopathy, generalized epilepsy
with febrile seizure, etc.), schizophrenia, general cognitive ability, educational attainment and
adolescent idiopathic scoliosis. GAD2, located on chromosome 10 around 1.5 Mb from seven
variants, is involved in chemical synaptic transmission and, more speciﬁcally, neurotransmitter
secretion. It was relative higher expressed in brain tissues. A locus on chromosome 16 was
lying within the intragenic region and nearby GNAO1, which is involved in several biological
process, including any process extending from neural cells (neuron formation and development)
and forebrain development, where associative information processing and voluntary motor func-
tions take place, among others. It was relative higher expressed in brain tissues. Defects on
GNAO1 are a cause of early-onset epileptic encephalopathy. Other reported diseases and traits
associated with GNAO1 are neurodevelopmental disorder with involuntary movements, cognitive
performance, depressive symptoms, neuroticism and subjective well-being. In the same locus,
MT3 was annotated between 300-700 kb from the variants. The encoded protein is a growth
inhibitory factor expressed exclusively in human brain (it controls the negative regulation of
neurogenesis). It was indeed higher expressed in brain tissues. Diseases associated with MT3
include Alzheimer and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Two members of the solute carrier family
(SLC1A6 and SLC12A5) were relative higher expressed in brain tissues and a third one (SLC2A10)
was reported as a candidate gene in the panel.
SLC1A6, annotated 60 kb from a variant in
chromosome 19, and SLC12A5, annotated around 800 kb from two variants in chromosome 20,
are involved in the process of synaptic transmission. Furthermore, SLC12A5 was predicted with
a very low LoF score (0.00861).
==PAGE:61==
Part IV
D I S C U S S I O N
==PAGE:62==
==PAGE:63==
9
D I S C U S S I O N
This project provides the ﬁrst genome-wide association study in intellectual disability. It describes
a comprehensive analysis, both in terms of environmental and genetic causes of ID, from unrelated
individuals of European population. Unlike most published studies of ID, variants outside genes
are also interpreted, using different annotation methods. Several of the loci identiﬁed are located
in or near genes known to have an important role in the development of a functional brain, in-
cluding BRINP3, CNTNAP2, CLN5, KLHL1, GNAO1 and members of the GABA- receptor family.
Only a small proportion of the heritability of ID can be explained by common variants (h2
SNP =
5.84%, SE = 0.023). The observed genetic correlations with childhood obesity, intelligence, years
of education and other phenotypes suggest a strong genetic similarity between ID and these traits.
The broad clinical heterogeneity of ID phenotypes is reﬂected with extreme genetic heterogene-
ity [5]. This presents a major challenge in understanding the underlying disease pathophysiology.
The comprehension that intellectual disability has high co-morbidity with other disorders and
conditions was herein supported by the nontrivial observed co-morbidity with mental disorders,
especially with autism and ADHD. It is estimated that in a random population 30% of patients
with ID have also a diagnosis of autism or ADHD, which raised the argument if ID should not be
analyze as a single phenotype. Furthermore, some studies have shown that milder forms of ID (IQ
of 50-55 to 70) are more complex than more severe forms (IQ below 50-55), and that damaging
variants in known ID genes are more often identiﬁed in severe ID than mild ID forms [21]. Hence
the genetic architecture of mild ID have been less characterized. Yet, the study presented does not
differentiate between the different degrees of impairment despite holding 57% of mild ID cases.
Unlike Mendelian disorders caused by alterations in a single gene (e.g. FMR1 gene in Fragile X
syndrome), most forms of ID rely on multiple genetic variants and their exposure to – and
interaction with – environmental factors [11]. Such gene-environment synergism is an important
source to the aetiology of ID and most of the complex disorders.
This makes iPSYCH an
inﬂuential large-scale population-based dataset to investigate the architecture underlying complex
disorders. The study supported that patients with ID were severely affected by environmental
factors during gestation, such as shorter gestational time, maternal smoke abuse, complications
during the perinatal period (e.g. placenta previa, hydrammios, etc.), and others. It has also been
observed that individuals with ID have higher mortality rates during the ﬁrst years of life.
The hypothesis that justiﬁed the ﬁrst GWAS was that common traits present in the general
population should be associated with common genetic variants, but soon it become clear that
the number of common variants associated with the different traits was much lower than an-
47
==PAGE:64==
48
D I S C U S S I O N
ticipated [11].
Most of the variants found in association with ID have MAF < 5% and the
proportion of variance attributable to all common SNPs (deﬁned as those with MAF ≥1%) is
small, which support the idea that rare un-measured variants not tagged by common SNPs on
the genotyping arrays are the causal variants responsible for the observed association signals.
Nonetheless, ﬁnding the optimal study design for the GWAS is essential, or we can fail to identify
gene variants causing a predisposition to ID. In this line, the meta-analyses were conducted using
ﬁxed-effects model, but given the heterogeneity presented within studies a random-effect model
might be more suitable.
The fact that the GWAS ﬁndings are not supported by a replication study is a disadvantage.
Also, the genome-wide association analyses accomplished here are limited to additive effect of
single variant association, while in real biology one expect to be many interaction effects among
genetic variants (known as epistasis), rather than additive. Testing marginal effects is limited, and
an approach that considers simultaneously all available variants for inclusion as predictors might
be more close to the theory of variants interaction. A future work might focus on reﬁning the
association analyses with e.g. BMAGWA [103], a software that uses Bayesian variable selection
and model averaging. A burden of duplications and deletions of stretches of chromosomal regions
exists in patients with ID. Hence, comprehensive and rigorous assessment of harmful CNVs and
its causative genes presents another future work area.
Previous studies have shown that h2
SNP estimates from LDSC are consistently smaller than
those from GREML method [54], but it is probably still not enough to explain the “missing
heritability”.
In the last years, genome wide association studies have achieved to identiﬁed
innumerable genetic variants that are signiﬁcantly associated with common complex disease,
but the amount of heritability explained by these risk alleles is still low [104] and the concept of
“missing heritability” has been subject of large debate and research [13, 105, 106]. Other constituents
such as rare variants, epistasis effects, CNVs and gene-environment interactions should be added
on top of the low amount of genetic variability accounted for in this project to explain the total
genetic variation in ID.
LDSC quantiﬁes the extent to which two phenotypes share genetic aetiology, with respect to
the common variants captured in the GWAS [16]. The signiﬁcant positive genetic correlation of
ID, an early-onset neurodevelopmental disorder, with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, a late-onset
neurodegenerative disorder, infers a strong genetic similarity between them, consistent with the
roles of KLHL1 and MT3 in the brain, found to be associated with both traits. Other positive
genetic correlations (diabetes, childhood obesity and rheumatoid arthritis) are consistent with the
co-morbidities seen in patients with ID. The negative genetic correlation with intelligence and
years of schooling suggests a strong genetic component to the epidemiological factors of ID and
the need for appropriate education programs for these patients.
Variants in non-coding regions have been virtually ignored in ID studies, given the difﬁculty
to identify the biological mechanisms by which they may act [24]. Yet, more than 90% of the
trait-associated risk variants discovered by GWAS map to non-coding or intergenic regions [97].
Most of the loci found here are, accordingly, in non-coding regions. Fine-mapping techniques
allow to effectively prioritize disease-causing mutations and to identify candidate ID genes. By
==PAGE:65==
D I S C U S S I O N
49
means of describing the genomic sites based on several external sources, multiple gene products
were found to participate in a pathway that serves a distinct biological function, the correct
functioning of the CNS. However, proving pathogenicity of these mutations and establishing that
a candidate ID gene is an ID-causing gene when mutated is still complicated [5].
A limitation presented when investigating cis-regulatory variants and their effect on gene ex-
pression (eQTL) was that common variants were ﬁltered for MAF > 5% in the CommonMind
and UKBEC databases and MAF > 1% in the GTEx. Yet, almost 70% of the variants found with
probable causal effect have MAF ≤1%. In the same line, approximately 25% of the mapped
genes did not have measured expression levels in the GTEx or BrainSpan databases. Finally,
the power to detect temporal patterns of expression in brain tissues from BrainSpan was almost
limited to differentiate the prenatal window against the other developmental stages. However,
distinguishing genes highly expressed during the infant or early childhood was proven a difﬁcult
task.
In summary, the analysis reports 69 genome-wide suggestive loci of common variants associ-
ated with ID through several GWAS approaches of circa 3,500 individuals with ID (3,351 and
3,612, depending on the follow-up time) from a cohort of 65,534 non-related individuals with
European ancestry, of which 13 loci were prioritized (those shown in Supplementary Figures
S22 and S23 plus the locus corresponding to the GABA receptor family). It implicates several
genes as important contributors to the genetic architecture and aetiology of ID. The analysis also
highlights strong overlap of the genetics of ID with related traits and points to environmental
factors as contributing constituents in ID.
==PAGE:66==
==PAGE:67==
Part V
A P P E N D I C E S
==PAGE:68==
==PAGE:69==
10
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
S U P P L E M E N TA RY T E X T
A. Description of the variables in the database.
In order to evaluate whether there were signiﬁcant differences in birth factors between individuals
with and without an ID diagnosis, several variables were collected. The following variables arose
or were derived from the DMBR (1-7) and the DNPR (8-14).
• Length at birth (in cm.); 1,029 missing values.
• Weight at birth (in gr.); 276 missing values.
• Gestational age (in completed weeks). Values were set to missing if less than 22 weeks or
more than 44 weeks, or less than 26 weeks given that birth weight was larger than 2,000 gr.,
or less than 29 weeks given that birth weight was larger than 3,000 gr.; 575 missing values.
• APGAR score 5 minutes after birth (values between 0-10): 561 missing values.
• Whether the child had a birth defect or not (1: malformation present or suspected, 0:
malformation not present); 539 missing values.
• Whether the mother of the child smoked at any time (and any amount) during the given
pregnancy or not (1/0 values). Information only available from 1991.
• Number of completed pregnancies (including stillbirths) before the current pregnancy of
the given individual.
• Whether the individual had been diagnosed with congenital anomalies (ICD-10: Q00-Q99)
at any time during the ﬁrst 20 years after birth. This information was not updated in the
second follow-up time (i.e. available only until and include 2012).
• Whether the individual had congenital infection speciﬁc to the perinatal period (ICD-10:
P35-P39).
• Whether the mother had a diagnosis of endometriosis (ICD-10: N80) at any time.
• Whether the mother had a hospital contact with certain pregnancy complications (ICD-10:
O360, O361, O365, O40, O44, O45) during the pregnancy of the given individual.
• Whether the mother had caesarean delivery (ICD-10: O820, O828, O829, O821) for the
given individual.
• Whether the mother had preclampsia or eclampsia (ICD-10: O14, O15) during the preg-
nancy of the given individual.
• Whether the mother had an infection during the pregnancy of the given individual. The
following infections were considered individually: gastrointestinal, skin, respiratory, uro-
logical, genital, otitis, CNS, bacterial, viral, pregnancy. The corresponding ICD-10 codes
are given in Supplementary Data 1 (additional ﬁle).
53
==PAGE:70==
54
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
The rest of the diagnoses used for PCA can be found in Supplementary Data 1 (additional ﬁle).
Some of the diagnoses for the individuals had very few or none register, due to the nature of the
diagnosis. For example Huntington disease (ICD-10: G10) and Parkinson disease (ICD-10: G20),
as they are diseases of the nervous system that develop later on time. Therefore, this information
was disregarded.
For individuals with a gestational age between 23 and 45 completed weeks the approximated date
of the pregnancy was deﬁned from the gestational age. For those with missing information (or
unrealistic values) the approximated date of the pregnancy was deﬁned as the 40 weeks prior to
delivery. This variable was used to calculate the age of the parents, the pregnancy period for
mother infections during the pregnancy, the time that passed between a given diagnosis and the
moment of the pregnancy, etc.
B. Patients’ age at time of ID diagnosis.
The iPSYCH2012 case-cohort is a database which is still in its early portion of life, meaning that
new cases (diagnoses) continue arising. Since the subjects were born between 1981 and 2005,
at the second follow-up time the youngest subject was still 10 years old, reasonably young to
be diagnosed with some of the disorders. Therefore, all analysis regarding age must be done
carefully.
Turning the eyes upon the plot on the left in Supplementary Figure S3, it appears that the number
of ID diagnoses increased until 2009, when it started to plunge. The explanation is given by the
fact that the number of subjects available each year for diagnoses increased until 2005 (as the
subjects in the case-cohort were born in different years), as seen in the plot on the middle in same
ﬁgure. Moreover, looking at the plot on the right in the same ﬁgure, it appears that in recent
years ID was diagnosed later on time (e.g. patients that were diagnosed with ID in 2016 were
on average 23 years old, while patients that were diagnosed with ID in 2004 were on average
10 years old). However, this is a misﬁgured interpretation, because the age range of the subjects
available for diagnosis differs. Whereas in 2016 the oldest subject was 35 years old, in 2004 the
oldest subject was 23 years old.
In order to avoid fallacious interpretations, it is required to study the subjects by birth year and
limit the diagnoses to the same number of years. Supplementary Figure S4 considers patients
born between 1982 and 1996 followed for ID diagnosis within the succeeding 20 years of birth.
It is then conclude that (a) ID is diagnosed earlier on time as the years go by and (b) the number
of cases diagnosed with ID increase each year. For example, for subjects born in 1982, ID was
diagnosed when patients were on average 14 years old, while for subjects born in 1994 ID was
diagnosed when patients were on average 10 years old (see plot on the left in Supplementary
Figure S4). Additionally, only 1.1% of subjects born in 1982 were diagnosed with ID within the
next 20 years, whereas 6.9% of subjects born in 1994 were diagnosed with ID within the next 20
years (see plot on the right in Supplementary Figure S4).
==PAGE:71==
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
55
C. Heterogeneity of effects between studies of a meta-analysis.
Heterogeneity of the effect of the variants across studies within each meta-analysis was tested
using the Cochran’s Q test. The test was used to verify whether the variants in the different
studies of one meta-analysis study had identical effects; the null hypothesis being test is equally
effects. Heterogeneity was also quantiﬁed with the I2 heterogeneity index, which expressed in
percentage ranges from 0%, no observed heterogeneity (i.e. no inconsistency or variability in
the effect of the variant between studies), to 100%. Most of the variants that were genome-wide
statistically signiﬁcant in more than one meta-analysis study, had statistically signiﬁcant different
effects on the studies of each meta-analysis (p < 0.05 and 65% ≤I2 ≤73%). On the other
hand, there was not strong enough evidence to reject that the effects of the variants that were
genome-wide statistically signiﬁcant in just one meta-analysis study were identical between the
studies.
D. Relative contribution of polygenic effects and confounding factors.
Using LD Score methods [52] it is possible to evaluate how much of the deviation from the null
in the genome-wide distribution of the GWAS χ2 statistics (as shown by the QQ plots) is due
to polygenicity (many small genetic effects) and how much is due to confounding factors (such
as population stratiﬁcation or sample relatedness). Supplementary Figure S13 showed (for two
different approaches) that some deviation was seen, although not very strong. However, when
regressing the χ2 statistics from GWAS against the pre-computed LD Scores, not all the variants
were tested, as explained in Methods section 5.2.1. Therefore, the following results are from
a portion of the variants shown in the QQ plots. The ratio (ratio = (intercept-1)/(mean(chi2)-1))
estimates how much can be ascribed to causes other than polygenic heritability. The ratio was high
in the covariate-corrected approaches (41.6% - 42.7%) but low in the meta-analysis approaches
(2.9% - 12.0%), meaning that in the meta-analysis approaches the estimated polygenic effects
accounted for more than 88% of the genome-wide inﬂation. Further, intercept-1 is an estimator
for how much of the inﬂation is due to confounding factors, which ranged from 2.3% to 0.09%,
with the lowest values again in the meta-analysis approaches.
E. Bayesian credible set analysis.
In order to reﬁne the set of variants with probable causal effect, a Bayesian credible set was
deﬁned to probabilistically identify the set of variants most likely to include a variant with causal
effect. Using Bayes theorem, the evidence for association at a SNP can be used to calculate
the posterior probability for each SNP, i.e. the probability that the SNP is actually driving the
association signal. The calculated value of the posterior probability depends on a number of
assumptions, including that there is a single causal variant observed in the genotype data [107].
If the model assumptions are correct, the Bayesian credible set can be considered to have a
99% probability of containing the true causal disease-associated variant.
The approach was
implemented using the published R script freely available online (https://github.com/
hailianghuang/FM-summary).
The 436 variants were considered for inclusion in the
==PAGE:72==
56
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
credible set analysis.
Since the Bayesian credible set analysis is conditioned on association
analysis p-values, summary statistics from the BG-CC-13 approach (with diagnoses as covariates)
were employed for the 285 variants found in LD with the 151 genome-wide associated variants.
Summary statistics from the approach with the most signiﬁcant association was employed for
those variants within the 151 that were signiﬁcant in more than one approach. The Bayesian
credible set included 138 variants – all them arose from genome-wide associated variants. The
information on which variants were included in the Bayesian credible set was kept; however
biological annotations were done on the originally set of variants with probable causal effect
(n=436).
==PAGE:73==
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
57
S U P P L E M E N TA RY DATA
Supplementary Data 1.
Data 1.1:
Diagnostics available and used for the analysis.
Data 1.2:
Variants surpassing genome-wide signiﬁcant threshold.
Data 1.3:
Results from pairwise genetic correlations with ID.
Supplementary Data 2.
Data 2.1:
Summary of the observed annotations for the 436 variants with probable causal
effect and each of the genes mapped (13,290 rows).
Data 2.2:
Results of LD analysis.
Data 2.3:
eQTLs from GTEx matching variants in the probable set.
Data 2.4:
eQTLs from UKBEC matching variants in the probable set.
Data 2.5:
Gene expression levels from GTEx; median TPM by tissue, with and without log2
transformations.
Data 2.6:
Gene expression levels from BrainSpan; averaged per developmental stage across
all brain regions, with and without log2 transformations.
Data 2.7:
Summary of annotations from the GWAS Catalog for common genes.
Data 2.8:
Compilation of 1,095 genes previously associated with ID.
==PAGE:74==
58
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
S U P P L E M E N TA RY F I G U R E S
Figure S1: The colors represent the changes in the ﬁve mental disorders diagnoses concerning a
concurrently ID diagnosis or not in the second follow-up time regarding the ﬁrst one.
“Several” and “None” stand for patients with several or none of the ﬁve mental disorder
diagnoses, respectively.
Figure S2: Allocation of ID and mental disorder diagnoses during the ﬁrst follow-up time within
the random sample subcohort.
Left: Total sample prevalence of ID and mental
disorders. When a particular diagnosis is pointed out, it stands for diagnosis of that
disorder only (i.e. no comorbidities with any of the other ﬁve speciﬁc disorders shown).
“Several” and “None” stand for patients with several or none of the six diagnoses
shown, respectively. Right: Patients diagnosed with either only ID or with ID and one
or more (“Several + ID”) mental disorders.
==PAGE:75==
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
59
Figure S3: Left:
Number of ID cases diagnosed each year from 1981 to 2016.
Middle:
Cumulative number of subjects available each year for medical diagnoses, since the
subjects were born between 1981 and 2005. Right: Bars represent the age range
(maximum and minimum age) of the subjects ready for medical diagnoses each year.
Dots represent the average age of patients diagnosed with ID at the given year.
Figure S4: Patients born between 1982 and 1996 followed for ID diagnosis within the succeeding
20 years of birth. Left: Boxplot of patient’s age at time of ID diagnosis in relation
to their year of birth. Right: Number of subjects born each year (height of bars) and
proportion of those subjects that were diagnosed with ID within the next 20 years after
birth (in blue).
==PAGE:76==
60
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
Figure S5: Kaplan Meier survival curves describing patient survival probabilities over the ﬁrst 20
years of life regarding diagnosis during the same time interval. The colored segments
represent the 95% upper and lower conﬁdence intervals.
Figure S6: Hazard ratios representing relative risk of death after 20 years of birth that compare
patients with ID and patients with mental disorders to the remaining population. The
95% conﬁdence interval is shown in parenthesis. Statistically signiﬁcant differences
are shown with an asterisk.
Figure S7: Left: Percentage of variance retained by each of the 20 ﬁrst principal components.
Right: Cumulative variance explained by the total number of components.
==PAGE:77==
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
61
Figure S8: Direction of the most contributing variables onto the PC1 and PC2 space. Positive
correlated variables point to the same side of the plot while negative ones are on
opposite sides of the plot.
Figure S9: Individuals projected onto the PC1 and PC2 space. The colors represent if the patient
was diagnosed with intellectual disability at the ﬁrst follow-up time (red) or not (blue).
==PAGE:78==
62
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
Figure S10: Number of genome-wide signiﬁcant variants in each of the 69 loci, colored by the number of times the given variant is signiﬁcant within
the 72 GWAS conducted. Variants that were not signiﬁcant but in LD with any of the signiﬁcant variants (r2 > 0.6, distance < 500 kb)
are shown in gray. Loci are indicated by the chromosome followed by a letter.
==PAGE:79==
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
63
Figure S11: Manhattan plot of the results from the GWAS using genotype dosage values and
including the diagnoses until the ﬁrst follow-up time of the ﬁve mental disorders as
covariates. Likewise, the phenotype (ID) was coded according to the diagnosis until
the ﬁrst follow-up. The y axis represents the -log(p) for association of variants with
ID using a total sample size of 3,351 cases and 62,183 controls. The horizontal red
line represents the genome-wide threshold for signiﬁcance (p = 5 × 10−8).
Figure S12: Manhattan plot of the results from the GWAS meta-analysis using genotype dosage
values and the diagnoses until the ﬁrst follow-up time of the ﬁve mental disorders
as 7 independent studies. Likewise, the phenotype (ID) was coded according to the
diagnosis until the ﬁrst follow-up. The y axis represents the -log(p) for association
of variants with ID using a total sample size of 3,351 cases and 62,183 controls.
The horizontal red line represents the genome-wide threshold for signiﬁcance (p =
5 × 10−8).
==PAGE:80==
64
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
Figure S13: Quantile-quantile (QQ) plots showing p-value distribution for the genome-wide
association analyses in Figure S11 (left) and Figure S12 (right). Certain observed
p-values are more signiﬁcant than expected under the null hypothesis.
Figure S14: Forest plot for the effect size estimates (natural logarithm of the odds ratio) of the
signiﬁcant variants in Figure S12. The 95% conﬁdence intervals are also shown.
Cochran’s Q test for equally effects was rejected for the variant in chromosome 1
(p=0.004, I2=73%) but not for the variant in chromosome 4 (p=0.212, I2=29%).
==PAGE:81==
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
65
Figure S15: Average LD in terms of r2 between the 151 genome-wide signiﬁcant variants and
the rest of iPSYCH imputed variants. Distances up to 2,000 kb were categorized
into intervals of 10 kb and the mean r2 value within each interval was calculated and
plotted. Correlation with the target variant itself and r2 = 0 were excluded from
analysis.
==PAGE:82==
66
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
(a) Variants within chromosomes 1-12 in LD (r2 > 0.6) with genome-wide associated variants.
==PAGE:83==
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
67
(b) Variants within chromosome 13-22 in LD (r2 > 0.6) with genome-wide associated variants.
Figure S16: High pairwise LD (r2 > 0.6) for close variants (distance < 500 kb). Each square
represents the pairwise LD (color scale from yellow to red) between a genome-wide
signiﬁcant variant and all the other close variants (including other genome-wide
signiﬁcant variants).
In the diagonal line, genome-wide signiﬁcant variants are
represented with black squares and other variants with a dash. No close variants were
in high LD with the genome-wide signiﬁcant variants in chromosome 19 and 22.
==PAGE:84==
68
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
Figure S17: Minor allele frequency (by intervals of percentage values) of the variants in the set
of variants with probable causal effect. The y-axis represents the number of variants
with that MAF.
Figure S18: Number of variants with probable causal effect considering the total number of
variants imputed in each chromosome. The plot on the left hand side allows for
only variants that were genome-wide associated with ID, while the plot on the right
hand side allows also for the variants in LD with the previous.
==PAGE:85==
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
69
Figure S19: Gene expression levels across different body tissues collected from GTEx. The expression values shown are log2 transformed and zero
mean normalized. Only the top 30 genes from the outer set that had in average higher expression in brain tissues than in the rest of the
tissues are displayed. Gray grids stand for TPM=0 before the logarithm transformation.
==PAGE:86==
70
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
Figure S20: Temporal gene expression levels averaged across neural tissues collected from BrainSpan. The expression values shown are log2
transformed and zero mean normalized for the genes in the inner set. A) shows the total top genes (rows) that had highest relative
expression at each developmental stage (columns). B) shows the top 5 highest relative expressed genes (rows) at each developmental
stage separately (8 graphs), where each graph contains all the developmental stages (columns) in the same order as A) to compare
expression levels.
==PAGE:87==
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
71
Figure S21: Temporal gene expression levels averaged across neural tissues collected from BrainSpan. The expression values shown are log2
transformed and zero mean normalized for the genes in the outer set. A) shows the total top genes (rows) that had highest relative
expression at each developmental stage (columns). B) shows the top 5 highest relative expressed genes (rows) at each developmental
stage separately (8 graphs), where each graph contains all the developmental stages (columns) in the same order as A) to compare
expression levels.
==PAGE:88==
72
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
Figure S22: Locus zoom plots for only the variants with probable causal effect identiﬁed by
GWAS and LD analysis (n=436). Only loci with highest strength of evidences are
displayed in the different regional association plots (A-L). To the left of each plot
(y axis) is the log10 P-value — if the variant was signiﬁcant in any GWAS, the
most signiﬁcant p-value was chosen; however, if the variant was found from the
LD analysis, the p-value from the BG-CC-13 with diagnoses as covariates approach
was taken. The index variant in each locus is given in purple color. The rest of the
variants were automatically colored according to their level of linkage disequilibrium
with the index variant, which was not important for the prioritizing exercise.
==PAGE:89==
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
73
Figure S23: (A) Locus 1:a on chromosome 1 for BRINP3 signal. (B) Locus 7:b on chromosome 7
for CNTNAP2 signal. (C) Locus 7:d on chromosome 7 for CTTNBP2 signal. (D)
Locus 13:a on chromosome 13 for CLN5 signal. (E) Locus 13:d on chromosome 13
for KLHL1 signal. (F) Locus 12:c on chromosome 12 for KRT85 signal. (G) Locus
17:a on chromosome 17 for TOP3A and ZNF286B signals.
(H) Locus 18:a on
chromosome 18 for GRP and CCBE1 signals. (I) Locus 3:e on chromosome 3 for
MYH15 signal. (J) Locus 3:c on chromosome 3 for RAB6B signal. (K) Locus 3:b
on chromosome 3 for ZIC1 and ZIC4 signals. (L) Locus 16:b on chromosome 16 for
GNAO1 and MT3 signals.
==PAGE:90==
74
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
S U P P L E M E N TA RY TA B L E S
2016
2013
Sch
Sch+ID ADHD ADHD+ID ASD ASD+ID Bip Bip+ID Depr Depr+ID None None+ID Several Several+ID
Sum
Sch 1,081
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
63
1,150
Sch+ID
0
53
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
55
ADHD
1
0
64
8,824
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
17
463
9,373
ADHD+ID
0
0
878
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
41
0
921
ASD
0
0
0
1
56
6,952
0
0
0
0
0
7
5
335
7,356
ASD+ID
0
0
0
0
1,308
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
54
0
1,362
Bip
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
470
0
0
0
1
1
39
512
Bip+ID
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
12
Depr
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
30
13,881
0
15
5
709
14,642
Depr+ID
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
249
2
0
0
18
0
269
None
37
0
2
109
2
82
0
21
4
239
29
22,711
0
53
23,289
None+ID
0
0
6
0
1
0
1
0
2
0
121
0
0
0
131
Several
6
0
0
9
0
7
0
1
0
6
0
2
47
5,783
5,861
Several+ID
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
596
3
601
Sum 1,125
58
950
8,946
1,369
7,042
12
492
285
14,129
150
22,740
788
7,448
65,534
Table S1: Intellectual disability diagnosis within each mental disorder diagnoses at two different
follow-up times.
When a particular mental disorder is pointed out, it stands for
diagnosis of that disorder only (i.e. no comorbidities with any of the other four mental
disorders shown). When “+ID” is added, it stands for diagnosis of that mental disorder
together with ID only. “Several” and “None” stand for patients with several or none of
the ﬁve mental disorder diagnoses, respectively.
==PAGE:91==
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
75
Table S2: Average gestational age, length, weight and APGAR score at birth of subjects that were
and were not diagnosed ID within the next 20 years after birth. Individuals included are
those born between 1981 and 1996. The p-value for the test of equal means is given in
the last column.
ID
no ID
test p-val
Gestational age (weeks)
39.27
39.61
3.4e−10
Birth length (cm)
51.25
51.64
2.3e−7
Birth weight (gr)
3328.76
3444.96
2.9e−13
APGAR score (5 min)
9.71
9.85
2.5e−07
Table S3: Frequency table of malformations at
birth (whether the child had a birth
defect or not, given by the DMBR)
and ID diagnosis through the ﬁrst 20
years of life.
Only subjects born
between 1981 and 1996 were subject
to the total count; 528 subjects had
missing information.
ID
Malformation
Yes
No
Total
Yes
54
640
694
No
1,777
44,528
46,350
Total
1,831
45,168
46,999
Table S4: Frequency
table
of
whether
the
mother smoked during the pregnancy
(given by the DMBR) and ID diag-
nosis through the ﬁrst 20 years of
life. The information on smoking was
available from 1991, so only subjects
born between 1991 and 1996 were
subject to the total count; 1,203 sub-
jects had missing information.
ID
Mother smoked
Yes
No
Total
Yes
488
6,438
6,926
No
677
10,688
11,365
Total
1,165
17,126
18,291
Table S5: Frequency table of whether the sub-
jects were diagnosed with congenital
anomalies (ICD-10: Q00-Q99 in the
DNPR) and ID diagnosis through
the ﬁrst 20 years of life. The infor-
mation on congenital anomalies was
available until 2012, so only subjects
born between 1981 and 1992 were
subject to the total count.
ID
Congenital
anomalies
Yes
No
Total
Yes
247
3,551
3,798
No
727
30,385
31,112
Total
974
33,936
34,910
Table S6: Frequency table of whether the
subjects had birth complications
(ICD-10:
O40, O44, O45, O360,
O361 and O365 in the DNPR) and
ID diagnosis through the ﬁrst 20
years of life.
Only subjects born
between 1981 and 1996 were subject
to the total count.
ID
Birth complica-
tions
Yes
No
Total
Yes
63
692
755
No
1,806
44,966
46,772
Total
1,869
45,658
47,527
==PAGE:92==
76
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
Table S7: Estimated SNP heritability (h2SNP) in liability scale (assuming 0.74% and 0.90%
population prevalence of ID in the ﬁrst and second follow-up, respectively) and LD
Score regression estimates from LD Score regression method (LDSC) for the eight
studies described in Section 5.2.1. Standard errors (SE) are shown in parenthesis.
h2SNP
λ
mean χ2
intercept
ratio
BG-CC-13
0.0563 (0.0243)
1.0557
1.0545
1.0233 (0.0090)
0.4276 (0.1652)
DO-CC-13
0.0581 (0.0244)
1.0557
1.0551
1.0230 (0.0091)
0.4165 (0.1652)
BG-CC-16
0.0568 (0.0229)
1.0588
1.0555
1.0237 (0.0086)
0.4267 (0.1545)
DO-CC-16
0.0584 (0.0229)
1.0588
1.0560
1.0233 (0.0086)
0.4164 (0.1541)
BG-MA-13
0.0467 (0.0230)
1.0375
1.0295
1.0035 (0.0088)
0.1199 (0.2979)
DO-MA-13
0.0482 (0.0232)
1.0375
1.0300
1.0032 (0.0089)
0.1052 (0.2970)
BG-MA-16
0.0516 (0.0218)
1.0345
1.0305
1.0014 (0.0086)
0.0457 (0.2734)
DO-MA-16
0.0531 (0.0220)
1.0345
1.0308
1.0009 (0.0084)
0.0285 (0.2742)
==PAGE:93==
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
77
Table S8: Pairwise genetic correlations estimated using LDSC method for ID and 61 phenotypes
of potential relevance with publicly available GWAS results with European ancestry
individuals using LD Hub in four of the studies
BG-CC-13
DO-CC-13
BG-MA-13
DO-MA-13
Category
Trait
rg
p
rg
p
rg
p
rg
p
Anthropometric Adolescent-adult height diff.
0.1190 0.6096
0.2769 0.2811
0.1468 0.5172
0.3057 0.2311
Birth weight
-0.1663 0.1125 -0.1864 0.1048 -0.1559 0.1281 -0.1724 0.1228
Body mass index
-0.0068 0.9506 -0.0270 0.8170 -0.0058 0.9565 -0.0287 0.8032
Child birth length
0.0426 0.8223
0.0781 0.6842
0.0441 0.8139
0.0802 0.6760
Child birth weight
0.2482 0.1490
0.2762 0.1472
0.2391 0.1579
0.2653 0.1561
Child-adult height diff.
-0.3702 0.1319 -0.3512 0.2145 -0.3406 0.1550 -0.3263 0.2381
Childhood obesity
0.4319 0.0072
0.3265 0.0583
0.4130 0.0075
0.3151 0.0598
Extreme bmi
-0.0153 0.9027 -0.0402 0.7510 -0.0161 0.8978 -0.0399 0.7523
Extreme height
-0.1856 0.1241 -0.1448 0.2406 -0.1781 0.1405 -0.1394 0.2594
Extreme waist-to-hip ratio
-0.1273 0.5437 -0.2010 0.3334 -0.1040 0.6219 -0.1816 0.3828
Height
-0.0759 0.4145 -0.0101 0.9207 -0.0714 0.4373 -0.0121 0.9044
Height (age F=10, M=12)
-0.0764 0.6655 -0.1742 0.3776 -0.0636 0.7115 -0.1621 0.4005
Hip circumference
-0.1354 0.2343 -0.1711 0.1957 -0.1220 0.2671 -0.1642 0.2024
Infant head circumference
0.1614 0.4841
0.2115 0.3812
0.1362 0.5482
0.1752 0.4633
Obesity class 1
-0.0539 0.6481 -0.1066 0.3813 -0.0507 0.6669 -0.1051 0.3944
Obesity class 2
-0.1367 0.3131 -0.2376 0.0910 -0.1324 0.3267 -0.2342 0.0974
Obesity class 3
-0.1142 0.4928 -0.2658 0.1163 -0.1185 0.4780 -0.2699 0.1129
Sitting height ratio
-0.2032 0.3038 -0.2550 0.2279 -0.2212 0.2610 -0.2705 0.1974
Waist circumference
-0.1097 0.3375 -0.1816 0.1783 -0.1014 0.3603 -0.1785 0.1762
Waist-to-hip ratio
-0.0660 0.5036 -0.1463 0.2041 -0.0659 0.4968 -0.1479 0.1948
Autoimmune
Asthma
0.0953 0.6972
0.0086 0.9742
0.0579 0.8051 -0.0237 0.9252
Celiac disease
-0.3268 0.2116 -0.1849 0.4879 -0.3165 0.2126 -0.1730 0.4974
Crohns disease
-0.0122 0.9202 -0.0508 0.6925 -0.0115 0.9242 -0.0453 0.7240
Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease
0.0910 0.4140
0.0624 0.5984
0.0854 0.4401
0.0637 0.5904
Multiple sclerosis
0.3861 0.2796
0.4136 0.2951
0.3864 0.2578
0.4191 0.2646
Primary biliary cirrhosis
0.2579 0.1576
0.1775 0.3470
0.2462 0.1708
0.1739 0.3494
Rheumatoid Arthritis
0.2634 0.0482
0.1101 0.4356
0.2609 0.0484
0.1114 0.4266
Systemic lupus erythematosus
0.1756 0.4359
0.1323 0.5478
0.1876 0.3947
0.1454 0.5009
Ulcerative colitis
0.1185 0.4108
0.0869 0.5581
0.1058 0.4554
0.0801 0.5858
Brain volume
ICV
-0.2250 0.4050 -0.2689 0.3906 -0.2021 0.4439 -0.2472 0.4178
Mean Accumbens
-0.0459 0.8980 -0.0522 0.8891 -0.0672 0.8488 -0.0706 0.8480
Mean Caudate
-0.2826 0.2435 -0.2497 0.3361 -0.2714 0.2565 -0.2310 0.3680
Mean Hippocampus
0.3688 0.1708
0.3448 0.2228
0.3923 0.1437
0.3764 0.1814
Mean Pallidum
-0.5278 0.0483 -0.4747 0.1215 -0.5183 0.0506 -0.4550 0.1340
Mean Putamen
-0.2989 0.1709 -0.2825 0.2073 -0.2974 0.1680
-0.276
0.2127
Mean Thalamus
0.1793 0.4822
0.1189 0.6706
0.1734 0.4940
0.1223 0.6609
Cognitive
Intelligence
-0.5245 0.0002 -0.4998 0.0018 -0.5365 0.0001 -0.5140 0.0013
Education
Childhood IQ
-0.5115 0.0476 -0.5094 0.0606 -0.4976 0.0465 -0.5026 0.0620
College completion
-0.2656 0.0619 -0.1927 0.1798 -0.2554 0.0617 -0.1838 0.1902
Years of schooling
-0.4502 0.0003 -0.3678 0.0031 -0.4506 0.0002 -0.3689 0.0025
Glycemic
Fasting glucose
-0.0622 0.7106 -0.0137 0.9391 -0.0580 0.7236
-0.011
0.9498
Fasting insulin
0.0874 0.6493
0.1630 0.4125
0.0800 0.6722
0.1486 0.4459
Fasting proinsulin
0.3279 0.1540
0.2284 0.3482
0.3257 0.1464
0.2223 0.3530
Type 2 Diabetes
0.1752 0.2615
0.0077 0.9612
0.1785 0.2449
0.0134 0.9317
Kidney
Albumin-to-creatinine (diabetes)
0.4252 0.1026
0.4324 0.1024
0.3968 0.1180
0.4084 0.1210
Albumin-to-creatinine ratio
0.5699 0.0399
0.5930 0.0382
0.5415 0.0447
0.5733 0.0437
Neurological
Alzheimers disease
-0.3726 0.1718 -0.4564 0.1715 -0.3625 0.1719 -0.4394 0.1734
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
0.7574 0.0123
0.6387 0.0454
0.7298 0.0132
0.6141 0.0489
Parkinsons disease
-0.2063 0.2224 -0.1793 0.3207 -0.2049 0.1916 -0.1916 0.2636
Personality
Neo-conscientiousness
0.1991 0.5507
0.2926 0.4171
0.1756 0.5903
0.2767 0.4377
Neo-openness to experience
-0.5120 0.0850 -0.5172 0.0958 -0.4865 0.0862 -0.4899 0.1045
Neuroticism
0.0861 0.7272
0.2319 0.3713
0.0914 0.7069
0.2289 0.3721
Psychiatric
ADHD
-0.4312 0.1922 -0.3949 0.2691 -0.4005 0.2173 -0.3653 0.2999
Autism spectrum disorder
-0.0778 0.7828 -0.0566 0.8392 -0.0805 0.7712 -0.0657 0.8108
Bipolar disorder
-0.0919 0.5626 -0.0469 0.7809 -0.0802 0.6052 -0.0394 0.8126
Major depressive disorder
-0.3492 0.1370 -0.4685 0.0822 -0.3422 0.1406 -0.4616 0.0826
Subjective well being
0.1373 0.3717
0.1942 0.2105
0.1238 0.4091
0.1833 0.2304
Sleeping
Chronotype
0.1400 0.2036
0.1052 0.3666
0.1325 0.2293
0.1008 0.3867
Excessive daytime sleepiness
-0.1176 0.3849 -0.1690 0.2503 -0.1255 0.3461 -0.1693 0.2406
Insomnia
0.0090 0.9546
0.0171 0.9137
0.0133 0.9318
0.0195 0.9004
Sleep duration
0.2272 0.1866
0.2590 0.1600
0.2242 0.1868
0.2521 0.1635
==PAGE:94==
78
S U P P L E M E N TA RY I N F O R M AT I O N
Table S9: Donors description for the RNA-Seq RPKM averaged to genes ﬁle from the
BrainSpan project and grouping of developmental stage given the age of the donor
(pwc = post-conceptional weeks; mos = months; yrs = years).
donor name
age
gender
developmental stage
# samples
total
H376.IIA.51
8 pcw
M
Prenatal (1st)
8
54
H376.IIA.50
9 pcw
M
Prenatal (1st)
5
H376.IIB.50
12 pcw
F
Prenatal (1st)
14
H376.IIB.51
12 pcw
F
Prenatal (1st)
13
H376.IIB.52
12 pcw
F
Prenatal (1st)
14
H376.IIIA.50
13 pcw
M
Prenatal (2nd)
14
119
H376.IIIA.51
13 pcw
F
Prenatal (2nd)
15
H376.IIIA.52
13 pcw
M
Prenatal (2nd)
13
H376.IIIB.50
16 pcw
M
Prenatal (2nd)
10
H376.IIIB.51
16 pcw
M
Prenatal (2nd)
16
H376.IIIB.52
16 pcw
M
Prenatal (2nd)
12
H376.IIIB.53
17 pcw
F
Prenatal (2nd)
13
H376.IV.53
19 pcw
F
Prenatal (2nd)
10
H376.IV.51
21 pcw
F
Prenatal (2nd)
2
H376.IV.54
21 pcw
M
Prenatal (2nd)
14
H376.IV.50
24 pcw
M
Prenatal (3rd)
16
38
H376.V.51
25 pcw
F
Prenatal (3rd)
1
H376.V.52
26 pcw
F
Prenatal (3rd)
3
H376.V.50
35 pcw
F
Prenatal (3rd)
2
H376.V.53
37 pcw
M
Prenatal (3rd)
16
H376.VI.50
4 mos
M
Infant
9
59
H376.VI.51
4 mos
M
Infant
8
H376.VI.52
4 mos
M
Infant
16
H376.VII.51
10 mos
M
Infant
10
H376.VIII.51
1 yrs
F
Infant
16
H376.VIII.53
2 yrs
F
Early childhood
12
44
H376.VIII.52
3 yrs
F
Early childhood
11
H376.VIII.54
3 yrs
M
Early childhood
14
H376.VIII.50
4 yrs
M
Early childhood
7
H376.IX.51
8 yrs
M
Late childhood
16
62
H376.IX.52
8 yrs
M
Late childhood
11
H376.IX.50
11 yrs
F
Late childhood
14
H376.X.51
13 yrs
F
Late childhood
16
H376.X.50
15 yrs
M
Late childhood
5
H376.X.53
18 yrs
M
Adolescence
13
59
H376.X.52
19 yrs
F
Adolescence
16
H376.XI.60
21 yrs
F
Adolescence
16
H376.XI.50
23 yrs
M
Adolescence
14
H376.XI.52
30 yrs
F
Adulthood
16
63
H376.XI.53
36 yrs
M
Adulthood
16
H376.XI.54
37 yrs
M
Adulthood
16
H376.XI.56
40 yrs
F
Adulthood
15
==PAGE:95==
L I S T O F F I G U R E S
1
Sketch of GWAS approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2
LD and physical distance for the 151 genome-wide signiﬁcant variants
and the rest of imputed variants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Frequency of diagnoses and comorbidities of ID and mental disorders;
total sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Patients’ age at time of ID diagnosis regarding degree of impairment and
gender . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Genetic correlations of ID with other traits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Gene expression levels on tissues (inner set) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
S1
Changes in diagnoses at two ﬁxed times . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
S2
Frequency of diagnoses and comorbidities of ID and mental disorders;
random sample
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
S3
ID diagnoses by year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
S4
ID diagnoses regarding year of birth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
S5
Kaplan Meier survival curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
S6
Hazard ratios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
S7
Variance retained by each PC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
S8
Direction of the variables onto PC1-PC2 space . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
S9
Individuals projected onto PC1-PC2 space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
S10
Number of signiﬁcant variants and variants in LD in each locus . . . . .
62
S11
Manhattan plot from 2013 diagnoses as covariates GWAS approach
. .
63
S12
Manhattan plot from 2013 diagnoses meta-analysis GWAS approach . .
63
S13
QQ plots for FiguresS11 and S12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
S14
Forest plot for ﬁgure S12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
S15
Average LD and genomic distance for the 151 genome-wide signiﬁcant
variants and the rest of imputed variants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
S16
Variants along the chromosomes in LD with genome-wide associated
variants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
S17
MAF of the variants in the set of probable causal effect . . . . . . . . .
68
S18
Proportion of variants with probable causal effect per chromosome . . .
68
S19
Gene expression levels on tissues (outer set) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
S20
Temporal gene expression patterns on brain (inner set)
. . . . . . . . .
70
S21
Temporal gene expression patterns on brain (outer set)
. . . . . . . . .
71
S22
Regional association plots (a-f) for variants with probable causal effect .
72
S23
Regional association plots (g-l) for variants with probable causal effect .
73
79
==PAGE:96==
L I S T O F TA B L E S
1
General changes in diagnoses at two follow-up times
. . . . . . . . . .
32
S1
Changes in mental disorders diagnoses regarding ID diagnosis at two
follow-up times . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
S2
Information on birth (average measure) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
S3
Two-way frequency table malformation at birth and ID . . . . . . . . .
75
S4
Two-way frequency table mother smoked during pregnancy and ID . . .
75
S5
Two-way frequency table congenital anomalies and ID
. . . . . . . . .
75
S6
Two-way frequency table birth complications and ID
. . . . . . . . . .
75
S7
SNP heritability and LD score estimates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
S8
Pairwise genetic correlations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
S9
Developmental stages for the gene expression analysis in the BrainSpan
project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
80
==PAGE:97==
A B B R E V I AT I O N S
ADHD
Attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder
ASD
Autism spectrum disorder
BMI
Body mass index
CNS
Central nervous system
CNV
Copy number variant
DMBR
Danish Medical Birth Register
DNPR
Danish National Patient Register
DNRS
Danish Civil Registration System
DNSB
Danish Newborn Screening Biobank
DPCRR Danish Psychiatric Central Research Register
DSL
Disease susceptibility locus
eQTL
Expression quantitative trait loci
GWAS
Genome-wide association study
ICD-10
International Statistical Classiﬁcation of Diseases and Related Health Problems (10th)
ID
Intellectual disability
MAF
Minor allele frequency
NCBI
National Center for Biotechnology Information
NDD
Neurodevelopmental disorder
RPKM
Reads per kilobase per million
SNP
Single nucleotide polymorphism
TPM
Transcripts per million
81
==PAGE:98==
==PAGE:99==
B I B L I O G R A P H Y
[1] Maulik, P. K., Mascarenhas, M. N., Mathers, C. D., Dua, T. & Saxena, S. Prevalence
of intellectual disability:
a meta-analysis of population-based studies.
Research in
Developmental Disabilities 32, 419–436 (2011).
[2] McKenzie, K., Milton, M., Smith, G. & Ouellette-Kuntz, H. Systematic Review of the
Prevalence and Incidence of Intellectual Disabilities: Current Trends and Issues. Current
Developmental Disorders Reports 3, 104–115 (2016).
[3] Pedersen, C. B. et al. A comprehensive nationwide study of the incidence rate and lifetime
risk for treated mental disorders. JAMA Psychiatry 71, 573–581 (2014).
[4] B´erub´e, N. G. & Kramer, J. M. Chapter 18 - Epigenetics in Intellectual Disability. In
Peedicayil, J., Grayson, D. R. & Avramopoulos, D. (eds.) Epigenetics in Psychiatry, 369 –
393 (Academic Press, Boston, 2014).
[5] Vissers, L. E., Gilissen, C. & Veltman, J. A. Genetic studies in intellectual disability and
related disorders. Nature Reviews Genetics 17, 9–18 (2016).
[6] van Bokhoven, H. Genetic and epigenetic networks in intellectual disabilities. Annual
Review of Genetics 45, 81–104 (2011).
[7] Greenberg, D. Chapter 17 - Neurogenesis in Cerebrovascular Disease. In Caplan, L. R.
et al. (eds.) Primer on Cerebrovascular Diseases (Second Edition), 89 – 91 (Academic
Press, San Diego, 2017).
[8] Dyall, S. C. Chapter 21 - The Role of Omega-3 Fatty Acids in Hippocampal Neurogenesis.
In Watson, R. R. & Meester, F. D. (eds.) Omega-3 Fatty Acids in Brain and Neurological
Health, 251 – 263 (Academic Press, Boston, 2014).
[9] Poduri, A. & Volpe, J. J. Chapter 6 - Neuronal Migration. In Volpe, J. J. et al. (eds.) Volpe’s
Neurology of the Newborn (Sixth Edition), 120 – 144 (Elsevier, 2018).
[10] Wallisch, P. et al. Chapter 27 - Synaptic Transmission. In Wallisch, P. et al. (eds.) Matlab
for Neuroscientists, 299 – 306 (Academic Press, London, 2009).
[11] Le Hellard, S. & Steen, V. M. Genetic architecture of cognitive traits. Scand J Psychol 55,
255–262 (2014).
[12] Laird, N. M. & Lange, C. The Fundamentals of Modern Statistical Genetics (Springer
Publishing Company, Incorporated, 2010), 1st edn.
[13] Foldager, L. A statistical perspective on association studies of psychiatric disorders. Ph.D.
thesis, Aarhus University (2014).
83
==PAGE:100==
84
Bibliography
[14] Visscher, P. M. et al. 10 Years of GWAS Discovery: Biology, Function, and Translation.
Am. J. Hum. Genet. 101, 5–22 (2017).
[15] Speed, D. & Balding, D.
Investigating the genetic architecture of complex traits and
prediction of phenotype from genome-wide snps (2016).
Lecture notes from Genetics
Summer Course 2016 at the University of New England, Armidale, NSW Australia.
[16] Trampush, J. W. et al. GWAS meta-analysis reveals novel loci and genetic correlates for
general cognitive function: a report from the COGENT consortium. Mol. Psychiatry 22,
1651–1652 (2017).
[17] Simpson, N., Mizen, L. & Cooper, S. Intellectual disabilities. Medicine 44, 79–82 (2016).
[18] Lauer, E. & McCallion, P.
Mortality of People with Intellectual and Developmental
Disabilities from Select US State Disability Service Systems and Medical Claims Data.
J Appl Res Intellect Disabil 28, 394–405 (2015).
[19] McCarron, M., Carroll, R., Kelly, C. & McCallion, P. Mortality Rates in the General Irish
Population Compared to those with an Intellectual Disability from 2003 to 2012. J Appl
Res Intellect Disabil 28, 406–413 (2015).
[20] Arvio, M., Salokivi, T. & Bjelogrlic-Laakso, N.
Age at Death in Individuals with
Intellectual Disabilities. J Appl Res Intellect Disabil 30, 782–785 (2017).
[21] Kurki, M. I. et al. Contribution of rare and common variants to intellectual disability in a
sub-isolate of Northern Finland. Nat Commun 10, 410 (2019).
[22] Girirajan, S. et al. Phenotypic heterogeneity of genomic disorders and rare copy-number
variants. N. Engl. J. Med. 367, 1321–1331 (2012).
[23] Braat, S. & Kooy, R. F. The GABAA Receptor as a Therapeutic Target for Neurodevelop-
mental Disorders. Neuron 86, 1119–1130 (2015).
[24] Carvill, G. L. & Mefford, H. C. Next-Generation Sequencing in Intellectual Disability. J
Pediatr Genet 4, 128–135 (2015).
[25] Gilissen, C. et al.
Genome sequencing identiﬁes major causes of severe intellectual
disability. Nature 511, 344–347 (2014).
[26] Coleman, J. R. I. et al. Biological annotation of genetic loci associated with intelligence in
a meta-analysis of 87,740 individuals. Mol. Psychiatry 24, 182–197 (2019).
[27] Sniekers, S. et al. Genome-wide association meta-analysis of 78,308 individuals identiﬁes
new loci and genes inﬂuencing human intelligence. Nature Genetics 49, 1107–1112 (2017).
[28] Savage, J. et al. Genome-wide association meta-analysis in 269,867 individuals identiﬁes
new genetic and functional links to intelligence. Nature Genetics 50, 912–919 (2018).
[29] IBP. Institute of Biological Psychiatry. https://biopsyk.dk/collaborators/.
Accessed: 2019-01-16.
[30] Pedersen, C. Danish Civil Registration System. Scand J Public Health 39, 22–25 (2011).
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
85
[31] Lynge, E., Sandegaard, J. L. & Rebolj, M. The Danish National Patient Register. Scand J
Public Health 39, 30–33 (2011).
[32] Mors, O., Perto, G. P. & Mortensen, P. B.
The Danish Psychiatric Central Research
Register. Scand J Public Health 39, 54–57 (2011).
[33] Bliddal, M., Broe, A., Pottegard, A., Olsen, J. & Langhoff-Roos, J. The Danish Medical
Birth Register. Eur. J. Epidemiol. 33, 27–36 (2018).
[34] Pedersen, C. B. et al. The iPSYCH2012 case-cohort sample: new directions for unravelling
genetic and environmental architectures of severe mental disorders. Mol. Psychiatry 23,
6–14 (2018).
[35] Auton, A. et al. A global reference for human genetic variation. Nature 526, 68–74 (2015).
The 1000 Genomes Project Consortium.
[36] O’Connell, J. et al. Haplotype estimation for biobank-scale data sets. Nature Genetics 48,
817–820 (2016).
[37] Howie, B., Marchini, J. & Stephens, M. Genotype imputation with thousands of genomes.
G3 (Bethesda) 1, 457–470 (2011).
[38] R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing (2018). URL
https://www.R-project.org/. R version 3.4.2.
[39] Jager, K. J., van Dijk, P. C., Zoccali, C. & Dekker, F. W. The analysis of survival data: the
Kaplan-Meier method. Kidney Int. 74, 560–565 (2008).
[40] Kaplan, E. L. & Meier, P. Nonparametric estimation from incomplete observations. Journal
of the American Statistical Association 53, 457–481 (1958).
[41] Mantel, N. Evaluation of survival data and two new rank order statistics arising in its
consideration. Cancer Chemother Rep 50, 163–170 (1966).
[42] Cox, D. R. Regression Models and Life-Tables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 34,
187–220 (1972).
[43] Therneau, T. M. A Package for Survival Analysis in S (2015). Version 2.38.
[44] Kassambara, A. & Kosinski, M. survminer: Drawing Survival Curves using ’ggplot2’
(2018). Version 0.4.3.
[45] Stacklies, W., Redestig, H., Scholz, M., Walther, D. & Selbig, J.
pcamethods – a
bioconductor package providing pca methods for incomplete data.
Bioinformatics 23,
1164–1167 (2007).
[46] Pers, T. H.
Integrative Systems Biology: Elucidating Complex Traits.
Ph.D. thesis,
Technical University of Denmark (DTU) (2011).
[47] Bush, W. S. & Moore, J. H. Chapter 11: Genome-wide association studies. PLoS Comput.
Biol. 8, e1002822 (2012).
==PAGE:102==
86
Bibliography
[48] Israel, H. & Richter, R. R. A guide to understanding meta-analysis. J Orthop Sports Phys
Ther 41, 496–504 (2011).
[49] Purcell, S. & Chang, C. PLINK [1.9] (beta 3). www.cog-genomics.org/plink/1.
9/ (2015).
[50] Chang, C. C. et al. Second-generation PLINK: rising to the challenge of larger and richer
datasets. Gigascience 4, 7 (2015).
[51] Laird, N. M. & Lange, C. The Fundamentals of Modern Statistical Genetics (Springer
Publishing Company, Incorporated, 2010), 1st edn.
[52] Bulik-Sullivan, B. K. et al.
LD Score regression distinguishes confounding from
polygenicity in genome-wide association studies. Nature Genetics 47, 291–295 (2015).
[53] Okbay, A. et al.
Genome-wide association study identiﬁes 74 loci associated with
educational attainment. Nature 533, 539–542 (2016).
[54] Yang, J., Zeng, J., Goddard, M. E., Wray, N. R. & Visscher, P. M. Concepts, estimation
and interpretation of SNP-based heritability. Nature Genetics 49, 1304–1310 (2017).
[55] Finucane, H. K. et al. Partitioning heritability by functional annotation using genome-wide
association summary statistics. Nature Genetics 47, 1228–1235 (2015).
[56] Bulik-Sullivan, B. et al. An atlas of genetic correlations across human diseases and traits.
Nature Genetics 47, 1236–1241 (2015).
[57] Zheng, J. et al. LD Hub: a centralized database and web interface to perform LD score
regression that maximizes the potential of summary level GWAS data for SNP heritability
and genetic correlation analysis. Bioinformatics 33, 272–279 (2017).
[58] Karolchik, D. et al. The UCSC Table Browser data retrieval tool. Nucleic Acids Research
32, D493–496 (2004).
[59] O’Leary, N. A. et al.
Reference sequence (RefSeq) database at NCBI: current status,
taxonomic expansion, and functional annotation. Nucleic Acids Research 44, D733–745
(2016).
[60] Quinlan, A. R. & Hall, I. M. BEDTools: a ﬂexible suite of utilities for comparing genomic
features. Bioinformatics 26, 841–842 (2010).
[61] McLaren, W. et al. The Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor. Genome Biol. 17, 122 (2016).
[62] Rentzsch, P., Witten, D., Cooper, G. M., Shendure, J. & Kircher, M. CADD: predicting
the deleteriousness of variants throughout the human genome. Nucleic Acids Research 47,
886–894 (2019).
[63] Fadista, J., Oskolkov, N., Hansson, O. & Groop, L. LoFtool: a gene intolerance score based
on loss-of-function variants in 60 706 individuals. Bioinformatics 33, 471–474 (2017).
[64] Sim, N. L. et al. SIFT web server: predicting effects of amino acid substitutions on proteins.
Nucleic Acids Research 40, W452–457 (2012).
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
87
[65] Ben-Ari, G. & Lavi, U. Chapter 11 - Marker-assisted selection in plant breeding. In Altman,
A. & Hasegawa, P. M. (eds.) Plant Biotechnology and Agriculture, 163 – 184 (Academic
Press, 2012).
[66] Yap, C. X. et al. Trans-eQTLs identiﬁed in whole blood have limited inﬂuence on complex
disease biology. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 26, 1361–1368 (2018).
[67] Moreno, V. et al. Colon-speciﬁc eQTL analysis to inform on functional SNPs. Br. J. Cancer
119, 971–977 (2018).
[68] CommonMind Consortium. Brain tissue was obtained from the following brain bank col-
lections: the Mount Sinai NIH Brain and Tissue Repository, the University of Pennsylvania
Alzheimer’s Disease Core Center, the University of Pittsburgh NeuroBioBank and Brain
and Tissue Repositories and the NIMH Human Brain Collection Core.
[69] Ramasamy, A. et al. Genetic variability in the regulation of gene expression in ten regions
of the human brain. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 1418–1428 (2014).
[70] Ardlie, K. G. et al.
Human genomics. The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) pilot
analysis: multitissue gene regulation in humans. Science 348, 648–660 (2015).
[71] Mele, M. et al. Human genomics. The human transcriptome across tissues and individuals.
Science 348, 660–665 (2015).
[72] Hawrylycz, M. J. et al. An anatomically comprehensive atlas of the adult human brain
transcriptome. Nature 489, 391–399 (2012).
[73] MacArthur, J. et al. The new NHGRI-EBI Catalog of published genome-wide association
studies (GWAS Catalog). Nucleic Acids Research 45, D896–D901 (2017).
[74] Hamosh, A., Scott, A. F., Amberger, J. S., Bocchini, C. A. & McKusick, V. A. Online
Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM), a knowledgebase of human genes and genetic
disorders. Nucleic acids research 33 (2005).
[75] Chiurazzi, P. & Pirozzi, F. Advances in understanding the genetic basis of intellectual
disability. F1000Res 5 (2016).
[76] Grozeva, D. et al. Targeted Next-Generation Sequencing Analysis of 1,000 Individuals
with Intellectual Disability. Hum. Mutat. 36, 1197–1204 (2015).
[77] Wright, C. F. et al. Genetic diagnosis of developmental disorders in the DDD study: a
scalable analysis of genome-wide research data. The Lancet 385, 1305 – 1314 (2015).
[78] Landrum, M. J. et al. ClinVar: improving access to variant interpretations and supporting
evidence. Nucleic Acids Research 46, D1062–D1067 (2018).
[79] Mailman, M. D. et al. The NCBI dbGaP database of genotypes and phenotypes. Nature
Genetics 39, 1181–1186 (2007).
[80] Stelzer, G. et al. The genecards suite: From gene data mining to disease genome sequence
analyses. Current Protocols in Bioinformatics 54 (2016).
==PAGE:104==
88
Bibliography
[81] Ashburner, M. et al. Gene ontology: tool for the uniﬁcation of biology. The Gene Ontology
Consortium. Nature Genetics 25, 25–29 (2000).
[82] Sham, P. C. & Purcell, S. M. Statistical power and signiﬁcance testing in large-scale genetic
studies. Nature Reviews Genetics 15, 335–346 (2014).
[83] Schwartz, S. & Susser, E. Genome-wide association studies: does only size matter? Am J
Psychiatry 167, 741–744 (2010).
[84] Waltoft, B. L., Pedersen, C. B., Nyegaard, M. & Hobolth, A.
The importance of
distinguishing between the odds ratio and the incidence rate ratio in GWAS. BMC Med.
Genet. 16, 71 (2015).
[85] Ni, G., Moser, G., Wray, N. R., Lee, S. H. & Schizophrenia Working Group of
the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium.
Estimation of Genetic Correlation via Linkage
Disequilibrium Score Regression and Genomic Restricted Maximum Likelihood. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 102, 1185–1194 (2018).
[86] van Rheenen, W. et al. Genome-wide association analyses identify new risk variants and
the genetic architecture of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nature Genetics 48, 1043–1048
(2016).
[87] Teumer, A. et al. Genome-wide Association Studies Identify Genetic Loci Associated With
Albuminuria in Diabetes. Diabetes 65, 803–817 (2016).
[88] Bradﬁeld, J. P. et al. A genome-wide association meta-analysis identiﬁes new childhood
obesity loci. Nature Genetics 44, 526–531 (2012).
[89] Okada, Y. et al. Genetics of rheumatoid arthritis contributes to biology and drug discovery.
Nature 506, 376–381 (2014).
[90] Sniekers, S. et al. Genome-wide association meta-analysis of 78, 308 individuals identiﬁes
new loci and genes inﬂuencing human intelligence. Nature Genetics 49, 1107–1112 (2017).
[91] Benyamin, B. et al. Childhood intelligence is heritable, highly polygenic and associated
with FNBP1L. Mol. Psychiatry 19, 253–258 (2014).
[92] Hibar, D. P. et al. Common genetic variants inﬂuence human subcortical brain structures.
Nature 520, 224–229 (2015).
[93] Gillies, M. J. et al.
The Cognitive Role of the Globus Pallidus interna; Insights from
Disease States. Exp Brain Res 235, 1455–1465 (2017).
[94] Kravitz, A. V. et al. Regulation of parkinsonian motor behaviours by optogenetic control
of basal ganglia circuitry. Nature 466, 622–626 (2010).
[95] Ripke, S. et al. A mega-analysis of genome-wide association studies for major depressive
disorder. Mol. Psychiatry 18, 497–511 (2013).
[96] de Moor, M. H. et al. Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies for personality.
Mol. Psychiatry 17, 337–349 (2012).
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
89
[97] Schaid, D. J., Chen, W. & Larson, N. B. From genome-wide associations to candidate
causal variants by statistical ﬁne-mapping. Nature Reviews Genetics 19, 491–504 (2018).
[98] Brodie, A., Azaria, J. R. & Ofran, Y. How far from the SNP may the causative genes be?
Nucleic Acids Research 44, 6046–6054 (2016).
[99] Cooper, S. A. et al.
Multiple physical and mental health comorbidity in adults with
intellectual disabilities: population-based cross-sectional analysis. BMC Fam Pract 16,
110 (2015).
[100] Temple, V. A., Foley, J. T. & Lloyd, M.
Body mass index of adults with intellectual
disability participating in Special Olympics by world region. J Intellect Disabil Res 58,
277–284 (2014).
[101] Hsieh, K., Rimmer, J. H. & Heller, T.
Obesity and associated factors in adults with
intellectual disability. J Intellect Disabil Res 58, 851–863 (2014).
[102] Clifford, H., Dulneva, A., Ponting, C. P., Haerty, W. & Becker, E. B. E.
A gene
expression signature in developing Purkinje cells predicts autism and intellectual disability
co-morbidity status. Scientiﬁc Reports 9, 485 (2019).
[103] Peltola, T. et al. Bayesian variable selection in searching for additive and dominant effects
in genome-wide data. PLoS ONE 7, e29115 (2012). URL https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0029115.
[104] Waltoft, B. L., Pedersen, C. B., Nyegaard, M. & Hobolth, A.
The importance of
distinguishing between the odds ratio and the incidence rate ratio in GWAS. BMC Med.
Genet. 16, 71 (2015).
[105] McCarthy, M. I. et al. Genome-wide association studies for complex traits: consensus,
uncertainty and challenges. Nature Reviews Genetics 9, 356–369 (2008).
[106] Zaitlen, N. et al. Using extended genealogy to estimate components of heritability for 23
quantitative and dichotomous traits. PLoS Genet. 9 (2013).
[107] Maller, J. B. et al. Bayesian reﬁnement of association signals for 14 loci in 3 common
diseases. Nature Genetics 44, 1294–1301 (2012).
