==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
The future of wind power resourced in Denmark predicted 
by downscaling global circulation models 
 
 
Ewa Elise Johansson 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0255 
January 2019 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Ewa Elise Johansson 
Title: The future of wind power resourced in Denmark predicted by 
downscaling global circulation models 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0255 
January 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD 
students. Research is conducted within nine research programmes organized 
into three main topics: Wind energy systems, Wind turbine technology and 
Basics for wind energy. 
Project period:  
August 2018 – January 2019 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisors: 
 
Andrea N. Hahmann 
Alfredo Pena Diaz 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
LIST OF FIGURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
LIST OF TABLES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
2. LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
2.1 GENERAL WEATHER PATTERNS OVER DENMARK 
 
 
 
 
8 
2.2 CLIMATE CHANGE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
2.2.1 
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project, Phase5 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
2.2.2 
Impact on wind pattern  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
2.3 DOWNSCALING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
2.3.1 
The microscale-models 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
2.4 FORMULAS FOR DATA PRE-PROCESSING 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
2.5 STATISTICAL METHODS   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
3. VALIDATION CONCEPT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
3.1 VALIDATION OF RE-ANALYSIS   
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
3.2 HISTORICAL VALIDATION OF CMIP5  
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
3.3 VALIDATION OF CMIP5 FUTURE SCENARIOS  
 
 
 
 
15 
3.4 VALIDATION METHODS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
4. DATA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
4.1 COUPLED MODEL INTERCOMPARISON PROJECT PHASE 5  
 
 
17 
4.2 MERRA2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
4.3 OBSERVATIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
 
5. FUTURE ANALYSIS AND DOWNSCALING 
 
 
 
 
20 
5.1 WIND ASSESMENT IN WAsP AND DOWNSCALING 
 
 
 
 
20 
5.1.1 
Methods to avoid time frequency related issues 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
5.1.2 
Methods to interpret CMIP5s topography map 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
5.2 ANALYSIS OF FUTURE CASES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
5.2.1 
Offshore case  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
5.2.2 
Onshore case  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
5.3 SUPPLEMENTARY FUTURE WIND ANALYIS 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
 
6. ANALYSIS AND RESULT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
6.1 VALIDATION STEPS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
6.1.1 
Validation of re-analysis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
6.1.2 
Historical validation of CMIP5  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
6.1.3 
Validation of CMIP5 future scenarios  
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 
6.1.4 
Evaluation of CMIP5 models  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
6.2 FUTURE WIND AND POWER PREDICTION  
 
 
 
 
 
44 
6.2.1 
Offshore case  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
6.2.2 
Onshore case  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52 
 
7. DISCUSSION AND PERSPECTIVE  
 
 
 
 
 
59 
7.1 DATA TREATMENT AND RELIABILITY  
 
 
 
 
 
59 
7.2 GENERAL TRENDS AND FINDINGS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60 
7.3 OFFSHORE EVALUATION  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60 
7.4 ONSHORE EVALUATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60 
7.5 FUTURE PERSPECTIVE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
61 
 
8. CONCLUSION  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
62 
 
9. APPENDIX  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63 
 
BIBLOGRAPHY  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
64 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
1 
 
ABSTRACT 
Climate change possesses the power to potentially alter wind patterns and thereby future wind power 
production. In this study, an attempt is made to predict such effects on the future of wind at a local 
scale.  
 
It is based on four CMIP5 models, validated locally and downscaled using the same methods as the 
European wind atlas. The validation validates a re-analysis, which is used to historically validate the 
CMIP5 models. The final validation step validates CMIP5 output for future predictions (as the dataset 
for the future scenarios begin in 2006) against observations.  
 
Two CMIP5 models, HAD GEM-ES and GFDL ESM2G, perform well at the main-reference site 
offshore (Fino3) and were downscaled for future predictions. The future predictions (primarily based 
on the HAD GEM-ES scenarios; rcp2.6, rcp4.5 and rcp8.5 and the GDFL ESM2G scenario rcp4.5) 
showed partly conflicting but overall minor changes in the wind climate during 2019-2042. The test 
wind farm showed an increase of 0.1-2.5% AEP for the years 2019-2042, compared with its reference 
period of 2010-2018.  
 
For an onshore case downscaling was not completely successful, but information’s based on GFDL 
ESM2G rcp4.5 showed a slight decrease in mean wind speed. The size of the change, however, made 
it more likely that the development of landscape roughness may play a larger role onshore in 
influencing local wind climate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
2 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisor Andrea Hahmann and co-supervisor Alfredo 
Peña for guidance, sparring and data providence.  
I would also like to thank Søren Ott for providence of turbine locations for Horns Rev III and Rogier 
Ralph Floors for Østerild surface map.  
Then I would like to thank Mikael Reynolds for spell-checking and mental support along the way. 
Finally, I would like to thank my fellow master student Adit Nand Kishore for all the small help and 
good company. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
3 
 
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
3.1. Time relation between CMIP5, MERRA2 and observations.   
 
 
 
13 
3.2. A map with observation and case locations.   
 
 
 
 
 
14 
4.1. A map with grid CMIP5s grid locations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
4.2. A map with grid MERRA2s grid locations.   
 
 
 
 
 
19 
5.1. Grid and contour line representation of elevation. 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
5.2. Contour and roughness map concept used in WAsP.  
 
 
 
 
22 
5.3. Horns Rev III case map.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
5.4. Østerild case map.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
5.3. A small study – regarding land roughness Østerild.   
 
 
 
 
24 
6.1. Correlation and mean bias - MERRA2 validation.   
 
 
 
 
26 
6.2. Monthly mean winds and bias - MERRA2 validation for Fino3. 
 
 
 
27 
6.3. Monthly wind directional distribution and bias - MERRA2 validation for Fino3. 
 
28 
6.4. Monthly mean winds and bias - MERRA2 validation for Høvsøre. 
 
 
 
28 
6.5. Monthly wind directional distribution and bias - MERRA2 validation for Høvsøre.   
29 
6.6. Monthly mean winds and bias - MERRA2 validation for Østerild. 
 
 
 
29 
6.7. Monthly wind directional distribution and bias - MERRA2 validation for Østerild. 
 
30 
6.8. Wind distribution - MERRA2 and observation for Fino3. 
 
 
 
 
30 
6.9. Wind roses - MERRA2 and observation for Fino3.  
 
 
 
 
31 
6.10. Wind distribution - MERRA2 and observation for Høvsøre.  
 
 
 
31 
6.11. Wind distribution - MERRA2 and observation for Østerild.  
 
 
 
32 
6.12. Yearly mean winds and bias - historical validation of CMIP5 for Fino3. 
 
 
33 
6.13. Yearly wind directional distribution and bias - historical validation of CMIP5 for Fino3.  
33 
6.14. Yearly mean winds and bias - historical validation of CMIP5 for Østerild.  
 
34 
6.15. Yearly wind directional distribution and bias - historical validation of CMIP5 for Østerild. 34 
6.16. Mean wind speed distribution - historical validation of CMIP5 for Fino3.   
 
35 
6.17. Wind roses - historical validation of CMIP5 for Fino3.  
 
 
 
 
36 
6.18. Mean wind speed distribution - historical validation of CMIP5 for Østerild.  
 
37 
6.19. Wind roses - historical validation of CMIP5 for Østerild. 
 
 
 
 
37 
6.20. Yearly mean winds and bias - validation of CMIP5 future scenarios for Fino3. 
 
38 
6.21. Yearly mean winds and bias - validation of CMIP5 future scenarios for Østerild. 
 
39 
6.22. Wind distribution - validation of CMIP5 future scenarios for Fino3.  
 
 
39 
6.23. Wind roses - validation of CMIP5 future scenarios for Fino3. 
 
 
 
41 
6.24. Wind distribution - validation of CMIP5 future scenarios for Østerild. 
 
 
42 
6.25. Wind roses - validation of CMIP5 future scenarios for Østerild.  
 
 
 
43 
6.26. Non-dimensional future mean wind - Fino3.    
 
 
 
 
 
44 
6.27. Non-dimensional future mean wind - Østerild.  
 
 
 
 
 
45 
6.28. Wind speed distribution and “relative future bias” - for Fino3. 
 
 
 
45 
6.29. Wind directional distribution and “relative future bias” - for Fino3.   
 
 
46 
6.30. Wind roses for the time period from 2019 to 2042 - for Fino3.  
 
 
 
47 
6.31. Wind distributions “relative future bias” development - HAD GEM-ES rcp2.6 for Fino3. 
48 
6.32. Wind distributions “relative future bias” development - HAD GEM-ES rcp4.5 for Fino3. 
48 
6.33. Wind distributions “relative future bias” development - HAD GEM-ES rcp8.5 for Fino3. 
49 
6.34. Wind distributions “relative future bias” development - GFDL ESM2G rcp4.5 for Fino3. 
49 
6.35. Mean wind speed development - yearly at Fino3. 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
6.36. Mean wind speed development - seasonally at Fino3. 
 
 
 
 
50 
6.37. Wind speed distribution and “relative future bias” - for Østerild. 
 
 
 
53 
6.38. Wind directional distribution and “relative future bias” - for Østerild. 
 
 
53 
6.39. Wind distributions “relative future bias” development - HAD GEM-ES rcp2.6 for Østerild. 54 
==PAGE:8==
4 
 
6.40. Wind distributions “relative future bias” development - HAD GEM-ES rcp4.5 for Østerild. 54 
6.41. Wind distributions “relative future bias” development - HAD GEM-ES rcp8.5 for Østerild. 55 
6.42. Wind distributions “relative future bias” development - GFDL ESM2G rcp4.5 for Østerild. 55 
6.43. Mean wind speed development - yearly at Østerild.  
 
 
 
 
56 
6.44. Mean wind speed development - seasonally at Østerild. 
 
 
 
 
56 
6.45. Wind roses downscaled vs. non-downscaled - GFDL ESM2G rcp4.5 for Østerild. 
 
57 
6.46. Observed wind rose - for Østerild.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
57 
6.47. Power density predictions at the resource grid - for Østerild. 
 
 
 
58 
9.1. Wind roses - MERRA2 and observation for Østerild. 
 
 
 
 
63 
9.2. Wind roses - MERRA2 and observation for Høvsøre. 
 
 
 
 
63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
5 
 
 
LIST OF TABLES 
4.1. Technical details CMIP5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
4.2. Technical details - MERRA2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
4.3. Technical details - observations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
6.1. Net AEP predictions at Horns Rev III.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
51 
6.2. Annual wake losses predictions at Horns Rev III. 
 
 
 
 
 
51 
6.3. Net AEP predictions at Horns Rev III – for Summer. 
 
 
 
 
51 
6.4. Net AEP predictions at Horns Rev III – for Winter.  
 
 
 
 
52 
6.5. Mean wind and power density predictions at Østerild.  
 
 
 
 
58 
9.1. Minimum, maximum and mean power density predictions for the resource grid at Østerild. 
63  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
6 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Anthropogenic forces threaten to rapidly change our climate at an unprecedented rate. Rising global 
temperatures, sea levels and extreme weather phenomena are all but commonplace in mainstream 
media as of late. The climate and weather, whilst differing in definition, are inherently linked. One of 
the largest known anthropogenic forces is the greenhouse gas CO2, whose emission rate increased 
greatly during the industrial era; many decelerative climate change programmes today focus primarily 
on CO2 emission reduction. There are several ways to reach these reduction goals and green energy 
production, hereunder, wind energy, I argue is a major force for sustainable climate change. 
 
Wind farms, capable of producing sustainable green energy for up to 20-25 years, are a strong 
instrument in the fight to decelerate adverse climate change. One of the main aims of this report is to 
become more knowledgeable about changes in wind climate at a local scale and its’ implications on 
future energy production. Classically, historical wind data is used to predict future energy output, 
however, in this study a more future oriented method will be applied to improve the wind resource 
assessment. This study will investigate indications in wind changes in the coming decades based on 
the output from global circulation models (GCM). 
 
During the pre-phase of a wind installation project, a wind resource assessment of a planned location 
plays an important part in assessing project viability. Its output provides the means to estimate 
potential power production of a site and thereby project attractiveness. These are classically based on 
local historical insights and do not indicate much about potential future climate changes. Uncertainty 
is commonplace, and unavoidable in such assessments, and has given rise to a set of commonly used 
uncertainty rates used in the wind industry associated with wind measurements and calculations. 
These, however, do not include uncertainty related to climate change on wind resources (Mortensen, 
2016).  
 
Denmark invests heavily in wind industry development in an effort to positively influence its global 
CO2 footprint and has a mission to solely produce green energy by 2050 (Danish Energy Agency, 
2018). With such ambitious green energy goals and a historical disposition towards sustainability and 
wind energy, Denmark is a suitable location for applying a more future oriented approach. It is also of 
interest climatologically with its mid-latitudinal location, where the westerlies provide dynamic 
weather and wind patterns. The offshore wind industry is booming in Denmark and by 2019 year-end 
yet another wind farm (Horns Rev III) will be ready for energy production on the west coast of 
Jutland. The layout of the park has been optimised on the basis of the wind climate at its location and 
raises interesting hypothesises of how future wind climate will influence wind production on such a 
park. The future wind climate at this location will be one of the two locations investigated in this study 
with the other on land in the North-Western part of Denmark, Østerild. 
 
The wind climate information for these locations will be provided by GCMs from Coupled Model 
Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) – an internationally approved standard for measuring 
climate change (CMIP, 2019). The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), a globally 
recognised United Nation body assessing climate change and its impacts (IPCC, 2019), evaluated and 
based their latest 5th assessment using CMIP5 (Flato et al., 2013). CMIP5 models predict most aspects 
of future climate change, hereunder wind, based on four different emission scenarios. This study will 
apply these models due to their scientific significance and being deemed the fittest for the purpose of 
this research. Before their application, a thorough validation is required, as well as, a down-scaling 
from their global resolution, of some degrees or more, to a local resolution of a few kilometres. Down-
scaling the models over “open water” i.e. bodies of water and the likes, may not have a large impact 
but it will be noticeable “over land” due to surface roughness and topography. The down-scaling itself 
will be done by microscale modelling which follows principles laid out by the global wind atlas, a 
resource for wind policy professionals and investors. 
==PAGE:11==
7 
 
 
At its essence, this project will investigate whether the CMIP5’s model output can represent about 
local wind climate, through quantitative analysis of modelled data and by attempting to generate a 
downscaled version of the global model. A concrete output of this study will be to conduct an 
uncertainty evaluation of the wind climate for two Danish locations, one onshore and another offshore. 
In the case of the offshore location, observations will be based on Fino3 input (situated in German 
Bight) in the absence of reliable and valid data points for Horns Rev III. A thorough validation check 
of the CMIP5 models for these two locations is a necessity to ensure reliability of the findings and will 
form a natural part of this paper. To succeed with the above, a validation concept (outlined in three 
steps in Chapter 3) will be formed such that both initial CMIP5 conditions and forced boundaries are 
taken into consideration. Firstly, the concept will validate an existing re-analysis model and (secondly) 
apply the output to historical (end 2005) CMIP5 data to discover possible deviations arising from 
initial conditions. Thirdly and finally, CMIP5’s future (2006 - 2100) scenario data will be validated 
against the same observations to further determine any additional deviations as a result of greenhouse 
gas forced boundaries. 
 
The structure of this report deviates slightly from your typical scientific study, but only to be able to 
logically guide the reader throughout. A short literature review (Chapter 2) will grant some necessary 
knowledge, before formulating the validation concept (Chapter 3) and deep diving into related 
methods. With this knowledge in place, the data-sets used in the study can be presented (Chapter 4). 
Thereafter, methods related to the down-scaling process and future wind prediction analysis (Chapter 
5) will be detailed out. The analysis and results (Chapter 6) will present validation results, an 
evaluation of the CMIP5 models and the outcome of the future analysis. These results will be 
discussed further in the subsequent discussion and future perspectives (Chapter 7) before concluding 
the overall study and recommendations for future research (Chapter 8). An appendix (Chapter 9) and 
bibliography can be found at the very end of the report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
8 
 
2. LITERATURE REVIEW 
This chapter provides an insight in required knowledge regarding wind patterns over Denmark, and its 
creation, climate change and the threat it induces on the weather patterns. Along with this will also be 
introduced basic information about climate change, future scenarios, GCMs, theories regarding post-
processing of meteorological model output. Lastly, a brief presentation of statistical methods, followed 
by downscaling methods and microscale-modelling.  
 
2.1 GENERAL WEATHER PATTERNS OVER DENMARK 
In a meteorological perspective, the general circulation of the atmosphere can be divided into three 
cells per hemisphere. These large-scale patterns are based on a complex combination of temporal 
averages of wind, temperature, humidity and precipitation (Holton, 2004).  
The wind within these three cells has the following zonal characteristics; The Hadley cell, located at 
the tropics has a belt of easterlies. The Ferrel cell located at the mid-latitudes, has a belt of westerlies. 
The Polar cell, located at the polar regions has an easterly flow, but less continuous than in the two 
other cells (Holton, 2004). 
  
Denmark are located between 54-58°N, so to follow the topic of this study will the following theory 
only concern the westerlies in the northerly mid-latitudes (the Ferrel cell) and its associated wind 
characteristics. In the mid-latitudes the zonal distribution of wind speed increases with height until the 
tropopause (Grotjahn, 2002). An outcome of this is the jet streams, located near 200hPa, at about 30° 
in Winter respectively about 45° in Summer, which is a very strong westerly wind (Randall 2015). Its 
strength is usually stronger during winter than during summer (Grotjahn, 2002). The strength and 
placement of the jet stream are dominated by the North Atlantic Oscillation, NAO. 
 
NAO is an area over North Atlantic with reversal surface pressure and defined to have a positive and a 
negative phase. The positive NAO phase is caused by decrease in pressure near the Icelandic low at 
the same time as the high at Bermuda-Azores increases. This provides stronger westerlies and send the 
cyclonic activity towards the northern Europe, that in wintertime mean mild and wet conditions. The 
negative NAO phase is reversed, increase of the pressure near the Icelandic low and decrease in 
pressure over Bermuda-Azores. Here follow, weaker westerlies and a more easterly cyclonic path, 
which in wintertimes mean dry and cold conditions over Denmark (Ahrens, 2012). 
 
When it comes to the longitudinal flow it is highly dependent on the surface characteristics. Naturally, 
large mountains have a larger effect than an ocean surface. This is the reason for northern hemisphere 
to have larger deviation of the longitudinal weather patterns than the southern hemisphere, which 
contain open waters (Holton, 2004). However, as earlier said the mid-latitudes are characterised by its 
cyclonic activity, that moves to the east or towards the poles. This causing storm tracks to passing 
north-eastward over Scandinavia (Grotjahn, 2002), in Denmark statistically at least 1-2 storms 
(defined as mean wind above 21m/s) per year is expected (DMI, 2019). While, the Norwegian 
mountains stands is a source of longitudinal terrain caused wind developed over Denmark but keeps it 
at a meso-scaled size. With a wind from northerly directions may the mountain either function as a 
blocking of the weather, giving Denmark calmer conditions, or as a source for lee-low pressure 
development (Ahrens, 2012).   
 
At the regional scale, the Danish weather is characterised as being tempered with an evenly 
distribution of precipitation throughout the year. The earlier mentioned cyclones and associate fronts 
are the source of the precipitation. The northerly latitudes give seasonally changes in temperature, i.e. 
cold Winters and warm Summers. The dominate westerlies provide Denmark with a maritime air flow, 
which provide relatively mild and moist Winters, respectively chilly and unstable atmospheric 
conditions during Summers. With this said, the wind is not always from west (for example, in 
situations where the large-scale circulations are in a negative NAO phase, or other atmospheric 
==PAGE:13==
9 
 
pressure blockings), and what weather to expect depend on the wind directions. To give an example, 
southerly or easterly winds normally provides continental weather, in winters meaning cold and during 
summers warm and sunny. To summarize the weather and wind patterns over Denmark; seasonally 
dependent temperature and predominated by a westerly air moist flow (Cappelen et al., 2004). The 
same was also conclude in a statistical study by Cappelen et al. (2004) where it was found that at least 
25% of the wind over Denmark comes from westerly directions. The study also declares that the wind 
speed varies between the coastal areas to the inland, but an average over Denmark as whole is at 
5.8m/s. They found the number of days with winds speed at 10.8m/s or above, to vary in the same 
manor, with about 30 days for inland and for example up to 170 days at Skaw (Cappelen et al., 2004).  
 
2.2 CLIMATE CHANGE 
Climate is defined as the statistical summary of the weather over a longer time. The climate has 
natural changes, for example caused by rate of solar activity, but today it is commonplacely to refer 
climate change to the anthropogenically forced part. The rapidly changing climate and potential effects 
of global warming have thoroughly been investigated by IPCC. The latest, fifth assessment report by 
IPCC was released in 2014 (IPCC, 2019). In the report, the rapid climate changes recognized to be 
humanly caused by greenhouse gas emission. Following from this is that it is the humanities action 
against climate change that will determine if the changes will be reduce or not. What way society will 
handle the threat of climate change and its associated global warming are not predetermined, therefore 
is a must for IPCC to evaluate a few possible scenarios for the future development. This has led to four 
different forcing scenarios that are called, Representative Concentration Pathways, rcp’s, namely 
rcp2.6, rcp4.5, rcp6 and rcp8.5. These scenarios are based on different a socioeconomical assumptions, 
but they are not directly related to the effort society chose to act. It is still related to greenhouse gas 
emissions but are defined as the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere and have 
different years where the CO2 peak occurs (rcp 2.6 peak 2010-2020, rcp4.5 about 2040, rcp6 about 
2080 and rcp8.5 is continuously rising throughout the century) (Cubasch et al., 2013). Regarding the 
emissions, in the fifth assessment report it is also stated that in the near-future, 2006-2035, the 
scenarios does play less of a role than later years (Kirtman et al., 2013). 
 
2.2.1 
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project, Phase5 
CMIP5s is a project running and comparing GCMs, which is a model covering the whole globe and 
contain the development of the atmospheric general circulation. The CMIP5 model’s are used to 
predict the climate in the future based on changing forcings. Basically, it is a numerical weather model 
that describse the physical processes in the atmosphere, ocean, cryosphere and land surface. This is 
done by describing the climate within a three-dimensional grid all over the globe. The grids sizes are 
typically the order of; 250 to 600km horizontally and 10 and 20 layers in the vertical. This spatial is 
coarse and requires that some physical processes must be parameterized (IPCC, 2013).  
 
The CMIP5 project is based on 20 different climate modelling groups and been acting as an 
information source in the scientific analyse in the firth assessment report by IPCC (CMIP5, 2019). 
Given the different modelling designs, initial conditions and different interpretation of greenhouse gas 
forcing; may one rcp scenario not give the same response for all models. This is of cause a large 
uncertainty with these models, but an even larger is that the composition of the future atmosphere is 
unknown. Meaning, even if an ensemble containing all models for a region showing one result it is not 
necessary the future climate (Kirtman et al., 2013). 
 
The CMIP5 models have produced hindcasts output for the period of at least a few decades back up 
until 2005. Then they have produced output for the future scenarios based on the before given rcps, 
from 2006 to 2100. The models are as said designed differently, where it is important to point out that 
the different design and initial conditions are present in the hindcast period, while the future scenario 
containing the same as well as the greenhouse gas forced boundaries. Furthermore, over time the 
==PAGE:14==
10 
 
initial state will have less of an impact and the greenhouse gas forced boundary will be the main 
source of changing difference between models, which occur gradually over the first couple of decades 
(Kirtman et al., 2013).   
 
2.2.2 
Impact on wind pattern 
Based on the earlier, fourth, assessment report by IPCC and mainly CMIP4 models, a decrease in 
surface pressure was found over the Arctic Ocean and an increase over central Europe. This indicates 
an increase of north-south pressure gradients, as well as a northward shift of the cyclone tracks 
(mentioned in Section 1.1). Resulting from such a general atmospheric pattern is an increase in wind 
speed over the northern part of Europe confirmed by several studies collectively evaluated by 
Hueging, et al. (2013) in their article about energy potentials over Europe. In the same article was 
indicated an increased intensity of NAO during winters. Their conclusion was a small increase of 
potential wind energy over northern Europe, with the highest increase during Winters. 
 
A national summary based on the fifth IPCC assessment report indicate that Denmark in the future is 
likely to get warmer, more precipitation and more weather extremes, compared to the period 1980-
2005. Winters are likely to hold more precipitation, while the Summer both contain more drought 
periods but also more heavy showers. The wind speeds in storms are rather likely to increase, at least 
over the North Sea, but not necessarily increased number storms. Finally, it was also concluded that 
the wind predictions are not as reliable as the temperature and precipitation predictions (Olesen, et al., 
2014).  
 
2.3 DOWNSCALING  
The GCM are designed to calculate the condition on a larger grid than suitable for this project. To 
increase the spatial resolution and better describe the local conditions is a downscaling process 
required. There are several methods to downscale a GCM to gain the higher spatial resolution.  
 
A study that evaluate downscaling methods used for downscaling GCM to regional climate models, 
found evidence that the regional models provided important regional effects (especially caused by 
terrain) and still provided similar future development for the region as predicted by the GCM. It was 
also indicated that statistical verses dynamical downscaling methods at times gave different regional 
results. Most of test downscaling evaluations has been based on temperature and precipitation, but 
should also be possible for other parameters, such as wind speed, but more research is requested 
(Mearns et al., 2018). 
 
In this study, a microscale-model will serve the role as the downscaling method, in the coming 
subsection will this method briefly be explained.  
 
2.3.1 
The microscale-models 
The mircoscale-models concept used in this study is predefined in the WAsP tool. It applies for 
complex-terrain, but not too steep hills, since its requirements are not fulfilled for air flow separation. 
The concept is designed to calculate the boundary layer flow. It is based on a combination of the 
linearized form of equation of motion, Fourier transformations and the velocity perturbations for each 
wave number vector to independently be calculated (Troen, 1990).  
 
The first basis of the physical concept in this model is to describes the wind measurements (or data) as 
frequencies of distribution in direction and speed. The logarithmic law, surface stress and Monin-
Obukhov length calculates the wind profiling in the model, which accounts for surface roughness and 
heat fluxes. From this is given the surface friction velocity from, which the geostrophic wind can be 
calculated, by the geostrophic drag law (neutral stability of the atmosphere is assumed in this case but 
can be adjusted for in WAsP). The surface roughness upstream the wind speed (about 10km) influence 
==PAGE:15==
11 
 
the surface friction. Where the surface roughness is summarised for all roughness changes occurring 
upstream (Troen and Lundtang Petersen, 1989).  
The orographic microscale-modelling can account for height changes in the terrain up to several tens 
of kilometres. It is designed to account for the potential flow perturbation, in all three dimensions. A 
set of equations and Fourier transformations are introduced to solve the flow perturbation based on 
polar coordinate system. Where the surface kinematic boundary conditions are solved to determine the 
coefficients required in a specific problem. In the surface kinematic boundary conditions equation is 
the terrain height and the basic state velocity vector included, and the result is a parameter representing 
the terrain induced vertical velocity (Troen and Lundtang Petersen, 1989).  
Secondly is the potential flow solution modified to include effects of surface friction, in an 
approximate sense. Where the depth of the flow layer can be defined, given that the potential flow 
indicates a balance between pressure gradient force and advection of momentum in the equation of 
momentum, as well as vanishing turbulent momentum. With these assumptions a depth of the flow can 
be defined based on the given roughness length for the site (in homogeneous conditions). For small 
enough roughness lengths will the turbulent transfer force balance the stress and wind shear. The result 
is then a logarithmic profile of the velocity perturbations (Troen and Lundtang Petersen, 1989).  
In the WAsP program these calculations are made based on a topographical map (including roughness 
lengths and orography) to account for a geostrophic wind (generalized regional wind climate) and then 
the calculations are done backwards to again gain a local wind climate at a specific location (Troen 
and Lundtang Petersen, 1989).  
A sheltering model are included in the WAsP setup, but not used in this study and therefore not 
mentioned in this literature review.  
 
2.4 FORMULAS FOR DATA PRE-PROCESSING 
This section will present relevant equations for post-processing for the meteorological data. Numerical 
weather models use a u- and v-wind components to represent the wind compontents, in the meridional 
plane and the zonal plane. By trigonometric relations can these be converted into a wind speed, U, and 
a wind direction, , by the following two equations 
 
 
𝑈= √𝑢2 + 𝑣2   
 
 
 
 
(2.1) 
 
 = 𝑎𝑡𝑎𝑛2𝑑(𝑢, 𝑣) + 180° 
 
 
 
 
(2.2) 
 
Where in equation 2.2 the are in degrees and the 180° are added to obtain meteorological definition of 
north being at 0 and 360°. 
 
Several of the CMIP5 models in this study are vertically based on hybrid sigma-pressure coordinate 
system. Where the sigma mean that the coordinate system is defined to following the terrain, while a 
pressure coordinate system is based on pressure levels. This being a hybrid of both, and where the 
hydrostatic formula is used to recalculate the pressure to meters above ground 
 
𝑧2 = 𝑧1 − 
𝑇∙𝑅
𝑔ln
𝑝2
𝑝1  
 
 
 
 
(2.3) 
 
Where z and p are the height above ground respective pressure for two levels, while T is the mean 
temperature in the layer given in Kelvin. R are the atmospheric gas constant and the g are the gravity 
constant, 287.058 [
J
kg∙K], respectively 9.82 [
m
𝑠2]. 
==PAGE:16==
12 
 
Most of the CMIP5 models are given with grid centred parameters, but one model is based on a 
staggered grid form, which means that the u and v components are stored in different grid locations. 
The u component is stored at the west and the east side of the grid, while v is stored at the north and 
the south of the grid. Both components are stored at the centre line of the grid, just in different 
direction. Meaning to get theses coordinates to be represented at the grid centre nearest an average of 
the two u and v must be calculated, separately.  
The models and observations will be evaluated at the same altitude for wind speed a interpolator is 
required, where the wind profile power law 
𝑈1 = 𝑈2 (
𝑧1
𝑧2)
𝛼
    
 
 
 
 
(2.4) 
 
and/or the logarithmic wind profile 
𝑈1 = 𝑈2 (
ln (𝑧1−𝑑)/𝑧0
ln(𝑧2−𝑑)/𝑧0) 
 
 
 
 
(2.5) 
was chosen. Where in both equations the U and z numbered 1 and 2 stands for the wind speed and the 
corresponding height for to different altitudes. In equation 2.4 the α is a coefficient based on the 
atmospheric stability. In equation 2.5 d stand for the zero-plane, at the height where the wind speed 
always will be zero and the z0 are the roughness length, which depend on the roughness of the 
surroundings. 
 
2.5 STATISTICAL METHODS 
Statistical method used in this study has been the relative bias 
 
𝐵=
(𝑈𝑥− 𝑈𝑚)
𝑈𝑚
∙100%   
 
 
 
(4.7) 
 
Here the Um stand for the mean value, which it mainly is used for in the study, but at per definition the 
reference value. While the Ux is the value that are being investigated.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
13 
 
3. VALIDATION CONCEPT 
The main objective and complexity of this project is to robustly validate the CMIP5 models. There are 
three things that ahould be understood by any reader:  
 
1. Observations are the prime validator to get the highest possible reliability at the local level, 
2. The CMIP5 has two principal sources of differences – one referring to (a) initial conditions and 
the other (b) forced boundaries. 
In historical datasets, CMIP5 only has differences arising from its initial conditions, meanwhile future 
scenarios based on the same models contain both initial conditions and forced boundaries – or at least 
for the first few decades, as stated in Chapter 2. Furthermore, the CMIP5 has historical data coverage 
from a couple of decades up until 2005, while the future oriented datasets begin in 2006 and include 
difference scenarios, hereunder different rates of forcing.  
 
Figure 3.1. An illustration showing the relationship between CMIP5 models, observations and their link to the re-analysis, 
MERRA2. The time periods given beneath the names are where data is available. For observations, the time is given in italics 
to highlight that the observations used in the study have different time periods.   
In Figure 3.1 it becomes clear that using re-analysis, or MERRA2, is needed to act as a link between 
the observations and historical validation of the CMIP5 models. The first step of the validation is to 
assess the validity of the MERRA2 wind data, as this can be used to historically validate the CMIP5 
model output (1980 to 2005), where the fundamental differences of the models can be found. As 
mentioned earlier, one of the sources of differences is the initial conditions, but as is common with 
models, these sources also include assumptions, parametrization and other model design related features 
that can impact output. The output of the CMIP5 models will be further validated against the 
observations made to find indications of differences arising from forced boundaries, i.e. the difference 
of interpretation of scenario forcing. More detailed descriptions are given below in their individual 
sections (2.1, 2.2, 2.3) and commonly used validation methods will be described in the final section 
(2.4).  
 
A last note for the validation itself is that it will be carried out both onshore and offshore, but the 
evaluation relies highly on the offshore validation. This is given the fact that the onshore model’s low 
spatial resolution will likely interpret the onshore surface differently from the reality at a local scale.    
 
CMIP5 
historical
1980-2005
MERRA2
1980-2018
Observations 
2010-2018
CMIP5 
future
2006-2100
==PAGE:18==
14 
 
3.1 VALIDATION OF RE-ANALYSIS  
The two cases in this study will be detailed at depth in Chapter 5, but as mentioned in the introduction 
will be Østerild and Horns Rev III, located in northern Jutland and off the Danish west coast 
respectively, as marked in Figure 3.2. The wind measurements used for Horns Rev III will originate 
from the Fino3 platform and Østerild will rely on local wind observations from a tall mast. An 
additional observation location, Høvsøre, is added to holistically determine MERRA2s ability to 
predict wind around and over north-western Denmark. All observation locations are marked in Figure 
3.2 and the overall presentation of them will be in Chapter 4. The observations have been chosen to be 
able to encompass a wider topographical study; Fino3 being in open water, Høvsøre along a coast and 
Østerild in more complex terrain in the northern part of Jutland, which is assumed to replicate the 
main features of the north-western region. These observations also differ in length, as mentioned in the 
figure text of Figure 3.1. At this point it is not important for the reader to know the exact lengths, as 
they will be presented in Chapter 4, but it should be mentioned that Østerild only contain 3 
consecutive years, which also was an argument for adding a second and longer mast observation 
onshore, Høvsøre.  
 
 
Figure 3.2. A map over Denmark and the North Sea, where the case locations are marked with black stars, Østerild in the 
north and Horns Rev III in the south. Marked with blue rings and named are the three met-masts used in the study.  
The observations have a time frequency of 10 minutes, while the MERRA2 is only once per hour and 
are post-processed to only contain data for every full hour. The observational dataset on the other hand 
has gaps in the timeseries, where the re-analysis will be post-processed to only include the same times. 
MERRA2 will for all observational locations be validated by: 
A. Correlation and mean bias,  
B. Bias of monthly variations of wind speed and directions,  
C. Overall wind speed and directional distribution.   
==PAGE:19==
15 
 
After completing the validation, it will be determined how well MERRA2 performs for the area. A 
special focus will be on the two locations, Fino3 and Østerild, where the data from MERRA2 will be 
used to validate the output from the CMIP5 models. 
3.2 HISTORICAL VALIDATION OF CMIP5 
Validation of the historical development of wind climate at the two locations for the CMIP5 models 
will be performed against the previously used re-analysis. This step will investigate whether there is 
consistency of the models over years and seasons and declare if the models are valid in the given 
locations. According to the information given in the fifth IPCC assessment report by Kirtman et al. 
(2013), this step will not validate a shorter frame than seasonal and yearly timeframes, as the datasets 
are meant for statistics for seasonal, annual or decadal averages. Before starting the validation, the 
time frequency of MERRA2 is post-processed from hourly to the CMIP5 given time frequency of 
every six hours (00, 06, 12 and 18UTC). The validation is done in a similar way as before, namely: 
 
A. Seasonally and yearly bias between CMIP5 and MERRA2. 
B. Collective wind speed and directional distribution for years and seasons between 1980-2005.  
 
In the following step, the CMIP5 models are seen from their future perspective and the validation will 
mainly be based on the rcp4.5 scenario. After this validation one of the CMIP5 models will emerge as 
the most comparable one and also include the rcp2.6 and rcp8.5. This decision is made to be able to 
have a larger span of forced boundaries and a reference for the models’ future reliability.  
 
 
3.3 VALIDATION OF CMIP5 FUTURE SCENARIOS 
Validation of CMIP5 future scenarios based on the observations will be conducted to understand the 
influence of boundary forces on results. The same timeframe will be used as for the first step, 
however, the observations will be post-processed to only contain data for 00, 06, 12 and 18 UTC. The 
timeframe may be a disadvantage, particularly at Østerild that only contains 3 full consecutive years 
of observations. The observation period offshore is longer and is stated as the main reference data 
point. 
 
The data from the CMIP5 models will be post-processed to exclude three months, January to March 
2014 at the offshore location, as the only longer period missing data in the observations. The other 
missing observational data will not be post-processed from the CMIP5 model output. In Chapter 4 the 
CMIP5 models will be presented and defined by different calendar types. On this basis, the models can 
be compared in the fairest manner with no additional exclusion of data, as the observations’ missing 
data are randomly placed. This validation will be made following the same pattern as in step 2: 
 
A. Seasonally and yearly bias between CMIP5 and observations, during the time periods 2010 to 
2013 and March 2014 to March 2018, offshore, and mid-February 2015 to mid-autumn 2018, 
onshore. 
B. Collective wind speed and directional distribution all years and seasons during 2010-2018 
offshore and 2015-2018 onshore  
 
After this final validation, a full image and discussion will be given on the CMIP5 models performance, 
which will end with a conclusion on what model/models and scenario/scenarios will be used for the 
down-scaling and future prediction analysis. 
 
3.4 VALIDATION METHODS 
The quality assessment of forecast model systems in IPCC is based on three strictly technical terms, 
accuracy, skill and reliability (Kirtman et al., 2013). The quality assessment in this report will be loosely 
==PAGE:20==
16 
 
based on these. Accuracy will be given as the relative bias (later given in equation 4.7) for mean wind 
and four sections of directions. These sections of directions will account for 90° each, evenly distributed 
around each direction of the compass. Skill will be based on the comparability of the full available time 
period of wind speed, directional distribution and the two combined – in wind roses.  
Reliability will not be seen as a direct result from any computation but be a part of the analysis and 
discussion to provide the overall picture.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
17 
 
4. DATA 
This Chapter contains information about data sets used in the validation, future analysis and some pre-
processing analysis regarding the onshore case (to be described in Chapter 5). The specifics will be 
outlined for the CMIP5 models, followed by the re-analysis and lastly, the observations. 
 
4.1 COUPLED MODEL INTERCOMPARISON PROJECT PHASE 5 
The data from the CMIP5 models used in this project originates from an open source platform, Earth 
System Grid Federation, where partners collaborate with providing model parameter output to the 
CMIP5 program. 
 
Four CMIP5 models were available to fulfil the requirements set for this study, namely: 
• 
A six-hour time frequency, 
• 
Wind data at heights between 30 and 150m, 
• 
Providing data for rcp4.5 scenario. 
The heights are given so that they act close to hub height but will be post-processed to act at 
approximately 50m (to match the height of the re-analysis dataset). Scenario rcp4.5 is supplemented 
by rcp2.6 and rcp8.5 for HAD GEM-ES, to give an additional future perspective. The technical 
features of these models are found below in Table 4.1. 
 
 
Grid size 
Coordinate 
system - 
vertical 
Coordinate 
system - 
horizontal 
Calendar 
Historical 
ensemble 
Future 
scenario and 
ensemble 
Reference 
HAD 
GEM-
ES 
1.875x1.25° 
Meter 
above geoid 
Arakawa-C 
360days/year 
r2i1p1 
rcp2.6 – r1i1p1 
rcp4.5 – r2i1p1  
rcp8.5 – r2i1p1 
Collins et 
al., 2011 
GFDL 
ESM2G 
2.0225x2° 
hybrid 
sigma-
pressure 
coordinate 
Grid centre 
365days/year 
r1i1p1 
rcp4.5 – r1i1p1  
 
The 
GFDL 
Data 
Portal, 
2018 
MIROC 
ESM 
2.8x2.8° 
hybrid 
sigma-
pressure 
coordinate 
Grid centre 
Gregorian 
r1i1p1 
rcp4.5 – r1i1p1  
 
Watanabe 
et al., 
2011 
MRI 
CMCM3 
1x0.5° 
hybrid 
sigma-
pressure 
coordinate 
Grid centre 
Gregorian 
r1i1p1 
rcp4.5 – r1i1p1  
 
Yukimoto 
et al., 
2011 
Table 4.2. Technical details for the CMIP5 models used.  
The used timeframes are 1980-2005 for the historical scenario, with the exception of December 2005 
for HAD GEM-ES which is non-existing, and 2010-2042 for the future scenarios. The grid-locations 
of all CMIP5 models for the two locations, Fino3 and Østerild, are given in Figure 4.1. 
 
 
==PAGE:22==
18 
 
 
Figure 4.1. A map over Denmark including the three observation sites (blue circles) and the CMIP5 grids used in this study 
indicated by the coloured squares; green for HAD GEM-ES, turquoise for GFDL ESM2G, magenta for MIROC ESM and 
yellow for MRI CMCM3. Marked with black starts is the two locations of the cases.  
Two of the models in Table 4.1 do not use the Gregorian calendar and have been post-processed as 
follows; GFDL ESM2G always has 28th days in February, HAD GEM-ES has January with 31 days, 
February with 28, March with 31and the remainder with 30 days, other performed post-processesing 
includeing; estimating wind speed and direction from u and v wind components (equation 2.1, 4.2 
respectively), conversion of hybrid sigma-pressure coordinates to a meter above ground (equation 2.3) 
and estimating wind speed at 50m (equation 2.4). 
 
In addition, in the pre-processing of downscaling cases, the following landcover and orography data 
has been accessed:  
• 
Land fraction for HAD GEM-ES (Bellouin et al, 2007), related to the same scenarios as in 
Table 3.1. The fraction is given in percentage per grid of; leaf tree, needle tree, tempered grass 
type, tropical grass type, shrubs, bare soil, inland water, urban and ice (analysed and 
summarized in Chapter 5). 
• 
Orography for GFDL ESM2G (The GFDL Data Portal, 2018). 
 
4.2 MERRA2 
The Modern-Era Retrospective Analysis for Research and Applications, Version 2, MERRA2, is the 
re-analysis chosen for this study (Global modeling and Assimilation office, 2016). The study uses 
instantaneous u and v wind parameters at 50m (after post-processed by equation 2.1 and 2.2). More 
technical details about MERRA2 are found below in Table 4.2. In Figure 4.2 are the grid locations 
used for the study indicated, together with the location of the observational sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:23==
19 
 
 
Grid size 
Coordinate 
system - 
vertical 
Coordinate 
system - 
horizontal 
Calendar 
Time 
period 
Time 
frequency 
Reference 
MERRA2 
0.625x0.5° 
Meter 
above 
surface 
Grid centre 
Gregorian 
January 
1980 – 
September 
2018  
one hourly 
Global 
modeling 
and 
Assimilation 
office, 2016 
Table 4.2. Technical details concerning the MERRA2 data set. 
 
 
Figure 4.2. A map over Denmark including the three observation sites (blue circles) and the MERRA2 grids (red squares) 
used in this study for these locations. Marked with black starts is the two locations of the cases.  
 
4.3 OBSERVATIONS 
The observational data has been provided by supervisor Andrea Hahmann, and in addition to the 
information in Table 4.3, a small portion of the post-processing of data has already been performed. 
This post-processing includes changing from local time to UTC and interpolating the observational 
heights to 50m. The interpolation is a result of a weighted average after evaluation by equations 2.4 
and 2.5 for all the three given heights in Table 4.3.  
 
 
Location 
Coordinate 
system - 
vertical 
Heights 
wind 
speed [m] 
Heights wind 
direction [m] 
Time period 
Time 
frequency 
[Minutes] 
Reference 
Fino3 
55.19N / 
7.11E 
Meter 
above 
surface 
50 
100 
January 2010 - 
December 2013 
and April 2014 - 
March 2018  
10 
Fino3, 
2018. 
Høvsøre 
56.43N / 
8.15E 
Meter 
above 
surface 
40, 60 and 
80 
60 
Mid-March 2004 
– mid-September 
2018 
10 
Peña et 
al., 2016. 
Østerild 
57.08N / 
8.87E 
Meter 
above 
surface 
40, 70 and 
90 
40 
Mid-February 
2015 – mid-
October 2018 
10 
Andrea 
Hahmann, 
2018. 
Table 4.3. Technical details concerning the three observational datasets from the given met-stations. 
==PAGE:24==
20 
 
5. FUTURE ANALYSIS AND DOWNSCALING 
In the introduction (Chapter 1) it was mentioned that two cases would be investigated, one offshore at 
Horns Rev III and one onshore at Østerild. These cases will both contain some wind resource 
assessment related tasks, which will be evaluated based on observations and downscaled CMIP5 
future scenarios. A statistical analysis of the non-downscaled CMIP5 model outputs will serve as a 
reference to the reliability of these results. The non-downscaled statistical analysis will also provide a 
smaller ensemble prediction based on all CMIP5 models and further evaluate the forced boundaries, 
i.e. whether all rcp4.5 following similar development paths. 
 
Throughout this Chapter, the focus will be on analysing the two locations within the timeframe 2019 
to 2042. The timeframe accounts for the life-time of a wind farm (20-25 years) and limits the model 
spread occurring from different scenarios (stated in Chapter 2: the emission scenarios in the near-
future, 2006-2035, play less of a role than for future time periods (Kirtman et al., 2013). Furthermore, 
the two cases will also utilise the wind assessment tool, WAsP and common downscaling methods. 
The methods related to WAsP will be presented first (Section 5.1), hereafter the two case studies 
(Section 5.2) and lastly a supplementary future wind analysis (Section 5.3) based on the non-
downscaled CMIP5s.  
 
5.1 WIND ASSESMENT IN WAsP AND DOWNSCALING 
WAsP is a well-recognised software in the wind industry and used for various wind turbine and wind 
farm calulations in conducting wind resource assessments, siting and energy yield calculations 
(WAsP, 2018). The software requires the wind climate at the site, represented by sector-wise wind 
directional distribution and sector-wise distribution of wind speeds. To obtain this wind climatology, 
the program checks for missing data and time intervals of the wind time series, but otherwise quality 
checks of data is done visually, where irregularities can be manually deleted.  
 
The microscale-model described in the downscaling microscale-model (Section 2.3) is a linerarized 
flow model internally defined in WAsP, where topographical inputs are given in vector maps for 
height contour lines and roughness changes, and obstacles are separately specified. With these inputs 
in place a prediction on local wind climate can be estimated by WAsP. Based on them, the program 
can calculate mean wind speed, power density, annual energy production (AEP) and other relevant 
parameters for the set resource grid, specified wind farm, reference site and so on. (Niels G. 
Mortensen, 2016). Case specifics; what is calculated is related to the offshore and onshore cases and 
given in the two previous sub-sections. 
 
The WAsP tool has several parameters that can be adjusted, e.g. air density, heat flux, etc. To avoid 
increasing uncertainty a set of predefined parameters will be selected, most of which are based on the 
standard atmosphere. This study exclusively is meant to evaluate the wind parameter, therefore, a false 
assumption is made that atmospheric parameters remain unchanged.   
 
The two main issues arising when using global models in WAsP will be treated in the coming two 
subsections, namely, how to make sure time frequency does not return with inexact outputs and how to 
treat topographical inputs from the CMIP5 models. 
 
5.1.1 
Methods to avoid time frequency related issues 
As mentioned earlier (Chapter 3) observations and CMIP5s have a time frequency of 10minute and 6 
hours respectively. To make sure that output is as close as possible to the 10-minute frequency, a small 
study testing this will be carried out. At a reference site, the mean wind speeds and power density will 
be compared between a set of observations with a frequency of 10 minutes and 6 hours. Years will be 
added to the test until the result is highly comparable. From this test, the number of years required for 
the future analyse in WAsP with CMIP5 data, will be determined.  
==PAGE:25==
21 
 
 
5.1.2 
Methods to interpret CMIP5s topography map 
The topography will be separated into elevation and roughness parts with distinctly separate methods.  
 
The CMIP5 models have orography valid at the centre of grid points in meters above mean sea level 
(some models do define this, upon a geoid concept, so that it allows the mean sea level to rise). This 
must be converted into contour lines; which WAsP is able to handle. In Figure 5.1 is an example of 
this transformation, where the grids surrounding Østerild in the GFDL ESM2G model are presented at 
the left and the contour line representation at the right.  
 
Figure 5.1. To the left is the elevation given in the GFDL ESM2G model for the grid representing Østerild and its 
neighbouring grids. To the right is the left image transformed into contour lines, where the given numbers are meters above 
mean sea level. 
The surface roughness length is not as easily interpreted, partly as roughness is not given as separate 
grid information; in fact, few models have information available about landcover fractions of trees, 
grass, shrubs etc. per grid. With such information it would have been tempting to calculate one 
roughness per grid and test using a similar method for elevation but on roughness instead. This data is 
provided as an insight to future landcover development, not as a roughness parameter within the 
models. Nonetheless landcover and roughness are related, but after researching the surface friction 
concepts used in HAD GEM-ES (Essery, et al., 2001), it was clear that the height of the different 
species was required to calculate surface roughness. This information was not found as a parameter in 
the free CMIP5 catalogue. If all models should be down-scaled and evaluated following the same 
method, this concept would fail.  
 
The chosen method is based on wind speeds in the different models and the logarithmic wind profile 
(equation 4.4). For twelve directional groups, evenly distributed around the compass directions, the 
roughness length from the logarithmic wind profile will be estimated. The calculations will be based 
on the models’ mean wind for each directional group in the two heights closest to 50m. Every twelve 
cones around the grid centre, as illustrated in Figure 5.2, will contain their estimated roughness. The 
WAsP program does not allow for different roughness’s within one closed area, meaning the thin lines 
between the cones seen in Figure 5.2 must contain the same roughness - they all lead to the centre of 
the grid. Given the very small area it affects and that it is surrounding the centre an overall roughness 
was calculated based on the total mean wind at the two heights. 
==PAGE:26==
22 
 
 
Figure 5.2. The map used in WAsP for the GFDL ESM2G model, where the elevation lines from Figure 5.3 are marked with 
red and the green lines indicate the directional defined roughness areas. In the middle a “met-mast”- figure is located to 
illustrate the centre location of GFDL ESM2Gs grid.  
Case specifics; the offshore location is assumed not to not include any roughness changes and no 
elevation, so a map around the grid centre at the CMIP5 models is only surrounded by water. The 
onshore case is treated as described above. 
 
5.2 ANALYSIS OF FUTURE CASES 
The individual wind assessment tasks will be presented separately below, as they are set up to answer 
different questions that may arise with climate change. Firstly, the offshore case will be presented, 
followed by the onshore case and both will contain the method specifics used to solve the tasks.  
 
5.2.1 
Offshore case 
In the introduction (Chapter 1) it was stated that the layouts on recent wind farms offshore are being 
optimized. Several aspects are evaluated in such optimisations, however, this is irrelevant to the study, 
as it does not contain a full wind farm assessment. This means the task will NOT answer whether the 
optimization for the chosen case (the optimized wind farm Horns Rev III) are adequate. Neither will 
the study reveal anything about the real potential power production at site, as hub height and turbine 
generator are not identical to the Horns Rev III project. Instead, the hub height is set to 80m and the 
turbine generator is a Vestas V90 3.0MW. The only resemblance is that the location of the farm and 
the turbines are replicated to look like Horns Rev III, kindly provided by Søren Ott. The wind farm is 
visualized in Figure 5.3 along with the location of the met-mast at Fino3. The topographical map in 
Figure 5.3 is based on the shuttle radar topography mission (NASA - Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 2014) 
and bar a small strip of coastline, only contains water. 
 
 
==PAGE:27==
23 
 
 
Figure 5.3. A map of the surrounding area of Horns Rev III where the white background is water and the red colour along 
the right side is the topographical map for the west coast of Jutland. At the bottom left is a small met-mast symbol indicating 
the location of Fino3. The inner marked square is the used resource grid where the wind farm itself is placed.   
Based on the above information about the offshore case, the study will investigate: 
 
A. Potential changes of AEP,  
B. Potential changes of wake losses. 
 
This will be done for the full 24year period, including the observational time period 2010-2018, which 
will function as a reference to highlight any potential changes. It will be done both at an annual and 
seasonal data basis, including the seasons Summer and Winter. These seasons are chosen, as it was 
concluded in Section 2.2.2 that they were when climate changes may have the largest effects. The 
seasonal wind data input in WAsP will act as if it was an annual record and calculate an AEP based on 
this information. Knowing that the data only covers a season, the net AEP result will be stated as AEP-
S such that it is clear for the reader that it is based on a seasonal wind climate.  
 
5.2.2 
Onshore case 
Onshore, the location of wind turbines is often limited by the area where it is socio- and 
environmentally acceptable and therefore the focus is different than for the offshore case. Here it will 
be on the resource grid and landscape structure. 
 
 
Figure 5.4. Roughness and elevation map used in WAsP for the Østerild location (provided by Rogier Ralph Floors). An 
inner square indicates the used resource grid for the analysis. An orange arrow points towards the location of the met-mast 
and is also the location for the reference site.  
==PAGE:28==
24 
 
The modelled future climate based on the CMIP5 model output will not only be projected at one 
topographical map but four, to account for potential changes on the landscape in the future. These 
maps are chosen to be; (1) today’s topographical situation (provided by Rogier Ralph Floors) seen in 
Figure 5.4, (2) simulating an increase of randomly placed leaf trees, (3) simulating an increase of leaf 
tree forestry north and south of the reference site and (4) simulating an increase of leaf tree forestry 
east and west of the reference site. The decision was based on the information in Figure 5.5.  
 
 
Figure 5.5. A small study that recovers the main and most likely roughness changes around Østerild, which is an increase of 
leaf trees.  
The three maps to be produced for the analysis will be constructed by adjustments to the roughness 
parameters on the existing map of today’s topographic at Østerild. The roughness will be increased to 
approximately correspond to a few percentage points of growth of leaf trees, for all the three maps, but 
distributed as given earlier (randomly, south-north and east-west). Thereafter, the resource grid and 
reference site will be situated as given in Figure 5.4, at 50m above ground. Based on this information, 
the following will be analysed: 
A. Mean wind and power density at the reference site, 
B. Evaluation of the power density at the resource map. 
 
 
5.3 SUPPLEMENTARY FUTURE WIND ANALYIS 
The analysis done in WAsP will not be standalone information for the future wind assessment and an 
additional analysis to determine the internal future development of the non-downscaled CMIP5 wind 
data will be conducted. This is to act as a reference frame for the wind assessment result and as an 
indication of more likely wind developments. 
 
The analysis for both locations during 2019-2042 will include: 
 
A. A general picture of mean wind development over the coming 24 years, given in a non-
linearized form, 
B. A general wind speed and directional distribution during 2019-2042; development and 
differences will be compared to the observational time frame, 
No relevant 
input
•By 2050 a sea level rise of 0.125-0.25m in Denmark is likely, reducing 
coastlines by approx 1-2m (The Danish Coastal Authority, 2018). 
•This change is too small for the spatial resolution in WAsP.
Possible 
minor forestry 
increase
•Denmark has as a goal to increase forestry from an area of approx. 11% in 
2005 to 20-25% by 2100 (Forest and Nature Agency, 2002). 
•Forests are located around Østerild and so is a national wind turbine testpark 
(Besøgscenter Østerild, 2018).  
Increase of 
leaf trees
•Analysis of HAG GEM-ES rcp2.6, rcp4.5 and rcp8.5 landcover parameters 
indicate an increase in leaf trees, a decrease in needle trees and a minor 
decrease of tempered grass.
==PAGE:29==
25 
 
C. Linearized mean wind development, at a yearly and seasonal basis. 
The non-linearized concept (A) will be based on the relative bias (equation 4.7), where the reference 
will be given as the models result from the observational time period. This will create a “future 
relative bias” relative to the observational time period and can reveal something about the more likely 
changes. This method circumvents biases found in the validation process, so all models will be 
included in this analysis. Other potential biases and uncertainties are of course still relevant and not 
excluded. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
26 
 
6. ANALYSIS AND RESULT 
Included in this Chapter is both the validation of CMIP5 models (following the concept given in 
Chapter 3) and a future wind and power predictions (based on the cases and methods from Chapter 5). 
Naturally, the validation will be presented first ending with an evaluation of the CMIP5 models 
performance. Hereafter, the result from the future predictions will be presented. 
 
6.1 VALIDATION STEPS 
The results from the validations analysis will be briefly discussed along with the results, to ease the 
ending evaluation of the CMIP5 models. After the three validation steps a summary and smaller 
discussion will be held to conclude on better performing model/models and scenario/scenarios. The 
evaluation will be based on the overall picture of the validation, but where the results from offshore is 
much higher weighted (As stated in Chapter 3).  
 
6.1.1 
Validation of re-analysis 
The validation of the re-analysis MERRA2 will be based on three locations, Fino3, Høvøre and 
Østerild, see Figure 3.1. They result of the analysis will simultaneously be presented for all locations, 
facilitate understanding every analysis step will follow the same order (Fino3, Høvsøre and Østerild).  
 
 
 
Figure 6.1. A collection of scatterplots, giving the correlation and mean bias (as the red linearly fitted line) between the 
observed wind speed and MERRA2. At the top are wind speed data related to the Fino3 location (Jan-2010 to Dec-2013 and 
Apr-2014 to Mar-2018), at the bottom right wind speed data associated to the Høvsøre location (mid-Mar-2004 to mid-Sep-
2018) and the bottom left wind speed data associated with the Østerild location (mid-Feb-2017 to mid-Oct-2018).  
An hourly comparison of the wind observations and MERRA2 data are showed in Figure 6.1. Firstly, 
it should be noted that, as expected with wind observations; none of them reach close to m/s, but 
always begin some m/s higher. The linear fitted line in the pot has an inclination of 0.95 for the Fino3 
location, 0.99 for Høvsøre and 1.38 for Østerild. This suggest that that both Fino3 and Høvsøre are 
==PAGE:31==
27 
 
slightly underestimated, while Østerild are rather largely overestimated. A likely reason for this would 
be the grid location and size (Figure 4.2), which containing a lot of water, i.e. the roughness length is 
likely to be too short. 
 
The monthly relative bias of MERRA2 compared with the observations, for mean wind speed and 
mean directional distribution (within the four wind directional groups), results in the following relative 
bias: 
 
Fino3: MERRA2 preform within -10% for the from the observed mean wind speed, Figure 6.2. 
Meaning the finding about a slight underestimation Figure 6.1The directional distribution is in general 
±20%, if overseeing the occasional higher peaks, Figure 6.3. It should be noted that the predominant 
westerly directions barely any occasional higher peaks. Furthermore, the relative bias of the southerly 
directions mainly has positive values, which may indicate an overprediction of southerly winds by 
MERRA2. 
Høvsøre: the mean wind speed for MERRA2 mainly has a relative bias of -5% to 15%, Figure 6.4., is 
not true for the monthly means where a larger range of means are overestimated. The wind directional 
distribution performance is at about 30-40% (again overseeing the occasional much higher peaks), 
however, easterly winds are clearly overestimated and westerly winds at most times overestimated, 
Figure 6.5. Perhaps a potential reason for this is the modelled effects caused by the Limfjord. 
Østerild: a large monthly relative bias of 25 to 60% are found for the mean wind speed, Figure 6.6. 
Again, the likely reason for this is roughness length considered for the specific data grid in MERRA2. 
For the directional part it performed mainly with about ±20% (overseeing the occasional higher 
peaks), but with somewhat higher overestimation of the northerly winds, Figure 6.7.  
  
 
Figure 6.2. Monthly mean wind speeds of MERRA2 (red) and the observations (blue) for the location Fino3, Jan-2010 to 
Dec-2013 and Apr-2014 to Mar-2018 (top). Monthly relative bias of MERRA2 (bottom). 
==PAGE:32==
28 
 
 
Figure 6.3. Monthly wind directional distribution for Jan-2010 to Dec-2013 and Apr-2014 to Mar-2018 related to the Fino3 
location. In the left column are the four given directional groups (corresponding to 90° around the given direction) given as 
frequency of occurrence for MERRA2 (red) and the observation (blue). To the right is the corresponding relative bias for 
MERRA2. 
 
 
 
Figure 6.4. Monthly mean wind speeds of MERRA2 (red) and the observations (blue) for the location Høvsøre, mid-Mar-
2004 to mid-Sept-2018 (top). Monthly relative bias of MERRA2 (bottom). 
==PAGE:33==
29 
 
 
 
Figure 6.5. Monthly wind directional distribution for mid-Mar-2004 to mid-Sep-2018 related to the Høvsøre location. In the 
left column are the four given directional groups (corresponding to 90° around the given direction) given as frequency of 
occurrence for MERRA2 (red) and the observation (blue). To the right is the corresponding relative bias for MERRA2. 
 
 
Figure 6.6. Monthly mean wind speeds of MERRA2 (red) and the observations (blue) for the location Østerild, mid-Feb-2015 
to mid-Oct-2018 (top). Monthly relative bias of MERRA2 (bottom). 
==PAGE:34==
30 
 
 
Figure 6.7. Monthly wind directional distribution for mid-Feb-2015 to mid-Oct-2018 related to the Østerild location. In the 
left column are the four given directional groups (corresponding to 90° around the given direction) given as frequency of 
occurrence for MERRA2 (red) and the observation (blue). To the right is the corresponding relative bias for MERRA2. 
The final analysis for the validation of MERRA2 is regards the full period of observational time (given 
in Table 4.3), at the three locations. The following findings are made: 
 
Fino3: Wind speed distribution (top plot in Figure 6.8) shows an overestimation of low wind speeds 
and underestimation of high wind speeds, which is as expected by the relative bias seen in Figure 6.2. 
The performance of MERRA2 in directional distrubation (top plot in Figure 6.8) is good for the 
eastern half, while the western half it tend to overestimate southeasterly winds and uncereasitmate 
northwesterly winds. The combined wind speed and directions (Figure 6.9) compare well visually, 
with expectations for the just mentioned wind directional issues in the southwest and northwest 
directions.  
 
 
 
Figure 6.8. The hourly distribution of wind presented as frequency in percentage related to the Fino3 location, Jan-2010 to 
Dec-2013 and Apr-2014 to Mar-2018. In the top plot is the wind speed distribution, while the bottom is the directional 
distribution. The datasets are MERRA2 (red) and the met-mast observations (blue). 
==PAGE:35==
31 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.9. The wind roses related to the Fino3 location, Jan-2010 to Dec-2013 and Apr-2014 to Mar-2018, for the specified 
wind speeds. To the left is the wind rose representing MERRA2 and to the right is the observed wind at Fino3. 
Høvsøre: the wind speed distribution shows overestimation of high wind speed and underestimations 
of low wind speeds (top plot in Figure 6.10) which correspond well with the finds from the monthly 
relative bias, Figure 6.4. The overestimation is not large enough to raise concerns about MERRA2 
reliability at coastal locations, as it is not expected to be perfectly predicted in the complex terrain.  
The wind directional distribution (bottom plot in Figure 6.10) has underprediction of easterly and 
north-easterly winds and overprediction of south-westly and westerly winds. With Høvsøre not being a 
part of the later validation process, these directional issues will not cause any troubles in this study, 
and also not be discussed further but only noted. The corresponding wind roses associated with the 
Høvsøre location is also not of interest, but is been found in appendix for interested, Figure 9.1. 
 
 
Figure 6.10. The hourly distribution of wind presented as frequency in percentage related to the Høvsøre location, Sep-2004 
to Aug-2018. In the top plot is the wind speed distribution, while the bottom is the directional distribution. The datasets are 
MERRA2 (red) and the met-mast observations (blue). 
Østerild: MERRA2 shows poor performance regarding the wind speed distribution (top plot in Figure 
6.11) which is clearly overestimated. The wind directional distribution (bottom plot in Figure 6.11) 
shows high resemblance, only small difference between south-southeast and south, as well as a minor 
at east-northeast and west and west-northwest. With the poor performance in wind speed the wind 
roses are concluded to be irrelevant to show, but are available in appendix, Figure 9.2.  
==PAGE:36==
32 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.11. The hourly distribution of wind presented as frequency in percentage related to the Østerild location, for Sep-
2015 to Aug-2018. In the top plot is the wind speed distribution, while the bottom is the directional distribution. The datasets 
are MERRA2 (red) and the met-mast observations (blue). 
Summary of validation of re-analysis: MERRA2 shows high resemblance with the wind observations 
at Fino3, but it is noted that MERRA2 has a slight underestimation of wind speed and favours south-
westerly wind directions over north-westerly ones. Both land locations show an overprediction of 
wind speed, especially at Østerild. A high resemblance is found for the wind directions at the Østerild 
location, but not at Høvsøre. Final comment, it should be noted for the MERRA2 data set at the 
Østerild location that the wind speed it is overpredicted by: a relative bias of monthly mean winds at 
25 to 60%, which approximately corresponding to 2-3m/s (Figure 6.6) and that the most frequent wind 
speeds found between are 3-6m/s by the observations, top plot in Figure 6.11. 
 
6.1.2 
Historical validation of CMIP5 
The MERRA2 data will in this section be the reference for validation of the CMIP5 models (HAD 
GEM-ES, GFDL ESM2G, MIROC ESM and MRI CMCM3) over the timeframe of 1980 to 2005. The 
same logic as pervious validation (Section 6.1.1) will be used, with presenting every step including the 
result from both locations, first result associated with Fino3 and thereafter at Østerild. Seasonally and 
yearly timeframes have been evaluated, but the findings from the seasonal analyse will only briefly be 
summarized without being showed in figures, as the difference mainly was increased relative bias. For 
the relative bias, yearly and seasonally was found: 
 
Fino3: the seasonal mean wind speeds were in general ±20% or lower, regardless of season. All 
CMIP5 shows similar individual bias regardless of season, except for MRI CMCM3. This model had a 
relative mean wind speed bias of 30-80% during the winter. The yearly relative mean wind bias 
(Figure 6.12) shows a main performance of about ±10%, expect for MRI CMCM3 that have a relative 
bias of mainly 15-30%.   
The wind directional distribution (Figure 6.13) shows a relative yearly bias ±25% (in general) for the 
westerly directions, but where all CMIP5 potentially underestimates the direction, expect MIROC 
ESM which overpredicts. The other directions do not show any clear indications of 
==PAGE:37==
33 
 
over/underestimations, but the relative bias is somewhat higher. For the seasons the indications are 
similar, but with higher relative bias.  
 
 
Figure 6.12. Yearly mean winds for the CMIP5 models and MERRA2 (colours are as given in legend right of plot), between 
1980 – 2005 associated to the Fino3 location (top). Relative bias of the CMIP5 models compared to MERRA2 (bottom). 
 
 
Figure 6.13. Mean directional distribution for the four given directional groups, between 1980 – 2005 associated to the 
Fino3 location (left), for the models given in the legend right of the plots. Corresponding relative bias for the CMIP5 
compared to MERRA2 (right). 
==PAGE:38==
34 
 
 
Figure 6.14. Yearly mean winds for the CMIP5 models and MERRA2 (colours are as given in legend right of plot), between 
1980 – 2005 associated to the Østerild location (left). Relative bias of the CMIP5 models compared to MERRA2 (right). 
 
 
Figure 6.15. Mean directional distribution for the four given directional groups, between 1980 – 2005 associated to the 
Østerild location (left), for the models given in the legend right of the plots. Corresponding relative bias for the CMIP5 
compared to MERRA2 (right). 
Østerild: the seasonal relative bias for mean wind speed are in general about 30 to -40%. This value is 
not far from the result of the yearly relative bias (Figure 6.14) which of about 10 to -40%. The 
seasonal variation is noticeable, where the winter almost has ±40%, while the spring only is ±20% 
during summer are all models underestimated compared to MERRA2. For both seasonal and yearly 
mean winds MIROC ESM and MRI CMCM3 predict higher mean wind speeds (expect summer) than 
MERRA2, meanwhile HAD GEM-ES and GFDL ESM2G predict about or lower mean wind speeds. 
Remark: on basis of earlier validation of MERRA2, the CMIP5 model with lower predictions of mean 
wind may hold higher comparability with the observed wind at Østerild.  
The relative bias for the wind directional distribution (Figure 6.15) has similar sizes as for results 
==PAGE:39==
35 
 
associated with the Fino3 location, however, the individual models perform differently. HAD GEM-
ES shows indications of overpredicted westerly and easterly winds, underprediction of southerly and 
easterly winds. Meanwhile, GFDL ESM2G shows underprediction of westerly winds, and some 
indications of overprediction in the other directional groups. MIROC ESM and MRI CMCM3 shows 
similar indications as GFDL ESM2G, but vaguer, except in the northerly directions for MIROC ESM, 
which is clearly overpredicted. Similar indications are seen for the season, but with some variation, 
and where the spring seem to have the lowest indication of over/underprediction. 
 
 
Figure 6.16. The six-hourly distribution of the given wind speeds for the CMIP5s and MERRA2, the line colours are given in 
the legend right of the plot. This distribution summarizes the full collection of the years 1980 to 2005 for the grids associated 
to the Fino3 location.  
 
The overall distribution from 1980 to 2005 show the following results: 
Fino3: The total six-hourly distribution of wind speed (Figure 6.16) give high resemblance between 
MERRA2 and GFDL ESM2G. HAD GEM is just slightly underestimated, while MIROC ESM and 
MRI CMCM3 clearly is under- and overestimated. The same insight is given by visual comparison of 
the CMIP5 models in the wind roses, Figure 6.17. In this figure can be found that MIROC ESM and 
MRI CMCM3, are not able to resemblance the MERRA2 wind rose, especially MIROC ESM perform 
poorly. The HAD GEM model preform very well, with a wind rose almost identical to MERRA2s, 
only smaller differences are noticed. The GFDL ESM2G wind rose resemble those of MERRA2 but 
lack some of the north-westerly winds. Remark: in earlier validation of MERRA2 was found an 
underprediction of the north-westerly wind compared to the observations at Fino3. 
 
==PAGE:40==
36 
 
 
Figure 6.17. The wind roses associated with the Fino3 location during the period 1980-2005. The uppermost wind rose is 
MERRA2, just right of this the colour legend for the given wind speeds. At the middle row to the; left is HAD GEM, right is 
GFDL ESM2G. The bottom row to the; left is MIROC ESM, right is MRI CMCM3.  
Østerild: The wind speed distribution found in Figure 6.18 shows that HAD GEM-ES and GFDL 
ESM2G are underestimated compared to MERRA2. Perhaps this provides higher resemblance with 
the observations, especially HAD GEM-ES are likely to have a wind speed distribution similar to the 
observations at Østerild. This model have its main distribution of wind speed between 2-6m/s, which 
is close to the findings about the observations at Østerild (seen in Figure 6.11). The overall wind 
distribution showed in Figure 6.19 find none of the CMIP5s to perfectly resemble MERRA2, but 
GFDL ESM2G and MRI CMCM3 perhaps being the closest ones to capture the shape of the wind 
roses. HAD GEM-ES preform very poorly on the wind rose shape for this location, with a high 
distribution of the west and east directions. 
==PAGE:41==
37 
 
Figure 6.18. The six-hourly distribution of the given wind speeds for the CMIP5s and MERRA2, the line colours are given in 
the legend right of the plot. This distribution summarizes the full collection of the years 1980 to 2005 for the grids associated 
to the Østerild location. 
 
Figure 6.19. The wind roses associated with the Østerild location during the period 1980-2005. The uppermost wind rose is 
MERRA2, just right of this the colour legend for the given wind speeds. At the middle row to the; left is HAD GEM, right is 
GFDL ESM2G. The bottom row to the; left is MIROC ESM, right is MRI CMCM3. 
==PAGE:42==
38 
 
Summary of the historical validation of CMIP5: HAD GEM-ES showed high resemblance with 
MERRA2 for the grids associated with Fino3. For this model will all three available scenarios, rcp2.6, 
rcp4.5 and rcp8.5 be included in the following and final validation step, meanwhile the other models 
only are based on the rcp4.5 scenario. This decision is made regardless of the poor performance of 
wind distribution of the model at the grid related to Østerild. It should also be noted that the GFDL 
ESM2G does in general perform well. While the other two models both shows over-/underprediction 
of wind speeds and have some problems with predicting the directional distribution, especially 
MIROC ESM.  
6.1.3 
Validation of CMIP5 future scenarios 
For this validation, all CMIP5 will be validated for their future scenarios against the observations at 
the two locations (the dataset from MERRA2 is also showed, but not evaluated or referred to, as it is 
only kept as the link between the two earlier validations). The seasonal and yearly relative bias have 
been analysed and show the following results: 
Fino3: the yearly relative bias for mean wind speed are in general about 0 to -15% (Figure 6.20) 
except for MRI CMCM3 that are overpredicted by 10 to 25%. The MRI CMCM3 are particularly bad 
at predicting the mean wind speed during Winter, while Summer and Autumn are closer to the results 
seen by the other model’s performance. For the seasons, the range of relative bias grows, in general 
ranging from about 15 to – 25%. 
The relative bias of directional distribution has been excluded for the report, as the result for this short 
time period does not give clear and significant value, but an almost general trend would perhaps be 
overprediction of northerly winds, both seasonally and yearly. The Spring and Autumn potentially 
indicated overprediction of southerly winds.  
Østerild: all HAD GEM-ES rcp scenarios perform with a yearly relative bias of -10 to 5% for the 
mean wind speed (Figure 6.21) while the GFDL ESM2G overpredict the mean wind by 10 to 20%. 
The other two CMIP5 models perform poorly (the relative bias at about 40%), with exception for the 
first year of MRI CMCM3. This is most likely caused by seasonal biases, since it was decided to keep 
all years despite the 1.5 missing month in the first year and 2.5 month in the last year. This is even 
more likely as this model before and also in this analyse overpredicting the mean wind speed during 
winters.  
Otherwise the seasonal relative biases of mean wind speed are about -10 to 60% for all the CMIP5 
models/scenarios, again all the HAD GEM-ES scenarios shows bias at only ±10%. 
 
==PAGE:43==
39 
 
Figure 6.20. Yearly mean winds for the CMIP5 models, MERRA2 and the observations (colours are as given in legend right 
of plot), between 2010 – 2017associated to the Fino3 location (top). Relative bias of the CMIP5 models compared to the 
observations (bottom). 
 
 
 
Figure 6.21. Yearly mean winds for the CMIP5 models, MERRA2 and the observations (colours are as given in legend right 
of plot), between 2015 – 2018 associated to the Østerild location (top). Relative bias of the CMIP5 models compared to the 
observations (bottom). 
The seasonal distribution of wind speed and direction shows similar patterns as the yearly distribution, 
therefor the seasonal distribution will not be presented in the report. The other findings of the wind 
distribution of the observational years are as follows: 
 
 
Figure 6.22 The six-hourly distribution of wind presented as frequency in percentage related to the Fino3 location, Jan-2010 
to Dec-2013 and Apr-2014 to Mar-2018. In the top plot is the wind speed distribution, while the bottom is the directional 
distribution. The datasets are CMIP5s, MERRA2 and the met-mast observations, as given by the legend just right of the plots. 
Fino3: The wind speed distribution shows (top plot Figure 6.22) overprediction of MRI CMCM3, 
underprediction of MIROC ESM, while HAD GEM-ES and GFDL ESM2G are closer to the observed 
wind speed distribution. Within the scenarios of HAD GEM-ES, rcp4.5 are the one closest to the 
observed, while rcp8.5 is the one further away without being far off, but just slightly underpredicted.  
==PAGE:44==
40 
 
The wind directional distribution (bottom plot Figure 6.22) provide no significant deviation from what 
was said in relation to Figure 6.17. With one exception, the HAD GEM rcp2.6 underestimated the 
south- and south-westerly wind. In general, all models perform well (both seasonally and yearly) for 
the easterly half of wind directions, except MIROC ESM. On the westerly half of wind directions, the 
MRI CMCM3 model overpredict the south-westerly winds, while MIROC ESM overpredict the 
westerly directions, and GFDL ESM2G underpredict the north-westerly directions.  
The overall distribution, visualised by the wind roses (Figure 6.23) MIROC ESM and MRI CMCM3 
has, as earlier indicated, poor performance of wind directions compared to the observational wind 
rose. The GFDL ESM2G models wind rose shows some difficulties with predicting the north-westerly 
wind, while the wind speed is rather well captured. For HAG GEM-ES rcp2.6 it becomes clear that not 
only the south-and south-westerly wind is underestimated, but so is also the north-westerly, while the 
direct westerly is somewhat overestimated. It is also clear that rcp4.5 lacking some east- and south-
easterly winds, while rcp8.5 overestimates the direct easterly winds. Still over all does all the HAD 
GEM-ES scenarios perform well for the location.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
41 
 
 
 
Figure 6.23. The wind roses related to the Fino3 location, Jan-2010 to Dec-2013 and Apr-2014 to Mar-2018, for the wind 
speed specified at the right top corner. At the top the mast observations. At the second row from the top at the left HAD GEM 
rcp2.6, at the right HAD GEM rcp4.5. The third row from the top to the left HAD GEM rcp8.5 and to the right GFDL 
ESM2G rcp4.5. The bottom row at the left MRI CMCM rcp4.5 and to the right MIROC ESM rcp4.5. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
42 
 
Østerild: the wind speed distribution of all HAD GEM-ES scenarios are very close to the observed 
ones (top plot in Figure 6.24) with the rcp4.5 scenario being closest. While all other models 
overpredict the wind speed, but with GFDL ESM having least overprediction. Regarding directional 
distribution (bottom plot in Figure 6.24) all the HAD GEM-ES scenarios perform poorly. Here does 
the GFDL ESM2G scenario give the result closest to the observational, but with underpredicted 
westerly winds and overpredicted east- and south-easterly ones. The MIROC ESM and MRI CMCM3 
shows similar patterns, with closer correlation on the easterly half of directions, but with 
overprediction of south-westerly directions and underpredictions of westerly.  
The overall picture of wind speed and wind directions combined (Figure 6.25) show rather poor 
comparison of all CMIP5 models and scenarios. The MRI CMCM3 and MIROC ESM have almost no 
similarities to the observational wind rose, except the lower occurrence of northerly winds. To point 
out the most obvious about the HAD GEM-ES scenarios, they are lack wind from southerly directions. 
In contrast to GFDL ESM2G that instead overpredict these directions and underpredict the north-
westerly winds. The GFDL ESM2G are for the overall perspective the one closest to resemblance the 
observations.  
 
 
Figure 6.24. The six-hourly distribution of wind presented as frequency in percentage related to the Østerild location, Sep-
2015 to Aug-2018. In the top plot is the wind speed distribution, while the bottom is the directional distribution. The datasets 
are CMIP5s, MERRA2 and the met-mast observations, as given by the legend just right of the plots. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
43 
 
 
 
Figure 6.25. The wind roses related to the Østerild location, Sep-2015 to Aug-2018, for the wind speed specified at the right 
top corner. At the top the mast observations. At the second row from the top at the left HAD GEM rcp2.6, at the right HAD 
GEM rcp4.5. The third row from the top to the left HAD GEM rcp8.5 and to the right GFDL ESM2G rcp4.5. The bottom row 
at the left MRI CMCM rcp4.5 and to the right MIROC ESM rcp4.5.  
 
6.1.4 
Evaluation of CMIP5 models 
It is crucial that wind speed and directions collectively are close to the observations, especially at our 
main reference location, Fino3.  
 
==PAGE:48==
44 
 
MIROC ESM and MRI CMCM3 are in general not performing at the level desired in the analysis at 
either of the locations, both regards wind speed and direction. There is a larger relative wind speed 
bias and too many irregularities in wind directions compared to the observations, and these models 
will be omitted from the future analysis including downscaling. 
 
GFDL ESM2G has captured the wind speed best at the Fino3 location but had some issues with 
capturing wind directions. At Østerild the model appeared to best capture the overall picture, despite 
being overpredicted, however, it was overpredicting wind speeds. GFDL ESM2G rcp4.5 will be used 
in the future analysis, but mainly as a reference to compare the two rcp4.5 developments.  
 
HAD GEM-ES is chosen as main model for the future analysis, including all three rcp scenarios. This 
is concluded after its good performance in capturing both the wind speed and direction at Fino3. The 
wind speed was also captured well at the Østerild location, however, here the directional distribution 
performed poorly. A given cause to this is an inclination of the landscape for the given grid cell. 
However, if the downscaling does not adjust for the directional distribution, the result for GFDL 
ESM2G rcp4.5 will be the only data analysed in WAsP of the onshore case.  
 
6.2 FUTURE WIND AND POWER PREDICTION 
This section is based on cases and the methods given in Chapter 5. The result will be presented as (or 
calculated by) four yearly averages before it is calculated for the full analyse period, 24years. This is 
to show the some of the fluctuations over the period. Normally yearly averages would been chosen, 
but to account for the time frequency of 6 hours instead of 10 minutes is the four years chosen after a 
small study. In this study the met-mast measurements from Fino3 both with 10 minutes and 6 hours 
frequency was compared after analysed in WAsP. Based on the mean wind and power density at a 
reference site was found that first when four years or more was included did the difference become 
less than 1%.  
 
In the coming sections, only the HAD GEM-ES rcp2.6, rcp4.5 and rcp8.5, as well as GFDL ESM2G 
rcp4.5 be will evaluated. Before that, a non-dimensional “relative future bias” of the mean wind for the 
years 2019 to 2042 will be presented (Figure 6.26 and 6.27, Fino3 case, respectively Østerild).  
 
In total over the years, the mean wind increases for all models and scenarios in the Fino3 case, with 
0.1-2.1%, while at Østerild ranges from -0.9 to 6.1%. The MRI CMCM3 which in the validation had 
overpredicted mean winds does in this result also give the highest increase in wind at both locations. 
For the Fino3 case the rcp4.5 scenarios for HAD GEM-ES (0.1%) and MIROC ESM (0.2%) give the 
highest resemblance while the other two has higher relative future bias 0.6% for GFDL ESM2G and 
1.8% for MRI CMCM3. For the Østerild location all except GFDL ESM2G (-0.3%) give increase, 
where HAD GEM-ES (1.9%) and MIROC ESM (2.7%) again are most similar and MRI CMCM 
provides a much higher value at 6.1%. 
 
 
Figure 6.26. This plot represents a non-dimensional mean wind development for the Fino3 case. The data is averaged over 
every fourth year, from 2019 to 2042 for all models used in this study, lines in the plot are described in the legend just right 
of the plot.    
==PAGE:49==
45 
 
 
Figure 6.27. This plot represents a non-dimensional mean wind development for the Østerild case. The data is averaged over 
every fourth year, from 2019 to 2042 for all models used in this study, lines in the plot are described in the legend just right 
of the plot.  
6.2.1 
Offshore case 
The future scenarios bid on wind speed distribution for 2019-2042 (top plot in Figure 6.28) related to 
the Fino3 location (also presented in the plot is the observations for the met-mast), shows that GFDL 
ESM2G rcp4.5 now has more resemblance to the observations in wind speeds 9-10 m/s than during 
the validation, Figure 6.22. The same goes for the three HAD GEM-ES scenarios, which also have 
more aligned distribution than before. These changes are also seen in the “future relative bias” (bottom 
plot in Figure 6.28) where relative bias has been calculated individually for the models with the 
observational timeframe as reference. Here it is found that the two rcp4.5 scenarios pointing on 
different development. The HAD GEM-ES scenarios rcp2.6 and rcp8.5 and GFDL ESM2G rcp4.5, 
showing increase occurrence of wind speeds of 15-20m/s and a decrease in 5-15m/s. Where HAD 
GEM-ES rcp4.5 indicate the opposite development. Furthermore, GFDL ESM2G rcp4.5 is the only 
one where the wind over 25m/s increase in numbers, while the others decrease. Wind speeds below 
5m/s, decrease slightly for HAD GEM-ES rcp2.6 and rcp4.5, while the two others have a slight 
increase.  
 
In relation to above, during the validation period 2010-2018 the wind speed distribution was between 
5-15m/s at about 74% based on the observations and where the two rcp4.5 scenarios were most alike 
with less than a percent in difference. Still both models overpredict winds below and underpredict 
winds above this interval with some percent. 
 
 
Figure 6.28. The future wind speed distribution and “relative future bias” for the Fino3 location over the period 2019-2042, 
with the period Jan-2010 to Dec-2013 and Apr-2014 to Mar-2018 as a reference. The top plot being the wind speed 
distribution and the bottom plot being the “relative future bias”, with the line colours explained in the legend right of the 
plots. 
==PAGE:50==
46 
 
The wind directional distribution for the period 2019 to 2042 and corresponding model individual 
“relative future bias” are seen in Figure 6.29, top respectively bottom plot. This information continues 
to give indications that HAD GEM-ES rcp4.5 and GFDL ESM2G rcp4.5 does not agree on the future 
development, besides a decrease in south-westerly wind directions (HAD GEM-ES rcp8.5 does also 
agree to that). However, the two rcp4.5 does have indications of increase of winds between east and 
southeast, but where the signal is weaker from GFDL ESM2G and rather being an increase of 
southeast to southerly directions. HAD GEM-ES rcp4.5 and rcp8.5 have very similar development 
patterns, while rcp2.6 almost always have opposite sign of the future relative bias.  
 
 
 
Figure 6.29. The future wind directional distribution and “relative future bias” for the Fino3 location over the period 2019-
2042, with the period Jan-2010 to Dec-2013 and Apr-2014 to Mar-2018 as a reference. The top plot being the wind 
directional distribution and the bottom plot being the “relative future bias”, with the line colours explained in the legend 
right of the plots. 
Despite the changes in Figure 6.28 and 6.29, the combined distribution does not change tremendously, 
as seen in Figure 6.30, if comparing to Figure 6.23. However, the main difference between the wind 
roses, is seen for HAD GEM rcp2.6 where local changes both within the western respectively eastern 
half are visible, in general giving less northerly and more southerly wind directions. HAD GEM rcp4.5 
have increase of east- and south-easterly direction, while rcp8.5 have increase of north-easterly 
directions, both also has other smaller changes. GFDL ESM2G rcp4.5 have got a more circular shape, 
after an increase of south-easterly and southerly winds. 
 
==PAGE:51==
47 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.30. Wind roses for the time period from 2019 to 2042 associated with the Fino3 location, with the wind speeds 
given at the right bottom corner. The upper row to the left is HAD GEM rcp2.6, at the right is HAD GEM rcp4.5. The bottom 
row to the is left HAD GEM rcp8.5 and to the right is GFDL ESM2G rcp4.5.  
To further evaluate the changes seen in Figure 6.28, 6.29 and 6.30 and determine if it is trends or 
fluctuations. A fourth yearly averages of each models are analysed and provided the following results: 
 
HAD GEM-ES rcp2.6: In Figure 6.31 top plot the signal is clear that wind speeds above 19 m/s will 
increase in all fourth years periods, but otherwise the changes mainly shift over the full period. The 
wind directional changes (Figure 6.21 bottom plot) seem to point toward the same result regarding the 
easterly half of wind directions for the full period, while the westerly half give a more fluctuating 
result over the years. 
  
HAD GEM-ES rcp4.5: In Figure 6.32, almost for all periods show indications of decrease of high and 
low wind speeds and increase of the middle sector. Regarding wind directions, almost all periods have 
increase of easterly directions and decrease of south- and south-westerly directions. 
  
HAD GEM-ES rcp8.5: The opposite to HAD GEM-ES rcp4.5’s wind speed distribution is found in 
Figure 6.33 top plot, which in general shows an increase in higher and lower wind speeds, while the 
middle sector shows decreasing trend for all four-yearly periods. For the wind directional distribution 
(Figure 6.33 bottom plot) only direct southerly and south- and south-westerly always has decreasing 
trend, while the others change back and forth over the period.  
 
GFDL ESM2G rcp4.5: Only in the wind speed distribution between 21-24 m/s has indications of a 
decrease for all periods, top plot in Figure 6.34. However, most of the periods have an increase of 
winds between 11-14m/s, but less for the later years than the earlier ones. For the earlier years, the 
whole ranges from 11-20m/s increasing. Regarding the wind directional distribution (bottom plot in 
Figure 6.34) for most fourth-year periods a decrease of winds around northeast and increase of winds 
from south are found. 
==PAGE:52==
48 
 
 
Figure 6.31. The HAD GEM-ES rcp2.6 “relative future bias” compared to the reference period Jan-2010 to Dec-2013 and 
Apr-2014 to Mar-2018 associated with the Fino3 location. Where the top plot is the “relative future bias” for the wind speed 
distribution and the bottom one for the wind directional distribution. Right of the top plot are the colours for the year 
intervals given. 
 
 
Figure 6.32. The HAD GEM-ES rcp4.5 “relative future bias” compared to the reference period Jan-2010 to Dec-2013 and 
Apr-2014 to Mar-2018 associated with the Fino3 location. Where the top plot is the “relative future bias” for the wind speed 
distribution and the bottom one for the wind directional distribution. Right of the top plot are the colours for the year 
intervals given. 
==PAGE:53==
49 
 
 
 
Figure 6.33. The HAD GEM-ES rcp8.5 “relative future bias” compared to the reference period Jan-2010 to Dec-2013 and 
Apr-2014 to Mar-2018 associated with the Fino3 location. Where the top plot is the “relative future bias” for the wind speed 
distribution and the bottom one for the wind directional distribution. Right of the top plot are the colours for the year 
intervals given. 
 
 
 
Figure 6.34. The GFDL ESM2G rcp4.5 “relative future bias” compared to the reference period Jan-2010 to Dec-2013 and 
Apr-2014 to Mar-2018 associated with the Fino3 location. Where the top plot is the “relative future bias” for the wind speed 
distribution and the bottom one for the wind directional distribution. Right of the top plot are the colours for the year 
intervals given. 
Despite the fluctuating changes over time that just been showed, the overall mean wind speed for 2019 
to 2042 indicates almost no change expect for HAD GEM-ES rcp2.6 which clearly decreases, Figure 
6.35. The indications of changes of the seasonally mean wind speeds (Figure 6.36) are similar, HAD 
GEM-ES rcp2.6 decreases during all seasons except in Summer, where it remains almost unchanged. 
While the two other HAD GEM-ES scenarios show almost no change for all seasons except Spring 
where it decreases. The GFDL ESM2G rcp4.5 change over most seasons, with decrease during Spring 
and Winter, and increase during Autumn. 
==PAGE:54==
50 
 
 
Figure 6.35. Mean wind speed development over the years 2019 to 2042 associated to the Fino3 location. Yearly mean wind 
speeds are shaded in grey tones for all the models, with a linear fit to the whole timeseries is coloured, as seen in the label 
right of the plot. 
 
Figure 6.36. Mean wind speed development over the years 2019 to 2042 for all four seasons associated to the Fino3 
location. Yearly mean wind speeds are shaded in grey tones for all the models, with a linear fit to the whole timeseries is 
coloured, as seen in the label right of the bottom plot. 
The case set up in WAsP for “Horns Rev III” are predicted to produce a net AEP as shown in Table 
6.1. A general increase of net AEP produced in the park for the period 2019-2042 compared to the 
observational period (Jan-2010 to Dec-2013 and Apr-2014 to Mar-2018) is found. The “future relative 
bias” are found to be 0.2-2.5%. This would potentially give a few GWh higher AEP production than 
calculated only based on the observations. Relating the information in Table 6.1. to Figure 6.28., 
where it was found a decrease in the wind speed distribution between 15-25m/s for HAD GEM-ES 
rcp4.5, but not the other models/scenarios, and now this model has the lowest increase in AEP. 
Furthermore, the GFDL ESM-ES are the model that has the net AEP closest to the observational one, 
which are the model with highest resemblance to the observational wind speed distribution. Despite 
this is the net AEP is still underestimated by more than 50GWh.  
 
The annual wake losses, Table 6.2, show a slight decrease of losses in the future by all HAD GEM-ES 
scenarios, while a minor increase by GFDL ESM2G. The wake loss is again, as for the net AEP, 
compared to the result given by the observations closes to the result given by the GFDL ESM2G 
rcp4.5 model.  
==PAGE:55==
51 
 
Model 
Scenario/time 
frequency 
Time period 2010-2018 [GWh]  
Time period 2019-2042 [GWh] 
“Relative future 
bias” [%] 
HAD GEM-
ES 
rcp2.6 
548.4 
561.6 
2.4 
HAD GEM-
ES 
rcp4.5 
570.3 
571.3 
0.2 
HAD GEM-
ES 
rcp8.5 
571.7 
582.0 
1.8 
GFDL 
ESM2G 
rcp4.5 
603.8 
618.4 
2.4 
Met-Mast 
10-minutes 
656.6 
 
 
Met-Mast 
6-hourly 
656.3 
 
 
Table 6.1. The net AEP [GWh] production for the test farm at Horns Rev III, based on the stated different CMIP5 models 
and the observations from the Fino3 met-mast. Both calculated for the reference period Jan-2010 to Dec-2013 and Apr-2014 
to Mar-2018 and the future period 2019-2042. Then are a relative bias calculated for the models based on their difference. 
 
Model 
Scenario/time 
frequency 
Time period 2010-2018 [%] 
Time period 2019-2042 [%] 
“Relative future bias” 
[%] 
HAD GEM-
ES 
rcp2.6 
2.21 
 
2.13 
 
-3.5 
 
HAD GEM-
ES 
rcp4.5 
2.05 
 
2.07 
 
-0.8 
 
HAD GEM-
ES 
rcp8.5 
2.12 
 
2.05 
 
-3.5 
 
GFDL 
ESM2G 
rcp4.5 
1.89 
 
1.91 
 
1.2 
 
Met-mast 
6-hourly 
1.80 
 
 
 
Table 6.2. The annual wake losses for the test farm at Horns Rev III are calculated for the reference period Jan-2010 to Dec-
2013 and Apr-2014 to Mar-2018 and the future period 2019-2042 for all CMIP5 scenarios and the met-mast observations at 
Fino3. Along with this is the calculated “relative future bias”. 
Similarly, Summer and Winter have been analysed for AEP-S in WAsP for the “Horn Rev III” test 
farm, Table 6.3, respectively Table 6.4. The differences between result based on the observations and 
the CMIP5 models/scenarios is much larger than for the full years. This is expected as the relative bias 
was larger for the seasons than for the full years.  
Despite the larger relative bias, the Summer (Table 6.3) clearly it indicates a decrease in power 
production. The decrease is calculated to have a “relative future bias” of 9.4-15.7%.  
For the Winter the net AEP-S are predicted to increase slightly, with a “relative future bias” of 0.7-
16.8%. It should be noted that the HAD GEM rcp8.5 are calculated to have almost the same net AEP 
as GFDL ESM2G rcp4.5, for the observational timeframe.  
 
Model 
Scenario/time 
frequency 
Time period 2010-2018 [GWh]  
Time period 2019-2042 [GWh] 
“Relative future 
bias” [%] 
HAD GEM-
ES 
rcp2.6 
394.7 
 
344.7 
 
-12.7 
 
HAD GEM-
ES 
rcp4.5 
409.0 
 
344.9 
 
-15.7 
 
HAD GEM-
ES 
rcp8.5 
429.0 
 
364.7 
 
-15.0 
 
GFDL 
ESM2G 
rcp4.5 
447.4 
 
405.2 
 
-9.4 
 
Met-mast 
6-hourly 
508.9 
 
 
 
Table 6.3. Seasonal energy production in Summer for the test farm at Horns Rev III, based on the stated different CMIP5 
models and the observations from the Fino3 mast. 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
52 
 
Model 
Scenario/time 
frequency 
Time period 2010-2018 [GWh]  
Time period 2019-2042 [GWh] 
“Relative future 
bias” [%] 
HAD GEM-
ES 
rcp2.6 
724.8 
 
779.1 
 
7.5 
 
HAD GEM-
ES 
rcp4.5 
779.4 
 
785.1 
 
0.7 
 
HAD GEM-
ES 
rcp8.5 
699.2 
 
816.3 
 
16.7 
 
GFDL 
ESM2G 
rcp4.5 
695.5 
 
811.0 
 
16.6 
 
Met-mast 
6hour 
798.3 
 
 
 
Table 6.4. Seasonal energy production in Winter for the test farm at Horns Rev III, based on the stated different CMIP5 
models and the observations from the Fino3 mast. 
6.2.2 
Onshore case 
The wind speed distribution predicted for the Østerild case during coming years, 2019 to 2042, are 
summarised in Figure 6.37. The only visible development since time period 2015-2018 is that HAD 
GEM-ES scenarios are more aligned. The wind speed distribution develops differently depending on 
model/scenario except that they all indicate an increase at the highest wind speed. Analysing 5-15m/s 
collectively all models/scenarios except HAD GEM-ES rcp8.5 increases, while for the 15-24m/s does 
all HAD GEM-ES scenarios increase but GFDL ESM2G rcp4.5 decrease. For the wind speeds below 
5m/s does HAD GEM-ES rcp4.5 and GDFL ESM2G rcp4.5 increase.  
Related to this is that HAD GEM-ES rcp4.5 had the highest comparability with the observations, but 
with a underprediction of wind speeds between 15-24m/s. 
 
The wind directional distribution, Figure 6.38, has no larger visible changes, except that GFDL 
ESM2G has even less wind from south-westerly directions than before. All models indicate an 
increase of south-easterly winds and decrease of west-and north-westerly winds, bottom plot Figure 
6.38.  
 
Looking at the distribution development over the years (Figure 6.39-6.42) the wind speed distribution 
for HAD GEM-ES rcp2.6 (Figure 6.39) and GDFL ESM2G rcp4.5 (Figure 6.42) have fluctuating 
positive and negative changes in wind speed. Whereas the other two HAD GEM-ES scenarios (Figure 
6.40-6.41) at shows a more general trend in their individual changes. However, it should be pointed 
out that the observational timeframe might being all too short to give a fair picture of the models, 
before evaluating their development. All model, except HAD GEM-ES rcp4.5, show a general trend 
over all the years regarding most of their changes in wind directional distribution. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
53 
 
 
Figure 6.37. The future wind speed distribution and “relative future bias” for the Østerild location over the period 2019-
2042, with the period Sep-2015 to Aug-2018 as a reference. The top plot being the wind speed distribution and the bottom 
plot being the “relative future bias”, with the line colours explained in the legend right of the plots. 
 
Figure 6.38. The future wind directional distribution and “relative future bias” for the Østerild location over the period 
2019-2042, with the period Sep-2015 to Aug-2018 as a reference. The top plot being the wind directional distribution and the 
bottom plot being the “relative future bias”, with the line colours explained in the legend right of the plots. 
==PAGE:58==
54 
 
 
Figure 6.39. The HAD GEM-ES rcp2.6 “relative future bias” compared to the reference period Sep-2015 to Aug-2018 
associated with the Østerild location. Where the top plot is the “relative future bias” for the wind speed distribution and the 
bottom one for the wind directional distribution. Right of the top plot are the colours for the year intervals given. 
 
Figure 6.40. The HAD GEM-ES rcp4.5 “relative future bias” compared to the reference period Sep-2015 to Aug-2018 
associated with the Østerild location. Where the top plot is the “relative future bias” for the wind speed distribution and the 
bottom one for the wind directional distribution. Right of the top plot are the colours for the year intervals given. 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
55 
 
 
Figure 6.41. The HAD GEM-ES rcp8.5 “relative future bias” compared to the reference period Sep-2015 to Aug-2018 
associated with the Østerild location. Where the top plot is the “relative future bias” for the wind speed distribution and the 
bottom one for the wind directional distribution. Right of the top plot are the colours for the year intervals given. 
 
 
Figure 6.42. The GFDL ESM2G rcp4.5 “relative future bias” compared to the reference period Sep-2015 to Aug-2018 
associated with the Østerild location. Where the top plot is the “relative future bias” for the wind speed distribution and the 
bottom one for the wind directional distribution. Right of the top plot are the colours for the year intervals given. 
 
The overall mean wind speed trend is decreasing for all models except HAD GEM rcp4.5 (Figure 
6.43). For the Spring does all models/scenarios show a decrease (Figure 6.44), while in Summer does 
HAD GEM-ES rcp2.6 and rcp4.5 barely change and the other two decrease. For Winter and Autumn 
does none of the models indicate to decrease or increase, except HAD GEM-ES rcp2.6 that decrease 
during winter.  
 
==PAGE:60==
56 
 
 
Figure 6.43. Mean wind speed development over the years 2019 to 2042 associated to the Østerild location. Yearly mean 
wind speeds are shaded in grey tones for all the models, with a linear fit to the whole timeseries is coloured, as seen in the 
label right of the plot. 
 
Figure 6.44. Mean wind speed development over the years 2019 to 2042 for all four seasons associated to the Østerild 
location. Yearly mean wind speeds are shaded in grey tones for all the models, with a linear fit to the whole timeseries is 
coloured, as seen in the label right of the bottom plot. 
The downscaling of the HAD GEM-ES failed to change the wind directional distribution significantly 
(relating back to the disformed wind roses in Figure 6.25), so therefore will only GFDL ESM2G 
rcp4.5 be evaluated. The changes seen for this model after downscaling are not drastical, but a slight 
decrease in frequency of westerly directions and increase of north and north-westerly directions is 
found (if comparing the before and after wind distribution plots in Figure 6.45). The mean wind does 
in this case decrease by 0.4m/s (7.1m/s respectively 6.7m/s), but still almost 1m/s higher than the 
prediction based on the observations (5.7m/s). If comparing the wind directional distribution of the 
downscaled GFDL ESM rcp4.5 (Figure 6.45) with the observed one (Figure 6.46) are the differences 
clearly seen for the westerly wind.  
 
 
==PAGE:61==
57 
 
 
Figure 6.45. The wind roses produced by GFDL ESM2G rcp4.5 located at the grid near Østerild for the time period Sep-
2015 to Aug-2018, to the left based on the pristine dataset and to the right the downscaled version based on the 
topographical map for Østerild. 
 
Figure 6.46. The wind directional distribution predicted at Østerild based on the observations during the period Sep-2015 to 
Aug-2018. 
Presented in Figure 6.47 are the power density results of the resource grid for the original and three 
manipulated maps (Section 5.2.2), based on predictions of wind climate of the observations (Sep-2015 
to Aug-2018). It is found that an increased density of broadleaf trees provides a larger negative change 
in power density if they are in a west-east placement or randomly placed, than north-southly placed.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:62==
58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.47. This is the predicted power density at the resource grid with a spatial resolution of 500m. All predictions are 
based on the met-mast observations for Østerild during Sep-2015 to Aug-2018. At the top to the left for the original map, to 
the right of the randomly placed leaf trees. At the bottom left for the map with the south-north placed leaf trees and to the 
right the east-west placed leaf trees. 
 
The same maps were used to produce predictions for the GFDL ESM2G rcp4.5 winds, both for the 
observational period Sep-2015 to Aug-2018 and for the future period 2019-2042. The pattern seen for 
the resource grid are similar as in Figure 6.47 but with higher power density, as the mean wind are 
higher for GDFL ESM2G than the observations. The mean wind and power density for a reference site 
(located at the same place as the met-mast) are presented in Table 6.5. Here is found that the changes 
in mean wind on is not very large between the reference years 2015-2018 and the future years 2019-
2042 for GFDL ESM rcp4.5. A “relative future bias” would be at negative at 1.5% or lower 
(depending on map). Analysing the mean wind speed differences caused by the map’s, a “future 
relative bias” based on the maps (with the original as reference) is in most cases larger; about 4-5% for 
the map simulating randomly placed leaf trees, about 1-2% for the map simulating north-south placed 
leaf trees and  about14-15 % for the map simulating the east-west placed leaf trees. It should be noted 
that no evaluation of reliability of the placement of leaf trees has been done, nor taken into 
consideration the placement of the reference site.  
The maximum, minimum and mean power density for the resource grid was also calculated, but as it 
does not add any value to the result is it placed in the appendix Table 9.1. 
 
Reference site 
                                           Mast observation 2015-2018     GFDL ESM2G 2015-2018         GFDL ESM2G 2019- 2042 
 
Orig. 
Rand. 
N-S 
E-W 
Orig. 
Rand. 
N-S 
E-W 
Orig. 
Rand. 
N-S 
E-W 
Mean wind [m/s] 
5.72 
5.47 
5.65 
4.91 
6.67 
6.29 
6.61 
5.59 
6.57 
6.21 
6.51 
5.54 
Power density [W/m2] 
232 
206 
222 
150 
337 
279 
330 
193 
312 
260 
305 
182 
Table 6.5. The mean wind and power density at the reference site at Østerild, calculated by WAsP for the above given 
combinations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:63==
59 
 
7. DISCUSSION AND PERSPECTIVE 
Firstly, the data treatment and reliability of the study will be discussed, followed by a discussion of the 
possible general wind development. The two cases will then be further discussed before future 
perspectives are presented. 
 
7.1 DATA TREATMENT AND RELIABILITY 
Observation always comes with uncertainty and irregularities in measurement caused by e.g. 
measuring cups, shadowing of mast, and so on. This is unavoidable, so in general an uncertainty for 
measurements are assumed to be 2-5% (Mortensen, 2016). Furthermore, the interpolation of wind 
speeds at Høvsøre and Østerild to get the wind to 50m are likely to impact the uncertainty, but only 
very minimally as the result was a weighted result. The uncertainty caused by changing the time 
frequency from 10minutes to only every sixth hour are likely to only be a few percent for Østerild, but 
less than 1% for Fino3, as it was tested in an analysis in WAsP that four consecutive years were 
enough to gain that range of certainty.  
 
The re-analysis MERRA2 is overestimated in two out of three cases. The overestimation is also seen 
in a study by Staffel and Pfenninger (2016), where they tested MERRA and MERRA2, which clearly 
indicated a general overestimation of wind over north-western Europe. The performance over open 
water may be better, as the Fino3 location only was slightly underestimated.  
 
The validation concept appears to work stably with the findings found for the CMIP5 models during 
both the historical and future scenario (with only small and expected changes). If only evaluating 
CMIP5 models for the onshore location, the validation concept would not have been satisfactory.  
 
The two CMIP5 models MIROC ESM and MRI CMCM3 generally show the same sort of relative bias 
at both locations. The models underpredicted (MIROC ESM) and overpredicted (MRI CMCM3) the 
mean wind speed, and the wind direction predictions did not resemble the reference data. These two 
models are not fit for use over north-western Denmark without bias correction. MRI CMCM3 may 
even have more bias in the future scenarios and there were at least indications of more increases in 
wind speed, despite the already existing overprediction. This is also along the lines of the IPCC 
evaluation of the models, where the u and v parameters were analysed at 850hPa (1980-2005) and 
MRI CMCM3 showed larger bias than the other three models (Flato et al., 2013). 
   
GFDL ESM2G has been reliable when it comes to deriving a general wind directional pattern, but 
always overpredicts the wind speed. The model does seem to resemble MERRA2, which may be 
because of the collaboration between the two model developers (and given that they perhaps have very 
similar initial parameters based on the same satellite measurements).   
 
HAD GEM-ES has in general performed well when modelling the wind speed, but instead lacks 
reliability for directions over land. This could however be avoided by placing the grid more cleverly, 
but this may negatively impact the wind speed. Regardless, all models were meant to be evaluated on 
the grid located over the observational location and ideally any irregularities caused by the topography 
would disappear or become minimal after downscaling.  
 
The downscaling may or may not provide good results, as it was previously stated that the quality of 
the downscaled regional model depends on the governing model and downscaling procedure (Flato et 
al., 2014). Pryor et al. (2012) also confirm this and that concludes that increasing the resolution from 
50 km to 6 km increases the extreme winds more than the mean wind. The downscaling performed in 
WAsP is doubtful based on the result and did not get downscaled to a size required for the onshore 
location. This is not surprising, as the microscale-model is made for downscaling no higher resolution 
than meso-scale models. 
==PAGE:64==
60 
 
 
7.2 GENERAL TRENDS AND FINDINGS 
The smaller ensemble (Figure 6.26 and 6.27) on development of mean wind speed do not indicate 
large changes and neither do any of the other analysis of the future wind speeds. Based on the CMIP5 
models and scenarios chosen for these locations, there is not likely to be a large change in the wind 
climate during 2019-2042.  
 
Recent studies based on the fifth assessment report by IPCC and the corresponding CMIP5 models 
suggest a similar trend. A study by Tobin et al. (2016) suggests that the future energy yield would 
remain stable at ±5%, potentially changing up to 15% at a local scale. This research was based on 
seven downscaled regional climate models, originating from five different GIMP5s. Similar findings 
were found by Moemken, J., et al. (2018) which examined nine regional climate models. They also 
pointed out that the signal over parts off Scandinavia was not consistent. On seasonal terms, they 
found that for western Europe the wind speed during Summers would decrease and increase during 
winter. These finding were only partly seen in this study, with a slight decrease during Summers, 
however, the timeframes between this study and their report were different. The decrease in wind may 
be related to the information in Section 1.1.2 by Martin Olesen, et. al, 2014, which said that droughts 
during the summer are more likely to occur in the future. Drought conditions in Denmark may indicate 
high pressure near Denmark with calmer wind conditions.   
 
Lastly, Moemken, J., et al. (2018) found a solid increase in wind speeds below 3m/s and a decrease of 
winds between 11-20m/s for wind at 100m. The decrease in 11-20m/s is also recognisable in this study 
by some of the models/scenarios, but it was not a general trend. 
 
A typical uncertainty of 1-3% is used for long-term extrapolation of wind climate (Niels G. 
Mortensen, 2016) and the given this study the future wind climate is likely also to fall within this size 
(Figure 6.26 and Figure 6.27). On the other hand, to account for all unknowns in the future, i.e. 
atmospheric composition, the size of this uncertainty might be increased somewhat (or indefinitely).  
 
7.3 OFFSHORE EVALUATION 
At the test park “Horns Rev III” the AEP was predicted to increase by 0.1-2.5% (Table 6.1). The gain 
in net AEP seems realistic compared to the development seen in the analysis of the models/scenarios, 
however, the unreliability of the future predictions of the models/scenarios remains.  
 
The Winter and Summer seasons do not show realistic results regarding AEP-S, but this is not 
unexpected as the models/scenarios had larger relative bias during the seasons than during the full 
years. Despite that the models are meant to be suitable for seasonal averages, perhaps longer 
timeframes are required to gain less relative bias.  
 
Overall the findings are doubtful, but the net AEP provides somewhat realistic results and potential 
likely development based on the analysis of the CMIP5 models in WAsP.   
 
7.4 ONSHORE EVALUATION 
The future analysis done for Østerild based on the different CMIP5 models/scenarios does not give a 
clear indication of development. The difference in interpolation of topography and the short reference 
period may be the two factors causing these results and the wind climate is not likely to change, but 
only fluctuate around its statistical wind climate. 
 
The downscaling fails to provide valuable information but the test of changing the roughness maps 
shows a large impact on the wind climate. This is perhaps the larger influencer of future wind climate 
at certain locations with complex terrain. The test with the roughness maps has not been investigated 
==PAGE:65==
61 
 
for realism and a more in depth analyse analysis be required to say anything on the matter. More than 
one development map would be required, as trees do not grow overnight and this test was meant to 
simulate the roughness map at Østerild closer to 2050.  
 
7.5 FUTURE PERSPECTIVE 
Higher resolution models would be interesting to investigate to figure out whether the resemblance 
with observations can be increased and potential biases minimized. Higher resolution models could 
also potentially increase the success rate of downscaling with the microscale-model in WAsP. As 
mentioned by IPCC, the initial biases are caused by a model’s initial conditions, but after a decade 
they will be based on greenhouse gas forced boundary differences (Kirtman et al., 2013). Therefore, it 
might be prudent to verify in what way the regional climate models affect the global climate model in 
the downscaling process.  
 
One of the originals proposals was to use geopotential height of the CMIP5 models, recalculated to 
geostrophic wind and then downscaled with the microscale-model in WAsP. Using this concept, the 
validation would have been performed on observations at locations at much higher altitudes (lidar 
measurements/measurements at 244m was available). This idea was dismissed when it was clear that 
none of the CMIP5 models had a time frequency higher than a day for the geopotential height. 
However, the proposal still has prospects if geopotential heights would be released with higher time 
frequencies. 
 
Another proposal to help predict future climate change effects on wind is by non-dimensional 
ensembles using as many CMIP5 (or later) models as possible over the given location/region, 
preferably with data from hub height. This would provide a large base of future inputs, from which the 
more likely development/developments could be analysed. Based on the indications of changes in the 
wind climate, a locally observed wind climate can be adjusted – either manually or by forcing a 
weather model to mirror the potential development/developments. 
 
The temperature, air pressure, atmospheric stability and other relevant parameters were excluded in 
this study but would be of interest to investigate, preferably all at once. In particular, the development 
in atmospheric stability could be interesting as heavy precipitation (suggested by Olesen, et al. (2014) 
to be more commonplace in Denmark in the future) may indicate an atmosphere with more unstable 
conditions.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:66==
62 
 
8. CONCLUSION  
The validation concept applied on the CMIP5 models was found to be applicable for the chosen 
location, timeline in years and over open waters. It was found not to be completely appropriate for 
onshore conditions. The last part of the validation including the future predictions of CMIP5 will be 
more and more relevant as time passes, as the internal model forces caused by greenhouse gases will 
increase/decrease with time.  
 
The use of CMIP5 models for such as study could be questioned as only two out of four models 
passed the validation test, meanwhile the re-analysis MERRA2 performed rather well over open 
waters but had some issues to predict the wind by coastlines. The downscaling process used was also 
not completely satisfactory, with its limitation of handling the topographical influences of the CMIP5 
models. The concept does work only if the CMIP5 output is closely related to the observations on site.  
 
To directly use the CMIP5 datasets to calculate wind and power output from a future perspective is not 
recommended, without having a reference period to compare with. The mean wind speed changes 
found in the study of a few percent does comply with what is found in similar studies. Lastly, it should 
be noted that to predict future wind climate at a local scale onshore, a proper investigation of likely 
changes in the landscape may contain invaluable and further enriching information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:67==
63 
 
9. APPENDIX 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.1. The wind roses related to the Østerild location, Sep-2015 to Aug-2018, for the specified wind speeds. To the left 
is the wind rose representing MERRA2 and to the right is the observed wind at Østerild. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.2. The wind roses related to the Høvsøre location, Sep-2004 to Aug-2018, for the specified wind speeds. To the left 
is the wind rose representing MERRA2 and to the right is the observed wind at Høvsøre.  
Resource grid 
                                           Mast observation 2015-2018     GFDL ESM2G 2015-2018         GFDL ESM2G 2019- 2042 
Power Density [W/m2] 
Orig. 
Rand. 
N-S 
E-W 
Orig. 
Rand. 
N-S 
E-W 
Orig. 
Rand. 
N-S 
E-W 
Minimum 
597 
590 
597 
584 
932 
926 
932 
921 
838 
832 
838 
827 
Maximum 
172 
143 
172 
108 
264 
218 
264 
155 
241 
205 
241 
145 
Mean 
318 
263 
317 
209 
460 
383 
459 
304 
422 
351 
421 
280 
Table 9.1. The minimum, maximum and mean power density for the resource grid around Østerild, calculated by WAsP for 
the above given combinations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:68==
64 
 
BIBLOGRAPHY 
Ahrens, C. D., 2012: Meteorology Today: An introduction to Weather, Climate, and Environment.
 
Brooks/Cole, Belmont, USA. pp308-309, 342. 
Bellouin N. et al, 2007: Improved representation of aerosols for HadGEM2. Meteorological Office
 
Hadley Centre, Technical Note 73, March 2007; Collins W.J.  et al, 2008: Evaluation of the
 
HadGEM2 model. Meteorological Office Hadley Centre, Technical Note 74,; Johns T.C. et
 
al, (2006) The new Hadley Centre climate model HadGEM1: Evaluation of coupled 
 
simulations. Journal of Climate, American Meteorological Society, Vol. 19, No. 7, pp 
 
1327-1353.; Martin G.M. et al, 2006: The physical properties of the atmosphere in the new
 
Hadley Centre Global Environmental Model, HadGEM1 - Part 1: Model description and 
 
global climatology. Journal of Climate, American Meteorological Society, Vol. 19, No.7, 
 
pp 1274-1301.; Ringer M.A. et al, 2006: The physical properties of the atmosphere in the  new 
 
Hadley Centre Global Environmental Model, HadGEM1 - Part 2: Aspects of variability and
 
regional climate. Journal of Climate, American Meteorological Society, Vol. 19, No. 7, 
 
pp1302-1326. 
 
Besøgscenter Østerild, 2018: [online] Available: https://testcenter.dk/testcentret/ [Retrieved Sep  
2018] 
 
Cappelen, J. and Hesselbjerg Christensen, J., 2004: Danmarks Klimacenter rapport 05-03. Available:
 
https://www.dmi.dk/fileadmin/Rapporter/DKC/dkcr05-03.pdf  
 
CMIP, 2019: [online] Available: https://cmip.llnl.gov/cmip5/ [Retrieved Sep 2018] 
 
Collins, W. J., et al., 2011: Development and evaluation of an Earth-system model - HadGEM2. 
 
 Geosci. Model Dev. Discuss., 4, pp997-1062; Jones, C.D. et al., 2011: The HadGEM2-ES
 
 implementation of CMIP5 centennial simulations. Geosci. Model Dev., 4, pp543-570; 
 
 Martin G.M. et al. (2011) The HadGEM2 family of Met Office Unified Model climate 
 
 configurations. Geosci. Model Dev., 4, pp 723-757. 
 
Cubasch, U., D. Wuebbles, D. Chen, M.C. Facchini, D. Frame, N. Mahowald, and J.-G. Winther, 
2013: Introduction. Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of 
Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, 
Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA. 
 
Danish Energy Agency, 2018: Vidensblad - Statslig information om vindmøller. Available: 
 
https://erhvervsstyrelsen.dk/sites/default/files/videnbladhvorforvindendergiweb1.pdf 
 
[Retrieved 15 Aug 2018] 
 
DMI, 2019: [online] Available:
 
https://www.dmi.dk/fileadmin/user_upload/Stormlisten/STORMS_IN_DENMARK_SINCE_1  
891.pdf [Retrieved 4 Jan 2019] 
 
Essery R., et al., 2001: Moses 2.2 Technical Documentation, Hadley Centre, Met Office, London 
 
Road, Bracknell, Berks R12 2SY, UK. 
 
==PAGE:69==
65 
 
Fino3, 2018; [online] Available: https://www.fino3.de/en/ [Retrieved from Andrea Hahmann, Sep 
 
2018] 
 
Flato, G., J. Marotzke, B. Abiodun, P. Braconnot, S.C. Chou, W. Collins, P. Cox, F. Driouech, S. 
Emori, V. Eyring, C. Forest, P. Gleckler, E. Guilyardi, C. Jakob, V. Kattsov, C. Reason and 
M. Rummukainen, 2013: Evaluation of Climate Models. Climate Change 2013: The Physical 
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. 
Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA. 
 
Forest and Nature Agency, 2002: Danmarks nationale skovprogram, Available:  
 
 
 https://www.trae.dk/wp-content/uploads/2001/11/danmarks_nationale_skovprogram.pdf  
 
Global modeling and Assimilation office, 2016: [online] Available:
 
https://gmao.gsfc.nasa.gov/reanalysis/MERRA-2/ [Retrieved Sep 2018] 
 
Grotjahn, R., 2002: General Circulation: Mean Characteristics. In: Holton, J. R., Pyle, J. A. and Curry 
J. A. eds., Encyclopedia of Atmospheric Science. London: Academic Press, pp 841–854. 
Hahmann Andrea, 2018: [Data provider] Østerild met-mast data [Retrieved Oct 2018] 
Holton, J. R 2004: An introduction to Dynamic Meteorology, 4th Edition. London: Academic Press, 
pp 535. 
 
Hueging H., Haas R., Born K., Jacob D., Pinto J., 2013: Regional Changes in Wind Energy Potential 
 
over Climate Model Ensemble Projections. In: Journals online. Available: 
 
 
 
https://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/pdf/10.1175/JAMC-D-12-086.1 
 
IPCC, 2013: [online] Available: http://ipcc-data.org/guidelines/pages/gcm_guide.html [Last modified
 
18 Jun 2013] 
 
IPCC, 2019: [online] Available: https://www.ipcc.ch/about/ [Retrieved Jan 2019] 
Kirtman, B., S.B. Power, J.A. Adedoyin, G.J. Boer, R. Bojariu, I. Camilloni, F.J. Doblas-Reyes, A.M.
 
 Fiore, M. Kimoto, G.A. Meehl, M. Prather, A. Sarr, C. Schär, R. Sutton, G.J. van 
 
 Oldenborgh, G. Vecchi and H.J. Wang, 2013: Near-term Climate Change: Projections and
 
 Predictability. Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of 
 
 Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
 
 Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. 
 
 Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
 
 United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA. 
Mearns L. O., Bukovsky M., Pryor S.C., Magana V., 2018: E.A. Lloyd, E. Winsberg (eds.), Climate
 
 Modelling, Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-65058-6_8 
Moemken, J., Reyers, M., Feldmann, H., and Pinto, J. G., 2018: Future changes of wind speed and
 
 wind energy potentials in EURO-CORDEX ensemble simulations. Journal of Geophysical
 
 Research:Atmospheres, pp123. Available: https://doi.org/10.1029/2018JD028473 [Accepted
 
 article online 5 Jun 2018] 
Mortensen N. G., 2016: Wind resource assessment using the WAsP software (DTU Wind Energy  
 
E-0135). Technical University of Denmark (DTU). (DTU Wind Energy E; No. 0135). 
==PAGE:70==
66 
 
NASA - Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 2014: [online] Available: 
 
 
 
 
 
 https://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.php?release=2014-321 [Retrieved Oct 2018] 
 
Olesen M., Skovgaard Madsen K., Ankjær Ludwigsen C., Boberg F., Christensen T., Cappelen J.,
 
Bøssing Christensen O., Krogh Andersen K., Hesselbjerg Christensen J., 2014: Fremtidlige
 
klimaforandringer i Danmark. Danmarks Klimacenter rapport nr.6. Available: 
 
 
https://www.dmi.dk/fileadmin/user_upload/Rapporter/DKC/2014/Klimaforandringer_dmi.pdf  
 
Peña Diaz A, Floors RR, Sathe A, Gryning S-E, Wagner R, Courtney M, Larsén XG, Hahmann AN, 
Hasager CB. 2016. Ten Years of Boundary-Layer and Wind-Power Meteorology at Høvsøre, 
Denmark. Boundary-Layer Meteorology. 158(1):1-26. Available: 10.1007/s10546-015-0079-8 
 
Randall, D. A. 2015: An Introduction to the General Circulation of the Atmosphere, [Online]. 
Available: http://kiwi.atmos.colostate.edu/group/dave/at605.html [Last updated 21 Jan 2015] 
 
The Danish Coastal Authority, 2018: [online] Available: http://m.kyst.dk/klimaaendringers-effekt-paa
 
-kysten-resume.html [Retrieved 9 Dec 2018] 
 
The GFDL Data Portal, 2018: [online] Available: http://nomads.gfdl.noaa.gov/  
Tobin I., Vautard R., Balog I., Bréon F-M., Jerez S., Ruti P. M., Thais F., Vrac M., You P., 2016: 
 
Assessing climate change impacts on European wind energy from ENSEMBLES high
 
resolution climate projections, Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht [Published 
 
online: 15 November 2014] 
 
Troen I. and Lundtang Petersen E., 1989: European Wind Atlas. Risø National Laboratory, Roskilde,
 
 Denmark, pp565-577.  
 
Troen I., 1990: A high resolution spectral model for flow in complex terrain. In N. O. Jensen, L. 
 
 Kristensen, & S. E. Larsen (Eds.), 9. Symposium on turbulence and diffusion (pp. 417-420).
 
 Boston, MA: American Meteorological Society. 
 
Wanner H., Brönnimann S., Casty C., Gyalistras D., Lunterbacher J., Schmutz C., Stephenson 
D. B.,  Xoplaki E.,. 2001: North Atlantic Oscillation – Concepts and Studie, Surveys in 
Geophysics 22: pp 321–382. 
 
WAsP, 2018: [online] Available: http://www.wasp.dk/ [Retrieved Sep 2018] 
 
WAsP, 2019: [online] Available: https://www.wasp.dk/DataandTools/Wind-atlas/European-Wind 
 
-Atlas/VI-Observational-wind-atlas [Retrieved Sep 2018] 
 
Watanabe et al., 2011: MIROC-ESM: model description and basic results of CMIP5-20c3m 
 
 experiments, Geosci. Model Dev. Discuss., 4, pp 1063-1128. 
 
Yukimoto et al., 2011: Technical Report of the Meteorological Research Institute, 64, pp 83. 
 
