==PAGE:1==
Side-Channel Vulnerabilities on
Nested Virtualization
Environment
Jaewook Woo
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The goal of this thesis is understanding nested virtualization as well as con-
ducting and analyzing side-channel attack on non-virtualized and virtualized
environments.
This thesis starts with a background description of cloud computing, cache
memory, nested virtualization, RSA and EdDSA cryptographic systems, and
side-channel attacks. Target scenario and detailed implementation of the pro-
posed attack is followed next. Finally, an evaluation of the attack and mitigation
techniques are discussed at the end of the thesis.
In conclusion, the proposed attack is conducted successfully on non-virtualized
and virtualized environments, which shows that the isolation boundary of vir-
tualization and nested virtualization is broke in a new way.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute, Department of Applied Mathemat-
ics and Computer Science in fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring an
M.Sc. in Computer Science and Engineering.
The thesis deals with side-channel vulnerabilities not only on non-virtualized
and single-level virtualization environment but also on the nested virtualization
environment.
Lyngby, 14-February-2019
Jaewook Woo
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my thesis supervisors Professor Christian Damsgaard
Jensen and Professor Jaehyuk Huh. With their invaluable support to me and
thesis project, I was able to drag the project in the right direction. Whenever I
had trouble or question about the research, they guided me to think in the right
way and even showed me the things I could not see. Without their support, I
could not successfully ﬁnish the thesis project.
I would also like to thank Ejner Fergo for providing and setting up the equipment
for the thesis project. Whenever I had a problem with the machine, he helped me
with his professional knowledge to resolve the problem. With his help, I could
properly manage the equipment and successfully conduct the experiments.
Lastly, I must express my gratitude to my family and to my girlfriend for giving
me continuous encouragement from South Korea throughout the whole period
of my study in Denmark. This accomplishment would not have been possible
without them. Thank you.
Author
Jaewook Woo
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
5
2.1
Cloud Computing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Adopting virtualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Hypervisor and guest OS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Cache Memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Cache hierarchy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.2
Cache structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.3
Translation Lookaside Buﬀer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.4
Cache addressing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Nested Virtualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1
CPU virtualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.2
MMU virtualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.3
I/O virtualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Cryptographic Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4.1
RSA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4.2
EdDSA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.5
Side-Channel Attacks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.5.1
Timing side-channel attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.5.2
Taxonomy of side-channel attacks
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
2.5.3
Cache side-channel attacks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.5.4
TLB side-channel attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.6
FLUSH+RELOAD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.6.1
Memory deduplication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.6.2
Attack method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3
Target Scenario
31
3.1
Threat Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2
Client-Server Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2.1
RSA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2.2
EdDSA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
Attack Implementation
37
4.1
The FLUSH+RELOAD Technique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Determining Threshold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
Setting up Virtualized Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4
Achieving Memory Deduplication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.5
Specifying Target Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.5.1
RSA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.5.2
EdDSA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Evaluation
45
5.1
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Attack Conﬁgurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3
Result Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3.1
Finite-state machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3.2
Longest common subsequence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.4
Experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.4.1
Same-OS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.4.2
Cross-VM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.4.3
Cross-NestedVM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.5
Further Recovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.6
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6
Mitigation Techniques
57
6.1
Modifying Target Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.2
Restricting clflush Instruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.3
Disabling Page Sharing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7
Conclusion
61
7.1
Vulnerabilities on Nested Virtulization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
Bibliography
63
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Cloud computing is widespread. As network capacity becomes larger and costs
for computers become lower, one cloud provider can build a big infrastructure of
machines and provide individual systems to the other people. As the cloud sys-
tem is advantaged by the hardware virtualization and service-oriented architec-
ture, it can oﬀer a better computing environment to the cloud users. Through
cloud computing, companies who are the cloud users, advantaged by saving
cost for investment and maintenance of infrastructure. Furthermore, they can
ﬂexibly adjust resources on their application to respond to the unpredictable
demand.
As the demands from companies become more diverse to provide large and
various services, companies need not only just a cloud server rented from the
cloud provider but also the cloud server with virtualization capabilities. This
is the rising use case of nested virtualization. In single-level virtualization, a
guest system can run on top of the host system which is called hypervisor.
However, the guest system doesn’t have any virtualization capabilities to run
guest systems on top of it. In nested virtualization, the hypervisor can run other
hypervisors on top of it with their associated virtual machines. The availability
of nested virtualization can fulﬁll the various demands of cloud users. However,
at the same time, nested virtualization opens new side-channel vulnerabilities
for a possible break of security.
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
As long as a system uses shared resources among diﬀerent parties, the system
is vulnerable to exposure of secret through the shared channel to the malicious
party. Since cloud servers are virtualized system on the cloud provider’s ma-
chine, they could have shared resources between virtual machines. Many side-
channel attacks that break the isolation boundary of virtualization is shown
to be successful [ZJRR12, IES15, YF14, LYG+15]. These attacks target the
Last-Level-Cache (LLC) which is shared hardware resource between virtual ma-
chines. Likewise in a nested virtualization environment, there are also shared
resources between nested virtual machines and consequently, it could be a target
for possible side-channel attacks.
1.1
Goal
In this thesis, reproduced side-channel attack that breaks the isolation bound-
ary of nested virtualization is implemented and tested. The reproduced attack
uses FLUSH+RELOAD technique [YF14] presented by Yarom and Falkner in
2014 targeting RSA and EdDSA implementation of libgcrypt in three diﬀerent
scenarios: same-OS, cross-VM, and cross-NestedVM. In the same-OS scenario,
both an attacker process and a victim process are in the same operating system.
In the cross-VM scenario, the attacker process and victim process are located in
diﬀerent virtual machines. In the cross-NestedVM scenario, the attacker process
and victim process are located in the diﬀerent nested virtual machine on the
same hypervisor. As a result, maximum 95.85%, 93.73% and 87.24% of RSA
secret components are recovered in same-OS, cross-VM, and cross-NestedVM
scenario respectively. However, the attack on EdDSA was impossible. Although
the target algorithm in EdDSA implementation contains the codes that could
leak secret depends on access patterns, the attack is practically impossible be-
cause the target algorithm in EdDSA always executes all target functions and
does not make a diﬀerence of access patterns.
1.2
Outline
The outline of the rest of the thesis is as follows. Chapter 2 explains background
information about cloud computing, cache memory, nested virtualization, cryp-
tographic systems, side-channel attacks, and FLUSH+RELOAD attack. Chap-
ter 3 states the motivation of the proposed attack and target attack scenarios.
Chapter 4 describes the detailed implementation of the attack on RSA and Ed-
DSA. In chapter 5, the proposed attack is evaluated. Mitigation techniques are
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Outline
3
discussed in chapter 6. Finally, the thesis ends with the conclusion in chapter
7.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Background
In this chapter, background information about cloud computing and virtualiza-
tion is explained. A cache memory, as well as address translation using Transla-
tion Lookaside Buﬀer (TLB), is described to understand the modern computer
system. Then, the implementation of the nested virtualization in x86 archi-
tecture is described. After that, a brief introduction of cryptographic systems
targeted by the attack in this thesis is followed. Finally, side-channel attacks
and especially, FLUSH+RELOAD attack is explained at the end of the chapter.
2.1
Cloud Computing
In the era of cloud computing, people use their devices to access the cloud
server and make the cloud system compute the operations on behalf of their
own devices. When the cloud user uses the service provided by the cloud server,
their data can be stored in the cloud system and the operations also can be
computed in the could system instead of the local devices. By letting a big
powerful cloud server to compute cloud user’s requests using its environment,
tools, physical machines, and resources, the cloud users can receive high-quality
services with eﬃcient cost.
==PAGE:16==
6
Background
The cloud providers who own a cloud system can oﬀer several types of service
as follows:
• Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) is oﬀered to the cloud users to use the
featured environment of the server, storage, and network.
• Platform as a Service (PaaS) is oﬀered to the cloud users to use the plat-
form which is the operating system to run the processes or the development
environment
• Software as a Service (SaaS) is oﬀered to the cloud users to use the software
or the application.
2.1.1
Adopting virtualization
Through cloud computing, the cloud users are advantaged by high-quality ser-
vices that even can’t be established by their own devices. However, from the
cloud provider’s perspective, establishing the cloud system cost-eﬀectively and
utilizing the existing resources highly while the cloud users using the cloud server
became the major issues. If the cloud provider oﬀers one server by one physical
machine, the demands of the server resource would rapidly increase and also
become unpredictable.
Here the concept of virtualization is introduced.
In-
stead of establishing one server with one physical machine, the cloud provider
can oﬀer multiple operating systems on one high-performance physical machine
through the virtualization. This approach is much eﬃcient than the previous
approach. Since each virtualized operating system is an independent system,
the cloud provider is able to create and provide as many servers as the user
demands with the independent systems. Through the virtualization, resources
of the physical machine are logically distributed to the virtual machines so that
the entire system can achieve high utilization of the resources.
2.1.2
Hypervisor and guest OS
Generally, in a virtualized system, there are two types of process which are
hypervisor and guest operating system. The guest operating system is the vir-
tualized operating system on the physical machine to be oﬀered to the cloud
user as a server. However, there is a problem of communication between the
guest operating system and the system hardware. If guest operating systems
on the same hardware use diﬀerent commands for the same job, the hardware
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Cloud Computing
7
doesn’t understand what is the right command for the job. For example, if Win-
dows guest issues ’ADD’ and Linux guest issues ’add’ for addition, the hardware
doesn’t understand which command to execute addition. Therefore, each com-
mand from the diﬀerent guest operating systems needs to be translated to the
form which the hardware understands. The described translation is done by
another type of process, hypervisor. The hypervisor exists in between the guest
operating systems and the hardware, translates diﬀerent commands from the
guest operating system into one correct command which the hardware can un-
derstand. Beside the translation, hypervisor also does the job for allocating and
adjusting the resources to the guest operating systems.
==PAGE:18==
8
Background
2.2
Cache Memory
Memory access is regarded as an expensive operation and often limit the perfor-
mance of an entire process. Every time the processor tries to access the memory,
it is suﬀered by long latency even if it has enough clock speed. The main rea-
son why memory is slower than the processor is that memory is apart from the
processor. To overcome this issue, the cache memory is introduced between the
processor and main memory. The cache memory stores a portion of the data
from the main memory. The idea is to place the often referenced data close to
the processor so that makes the processor doesn’t have to access that data from
main memory every time. The data in the cache memory is replaced according
to algorithms designed to provide better eﬃciency.
2.2.1
Cache hierarchy
There are diﬀerent types of cache between the processor and the main memory.
These caches comprise multiple layers with diﬀerent structures.
Figure 2.1 shows the typical cache hierarchy in a multicore CPU. Each core has
L1 (level 1) private cache. This L1 cache is usually split into L1I (instruction)
cache and L1D (data) cache. The L2 (level 2) cache comes after the L1 cache.
This L2 cache is also private to each core and not split. The L3 cache is not
private anymore and shared across the cores.
2.2.2
Cache structure
Cache memory is consist of several rows of cache entries. A cache entry is consist
of tag, data block, and ﬂag bits. Data from the main memory is transferred in
a ﬁxed size of the block, called cacheline. Each cacheline contains actual data
and the data is located in the data block. A tag is part of the address of the
data and used for comparing with memory access address when the process tries
to ﬁnd the data in the cache. There are two types of ﬂag bits, which are valid
bit and a dirty bit. Instruction cache entry only has a valid bit. The valid bit
indicates the cache entry has the actual valid data or not. Data cache entry
usually has both a valid bit and a dirty bit. The dirty bit indicates the data in
cache entry has been changed since it is fetched from the main memory.
Cache entries can be organized in diﬀerent ways depends on cache associativity.
Here the idea of a set associative cache is introduced. The basic idea of a set
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Cache Memory
9
Figure 2.1: The cache memory hierarchy in a multicore system.
associative cache is to store several cache entries that correspond to the same
address in the cache and reduce the total number of cacheline replacement. The
group of cache entries called set. If the number of cache entries in a set is n,
it is called n-way set associative cache. The case of n=1, it is called a direct
mapped cache. The case that there is only one set contains entire cache entries,
it is called a fully associative cache. Figure 2.2 shows the diﬀerent cache design
depends on associativity.
2.2.3
Translation Lookaside Buﬀer
Modern computer system adopts virtual memory to provide an abstraction of
the memory resources and isolation between user processes space. Therefore,
every memory address accessed through virtual address needs to be translated
to a physical address by speciﬁc hardware, named Memory Management Unit
(MMU). MMU uses page tables structure that contains mapping information
from virtual address to physical address. However, to translate each virtual ad-
dress, MMU needs to refer to the page tables data that reside out of the CPU.
To reduce the latency of round-trip to memory hierarchy, the processor caches
the portion of page tables in Translation lookaside buﬀer (TLB). More speciﬁ-
cally, TLB caches the mapping information of page number to frame number.
==PAGE:20==
10
Background
Figure 2.2: (Top) Cache entry structure and memory address structure in
cache point of view; (Bottom) Cache structures depends on cache
associativity.
Page number indicates the most signiﬁcant bits of the virtual address except the
memory page oﬀset bits. Frame number, on the other hand, indicates the most
signiﬁcant bits of the physical address except the memory page oﬀset bits. Since
the memory page oﬀset bits which are the least signiﬁcant bits of the memory
address don’t need to be translated, TLB only caches the page number to frame
number entries.
Figure 2.3 shows the address translation using TLB structure. First, the core
issues a memory operation with a virtual address. Next, MMU takes the virtual
address and lookup TLB with the page number of the virtual address. If TLB
has a corresponding page number to frame number entry, it gives the frame
number to MMU. Then, MMU combines the frame number with the memory
page oﬀset bits of the virtual address to make a physical address.
Finally,
address translation is done and data at the physical address is fetched to the
core. By introducing the TLB, the latency of round-trip to memory hierarchy
for address translation is removed.
Similar to data or instruction caches, TLB may have multiple levels of hierar-
chy and diﬀerent associativity, but the diﬀerence is that TLB caches address
mapping information in page unit instead of data in the cacheline unit.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Cache Memory
11
Figure 2.3: Address translation using TLB structure.
2.2.4
Cache addressing
With the translated memory address by MMU and TLB structure, a system
should ﬁnd out whether the desired data is located in a cache or not. In other
words, a memory address is used to specify which cache entry is matched with
that address or not.
Figure 2.2 shows the memory address in a cache point of view.
The block
oﬀset, which is the least signiﬁcant bits, speciﬁes the desired data within the
data block in the cache entry.
The index, which is the second least signif-
icant bits, speciﬁes the cache entry.
The tag, which is the most signiﬁcant
bits, is used when comparing itself with a tag in cache entry retrieved by in-
dex bits. To specify the data in the data block, the block oﬀset bits should
be log2(number of bytes per data block) bits long.
The index bits should be
log2(number of cache entry rows) bits long. The rest of the bits from the entire
address bits except block oﬀset bits and index bits are the length of the tag bits.
Depends on whether the tag or index corresponds to a virtual address or physical
address, a cache can be categorized into 4 types [Wika].
• Physically indexed and physically tagged cache (PIPT).
==PAGE:22==
12
Background
• Virtually indexed and virtually tagged cache (VIVT).
• Virtually indexed and physically tagged cache (VIPT).
• Physically indexed and virtually tagged cache (PIVT).
In the case of tagging, virtually tagged caches are now uncommon. If address
translation is done by Translation Lookaside Buﬀer (TLB) before cache lookup,
the physical address is available for checking cache entry tag. In the case of
indexing, L1 caches are usually virtually indexed (VIPT) and larger caches are
usually physically indexed (PIPT).
Figure 2.4: Diﬀerent cache memory access between VIPT caches and PIPT
caches.
Figure 2.4 shows the diﬀerent memory accesses between VIPT caches and PIPT
caches. The reason why L1 caches are advantaged by adopting VIPT addressing
is that it has lower latency compare to PIPT addressing because cache row
lookup with the virtual index can be done in parallel with address translation.
As soon as the physical address is available by TLB lookup, the prepared cache
rows speciﬁed by the virtual index are checked with their tags. For larger caches,
however, cache row speciﬁcation is done in a long time because they are far away
from the processor and have a large size. Therefore, the cache row speciﬁcation
can’t always be done before address translation is done. Since physical indexing
is less costly than virtual indexing, the larger caches adopt PIPT addressing.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Nested Virtualization
13
2.3
Nested Virtualization
Operating systems are nowadays become having virtualization capabilities which
are supported by hardware.
Through virtualization, the system can achieve
isolation between virtual machines, eﬃcient resource management, and high re-
source utilization. The cloud provider takes these advantages and allows users
to rent the virtual machine to use. However, not only just using the operating
system, a need for virtualization capabilities in the rented virtual machine arises.
This leads to the emergence of nested virtualization. In a nested virtualization
environment, notions of L0 (level 0) host hypervisor, L1 (level 1) guest hyper-
visor and L2 (level 2) guest operating system are used. L0 host hypervisor runs
directly on top of the hardware. L1 guest hypervisor runs in a virtual machine
running on L0 host hypervisor, but at the same time, it is a hypervisor which
can run virtual machines on top of it. L2 guest operating system is in a virtual
machine runs on top of the L1 guest hypervisor, so the virtual machine on top
of the guest hypervisor is called nested virtual machine.
There are several use cases of nested virtualization as follows:
• The cloud users can run their own hypervisor on a virtual machine rented
from the cloud provider. Nested virtualization make this scenario possible
by exposing the virtualization capabilities to the virtual machine.
• A large system applications which use the various functionalities of other
applications from the relevant framework can be eﬃciently managed by
nested virtualization setup rather than single-level virtualization setup.
Each L2 guest operating system conducts individual job while each L1
guest hypervisor manages the module of the large system application and
L0 host hypervisor manages the entire system.
• Nested virtualization can provide a framework for testing and debugging
hypervisors and multiple virtualization setups. Without a need for other
physical machines, hypervisor and virtualization setup can be tested and
debugged in a separate virtual machine.
There are two types of model for nested virtualization: multi-level architec-
tural support for nested virtualization and single-level architectural support for
nested virtualization.
In multi-level architectural support for nested virtual-
ization, each hypervisor handles traps occurred by its own direct guest.
In
single-level architectural support for nested virtualization, one single hypervisor
handles all traps occurred by all guests. The latter is implemented in Intel’s
x86 virtualization extensions [Int10].
==PAGE:24==
14
Background
Since the x86 hardware can’t support multi-level virtualization directly, the x86
guest hypervisor is not able to beneﬁt the virtualization extensions directly from
the hardware to run nested virtual machines. To enable nested virtualization
on x86 architecture, multiplexing the multiple levels of virtualization into a sin-
gle level of virtualization is needed [BYDD+10]. Figure 2.5 shows the example
of multiplexing which is L2 guest operating systems and L1 guest hypervisor
are multiplexed into a single level of virtualization. Through the multiplexing,
the nested virtualization can be supported by hardware directly. More specif-
ically, three areas of virtualization are developed: CPU virtualization, MMU
virtualization, and I/O virtualization.
Figure 2.5: Multiplexing multiple levels of virtualization into a single level of
virtualization.
2.3.1
CPU virtualization
Intel hardware virtualization extensions [Int10] introduced two modes of oper-
ations: root mode when running the hypervisor and guest mode when running
the virtual machine. In a nested virtualization environment, L0 host hypervisor
runs in root mode while L1 guest hypervisor and L2 guest operating system run
in guest mode.
Virtual machine control structures (VMCS) are also introduced for specifying
the environment conﬁgurations of virtual machine and hypervisor. Since In-
tel adopts single-level architectural support for nested virtualization, L0 host
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Nested Virtualization
15
hypervisor should manage VMCS0-1 which is used when running the L1 guest
hypervisor, and VMCS0-2 which is used when running L2 guest operating sys-
tem. VMCS0-1 is created by L0 host hypervisor and loaded into the processor.
However, VMCS0-2 can’t be automatically created. VMCS0-2 is constructed in
the following steps: VMCS1-2 is created by the L1 guest hypervisor to deﬁne the
L2 guest operating system’s environment conﬁgurations in L1 guest hypervisor’s
perspective. VMCS1-2 is never loaded into the processor and L0 host hypervisor
can’t use it to run L2 guest operating system, but L0 host hypervisor uses it
to construct VMCS0-2 that contains L2 guest operating system’s environment
conﬁgurations in L0 host hypervisor’s perspective.
2.3.2
MMU virtualization
Modern computer systems take advantage of virtual memory management. To
access the memory system, the processor needs to use the virtual address of
the desired data. This virtual address is, however, translated into the physical
address by special hardware named Memory Management Unit(MMU).
In the case of single-level virtualization, two levels of address translation need
to be achieved: guest virtual address to guest physical address; and then to host
physical address. The ﬁrst translation is achieved by a guest page table built
by the guest operating system. The second translation is achieved by Extended
Page Tables (EPT) by Intel hardware virtualization extensions [Int10] in the
MMU. By introducing Extended Page Tables, hardware supported MMU virtu-
alization is achieved. If there were no hardware support for MMU virtualization,
shadow page tables are used. In the case of using shadow page tables, the step
for creating guest page tables is the same with the case of using EPT. However,
the step that the hypervisor creates shadow page tables which directly translate
the guest virtual address to host physical address based on the guest page tables
is diﬀerent. Since hypervisor needs to trap all changes of guest pages, shadow
page tables have performance weakness compare to EPT.
In the case of the nested virtualization environment, three levels of address
translation need to be achieved: L2 guest virtual address to L2 guest physical
address; then to L1 guest physical address; and then to L0 host physical address.
Depends on the processor capabilities, L0 and L1 hypervisors can choose which
technique to virtualize MMU between EPT and shadow page tables [BYDD+10].
Figure 2.6 shows three models to achieve nested MMU virtualization.
• Shadow page tables on shadow page tables
• Shadow page tables on EPT
==PAGE:26==
16
Background
• EPT on EPT
Shadow page tables on shadow page tables is the least eﬃcient method used
when no hardware support for MMU virtualization is available. First, L0 host
hypervisor creates shadow page tables for L1 guest hypervisor (SPT0-1) and
L1 guest hypervisor creates shadow page tables for L2 guest operating system
(SPT1-2). Since L0 host hypervisor can’t use SPT1-2 directly, L0 host hypervisor
constructs SPT0-2 which directly translates L2 guest virtual address to L0 host
physical address by combining SPT1-2 and SPT0-1.
Shadow page tables on EPT can be chosen when the processor support EPT.
If L0 host hypervisor can use EPT0-1 but L1 guest hypervisor can’t, L1 guest
hypervisor uses shadow page tables instead (SPT1-2). Therefore, MMU uses
SPT1-2 for the ﬁrst translation table which translates L2 guest virtual address
to L1 guest physical address, and EPT0-1 for the second translation table which
translates L1 guest physical address to L0 host physical address.
EPT on EPT can be achieved by exposing EPT capabilities to L1 guest hyper-
visor even though there are single level EPT supported by hardware. First, L0
host hypervisor creates EPT0-1 and L1 guest hypervisor creates EPT1-2. Since
the hardware only supports a single level of EPT, two EPT structures need to
be combined into EPT0-2 by L0 host hypervisor. Therefore, MMU uses L2 guest
page tables for the ﬁrst translation table which translate L2 guest virtual ad-
dress to L2 guest physical address, and EPT0-2 for the second translation table
which translates L2 guest physical address to L0 host physical address directly.
2.3.3
I/O virtualization
There are three techniques to virtualize I/O devices in single-level virtualization
environment: hypervisor emulates I/O device for guest to use without modify-
ing the driver, a paravirtual driver in the guest, and hypervisor assigns the real
device to the guest. Among the three techniques, the device assignment shows
the best performance, but to provide direct memory access (DMA) for the guest
operating system, special hardware named IOMMU is required. IOMMU trans-
lates guest physical memory to host physical memory so that guest can access
the I/O device directly.
In the case of nested virtualization, there are nine possible ways to virtualize
I/O devices with three techniques for each level of virtualization. Among the
nine techniques, a two-level device assignment might show the best performance.
However, since IOMMU only support single-level I/O virtualization, two levels
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Nested Virtualization
17
Figure 2.6: Nested MMU virtualization models. (a) shadow page tables on
shadow page tables. (b) shadow page tables on EPT. (c) EPT on
EPT (multi-dimensional page tables).
of address translation should be combined into one level. The two-level device
assignment is implemented in the following steps: L0 host hypervisor emulates
IOMMU for L1 guest hypervisor so that L1 guest hypervisor sets the mapping
from L2 guest physical address to L1 guest physical address. L0 host hypervisor
remaps L1 guest physical address to corresponding L0 host physical address,
and construct L2 guest physical address to L0 host physical address mapping
on real IOMMU. Finally, the L2 guest operating system can use the assigned
I/O device directly.
==PAGE:28==
18
Background
2.4
Cryptographic Systems
Cryptography is a study of techniques for secure communication while in pres-
ence of adversaries. It concerns about constructing and analyzing protocols that
prevent leaking private information to adversaries or public. The modern ﬁeld
of cryptography is categorized into several areas: symmetric-key cryptography,
public-key cryptography, digital signature algorithm, and so on.
The systems which have secret information to be hidden from the third party
needs to adopt secure protocols in their systems. By merging cryptographic
systems, the system can achieve particular functionality as well as security
properties.
Depends on what type of secure functionality the system needs,
corresponding cryptographic systems can be used in the system.
In this section, two public-key cryptographic systems are introduced.
The
public-key cryptographic system often called as an asymmetric key crypto-
graphic system since it uses two diﬀerent but mathematically related keys which
are a public key and private key. As the name implies, private key needs to be
kept secret while public key needs not.
2.4.1
RSA
RSA (Rivest–Shamir–Adleman) is a public-key cryptographic system used for
secure data transmission. RSA uses public and private key pair. In this cryp-
tographic system, a message is encrypted using RSA public key and can be
decrypted only with a corresponding RSA private key which should be kept
secret.
2.4.1.1
Basic principle of RSA
The basic principle of RSA is based on the fact that it’s practical to ﬁnd 3
large positive integers e, d and n such that with modular exponentiation for all
integer m (0 ≤m < n):
(me)d ≡m
(mod n)
However, even (e, n) or (e, m) is known, ﬁnding d is very diﬃcult [Wikb].
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Cryptographic Systems
19
2.4.1.2
RSA key generation
Based on the principle above, the RSA key pair is generated in the following
way:
1. Randomly select two prime numbers p and q.
2. Calculate n = pq.
3. Select public exponent e.
4. Calculate private exponent d ≡e−1 (mod (p −1)(q −1)).
In conclusion, components of RSA cryptosystem are:
• Public key comprises (n, e).
• Private key comprises (n, e, d, p, q).
• Encryption function is c ≡me (mod n).
• Decryption function is cd ≡(me)d ≡m (mod n).
2.4.1.3
CRT-RSA optimization
To accelerate the decryption and signing, the optimization based on Chinese
remainder theorem named CRT-RSA is adopted. CRT-RSA is implemented in
the following steps:
1. dp = d (mod (p −1)) and dq = d (mod (q −1)) are computed.
2. u = q−1 (mod p) is computed.
3. mp = cdp (mod p) and mq = cdq (mod q) are computed.
4. h = u(mp −mq) (mod p) is computed
5. m = mq + hq is recovered.
In the case of CRT-RSA optimization, the private key comprises (n, e, d, p, q, u).
==PAGE:30==
20
Background
2.4.1.4
Vulnerability in RSA implementation
Libgcrypt version before 1.5.3 uses square-and-multiply exponentiation algo-
rithm for encryption and decryption: R = BE mod M. Algorithm 1 shows a
pseudo-code implementation of square-and-multiply exponentiation. Through
the main loop in the algorithm, a binary representation of exponent E is scanned
bit-wise and depends on the bit which is 0 or 1, the sequence of operations in
the algorithm is diﬀerent. As shown in the algorithm 1, if the bit is set, the
algorithm computes square, modulo reduce, multiply and modulo reduce in se-
quence. If the bit is not set, the algorithm only computes square and modulo
reduce. Therefore, these two diﬀerent sequences of operations can possibly leak
the secret information of exponent E. In other words, if an attacker process
can trace the square-and-multiply exponentiation algorithm, it can recover the
exponent E.
Algorithm 1 R = BE mod M
R ←1
i ←|E| −1
while i ≥0 do
R ←R2
R ←R mod M
if (signed) Ei < 0 then
R ←RB
R ←R mod M
end if
i ←i −1
end while
return R
==PAGE:31==
2.4 Cryptographic Systems
21
2.4.2
EdDSA
Edwards-curve Digital Signature Algorithm (EdDSA) is a digital signature scheme
for secure signing which design is based on Twisted Edwards curves. EdDSA is
known to faster than existing digital signature schemes without losing security.
As digital signature implies, EdDSA uses a public key to sign a message and
corresponding private key to verify a signed message.
2.4.2.1
Components of EdDSA
• B is base point and H is SHA-512 hash function with 2H-bit output.
• Private key is b-bit string d and corresponding public key is curve point
A = sB where s = H0,,,b−1(d).
• Signature on a message is (R, S) where R = rB for r = H(Hb,...,2b−1(d), M)
and S = r + H(R, A, M)s.
• Veriﬁcation equation is 2cSB = 2c(r + H(R, A, M)s)B
= 2crB + 2cH(R, A, M)sB = 2cR + 2cH(R, A, B)A.
2.4.2.2
Vulnerability in EdDSA implementation
Libgcrypt supports EdDSA from version 1.6.0. The implementation of EdDSA
signing and veriﬁcation uses a scalar-point multiplication algorithm. Algorithm
2 shows a pseudo-code implementation of scalar-point multiplication. The al-
gorithm has two branches: duplicate-and-add-unconditionally branch for com-
puting secret scalar component and duplicate-and-add-conditionally branch for
computing non-secret scalar component. The scalar value can be determined
as secret or not depends on whether it is marked as secure value or not. Pre-
vious work targeted this duplicate-and-add-conditionally branch to attack and
recover EdDSA private key [GRBG18].
In the duplicate-and-add-conditionally branch, scalar is scanned bit-wise and
depends on the bit which is 0 or 1, the algorithm will follow diﬀerent sequences.
As shown in the algorithm 2, if the bit is set, the algorithm computes duplicate
point and add points in sequence.
If the bit is not set, the algorithm only
computes duplicate point.
Therefore, these two diﬀerent sequences can possibly leak the secret informa-
tion of component scalar. In other words, if an attacker process can trace the
==PAGE:32==
22
Background
duplicate-and-add-conditionally branch of the scalar-point multiplication algo-
rithm, it can recover the secret component scalar.
Algorithm 2 R = SP
R ←0
if S is secure then
for i in |S|-1 down to 0 do
R ←2R
temp ←R + P
if i = 1 then
R ←temp
end if
end for
else
for i in |S|-1 down to 0 do
R ←2R
if i = 1 then
R ←R + P
end if
end for
end if
return R
However, in practical implementation, it’s impossible to recover meaningful in-
formation from the secret component of EdDSA. The detailed explanation will
be discussed in chapter 4.
==PAGE:33==
2.5 Side-Channel Attacks
23
2.5
Side-Channel Attacks
In computer security, there are many techniques to attack secure algorithms and
try to extract the secrets. These attacks may exploit the weakness of the algo-
rithm or brute forcing every possible value to extract the secret. Besides these
attacks, side-channel attacks are using information gained from the physical im-
plementation of a computer system. For example, timing, power consumption,
electromagnetic information, and even sound can be a channel for the attack
[Wikc]. Those physical eﬀects caused by the security-critical operations can pro-
vide useful extra information about the secret. Therefore, side-channel attacks
focus on analyzing those physical eﬀects to get information about the secret.
Side-channel attacks are categorized into several groups depends on which in-
formation to measure and analyze for the attack. Among the groups of the
attack, timing side-channel attacks that use cache and TLB as a side-channel
are described in this section.
2.5.1
Timing side-channel attacks
Timing side-channel attacks are based on measuring and comparing the time
when the security-critical operations or the operations that use secret component
are executed. For example, if a password checker takes shorter time when it
computes correct character of the password than when it computes the wrong
character, repeatedly comparing the time taken to execute the password checker
will leak the correct character of the password to the attacker. Timing side-
channel attacks are powerful because the attacker doesn’t need to know much
about the detail of the security-critical algorithm and the system which the
victim is processing, as long as the attacker could measure the time taken to
execute victim’s security-critical operations.
In practice, however, it is nearly impossible to have permission to directly mea-
sure the time taken to execute the other process’s security-critical operations.
The attacker process doesn’t know when the victim starts the security-critical
operation and when it ends even if the attacker can trigger the victim’s security-
critical operation. Furthermore, the attacker can’t use an instruction which used
to measure the time of the operation on the victim’s side. Therefore, instead of
gaining timing information on the victim’s side, timing side-channel attacks try
to gain the timing information indirectly through the shared hardware resources
such as cache and TLB. Since the sharing resources can be achieved by multiple
independent processes on the hardware level, the attacker is able to observe and
time the victim’s security-critical operations even it is unauthorized to access
and measure the time of victim’s operations.
==PAGE:34==
24
Background
As a result, by exploiting the resource sharing, the timing side-channel attacks
can break the isolation boundary of threads, cores, or even virtual machines de-
pends on how wide the resources are shared between two independent processes
in the system.
2.5.2
Taxonomy of side-channel attacks
Depend on the isolation boundary, side-channel attacks can be categorized into
several groups; Cross-hyperthread, Cross-core, Same-OS and Cross-VM attacks.
Figure 2.7 shows the relationship between the side-channel attacks.
Figure 2.7: Relationship between the side-channel attacks. Cross-hyperthread
and Cross-core attack are exclusive terms.
Also, Same-OS and
Cross-VM attack are exclusive terms.
Cross-hyperthread attack uses the shared resources between two sibling threads
from one same core. Modern processors can enable simultaneous multithreading
(SMT) to improve the eﬃciency of CPU by sharing resources between multiple
threads. These threads from the one same core share the core resources such
as L1 private cache and TLB. By exploiting this sharing, attacker thread can
observe the sibling thread’s information through the shared hardware resources.
Since two sibling threads are coming from one same core, Cross-hyperthread
==PAGE:35==
2.5 Side-Channel Attacks
25
attack is an exclusive term with the Cross-core attack. The term hyperthread
is Intel’s implementation of SMT.
Cross-core attack uses the shared resources between multiple physical cores as
a side-channel. Since last-level-cache (LLC) is shared between physical cores in
the multicore system, the attacker on one core can use last-level-cache (LLC)
as a side-channel to observe the security-critical operations of the victim who
resides on another core in the multicore system.
Same-OS attack is conducted between two processes which are the attacker and
the victim on the same operating system. This kind of attack uses either L1
private cache if the attacker and the victim are sibling thread of each other
(Cross-hyperthread), or last-level-cache (LLC) if the attacker and the victim
reside in diﬀerent cores (Cross-VM) as a side-channel. However, Same-OS attack
is an exclusive term with the Cross-VM attack since diﬀerent virtual machines
can never be in the same operating system.
Cross-VM attack means that the attacker process in one virtual machine attacks
the victim process resides in another virtual machine, which breaks the strong
isolation of virtualization.
In general, virtual machines are logically isolated
from the other virtual machines. This feature oﬀers a safe execution environ-
ment to the cloud users who rent the server which is virtualized on the cloud
provider’s machine. However, since last-level-cache (LLC) is shared between
virtual machines in the system, these hardware resources can be used as a side-
channel and consequently, have Cross-VM timing side-channel attacks possible.
This attack is a severe threat to the cloud system because even if the cloud
servers are logically isolated from the others, the attack implies that the mali-
cious cloud user can extract secret data from other cloud users.
2.5.3
Cache side-channel attacks
Cache memory is used to store a portion of data from the main memory. Since
the multiple processes can share the cache memory, the data can be leaked to
the other process which is not authorized to access and see that data. This
leakage is possible because of the intrinsic characteristic of a timing diﬀerence
between a cache hit and a cache miss. However, the attacker processes generally
don’t know how speciﬁcally victim process is accessing each cache entry. There-
fore, attackers should observe indirectly how the victim is interacting with the
shared cache. Depend on the methods to examine the shared cache, cache side-
channel attacks can be divided into two categories: timing-based attacks and
access-based attacks [HL17].
Timing-based attacks and access-based attacks
both exploit diﬀerence of measure time but the scale of the timed operation is
==PAGE:36==
26
Background
diﬀerent.
Timing-based attacks measure the total execution time of the victim’s security-
critical operation. Attacker observes whether the victim’s total execution time is
longer or shorter than average execution time. EVICT+TIME attack [OST06]
and Cache Collision attack are categorized into timing-based attacks.
• In EVICT+TIME attack, the attacker evicts some cache sets of interest.
This would occur cache miss if the victim accesses evicted cache set while
victim processes security-critical operations. Therefore, the attacker can
observe the total execution time of the victim’s security-critical operation
longer.
• In Cache Collision attack, attacker observes victim’s cache hit when victim
accesses same memory line. This would make total execution time of the
victim’s security-critical operation shorter.
Unlike the timing-based attacks, access-based attacks measure each memory
access time after the victim’s security-critical operation.
PRIME+PROBE
[OST06, ZJRR12, LYG+15, IES15, IGA+15] and FLUSH+RELOAD [YF14,
YB14, IIES14] attacks are categorized into access-based attacks.
• In PRIME+PROBE attack, the attacker ﬁrst primes some cache sets by
ﬁlling data on that sets.
Then let the victim process security-critical
operation. After that, the attacker probes the same cache sets by loading
the data again and time each access. Longer time means cache miss occurs
and it means that victim’s secret data evicts attacker’s data in primed
cache set.
• In FLUSH+RELOAD attack, an attacker needs to share library or data
with a victim. First, the attacker targets a shared memory line of interest
and ﬂush the data from the cache. Then wait for the victim to execute
a security-critical operation. After that, attacker reloads ﬂushed memory
line and time each access. Shorter time means cache hit occurs and the
victim used the corresponding line of shared library or data.
2.5.4
TLB side-channel attacks
Translation Look-aside Buﬀer (TLB) is used for caching virtual-to-physical map-
ping information. Since TLB is also the shared hardware component between
==PAGE:37==
2.5 Side-Channel Attacks
27
processes, it can be used as a side-channel for tracing the secret information.
Modern Intel TLB architectures have the 2-level hierarchy. L1 TLB (level 1)
is divided into L1 instruction TLB for caching code pages and L1 data TLB
for caching data pages. L2 (level 2) TLB contains both code and data pages.
Similar to cache, TLB typically partitioned into sets and ways.
A recent study shows that an attack on TLB as a side-channel is possible
[GRBG18]. It uses a similar technique to PRIME+PROBE attack, but the dif-
ference from cache attack is that TLB attack has page unit granularity rather
than cache line granularity. To overcome this limitation, it adopts a machine
learning based analysis and uses temporal patterns of victim’s access.
==PAGE:38==
28
Background
2.6
FLUSH+RELOAD
FLUSH+RELOAD attack on L3 cache is presented by Yarom and Falkner in
2014 [YF14]. This attack relies on the page sharing technique that is executed
by the kernel to reduce the memory footprint. Attacker process can trace the
victim process’s access to the speciﬁc memory line by monitoring shared pages.
More speciﬁcally, the attacker uses clflush instruction to evict the memory
line from the caches, and check whether the data at the memory line is loaded
back in the cache after the victim executes the security-critical operations.
FLUSH+RELOAD targets the GnuPG implementation of RSA and try to ex-
tract the components of a private key in Same-OS and Cross-VM scenarios.
As a result, FLUSH+RELOAD can successfully recover the component of RSA
private key with exploiting the vulnerability of the square-and-multiply expo-
nentiation algorithm used in RSA implementation.
2.6.1
Memory deduplication
Memory deduplication is one form of page sharing techniques.
While mem-
ory deduplication feature is enabled, the system ﬁnds identical memory pages
among active processes and make each pair of duplicate pages into a single page.
Since the deduplicated page could originally belong to unrelated processes and
a malicious process can possibly modify the content of the page, the system has
to prevent this. When merging the identical pages, system mark deduplicated
page as copy-on-write and call CPU trap when a write operation is issued on
a copy-on-write page. Once CPU trap is called because of the write operation,
the system copies the content of the page and allocate the page into the address
space of the process which called write operation. By memory deduplication,
the memory footprint of the system can be reduced without losing the integrity
of the execution.
However, since one merged page is shared by diﬀerent processes, the page itself
could be a side-channel for the attack. Even though the virtual address of the
shared page for the sharing processes is diﬀerent, the corresponding physical
address is the same. Therefore, if the attacker targets the L3 cache, which is
physically indexed and physically tagged cache (PIPT), the attacker doesn’t
need to care about the virtual-to-physical mapping of the cache line of interest.
By just monitoring the memory line on the attacker’s virtual address space,
the attacker can automatically trace the secret behavior of the victim process.
FLUSH+RELOAD uses this property when spying L3 cache.
==PAGE:39==
2.6 FLUSH+RELOAD
29
Kernel-based Virtual Machine (KVM) version of implementation for memory
deduplication is Kernel Same-page Merging (KSM). KSM was originally in-
tended to reduce memory footprint by sharing pages among virtual machines,
but it’s also found to be useful to non-virtualized environments for diﬀerent
processes. KSM was merged into Linux kernel mainline since version 2.6.32.
2.6.2
Attack method
FLUSH+RELOAD attack consists of three phases. At the ﬁrst phase, monitored
memory lines are ﬂushed from the whole cache hierarchy. At the second phase,
the attacker waits for the victim to access the ﬂushed memory lines. At the
third phase, the attacker reloads the memory lines and measure the time of
each access. If the measured time is shorter, it implies the victim accessed the
memory line.
The target memory lines to extract RSA private key are code for square, modulo
reduce and multiply function in the implementation of a modulo exponentiation
algorithm.
Depends on each secret exponent bit, the execution sequence of
modulo exponentiation will be diﬀerent.
By tracing the sequence of victim
execution, the attacker can determine each bit of secret exponent. The detailed
implementation of the reproduced FLUSH+RELOAD attack is described in
chapter 4.
==PAGE:40==
30
Background
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 3
Target Scenario
Depends on which information to use and analyze for the attack, side-channel
attacks are divided into several groups. Among those groups, the attack that
uses timing information of the victim’s security-critical operations is catego-
rized as timing side-channel attacks. However, in general, the attacker doesn’t
have permission to measure the victim’s security-critical operations, which leads
the timing side-channel attacks to lose power. To overcome this limitation, the
timing side-channel attacker traces the victim’s security-critical operations indi-
rectly through the shared hardware resources, instead of measuring time directly
on the victim’s side. As long as the attacker shares the resource with the victim
and have access to that resources, the attacker can have a chance to get time
information of the victim’s security-critical operations. By tracing the victim
indirectly through the shared resources, the timing side-channel attacks become
powerful.
Nowadays, many systems adopt a multicore processor to improve computing
power while keeping the size of hardware not big. Using the multicore processors,
the entire system can be built as a multicore system which has multiple processes
on multiple cores at the same time. To improve the computing power of the
entire system, the system normally let the processes to share the hardware
resources depends on the level of the boundary between the processes.
For
example, the L1 cache is a private cache for each core so it can be shared
between two sibling threads on one same core. L3 cache is shared cache among
==PAGE:42==
32
Target Scenario
all cores in the entire system, so the process can share the L3 cache with the
process from another core. However, this sharing makes the multicore system
vulnerable to the timing side-channel attacks. If one of the processes in the
system is malicious and wants to extract the secret from the other processes,
it can possibly conduct the timing side-channel attack by tracing through the
shared hardware resources in the system.
The scenario gets worse when it comes to the cloud system. Each cloud server
given to the cloud user is a virtual machine on the cloud provider’s machine.
These virtual machines have their own allocated cores, memory, and disk dis-
tributed by the cloud provider, and therefore, considered as logically isolated
processes from each other. However, even though the virtual machines have
their own hardware resources, they must have shared hardware components
since they are built on top of the same multicore system. Therefore, cloud users
also can not avoid the risk of the timing side-channel attacks. If a malicious
process in the virtual machine wants to extract the secret from the process in
another virtual machine, it can possibly conduct the timing side-channel attack.
This scenario is a serious threat to the cloud users and even to the cloud provider
since the attack can break the strong isolation of virtualization.
Many studies show the side-channel attacks that break the isolation boundary of
virtualization [ZJRR12, LYG+15, IES15, IGA+15, YF14, YB14, IIES14]. These
attacks exploit the sharing property in the multicore system, target various cryp-
tographic algorithm of interest, and successfully recover the secret component
of the cryptographic algorithms. Based on the result of the studies that the
side-channel attacks are eﬀective in the virtualized environment, I propose the
side-channel attack that breaks the isolation boundary of nested virtualization.
As described in section 2.3, the implementation of nested virtualization on x86
architecture is achieved by multiplexing the multiple levels of virtualization into
a single level. From the hardware point of view, since a nested virtual machine
and a non-nested virtual machine are multiplexed into the same level, these
two virtual machines are the processes which share the hardware resources just
as like the scenario of single-level virtualization. Therefore, it is a sound ap-
proach to conduct the side-channel attack between two diﬀerent nested virtual
machines.
The proposed attack in this thesis targets three diﬀerent kinds of scenario de-
pends on the environment the attack conducted: Same-OS attack, Cross-VM
attack, and Cross-NestedVM attack. In the Same-OS attack, the victim and the
attacker executed on the same non-virtualized environment. In the Cross-VM
attack, the victim and the attacker executed on a diﬀerent virtual machine which
is virtualized on the same hypervisor. The Same-OS attack and the Cross-VM
attack are described in section 2.5, but here the new scenario of side-channel at-
tack is introduced. In the Cross-NestedVM attack, the victim and the attacker
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Threat Model
33
executed on a diﬀerent nested virtual machine which is virtualized on the same
virtual machine, which makes nested virtualization. The proposed attack tar-
gets RSA and EdDSA implementation of libgcrypt. The successful attack will
recover the private key of RSA and EdDSA cryptographic system. The rest of
the chapter consists of the description of the threat model and the client-server
model for the attack.
3.1
Threat Model
The threat model of the Same-OS attack is that the attacker process runs on
the same operating system with the victim process. It doesn’t involve any vir-
tualization in this model. The threat model of the Cross-VM attack is that the
attacker process runs on diﬀerent virtual machines with the victim process, but
shares the same physical processor. The threat model of the Cross-NestedVM
attack is that the attacker process runs on diﬀerent nested virtual machines
virtualized by the same guest hypervisor, but shares the same physical proces-
sor.
Since the attacker and the victim share the same physical processor in
Cross-VM and Cross-NestedVM scenarios, the attacker can trace L3 cache as
well as L1 cache as a side-channel. All virtual machines are logically isolated
from the other virtual machines, so the attacker can communicate to the victim
only through the client-server model or by tracing the shared cache structure.
The attackers in these threat models don’t need to have root privilege since the
clflush instruction which is key instruction to FLUSH+RELOAD technique
can be issued by a non-root privileged process.
3.2
Client-Server Model
To make the attack scenarios practical, I target a client-server model which uses
RSA encryption/decryption or EdDSA signing/verifying while it communicates.
I implemented the simple client-server model and made the attacker process
conduct the proposed attack using this client-server communication system.
3.2.1
RSA
Figure 3.1 shows the sequence of attack on RSA client-server model. First, at
the very initial step, the victim server generates a 2048-bit RSA key pair and
shares the public key with the client. Then the client encrypts plain text using
==PAGE:44==
34
Target Scenario
the server’s RSA public key before it sends ciphertext to the server. Next, the
attacker load and map libgcrypt shared library on its virtual address space to
achieve page sharing and consequently, let the kernel do page deduplication.
Now the attack is ready, the attacker starts to probe the address of target RSA
functions. While the attacker probing, the client sends ciphertext to the victim
server and trigger the victim to decrypt the ciphertext using the RSA private
key. Until the client receives the decrypted text from the server, the attacker
gets the time of each access to the target addresses. Finally, the attacker ﬁnishes
probing and analyses the probing results to recover the RSA secret component.
Figure 3.1: The attack scenario on the RSA encryption/decryption client-
server model.
3.2.2
EdDSA
Figure 3.2 shows the sequence of attack on EdDSA client-server model. First,
at the very initial step, the victim server generates a 256-bit EdDSA key pair
and shares the public key with the client. Next, the attacker load and map
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Client-Server Model
35
libgcrypt shared library on its virtual address space to achieve page sharing and
consequently, let the kernel do page deduplication. Now the attack is ready,
the attacker starts to probe the address of target EdDSA functions. While the
attacker probing, the client sends plain text to the victim server and trigger
the victim to sign on the plain text using EdDSA private key. Until the client
receives the signed text from the server, the attacker gets the time of each access
to the target addresses. Finally, the attacker ﬁnishes probing and analyses the
probing results to recover EdDSA secret component.
Figure 3.2: The attack scenario on the EdDSA signing/verifying client-server
model.
In this chapter, the motivation why I propose the timing side-channel attack is
stated. Since timing side-channel attacks use shared hardware resources between
the process as a side-channel, the multicore systems that have shared resources
are vulnerable to this kind of attack. The cloud system is not an exception to the
attack. Cloud system normally adopts virtualization to save management cost
and improve computing power. Cloud provider gives cloud user a cloud server
which is a virtual machine on the cloud provider’s host machine. However, these
virtual machines on the same machine also share some hardware resources each
other and consequently, can not escape from the risk of the side channel attacks.
==PAGE:46==
36
Target Scenario
This is a serious threat to cloud users and also to cloud providers.
With the above motivation, three target scenarios for the attack are stated. Be-
sides the Same-OS and Cross-VM attack, the Cross-NestedVM scenario is pro-
posed. Since the Intel implementation of the nested virtualization is achieved by
multiplexing the multiple levels of virtualization into a single level, nested vir-
tual machines also share hardware resources as non-nested virtual machines do.
Therefore, this implementation makes the proposed Cross-NestedVM attack sce-
nario possible. Furthermore, the client-server model for the attack is described
to make the attack scenario more practical.
Depends on the target crypto-
graphic system, the client-server model uses either RSA encryption/decryption
or EdDSA signing/verifying when communicates.
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
Attack Implementation
With the target scenarios presented in the previous chapter, the detailed im-
plementation of the proposed attack is described in this chapter. The proposed
attack is reproduced based on the FLUSH+RELOAD technique presented by
Yarom and Falkner in 2014 [YF14]. The FLUSH+RELOAD attack uses Last-
Level-Cache (LLC) as a side-channel. However, the proposed attack targets to
trace L1 cache to get information about the victim. Like this, even though the
idea of the attack is similar, the method of the reproduced attack is diﬀerent in
several ways as follows. The implementation details of the attack are described
in step by step in the following sections. The implementation of the attack on
RSA and EdDSA is described separately.
4.1
The FLUSH+RELOAD Technique
The proposed attack uses the FLUSH+RELOAD technique to trace the vic-
tim’s secret behavior. The FLUSH+RELOAD technique consists of three main
phases. At the ﬁrst phase, the attacker ﬂushes the target memory line from the
whole cache hierarchy. Then, the attacker let the victim processes the security-
critical operations. Finally, the attacker reloads the target memory line and
measures the time of each access. If the victim accesses the target memory line
==PAGE:48==
38
Attack Implementation
on the second phase, it will be cached from the main memory to cache hierarchy
and the measured reload time on the third phase will short. On the other hand,
if the victim doesn’t access the target memory line, it will still be on the main
memory and the measured reload time will long.
The practical implementation of these three main phases is shown in ﬁgure 4.1.
To correctly trace the victim’s security-critical operations from time to time,
time slots are introduced to make the tracing uniform. In each time slot, the
attacker ﬂushes all target memory lines and busy waits for certain cycles which
allowing the victim process to access the target memory lines. On the next
time slot, the attacker measures time to access each memory line and ﬂushes all
target memory lines again.
Figure 4.1: Code for tracing the victim’s secure behavior.
The probe function is slightly modiﬁed from the original version. Instead of
checking whether the measured cycles are below the threshold or not as it is like
the original paper, the function is modiﬁed to return the measured cycles itself.
Figure 4.2 shows the modiﬁed version of probe function. By modifying the probe
function, it was easy to record measured cycles of every target memory line in
every time slot.
Before to eﬀectively conduct the attack, several preparation steps are needed
such as determining threshold between L1 cache access and main memory access,
setting up the virtualization environments, achieving memory deduplication,
and specifying the target addresses. These preparation steps make the proposed
attack successfully conducted on the virtualized environments.
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Determining Threshold
39
Figure 4.2: Code for modiﬁed probe function.
4.2
Determining Threshold
In the attacker’s point of view, a clear classiﬁcation standard of cycles is needed
to determine whether the victim process accesses the target memory line or not.
It is obvious if the victim really accesses the target memory line during the
second phase of the attack, the memory line should be in cache hierarchy not
in main memory until the next clflush instruction is called. Therefore, if the
measured cycles are a similar number of cycles when the process accesses to the
L1 cache, the attacker can determine that the victim accesses to the memory
line during the second phase.
To determine which access is to the L1 cache and which access is to the main
memory by recorded cycles, clear criteria of a threshold is needed. I reused
the probe code shown in ﬁgure 4.2 to measure the access time to the L1 cache
but without the clflush instruction. To measure the access time to the main
memory, I probed the same memory line with clflush this time, but without
any process operates at the same time. The access time to the L1 cache and the
main memory is measured 150,000 times each on Dell Optiplex 9010 machine
which has 8 Intel Core i7-3770S CPU and 8GB DDR3-1600 memory, running
CentOS 7.6 as an operating system. Figure 4.3 shows the distribution of times
of each type of access.
In the ﬁgure, it is clear that the most L1 cache access takes less than 100 cycles
and the most main memory access take more than 200 cycles. In fact, several
cycles need to be added on the cycles of L1 cache access to consider not only
L1 cache access but also L2 and L3 cache accesses. Therefore, it will be a good
==PAGE:50==
40
Attack Implementation
Figure 4.3: Distribution of times to access L1 cache and main memory.
idea to set the threshold between 100 cycles to 200 cycles. However, during the
evaluation, I found that there are a lot of observations between 100 cycles and
200 cycles, so if I set threshold moderately, for example, 150 cycles, the wrong
observations between 100 and 150 cycles will be regarded as target function
access by the victim process. Therefore, I set the threshold conservatively to
85 cycles to ensure the only L1 cache accesses are counted to actual accesses by
the victim process.
4.3
Setting up Virtualized Environment
Among the three target scenarios described in chapter 3, the Same-OS attack
doesn’t need virtualization features to be conducted. However, for Cross-VM
and Cross-NestedVM attacks, a proper virtualization environment needs to be
set up. For Cross-VM and Cross-NestedVM attack, KVM/QEMU virtualiza-
tion is achieved by using libvirt virtualization API. Two virtual machines on
one hypervisor are set up for Cross-VM attack. Especially to achieve nested
virtualization, I conﬁgured the virtual machine as an L1 guest hypervisor by
exposing KVM/QEMU virtualization capabilities to the virtual machine to be
advantaged by the hardware virtualization extension. Therefore, two L2 nested
virtual machines on one L1 guest hypervisor are set up for Cross-NestedVM
attack.
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Achieving Memory Deduplication
41
Since the virtualization gives strong isolation between the virtual machines,
the victim process and the attacker process need to be executed on the same
physical processor to successfully trace the process executed on the other virtual
machine through the shared cache hierarchy. This CPU aﬃnity is achieved by
virtual CPU pinning feature in libvirt API and taskset command in Linux.
By using the virtual CPU pinning, the number and the position of each virtual
machine’s core was conﬁgured. By using the taskset command, which process
to be executed on which cores can be conﬁgured even when it starts to run.
Through the CPU aﬃnity setting on the virtual machine, I can successfully set
up the virtualized environment which the victim and the attacker executed on
the diﬀerent virtual machines, but on the same physical process with shared L1
cache.
4.4
Achieving Memory Deduplication
The FLUSH+RELOAD technique relies on shared pages between the victim
and the attacker.
Because of that the page sharing is achieved by the ker-
nel, the attacker can issue the clflush instruction which targets the memory
line on the attacker’s virtual address space, even the attacker doesn’t know the
target virtual address of the memory line on the victim. This page sharing tech-
nique, especially memory deduplication between the victim and the attacker, is
achieved by Kernel Same-page Merging (KSM). By enabling KSM on the target
systems, the kernel ﬁnds identical pages among active processes and merge those
pages into a single page.
In practical, libgcrypt shared library should be deduplicated between the at-
tacker and the victim since the target functions are included in the libgcrypt
shared library. The attacker can achieve memory deduplication by mmaping the
same libgcrypt ﬁle with the victim’s libgcrypt library on its virtual address
space. Since the contents of the mmaped libgcrypt ﬁle on main memory is the
same with the victim’s libgcrypt library, the kernel merges these two contents
of pages into one single content of pages.
4.5
Specifying Target Addresses
Specifying the eﬀective target addresses within the libgcrypt library is an es-
sential part of the attack.
The attacker needs to target the addresses only
accessed when the victim executes the secure operation of interest. Since the
==PAGE:52==
42
Attack Implementation
whole libgcrypt library is mmaped on the attacker’s virtual address space and
consequently, the attacker knows the start address of the mmaped libgcrypt ﬁle.
Therefore, the attacker only needs to ﬁnd the oﬀset of each target functions to
specify the target addresses. By adding the start address of the libgcrypt ﬁle
and the oﬀset of the target functions, the attacker can get the virtual address
of the target functions.
To specify the target oﬀset easily, I built the libgcrypt library with -O2 optimiza-
tion and debug option. The debug option gives information of which source code
is corresponded to which memory line of assembly instruction. Also, it doesn’t
aﬀect the victim’s performance since the debugging symbols are not loaded in
run time.
With the advantage of debug option, objdump command outputs
memory oﬀset of target functions, so the attacker can either target the start
line of the target function or frequently accessed line of the target function.
However, processor optimization such as speculative execution on the victim’s
side could decrease the correctness of tracing results. To reduce the eﬀect of
speculative execution, I made the attacker target the oﬀset near to the return
instruction rather than start line or frequently accessed line of the target func-
tion.
The target oﬀsets for RSA and EdDSA are described in the following
section.
4.5.1
RSA
As shown in algorithm 1, the target functions of attack on RSA are square, mod-
ulo reduce and multiply. There are two helper functions for square, one helper
function for modulo reduce, and two helper functions for multiply. Therefore,
I targeted the oﬀset near the return instruction of the total 5 functions for the
ﬁrst time.
However, the result shows that the one square function and one
multiply function are rarely accessed during the attack. Therefore, I decided to
target just 3 oﬀsets of the active functions. Figure 4.4 shows the target oﬀsets
which are near to the retq instruction. By reducing the number of addresses to
target, the attacker can get a higher resolution of the result because the number
of heavy clflush instruction also reduced within the time slot.
4.5.2
EdDSA
As shown in algorithm 2, the target functions of attack on EdDSA are a dupli-
cation of point and addition of points. Since there is just one helper function
for each target function, it was easy to ﬁnd the oﬀset of the target functions.
However, in practical implementation, it’s impossible to recover meaningful in-
==PAGE:53==
4.5 Specifying Target Addresses
43
Figure 4.4: Target oﬀset of sqaure (blue), modulo reduce (green) and multiply
(red) in RSA implementation of libgcrypt version 1.5.2.
formation from the secret component of EdDSA. In veriﬁcation step, the hashed
value of private string d: H0,,,b−1(d) is stored in the secure buﬀer and need to
be computed as scalar in algorithm 2. Since this value is stored in a secure
buﬀer and marked as secret value, scalar-point multiplication algorithm takes
the constant-time branch and consequently, leak nothing about the secure com-
ponent.
Unlike the hashed value of private string d: H0,,,b−1(d), r = H(Hb,...,2b−1(d), M)
is stored in the normal buﬀer, not securely marked, so attack on r value was pos-
sible. However, it’s almost impossible to recover meaningful information from r
even though r value can be obtained perfectly because the private component is
already hashed twice in r. From libgcrypt version 1.7.7, the r value is marked
as secure and stored in the secure buﬀer so the attack on r is practically not
possible anymore. This update means that there were possible timing attacks
on EdDSA session key [Koc].
In this chapter, the detailed implementation of the proposed attack is described.
==PAGE:54==
44
Attack Implementation
The attack uses the idea of the FLUSH+RELOAD technique presented in 2014,
but the method is diﬀerent in several ways. First, the threshold that distin-
guishes victim access is set conservatively to 85. This threshold makes the only
accesses from the L1 cache are considered as victim access unlike to the original
technique which considers access from the LLC as well. Second, virtualization
environments are set up using libvirt virtualization API which oﬀers the envi-
ronment to Cross-VM attack and Cross-NestedVM attack. Also, CPU aﬃnity
is set to make sure the attacker and the victim on diﬀerent virtual machines are
on the same physical process with a shared L1 cache. Third, memory deduplica-
tion between the attacker process and the victim process is achieved by Kernel
Same-page Merging (KSM) feature. The target memory pages to deduplicate
are the mmaped libgcrypt library which was built with -O2 optimization and
debug option. Using the debug option in the shared library, the address of the
target functions of RSA and EdDSA implementation in libgcrypt is speciﬁed.
For the case of attacking RSA, it is possible to get a secret exponent by ex-
ploiting the vulnerability in the implementation as described in section 2.4.1.4.
However, in the case of attacking EdDSA, it is impossible to get a secret compo-
nent practically even though the implementation of the target EdDSA function
itself contains a vulnerable code.
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 5
Evaluation
The proposed attack is tested on diﬀerent experimental setup depends on which
attack scenario it targets.
Since the environment of the attack is diﬀerent,
also the conﬁguration that shows the higher resolution of results is diﬀerent.
In this section, an experimental setup for the proposed attack and the way
how I achieved better results by changing the several attack conﬁgurations is
described. After getting the tracing results of target addresses by the method
shown in ﬁgure 4.1, the results need to be translated to the form comparable to
the ground truth which is a bit sequence of the secret. Therefore, I implemented
a ﬁnite-state machine that automatically translates the tracing results to bit
sequence. At last, translated data is compared with the ground truth of secret
using a longest common subsequence algorithm, and ﬁnal recovery rates of the
attacks are presented.
5.1
Experimental Setup
I tested the attacks on Dell Optiplex 9010 with 8 Intel Core i7-3770S CPU and
8GB DDR3-1600 memory. All systems involved in the attacks use Centos 7.6 as
an operating system. The attacker and the victim of Same-OS attack are two
diﬀerent processes on this system. For cross-VM and cross-NestedVM attacks,
KVM/QEMU single-level virtualization and KVM/QEMU nested virtualization
==PAGE:56==
46
Evaluation
are managed by libvirt, respectively. In the cross-VM scenario, the victim server
is located on one virtual machine, and the attacker and client are located on
another virtual machine. 4GB memory is allocated on each virtual machine. In
the cross-NestedVM scenario, two nested virtual machines are virtualized on one
virtual machine which is used in the cross-VM scenario. Similar to cross-VM,
the victim server is located on one nested virtual machine, and the attacker and
client are located on another nested virtual machine. 1GB memory is allocated
on each nested virtual machine. Since the size of the libgcrypt ﬁle is less than
10MB, 1GB is enough memory to mmap the libgcrypt ﬁle.
5.2
Attack Conﬁgurations
To achieve a better resolution of the attack results, diﬀerent attack conﬁgu-
rations are used in three diﬀerent scenarios. First, deﬁning the total number
of time slots is needed to detect the victim server’s behavior without loss. If
the maximum number of time slots are small, the attacker couldn’t detect all
behavior of the victim server within the time slots. In three attack scenarios,
50000 time slots are enough to detect all secret behavior of the victim server.
Second, synchronizing the attack process and client process are needed. to detect
the secret behavior of the victim server within the time slots. If the client process
triggers the victim server’s security-critical operations too early or too late, the
attacker couldn’t get the results even it has enough time slots. To synchronize
two processes, sleep() command is used. In the same-OS scenario, the client
triggers the security-critical operations 0.001 seconds after the attacker starts
to trace. However, in the cross-VM and cross-NestedVM scenario, the attacker
starts to trace 0.0005 seconds after the client sends a request to the victim
server to trigger the security-critical operations. In a virtualized system, system
calls such as send() or receive() make a trap to the host hypervisor and need to
return back after the host hypervisor deals with the trap. In other words, issuing
system calls by the client in a virtual machine makes a longer time interval from
send() request by the client to the security-critical operations operating in victim
server, than the issuing system calls by the client in a non-virtualized system.
Therefore, in virtualized scenarios, the attacker can detect the victim server’s
behavior correctly if it starts to trace after the client sends the request to trigger
the victim’s security-critical operations.
Third, the number of cycles to wait in each time slot need to be conﬁgured to
achieve a higher resolution of attack. In terms of resolution, the best result of the
attack is detecting only one access per one time slot. I tested several numbers of
cycles in each scenario to ﬁnd the best number of cycle of each attack scenario.
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Result Processing
47
In same-OS attack, 200 cycles per each time slot show the highest recovery rate
among 50, 100, 200, and 300 cycles. In the cross-VM scenario, 100 cycles per
each time slots show the highest recovery rate among 50 and 100 cycles. In the
cross-NestedVM scenario, I tested 50 and 100 cycles per each time slot, and the
result of 100 cycles conﬁguration is slightly better than 50 cycles.
5.3
Result Processing
Before comparing the attack results with the ground truth, processing the raw
data to the comparable form of ground truth is needed. Since the raw data from
the attack is just a number of cycles for accessing each function, it needs to be
translated to the bit sequence depends on the pattern of accesses. To do that,
instead of ﬁnding patterns on a graph from the ﬁrst time slot to the last time
slot, I implemented a ﬁnite-state machine to do the translation automatically.
After the translation to bit sequence is done, it needs to be compared with the
ground truth to get a recovery rate. To do the comparison eﬀectively, I used the
longest common subsequence algorithm to the translated result and the ground
truth. By these two methods, the raw result data is properly translated into
bit sequence and recover rate could have been calculated appropriately. In each
attack scenario, 1000 trials of attack are conducted and analyzed. Table 5.1
shows the average, median and maximum recovery rate of each scenario.
Attack scenario
Same-OS
Cross-VM
Cross-NestedVM
Average
91.42%
91.09%
76.61%
Median
93.55%
91.83%
76.74%
Maximum
95.85%
93.73%
87.24%
Table 5.1: Recover rates of each attack scenario
5.3.1
Finite-state machine
The implemented ﬁnite-state machine is used to translate raw result data to
bit sequence automatically. Since each bit of secret component is deﬁned by
the detected access pattern, the machine needs to ﬁnd square, modulo reduce,
multiply and modulo reduce for bit 1, or square and modulo reduce for bit 0.
First, the machine takes a sequence of accesses as an input. Then it checks
whether which function is accessed or not for all time slots.
Based on the
information obtained, the machine outputs the bit 1 or 0 by analyzing the
==PAGE:58==
48
Evaluation
information in each time slot and changing its states.
Figure 5.1 shows the
transition rules of the ﬁnite-state machine. First, the machine state is START. If
the machine ﬁnds square function access, it transits to SQUARE state. Likewise,
if the machine ﬁnds modulo reduce function access, it transits to MODULO
state. In MODULO state, the machine can expect multiply function access for
bit 1 or square function access for bit 0. If the machine gets multiply access, it
transits to MULTIPLY state and waits for modulo reduce function access. If it
ﬁnally got modulo reduce access, it outputs bit 1, transits to the FINAL state
and waits for another square function access to start again. If the machine gets
square function access while in MODULO state, it outputs bit 0 and waits for
modulo reduce function access.
Figure 5.1: Transition rules for the ﬁnite-state machine.
However, there could be a wrong translation because of speculative execution.
While the machine waits for square access or multiply access in MODULO state,
multiply access can come right after the speculatively executed square access.
In this case, the machine translates the bit wrongly as two 0s instead of one
1. To correctly translate the raw results even with the speculative execution is
applied, I implemented an optimized ﬁnite-state machine added with another
modulo state which is MODULO_R. By introducing MODULO_R state, the
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Result Processing
49
machine can postpone the decision of output bit 0 and wait for possible multiply
function at the next time slot. Figure 5.2 shows the new transition rules of the
optimized ﬁnite-state machine. If there is a multiply function access at the next
time slot, the machine transits to MULTIPLY state and follows the default
transition rules. If there is not multiply function access, the machine outputs
bit 0 for the postponed access pattern and follows the default transition rules.
By applying this optimization to handle the eﬀect of speculative execution, the
recovery rate is improved by around 10%.
Figure 5.2: Transition rules for the optimized ﬁnite-state machine.
5.3.2
Longest common subsequence
Now the translated bit sequence of result data can be compared to the ground
truth. However, obviously, there are some error bits causing from the attack
itself and the ﬁnite-state machine which make the length diﬀerence and conse-
quently, make comparison diﬃcult. Since the total length of two bit sequences
is diﬀerent, comparing the bit position by position is an unsound method. Al-
though the length is diﬀerent, I can ﬁnd there are identical multiple long bit
sequences between the result and the ground truth. Also, I found that there
==PAGE:60==
50
Evaluation
is some small length of a wrong bit sequences between the identical long bit
sequences. Based on these observed patterns, I decided to use the longest com-
mon subsequence (LCS) algorithm to compare the result and the ground truth
eﬀectively. If the LCS is applied to the result and the ground truth, the identical
long bit sequences will be counted in LCS and the small bit sequences will not
be counted in LCS so that the wrong bits will be removed. By applying the
LCS algorithm for comparison, I was able to achieve a high recovery rate by
eﬀectively comparing the bit sequences in the translated results.
5.4
Experimental results
The time measurements were done while the victim server decrypts the cipher-
text sent by the client using 2048-bit RSA private key of libgcrypt version 1.5.2.
More speciﬁcally, the victim uses CRT components dp and dq as an exponent for
square-and-multiply exponentiation algorithm since libgcrypt adopts CRT-RSA
optimization. Therefore, recovered secrets are CRT components and these CRT
components were compared with each ground truth, shows the ﬁnal recovery
rate of each attack scenario.
5.4.1
Same-OS
The same-OS attack shows the best recovery rate with the clearest access pat-
terns among three attack scenarios: median 93.55% and maximum 95.85%. In
addition to the results of 1000 trials of the attack, one example of the victim’s
access patterns is depicted in ﬁgure 5.3.
Figure 5.3 shows the graph of access time to target memory addresses during
Same-OS attack in arbitrary 100 time slots.
The accesses to the address of
square, modulo reduce and multiply function depicted as a blue circle, green
triangle, and red cross respectively. In the graph, we can clearly distinguish
which access is from the main memory and which access is from the L1 cache
based on cycles as described in section 4.2. Since the accesses from the L1 cache
indicate the victim has accessed the target function, it is enough to analyze only
accesses below the threshold, which is set to 85 as described in section 4.2.
The patterns of accesses are clearly distinguishable in the graph. For example,
the ﬁrst rectangular box with the black outline from time slot 8005 to 8009
indicates bit 1. At time slot 8005 and 8006, square accesses are observed. After
that, at time slot 8007, modulo reduce access is observed. Next, multiply access
==PAGE:61==
5.4 Experimental results
51
Figure 5.3: Measured cycles in 100 time slots by Same-OS attack.
is observed at time slot 8008. Finally, modulo reduce access is observed at time
slot 8009. This sequence of the square, modulo reduce, multiply and modulo
reduce implies that the victim was processing the exponent bit 1 during these
time slots. Likewise, the second rectangular box from time slot 8010 to 8015
also indicates bit 1 which has a similar access pattern with the ﬁrst rectangular
box. The case of processing bit 0 is observed as well from time slot 8022 to
8023 which is the fourth rectangular box. Before the time slot 8022, the access
pattern was ended with bit 1. Therefore, square access at time slot 8022 is
considered as a start of the new access pattern. There is modulo reduce access
following at time slot 8023. In the next time slots, the square access is observed
instead of multiply access. Therefore, it concludes the previous access pattern
with bit 0 and starts a new access pattern with square function access.
Besides the clear patterns of accesses, there are also ambiguous patterns in the
graph. The third rectangular box which is from time slot 8016 to 8021, contains
square function access and multiply function access at the same time slot 8019
after the square and modulo reduce accesses.
In this case, these slots may
indicate one 1 bit or two 0 bits. However, I decided that these slots indicate
bit 1. The reason for the decision is because the square function is more likely
to be speculatively executed than the multiply function so that the access to
multiply function has more weight than the access to square function. This
logic is included in the transition rules of the ﬁnite-state machine.
Another
ambiguous pattern observed is at the last rectangular box in the ﬁgure which
is from time slot 8093 to 8098. In this case, square access and modulo reduce
==PAGE:62==
52
Evaluation
access is observed in serial. However, there is no square access or multiply access
following, except that there is multiply access just above the threshold. These
access pattern may indicate bit 0, bit 1, or two bit 0. Since there are 6 time slots
in this pattern, it might not be one bit 0 because one bit 0 normally comprises
at most 3 time slots. The ﬁnite-state machine will interpret this pattern as one
0 bit, so this interpretation leads to the error case.
In this trial of the attack, total 8224 time slots were taken while the victim
processes exponentiation algorithm twice for dp and dq. The ground truth of
these CRT components is 1024-bit and 1022-bit long, respectively.
5.4.2
Cross-VM
The Cross-VM attack shows the lower recovery rate than the Same-OS attack,
but it still above 90%: median 91.83% and maximum 93.73%. In addition to the
results of 1000 trials of the attack, one example of the victim’s access patterns
is depicted in ﬁgure 5.4.
Figure 5.4 shows the graph of access time to target memory addresses during
Cross-OS attack in arbitrary 100 time slots.
Like the Same-OS attack, the
accesses to the address of square, modulo reduce and multiply function depicted
as a blue circle, green triangle, and red cross respectively. Compare to Same-OS
attack, there are more observations accessed between the L1 cache access and
the main memory access. This is because issuing clflush and tracing within
the virtual machine makes more noise and takes more time per each time slot
than the case of withing the non-virtualized environment. However, the ﬁnite-
state machine still can capture the bit patterns because the threshold is set
conservatively to 85.
The accesses below the threshold are more ﬂuctuating than at the Same-OS at-
tack, but still, it is possible to interpret the access patterns. The ﬁrst three rect-
angular boxes clearly indicate bit 0. Within the boxes, square access is followed
by modulo reduce access and there is no multiply access which may interrupt
the interpretation. For the cases of bit 1 in the ﬁgure, square, modulo reduce,
multiply and modulo reduce sequence is clearly observed and interpreted. Fur-
thermore, there is no square access at the time slot which the multiply access
is observed.
These patterns contribute to the correct recovery of the secret
component.
However, there are some time slots which have not any access below the thresh-
old. This is because the number of cycles for the busy wait after each clflush
instruction is reduced from 200 (Same-OS) to 100 (Cross-VM). Reducing the
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Experimental results
53
Figure 5.4: Measured cycles in 100 time slots by Cross-VM attack.
number of cycles makes the result become high resolution but generates missing
accesses at some time slots. Although there are missing accesses at some time
slots, there is no eﬀect on the implemented ﬁnite-state machine because the
machine just ignores those slots and moves on to the next time slot.
In this trial of the attack, total 12404 time slots were taken while the victim
processes exponentiation algorithm twice for dp and dq. The ground truth of
these CRT components is 1020-bit and 1023-bit long, respectively.
5.4.3
Cross-NestedVM
The Cross-NestedVM attack shows the lowest recovery rate among three attack
scenarios: median 76.74% and maximum 87.24%. In addition to the results of
1000 trials of the attack, one example of the victim’s access patterns is depicted
in ﬁgure 5.5.
Figure 5.5 shows the graph of access time to target memory addresses during
Cross-OS attack in arbitrary 100 time slots.
Like the Same-OS and Cross-
VM attacks, the accesses to the address of square, modulo reduce and multiply
function depicted as a blue circle, green triangle, and red cross respectively.
Similar to the cross-VM attack, the detected result has a lot of noise between
the L1 cache access and the main memory access because the attack is conducted
==PAGE:64==
54
Evaluation
on the nested virtual machine, but still, the implemented ﬁnite-state machine
can capture the bit patterns because the threshold is set conservatively to 85.
The accesses below the threshold are still ﬂuctuating, but it is possible to in-
terpret the access patterns. The ﬁrst two rectangular boxes clearly indicate bit
1. Within the boxes, the sequence of the square, modulo reduce, multiply and
modulo reduce is clearly observed and interpreted.
Three rectangular boxes
which indicate bit 0 are followed. In each box, square access is followed by mod-
ulo reduce access and no multiply access is detected. These patterns contribute
to the correct recovery of the secret component.
Figure 5.5: Measured cycles in 100 time slots by Cross-NestedVM attack.
However, there is an ambiguous rectangular box between time slot 15066 and
15072. Within the box, square and modulo reduce accesses are followed by the
second square access. However, multiply access is just followed at the next time
slot of the second square access. Similar to the case of the Same-OS attack,
these slots may indicate one 1 bit or two 0 bits. Again, I decided that these
slots indicate bit 1 to maintain consistency with the Same-OS case by treating
square access here as speculatively executed. The optimization of the ﬁnite-
state machine deals exactly this ambiguous case. Using the optimized ﬁnite-
state machine that is designed to handle the eﬀect of speculative execution, the
recovery rate of Cross-NestedVM attack is improved by around 10%.
In this trial of the attack, total 12543 time slots were taken while the victim
processes exponentiation algorithm twice for dp and dq. The ground truths of
these CRT components are 1024-bit and 1022-bit long, respectively.
==PAGE:65==
5.5 Further Recovery
55
5.5
Further Recovery
Since the secret RSA exponent is partially recovered, it needs to be fully recov-
ered to complete the attack. Every result from the trial of the attack has error
bits. However, those error bits are independent to the trial of the attack and
also to the position of the bit sequence. Therefore, those independent errors can
be corrected by comparing the result of the attacks.
As described in section 5.3.2, the observed bit patterns show that there is a
short length of incorrect bits between a long length of correct bits. Therefore,
the more the recovered bit sequences are compared, the fewer likelihoods of
the incorrect bits are in the same position. To test this approach, I compared
multiple pairs of the recovered bit sequences. When comparing the pairs of the
bit sequences, I did count the long same bit patterns that appear mostly and
didn’t count the short bits that appear randomly and nearly not. Those short
bits that expected to be an incorrect bit are at most 2 bits between the long bit
patterns. Therefore, by comparing the multiple partially recovered secrets, the
attacker can recover the secret.
Although the proposed attack shows the high recovery rate and fully recovers
the secret of the victim, the recovered secret is not RSA private key itself, but
the CRT components of RSA since libgcrypt adopts CRT-RSA optimization. In
other words, the attacker can only recover dp and dp by the proposed attack.
However, knowing CRT component of RSA which is dp or dp is suﬃcient to
break the RSA cryptographic system because (m −medp) is a multiple of p or
(m −medq) is a multiple of q for an arbitrary message m [CS04]. In conclusion,
with the discussions above, the attacker can recover RSA private key.
5.6
Limitations
Although the attack shows a high recovery rate of the secret exponent, there
are some practical limitations to execute the attack. First, the victim process
and the attacker process should be executed on the same physical process to
trace the victim’s behavior. I achieved this by setting CPU aﬃnity as described
in section 4.3. However, in a real multicore system, the core scheduler allocates
the core to the processes so the attacker can’t sure the desired CPU aﬃnity is
achieved and consequently, the attack depends on the core scheduler. Second,
I executed only two processes at the same time to test the attack, but there
would be more processes running at the same time in a real scenario. Since
the proposed attack relies on page sharing between the victim process and the
==PAGE:66==
56
Evaluation
attacker process, the other processes will aﬀect the tracing result badly if the
attacker shares the target library with other processes, not the victim process.
In this chapter, the attacks on three target scenarios are evaluated. To get the
results with high resolution, the attack conﬁgurations such as the number of time
slots and cycles to busy wait are adjusted. With the adjusted conﬁgurations,
1000 trials of attack are tested for each target scenario. The raw results from
the attack, however, needs to be translated into the form comparable with the
ground truth of the secret which is bit sequence. The translation is done by
the ﬁnite-state machine which takes the raw result as an input and output bit
sequences. Finally, the translated bit sequences are compared with the ground
truth of the secret using the longest common subsequence algorithm.
As a
result, maximum 95.85%, 93.73% and 87.24% of RSA secret components are
recovered in same-OS, cross-VM, and cross-NestedVM scenario respectively.
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 6
Mitigation Techniques
The FLUSH+RELOAD technique presented in 2014 already mitigated by sev-
eral techniques.
Since the proposed attack relies on the FLUSH+RELOAD
technique, those mitigation techniques can eﬀectively mitigate the proposed at-
tack as well.
6.1
Modifying Target Algorithm
Using the libgcrypt version 1.5.3 or higher removes the potential vulnerabil-
ity in the square-and-multiply algorithm of RSA. From the version 1.5.3, the
libgcrypt starts to use a new version of the square-and-multiply algorithm for
RSA implementation shown in algorithm 3 which executes multiply function
always independent to whether the secret bit is 0 or 1. After the algorithm
executes multiply and modulo reduce, it determines whether to use the result
or not depends on the secret bit. The proposed attack method traces whether
the victim accesses the target address of the function or not and determine the
secret bits, so this modiﬁcation to the algorithm eﬀectively defends the attack.
However, modifying the target algorithm to be executed in constant time doesn’t
mitigate the proposed attack. The proposed attack checks whether the victim
==PAGE:68==
58
Mitigation Techniques
Algorithm 3 R = BE mod M
R ←1
i ←|E| −1
while i ≥0 do
R ←R2
R ←R mod M
if E is secure || (signed) Ei < 0 then
temp ←RB
temp ←temp mod M
end if
if (signed) Ei < 0 then
R ←temp
end if
i ←i −1
end while
return R
accesses to the monitoring memory lines or not, instead of comparing the time
diﬀerence of execution of the algorithm.
Therefore, if the access pattern of
the target memory lines is distinguishable within one execution of the target
algorithm, the attacker can successfully trace the victim’s secret behavior even
if the target algorithm is always executed in constant time.
6.2
Restricting clflush Instruction
Restricting the power of clflush instruction will possibly defend the attack. In
the proposed attack method, the attacker can issue clflush instruction with
the address of the target memory line which is on the attacker’s virtual ad-
dress space. Since the page sharing is achieved between the victim’s memory
pages and the attacker’s memory pages, clflush can eﬀectively ﬂush the shared
memory line from the cache hierarchy. Therefore, if the attacker can’t ﬂush the
memory line which is shared with the other process, the attack couldn’t operate
successfully. More speciﬁcally, if the process can only issue clflush instruction
to the memory lines which the process has write access, the attacker couldn’t
ﬂush the memory line of shared libgcrypt library and consequently, this restric-
tion of clflush instruction will mitigate the proposed attack eﬀectively.
==PAGE:69==
6.3 Disabling Page Sharing
59
6.3
Disabling Page Sharing
Disabling page sharing between the victim and the attacker will possibly defend
the attack. However, abandoning the beneﬁts of page sharing will increase the
memory requirement of the whole system. If it goes to the virtualized environ-
ment, the hypervisor will suﬀer more from the memory requirement since the
virtualized systems are advantaged by page sharing a lot. Therefore, disabling
page sharing can prevent the proposed attack but it is not a practical mitigation
technique.
Besides the mitigation techniques discussed in this chapter, there are other
possible techniques eﬀectively mitigates the proposed attack such as cache par-
titioning and changing cache replacement policy [YGST17]. However, there is a
trade-oﬀbetween the performance of the system and the risk of the side-channel
attacks. In other words, these techniques, like disabling page sharing discussed
above, scarify some performance to make the system to be secure.
==PAGE:70==
60
Mitigation Techniques
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
In this thesis, reproduced side-channel attack that breaks the isolation boundary
of nested virtualization is implemented and tested to extract the 2048-bit RSA
private key of libgcrypt version 1.5.2. Attacking 256-bit EdDSA private key is
also discussed.
The proposed attack was tested on three diﬀerent environments which are Same-
OS, Cross-VM and Cross-NestedVM targeting client-server model using RSA
encryption/decryption and EdDSA signing/verifying. The attack on RSA suc-
cessfully recovers a secret component of RSA by exploiting the vulnerability of
the square-and-multiply algorithm. However, the attack on EdDSA was prac-
tically impossible because the target algorithm in EdDSA always executes all
target functions and does not make a diﬀerence in access patterns.
The experimental results are translated to the form comparable with the ground
truth of the target secret component. The translation is achieved by the ﬁnite-
state machine which takes the number of cycles of each time slot as an input and
outputs bits by the deﬁned the transition rules. After that, the translated bit
sequences are eﬀectively compared with the ground truth using the longest com-
mon subsequence algorithm. As a result, maximum 95.85%, 93.73%, 87.24% of
RSA secret bits are recovered in same-OS, cross-VM, cross-NestedVM scenario
respectively.
==PAGE:72==
62
Conclusion
7.1
Vulnerabilities on Nested Virtulization
The results show that the attack using clflush instruction and page sharing
technique on a vulnerable algorithm is still possible. Since the process on not
only the non-virtualized environment and the single-level virtualization but also
the nested virtualization can issue clflush instruction on shared memory pages,
the attack on the nested virtualization environment is possible as shown. To
mitigate the proposed attack, restricting the power of clflush instruction or
disabling page sharing feature would be possible but the latter one is not a
practical approach as explained in chapter 6. In conclusion, the proposed at-
tack is conducted successfully on the not only non-virtualized environment and
single-level virtualization environment but also nested virtualization environ-
ment, which shows the isolation boundary of nested virtualization is vulnerable
to the side-channel attacks.
7.2
Future Work
In this thesis, attacking the process on the same level of virtualization is imple-
mented and tested. However, extracting the secret from L1 guest hypervisor or
even from L0 host hypervisor as an L2 guest operating system would be pos-
sible. Nested virtualization is achieved by multiplexing the multiple levels of
virtualization into a single level of virtualization, which is supported by hard-
ware directly as described in section 2.3. More speciﬁcally, from a hardware
point of view, the target channel for the attack such as LLC is shared by L0
host hypervisor and the multiplexed virtual machines regardless of L1 guest hy-
pervisor or L2 guest operating system. Therefore, as long as the target memory
pages are shared between the victim and the attacker through the page shar-
ing technique, the proposed attack can extract L1 guest hypervisor or L0 host
hypervisor’s secret as an L2 guest operating system. In a real scenario for the
nested virtualization environment, there is a little likelihood of communication
in an application level between L0 host hypervisor and L2 guest operating sys-
tem. Therefore, attacking L1 guest hypervisor’s secret as an L2 guest operating
system would be realistic future work using the proposed attack.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[BYDD+10] Muli Ben-Yehuda, Michael D Day, Zvi Dubitzky, Michael Factor,
Nadav Har’El, Abel Gordon, Anthony Liguori, Orit Wasserman,
and Ben-Ami Yassour. The turtles project: Design and implemen-
tation of nested virtualization. In OSDI, volume 10, pages 423–436,
2010.
[CS04]
Matthew J Campagna and Amit Sethi. Key recovery method for crt
implementation of rsa. IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2004:147,
2004.
[GRBG18]
Ben Gras, Kaveh Razavi, Herbert Bos, and Cristiano Giuﬀrida.
Translation leak-aside buﬀer: Defeating cache side-channel protec-
tions with {TLB} attacks. In 27th {USENIX} Security Symposium
({USENIX} Security 18), pages 955–972, 2018.
[HL17]
Zecheng He and Ruby B Lee. How secure is your cache against side-
channel attacks?
In Proceedings of the 50th Annual IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Microarchitecture, pages 341–353.
ACM, 2017.
[IES15]
Gorka Irazoqui, Thomas Eisenbarth, and Berk Sunar.
S $ a:
A shared cache attack that works across cores and deﬁes vm
sandboxing–and its application to aes.
In Security and Privacy
(SP), 2015 IEEE Symposium on, pages 591–604. IEEE, 2015.
[IGA+15]
Mehmet Sinan Inci, Berk Gülmezoglu, Gorka Irazoqui Apecechea,
Thomas Eisenbarth, and Berk Sunar. Seriously, get oﬀmy cloud!
cross-vm rsa key recovery in a public cloud.
IACR Cryptology
ePrint Archive, 2015:898, 2015.
==PAGE:74==
64
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[IIES14]
Gorka Irazoqui, Mehmet Sinan Inci, Thomas Eisenbarth, and Berk
Sunar. Fine grain cross-vm attacks on xen and vmware. In Big Data
and Cloud Computing (BdCloud), 2014 IEEE Fourth International
Conference on, pages 737–744. IEEE, 2014.
[Int10]
Intel. Intel
R⃝64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’ s
Manual Volume 3A : System Programming Guide, Part 1. System,
3(253666):1807–1814, 2010.
[Koc]
Werner Koch. Libgcrypt 1.7.7 released. https://lists.gnupg.
org/pipermail/gnupg-announce/2017q2/000406.html.
Ac-
cessed: 2019-01-13.
[LYG+15]
Fangfei Liu, Yuval Yarom, Qian Ge, Gernot Heiser, and Ruby B
Lee. Last-level cache side-channel attacks are practical. In Secu-
rity and Privacy (SP), 2015 IEEE Symposium on, pages 605–622.
IEEE, 2015.
[OST06]
Dag Arne Osvik, Adi Shamir, and Eran Tromer. Cache attacks
and countermeasures: the case of aes. In Cryptographers’ Track at
the RSA Conference, pages 1–20. Springer, 2006.
[Wika]
Wikipedia. Cpu cache. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CPU_
cache#Cache_entries. Accessed: 2018-10-11.
[Wikb]
Wikipedia.
Rsa (cryptosystem).
https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/RSA_(cryptosystem). Accessed: 2018-11-26.
[Wikc]
Wikipedia.
Side-channel attack.
https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Side-channel_attack. Accessed: 2018-10-12.
[YB14]
Yuval Yarom and Naomi Benger. Recovering openssl ecdsa nonces
using the ﬂush+ reload cache side-channel attack. IACR Cryptol-
ogy ePrint Archive, 2014:140, 2014.
[YF14]
Yuval Yarom and Katrina Falkner. Flush+ reload: A high resolu-
tion, low noise, l3 cache side-channel attack. In USENIX Security
Symposium, volume 1, pages 22–25, 2014.
[YGST17]
Mengjia Yan, Bhargava Gopireddy, Thomas Shull, and Josep Tor-
rellas. Secure hierarchy-aware cache replacement policy (sharp):
Defending against cache-based side channel attacks. In Computer
Architecture (ISCA), 2017 ACM/IEEE 44th Annual International
Symposium on, pages 347–360. IEEE, 2017.
[ZJRR12]
Yinqian Zhang, Ari Juels, Michael K Reiter, and Thomas Risten-
part. Cross-vm side channels and their use to extract private keys.
In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM conference on Computer and com-
munications security, pages 305–316. ACM, 2012.
