==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Learning Data Augmentation
Improving the Robustness of Brain Segmen-
tation Predictions
Bue Jul Jørgensen (s162882)
Christian Hjuler Christensen (s162868)
Daniel Beck Hansen (s165311)
Supervisor: Søren Hauberg
Associate professor at the Section for Cognitive Systems at DTU
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Data augmentation is a commonly applied technique in machine learning to oﬀset lim-
itations of data scarcity. For an image data set, new images can be generated by sim-
ple transformations, e.g by rotating or translating existing images. While manual ap-
proaches to data augmentation are widely used, they are in fact an implicit form of
feature engineering.
In this thesis we aim to learn the transformations from a machine learning perspective
rather than manually specifying the transformations. For a pair of images, the idea is
to learn the transformation that makes one image resemble the other image as much as
possible. Learning these transformations for all pairs of images in the data set, a gener-
ative statistical model of the transformations is build, from which new data is generated
by applying the learned transformations to existing data, under the assumption that the
generated data belong to the same domain as the original data.
In this project, 3D magnetic resonance brain images are considered for a segmentation
task on a voxel-wise level. A U-Net, a particular type of a convolutional neural network,
is implemented to solve the learning task. We demonstrate that applying data augmen-
tation improves performance of the U-Net. The learning-based augmentation approach
is not shown to enhance segmentation performance compared to an unlearned, rotational
augmentation scheme. However, the U-Net becomes more robust in the training phase
when the learned approach is taken.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for acquiring a Master of Science in Engineering ( Mathematical Modelling and Compu-
tations).
The authors of the thesis have consulted each other on the diﬀerent aspects and consid-
erations found in this thesis. However, Bue Jul Jørgensen has been instrumental in the
part of the project concerning CPAB transformations, while Daniel Beck Hansen and
Christian Hjuler Christensen have implemented the convolutional neural network used
to segment brain images.
Kongens Lyngby, January 27, 2019
Bue Jul Jørgensen (s162882)
Christian Hjuler Christensen (s162868)
Daniel Beck Hansen (s165311)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisor Søren Hauberg, associate professor at the Section
for Cognitive Systems at the Technical University of Denmark, for his guidance and
help throughout the project, and for advice on the structure and contents for the thesis.
We would also like to thank Nicki Skafte Deltefsen, PhD at the Technical University of
Denmark, for providing assistance, fast response, and bug ﬁxing in the CPAB library,
libcpab. We also thank Pola Elisabeth Schwöbel, PhD at the Technical University of
Denmark, for sharing knowledge and experiences in data augmentation concerning brain
images.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Data description
3
2.1
Pre-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Convolutional Neural Networks
7
3.1
A brief course in CNNs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
The U-Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.1
The original 2D U-Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.2
The 3D U-Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Segmenting brain images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3.1
Parameter choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3.2
Training the U-Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.3
Using multiple GPUs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.4
Segmentation results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Data augmentation
23
4.1
Data augmentation based on rotations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.1
Segmentation results using data augmentation based on rotations
23
4.2
CPAB Transformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.1
The space of CPA vector ﬁelds VΩ,P . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2.2
From CPA vector ﬁelds to transformations . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.3
Implementation of CPAB transformations in python . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Data augmentation based on CPAB transformations . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.1
Elactic transformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.1.1
Segmentation results using data augmentation based on
elastic transformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.2
Learning smarter CPA-transformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4.3.2.1
Pre-aligning image pairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3.2.2
Choice of loss function and optimization of training pa-
rameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.3.2.3
Properties and performance of the learned CPAB trans-
formations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.3.2.4
Segmentation results using data augmentation based on
learned transformations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5
Dicussion and Conclusion
59
A Data
63
B CNN
67
C Data Augmentation
69
D Learning Objectives
79
Bibliography
81
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
A crucial aspect of machine learning is data, in particular, the amount of data. This
is especially true when the data consist of images containing objects for classiﬁcation.
Facebook, for example, has a vast amount of photos at their disposal. From the photos
uploaded, often tagged with the names of the people in them, Facebook can extract
an extensive labelled data set that has been used to develop excellent face recognition
algorithms.
However, it is not always the case that a large data set is available. When data is scarce,
obtaining good results with machine learning becomes diﬃcult. Insuﬃcient data is fre-
quently seen in medical image data, where image segmentation can be useful, e.g to ﬁnd
abnormalities in organs. The amount of annotated medical images is often limited due
to the highly time consuming task it is for doctors to annotate these images - especially
for 3D images, where the number of voxels rapidly increases. For a 3D image of size
128×128×128 voxels, which is an intermediate size medical image, the number of voxels
is a little more than two million. For an image of size 256 × 256 × 256, the number of
voxels grows to more than 16 million.
Data augmentation is carried out to counter data scarcity. A commonly used data
augmentation scheme in image data sets is to apply simple transformations, e.g rota-
tions or translations, which are fast to implement and often improve performance of the
ﬁnal model. An intuitive example would be digit classiﬁcation. The MNIST data set,
familiar to most people working with machine learning, contains 60, 000 training images
and 10, 000 testing images of handwritten digits. Many models have been made that
classify these images almost perfectly - but what if only a fraction of the 60, 000 training
images were available? The idea is then that a simple transformation, such as rotating
a handwritten "1" by a small amount, would still make the rotated "1" belong to the
domain of handwritten "1"s. The transformed image can then be considered a new data
point and used when training a model for classiﬁcation. Applying simple transforma-
tions throughout the data set and considering these as new data points would in theory
improve the machine learning model when classifying handwritten digits.
Despite the clear beneﬁts of data augmentation in the example above, the described
techniques have some drawbacks. First, they require speciﬁcation of the extent of e.g.
rotation or translation. Second, the same manual techniques are often applied over the
entire data set. This limits e.g how much to rotate images - in the MNIST example, a
"6" might turn into a "9", although a similar rotation for another digit might be useful.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
These drawbacks lead to learning how to augment the data set. The aim is to learn
the transformations to be used for data augmentation. In this project, a pair of images
will be used to learn a transformation that makes one image in the pair resemble the
other image in the pair as much as possible. Such transformations will be learned for all
image pairs in the data set, and the distribution of the transformations is approximated
by a Gaussian distribution. Transformations can then be sampled and applied to data
points in the data set, resulting in new data points which are assumed to belong to the
same domain as the original data set. The new data points can then be used as training
data for a machine learning model - in this project, a convolutional neural network. The
remainder of this chapter provides an overview of the project and how it is structured.
Project outline:. The project is centered around two major aims: One is to implement
a state-of-the-art deep convolutional neural network to segment 3D magnetic resonance
(MR) brain images on a voxel-by-voxel level. The other aim is to mathematically gain
an understanding of learning transformations for brain images to be used for data aug-
mentation. The overall goal of the project is then to investigate how data augmentation,
in particular using a learned data augmentation scheme, can help the implemented deep
convolutional neural network to segment 3D brain images.
Chapter 2 describes the brain image data used in the project and how the data was
pre-processed.
In chapter 3, a brief introduction to convolutional neural networks is given, followed
by a description of the architecture for the convolutional neural network used in this
work, the U-Net, proposed by Ronneberger et al. [1]. The training procedure, which
utilizes 8 coupled GPUs, is then described, and the segmentation results using the data
without data augmentation are presented. These results will be used as a baseline when
comparing the results where data augmentation has been applied.
Chapter 4 describes data augmentation. The ﬁrst part of the chapter investigates the
performance of the U-Net when using the simple data augmentation technique of rotat-
ing the data. Then, a mathematical description of continuous piece-wise aﬃne (CPA)
vector ﬁelds and CPA based transformations follows. These CPA based transformations
are used to investigate another data augmentation scheme based on elastic transforma-
tions and results are presented. Then, a description of how to learn transformations to
augment the brain image data set is given, followed by the results obtained using the
learned data augmentation scheme.
Chapter 5 discusses the results and the setting in which they were found and concludes
the project.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Data description
The data considered in this project is a modiﬁed version of the data from the Internet
Brain Segmentation Repository (IBSR). The IBSR provides brain images with manually
guided expert segmentations along with their MR data. The modiﬁed data, provided by
Torsten Rohlﬁng [2], can be found at https://www.nitrc.org/projects/ibsr/, along
with a description of the class labels and subjects. The data consist of 18 3D MR brain
images of adolescents and adults, male and female (see Figure A.1). For each subject,
the data consists of 256 × 128 × 256 (8, 388, 608) voxels of raw MR signals along with
its annotation in which each voxel has been classiﬁed into one of 39 classes. The MR
image scans have been taken at three diﬀerent resolutions (see Figure A.1) with either
0.837mm, 0.938mm or 1mm between each measurement of each voxel in the x and z di-
rection and a 1.5mm resolution in the y direction. The diﬀerence in resolution is clearly
reﬂected by the fact that the 4 brain images which have the highest resolution, image 15,
16, 17 and 18, also are the 4 brain images where most voxels belong to a non-background
class (see Table A.1 and Figure A.1). Further, the MR intensities vary throughout the
data set. This is seen in Figure A.2, where in particular one of the brain images is very
diﬀerent from the rest.
As is often the case in medical images, the brain images are highly imbalanced: All
classes are not present in every image, and some classes are very sparse while others are
very large. For example, the background class accounts for around 70 % of the data
and together with the 4 largest brain segments, these 5 classes occupy around 93 % of
data. Thus, about only 7 % of the data is split between 34 classes. This is illustrated in
Figure 2.2 for all 18 brain images. The anatomical names of each of the 39 classes can
be found in Figure A.3.
2.1
Pre-processing
The data came in a NIFTI.tz format and was loaded into MATLAB and then saved
as a csv ﬁle using a toolbox provided by https://se.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/
fileexchange/8797-tools-for-nifti-and-analyze-image.
By inspection it is seen that the brain images are centered, aligned in the same direction,
and contain a lot of background voxels. Anticipating high memory consumption when
training the neural network, the images are cropped by removing excess background
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Data description
Figure 2.1: Illustration of MR scans and brain segmentations.
voxels without altering the alignment of the images. After cropping, a consistent image
size on all images of 176 × 128 × 176 (3964928) voxels, a reduction from the original
images of about 53 %, is achieved. A reason for this particular dimension size will be
clear when the input to the segmentation model is discussed in section 3.2.2.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Pre-processing
5
Figure 2.2: Illustration of which classes are present in the diﬀerent brain images. Yellow
correspond to present, blue to non-present. The numbers at the bottom are the aver-
ages of voxels in each class when present. Note that class 19 and 36 are voxels with
undetermined class.
==PAGE:16==
6
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Convolutional Neural
Networks
In this chapter, a brief introduction to Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), ﬁrst
introduced by Y. LeCun et al. [3], is given. Details then follow on a particular kind of
CNN, namely the U-Net, originally developed by Ronneberger et al. [1] for 2D image
segmentation. The architecture of 3D U-Net used in this work is then described in detail
before results are presented. The reader is assumed to be familiar with machine learning
and basic concepts of simple Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs), e.g simple feed forward
neural networks (FNNs), and terminology such as activation function, weights, bias, etc.
Due to the level of detail in this chapter, a short summary outlining the most important
aspects is given here. The 3D U-Net will take as input a 3D brain image and output
each voxel’s probability for belonging to each class. The basic architecture of our U-Net
can be seen in Figure 3.5. It consists of a contracting path and an expansive path, each
consisting of 4 layers. Each layer of the contracting path consists of residual blocks,
followed by a downsampling step in which the spatial dimensions of the input are halved
but the number of feature channels are doubled. When the bottom layer is reached, the
expansive path begins. Each layer in the expansive path consists of a concatenation of
the input from the corresponding layer of the contracting path for context preservation.
This is followed by convolutions and activation functions. Then, an upsampling of the
input that doubles the spatial dimensions and halves the number of feature maps. As a
ﬁnal step, the input before each expansive layer is interpolated and merged, and on this,
the ﬁnal softmax layer is applied, a procedure known as deep supervision. The softmax
output is interpreted as probablities for each voxel belonging to each class.
In this work, our Baseline experiment will reach a Dice score DSC of about DSC = 0.64,
without the use of data augmentation. Other works in brain segmentation often focus
on simpler classiﬁcation problems with signiﬁcantly fewer classes. The best performing
models typically reach Dice scores of about DSC = 0.90.
These scores are usually
reached when data augmentation has been applied. The Dice scores for our problem to
compared to these are thus diﬃcult compare. By random guessing that one image can
be segmented using another image’s segmentation, we obtain an average Dice score of
DSC = 0.5033 with a standard deviation 0.065. Our U-Net thus performs better than
simply guessing one brain segmentation is equal to another.
==PAGE:18==
8
3 Convolutional Neural Networks
3.1
A brief course in CNNs
A standard feed forward neural network does not take into account the spatial structure
of an image input, but treats pixels far apart and close together in the same way. The
CNN is developed to take spatial structure into account and take advantage of it. Three
basic ideas make up a CNN: local receptive ﬁelds, shared weights and pooling.
Local receptive ﬁelds: For a CNN with a 2D image input, it is useful to think of
the input layer as a square of neurons (or a cube in the 3D case). For simplicity, the
2D case will be described below as the 3D easily follows. Instead of connecting each
input (i.e, each pixel) to a hidden neuron, as would have been done in an FNN where
the input layer is often represented as a vertical line of neurons, each neuron instead
receives information from a small region in the input layer, see Figure 3.1. This small
region is called the local receptive ﬁeld for the hidden neuron. In the example laid out
by the ﬁgure, the size of the local receptive ﬁeld is 5 × 5, but is generally user speciﬁed.
The size will be denoted K = (Kh, Kv) (or Kx, Ky, Kz in the 3D case), where Kh, Kv
correspond to respectively the horizontal and vertical size of the local receptive ﬁeld. K
is often referred to as the kernel size.
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the ﬁrst local receptive ﬁeld and its connection to the ﬁrst
hidden neuron in the ﬁrst hidden layer. Illustration taken from Michael Nielsen’s online
book Neural Networks and Deep Learning [4].
To get the connection from the local receptive ﬁeld to the next hidden neuron, the local
receptive ﬁeld is moved across the input neurons, e.g. by moving it one pixel to the right
as seen in Figure 3.2, in which case the stride in the horizontal direction is Sh = 1. The
stride, determining how far to move the local receptive ﬁeld, is also generally user spec-
iﬁed. When the local receptive ﬁeld reaches the right hand side, the procedure repeats,
again starting from the left but vertically moved down according to the stride Sv in the
vertical dimension.
The size of the ﬁrst hidden layer depends directly on the size of the input image, the
stride S = (Sh, Sv) (or Sx, Sy, Sz in the 3D case) used, the size of the local receptive ﬁeld,
==PAGE:19==
3.1 A brief course in CNNs
9
and of padding P = (Ph, Pv) - i.e adding values around the edges (usually constants),
such that the local receptive ﬁeld is applied over a larger region around the edges.
Figure 3.2: Illustration of the second local receptive ﬁeld and its connection to the second
hidden neuron in the ﬁrst hidden layer. A stride of one is used. Illustration taken from:
[4].
Shared weights and biases: Each hidden unit has a bias and Kh × Kv weights
connected to its local receptive ﬁeld, where n is the size of the local receptive ﬁeld. The
n × n weights and the biases are the same for each hidden unit, and they are therefore
called the shared weights and the shared bias. Thus, for the j, kth hidden neuron the
output is:
σ

b +
Kv
∑
l=0
Kh
∑
m=0
wl,maj+l,k+m


(3.1)
where σ is the activation function, b is the shared bias, w is the shared weights of size
n × n, i.e the size of the local receptive ﬁeld, and ax,y is the input activation at position
x, y of the input. With shared weights and biases, much fewer parameters are needed
for optimization when backpropagating compared to the FNN. Since the weights are the
same for each hidden neuron they also detect the same features from the input image,
but from diﬀerent locations. The maps from the input layer to the hidden layer are for
this reason called feature maps. Finding multiple features in the input is clearly desir-
able, and hence multiple feature maps are generally made. A simple illustration taken
from [4] can be seen in Figure 3.3 with 28 × 28 input neurons, 5 × 5 local receptive ﬁeld,
a stride of one, and 3 feature maps. The 3 feature maps are also called a convolutional
layer.
Pooling: CNNs often contain pooling layers. When present in a CNN, these are typi-
cally used directly after a convolutional layer (i.e, on a collection of feature maps) and
the goal is to simplify information from the convolutional layer. In a similar fashion of
the local receptive ﬁeld described above, the pooling layer will look at a region in the
previous convolutional layer, e.g a 2 × 2 region. A common pooling technique is max
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Convolutional Neural Networks
Figure 3.3: Illustration of input and three feature maps in the ﬁrst hidden layer. Illus-
tration is from: [4]
pooling, in which the output from the convolutional layer to the pooling layer would
simply be the maximum activation from the 2 × 2 region. Other pooling techniques
also exist, and sometimes pooling is omitted from CNNs. Instead of using pooling, one
could simply consider the current convolutional layer and convolute that once again by
ﬁnding feature maps from the layer of feature maps. When this is done repeatedly, the
network is said to get deeper. When deﬁning the types of convolutions used in a CNN, it
is important to take into account how the sizes of the local receptive ﬁelds, strides, and
paddings all aﬀect the following convolutonal layers and their dimensions. The formula
below can be used to compute spatial dimension sizes.
Wout = Win −k + 2p
s
+ 1.
(3.2)
Here, Wout is the resulting output size of the desired dimension, Win is the size of the
input in that dimension, k is the size of the local receptive ﬁeld, P is padding, and s
is stride. Beware that for the diﬀerent dimensions, Win, k, s and p might not be the same.
With the concepts described above, one can form a complete CNN with diﬀerent combi-
nations of convolutional layers, local receptive ﬁelds, strides, padding, number of feature
maps, etc. In the next section, the U-Net, a particular type/architecture of CNN widely
used for medical image segmentation will be described.
3.2
The U-Net
Following the examples of other successful convolutional neural networks for medical
image segmentation, the ﬁnal deep learning architecture in this work is a modiﬁed version
of the U-Net, originally developed by Ronneberger et al. [1] for 2D image segmentation.
Since then, U-Net architectures for 3D images have been proposed, most notably by
==PAGE:21==
3.2 The U-Net
11
Milletari et al. [5] and Kayalibay et al. [6]. The original 2D U-Net is outlined below,
followed by a description of the 3D version eventually used in this work.
3.2.1
The original 2D U-Net
Our ﬁrst implementation of a U-Net in this work was made for 2D slices of brain images
as a way to gain a foundation for further work. Therefore, as well as for illustrative
reasons and as a courtesy to the original developers of the U-Net, a description of the
original 2D U-Net architecture, illustrated in Figure 3.4, is given below. It consists of a
contracting path to the left and an expansive path to the right. The typical convolutions
from CNNs are applied in the contracting path: First, a 3 × 3 one-strided, unpadded
convolution is applied to the input with 64 feature channels.
This is followed by a
rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU), then by another 3 × 3 convolution with the same amount
of feature channels as before and ﬁnally a ReLU. A 2 × 2 two-strided, unpadded max
pooling is then applied, halving the spatial dimension size. This procedure is repeated:
two 3 × 3 convolutions, where the ﬁrst doubles the amount of feature channels, are
applied, each followed by a ReLU and then another max pooling. Thus, for each layer
in the contracting path, each spatial dimension size is reduced by almost half (i.e, half
minus 4), while the number of feature channels is doubled.
Figure 3.4: The architecture of the original U-Net proposed by Ronneberger et al [1].
Note that the size of the input is larger than the size of the output. Figure taken from
the original paper by Ronneberger et al. [1].
When the 5th and bottom layer is reached, the max pooling operation is substituted
by a 2 × 2 "up-convolution", i.e. a transposed convolution, that halves the number of
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Convolutional Neural Networks
feature channels followed by a concatenation from part of the corresponding layer in
the contracting path (known as a skip connections). Then, two 3 × 3 convolutions are
applied, each followed by a ReLU, but this time the number of feature channels is halved.
This procedure is repeated, so that the expanding path halves the number of feature
channels and almost doubles (i.e, double minus 4) each spatial dimension size in each
layer. After the ﬁnal convolution in the expansive path, a 1 × 1 convolution1 is applied
to map the 64 feature maps to the desired number of classes. Softmax is then applied
to get the probabilities that a pixel belongs to a given class.
Four things worth consideration are addressed below.
The input and output sizes of the U-Net do not match: In the original U-Net
paper [1], 2D images with hard-to-classify border pixels of are used. For this reason,
mirror padding is useful to provide additional context to pixels on the borders. This
explains the architecture in which the input and output are not of equal size. We expect
that the boundary voxels in our data set are easily classiﬁed since they are all back-
ground. Therefore, mirror padding will not be applied. Therefore, the input and output
dimension for the 3D U-Net presented in this project will be equal.
The depth of the network: Memory consumption will be considerably higher in the
3D case than in the 2D case. The initial feature map size of 64 in [1], as well as the ﬁve
layer depth, will be reduced in order to cope with memory demand. For the 3D U-Net,
16 initial feature maps and four layers will be employed.
Residual blocks: Since the work by Ronneberger et al. [1], other U-Net architectures
have been proposed. Many of these include residual blocks, which were ﬁrst introduced
in the famous paper (ResNet) by He et al. [7] and were ﬁrst used in a U-Net setting in
the V-Net paper by Milletari et al [5]. According to [6], the purpose of residual blocks is
to allow the gradient in the backward pass to ﬂow more freely and to retain information
prior to the application of convolutions, normalizations, and non-linearities. Residual
blocks are now found in most newer U-Net architectures and will be employed in the 3D
U-Net as well.
Multiple segmentation mas: The idea to combine segmentation maps (these maps
do not represent actual segmentations of data, but are named so nonetheless) created
at diﬀerent points in a CNN was ﬁrst used by Long et al. [8] and ﬁrst used in a U-Net
by Kayalibay et al. [6]. In [6], both 3D brain MR images and 3D hand MR images are
used to train two U-Nets. The authors conduct experiments and ﬁnd that using multiple
segmentation maps result in faster convergence when training the network. Their work
was used in the BraTS2 2015 competition with excellent results. Since then, other U-Net
1Technically, this is not a convolution in a mathematical sense. The term is widely (mis)used in the
Deep Learning community, and we shall use it too when applying 1 × 1 kernels.
2http://braintumorsegmentation.org/
==PAGE:23==
3.2 The U-Net
13
architectures have adopted the strategy of multiple segmentation maps, among them a
U-Net by Isensee et al.[9], very similar to [6] but with more initial feature maps and
with more levels. Multiple segmentation maps will also be used in this work.
3.2.2
The 3D U-Net
Diﬀerent designs of the U-Net were considered and tried in the process of implementing
the ﬁnal U-Net in this work, e.g. experiments with residual blocks, multiple segmentation
maps, and initial ﬁlter sizes to mention a few.
Another important design choice is
whether to take a whole image at once as input (e.g. as in [6]) or to use a patch of
an image as input (e.g as in [9]). The choice is obviously important regarding memory
consumption. A smaller input will allow for more a deeper network, a larger number of
initial feature maps and a larger batch size. Using patches will however provide other
challenges when stitching patches together for the ﬁnal segmentation, possibly loosing
information at patch-borders. Instead we choose to process an entire image as input
to the 3D U-Net.
To overcome memory issues, the choice to employ a too shallow
network is undesirable. Reducing the batch size instead (which will also result in more
optimization steps) will still allow for a deep network when processing entire images.
The U-Net in this work ends up being very similar to the ones by Kayalibay et al. [6]
and Isensee et al. [9]. As in the former, whole images will be processed at once and
multiple segmentation maps are used, and as in the latter, the network becomes deeper
by using a higher number of initial feature maps and larger residual blocks. The network
is illustrated in Figure 3.5. Due to the architecture of the 3D U-Net, each dimension in
the input must be divisible by 16, since the spatial dimensions are halved three times.
This explains why the images were initially cropped to be of size 176 × 128 × 176 as
described in section 2.1. This was the smallest dimension fulﬁlling the requirement while
still containing whole brains.
The network consists of a contracting path to the left and an expansive path to the
right. A major diﬀerence from the original 2D U-Net described above is the inclusion of
residual blocks in the contracting path as well as the inclusion of multiple segmentation
maps applied in the expansive path. Below, descriptions of the contracting path, the
expansive path, the residual blocks, and the multiple segmentation are given.
The contracting path: A one-strided, one-padded, 3 × 3 × 3 convolution with 16
feature maps is ﬁrst applied to the input. The resulting data thus keeps its spatial di-
mension size and a copy of the data is send as a skip connection to the last layer of the
expansive path before an instance normalization and then a Parametric ReLU (PReLU)
is applied. Next, the data enters the ﬁrst layer of the contracting path. A two-strided,
zero-padded 2 × 2 × 2 convolution is applied, halving the spatial dimension size but
doubling the number of feature maps from 16 to 32. A copy of the data is then stored
before entering a residual block which does the following: The repeated application of
instance normalization, PReLU and a one-strided, one-padded 3 × 3 × 3 convolution,
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Convolutional Neural Networks
Figure 3.5: The ﬁnal CNN inspired by [6]. If the dot operation-sign for InNorm+PRelU
is above another operation-sign it means that InNorm+PReLU comes before this oper-
ation and if under InNorm+PReLU comes after this operation.
keeping the number of feature maps from before, and a dropout at the end constitutes
the residual block. The data prior to entering the residual block is then added to the
data after the residual block. Once again a copy of the data is made and send as a skip
connection, this time to the second to last layer of the expansive path. This procedure
is repeated until the ﬁnal layer is reached. Thus, for each layer in the contracting path,
each spatial dimension size is reduced by half while the number of feature maps doubles.
The expansive path: When the data has gone through the residual block of the last
layer in the contracting path, a one-strided, zero-padded 1×1×1 convolution is applied
which keeps the spatial dimension size but halves the number of feature maps. This is
followed by instance normalization and a PReLU. Then, upsampling (nearest neighbour
interpolation) is applied which maintains the number of feature maps, but doubles the
size of the spatial dimension. Instance normalization and a PReLU is applied again and
the data is then concatenated with the skip connection from the corresponding layer in
the contracting path. Merging the data in this way can be thought of as doubling the
feature maps again - these are then halved by the next convolution which is one-strided,
==PAGE:25==
3.2 The U-Net
15
one-padded with a 3 × 3 × 3 kernel, keeping the spatial dimension size. Instance nor-
malization, PReLU is applied, and the data is copied for the ﬁrst of the low-resolution
segmentation maps.
A one-strided, zero-padded 1 × 1 × 1 convolution, halving the
number of feature maps and keeping the spatial dimension size is applied, followed by
instance normalization, PReLU and upsampling (nearest neighbour interpolation). The
expansive path follows this pattern until the ﬁnal layer is reached, thus for each layer
we double the spatial dimensions and half the feature maps.
Figure 3.6: Construction of residual blocks.
Residual blocks: The residual blocks used in this work apply the repetition of an in-
stance normalization, PReLU and then a one-strided, one-padded 3 × 3 × 3 convolution
that does not change the number of feature maps. After the second convolution, dropout
is added before the output is merged with the data prior to entering the residual block.
See Figure 3.6. The design of the residual block in this work is directly adopted by the
one described in [6] pp. 4. The idea of a residual block is to keep some context and
allow for smoother ﬂow of the gradient in order for the network to converge faster when
training. The design in [6] is chosen due to the experiments conducted in [10] comparing
diﬀerent designs, i.e whether to ﬁrst use convolution, a non-linearity, or normalization.
Multiple segmentation maps: Experiments in [6] show that training the U-Net con-
verges substantially faster when including multiple segmentation maps. Supposedly, the
segmentation maps created at diﬀerent points in the network make the network learn
faster by encouraging earlier layers to produce better segmentation results. The segmen-
tation maps work in the following way: In the expansive path, after each concatenation,
convolution, normalization and PReLU, the output is copied for segmentation. Then, a
one-strided, zero-padded 1 × 1 × 1 convolution is applied, outputting the same amount
of feature maps as there are classes, resulting in a segmentation map. The ﬁrst segmen-
tation map (in the bottom) is then interpolated (trillinearly) so that it will have the
same spatial size as the second segmentation map (in the middle). They are then added
together and interpolated again, this time to have the same spatial dimensionality as the
last segmentation map (in the top). These are then added together to produce the ﬁnal
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Convolutional Neural Networks
segmentation map, upon which the softmax function is applied to get the probabilities
that a voxel belongs to a certain class.
3.3
Segmenting brain images
In this section we describe how the U-Net was set up in practice and used to segment
brain images. In particular, we shall discuss running the U-Net in a multi-GPU setting,
parameter choices, choice of loss function, and thoughts on eﬃcient memory usage.
3.3.1
Parameter choices
Due to the many parameters that can be tuned when training a neural network, such
as learning rate, weight decay, as well as the parameters in the network itself, such as
activation function, types of normalizations, etc., many preliminary experiments were
run in this work that weren’t recorded. The ﬁrst reason for this was simply for the
authors, as new-comers to the ﬁeld, to get an intuition of how to design the U-Net. The
second reason is that it is simply beyond the scope of this project to exhaust near all
possible opportunities to ﬁnd the optimal parameter setting. Instead, inspiration for
parameter choices was found in the work of others.
Initialization of weights and biases - Dropout - Activation function:
The weights and biases of the network were initialized with the Xavier initialization
method using a normal distribution, an initialization often used in ANNs. Each weight
w in the network is thus sampled from N(0, std) where std =
√
2
nin+nout and nin is the
number of input neurons feeding into w while nout is the number of output neurons fed
by w in the next layer. All biases were initialized to 0.01.
Dropout was employed in the contracting path of the network after each residual block.
Diﬀerent rates were tried and a dropout rate of p = 0.25 was eventually used.
Diﬀerent versions of rectiﬁed linear units, ReLUs, have recently become the most used
activation functions in neural networks. In this work, a parametric ReLU, PReLU was
used given by PReLU= max(0, x) + α · min(0, x) where α is a learnable parameter.
Loss function:
A recurring challenge in medical image segmentation tasks is class imbalance, a challenge
that is also encountered in the data of this project, as described in chapter 2. To counter
this issue, a multiclass Dice score loss function employed by Isensee et al. [9], is used. It
is given below:
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Segmenting brain images
17
LDice = −2
|K|
∑
k∈K
∑
i ui,kvi,k
∑
i ui,k + vi,k
(3.3)
Here, u is the softmax output from the network and v is a one hot encoding of the
ground truth brain segmentation. u and v have shape I × K where i ∈I is the index of
the voxels in the brain segmentation image and k ∈K is the class label. The range of
the Dice loss is [−1, 0], where −1 is the best possible score.
Learning rate - Weight decay:
An important parameter when training neural networks is the learning rate used in the
optimizer. If the learning rate is too high, the network will learn fast but will likely start
ﬂuctuating heavily around a minimum. On the other hand, if the learning rate is too
low the network will learn slowly and possibly stagnate at a sub optimal local minimum.
Diﬀerent learning rates were tested in the preliminary experiments. It was found that a
relatively high learning rate of 0.1 was very eﬃcient when training the model for the ﬁrst
optimization steps. To tackle the concern described above with too early ﬂuctuations,
the Pytorch scheduler
torch.optim.kr_scheduler.ReduceLROnPlateua was utilized. This scheduler was set
to reduce the learning rate with 75% if a new optimum wasn’t found in 6 consecutive op-
timization steps. A learning rate of 1e−5 was set as the minimum possible learning rate.
The optimizer was used with L2 weight decay. Preliminary results showed that a weight
decay of 0.0001 worked well and hence this was used for the rest of the experiments.
3.3.2
Training the U-Net
When training the U-Net we partition our data set into three parts each consisting of
six images each. Then for each combination of the parts we let two of them, with 12
images in total, be used for training and use the last part for testing. For statistics we
repeated this processes for yet another partition of the data set. (see Table B.1)
In the beginning of each run the training images were normalized using their common
mean and standard deviation. The test images were then "normalized" using the train
images common mean and standard deviation. Training images were then send through
the U-Net in train mode in batches of 6 images at a time. This was possible due to
the multi-GPU setting in which 8 coupled GPUs were used (see section 3.3.3).
For
optimal memory usage the batch size ought to have been a multiple of the numbers of
GPUs. We initially hoped to test the eﬀect of learned data augmentation on smaller
data sets. Therefore, we would have liked to conduct a similar baseline experiment but
with a train set of only six images. In order to rule out batch size as a factor when
comparing results from smaller data sets to larger, we could not use a batch size larger
than the smallest train set. Unfortunately, we did not ﬁnish the tests on smaller training
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Convolutional Neural Networks
sets within the time frame of this work. The batch size of 6 images was still used though.
Parameters and loss function were chosen as described in section 3.3.1. Due to limited
resources, a stopping criteria for training was imposed.
If no improvement in train
loss has occurred for the last 12 iterations, training stops. Using a validation set for
early stopping, as is commonly done in neural networks, would have been too resource
consuming due to the many possible folds for cross-validation.
3.3.3
Using multiple GPUs
PyTorch is known for being relatively easy to use in a multi-GPU setting. For this
reason, the U-Net was trained using 8 coupled Nvidia Tesla K80 GPUs with 12 GB of
memory provided by Amazon Web Services (AWS). The beneﬁt of using AWS for this
work is that it comes with a wide verity of GPU constellations all pre installed with
all the necessary software for our work. Even more the requested GPU’s were almost
always available to us right as we needed them. Despite this AWS was cumbersome to
get started with and for this reason we included description on how AWS was used in
Appendix B. Using multiple GPUs compared to a single GPU has some clear advantages.
An obvious one is the run-time to train an end-to-end neural network, which should be
roughly 8 times as fast using 8 GPUs compared to a single GPU. This is useful in this
setting, where many networks are trained end-to-end. Training deep neural networks
is known to be time consuming, sometimes even taking days when the computations
are done on a single GPU. Another advantage of using 8 GPUs is that the ﬁnal model
can be more complex, since the data and computational tasks can be distributed to the
diﬀerent GPUs in ways that will be memory eﬃcient, thus allowing for a deeper network.
There were some challenges in setting up the multi-GPU framework, however. Using
PyTorch’s torch.nn.DataParellel wrapper did activate the multiple GPUs, but the
data ﬂows to them were highly imbalanced as seen in Figure 3.7 (a). This shows the
memory distribution of a preliminary U-Net with only 8 initial feature maps and pro-
cessing inputs of size 128 × 128 × 128. This U-Net could not process inputs of size
176 × 128 × 176 even with 8 GPU’s due to GPU 0 (the "main" GPU) running out of
memory. Investigating the issue, the likely reason for this imbalance was that backprop-
agating in PyTorch takes place on the main GPU when nothing else is speciﬁed, as well
as all data and outputs from the neural network was stored here too.
To overcome this issue, a Python class was made that wrapped both the U-Net and
the loss function as well as the backward step. torch.nn.DataParellel could then be
wrapped around the wrapper, forcing the backward step to be parallelized too. A pseudo
code for this can be seen in List B.1. Further, each Python variable of importance (i.e,
the brain MR data and the brain segments) were placed on particular GPUs, instead of
the default GPU 0, after it was discovered that the .cuda() extension to variables was
equivalent to .cuda(0), i.e placing a variable on GPU 0. In Figure 3.7 (b) the memory
consumption can be seen for a U-Net of the ﬁnal form, i.e with 16 initial ﬁlters and
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Segmenting brain images
19
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.7: (a): Memory distribution on 8 GPUs without the loss function being paral-
lelized. The input is 8 128 × 128 × 128 images and the U-Net has 8 initial feature maps.
Note the imbalance of memory distribution. (b): Memory distribution on a 8 GPUs
with the loss function parallelized (see Appendix B.1 for pseudo code on how to embed
the loss function in a wrapper for parallelization. Here, the input is 6 176 × 128 × 176
images with 16 initial feature maps. Note how even memory is distributed (except for
GPU 6 which is not processing an image due to the chosen batch size).
processing images of size 176 × 128 × 176. Note that GPU 6 is not doing much. This
is due to how PyTorch distributes the work. Since our batch size is 6, only the ﬁrst 6
GPUs are processing images in PyTorch. To activate all GPU’s, the input images are
stored on GPU 6, the segmented images are stored on GPU 5, and the output of the
U-Net is placed on GPU 7 - an output of size 6×39×176×128×176 due to the 6 images
and 39 softmax layers. To see how data and computational tasks were distributed see
table 3.1.
GPU
Data and Computational Tasks
0
Processing Image 1 + Keeping track
1
Processing Image 2
2
Processing Image 3
3
Processing Image 4
4
Processing Image 5
5
Processing Image 6 + 6 Segmentation images
6
6 Brain images
7
Output from the U-Net
Table 3.1: Table of data distribution and computational tasks on the 8 GPUs.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Convolutional Neural Networks
3.3.4
Segmentation results
We present the results from the baseline experiment described in section 3.3.2 below.
Seen in Figure 3.8 is the train loss for the the baseline experiments based on the Dice
Loss function, as described in section 3.3.1. Each curve corresponds to a cross-validation
fold. The updates on the x-axis correspond to optimization steps when training the U-
Net. For the baseline experiment two updates are undertaken before the U-Net has
processed the entire training set. Each update takes about 14.5 seconds.
Figure 3.8: Train loss plottet with a 95% conﬁdence bound as function of optimizer
steps for 6 diﬀerent partitions containing 12 images.
To verify that we do not overﬁt during training we regularly calculate the test Dice
scores as we train. For all folds in the experiment this is plotted in Figure 3.9. Here we
see that in all folds, the test and train Dice score follows each other and since we do not
see stagnation or decrease in test Dice while the train Dice increases, overﬁtting is not
a problem. We stress that we do not use the test for anything else than visualization.
The training is solemnly dependent on the train scores.
The distributions of the ﬁnal test Dice scores for the baseline experiment are seen in
Figure 3.10. The boxplot shows the distribution of the test scores when evaluated on
each test image, thus there are 36 total test images, 6 for each of the 6 test sets.
Note: When evaluating the ﬁnal test Dice scores, it will be the case that some of the
test images contain classes not found in the training set. Since evaluating performance
on labels that has never been seen by the U-Net is "unfair", such labels will not be used
when calculating the test Dice scores.
A summary of the test Dice scores and the time to train the U-Net end-to-end in minutes
is given in table 3.2.
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Segmenting brain images
21
Figure 3.9: Test and Train Dice scores.
Figure 3.10: Distribution of the Dice scores for each image in the test sets.
Dice score
Total time (minutes)
Basline 1
0.6370 ± 0.0501
76.04 ± 9.43
Table 3.2: Table of the Dice score mean and run times for the baseline experiment.
A prediction from the baseline experiment is seen in Figure 3.11. The prediction showed
in the ﬁgure is the one with a test Dice score closest to the mean of the ﬁnal test
Dice scores for the baseline experiment. The ﬁgure illustrates that the misclassiﬁcations
occur mostly around the edges of the segments and that few smaller classes are entirely
misclassiﬁed.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Convolutional Neural Networks
Figure 3.11: (a) Baseline 1. In general: Left coloumn: Ground truth, Middle coloumn:
Predictions, Right coloumn: Predictions where the misclassiﬁed voxels are marked red.
Note: For aesthetic reasons the image has been padded with zeros such that each slice
has the same size.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Data augmentation
This chapter describes the concept of data augmentation. In the ﬁrst part of the chapter,
a simple data augmentation technique for image data is considered, i.e generating new
images by rotating existing ones. The U-Net is then trained with the augmented data
set and performance is analyzed. In the second part of the chapter, another approach to
data augmentation is described. This approach is based on CPA vector ﬁelds, and data is
augmented using elastic deformations, a technique commonly found when working with
small medical image data sets, e.g as in [5], [9], [11]. Finally, a more novel approach,
based on the work by Hauberg et al. [12], is taken. Here, the goal is to learn what
transformations to use when generating new data. The mathematical theory behind
these transformations, which are also CPA based, is described, and the performance of
the U-Net trained using these transformations is inspected.
4.1
Data augmentation based on rotations
In an eﬀort to improve the performance of the U-Net, data augmentation is applied. The
experiment conducted in section 3.3.4 is taken as the starting point for improvement.
This will be called Baseline 1.
The performance will be evaluated in the same way
as previously, i.e the data set is split into the same three partitions twice (see Table
B.1). Training the U-Net is done similarly to Baseline 1, except for the following: In
each iteration in the training phase, a random subset is drawn from the training set.
Each dimension of each image (and its segmentation) in the batch is then rotated by a
degree ∼N(0, 2), i.e 68.27 % of the rotations in each dimension is within ±2 degrees
and 95.45 % is within ±4 degrees.
4.1.1
Segmentation results using data augmentation
based on rotations
The results from the rotation based data augmentation experiment is given below, to-
gether with the Baseline 1 results for comparison.
The train loss for Baseline 1 and the rotational data augmentation experiment can be
seen below in ﬁgure 4.1.
Curves correspond again to cross-validation folds, and the
horizontal axis again correspond to optimization steps. In the rotation experiment, an
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Data augmentation
update is performed after the batch of 6 images has been trained and takes about 17.5
seconds. Although each update takes a few more seconds than in the Baseline 1 exper-
iment, due to rotation computations, the rotational experiment generally converges in
fewer steps. The stopping criteria in the rotation experiment has been adjusted due to
higher ﬂuctuations when training elsewise resulting in premature stopping. Instead of
stopping if no improvement is seen after 12 updates, 20 updates will now be necessary.
The partition used in the second fold in the ﬁrst run performs the worst in both experi-
ments, and even more so with rotations. This can be seen by the fact that the ﬁnal Dice
score outliers in both experiments (see Figure 4.2) were from this run. The other folds
generally seem to converge at a lower value (negative Dice) for the rotation experiment
than the Baseline 1, however.
Figure 4.1: Loss as a function of optimizer steps for 6 diﬀerent partitions containing 12
images. Left: Train loss for Baseline 1. Right: Train loss for the augmented data set
(using rotations).
As we saw when training Baseline 1 we still see that we do not overﬁt during training.
See Figure C.1.
The distributions of the ﬁnal test Dice scores for Baseline 1 and the rotation experiment
can be seen in ﬁgure 4.2. The Dice scores are calculated in the same manner as described
in section 3.3.4. A Mann-Whitney U-test is suitable for comparing the two experiments
because this test does not require data to be Gaussian distributed or have equal variance.
The test produces a p-value of p = 0.0292. Thus, on a 95 % conﬁdence level, the null
hypothesis that a sample from one of the distributions is equally likely to be smaller or
larger than a sample from the other can be rejected. Or, expressed in another way: The
two sets are statistically diﬀerent in that it is more likely for a randomly drawn sample
from experiment one to have a larger Dice score than a randomly drawn sample from
experiment two. It is thus concluded, that drawing a random sample from one of the
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Data augmentation based on rotations
25
two sets, will mean that a higher Dice score will likely be found when rotational data
augmentation has been applied.
Figure 4.2: Mean Dice scores for the test sets of Baseline 1 experiment and the rotational
augmented data set.
In table 4.1, a summary of the mean Dice scores and total run-time is given. Notably, it
is seen that the total train time is not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the two experiments.
In the ﬁrst experiment, an update takes about 14.5 seconds against 17.5 seconds in this
experiment. However, this experiment converges in fewer steps. Each training fold takes
about one hour and 15-20 minutes on average to train in both experiments.
Dice score
Total time (minutes)
Baseline 1
0.6370 ± 0.053
76.04 ± 9.43
Rotations
0.6485 ± 0.090
78.46 ± 7.88
Table 4.1: Table of Dice scores and run times for Baseline 1 and the rotational data
augmentation experiments.
The two experiments took about the same time to train end-to-end. Rotating the im-
ages is easily done in python, and we conclude that this simple augmentation scheme
has slightly improved performance generally - although the images that were hard to
segment in each experiment performed the worst in the rotational experiment.
Predictions from Baseline 1 and the rotation experiment are seen in ﬁgure 4.3. The
plotted predictions were chosen such that their performance were the closest to the mean
Dice score for each experiment. Like in the baseline experiment, the misclassiﬁcations
occur mostly around the edges of the classes and some of the smaller classes in the
middle are completely misclassiﬁed, which was also seen in Baseline 1. The amount
of misclassiﬁcation seems equal in the two experiments, illustrating the point from the
boxplot that the mean Dice scores from the experiments are not statistically diﬀerent.
The ﬁnal Dice scores from the rotational experiment varied more compared to Baseline 1.
The predictions with the worst and the best ﬁnal Dice scores throughout all experiments
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Data augmentation
were found using rotational data augmentation. These predictions can be seen in Figure
C.4.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3: (a) Baseline 1, (b) Rotation. In general: Left coloumn: Ground truth,
Middle coloumn: Predictions, Right coloumn: Predictions where the misclassiﬁed voxels
are marked red. Note: For aesthetic reasons the image has been padded with back-
ground such that each slice has the same size.
4.2
CPAB Transformations
Using elastic deformations is an approach commonly used in medical image segmenta-
tion for data augmentation, and used e.g in [5], [9], [11]. We aim to test whether or not
elastic transformations will also lead to performance improvements on our data domain
and with the U-Net used in this work.
More importantly, we aim to test if transformations drawn from a distribution of trans-
formations learned from our data will give rise to an even larger improvement of perfor-
mance as it has previously been shown to do regarding the MNIST data set by Hauberg
et al. [12].
In section 4.2.1 we ﬁrst deﬁne the space of all continuous piecewise aﬃne (CPA) vector
ﬁelds VΩ,P and deduce some important properties of the space regarding dimensionality,
==PAGE:37==
4.2 CPAB Transformations
27
linearity and parametrization. In section 4.2.2 we deﬁne transformations based on in-
tegration of these continuous piecewise aﬃne vector ﬁelds called CPAB tranformations.
We then deduce properties of these transformations such as diﬀerentiability, non-linearity
and inversion. In section 4.2.3 we describe how CPAB transformations can be used to
transform our data and how this has been implemented in the libcpab library provided
by N.S. Detlefsen [13], and by the authors of this thesis.
4.2.1
The space of CPA vector fields VΩ,P
In this section we go into detail on how CPA vector ﬁelds are deﬁned and how they can
be constructed. As we will see, the space of all CPA vector ﬁelds is a ﬁnite dimensional
linear space and any CPA vector ﬁeld can be parametrized by a vector θ ∈Rd where d
is the dimension of the null space of a cleverly constructed matrix and the dimension of
the space of all CPA vector ﬁelds. Further, we will see that additional constraints on the
CPA vector ﬁeld, such as the vector ﬁeld being perpendicular to the domain boundary
normal at the domain boundary, can easily be fulﬁlled simply by adding additional rows
to the before mentioned matrix.
In the following we closely follow the deduction of properties as done in [14], but explic-
itly for Ω⊂R3, since we aim to use the transformations on 3D images.
Let Ω⊆R3 denote the image domain, and let P be a triangular tessellation of Ω. See
Figure 4.4 for expamples of such.
We then denote a velocity ﬁeld v : Ω7→R3 as
piecewise-aﬃne (PA) if v restricted to each of the triangles in P is aﬃne. Further, we
deﬁne the space of all continuous piecewise aﬃne (CPA) vector ﬁelds as VΩ,P:
VΩ,P ≜{v|v is an CPA map Ω7→R3 w.r.t. P}
(4.1)
Though VΩ,P depends on both Ωand P we will often notationally suppress the subscripts
and simply write VΩ,P as V.
Given a tessellation P we denote its number of cells as Nc and its number of vertices as
Nv.
For now, denote a generic element of V by vA, where A ≜(A1, ..., ANc) groups its Nc
associated (3 × 4) matrices. Thee subscripted A will sometimes be suppressed to ease
notation.
Lemma 4.2.1. Let Ω⊂R3, let P be a tessalation of Ωand let Nv be the number of
vertices in P. Then VΩ,P is a ﬁnite dimensional linear space with d ≜dim(V) = 3Nv
Proof. First, we note that addition of two maps and multiplication of a scalar with a
map is deﬁned the usual way. I.e, if α ∈R and f and g are two Ω7→R3 maps, we
deﬁne:
(f + g) : x 7→f(x) + g(x),
and
(αf) : x 7→αf(x)
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Data augmentation
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 4.4: Diﬀerent tessellations of a cube Ω⊂R3 (a): P[1,1,1] , (b): P[2,1,1] (c): P[2,1,2],
(d): P[2,2,2], (e): P[3,3,3], (f): P[4,4,4]. Note that cells with equal color are not correlated.
For any vA ∈V we further deﬁne vA : x 7→Aγ(x)˜x, where γ : x 7→{n ∈N : n ≤Nc}
is the index function that returns the smallest index of the cell in P containing x and
˜x =
[
x
1
]
.
Second, we prove that V is linear by showing that it is closed under linear combina-
tions. Let α ∈R and vA, vA′ ∈V. Then, (αvA) : x 7→α(Aγ(x)˜x) = (αAγ(x))˜x and
(vA + vA′) : x 7→Aγ(x)˜x + A′
γ(x)˜x = (Aγ(x) + A′
γ(x))˜x which clearly are CPA from the
linearity of R3×4
Third, in order to show the dimensionality of V we see that the value any v ∈V takes at
the vercites of a cell in P uniquely determines the value of A in that cell. Let x1, ..., x4
be the four verticies of a cell and let y1 = v(x1), ..., y4 = v(x4). We can then write the
following set of equations:
A
[
˜x1
˜x2
˜x3
˜x4
]
=
[
y1
y2
y3
y4
]
Because of the triangular structure of P, the 4 × 4 matrix
[
˜x1
˜x2
˜x3
˜x4
]
will have
==PAGE:39==
4.2 CPAB Transformations
29
full rank and therefore have an inverse, giving A a closed form solution.
Fourth Applying the procedure from above for all cells in P to obtain A we need to make
sure that vA is continuous not only on the shared vertices of two adjacent cells in P, but
on the entire side connecting two adjacent cells. So let Ci, Cj be two adjacent cells in P,
and let xa, xb and xc be the shared vertices of Ci and Cj. Equal values at the vertices
gives Ai˜xa = Aj˜xa, Ai˜xb = Aj˜xb and Ai˜xc = Aj˜xc. Any point on the connecting side
of the cells can be made as a convex combination of the points xa, xb and xc. Together,
this gives us:
Ai(α ˜xa + (1 −α)(λ ˜xb + (1 −λ) ˜xc)) = Aj(α ˜xa + (1 −α)(λ ˜xb + (1 −λ) ˜xc))
∀α, λ ∈[0, 1]
(4.2)
which shows continuity on the connecting side.
Finally, we now conclude that d ≜dim(V) = 3Nv since the value of vA at each of the
vercites in P uniquely determines the value of A and therefore the value of vA on all of
Ω, and since the map value at each vertex has three degrees of freedom, the dimension
of V is 3Nv
Deﬁnition 4.2.2. The vectorization of a matrix A is its row-by-row ﬂattening to a
coloumn vector deﬁned as:
vec(A) = vec





a1,1
a1,2
a1,3
a1,4
a2,1
a2,2
a2,3
a2,4
a3,1
a3,2
a3,3
a3,4




=


a1,1
a1,2
a1,3
a1,4
a2,1
a2,2
a2,3
a2,4
a3,1
a3,2
a3,3
a3,4


Similarly, the vectorization of a grouping of matrices, A, we deﬁne as
vec(A) = [vec(A1)T, ..., vec(ANc)T]T.
Deﬁnition 4.2.3. We deﬁne an inner product on V as
⟨vA1, vA2⟩= vec(A1)Tvec(A2).
We now look into how to construct an orthonormal basis for V and how we can parametrize
V by a parameter θ.
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Data augmentation
Lemma 4.2.4. For any vA ∈V, A satisﬁes a system of linear constraints denoted by
Lvec(A) = 0.
See the proof for the construction of L.
Proof. Let Ω⊂R3, P be a tessellation of Ω, vA ∈VΩ,P and let Ci, Cj be two adjacent
cells in P. As shown in the proof of Lemma 4.2.1, that v is everywhere continuous is
equivalent to v being continuous on the three shared vertices xa, xb, xc of Ci, Cj for any
adjacent cell pair. For a single adjacent cell pair we can write this condition as nine
linear constraints:


˜xaT
01×4
01×4
−˜xaT
01×4
01×4
01×4
˜xaT
01×4
01×4
−˜xaT
01×4
01×4
01×4
˜xaT
01×4
01×4
−˜xaT
˜xbT
01×4
01×4
−˜xbT
01×4
01×4
01×4
˜xbT
01×4
01×4
−˜xbT
01×4
01×4
01×4
˜xbT
01×4
01×4
−˜xbT
˜xcT
01×4
01×4
−˜xcT
01×4
01×4
01×4
˜xcT
01×4
01×4
−˜xcT
01×4
01×4
01×4
˜xcT
01×4
01×4
−˜xcT


[9×24]
·
[
vec(Ai)
vec (Aj)
]
[24×1]
=
[
09×1
]
In a similar fashion, constraints for other adjacent cells can be enforced by stacking them
together in an analogous equation:
L
9Ns×12Ncvec (A)
12Nc×1
=
0
9Nc×1
where Ns is the number of shared sides in P and L is the stacked constraint matrix. Any
vA whose A satisﬁes this set of linear constraints is thus everywhere continuous in V,
and we conclude that V coincides with the null-space of L denoted null(L)
Let B = [B1, ..., Bd] ∈R12Nc×d denote the orthonormal basis of null(L) obtained through
an SVD decomposition of L. If vec(A) = Bθ for any θ ∈Rd we have that vA is CPAB.
In particular vvec−1(Bj) is CPA for any j ∈{1, ..., d} and {vvec−1(Bj)}d
j=1 is a basis for V.
Instead of denoting a generic element of V by vA, as done previously, we will now denote
it by vθ where θ ∈Rd is the element’s coeﬃcients with respect to the {vvec−1(Bj)}d
j=1
basis of V. That is:
vθ(x) = vAθ(x) = Aγ(x),θ˜x =
d
∑
j=1
θjvvec−1(Bj)(x)
(4.3)
where Aθ ≜(A1,θ, ..., ANc,θ) ≜vec−1 (∑d
j=1 θjBj
)
.
This basis is orthonormal with
respect to the inner product from Deﬁnition 4.2.3 since for any i, j ∈{1, ..., d} :
⟨
vvec−1(Bj), vvec−1(Bi)
⟩
= BT
j Bi =



0
i ̸= j
1
i = j
==PAGE:41==
4.2 CPAB Transformations
31
where the last equality follows from the deﬁnition of B. We further see that for any
θ1, θ2 ∈Rd:
⟨
vθ1, vθ2⟩
= θT
1 θ2
If Ω⊊R3, let ∂Ωdenote the boundery of Ωand let n : ∂Ω7→S2 denote the unit normal
to ∂Ω.
Lemma 4.2.5. Additional constraints on V such as
⟨
vθ(x), n(x)
⟩
= 0
∀x ∈∂Ωand/or
{tr(Aj) = 0}Nc
j=1
∀vA ∈V are linear constraints and can therefore be added as extra
rows to L. If we denote this extension L′, then null(L′) is a linear subset of null(L) and
d′ = dim(null(L′)) < d = dim(null(L)).
Let B′ = [B′
1, ..., B′
12Nc] ∈R12Nc×d′ be the orthonormal basis of null(L′) obtained via
SVD of L′. Then {vvec−1(B′
j)}d′
j=1 is a basis for CPA vector ﬁelds that satisﬁes the new
constraints.
Proof. To enforce zero trace on each cell of P we expand L by adding the following rows:
[1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0]vec(Aj) = 0
∀j ∈{1, ..., Nc}
Assuming that Ωis cubic (i.e, Ω= [xmin, xmax] × [ymin, ymax] × [zmin, zmax]) we can
expand L by adding the followings rows:
[
˜xT, 01×4, 01×4
]
vec(Ac(x)) = 0
∀x = [x1, x2, x3]T ∈{x vertex in P|x1 ∈{xmin, xmax}}
to ensure that
⟨
vθ(x), n(x)
⟩
= 0 on the two sides of Ωthat lie parallel to the y, z-plane.
Note that c(x) is the index to any cell containing x, in where γ(x) returns the lowest
cell index containing x. Similar constraints can be added as rows to L to guarantee that
this condition is also fulﬁlled on the other sides of Ω.
The corresponding subspaces of V that are spanned by {vvec−1(B′
j)}d′
j=1 will be denoted
as V∂, Vtr and V∂,tr = V∂∩Vtr depending on the added constraints.
4.2.2
From CPA vector fields to transformations
From the CPA vector ﬁelds constructed in section 4.2.1 we wish to construct transfor-
mations of image domains Ω. In this section we show that this can be done through
integration of the vector ﬁelds vθ ∈V. Doing so, we will see that we obtain transforma-
tions that are non-linear diﬀeomorphisms whose inverses are also based on integration
of CPA vector ﬁelds. In fact, the inverse of the transformation based on integration of
vθ ∈V is the transformation based of integration of v−θ ∈V.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Data augmentation
In general, any continuous Rn 7→Rn vector ﬁeld, whether CPA or not, deﬁnes diﬀer-
entiable R 7→Ωtrajectories. If x ∈Rn, then the vector ﬁeld v : Rn 7→Rn deﬁnes a
trajectory t 7→ϕ(x, t) through the solution to the integral equation:
ϕ(x, t) = x +
∫t
0 v(ϕ(x, τ))dτ
(4.4)
We note that for any solution to this equation, ϕ(x, 0) = x.
We see that for (4.4) to be well deﬁned we need v(ϕ(x, τ)) to always be well deﬁned.
This is generally not the case for any vθ ∈VΩif Ω⊊R3, since ϕ(x, τ) might not be in
Ω. It will be the case however, if Ω⊊R3 and vθ ∈V∂
Ω, but if Ω⊊R3 and vθ ∈V\V∂we
need to make v(ϕ(x, τ)) well deﬁned through an extension of Ωand P:
Lemma 4.2.6. If Ω⊊R3 we can extend Ωto R3, extend P to a larger non triangular
tessellation P′ on R3 and add some additional linear constraints such that we obtain a
linear subspace of VR3,P′ whose elements restricted to Ωare in VΩ,P.
Proof. A proof of the case Ω⊊R2 is given in [15] and can easily be extended to Ω⊊R3
with some extra constraint bookkeeping.1
Up to the extension described in Lemma 4.2.6 any CPA vector ﬁeld vθ ∈V deﬁnes a
transformation T θ : Ω7→Ω, i.e: if we vary x and keep t ﬁxed in the solution to (4.4).
Deﬁnition 4.2.7. Without loss of generality, we ﬁx t = 1 and deﬁne a transformation
T θ as
T θ(·) ≜ϕ(·, 1)
(4.5)
Since T θ is based on integration of CPA vector ﬁelds we call these transformations CPA-
Based (CPAB).
To indicate the relation between the vector ﬁeld vθ ∈V and the corresponding transfor-
mation we write:
T θ ≜exp(vθ)
The space of all CPAB transformations we denote M and deﬁne as
M ≜exp(V) ≜{exp(vθ)|vθ ∈V}
Note: Forward on, if Ω⊊R3 and vθ ∈VΩ\V∂
Ωwe assume that the procedure from
Lemma 4.2.6 has been applied, such that T θ is always an Ω7→Ωmap, equation (4.4) is
well deﬁned, and vθ is CPA.
In order to ﬁnd and describe the transformations T θ ∈M we need to set op some build-
ing blocks.
1In our experiments we only base our transformations on V∂and will therefore not go into detail
with this proof.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 CPAB Transformations
33
First, we look at how a solution to (4.4) behaves within the cell of P that any x ∈Ω
starts in. So let vθ ∈V, let ϕ be the corresponding solution to (4.4), let c1 = γ(x) and
let t be the largset value, possibly inﬁnite, such that c1 = γ(ϕ(x, t)) for all t ∈[0, t1].
We then diﬀerentiate (4.4) w.r.t. t to obtain
∂
∂tϕ(x, t) = vθ(ϕ(x, t)) = Ac1,θ ^
ϕ(x, t)
∀t ∈[0, t1]
(4.6)
We see that the solution to (4.6) is equivalent to the ﬁrst three equations of the following
ODE with aﬃne velocity ﬁeld
∂
∂t
^
ϕ(x, t) =
[
Ac1,θ
01×3 1
]
^
ϕ(x, t) = ˜A ^
ϕ(x, t)
∀t ∈[0, t1]
From [16] we know that the solution to this ODE is given by ^
ϕ(x, t) = e ˜
At˜x . Due to
the structure of ˜A we know that the last row of ^
ϕ(x, t) will always stay equal to one.
Remark: The notation exp(·) used in Deﬁnition 4.2.7 originates from this result, but
does not have anything directly to do with the matrix exponential.
Deﬁnition 4.2.8. Let vθ ∈V, let x ∈Ω, let ϕ(x, t) be the corresponding solution to
(4.4), let c1 = γ(x) and let t1 ∈R be the largest value, possibly inﬁnite, such that
c1 = γ(ϕ(x, t)) for all t ∈[0, t1]. We then deﬁne ψt1
θ,c1(x) as
[
ψt1
θ,c1(x)
1
]
= et1 ˜
Ac1,θ ex
We recall from Deﬁnition 4.2.7 that a CPAB transformation was deﬁned as T θ(x) =
ϕ(x, 1). Therefore, a transformation must be a composition of ﬁnitely many, denoted m,
of such solutions such that ∑m
i=1 ti = 1:
T θ(x) = ϕ(x, 1) =
(
ψtm
θ,cm ◦. . . ◦ψt2
θ,c2 ◦ψt1
θ,c1
)
(x)
(4.7)
The compact notation in (4.7) hides a very important detail. The number of trajectory
segments, m, their duration, {ti}m
i=1 and the involved cell indices, {ci}m
i=1, all depend on
x, and apart from the ﬁrst cell index, c1, they all depend on θ too. Exactly because of
these dependencies in x, T θ : Ω7→Ωis not aﬃne. And because they may vary with x
even within a cell, T θ is neither PA therefore nor CPA.
Theorem 4.2.9.
i) Let α ∈R. Then ϕθ(·, t) = ϕαθ(·, t/α).
ii) (T θ)−1 exists, is in M and is given by T −θ.
iii) The elements of M are diﬀeomorphisms.
iv) M is a d-dimensional nonlinear space.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Data augmentation
Proof. This is not a rigorous mathematical proof of Theorem 4.2.9. Such a proof is out-
side the scope of this project. Rather, it is meant to give an intuition of the reliability
of the theorem and of how a formal proof would be formulated.
i) We ﬁrst note that the map θ 7→vθ is linear: Let α1, α2 ∈R and θ, θ′ ∈Rd. Then for
any x ∈Ω:
vα1θ+α2θ′ =
d
∑
i=1
(α1θi+α2θ′
i)vvec−1(Bi) = α1
d
∑
i=1
θivvec−1(Bi)+α2
d
∑
i=1
θ′
ivvec−1(Bi) = α1vθ+α2vθ′
Next, we see that
ξθ(x, t) ≜ϕαθ(x, t/α) = x +
∫t/α
0
vαθ(ϕαθ(x, τ))dτ = x +
∫t/α
0
αvθ(ϕαθ(x, τ))dτ =
x +
∫t
0 vθ(ϕαθ(x, η/α))dη = x +
∫t
0 vθ(ξ(x, η))dη
and we have that ξθ coincides with ϕθ. From this it follows that ϕ−θ(x, t) = ϕθ(x, −t)
ii) Given an element T θ ∈M we know from the linearity of Rd that −θ ∈Rd. From the
deﬁnition of V, then clearly v−θ ∈V giving us that T −θ ∈M. From [15] we know that
vθ is Lipschitz continuous and this together with The Picard-Lindelöf Theorem ensures
no intersecting trajectories, which implies existence and uniqueness of (T θ)−1. It also
implies a fundamental consistency condition [16] on ϕθ meaning that for any x ∈Ω,
and any s, u in the domain of ϕθ such that s + u is also in the domain we have that
ϕθ(ϕθ(x, s), u) = ϕθ(x, s + u). But then from i) we have that
T −θ(T θ)(x) = ϕ−θ(ϕθ(x, 1), 1) = ϕθ(ϕθ(x, 1), −1) = ϕθ(x, 1 −1) = ϕθ(x, 0) = x
which shows that T −θ is in fact the inverse of T θ
iii) Since we in ii) showed that for any T θ ∈M we also have that (T θ)−1 ∈M, it only
needs to be shown that any T θ is diﬀerentiable w.r.t. x. In [15] it is stated that this is a
well known result: any transformation based on stationary Lipschitz-continuous vector
ﬁelds through 4.4 is diﬀerentiable.
iv) Any space whose elements are invertible Ω7→Ωmaps must be non-linear w.r.t. the
standard operations deﬁned in Lemma 4.2.1, even if the maps themselves are linear. An
example would be the space of rotations in R3, SO(3). Its elements, rotations, are linear
maps, but the map that is adding the result of two diﬀerent rotations is not a rotation
itself, hence SO(3) is nonlinear w.r.t the standard operations. That this result holds in
general follows from the fact that any linear subspace of a larger linear space must have
the same zero element w.r.t. the operation. But any space, in which the elements are
invertible Ω7→Ωmaps, is a subspace of the linear space of all Ω7→Ωmaps, whose zero
element w.r.t. the standard operations, deﬁned in Lemma 4.2.1, is the map x 7→0. But
clearly this map is not invertible and therefore not in the subspace.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 CPAB Transformations
35
That M and V has the same dimension intuitively follows from the fact that there is
a bijective relation between them. From [15], this is a standard result in diﬀerential
geometry.
We now wish to augment our data utilizing the CPAB transformation deﬁned in section
4.2.1. To do so we ﬁrst need to look into how these transformations can be used to
transform our data and how they can be implemented in python.
4.2.3
Implementation of CPAB transformations in
python
In order to use the CPAB transformations when training our CNN we need them to be
implemented in code. In this project we have used an implementation from the library
libcpab [13] provided by Nicki Skafte Detlefsen based on [17],[18]. The library was
updated multiple times in the making of this report and the version used for the ﬁnal
results was libcpab v.
2.0. The library is based out of python and for this report
we used the pytorch backend on a single Nvidia Tesla K80 GPU with 12 GB of memory
from AWS.
The library has a lot of useful features: First of all, if Ω⊊R3 is rectangular the library
can generate a triangular tessellation of a speciﬁed size. The type of tessellation gener-
ated for Ω⊊R3 is of the type illustrated in Figure 4.4 by default in the library. For all
of our experiments, a P[4,4,4]-tessellation has been used. In order to have the most ex-
pressive models the ﬁnest tessellation possible was used. Due to the memory complexity
when training alignments of image pairs, as described in the following section 4.3.2, this
tessellation was chosen.
Another feature in the library is that it can construct the L matrix described in the
proof of Lemma 4.2.4 (with or without the additional constraints described in Lemma
4.2.5) and also calculate an orthonormal basis for the null space of L through an SVD
decomposition of L. However, in our experiments we only work with transformations
T θ ∈exp(V ∂
Ω,P[4,4,4]) since this ensures that we do not transform anything within an im-
age out of the image, and that we do not transform anything from outside the image
into the image, which we would then have to deﬁne. Using libcpab[13] we found that
d = dim(V∂
Ω,P[4,4,4]) = 225.
Given this basis and a value of θ ∈Rd it can construct the corresponding CPA vector
ﬁeld vθ ∈V simply by devectorizing each of the basis vectors and adding them together
according to θ as formulated in (4.3).
Based on the algorithm proposed in [17] it can now calculate T θ(x) = ϕθ(x, 1) for
all x ∈Ω.
See the algorithm in pseudo code in Appendix C.5.
The basic idea of
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Data augmentation
the algorithm is to solve the integration discretely by dividing the integration time,
in this case t = 1, in Nsteps steps each of length ∆t.
In each step the analytic so-
lution xtemp = ψ∆t
ci,θ(xi) = e ˜
A∆t( ˜xi), as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 4.2.8, is calculated.
If
γ(xi) = γ(xtemp) the analytic result xi+1 = xtemp is saved, and otherwise a generic ODE
solver is applied. This is done for all x ∈Ωin parallel. According to [17] the advantage
of this algorithm compared to using a generic ODE solver for the entire integration is
higher integration accuracy and faster computations since the integration is partly done
analytically.
Since our images I ∈R176×128×176 = Ωimg we need to specify how a CPA transformation
T θ : Ω⊊R3 7→Ω⊊R3 can be understood as a T θ : Ωimg 7→Ωimg map. If we let Ω=
[0, 176] × [0, 128] × [0, 176] ⊊R3 we can represent the index, x = [i, j, k]T, of each entry,
also referred to as pixel, in I as an element in [0, 176]N × [0, 128]N × [0, 176]N = ΩN ⊂Ω,
and on these indices we can use T θ. But since T θ([i, j, k]T) are not necessarily in ΩN we
cannot simply deﬁne the transformation from an input image Iinput to a transformed
image Itrans as
T θ(Iinput) = Itrans with
Itrans
T θ([i,j,k]T ) = Iinput
[i,j,k]
Instead, the library uses the inverse transformation T −θ to transform an index in the
transformed image x′ = [i′, j′, k′]T back to the input image T −θ(x′) = [y1, y2, y3]T = y.
Clearly, we still cannot guarantee that y ∈ΩN. Therefore, if x1, ..., x8 ∈ΩN are the
eight corners of the smallest cube in Ωcontaining y, i.e. x1 = [⌊y1⌋, ⌊y2⌋, ⌊y3⌋], x2 =
[⌊y1⌋, ⌊y2⌋, ⌊y3⌋+1] etc., then we deﬁne the intensity of Itrans
x′
as a trillinear interpolation
of the input intensities Iinput
x1
, Iinput
x2
, ..., Iinput
x8
weighted by 1−||x1−y||, 1−||x2−y||, ..., 1−
||x8 −y|| respectively. Emphasizing that x1, ..., x8 all depend on x′, this can be written
as
T θ(Iinput) = Itrans
with
Itrans
x′
=
8
∑
i=1
(
1 −||xi(x′) −T −θ(x′)||
)
Iinput
xi(x′)
∀x′ ∈ΩN
This procedure is also implemented in the library by default.
Our segmentations however, are elements S ∈(N/39N)176×128×176 = Ωseg and by using
the transformation deﬁned above we cannot ensure that also T θ(S) ∈Ωseg. This has
to do with the trillinear interpolation where each pixel value is calculated as a weighted
sum, with weights 0 ≤1 −||x1 −y||≤1, of elements in (N/39N).
This cannot be
guarenteed to be in (N/39N) itself. To overcome this issue we implemented our own
segmentation transformation T θ
seg deﬁned as
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Data augmentation based on CPAB transformations
37
T θ
seg(Sinput) = Strans
with
Strans
x′
= Sinput
argmini∈{x1(x′),...,x8(x′)}||xi(x′)−T −θ(x′)||
∀x′ ∈ΩN
reusing the notation from above.
Or in words: given a pixel x′ in the transformed
segmentation, we transform x′ back to the input segmentation y = T −θ(x′) and set the
value of Strans at x′ equal to the value of Sinput at the pixel closest to y. This has been
implemented by the authors of this work, utilizing that whenever we need both T θ(I)
and T θ
seg(S) we only need to calculate T θ(x′)
∀x′ ∈ΩN once.
4.3
Data augmentation based on CPAB
transformations
4.3.1
Elactic transformations
In this section we test the approach of using elastic transformations for data augmen-
tation.
Often, elastic transformations are based on integration of vector ﬁelds and
since we have already set up the basics of CPAB transformations we will sample small
CPAB transformations from a simple normal distribution. That is, generating T θ with
θ ∼N(0, 10−3I) where I is the identity matrix. Hereby we assume that our image
domain is closed under ’small’ CPAB transformations, i.e. that MRI brain scans trans-
formed by ’small’ CPAB transformation are still representative of MRI brain scans in
general. One could expect this to be a better assumption than it was for rotational trans-
formations due to the inherited rotational alignment within the domain. To emphasize
that this assumption may be viable, an illustration of 3 diﬀerent CPAB transformations
based on θ ∼N(0, 10−3I) can be seen in Figure 4.5.
The training procedure is similar to the one applied in the rotational experiment in sec-
tion 4.1. Instead of rotating the images, a sampling of θ ∼N(0, 10−3I) for each image
in the batch is done. We then apply T θ on the image and T θ
seg on its corresponding
segmentation and train on these. The stopping criterion from the rotational transforma-
tion experiment is used again, i.e training stops if the train loss has not improved for
20 iterations. Note that the U-Net does not receive any non-transformed images in the
training phase.
4.3.1.1
Segmentation results using data augmentation based on
elastic transformations
Below we present results from the elastic transformations along with the results from
Baseline 1 and the rotation experiment for comparison.
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Data augmentation
Figure 4.5: Transformation of three diﬀerent brain images and their segmentation based
on three diﬀerent θ ∼N(0, 10−3I). Odd columns: Intensity diﬀerence between image
and its transformation. Even columns: Transformed segmentation with red dots where
the transformation changed the segmentation. Rows: Image/segmentation sliced along
center of x, y, z-axis respectively.
Seen in ﬁgure 4.6 is the train loss for the Baseline 1, rotation and elastic transformation
experiment based on the Dice Loss function, as described in section 3.3.1. Each curve
corresponds to a cross-validation fold and each color have used the same train and test
partition. The updates on the x-axis corresponds to optimization steps when training
the U-Net. In the elastic transformation experiment, an update is performed in a similar
way to the other experiments, i.e when a batch of 6 training images has been processed.
Each update takes about 34.5 seconds - substantially longer than the two other experi-
ments (14.5, 17.5 seconds).
Figure 4.7 shows a boxplot of the test Dice scores for Baseline 1, the rotational experi-
ment and the elastic transformation experiment. It looks like the test Dice scores from
the elastic transformation experiment performs similarly to Baseline 1, but a bit worse
than the rotational experiment. The U-tests conﬁrms these observations with p = 0.3784
between Baseline 1 and the elastic transformations, but with p = 0.0267 between the
rotational transformations and the elastic transformations. Thus, contrary to expecta-
tion, the rotational experiment seems to generally perform better, i.e drawing a random
sample from each of the test sets, the highest sample value is more likely to be found
when rotational data augmentation has been applied.
A summary of the test Dice scores and the time to train the networks end-to-end in
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Data augmentation based on CPAB transformations
39
Figure 4.6: Left: Train loss for Baseline 1. Middle: Train loss for augmented data
(using rotations). Right: Train loss for augmented data (using elastic transformations).
Figure 4.7: Dice scores for the test sets of Baseline 1, the rotational experiment and the
elastic transformation experiment.
minutes is given in table 4.2. This shows that the elastic transformation experiment is
signiﬁcantly more time consuming (about twice the amount) than Baseline 1 and the
rotations experiment. For the data set of brain images in this project, we conclude that
elastic transformations sampled with θ ∼N(0, 10−3I) does not improve performance.
It might be that the covariance matrix used for sampling has deformed the images too
much, or that it has not deformed the images enough. Letting the covariance matrix get
closer and closer to the identity however, the transformations will likely not be expressive
enough.
Dice score
Total time (minutes)
Baseline 1
0.6370 ± 0.053
76.04 ± 9.43
Rotations
0.6485 ± 0.090
78.46 ± 7.88
Elastic
0.6289 ± 0.059
151.87 ± 12.15
Table 4.2: Table of Dice score means and run times for Baseline 1, the rotation experi-
ment and the elastic transformation experiment.
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Data augmentation
We again show the predictions that has been generated thus far, seen in Figure 4.18.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.8: (a) Baseline 1, (b) Rotation,(c) Elastic transformation. In general: Left
coloumn:
Ground truth, Middle coloumn:
Predictions, Right coloumn:
Predictions
where the misclassiﬁed voxels are marked red. Note: For aesthetic reasons the image
has been padded with background such that each slice has the same size.
4.3.2
Learning smarter CPA-transformations
When elastic data augmentation in section 4.3.1 was applied, we simply drew a θ ∼
N(0, 10−3I) and assumed that when transforming a brain image the resulting trans-
formed image would still remain within the domain of MRI brain scans. Instead of this,
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Data augmentation based on CPAB transformations
41
we now aim to learn transformations, T θ, between image pairs in order to build a prob-
abilistic generative model of transformations: P(T θ|y). That is, instead of manually
setting the mean and covariance according to the Gaussian normal distribution, with
mean zero and covariance as in the elastic case, from which θ was sampled, we now
wish to learn these parameters. We focus our attention to the CPAB transformations
constructed in section 4.2.1. As we saw these are well behaved, easy to compute using
libcpab[13], accurate and as see in [12] mathematically expressive too.
Learning the two parameters, the mean and covariance of the Gaussian distribution we
seek to approximate, we will for each image pair learn two transformations, such that
the transformation of one of the images in the pair resembles the other as much as pos-
sible and vice versa. Exactly what is meant by resemblance will be described in section
4.3.2.1. Doing this, we obtain a set of θ’s for which the brain image domain is assumed
to be invariant under the corresponding transformations. Then we set the covariance of
the Gaussian normal distribution, from which θ is sampled for the elastic deformations,
to be instead the covariance of the learned θ’s.
From Theorem 4.2.9 the inverse of a transformation T θ ∈M is given by T −θ ∈M. In
theory, this means that if the learned transformations T θ were perfect transformations
when transforming from i to j then T −θ would be the prefect transformation from j to
i. This leads to the learned values of θ having zero mean. However, as we will see later,
the learned transformations of image pairs does not lead to perfect alignments of the
pairs. Despite this, we will choose to sample values from a Gaussian distribution with
zero mean.
4.3.2.1
Pre-aligning image pairs
As described above, for each data point (MR brain image and its corresponding seg-
mentation) pair we wish to learn a transformation for each data point in the pair such
that the resulting transformed data point resembles the other data point as much as
possible. The data point we wish to transform will be denoted the input and the data
point we wish it to resemble will be denoted the target. We formulate this mathemat-
ically as follows: For each data point pair ((Ii, Si), (Ij, Sj)), i, j ∈0, ..., 17, i ̸= j we
let Ii = Iinput, Si = Sinput, Ij = Itarget and Sj = Starget and we then wish to solve the
following optimization problem:
θ∗= argminθ∈R225L
(
(T θ(Iinput), T θ
seg(Sinput)), (Itarget, Starget)
)
(4.8)
where L : (Ωimg × Ωseg) × (Ωimg × Ωseg) 7→R is a function that describes the dissimi-
larity between two data points (Ii, Si), (Ij, Sj) ∈(Ωimg × Ωseg). We coin this function
as our loss function.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Data augmentation
In this project we choose a loss function consisting of a regularization term and a linear
combination of two diﬀerent loss functions, Limg, Lseg, each describing the dissimilarity
of the images and segmentations respectively, i.e
L
(
(T θ(Iinput), T θ
seg(Sinput)), (Itarget, Starget)
)
=
(
αLimg(T θ(Iinput), Itarget) + (1 −α)Lseg(T θ
seg(Sinput), Starget) + λ||θ||2
2
)
(4.9)
where α ∈[0, 1] is a weighting parameter describing the importance of Limg to Lseg,
and where λ > 0 is a regularization parameter describing how much regularization is
added to the training procedure. We denote Limg as the image loss and Lseg as the
segmentation loss.
Before we go into detail on our choice of image- and segmentation loss we have to ad-
dress that we have imbalanced images in our data set, see ﬁgure A.2 in Appendix A.
We therefore assume that we need to pre-align or normalize our images before training
in some way. This can be done in multiple ways and which is best, from a learning
perspective, is not obvious. Four diﬀerent ways to either standardize or pre-align the
images were tested against no standardization or pre-alignment:
i) Since we are only interested in the optimal transformation for an image pair, we
normalize the image pair such that the set of the two images have zero mean and
standard deviation one, as is often done in machine learning settings. Given a pair of
images (Ii, Ij), i ̸= j each in Ωimg, then
µpair =
1
2|ΩN|
∑
k∈{i,j}
∑
x∈ΩN
Ikx
σpair =
v
u
u
t
1
2|ΩN|
∑
k∈{i,j}
∑
x∈ΩN
(Ikx −µpair)2
Spair(Ik) = Ik −µpair
σpair
k ∈{i, j}
gives a normalized pair (Spair(Ii), Spair(Ii)). Recall that ΩN = [0, 176]N × [0, 128]N ×
[0, 176]N is the set of indices in an image matrix I ∈Ωimg meaning that |ΩN| is the
number of pixels in an image. Note that Ikx is the intensity of image number k at index
x. See the second column of Figure 4.9.
ii) Though the normalization Spair is often done in machine learning settings it does
not minimize the sometimes extensive diﬀerence in intensity range of the two images.
Instead, we standardize each image individually the same way, such that each image has
zero mean and standard deviation one:
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Data augmentation based on CPAB transformations
43
µindv
k
=
1
|ΩN|
∑
x∈ΩN
Ikx
k ∈{i, j}
σindv
k
=
v
u
u
t 1
|ΩN|
∑
x∈ΩN
(Ikx −µindv
k
)2
k ∈{i, j}
Sindv(Ik) = Ik −µindv
k
σindv
k
k ∈{i, j}
This way the possibly large diﬀerence in intensity is removed within the pair (Sindv(Ii), Sindv(Ij)).
See Figure 4.9, column three.
iii) A diﬀerent approach to minimizing the sometimes large diﬀerence in intensity is to
simply leave one image unchanged and then align the other image to have the same
mean and standard deviation as the unchanged image:
A(Ij) =
(Ij −µindv
j
σindv
j
)
σindv
i
+ µindv
i
leading to the aligned pairs (Ii, A(Ij)) and (A(Ii), Ij). Here µindv
k
and σindv
k
are as de-
ﬁned above. For the pair (Ii, A(Ij)) we say that Ij has been alligned to Ii. Within the
pair (Ii, A(Ij)) the diﬀerence in intensity range is minimized compaired to before the
alignment. A drawback to A is however, that the intensity range among pairs are still
present. Even when comparing (Ii, A(Ij)) to (A(Ii), Ij). See column four and ﬁve in
Figure 4.9. WLOG, we let the alignment of a pair be of the form (Ii, A(Ij)) from now on.
iv) Normalizing image pairs using Sindv or aligning images pairs using A, we still see
large diﬀerences in mean and standard deviation of intensity within each class among
the two images in the pair. See Table C.1. However, when we train transformations
from one data point to the other, we want the transformations to be class sensitive too.
Hoping to emphasize this, we also try aligning one image to the other by aligning each
class in one image to the corresponding class in the other by giving it the same mean
and standard deviation. This of course can only be done for classes that are present in
both segmentations. Classes that are not are left unchanged. Let C be the class labels
that are present in both segmentations in the pair. We then deﬁne this alignment Aseg
by its pixel-wise operation:
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Data augmentation
µc
k =
1
|{x ∈ΩN|γk(x) = c}|
∑
x∈ΩN|γk(x)=c
Ikx
k ∈{i, j}, c ∈C
σc
k =
v
u
u
t
1
|{x ∈ΩN|γk(x) = c}|
∑
x∈ΩN|γk(x)=c
(Ikx −µc
k)2
k ∈{i, j}, c ∈C
Aseg(Ij)x =

Ijx −µ
γj(x)
j
σ
γj(x)
j

σ
γj(x)
i
+ µ
γj(x)
i
x ∈{x ∈ΩN|γj(x) ∈C}
where γk(x) = Skx is the class label of pixel x in data point k. This again leads to
two diﬀerent alignments of a pair: aligning j to i; (Ii, Aseg(Ij)) and aligning i to j;
(Aseg(Ii), Ij).
From now on we deﬁne an alignment of this type to be of the form
(Ii, Aseg(Ij). As was the case when aligning using A, we still have that the diﬀerence in
intensity ranges within the image pair, is minimized compared to before pre-processing,
however now only for classes that are present in both images, whereas intensity ranges
among pairs are still diﬀerent, even between (Ii, Aseg(Ij)) and (Ij, Aseg(Ii)). See Figure
4.9 column six and seven.
Figure 4.9: Illustration of diﬀerent ways of normalizing and pre-aligning the image pair
(I0, I8)
Looking closely at Figure 4.9 we see that the normalized / aligned pair that visually
resembles each other the most are the pairs that were aligned using Aseg. While Sindv
and A also provide equal intensity range Aseg also captures "blurness". Initially, image
no. 0 appears more blurred then image no. 8 and the "blurness" of one image is carried
over to the other using Aseg.
To test the importance of normalization or alignment, we train transformations using a
simple loss function with no regularization and no segmentation loss by simply setting
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Data augmentation based on CPAB transformations
45
α = 1 and λ = 0. As image loss, we simply use the L2 norm of the diﬀerence between
Itarget and T θ(Iinput) squared:
Limg(T θ(Iinput), Itarget) =
1
|ΩN|||T θ(Iinput) −Itarget||2
2
Note that Iinput and Itarget are the images after pre-processing has been applied.
When training we use pytorch’s build-in backpropagation feature to backpropagate
through the loss function L = Limg using an Adam optimizing routine. We did some
rough initial tests of learning rate and found that a learning rate of 5 · 10−2 gave useful
results. A more rigorous test is done later on. As for stopping criteria we forced the
training to last a minimum of 20 iterations. After that we check if the loss has deceased
by more then 10−4 in each iteration and if not, we stop. To save time and resources we
trained for a maximum of 75 iterations, which took approximately 20 minutes.
Testing all combinations of pre-processing techniques, λ, α and learning rate would be
too time consuming and resource demanding for the scope of this project. Instead, we
only focus on optimizing one parameter at a time, although this might not lead to the
most optimal combination.
Testing the eﬀect of diﬀerent pre-alignment or normalization schemes, ﬁve random data
point pairs were drawn from our data set and the eﬀect tested when training a trans-
formation from the ﬁrst data point to resemble the second in the pair. The ﬁve pairs
were: (9, 16), (7, 1), (4, 14), (13, 15) and (12, 3). As shown in Figure C.6, the majority of
the training losses did converge under this setup. The few training processes that did
not fully converge, did however experience a signiﬁcant reduction in loss and were close
to converged.
Limg depends heavily on the pre-processing method used, as seen in Figure C.6, and
therefore we cannot use it to quantify the performance of the transformations, i.e. how
much the transformation of the input resembles the target. Instead we introduce the
following two performance measures of transformations:
If Si, Sj ∈Ωseg are two segmentations we let m(θ, Si, Sj) = |{x ∈ΩN|Six ̸= Sj,x}|
be the number of miss classiﬁcations. We then deﬁne The relative reduction in miss
classiﬁcation, RRM as
RRM(θ, Si, Sj) = m(Si, Sj) −m(T θ
seg(Si), Sj)
m(Si, Sj)
We see that if T θ
seg(Si) = Sj then RRM(θ, Ii, Ij) = 1 meaning that the number of misclas-
siﬁcations before the transformation has been reduced by 100% after the transformation.
If RRM(θ, Si, Sj) = 0 the number of miss classiﬁcations are unchanged during the trans-
formation. And if RRM(θ, Si, Sj) < 0 the number of misclassiﬁcations has increased by
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Data augmentation
the transformation.
Next, we deﬁne the Dice score of two segmentations Si, Sj ∈Ωseg as
Dice(Si, Sj) =
39
∑
c=0
2|{x ∈ΩN|γi(x) = γj(x) = c}|
|{x ∈ΩN|γi(x) = c}|+|{x ∈ΩN|γj(x) = c}|
Note that this deﬁnition of the Dice score corresponds to the negative Dice loss function
deﬁned in equation (3.3) used for training the U-Net if the predicted class probability
for each pixel returned by the soft max layer in the U-Net were all equal to one. We can
then deﬁne The relative Dice increase, RDI as
RDI(θ, Si, Sj) = Dice(T θ
seg(Si), Sj) −Dice(Si, Sj)
Dice(Si, Sj)
Here we see that if the Dice score is unchanged by the transformation, Dice(Si, Sj) =
Dice(T θ
seg(Si), Sj), then RDI(θ, Si, Sj) = 0, and that if the Dice score is increased by
e.g 15% by the transformation then RDI = 0.15. Similarly, if the Dice score is reduced
by e.g 10% by the transformation then RDI = −0.1, etc.
Calculating RRM and RDI of the transformations of data point pairs learned using the
four diﬀerent pre-alignment methods, we see that while pairwise normalization shows in-
signiﬁcant improvement compared to doing no pre-alignment, a noticeable improvement
in performance is seen when pre-aligning using the rest of the methods. Comparing
Sindv, A and Aseg, no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in performance is found. See Figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: Performance of transformations when aligning 5 diﬀerent point pairs us-
ing four diﬀerent pre-alignment methods. Performance is measured in
Relative Dice
increase, RDI and Reletive reduction of misclassiﬁcations, RRM
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Data augmentation based on CPAB transformations
47
Going forward, we will use the pre-alignment method Aseg when training transforma-
tions. As seen in Figure 4.10 the performance of the transformations obtained using this
method is not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from normalizing using Sindv or pre-aligning using
A. Looking at Figure 4.9, we ﬁnd it slightly more visually pleasing, and though it is
more computationally expensive than the other methods, the compute time of Aseg is
only a fraction of the total compute time when training a transformation (∼1 sec. vs.
∼20 min.)
4.3.2.2
Choice of loss function and optimization of training
parameters
In the last section, we tested diﬀerent methods of normalizing or pre-aligning image
pairs prior to learning a transformation from one image to the other. We found that
pre-aligning the image pair in a class speciﬁc way using Aseg, the performance of the
learned transformations were signiﬁcantly better compared to no normalization or pre-
alignment. However, we still need to settle on a segmentation loss function and to tune
training parameters such as learning rate, lr, relation between image loss and segmen-
tation loss, α and regularization parameter, λ. This will be explored in this section.
Remark: Before we go into depth with ﬁnding parameters, we note that we do not ﬁnd
a fully satisfactory optimization set up. Unfortunately, it was not until the end of De-
cember 2018 that we realized that the libcpab [13] library had a couple of smaller bugs
when backpropagating through transformations of 3D data using the pytorch backend.
Before this came to our attention we were still able to produce and optimize transforma-
tions and we had no reason to suspect a problem. At some point however, we did realize
the not all coeﬃcients of θ was backpropagated through and therefore not optimized,
thereby leaving us with limited results. Fortunately, the bugs were quickly corrected
by the author of the library in version 2.0. This, however left us with a new problem.
The setup, especially the segmentation loss function, found to have led to signiﬁcant
performance improvements, no longer led to improvements at all and we had to come
up with something new, and retest training parameters within a short time frame. As
will be seen, no new segmentation loss function that improved performance was found.
Learning rate: A formal test for optimal learning rate was carried out in section C.
Here we ﬁnd that for a to small learning rate of 0.005 the optimization process did not
converge with in desired time frame. Opposite we ﬁnd that a to high learning rate 0.1
resulted in in unstable learning resulting in premature stopping. For the tested learning
rates with this range the performance of the learned transformations were similar and
we chose at learning rate of 0.05.
Segmentation loss: To overcome the problem of neglecting smaller classes during the
training process of transformations, we now introduce a segmentation loss to our loss
function. That is, we let α ̸= 1 in equation (4.9). How to deﬁne a segmentation loss
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Data augmentation
function, Lseg that resolves this problem is not clear, however.
First of all, even though both RRM and RDI describes the resemblance of segmentations,
they are not continuous and therefore pytorch’s backpropagation feature cannot be used.
We therefore cannot use any of them as segmentation loss functions.
Next, looking at T θ
seg(S4) when trained to resemble S14 as illustrated in Figure 4.11,
which was calculated as part of the learning rate test, we see that a majority of the pix-
els that are still misclassiﬁed after the transformation are at the edge between classes.
And since edge pixels in general constitute a larger fraction of smaller classes than of
larger classes, we generally have worse performance on smaller classes. For this reason,
the two segmentation loss functions that we have tested both focus on the performance
of edge pixels.
Figure 4.11: T θ
seg(S4) when trained to resemble S14 using lr = 0.05, α = 1, λ = 0.
White dots: Misclassiﬁed pixels prior to the transformation that was not removed by the
transformation. Black dots: Misclassiﬁed pixels that were caused by the transformation.
We need to deﬁne what we mean by an edge pixel. If x ∈ΩN we deﬁne its 6 neighbouring
pixels as B(x, 1) = {y ∈ΩN| ||x −y||2= 1}. Then we can deﬁne the set of edge pixels in
segmentation Sj, E(Sj) as
E(Sj) = {x ∈ΩN|∃y ∈B(x, 1) : Sjx ̸= Sjy}
and the class speciﬁc edge pixels in the segmentation Sj, Ec(Sj), as
Ec(Sj) = {x ∈E(Sj)|Sjx = c}
∀c ∈(N/39N)
For each segmentation, Sj in our data set, each pixel in the segmentation x and each
class, c, we can calculate the distance to the nearest edge pixel of a speciﬁc class, c,
deﬁned by
Dc(Sj)x =
min
y∈Ec(Sj)||x −y||2
∀c ∈(N/39N), ∀x ∈ΩN
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Data augmentation based on CPAB transformations
49
The ﬁrst segmentation loss function we tested was deﬁned by
Lseg(T θ
seg(Sinput), Starget) =
∑
x∈E(Starget)
DStarget
x
(Sinput)T −θ(x)
The idea behind this segmentation loss function is that we want the pixels in T θ
seg(Sinput),
that are edge pixels in Starget, to also originate from edge pixels in Sinput, i.e T −θ(x) ∈
E(Sinput) for all x ∈E(Starget). Or better yet: We want T −θ(x) ∈Ec(Sinput) for all
x ∈Ec(Starget) and for all classes c. To measure how far T −θ(x) is from Ec(Sinput), we use
the L2 distance to the nearest edge pixel of the desired class: DStarget
x
(Sinput)T −θ(x). Re-
call that Starget
x
is the class of pixel x in the target segmentation. Note that T −θ(x) is not
necessarily in ΩN, thus DStarget
x
(Sinput)T −θ(x) is in fact an interpolation of DStarget
x
(Sinput)
at the 8 pixels closest to T −θ(x) as deﬁned in section 4.2.3.
Unfortunately, this segmentation loss function did not lead to useful results. When train-
ing using only this segmentation loss function, i.e. α = 0, the loss function did decrease
signiﬁcantly during training, but the resulting brain images looked far from real brains.
Employing a loss function that was a combination of image loss and segmentation loss,
0 < α < 1 we found that even for large values of α, we still were producing unfruitful
transformations. For any value of α < 1, the performance of the learned transformations
were worse than when training without the segmentation loss and we therefore had to
abandon this idea. A deeper discussion as to why this segmentation loss function did not
lead to good training results is beyond the scope of this project. Our intuitive explana-
tion is, that this loss function focuses on minimizing the smallest distance from T −θ(x)
to an edge pixel of the same class as x in the input segmentation. But this distance
might not resemble how far T −θ(x) is from its optimal y ∈Ec(Sinput). In fact, it might
even point away from it. The problem is, that we do not know which y ∈Ec(Sinput) is
the optimum for pixel x ∈Ec(Starget).
The second segmentation loss function we tested was also based on Dc, but in a dif-
ferent manner.
First, we realize that if T θ(Sinput) resembles Starget perfectly, then
Dc(T θ
seg(Sinput)) = Dc(Starget) for all classes present in both segmentations. To base
a loss function on Dc(T θ
seg(Sinput)) would be computationally very expensive, since
Dc(·) by itself is expensive and it would have to be calculated for all classes in each
iteration.
Instead, we realize that Dc(Iinput) ∈Ωimg and that we therefore can ap-
proximate Dc(T θ
seg(Sinput)) by T θ
img(Dc(Sinput)). This way Dc(Sinput) would only have
to be computed once for each class.
We now let our segmentation loss function be
the mean of the diﬀerence between T θ
img(Dc(Sinput)) and Dc(Starget) squared for all
c ∈C = {3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 18, 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35}:
Lseg = 1
|C|
∑
c∈C
1
|ΩN|||T θ
img(Dc(Sinput) −Dc(Starget)||2
2
Ideally, the segmentation loss function would take all classes into account. This however,
would be too computationally expensive and could not be carried out on the hardware
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Data augmentation
available. Instead, we did not include the ﬁve biggest classes nor the classes that were
not present in all classiﬁcations or classes that had an average size of less than 800 pixels.
This way, extra emphasis is put on class edges of smaller classes that are universal and
still not too small.
With this segmentation loss function, we now see an improvement in performance of
transformations, even when only training on the segmentation loss, i.e α = 0. For this
reason, we carried out an investigation for optimal values of α, again using the same
data points as previously. We optimize the transformations, using the learning rate of
0.05 and the pre-alignment Aseg as found above, no regularization, λ = 0, and the same
stopping criterion as before.
As we see in Figure C.9, all transformation optimization experiments converged. Due
to the diﬀerence in magnitude of Limg and Lseg, see the ﬁrst and last column of Figure
C.10, we cannot use the total loss as a measure for performance for diﬀerent values of α.
Therefore, we use RRM and RDI as our performance measure of transformations, and
as we see in Figure 4.12 that there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in performance for values
of α > 0. A value of α = 0, does however appear to lead to worse transformations than
all other tested values of α. For values of α > 0.125 we do see a slight tendency of larger
values of α leading to larger value of RRM, but smaller value of RDI, just as we had
hoped for when introducing this kind of segmentation loss. This tendency is not signif-
icant though, and does not follow through for lower values of α. Therefore, we simply
choose to train with α = 1 further on in the this report. Doing this, the performance is
not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from other tested choices of α, but the compute time is smaller.
Though T −θ(x), ∀x ∈ΩN still only has to be computed once per iteration the number of
interpolations that has to be done in order to compute the segmentation loss is 23 times
larger than the number of interpolations required to compute the image loss. The same
goes for the number of diﬀerences, squaring and summations.
Within the time frame of this report we did not come up with a segmentation loss func-
tion that was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the ones described here. And unfortunately,
the two segmentation loss functions we did come up with did not lead to a signiﬁcant
improvement in performance and they were therefore both discarded, leaving us with
CPAB transformations that generally has bad performance on class edges, sometimes
even resulting in negative RDI scores.
Regularization: Experiments for diﬀerent values of regularization parameter λ was
also carried out. See Figure C.11 and Figure C.12. For λ < 5 we see no signiﬁcant
diﬀerence in performance of the transformations and we simply chose to go with the
simplest loss function with λ = 0. 2
2After this choice was made it came to our attention that this choice of λ of course goes against
popular machine learning procedure of choosing simplest model possible i.e.
largest regularization
possible. Had this come to our attention before we would have chosen λ = 0.5 instead.
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Data augmentation based on CPAB transformations
51
Figure 4.12: Performance of transformations when trained using diﬀerent values of α i.e.
diﬀerent weighting of Limg and Lseg
Having tested pre-alignment methods, learning rate, segmentation loss and regulariza-
tion we end up settling with the following loss function when training CPAB transfor-
mations of one data point pair to resemble another data point pair:
L
(
(Iinput, Sinput), (Itarget, Starget)
)
=
1
|ΩN|||T θ
img(Iinput) −Aseg(Itarget)||2
2
(4.10)
with a learning rate of lr = 0.05.
4.3.2.3
Properties and performance of the learned CPAB
transformations
Using the loss function given in equation (4.10) and a learning rate of lr = 0.05 we now
train a CPAB transformation for every data point pair in our data set ((Ii, Si), (Ij, Sj)) =
((Iinput, Sinput), (Itarget, Starget)) , i, j = 0, ..., 17, i ̸= j, by solving the optimization prob-
lem described in equation (4.8). In total, this leads to 306 CPAB transformations to
train giving us a total training time of approximately 3.5 days using the Nvidia Tesla
K80 GPU with 12 GB of memory from AWS.
Training these transformations, we see that the majority of them converged during train-
ing, see Figure C.13. Looking at the learning curves of the eleven CPAB transformations
that appear to have been stopped prematurely, see Figure C.14, we see that they still
are subject to a signiﬁcant reduction in loss and therefore we do not discard them. Note
that the transformations saved were the transformations corresponding to the lowest
value of the loss function and not just the transformation in the last iteration of the
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Data augmentation
optimization process.
In Figure 4.13(a) we plot the 306 learned values of theta. Here, the alignments along
the x-axis is ordered such that transformations based on the same input data point fol-
lows each other, i.e the ﬁrst 17 values of learned θ’s correspond to the transformations
learned for the data point pairs ((I0, S0), (Ij, Sj)) , j = 1, ..., 17 etc. Being aware of this,
it is clear from Figure 4.13(a) that transformations based on data point pairs including
the last four data points and one of the ﬁrst 14 data points appear larger than transfor-
mations based on data points including only the 14 ﬁrst data points or only the last four
data points. Plotting the L2 norm of all learned values of θ, as done in Figure 4.13(b),
this becomes even more evident. Knowing that the last four data points had the ﬁnest
resolution of all the data points, see Figure A.1, this demonstrates that our learned
transformations could even be used in an unsupervised classiﬁcation setting. This goes
beyond the scope of this project.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.13: a) All 306 learned values of θ. b) ||θ||2 for all learned values of θ. Note
that transformations from a data point to itself is not calculated and the corresponding
θ-value is simply set to zero.
Figure 4.13(b) shows another slightly surprising ﬁnding. From Theorem 4.2.9, we would
expect that if the CPAB transformation making one data point resemble a second data
point the most is given by T θ, then the CPAB transformation that would make the
second data point resemble the ﬁrst data point the most would be T −θ. Due to the
learning process where we do not ﬁnd transformations that lead to perfect resemblance,
we did however expect the corresponding values of θ to be reasonably similar up to a
sign. Despite this, Figure 4.13(b) illustrates noticeable diﬀerences in the size of θ for
CPAB transformation based on data point pairs (i,j) and (j,i). Letting θi,j be the learned
θ, when transforming data point i to resemble data point j, as shown in Figure 4.15, we
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Data augmentation based on CPAB transformations
53
ﬁnd that the norm of the diﬀerence between θi,j and θj.i corresponds to more than 50%
of the norm of θi,j:
||θi,j+θj,i||2
||θi,j||2
> 0.56
∀i, j = 0, ..., 17, i ̸= j. This is another indication
that the loss function used does not lead to optimal transformations, and maybe not
even to transformations that are close to optimal.
Figure 4.14: Relative diﬀerence between learned values of θ when trained on opposite
data point pairs:
||θi,j+θj,i||2
||θi,j||2
This is also seen if when looking at the performance scores, RRM and RDI, of the
learned transformations. Here we got an average RRM score of 0.2812 and an average
RDI score of 0.0289. Further, as shown in Figure, we see that more than 25% of all
learned transformations have a negative RDI score, meaning that more than a quarter
of all learned transformations do not increase the Dice score when simply comparing to
the Dice score of the non-transformed segmentations. Although the learned transforma-
tions might not be close to optimal, they are still not completely useless. All learned
transformations reduces the number of misclassiﬁcations, and on average 28.12% of the
misclassiﬁcations are removed by the learned transformations. We even see up to more
then 60 % of misclassiﬁcations removed and Dice scores being increased by up to more
then 30 % for some transformations.
We still wish to test whether or not data augmentation based on these sub-optimal
CPAB transformations will lead to a signiﬁcant improvement in performance of the U-
Net. In order to augment our data based on the learned CPAB transformations we
approximate the distribution the learned θ values by a multivariate normal distribution:
θ ∼N(0, Σtheta), where Σθ is the approximated covariance matrix of the observed ’s as
proposed in [12][14]. Exactly how Σθ is computed numerically is described in section
4.3.2.4. We choose the mean value of the multivariate normal distribution to be zero
since we from Theorem 4.2.9 know that (T θ)−1 = T −θ and therefore we expect the dis-
tribution to have mean value 0, even though this is not exactly what we ﬁnd, probably
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Data augmentation
Figure 4.15: Performance of all learned transformations measured in RRM and RDI
due to poor learning as described above. To check if this assumption of the learned θ’s
following a multivariate normal distribution is viable we perform a principal component
analysis on the learned θ’s to see if the assumption at least holds along the ﬁve principal
component axes describing the most variance. Each learned value of θ’s score along these
ﬁve principal component axes is plotted in Figure C.15. It is seen that the assumption
does not fully hold for the ﬁrst principal component axis. Plotting the data along this
axis against any of the other of the ﬁrst principal component axes, our learned θ’s do not
appear normally distributed and looking at the θ’s only along the ﬁrst principal compo-
nent axis, the distribution seems to have heavier tails than a normal distribution. Along
all other plotted principal component axes, the learned θ’s do appear to be normally
distributed though. Since the ﬁrst principal component axis accounts for approximately
42% of the variance and all others less than 8% of the variance of the learned θ’s the
assumption of the learned ’s following a multivariate normal distribution is not fully
appropriate.
4.3.2.4
Segmentation results using data augmentation based on
learned transformations
Below we present U-Net results for the augmented data set using the learned trans-
formations, together with the results from Baseline 1 and the rotational and elastic
transformation augmented experiments for comparison.
Seen in ﬁgure 4.16 is the train loss for Baseline 1 (without data augmentation), the
rotational and elastic transformation augmented data sets and the learned transforma-
tion augmented data set. From the plots, it seems that using data augmentation with
learned transformations results in more stable convergence.
It is important to note that for each cross-validation fold, the learned transformations
used on the data set are only drawn from a transformation distribution based on the
images in the training set. The covariance matrix containing the θ’s should in theory
be positive deﬁnite. Due to numerical instability however, this is not the case. An algo-
rithm, proposed by Higham [19], to calculate the nearest symmetric positive semi deﬁnte
matrix is applied to overcome this problem. An implementation by Fasih [20] was used to
calculate this matrix in python. This was necessary due to a Cholesky-factorization be-
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Data augmentation based on CPAB transformations
55
ing applied when sampling a transformation based on the covariance matrix in libcpab
libraray [13]. When training, transformations are applied on the images in the training
set and on their segmentations. Note that all images used for training the U-Net are
transformations and no non-transformed images are actually seen by the U-Net.
Figure 4.16: Loss as a function of optimizer steps for the experiments: Baseline 1 (with-
out data augmentation), and the augmented data sets using rotational transformations,
elastic transformations and learned transformations.
Test Dice score distributions for each of the four experiments are seen in ﬁgure 4.17. The
best test scores for the U-Net trained with the learned transformations do not outperform
the best test scores using rotational transformations. However, the standard deviation
is seen to be smaller and performance more consistent, and a Levene test for variance
conﬁrms this. More importantly, when testing whether a randomly drawn sample for the
diﬀerent test sets is more likely to be better for the learned data augmentation scheme,
the U-test gives p-values of p < 0.05 for Baseline 1 and for the elastic transformed data
augmentation. However, the U test cannot distinguish the rotational data augmentation
scheme from the learned data augmentation scheme with p = 0.45.
A summary of the test Dice scores and the time to train the networks end-to-end in
minutes is given in table 4.3. The data augmentation schemes using CPA transforma-
tions, learned or random, both take substantially longer time to train. However, the
highest mean Dice score is achieved when using the learned data augmentation scheme,
although it is not statistically diﬀerent from the rotational augmentaton scheme, due to
the higher standard deviation of the test scores for this set. The standard deviation of
the Dice scores is lowest using the learned transformations though, indicating robustness
when training the U-Net.
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Data augmentation
Figure 4.17: Boxplots of ending Test Dice scores from the four experiment, Baseline 1,
Rotation, Elastic and learned transformation.
Dice score
Total time (minutes)
Baseline 1
0.6370 ± 0.053
76.04 ± 9.43
Rotations
0.6485 ± 0.090
78.46 ± 7.88
Elastic
0.6289 ± 0.059
151.87 ± 12.15
Learned
0.6720 ± 0.026
145.53 ± 14.73
Table 4.3: Table of Dice Scores and run times for Baseline 1, the rotation experiment,the
elastic transformation experiment and the learned transformation experiment.
Predictions from Baseline 1, the rotational transformation and elastic transformation
experiments are seen in ﬁgure 4.18. It is diﬃcult to compare the results from the diﬀerent
models, but we choose to use the predictions with Dice score closest to the mean Dice
score for each experiment. It is seen that the misclassiﬁcations most frequently occur
around the edges of diﬀerent segments, and on some of the smaller or intermediate,
centered classes.
By observing ﬁgure 4.18 one sees that the learned transformation
experiment has less classes misclassiﬁed comparted to the other experiments. In the
brain slices that is shown one only sees class 31 misclassiﬁed.
==PAGE:67==
4.3 Data augmentation based on CPAB transformations
57
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.18: (a) Baseline 1, (b) Rotation, (c) Elastic transformation, (d) learned trans-
formation. In general: Left coloumn: Ground truth, Middle coloumn: Predictions,
Right coloumn: Predictions where the misclassiﬁed voxels are marked red. Note: For
estethic reasons the image has been padded with zeros such that each slice has the same
size.
==PAGE:68==
58
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5
Dicussion and Conclusion
The fundamental goal of this project is to learn transformations that can be used for
data augmentation, concretely for brain image data.
In this chapter we discuss the
results of segmentation of brain images when using a learned data augmentation scheme
compared to using an unlearned, rotational augmentation scheme. Ideas for future work
are also laid out.
At the end of the chapter we conclude that the augmentation of
brain image data conducted in this work has improved the performance of the U-Net
for segmentation of brain images, and that using the learned approach results in more
robust training and model evaluation.
Discussion
Learning an augmentation scheme or using simple transformations:
Hauberg et al. [12] compared learned and unlearned data augmentation schemes for
handwritten digit classiﬁcation using the famous MNIST data. They demonstrated that
the classiﬁcation models signiﬁcantly improve when using a learned data augmentation
scheme compared to using both unaugmented data and using data augmented as in
inﬁMNIST [21] where a mix of translations, rotations, scalings, Gaussian pertubations
etc., are used for augmentation.
A similar, decisive conclusion cannot be made in this work on brain image segmentation,
evaluated on the ﬁnal Dice score results.
Although data augmentation is shown to
signiﬁcantly improve performance when segmenting brain images, the performances of
the U-Net cannot be distinguished in the learned approach compared to the unlearned,
rotational approach, except that the learned approach yields more stable results. A
reason for the insigniﬁcant performance may be due to the high amount of complexity
in the brain images compared to the simpler MNIST data where an image of only 28×28
pixels deﬁnes a single class. Learning useful transformations from the highly complex
brain image data is many times more diﬃcult. The results obtained in this thesis may
well be limited by the poorly learned transformations, caused by an insuﬃcient loss
function.
Using elastic deformations was another unlearned approach tested for data augmenta-
tion, an approach often applied in machine learning settings on medical images. The
results from the U-Net trained on the elastic transformations did not improve perfor-
mance compared to the baseline, as has previously been demonstrated in other works
such as [11], [9]. This could be due to a poor choice of covariance matrix, such that the
==PAGE:70==
60
5 Dicussion and Conclusion
sampled transformations might be deforming the brain images too much or too little. It
could also simply be that the brain image data set will not gain from data augmentation
using this approach due to the complexity of the data, with a high number of diﬀerent,
imbalanced classes.
Feature engineering:
An interesting aspect in data augmentation is the implicit use of feature engineering,
in particular when using the simple data augmentation schemes. If assumptions are
made regarding the domain of which the data belongs, such as rotational invariance,
then such assumptions are enforced on the model through training using rotational aug-
mented data, since the model will learn these invariances. This will be the case even if
the sampled data, originating from the rotational invariant domain, was aligned in one
direction. Such assumptions are exactly what we try to avoid when using a learned data
augmentation scheme - we want to learn statistical models of viable transformations. An
objection might be however, that even when using a learned data augmentation scheme,
a human still has to specify a loss function to determine the transformations. Thus, the
learned approach might be thought of as an implicit form of implicit feature engineering.
This objection is not entirely fair, though, since the unsupervised approach in ﬁnding
these transformations does not enable us to know the transformations before hand.
Time:
Execution time is another important aspect when evaluation performance. Training the
learned transformation is approximately twice as time consuming as the rotation exper-
iment and the Baseline 1 experiment. The results show that the eﬃcient rotation exper-
iment on average performs equally well to the learned augmentation scheme, although
the latter experiment showed more consistent results, which arguably compensate for
the extra training time.
Future work
Learning transformations:
The most important aspect when learning transformations is the loss function used to
ﬁnd the transformations. It was obvious that the information of the segmentations of
the brain images should have been incorporated in the loss function. An eﬀort to do so
was made, but when it was discovered that the initial version of the libcpab library did
not work as expected, it was too late to remedy the previous eﬀorts. We expect that
better transformations could have been found, had the loss function taken the segmenta-
tions into account. This would in theory make the generated MR brain images used for
augmentation more likely to belong to the domain of MR brain images, which should
further have improved the U-Net for segmentation.
The segmentation model:
A more complex convolutional neural network could employed for better segmentation
==PAGE:71==
5 Dicussion and Conclusion
61
results. In this project, resources were limited, but access to GPUs with larger mem-
ory would mean a deeper neural network could have been employed, e.g a U-Net with
more initial feature maps and more layers. Diﬀerent parameters of the neural network,
such as the type of activation functions, dropout-rates, convolutional operations, weight
initialization etc. could be investigated for higher performance.
Using learned data augmentation on smaller data sets:
Beside investigating the eﬀect of learned data augmentation for a large set, it is of
interest to test the performance of segmenting brain images when only a smaller set is
available. We aimed to do so in this project, but limited resources scuppered this.
Conclusion
Learning transformations is useful: In section 4.1.1 and section 4.3.2.4, data aug-
mentation was shown to signiﬁcantly improve performance of the U-Net when segment-
ing brain images.
Due to the high amount of variance in the experiments, the mean Dice scores for all
experiments were not statistically diﬀerent. However, Mann-Whitney U tests showed
that it was more likely that a high Dice score sample would be found when augmenting
the brain image data set using rotations or using the learned transformations compared
to not augmenting the data set.
On the other hand, a U test showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in performance of the U-Net
predictions when comparing rotational augmented data to learning transformations for
augmentation. The highest mean Dice score was found using the learned augmentation
scheme, but the high level of variance in the Dice scores from the rotational experiment
meant that the mean Dice scores from the two experiments were not signiﬁcantly diﬀer-
ent and equally accurate.
However, one discovery made was that training the U-Net using the learned data aug-
mentation scheme made the U-Net more robust. This is exhibited in Figure 4.16 where
the train loss of the four experiments are shown. The robustness is also evident by con-
sidering the ﬁnal test Dice scores, as seen in Figure 4.17, where the learned augmentation
scheme produced more precise results due the low variance in the Dice scores.
==PAGE:72==
62
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX A
Data
(a)
(b)
Figure A.1: (a) The gender and age of person from which the brian images were taken.
JUV=juvenile. (b) The resolution in the x and y direction. The y-dimension is in our
project the z-dimension, while the ’SLICE’ dimension is y.
==PAGE:74==
64
A Data
Image
Size in voxels
1
1147470
2
1200498
3
951358
4
1069342
5
1040178
6
1078395
7
867764
8
868943
9
1002429
10
982227
11
958119
12
954168
13
1058473
14
1140358
15
1378515
16
1460808
17
1565779
18
1668142
Table A.1: Brain images size measured in voxels diﬀerent from zero
Figure A.2: Slices of each of the 18 MR brain images in the middle of the brain. Note
that image 11 has a substantially diﬀerent MR intensity than the rest.
==PAGE:75==
A Data
65
Figure A.3: Table with the anatomical names for each brain class
==PAGE:76==
66
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX B
CNN
Train set
Test set
Exp1_1
[14,10,11,1,2,16,13,5,9,6,0,12]
[4,15,7,17,8,3]
Exp1_2
[4,15,7,17,8,3,13,5,9,6,0,12]
[14,10,11,1,2,16]
Exp1_3
[4,15,7,17,8,3,14,10,11,1,2,16]
[13,5,9,6,0,12]
Exp1_4
[2, 8, 17, 11, 13, 7,14, 12, 10, 1, 0, 5]
[16, 9, 4, 15, 6, 3]
Exp1_5
[16, 9, 4, 15, 6, 3,14, 12, 10, 1, 0, 5]
[2, 8, 17, 11, 13, 7]
Exp1_6
[16, 9, 4, 15, 6, 3, 2, 8, 17, 11, 13, 7]
[14, 12, 10, 1, 0, 5]
Exp2_1
[13, 2, 1, 5, 14, 0]
[15, 8, 7, 16, 17, 10,3, 6, 12, 11, 4, 9]
Exp2_2
[15, 8, 7, 16, 17, 10]
[13, 2, 1, 5, 14, 0, 3, 6, 12, 11, 4, 9]
Exp2_3
[3, 6, 12, 11, 4, 9]
[13, 2, 1, 5, 14, 0,15, 8, 7, 16, 17, 10]
Exp2_4
[0, 16, 7, 14, 5, 4]
[3, 1, 15, 10, 13, 6,12, 11, 17, 2, 9, 8]
Exp2_5
[3, 1, 15, 10, 13, 6]
[0, 16, 7, 14, 5, 4,12, 11, 17, 2, 9, 8]
Exp2_6
[12, 11, 17, 2, 9, 8]
[0, 16, 7, 14, 5, 4,3, 1, 15, 10, 13, 6]
Table B.1: Table wit indices of training images and test images for each experiment
Getting started with Amazon Web Services
Due to the size of the data and the deep neural network usage of GPU’s was neces-
sary. Amazon Web Services(AWS) oﬀer diﬀerent sizes and qualities of GPU’s instances
for money and their services were used for augmenting data and training deep neural
networks. The prices of the diﬀerent GPU’s varied across the diﬀerent regions in USA,
Europe and Asia, and we used the us-east-1 and the eu-west-1 region which had some of
the cheapest prices for the GPU’s we needed. Spot-Requests, a request for an instance
which is terminated when closed, were used for investigating diﬀerent parameters of
CNN’s and getting a feeling of CNN’s since one could save up to 70 % of normal price
when running a normal instance. The two major disadvantages using spot-requests are
that the GPU’s you want to use should be available and that that the instance type you
run can be interrupted when AWS runs out of spot capacity, that is when all the spot
instances of the type you want in a speciﬁc region have been requested for a normal
instance request. There was made a work line for AWS which basically consisted of one
shell script. The script connected to the instance, transferred the necessary ﬁles from
the pc to the instance, started on of the script on the instance and downloaded the
==PAGE:78==
68
B CNN
output from the script in the end. An indispensable working tool used in this process
was Amazon Command Line Interface.
1
2 class
FullModel(nn.Module):
3
4
def
__init__(self ,model ,num_classes ,loss):
5
super(FullModel ,self).__init__ ()
6
self.model = model
7
self.loss = loss
8
9
def
forward(self ,x,y):
10
11
output = self.model(x)
12
loss = self.loss(output ,y)
13
loss.backward ()
14
return out , torch.unsqueeze(loss ,0)
15
16 net=Unet(num_classes ,NumFil =16)
17
18 full_mod = FullModel(net[i],lossfunc)
19 full_mod = torch.nn.DataParallel(full_mod[i],output_device = 7).cuda ()
20
21 for
idx_batch in Indices:
22 x_batch = x_train[idx_batch ]. cuda (6)
23 y_batch = y_train[idx_batch ]. cuda (5)
Listing B.1: pseudo code for GPU memory optimazation wrapper
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX C
Data Augmentation
Figure C.1: Test and Train Dice scores for the rotation experiment.
.
.
Class, c
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1 −mean(Sindv(I0)c)
mean(Sindv(I8)c)
-0.160
0.146
-0.095
-3.700
-0.228
0.234
0.059
0.167
0.090
0.106
1 −std(Sindv(I0)c)
std(Sindv(I8)c)
-0.172
0.317
0.129
0.331
0.441
0.520
0.318
0.269
0.123
0.514
1 −
mean(Ic
0)
mean(A(I8)c)
3.779
0.116
-0.062
-0.682
-0.134
0.193
0.042
0.130
0.067
0.081
1 −
std(Ic
0)
std(A(I8)c)
-0.172
0.317
0.129
0.331
0.441
0.520
0.318
0.269
0.123
0.514
Table C.1: Relative diﬀerence between class intensity mean and standard deviatiation
within an image pair for the ﬁrst 10 classes that are in both data points when either
normalizing using Sindv or aligning using A. Here Ic
j is all intercities in image nr j that
has class label c
.
==PAGE:80==
70
C Data Augmentation
Figure C.2: Test and Train Dice scores for the elastic experiment.
Figure C.3: Test and Train Dice scores for the learned transformation experiment.
.
.
.
==PAGE:81==
C Data Augmentation
71
(a)
(b)
Figure C.4: (a) Worst prediction by rotation experiment, (b) Best prediction by rotation
experiment. In general: Left coloumn: Ground truth, Middle coloumn: Predictions,
Right coloumn: Predictions where the misclassiﬁed voxels are marked red. Note: For
estethic reasons the image has been padded with zeros such that each slice has the same
size.
Figure C.5: Algorithm proposed in [17] implemented in [13] used for integrating vθ ∈V
Test for learning rate
We decide to optimize the learning rate, lr. Testing on the ﬁve data point pairs from
before, (9, 16), (7, 1), (4, 14), (13, 15) and (12, 3), initially aligned using Aseg and using a
==PAGE:82==
72
C Data Augmentation
Figure C.6: Learning curves from training transformations of the data points 9,7,4,13,12
to resemble the data points 16,1,14,15,3 respectively using diﬀerent pre-processing meth-
ods. (α = 1, λ = 0, lr = 0.05). Note that the scaling of the y-axis is diﬀerent for each
pre-processing method.
loss function with only image loss and no regularization, α = 1 and λ = 0, and the same
stopping criterion as before, we train transformations using the ﬁve diﬀerent learning
rates: 0.005, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5. Preliminary tests indicated that the optimal lr would be
within this range.
Learning curves for the training of transformations for each point pair and each learning
rate is shown in Figure C.7. Note that the image loss plotted cannot be used to compare
the performance of the learned transformation for diﬀerent point pairs. It can however,
be used to compare performance for the same point pair with diﬀerent learning rates.
We see that training with a learning rate of 0.005, the learning process is not fully con-
verged within the enforced time frame of 75 iterations, while with a learning rate of 0.01
we almost have convergence. Training with a learning rate of 0.5 is more unstable, and
therefore stops before convergence.
Comparing the performance of the transformations in terms of image loss for the same
image pair, we see only a little diﬀerence. This is also the case when evaluating the
performance of the learned transformations in terms of the earlier deﬁned RRM and
RDI as seen in Figure C.8. Apart from the edge cases, where the training processes did
not fully converge, we also here see no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in performance in terms of
==PAGE:83==
C Data Augmentation
73
Figure C.7: Learning curves when training transformations with diﬀerent learning rates.
RRM and RDI. Looking at the learning curves in Figure C.7 we chose a learning rate
of 0.05 to be used for further training since this showed to have fully converged within
the desired time frame and was the most stable.
An interesting to note in Figure C.8 is that when we train a transformation of data
Figure C.8: Performance of transformations learned with diﬀerent learning rates.
point no. 13 and 12 to resemble data point no. 15 and 3 respectively, we see that the
learned transformations both have positive RRM scores but negative RDI regardless of
learning rate, meaning that for the learned transformations, the resemblance between
the transformed input and the target when putting equal emphasis on all pixels is in-
creased, while the class weighted pixel correspondence between the transformed input
and the target is decreased. This indicates that the setup with this loss function puts
more emphasis on resembling larger classes than smaller classes, even though the initial
idea with Aseg was to prevent this from happening.
==PAGE:84==
74
C Data Augmentation
Figure C.9: Learning curves from training transformations of the data points 9,7,4,13,12
to resemble the data points 16,1,14,15,3 respectively when including a segmentation loss
for diﬀerent values of α. (λ = 0, lr = 0.05). Note that the scaling of the y-axis is
diﬀerent for each value of α due to the large diﬀerence in magnitude og Limg and Lseg.
Figure C.10: Learning curves from training transformations of the data points 9,7,4,13,12
to resemble the data points 16,1,14,15,3 respectively when including a segmentation loss
weighted by diﬀerent values of α. (λ = 0, lr = 0.05). For each plot the components of
the total loss; αLimg - black, and (1 −α)Lseg - gray, are plotted explicitly.
==PAGE:85==
C Data Augmentation
75
Figure C.11: Learning curves from training transformations of the data points 9,7,4,13,12
to resemble the data points 16,1,14,15,3 respectively when including a regularization
term weighted diﬀerent values of λ. (α = 1, lr = 0.05).
Figure C.12: Performance of transformations learned using diﬀerent values of regular-
ization parameter λ (α = 1, lr = 0.05)
==PAGE:86==
76
C Data Augmentation
Figure C.13: Learning curves for all learned CPAB transformations. Each plot contains
learning curves from transformations with the same input data point. Note that the
scale of loss is diﬀerent from input to input due to Aseg
Figure C.14: Learning curves for the training of CPAB transformations that did not
appear to converge
==PAGE:87==
C Data Augmentation
77
Figure C.15: Learned values of θ plotted along the ﬁrst ﬁve principal components
==PAGE:88==
78
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX D
Learning Objectives
The learning objectives in bullet points
• Gain knowledge in Deep Learning
• Learn how to use Python
• Make a CNN for segmentation of brain images
• Gain an understanding of learned data augmentation
• Make a statistical to generate learned transformations
• Test a learned data augmentation scheme against a baseline without data augmen-
tation
• Test learned transformation against unlearned transformation
==PAGE:90==
80
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[1]
Ronneberger, O.,Fischer, P., and Brox, T. U-Net: Convolutional Networks for
Biomedical Image Segmentation. In: MICCAI 2015 (May 2015). arXiv: 1505 .
04597v1 [cs.CV] (cited on pages 2, 7, 10–12).
[2]
Rohlﬁng, T. Image similarity and tissue overlaps as surrogates for image regis-
tration accuracy: Widely used but unreliable. In: IEEE Transactions on Medical
Imaging 31.2 (February 2012), pages 153–163 (cited on page 3).
[3]
LeCun, Y., Boser, B., Denker, J.S., Henderson, D., Howard, R.E., Hubbard, W.,
and Jackel, L.D. Backpropagation Applied to Handwritten Zip Code Recognition.
AT&T Bell Laboratories. 1989 (cited on page 7).
[4]
Nielsen, M. Neural Networks and Deep Learning. 2018. url: http://neuralnet
worksanddeeplearning.com/ (cited on pages 8–10).
[5]
Milletari, F., Navab, N., and Ahmadi, S-A. V-Net: Fully Convolutional Neural
Networks for Volumetric Medical Image Segmentation. 2015. arXiv: 1606.04797v1
[cs.CV] (cited on pages 11, 12, 23, 26).
[6]
Kayalibay, B., Jensen, G., and Smagt, P. V. D. V-Net: Fully Convolutional Neural
Networks for Volumetric Medical Image Segmentation. 2017. arXiv: 1701.03056v2
[cs.CV] (cited on pages 11–15).
[7]
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recog-
nition. December 2015. arXiv: 1512.03385v1 [cs.CV] (cited on page 12).
[8]
Long, J., Shelhamer, E., and Darrell, T. Fully Convolutional Networks for Semantic
Segmentation. 2015. arXiv: 1411.4038v2 [cs.CV] (cited on page 12).
[9]
Isensee, F., Kickingereder, P., Wick, W., Bendszus, M., and Maier-Hein, K. H.
Brain Tumor Segmentation and Radiomics Survival Prediction: Contribution to
the BRATS 2017 Challenge. February 2018. arXiv: 1802.10508v1 [cs.CV] (cited
on pages 13, 16, 23, 26, 59).
[10]
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Identity Mappings in Deep Residual
Networks. July 2016. arXiv: 1603.05027v3 [cs.CV] (cited on page 15).
[11]
Cicek, O., Abdulkadir, A., Lienkamp, S., Brox, T., and Ronneberger, O. 3D U-
Net: Learning Dense Volumetric Segmentation from Sparse Annotation. June 2016.
arXiv: 1606.06650v1 [cs.CV] (cited on pages 23, 26, 59).
==PAGE:92==
82
Bibliography
[12]
Hauberg, S., Freifeld, O., Larsen, A. B. L, Fisher III, J. W., and Hansen, L. K.
Dreaming More Data: Class-dependent Distributions over Diﬀeomorphisms for
Learned Data Augmentation. In: Proceedings of the 19th International Confer-
ence on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics (June 2016), pages 342–350 (cited on
pages 23, 26, 41, 53, 59).
[13]
N. S. Detlefsen. libcpab. 2018. url: https://github.com/SkafteNicki/libcpab
(cited on pages 27, 35, 41, 47, 55, 71).
[14]
Freifeld, O., Hauberg, S., Batmanghelich, K., and Fisher III, J.W. Highly-expressive
spaces of well-behaved transformations: Keeping it simple. In: ICCV (December
2015). Santiago, Chile (cited on pages 27, 53).
[15]
Freifeld, O., Hauberg, S., Batmanghelich, K., and Fisher III, J. W. Supplemen-
tal Material for Transformations Based on Continuous Piecewise-Aﬃne Velocity
Fields. February 2016. url: http://www2.compute.dtu.dk/~sohau/papers/
freifeld_preprint2016/freifeld_CPAB_preprint_2016_supmat.pdf (cited
on pages 32, 34, 35).
[16]
Perko, L. Diﬀerential Equations and Dynamical Systems. 3rd edition. Springer
Science+Buisness Media, LLC, 2000. isbn: 978-0-387-95116-4 (cited on pages 33,
34).
[17]
Freifeld, O., Hauberg, S., Batmanghlich, K., and Fisher III, J.W. Transformations
Based on Continuous Piecewise-Aﬃne Velocity Fields. In: IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2017) (cited on pages 35, 36, 71).
[18]
Detlefsen, N.S., Freifeld, O., and Hauberg, S. Deep Diﬀeomorphic Transformer
Networks. In: Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)
(2018) (cited on page 35).
[19]
Higham, N.J. Computiting a Nearest Symmetric Positive Semideﬁnte Matrix. 1988.
url: http://www.maths.manchester.ac.uk/~higham/narep/narep126.pdf
(cited on page 54).
[20]
A. Fasih. nearestPD. 2017. url: https://gist.github.com/fasiha/fdb5cec
2054e6f1c6ae35476045a0bbd (cited on page 54).
[21]
Loosli, G., Canu, S., and Bottou, L. Training invariant support vector machines
using selective sampling. In: Large scale kernel machines (2017), pages 301–320
(cited on page 59).
