==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark - DTU
Integrated Process & Product Design:
Process-Based Entrainer Screening For
Extractive Distillation
Master Thesis
By:
Adem Rosenkvist Nielsen Aouichaoui (s134056)
M.Sc. Chemical Engineering
Supervised by:
Jens Abildskov
Jakob Kjøbsted Huusom
Seyed Soheil Mansouri
Process and Systems Engineering Center (PROSYS Research Centre)
Department of Chemical & Biochemical Engineering
January 27, 2019
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Extractive distillation is considered an important intensiﬁed separation processes. It is
capable of conducting separation that are not feasible through conventional distillation
by introducing an additional liquid compound in the column called entrainer. In fact it is
applied to achieve separations beyond the azeotropic compositions granted that a suitable
entrainer is present. The economic viability of such process is very much reliant on the
existence of such an entrainer. Traditionally, these entrainer were found on a trial an error
basis through experimentation. This is exhaustive, time consuming and might not yield
any success. In recent years, computer aided tools have been constructed to assist in the
search of suitable entrainers. These computer aided tools use a series of constraints and
target properties that the entrainer must keep to. However most of these properties are
based on heuristic measures that are not necessarily always true. An interesting prospect
is to develop a process model that can be incorporated in the product and thus achieve a an
entrainer based on on the evaluation of a process model. For extractive distillation these
models are rare and if available they are cumbersome to implement and rely on extensive
mathematical procedure. In this work, Computer-Aided Molecular Design program is
developed. The program is able to generate a multitude of feasible structures and predict
their pure properties as well as their properties within a mixture. As a novelty, a shortcut
model is Incorporated to investigate the performance of an entrainer candidate.
The
model consist of the ”Inﬁnitely Sharp Split (ISS)” by Petlyuk (2004). The model uses a
series of thermodynamic criteria to determine the minimum entrainer to distillate ratio.
Furthermore, the method is also able to calculate the corresponding value of the reﬂux
ratio. These two parameters can be used t evaluate the process economics. A low entrainer
to distillate ratio suggest less investment in procuring entrainers and less amount to be
supplied to the process. A low reﬂux ratio would indicate less operational cost by reducing
the cost of utilities. As far the the knowledge of the authors, this is the ﬁrst attempt
to incorporate this short-cut model into a Computer-Aided- Molecular design framework.
The Design Program is performed in the software GAMS. The constructed framework is
applied in an industrial relevant case consisting of the separation of the azeotropic system
acetone-methanol.
i
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This research originally stemmed from my passion for mathematical modelling, thermody-
namics and coding. This project is conducted as part of the ﬁnal assessment of the M.Sc.
in Chemical & Biochemical Engineering. The project was conducted at the PROSYS
(PROcess and SYStems Engineering) research centre of the department of Chemical &
Biochemical Engineering (KT) at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
Th completion of this work would not have been possible without the help of my supervi-
sors. Their help and guidance, suggestions and meaningful discussion as well as their vast
experience have been of valuable and was dearly appreciated. A special thanks go to my
main supervisor throughout my M.Sc. studies, Jens Abildskov. Countless meetings and
lengthy emails to plan and set the frame for my studies have truly been appreciated. I
hope I was not too much of a hassle. Another special thanks goes to Stefano Cignitti. His
help with issues regarding the GAMS software was life-saving, without which, the frame-
work would not be functioning. I would also like to thank Carina Gargalo and Yuqiu Chen
for their inputs about the GAMS software. Finally, I would like to express my gratitude
to Ivonne Rodriguez-Donis for a fantastic talk about the possible methods to implement
in this work and especially explaining the ISS method and providing working examples.
It has been a challenging period conducting this work and would have been unbearable if
not for the presence the people around me. They helped me pull through. Their support
has truly been invaluable. A special thanks goes to mi hermanos: Andres, Jorge and
Nail. The constant ﬂow of memes they supplied has brought me immense joy and lengthy
laughter. Another thanks goes to Thomas, Sussie, Simone and Chinmayi for helping keep
my spirit high and hearing my constant complaints. Last but not least, a big thanks
goes to my parents and especially my mother. I wouldn’t have been here without their
support.
I hereby declare that the work presented in this document is based on
research carried out by the authors:
Signature:
Date:
ii
==PAGE:4==
Nomenclature
Mathematical symbols:
Symbol
Units
Description
x
−
Liquid mole fraction
y
−
Vapour mole fraction
x′
−
Liquid mole fraction on entrainer free-basis
y′
−
Vapour mole fraction on entrainer free-basis
T
K
Temperature
Tm
K
Normal melting point
Tb
K
Normal boiling point
Tc
K
Critical temperature
P
kPa
Pressure
Pc
kPa
critical Pressure
P sat
kPa
Saturated vapour pressure
P 0
kPa
Reference presser (atmospheric pressure)
w
−
Accentric factor
E/D
−
Entrainer to distillate ratio
xiso
−
composition at isovolatility
xmin
−
camposition corresponding to the mnimum E/D
Sij
−
Selectivity
C
−
Capacity
Sinf
−
Selectivity at inﬁnite dilution A
N
−
Number of stages
R
−
Reﬂux ratio
k
−
group k
vk
−
Valency of group k
a
−
A
iii
==PAGE:5==
iv
Abbreviations:
PSWD
Pressure-Swing Distillation
THF
Tetrahydrofuran
EA
Ethyl Acetate
DMSO
Dimethyl sulfoxide
CAMD
Computer-Aided (or Computer-Assisted) Molecular Design
QSPR
Quantitative Structure-Property Relation
GC
Group Contribution
GAMS
The General Algebraic Modeling System
GCM
Group Contribution Method
IP
Isopropyl alcohol
DMF
Dimethylformamide
USD
U.S. Dollar
TAC
Total Annual Cost
TI
Topology Indices
SD
Signature Descriptors
MIP
Mixed Integer Problem
MILP
Mixed Integer Linear Problem
MINLP
Mixed Integer NonLinear Problem
NLP
NonLinear Problem
UNIFAC
UNIversal Functional-group Activity Coeﬃcients
VLE
Vapour-Liquid Equilibrium
ISS
Inﬁnitely sharp Split
min
minimum
max
maximum
ICAS
Integrated Computer Aided System
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Nomenclature
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Importance Of Separation Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
Advanced Distillation Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.3
Chemical product design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2
Problem Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2.2
Project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2.3
Gantt Chart
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Literature Review
12
2.1
Extractive Distillation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.1
Types Of Extractive Distillation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Entrainer Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3
Computer-Aided Molecular Design: CAMD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3.1
CAMD Techniques And Formulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3.2
CAMD applications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.3.3
Solution Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3
Methods
30
3.1
CAMD Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2
Model Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2.1
Structure Model: Odele and Macchietto (1993) . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2.2
Property Model: GCM by Constantinou and Gani (1994) . . . . .
35
3.2.3
Thermodynamic Model: UNIFAC by Fredenslund (1975)
. . . . .
35
3.2.4
Mixture Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.5
Process Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4
Implementation & Validation
43
4.1
Structural model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.1.1
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.1.2
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2
GCM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2.1
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2.2
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.3
VLE-Calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3.1
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
v
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
vi
4.3.2
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.3.3
Implementation of the saturated pressure calculation . . . . . . . .
51
4.3.4
Validation of he Saturated vapour calculation . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.3.5
Implementation of VLE calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.3.6
Validation of the VLE calculation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.3.7
Implementation of mixture Property calculations . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.4
Process model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.4.1
Fenske model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.4.2
ISS method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5
Case Studies
65
5.1
CAMD Framework: Acetone-methanol separation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.1.1
Problem deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.1.2
CAMD constraint selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.1.3
CAMD formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.1.4
Solution strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6
Results & Discussions
71
6.1
Benchmark entrainers for acetone methanol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.2
Entrainer design for acetone-methanol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
Conclusions
79
Appendices
81
Appendix A - All structural feasible molecules
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
Appendix B - Parameter plots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
101
Appendix B - GAMS Code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
104
Bibliography
104
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Many of the recent scientiﬁc and technological developments in the last century have
been catalysed by the development of faster and stronger computer tools. These tools
are capable of solving complex problems in nearly every subject. They have been used
in sociology to predict human behaviour such as the public reaction towards a speciﬁc
product or policy [81]. They have also been employed in environmental sciences, where
they have been able to forecast natural disasters such as the trajectory of tornadoes [61].
This has made it possible for the authorities the initiate contingency plans in time to
reduce material and human loss. In physics, supercomputers have been used to analyse
data from the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) where particles collide more than 500 times
per second in the hope of shedding some light on a series of fundamental questions such
as the deep structure of space and time. In the ﬁelds of biology and medicine, computer
aided tools for the detection of diseases have been developed such as the detection of
cancer types in their early stages [51]. These are but a few of the ﬁelds that have been
inﬂuenced by the development of computer science. Other ﬁelds include economics, con-
struction, mathematics and supply chain management.
The processing engineering industry and speciﬁcally the chemical engineering ﬁeld is no
exception from the inﬂuence of the advancement in computing system technology. The
“Amundson” report issued by the National Research Council of the U.S in 1987, suggested
a list of seven directions where process engineering would develop in the 21st century [62].
Computer assisted process engineering (CAPE) was among these directions. This has in-
deed come true since then. Each year, series of entire conferences, conference sessions and
symposia are dedicated to the discussion and presentation of the newest developments
within the application of computers in the chemical engineering ﬁeld. Such conferences
include but are not limited to “PSE: Process Systems Engineering”,“ESCAPE: The Euro-
pean Symposium on Computer Aided Process Engineering” and “FOCAPD: Foundations
of Computer Aided Process Operations / Chemical Process Control”. The extent of this
inﬂuence can also be seen through the dedication of an international journal on computer
applications in chemical engineering titled “Computers & chemical engineering”. In fact,
the use of computers in chemical engineering have become a discipline on it own that
has given birth to “Computer aided” ﬁelds within chemical engineering such as computer
aided process design, computer aided process control and computer aided product de-
sign. These ﬁelds mainly focus on the modelling of unit operations, the simulation of
entire processes and the investigation of the process dynamics to study their operability.
Other focuses also include process synthesis, process integration and process intensiﬁ-
cation. These ﬁelds have become even more important nowadays due to the increasing
pressure on the available world resources. This has pushed industries to manage and
reduce their energy consumption while achieving similar or higher production capacity,
resulting in the development of highly specialised and complex processes. These processes
are referred to as “intensiﬁed processes”.
1
==PAGE:9==
1.1. BACKGROUND
2
Moulijn et. al. deﬁned process intensiﬁcation as as “Any chemical engineering devel-
opment that leads to a substantially smaller, cleaner, safer, and more energy eﬃcient
technology” [84]. These processes have such a degree of complexity that computer-aided
tools are necessary to design and develop them. These tools are needed because the design
methods are usually based on large algorithms that need to evaluate and solve a series
of constitutive equations describing the dynamics of the system at hand.
Within the
chemical engineering ﬁeld, separation processes have especially been targeted by process
intensiﬁcation, resulting in processes such as reactive distillation, divided wall columns,
azeotropic distillation and extractive distillation. However, these tools are not exclusively
used for process design, and are of equal importance in product design. A product can
be speciﬁcally design/engineered to satisfy desired properties such as the ability to carry
heat (refrigerants), to dissolve another compound (solvents) or oﬀer protection in speciﬁc
environments (coatings). The use of computer assisted tools within separation processes
and chemical product design is motivated and illustrated in the following section by un-
derlining the huge importance of these processes and the opportunities computer-aided
tools oﬀer. These will set the stage for the problem formulation in focus in this work.
1.1
Background
1.1.1
Importance Of Separation Processes
Separation processes are processes intended to separate a mixture feed into its con-
stituents. Based on the nature of the feed and the principle by which the separation
is realised, several types of separation processes can be distinguished. Mechanical sepa-
ration processes such as centrifugation or sedimentation are applied if the feed mixture
contains immiscible phases. However if the the feed mixture exists as a homogeneous
phase other separation techniques with diﬀerent nature must be used. In these processes,
the constituents are forced to separate into diﬀerent spacial locations with a given process
equipment. All separation process can be related to either of the following techniques:
separation by phase creation (e.g. distillation), separation by phase addition (e.g. ex-
traction), separation by barrier (e.g. membrane ﬁltration), separation by solid agent (e.g.
adsorption) or separation by force ﬁeld or gradient (e.g. centrifugation). However more
advanced separation processes combine some of these techniques together e.g. the combi-
nation of phase creation (distillation) and phase addition (in the form of a mass separating
agent) to form extractive distillation or the combination of phase creation (distillation),
phase addition (mass separating agent) and a barrier (ﬁltration) in azeotropic distillation.
In general, separation processes have been of constant interest for process intensiﬁcation.
The reason for this is the vital role they play in modern human life, highlighted by
the amount of energy dedicated to their operating them. Separation processes in the
chemical industry cover close to 15% of the world energy consumption [80]. Distillation
covers a big part of this consumption. In fact, it covers about 50% of the U.S. energy
consumption of separation processes [80]. In principle, distillation exploits the diﬀerence
in the relative volatility between the components in a given mixture [43] and is one the
most energy intensive processes as reported by the U.S. department of energy [89]. The
relative energy usage of the diﬀerent industrial processes can be seen in ﬁg. 1.1.
==PAGE:10==
1.1. BACKGROUND
3
Figure 1.1: Relative Energy use by various separation processes [89].
Process intensiﬁcation has opened the door for possibilities, previously unattainable by
conventional processes. As an example, conventional distillation is not able to fully sep-
arate some mixtures. This is due to azeotrope formation between the components. A
mixture forming an azeotrope exhibits a constant boiling point for which the vapor and
liquid phases have the same composition and no further separation is attainable using
conventional distillation. Azeotropes are the result of the mixture deviating from ideal-
ity. This deviation can either be due to strong attractive forces between the components
which will result in maximum boiling azeotrope [55], or be the result of strong repulsive
forces between the molecules in the liquid mixture [55]. This results in a minimum boiling
azeotrope. The product loss resulting from this, constitute an untapped resource which is
undesirable from an economic and a sustainability perspective. To tap into these poten-
tial resources, advanced distillation schemes have been developed. Such schemes include
pressure-swing distillation, azeotropic distillation and extractive distillation. In the fol-
lowing, the working principle and the industrial application of each of these techniques
are illustrated.
1.1.2
Advanced Distillation Techniques
Pressure-Swing Distillation (PSWD)
Some azeotropic systems exhibit a particular sensitivity towards change in pressure [12].
For these systems, PSWD can be an attractive method of separation. Particularly because
it avoids contamination eﬀects associated with the addition of a separating agent. The
process conﬁguration for this type of distillation consists of two columns operating at
diﬀerent pressures.
If the system forms a minimum boiling azeotrope, the operating
pressure of the ﬁrst column is lower than than of the second column [22]. The inverse is
==PAGE:11==
1.1. BACKGROUND
4
true for the maximum boiling azeotropic systems. The jump in the azeotropic composition
between the two columns results in obtaining 2 pure component streams along with a third
stream containing a mixture of azeotropic composition. This stream can then be recycled
as feed to the ﬁrst column. Such column conﬁguration can be seen in ﬁg. 1.2.
Figure 1.2: Column arrangement in pressure-swing distillation for minimum and
maximum boiling azeotropes [22].
Some examples of the application of PSWD in industry are shown in table 1.1.
Table 1.1: Examples of industrial application of PSWD
Mixture
Process discritpion
Ref
Acetone
-
Methanol
The mixture forms a minimum boiling azeotrope at 1 atm at
[22]
a temperature of 328K. Increasing the pressure to 10 atm, the
azeotrope is shifted to a 37.5 mol% of acetone at a 408 K.
Purity of 99.5 mol% for methanol and 99.4 mol% for
acetone were achieved.
Water
-
tetrahydrofuran (THF)
This system forms an azeotrope at 1.01 bar with 82.3 mol%
[48].
THF. At 7.9 bar, the composition is shifted to 63.9 mol% THF.
PSWD has produced a product purity of 99.9 mol% and
99.0 mol% for THF and water respectively.
Ethyl acetate (EA)
-
ethanol
A minimum boiling azeotope is formed at a composition of at
[100]
55.5 mol% EA and at a temperature of 344.9 K. Deploying a
ﬁrst column operating at 6 atm and a second column operating
at 0.5 atm, product purity beyond 99.5 %mol is achieved for
both compounds.
One major concern in using PSWD is the fact that not all azeotropes are susceptible to
signiﬁcant changes with pressure. PSWD is also associated with high compressor duties
needed to displace the azeotrope. To overcome these disadvantages, azeotropic or extrac-
tive distillation can be used. These two processes are characterised by the addition of an
extra mass separating agent known as an ”entrainer” to the process. The main purpose of
this component is to alter the relative volatility existing between the components forming
the azeotrope [43].
==PAGE:12==
1.1. BACKGROUND
5
Azeotropic Distillation
Depending on whether the added agent causes the formation of an immiscible liquid
phase, the azeotropic distillation can be distinguished as homogeneous or heterogeneous
[12]. In heterogeneous azeotropic distillation, the entrainer forms a low boiling azeotrope
and a phase split (two liquid phases). The entrainer is mixed with the feed and fed into a
distillation column [43]. Due to the formation of minimum boiling azeotrope, the heavy
key can be easily separated as the bottom product [12], while the light key along with the
entrainer leave the column as top product. Since the top products are not miscible, the
components can be separated using a decanter. The entrainer can thus be recycled back
to the feed of the distillation column along with a make-up stream, since small losses of
the entrainer is inevitable. An illustration of such conﬁguration can be seen in ﬁg. 1.3.
For homogeneous azeotropic distillation, two mass separating agents are employed. The
entrainer is fed with the azeotropic mixture. The entrainer forms a low boiling azeotrope
with one of the components and is separated as overhead product in the ﬁrst column. The
bottom product is a pure stream of the remaining component. The entrainer is separated
in the overhead stream using liquid-liquid extraction and thereby the introduction of the
second mass separating agent. The new resulting mixture should then be separated using
a second column. It is a requirement that the volatility is suﬃciently diﬀerent so the
can be separated into pure product streams. The solvent can then be recycled for the
liquid-liquid extraction process [47] [43]. A schematic of a typical azeotropic distillation
can be seen in ﬁg. 1.3.
Figure 1.3: Typical Homogeneous (left) and heterogeneous (right) azeotropic dis-
tillation schematics [43].
There are many examples of the use of azeotropic distillation to overcome the chal-
lenges presented by azeotrope formation. An important application is the production
of anhydrous ethanol which is of special importance in the production of biofuels. The
ethanol-water mixture forms a minimum boiling azeotrope at atmospheric pressure. The
azeotropic composition is 89 mol% ethanol. Cyclohexane can be used as a heterogeneous
entrainer. The process schematic is identical to the one presented in ﬁg. 1.3. The bottom
product of the ﬁrst column mainly comprises of ethanol with a composition of 99.6 mol%.
The bottom product of the second column is pure water with very small traces of ethanol
and the solvent. The top product which contains ethanol and water is recycled to the
ﬁrst column [8].
==PAGE:13==
1.1. BACKGROUND
6
Extractive distillation
Similarly to azeotropic distillation, extractive distillation necessitates the addition of an
entrainer. The entrainer alters the relative volatility of the azeotropic components without
creating any new azeotropes or allowing phase split when it is added [12]. In extractive
distillation there is a distinction between whether the entrainer used has a higher, an
intermediate, or a lower boiling temperature compared to the the original mixture. This
distinction results in diﬀerent process conﬁguration based on the type of entrainer. The
typical extractive distillation conﬁgurations for a binary azeotropic mixture comprises
two successive distillation columns. The ﬁrst one is called the ”extractive” column, while
the second is called the ”recovery” column [32]. The entrainer is fed into the extractive
column on a feed stage located close to the top of the column. This is due to the fact that
the altering of the relative volatility predominantly occurs in the liquid phase and also to
insure that it is present in appreciable concentration in every tray [12]. The component
having the highest volatility in presence of the entrainer leaves the extractive column at
the top as a pure stream. The entrainer and the remaining component are fed into the
recovery column where the entrainer is recovered and recycled to the extractive column.
Depending on whether the entrainer is the heavy boiling component or not, the entrainer
can either leave the top of the recovery column or the bottom of the recovery column.
Heavy boiling entrainers are usually more desirable due to the fact that no additional
energy is needed to evaporate them in the recovery column [49]. The typical process
conﬁguration for extractive distillation can be seen in ﬁg. 1.4.
Figure 1.4: extractive distillation conﬁguration (left:heavy entrainer, right:light
entrainer) [32]
An example is the acetone-methanol system system, which forms an azeotrope at 328 K
with a 77.6 mol% acetone. A series of solvents have been used in extractive distillation
to achieve high purity (minimum 99.5 mol % for both components) [17]. The entrainers
used include water, DMSO and chlorobenzene. An extensive overview of the diﬀerent
systems to which extractive distillation is applied and the respective entrainers used can
be found in the literature review section or in the paper by Gerbaud et al. (2018) [92].
All three separation techniques oﬀer the possibility to achieve product purity beyond
the azeotropic composition. Nevertheless, each process is associated with some advan-
tages and disadvantages. Pressure-swing distillation is only applicable if the azeotrope
is pressure-sensitive and in some cases a very high pressure is needed to displace the
==PAGE:14==
1.1. BACKGROUND
7
azeotrope signiﬁcantly. Thus resulting in high compressor operating cost. On the other
hand, azeotropic distillation and extractive distillation can be operated at atmospheric
pressure. The addition of the entrainer, however, results in additional cost: cost of the
entrainer and an additional distillation column to recover the entrainer. The use of an
entrainer could also increase the risk of contamination. Several studies, however, have
shown that if a suitable entrainer is available, then extractive distillation could prove to be
the most advantageous of these technologies from an operational and economic perspec-
tive [55]. The choice of a suitable entrainer, constitute a major challenge for extractive
distillation as it is considered the deciding factor on the economic feasibility of the pro-
cess. Therefore, many eﬀorts have been dedicated to address this issue. The process of
designing or selecting an entrainer is considered a chemical product design problem.
1.1.3
Chemical product design
By deﬁnition, product design is the process of translating a set of needs into a product
[11]. Chemical product design is therefore the procedure ”of ﬁnding a chemical product
that exhibits certain set of functional properties (the needs) [25]. In terms of chemical
products, the product can either be a single chemical, a mixture of chemicals or a formu-
lation of active ingredients and additives [27]. The identity of the product is unknown but
its properties are well deﬁned [24]. This type of design is referred to as ”reverse property
prediction”. In essence, it is the ability to determine the structure of the molecule based
on its properties [24]. The product function or performance can be related to some of
its properties. An example of this is refrigerants. The heat capacity of refrigerants have
major impact on their ability to carry heat. However in some cases, a clear-cut relation
between properties and performance is not always available. Therefore the product can-
didates are usually applied in the process they are intended to an evaluated based on
that. Adjustments can also be implemented on the intended process to accommodate
the obtained product. This underline the importance of being able to measure the suit-
ability of a product not only by its properties but also by a performance metric. The
interconnection between the product design and process design is illustrated in ﬁg. 1.5.
Figure 1.5: Interconnection between product and process design/application [27]
==PAGE:15==
1.1. BACKGROUND
8
Diﬀerent approaches have been developed to solve the product design problem. These
approaches include experiments, databases, heuristics or model based approaches [99]. A
schematic of the diﬀerent product design approaches can be seen in ﬁg. 1.6.
Figure 1.6: A schematic of the diﬀerent approaches to the chemical product design
problem
Each approach has its advantages and disadvantages. Conducting experiments has usually
been based on trial and error, which can be tedious, time consuming and success is not
always guaranteed. In addition, this approach can be limited by the ﬁnancial resources
available to acquire such products. Even if this approach is successful in generating a
suitable candidate, there is no guarantee that it is the optimal solution. The experimen-
tal approach is however a real reﬂection of the reality and the real performance of a given
product and is thus vital for validating of the obtained product [99]. Using databases
oﬀers access to a large amount of available chemical products. Most registered properties
are reliable and can generate candidates fast based on desired properties. A disadvantage
is that it is mainly pure component properties that are available in databases, while mix-
ture properties, such as as selectivity are rarely found in databases [99]. Heuristics oﬀer a
fast, easy and inexpensive solution to a given design problem. The downside is the need
for ”know-how” concerning the process and product. Additionally, heuristic measures lack
theoretical basis and are thus of limited applicability [99]. The last approach is a model-
based search technique that applied mathematical models to describe the design problem
in terms of properties. This requires the existence of validated mathematical models to
estimate all the required properties [27]. This approach is capable of generating a list of
feasible candidates that can be tested and evaluated with regard to process performance
in a fast and eﬃcient manner. These models represent computer aided molecular design
(CAMD) tools. The models used are based on the concept of relating the structure of
of a compound to its properties, also known as QSPR (Quantitative Structure-Property
==PAGE:16==
1.2. PROBLEM FORMULATION
9
Relationships (QSPRs). QSPRs are semi-empirical mathematical models that link phys-
ical, chemical and thermodynamic properties to the molecular structure [99]. TA few of
these methods are signature descriptors, topology indices and group contribution methods
[2]. The ability to describe the product design problem in terms of mathematical models
oﬀers another advantage which is the ability to evaluate the performance of the product
in a given process. This requires the availability of a process model. Should this be the
case, then the design problem can be formulated as an integrated product-process design
problem, where the product is not solely evaluated through its properties but also by its
performance.
In summary, the importance of separation processes and especially extractive distillation
has been demonstrated. Some of the challenges associated with extractive distillation
have been presented, of which the entrainer selection is the most important. The en-
trainer selection is a product design problem for which computer-aided tools might oﬀer
signiﬁcant help. It is in this context that the problem formulation in the following section
is considered.
1.2
Problem Formulation
1.2.1
Problem Statement
The feasibility of extractive distillation is heavily dependent on the availability of an
eﬃcient entrainer capable of breaking the azeotrope existing between the components of
a given mixture. The entrainer must posses a series of properties that qualiﬁes it be used in
the extractive distillation processes. It is therefore of paramount importance to be able to
quickly screen the available candidates for those that clearly do not have these properties
and thus reducing the search space considerably. These candidates should then be ranked
based on some process metric that reﬂects either its performance or the economics of
the process. Therefore, the objective of this work is the develop a CAMD tool to screen
a deﬁned search space for promising entrainers to used in extractive distillation. This
screening should be based not only on the product properties but also on its performance
in the process (integrated product-process design).
The tool will be developed on a
conceptual level and then implemented in a suitable software. The software chosen for
this work is GAMS (The General Algebraic Modeling System), which is a software used to
formulated mathematical models and solve complex numerical problems through advanced
algorithms.
1.2.2
Project plan
The project problem will be divided into sub-problems or sub-tasks to manage the com-
plexity of the problem but also to provide an overview of the diﬀerent parts and stages
of the project. The project work-ﬂow will be reported in a Gantt chart and the deadline
for the partial reports will be set within. The project tasks are deﬁned in the following.
Task 0: Problem formulation
The ﬁrst part consist of formulating the project problem and establish the aims and
objectives of the projects.
==PAGE:17==
1.2. PROBLEM FORMULATION
10
Task 1: Literature Review
The second part of the project will consist of a literature review on the uses of extractive
distillation and the existing methods for entrainer selection. This will serve to establish
an overview on existing methods to perform the molecular design and the diﬀerent target
properties.
Task 2: Design framework
A framework to handle the entrainer design problem is to be established. This frame-
work will provide a systematic approach to manage the complexity of the integrated
product-process design problem. The formulation of the entrainer design problem must
be developed and the diﬀerent methods to formulate and solve the design problem must
be identiﬁed. The following sub-tasks are planned.
a Establishing a Design framework suitable for the entrainer design problem.
b Apply the framework on the entrainer design problem.
c Identify the methods to describe the entrainer from a product design perspective.
d Identify the methods to describe the entrainer from a process design perspective.
Task 3: Implementation & validation of the CAMD tool
The formulated design problem and the supporting methods and models are implemented
in GAMS and validated through sanity checks, data from the litterature and cases studies.
The second part of the project is dedicated to the extractive distillation process design.
The process design covers the extractive column as well as the recovery column.
An
investigation is performed of short-cut methods that can provide process insights for
economic evaluation. The following sub-tasks are planned.
a Model Implementation.
b Model validation.
c Solving an entrainer design problem through a case study.
1.2.3
Gantt Chart
The decomposed problems have been reported in a Gantt chart to monitor and plan the
progress of the work at hand. The Gantt chart can be seen in ﬁg. 1.7.
==PAGE:18==
1.2. PROBLEM FORMULATION
11
Year
2018
2019
Week
35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 1
2
3
4
Task 0
Task 1
Task 2
Task 2.a
Task 2.b
Task 2.c
Task 2.d
Task 3
Task 3.a
Task 3.b
Task 3.c
Figure 1.7: Gantt Chart illustrating the project plan.
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Literature Review
This chapter serves as a short literature review of the general aspects of extractive dis-
tillation and especially the solvent selection procedure as well as the diﬀerent CAMD
techniques applied in the chemical product design ﬁeld. The advantages and disadvan-
tages of the diﬀerent selection criteria and the design techniques will be discussed. This
will set the stage for the selection of suitable methods for determining entrainers.
2.1
Extractive Distillation
In this section, the technology of extractive distillation is reviewed. The diﬀerent pro-
cess conﬁgurations and types of extractive distillation are presented. A more thorough
overview of the application of this process in an industrial context is also given.
2.1.1
Types Of Extractive Distillation
A distinction between the operating mode of the extractive distillation can be made; the
process can either operate in a semi-batch or as a continuous process. The conﬁguration
in both operating modes changes depending on the nature of the the entrainer used. This
is discussed in the following.
Semi-Batch Operation
The entrainer used in an extractive distillation process can either have a signiﬁcantly
higher boiling point than the azeotropic pair and thus be denoted“heavy entrainer” or
have a signiﬁcantly lower boiling point and thus be called “light entrainer”. Based on
the type of entrainer used, two conﬁgurations are suggested.
For the use of a light
entrainer, a batch stripper is used. The entrainer is fed in an intermediate stage of the
column. The section above the feed stage makes up the extractive section, whereas the
section below makes up the stripping section. One of the components is stripped from
the original mixture, while the remaining compound can be removed from the bottom
[32]. This conﬁguration is usually used when the original mixture contains high-boiling-
point components or the components are heat sensitive. When using a heavy entrainer,
a batch rectiﬁer column is used. Similarly to the other conﬁguration, the entrainer is fed
at an intermediate location. The section above is called the rectiﬁcation section, while
the the section below is the extractive section. The mixture is fed into the reboiler. This
type is used if the mixture has a low boiling point [32]. An illustration of the process
conﬁguration can be seen in ﬁg. 2.1. Both conﬁgurations have been extensively studied
and used. Table 2.1 contains a short overview of the applications where batch extractive
distillation has been employed.
12
==PAGE:20==
2.1. EXTRACTIVE DISTILLATION
13
Figure 2.1: Semi-Batch conﬁguration for extractive distillation (left: heavy en-
trainer, right: light entrainer)[32]
Table 2.1: Industrial application of extractive distillation operated as semi-batch
Mixture(A-B)
Entrainer (E)
Reference
ethanol-water
methanol
[91]
IPA-water
DMSO
[96]
methyl acetate-cyclohexane
carbon tetrachloride
[50]
chloroform-ethyl acetate
2-chlorobutane
[50]
cyclohexane-1-propanol
DMF
[85]
ethanol-water
ethylene glycol
[39]
acetone-methanol
water
[75]
Continuous Extractive Distillation
Extractive distillation operated as a continuous process is the core focus of this thesis.
Thus, a more extensive review is presented. Firstly, a description of the diﬀerent process
conﬁgurations is given followed by an overview of the industrial application. Finally, the
comparison between continuous extractive distillation with the remaining technologies
used to separate azeotropic mixtures is presented. This comparison will motivate the
interest in the technology at hand.
The distinction between using a heavy or a light entrainer is visible from the column
conﬁgurations of the processes. The important feature of extractive distillation is that the
entrainer feed location diﬀers from the azeotropic mixture feed stage. For both entrainer
types, the extractive column is divided into three parts: an extractive section that is
located between the two feed stages, a rectiﬁcation section that is located above the
extractive section and a stripping section that is located below the extractive section.
The ﬁgure presented in the previous chapter is revisited below.
==PAGE:21==
2.1. EXTRACTIVE DISTILLATION
14
Figure 2.2: Typical conﬁguration for extractive distillation (left: heavy entrainer,
right: light entrainer) [32]
In conﬁguration (a), the heavy entrainer interacts with one of the compounds and reduces
its relative volatility which makes it possible to obtain the other component as a pure
product at the top of the extractive column. The entrainer and the remaining compound
are then separated in the recovery column where the entrainer is the bottom product.
The advantage of using a heavy entrainer is the fact that there is no need for extensive
energy supply to evaporate it. The entrainer is then recycled into the extractive column.
It is essential that the top product in this column is as pure as possible. Impurities in the
bottom product of the recovery column are not of concern as this stream proceeds to the
extractive column.
In conﬁguration (b), the light entrainer interacts with one of the azeotropic components
and increases its relative volatility. This will result in a top product consisting of the
entrainer and one of the components of the original mixture. The remaining component
from the original azeotropic mixture can then be obtained as the bottom product of the
extractive column. In the recovery column, the entrainer is obtained as the top product
and recycled to the extractive column while the remaining component from the original
mixture is removed from the bottom.
The popularity and importance of this process is highlighted by the numerous systems
and mixtures it has been applied to in an industrial context. In fact it has been used to
separate both maximum- and minimum-boiling azeotropes using two types of entrainers.
Table 2.2 presents a list of mixtures forming maximum boiling azeotropes and where a
light entrainer has been used.
Table 2.2: Example of maximum boiling azeotropes and applied light entrainers
Mixture
Azeotrope
Entrainer
Purity
References
Acetone (A)
-
chloroform (B)
xA=0.36
dichloromethane
0.99
0.99
[73]
Methyl isobutyl ketone (A)
-
Propanoic acid (B)
xA=0.57
dimethylformamide
0.99
0.99
[73]
==PAGE:22==
2.1. EXTRACTIVE DISTILLATION
15
Table 2.3 shows an overview of systems forming maximum boiling azeotropes where a
heavy entrainer have been used. The table also showcases the azeotropic composition of
the mixtures and the product purity obtained by using the entrainer.
Table 2.3: Example of maximum boiling azeotropes and applied heavy entrainers
Mixture
Azeotrope
Entrainer
Purity
xA
xB
References
Acetone(A)-chloroform(B)
xA=0.96
Benzene
0.99
0.99
[72]
Toluene
0.99
0.99
[72]
DMSO
0.995
0.995
[55]
Dimethylformamide
0.995
0.995
[1]
water(A)-ethylene diamine(B)
xA=0.45
1,3-propandiol
0.997
0.997
[98]
1,2-propandiol
0.997
0.997
[98]
1,4-butandiol
0.997
0.997
[98]
Table 2.5 and Table 2.4 show minimum boiling azeotropic systems where heavy and light
entrainers have been applied respectively.
Table 2.4: Example of minimum boiling azeotropes and applied light entrainers
Mixture
Azeotrope
Entrainer
Purity
xA
xB
References
ethanol(A)-water(B)
xA0.8970
methanol
0.99
0.99
[91]
acetone
0.998
0.998
[46]
ethanol(A)-toluene(B)
xA=0.8152
acetone
0.99
0.99
[73]
2-propanol(A)-water(B)
xA=0.6740
methanol
0.998
0.998
[46]
Based on the industrial applications presented above, it is evident that the same sys-
tem can be separated by either using a light or a heavy entrainer. In a similar way, a
light entrainer for a speciﬁc system can act as a light entrainer in another system. In all
applications, a product purity beyond the azeotropic composition is obtained. This not
only underline the wide spread usage of the process but also the versatility of the process
(diﬀerent entrainers same process). To further underline the beneﬁts of using extrac-
tive distillation, a case based comparison between the diﬀerent technologies to separate
azeotropic mixtures is provided in the following.
==PAGE:23==
2.1. EXTRACTIVE DISTILLATION
16
Table 2.5: Example of minimum boiling azeotropes and applied heavy entrainers
Mixture
Azeotrope
Entrainer
Purity
xA
xB
References
ethanol(A)-water(B)
xA=0.8970
ethylene glycol
0.995
0.995
[54]
Propylene glycol
0.995
0.995
[63]
glycerol
0.995
0.995
[29]
tetrahydrofuran (A)-water (B)
xA=0.817
propylene glycol
0.995
0.995
[95]
ethylene glycol
0.999
0.005
[18]
DMSO
0.9999
0.9999
[33]
1,2-propandiol
0.9975
0.9975
[33]
glycerol
0.985
0.985
[33]
Acetonitrile (A)-water (B)
xA=0.6900
DMSO
0.999
0.999
[78]
dichloromethane
0.9995
0.9995
[87]
ethylene glycol
0.999
0.999
[78]
Acetone (A)-methanol (B)
xA=0.7600
water
0.994
0.995
[88]
2-propanol
0.995
0.995
[45]
ethanol
0.995
0.995
[45]
DMSO
0.994
0.995
[54]
Butandiol
0.995
0.995
[45]
propandiol
0.995
0.995
[45]
ethylene glycol
0.995
0.995
[45]
p-xylene
0.995
0.995
[82]
Extractive distillation: the go to process for azeotropic separation
In many cases, extractive distillation oﬀers an attractive option regarding cost and en-
ergy savings in comparison with pressure swing and azeotropic distillation. Luyben made
a comparative study of the cost of separating acetone and chloroform using extractive
distillation (entrainer: DMSO) and pressure-swing [55]. The estimated annual cost of
==PAGE:24==
2.1. EXTRACTIVE DISTILLATION
17
operating the pressure-swing process was found to be over 4 billion USD , while extrac-
tive distillation could be operated with less than a quarter of that amount [55]. This is
not surprising since the cost of compression and maintaining the column under pressure
will result in major equipment and energy costs. Luyben made another study using the
example of methanol recovery using water in the TAME reactive distillation process [56].
This study showed that the extractive distillation would oﬀer a reduction of the capital
investment of 40% (from 4.25 billion USD to 2.44 Billion USD) while the energy saving
would reach 60% (from 6.92 billion USD to 2.22 billion USD). The total annual cost is
thus reduced by 65% from 8.34 billion USD to only 30.04 billion USD [56]. Modla et.
al. [59] made the comparison based on the acetone-methanol azeotrope. Using water as
the entrainer, the extractive distillation still oﬀered lower total annual cost than pressure
swing. Even though extractive distillation does in general oﬀer cost savings compared to
pressure swing, it is not always the case. This can be due to two reasons: the azeotrope
is very pressure-sensitive or the entrainer used is too expensive. Such case were studied
by Lladosa et al.[53] for the separation of di-n-propyl ether and n-propyl alcohol [53]. In
this case extractive distillation uses 50% more in capital investment and resulting in a
total annual cost reduction of 30% (0.64 million Euros to 4.45 Million euros) for 12,000
ton/year plant[53].
The same trends are seen when comparing azeotropic distillation
with extractive distillation. Zhao et al.[101] studied the economics for the separation of a
ternary azeotrope made of ethanol, toluene and water using both processes. The entrainer
for the extractive distillation was glycerol, while the heterogeneous azeotropic distillation
used the toluene present as entrainer itself. For the proposed capacity of 1 ton/h of the
azeotropic mixtures, the total annual cost of the the extractive distillation process was
30% less than the one for azeotropic distillation [101]. The ethanol dehydration process
has also been used as a benchmark to evaluate the cost diﬀerence between azeotropic
and extractive distillation (using ethylene glycol) [8]. With a plant capacity of 300 cubic
meters per day, the study showed that savings of around 30% in the capital cost (from
around 3 million to 2 million USD) [8]. An important feature of the extractive distilla-
tion that can result in cost savings is the use of heavy entrainers that do not need to be
evaporated in the recovery column.
Even though extractive distillation does oﬀer some attractive savings on the capital and
operational costs, there are some challenges associated with this technology. These chal-
lenges reside mainly in the choice of a suitable entrainer. In fact, this can be the deciding
factor in the feasibility of a process [49]. In the industrial case of the separation of water
and tetrahydrofutan (THF), three entrainers were evaluated [40] for a 100 kmol per hour
production capacity. The evaluated entrainers were ethylene glycol (EG), glycerol (GL)
and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). The total annual cost associated with EG was the low-
est. Compared with DMSO, it oﬀered 16% reduction of the TAC, while comparaed with
GL it oﬀered 60% savings [40]. For the separation of acetonitrile from water, a total of
six entrainers were evaluated (DMSO, 1,2-ethandiol, DMF, Glycerol, Butyl acetate and
pyridine) [77]. Three of them (DMF, butyl acetate and pyridine) resulted in thermody-
namically infeasible separations due to the formation of azeotropes and heterogeneous
regions. The energy savings were evaluated and it was found that using glycerol oﬀered
6.5% and 13% savings in reboiler duties compared to DMSO and 1,2.ethandiol [77]. It is
therefore important to highlight and review the criteria used in the literature to overcome
the challenge of selecting a suitable entrainer.
==PAGE:25==
2.1. EXTRACTIVE DISTILLATION
18
Design methods
A brief overview of the methods used to design the extractive distillation process is pre-
sented in the following. The main advantages and disadvantages are also highlighted.
The conceptual design of extractive distillation is a challenging task [69]. This is due
to multiple reasons: the extractive column has multiple feeds (feed stage location, feed
conditions, entrainer to feed ratio, reﬂux ratio, number of stages), the fact that the ﬁrst
column exhibits diﬀerent phenomena (rectiﬁcation, stripping and extraction) and the
presence of recycle streams from the recovery column to the extractive one[68]. All these
particularities of the process result in greater degrees of freedom from a design perspective.
Commercial simulators have been applied extensively in the design and optimisation of
extractive distillation processes and have usually been based on ”trial and error” [69].
This procedure can be cumbersome, however it permits rigorous design and the usage
of diﬀerent thermodynamic packages. De Figueiredo et al (2011) proposed a systematic
procedure to design and optimise extractive distillation columns using a commercial sim-
ulator Aspen Plus[20]. The procedure was applied on the dehydration of ethanol. The
aim was to minimise the ratio of reboiler duty to the ethanol production rate. An initial
feasible design must be constructed at ﬁrst and the objective function along with the
free variables must be indicated (solvent ﬂow ratio, distillate ﬂowrate, feed stages number
of stages). Aspen plus optimiser toolbox was then used to ﬁx the solvent ﬂowrate, the
distillate ﬂowrate and the reﬂux ratio. The number of stages and the feed stages are de-
termined using a sensitivity analysis[20]. The objective function used in by De Figueiredo
et al (2011) might not reﬂect the whole process economics and therefore might not provide
an optimal solution. Another concern is the fact that the interplay between the ﬂow rates
and the feed stages/number of stages is not investigated since they are determined in a
sequential manner.
In contrast to rigorous models, short-cut methods usually provide much easier and sim-
pler performance metrics that makes it possible to compare diﬀerent designs. Since the
entrainer chosen for a given separation have huge impact on the process design, these
methods can be used to compare the performance of the entrainers. Extensive eﬀorts
have been dedicated to develop methods to study the feasibility of extractive distillation
processes from a thermodynamic point of view [69]. These methods usually are based on
on a series of analysis of the ternary diagrams and distillation residue curve maps. Such
eﬀorts include the works by Doherty et al.(1985) in which they used ternary residue curves
to determine if a separation of a given mixture was possible using extractive distillation
[13]. Wahnschaft et al. (1993) developed a geometric approach based on residue curve
maps to determine the feasibility of a split given a speciﬁc feed composition and target
product purity [93]. More recent work include the work by Rodriguez-Donis et al. (2009)
in with the a method based on the analysis of the uni-volatility lines was developed to
study the feasibility of batch extractive distillation [73][72].
Studies on the thermodynamic feasibility of splits in extractive processes are numerous,
however not many methods have been developed for the process design part. Kossack
et al (2008) proposed a shortcut method to determine the minimum entrainer ﬂow rate
and the minimum reﬂux ratio[45] based on the rectiﬁcation body method by Bausa et al.
(1998) [3]. The principle of this method is to approximate the column proﬁles through
”rectiﬁcation bodies” that are determined from pinch points. The minimum entrainer
ﬂow rate is then determined through a pitchfork analysis of the pinch points. Results ob-
==PAGE:26==
2.2. ENTRAINER SELECTION
19
tained with this method enables the ranking for diﬀerent entrainers based on the amount
of entrainer required but also on the possible energy demand through the reﬂux ratio
[45], which proved to be in accordance to rigorous designs obtained through process sim-
ulators [45]. Despite its reliability, the method have had limited usage. This is due to
the complex mathematical approach and the numerical instability it exhibits. Another
short-cut method is based on the principle of inﬁnitely sharp split developed by Petlyuk
et al. (2015) [69]. Similarly to the method by Kossack et al. (2008), this method is capa-
ble of determining the limiting value of the entrainer to distillate ﬂowrate as well as the
minimum reﬂux ratio [69]. this method is considered much simpler as it it only requires
knowledge about the feasibility of a given split and no tedious mathematical algorithms
are needed to determine the metrics of interest. The results obtained from this method
were in good agreement with the results obtained from a commercial process simulator.
A last example of short-cut methods used for extractive distillation is the application of
the Fenske equation [63]. This methods is predominantly used in multicomponent con-
ventional distillation to determine the number of stages at inﬁnite reﬂux. However, it has
been used in extractive distillation to illustrate the ease of separation, resulting from the
addition of a ﬁxed amount of entrainer.
2.2
Entrainer Selection
In this section, the desired properties of an entrainer for extractive distillation is high-
lighted. The section will also present a review on the diﬀerent criteria applied in CAMD
for entrainer screening.
The objective of adding an entrainer is to separate an azeotropic pair beyond the azeotropic
composition and should therefore not form an azeotrope with the mixture compounds[45].
In the case of azeotropic distillation, this criteria might be disregarded as the recovery
step is not necessarily done using a distillation column. The added entrainer should also
no create a phase split[4]. Otherwise, less energy intensive processes can be used[72].
The entrainer should not only make the original separation feasible, it should also ensure
that the recovery process is easy by having suitable enthalpy of vaporisation and boiling
point[4]. The entrainer should also be safe to handle (not cause corrosion, should not
harm operators) [49]. All these criteria should be determined and evaluated for a given
entrainer candidate. Entrainers have predominantly been screened based on a series of
heuristic rules that are rooted in either thermodynamic perspective (ability to alter the
relative volatility) or a molecular perspective (ability to form hydrogen bounds[49]).
From a heuristic point of view, the ability to alter the relative volatility is related to the
ability of the entrainer to associate preferentially with one of the azeotropic components
in the original mixture (e.g. through hydrogen bounds). Blass (1989) [4] suggests that
molecules can be classiﬁed into ﬁve categories. This classiﬁcation is based on comparing
the Trouton’s constant with the enthalpy of vaporisation of an entrainer. The reasoning
supporting this approach is that higher values for the enthalpy of vaporisation would
suggest stronger interactions in the liquid phase. In contrast, a lower value suggests the
formation of associates in the vapor phase. This classiﬁcation can be seen in table 2.6).
Based on observations and experience working in the ﬁeld, authors usually agree that
compounds for class I and class II are often successful when selected as entrainers [49].
The selection of an entrainer can also take roots in the thermodynamics occurring when
adding an entrainer. The main objective of the entrainer is to alter the relative volatility
==PAGE:27==
2.2. ENTRAINER SELECTION
20
Table 2.6: Molecule classiﬁcation based on the ability of forming hydrogen bounds
Class
Description
Example
I
Capable of of forming three dimensional networks of strong
Hydrogen bounds. Highest deviation fro Trouton’s constant
water, glycerol
hydroxy-acids, amides
II
Capable of forming one dimensional chains by hydrogen bounding.
Eﬀect of hydrogen bounds is not a dominant as Van der waal forces
ethanol
acetic acid
III
Capable of acting as hydrogen bound acceptors. The enthalpy of
vaporisation is close to Trouton’s constant
ethers, ketones
nucleophelic aromatics
IV
Capable of acting as hydrogen bound donors
chloroform, dichlorethane
trichloroethane
V
Not capable of acting neither as hydrogen bond donor nor acceptor.
Tetrachloroethane
aromatics
of one of the compounds forming an azeotrope. Assuming ideal vapour phase, the relative
volatility has been deﬁned as in equation eq. (2.1), where x and y are the mole fraction in
the the liquid and vapour phase respectively, P sat is the vapour pressure, γ is the activity
coeﬃcient calculated from a thermodynamic model and “i”,“j” are the binary pair in the
mixture where “j” denotes the solute (the component on which the solvent/entrainer act).
αij = yi/xi
yj/xj
= γi P 0
i
γj P 0
j
(2.1)
When an azeotrope is formed, the relative volatility equals unity. Therefore, the aim of
the addin the entrainer is to displace the relative volatility far from unity. For a ﬁxed
temperature and pressure, the inﬂuence of the entrainer on the relative volatility can
be examined predominantly based on the ratio of the activity coeﬃcients. This ratio in
the presence of the solvent is called ”selectivity” eq. (2.2). This metric has been used
throughout the literature in the selection of entrainers [12] [32] [45] [49].
Sij =
 γi
γj

S
(2.2)
Since the activity coeﬃcients are dependent on the liquid phase composition and the
fact that the entrainer eﬀect increases proportionally with the concentration, it is usually
evaluated inﬁnite dilution instead [45]. The selectivity at inﬁnite dilution represents the
maximum selectivity that can be possibly achieved and is evaluated for a binary mixture
where the entrainer composition is close to unity [45]. The expression of the selectivity
at inﬁnite dilution can be seen in eq. (2.3).
S∞
ij =
 
γ∞
i
γ∞
j
!
S
(2.3)
Another parameter that has been considered in the literature is the “capacity” [4]. The
capacity of the entrainer towards the solute is deﬁned in eq. (2.4).
C∞
j,S =
1
γ∞
j
(2.4)
The capacity is an expression of the interaction between the solute and the entrainer.
The lower the activity coeﬃcient, the higher the interactions between the two compounds
and thus the higher the capacity.
A high interaction between the entrainer and one
of the azeotropic compounds is a desired property. However, it has been documented
==PAGE:28==
2.2. ENTRAINER SELECTION
21
that entrainer candidates exhibiting high capacities also exhibits low selectivity values
[4] [45]. The common practice is to drop the the capacity from consideration and only
consider the selectivity at inﬁnite dilution [49]. Candidates are usually ranked based on
this parameter and those possessing the highest value are deemed the most promising.
The general expectation is that those with the highest selectivity oﬀer the most cost-
eﬀective process [4] [60]. However, this is not always the case. In fact multiple studies
have been conducted to evaluate the accuracy of using selectivity as basis for solvent
screening [45] [60]. Momoh(1991) evaluated the selectivity as a ranking parameter for a
number of entrainers 1 used on three diﬀerent azeotropic systems. The following systems
were considered:
1. Mixture A: 2-Methyl-1-Butene/Isoprene.
2. Mixture B: n-Butane/Trans-2-Butene.
3. Mixture C: n-Hexane/Benzene.
For each of the aforementioned mixtures, the author calculated the total annual cost
(TAC) of the extractive distillation process including both the operating cost and the
capital cost for the extractive column and the recovery column. The calculations were
based on an entrainer to feed ratio of two and and equimolar feed of the mixtures. The
TAC was then evaluated with regard to the calculated selectivity. The results can be seen
in ﬁg. 2.3, ﬁg. 2.4 and ﬁg. 2.5 for mixtures A, B and C respectively.
Figure 2.3: Inﬂuence of entrainer selectivity on the TAC of the extractive distilla-
tion process for (2-methyl-1-butene/Isoprene) [60]
1 The nature of these entrainers are not important in this discussion.
They can be found in the
references [60] and [49]
==PAGE:29==
2.2. ENTRAINER SELECTION
22
Figure 2.4: Inﬂuence of entrainer selectivity on the TAC of the extractive distilla-
tion process for (n-butane/Trans-2-butene) [60]
Figure 2.5: Inﬂuence of entrainer selectivity on the TAC of the extractive distilla-
tion process for (n-Hexane/Benzene) [60]
==PAGE:30==
2.2. ENTRAINER SELECTION
23
Based on the results obtained by Momoh (1991) and shown in ﬁg. 2.3, ﬁg. 2.4 and ﬁg. 2.5,
it seems that the TAC is inversely proportional to the selectivity; that is, the TAC de-
creases with increasing selectivity [60]. This trend can be explained by the fact that with
increasing relative volatility, the reﬂux ratio decreases which will result in a decrease in
the number of stages needed to achieve the separation in the extractive column [60]. Ad-
ditionally, the decrease in the reﬂux ratio reﬂects a decrease in the vapour ﬂow rate. This
could therefore suggest a reduction in the utilities used for the reboiler and the condenser.
For low values of the selectivity, the TAC is dominated by the cost of the extractive col-
umn. As the selectivity increases, the separation in the ﬁrst column becomes easier and
the TAC decreases. Eventually, the TAC becomes dominated by the cost of the recovery
column thus the graphs becomes more ﬂat. Although the trend of inverse proportionality
between the selectivity and the TAC, the ﬁgures do not suggest that the highest selectivity
corresponds to the lowest TAC. In mixture A, the highest selectivity does not correspond
to the lowest TAC, in fact it is approximately 30% higher than the lowest TAC value.
In mixture C, the highest TAC does not correspond to the lowest selectivity either (2nd
lowest).
Using selectivity as a basis for screening is by no means a bad criteria, but concerns about
the accuracy are evident. It could be suggested that the selectivity could be used as a
”cut-oﬀ” criteria where a minimum value for the selectivity is set. In fact Momoh(1991)
made a comparative study between the TAC of the extractive distillation process using
the diﬀerent entrainer candidates and the TAC of the ordinary distillation set-up [60].
It was shown that to achieve a TAC lower than that of the conventional distillation, a
minimum selectivity can be suggested. These can be seen in table 2.7. It is important
to highlight that the suggested values are system-dependant and will vary for various
systems.
Table 2.7: Minimum selectivity to achieve lower TAC compared to conventional
distillation [60]
Systems
Minimum Selectivity
Mixture A
1.1760
Mixture B
1.1060
Mixture C
4.3250
Another study conducted by Kossack et al.(2003) investigated the TAC including the
energy demand for the separation of a water/acetone mixture using diﬀerent entrainers
[45]. The energy demand for the extractive column and the total process as function
of the selectivity can be seen in ﬁg. 2.6. Based on these results, it is clear that for low
selectivities, the energy demand is not predicted accurately and it seems that this demand
does not change signiﬁcantly for higher values of the selectivity.
==PAGE:31==
2.2. ENTRAINER SELECTION
24
Figure 2.6: Energy demand as function of the selectivity [45]
The TAC as a function of the selectivity was also investigated [45]. The results can be
seen in ﬁg. 2.7.
These results show that there is a poor correlation between the two
parameters.
Figure 2.7: Total annual cost as a function of selectivity[45]
The authors however suggest that a better agreement is observed between the TAC and
the product of the selectivity and the capacity of the entrainer. The parameter is deﬁned
as follows and the obtained results can be seen in ﬁg. 2.8.
C∞
j,S ˙S∞
ij =
γ∞
i
(γ∞
j )2
(2.5)
It is important to note that these criteria are based on observation and are thus heuristics
and do not always hold as previously demonstrated. To be able to more precisely assess the
performance of an entrainer, some process parameters must be included in the evaluation
of the entrainer.
==PAGE:32==
2.3. COMPUTER-AIDED MOLECULAR DESIGN: CAMD
25
Figure 2.8: Total annual cost as a function of capacity-times-selectivity [45]
2.3
Computer-Aided Molecular Design: CAMD
As touched upon in the background section, computer-aided molecular design have been
applied in chemical product design and also in the entrainer design problem.
In this
section, the most important CAMD techniques are presented and reviewed along with
the theory and principles behind the this approach.
2.3.1
CAMD Techniques And Formulations
Computer aided molecular design applies mathematical models to reverse engineer the
molecular structure of a chemical entity based on its properties. These models are usually
semi-empirical, of which the most applied are:
1. Group contribution methods.
2. Signature descriptors.
3. Topological indices.
In the following, the principle supporting each QSPR techniques is presented.
Group Contribution Method (GCM)
The Group contribution method is the most
popular QSPR model used in CAMD [2]. Its popularity is the result of the simplicity
and universality of the concept. This technique is especially attractive in a conceptual
design stage and as part of pre-design stages [44] as it is not computationally heavy. The
working principle of GC methods is that the property of a given molecule can be related or
predicted based on the number of occurrence of a series of predetermined building blocks
forming the molecule [2]. These building blocks could either refer to atomic fragments
(occurrence of atoms), bond fragments (occurrence of a speciﬁc bound between two atoms)
or as group fragments (speciﬁc arrangement of atoms) in the molecule. An illustrative
example can be seen in ﬁg. 2.9 for a molecule of ethanol.
==PAGE:33==
2.3. COMPUTER-AIDED MOLECULAR DESIGN: CAMD
26
Figure 2.9: Decomposition of ethanol into fragments
In GCM, each group has a “contribution” towards the overall property of the molecule.
The methods takes into account the type of groups present and their number of occurrence
[2]. A generic formulation can be seen in equation eq. (2.6) where P is the property, Ci
is the contribution of group g and Ni is a vector representing the number of occurrence
of the groups.
P =
X
i
Ni Ci
(2.6)
Many diﬀerent GC methods have been developed throughout history. One for the early
and popular version is the GC method developed by Joback and Reid [2][41].
They
suggested that some properties should be described as non-linear (e.g. logarithm, power
function) since not all properties could be captured with a linear function. A generic
functional transformation of eq. (2.6) can be seen in equation eq. (2.7)), where f is the
functional transformation.
P = f
 X
i
Ni Ci
!
(2.7)
An important limitation to this method is the fact that it only accounts for the occurrence
of groups and can therefore not distinguish between isomers. Constantinou and Gani
(1994) proposed a new GC method that uses two levels of contribution [9]. The ﬁrst
level is made of a set of ﬁrst order groups while the second level is made of a much
smaller subset of second order groups that describe a larger arrangement of groups. The
second order groups serve to provide more information of the overall structure of the
molecule. The introduction of a new structural level has also contributed to capturing
the group proximity eﬀects. Proximity eﬀect is a result of the interaction between two
groups in a molecule which alters the contribution of either of the groups. This method
has resulted in more accurate prediction for a wide range of properties such as the boiling
point temperature, the critical point, critical pressure and melting point [9]. Marrero and
Gani (2001) extended the model of Constantinou and Gani (1994) by introducing a new
structural level and third order groups to increase the accuracy of predicting properties for
polycyclic compounds [57]. The generic form of the new GC method is shown in eq. (2.8)
==PAGE:34==
2.3. COMPUTER-AIDED MOLECULAR DESIGN: CAMD
27
where Ci, Dj, Ek are contribution of the ﬁrst, second and third groups i,j,k respectively.
Ni, Mj, Ok are integer vectors accounting for the occurrence of the groups. w and z are
binary parameters that take the value one if the level is considered, otherwise they are
zero.
P =
X
i
NiCi + w
X
j
MjDj + z
X
k
OkEk
(2.8)
A wide range of properties has been predicted using GC methods [2]. Table 2.8 presents
a small overview of some of these properties for ehich the mentioned methods have been
applied. For a much larger overview, may consult be found in the work of Austin et al.
(2016) and kolska et al (2012) [2] and [44].
Table 2.8: Properties predicted by GCM
GC methods
Properties
Ref
Joback and Reid (1987)
Boiling point, critical pressure, enthalpy of formation
enthalpy of fusion, enthalpy of vaporizarion, heat capacity
Gibbs energy of formation, viscocity
[41]
Constantinou and Gani (1994)
Boiling point, accentric factor, critical pressure,
critical temperature, enthalpy of formation, critical volume
enthalpy of vaporisation, melting point
[9]
Marrero and Gani (2001)
Boiling point, critical pressure, critical temperature,
enthalpy of formation, critical volume,enthalpy of vaporisation,
melting point
[57]
Topological Indices (TI)
Topological indices is based on “chemical graph theory”.
The basic concept of this idea is that “atoms and bounds forming a molecule can be
considered nodes and edges in a graph” [2] and thus the molecule can be represented in
terms of vertices and edges. Based on these elements (vertices and edges) of the graph (the
molecule) diﬀerent graphical features can be determined such as the Wiener index, edge
index and connectivity index [2]. All these features are then incorporated in QSPR model
to predict a wide range of properties. Some of these properties and the corresponding TI
method by which they are predicted can be seen in table table 2.9. A larger overview can
be found in the work by Austin et al. (2016) [2].
Table 2.9: Properties predicted by TI
Property
TI method
Reference
Aqueous solubility
Hall et al. (1975)
[35]
Boiling point
Hall et al. (1975)
[35]
Heat capacity
Yao et al. (2003)
[97]
Flash point
Patel et al. (2009)
[67]
Enthalpy of vaporization
Galvez et al. (1994)
[23]
Density
Estrada(1995)
[16]
Biodegradability
Beothling(1986)
[5]
Signature Descriptors (SD)
This method has been developed much more recently
than the two other methods and can be considered hybrid method combining some as-
pects of GC and TI [2] [19]. It combines the atomic connectivity from the GCM with
the chemical graph theory from TI. In fact, methods have been developed to translate TI
==PAGE:35==
2.3. COMPUTER-AIDED MOLECULAR DESIGN: CAMD
28
method formulation into SD formulations and therefore the properties predicted by this
method are similar to those predicted by TI [19].
Each of the presented QSPR techniques exhibits a series of advantages as well as short-
comings.
Depending on the GC method used, a distinction of isomers might not be
possible. This problem does not occur when using TI or SD. However GC methods are
much simpler, more intuitive and more ﬂexible compared to the other methods [2]. It is
also able to represent a much larger design space. Additionally, GC methods provide a
simple mathematical formulation that is easy to formulate but also easy to apply [2].
2.3.2
CAMD applications
CAMD have been used to solve a wide range of design problems. They have been used
to identify replacements to already existing products in an eﬀort to make a given process
more sustainable or more safe. Some of the CAMD application ﬁelds and examples can
be seen in table 2.10.
Table 2.10: Fields of CAMD application
Applications
Method
Reference
Replacement solvent for liquid liquid
extraction of phenol from wastewater
GC
[37]
Replacement solvent for benzene
GC
[37]
Design of extractive distillation agent
GC
[37]
Replacement for refrigerant
GC
[26]
Emulsiﬁer design
GC
[26]
Optimal solvent for liquid-liquid extraction
GC
[7]
As can be seen in the table, GCM is the method of choice in solving CAMD problems.
2.3.3
Solution Strategies
After reviewing some of the techniques to formulate the CAMD problem, it is important
to identify the conceptual strategies used to solve such problems. Each of these strategies
are explained in the following.
Generate And Test
The generate and test method consists of systematically reducing the number of alter-
natives.
At ﬁrst, all possible molecular structures from a predeﬁned search space are
generated. The properties of interest are then evaluated for all the candidates and com-
pared to the desired specs [37]. Those candidates that do not exhibit the desired property
are eliminated from further considerations. It is important to note that this procedure
is only applicable in a limited design space where some structural limitations have been
deﬁned. The advantage of this solution strategy is the fact that it is not computationally
heavy since most properties are not described by complex correlation and are thus easy
to evaluate [2]. Another advantage is the fact that this method can generate an optimal
solution in a given design space given that all possible candidates within this space were
generated [71]. This method has been applied in many case studies such as the design of
solvent for organic synthesis [28], the design of polymers for heat resistant ﬁlms [76] and
for the design of cosmetics [94].
==PAGE:36==
2.3. COMPUTER-AIDED MOLECULAR DESIGN: CAMD
29
Mathematical Optimisation
If the desired CAMD problem can be formulated as an optimisation problem, then a
numerical solver can be applied to solve it and produce possibly a candidate for the
design problem [71]. Depending on the property models and the process models used, the
complexity of the formulation and the performance of numerical solvers might diﬀer and
in some cases be too computationally heavy [71]. The resulting mathematical formulation
is usually a mixed integer problem that can be either linear or non-linear depending on the
models used. It is important to note that for these types of problems, a global optimum
is not always guaranteed and the procedure can be computationally heavy. To overcome
this, some decomposition methods have been proposed to reduce the MIP to either linear
problems or non-linear problems.
Mathematical optimisation has been used to solve
design problems related to polymer [90] design and refrigerant design [14]. In some cases,
heuristic algorithms can be used to solve such problems. These algorithms are suitable
for problems that are multi-dimensional, have a large design space and exhibit strong
non-linearity in the process or property models. The working principle of such algorithms
includes high-level selection strategies to generate diﬀerent starting point which are then
evaluated with regard to the objective function [2].
The memory of each solution is
retained so as not to repeat the same solution again [2]. Examples of this type of algorithm
that have been reported in the literature are: Genetic algorithms (algorithms that tries
to imitate the idea of natural selection), ant colony algorithms ( imitates the behaviour of
ants) and simulated annealing [2]. Table 2.11 contains examples in which these algorithm
have been used.
Table 2.11: Heurtic algorithms and their application on CAMD problems
Algorithm
Problem
Reference
Genetic algorithm
Two-phase reactions and gas absorption problems
[102]
Ant colony
Liquid-liquid extraction
[30]
Simulated annealing
Refrigerant replacement
[66]
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3
Methods
In this chapter, the solution procedure to the entrainer screening problem is presented
in the form of a CAMD framework. This will cover the principle and the methodology
employed to construct the computer aided product design, the formulation of the design
problem and the solution approach adopted. In the ﬁrst section, the overall framework
used and the solution approach are presented. In the second section, the property model
and the thermodynamic model used within the framework are motivated.
3.1
CAMD Framework
In this chapter, a step-by-step procedure to formulate and solve the CAMD problem is
presented. Since the CAMD is based on a series of mathematical models consisting of the
QSPR models, it can be formulated as a mathematical problem. The following framework
is presented in a general aspect that is independent of the QSPR model used.
CAMD Framework
Cignitti et al. (2015) proposed a systematic framework framework for formulating and
ultimately solving various types of CAMD problems [6]. The framework serves to reduce
the complexity of the design problem into a series of sub-problems. A schematic of the
various steps in the framework and the information network between the steps can be
seen in ﬁg. 3.1. Each step of the framework is explained in the following.
Step 1: Problem Deﬁnition
The problem is deﬁned by determining the needs, the type along with the process or
application the chemical product is intended. The needs can be expressed in terms of a
series of properties, environmental impact potentials or the cost of the product. These
needs are then translated into target properties that can be identiﬁed. These properties
can either be primary properties, secondary properties, functional properties or mixture
properties [24]. Primary properties are constant and are directly related to the molecular
structure. This type of properties include the critical temperature and the normal boiling
point. Secondary properties are dependent on other properties and include the enthalpy
of vaporisation at the normal boiling point and the eccentric factor. Functional properties
vary with temperature or pressure e.g. liquid viscosity, heat of vaporisation and thermal
conductivity. The mixture properties that characterise the mixture in which the product
is present[24]. These properties can either characterise the overall bulk of the mixture
such as the composition or the temperature. These are called bulk properties. Other
mixture properties are related to the phase equilibrium. This could include volatilities,
saturation composition and solubility. After ﬁxing the considered properties, a target
must be set for them in terms of lower and upper bounds. These bounds can be derived
from the intended application or some safety consideration. In some cases these can also
be suggested by heuristic methods or past experience.
30
==PAGE:38==
3.1. CAMD FRAMEWORK
31
Figure 3.1: CAMD framework proposed by Cignitti et l. [6]
==PAGE:39==
3.1. CAMD FRAMEWORK
32
Step 2: CAMD Constraint Selection
In this step the constraints for the CAMD procedures are set. This includes the selection
the building blocks of the product as well as the structural model used to assemble these
building blocks into meaningful structures. The property models and thermodynamic
models used to determine the pure properties and mixture properties of the product
are selected.
The property models are usually QSPR models such as the GCM and
TI [6].
Thermodynamic models are used to calculate the phase equilibrium between
the compounds of a mixture and are also used to determine mixture properties such as
solubility[7]. IF applicable, a process model to evaluate the performance or the application
of the product should also be selected. This allows for a simultaneous product and process
design since the product is selected based on process performance and not only based on its
properties. A target objective function should also be selected in this step. This function
could include some indication of the performance of the product derived from the process
model. The objective function is then the subject of an optimisation based design where
the ﬁnal design should provide an optimum value for the objective function.The objective
function could also be disregarded either due to the fact that they are too complex or hard
to determine or describe. If the objective function is not considered, the design problem
is then considered a feasibility problem that produces all available candidates that abide
by the previously set constraints.
Step 3: CAMD Problem Formulation
The CAMD problem is the formulated as a Mixed Integer Problem (MIP). Depending
on the structural and property models used, the problem can either be linear (MILP) or
nonlinear (MINLP). A generic CAMD formulation taking into account all the previously
developed constraints and models is presented in the following:
min / max
F(X, N)
(3.1)
Structural Constraints
g1(N, Y) ≤0
(3.2)
Pure component property Constraints
g2(N) ≤0
(3.3)
Mixture property Constraints
g3(N) ≤0
(3.4)
Process model or other constraints
g4(X, N) = 0
(3.5)
X ∈ℜn , N ∈Zm , Y ∈{0, 1}q
The CAMD problem is formulated as an optimisation problem, eq. (3.1) is the objective
function, which is a target for maximisation or a minimisation depending on the nature
of the function. If the objective function reﬂects the energy usage in a given processes, it
is usually desired to minimise this. If the objective function reﬂects the revenue a given
product might ensure, then it is usually maximised.
“g1” is a set of linear equations
reﬂecting a set of structural constraints.
These constraints reﬂect the feasibility of a
suggested structure and if it is a meaningful structure. Additional structural constraint
might include restriction on the occurrence of speciﬁc building blocks or the total allowed
number of blocks in a structure. “g2” is a set of constraints concerning some of the primary
properties of the product. “g3” are a set of constraints applied on the mixture properties.
The constraints related to the properties are usually expressed by upper and lower bounds
for a given property. “g4” is a set of constraints or model equation reﬂecting the process in
which the product is intended or some kind of performance indicator. The process model is
usually made of a series of constitutive equations in the form of mass and energy balances
that must be satisﬁed. N is a vector of integer variables which represent the number of
==PAGE:40==
3.1. CAMD FRAMEWORK
33
occurrences of the structural building blocks forming the product. Y is the adjacency
matrix that reﬂects the molecular structure and the interconnection between the diﬀerent
building blocks. X is a vector of continuous variables representing the properties or the
process variables.
Step 4: Solution Strategy
Depending on the process and thermodynamic models used, the CAMD formulation can
lead to highly non-convex and non-smooth problems [6]. The solution for these kinds of
problems is not always straight forward and a solution is not guaranteed. Karunanithi
et al. proposed a decomposition approach to convert the MIP into a series of smaller
problems that are handled in a sequential manner [42].
Each of these sub-problems
represent a subset of the CAMD constraints. This approach will result in a solution space
that is continuously reduced after each sub-problem. This is illustrated in ﬁg. 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Continuous reduction of the solution space
By handling each set of constraints sequentially, the nature of the CAMD problem is
changed. Only the ﬁrst sub-problem consisting of generating feasible structures is a MIP
[6]. After the structures are determined, they are all evaluated against the remaining
constraints which would either be Linear problems or nonlinear problems depending on
the models used. Cignitti et al. incorporated the decomposition principle by Karunanithi
et al. into the CAMD framework described earlier[6] which can be seen in ﬁg. 3.3.
==PAGE:41==
3.2. MODEL SELECTION
34
Figure 3.3: CAMD Framework by Cignitti et al.[6] integrated with decomposition
approach by Karunanithi et al. [42]
3.2
Model Selection
The models generating feasible molecular structure, determining their primary properties
as well as the thermodynamic model enabling phase equilibrium calculations largely de-
termine how the CAMD is formulated. In this section the models considered in this work
are introduced. The working principle as well as the motivation for choosing these model
are also presented in this section.
3.2.1
Structure Model: Odele and Macchietto (1993)
The structure model used in this work is was developed by Odele and Macchietto in
1993 [65]. This model provides a simple relation to describe the structural feasibility by
considering the number of valances a structural group has. The valences can be considered
as the number of connection a given building block posses. A feasible structure should
have no unoccupied connections. This is also known as “the octet rule”. Therefore for
each molecular building block, the number of valency is given. An additional constraint
is formulated for this model which states that “two adjacent groups may not bi linked by
more that one bond [65]. An implication of this constraint is that if a group of valency
four is to be included in the solution, at least four additional groups must be present.
This will therefore eliminate the possibility of creating double or triple bounds between
the molecular building blocks. This rule is called the “connectivity constraint” [7]. The
building blocks chosen are the ﬁrst order groups presented by Constantinou and Gani in
1994 [9].
==PAGE:42==
3.2. MODEL SELECTION
35
3.2.2
Property Model: GCM by Constantinou and Gani (1994)
The model used to determine the pure compound properties is a GCM. They relatively
simple to implement, intuitive to understand from a chemical engineering point of view
and are capable of determining a wide range of properties (e.g. boiling point, critical
points). The method chosen was developed by Constantinou and Gani in 1994 [9]. The
model is able to provide both ﬁrst and second order predictions. The second order groups
serve to increase the accuracy of the prediction as well as enable the diﬀerentiation between
isomers. However in this work, only ﬁrst order groups are considered. The reason for
excluding second order groups is that this work is concerned with the proof of concept
of developing a decisions making tool for fast screening of entrainer candidates.
The
increased accuracy and complexity might not be merited at this stage. One drawback is
that the method will only provide the identity of possible entrainer candidates by the pool
of groups present and will provide no information on the sequencing and arrangement of
such groups. The groups forming the search space will be the ﬁrst order groups containing
Carbon (C), Oxygen (O) and hydrogen (H). An additional motivation behind the selection
of this method is the fact that the model uses the same ﬁrst order groups considered in
the UNIFAC thermodynamic model [6]. This makes it possible to generate structures and
evaluate the mixture properties based on the same set of groups.
3.2.3
Thermodynamic Model: UNIFAC by Fredenslund (1975)
Mixture properties is of great importance in the entrainer design problem. It is therefore
necessary to conduct phase equilibrium calculations. The extractive distillation processes
involves vapour-liquid phase equilibrium calculations as is the case for all distillation pro-
cesses. Since the processes does not involve high pressures and the mixture properties re
not to be evaluated beyond the critical points, a γ-φ approach is used for VLE calcula-
tions, where activity coeﬃcient models are used for both the gas and the liquid phase.
The criteria for vapour-liquid equilibrium is that the fugacity “f” of each phase is equal
as shown in eq. (3.6) where superscript “V” denotes the vapour phase and “L” denotes
the liquid phase [15].
ˆfV
i = ˆfL
i
(3.6)
The fugacity can be expressed as shown in eq. (3.7) and eq. (3.8) for the liquid phase and
vapour phase respectively. For these equations, “y” is the vapour mole fraction, “x” is
the liquid mole fraction, P is the total pressure, Psat is the saturated vapour pressure, φ
is the fugacity coeﬃcient and γ is the liquid activity coeﬃcient [15].
ˆfV
i = yi ˆφi P
(3.7)
ˆfL
i = xi ˆγiP sat
i
(3.8)
Since the phase equilibrium will be evaluated at low pressures the gas phase will be
assumed ideal (φi=1). To model the interaction in the liquid phase, the original UNIFAC
model developed by Fredenslund et al (1975) [21] with the revision and extensions by
Hansen (1991) [36]. The thermodynamic model is also based on the principle of group
contribution and the groups considered are identical to the ﬁrst order groups used in the
GCM by Constantinou and Gani (1994). This is makes the development of the CAMD
procedure more convenient since the same groups are used in predicted both the pure
compound property as well as the mixture properties. For the vapour pressure calculation
needed for the VLE calculation, the Antoine equation is used.
==PAGE:43==
3.2. MODEL SELECTION
36
3.2.4
Mixture Properties
The mixture properties of interest of an entrainer is the ability to fully mix with the
components of the azeotropic mixture, also called stability condition, and the ability to
not form any azeotropes with any of the compounds in the mixture. These properties
necessitates the vapour-liquid and the liquid liquid equilibrium calculations. The method
for ensuring these properties are upheld are presented in the following.
Stability Conditions by Conte et al. (2011)
The miscibility of a compound in a mixture is related the trend of the Gibbs free energy
of mixing “∆Gmix” [10]. The most characteristic behaviours of this function can be seen
in ﬁg. 3.4.
Figure 3.4: The most common shapes for the function ∆Gmix/RT. From [10].
Based on the graphical trends in ﬁg. 3.4, a series of observations can be made. The curve
(a) represents a case where there is complete immiscibility in the whole composition range
and is expressed by the Gibbs energy of mixing being positive. Curve (b1) represents the
case where there is partial miscibility. This means that for some certain compositions, no
phase split occurs. The mixing process is spontaneous if for the whole composition range,
the Gibbs energy of mixing is negative. This correspond to curve (c) in ﬁg. 3.4. Curves
with similar trends as curve (b2), indicates that there is a miscibility gap, even though
for the whole composition range the Gibbs energy of mixing is negative. One way to
identify this case is to ensure that the Gibbs energy of mixing is convex and exhibits only
one extremum. This can be identiﬁed through calculating the second derivative of the
function Gibbs energy of mixing. For the whole composition range, the second derivative
==PAGE:44==
3.2. MODEL SELECTION
37
must be positive [10]. These conditions have previously been used to perform stability
checks in the design of formulated products by Conte et al. (2011) [10].
”No azeotrope” Condition
Systems forming an azeotrope are characterised by the great variation of the relative
volatility as a function of the composition [64]. The relative volatility between two com-
ponents is deﬁned as the ratio of the equilibrium constants of these components in the
mixture. The equilibrium constant is expressed as the ratio between te vapour and liq-
uid molefraction. For systems forming an azeotrope, the relative volatility of the binary
mixture crosses the diagonal line in an x-y diagram [64]. Typical representations for a
minimum boiling and maximum boiling azeotropes can be seen in ﬁg. 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Schematic of x-y diagram for maximum boiling and minim boiling
azeotropes
For minimum boiling azeotropes, the relative volatility is greater than unity at low con-
centration while it decreases below unity at high concentrations. For maximum boiling
azeotropes, the case it is the opposite [64]. The point where the the interception between
the relative volatility occur with the diagonal corresponds to the azeotropic composition.
Based on this description if a binary system exhibits composition values for which the
relative volatility are located on both sides of unity, they form an azeotrope.
3.2.5
Process Model
In this section, the mathematical model describing the performance of the entrainer is
developed. The model chosen produce a series of process metrics that can be used as a
basis for comparing the eﬃciency of the entrainer candidates. It is important to note that
these models are short-cut models i.e. they are simpliﬁed version of the real process model.
the process model considered in this work are: the Fenske equation for determining the
minimum number of stages in a distillation column and the inﬁnitely sharp split method
by Petlyuk for determining the entrainer to distillate ﬂow rate and the reﬂux ratio [69].
==PAGE:45==
3.2. MODEL SELECTION
38
Fenske Equation (1932)
The minimum equilibrium stages needed in a column corresponds to the number of stages
for a column operating at total reﬂux. The number of stages can be determined using
the Fenske equation eq. (3.9), where Nmin the minimum number of stages, “S” is the
separation factor in the column and αm is the mean relative volatility [79].
Nmin = log S
log αm
(3.9)
The separation factor S is calculated as shown in eq. (3.10) , where x is the product mole
fraction, the superscripts ”B” and ”D” denotes the bottom and distillate products and
”i” denotes the light key while ”j” denotes the heavy key.
S = xD
i
xD
i
xB
j
xB
i
(3.10)
Since the relative volatility is not constant throughout the column, the geometric mean
of the top and bottom stage is calculated as shown in eq. (3.11). “N” denotes the top
stage while “1” denotes the bottom stage.
αm =
q
(αi,j)N (αi,j)1
(3.11)
The Fenske equation is applied under the assumption of total reﬂux.
Total reﬂux is
achieved by charging the column with the feed and operating it until steady state is
achieved. During operation no feed addition or product removal occurs. In the case of
extractive distillation, the method can be applied by considering the three component
system as a pseudo-binary system composed of the heavy key and light key [63] [52].
It is assumed that the eﬀect of the entrainer is present throughout the column from
top to bottom and that the ﬂow of entrainer is constant on all stages [63]. Te pseudo-
binary system is obtained by converting the molefraction in presence of the entrainer into
entrainer free molefractions. the molefractions can then be used to calculate separation
factor and the minimum number of stages.
Inﬁnitely Sharp Split method (ISS)
Petlyuk et al (2015) proposed a method to determine limiting parameters related to the
operation of the extractive column. These parameter consist of the minimal entrainer
ﬂow rate and the minimum reﬂux ratio[69]. The column is assumed to operate under
the assumption that a sharp split occurs in the top section of the column. Considering
a column divided into three section; a top section, an extractive section and a bottom
section as shown in ﬁg. 3.6.
the limiting mode of operation is also know as the “In-
ﬁnitely Sharp Split (ISS) mode”. It is assumed that each section is of inﬁnite height and
tat a sharp split occurs in the top section of the column. A sharp split is achieved if
one of the components is only present at one end of a section. The sharp split in this
case occurs in the top section where the top of the top section only contains component A.
==PAGE:46==
3.2. MODEL SELECTION
39
Figure 3.6: Component splits in the extractive column [69].
In contrast to the Fenske equation for which the theory and the derivation are known, the
ISS mode and how the limiting parameters are calculated are more obscure. Therefore,
the derivation and calculation of these parameters is explained in the following.
Two control volumes are identiﬁed to perform a mass balance: the top section and the
combination of the top section and the extractive section. These control volumes along
with in-going and out-going streams can be seen in ﬁg. 3.7.
Figure 3.7: Control volumes for the mass balance [69].
The total mass balance for the top and the combined top and extractive section can be
seen in eq. (3.12) and in eq. (3.13) respectively.
Top section:
V = D + L
(3.12)
Top + extractive section:
V = (D −E) + L
(3.13)
The component mass balance can be seen in eq. (3.14) and eq. (3.15) for the top section
==PAGE:47==
3.2. MODEL SELECTION
40
and the combined section respectively.
Top section:
V yV = D xD −L xL
(3.14)
Top + extractive section:
V yV = (D xD −E xE) + L xL
(3.15)
At this point the concept of delta composition “x∆” also known as diﬀerence point is
introduced. The delta composition is a virtual composition that “represent a composition
of diﬀerence between the distillate and the entrainer feed to the column” [69]. This concept
have been discussed in details by Tapp et al. (2004) and Haun et al. (200)[86][38]. This
composition is used to rewrite the component mass balance in the combined top and
extractive section as shown in eq. (3.16).
Top + extractive section:
V yV = (D −E) x∆+ L xL
(3.16)
Considering component “1” (the top product): since a sharp split occurs, only component
“1” is present in the top product (Distillate) therefore:
xD
1 = 1
xE
1 = 0
eq. (3.15) can then be rewritten as
V yV
1 = D + L xL
1
⇒
D = V yV
1 −L xL
1
(3.17)
Turning attention to eq. (3.16), an expression for the delta composition x∆can be derived.
This expression can be seen in eq. (3.18)
x∆= V yV −L xL
D −E
=
D
D −E =
1
1 −E/D
(3.18)
Another concept is now introduced, which is the pinch points. For columns with inﬁnite
height, the vapour and liquid at same height are in equilibrium. In addition, at these point
in the distillation trajectory, the compositions-called pinch composition- (denoted xr) of
the phases do not change. Each section has at least one pinch point since all sections are
of inﬁnite height. Considering eq. (3.16) at the pinch composition and by substituting
the total mass balance into the equation, as shown int eh following an expression of the
delta point can be obtained.
Introduce the pinch composition:
V Ki xr
i −L xr
i = (D −E) x∆
i
Substitute with the total mass balance:
V Ki xr
i −L xr
i = (V −L) x∆
i
Substitute with the total mass balance:
V Ki xr
i −L xr
i = (V −L) x∆
i
The expression for the delta point is shown in eq. (3.19).
x∆
i = xr
i
Ki −L/V
1 −L/V
(3.19)
Considering component “3” which is neither present in the distillate or the entrainer
feed, the balance in the combined top and extractive section eq. (3.15) can be reduced to
eq. (3.20).
V yV
3 = L xL
⇒
yV
3 /xL
3 = K3 = L/V
(3.20)
==PAGE:48==
3.2. MODEL SELECTION
41
An since the amount of component “3” in this column section is very small, the K value
derived corresponds to that of inﬁnite dilution of “3” in component “1” and “2” (K3 =
K∞1,2
3
).
By combining eq. (3.18) and eq. (3.19) and rearranging the obtained expression, the
following expression for E/D is obtained.
E
D = 1 −
1 −L/V
xr
1 (K1 −L/V )
(3.21)
Introducing the result obtained in eq. (3.20), a reduced expression for E/D is obtained
and is shown in
E
D = 1 −
1 −K3
xr
1(K1 −K3)
(3.22)
By analysing the column behaviour and the trajectories of the column, Petlyuk deduced
that the E/D possess a minimum value for an xr
1 value below a certain value of the
pinch branch composition. This composition corresponds to the one obtained at the uni-
volatility line at the 1-2 side of the ternary diagram[69][68]. This value is obtained when
the condition in is fulﬁlled.
K1,2
1
= K∞1,2
3
(3.23)
The composition of component “1” for which eq. (4.38) represent a singularity point for
which the assumption of ISS is not valid and thus the composition for E/D is minimal
must be located below that value. The above mentioned theory is supported by a series
of graphical constructions that Petlyuk et al. (2004) conducted on the behaviour of pf
the K values and the E/D [68]. The trend of the equilibrium constant and the E/D ratio
can be seen in ﬁg. 3.8 and ﬁg. 3.9 respectively. Based on the ﬁgures, it is evident that a
minimum value for E/D is present at a composition below that of the isovolatility between
component 1 and 2.
Figure 3.8: K-values as function x1 on the binary side 1-2
==PAGE:49==
3.2. MODEL SELECTION
42
Figure 3.9: E/D as a function of xr
1
Finally, by using the mass total mass balance derived in eq. (3.13) and the obtained
expression for E/D, an expression for the corresponding reﬂux ratio can b derived and is
shown in eq. (3.24).
R = K∞1,2
3
−E/D
1 −K∞1,2
3
(3.24)
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 4
Implementation & Validation
In this chapter, the various implementations of the methods and tests used in the CAMD
problem are presented.
Each implementation is described in details and how it was
performed. Each implementation is validated and tested.
4.1
Structural model
4.1.1
Implementation
A subset of ﬁrst order groups are chosen to limit the design space. this is called the basis
set. The ﬁrst order groups considered are those considered by Fredenslund (1975) and
Hansen (1991) [21] [36] and contain Carbon, hydrogen and oxygen.
A molecular structure is described with a vector “n” comprised of the integers “nk” ac-
counting for the occurrence of group “k“ in the proposed structure. The valency number
of each group “k” is denoted “vk” and describes the number of connections a group can
form with other groups. The structure model by Odele and Macchietto (1993) is then
formulated as following.
The Octet Rule: The octet rule is expressed as shown in equation (4.1), where “m” is
a parameter to express the type of structure generated. For acyclic structures “m=1”, for
monocyclic structures “m=0”, for bicyclic structures “m=-1”. In this work, only acyclic
compounds were considered and thus “m” is set to unity [65]. The reason for considering
only acyclic compounds is to limit the design space considered.
X
k
(2 −vk) nk = 2 m
(4.1)
The Connectivity rule: The connectivity rules is expressed as follows in eq. (4.2) [65] [2].
X
i
ni ≥nj(vj −1) + 2
(4.2)
In the implementation of the structural model, additional constraints might be considered
to limit the design space. These constraints could either limit the length of the generated
structures as in eq. (4.3) or limit the amount of occurrence of certain groups as in eq. (4.4).
nl ≥
X
k
nk ≥nu
(4.3)
nl
f ≥
X
k
nk −nCH3 −nCH2 −nCH −nC ≥nu
f
(4.4)
In eq. (4.3), a maximum length nu set to six and a minimum length of nl three. eq. (4.4)
restricts the number of functional groups in the structure. The lower limit nl
f and the
43
==PAGE:51==
4.1. STRUCTURAL MODEL
44
upper limit nu
f are set to one and two respectively. This was done in an eﬀort to limit
possible proximity eﬀect.
Generating the feasible structures is a Mixed Integer Problem.
The problem involves
integer values through “nk” and all the structural models or constraints are linear. Such
problems can be solved The problem is solved using the branching method. This method
is best illustrated in ﬁg. 4.1. From an initial point (k=CH3) all possible paths are inves-
tigated. Linking “CH3” to another “CH3” will satisfy the octet rule and the connectivity
rules. However due to the fact that the structure breaches the minimum requirement for
structure size, the structure fails and the search continues from the initial point again.
Branching to a“CH2” group and then an “OH” group result in a feasible structure sat-
isfying all constraints the structure deemed feasible. When all possible paths have been
exhausted, a new initial point is chosen and the search continues.
Figure 4.1: Illustration of the branching method for MIP
In terms of the software chosen, such algorithm is already in place.
The “BARON”
(Branch And Reduce Optimization Navigator) is a global solver able to handle MINLP
problems. Since the algorithm is formulated as an optimization tool in GAMS, an objec-
tive function must be provided. However, since we are interested in all feasible structures
within the design space chosen, a constant objective function is provided to the algorithm.
Since a constant function is always valid, all candidates that abide by the constraints will
be determined.
4.1.2
Validation
To validate the structural model, a series of structures will be tested for survival. The
feasibility of the structures is known beforehand thus validating whether the model have
been implemented correctly. A small basis set of the groups by Fredenslund (1975) and
Hansen (1991) are chosen and presented in along with their valency intable 4.1 [21] [36].
Table 4.1: Subset of ﬁrst order groups and their number of connections
Groups, k
CH3
CH2
OH
H2O
CHO
vk
1
1
1
0
3
==PAGE:52==
4.1. STRUCTURAL MODEL
45
Groups
Octet rule
Connectivity rule
Comments
CH3
CH2
OH
H2O
CHO
P
k(2 −vk) nk = 2
P
i ni ≥nj(vj −1) + 2
n(A)
1
1
1
0
0
(2−1)∗1+(2−2)∗1+(2−1)∗
1 + (2 −0) ∗0 + (2 −3) ∗0 = 2
3 ≥1 ∗(1 −1) + 2 = 2
3 ≥1 ∗(2 −1) + 2 = 3
3 ≥1 ∗(1 −1) + 2 = 3
3 ≥0 ∗(0 −1) + 2 = 2
3 ≥0 ∗(3 −1) + 2 = 2
Both the octet and the connec-
tivity rules are satisﬁed.
The
structure corresponds to ethanol
with the chemical formula CH3-
CH2-OH
n(B)
1
1
0
0
0
(2−1)∗1+(2−2)∗1+(2−1)∗
0 + (2 −0) ∗0 + (2 −3) ∗0 = 1
2 ≥1 ∗(1 −1) + 2 = 2
2 ≥1 ∗(2 −1) + 2 = 3
2 ≥0 ∗(1 −1) + 2 = 2
2 ≥0 ∗(0 −1) + 2 = 2
2 ≥0 ∗(3 −1) + 2 = 2
The structure is not feasible as it
has one unused valency. This is
detected by the octet rule. Addi-
tionally, since the “CH2” group
has two valences, at least two ad-
ditional groups must be present.
Since this is not the case, the con-
nectivity rule captures that.
n(C)
1
3
0
1
1
(2−1)∗1+(2−2)∗3+(2−1)∗
0 + (2 −0) ∗1 + (2 −3) ∗1 = 2
6 ≥1 ∗(1 −1) + 2 = 2
6 ≥3 ∗(2 −1) + 2 = 5
6 ≥0 ∗(1 −1) + 2 = 2
6 ≥1 ∗(0 −1) + 2 = 1
6 ≥1 ∗(3 −1) + 2 = 4
Although both rules are satis-
ﬁed, it is clear that the proposed
molecule does not exist since it
contains a whole water molecule.
==PAGE:53==
4.2. GCM
46
The proposed molecular structures “A”, “B” and “C” are suggested for the veriﬁcation
of the structure generation model. The model have been able to detect that “A” is a
meaningful structure, which is not surprising since it represent an ethanol molecule. “B”
failed the structural constraints since it is an incomplete structure. “C” however passed
through all constraints although the structure is not possible. The reason for this is the
presence of “H2O” group. Since the model was not intended to handle these type of
groups from Fredenslund (1975) and Hansen (1991) that have no valency, they must be
handled separately. These groups will be called “category 1” groups while the remaining
groups will be referred to as “category 2” groups. “Category 1” groups will henceforth
bypass the structural constraints since they are already meaningful structures.
4.2
GCM
4.2.1
Implementation
The properties needed in this work are: the normal boiling point, the melting point, the
critical temperature, the critical pressure, acentric factor and enthalpy of vaporisation.
The correlations by Constantinou and Gani (1994) are formulated explicitly in terms
of the desired property and considering only the ﬁrst order groups in this work. The
correlation can be seen in table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Pure property GCM correlations by Constantinou and Gani (1994) [9].
Property
Correlation
Normal melting point, Tm
Tm0 log P
k nk Tm1,k
Tm0
Tm1,k
Adjustable parameter
Contribution of grp “k” to Tm
Normal boiling point, Tb
Tb0 log P
k nk Tb1,k
Tb0
Tb1,k
Adjustable parameter
Contribution of grp “k” to Tb
Critical temperature Tc,
Tc0 log P
k nk Tc1,k
Tc0
Tc1,k
Adjustable parameter
Contribution of grp “k” to Tc
Critical pressure Pc
Pc1
h P
k nkPc1,k
i−2
Pc1
Pc1,k
Adjustable parameter
Contribution of grp “k” to Tc
Acentric factor, ω
ω01
h
w03
+
P
k nkw1,k
iw02
ω01
ω02
ω03
ω1,k
1stAdjustable parameter
2ndAdjustable parameter
3rdAdjustable parameter
Contribution of grp “k” to Tc
Standard enthalpy of
vaporisation ∆Hv298K
hv0 + P
k nk hv1,k
hv0
hv1,k
Adjustable parameter
Contribution of grp “k” to ∆Hv
The ﬁrst order contributions to each of the aforementioned properties for “Category 2”
groups can be found in the original publication by Constantinou and Gani (1994) [9]. The
value of the adjustable parameters are reported in table 4.4 [9].
==PAGE:54==
4.2. GCM
47
Table 4.4: Value of adjustable parameter of the GCM by Constantinou and Gani
(1994) [9].
Parameter
Value
Tm0
102.425
K
Tb0
204.359
K
Tc0
181.128
K
Pc1
1.3705
bar
ω01
0.4085
ω02
0.505
ω03
1.1507
hv0
6.829
kJ/mol
To be able to accommodate “Category 1” groups in the developed framework, their prop-
erties must be determined in a similar way using the correlations in table 4.3. Using the
same adjustable parameters, their contributions are determined using the corresponding
experimental value. An example is seen below for the contribution to the boiling point
for water (H2O):
Tb = 373.15K = Tb0 log Tb1
⇓
Tb1,H2O = exp Tb
Tb0
= exp 373.15
204.359 = 6.208
This is done for all “Category 1” groups and the properties considered above. The exper-
imental values used to determine the contribution were extracted from the commercial
simulator Aspen Plus.
4.2.2
Validation
The implementation of the GCM by Constantinou and Gani (1994)[9] is veriﬁed. This is
done by calculating the pure compound properties of interest for some random molecular
structures and comparing the with properties calculated using ProPred as well as exper-
imental data if available. ProPred is a property estimation toolbox integrated with the
ICAS software developed by CAPEC DTU. The software is able to calculate properties
based on the GCM used in this work. The validation is performed on the following prop-
erties: Normal boiling point, melting point, critical temperature and pressure, enthalpy
of vaporisation and acentric factor. The results from the implementation, ProPred and
the experimental values from NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology) for
the properties of interest can be seen in table (4.5) .
==PAGE:55==
4.2. GCM
48
Table 4.5: Comparison between the Properties of interest for certain molecular structures
Structure
Name
Properties
Tm [K]
Tb [K]
Tc [K]
Pc [bar]
Hv [at 298K] [kJ/mol]
w
Nr.
Groups
Occurrence
Imp
ProPred
Exp
Imp
ProPred
Exp
Imp
ProPred
Exp
Imp
ProPred
Exp
Imp
ProPred
Exp
Imp
ProPred
Exp
1
H2O
1
water
373.15
NA
273.15
373.15
NA
273.15
647.00
NA
647.00
220.64
NA
220.64
43.98
NA
43.98
0.345
NA
NA
2
DOH
1
Ethylene glycol
260.15
NA
260.15
470.45
NA
470.45
719.70
NA
719.70
85.38
NA
85.38
66.25
NA
66.25
0.487
0.846
NA
3
CH3
1
Acetone
171.62
171.62
178.35
305.37
305.37
329.15
490.11
490.11
508.2
48.8
48.8
47
29.94
29.94
30.84
0.332
0.332
NA
CH3CO
1
4
CH3
1
Ethanol
164.57
164.57
159.05
330.01
330.01
351.35
489.28
489.28
513.92
55.57
55.57
61.47
40.12
40.12
42.32
0.527
0.527
NA
CH2
1
OH
1
5
CH3
2
NA
213.52
213.53
NA
439.00
439.00
NA
433.99
433.99
NA
31.00
31.00
NA
50.58
50.58
NA
0.567
0.567
NA
CH2COO
2
6
CH2
1
NA
228.40
228.40
NA
409.33
409.33
NA
592.12
592.12
NA
43.60
43.60
NA
47.10
47.10
NA
0.607
0.607
NA
HCO
1
CH3COO
1
==PAGE:56==
4.3. VLE-CALCULATION
49
For water and ethylene glycol, the experimental results are identical with the calculated
values. This is due to the fact they belong to the groups for “Category 1” and their
contribution were directly determined from the experimental values as explained in the
implementation. ProPred is not able to generate structures for water. Since water cannot
be described by the GCM by Constantinou and Gani (1994). Since ethylene glycol has
its own group in the UNIFAC, it was considered as a “Category 1” group and a new
contribution was calculated to match the experimental values. For acetone and ethanol,
some discrepancies can be noted in terms of all properties, this reﬂects the accuracy of
the predictive model used. The highest deviation can be seen for the boiling point and
the critical temperature of acetone. For structure Nr. 5, the name cannot be determined
since it can have diﬀerent isomers. It is however important to note that the calculated
boiling point is higher than the critical point for this structure. This cannot be the case
in reality. This reﬂects yet again some of the weaknesses with using predictive models.
It is then important to sort out such structures from further analysis in the framework.
Therefore an additional constraint should be added stating that the boiling point of a
generated structure must not be higher than its critical point. The enthalpy of vaporisa-
tion for water and ethylene glycol matches the experimental ones. This is yet again due to
the fact that they have been determined manually based on a single group contribution.
The acentric factor was only compared t the values obtained through ProPred.
Based on the previous analysis and the data in table (4.5), we can conclude that the GCM
by Constantinou and Gani (1994) have been successfully implemented in this work as it
matches the results obtained by ProPred.
4.3
VLE-Calculation
4.3.1
Implementation
UNIFAC
The liquid phase activity coeﬃcients are calculated using UNIFAC using the extended and
revised groups of Hansen et al. (1991) [36]. For component “i” the activity coeﬃcient
γi can be calculated from eq. (4.5), where γC
i and γR
i are the combinatorial and residual
parts of the activity coeﬃcient.
ln γi = ln γC
i + ln γR
i
(4.5)
The combinatorial part can be calculated through eq. (4.6) where xi is the liquid mole
fraction of component “i”, z is a constant equal to 10. Φp is the segment fraction, θi is
the area fraction and li is a parameter.
ln γC
i = ln Φi
xi
+ z
2 qi ln θi
Φi
+ li −Φi
xi
X
j
xjlj
(4.6)
The li parameter is calculated as in eq. (4.7), where ri and qi are measures to the molecular
van der Waals volumes and molecular surface areas.
li = z
2(ri qi)(ri −1)
(4.7)
The area fraction θi can be calculated by eq. (4.8).
θi =
qixi
P
j qjxj
(4.8)
==PAGE:57==
4.3. VLE-CALCULATION
50
The segment fraction determined be eq. (4.9).
Φi =
rixi
P
j rjxj
(4.9)
qi is related to the pure property of compound “i” by eq. (4.10) where Qk is the area
parameter of group k.
qi =
X
k
v(i)
k Qk
(4.10)
ri is also related to the pure property of compound “i” by eq. (4.11) where Rk is the
surface parameter of group k.
ri =
X
k
v(i)
k Rk
(4.11)
The residual part γR
i
i calculated through eq. (4.12), where Γk is the group residual
activity coeﬃcient and Γ(i)
k
is the residual activity coeﬃcient of group k in a reference
solution only containing group k.
These are calculated as following in eq. (4.13) and
eq. (4.14) respectively.
ln γR
i =
X
k
v(i)
k (ln Γk −ln Γ(i)
k )
(4.12)
ln Γk = Qk
 
1 −ln
X
m
ΘmΨm,k −
X
m
ΘmΨm,k
P
n ΘnΨn,m
!
(4.13)
ln Γ(i)
k = Qk
 
1 −ln
X
m
Θ(i)
m Ψm,k −
X
m
Θ(i)
m Ψm,k
P
n Θ(i)
n Ψn,m
!
(4.14)
The area fraction fraction of group m Θm is calculated as in eq. (4.15), where χ is the
mole fraction group m in the mixture. This mole fraction is calculated by eq. (4.16).
Θm =
Qmχm
P
n Qnχn
(4.15)
χm =
P
i v(i)
m x(i)
P
i
P
n v(i)
m x(i)
(4.16)
The corresponding parameters for the reference solutions can be determined by eq. (4.17)
and eq. (4.18).
Θ(i)
m =
Qmχm(i)
P
n Qnχn(i)
(4.17)
χm(i) = vm(i)
(4.18)
Ψ is a measure of the group interaction parameter between group “m” and “n”, while
am,n is the interaction parameter between group m and n calculated by eq. (4.19). This
parameter is evaluated experimentally and through data regression. T is the temperature.
Ψm,n = exp
−am,n
T

(4.19)
If the identity of the compounds present in the mixture are known, then only two degrees
of freedom remain in the UNIFAC model. As a simpliﬁcation, the model can then be rep-
resented as the activity coeﬃcient as a function of the mole fraction and the temperature
as seen in eq. (4.20)
γi = γi(xi, T)
(4.20)
==PAGE:58==
4.3. VLE-CALCULATION
51
4.3.2
Validation
The UNIFAC implementation is validated by producing the liquid activity coeﬃcients for
a binary mixture of Diethylamine (DEA) and n-heptane (HEP) at 308.15 K. The system
was chosen as since it has been previously used to demonstrate the application of the
model [83]. The two compounds are described in terms of groups as shown in table 4.6.
Table 4.6: DEA and HEP in terms of groups
Compound
Groups
CH3
CH2
CH2NH
DEA
2
1
1
HEP
2
5
0
The liquid activity coeﬃcients obtained through the implementation are compared to
those obtained for the same system, under the same condition and using the same model
in Aspen Plus. The results for the whole composition range are shown in ﬁg. 4.2.
Figure
4.2:
Logarithm of the activity coeﬃcients of the binary system
diethylamine(1)-n-heptane(2) at T=308.15 K as a function the mole fraction of di-
ethylamine
The results from the implementation are identical to the ones obtained through the com-
mercial software. Furthermore, the case study performed in the literature obtained the
results shown in table 4.7, which are identical to the result in ﬁg. 4.2. Furthermore, the
trend observed in ﬁg. 4.2 suggests that as the composition approaches unity, the slop
approaches zero as required by the Gibbs/Duhem equation.
Based on the results obtained through Aspen Plus and the literature case study, it can
be concluded that UNIFAC was successfully implemented. Data produced by GAMS and
Aspen for the validation can be seen in appendix.
4.3.3
Implementation of the saturated pressure calculation
The saturated vapour pressure is calculated through the Antoine equation [79] which can
be seen in eq. (4.21), where Psat is the saturated pressure in bar, and A, B and C are
==PAGE:59==
4.3. VLE-CALCULATION
52
Table 4.7: Liquid activity coeﬃcients for DEA and HEP at 308.15 K at xDEA=0.4
[83]
Compound
x
γ
DEA
0.4
1.133
HEP
0.6
1.047
constant that are experimentally determined. T is the temperature in Celsius.
P sat = A −
B
T + C
(4.21)
Since the identity of the generated structure is not known and in the absence of a database
containing the Antoine parameter, a procedure to determine these is implemented. For all
compounds the following three relations must hold true: the saturated vapour pressure at
the normal boiling point must correspond to the atmospheric pressure P0 eq. (4.22), the
saturated vapour pressure at the critical point must correspond to the critical pressure
Pc eq. (4.23) and the the deﬁnition of the Pitzer acentric factor eq. (4.24) [70].
P0 = A −
B
C + Tb
(4.22)
Pc = A −
B
C + Tc
(4.23)
ω = −1 −log10 P sat
Tr=0.7
(4.24)
The A, B and C parameters are determined through an optimisation procedure minimising
the square errors of the Pc, P0 and ω determined by the Antoine equation and the the
GCM. The optimisation problem is formulated in the following eq. (4.25).
min
A,B,C∈Z Fobj(A,B,C) = R(Pc)2 + R(P0)2 + R(ω)2
(4.25)
s.t
R(Pc) = Pc(GCM) −Pc(Antoine)
R(P0) = P0(GCM) −P0(Antoine)
R(ω) = ω(GCM) −ω(Antoine)
In terms of the software used and since the problem is nonlinear (presence of power
functions), a nonlinear must be chosen. The solver chosen is “CONOPT”. The solver has
been described as the “go-to” solver for nonlinear problems and was thus chosen.
4.3.4
Validation of he Saturated vapour calculation
To validate the procedure for calculating the saturated vapour pressure, four compounds
were chosen: diethylamine, n-heptane, water, ethylene glycol. Based on the calculated
critical points, normal boiling temperature and the acentric factor calculate by GCM, the
Antoine parameter were calculated. The data used in and obtained from the optimisation
can be seen table 4.8. The obtained Antoine parameter successfully recreated the data
from which they were obtained. The residual error (Fobj) is very small in each case.
==PAGE:60==
4.3. VLE-CALCULATION
53
Table 4.8: Data used and obtained from the procedure for determining the Antoine
constants
by GCM
by Antoine equation
Fobj
Antoine Parameters
Tb
Tc
Pc
ω
P0
Pc
ω
A
B
C
DEA
341
516
39,96
0,326
1,013
39,96
0,325
1,4 e-7
4,423
1367,537
241,40
HEP
379
549
28,26
0,337
1,013
28,26
0,337
8,4 e-18
2,56
334,773
25,117
H2O
373
647
220,6
0,345
1,013
220,6
0,345
1,1 e-9
5,27
1809,921
243,43
DOH
470
719
84,38
0,487
1,013
84,38
0,487
6,6 e-12
4,04
1104,657
76,215
A further veriﬁcation is done by calculating the vapour pressure curve of water using
the obtained Antoine constants and comparing the results with those obtained from the
implementation. The results obtained can be seen in ﬁg. 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Saturated vapour pressure of water obtained through the current im-
plementation and through Aspen Plus
The good accordance between the the results obtained from this work and those from
Aspen Plus is a further proof of the correctness of the implementation. It must be noted
however that Aspen uses an extended Antoine equation as shown eq. (4.26).
log P sat = C1 +
C2
T + C3
+ C4T + C5 log T + C6T C7
(4.26)
4.3.5
Implementation of VLE calculation
The mixture properties of interest are closely related to the vapour-liquid equilibrium
occurring during the extractive distillation process.
The vapour liquid equilibrium is
==PAGE:61==
4.3. VLE-CALCULATION
54
described by eq. (3.6) while the fugacity coeﬃcients are given by eq. (3.7) and eq. (3.8).
ˆfV
i = ˆfL
i
ˆfV
i = yi ˆφi P
ˆfL
i = xi ˆγiP sat
i
Since the vapour phase will be considered ideal, the equilibrium condition will be rewritten
in terms of the vapour mole fraction yi as in eq. (4.27)
yi = xi ˆγi
P sat
i
P
(4.27)
The saturated vapour pressure P sat is only a function of temperature, while the total
pressure P is ﬁxed to the operating pressure of the column. This is set to atmospheric
pressure. By applying a degree of freedom analysis, it is clear that eq. (4.27) has three
variables: the mole fractions xi, yi and the temperature T. By supplying the liquid mole
fractions xi, the degree of freedom is reduced by one. The current implementation is
formulated as a bubble point calculation where the liquid composition for the whole
concentration range is provided.
An additional relation can be formulated, where the sum of the the mole fractions must
be equal to unit as shown in eq. (4.28).
X
i
yi = 1
(4.28)
X
i
xi = 1
(4.29)
However since the liquid mole fraction is provided by the user, eq. (4.29) is not considered.
This will increase the number of equations in the system by one which will result in a
well deﬁned problem with two equations (eq. (4.27) and eq. (4.28) ) and two variables (T
and y1 = 1 −y2 ).
4.3.6
Validation of the VLE calculation
To verify the implementation of the VLE calculation, a series of the system Acetone,
methanol and water is considered in pairs and the corresponding x-y diagrams are pre-
sented. The diagrams are produced with the current implementation and by Aspen Plus
to provide a basis for comparison. The acetone-methanol system is a known azeotropic
mixture that is used as a benchmark case in many articles concerning extractive distilla-
tion and water has been used as an entrainer for the mixture [45].
System1: acetone(1) + methanol(2):
The x-y data obtained for the VLE calcu-
lation implemented can be seen in ﬁg. 4.4. As can be seen in ﬁg. 4.4, the performed
calculation does not show the formation of an azeotrope. By careful examination, it was
concluded that the deviation was due to the vapour pressure calculation. These are de-
pendant of the pure component properties and as pointed out earlier, there was a notable
deviation between the experimental and the GCM calculated properties of acetone.
==PAGE:62==
4.3. VLE-CALCULATION
55
Figure 4.4: x-y diagram for acetone(1)-methanol(2) using GC+UNIFAC
The problem described can be remedied by manually inserting the experimental values
of Tb,Tc,Pc for acetone. The implementation was able to reproduce the x-y data from
Aspen Plus as can be seen in ﬁg. 4.5 1. The data for acetone used in both calculations
can be seen in table 4.9
Figure 4.5: x-y diagram for acetone(1)-methanol(2) with diﬀerent techniques: As-
pen, GC+UNIFAC and Exp+UNIFAC
As can be seen in 4.5, the accuracy of the VLE calculation is much closer to the one
provided by Aspen Plus. This results underline the importance of having accurate pure
compound properties. Therefore, since the azeotropic pair to separate is known, the pure
compound properties for these will be inserted manually.
1EXP: indicates that the experimental values for Tc, Pc, Tb were inserted for the binary A-B
==PAGE:63==
4.3. VLE-CALCULATION
56
Table 4.9: Physical properties for acetone
Property
GCM
Experimental
Tb [K]
305.37
329.15
Tc [K]
490.11
508.20
Pc [bar]
48.83
47.20
system 2:
methanol(1)-water(2)
The VLE calculation is shown as x-y diagram
which can be seen in ﬁgure(4.6). In the case of the binary system methanol water the
VLE data calculated by the implementation match well with the data from Aspen. Addi-
tionally, there is no diﬀerence between data entered through the GCM or manually. This
is due to the fact that the two compound are described by a single group for which the
contribution was calculated through the experimental values.
Figure 4.6: x-y diagram for methanol(1)-water(2)
System 3: Acetone-water
The x-y diagram resulting from the VLE calculation be-
tween water and acetone can be seen in ﬁg. 4.7. The results from the implementation are
in good agreement with those obtained from Aspen Plus.
==PAGE:64==
4.3. VLE-CALCULATION
57
Figure 4.7: x-y diagram for acetone(1)-water(2)
The results obtained by the implementation match the ones obtained by the implemen-
tation. ﬁg. 4.7 suggest that the separation might become very diﬃcult approaching pure
acetone. To investigate this further, a closer look at high liquid mole fraction for acetone
is done. The obtained results can be seen in ﬁg. 4.8.
Figure 4.8: Portion of x-y diagram for acetone(1)-water(2) (x=0.96 to x=1) by
various methods
The implementation and the UNIFAC in Aspen Plus both suggest the formation of an
azeotrope between water and acetone. This is however not the case as cited in the litera-
ture [45] [32] [31]. This is also supported by the results obtained from Aspen Plus using
UNIQUAC. This incident is simply due to the model and is not related to the implemen-
tation.
Based on the various cases inspected, it can be concluded that the VLE calculation has
been implemented correctly.
==PAGE:65==
4.3. VLE-CALCULATION
58
4.3.7
Implementation of mixture Property calculations
The mixture properties of interest is selectivity and capacity at inﬁnite dilution. Addition-
ally, a test for the formation of azeotropes as well as phase stability must be established.
Selectivity At Inﬁnite Dilution
The selectivity at inﬁnite dilution is determined as
indicated in eq. (2.3).
S∞
ij =
 
γ∞
i
γ∞
j
!
E
In the current implementation, the activity coeﬃcients at inﬁnite dilutions are calculated
at the boiling point of the entrainer E and with a molefraction predominantly made of
the entrainer as shown in table table 4.10.
Table 4.10: Data for calculating the activity coeﬃcients at inﬁnite dilution
T
xE
xi
xj
γ∞
i
Tb(E)
0.9999999
0.0000001
0
γ∞
j
Tb(E)
0.9999999
0
0.0000001
In a similar way, the capacity is calculated as in eq. (2.4).
C∞
j,S =
1
γ∞
j
The validation of the of the calculation of the selectivity and the capacity are assumed
proven by the previously proven accuracy of the VLE calculation.
Check For The Presence Of Azeotropes
The entrainer E must not create an
azeotrope with neither A nor B. Azeotropic mixtures are characterised by the fact that the
relative volatilities αA−E and αB−E exhibits values on both signs of unity. The proposed
implementation is to consider two points at the extremities of the composition range. The
ﬁrst point approaches xE ≈1 while the second approaches xE ≈0. The relative volatil-
ities are calculated at these points. Based on the analysis shown in the method section,
the relative volatility at the two points will be on both sides of unity is an azeotrope is
formed. The suggested detection method is to calculate the product of the the logarithm
of the activity coeﬃcients at the suggested two points. A positive product indicates that
the calculated relative volatilities are on the same side of unity (either both logarithms
are positive or they are both negative). This is evaluated for both binary pairs A-E and
B-E. Considering the binary A-E, the calculation is performed as following in eq. (4.31).
==PAGE:66==
4.3. VLE-CALCULATION
59
log αAE

xE≈0 × log αAE

xE≈1
(4.30)
⇓
log
KA
KE
 
xE≈0 × log
KA
KE
 
xE≈1
⇓
log
 1
KE
 
xE≈0 × log
KA
1
 
xE≈1
⇓
log

1
γE P sat
E
 
xE≈0 , T≈Tb(A) × log
 γA P sat
A
 
xE≈1 , T≈Tb(E)
(4.31)
In a similar manner, the expression for the binary pair B-E as shown i eq. (4.32)
log

1
γE P sat
E
 
xE≈0 , T≈Tb(B) × log
 γA P sat
B
 
xE≈1 , T≈Tb(E)
(4.32)
The veriﬁcation of the azeotrope detection is performed on the Acetone(A)-water(E)-
methanol(B) system considered previously. The obtained results can be seen in table 4.11
Table 4.11: Results for azeotrope detection implementation in the acetone-water-
methno system
Pair
log αij

xj≈0
log αij

xj≈1
Product
Comment
A-B
0.0131
-0.0142
≤0
The implementation successfully
detect the azeotrope formed be-
tween Acetone and methanol as
conﬁrmed by the VLE calcula-
tions.
A-E
3.7895
-0.2394
≤0
The implementation detects an
azeotrope between Acetone and
water, which was also conﬁrmed
by the VLE calculation although
this is not the case in reality.
B-E
2.0916
0.8658
≥0
No azeotropes are detected be-
tween water and methanol.
Based on the results obtained above, it can be concluded that the azeotrope detection
method works. Although it does detect an azeotrope between acetone and water, this is
the fault of the model used and the risk associated with using the predictive models.
==PAGE:67==
4.3. VLE-CALCULATION
60
Check For Phase Stability
The phase stability is closely related to the Gibbs energy
function of mixing. This is calculated as in eq. (4.33) where R is the gas constant, T is
the temperature and GE is the Gibbs excess energy[10].
∆Gmix
RT
= GE
RT +
X
i
xi log(xi)
(4.33)
The Gibbs excess energy is calculates as in eq. (4.34)
GE
RT =
X
i
xi log(γi)
(4.34)
Combining the two relations yields the full expression of the Gibbs energy of mixing
∆Gmix
RT
=
X
i
xi log(γi) +
X
i
xi log(xi)
(4.35)
The second derivative of the Gibbs energy of mixing is determined by performing central
diﬀerentiation using the points obtained from eq. (4.35). The expression thus becomes
as in eq. (4.36). Here the subscript “dp” indicates the the total number of data points
describing the liquid composition in the binary pair i-j.
∂2
∆Gmix
RT

∂x2
i
= ∆Gmix
RT

xdp+1,i
−2 ∆Gmix
RT

xdp,i
+ ∆Gmix
RT

xdp−1,i
(4.36)
For all entrainer and for the whole liquid composition range eq. (4.35) must always be
negative, while eq. (4.36) should always be positive. The stability check implementation
is tested on the acetone-methanol mixture and compared to the same results obtained
through Aspen Plus as shown in ﬁg. 4.9.
Figure 4.9: Gibbs free energy of mixing and its second derivative for Acetone (1)-
water(2)
==PAGE:68==
4.4. PROCESS MODEL
61
The obtained result suggest some discrepancy between the values calculated by the im-
plementation and those obtained by Aspen Plus.
The discrepancy is highest for the
extremities of the composition. The model however is able to conﬁrm that the mixture
acetone-water does not create a second liquid phase and that the mixture is stable.
4.4
Process model
4.4.1
Fenske model
The Fenske equation is applied to illustrate how easy a separation is in the presence of
the entrainer. The calculations must be performed on entrainer free basis. A simpliﬁed
process model is considered consisting of an extractive column an a recovery column. an
entrainer to feed ration of 1 is chosen to ensure that enough entrainer is present to break
the azeotrope. This value has previously been reported by Kossack et al (2008) [45] and
Momoh (1991) [60]. Additionally, the following speciﬁcations are made.
• All of component A leaves the extractive column at the top.
• The distillate composition is 0.995 of A and 0.005 of B on entrainer free basis.
• The top product of the recovery column is comprised of 0.995 B and 0.005 E.
• Entrainer to feed ratio : 1.
• Feed composition of 0.75 A and 0.25 B.
The entrainer free fractions denoted x′ of component A and B can be calculated as shown
in eq. (4.37) [79].
x′
j =
xj
1 −xE
forj = A, B
(4.37)
Using eq. (4.37) and the indicated process specs, a total mass balance can be performed on
the column to determine the actual compositions as well as the entrainer free compositions.
The obtained results for the molefraction are reported in table 4.12.
Table 4.12: Process stream mole fractions
A
B
E
xF
0.375
0.125
0.500
x’F
0.75
0.25
0.000
xD1
0.427
0.003
0.570
x’D1
0.995
0.005
0.000
xB1
0.000
0.200
0.800
x’B1
0.000
1.000
0.000
xD2
0.000
0.995
0.005
xB2
0.000
0.001
0.999
For the ﬁrst column, the molefraction where the entrainer is present are used in to calculate
the corresponding vapour molefractions.
These are then converted into entrainer free
fraction using eq. (4.37).
The obtained entrainer free molefractions are then used to
determine the geometric average of the relative volatility using eq. (3.11). For the second
column, the mixture is only binary (B+E) and therefore the molefraction used are the
actual molefractions.
==PAGE:69==
4.4. PROCESS MODEL
62
Figure 4.10: Process conﬁgurations and stream specs considered in the process
model
==PAGE:70==
4.4. PROCESS MODEL
63
Calculations regarding the Fenske model are related to the mass balance over the columns
and the VLE caulcations.
The model equations are provided in the methods section
eq. (3.9) and eq. (3.11). Therefore the validation of the Fenske is not done.
4.4.2
ISS method
Implementation
The process model is implemented as an optimisation problem, where the E/D is min-
imised. In the implementation of the ISS method there are two compositions of interest:
the composition for which the isovolatility line intersects with the binary composition
A-E and the composition at which E/D is minimal. In both cases “B” is is considered to
be present at inﬁnite dilution 2. The ﬁrst step is thus to determine the composition for
which the the equilibrium constant of A is equal to that of B (B is in inﬁnite dilution).
KA(xiso
A , T)
K∞A,E
B
(xiso
A , T)
= 1
(4.38)
The composition xiso satisfying eq. (4.38) is unique as proven by Petlyuk et al. (2004)
[68]. E/D can thereafter be calculated as part of an optimisation procedure formulated
as shown below in eq. (4.39):
min
xmin
A
∈Z Fobj(xmin
A
) = E/D
(4.39)
s.t
E
D = 1 −
1 −KB∞(xmin
A
, T)
xmin
A
(KA(xmin
A
, T) −K∞
B (xmin
A
, T))
R = K∞
B (xmin
A
, T) −E/D
1 −K∞
B (xmin
A
, T)
KA(xiso
A , T)
K∞A,E
B
(xiso
A , T)
= 1
xmin
A
≤xiso
A
The problem formulation in eq. (4.39) is a nonlinear problem. In terms of the software
used, the same solver is used as for determining the Antoine constants.
Validation
The validation of the ISS method is not straight forward, in fact a thorough search of
the relevant literature yielded only two related works which are the articles with proof
of concept of the method [68] [69] and this is one of the reasons this method is being
investigated. In the absence of working examples published in the literature, the only
way to perform a validation is to investigate the trend of E/D over the entire binary
composition A-E. A correct implementation should yield similar trends as the ones shown
in ﬁg. 3.9. The system Acetone-methanol-water is again considered. The implementation
2xB ≈0
==PAGE:71==
4.4. PROCESS MODEL
64
yields the following results:
xiso
A = 0.958
xmin
A
= 0.927
(E/D)min = 0.020
Rmin = 3.61
The obtained values match the graph ﬁg. 4.11.
Figure 4.11: Trend of E/D obtained through the implementation
The trend of (E/D)min inﬁg. 4.11 matches well with one constructed by Petlyuk ﬁg. 3.9
[68].
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 5
Case Studies
In the following chapter, the cases studies on which the constructed CAMD is used are pre-
sented. The mixture of interest in both cases is acetone-methanol. Acetone and methanol
are major compounds of the aqueous product resulting from hydrocarbon synthesis by the
Fischer-Tropsch process through the usage of carbon monoxide and hydrogen [34]. The
acetone(A)-methanol(B) mixture exhibits a minimum boiling azeotrope at 328.29 K with
an acetone composition of xA=0.79 at atmospheric pressure [74]. Another reason this
mixture is of interest in this work is that it has been studied extensively in the literature.
The ﬁrst case studies consist of evaluating the benchmark entrainer used for the sep-
aration of acetone and methanol. These entrainers are reported by Kossack et al. (2008)
and consist of: water, DMSO, and ethylene glycol [45].
It is therefore of interest to
see if these survive the diﬀerent constraints formulated in this work. The second Case
study consist of applying the CAMD procedure in it entirety to determine suitable en-
trainer to the acetone-methanol case. At ﬁrst, the CAMD constraints are formulated to
accommodate the acetone-methanol case and thereafter, it is tested.
5.1
CAMD Framework: Acetone-methanol separation
5.1.1
Problem deﬁnition
It is desired to obtain heavy entrainer candidates capable of separating the azeotropic
mixture Acetone-methanol through extractive distillation. It is furthermore desired to
obtain acetone as the top product of the extractive column. The entrainer should there-
fore associate preferentially with methanol. The entrainer must be in liquid phase during
operation. It should also be easy to separate the entrainer-methanol mixture in the re-
covery column. The entrainer should also not result in any hazardous gases nor cause
extensive energy consumption.
The needs are then translated into target properties as shown in table 5.1.
For each
of these properties, target values are set to satisfy the needs. These target needs are
reported in table 5.2.
65
==PAGE:73==
5.1. CAMD FRAMEWORK: ACETONE-METHANOL SEPARATION
66
Table 5.1: Entrainer needs and corresponding target properties considered
Need
Target property
Comment
Entrainer
melting point
An entrainer indicates that the product must be liquid.
Heavy entrainer
Boiling point
The boiling point of the entrainer must be suﬃciently high
so there is no risk it will evaporate
Reduce energy consumption
Enthalpy of vaporisation
Diﬃcult to predict as it depends on the pressure, boiling
point and enthalpy of vaporization However in this work
it is assumed that a low enthalpy of vaporisation directly
translate to less energy usage
Aﬃnity towards methanol
Selectivity at inﬁnite dilution
The litterature suggest that a high selectivity translates to
a high aﬃnity to associate with methanol and can thus be
removed as the bottom product of the extractive column
Miscibility
Gibbs energy of mixing
A spontaneous mixing process correspond to a negative
Gibbs energy of mixing.
No miscibility Gap
Gibbs energy of mixing
a concave proﬁl for the Gibbs energy of mixing suggest the
absence of mscibility gaps.
No azeotrope formation
relative volatility
The entrainer should not form any new azeotropes. Thus its
corsponding relative volatility must not cross unity at any
point.
Safety consideration
Chemical groups
Safety considerations can be applied through the choice of
groups to build the entrainer.
==PAGE:74==
5.1. CAMD FRAMEWORK: ACETONE-METHANOL SEPARATION
67
Table 5.2: Target property values in the sepration of acetone-methanol
Target property
Target value
Comment
Melting point
greater than 298 K
The melting point of the solvent should be below room tem-
perature to be in the liquid phase during processing.
Boiling point
greater than 368K and less
than 500K
the highest boiling compound of the azeotropic mixture is
methanol. Thus the a temperature diﬀerence of about 30K
is chosen between the entrainer and methanol. The upper
bound is dictated by the lowest critical temperature in the
mixture.
Enthalpy of vaporization
less thn 67 kJ/mol
There is no solid reasoning behind the value set other than
to avoid compiund with verry high entalpy of vaporisation
Selectivity at inﬁnte dilution
above 2
Based on the observation by Kossack et al. (2008) they con-
cluded that entrainer with selectivity above two have poten-
tial to be good candidates.
Gibbs energy of mixing
below zero
To reﬂect the spontaneous mixing of compound
second derivative of Gibbs energy of
mixing
above 0
to reﬂect the trend of the mixing function
relative volatility
only on one side of unity along
the whole compsition range
T ensure that the relative volatility does not cross unity.
Basis set
No sulphur, no ﬂour, no chlo-
ride and no bromine
These chemical groups are usually associated with haz-
ardeous gases.
==PAGE:75==
5.1. CAMD FRAMEWORK: ACETONE-METHANOL SEPARATION
68
5.1.2
CAMD constraint selection
The groups considered to form the backbone of the entrainer are reported in table 5.3. The
considered groups all contain exclusively Carbon, hydrogen and oxygen except DMSO.
This compound is included in the analysis since it is a benchmark entrainer for the
separation of acetone and the methanol.
Table 5.3: Basis set for the CAMD
Groups
Category 1
H2O - HCOOH - DOH
Category 2
CH3 - CH2 - CH - C - OH
CHO
-
HCO
-
CH3COO
CH2COO - HCOO - CH3CO
CH2O - COOH - COO
The selected models to incorporate into the CAMD can be seen in table 5.4 and include
the d´structure model, the property model, the thermodynamic model as well as the
process model.
Table 5.4: Models selected for the CAMD formulation
Type
Model
Reference
Structure model
Octet rule
Connectivity rule
Odele and Macchietto (1993) [65]
Odele and Macchietto (1993) [65]
Property model
GCM
Constantinou and Gani (1994) [9]
Thermodynamic model
UNIFAC Original
Fredenslund (1975) [21]
Hansen (1991) [36]
Process model
Fenske equation
ISS method
Fenske (1932) [79]
Petlyuk et al. (2015) [69]
The objective function chosen is the entrainer to distillate ratio (E/D) determined by the
ISS method by Petlyuk et al. (2015) [69]. This function should be minimised. A lower
entrainer to distillate ratio means less amount of the entrainer is used.
5.1.3
CAMD formulation
The mathematical formulation of the CAMD is given in the following: eq. (5.1) is the
objective function, eq. (5.2) is the octet rule, eq. (5.3) is the connectivity constraints,
eq. (5.4) constraints the total number of groups making an entrainer while eq. (5.5)
constraints the occurrence of functional groups. eq. (5.6) ensures the entrainer is liquid,
eq. (5.7) ensures the entrainer is heavy, eq. (5.8) ensures that the boiling point is below
the critical point (ﬁlter faulty structures oﬀ), and eq. (5.9) ensures that the energy is
reduced. eq. (5.10) ensures aﬃnity is towards methanol,eq. (5.11) ensure no azeotrope
is formed between A-E, eq. (5.12)ensure no azeotrope is formed between B-E, eq. (5.13)
ensures miscibility and ensures that no miscibility gap occurs eq. (5.14). eq. (5.15) and
5.16 calculate the minimum number of stages in the extractive and recovery columns
respectively. eq. (5.17) determines the composition of the isovolatility line intersection at
the side A-E, eq. (5.18) constraints the search direction for xmin. eq. (5.19) calculates
the E/D ratio while eq. (5.20) calculates the reﬂux ratio.
==PAGE:76==
5.1. CAMD FRAMEWORK: ACETONE-METHANOL SEPARATION
69
The objective function:
min
F = E/D
(5.1)
The Structural constraints
v
X
k
(2 −vk) nk = 2 m
(5.2)
X
i
ni ≥nj(vj −1) + 2
(5.3)
3 ≥
X
k
nk ≥6
(5.4)
1 ≥
X
k
nk −nCH3 −nCH2 −nCH −nC ≥2
(5.5)
The pure property constraints
Tm0 log
X
k
nk Tm1,k ≤298K
(5.6)
368K ≤Tb0 log
X
k
nk Tb1,k ≤500K
(5.7)
Tc0 log
X
k
nk Tc1,k ≥Tb0 log
X
k
nk Tb1,k
(5.8)
hv0 +
X
k
nk hv1,k ≤67kJ/mol
(5.9)
The mixture property constraint
S∞
AB ≤2
(5.10)
log αAE

xE≈0 × log αAE

xE≈1 ≥0
(5.11)
log αBE

xE≈0 × log αBE

xE≈1 ≥0
(5.12)
X
i
xi log(γi) +
X
i
xi log(xi) ≤0
(5.13)
∆Gmix
RT

xdp+1,i
−2 ∆Gmix
RT

xdp,i
+ ∆Gmix
RT

xdp−1,i
≥0
(5.14)
The process model:
Nmin,1 =
log S1
log αm,1
(5.15)
Nmin,2 =
log S2
log αm,2
(5.16)
KA(xiso
A , T)
K∞A,E
B
(xiso
A , T)
= 1
(5.17)
xr
A
≤xiso
A
(5.18)
E/D = 1 −
1 −K∞1,2
B
xr
A(KA −K∞1,2
B
)
(5.19)
Rmin = K∞1,2
B
−(E/D)min
1 −K∞1,2
B
(5.20)
==PAGE:77==
5.1. CAMD FRAMEWORK: ACETONE-METHANOL SEPARATION
70
5.1.4
Solution strategy
The solution strategy adopted is the decomposition method by Karunanithi et al (2005)[42].
All feasible structures are generated and their properties are evaluated in a sequential man-
ner. In terms of the GAMS software, the solvers used are ‘BARON” and “CONOPT”.
The results are presented in an a chapter on their own.
==PAGE:78==
Chapter 6
Results & Discussions
Two cases studies were investigated in this work.
The ﬁrst consist of testing already
existing benchmark entrainer against the developed framework. The second consist of
generating new entrainers through the CAMD framework.
6.1
Benchmark entrainers for acetone methanol
The benchmark entrainer considered are: water (H2O), dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) and
ethylene glycol (DOH). All three entrainer survive the evaluation of the pure property
constraints, however water is eliminated due to the formation of azeotrope (as shown in
the implementation chapter) and DMSO is eliminated due to the limit on the selectivity.
The elimination process can be seen in ﬁg. 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Evaluation of benchmark entrainer for acetone-methanol
The only surviving candidate is DOH. The result suggest that the criteria set on the
selectivity might be too stringent. The elimination of water from the process cannot be
avoided due to the limitation set by the UNIFAC thermodynamic model. It is however still
71
==PAGE:79==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
72
interesting to evaluate their performance in the process model and are thus re-included
in the process model evaluation. The obtained results are summered in table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Process model evaluation for benchmark entrainers
Entrainer
S
N1
N2
(E/D)min
R
H2O
5.24
16
9
0.020
3.618
DMSO
1.46
26
3
0.619
1.385
DOH
2.24
21
2
1.021
1.376
The highest selectivity is exhibited by water followed by DOH. The number of stages in the
extractive column is lowest for water followed by DOH. This could suggest that the number
of stages in the extractive column decreases with increasing selectivity. This observation
is in accordance with many observations and studies conducted in the literature however
concerns about its validity have also been noted [60]. The separation in the recovery
column is slightly harder than for the two other entrainer candidates (9 compared to 3
and 2). This could be due to the fact that the boiling point of water is the closest to
methanol amongst the present candidates. The boiling point of DOH and DMSO are very
close which could suggest the reason why the number of stages in the recovery column
are very close. It seems based on the results that a low entrainer to distillate is neither
associated with the lowest number of stages in any column nor have an eﬀect on the
reﬂux ratio. Water posses the highest reﬂux ratio and the lowest E/D. which could also
suggest the low number of stages in the extractive column ( an increase in the reﬂux ratio
usually corresponds to a lower number of stages which only the case for water). Based on
the results obtained in this case, it is not possible to make any clear tendencies on how
the parameters of the process model interact. It is however important to note that the
Fenske method and the ISS are based on totally diﬀerent assumptions (Fenske assumes
total reﬂux, and extractive distillation cannot operate under such assumptions). A larger
amount of data is needed to be able to make any meaningful suggestions on the existence
of any clear relation between the process parameters determined.
6.2
Entrainer design for acetone-methanol
A total of 476 possible structures have been generated by assembling the groups from
“Category 2”. Four “Category 1” structures are also considered resulting in a total of
480 feasible structures have been generated. An overview of these can be seen in the
Appendix. Evaluating the pure property constraints indicated in table 5.2 eliminates 140
candidates while the mixture property control step including the restriction set on the
selectivity, eliminates most candidates and only 18 candidates are left. The reduction of
possible candidates is illustrated in ﬁg. 6.2.
==PAGE:80==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
73
Figure 6.2: Continuous reduction of the solution space fr the acetone-methanol
case
All 18 obtained candidates can be seen in table 6.2. None of the obtained candidates are
carboxylic acids. However nearly obtained structures are alcohols (either contains OH or
HCO). The obtained candidates are only identiﬁed by the groups present in the structure
and not how the groups are aligned or connected. This i a notable disadvantage since the
true identity of the candidate is not known. However it is possible to verify the candidate
by manually assembling the molecule. A noticeable candidate in table 6.2 is “multsol1”.
This structure corresponds to ethylene glycol (OH-CH2-CH2-OH). Since ethylene glycol
is deﬁned as a group on its own, this candidate should not be considered in further studies
although it is included in table 6.3. The candidate “multsol291” and “multsol292” can
only make up unique structures (HCO only has one valency). Assembling the candidates
“multsol291” result in the structure seen in ﬁg. 6.3. The obtained structure corresponds to
Succinaldehyde. The GCM predicted the boiling point to be 422 K , while to experimental
value is only 331.15 K and should not ave survived the pure property check. This result
clearly illustrates the limitations of using the predictive models.
Figure 6.3: Multsol 291 structure corresponding to Succinaldehyde
==PAGE:81==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
74
Table 6.2: Entrainer candidate for the separation of acetone and methanol
CH3
CH2
CH
C
OH
CH3CO
HCO
CH3COO
CH2COO
HCOO
CH2O
CHO
COOH
COO
multsol1
2
2
multsol105
2
1
1
1
multsol107
2
1
2
multsol146
2
1
2
multsol291
2
2
multsol292
2
1
1
multsol369
1
1
2
multsol372
1
1
1
1
multsol373
1
1
1
2
multsol381
1
1
1
1
multsol431
1
1
1
1
1
multsol456
1
1
1
multsol457
1
2
multsol461
3
2
multsol468
3
1
1
multsol470
1
2
multsol471
1
1
2
==PAGE:82==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
75
Another example of candidates resulting in a unique structure is “multsol461” which
corresponds to glutaral. This compound is used or sterilisation of medicinal tools and
in surgeries. Therefore, the prospects of it being used as an entrainer is not completely
possible.
Figure 6.4: Multsol 461 structure corresponding to glutaral
It is however interesting to investigate whether glutaral is capable of acting as an entrainer.
For this, a pseudo x-y diagram is constructed and can be seen in ﬁg. 6.5.
Figure 6.5: Pseudo-binary xy diagram for acetone methanol at various entrainer
fraction
From ﬁg. 6.5, it is evident that the entrainer does eﬀect the relative volatilities. However
it seems that an azeotrope is still present. A further investigation revealed that in fact
the azeotrope is still present at 50% entrainer as can be seen in ﬁg. 6.6. In fact it seems
the azeotrope is becoming more prominent as the entrainer composition increases. The
reason this is not captured by the model has not been determined since no experimental
values for the boiling point or critical point were found. These could be the reason why
the model does not capture this behaviour.
==PAGE:83==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
76
Figure 6.6: Zoom on Pseudo-binary xy diagram for acetone methanol at various
entrainer fraction at high acetone liquid fractions
For the 19 obtained entrainer candidates, the process model was evaluated. In addition to
the results from the process model, the selectivity, the capacity are also of interest due to
their regular occurrence in the literature concerning extractive distillation. These results
are reported in table 6.3. Based on the results obtained, not apparent clear conjuncture
can be made concerning the E/D and R parameters. The highest value of E/D does neither
correspond to the highest nor the lowest value of R. An interesting feature to investigate
is if there is any clear correlation between any of these parameters. Figures featuring the
parameters plot against each other can be found in the appendices (Appendix B). In most
cases, no clear correlation or pattern could be concluded. However in the following, the
most interesting trends are highlighted and discussed in details.
==PAGE:84==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
77
Table 6.3: Selected results from the CAMD procedure
Candidate
S
C
Nmin1
Nmin2
(E/D)min
R
DOH
2.24
1.24
21
2
1.021
1.376
multsol1
2.74
1.17
21
4
0.698
1.529
multsol105
2.36
1.92
25
3
0.718
1.859
multsol107
2.30
1.25
24
4
0.830
1.802
multsol146
2.18
2.41
27
4
0.530
1.948
multsol291
2.68
2.50
22
4
0.480
1.656
multsol292
2.86
1.89
21
4
0.588
1.535
multsol369
2.75
2.56
22
5
0.416
1.573
multsol372
2.93
1.91
22
5
0.416
1.573
multsol373
2.16
2.36
27
3
0.579
1.999
multsol381
2.00
2.01
30
9
0.848
2.666
multsol431
2.32
1.91
25
3
0.711
1.854
multsol456
4.01
1.79
17
3
0.569
1.178
multsol457
3.96
2.58
17
6
0.261
1.149
multsol461
2.12
2.23
29
2
0.609
2.056
multsol468
2.28
1.89
25
3
0.700
1.855
multsol470
3.65
1.03
17
6
0.504
1.459
Considering the selectivity since it is the most prominent reoccurring parameter when
preforming entrainer design. The relation between the selectivity and the minimum num-
ber of stages in the extractive column is investigated and can be seen in ﬁg. 6.7. For
low values of the selectivity, the minimum number of stages in the extractive column has
the its maximum value which decreases with increasing selectivity. Some of the lowest
values for the number of stages i achieved the high values of the selectivity. This trends
is not surprising and has been review in the literature chapter. The same conclusion as
Momoh (1991) also hold true. In fact the lowest value for the number of stages does not
correspond to the highest value of the selectivity [60]. However the trend of decreasing
number of stages with increasing selectivities is undeniably present.
Figure 6.7: The selectivity Vs. the number of stages in the extractive column
==PAGE:85==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
78
Based on the ﬁgure obtained in ﬁg. 6.8, it it seems that there is a tendency for E/D to
decrease with increasing selectivity. However more data points are needed to make any
clear conclusions.
Figure 6.8: Selectivity Vs-. Entrainer to distillate ratio
The reﬂux ratio is clearly decreasing with increasing selectivity as seen in ﬁg. 6.9. This
could be due to the fact that a high selectivity reﬂects the aﬃnity of methanol to associate
preferentially with the entrainer and thus it becomes less volatile. This will result in the
a top product that is more pure and thus less reﬂux is needed to achieve the intended
purity.
Figure 6.9: Selectivity Vs. reﬂux ratio
The trend of the reﬂux with regard to the number of stages in the extractive column can
be seen in ﬁg. 6.10. Usually, a minimal values of the reﬂux ratio corresponds to an inﬁnite
number of stages and vice versa. However, it seems from ﬁg. 6.10 that increasing number
of stages result in an increase in the reﬂux. This could be due to the fact that the Fenske
equation used to calculate the minimum number of stages is not entirely applicable on
extractive distillation. In fact one of the assumptions made was that the entrainer was
==PAGE:86==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
79
present throughout the column, which is not true since the entrainer is heavy and is not
very volatile.
Figure 6.10: Number of stages in the extractive column Vs. The reﬂux ratio
In ﬁg. 6.11 the relation between the entrainer to distillate ﬂowrate and the reﬂux ratio are
investigated. The ﬁgure indicates vaguely that there might be a relation between the tow
parameters. In fact, the lowest value for E/D correspond to the lowest value of the reﬂux.
The same is true for the highest values. This can be explained through the underlying
assumption of the ISS method. The reﬂux ratio determined corresponds to the reﬂux
in the top section. Based on the ISS assumption, only the top product (acetone) and
the entrainer are present in this section. Therefore an increasing value of the E/D ratio
necessitates additional reﬂux to achieve the desired purity.
Figure 6.11: Entrainer to distillate ratio Vs. reﬂux ratio
==PAGE:87==
Conclusions
A Computer-Aided Molecular Design (CAMD) framework has been developed to conduct
molecular design for heavy entrainer in the separation of minimum boiling azeotropes. The
Framework incorporates a series of models of diﬀerent types: structural models, property
models and thermodynamic models. Each model incorporated has been validated through
a series of sanity tests and through working examples. All models implemented in this
work were successfully implemented and validated.
The current implementation does
oﬀer great advantages in terms of maintenance. The only ”human” interaction needed
is the deﬁnition of the azeotropic pairs, their pure component property and the basis
set from which the entrainer should be constructed. This illustrates the strength of the
predictive model. However there is always a risk associated with using them. Through
the various implementations and case studies, the great weakness of property predictive
models has been exposed.
In many cases even small diﬀerences in the pure property
prediction can have an immense eﬀect. These small discrepancies have resulted in the
formation of azeotropes that contradicts the actual real world case (formation of azeotrope
between water and acetone) or the disappearance of azeotropes when in reality they are
present.
A novel shortcut method have been implemented in the CAMD framework.
The short-cut is able to determine the minimal entrainer to distillate ratio as well as
the corresponding reﬂux ratio.
This work serves as a proof of concept that the ISS
method can be incorporated in a CAMD framework.
However, n the absence of any
other attempts to incorporate this model into CAMD procedures, it has been diﬃcult
to to compare the performance of this model.
However, the model did present some
interesting results that have previously been noted in the literature. This observations
include the decrease of the capital investment with increasing selectivities.
Thus was
observed through the decrease of the minimum number of stages in the extractive column
with increasing selectivity. Furthermore, i was observed that with increasing selectivity
the reﬂux ratio in the extractive column is reduced. Based on study conducted in this
work, it can be concluded that the selectivity is by no mean an unreliable parameter in
the search of suitable entrainers. However it must only be used as a form of threshold
value and not a ranking parameter. The use of the ISS method by Petlyuk (2004) must
be applied with care. In fact during the conduction of this work it became clear that
the method is extremely sensitive to the vapour-liquid distribution coeﬃcient at inﬁnite
dilution. This resulted in some diﬃculties when implementing the method in GAMS.
This observation was also noted by Petlyuk (2015) [69]. His recommendation was to use
experimental data to determine the value of the operating parameter E/D and R.
80
==PAGE:88==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
81
Future work
The future work consist of enhancing the ability to predict the pure compound proper-
ties. These are extremely important as they have great inﬂuence on the saturated vapour
calculation. Increased accuracy will increase the reliability of the mode. This can be done
by implementing the second order groups by Marrero and Gani [58].
The ISS method should also be further investigated. The objective of this work to im-
plement the method in a CAMD framework, it should now be studied further and to
investigate the possibility of using it on maximum boiling azeotropes.
The developed framework is only able to suggest the groups from which the potential
entrainer candidate is made of. This can be cumbersome when validating the obtained
encountering candidates and thus it might be advantageous to construct a model capable
of performing such group assembling and suggesting complete structure.
==PAGE:89==
Appendices
Appendix A - Feasible structures from the implementation.
82
==PAGE:90==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
83
Table 6.4: My caption
CH3
CH2
CH
C
OH
CH3CO
HCO
CH3COO
CH2COO
HCOO
CH2O
CHO
COOH
COO
multsol1
2
2
multsol10
2
2
1
1
multsol100
2
1
1
1
multsol101
2
1
1
1
1
multsol102
2
1
1
1
1
multsol103
2
1
1
1
1
multsol104
2
1
1
1
multsol105
2
1
1
1
multsol106
2
1
1
1
multsol107
2
1
2
multsol108
2
1
1
1
multsol109
2
1
1
1
1
multsol11
2
2
1
multsol110
2
1
1
1
multsol111
2
1
1
multsol112
2
1
1
2
multsol113
2
1
1
1
multsol114
2
2
1
1
multsol115
2
1
1
1
multsol116
2
1
1
1
1
multsol117
2
1
1
1
1
multsol118
2
1
1
1
multsol119
2
1
1
1
multsol12
2
2
1
1
multsol120
2
1
1
1
multsol121
2
1
1
1
1
multsol122
2
1
1
1
1
==PAGE:91==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
84
Table 6.4 continued from previous page
CH3
CH2
CH
C
OH
CH3CO
HCO
CH3COO
CH2COO
HCOO
CH2O
CHO
COOH
COO
multsol123
2
1
1
1
1
multsol124
2
1
1
1
multsol125
2
1
1
1
multsol126
2
1
1
1
multsol127
2
1
1
1
1
multsol128
2
1
2
multsol129
2
1
1
1
multsol13
2
2
1
1
multsol130
2
1
1
multsol131
2
1
1
1
multsol132
2
2
1
1
multsol133
2
1
1
1
multsol134
2
1
1
1
1
multsol135
2
1
1
1
1
multsol136
2
1
1
1
multsol137
2
1
1
1
multsol138
2
1
1
1
1
multsol139
2
1
1
1
1
multsol14
2
2
1
multsol140
2
1
1
1
multsol141
2
1
1
1
multsol142
2
1
1
1
multsol143
2
1
1
1
multsol144
2
1
1
multsol145
2
1
1
1
multsol146
2
1
2
multsol147
2
1
1
1
multsol148
2
2
1
1
==PAGE:92==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
85
Table 6.4 continued from previous page
CH3
CH2
CH
C
OH
CH3CO
HCO
CH3COO
CH2COO
HCOO
CH2O
CHO
COOH
COO
multsol149
2
1
1
1
1
multsol15
2
2
1
1
multsol150
2
2
2
multsol151
2
1
1
1
1
multsol152
2
1
1
1
multsol153
2
1
1
1
multsol154
2
1
1
1
multsol155
2
1
1
2
multsol156
2
1
2
multsol157
2
1
1
1
1
multsol158
2
1
1
multsol159
2
1
1
1
1
multsol16
2
2
1
1
multsol160
2
1
1
1
multsol161
2
1
1
1
multsol162
2
1
2
multsol163
2
1
1
1
1
multsol164
2
1
1
1
1
multsol165
2
1
1
1
multsol166
2
1
1
1
multsol167
2
1
1
1
multsol168
2
1
1
1
multsol169
2
1
1
multsol17
2
2
1
1
multsol170
2
1
1
1
multsol171
2
1
2
multsol172
2
1
1
1
1
multsol173
2
2
1
1
==PAGE:93==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
86
Table 6.4 continued from previous page
CH3
CH2
CH
C
OH
CH3CO
HCO
CH3COO
CH2COO
HCOO
CH2O
CHO
COOH
COO
multsol174
2
1
1
1
1
multsol175
2
1
1
multsol176
2
1
1
1
1
multsol177
2
1
1
1
1
multsol178
2
1
1
1
multsol179
2
1
1
1
multsol18
2
2
2
multsol180
2
1
1
1
multsol181
2
1
1
1
multsol182
2
1
1
multsol183
2
1
1
1
multsol184
2
1
1
1
1
multsol185
2
1
1
1
multsol186
2
2
multsol187
2
1
multsol188
2
1
1
multsol189
2
1
1
multsol19
2
3
1
multsol190
2
1
1
1
multsol191
2
1
1
1
multsol192
2
1
2
multsol193
2
1
1
1
multsol194
2
1
1
1
multsol195
2
1
1
1
1
multsol196
2
1
1
1
1
multsol197
2
1
1
1
multsol198
2
2
multsol199
2
2
==PAGE:94==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
87
Table 6.4 continued from previous page
CH3
CH2
CH
C
OH
CH3CO
HCO
CH3COO
CH2COO
HCOO
CH2O
CHO
COOH
COO
multsol2
2
2
1
1
multsol20
2
2
1
1
multsol200
2
1
multsol201
2
1
1
multsol202
2
1
1
multsol203
2
1
multsol204
2
2
1
1
multsol205
2
2
2
multsol206
2
1
2
multsol207
2
2
2
multsol208
2
1
1
1
1
multsol209
2
1
1
multsol21
2
2
1
1
multsol210
2
1
1
multsol211
2
1
1
multsol212
2
1
1
1
1
multsol213
2
1
1
multsol214
2
1
1
2
multsol215
2
1
1
1
1
multsol216
2
1
1
multsol217
3
1
1
1
multsol218
3
1
1
multsol219
2
2
2
multsol22
2
2
1
1
multsol220
4
1
1
multsol221
2
1
1
2
multsol222
2
1
2
multsol223
2
2
2
==PAGE:95==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
88
Table 6.4 continued from previous page
CH3
CH2
CH
C
OH
CH3CO
HCO
CH3COO
CH2COO
HCOO
CH2O
CHO
COOH
COO
multsol224
1
1
1
multsol225
1
1
1
multsol226
1
1
2
multsol227
1
1
1
1
multsol228
1
1
1
1
1
multsol229
1
1
1
2
multsol23
2
2
1
1
multsol230
1
1
1
1
multsol231
1
1
1
1
multsol232
1
1
1
multsol233
1
1
1
multsol234
1
2
multsol235
4
1
1
multsol236
4
1
1
multsol237
4
1
1
multsol238
1
1
1
1
multsol239
1
1
1
1
multsol24
2
2
1
1
multsol240
1
1
1
multsol241
1
1
1
multsol242
1
1
1
multsol243
1
1
1
1
multsol244
1
1
1
multsol245
4
1
1
multsol246
4
1
1
multsol247
4
1
1
multsol248
1
1
1
multsol249
1
2
1
1
==PAGE:96==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
89
Table 6.4 continued from previous page
CH3
CH2
CH
C
OH
CH3CO
HCO
CH3COO
CH2COO
HCOO
CH2O
CHO
COOH
COO
multsol25
2
2
1
1
multsol250
1
3
1
1
multsol251
1
2
1
1
multsol252
1
2
1
1
multsol253
3
1
1
multsol254
3
1
1
multsol255
2
1
1
multsol256
2
1
1
multsol257
2
1
1
multsol258
2
2
multsol259
3
1
1
multsol26
2
2
1
1
multsol260
2
1
1
multsol261
2
1
1
multsol262
1
3
1
multsol263
1
2
1
multsol264
4
1
1
multsol265
3
2
multsol266
3
1
1
multsol267
1
1
1
1
multsol268
1
1
1
1
multsol269
1
1
1
1
multsol27
2
2
1
1
multsol270
1
1
1
multsol271
1
1
1
multsol272
1
4
1
multsol273
1
1
1
1
multsol274
1
1
1
==PAGE:97==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
90
Table 6.4 continued from previous page
CH3
CH2
CH
C
OH
CH3CO
HCO
CH3COO
CH2COO
HCOO
CH2O
CHO
COOH
COO
multsol275
1
1
1
multsol276
1
1
1
1
multsol277
1
1
1
1
multsol278
1
1
1
multsol279
1
1
1
1
multsol28
2
2
1
1
multsol280
1
1
1
1
multsol281
1
2
1
1
multsol282
1
2
1
1
multsol283
1
2
1
1
multsol284
1
3
1
1
multsol285
2
1
1
multsol286
3
1
1
multsol287
2
1
1
multsol288
3
1
1
multsol289
2
1
1
multsol29
2
2
1
1
multsol290
3
1
1
multsol291
2
2
multsol292
2
1
1
multsol293
1
4
1
multsol294
1
3
1
multsol295
1
2
1
multsol296
1
3
1
1
multsol297
1
2
1
1
multsol298
1
3
1
1
multsol299
1
3
1
1
multsol3
2
2
1
1
==PAGE:98==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
91
Table 6.4 continued from previous page
CH3
CH2
CH
C
OH
CH3CO
HCO
CH3COO
CH2COO
HCOO
CH2O
CHO
COOH
COO
multsol30
3
2
1
multsol300
1
2
1
1
multsol301
1
2
1
1
multsol302
1
3
1
1
multsol303
3
1
1
multsol304
2
2
multsol305
3
1
1
multsol306
2
1
1
multsol307
2
1
1
multsol308
1
2
1
multsol309
4
1
1
multsol31
3
2
1
multsol310
3
1
1
multsol311
2
1
1
multsol312
1
3
1
multsol313
1
2
1
multsol314
3
1
1
multsol315
2
1
1
multsol316
1
3
1
1
multsol317
1
2
1
1
multsol318
1
3
1
1
multsol319
1
2
1
1
multsol32
3
2
1
multsol320
1
3
1
1
multsol321
1
3
1
1
multsol322
1
2
1
1
multsol323
1
3
1
1
multsol324
1
2
1
1
==PAGE:99==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
92
Table 6.4 continued from previous page
CH3
CH2
CH
C
OH
CH3CO
HCO
CH3COO
CH2COO
HCOO
CH2O
CHO
COOH
COO
multsol325
1
2
1
1
multsol326
1
1
1
1
1
multsol327
1
1
1
1
1
multsol328
1
1
1
1
1
multsol329
3
2
multsol33
2
2
1
1
multsol330
2
2
multsol331
1
1
1
2
multsol332
2
3
1
multsol333
1
3
1
1
multsol334
1
3
1
multsol335
1
2
1
1
multsol336
1
2
1
1
multsol337
1
2
1
1
multsol338
3
1
1
multsol339
3
2
multsol34
3
2
1
multsol340
3
1
1
multsol341
2
2
multsol342
2
3
1
multsol343
1
3
1
1
multsol344
1
2
1
1
multsol345
2
1
1
multsol346
2
1
1
multsol347
2
1
1
multsol348
1
2
1
multsol349
1
1
1
1
multsol35
2
2
2
==PAGE:100==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
93
Table 6.4 continued from previous page
CH3
CH2
CH
C
OH
CH3CO
HCO
CH3COO
CH2COO
HCOO
CH2O
CHO
COOH
COO
multsol350
1
1
1
1
multsol351
1
1
1
1
multsol352
1
1
1
1
multsol353
1
1
2
multsol354
1
3
1
multsol355
1
1
1
multsol356
1
3
1
1
multsol357
3
2
1
multsol358
1
3
1
multsol359
1
2
1
multsol36
2
2
2
multsol360
4
1
1
multsol361
1
1
1
1
1
multsol362
1
3
1
1
multsol363
3
2
multsol364
1
1
1
1
1
multsol365
1
1
1
1
1
multsol366
1
1
1
multsol367
1
1
1
1
multsol368
1
1
1
1
multsol369
1
1
2
multsol37
3
1
1
1
multsol370
1
1
2
multsol371
1
1
1
1
multsol372
1
1
1
1
multsol373
1
1
1
2
multsol374
1
1
1
multsol375
2
1
1
2
==PAGE:101==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
94
Table 6.4 continued from previous page
CH3
CH2
CH
C
OH
CH3CO
HCO
CH3COO
CH2COO
HCOO
CH2O
CHO
COOH
COO
multsol376
1
1
1
1
1
multsol377
1
1
1
1
multsol378
1
1
1
multsol379
1
1
1
multsol38
3
1
1
1
multsol380
1
1
1
1
multsol381
1
1
1
1
multsol382
1
1
1
multsol383
1
1
1
multsol384
1
1
1
multsol385
1
1
1
1
1
multsol386
1
1
1
1
multsol387
1
1
1
1
multsol388
1
1
2
multsol389
1
1
1
1
multsol39
3
1
1
1
multsol390
1
4
1
multsol391
2
1
1
2
multsol392
1
1
1
1
1
multsol393
1
1
1
multsol394
1
1
1
multsol395
1
1
1
1
multsol396
1
1
1
1
multsol397
1
2
1
1
1
multsol398
1
2
1
1
1
multsol399
1
2
1
1
1
multsol4
2
2
1
1
multsol40
3
1
1
1
==PAGE:102==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
95
Table 6.4 continued from previous page
CH3
CH2
CH
C
OH
CH3CO
HCO
CH3COO
CH2COO
HCOO
CH2O
CHO
COOH
COO
multsol400
1
2
1
1
1
multsol401
1
1
1
multsol402
1
2
1
1
1
multsol403
1
2
1
1
1
multsol404
1
2
1
1
1
multsol405
1
4
1
multsol406
1
4
1
multsol407
1
1
1
multsol408
1
2
1
2
multsol409
1
2
1
1
1
multsol41
3
1
1
1
multsol410
1
2
1
1
1
multsol411
1
1
1
multsol412
1
2
1
1
1
multsol413
1
2
1
2
multsol414
1
2
1
1
1
multsol415
1
1
1
multsol416
1
2
1
2
multsol417
1
2
1
2
multsol418
1
1
1
multsol419
1
2
1
1
1
multsol42
3
1
1
1
multsol420
1
1
1
1
1
multsol421
1
2
1
1
1
multsol422
4
1
1
multsol423
1
1
1
1
1
multsol424
4
2
multsol425
1
2
1
2
==PAGE:103==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
96
Table 6.4 continued from previous page
CH3
CH2
CH
C
OH
CH3CO
HCO
CH3COO
CH2COO
HCOO
CH2O
CHO
COOH
COO
multsol426
4
2
multsol427
1
1
1
2
multsol428
1
1
1
1
1
multsol429
1
2
1
1
1
multsol43
3
1
1
multsol430
4
1
1
multsol431
1
1
1
1
1
multsol432
2
2
1
1
multsol433
4
1
1
multsol434
1
1
1
2
multsol435
4
1
1
multsol436
1
1
1
1
1
multsol437
1
1
1
1
multsol438
1
2
1
1
1
multsol439
1
2
multsol44
3
1
1
multsol440
1
1
1
multsol441
1
2
1
2
multsol442
4
1
1
multsol443
4
2
multsol444
1
2
multsol445
4
1
1
multsol446
1
1
1
1
multsol447
1
1
1
multsol448
1
3
1
1
multsol449
1
1
1
multsol45
3
1
1
1
multsol450
1
4
1
==PAGE:104==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
97
Table 6.4 continued from previous page
CH3
CH2
CH
C
OH
CH3CO
HCO
CH3COO
CH2COO
HCOO
CH2O
CHO
COOH
COO
multsol451
1
1
1
1
multsol452
1
1
1
multsol453
1
1
1
multsol454
1
1
1
multsol455
1
2
multsol456
1
1
1
multsol457
1
2
multsol458
1
1
1
multsol459
1
1
1
multsol46
3
1
1
1
multsol460
4
2
multsol461
3
2
multsol462
4
1
1
multsol463
4
2
multsol464
1
1
1
multsol465
4
2
multsol466
1
3
1
1
multsol467
1
3
1
1
multsol468
3
1
1
multsol469
1
1
1
2
multsol47
3
1
1
1
multsol470
1
2
multsol471
1
1
2
multsol472
3
1
1
multsol473
3
2
1
multsol474
3
2
multsol475
2
1
1
multsol476
4
2
==PAGE:105==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
98
Table 6.4 continued from previous page
CH3
CH2
CH
C
OH
CH3CO
HCO
CH3COO
CH2COO
HCOO
CH2O
CHO
COOH
COO
multsol48
3
1
1
1
multsol49
3
1
1
1
multsol5
2
2
1
1
multsol50
3
1
1
1
multsol51
3
1
1
1
multsol52
3
1
1
multsol53
3
1
1
1
multsol54
3
1
1
1
multsol55
3
1
1
1
multsol56
3
1
1
1
multsol57
3
1
1
1
multsol58
3
1
1
1
multsol59
3
1
1
multsol6
2
2
1
1
multsol60
3
1
1
1
multsol61
3
1
1
1
multsol62
3
1
1
1
multsol63
3
1
1
1
multsol64
3
2
1
multsol65
3
1
1
1
multsol66
3
1
1
multsol67
3
1
1
1
multsol68
3
1
1
1
multsol69
3
1
1
multsol7
2
2
1
1
multsol70
3
1
1
multsol71
3
1
1
1
multsol72
4
1
1
==PAGE:106==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
99
Table 6.4 continued from previous page
CH3
CH2
CH
C
OH
CH3CO
HCO
CH3COO
CH2COO
HCOO
CH2O
CHO
COOH
COO
multsol73
3
1
2
multsol74
3
1
1
multsol75
3
1
multsol76
3
1
1
1
multsol77
3
1
1
1
multsol78
3
1
1
1
multsol79
3
1
1
1
multsol8
2
2
1
multsol80
3
1
1
multsol81
3
1
1
1
multsol82
3
1
1
1
multsol83
3
1
1
multsol84
2
2
2
multsol85
3
1
2
multsol86
3
1
1
1
multsol87
3
1
1
1
multsol88
4
1
1
multsol89
3
1
1
multsol9
2
2
1
1
multsol90
3
1
1
1
multsol91
3
1
2
multsol92
3
1
1
1
multsol93
3
1
1
1
multsol94
3
1
1
multsol95
2
1
1
1
1
multsol96
2
1
1
1
1
multsol97
2
1
1
1
1
multsol98
2
1
1
1
==PAGE:107==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
100
Table 6.4 continued from previous page
CH3
CH2
CH
C
OH
CH3CO
HCO
CH3COO
CH2COO
HCOO
CH2O
CHO
COOH
COO
multsol99
2
1
1
1
==PAGE:108==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
101
Appendix B - parameter plots
(a) S Vs C
(b) S Vs. N1
(c) S Vs. N2
(d) S Vs. EDmin
(e) S Vs. R
Figure 6.12: Process model results against the Selectivity.
==PAGE:109==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
102
(a) C Vs. N1
(b) C Vs. N2
(c) C Vs. EDmin
(d) C Vs. R
Figure 6.13: Process model results against the Capacity
==PAGE:110==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
103
(a) N1 Vs. N2
(b) N1 Vs. EDmin
(c) N1 Vs. R
Figure 6.14: Process model results against the minimum number of stages in the
extractive column
(a) N2 Vs. EDmin
(b) N2 Vs. R
Figure 6.15: Process model results against the minimum number of stages in the
recovery column
==PAGE:111==
6.2. ENTRAINER DESIGN FOR ACETONE-METHANOL
104
(a) ED Vs. R
Figure 6.16: Minimum entrainer to distillate ratio to the reﬂux ratio
==PAGE:112==
Bibliography
[1]
Elena Anokhina and Andrey Timoshenko. “Criterion of the energy eﬀectiveness of
extractive distillation in the partially thermally coupled columns”. eng. In: Chem-
ical Engineering Research and Design 99 (2015), pp. 165–175.
[2]
Nick D. Austin, Nikolaos V. Sahinidis, and Daniel W. Trahan. “Computer-aided
molecular design: An introduction and review of tools, applications, and solution
techniques”. In: Chemical Engineering Research and Design 116 (2016), pp. 2–26.
[3]
J. Bausa, R. v. Watzdorf, and W. Marquardt. “Shortcut methods for nonideal mul-
ticomponent distillation: I. Simple columns”. eng. In: Aiche Journal 44.10 (1998),
pp. 2181–2198.
[4]
E. Blass. “Entwicklung verfahrenstechnischer Prozesse”. In: Chemie Ingenieur Tech-
nik 71.1-2 (1999), pp. 169–169.
[5]
Robert S. Boethling. “Application of molecular topology to quantitative structure-
biodegradability relationships”. In: Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 5.9
(1986), pp. 797–806.
[6]
Stefano Cignitti, Lei Zhang, and Raﬁqul Gani. “Computer-aided Framework for
Design of Pure, Mixed and Blended Products”. eng. In: Computer-aided Chemical
Engineering 37 (2015), pp. 2093–2098.
[7]
Stefano Cignitti et al. “Systematic Optimization-Based Integrated Chemical Prod-
uct–Process Design Framework”. In: Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
57.2 (2018), pp. 677–688. issn: 0888-5885.
[8]
“Comparison of the main ethanol dehydration technologies through process sim-
ulation”. In: 20th Eurpean Symposium on computer aided process engineering -
ESCAPE20 November (2010), pp. 1–6.
[9]
L Constantinou and R Gani. “New group-contribution method for estimating prop-
erties of pure compounds”. eng. In: Aiche Journal 40.10 (1994), pp. 1697–1710.
[10]
Elisa Conte, Raﬁqul Gani, and K.M. Ng. “Design of formulated products: a sys-
tematic methodology”. eng. In: A I Ch E Journal 57.9 (2011), pp. 2431–2449.
[11]
E. L. Cussler and G. D. Moggridge. Chemical Product Design. 2nd ed. Cambridge
Series in Chemical Engineering. Cambridge University Press, 2011.
[12]
M. F. Doherty and Jeﬀrey P. Knapp. Distillation, Azeotrpoc and Extractive. 2004.
[13]
MF Doherty and GA Caldarola. “Design and synthesis of homogeneous azeotropic
distillations .3. the sequencing of columns for azeotropic and extractive distilla-
tions”. eng. In: Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Fundamentals 24.4 (1985),
pp. 474–485.
[14]
Amit P. Duvedi and Luke E.K. Achenie. “Designing environmentally safe refriger-
ants using mathematical programming”. In: Chemical Engineering Science 51.15
(1996), pp. 3727–3739.
[15]
Jarrell Elliott and Carl Lira. “Introductory Chemical Engineering Thermodynam-
ics”. In: Jan. 1999, pp. 260–300.
105
==PAGE:113==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
106
[16]
Ernesto Estrada. “Edge Adjacency Relationships and a Novel Topological Index
Related to Molecular Volume”. In: Journal of Chemical Information and Computer
Sciences 35.1 (1995), pp. 31–33.
[17]
“Extractive Distillation of the Acetone–Methanol System”. In: Design and Control
of Distillation Systems for Separating Azeotropes. Wiley-Blackwell, 2010. Chap. 11,
pp. 327–367.
[18]
Zhidong Fan et al. “Design and Control of Extraction Distillation for Dehydration
of Tetrahydrofuran”. eng. In: Chemical Engineering and Technology 36.5 (2013),
pp. 829–839.
[19]
Jean-Loup Faulon, Donald P. Visco, and Ramdas S. Pophale. “The Signature
Molecular Descriptor. 1. Using Extended Valence Sequences in QSAR and QSPR
Studies”. In: Journal of Chemical Information and Computer Sciences 43.3 (2003),
pp. 707–720.
[20]
Marcella Feitosa de Figueiredo et al. “Optimal design of extractive distillation
columns-A systematic procedure using a process simulator”. eng. In: Chemical
Engineering Research and Design 89.3A (2011), pp. 341–346.
[21]
A Fredenslund, RL Jones, and JM Prausnitz. “group-contribution estimation of
activity-coeﬃcients in nonideal liquid-mixtures”. eng. In: aiche journal 21.6 (1975),
pp. 1086–1099.
[22]
Alyssa Marie Fulgueras, Dong Sun Kim, and Jungho Cho. “Modeling and opti-
mization study of pressure-swing distillation for the separation process of acetone-
methanol mixture with vapor-liquid equilibrium analysis”. In: Journal of Chemical
Engineering of Japan 49.2 (2016), pp. 84–96.
[23]
J. Galvez et al. “Charge Indexes. New Topological Descriptors”. In: Journal of
Chemical Information and Computer Sciences 34.3 (1994), pp. 520–525.
[24]
R Gani. “Computer aided methods and tools for chemical product design”. In:
Chem. Eng. Res. Design 82.November (2004), pp. 1494–1504.
[25]
R. Gani, L. E.K. Achenie, and V. Venkatasubramanian. “Chapter 1: Introduction
to CAMD”. In: Computer Aided Chemical Engineering 12.C (2003), pp. 3–21.
[26]
Raﬁqul Gani. “CAMD: Computer Aided Molecular Design – Examples of Appli-
cations”. eng. In: (2015).
[27]
Raﬁqul Gani and Kim Dam-Johansen. “Chemical Product Design – A Brief Overview”.
English. In: Computer-Aided Chemical Engineering, 23. 2007, pp. 1–21.
[28]
Raﬁqul Gani et al. “Solvents in organic synthesis: Replacement and multi-step
reaction systems”. In: Computers & Chemical Engineering 32.10 (2008), pp. 2420–
2444.
[29]
Pablo Garcia-Herreros and Jorge M. Gomez. “Optimization of the Design and
Operation of an Extractive Distillation System for the Production of Fuel Grade
Ethanol Using Glycerol as Entrainer”. eng. In: Industrial and Engineering Chem-
istry Research 50.7 (2011), pp. 3977–3985.
[30]
Berhane H. Gebreslassie and Urmila M. Diwekar. “Eﬃcient ant colony optimization
for computer aided molecular design: Case study solvent selection problem”. In:
Computers & Chemical Engineering 78 (2015), pp. 1–9.
[31]
Vincent Gerbaud and Ivonne Rodriguez-Donis. Extractive Distillation. Elsevier
Inc., 2014, pp. 201–245.
==PAGE:114==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
107
[32]
Vincent Gerbaud et al. “Review of Extractive Distillation. Process design, oper-
ation, optimization and control”. In: Chemical Engineering Research and Design
(2018).
[33]
Pravin D. Ghuge, Nilesh A. Mali, and Sunil S. Joshi. “Comparative analysis of
extractive and pressure swing distillation for separation of THF-water separation”.
eng. In: Computers and Chemical Engineering 103 (2017), pp. 188–200.
[34]
John Griswold and C. B. Buford. “Separation of Synthesis Mixtures Vapor-Liquid
Equilibria of Acetone-Methanol-Water”. In: Industrial & Engineering Chemistry
41.10 (1949), pp. 2347–2351.
[35]
Lowell H. Hall, Lemont B. Kier, and Wallace J. Murray. “Molecular connectivity II:
Relationship to water solubility and boiling point”. In: Journal of Pharmaceutical
Sciences 64.12 (1975), pp. 1974–1977.
[36]
Henrik K. Hansen et al. “Vapor-Liquid Equilibria by UNIFAC Group Contribu-
tion. 5. Revision and Extension”. eng. In: Industrial and Engineering Chemistry
Research 30.10 (1991), pp. 2352–2355.
[37]
Peter Mathias Harper et al. “Computer aided molecular design with combined
molecular modeling and group contribution”. eng. In: Fluid Phase Equilibria 158
(1999), pp. 337–347.
[38]
S Hauan et al. “Diﬀerence points in extractive and reactive cascades. I - Basic prop-
erties and analysis”. eng. In: Chemical Engineering Science 55.16 (2000), pp. 3145–
3159.
[39]
C Hua et al. “Design and operation of batch extractive distillation with two re-
boilers”. eng. In: Chinese Journal of Chemical Engineering 15.2 (2007), pp. 286–
290.
[40]
Asma Iqbal, Syed Akhlaq Ahmad, and Ojasvi. “Entrainer based economical design
and plantwide control study for Tetrahydrofuran/Water separation process”. In:
Chemical Engineering Research and Design 130 (2018), pp. 274–283.
[41]
K.G. Joback and R.C. Reid. “Estimation of pure-component properties from group-
contributions”. In: Chemical Engineering Communications 57.1-6 (1987), pp. 233–
243.
[42]
A.T. Karunanithi, L.E.K. Achenie, and Raﬁqul Gani. “A new decomposition-based
computer-aided molecular/mixture design methodology for the design of optimal
solvents and solvent mixtures”. eng. In: Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Re-
search 44.13 (2005), pp. 4785–4797.
[43]
Anton Kiss. “Distillation — Azeotropic Distillation”. In: Reference Module in
Chemistry, Molecular Sciences and Chemical Engineering. Dec. 2013.
[44]
Zdeˇnka Kolsk´a, Milan Z´abransk´y, and Alena Randov´a. “Group contribution meth-
ods for estimation of selected physico-chemical properties of organic compounds”.
In: Thermodynamics: Fundamentals and Its Application in Science (2012), pp. 135–
162.
[45]
S. Kossack et al. “A systematic synthesis framework for extractive distillation
processes”. In: Chemical Engineering Research and Design 86.7 (2008), pp. 781–
792.
[46]
L. Laroche et al. “Homogeneous azeotropic distillation: Comparing entrainers”.
eng. In: Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering 69.6 (1991), pp. 1302–1319.
==PAGE:115==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
108
[47]
F.M. Lee and R.W. Wytcherley. “Azeotropic Distillation”. In: Encyclopedia of
Separation Science d.2007 (2007), pp. 990–995.
[48]
Jihwan Lee et al. “Separation of tetrahydrofuran and water using pressure swing
distillation: Modeling and optimization”. In: Korean Journal of Chemical Engi-
neering 28.2 (2011), pp. 591–596.
[49]
Zhigang Lei, Chengyue Li, and Biaohua Chen. “Extractive distillation: A review”.
In: Separation and Puriﬁcation Reviews 32.2 (2003), pp. 121–213.
[50]
Z. Lelkes et al. “Batch extractive distillation with intermediate boiling entrainer”.
eng. In: Computer Aided Chemical Engineering 14.C (2003), pp. 197–202.
[51]
Guillaume Lemaˆıtre et al. “Computer-Aided Detection and diagnosis for prostate
cancer based on mono and multi-parametric MRI: A review”. In: Computers in
Biology and Medicine 60 (2015), pp. 8–31.
[52]
GL Liu et al. “Shortcut design method for columns separating azeotropic mix-
tures”. eng. In: Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 43.14 (2004), pp. 3908–
3923.
[53]
Estela Lladosa, Juan B. Mont´on, and Ma Cruz Burguet. “Separation of di-n-propyl
ether and n-propyl alcohol by extractive distillation and pressure-swing distillation:
Computer simulation and economic optimization”. In: Chemical Engineering and
Processing: Process Intensiﬁcation 50.11-12 (2011), pp. 1266–1274.
[54]
Rivana Mabel Lucena Oliveira Souto et al. “Rigorous thermodynamic evaluation
of the extractive distillation process”. eng. In: Chemical Engineering Research and
Design 133 (2018), pp. 195–203.
[55]
William L. Luyben. “Comparison of extractive distillation and pressure-swing dis-
tillation for acetone/chloroform separation”. In: Computers and Chemical Engi-
neering 50 (2013), pp. 1–7.
[56]
William L. Luyben. “Comparison of pressure-swing and extractive-distillation meth-
ods for methanol-recovery systems in the TAME reactive-distillation process”. In:
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 44.15 (2005), pp. 5715–5725.
[57]
Jorge Marrero and Raﬁqul Gani. “Group-contribution based estimation of pure
component properties”. In: Fluid Phase Equilibria 183-184 (2001). Proceedings of
the fourteenth symposium on thermophysical properties, pp. 183–208.
[58]
Jorge Marrero and Raﬁqul Gani. “Group-Contribution-Based Estimation of Oc-
tanol/Water Partition Coeﬃcient and Aqueous Solubility”. In: Industrial & Engi-
neering Chemistry Research 41.25 (2002), pp. 6623–6633.
[59]
G. Modla and P. Lang. “Removal and recovery of organic solvents from aqueous
waste mixtures by extractive and pressure swing distillation”. In: Industrial and
Engineering Chemistry Research 51.35 (2012), pp. 11473–11481.
[60]
So Momoh. “Assessing the accuracy of selectivity as a basis for solvent screening in
extractive distillation processes”. eng. In: Separation Science and Technology 26.5
(1991), pp. 729–742.
[61]
Benny Benyamin Nasution et al. “Information Technology in Disaster Risk Reduc-
tion”. In: 501 (2017), pp. 155–169.
[62]
National Reseasrch counsil. “Frontiers in Chemical Engineering, Research, Needs
and Opportunities”. In: National Academy Press (1988).
==PAGE:116==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
109
[63]
Mihaela Neagu (Petre) and Diana Cursaru. “Bioethanol Dehydration by Extractive
Distillation with Propylene Glycol Entrainer A preliminary case study”. eng. In:
Revista De Chimie 64.1 (2013), pp. 92–94.
[64]
H.R. Null. Phase equilibrium in process design. eng. Wiley-Interscience, 1970, 275
s.
[65]
O Odele and S Macchietto. “Computer-aided molecular design - a novel method for
optimal solvent selection”. eng. In: Fluid Phase Equilibria 82.pt 1 (1993), pp. 47–
54.
[66]
J.E. Ourique and A. Silva Telles. “Computer-aided molecular design with simu-
lated annealing and molecular graphs”. In: Computers & Chemical Engineering 22
(1998). European Symposium on Computer Aided Process Engineering-8, S615–
S618.
[67]
Suhani J. Patel, Dedy Ng, and M. Sam Mannan. “QSPR Flash Point Prediction of
Solvents Using Topological Indices for Application in Computer Aided Molecular
Design”. In: Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 48.15 (2009), pp. 7378–
7387.
[68]
F. B. Petlyuk. “Distillation Trajectories in Inﬁnite Complex Columns and Com-
plexes”. In: Distillation Theory and its Application to Optimal Design of Sepa-
ration Units. Cambridge Series in Chemical Engineering. Cambridge University
Press, 2004, pp. 170–217.
[69]
Feliks Petlyuk, Roman Danilov, and Jakob Burger. “A novel method for the search
and identiﬁcation of feasible splits of extractive distillations in ternary mixtures”.
eng. In: Chemical Engineering Research and Design 99 (2015), pp. 132–148.
[70]
KS PITZER. “The volumetric and thermodynamic properties of ﬂuids .1. theo-
retical basis and virial coeﬃcients”. eng. In: Journal of the American Chemical
Society 77.13 (1955), pp. 3427–3433.
[71]
Gani Raﬁqul et al. “Chapter 6 – Computer-Aided Molecular Design and Prop-
erty Prediction”. eng. In: Computer-aided Chemical Engineering 39 (2017). Ed. by
Chemmangattuvalappil Nishanth G. Mart´ın Mariano Eden Mario R., pp. 153–196.
[72]
Ivonne Rodriguez-Donis, Vincent Gerbaud, and Xavier Joulia. “Thermodynamic
Insights on the Feasibility of Homogeneous Batch Extractive Distillation, 1. Azeotropic
Mixtures with a Heavy Entrainer”. eng. In: Industrial and Engineering Chemistry
Research 48.7 (2009), pp. 3544–3559.
[73]
Ivonne Rodriguez-Donis, Vincent Gerbaud, and Xavier Joulia. “Thermodynamic
Insights on the Feasibility of Homogeneous Batch Extractive Distillation. 3. Azeotropic
Mixtures with Light Entrainer”. eng. In: Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Re-
search 51.12 (2012), pp. 4643–4660.
[74]
John R. Rumble. CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 99th Edition. eng.
CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2018.
[75]
B.T. Safrit and A.W. Westerberg. “Improved operational policies for batch extrac-
tive distillation columns”. eng. In: Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research
36.2 (1997), pp. 436–443.
[76]
Kavitha Chelakara Satyanarayana, Jens Abildskov, and Raﬁqul Gani. “Computer-
aided polymer design using group contribution plus property models”. eng. In:
Computers and Chemical Engineering 33.5 (2009), pp. 1004–1013.
==PAGE:117==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
110
[77]
Aleksandra Yu Sazonova and Valentina Raeva. “Recovery of Acetonitrile from
Aqueous Solutions by Extractive Distillation – Eﬀect of Entrainer”. In: Interna-
tional Journal of Chemical, Molecular, Nuclear, Materials and Metallurgical En-
gineering 9.2 (2015), pp. 288–291.
[78]
Aleksandra Yu. Sazonova, Valentina M. Raeva, and Alla K. Frolkova. “Design of
extractive distillation process with mixed entrainer”. eng. In: Chemical Papers 70.5
(2016), pp. 594–601.
[79]
J. D Seader and Ernest J Henley. Separation process principles. New York : Wiley,
1998.
[80]
David S Sholl and Ryan P. Lively. “Seven chemical separations to change the
world”. In: Nature 532 (2016), pp. 435–438.
[81]
Jose Simoes and Thomas Magedanz. “Can you predict human behavior?” In: 2010
14th Int. Conference on Intelligence in Next Generation Networks: ”Weaving Ap-
plications Into the Network Fabric”, ICIN 2010 - 2nd Int. Workshop on Business
Models for Mobile Platforms, BMMP 10 (2010).
[82]
Mirko Skiborowski, Marcel Rautenberg, and Wolfgang Marquardt. “A Hybrid Evo-
lutionary Deterministic Optimization Approach for Conceptual Design”. eng. In:
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 54.41 (2015), pp. 10054–10072.
[83]
J.M. Smith and H.C. van. Ness. Introduction to Chemical Engineering Thermody-
namics. eng. McGraw-Hill, 1987, pp. 681–683.
[84]
Stankiewicz, Andrzej I. and Moulijn, Jacob A. “Process Intensiﬁcation: Transform-
ing chemical engineering”. In: Chemical Engineering Progress 96 (2000), pp. 22–
23.
[85]
Chang Sun et al. “Separation of cyclohexane-1-propanol by batch extractive distil-
lation”. chi. In: Xiandai Huagong/modern Chemical Industry 33.6 (2013), pp. 108–
111.
[86]
M Tapp et al. “Column proﬁle maps. 1. Derivation and interpretation”. eng. In:
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 43.2 (2004), pp. 364–374.
[87]
Antonio Tripodi et al. “Pressure-swing or extraction-distillation for the recovery of
pure acetonitrile from ethanol ammoxidation process: A comparison of eﬃciency
and cost”. eng. In: Chemical Engineering Research and Design 127 (2017), pp. 92–
102.
[88]
Salvador Tututi-Avila et al. “Design of an energy-eﬃcient side-stream extractive
distillation system”. eng. In: Computers and Chemical Engineering 102 (2017),
pp. 17–25.
[89]
U.S. Department of Energy. “Materials for separation technologies: energy and
emission reduction opportunities”. In: (2005), p. v.
[90]
Ragavan Vaidyanathan and Mahmoud El-Halwagi. “Computer-Aided Design of
High Performance Polymers”. In: Journal of Elastomers & Plastics 26.3 (1994),
pp. 277–293.
[91]
Vikt´oria Varga et al. “Batch Extractive Distillation with Light Entrainer”. In:
Chemical & Biochemical Engineering Quarterly ; Vol.20 No.1 20 (Mar. 2006).
[92]
Gerbaud Vincent et al. “Supplementary material to the manuscript Review of
Extractive Distillation : process design , operation optimization and control”. In:
Chemical Engineering Research and Design 2017 (2018).
==PAGE:118==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
111
[93]
Oliver M. Wahnschaﬀt and Arthur W. Westerberg. “The product composition
regions of azeotropic distillation columns. 2. Separability in two-feed columns and
entrainer selection”. eng. In: Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 32.6
(1993), pp. 1108–1120.
[94]
C Wibowo and KM Ng. “Product-oriented process synthesis and development:
Creams and pastes”. eng. In: Aiche Journal 47.12 (2001), pp. 2746–2767.
[95]
S. Xu and H. Wang. “Separation of tetrahydrofuran-water azeotropic mixture by
batch extractive distillation process”. eng. In: Chemical Engineering Research and
Design 84.A6 (2006), pp. 478–482.
[96]
Jyun-Yang Yao, Sheng-Yu Lin, and I-Lung Chien. “Operation and control of
batch extractive distillation for the separation of mixtures with minimum-boiling
azeotrope”. In: Journal of the Chinese Institute of Chemical Engineers 38.5 (2007),
pp. 371–383.
[97]
Xiaojun Yao et al. “Quantitative structure property relationship models for the
prediction of liquid heat capacity”. In: QSAR & Combinatorial Science 22.1 (2003),
pp. 29–48.
[98]
Hao Yu et al. “Comparison of alternative distillation processes for the maximum-
boiling ethylenediamine dehydration system”. eng. In: Chemical Engineering and
Processing 97 (2015), pp. 84–105.
[99]
Lei Zhang et al. “Advances in chemical product design”. In: Reviews in Chemical
Engineering 34.3 (2018), pp. 319–340.
[100]
Qingjun Zhang et al. “Heat-integrated pressure-swing distillation process for sep-
arating the minimum-boiling azeotrope ethyl-acetate and ethanol”. In: Separation
and Puriﬁcation Technology 189 (2017), pp. 310–334.
[101]
Lei Zhao et al. “Comparison of heterogeneous azeotropic distillation and extractive
distillation methods for ternary azeotrope ethanol/toluene/water separation”. In:
Computers and Chemical Engineering 100 (2017), pp. 27–37.
[102]
Teng Zhou, Yageng Zhou, and Kai Sundmacher. “A hybrid stochastic–deterministic
optimization approach for integrated solvent and process design”. In: Chemical
Engineering Science 159 (2017). iCAMD – Integrating Computer-Aided Molecular
Design into Product and Process Design, pp. 207–216.
