==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Modelling and control of modular multilevel converter on a 
HVDC interconnection 
 
 
     Georgios Papakonstantinou 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0245 
February 2019 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Title: Modelling and control of modular multilevel converter on a HVDC 
interconnection 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0245 
February 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD 
students. Research is conducted within nine research programmes organized 
into three main topics: Wind energy systems, Wind turbine technology and 
Basics for wind energy. 
Project Period:  
September 2018 - February 2019 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisors: 
Nicolaos Antonio Cutululis 
Jayachandra Naidu Sakamuri 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
 
 
 
    
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
 
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
8
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3
Outline of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Modelling and Control of Modular Multilevel Converter
10
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Modelling of Modular Multilevel Converter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Introduction of Sub-Module Topologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
Basic Modular Multilevel Converter Equations
. . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Controls of Modular Multilevel Converter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.1
Dynamic Model of Modular Multilevel Converter . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.2
Cell Capacitor Voltage Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.3
Circulating Current Control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.4
Reference Signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.5
Nearest Voltage Level Balancing Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4
Implementation on Simulink . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4.1
Description of Source Averaged HB-MMC Model . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4.2
Implementation of Fully Detailed Switched HB-MMC Model
. . . .
22
2.4.3
Implementation of Fully Detailed Switched FB-MMC Model
. . . .
24
2.4.4
Implementation of Equivalent Aggregate FB-MMC Model . . . . . .
25
2.5
Validation of all Models against Source Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Modelling and Control of HVDC-MMC Interconnection
28
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Modelling of HVDC-MMC Interconnection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.1
System Ratings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.2
Modelling of AC Grids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.3
Modelling of Modular Multilevel Converters . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.4
Modelling of HVDC Link
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
Controllers of HVDC-MMC Interconnection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3
==PAGE:4==
3.4
Validation of HVDC Interconnection Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
DC Faults
37
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Blocking MMC during DC Faults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
Control of FB-MMC during DC Faults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4
Overview Comparison Results and Observations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.4.1
Handling DC Faults with Blocking of MMC (FB-MMC vs HB-MMC) 51
4.4.2
Handling DC Faults with Control of MMC (FB-MMC vs HB-MMC)
54
4.4.3
Observations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5
Conclusions
57
5.1
Switched vs Aggregate Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Handling of DC Faults with Blocking: FB-MMC vs HB-MMC . . . . . . . .
57
5.3
Handling of DC Faults with FB-MMC: Blocking vs Controlling . . . . . . .
58
5.4
Suggested New Sub Module for Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A Appendix 1: Extra Signal Waveforms
63
A.1 Converter Signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.2 HVDC Link . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.3 Signals at Point of Connection with Receiving End Grid . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.4 Receiving End Grid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
B Appendix 2: Simulink Schematics
70
C Appendix 3: NVL Balancing Algorithm
71
Page 4 of 74
==PAGE:5==
Preface
The ”Modelling and Control of a Modular Multilevel Converter on a HVDC Interconnec-
tion” Master Thesis was conducted at The Department of Wind Energy as prerequisite of
M.Sc. in Wind Energy, at the Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby and Risø, during
the period 01.09.2018-01.02.2019.
The author kindly thanks his supervisors Antonio Nicolaos Cutululis and Jayachandra
Naidu Sakamuri for their guidance and motivation.
Gratitude extends to his managers Alberto Vivi, Paul Godridge, and Kim Høj Jensen
for their decisive support to author’s studies in DTU, from November 2016 to February
2019.
If the mind is to emerge unscathed
from this relentless struggle with the
unforeseen, two qualities are
indispensable: ﬁrst, an intellect that,
even in the darkest hour, retains some
glimmerings of the inner light which
leads to truth; and second, the courage
to follow this faint light wherever it
may lead.
Carl Von Clausewitz, On War:Volume
1
==PAGE:6==
Page 6 of 74
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
DFB −MMCSM Double-Full-Bridge-based Modular Multilevel Converter Sub Module
DFB −MMC Double-Full-Bridge-based Modular Multilevel Converter
FACT Flexible AC Transmission System
FB −MMCSM Full-Bridge-based Modular Multilevel Converter Sub Module
FB −MMC Full-Bridge-based Modular Multilevel Converter
HB −MMCSM Half-Bridge-based Modular Multilevel Converter Sub Module
HB −MMC Half-Bridge-based Modular Multilevel Converter
HV DC High Voltage Direct Current
LCC
Line Commutated Converter
MMC Modular Multilevel Converter
NV L Nearest Voltage Level
PLL
Phase Locked Loop
SM
Sub Module
STATCOM Static Synchronous Compensator
7
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Commercial HVDC was pioneered in the 1950s, starting with the 20-MW Gotland submarine-
land project in Sweden. In HVDC systems, transmission depends on two prevalent tech-
nologies: the line-commutated-converter (LCC) and the voltage-source-converter (VSC).
In a LCC-based HVDC system, a sending AC Grid is connected to the HVDC link with
a rectiﬁer and the HVDC link is then connected to the receiving AC grid with an inverter.
LCC is also named as current source converter. The main drawback of LCC technology is
that current direction cannot change inside the converter.
In the other type of HVDC transmission technology, VSC-based technology, switching
devices are IGBTs instead of thyristors that are normally used in LCC. The main advantage
of a VSC based converter is the ability to control independently active and reactive power,
by controlling modulation of converter, however switching losses in a VSC-based technology
can be higher, while current and voltage ratings are lower.
The main limitations of the two level converter are its high switching losses due to rel-
atively high switching frequency, which actually necessitates high insulation requirements
for the transformer, as well as ﬁlters. The introduction of modular multilevel converter
technology led to overcoming many of the above-mentioned drawbacks, however at the
expense of more semi-conducting devices and a capacitor for each sub module [1], [2].
The main advantages a modular multilevel converter can demonstrate over a two-level
voltage source converter are:
• Modularity in design and scalability in power, voltage and current ratings
• High controllability
• Low AC ﬁlter requirements and high frequency noise
• High Eﬃciency
==PAGE:9==
• Robustness by using redundant modules
• AC side current quality is better, due to the multi-level waveform than the traditional
two-level VSC
[3]. Technical literature and the ever growing amount of installations presents the
success and market performance of the MMC topology.
1.2
Objectives
Thesis studies FB-MMC and HB-MMC based HVDC interconnection between two strong
AC grids focuses on the diﬀerences between the two topologies in respect to handling with
DC Faults. For the purpose of this thesis, an open-access Matlab Simulink toolbox was
used, from Best-Paths Project
[4],for modelling the HVDC interconnection. HB-MMC
and FB-MMC fully switched detailed and aggregate models were modelled, with a view to
studying the advantages a full-bridge sub module may oﬀer over the half-bridge one.
Thesis focuses exclusively on half-bridge and full-bridge topologies and DC faults. The
main diﬃculties faced during the thesis work had to do mainly with high complexity of
simulink models that resulted in great simulation times.
1.3
Outline of the Thesis
The Thesis is structures in the following chapters:
• Chapter 1: Introduction
• Chapter 2: Literature review on the basics of the modelling and control of a modular
multilevel converter, using half-bridge and full-bridge sub module topology, descrip-
tion of source MMC model and implementation of switched and new averaged ones.
• Chapter 3: Literature review on the basics of the modelling and control of a HVDC
interconnection, basic description of the interconnection-model used.
• Chapter 4: Description of the control development scheme for handling DC faults
with FB-MMC, comparison between HB-MMC and FB-MMC results, literature re-
view on the DC Faults.
• Chapter 5: Conclusions and suggested future work
• Chapter 6: Appendices
Page 9 of 74
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2
Modelling and Control of Modular
Multilevel Converter
2.1
Introduction
The purpose of this chapter is to give a brief theoretical description of modelling and
internal controls of a Modular Multilevel Converter model.
2.2
Modelling of Modular Multilevel Converter
A typical top-level structure of a MMC is shown in the following ﬁgure.
Figure 2.1: Top Level perspective of MMC
NTotal sub modules compose a converter arm along with a resistance and reactor. In
==PAGE:11==
a MMC the number of steps of the output voltage is depends on the number of series
connected sub modules. The pulse switching signal is controlled in a way so that only
NTotal out of 2 · NTotal sub modules of a converter leg are activated.
2.2.1
Introduction of Sub-Module Topologies
Various sub module topologies for modular multilevel converter have been investigated
throughout the years, while the most commonly used industrially are the half-bridge and
the full-bridge sub-module topology.The half-bridge topology can generate only positive
and zero voltages, while the full-bridge topology can generate positive, negative and zero
voltages.
Half-Bridge Sub Module Topology
Below, is presented the structure of a sub module with half-bridge topology.Each sub-
module is a simple chopper cell that consists of two IGBT switches.
The half-bridge
topology of a modular multilevel converter sub-module is presented in the following ﬁgure
.
Figure 2.2: HB-MMC Sub Module Topology and Voltage Output [5]
.
The switching states of a half-bridge sub module is shown in the following ﬁgure:
Page 11 of 74
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.3: Half-Bridge Sub Module Switching States [5]
• If f
S1 is ON and S1 is oﬀthen
Voutput,submodule = 0
(2.1)
.
• If f
S1 is OFF and S1 is ON then
Voutput,submodule = Vcapacitor,submodule
(2.2)
.
Full-Bridge Sub Module Topology
Figure
2.4 presents the structure of a sub module with full-bridge topology.Each sub-
module is a simple chopper cell that consists of four IGBT switches.
The full-bridge
topology of a modular multilevel converter sub module is presented in the following ﬁgure.
Figure 2.4: FB-MMC Sub Module Topology and Voltage Output [5]
Page 12 of 74
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.5 presents the switching states of a full-bridge sub-module:
Figure 2.5: Full-Bridge Sub Module Switching States [5]
It is noted that f
S1, f
S2 are always at complement states to S1, S2.
• If S1 and S2 are ON and then
Voutput,submodule = Vcapacitor,submodule
(2.3)
.
• If S1 and S2 are OFF and then
Voutput,submodule = −Vcapacitor,submodule
(2.4)
.
• If S1 and S2 are complement to each other
Voutput,submodule = −Vcapacitor,submodule
(2.5)
.
2.2.2
Basic Modular Multilevel Converter Equations
In this section, basic operating principles of an MMC are reviewed, while basic equations
that describe an averaged model are derived.
Figure
2.6 presents the structure of a
converter leg.
Page 13 of 74
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.6: Modular Multilevel Converter Structure [6]
Output current is deﬁned as the current that consists of the upper and lower arm of a
converter leg that corresponds to a phase.
Ioutput = Iupper + Ilower
(2.6)
The circulating current is deﬁned as the ﬂowing current inside the converter legs. Cir-
culating current does not contribute to output current and is equal to the diﬀerential value
between the currents ﬂowing into the upper and lower converter arms of the same leg. It
is also referred later, as DC current.
Icirculating = Iupper −Ilower
2
(2.7)
A manipulation of above equations 2.8 can lead to the equations of converter leg upper
and lower arm currents as a function of the circulating and the phase output current.
Below, they are presented:
Page 14 of 74
==PAGE:15==
Iupper = Icirculating + Ioutput
2
(2.8)
Ilower = −Icirculating + Ioutput
2
(2.9)
A converter with N sub modules per arm is considered. Every arm is controlled with an
insertion index n(t). Insertion index actually indicates the ratio of inserted sub-modules to
the total number of sub-modules n(t) = NInserted
NT otal
and gets values with discrete steps from
the interval: n(t) ∈[0, 1].
The case n(t) = 0 occurs when all converter arm sub-modules are bypassed, where as
case n(t) = 1 occurs when all sub-modules are inserted, respectively.
C is the capacitance of a sub-module. The variable eﬀective capacitance Carm of a
converter arm is deﬁned as 2.10
Cconverterarm =
C
NInserted
.
(2.10)
.
V is the voltage of a sub-module. Each capacitor voltage is described by 2.11
Vconverterarm = NInserted · VSubModule
(2.11)
The eﬀective converter arm voltage Varm of a converter arm is deﬁned as 2.12
C · dVsubmodule
dt
= n(t)submodule · Iconverterarm
(2.12)
It is noted that n(t)submodule could be either 0 or 1, indicating that the sub module is
bypassed or inserted respectively. Summation of all sub modules in a converter arm yields
the 2.17 :
C ·
N
X
i=1
d PN
i=1 Vsubmodule
dt
=
N
X
i=1
n(t)submodule · Iconverterarm
(2.13)
C · d PN
i=1 Vsubmodule
dt
= Iconverterarm ·
N
X
i=1
n(t)submodule
(2.14)
C · dVconverterarm
dt
= Iconverterarm · NInserted
(2.15)
C · dVconverterarm
dt
= Iconverterarm · n(t) · NTotal
(2.16)
Varm = n(t) · Varm,total
(2.17)
Page 15 of 74
==PAGE:16==
I is the ﬂowing current of a converter arm. It is deﬁned as following:
Iarm · n(t) =
C
NTotal
· dVarm,total
dt
(2.18)
.
Applying Kirchoﬀ’s voltage law to an arm of a phase of modular multilevel converter
leads to the 2.19 2.21.
For an upper converter arm:,
Vd
2 −Varm,upper −Vimpedance = Voutput
(2.19)
Vd
2 −n(t)upper · Varm,total,upper −Iupper · R −L · dIupper
dt
= Voutput
(2.20)
For a lower converter arm:,
−Vd
2 + Varm,lower −Vimpedance = Voutput
(2.21)
−Vd
2 + n(t)lower · Varm,total,lower −Ilower · R −L · dIlower
dt
= Voutput
(2.22)
Deriving the equation for the upper converter arm, 2.29 is obtained:
Vd
2 −Varm,upper −Vimpedance = Voutput
(2.23)
Vd
2 −Varm,upper −Vimpedance = Voutput
(2.24)
Vd
2 −Varm,upper −Iupper · R −L · dIupper
dt
= Voutput
(2.25)
d(Vd
2 −Varm,upper −Iupper · R −L · dIupper
dt
)
dt
= dVoutput
dt
(2.26)
dVarm,upper
dt
−dIupper
dt
· R −L · d2Iupper
dt
= −dVoutput
dt
(2.27)
dVarm,upper
dt
−dIupper
dt
· R −L · d2Iupper
dt
= −dVoutput
dt
(2.28)
Iupper · NInserted
C
−dIupper
dt
· R −L · d2Iupper
dt
= −dVoutput
dt
(2.29)
Page 16 of 74
==PAGE:17==
The respective equation for the lower converter arm is:
Ilower · NInserted
C
+ dIupper
dt
· R + L · d2Iupper
dt
= +dVoutput
dt
(2.30)
Subtracting the equation for the lower arm current from the one of the equation for the
upper arm current, the following dynamic equation is obtained:
d(Iupper −Ilower)
dt
= Vd −Varm,upper −Varm,lower −R · (Iupper −Ilower)
2 · L
(2.31)
dIcirculating
dt
= Vd −Varm,upper −Varm,lower −R · Icirculating
2 · L
(2.32)
While adding the same equations, the dynamic equation 2.21 is obtained
Voutput = Varm,lower −Varm,upper −R · Ioutput −L · dIoutput
dt
2
(2.33)
From the above equations, a dynamic and continuous model of the modular multilevel
converter can be fully obtained.
2.3
Controls of Modular Multilevel Converter
In this section, a theoretical introduction to a dynamic continuous model of a modular
multilevel converter is done and to its basic internal controls. Moreover, internal controls
used in the source MMC model are brieﬂy explained.
2.3.1
Dynamic Model of Modular Multilevel Converter
From the previous analysis, a continuous and dynamic model of a modular multilevel
converter was obtained. This model is shown below, as a system of a dynamic equations.
d
dt


Icirculating
Varm,total,upper
Varm,total,lower

=


−R
L
−n(t)upper
2·L
−n(t)lower
2·L
n(t)upper
Carm,total
0
0
n(t)lower
Carm,total
0
0

·


Icirculating
Varm,total,upper
Varm,total,lower

+


Vd
2
n(t)upper·Ioutput
2·Carm,total
−n(t)lower·Ioutput
2·Carm,total


(2.34)
The following conclusions are drawn.
1. The output voltage if a function of the output current and the diﬀerential voltage
between the converter arms
Page 17 of 74
==PAGE:18==
2. Circulating current depends only on the dc link voltage level and the sum of arm
voltages
In the next sub sections, a brief description is given of the internal MMC controllers,
as included in the Best Paths source HVDC inter connector model [4].
2.3.2
Cell Capacitor Voltage Control
A sub-module voltage controller was implemented with a view to enhancing internal voltage
balancing, across the cells of the same converter arm.The average cell capacitor voltage is
controlled to V dc/N using a PI controller. The output of the controller is DC current
reference component.
Figure 2.7 presents the relevant cell capacitor voltage control scheme.
Figure 2.7: Sub Module Capacitor Voltage Control Scheme
2.3.3
Circulating Current Control
A circulating current control scheme was implemented with a view to minimizing the alter-
nating component of the circulating current in a converter arm. The measured circulated
current is controlled to the Idref using a PI controller.Idref is the output of the cell ca-
pacitor voltage controller. Figure 2.8 presents the circulating current controller.
Page 18 of 74
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.8: Circulating Current Control Scheme
2.3.4
Reference Signals
The voltage reference signals for upper and lower converter arms are given by 2.35,2.36:
V ∗
UpperABC = V ∗
DC
2
−v∗
OutputABC −v∗
circulatingABC
(2.35)
V ∗
LowerABC = V ∗
DC
2
−v∗
OutputABC −v∗
circulatingABC
(2.36)
• VDC is the nominal dc link voltage reference
• vOutputABC is the converter voltage reference, as produced by outer control loops of
an HVDC interconnection
• v∗
circulatingABC is the voltage reference, as produced by aforementioned internal MMC
circulating current controller
Figure 2.9 presents an overview of the voltage reference signals scheme.
Page 19 of 74
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.9: Voltage Reference Signals Scheme
2.3.5
Nearest Voltage Level Balancing Algorithm
Modulation methods in MMC are classiﬁed either as PWM ones at high switching frequen-
cies or staircase ones at low switching frequencies. Staircase modulation methods are used
in MMCs with high number of converter arm submodules and, therefore, high number of
voltage levels. The prevalent staircase modulation methods are the method of multilevel
selective harmonic elimination
[7] and the method of nearest voltage level modulation
[8]. In the source inter connector model, NVL method is used.The NVL method uses the
very high number of voltage levels by approximating the voltage reference to the nearest
possible output converter voltage level.According to this method, the converter arm cell
voltages get sorted and speciﬁed sub modules get activated at every switching iteration,
depending on sorting ranks and converter current direction. Its principle is simple and can
be described as the following steps:
I The individual 320 cell capacitor voltages in every converter arm are sorted.
II Converter arm current directions get identiﬁed. Current ﬂow determines the charge
or discharge-state of a cell voltage.
III At a charge period, the sub modules with the lowest capacitor voltage level get acti-
vated, while at a discharge period the sub modules with the highest voltage levels get
activated respectively.
Page 20 of 74
==PAGE:21==
This kind of direct capacitor voltage balancing control was proven to have desired
dynamic performance
[9]. The c embedded function used in the source inter-connector
model for the implementation of the above mentioned voltage balancing control is shown
more detailed in the Appendix 3.
2.4
Implementation on Simulink
Fully-detailed switched models represent reliably reality.However, they can be extremely
slow, complex and, consequently, unpractical. Equivalent aggregate models can greatly
speed up a simulation time. The purpose of this chapter is to demonstrate the modelling
work,during this thesis. In the source model, provided by Best Paths Project, was imple-
mented using an aggregate model to simulate 320 sub modules per converter arm. In a
aggregate model, only only virtual capacitor is used to represent the 320 capacitors of the
converter arm. It is also assumed that all capacitor voltages of all sub modules are well-
balanced. An averaged model can run much faster compared to a fully detailed switched
model, proving to be a useful tool for real time simulations.
2.4.1
Description of Source Averaged HB-MMC Model
Figure 2.10 presents the algorithm, based on which an aggregate converter arm voltage is
calculated.
Figure 2.10: Description of Source Averaged of HB-MMC Topology on Simulink
The following equation summarizes the calculation of the average capacitor voltage of
an aggregate converter arm. [10].
Vconverterarm =
Ninserted
Csubmodule · NTotal
·
Z
Iconverterarmdt
(2.37)
The main simpliﬁcation of this equation is that only the average capacitor voltage is
taken into account.It is assumed that all sub-modules within each converter arm are totally
Page 21 of 74
==PAGE:22==
balanced and polarized to the nominal sub module voltage.In order to save processing
power, assuming such a calculation simpliﬁcation could be a decisive advantage.
Figure 2.11 presents the source averaged model of the HB-MMC, as included in Best
Paths package [4].
Figure 2.11: Source Averaged HB-MMC Model Topology on Simulink
2.4.2
Implementation of Fully Detailed Switched HB-MMC Model
The following ﬁgures demonstrate the modelling stages on the way to accurately replace
the source averaged Simulink HB-MMC model block, with a fully switched detailed one.
Figures 2.12 presents a partial overview of the Simulink sub module blocks in series
connection
Page 22 of 74
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.12: Implementation of Switched of HB-MMC Topology on Simulink-Part 1
Figures 2.13 presents an overview of the implementation of an HB-MMC sub module
topology on Simulink. It is noted that the capacitor is rated with nominal capacitance and
carries initial voltage, identical to the ones of the source model.
Figure 2.13: Implementation of Switched of HB-MMC Topology on Simulink-Part 2
Page 23 of 74
==PAGE:24==
2.4.3
Implementation of Fully Detailed Switched FB-MMC Model
Figures 2.14, 2.15 present the similar fully-switched modelling stages for FB-MMC case.
Figure 2.14: Implementation of Switched of FB-MMC Topology on Simulink-Part 1
Figure 2.15: Implementation of Switched of FB-MMC Topology on Simulink-Part 2
Page 24 of 74
==PAGE:25==
Signal Mod is carrying the switching pulses and is identical to the signal used for
modulation of half bridge sub-modules. This signal is sent to IGBT no 1 of the full-bridge
sub modules. With the above depicted implementation, the complement signal is sent to
IGBT no 2 of the full-bridge sub module. IGBT no 3 is constantly oﬀ, whileIGBT no
4 is constantly on. That way the full-bridge sub module can act in a identical way to
the source half-bridge sub module, according to full bridge switching states table. When
negative polarity is indicated, the four modulation signals pass through a NOT gate, so that
full-bridge sub module can output a negative voltage state, again according to switching
states table.
2.4.4
Implementation of Equivalent Aggregate FB-MMC Model
The purpose of this modelling to greatly speed up simulation time. A similar approach to
the source averaged HB-MMC model was implemented. Figure 2.16 presents the modelling
scheme for the averaged FB-MMC model.
Page 25 of 74
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.16: Implementation of Averaged of FB-MMC Topology on Simulink
In contrast to the averaged source HB-MMC model, the averaged FB-MMC model
includes a switching polarity mechanism and an extra anti-parallel diode. Once Negative
Polarity signal is ON, polarity is reversed using breakers and proper signaling. It is noted
that the extra anti-parallel diode is connected, only when the MMC converter is set to
Blocked state, with a view to emulating the functionality of the extra free-wheeling diode.
2.5
Validation of all Models against Source Model
All the above-mentioned models,listed below, were validated against each other with a view
to testing their ability to output identical steady state results.
• Aggregate (Averaged) HB-MMC model, source model as provided from BestPaths
Project
Page 26 of 74
==PAGE:27==
• Detailed (Switched) HB-MMC model, modelled
• Aggregate (Averaged) FB-MMC model, modelled
• Detailed (Switched) FB-MMC model, modelled
The validation was done in the following way:
1. Replacing MMC block in the source Interconnector Model with the modelled MMC
blocks.
2. Comparing Active Power, HVDC Voltage, HVDC Currents, and Reactive Power on
both ends, during steady state and power step changes, among all models.
3. Aggregate (Averaged) FB-MMC model, modelled
4. Detailed (Switched) FB-MMC model, modelled
comparing Active Power, HVDC Voltage, HVDC Currents, and Reactive Power on
both ends, during steady state and power step changes, among all models. The validation
among all models was combined with the testing of control system dynamics. Therefore
overall validation results will be shown in the end of next chapter, where the total HVDC
inter connector model is tested, for all listed cases of modelled MMCs.
Page 27 of 74
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 3
Modelling and Control of
HVDC-MMC Interconnection
3.1
Introduction
Figure 3.1 presents a two-terminal HVDC system for AC interconnection, with strong AC
grids.
Figure 3.1: Top Level Schematic of Case Study [5]
In this case study, the sending-end modular multilevel converter regulates the amount
of the active power sent to HVDC link to a value of 500MW and the reactive power at
the converter terminals to a value of 100MV Ar. The receiving-end modular multilevel
converter regulates the DC voltage to a value of ±320kV .
==PAGE:29==
3.2
Modelling of HVDC-MMC Interconnection
In this section a brief description of the inter connector model used for this thesis, as
provided from Best Paths project [4] package is given.
3.2.1
System Ratings
Table 3.2.1 summarizes the System Ratings of the inter connector model.
System Ratings
Values
Description
Active Power
500 MW
Rated power transfer
Reactive Power
100 MW
Reactive power compensation
C
0.033 F
Sub-Module Capacitor
Voltage
640 kV
Nominal HVDC voltage
In
Power/Vdc
DC Current
Vc0
2000
Initial sub-module capacitor voltage
ncellsarm
320
Number of sub-modules per converter arm
Lﬁlter
7e-3 Ohm
Filter Inductance
Rﬁlter
1e-1 Ohm
Filter Resistance
Freq
50Hz
Grid frequency
3.2.2
Modelling of AC Grids
Strong AC Grids are emulated as symmetrical three-phase voltage sources in both sending
and receiving end.
3.2.3
Modelling of Modular Multilevel Converters
The modelled MMC blocks descripted in the previous chapter were used.
3.2.4
Modelling of HVDC Link
The DC cable model was developed as a time domain implementation of a single-phase,
frequency-dependent traveling wave model, by means of a Norton equivalent.
3.3
Controllers of HVDC-MMC Interconnection
The source inter-connector model includes high-level controllers that are designed to oper-
ate in 3 control modes.
• DC V-Q Control
Page 29 of 74
==PAGE:30==
• P Q Control
• AC V Control
Figure 3.2 presents a top level structure of controllers in the inter connector model.
Figure 3.2: High Level Controller [4]
In the case study of this thesis, the sending-end converter operates in Active-Reactive
power control mode, while the receiving end converter operates in DC Voltage-Reactive
Power control mode. AC Voltage control, mainly needed for islandic mode was not used.
The sending-end MMC can control the active power sent via the HVDC link and the
reactive power in its terminal in a decoupled way.For this purpose, vector control scheme is
used, also known as synchronous-dq frame control approach. In the synchronous-dq frame,
the dq-axis is rotating at the grid frequency, and the grid voltage vector is aligned with
the d-axis.Therefore, the q-axis voltage component becomes zero, and the d-axis voltage
component is equal to the grid voltage.To implement the current controller, the three-phase
grid voltages and currents are transformed to the dq-frame, which will be synchronized with
the grid frequency by using a phase-locked loop (PLL).The control scheme consists of two
outer loops that minimize the error between the active and reactive power measured values
and their respective references. D and Q current references are derived from the active and
Page 30 of 74
==PAGE:31==
reactive power references.The reference d- and q-axis current components are given to the
dq-frame current controller.
Figure 3.3 presents how active power is controlled.
Figure 3.3: Control of Active Power
Figure 3.4 presents how reactive power is controlled.
Figure 3.4: Control of Reactive Power
A similar approach is followed for the receiving-end converter control scheme. However,
in contrast to the sending-end converter control, the d-current reference component is
derived from an outer loop that regulates the HVDC link voltage level. That way, the
sending-end converter controls the active power dispatched via the dc link and the receiving-
end converter controls the HVDC link voltage level independently.
Figure 3.5 presents how DC voltage is controlled.
Page 31 of 74
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.5: Control of DC Voltage
Figure 3.6 presents how current references are calculated, while 3.7 presents the DQ
frame current controller
Figure 3.6: Current References Calculation
Figure 3.7: dq Frame Current Controller [5]
Page 32 of 74
==PAGE:33==
3.4
Validation of HVDC Interconnection Operation
The purpose of this section is to conduct an overall validity test for MMC models modelled,
as described in previous chapter, as well as a quality check for the inter connector model,
obtained from Best Paths project. The following test performed to validate the converter
control of the HVDC interconnection operation among all inter connector models (av-
eraged half-bridge-based,averaged full-bridge-based, switched half-bridge-based, switched
full-bridge-based).
• At 0.2 sec, the active power reference gets stepped up to 20 per cent.
• At 0.4 sec, the active power reference gets stepped up to 40 per cent.
• At 0.6 sec, the active power reference gets stepped up to 60 per cent.
• At 0.8 sec, the active power reference gets stepped up to 80 per cent.
• At 1 sec, the active power reference gets stepped up to 100 per cent.
• At 1.2 sec, the active power reference gets lowered down to 80 per cent.
• At 1.4 sec, the active power reference gets lowered down to 60 per cent.
• At 1.6 sec, the active power reference gets lowered down to 40 per cent.
• At 1.8 sec, the active power reference gets lowered down to 20 per cent.
• At 2 sec, the active power reference gets lowered down to 0 per cent.
• At 2.2 sec, there is a step up to 100 per cent.
Figures
3.8, 3.9,, 3.10, 3.11, 3.12 prove the validation of the HVDC interconnection
operation among all inter connector models, in terms of:
• active power transferred via HVDC link
• reactive power at sending end MMC
• reactive power at sending end MMC
• HVDC voltage
• HVDC current
Page 33 of 74
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.8: Active Power transferred via HVDC Link
Figure 3.9: Reactive Power at Sending-End Terminal
Figure 3.10: Reactive Power at Receiving-End Terminal
Page 34 of 74
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.11: HVDC Voltage
Figure 3.12: HVDC Current
The following observations are made:
1. Switched Fully-Detailed models provide identical results to the Agreggated ones in
steady state operation and also in terms of control system dynamics. All reference
and measurement signals overlay perfectly among all models.
2. A switched fully detailed model is expected to represent reality to a greater extent
than an aggregate model.
The fact that modelled fully detailed models provide
identical results to the results obtained from the source aggregate model is a proof
for both the validity of the source Best Paths toolbox models and the modelled ones.
3. Switched fully detailed models are expected to be used for validation purposed mainly,
as they can incur huge simulation times. Aggregate models are expected to be used
for control development as they can drastically reduce simulation times.
4. During the simulation, the measured variables follow their references satisfactorily.
Active Power can never reach the power reference, as there are switching losses. As
Page 35 of 74
==PAGE:36==
it can be seen, the receiving-end converter controls the HVDC link voltage at its
reference (640kV ). Voltage overshoots and drops are observed, when active power
transfer gets increased or decreased respectively, as expected. At the onset of an
active power transfer increase, the active power arriving at the HVDC link is higher
than the active power departing from the link, resulting in the rise of voltage among
the capacitors of the receiving-end MMC sub-modules. The opposite phenomenon is
observed when the active power transferred decreases.
Page 36 of 74
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4
DC Faults
4.1
Introduction
The main problems in HVDC Networks arise from DC faults.
DC faults present the
following inherent characteristics:
• fast transients
• high peak currents
Due to these characteristics, it is not possible to handle DC faults using traditional
breakers. Therefore, research was mostly conducted on design of DC breakers that are able
to handle DC faults or new MMC sub-module topologies. From a DC Fault perspective,
not only a grid needs protection equipment but ensuring as well that controllability of
MMC stations is uninterrupted. Uninterrupted controllability may ensure isolation of AC
grid operation from HVDC line and that is highly important for the cases, where AC grids
are weak, such as the wind farms. MMC stations are required to provide continuous AC
Voltage support and Reactive Power to the weak AC grids.
Overall, there are two prevalent concepts for handling of DC faults, in HVDC networks
[11] :
• use of half-bridge-based MMC stations, along with DC breakers. The extra protection
equipment, DC breakers in this case, incurs extra costs. In this case, half-bridge sub
modules will face high peak currents, unless DC breaker total interruption time is
lower than the travelling time from fault point to MMC station. The MMC station,
in order to protect itself, will have to inhibit control operation. Therefore, the MMC
station will act as an equivalent diode-bridge rectiﬁer, losing the ability to control
and support the AC grid.
==PAGE:38==
• use of full-bridge-based MMC stations, without any extra protection equipment
needed. As it will be seen later, a full-bridge-based MMC can handle DC faults ef-
fectively, with or without losing the ability to support AC grids with reactive power
compensation.
Figure 4.1 presents the fault DC current path in a MMC.
Figure 4.1: Fault Current Path in a MMC under a DC Fault [6]
As already said on chapter 2, a full-bridge based sub module (FBSM) can generate
three voltage states-outputs of cell capacitor voltage V c, 0, −V c, in contrast to a half-
bridge based sub module (HBSM) that generates only two V c, 0. The extra voltage state
that FBSM can produce is not normally used during normal operation of FB-MMC. In
normal operation, full-bridge sub modules are modulated in a identical way to the half-
bridge ones, with only two of the switch valves operating every time. However, during
DC faults, the extra pair of switch valves can be used properly. Therefore, FB-MMC can
demonstrate advantages over HB-MMC, during dealing with DC-Faults.
As it will be further analyzed, these advantages can be clearly demonstrated during DC
faults, where high peak currents rapidly develop. FB-MMC can demonstrate superiority
to HB-MMC in the following cases:
• Inhibit of control operation of MMC sub modules
Page 38 of 74
==PAGE:39==
• Over currents get nulliﬁed with proper controlling of MMC DC current.
In this thesis, the following scenario is examined, where a fault is applied among two
DC poles and ground, in the end of DC transmission line. Figure
4.2 presents HVDC
voltage waveform, during a DC fault. It is noted that this waveform is common for all
study cases.
Figure 4.2: HVDC Voltage during DC fault
4.2
Blocking MMC during DC Faults
When using HB-MMC, the fault current cannot get blocked.That is shown in this section.
Figure 4.3 presents the current path in a half-bridge sub module, under a DC fault.
Figure 4.3: Fault Current Path in a HBSM under a DC Fault [6]
Page 39 of 74
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.4, 4.5 present the DC currents on both terminal sides, under a DC fault at
t = 0.2sec. DC currents, as expected, get extremely high value.
Figure 4.4: DC Current at Sending-End HB-MMC during DC fault when MMC blocked
Figure 4.5: DC Current at Receiving-End HB-MMC during DC fault when MMC blocked
Page 40 of 74
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.6, 4.7 present the reactive powers on both MMC terminals, under a DC fault
at t = 0.2sec. As expected, reactive powers get unstable and uncontrollable.
Figure 4.6: Reactive Power at Sending-End HB-MMC at variable Reactive Power Ref
during DC fault when MMC blocked
Page 41 of 74
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.7: Reactive Power at Receiving-End HB-MMC at variable Reactive Power Ref
during DC fault when MMC blocked
In contrast to the previous case, when using FB-MMC, an opposing polarity is applied
to the direction of the fault current during the DC fault. The capacitor voltages of every
arm are serially connected and oppose to the rise of the fault current. The total equivalent
series capacitor voltage is higher than the peak line-to-line voltage of the connected AC
Grid.
This causes the fault current to drop to zero.However, the disadvantage of this
method is that ability to control is lost and therefore, the MMC station cannot provide
support to the AC side voltage.
Figure 4.8 presents the current path in a full-bridge sub module, under a DC fault.
Figure 4.8: Fault Current Path in a FBSM under a DC Fault [6]
As it is seen, due to the extra pair of switch valves, FB-MMC has the inherent ability
of dc fault blocking, in contrast to HB-MMC. That does not come with no cost though, as
at the costs of power semiconductor devices and power losses get increased. Fault current
is ﬂowing through the freewheeling diodes in the upper and lower converter arms, while
Page 42 of 74
==PAGE:43==
the sub-module capacitors are bypassed.
Figure 4.9, 4.10 present the DC currents on both terminal sides, under a DC fault at
t = 0.2sec.
Figure 4.9: DC Current at Sending-End FB-MMC during DC fault when MMC blocked
Figure 4.10: DC Current at Receiving-End FB-MMC during DC fault when MMC blocked
Page 43 of 74
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.11, 4.12 present the reactive powers on both MMC terminals, under a DC fault
at t = 0.2sec. As expected, reactive powers cannot be controlled also in this case. However
there is a notable diﬀerence compared to previous case: instead of getting unstable, they
get 0.
Figure 4.11: Reactive Power at Sending-End FB-MMC at variable Reactive Power Ref
during DC fault when MMC blocked
Page 44 of 74
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.12: Reactive Power at Receiving-End FB-MMC at variable Reactive Power Ref
during DC fault when MMC blocked
4.3
Control of FB-MMC during DC Faults
FB-MMC provides the ability to absorb fault over currents, by making use of the negative
polarity of in-series total cell capacitor voltage.When a fault is detected, then the circulating
current reference will be set to 0. That will end to the insertion index of the sub modules
getting negative values also. Negative insertion function values have no meaning, for HB-
MMC case, as converter arm voltage polarity cannot be reversed. However, this can be done
in the FB-MMC case though.When the insertion function is negative, it is indicated that
the sub modules to be activated in a converter arm should connect with reverse polarity,
by applying a NOT signal to the IGBT switching pulses.
Page 45 of 74
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.13: DC Current control scheme for handling DC faults
Figure 4.13 presents an overview of the DC current control scheme used for handling
DC faults, by driving direct current to 0.
In normal operation, in the sending end MMC insertion fuction, dc link voltage reference
is set by the HVDC voltage feedback, as this MMC is responsible for active power control.
In the receiving end MMC insertion function, dc link voltage reference is set by default
to 640kV rated value. However, during DC faults, DC voltage reference for both MMC
insertion functions is set to 0, while eventually active power reference in the sending end
MMC is set to zero too.
From a modelling aspect, a simple mechanism was developed on simulink that detects
negative values of converter arm submodules insertion function. Once, a negative value
is identiﬁed, then negative polarity gets activated in the submodules, while the absolute
value is given as input to the NVL block. That way, negative insertion function could be
totally decoupled from NVL balancing algorithm. For comparison purposes, the developed
control scheme was used in HB-MMC. As expected, HB-MMC could not make use of the
advantages of this scheme.
When using HB-MMC:
Figure 4.14, 4.15 present the DC currents on both terminal sides, under a DC fault
at t = 0.2sec. DC currents, as expected, get extremely high value.
Page 46 of 74
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.14: DC Current at Sending-End HB-MMC during DC fault when MMC controlled
Figure 4.15: DC Current at Receiving-End HB-MMC during DC fault when MMC con-
trolled
Figure 4.16, 4.17 present the reactive powers on both MMC terminals, under a DC
fault at t = 0.2sec. As expected, reactive powers get unstable and uncontrollable.
Page 47 of 74
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.16: Reactive Power at Sending-End HB-MMC at variable Reactive Power Ref
during DC fault when MMC controlled
Figure 4.17: Reactive Power at Receiving-End HB-MMC at variable Reactive Power Ref
during DC fault when MMC controlled
When using FB-MMC:
Page 48 of 74
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.18, 4.19 present the DC currents on both terminal sides, under a DC fault
at t = 0.2sec. DC currents get nulliﬁed, after some initial expected spikes.
Figure 4.18: DC Current at Sending-End FB-MMC during DC fault when MMC controlled
Figure 4.19: DC Current at Receiving-End FB-MMC during DC fault when MMC con-
trolled
Page 49 of 74
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.20, 4.21 present the reactive powers on both MMC terminals, under a DC
fault at t = 0.2sec. As expected, reactive powers are controlled and follow the reactive
power reference, during the post fault period.
Figure 4.20: Reactive Power at Sending-End FB-MMC at variable Reactive Power Ref
during DC fault when MMC controlled
Page 50 of 74
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.21: Reactive Power at Receiving-End FB-MMC at variable Reactive Power Ref
during DC fault when MMC controlled
4.4
Overview Comparison Results and Observations
In this section an overview of comparison results between HB-MMC and FB-MMC is
given in the case of blocking the converters or using the aforementioned control scheme for
handling DC fault currents.
4.4.1
Handling DC Faults with Blocking of MMC (FB-MMC vs HB-
MMC)
Figures 4.22 and 4.23 present the diﬀerence between FB-MMC and HB-MMC, in terms
of DC current, on both terminal sides, when converter blocking is used to handle with fault
currents.
Page 51 of 74
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.22: DC Current at Sending End MMC (FB-MMC vs HB-MMC)
Figure 4.23: DC Current at Receiving End MMC (FB-MMC vs HB-MMC)
Figures
4.24 and
4.25 present the diﬀerence between FB-MMC and HB-MMC, in
terms of reactive power, on both terminal sides.
Page 52 of 74
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.24: Reactive Power at Sending End MMC (FB-MMC vs HB-MMC)
Figure 4.25: Reactive Power at Receiving End MMC (FB-MMC vs HB-MMC)
Page 53 of 74
==PAGE:54==
4.4.2
Handling DC Faults with Control of MMC (FB-MMC vs HB-
MMC)
Figures 4.26 and 4.27 present the diﬀerence between FB-MMC and HB-MMC, in terms
of DC current, on both terminal sides, when converter control is used to handle with fault
currents.
Figure 4.26: DC Current at Sending End MMC (FB-MMC vs HB-MMC)
Page 54 of 74
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.27: DC Current at Receiving End MMC (FB-MMC vs HB-MMC)
Figures
4.28 and
4.29 present the diﬀerence between FB-MMC and HB-MMC, in
terms of reactive power, on both terminal sides.
Figure 4.28: Reactive Power at Sending End MMC (FB-MMC vs HB-MMC)
Page 55 of 74
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.29: Reactive Power at Receiving End MMC (FB-MMC vs HB-MMC)
4.4.3
Observations
• FB-MMC can clearly handle DC faults in contrast to HB-MMC, when control op-
eration is inhibited.
However, none of them can support AC grids with reactive
power.
• FB-MMC can clearly handle DC faults in contrast to HB-MMC, with proper control
scheme. In contrast to previous case, FB-MMC can support AC Grids with reactive
power, and act as a STATCOM.
Page 56 of 74
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5
Conclusions
The aim of this thesis project is the modelling and control of a half-bridge-based and full-
bridge-based modular multilevel converter function on a HVDC interconnection during
normal operation and DC faults.An open access HVDC inter connector simulink toolbox
was used for this purpose, while half-bridge based and full-bridge based modelled MMC
were used. The advantages a full-bridge MMC over Half-Bridge were studied, during DC
faults. The conclusions drawn during this thesis work are presented below:
5.1
Switched vs Aggregate Modelling
From a modelling perspective, it was proven that an averaged MMC model can present
identical behavior to a heavy fully-detailed switched MMC model with 320 sub modules
per converter arm. Fully-switched MMC models can be used for veriﬁcation purposes but
Averaged models oﬀer outstanding speed simulation-wise.
5.2
Handling of DC Faults with Blocking: FB-MMC vs HB-
MMC
In case of DC faults, a FB-MMC can provide DC fault blocking ability, when control
operation is blocked. In contrast, HB-MMC cannot provide this ability and block the DC
faulty currents. Reactive Power is not controlled in both MMC terminals on a HVDC
interconnection in both FB-MMC and HB-MMC cases.
However, there is an essential
diﬀerence in the way reactive power is not controlled between the two cases. In HB-MMC,
reactive power control gets unstable, while in FB-MMC reactive power gets nulliﬁed.
==PAGE:58==
5.3
Handling of DC Faults with FB-MMC: Blocking vs Con-
trolling
Using a modiﬁed internal DC Current Control, a FB-MMC can handle DC faults without
the necessity of being blocked during DC Faults. Faulty DC current get nulliﬁed rapidly.
In such case, a FB-MMC was proven to act as a STATCOM, allowing control of reactive
power during the fault. This is of great importance for case of weak grids, where continuous
voltage support is required with reactive power compensation.
5.4
Suggested New Sub Module for Future Work
As it was seen, an addition of an extra pair of switching devices along with anti-parallel
diodes in a half-bridge sub module topology resulted in an impressive improvement the
way an MMC handles DC faults, on a HVDC interconnection. A sub-module topology
aﬀects greatly an MMC performance, when its material are exploited properly.
During the thesis, the author came across many interesting publications suggesting
various topologies.
The cited one
[12] proposes a sub module topology, where a sub
module comprises a capacitor and four-half-bridges connected to it.
Figure 5.1presents the proposed double-full-bridge topology.
Figure 5.1: Proposed Double-Full-Bridge Topology [12]
In contrast to previous sub module topologies, the new proposed sub module is no
longer a two-pole module, but a four-pole one. Each connection between two neighbor
modules is split into two. This doubling of poles corresponds to a split of each connection
between modules into two connections. Every pole is connected to the module capacitor
via a half-bridge formed by two semiconductor switches. In consequence, every neighbor
of a module has the the ability access to both sides of the capacitor at the same time.
The 8 switching devices allow in total 28 = 256 states, 9 of which are of special interest.
These 9 states include all 4 states of a full-bridge sub module (positive voltage output,
zero voltage output, negative voltage output, blocked state), where two poles connecting
one given module with its two neighbor modules are operated in a identical way to a single
Page 58 of 74
==PAGE:59==
pole connecting neighboring full-bridge sub modules. The new 5 states enable a module
connect with its neighbor ones in a parallel way with positive or negative polarity.
Figure 5.2presents the possible switching stats of a double-full-bridge topology. The
possible connections between one given sub-module and its two neighbor ones are presented
in the left, while in the right an equivalent circuit of the connection is presented.
Consequently, the proposed DFB-MMC SM topology allow an extra degree of freedom,
by controlling also the equivalent capacitance of a converter arm. Future research can
focus on how this extra degree of freedom, the extra control of capacitance that can be
introduced, can lead to amendments of an MMC performance.
• a- serial connection with positive polarity
• b- serial connection with negative polarity
• c- bypass state with output zero voltage
• d- blocked state, reverse diodes enforce rectiﬁcation
• e- parallel on the left side with positive polarity
• f- parallel on the left side with negative polarity
• g- parallel on the right side with positive polarity
• h- parallel on the right side with negative polarity
• i- parallel on both sides
Page 59 of 74
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.2: DFB-MMC Switching States [12]
Page 60 of 74
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1] Anton Lesnicar and Rainer Marquardt. An innovative modular multilevel converter
topology suitable for a wide power range. In Power Tech Conference Proceedings,
2003 IEEE Bologna, volume 3, pages 6–pp. IEEE, 2003.
[2] Yuanze Zhang. Modular Multi-level Converter Based Multi-terminal HVDC System
for Oﬀshore Wind Power Transmission. PhD thesis, School of Electrical Engineering
and Telecommunications, University of South Wales, 2017.
[3] Rodrigo Da Silva. Optimisation of VSC-HVDC Transmission for Wind Power Plants.
PhD thesis, Department of Energy Technology, Aalborg University, 2012.
[4] CE Ugalde-Loo, OD Adeuyi, S Wang, J Liang, N Jenkins, S Ceballos, M Santos,
I Vidaurrazaga, S D’Arco, G Bergna, et al. Open access simulation toolbox for the
grid connection of oﬀshore wind farms using multi-terminal hvdc networks. 2017.
[5] Du Sixing, Dekka Apparao, Wu Bin, and Zargari Navid. Modular Multilevel Convert-
ers: Analysis, Control, and Applications. IEEE Press, 2018.
[6] Rong Zeng, Lie Xu, and Liangzhong Yao. An improved modular multilevel converter
with dc fault blocking capability. In PES General Meeting— Conference & Exposition,
2014 IEEE, pages 1–5. IEEE, 2014.
[7] J Rodiguez.
Multilevel inverter: a survey of topologies, controls, and application.
IEEE Transaction on Industrial Electronics, 49(4):724–738, 2002.
[8] Minyuan Guan, Zheng Xu, Qingrui Tu, and Weiyong Pan. Nearest level modulation
for modular multilevel converters in hvdc transmission [j].
Automation of Electric
Power Systems, 2:012, 2010.
[9] Minyuan Guan, Zheng Xu, and Hairong Chen. Control and modulation strategies
for modular multilevel converter based hvdc system. In IECON 2011-37th Annual
Conference on IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, pages 849–854. IEEE, 2011.
61
==PAGE:62==
[10] O Venjakob, S Kubera, R Hibberts-Caswell, PA Forsyth, and TL Maguire. Setup and
performance of the real-time simulator used for hardware-in-loop-tests of a vsc-based
hvdc scheme for oﬀshore applications.
In Proc. Int. Conf. Power Syst. Transients
(IPST), pages 18–20, 2013.
[11] E Kontos, Georgios Tsolaridis, Remus Teodorescu, and Pavol Bauer. Full-bridge mmc
dc fault ride-through and statcom operation in multi-terminal hvdc grids. Bulletin of
the Polish Academy of Sciences Technical Sciences, 65(5):653–662, 2017.
[12] Stefan M Goetz, Angel V Peterchev, and Thomas Weyh. Modular multilevel con-
verter with series and parallel module connectivity: Topology and control.
IEEE
Transactions on Power Electronics, 30(1):203–215, 2015.
Page 62 of 74
==PAGE:63==
Appendix A
Appendix 1: Extra Signal
Waveforms
The purpose of this section is to present wave forms of many other signals of the models,
during state operation.
As stated in previous chapter, all models have been validated
proved to output identical results. Therefore, the following graphs refer to all models at
steady state operation, where the active power reference is set to 500MW, reactive power
reference is set to 100MV ar for both ends.
==PAGE:64==
A.1
Converter Signals
Figure A.1: Converter Arm Voltages
Page 64 of 74
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.2: Converter Currents
Page 65 of 74
==PAGE:66==
Figure A.3: Total Converter Arm Sum Capacitor Voltage
A.2
HVDC Link
Figure A.4: Positive and Negative Pole Voltage
Page 66 of 74
==PAGE:67==
A.3
Signals at Point of Connection with Receiving End Grid
Figure A.5: Iabc at Point of Connection with Receiving End AC Grid
Figure A.6: Vabc at Point of Connection with Receiving End AC Grid
Page 67 of 74
==PAGE:68==
Figure A.7: Active and Reactive Powers at Point of Connection with Receiving End AC
Grid
A.4
Receiving End Grid
Figure A.8: Vabc at Receiving End AC Grid
Page 68 of 74
==PAGE:69==
Figure A.9: Iabc at Receiving End AC Grid
Figure A.10: Active and Reactive Powers at Receiving End AC Grid
Page 69 of 74
==PAGE:70==
Appendix B
Appendix 2: Simulink Schematics
Figure B.1: Top Level Simulink Schematic
70
==PAGE:71==
Appendix C
Appendix 3: NVL Balancing
Algorithm
function
c=fcn(VoltageRef,CellCapacitorVoltages,ConverterArmCurrents,ExtraCommutations,BlockedState)
d=ExtraCommutations;
m = round(VoltageRef);
s = size(CellCapacitorVoltages);
deactivated=0;
activated=0;
persistent m_prev;
persistent a;
if isempty(a)
a = zeros(s(1),1);
m_prev=0;
end
[y,I] = sortrows(CellCapacitorVoltages);
if((m-m_prev)>=0)
%activate m-m_prev new SMs
%deactivate d modules
if(ConverterArmCurrents>=0)
%deactivate the d SMs most loaded
for i=1:s(1)
if(deactivated<ExtraCommutations)
if(a(I(s(1)+1-i))==1)
a(I(s(1)+1-i))=0;
deactivated=deactivated+1;
end
end
==PAGE:72==
end
%activate the m-m_prev+deactivated SMs least loaded
for i=1:s(1)
if(activated<(m-m_prev+deactivated))
if(a(I(i))==0)
a(I(i))=1;
activated=activated+1;
end
end
end
else
%deactivate the d SMs least loaded
for i=1:s(1)
if(deactivated<ExtraCommutations)
if(a(I(i))==1)
a(I(i))=0;
deactivated=deactivated+1;
end
end
end
%activate the m-m_prev+deactivated SMs most loaded
for i=1:s(1)
if(activated<(m-m_prev+deactivated))
if(a(I(s(1)+1-i))==0)
a(I(s(1)+1-i))=1;
activated=activated+1;
end
end
end
end
end
if(m_prev-m>0)
%deactivate new m_prev-m SMs
%activate d modules
if(ConverterArmCurrents>=0)
%activate the d SMs least loaded
for i=1:s(1)
if(activated<ExtraCommutations)
if(a(I(i))==0)
a(I(i))=1;
activated=activated+1;
end
end
end
%deactivate the m_prev-m+activated SMs most loaded
for i=1:s(1)
Page 72 of 74
==PAGE:73==
if(deactivated<(m_prev-m+activated))
if(a(I(s(1)+1-i))==1)
a(I(s(1)+1-i))=0;
deactivated=deactivated+1;
end
end
end
else
%activate the d SMs most loaded
for i=1:s(1)
if(activated<ExtraCommutations)
if(a(I(s(1)+1-i))==0)
a(I(s(1)+1-i))=1;
activated=activated+1;
end
end
end
%deactivate the m_prev-m+activated SMs least loaded
for i=1:s(1)
if(deactivated<(m_prev-m+activated))
if(a(I(i))==1)
a(I(i))=0;
deactivated=deactivated+1;
end
end
end
end
end
m_prev=m;
if (BlockedState==0)
m_prev=0;
a = zeros(s(1),1);
end
c=a;
73 of 73
