==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet 
 
Department of Chemical 
and Biochemical Engineering 
H. Lundbeck A/S 
 
 
IMMOBILIZATION OF MAO 
FOR CONTINUOUS OPERA TION 
 
 
Student: 
Alessio Mazzella 
S170082 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supervisors: 
John M. Woodley 
jw@kt.dtu.dk 
 
Rowan M. Lindeque 
rmalin@kt.dtu.dk 
 
Tommy Skovby 
TSK@Lundbeck.com 
 
27 January 2019 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
 
5 
 
1.   ABSTRACT 
 
 
 
Biocatalysis in the pharmaceutical industry is expanding due to the improved access 
to enzymes and the capacity to modify those proteins to satisfy the industrial 
processes demands. The prospective for an alternative, more efficient and cost-
effectively pathway for the production of API through enzymatic finds in 
continuous bioprocesses an attractive solution, where catalyst immobilization 
combines the benefits of enzymatic processes with a heterogeneous reaction 
environment. 
Driven by the collaboration between DTU PROSYS (Process and Systems 
Engineering Center) and H. Lundbeck A/S, this project is aimed to investigate the 
immobilization Codexis monoamine oxidase on porous glass microparticles 
provided by the Swedish company EnginZyme. After six months of research and 
experiments, two out of the three carriers provided (EziG2 and EziG3) are selected 
as the best support for the MAO immobilization. They show excellent fluid-
dynamic properties when packed in a column for continuous operation, with no 
significant pressure drops observed. Moreover, they seem to overtake similar 
immobilization technology in terms of binding capacity (more than 200 mg MAO 
immobilized per gram of support), residual activity (at least 70 – 90% activity of 
immobilized MAO compared to the soluble enzyme) and enzyme retention (no 
sensitive enzyme leeching). Last, but not least, the standardized immobilization 
protocol makes EziG carriers potentially a great solution for all of those companies 
aiming for a reliable, plug-and-play, easy to use solid carrier to be employed in a 
backed bed reactor with immobilized catalyst for continuous API production. 
However, the great potential of this technology cannot be exploited in absence of a 
properly engineered enzyme. The time pressures existing in pharmaceutical 
industry are often incompatible with the long lead times needed for engineering a 
suitable biocatalyst. Significant enhance of protein engineering is required to 
deliver on the ever-increasing chances for continuous biocatalysis is pharmaceutical 
manufacturing. 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
7 
 
2.   TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
 
1. 
Abstract .................................................................................................................. 5 
3. 
List of Symbols ....................................................................................................... 9 
4. 
Preface .................................................................................................................. 11 
5. 
Introduction .......................................................................................................... 13 
5.1.     Continuous Operations in Pharmaceutical Industry ...............................13 
5.2. 
Biocatalysis in Pharmaceutical Industry ...............................................16 
5.3. 
Immobilization of Proteins ...................................................................18 
5.4. 
Affinity Immobilization and His-Tagged Proteins ................................20 
6. 
Materials and Methods .......................................................................................... 21 
6.1. 
EziG Carrier .........................................................................................21 
6.2. 
MAO Characterization .........................................................................24 
6.3. 
Immobilization of MAO – Discontinuous .............................................27 
6.4. 
Immobilization of MAO – Continuous .................................................30 
7.     Results and Discussions ........................................................................................ 33 
7.1.     MAO Characterization .........................................................................35 
7.2. 
Immobilization of MAO – Discontinuous .............................................41 
7.3. 
Immobilization of MAO – Continuous .................................................45 
8. 
Conclusion ............................................................................................................ 51 
9. 
Acknowledgements ............................................................................................... 54 
10.   Appendices ........................................................................................................... 56 
11.   References ............................................................................................................ 65 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
 
9 
 
3.   LIST OF ACRONYMS 
 
 
 
Acronym Explanation 
 
 
API 
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient 
CPG 
Controlled Porosity Glass 
CPM 
Continuous Process Manufacturing 
CSTR 
Continuous Stirred Tank Reactor 
FDA 
Food and Drug Administration 
GC 
Gas Chromatography 
HPLC 
High-Performance Liquid Chromatography 
HRP 
Horse Radish Peroxidase 
ISO 
International Organization of Standardization 
MRT 
Mean Residence Time 
PBR 
Packed-Bed Reactor 
PFR 
Plug-Flow Reactor 
RTD 
Residence Time Distribution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
 
11 
 
4.   PREFACE 
 
 
 
The current work is the result of the collaboration between DTU PROSYS (Process 
and Systems Engineering Center) and H. Lundbeck A/S, a global pharmaceutical 
company based in Valby and specialized in psychiatric and neurological disorders, 
with the supervision of the professor John M. Woodley, the PhD student Rowan M. 
Lindeque and the Senior Project Manager at Lundbeck Tommy Skovby. 
The driving force for this partnership is the research and development of a 
continuous biocatalytic process aimed to the manufacturing of piperidine-based 
APIs and reaction intermediates. In particular, the focus of this work is to 
investigate whether monoamine oxidase (the enzyme of interest) could be 
immobilized onto a proper support and employed as a catalyst for a packed bed or 
a fluidized bed reaction in a continuous process. Affinity immobilization, a 
technique that exploit the extremely selective binding between genetically modified 
proteins and metal ions, is the technology selected to achieve the final desired 
outcome. The Swedish company EnginZyme, producer of the immobilization 
support (EziG) utilized in this research, deserve remarkable credits as well as 
Codexis, provider of the MAO. 
The ambitious scope of this Master thesis is to demonstrate how affinity 
immobilization, when combined with a well-performing catalyst, can represent not 
only an attractive alternative to the established batch technology in the production 
of APIs, furthermore a potential key step for the future implementation of more 
efficient, costs-effectively and environmentally friendly continuous processes. 
 
Kongens Lyngby, January 28th, 2019 
 
 
 
Alessio Mazzella 
 
==PAGE:12==
 
 
 
12 
 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
 
13 
 
5.   INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
5.1.     CONTINUOUS OPERATIONS 
IN PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY 
 
Organic synthesis represents a crucial pathway for the active pharmaceutical 
ingredients (APIs) manufacturing and most of these small molecules have been 
produced through batch and semi-batch processes (Gerogiorgis and Barton 2009). 
Despite discontinuous operations might be considered versatile and flexible; they 
are interested by a significant number of disadvantages. For instance, long reaction 
sequences, occurrence of inconsistent condition inside the vessels, limited potential 
to apply real time process monitoring and difficulties in automating the production 
are just some of the obstacles connected with operating a production process in 
batch reactors (Mitic et al. 2013). Furthermore, such configurations are usually 
related to the generation of an important amount of waste. Parallel operations such 
as cleaning procedures, treatment and storage of hazardous components become 
relevant in terms of time and costs. As a consequence, the number of these non-
profitable activities should be reduced as much as possible in order to achieve the 
most rewarding production of APIs (Woodcock 2004). 
The implementation of continuous processes manufacturing (CPM) in the food and 
drug industry is a key factor for all of those companies aiming for a better process 
design and product quality (Poechlauer et al. 2012). Continuous operations enables 
an easier process monitoring in terms of temperature, concentration profile, control 
and automation compared to the traditional technology based on discontinuous 
processes (Mitic et al. 2013). Unlike batch reactors, CPM does not provoke 
significant losses in yields during the scale up (Yadav and Stephanopoulos 2014) 
and can also be considered more environmental friendly and economical due to an 
optimized usage of raw materials and the waste reduction. In addition, it drastically 
reduces the amount of non-profitable activities related to batch operations. 
==PAGE:14==
 
 
 
14 
 
However, the development of CPM on industrial scale can be related to difficulties. 
A desired product quality can be difficult to achieve when long reaction sequences 
are occurring. Residence time in batch or fed-batch reactor can be precisely set 
according to the most suitable operative conditions. This optimal condition could 
be reproduced in ideal laminar plug-flow reactors, where the residence time is fixed 
for all the fluid sections and it depends on the flowrate (Fogler 2006). Indeed, this 
statement is not true when it comes to experimentally observe the real behavior of 
PFRs, where dispersions occur in the system affecting the mean residence time (J 
and Lorenz 2014). Unlikely batch and fed-batch, continuous reactors are described 
by a residence time distribution (RTD) as shown in figure 1. This can be translated 
by elementary statistic terms in reaction pathway unpredictability: shorter residence 
time causes a non-complete conversion in the reactor and longer ones may promote 
chain reactions with production of by-products. These obstacles related to the 
industrial scale-up are one of the reasons the transition from batch to continuous 
has been a controversial topic for the pharmaceutical manufacturing debate during 
the last decades (Gerogiorgis and Barton 2009).  
 
 
FIGURE 1 - RESIDENCE TIME DISTRIBUTION FOR AN IDEAL CSTR 
AND AN IDEAL PFR. THE GREEN VERTICAL LINE REPRESENTS 
THE MEAN RESIDENCE TIME IN BOTH THE REACTORS 
 
Although all the companies would be interested in a well-designed process which 
can lead to high performance (in terms of production, optimization, control, 
E(t)
residence time [s]
CSTR
PFR
MRT
==PAGE:15==
 
 
 
15 
 
automation, economy and environmental impact), the main target for these 
extremely valuable molecules industry consists in the two words mentioned in the 
section above: product quality (Lawrence 2008). This prerequisite is currently 
mandatory in the medicinal industry and companies are developing strategies in 
order to deliver extremely high-quality products. Opinions about what product 
quality consists in are wide and different but regulatory bodies, such as the 
International Organization of Standardization (ISO) and the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), have tried to elaborate a definition based on some 
fundamental criteria. At first, the product should fulfil the specifications defined by 
its designers and marketing authorities: identity, strength, purity, potency and 
bioavailability. Secondly, undesired defects during the manufacturing and 
packaging processes should be avoided. Lastly, the uniformity of dosage forms, the 
support service after purchasing and the ratio between the usefulness of a product 
and its cost should be considered as a part of the product quality (Reid and Sanders 
2011). 
This strict demand for an extremely high product quality has been leading the most 
competitive pharmaceutical companies to invest for the research and development 
of new solutions in order to achieve these desired goals and consequently ensure a 
high level of costumers’ satisfaction. Several changes and innovative technologies 
have been moving towards microprocess technology and enzymatic catalysis with 
the aim of accelerate slow chemical reactions and increase the purity of the product 
(Mitic et al. 2013). The potential benefit obtainable from the combination of both 
these physical and chemical approaches is the possible achievement of 
pharmaceutical quality as well as economical and eco-friendly processes. 
With regards of physical approaches, micro (µm) and meso (mm) scale flow 
reactors represent the current trend. The increasing interest in this technology is due 
to the enhanced mass transfer achievable because of to the higher surface-volume 
ratio peculiar in small scale transport phenomena and the improved mixing (Hessel, 
Knobloch, and Lowe 2008).  The equipment downsizing can consequently be 
related to further advantages beside the ones already mentioned for the continuous 
processes: the lower costs for transport and materials, the earlier start of production 
and the more flexible reaction to the market demand represent some of the most 
appealing improvements connected with this technology (Mitic et al. 2013). It is 
important to denote that micro scale reactors are usually avoided during the design 
of processes involving high viscosity fluids. The clogging of narrow tubes and the 
==PAGE:16==
 
 
 
16 
 
significant pressure drop due to friction along the channels’ walls may represent a 
relevant issue: the implementation of larger pipes (meso scale) can significantly 
reduce the risk of blockage and the energy loss (Judy, Maynes, and Webb 2002). 
Despite the advantages provided by these physical approaches, it is important to 
denote again that the first concern of pharmaceutical industry is not just to operate 
with a process efficiently, but to deliver products of extremely high quality (Corbet 
and Mignani 2006): this goal cannot usually be achieved without a proper chemical 
catalysis.  Some of the most employed catalytic systems and the reasons why the 
use of biocatalysts represents the actual trend for pharmaceutical industry are 
discussed in the following subchapter. 
 
 
 
5.2. 
BIOCATALYSIS IN 
PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY 
 
The importance of catalysis for industrial processes is one of the most investigated, 
discussed and acknowledged topic in the chemical engineering literature (Pollard 
and Woodley 2007). The purpose of this section is not to give a hundred pages 
analysis about the advantages of catalysis. Nevertheless some of the most important 
benefits deserve to be quickly mentioned, such as the faster reaction rate as well as 
the improved selectivity (Wang et al. 2008). In addition, the most relevant 
differences between inorganic catalysts and enzymes need to be remarked. 
The diminution of the original energetic barrier of the reaction is one of the few 
qualities shared between these two systems. Compared to the usual inorganic 
chemicals, biocatalysts achieve up to 107 fold faster reaction rates even at mild 
conditions (temperature between 20 and 40° C, atmospheric pressure, aqueous 
solutions, pH 6 ̴ 8) (W.K. Drauz, H. Groger et al. 1995). Moreover, their ability in 
binding univocally to the substrate results in extremely high reaction specificity: 
not only the formation of byproduct is negligible, but the exclusive production of a 
particular isomer is possible. Lastly, the savings in energy and waste treatment costs 
==PAGE:17==
 
 
 
17 
 
due to the mild reaction conditions represent a both economic and environmental 
breakthrough (Gomes 2018). 
It is not so hard to understand why the interest in new biocatalytic applications for 
pharmaceutical industry has consistently raised over the past two decades (Busacca 
et al. 2011): higher productivity and yield, cost reduction in terms of time, materials 
and energy, production of purer and better quality products which can be sold at 
more expensive prices. 
One of the most relevant reasons why enzyme employment is often discouraged, in 
particular in those fields which have an alternative established procedure, consists 
in the extremely high cost of biocatalysts due to the fact that they are difficult to be 
produced and engineered properly. Generally, the price range for enzymes may vary 
between 200 – 2000 USD/kg protein in case of bulk commodity enzyme (more than 
1000 ton/year) or to more than 100,000 USD/kg in case of specialized and 
genetically engineered proteins for narrow markets (less than 100 ton/year). 
Enzyme for APIs lays in this last category, since they are produced on a small scale. 
This high cost comes because of the protein engineering: this tedious procedure 
provides optimized enzymes with enhanced values of activity, substrate specificity 
and operative range (pH and temperature).  
The recovery and reutilization of this extremely expensive catalyst represent the 
cornerstone when it comes to develop continuous biocatalytic operations and the 
efficiency of such operation may affect the economic feasibility of the entire 
process. Moreover, removing the enzyme from the stream before a succeeding 
reaction step or simply before the final product purification steps is a critical factor 
in pharmaceutical manufacturing. The undesired presence of active protein in the 
current would alter the designed reaction sequence and negatively affect the purity 
(and quality) of the final product. 
Several techniques for enzyme removal have been tried for more than 30 years, with 
few success and with experiments performed at conditions far from those in an 
industrially feasible process (Haven et al. 2015). Protein absorption and 
ultrafiltration are just two examples of the most common enzyme recovery 
operations, but both procedures involve disadvantages that discourage industrial 
applications. Absorption is usually not extremely high selective and cause an 
important loss in enzymatic activity due to irreversible chemical processes. On the 
other hand, filtration does not imply chemical alteration of the protein, but usually 
requires very slow flow rates and high pressure to be performed effectively. 
A different approach is investigated in the next chapter. The retention of protein in 
the reactor through immobilization techniques is preferred to the recycle. Before 
==PAGE:18==
 
 
 
18 
 
proceeding with the experimental setup, it is convenient to focus on immobilization 
and understand both the potential and limitation of this technology. 
 
 
 
5.3. 
IMMOBILIZATION OF PROTEINS 
 
To briefly summarize the last section, the biological nature of enzymes makes them 
attractive for the synthesis of pharmaceuticals and other fine chemicals. They are 
bio-compostable, biodegradable and obtained from natural resources. Furthermore, 
bioprocess operates at mild conditions in water with high rates and selectivity, 
affording synthetic routes that are more step economic, generates less waste and are 
more energy efficient than conventional organic synthesis (Sheldon and van Pelt 
2013). 
Although these advantages, industrial application are often difficult to realize due 
to short-term stability issues, as well as difficult enzyme recovery and reusability 
(Zhu et al. 2012). Immobilization can overcome these problems and, essential for 
pharmaceutical industry, this technology reduce the risk of product contamination 
with protein residues. In addition, handling a solid material makes the separation 
from the liquid phase and downstream easier (Fadhel et al. 2010). There are several 
immobilization techniques, which can be grouped in three categories: binding on a 
support, entrapment and cross-linking. 
The adsorption on a solid surface can be physical or chemical (Fernandez-Lafuente 
et al. 1998), but physical interactions are usually too weak to keep the enzyme 
bound to the support under continuous industrial conditions. Ionic and covalent 
bonds are stronger and prevent leaching of protein, but on the other hand they may 
alter the chemical structure of the enzyme making the catalytic site unavailable for 
use (Homaei et al . 2013). Moreover, if the adsorption is not extremely selective 
some other components can bind to the carrier surface and the surface potentially 
available for the immobilization will decrease. 
The encapsulation involves the enzyme entrapment in a polymeric matrix, usually 
polyacrylamide (organic) or silica sol-gel (inorganic). Also in this case, physical 
forces are not strong enough to avoid enzyme leaching and covalent interaction are 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
 
19 
 
often required. That is why the difference between entrapment and solid binding is 
often not clear. Some reviews (Sheldon and van Pelt 2013) find the difference of 
these two technologies in the nature of the carriers. Prefabricated supports for the 
solid binding and polymers synthetized for the specific purpose in case of 
entrapment. 
The cross-linking of proteins is made possible by external reactants which help the 
crystallization and is used to create carrierless macroparticles. This method involves 
the dilution of the enzyme in a large amount of non-catalytic material (up to 99%) 
and this affects negatively the space-time-yield and productivity. The usage of a 
higher enzyme loading does not help to overcome this problem as it would create a 
multilayer enzymatic system with a loss of activity for the deeper catalytic sites. 
The ideal situation is difficult to achieve and it consists in an enzyme monolayer 
immobilized on the carrier: this optimal configuration may be similar to the 
description of enzyme adsorption, but in this case the purchase of the often-
expensive prefabricated carrier is not required.  
The techniques briefly explained above presents many variants and, due to the 
different nature of the enzymes, it is not possible to select a single technology that 
represents the best option for every enzyme immobilization. However, the interest 
in plug-and-play systems for catalysts immobilization in PBRs (packed-bed 
reactors) is increasing due to their obvious benefits (Thompson 2018). First, the 
saving in terms of time, money and resources for all those company that wants to 
operate with immobilized enzyme but that are not specialized in protein and carrier 
engineering yet. It would mean to be able to operate with a highly versatile 
immobilization support which can be optimally adapted to most of the 
commercialized enzyme according to a standardized protocol. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:20==
 
 
 
20 
 
5.4. 
AFFINITY IMMOBILIZATION 
AND HIS-TAGGED PROTEINS 
 
Affinity binding has been recently included among the immobilization techniques, 
even though it utilizes an already established technology for biological molecule 
separation by chromatography. It consists in the selective binding of enzymes on a 
solid support, thanks to the molecular structure of genetically modified proteins. 
The nature of the highly selective binding is due to the chemical interaction between 
polyhistidine-tag (His-tag), an amino acid sequence attached at the end of the 
peptide chain by protein engineering processes, and metal ions covering the surface 
of the solid matrix where the enzyme has to be immobilized. His-tag was invented 
by Roche (Hochuli et. al. 1988), but it is now public domain since the patent has 
expired in 2003. Briefly, proteins can coordinate metal ions thanks to this tag and 
it is so possible to separate this molecule from a solution by chromatography. 
This technology can be applied to immobilization since enzymes can be genetically 
modified and, whether they obtain the His-tag, they can be selectively bound and 
retained on a solid surface. The support is often a silica porous material covered 
with metal ions, usually copper or iron since these two elements shows the best 
affinity towards histidine (Porath 1992). When more than one molecule in the crude 
mixture presents a similar structure to histidine, a concentration of 25 – 75 mM 
imidazole may help the non-competitive enzyme binding. This process has to be 
run at mild condition, room temperature, atmospheric pressure and physiologic pH. 
The pressure does not influence the binding sensitively and acid pH (below 6) 
causes the protonation of histidine and the consequent disruption of the bond. Basic 
pH favorites the immobilization but they may cause protein denaturation, as well 
as high temperatures. Decreasing the pH below 6 is a good method to wash the 
carrier from the enzyme, whether it needs to be reused, but also acid pH may lead 
to a premature enzyme denaturation (Yang et al. 1993). 
The immobilization can take place in stirred vessels (discontinuous) or packed 
columns (continuous) with liquid solution recycle. 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
 
21 
 
6.  MATERIALS AND METHODS 
 
 
 
6.1. 
EZIG CARRIER 
 
This chapter 6 is about the experimental part of this final project. It explains the 
chemical substances involved, the equipment used and the method selected in order 
to achieve the purpose of this work: the lab-scale assessment of a continuous 
operation for immobilized monoamine oxidase. Although, the protagonist of this – 
and the following – chapter deserves to be presented even before the explanation of 
the experiments. 
As explained in chapter 5, despite the advantages of using immobilized enzymes in 
continuous systems it is usually a trade-off. Some technologies may ensure a good 
protein-support link but they can sacrifice the enzyme catalytic potential (activity) 
and vice versa. Some protein adsorption techniques are not selective at all, while 
some others involve too weak bonds with a high probability of enzyme leaching. 
As the name suggests, EziG (pronounced Easy G) is the technology developed by 
the Swedish company EnginZyme aiming to an easier and cost-effectively 
continuous biocatalysis. EziG carriers are very fine solid particles (75 – 125 µm 
size) with a high porous inner structure (300 – 500 Å pore diameter with 1.8 mL 
pores per gram of solid). The material is almost pure siliceous (94 – 99 % SiO2) 
controlled porosity glass (CPG) with excellent fluid dynamic properties due to the 
interconnecting porous structure. EginZyme developed three kind of carriers in 
collaboration with the American company Prime Synthesis Inc. with different 
surface materials:  hydrophilic glass (EziG1 Opal), hydrophobic polyvinyl-benzyl-
chloride (EziG2 Coral) and hybrid silica-polymeric (EziG3 Amber). In this way, 
EziG carriers can be suitable for both aqueous and organic solvents. 
 
==PAGE:22==
 
 
 
22 
 
 
FIGURE 2 - THE THREE EZIG CARRIERS: 1) OPAL 2) CORAL 3) AMBER 
 
Regardless of the material, EziG CPG or hybCPG surface is modified with more 
than 10 µmol Fe3+ ions per gram of solid in order to bind protein affinity tags. This 
technology is not innovative, because it is already used in particularly selective 
downstream operations such as affinity chromatography, but its application to 
continuous biocatalysis can be considered groundbreaking: it allows an extremely 
selective and strong bond between EziG surface and the enzyme poly-histidine-tag 
(His-tag), a peptide sequence genetically grafted onto recombinant proteins. 
 
 
FIGURE 3 - SIMPLE SCHEME OF AFFINITY BINDING BETWEEN 
THE HISTIDINE-TAG AND THE EZIG'S IRON IONS 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
 
23 
 
 
Figure 3 simply shows the chemistry behind affinity immobilization: the nitrogen 
atoms present at the far end of the histidine-tag creates a bond with the iron ion 
present on the EziG surface. In this kind of covalent bond, the nitrogen dipole is 
used to coordinate the ion Fe3+ which does not share any electrons in the bond. As 
a covalent bond, it is known to be the strongest interatomic interaction and this is 
the reason it can be exploited for highly selective protein separation and 
immobilization purposes. 
Whether His-tag is present on industrial enzymes, it results in a combined 
immobilization of the enzyme and a purification of the tagged protein from the other 
molecule and impurities may be present in the crude solution. The purpose of this 
combined action is to save time in enzyme preparation, reduce its costs, bind as 
much active enzyme as possible, prevent protein leaching increasing product purity 
and avoiding expensive downstream purification processes. 
The physical structure of EziG, combined to the technology it operates with, open 
new application scenarios. Talking about continuous biocatalysis in packed 
immobilized enzyme bed reactors, it would be possible to operate cascade reactions 
after a proper immobilization of multiple enzymes at different length of the same 
bed. In addition, the immobilization of multiple enzymes on the same support 
would be an interesting application also for those catalytic systems requiring a 
cofactor regeneration (red-ox bioreactions) or in situ reaction such as byproduct 
removal or reactant production. These circumstances are investigated later this 
work, due to the nature of the enzyme to be immobilized. 
According to EnginZyme, the optimal operating conditions for immobilization on 
EziG carriers are mild: room temperature and physiologic pH 7 – 8. Thus, these are 
the conditions the experiments are run at. 
Testing the great potential of affinity binding innovative application is the main 
purpose of this work. The following paragraphs explain the procedure selected, the 
equipment involved and the solutions adopted to achieve such a goal. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
 
 
 
24 
 
6.2. 
MAO CHARACTERIZATION 
 
Monoamine oxidase (EC 1.4.3.4) is an enzyme that, as the name suggest, catalyses 
the oxidation of primary amines using molecular oxygen as reactant and FAD 
(flavin adenine dinucleotide) as cofactor. For interest, 4-methyl-piperidine has to 
be oxidized by MAO according to the reaction scheme shown in figure 4. 
 
 
FIGURE 4 - BIOLOGICAL OXYDATION OF 4-METHYLPIPERIDINE 
TO 4-METHYL-2,3,4,5-TETRAHYDROPYRIDINE 
 
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is the byproduct of the reaction shown in figure 4 and it 
must be removed since remarkable concentration of this component may poison the 
enzyme. Peroxide removal in industrial bioporocesses can be performed by catalase, 
which degrades peroxide into water and half mole molecular oxygen. This 
byproduct removal it is also useful to increase the oxygen availability to the reaction 
by in situ production. 
Monoamine oxidase from Codexis (CDX-656) is the enzyme employed for the 
purpose of this work. Differently from most of oxidoreductases where addition and 
regeneration of cofactors such as NADH is required, MAO belongs to the flavin-
containing family. The FADH molecule is already bound to the active site and the 
cofactor regeneration occurs through a red-ox mechanism.  
An enzymatic assay of monoamine oxidase is needed in order to characterize the 
enzyme and investigate some key values such as activity and inhibition, but neither 
the substrates consumption nor the products production are easy to analyse with the 
most common technologies. Spectrophotometric assay is an easy technique and it 
can indirectly evaluate monoamine oxidase activity as follows. According to figure 
4, the enzymatic oxidation produces one mole 4-methyl-2,3,4,5-tetrahydropyridine 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
 
25 
 
and one mole hydrogen peroxide per mole of substrate. The introduction of 
horseradish peroxidase (HRP) as secondary enzyme can make the MAO 
characterization possible. 
HRP takes his name from the horseradish root, a plant where it can be found, and it 
is a common enzyme widely used in biochemistry applications. It catalyses the 
oxidation of various organic compounds as shown in figure 5 using hydrogen 
peroxide and 4-aminoantipyrine (4-AAP) as reactants, resulting in a change of the 
solution colour which can be quantitatively evaluated by measuring the absorbance 
increase at 515 nm (Heuts et al. 2007). Whether MAO results to be slower than 
HRP (declared to be 200 U/mL at the experimental conditions examined), its 
reaction rate would be the limiting one and the assay can be performed effectively 
to characterize monoamine oxidase itself. 
 
 
FIGURE 5 - CHEMICAL REACTION OCCURRING DURING THE HRP ASSAY 
 
For this purpose, a solution containing 4-AAP (4-aminoantipyrine) 1 mM, DCHBS 
(3,5-dichloro-2-hydroxybenzenesulfonic acid) 10 mM, 50 µL MAO (monoamine 
oxidase) 1 g/L, 50 µL HRP (horseradish peroxidase) 1 g/L and 50 mM KPi buffer 
(pH 7.5, room temperature) is prepared. The buffer is constantly sparged with air 
in order to achieve oxygen concentration close to saturation (from Henry’s law, at 
20 °C and atmospheric pressure is 9.17 mg/L, equal to 0.287 mM). Different 
concentrations of the 4-MPP (4-methylpiperidine) substrate are added (9, 10, 11 
and 15 mM respectively) and the absorbance at 515 nm wavelength gradient is 
measured by a spectrophotometric analysis. The concentration of pink/purple 
product is related to its absorbance by the Lambert-Beer law: 
==PAGE:26==
 
 
 
26 
 
 
𝐴= 𝜀 𝑙 𝐶          (1)  
 
where A is the absorbance measured [dimensionless], ε is the extinction coefficient 
of the pink/purple product at 515 nm [26 mM-1 cm-1], l is the characteristic length 
of the cuvette used for the experiment [1 cm] and C is the concentration of 
pink/purple product [mM]. 
Since the volume of the cuvette is known to be 1 mL, the initial absorbance gradient 
can be easily related to the enzyme activity expressed in U (where 
U = µmol/min) according to equation the Lambert-Beer law. 
Once the reaction rate is calculated and substrate inhibition verified, the experiment 
can be performed in a substrate concentration range below the inhibition limit in 
order to evaluate the Michaelis-Menten (equation 2) key parameters through a 
numerical analysis. 
 
𝑉= 𝑉𝑚𝑎𝑥 
𝑆
𝑆+ 𝐾𝑀
= 𝑘𝑜𝑏𝑠 𝐸 
𝑆
𝑆+ 𝐾𝑀
          (2) 
 
where Vmax is the maximum reaction rate achievable by MAO according to the 
Michaelis-Menten model [µmol/min] and it is defined by a first order kinetic as the 
product between the enzyme amount in solution [E = 1 g/L = 10-3 g] and the kinetic 
constant kobs [µmol/min/gMAO], S is the 4-MPP concentration [mM] and KM is the 
Michaelis-Menten constant for MAO [mM] defining the substrate concentration at 
which Vmax is halved. 
 
1
𝑉= 𝐾𝑀
𝑉𝑚𝑎𝑥
1
𝑆+
1
𝑉𝑚𝑎𝑥
          (3) 
 
Equation 3 is an alternative expression of the Michaelis-Menten equation which be 
used to define Vmax and KM. These two key parameters can be expressed by a simple 
linear regression where 1/S values lay on the x-axis and the respective 1/V 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
 
27 
 
experimental data lay on the y-axis. The linear regression is as much accurate as the 
enzyme follows the Michaelis-Menten kinetic model. The R2 parameter of the 
regression identifies the square of the standardized deviation between predicted and 
experimental data. 
 
 
 
6.3. 
IMMOBILIZATION OF MAO – DISCONTINUOUS 
 
Once the characterization of the soluble enzyme is completed, the kinetic of 
immobilized monoamine oxidase can be examined and compared with the soluble 
one. The main focus of this paragraph is to explain the experimental procedure for 
the analysis of immobilized MAO directed to select the most suitable EziG carrier 
for the enzyme. In order to just decide the best carrier, immobilization is performed 
under discontinuous systems. 
The first part of the experiment consists in the identification of the carrier binding 
capacity, described as the amount of immobilized enzyme per gram of support. 
Several initial loadings are investigated, in a range from 100 mg/g to 1000 mg/g 
(mg enzyme per gram of carrier), for all of the three carriers. 
First of all, a buffer is prepared according to the protocol provided by EnginZyme 
for an optimal immobilization environment: 500 mM NaCl diluted in 20 mM 
aqueous potassium phosphate at pH 7.5. Monoamine oxidase is diluted in this 
buffer achieving a concentration of 50 g/L and 40 µL of the preparation are pipetted 
in four different 5 mL vials. High enzyme concentration maximizes the interactions 
between the protein and the carrier surface. Considering that every vial contains 2 
mg MAO, the desired amount of EziG carrier can be added to the vials for the 
investigation: for example, 20 mg EziG can be added in order to investigate a 
maximum binding capacity of 100 mg/g. Continuing with this first example, 20 mg 
EziG1 are added to vial 1, 20 mg EziG2 are added to vial 2, 20 mg EziG3 are added 
to vial 3 and no EziG is added in vial 4. 
Vials with the enzyme to be immobilized are left in an orbital shaker at slow speed, 
200 RPM, for 20 minutes at room temperature. Faster shaking may theoretically 
enhance the immobilization, but solid particles may also stick to the glass surface 
==PAGE:28==
 
 
 
28 
 
of the vial resulting in a loss of solid material and inefficient process. After 20 
minutes, 1960 µL buffer are added to the vials to achieve an enzyme concentration 
of 1 g/L (2 mg MAO diluted in 2 mL solution). The vials are left in the orbital 
shakers for other 10 minutes at the same condition as before. 
After a total time of 30 minutes, samples are pipetted out from vials and sent to the 
spectrophotometric assay. Once activity is measured through the same procedure 
as paragraph 5.2 (HRP method), the binding capacity can be calculated as follows: 
 
𝐵𝐶= (𝐵𝐶𝑚𝑎𝑥) (1 −𝐴𝑖
𝐴4
)          (4) 
 
where BC is the binding capacity expressed in mg MAO per gram of EziG, BCmax 
is the maximum binding capacity can be achieved in the experiment (100 mg/g in 
this example), Ai is the MAO activity measured in the samples from vials 1, 2 and 
3 and A4 is the MAO activity measured in the sample from vial 4. 
Just to clarify, whether Ai is equal to A4 the binding capacity is null since no 
immobilization has occurred and all the enzyme is still in the supernatant. Reverse, 
whether Ai is null the binding capacity is equal to BCmax since all the enzyme is 
immobilized and there is no MAO in the supernatant. 
Binding capacity is investigated after 30, 60, 120, and 240 minutes in order to 
investigate how long the immobilization on the different carriers can take. 
Moreover, BC is investigated for different range of BCmax (from 100 mg/g to 1000 
mg/g) in order to achieve more precise results. 
As explained in the previous chapter, once an enzyme is immobilized onto a carrier 
its activity may be affected in several ways. It can be enhanced because the 
immobilization process discourages the bending and folding of the peptide chains, 
but it can be more likely be reduced by external factors: the attachment site between 
the enzyme and the carrier can hinder the protein active site, it can restrain the 
molecule slowing down the reaction rate and it can introduce mass transfer 
limitations. That is why, once monoamine oxidase is correctly bound to EziG 
carriers, its residual activity and reusability over time needs be investigated. 
Residual activity is the ratio between the activity of the immobilized enzyme and 
the activity of the soluble enzyme, expressed as percentage. MAO is immobilized 
according to the protocol explained earlier in this paragraph, washed and finally 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
 
29 
 
separated from the liquid. Depending on the amount of immobilized MAO, a new 
solution is prepared to be added into the vials such as the reactants concentration 
follows the HRP assay guidelines: 4-AAP 1 mM, DCHBS 10 mM, MAO 25 mg/L, 
HRP 25 mg/L and 50 mM KPi buffer (pH 7.5, room temperature). The result is to 
obtain three vials with immobilized MAO (respectively on EziG1, EziG2 and EziG3) 
and a fourth vial containing soluble MAO with the same environment in terms of 
reactants concentration. 
Finally, the substrate (10 mM 4-MPP) is added in each vial, the reaction is run. 
After two minutes, 1 mL pink solution is pipetting out from the vials and sent to the 
spectrophotometer for the absorbance measurement at 515 nm. Here the 
immobilized MAO activity can be calculated and compared with the soluble 
enzyme’s one. 
After the measurement, the immobilized enzyme is separated from the liquid, 
washed and left in the vial with addition of buffer. The amount of buffer to be added 
to each vial depends on the amount of immobilized MAO present in the vial itself: 
enzyme concentration needs to be 1 g/L. The immobilized enzyme rests in the vial 
for 6 hours, then the supernatant is examined with the same procedure described 
above for binding capacity. The measured activity in the supernatant may reveal 
protein traces come off from the carrier and the amount of lost enzyme can be 
calculated as follows: 
 
𝑀𝐴𝑂𝑠= 𝑉𝑖(𝐴𝑠,𝑖
𝐴𝑠,4
)          (5) 
 
where MAOs is the amount of enzyme lost from the carrier expressed in mg, Vi is 
the volume of supernatant in the vial 1, 2 or 3 expressed in mL, As,i is the activity 
measured in the supernatant from the vial 1, 2 or 3 and As,4 is the activity measured 
for the soluble enzyme. 
It is easy to understand that, since vial 4 contains 1 g/L soluble enzyme and buffer 
is added to vials 1,2 and 3 such as immobilized MAO concentration is 1 g/L as well, 
when As,i is equal to As,4 all the immobilized enzyme detaches from the carrier. 
Alternatively, when As,i is null there is no activity measured in the supernatant and 
all the enzyme is still bound to EziG. 
==PAGE:30==
 
 
 
30 
 
Once potential leaches are investigated, the residual activity is measured again. 
Measurements for residual activity and enzyme loss are taken after 6, 12 and 24 
hours in order to evaluate EziGs behaviour along time. 
 
 
 
6.4. 
IMMOBILIZATION OF MAO – CONTINUOUS 
 
The investigation for the immobilization of MAO in continuous processes follows 
the same principles as the batch immobilization explained in paragraph 5.3. The 
binding capacity of the EziG support and the residual activity of the immobilized 
enzyme are measured and compared with the result achieved during the 
discontinuous experiment. 
After several attempts using different equipment available in the laboratory at DTU 
227, a glass column (15 cm height, 1 cm diameter) designed for lab-scale 
chromatography and purchased from Sigma-Aldrich is chosen for the continuous 
immobilization of MAO on EziG carriers. The column is vertically oriented, 
presenting a permeable micromembrane at the bottom for the solid particle retention 
and the bed height is 2 cm (300 mg EziG) before the flow starting. The aim of the 
first part of the experiment is to investigate the binding capacity of the carriers and 
the saturation time at different operative conditions. 
3 g/L MAO are diluted in a 50 mL 20 mM phosphate buffer solution at pH 7 with 
500 mM NaCl, for 150 mg total MAO to be immobilized. The solution containing 
soluble enzyme is sent from a 100mL glass becker to the column by a lab-scale 
pump and it flows into in rubber microtubes. The column and the microtubes 
describe a closed-track, where the inlet and the outlet coincide into the 100 mL 
becker containing the solution. 
Two different setups are investigated for the immobilization column: a packed bed 
column where the solution flows downwards and a fluidized bed where the solution 
flows upwards.  
 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
 
31 
 
 
FIGURE 6 - PACKED AND FLUIDIZED BED COLUMN SCHEME 
 
For the packed bed setup, the process is run at different flowrates from 1 mL/min 
to 10 mL/min. With regards of the fluidized bed setup, the process is not tested for 
flowrates higher than 2 mL/min in order to avoid a solid mass lost from the top of 
the column where the micromembrane is not present. 
The enzymatic activity in the solution is measured and compared with the one of a 
soluble 3 g/L MAO in order to deduce the amount of bound protein after 15, 30, 60, 
120 and 240 minutes. For the best setup, measurements are taken at 1440 and 2880 
minutes (24 and 48 hours respectively) to ensure the carrier saturation. Once the 
binding capacity is found, a fresh buffer solution is fed to the column and the 
activity in the outflow is measured after 15, 30 and 60. 
As last experiment, the residual activity of the immobilized enzyme is measured. A 
solution containing 1 mM 4-AAP, 10 mM DCHBS, 50 mg/L HRP and 10 mM 4-
MPP is fed to the column. For this experiment, inlet and outlet are separated: 1 mL 
of the outflow current is collected in an empty becker and samples are taken for the 
spectrophotometric analysis. The residence time in the bed is calculated and the 
absorbance measured is compared to the one detected with soluble MAO at the 
same solution concentration. However, it is important to mention that 
underestimated results are expected for the residual activity investigation due to the 
low analyte concentration.  
 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
 
32 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
 
33 
 
7.  RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
 
 
 
The experimental results of the experiments described in section 6 are presented 
and discussed in this chapter 7. When not specified, samples are analysed three 
times (triplicates) and data shown in diagrams represent the average of such 
experimental values. Error bars are not shown for measurements reporting a relative 
standard error lower than 1%. Singular data are listed in the appendix at the end of 
this work. 
In addition, the results listed in this chapter are mainly focus on initial reaction rate 
investigation and the following determination of enzymatic activity. To clearly state 
the difference between the two before the beginning of the section, the term initial 
rate defines the experimentally measured rate of the biochemical reaction observed 
at the beginning of the reaction itself. Differently, the term enzymatic activity 
defines the amount of active protein involved in an enzymatic process rather than 
its rate. In fact, one unit [U] of enzyme is defined in this work as the amount of 
enzyme capable to convert one µmol of substrate in one minute. The term specific 
activity [U/mg] is recurring in the text and identifies the unit of active enzyme per 
grams of protein. 
All the results discussed in this chapter are obtained with a spectrophotometric 
analysis, where the absorbance gradient measured in the 1 mL cuvette at 515 nm 
corresponds to the pink product concentration gradient according to equation 1. An 
example of standard curve for the assay is reported in figure 7 below, where the 
absorbance at 515 nm is measured for 30 seconds in a cuvette containing the 
following sample: 4 mM 4-methylpiperidine, 1 mM 4-aminoantipyrine, 10 mM 
dichloro-hydrobenzenesulfonate, 50 µg/mL MAO, 50 µg/mL HRP, 50 mM KPi 
buffer saturated in oxygen content. 
One mole hydrogen peroxide per mole of substrate is produced by MAO, then it is 
suddenly converted by HRP to one mole of pink product. According to this scheme, 
it is possible to indirectly determine the 4-MPP oxidation initial rate through the 
calculation of the pink product formation rate. 
 
==PAGE:34==
 
 
 
34 
 
 
FIGURE 7 - EXAMPLE OF STANDARD CURVE FOR SPECTROPHOTOMETRIC ASSAY 
 
The experimental measurements are shown in the graph where absorbance (y-axis) 
is plotted over time (x-axis). The relation between absorbance and time is usually 
linear in the first seconds of the reaction and it is also possible to determine the 
absorbance gradient as the slope of the data linear regression (red line). In this case, 
dA/dt = 2.76·10-4 (this value is approximated to 0.0003 in figure 7). 
The pink product production rate dC/dt can now be easily calculated through the 
Lambert-Beer law since both the characteristic length and the extinction coefficient 
are known. Once the value is found, it can be converted in the most appropriate unit 
of measurement (µmol/min) since the volume of the cuvette is known. For the 
stoichiometric reasons stated above, the pink product production rate equals the 
4-methylpiperidine oxidation rate: 6.37·10-4 µmol/min. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
y = 0,0003x + 0,0196
0,01
0,015
0,02
0,025
0,03
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Absorbance
Time [s]
==PAGE:35==
 
 
 
35 
 
7.1.   MAO CHARACTERIZATION 
 
 
FIGURE 8 - OBSERVED RATE FOR MAO AT 
DIFFERENT SUBSTRATE CONCENTRATIONS 
 
The graph in figure 8 shows a strong inhibited pattern even at low substrate 
concentration, when the oxidation of piperidine is catalysed by MAO. Is it possible 
to denote a decrease in the observed MAO initial rate when 4-MPP concentration 
exceeds 10 mM. 
In order to understand whether is MAO or HRP inhibited by the substrate, the 
experiment is to be run in order to directly investigate the HRP inhibition in 
presence of 4-MPP. In this singular case, 4 mM hydrogen peroxide is added to the 
solution separately since it is not produced by MAO. Results are shown in the figure 
9 below. 
 
0,00E+00
5,00E-05
1,00E-04
1,50E-04
2,00E-04
2,50E-04
3,00E-04
3,50E-04
4,00E-04
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Observed initial rate [umol/min]
Substrate concentration [mM]
==PAGE:36==
 
 
 
36 
 
 
FIGURE 9 - MEASURED RATE FOR HRP AT 
DIFFERENT SUBSTRATE CONCENTRATIONS 
 
HRP reaction rate is measured at different piperidine concentration and steady 
hydrogen peroxide concentrations. In case of no inhibition, HRP initial rate would 
be measured as constant. From figure 9 a decrease in the HRP activity can be 
observed again when 4-MPP concentration exceeds 8-10 mM. This means that 
MAO could potentially operates even at higher substrate concentration, but this can 
not be evaluated through the spectrophotometric assay since the HRP inhibition 
force the experiments to be limited. 
It is convenient to continue with the spectrophotometric method, operating with a 
maximum 10 mM 4-MPP initial concentration in the sampled, but HPLC is 
considered as an alternative method for future measurements when immobilized 
MAO performances need to be examined in a continuous system. Results for the 
monoamine oxidase assay in presence of low-substrate concentration are shown in 
the following figures 10 and 11. 
 
0,00E+00
2,00E-04
4,00E-04
6,00E-04
8,00E-04
1,00E-03
1,20E-03
1,40E-03
1,60E-03
1,80E-03
2,00E-03
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
HRP initial rate [umol/min]
Substrate concentration [mM]
==PAGE:37==
 
 
 
37 
 
 
FIGURE 10 - OBSERVED RATE FOR MAO AT 
LOW SUBSTRATE CONCENTRATIONS 
 
 
FIGURE 11 - MICHAELIS-MENTEN LINEAR REGRESSION FOR MAO 
 
Equation 2 and 3 are respectively represented in figure 10 and 11 where substrate 
concentration is kept below 10 mM. Kinetic parameters for MAO such as KM can 
0,00E+00
5,00E-05
1,00E-04
1,50E-04
2,00E-04
2,50E-04
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Observed initial rate [µmol/min]
Substrate concentration [mM]
y = 8894,7x + 18,106
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
1/V [L/µmol]
1/S [mM-1]
==PAGE:38==
 
 
 
38 
 
be obtained from the linear regression (equation 3) shown in figure 11, even though 
the results can not be considered reliable since data are limited to a very low 
substrate concentration interval. However, KM is calculated to be 490 mM. Thus, it 
is possible to consider a linear relation between MAO reaction rate and 4-MPP 
concentration since the enzyme is tested for S << KM. This statement can be easily 
be understood through equation 6, which is an equation 2 approximation. 
 
𝑉= 𝑉𝑚𝑎𝑥 
𝑆
𝑆+ 𝐾𝑀
~ 𝑉𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝑆
𝐾𝑀
          (6) 
 
It is important to denote that the measured KM (490 mM) far exceeds the limit value 
for substrate concentration (10 mM) and this represents a remarkable restriction for 
the kinetic of the process, also deductible from equation 6. This mathematic relation 
is confirmed from the experimental results shown in figure 10 and it can be assumed 
valid for low concentration of piperidine. 
Faster monoamine oxidase reaction rate could potentially be observed with an 
alternative analytic method which does not involve the limitation experienced with 
the spectrophotometric assay. However, exceptional speed would not be expected 
also in this case because of the poor oxygen availability in the aqueous solution 
where the biocatalytic process takes place, limited to a maximum 0.287 mM 
(saturation limit at the environmental conditions). 
The limitations occurring in oxidative biocatalysis in aqueous systems due to the 
reduced oxygen uptake to the reaction is not in-depth discussed, since they do not 
represent the subject of this work. Nevertheless, this is a critic topic in the last years 
debates on continuous processes involving oxygen dependant enzymes and it surely 
represents the turning point for future works. 
Back then to the MAO characterization results, determination of Vmax is not really 
useful for the purpose of interests as well as it is impossible to define in an accurate 
since further MAO inhibitions can not be investigated with the spectrophotometric 
analysis. However, the hypothetical maximum reaction rate Vmax for MAO can be 
calculated if absence of inhibition and oxygen limitation are assumed and it results 
to be 55,23 µmol/L/min (or equivalently 1,104 U/mg specific activity, since 50 µg 
soluble MAO are diluted in 1 mL solution tested) according to the Michaelis-
Menten kinetic model. 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
 
39 
 
Monoamine oxidase from Codexis is the only enzyme taken into account within 
this experimental study, but it would be useful to compare its activity with other 
similar enzymes. Glucose oxidase, for instance, is an oxidoreductase enzyme which 
catalyses the oxidation of glucose to glucono-lactone and hydrogen peroxide with 
a reaction mechanism similar to the MAO one. The activity of this enzyme, 
provided by Novozymes, has been tested in previous works (Toftgaard Pedersen et 
al. 2017) to be 9,68 U/mg. In the same work, bovine catalase has been also assayed 
with an observed activity of 3308 U/mg. 
The poor MAO activity is remarkable when compared to one of the fastest known 
enzymes such as catalase (about 3000-fold less active), but also when it is compared 
to similar enzymes as GOx (about 10-fold less active). The lack of catalytic 
potential of this enzyme is of course to be considered when it comes to imagine its 
industrial applications, but also when the most suitable experimental method for the 
academic analysis is to be chosen. 
The spectrophotometric analysis is preferred to the chromatographic one due to the 
reduced reaction rate and the highly diluted volumes involved. Moreover, the 
4-MPP substrate is not easy to identify with HPLC methods and the monoamine 
oxidase examined shows no activity on alternative substrate such as 
methylbenzylamine. 
Monoamine oxidase activity is observed along time to investigate any sensitive 
decrease in the reaction rate. Figure 12 below shows no evidence of activity loss in 
the first 24 hours investigation. Excluding deactivation of the soluble enzyme is 
required and useful for further experiments, where the reaction rate in the 
supernatant is observed to evaluate enzyme immobilization. 
 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
 
40 
 
 
FIGURE 12 - OBSERVED RATE FOR MAO ALONG 24 HOURS WITH 10 MM SUBSTRATE 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1,50E-04
1,70E-04
1,90E-04
2,10E-04
2,30E-04
2,50E-04
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Observed rate [umol/min]
Time [h]
==PAGE:41==
 
 
 
41 
 
7.2. 
IMMOBILIZATION OF MAO – DISCONTINUOUS 
 
The binding capacity of each EziG support, defined as the amount of enzyme 
immobilized per gram of carrier, is tested and results are shown in figure 13 below. 
 
 
FIGURE 13 – IMMOBILIZED MAO ON THREE DIFFERENT EZIG SUPPORTS 
 
Concerning the discontinuous process, most of the immobilization takes place in 
the first hour of enzyme-carrier contact. It is observed that small volumes with high 
concentration of enzyme facilitates the immobilization, as well as a mild stirring. 
An optimal immobilization is achieved with a 1:2 MAO/EziG initial weight ratio 
and an enzyme concentration higher than 30 g/L in the vial where the process takes 
place. 
As a confirm what stated by EnginZyme, binding capacity for all the EziG supports 
reaches surprisingly high values if compared to what can be achieved using 
alternative immobilization technology – 50 mg/g, resulting in a three/four folds 
more capable carrier. This is due to the interconnected controlled porous glass 
matrix of EziG support and the increased surface/volume ratio. 
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Observed Immobilization [mg/g]
Immobilisation Time [min]
EziG 1
EziG 2
EziG 3
==PAGE:42==
 
 
 
42 
 
The improved binding capacity of EziG makes this carrier interesting for further 
studies and applications to continuous biocatalysis, but it is not the only important 
parameter to be considered. The residual activity, defined as the ratio between the 
activity of the immobilized enzyme and the soluble enzyme’s one, is also to be 
determined for a complete carrier analysis. 
 
 
FIGURE 14 - RESIDUAL ACTIVITY OF IMMOBILIZED MAO 
 
It is possible to observe in figure 14 the surprisingly high percentage of activity 
conserved by MAO after its immobilization. When immobilized on EziG1 and 
EziG3, MAO loses less than 30% of its original activity, when immobilized on 
EziG2 it loses less than 10%. However, it is also possible to denote a continuous 
decrease of catalytic potential with the progress of the reaction: all of the samples 
show MAO can lose more than 60% activity after a 24 hours reaction time. 
As discussed earlier in this chapter, this decrease in the catalytic potential is neither 
due to enzyme deactivation nor to the internal mass transfer limitations of the 
porous structure. The diffusive transport affects the activity since the beginning of 
the experiment and the limiting effect is not expected to increase with the progress 
of the reaction. The causes for such activity decrease are more likely due to a 
combination of effects. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Residual Activity [%]
Time [h]
EziG 1
EziG 2
EziG 3
==PAGE:43==
 
 
 
43 
 
The first one cannot be avoided and consists in the limitation of substrate 
concentration to 10 mM. Operating with such a low concentration of analyte, the 
small amount of analyte entrapped into the EziG porous matrix may represent a not 
negligible side effect for the spectrophotometric analysis. As a consequence, this 
involves underestimated results. 
The second reason lays in the nature of the EziG particles and the technique used 
for this experiment. As explained in chapter 5, 1 mL solution is pipetted from the 4 
mL vial where immobilized MAO catalyses the reaction and transferred to the 
cuvette for spectrophotometric analysis. Even waiting for EziG precipitation, it is 
impossible to avoid a not negligible amount of carrier particles to be pipetted out 
from the vials since they are very fine. After several measurements, the loss of solid 
material from the samples might be remarkable and this also involves a continuous 
loss of measured MAO activity, with an underestimation of the results. 
The third reason of the loss in residual activity could be due to a leak of the 
biocatalyst from the solid surface during the reaction progress. This eventuality is 
investigated by measuring the activity in the supernatant after the EziG washing 
and results are shown in figure 15. Whether leakage occurs, some activity should 
be measured in the supernatant due to the presence of MAO.  
 
 
FIGURE 15 - RETAINED MAO ON THE EZIG CARRIERS SURFACE 
 
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Retained Enzyme [%]
Reaction time [h]
EziG 1
EziG 2
EziG 3
==PAGE:44==
 
 
 
44 
 
According to the results in figure 15, soluble MAO shows a good affinity with the 
hydrophobic material characterizing EziG 2 and 3. Most of the enzyme is retained 
on the carrier surface, while the same is not true for EziG 1 which presents a 
hydrophilic surface. However, even the 25% loss of protein after 24 hours shown 
in this last example does not justify alone the 70% loss of catalytic potential 
measured and presented in figure 14. 
This is a positive conclusion, since the measured lost activity is not due a bad 
behaviour of EziG but more likely to a lack of accuracy of the measurement 
technique. The obtained results for binding capacity and residual activity for EziG 
are good if compared with alternative immobilization technologies and they could 
be probably be even better. This leaves great expectations for future works. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
 
45 
 
7.3. 
IMMOBILIZATION OF MAO – CONTINUOUS 
 
 
 
FIGURE 16 - IMMOBILIZATION OF MAO ON EZIG2. 
FULL-LINE REPRESENTS PACKED BED SETUP, 
DASHED LINE REPRESENTS FLUIDIZED BED SETUP 
 
 
FIGURE 17 - IMMOBILIZATION OF MAO ON EZIG3. 
FULL-LINE REPRESENTS PACKED BED SETUP, 
DASHED LINE REPRESENTS FLUIDIZED BED SETUP 
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Immobilized MAO [mg/g]
Immobilization time [min]
1 mL/min
2 mL/min
5 mL/min
7.5 mL/min
1 mL/min
2 mL/min
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Immobilized MAO [mg/g]
Immobilization time [min]
1 mL/min
2 mL/min
5 mL/min
7.5 mL/min
1 mL/min
2 mL/min
==PAGE:46==
 
 
 
46 
 
 
Following the results obtained with the discontinuous method, further investigation 
for MAO immobilization does not consider EziG1 for continuous processes, since 
it results to be the worst amoung the three carriers tested. EziG2 and EziG3 are 
compared each other to select the most suitable carrier for MAO. 
The first evidence shown in figure 16 and 17 is the negligible immobilization 
occurred in fluidized bed conditions. This was an expected result, according to what 
can be observed in the discontinuous immobilization where immobilization is 
enhanced when concentrations of EziG and MAO are higher (immobilization 
volume is reduced). In fluidized bed conditions, the amount of solid and enzyme 
does not change while the immobilization volume is increased by the upwards flow. 
As a consequence, both the solid and enzyme concentration is lower and 
immobilization results to be less effective. 
Another suggestion observed from figure 16 and 17 is the immobilization is 
enhanced at higher flowrate through the packed column. This might appear as a 
contradiction, since in the discontinuous experiment the immobilization is achieved 
in a gently stirred batch environment. As common sense, the longer the enzyme is 
in contact with the solid, the higher should be the amount of enzyme immobilized. 
This would have been probably verified for very slow flowrates, but even when the 
solution flows at 1 mL/min, the residence time in the bed (bed volume 
approximately 1.5 mL) is clearly too low to ensure a proper binding. Thus, the best 
configuration results to be the one at which the solution flows through the bed more 
frequently: the highest flowrate. 
The best configuration for EziG2 and EziG3 is experimented for long term 
immobilization in order to investigate the binding capacity of the carrier once the 
saturation of the surface is reached and check whether a higher or lower binding is 
achieved compared to the batch immobilization. 
 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
 
47 
 
 
FIGURE 18 - LONG TERM IMMOBILIZATION AND BINDING 
CAPACITY FOR EZIG2 AND EZIG3 
 
Figure 18 shows that both EziG2 and EziG3 reach the saturation with around 200 
mg MAO immobilized per gram of carrier (EziG2 = 206 mg/g, EziG3 = 224 mg/g) 
which is approximately the same result achieved during the batch immobilization 
(EziG2 = 192 mg/g, EziG3 = 213 mg/g). The main difference is that the saturation 
is reached at least after five/six hours in the continuous immobilization, while the 
same result can be achieved in one hour when immobilization is run 
discontinuously. 
From a first sight, batch immobilization would be the best option in this specific 
case. However, the preparation of an immobilized MAO in a separated 
discontinuous setup might be not optimal for a subsequent continuous operation. 
The solid matrix should be separated from the initial mixture by filtration, washed, 
filtered a second time and finally added to the column as a bed for the continuous 
bioprocess of interest. All of these operations require time, might be costly and, 
most of all, they might lead to a loss of solid material and consequently catalytic 
potential. Despite the longer immobilization time, immobilizing the enzyme in the 
bed where the following reaction takes place is an advantage that should 
significantly be considered for the process economy. 
Figure 19 shows the comparison between the activity of immobilized and the 
soluble MAO, but unfortunately it cannot be considered as a reliable description of 
the real catalytic potential of the protein. 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Immobilized MAO [mg/g]
Immobilization time [min]
EziG 2
EziG 3
==PAGE:48==
 
 
 
48 
 
 
FIGURE 19 - IMMOBILIZED MAO RESIDUAL ACTIVITY 
COMPARED TO SOLUBLE MAO ACTIVITY 
 
The nature of these poor results is already discussed in the previous chapters and it 
lies in the limitations occurring during the spectrophotometric analysis. The low 
concentration of analyte, combined with the low rate of the soluble MAO itself, 
provoke an irregular adsorption of the pink product within the solid bed. During the 
experiment it is possible to observe the bed changing colour from slightly pink to 
strong purple, but the analyte is not released from the outflow and it cannot be 
properly measured with the instrument selected. 
Alternative measurement methods were meant to tested, but they could not be tried 
since the MAO provided by Codexis showed no activity towards alternative 
substrates such as methylbenzylamine. However, even though they are not precise 
and reliable, the results achieved in the discontinuous experiments can be 
considered as an important index to describe the real activity of immobilized MAO. 
Further considerations are discussed in the conclusive chapter of this work. 
The last experiment run in the packed column is the investigation of the enzyme 
retention on the EziG surface. 
 
0,00
2,00
4,00
6,00
8,00
10,00
12,00
14,00
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Residual Activity [%]
Reaction time [min]
EziG 2
EziG 3
==PAGE:49==
 
 
 
49 
 
 
FIGURE 20 - PERCENTAGE OF IMMOBILIZED MAO RETAINED 
ON THE CARRIER SURFACE 
 
The excellent results obtained for the enzyme retention are shown in figure 20. 
According to the graph, after two hours investigation EziG2 retains 98% of the 
immobilized MAO and EziG3 retains almost 99% of it. However, even though these 
results are already promising, they might be underestimated. As explained in 
section 5.4, the activity in the washing solution is measured in order to verify the 
presence of active proteins. It can be observed that the initial value for enzyme 
retention is not 100% and this means that some activity is measured in the first 
sample. Then, the following samples presents almost no activity (in particular for 
EziG3) and so the percentage of enzyme retained does not decrease. This is an 
unexpected behaviour, since more leaching would be expected after the initial one. 
This phenomenon can be explained if protein impurities are present in the column. 
In fact, even though the column is washed before the experiment, some track of 
non-immobilized MAO might be retained onto the column walls or the carrier 
surface and released immediately after the first run, resulting in an activity. Whether 
this possibility is considered and the measurement at t = 0 is not taken into account, 
the retained enzyme percentage would be higher for both the carriers 
(EziG2 = 99.2%, EziG3 = 99.7%). 
 
 
95
95,5
96
96,5
97
97,5
98
98,5
99
99,5
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Retained MAO [%]
Time [min]
EziG 2
EziG 3
==PAGE:50==
 
 
 
50 
 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
 
 
 
51 
 
8.   CONCLUSION 
 
 
 
The collaboration between the Danish pharmaceutical company H. Lundbeck A/S 
and the Process and Systems Engineering Centre at DTU has made the experimental 
investigation of monoamine oxidase immobilization on controlled porous glass 
microparticles possible. 
The research and the laboratory tests performed during these last five months 
underline the great potential shown by the EziG carriers (provided by the Swedish 
company EnginZyme) for continuous biocatalysis applications. Compared with 
different technologies and setups (Popat et al. 2011)(Verma, Puri, and Barrow 
2016), the affinity immobilization of MAO on this support deserves to be 
mentioned as one of the most effective immobilization solution. Among the three 
carriers investigated, EziG2 and EziG3 (hydrophobic polymeric surface and semi-
hydrophobic hybrid surface, respectively) show the greatest affinity with the 
soluble enzyme provided by Codexis. The performance claimed by the producer 
are confirmed: more than 200 mg enzyme immobilized per gram of carrier, at least 
70 – 90% residual activity of the enzyme after its immobilization, great protein 
retention on the carrier’s surface with no sensitive enzyme leaching measured in 
the liquid media, excellent fluid-dynamic properties with negligible pressure drops 
when the support is packed in a lab-scale column (diameter 1 cm, bed length 2 cm) 
and continuous operations are run up to 7.5 mL/min. 
The range of industrial applications for such a promising system is extremely wide. 
First of all, in the pharmaceutical manufacturing for the production of API or for 
the synthesis of reaction intermedia compounds. The combination of continuous 
processes with plug-and-play immobilized biocatalysts may represent a valid 
alternative to the already established chemical synthesis and it can potentially 
provide more performing, milder, safer, easier to control, cost-effectively industrial 
processes. As a result, higher quality products can be delivered to the final user with 
more income for the companies and less cost for the costumer. 
However, the enzyme is still the main character in a catalysed system and it plays 
the most important role. The immobilization support, EziG in this specific case, can 
be seen like a car external body: even the best designed one cannot promise high 
performances in absence of a good engine. 
==PAGE:52==
 
 
 
52 
 
The low concentration of dissolved oxygen in aqueous media is not a limitation for 
the enzyme immobilization, but it surely represents a crucial problem to be 
overtaken. The poor oxygen availability becomes even more a challenging topic 
when it comes to consider continuous processes, which are more difficult to be 
aerated compared to their batch or fed-batch counter part and where the productivity 
can be limited by the early consumption of this reactant. The oxygen supplies to 
industrial application of continuous biocatalysis not only can negatively affect the 
final conversion of the substrate and the global process productivity (Nordblad et 
al., 2018; Nordkvist et al., 2007; Pedersen et al., 2015), but also the enzyme stability 
as a consequence of intensive aeration techniques (Bhagia et al., 2018; Bommarius 
and Karau, 2005). The understanding and overtaking of such limitations may lead 
to a sensitive improvement in bio-oxidative catalytic process desing and this is why 
future research should focus on this direction. 
Summarizing, the strong restriction encountered operating with monoamine 
oxidase, together with the limitation in the dissolved oxygen in aqueous 
environments, are the real bottleneck of this experimental work and it probably 
represent the actual restriction to continuous biocatalysis. Whether a company 
decided to invest in a continuous process involving the monoamine oxidase 
protagonist of this investigation, it would probably not be competitive on the market 
in terms of productivity. Therefore, great efforts in protein engineering are required 
to provide performing enzymes able to satisfy the pharmaceutical industry demand 
as well as an optimized design for continuous processes involving oxygen 
dependant enzymes. 
The future research and work in this application should focus in the optimization of 
monoamine oxidase, engineering an enzyme with an improved stability (the 
measurements of the kinetic parameters of this enzyme have not been always 
consistent along the five-months experiment) and at least a decent activity towards 
the substrate of interest. Partnership between pharmaceutical companies and 
enzyme manufacturers might be a good option, due to the intensive amount of 
resources (time, technology, research, costs) needed to achieve an ideal protein 
engineering. In parallel, gas-liquid mass transfer in bio-oxidative catalysis needs to 
be investigated in order to better understand the oxygen supply limitations to the 
reaction and to appropriately design well-performing processes for the continuous 
manufacturing of APIs. 
With regards to the subject of this work, future investigations on continuous 
immobilization in both packed column and packed bed reactor are suggested. It 
would be interesting to observe how the EziG carriers behave in different set-ups, 
measuring whether pressure drops in the reactor would drastically increase in a 
==PAGE:53==
 
 
 
53 
 
longer bed, investigating the immobilization profile (mg enzyme immobilized at 
different bed length) along the bed and the influence of the bed length on the time 
needed to achieve the EziG’s surface saturation. Moreover, the full potential of the 
carriers produced by EnginZyme could be observed operating with a well-
performing His-tagged enzyme, measuring the residual catalytic potential of the 
immobilized protein in absence of substrate limitations. 
Continuous biocatalysis in pharmaceutical industry may represent the future 
established technology for API manufacturing and affinity immobilization of His-
tagged enzyme, even after this investigation, results to potentially be a very 
attractive route to travel. The technology is present, improvement opportunities are 
several. 
 
 
==PAGE:54==
 
 
 
54 
 
9. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
 
 
Copenhagen, 21 Gennaio 2019 
 
Avevo scritto circa quindici pagine, tra ringraziamenti ed insulti. Avevo citato 
moltissime persone, tutte meritevoli e alle quali sento il dovere di porre omaggio. 
Avevo spiegato, avevo urlato, avevo criticato, mi ero giustificato. Ho cancellato 
tutto. Non solo da queste pagine, ma anche da me stesso. 
Molti vedono il giorno della propria proclamazione come una sorta di traguardo. 
Finalmente ce l’ho fatta. Sono arrivato. Onestamente, io no. Per me questo giorno 
rappresenta un punto di partenza, una nuova alba, un nuovo inizio. Rappresenta il 
giorno in cui inizio a vivere la mia vita senza i rancori che mi sono trascinato dietro 
per tutti questi anni verso le persone o le circostanze. Persone e circostanze che 
hanno sempre tentato, senza riuscirci, di allontanarmi dalle mie ambizioni e dai 
miei desideri. 
Se oggi sono qui a scrivere queste righe sulla mia Tesi di Laurea Magistrale in 
Ingegneria Chimica e Biochimica è sicuramente anche per merito di John, che mi 
ha affidato il progetto, e di Rowan, che mi ha affiancato in laboratorio in questi 
mesi. Se oggi sono qui è anche merito loro, ma non solo. 
Se oggi sono qui a scrivere queste righe sul tavolo di casa mia, ammirando il 
meraviglioso paesaggio di una Copenaghen ricoperta di neve dalle vetrate della 
mia sala, è sicuramente anche per merito di tutte le persone che mi sono state vicino 
in questi anni. Persone che non cito, ma che sanno di aver contribuito. In questa 
lista invisibile c’è chi mi ha dato fiducia, chi mi ha dato un lavoro, chi mi ha dato 
conforto, chi mi ha dato uno schiaffo, chi mi ha dato una ragione per sorridere, chi 
mi ha dato una ragione per piangere, chi mi ha dato soddisfazione e chi mi ha dato 
amore. Se oggi sono qui è anche merito loro, ma non solo. 
Trovo davvero strano come, proprio oggi, io non mi senta di lasciare una dedica 
particolare a coloro che mi sono rimasti accanto. Mi sembra quasi irrispettoso nei 
loro confronti, anche se non c’è nulla che io possa fare a riguardo. 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
 
55 
 
Invece, il mio ringraziamento più sentito lo rivolgo a quelle persone che nell’arco 
della mia vita vicine non lo sono state mai – o quasi. A tutte quelle persone che 
sono rimaste lontane, ma che io avrei sempre voluto vicine, che ho immaginato 
vicine. 
Le ho immaginate sedute al tavolo a festeggiare i miei compleanni. Le ho 
immaginate alla celebrazione della mia precedente Laurea in Italia. Le ho 
immaginate sul mio divano a scartare i regali di natale. Le ho immaginate da 
ragazzino in quei pomeriggi al ritorno da scuola quando a casa non c’era nessuno. 
Le ho immaginate insieme a me ai matrimoni, alle cresime, alle comunioni, ai 
battesimi, alle Pasque. 
A ventisette anni realizzo che probabilmente il mio unico rimpianto nella vita è di 
essermi limitato ad immaginarli, senza mai aver fatto uno sforzo in più. Penso di 
non aver quasi mai aver chiamato, né un messaggio, né una telefonata da parte 
mia. Penso di essere andato personalmente a fargli visita solo un paio di volte, un 
paio di volte in ventisette anni. Penso, anzi, sono sicuro, di non aver mai detto loro 
quanto io gli voglia bene. E loro probabilmente non sanno quanto siano importanti 
per me. 
Così come probabilmente non sanno che oggi sto conseguendo una Laurea 
Magistrale. Così come non sanno esattamente dove vivo, né cosa faccia. Così come 
non sanno cosa mi piaccia mangiare, cosa mi piaccia bere, quale musica ascolti, 
quali film guardi al cinema. 
Così come probabilmente non sanno quante volte io mi sia chiesto come sarebbe 
stata la mia vita se fossi nato e cresciuto a Napoli, tra loro, con loro. 
Il mio ringraziamento più sentito lo rivolgo a loro. A Luigi ed Anna, i mei nonni, 
sopra tutti. A Vincenzo e Delfina, con Fabiana e Gianluigi. A Vittorio e Grazia, con 
Felice. A Mimmo e Patrizia, con Antonio e Fabio. Ad Enzo e Melina, con Teresa, 
Antonio ed Anita. A Gaetano e Simona, che in modo particolare hanno contribuito 
al concretizzarsi delle mie ambizioni. A Gianni e Raffaella, con Teresa e Mara. 
 
Vi voglio bene, anche se non ve l’ho mai detto. 
 
 
Alessio 
==PAGE:56==
 
 
 
56 
 
10. 
APPENDICES 
 
 
 
TABLE 1 – EXPERIMENTAL DATA, FIGURE 8 
Substrate [mM] 
9 
10 
11 
15 
 
1,44E-04 
1,46E-04 
8,79E-5 
< 1E-07 
dA/dt [1/s] 
1,46E-04 
1,72E-04 
8,94E-5 
< 1E-07 
 
1,24E-04 
1,62E-04 
8,60E-05 
< 1E-07 
Average [1/s] 
1,38E-04 
1,60E-05 
8,78E-05 
 
Error [1/s] 
1,72E-10 
1,93E-10 
3,37E-12 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 2 – EXPERIMENTAL DATA, FIGURE 9 
Substrate [mM] 
0 
5 
10 
15 
 
8,10E-04 
7,63E-04 
4,77E-04 
2,51E-07 
dA/dt [1/s] 
8,06E-04 
7,58E-04 
4,81E-04 
3,55E-06 
 
8,02E-04 
7,67E-04 
4,72E-04 
< 1E-07 
Average [1/s] 
8,06E-04 
7,63E-04 
4,77E-04 
1,27E-06 
Error [1/s] 
2,17E-11 
2,17E-11 
2,17E-11 
4,54E-12 
 
 
 
TABLE 3 - EXPERIMENTAL DATA, FIGURE 10 
Substrate [mM] 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
 
2,94E-05 
4,94E-05 
7,94E-05 
8,84E-05 
9,88E-05 
dA/dt [1/s] 
2,01E-05 
4,12E-05 
7,24E-05 
8,71E-05 
9,56E-05 
 
2,32E-05 
5,56E-05 
7,68E-05 
9,45E-05 
9,70E-05 
Average [1/s] 
2,42E-05 
4,87E-05 
7,62E-05 
9,00E-05 
9,71E-05 
Error [1/s] 
2,59E-11 
6,00E-11 
1,40E-11 
1,80E-11 
3,00E-12 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
 
57 
 
TABLE 4 - EXPERIMENTAL DATA, FIGURE 12 
Time [h] 
0 
0,5 
1 
2 
4 
8 
24 
 
8,11 
E-05 
8,06 
E-05 
7,95 
E-05 
8,00 
E-05 
7,95 
E-05 
7,79 
E-05 
7,84 
E-05 
dA/dt 
[1/s] 
8,08 
E-05 
7,84 
E-05 
8,08 
E-05 
7,88 
E-05 
7,84 
E-05 
8,01 
E-05 
7,91 
E-05 
 
7,94 
E-05 
8,12 
E-05 
8,04 
E-05 
7,96 
E-05 
8,14 
E-05 
7,92 
E-05 
7,76 
E-05 
Average 
[1/s] 
8,04 
E-05 
8,01 
E-05 
8,02 
E-05 
7,95 
E-05 
7,98 
E-05 
7,91 
E-05 
7,84 
E-05 
Error 
[1/s] 
9,51 
E-13 
2,51 
E-12 
5,12 
E-13 
4,31 
E-13 
2,66 
E-12 
1,41 
E-12 
6,51 
E-13 
 
 
 
TABLE 5 - EXPERIMENTAL DATA, FIGURE 13 
Time [min] 
 
30 
60 
240 
 
 
59 
125 
150 
 
EziG1 
60 
122 
149 
 
 
61 
125 
145 
Observed 
 
90 
153 
190 
Immobilized 
EziG2 
88 
157 
193 
MAO [mg/g] 
 
86 
152 
193 
 
 
74 
187 
214 
 
EziG3 
74 
188 
215 
 
 
77 
186 
210 
 
EziG1 
60 
124 
148 
Av. [mg/g] 
EziG2 
88 
154 
192 
 
EziG3 
75 
187 
213 
 
EziG1 
1,15 
4,62 
3,46 
Error [1/s] 
EziG2 
3,46 
8,08 
1,15 
 
EziG3 
8,08 
3,46 
8,08 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:58==
 
 
 
58 
 
TABLE 6 - EXPERIMENTAL DATA, FIGURE 14 
Time [h] 
 
0 
6 
12 
24 
 
 
1,54E-04 
9,64E-05 
7,45E-05 
6,21E-05 
 
EziG1 
1,58E-04 
9,56E-05 
7,16E-05 
5,97E-05 
 
 
1,60E-04 
1,03E-04 
6,74E-05 
6,70E-05 
 
 
2,04E-04 
1,52E-04 
8,65E-05 
5,78E-05 
dA/dt [1/s] 
EziG2 
2,01E-04 
1,07E-04 
7,78E-05 
5,43E-05 
 
 
2,00E-04 
8,41E-05 
7,79E-05 
6,11E-05 
 
 
1,51E-04 
1,26E-04 
9,85E-05 
7,64E-05 
 
EziG3 
1,49E-04 
1,12E-04 
9,32E-05 
7,82E-05 
 
 
1,67E-04 
1,08E-04 
9,34E-05 
6,61E-05 
 
 
2,16E-04 
 
Sol. MAO 
2,16E-04 
 
 
2,18E-04 
 
EziG1 
1,57E-04 
9,83E-05 
7,12E-05 
6,29E-05 
Average [1/s] 
EziG2 
2,02E-04 
1,14E-04 
8,07E-05 
5,77E-05 
 
EziG3 
1,56E-04 
1,15E-04 
9,50E-05 
7,36E-05 
 
Sol. MAO 
2,17E-04 
 
EziG1 
1,07E-11 
1,85E-11 
1,46E-11 
1,59E-11 
Error [1/s] 
EziG2 
4,25E-12 
1,38E-09 
2,89E-11 
1,32E-11 
 
EziG3 
1,18E-10 
1,00E-10 
1,03E-11 
4,93E-11 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
 
59 
 
TABLE 7 - EXPERIMENTAL DATA, FIGURE 15 
Time [h] 
 
0 
6 
12 
 
 
3,32E-05 
4,21E-05 
5,86E-05 
 
EziG1 
2,95E-05 
4,36E-05 
5,53E-05 
 
 
2,94E-05 
4,84E-05 
4,66E-05 
 
 
6,89E-06 
1,11E-05 
8,39E-06 
dA/dt [1/s] 
EziG2 
5,69E-06 
1,07E-05 
1,26E-05 
 
 
6,30E-06 
6,52E-06 
1,48E-05 
 
 
5,84E-06 
4,25E-06 
5,26E-06 
 
EziG3 
1,02E-06 
1,03E-06 
2,36E-06 
 
 
1,28E-06 
4,81E-06 
4,75E-06 
 
 
 
2,16E-04 
 
 
Sol. MAO 
 
2,16E-04 
 
 
 
 
2,18E-04 
 
 
EziG1 
3,07E-05 
4,47E-05 
5,35E-05 
Average [1/s] 
EziG2 
6,29E-06 
9,44E-06 
1,19E-05 
 
EziG3 
2,71E-06 
3,36E-06 
4,12E-06 
 
Sol. MAO 
 
2,17E-04 
 
 
EziG1 
5,39E-12 
1,25E-11 
4,46E-11 
Error [1/s] 
EziG2 
4,16E-13 
7,44E-12 
1,23E-11 
 
EziG3 
8,49E-12 
4,81E-12 
2,77E-12 
 
 
 
==PAGE:60==
 
 
 
60 
 
TABLE 8 - EXPERIMENTAL DATA, FIGURE 16 
Time [min] 
 
15 
30 
60 
120 
240 
 
 
11 
20 
32 
61 
78 
 
Packed 
1 mL/min 
11 
21 
36 
61 
74 
 
 
12 
21 
34 
62 
76 
 
 
12 
21 
37 
62 
81 
 
Packed 
2 mL/min 
14 
20 
38 
62 
81 
 
 
13 
20 
37 
61 
80 
 
 
13 
27 
41 
70 
116 
 
Packed 
5 mL/min 
13 
27 
42 
72 
114 
Immob. 
 
16 
25 
42 
71 
115 
MAO 
[mg/g] 
 
19 
37 
61 
100 
159 
 
Packed  
7.5mL/min 
15 
37 
59 
101 
159 
 
 
17 
38 
60 
102 
157 
 
 
4 
9 
12 
12 
15 
 
Fluidized 
1 mL/min 
5 
8 
12 
14 
16 
 
 
5 
7 
11 
13 
14 
 
 
< 1 
< 1 
< 1 
< 1 
< 1 
 
Fluidized 
2 mL/min 
< 1 
< 1 
< 1 
< 1 
< 1 
 
 
< 1 
< 1 
< 1 
< 1 
< 1 
 
Packed 
1 mL/min 
11 
21 
34 
61 
76 
 
Packed 
2 mL/min 
12 
20 
37 
62 
81 
Average 
Packed 
5 mL/min 
14 
26 
42 
71 
115 
[mg/g] 
Packed 
7.5mL/min 
17 
37 
60 
101 
158 
 
Fluidized 
1 mL/min 
5 
8 
12 
13 
15 
 
Fluidized 
2 mL/min 
< 1 
< 1 
< 1 
< 1 
< 1 
 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
 
61 
 
TABLE 9 - EXPERIMENTAL DATA, FIGURE 17 
Time [min] 
 
15 
30 
60 
120 
240 
 
 
15 
26 
35 
69 
74 
 
Packed 
1 mL/min 
15 
28 
40 
68 
75 
 
 
16 
27 
39 
68 
76 
 
 
18 
26 
43 
68 
94 
 
Packed 
2 mL/min 
19 
24 
43 
69 
90 
 
 
18 
28 
42 
69 
89 
 
 
19 
28 
45 
81 
85 
 
Packed 
5 mL/min 
17 
29 
44 
79 
86 
Immob. 
 
18 
28 
44 
80 
82 
MAO 
[mg/g] 
 
18 
39 
65 
112 
186 
 
Packed  
7.5mL/min 
18 
40 
66 
111 
186 
 
 
19 
38 
65 
115 
187 
 
 
4 
9 
9 
9 
9 
 
Fluidized 
1 mL/min 
3 
8 
8 
10 
9 
 
 
5 
9 
10 
9 
10 
 
 
< 1 
< 1 
1 
< 1 
1 
 
Fluidized 
2 mL/min 
< 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
 
 
< 1 
< 1 
< 1 
1 
1 
 
Packed 
1 mL/min 
15 
27 
38 
68 
75 
 
Packed 
2 mL/min 
18 
26 
43 
69 
91 
Average 
Packed 
5 mL/min 
19 
28 
44 
80 
84 
[mg/g] 
Packed 
7.5mL/min 
19 
39 
65 
113 
186 
 
Fluidized 
1 mL/min 
5 
9 
9 
9 
9 
 
Fluidized 
2 mL/min 
< 1 
< 1 
1 
1 
1 
 
==PAGE:62==
 
 
 
62 
 
TABLE 10 - EXPERIMENTAL DATA, FIGURE 18 
Time 
[min] 
 
15 
30 
60 
120 
240 
1440 
2880 
 
 
19 
37 
61 
100 
159 
190 
206 
 
EziG2 
15 
37 
59 
101 
159 
194 
206 
Immob. 
 
17 
38 
60 
102 
157 
191 
207 
MAO 
[mg/g] 
 
18 
39 
65 
112 
186 
218 
223 
 
EziG3 
18 
40 
66 
111 
186 
217 
224 
 
 
19 
38 
65 
115 
187 
216 
224 
Average 
EziG2 
17 
37 
60 
101 
158 
192 
206 
[mg/g] 
EziG3 
19 
39 
65 
113 
186 
217 
224 
 
 
 
TABLE 11 - EXPERIMENTAL DATA, FIGURE 19 
Time [min] 
 
15 
60 
 
 
9,25E-06 
1,72E-05 
 
EziG2 
4,74E-06 
1,26E-05 
 
 
1,32E-05 
1,07E-05 
 
 
1,29E-05 
1,11E-05 
dA/dt [1/s] 
EziG3 
6,35E-06 
1,56E-05 
 
 
4,81E-06 
1,59E-05 
 
 
1,04E-04 
 
Soluble MAO 
1,21E-04 
 
 
1,20E-04 
 
EziG2 
9,07E-06 
1,35E-05 
Average [1/s] 
EziG3 
8,02E-06 
1,42E-05 
 
Soluble MAO 
1,15E-04 
 
EziG2 
2,08E-11 
1,29E-11 
Error [1/s] 
EziG3 
2,13E-11 
8,35E-12 
 
Soluble MAO 
1,82E-10 
 
 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
 
63 
 
TABLE 12 - EXPERIMENTAL DATA, FIGURE 20 
Time 
[min] 
 
0 
15 
30 
60 
120 
 
 
2,21E-06 
2,14E-07 
1,17E-07 
< 1E7 
2,12E-07 
 
EziG2 
3,56E-07 
9,50E-07 
< 1E7 
< 1E7 
< 1E7 
 
 
1,57E-06 
2,16E-07 
2,34E-07 
< 1E7 
4,78E-07 
 
 
3,21E-07 
4,21E-07 
1,21E-07 
< 1E7 
< 1E7 
dA/dt 
[1/s] 
EziG3 
2,43E-07 
1,12E-07 
< 1E7 
< 1E7 
< 1E7 
 
 
2,54E-06 
1,57E-07 
2,33E-07 
< 1E7 
3,63E-07 
 
 
1,04E-04 
 
Soluble 
MAO 
1,21E-04 
 
 
1,20E-04 
 
EziG2 
1,38E-06 
4,60E-07 
1,17E-07 
< 1E7 
2,30E-07 
Average 
[1/s] 
EziG3 
1,04E-06 
2,30E-07 
1,18E-07 
< 1E7 
1,21E-07 
 
Soluble 
MAO 
1,15E-04 
 
EziG2 
7,69E-07 
3,46E-07 
9,55E-08 
 
1,96E-07 
Error 
[1/s] 
EziG3 
1,01E-06 
1,36E-07 
9,51E-08 
 
1,71E-07 
 
Soluble 
MAO 
1,82E-10 
 
 
==PAGE:64==
 
 
 
64 
 
 
 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
 
65 
 
11. 
REFERENCES 
 
Bhagia, S., Dhir, R., Kumar, R., Wyman, C.E., 2018. “Deactivation of Cellulase 
at the Air-Liquid Interface Is the Main Cause of Incomplete Cellulose 
Conversion at Low Enzyme Loadings.” Sci Rep 8, 1350. 
Bommarius, A.S., Karau, A., 2005. “Deactivation of Formate Dehydrogenase 
(FDH) in solution and at gas-liquid interfaces.” Biotechnol Prog 21, 1663–
1672. 
Busacca, Carl A., Daniel R. Fandrick, Jinhua J. Song, and Chris H. Senanayake. 
2011. “The Growing Impact of Catalysis in the Pharmaceutical Industry.” 
Advanced Synthesis and Catalysis 353 (11–12): 1825–64.  
Corbet, Jean Pierre, and Gérard Mignani. 2006. “Selected Patented Cross-
Coupling Reaction Technologies.” Chemical Reviews 106 (7): 2651–2710. 
Fadhel, A. Z., Pollet, P., Liotta, C. L., & Eckert, C. A. 2010. "Combining the 
benefits of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis with tunable solvents 
and nearcritical water." Molecules, 15(11), 8400-8424. 
Fernandez-Lafuente, R., Armisén, P., Sabuquillo, P., Fernández-Lorente, G., & 
Guisán, J. M. 1998. "Immobilization of lipases by selective adsorption on 
hydrophobic supports." Chemistry and Physics of Lipids, 93(1), 185-197. 
Fogler, H. Scott. 2006. “Chapter 13: Distributions of Residence Times for 
Chemical Reactors.” Elements of Chemical Reaction Engineering, 867–944.  
Gerogiorgis, Dimitrios I., and Paul I. Barton. 2009. Steady-State Optimization of a 
Continuous Pharmaceutical Process. Computer Aided Chemical 
Engineering. Vol. 27. Elsevier Inc. 
Gomes, M. D. 2018. "Understanding Scale-down of Oxygen Dependent 
Biocatalysis." Operational Aspects Of Continuous Pharmaceutical 
Production. Technical University of Denmark, PhD Thesis. 
Haven, Mai Østergaard, Jane Lindedam, Martin Dan Jeppesen, Michael Elleskov, 
Ana Cristina Rodrigues, Miguel Gama, Henning Jørgensen, and Claus Felby. 
2015. “Continuous Recycling of Enzymes during Production of 
Lignocellulosic Bioethanol in Demonstration Scale.” Applied Energy 159: 
188–95. 
 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
 
66 
 
Hessel, Volker, Christoph Knobloch, and Holger Lowe. 2008. “Review on Patents 
in Microreactor and Micro Process Engineering.” Recent Patents on 
Chemical Engineeringe 1 (1): 1–16. 
Heuts, Dominic P.H.M., Erik W. Van Hellemond, Dick B. Janssen, and Marco W. 
Fraaije. 2007. “Discovery, Characterization, and Kinetic Analysis of an 
Alditol Oxidase from Streptomyces Coelicolor.” Journal of Biological 
Chemistry 282 (28). 
Hochuli, E., Bannwarth, W., Döbeli, H., Gentz, R., & Stüber, D. 1988. "Genetic 
approach to facilitate purification of recombinant proteins with a novel metal 
chelate adsorbent." Nature biotechnology, 6(11), 1321. 
Homaei, A. A., Sariri, R., Vianello, F., & Stevanato, R. 2013. "Enzyme 
immobilization: an update." Journal of chemical biology, 6(4), 185-205. 
J, L R De Souza, and L Lorenz. 2014. “Residence Time Distribution for Tubular 
Reactors,” 2014. 
Judy, J., D. Maynes, and B. W. Webb. 2002. “Characterization of Frictional 
Pressure Drop for Liquid Flows through Microchannels.” International 
Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 45 (17): 3477–89. 
Lawrence, X. Y. 2008. "Pharmaceutical quality by design: product and process 
development, understanding, and control." Pharmaceutical research, 25(4), 
781-791. 
Mitic, A., Krist V. G., Johansen K. D., and Skovby. T. 2013. Operational Aspects 
Of Continuous Pharmaceutical Production. Technical University of 
Denmark, PhD Thesis. 
Nordblad, M., Dias Gomes, M., Meissner, M.P., Ramesh, H., Woodley, J.M., 
2018. "Scoping Biocatalyst Performance using Reaction Trajectory 
Analysis." Org Process Res Dev 22, 1101–1114. 
Nordkvist, M., Nielsen, P.M., Villadsen, J., 2007. "Oxidation of Lactose to 
Lactobionic Acid by a Microdochium nivale Carbohydrate Oxidase: Kinetics 
and Operational Stability." Biotechnol Bioeng 97, 694–707. 
Pedersen, A.T., Birmingham, W.R., Rehn, G., Charnock, S.J., Turner, N.J., 
Woodley, J.M., 2015. "Process requirements of galactose oxidase catalyzed 
oxidation of alcohols." Org Process Res Dev 19, 1580–1589. 
 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
 
67 
 
Poechlauer, P., Manley, J., Broxterman, R., Gregertsen, B., & Ridemark, M. 2012. 
"Continuous processing in the manufacture of active pharmaceutical 
ingredients and finished dosage forms: an industry perspective." Organic 
Process Research & Development, 16(10), 1586-1590. 
Pollard, D. J., & Woodley, J. M. 2007. "Biocatalysis for pharmaceutical 
intermediates: the future is now." Trends in biotechnology, 25(2), 66-73. 
Popat, Amirali, Sandy Budi Hartono, Frances Stahr, Jian Liu, Shi Zhang Qiao, 
and Gao Qing Lu. 2011. “Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles for 
Bioadsorption, Enzyme Immobilisation, and Delivery Carriers.” Nanoscale 3 
(7): 2801–18. 
Porath, J. (1992). "Immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography." Protein 
expression and purification, 3(4), 263-281. 
Reid, R.Dan, and Nada R. Sanders. 2011. Operations Management. Journal of 
Chemical Information and Modeling. Vol. 53. 
Sheldon, Roger A., and Sander van Pelt. 2013. “Enzyme Immobilisation in 
Biocatalysis: Why, What and How.” Chemical Society Reviews 42 (15): 
Thompson, Matthew P. 2018. “Biocatalysis in Continuous Flow Using 
Immobilised Enzymes.” 
Toftgaard Pedersen, Asbjørn, Teresa Melo de Carvalho, Euan Sutherland, Gustav 
Rehn, Robert Ashe, and John M. Woodley. 2017. “Characterization of a 
Continuous Agitated Cell Reactor for Oxygen Dependent Biocatalysis.” 
Biotechnology and Bioengineering 114 (6): 1222–30.  
Verma, Madan L., Munish Puri, and Colin J. Barrow. 2016. “Recent Trends in 
Nanomaterials Immobilised Enzymes for Biofuel Production.” Critical 
Reviews in Biotechnology 36 (1): 108–19.. 
W.K. Drauz, H. Groger, O. May, W.K. Drauz, H. Groger, Wiley-VCH-Weinheim 
O.May, O. May W.K. Drauz, H. Groger, W.K. Drauz, H. Groger, and Wiley-
VCH-Weinheim O.May. 1995. Enzyme Catalysis in Organic Synthesis. 
Wang, C., Wu, X., & Xiao, J. 2008. "Broader, greener, and more efficient: Recent 
advances in asymmetric transfer hydrogenation." Chemistry–An Asian 
Journal, 3(10), 1750-1770. 
Woodcock, J. (2004). The concept of pharmaceutical quality. Am Pharm 
Rev, 7(6), 10-15. 
==PAGE:68==
 
 
 
68 
 
Yadav, Vikramaditya G., and Gregory Stephanopoulos. 2014. “Metabolic 
Engineering: The Ultimate Paradigm for Continuous Pharmaceutical 
Manufacturing.” ChemSusChem 7 (7): 1847–53. 
Yang, A. S., & Honig, B. 1993. "On the pH dependence of protein stability." 
Journal of molecular biology, 231(2), 459-474. 
Zhu, J., & Sun, G. 2012. "Lipase immobilization on glutaraldehyde-activated 
nanofibrous membranes for improved enzyme stabilities and activities." 
Reactive and Functional Polymers, 72(11), 839-845. 
 
 
