==PAGE:1==
USER EXPERIENCE IN 
AUTONOMOUS 
DELIVERY DRONES 
 
SMALL NON-BRIDGED ISLANDS IN DENMARK 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
English title:​ User experience in Autonomous Delivery Drones 
 
Supervisor​: Jaap Daalhuizen, Assistant Professor, DTU Management Engineering 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Master Thesis in M.Sc. Design & Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Management Engineering 
27/8/2018 - 27/01/2019 
30 ECTS Points 
82 Pages 
27 appendices 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens, s112001 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:3==
 
TABLE OF CONTENT 
ABSTRACT
3 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
4 
MOTIVATION
5 
INTRODUCTION
6 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
6 
INTRODUCTION
7 
LITERATURE REVIEW
8 
ACCEPTANCE OF DRONES
9 
CUSTOMER ENGAGEMENT
1​2 
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
1​4 
TRENDS & CAPABILITIES
1​6 
CONCLUSIONS FROM LITERATURE STUDY
19 
SCOPING
2​0 
THE USE CASE
2​1 
EXPERT INTERVIEWS
2​2 
FEJØ EXPERT INTERVIEW
2​4 
SEJERØ EXPERT INTERVIEW
2​5 
ISLAND EXPERT INTERVIEW CONCLUSION
2​7 
HEARING IN THE DANISH PARLIAMENT
29 
CURRENT FLOW
3​0 
EXPERIENCE
31 
EXPERIENCE JOURNEY METHODOLOGY
3​2 
CURRENT EXPERIENCE FLOW
3​4 
‘DEFINING’ PHASE
3​5 
‘PRE-DELIVERY’ PHASE
3​6 
‘DELIVERY’ PHASE
3​8 
‘PICK-UP’ PHASE
4​1 
‘DISPATCH & RETURN’ PHASE
4​2 
EXPERIENCE INSIGHTS
4​3 
KEY ISSUES
4​5 
PERSONAS
4​7 
ENVISIONED FLOW
50 
THE GENERAL DRONE FRAMEWORK
51 
TOUCHPOINT, ISSUES & OPPORTUNITIES
53 
THE DESIGN
56 
ENRICHING EXPERIENCES WITH NEGATIVE EMOTIONS
5​6 
IDEA GENERATION
5​7 
FINAL DESIGN
5​8 
ROBUSTNESS OF BUSINESS MODEL
67 
CONCEPT EVALUATION
6​9 
DISCUSSION
74 
CONCLUSION
78 
REFERENCES
79 
Page 2 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:4==
 
ABSTRACT 
This thesis takes on the observation that literature, on the subject of delivery drones, does not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
address the issue of user experience. Many of the proposed concepts, concerning delivery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drones, moreover have apparent deficiencies in regards to viability of the use cases. 
Through literature studies, including user studies on the subjects of acceptance and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
engagement of drones, the best practice delivery drone use case is identified. This best practice
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
use case concerns the use in rural areas, where delivery drones are economically viable and with
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lesser risk of posing privacy issues.  
To address the issue of user experience in relation to delivery drones, this thesis designs an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
envisioned experience flow, based on the introduction of delivery drones on small non-bridged
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
islands in Denmark. The experience flow is furthermore altered to include workflows of
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
mailmen, in order to attain an understanding of the interplay between user and delivery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system. To stimulate positive emotions in the experience flow, the theory of rich emotions is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
used for improving user experience in various touchpoint along the journey.  
Finally, after designing and iterating on sub functions to the final proposal, a concept
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
stimulating positive emotions, using the rich emotions theory, is developed. The final concept
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
uses thrilling, eerie and indulging qualities to stimulate emotions of joyfulness, fascination and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
desire throughout touchpoints in the experience journey. 
 
Page 3 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:5==
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
During this thesis I have received valuable help and assistance from several people. First of all, I
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
want to thank my supervisor, Jaap Daalhuizen, for guiding me through the project and for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
being patient with me all the way through. 
Secondly, I want to thank the fantastic people of Fejø and Sejerø for taking time to answer all
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
my curious questions, and for involving me in the island-living. 
Thirdly, I would like to thank the co-working space, Skråplan, for providing coffee and
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
company during the long days, and for making the toughest moments more enjoyable. 
Lastly, I would like to thank my girlfriend, Signe, for taking care of our daughter while I have
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
been working long nights for weeks in a row, and for being patient when I have been raving
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
about drones. 
 
Page 4 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:6==
 
MOTIVATION 
Having followed the technological development of drones, and in particular those for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
commercial purposes, during the author’s time at the Technological University of Denmark,
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
doing a thesis was a natural extension of the interest within this topic. Seeing the different press
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
material from the large players within the delivery drones sector, from a Design & Innovation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
point of view, there is an obvious deficiency in the solutions, and a natural wonder from the
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
author. From the author’s point of view, there are so many questions left unanswered, or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unsolved, in the delivery drone proposals available in public, and this yielded a natural desire
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
for solving these concerns. 
The author is moreover working as a student assistent in a company building mobility
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
solutions based on autonomous mobility. Hence the topic on autonomous vehicles and user
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience has become even more concrete. This adding even more to the interest and wonder
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
within this subject. 
 
Page 5 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
After completion of this master’s thesis, the author has proved that he…: 
 
●
Can identify and reflect on technical scientific issues and understand the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interaction between the various components that make up an issue 
●
Can, on the basis of a clear academic profile, apply elements of current
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
research at international level to develop ideas and solve problems 
●
Masters technical scientific methodologies, theories and tools, and has the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
capacity to take a holistic view of and delimit a complex, open issue, see it
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
in a broader academic and societal perspective and, on this basis, propose a
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
variety of possible actions 
●
Can, via analysis and modelling, develop relevant models, systems and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
processes for solving technological problems 
●
Can communicate and mediate research-based knowledge both orally and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in writing 
●
Is familiar with and can seek out leading international research within my
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specialist area. 
●
Can work independently and reflect on own learning, academic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development and specialization 
●
Masters technical problem-solving at a high level through project work,
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
and has the capacity to work with and manage all phases of a project –
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
including preparation of timetables, design, solution and documentation 
●
Can create and assess an AS-IS journey mapping from synthesized data 
●
Can perform a segmentation of personas from synthesized data 
●
Can create an envisioned journey based on opportunities from the AS-IS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mapping 
●
Can do a validation of the envisioned customer journey with relative
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stakeholders 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:8==
 
INTRODUCTION 
Drones, UAV’s (Unmanned Aerial Vehicles), UAS (Unmanned Aircraft Systems). They are all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expressions of the same thing, and that is unmanned, or remotely piloted, aircrafts with varying
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
size and application. Drones come in all shapes and sizes, ranging in weights from only a few
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
hundred grams to several hundreds of kilograms (Finn & Wright, 2012) and with designs going
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
from a more traditional airplane design to multicopter-designs with helicopter-like looks
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Lidynia et al, 2017). 
Traditionally drones has been associated with military purposes (Clothier et al, 2015) but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
today drones are being used in a wide range of applications.The first drones were build for
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
warfare purposes only and this trend continued in several decades, applying a rather grim
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
reputation to the drone theme (Boucher, 2014). Today drones are still being used for military
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
purposes, but both civil and commercial use of drone applications are on the rise (Lidynia et al,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
2017). Many drones carry cameras for surveillance purposes, and applications for this kind of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
use range from recording extreme sport athletes, documentaries and movie sequences, to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deployment for precision farming, wildlife preservation and search and rescue (Sandbrook,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2015). Furthermore, in the commercial sector, companies plan to deploy drones for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transportation and delivery of goods (Chalupníčková et al, 2014). 
Google, Amazon and DHL have all presented video and image material to the public, with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery drones delivering parcels in various use cases. The use of delivery drones in urban areas
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
is presumably the most talked about and tangible use case, when discussing this form of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery. The envisioned benefits are also many; herein almost instantaneous delivery and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery directly to the doorstep of your house. If the drone-hype is put aside for a short while,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
there are however also some apparent disadvantages for this urban use. Where will the drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
land? If it will land in the back garden, then what if there is a dog - and what about theft? What
     
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
     
   
 
 
 
 
 
will the neighbor think of having a drone fly over his house and what about safety?
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, how will you order the drone and what about parcels for return? These are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questions that seem left unanswered when studying the many delivery drone use cases from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
various companies.  
In the literature today there is a gap in the research on this topic in particular. Focus of
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
previous work within delivery drones has been mainly on the software and hardware aspects.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore recent studies has worked on designing aerial frameworks for drones and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
legislation in Europe, is close to completion. With this in mind drones themselves seem to be
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ready for deployment worldwide, but as a result, the integration of user experience thinking is
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
now more relevant than ever.  
This master thesis will investigate user experience within autonomous delivery drones, herein
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which use case will be feasible in relation to public attitudes and technology. The growing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
trend of using drones in general will lead to the public being more exposed to the technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and that opinions will begin to form - if they not already have. The perception of drones in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
public will be a driving factor in the acceptance of the technology and therefore the attitude
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
towards drones must be taken seriously. This thesis will base its analysis on the development of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an experience flow based on the current delivery situation. Moreover produce an experience
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
flow for the envisioned user journey with the introduction of delivery drones. 
 
Page 7 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:9==
 
LITERATURE 
REVIEW 
This section includes reviews of literature concerning the public acceptance and engagement in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
drones, herein delivery drones. This literature review furthermore researches in the trends and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
capabilities of delivery drones as well as the regulatory framework surrounding the technology.
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The goal is to obtain an understanding of the users’ perception of the technology as well as the
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
capabilities and limitations of drones. 
 
Page 8 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:10==
 
ACCEPTANCE OF DRONES 
GENERAL ATTITUDE 
In a study by Boucher, people of different age, gender and with different social backgrounds
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are put together in two separate focus groups - one in the United Kingdom and one in Italy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Boucher, 2016). The study aims to get an understanding of people’s first impressions on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drones for civil use contexts, as well as explore the boundaries of acceptability and their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development. The study finds that first opinions are often generated by the, so far, relatively
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
few news stories on drones. Based on the few news stories in the media, some participants see
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drones as a nuisance, while others, without reference to the news stories, are concerned about
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
privacy. 
Clothier et al ask 200 participants to rate their immediate feeling when seeing drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology pictured in three different forms (Clothier et al, 2015). The average answer from
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants is 6,26 with the scale ranging from 1-11 - 1 being very negative and 11 being very
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
positive.  
Based on the two studies, people seem to have varying first impression when it comes to drones
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
for civil use applications. Clothier et al moreover finds that people score the statement This
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology is safe 6,19 on average while the statement This technology is beneficial to society
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
scores 6,31. 
In a questionnaire with 200 respondents, Lidynia et al ask participants to evaluate different
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
statements about drones (Lidynia et al, 2017). The study finds that people in general are not
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scared of drones nor are they afraid of drone related injuries. Generally respondents find the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology useful. On the other hand, what participants agree with the most is that it bothers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
them that there are no way to identify whether a drone is filming. Moreover it is generally
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
     
 
agreed on that you do not want a drone to fly over your property. In relation to these
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
agreements, violation of privacy is rated as the most important factor when it comes to civil
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
drone use. Noise along with risk of accidents are rated to be the least important.  
In the Boucher et al study, people also raise concerns on privacy when they are told to bring
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
out their first impression on the drone technology.  
CONTEXT OF USE 
As previously mentioned, drones in civil use contexts have many different applications in a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
wide range of industries. The many applications have an impact on people’s attitude towards
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the technology and affects the desired requirements for use contexts. Lidynia et al do a survey
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
   
 
on approval rates of drones in three different use contexts; hobby, commercial and emergency
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
use. Both random people and drone pilots have answered the survey. When speaking about
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
commercial drones, the average attitude towards form and color is rated neutral. Routes for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
drones for commercial use should however, according to the average of all participants, be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regulated by authorities and the possibility to identify drones should be mandatory. When
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
only looking at the responses from drone pilots, the most noticable differences are in route
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approvals, where drone pilots are more willing to allow free route choice compared to all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants. 
The focus group from the Boucher (2016) study explores the boundaries between acceptable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and unacceptable use of civil drone technology. The participants in the focus groups generally
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
agree on the line between acceptable and unacceptable. Acceptability in applications often
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:11==
 
relies upon who the user is rather than the specific use itself. Users such as police force, military
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
and emergency units are trusted to use drones while private people, according to participants,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should not be allowed drones. The use cases that provide serious social benefits are also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
considered to be acceptable - this is again police and emergency use. Delivery services using
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drones are, in the Boucher (2016) study, by participants seen as unacceptable civil use of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drones. According to participants, delivery drones have insignificant advantages to society and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are therefore seen as unacceptable.  
PRIVACY 
In most literature, on the acceptance of drone technology in the private sector, privacy, and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
impact on the very same, is the big talking point and concern for many respondents.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Participants in surveys, as well as focus groups, are concerned with drones, carrying camera
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology, invading people’s private domain. A statement, regarding the concern on whether
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
you can tell if a drone is filming or not, is the most agreed on in a row of nine questions in the
 
 
     
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
   
 
Lidynia et al study. Furthermore, the statement that participants do not want drones to fly
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
over one’s property is the third most agreed on. 
Although the answers in general are relatively neutral in the Clothier et al study, the most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
commented thing, along with comments about general knowledge on the drone technology, is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
comments on privacy. The comments are on concerns, interests or comments on personal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
privacy, and citizen rights.  
The same concerns are present with participants from the Boucher (2016) study. Here
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants raise concerns of drones being able to invade people’s privacy, and connects drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology with a Big Brother-like feeling. A somewhat contradicting response to the invasion
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
of privacy from drones is brought up by participants. Some agree, that they are actually more
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concerned with the feeling of having their privacy intruded rather than actually having
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
excessive surveillance from drones. Participants will in that respect like drones to be silent in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
order for them not to experience the feeling of having their personal space intruded.  
Kahn & Javed Malik investigates the acceptability by consumers of drones being used for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
package delivery in Pakistan (Kahn & Javed Malik, 2018). In a study with 307 respondents, the
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
only variable that is a major concern for people, when speaking about drones used for delivery,
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is the privacy issue. Safety and the effect on the environment does not have significant impact
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on consumers’ ability to accept delivery drones. The concern about privacy, within drones in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
the private sector, builds upon the drones having the ability to videotape or photograph when
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in use. 
ENVIRONMENT 
The focus groups from the study by Boucher (2016) imagines a scenario in the future where
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
the sky is littered with commercially used drones for various use cases. This concept of the
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
future is generally adopted by participants from the study and seen as something inevitable,
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
but at the same time associated with unease and opposed as a scenario. The full skies vision is,
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
   
by the focus groups, mostly associated with negative themes such as in-air collision and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
invasion of personal space. When being introduced to possible positive impacts from using
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drones in the private sector, most participants meet the vision with scepticism.  
The same concern with the environment is not present in the same degree in other literature.
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lidynia et al describes the risk of accidents and noise as two the least important factors and
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:12==
 
Kahn & Javed Malik also describes the effect on the environment to not hold any significant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
value in relation to accepting delivery drones.  
RESULTS 
In the different studies, people are, in one way or another, questioned about their attitude
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
towards drone technology in the private sector. The general attitude in the different literature
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
has some common factors as described above but do vary in areas. The participants from the
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
United Kingdom and Italian focus groups in the Boucher study are generally very sceptical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
about the technology and the different possible applications hereof. The United Kingdom are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
very exposed to CCTV (Lewis, 2011) and this might explain why the British participants from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a start are very skeptical of something that can be perceived as privacy invading. Besides the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
sceptical view on drones, the study points to the idea that drones for private use should have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different sets of rules depending on the exact use case.  
The Lidynia et al study points to the same thing; that different use cases should have different
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sets of rules. This study generally has more positive feedback from the respondents than the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Boucher (2016) study and one of the highest rated statements is that participants find the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
drone technology useful. Concerns on the impact of privacy is however still a high rated factor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
when it comes to the drone technology.  
In the study by Clothier et al, participants are asked to rate different statements in respect to
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
how positive and negative they are. In this survey, the answers from participants are generally
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
very neutral. This could point to a lack of knowledge by respondents making them unable to
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adequately answer the questions. Like the other studies, this study rate the concern of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
invasion of personal space high.  
The most trending concern, when it comes to accepting drone technology in the private sector,
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
is the issue of having privacy impacted negatively. This issue seems to be the big talking point
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by respondents and participants in the various studies. The general attitude towards drones
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
however, vary throughout the different studies, with one study being very negative, one study
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
being predominantly positive and one being relatively neutral. This could point to several
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
things but knowledge and cultural bias might explain the different responses in the studies. 
The studies that mention the subject of having drones flying over people’s houses do generally
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
agree, that this is unwanted or unacceptable. The Lidynia et al and Kahn & Javed Malik studies
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
     
 
   
 
 
 
suggests that people are not concerned with effects on the environment - included here, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
concern of noise. 
 
Page 11 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:13==
 
CUSTOMER ENGAGEMENT 
Mittendorf et al and Yoo et al investigates the mechanisms for customer engagement in drone
     
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
technology used for delivery services (Mittendorf et al, 2017) (Yoo et al, 2018). The studies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bring forward several hypotheses for customer engagement, based on a range of studies. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
following hypotheses are proposed by the authors. 
PERCEIVED RISK 
Perceived risk, in the use of new technologies, is by Mittendorf et al defined as users’ belief
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
   
 
 
about potential negative outcome of using a new technology. Yoo et al states that the overall
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
perceived risk affects the adoption of new products or services. In the case of drone delivery,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perceived risk might be the potential negative outcomes from failure in technology and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hacking. Yoo et al develops three hypotheses on the basis of perceived risk arguing that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different types of risks can affect the consumer’s adoption of the technology. Like Mittendorf
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
et al, Yoo et al argues that consumers might be concerned with the risk of the technology to fail
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E.g. has a drone malfunctioning, thereby failing to deliver the good. 
Mittendorf et al and Yoo et al both propose hypotheses about people’s willingness to engage in
     
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
drone delivery based on their perceived risk of the technology. 
CONVENIENCE 
The ability to be compatible in the life of consumers might also be a factor motivating users to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
use delivery drones, Yoo et al argues. A low complexity for users, meaning that drone delivery
 
 
 
     
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will be easy to use, is also a factor, similar to convenience, increasing the attitude towards the
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology, according to Yoo et al. Delivery drones are furthermore able to substitute the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
normal everyday ride to grocery shops and alike, hereby creating convenience for users, states
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mittendorf et al.  
Personal innovativeness 
Mittendorf et al also states that some individuals have personality traits making them more
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
willing to try out and experiment with new technologies. As drone deliveries has yet to be put
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into real use, this is something that might push users into engaging in the technology. The
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exact same thing is proposed by Yoo et al.  
RESULTS 
In both studies, hypotheses are tested by doing consumer surveys. Mittendorf et al do a survey
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
   
 
with 116 respondents in Germany and Yoo et al do a study with 296 respondents in the United
 
 
   
 
 
     
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
States. Not all hypotheses have equal support from both studies which may be due to cultural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
differences. Totally, the studies have three areas in which support from consumers are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applicable; perceived risk, convenience, and personal innovativeness. These three factors, along
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with the ones without support, can be seen in the table, where support within the two studies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are presented. 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:14==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mittendorf et al 
Yoo et al 
TRUST 
Supported 
 
PERCEIVED RISK 
Supported 
Supported 
FINANCIAL MOTIVATION 
Not supported 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL ADVANTAGE 
Not supported 
Supported 
ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERN 
 
Not supported 
CONVENIENCE MOTIVATION  
Supported 
Supported 
TIME SAVING MOTIVATION 
Not supported 
Supported 
PERSONAL INNOVATIVENESS 
Supported 
Supported 
MASS MEDIA MOTIVATION 
 
Not supported 
Table 1: Support of customer engagement hypotheses 
 
Page 13 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:15==
 
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK 
The
European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) has issued a proposal for a regulatory
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
framework for the operation of drones in European airspace (EASA, 2015). The proposed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regulatory framework is by january 2019 still not adopted, but is expected to go into action this
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
year (2019). 
EASA proposes a regulatory framework for safe operation of drones, which is based upon
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
drones being separated into three different categories (EASA, 2015). These three categories are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
based on the risk, which the operation poses to third parties and are divided in following
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
classifications: 
●
Open category (low risk) 
●
Specific category (medium risk) 
●
Certified category (high risk) 
Instead of categorizing drones directly upon their shape and capabilities, EASA classifies them
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
based upon the risk, which they pose during operation. A small drone flying over a populated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
area might present a bigger risk, than a large one flying over open water.  
In the open category, the operator must at all times have visual contact with the drone and it
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
must not weigh above 25 kg. Moreover, it cannot fly above 150 meters and it must react to
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
geofencing, which is software or hardware restrictions, that prevents drones from entering
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
certain no-fly zones. If operations with a drone exceeds one of these demands, it will fall into
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
the specific category. In this category operators must perform a risk assessment and mitigate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
any potential risks. Drones in the certified category have requirements comparable to those of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
manned aviation and will likely be implemented under the same rules as those for normal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aircrafts (EASA, 2015). 
This risk assessment in the specific category is based on the Specific Operation Risk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assessment (SORA) methodology as proposed by the Joint Authorities for Rulemaking on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unmanned Systems (JARUS) (La Cour-Harbo, 2018). This SORA is based on the likelihood
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
and effect of potential damages to the following areas: 
●
Harm to 3rd parties on ground 
●
Harm to 3rd parties in air 
●
Damage to infrastructure 
The operation is evaluated upon various points in the above three areas and will receive a
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
so-called Speciﬁc Assurance and Integrity Level (SAIL) risk score depending on the degree of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
risk in the different parts (La Cour-Harbo, 2018). This overall score will in the end determine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
the need for mitigation and preparation, to obtain an acceptable level of risk. Consequently, if
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
drones fly over populated areas, the SAIL score will be high, thus needing a lot of mitigational
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
actions. 
Populated areas might also be specified as no-fly zones These are zones in which drones, for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
various reasons, cannot fly. Zones might be near airports, military grounds or in areas with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
high population density, like bigger cities. No-fly zones are specified in the country of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
operation and not EASA (EASA, 2015).  
 
Page 14 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:16==
 
The Civil Aviation Authority in Singapore (CAAS) has in collaboration with Airbus proposed
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
an idea for airspace navigation of delivery drones, being used for urban last-mile delivery, in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
National University of Singapore (NUS) (AIRBUS, 2017, link). The idea is called Skyways and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
proposes that UAVs should navigate in predefined three-dimensional aerial corridors as seen
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
from image 1.  
CAAS, Airbus and EASA have in july 2018 entered a triplet partnership to collaborate on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
developing a regulatory framework and requirements for UAVs (CAAS, 2018, link). The
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
focus will be on UAVs operating in urban environments as with the Skyways project. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience gained from the Skyways project will be the center of investigation and work. 
 
 
 
Image 1: ​Illustration of the Skyways proposal. (Airbus, link) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:17==
 
TRENDS & CAPABILITIES 
McKinsey foresees that autonomous vehicles and drones in the future will deliver close to 100
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
percent of X2C goods and 80 percent of all items (Joerss et al, 2016). Furthermore, they state
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
that this transformation to autonomous delivery models will happen within the next ten years.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
According to DHL, drones are surrounded with a broad range of opportunities but, at least for
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
delivery drones, enclosed with a whole lot of challenges (DHL, 2014). McKinsey concludes
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that drones for delivery purposes in rural areas are only approximately 10% more expensive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
than today’s delivery models but disadvantages are low weight capacity and large size of long
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
range models. According to McKinsey drones are however less expensive and more feasible for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rural areas than other autonomous delivery models (Joerss et al, 2016). In the DHL report, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
focus is entirely on drones used for logistics solutions. DHL divides drones for logistics into
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
four different subcategories; Urban First- and Last Mile, Rural Delivery, Surveillance of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Infrastructure and Intralogistics. 
URBAN FIRST & LAST MILE  
Urban First- and Last Mile drones could, according to DHL, be one of the solutions for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solving the increased e-commerce growth, and consequently the increased delivery need. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
China alone e-commerce has risen with 120% from 2003 to 2011 (DHL, 2014). McKinsey also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
suggests that increase in parcel deliveries in developed countries, such as Germany and USA,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
could increase from 5 to 25 billion parcels per year from 2015-2025 (Joerss et al, 2016). DHL
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
suggest several use cases for delivery drones - use cases that are already in action as well as future
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
 
possible scenarios. They describe the ideal delivery drone scenario with drones picking up
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
packages, that suit the capabilities and capacity of the drones, at the postal warehouse, to fly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
out delivering the goods at the point of delivery. On the way back, drones might, according to
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DHL, pick up and deliver packages at various points. DHL also mentions the possibility for
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery trucks having a drone connected, allowing them to drop of flying packages outside of
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the normal delivery route. The hardest job for a drone delivery operator will, according to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
DHL, be the first and last meters of the journey. Urban first- and last mile delivery might be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the most tangible use case for delivery drones, but, according to DHL, also the one with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
largest barriers to overcome because of privacy and safety related issues in the urban
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
environment (DHL, 2014). 
 
 
Image 2:​ Google’s Project Wing drone (X, link) 
 
 
Page 16 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:18==
 
RURAL DELIVERIES 
McKinsey suggests that delivery drones would be best suited for use in rural areas, as other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
autonomous technology will be cheaper in urban environments (Joerss et al, 2016). DHL also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
describes the idea of using delivery drones for rural deliveries with poor infrastructure or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
challenging geographical conditions. They describe scenarios such as drones delivering vaccines
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
to remote places, or packages for islands with no fixed link to the mainland. According to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DHL this yields great advantages for weak or non-existing infrastructures like rural Europe or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Africa (DHL, 2014). Exactly the use case of delivering vaccines or goods to remote places is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
what Google tries to solve with their Project Wing (X, link). Project Wing is an autonomous
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
drone system meant for delivering goods for farmers in urgent lack of spare parts, families with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
no food or emergency workers needing medical supplies (Image 2). DHL pursues the same use
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
case as Google, namely having drones delivering goods in rural areas, with their DHL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parcelcopter . It is, according to DHL, still a work in progress (DHL, 2018, link). 
CAPABILITY CHART 
Below is Table 2 with known capabilities of various drones, from different manufacturers,
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
being tested and used at the moment. All of the drones listed below are either in a pilot-project
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
phase or a simple testing phase. 
 
 
Payload capacity 
Range 
Speed 
DHL PARCELCOPTER 4.0 
6 kg 
100 km 
240 km/h 
AMAZON PRIME AIR 
2,3 kg 
32 km 
80 km/h 
GOOGLE PROJECT WING 
1,5 kg 
28 km 
120 km/h 
MCKINSEY PREDICTION 
5 kg 
 
 
ZIPLINE 
 
160 km 
 
JD.COM Y3 
5-10 kg 
10 km 
72 km/h 
JD.COM VTOL (V2) 
5-10 kg 
100 km 
100 km/h 
JD.COM CT120 
30 kg 
30 km 
54 km/h 
Table 2:​ Capabilities of different delivery drones (JD.com, 
2016), (DHL, 2018, link), (X, link), (Joerss et al, 2016), 
(Zipline, link), (Forbes, 2016, link) 
RESULTS 
When combining the findings from the literature study on trends and capabilities of delivery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drones, it is obvious that there are many similarities between the different reports and articles.
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deliveries in urban areas seem to be the most mentioned use case when talking delivery drones,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
but from both DHL’s (DHL, 2014) and McKinsey’s (Joerss et al, 2016) point of view,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applying UAV’s for delivery in these surroundings pose several issues. Privacy and safety are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the biggest concerns according to DHL (DHL, 2014), where McKinsey (Joerss et al, 2016)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
suggests that delivery drones might not be the cheapest solution for urban first- and last mile
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deliveries. 
Page 17 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:19==
 
Both DHL (DHL, 2014), Google (X, link) and McKinsey (Joerss et al, 2016) suggests that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rural deliveries might have excellent use cases for delivery drones, as they are more cost effective
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
and require less developed infrastructure compared to traditional delivery models. Google (X,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
link) and DHL (DHL, 2014) suggests that delivery drones might be used for bringing out
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
medicine, or to be used for other emergencies but both DHL (DHL, 2014) and McKinsey
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Joerss et al, 2016) believes that drones could support ordinary parcel logistics in these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conditions. 
In regards to limitations in the technical aspect of drones, as seen from the chart, there are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drones for a wide range of use. The large range on many of the drones make them usable in a
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
wide range of use cases, and their speed could make them quicker than today’s means of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transportation. Weight carrying capabilities are limited to a maximum of 30 kg, meaning that
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
the largest of goods cannot be transported. 5-10 kilograms can however be assumed to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enough for carrying most of the parcels being shipped around.  
 
 
 
Page 18 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:20==
 
CONCLUSIONS FROM LITERATURE STUDY 
The study on acceptance of drones has shown varying results but with common denominators.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The issue regarding privacy concerns, when having drones flying above people or private plots,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is the most noticeable when going through literature - and possibly the concern to be taken
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
most seriously. Even the studies that are yielding the most positive results raise the concern on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
privacy. When looking at the general attitude towards drones, results from studies vary. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
might be due to cultural bias or different degrees of knowledge on the subject. It could
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
however also point to the idea that people are divided on the subject of drones and that this is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
something with multiple perceptions throughout the community.  
The literature also describes and provides several possible solutions to, how people get engaged
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in drone delivery. The studies do not agree in all mechanisms for customer engagement in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drone technology used for delivery services, but three things they do agree on. How customers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perceive the risk of using delivery drones is one of the agreed factors in user engagement. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
concludes that customers must view delivery drone systems as reliable for them to engage in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
technology. Another important factor, according to literature, is the motivation of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
convenience when using the technology. If delivery drones are complex to use, and do not fit
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into the life of the user, then people will not engage. Lastly, some people are motivated by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
testing and trying out new technologies which, as delivery drones has yet to be put into action,
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
might generate engagement. Personal innovativeness is hereby the third motivator for creating
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
user engagement in delivery drones according to literature.  
Regarding legislation on drone use, regulatory frameworks are under construction in Europe.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In Europe a so-called specific category for commercially used drones is under development, in
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
which UAV’s with high risk use cases are to be regulated. This category does however allow
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drones to exceed normal limits of operation, opening up for UAV’s to be used in various, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
widespread, use cases. As development of these regulations is still in progress, and since the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
legislation has never been used, it is not specific what kind of use will be allowed or how
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
operations will be carried out. The Civil Aviation Authority of Singapore and Airbus do
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
however, in a joint partnership, propose the idea of using flight corridors for drones being used
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in logistics.  
DHL and McKinsey also describes drones being used for logistics when investigating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
commercial drone trends. Drones being used for delivery in urban places seem to be the most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mentioned use case in drone logistics, but according to both DHL and McKinsey this might
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not be the best. Instead the studies focus on drones being used for logistics in rural areas, where
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
they accordingly are more suitable and cheaper. 
 
Page 19 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
SCOPING 
The purpose of this section is firstly to define the use case shaping the basis for this thesis.
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Secondly the aim is to conduct qualitative research to gain an understanding of the issues and
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
obtain insights in the experiences related to the use case. The goal for this part is to provide
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
enough data, along with the literature study, to enable analysis of the existing situation. 
 
Page 20 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:22==
 
THE USE CASE 
When talking about delivery drones, the most tangible use case, and the use case most people
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would think of, is the one using drones for deliveries in urban areas. This would be first and
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
last mile deliveries in cities. When studying literature on user acceptance of drones, as well as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
best practice studies for delivery UAVs, this use case, with drones being used for urban
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deliveries, has several serious challenges.  
In studies on user acceptance of drones, the biggest issue for people is privacy. People are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
concerned about having their privacy invaded, if drones should potentially fly over one’s
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
property. It is the concern over potentially being filmed and surveilled if a drone flies over
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
private property, that puts people off when discussing drones. Urban areas are densely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
populated, with people living close to each other, and does not have wide spread open areas.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Because of this dense population, the risk of having people’s privacy invaded is great, and it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
might be difficult to operate drones for large scale delivery without raising concerns over
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
privacy.  
The idea, proposed by CAAS and Airbus (Airbus, 2017, link), concerning the use of flight
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
corridors, limiting drones to certain “skyways”, might however be a solution to this problem.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Flight corridors could potentially be positioned in areas without dense population or even
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
above large roads or highways. This could potentially limit commercial drones to areas within
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an urban environment, where privacy would not be as important. Limiting drones to these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
flight corridors does however pose another problem for the use of delivery drones. The idea of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
having drones for delivery purposes is based upon several advantages, of which one is the
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
ability to be flexible. This flexibility could however be compromised if drones are limited to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
flying in certain flight corridors.  
In the literature both DHL (DHL, 2014) and McKinsey (Joerss et al, 2016) argues for delivery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
drones to be used in rural areas as a best practice use case. Deliveries using drones in urban
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
areas, will, according to McKinsey (Joerss et al, 2016), not be economically viable compared to
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other ways of delivery, such as ground based autonomous vehicles. Rural deliveries using
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drones are however, according to McKinsey (Joerss et al, 2016), economically viable and even
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
cheaper than other autonomous delivery forms. Furthermore, according to DHL (DHL,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2014), drones seem to suit this geography because of underdeveloped infrastructure and large
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distances between people and greater cities. 
The legal aspect also conflicts with this use case in some ways. The law, soon to be adopted by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EASA, permits the flight in cities, if there are no no-fly zones, but because of the greater risk,
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more mitigating measures need to be made. If mitigating actions however do not reduce the
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SAIL score to an acceptable level, the SORA (La Cour-Harbo, 2018) risk assessment cannot be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
passed. On the other hand might a high number of mitigating measures complicate and limit
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
operation, to a degree where it is pointless.  
 
With these findings in mind, this thesis will focus on the best practice use case of using delivery
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drones for parcel deliveries in rural areas. This decision is based upon the assumption, that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
large scale deliveries, with drones in urban areas, are surrounded with so many barriers that it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
might not be a common practise in countries such as Denmark. Challenges with things such as
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
privacy is simply too big for it to be a viable case. 
Page 21 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:23==
 
The logistics companies have their own definition of rural areas - or so called remote areas.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
DHL defines a remote area as a place that is “difficult to serve” (DHL, 2019). Thus in this
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thesis the use of drones in rural areas is the use of drones for deliveries in areas that are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
otherwise difficult to serve.  
In Denmark, rural areas are defined on the basis of income per capita in a given municipality
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
and on the distance to the closest bigger city. Approximately 940.000 people live in rural areas
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
in Denmark which in total is 23 municipalities
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
and 27 small islands placed around the country
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Erhvervsstyrelsen, link).  
 
The most difficult areas to serve, and areas that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are very remote compared to most other places
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in Denmark, are presumably the 27 small
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
non-bridged islands in Denmark (Image 3).
 
 
 
 
 
 
These islands all have a population smaller
 
 
 
   
 
 
than 1200 people and some as low as 8 (SaDS,
 
 
 
 
   
     
 
link). There are people living on the islands all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
year round, they are all non-bridged and can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
only be reached by ferry or boat. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
assumption for this thesis is, that these islands
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are able to represent rural areas, in the sense
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that they are remote, has poor infrastructure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and a low population.  
 
Image 3:​ 27 small Danish non-bridged islands 
(SaDS, link) 
EXPERT INTERVIEWS 
The 27 small islands in Denmark representing rural areas, as described in previous section,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should be investigated in order to get a better understanding of the islands themselves and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people living there. Therefore two interviews with island representatives has been conducted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Appendix 1, 2, 3, 4). The two island representatives are assumed to be experts in the island
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where they live and its residents. This means that they are questioned as experts and not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
individuals.  
The idea behind the expert interviews is to investigate the details about the islands, and the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people living there, in relation to parcel deliveries and drone acceptance. The idea is to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
investigate the areas having an effect on parcel deliveries and drone acceptance, but not the two
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subjects directly. By not asking questions directly on the given subjects, the interviews are able
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to dig deeper and get a broader understanding on what is important.  
In preparation to the interviews with the island representatives, the two themes, parcel
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deliveries and drone acceptance, has been mapped out. On the mapping, areas having an effect
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on the aforementioned themes are identified. An ordinary brainstorm has been done in order
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
to discover research areas associated with parcel delivery and drone acceptance. These areas can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be seen on the illustrations. 
Page 22 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:24==
 
For the subject, parcel deliveries, both personal life and work life have an effect on the way
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people on the non-bridged islands receive packages. If either work- or personal lives require
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
people to leave the island then they might change parcel delivery habits accordingly. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
might be due to changes in delivery locations or the fact that people in these cases might visit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bigger cities more often. Relationships in work- or personal lives might also affect the way
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parcels are delivered, due to the possibility of other people interacting in one’s parcel delivery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
journey. Infrastructure could likely, also have an effect on the way people on these islands
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
receive parcels. Distances between locations, accessibility to homes on the island in general, or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
effects on infrastructure from changes in weather or seasons, could all affect the way parcels are
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivered and received. Lastly, shopping habits, of the island residents, could have an effect on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parcel deliveries. This might be due to online shopping tendencies, choice of grocery shops, or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tendencies to visit larger shopping malls or centres (Figure 1).  
 
 
Figure 1: ​Themes associated with parcel delivery 
 
Also for the subject on drone acceptance, several areas might affect the way people on the small
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
non-bridged islands relates. The way that people act around one another, both in relation to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
privacy but also how they socialize, could have an effect on drone acceptance. Culture in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relation to socialization might have an effect in how island residents perceive noise from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
surroundings. E.g. if you know your neighbor, you might be more forgiving if he makes noise.
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
As described in the literature study, studies conclude that privacy is a major factor in people’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
   
 
view on drones and their use. Therefore, this privacy factor is likely to also have an effect on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
how people on these islands view drones. The way that people view the environment, and how
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they relate to new technology, might also have an effect on how drones will be accepted. In the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
literature study on user acceptance of delivery drones, personal innovativeness is found to have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
a positive effect on how good people accept drones. The way people on the island relates to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
new technology is therefore likely to have an effect on how they would adopt drones. Lastly,
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people’s view on the environment will likely have an effect on the acceptance of drones.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Drones make noise and are visible in the air, meaning that the way people think of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
environment, and how much they appreciate it, will affect their attitude towards the drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology. The mapped out drone acceptance can be seen on Figure 2.  
The idea behind the interviews has been to ask questions on the listed subjects above, in order
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
to obtain an understanding on the things, that might have an effect on the two themes; parcel
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:25==
 
deliveries and drone acceptance. The interview is done in a semi-structured way (Boeijen et al,
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
2012) allowing for the interview to move in different directions depending on what the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interviewee finds important. This way, areas that have not been thought of before the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interview, but still might be important, can be described and examined. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: ​Themes associated with parcel delivery 
 
FEJØ EXPERT INTERVIEW 
The interview (Appendix 2) with the island representative of Fejø, Kasper Tøgern, was done
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on Fejø in the house of Kasper. Kasper is a Fejø-expert and the questions for him are based on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the subjects related to drone acceptance and parcel delivery. 
Fejø has a population of about 450 people and is not connected to the mainland with a bridge.
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Instead people have to take the ferry, which takes about 15 minutes each way and has around
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 departures per day. The people living on the island of Fejø are on average older than the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
general population in Denmark, but the number is decreasing because of the newcomers
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
moving to the island. The newcomers are often young people and generally people from bigger
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cities. Elderly care can be difficult on the island and Kasper tells that the municipality at some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
point tried to cut time. According to Kasper, the inhabitants on Fejø vote almost exactly the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
same as the country average. The island has its own school, which kids attend until 6th grade
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and additionally a small grocery store, its own doctor and postman.  
People move to the island to escape the city life, to get some peace and have the nature close by.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In general people living on Fejø care about the environment and they are concerned with it. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
the night, city light are turned off in the city, because people like the black night sky and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
silence.  
 
“People wants the nature and the peace and quiet - that is why they live
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
here.”  
- Kasper 
 
Page 24 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:26==
 
Some of the new people moving to the island, often the ones from the cities, are very much
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into the environment and ecology. Some of the residents grow their own vegetables to be self
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
supplying - something they would not be able to do in the city. The grocery shop has spotted
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this trend with people on the island valuing ecology and therefore has adapted to sell both
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bio-meat and bio-vegetables. 
 
“People on the island are generally concerned with things that can make
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
living easier, smarter and preferably greener.” 
 - Kasper 
 
The inhabitants on the island of Fejø are generally very connected to each other and quite
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sociable. They always greet each other when meeting on the road and it seems like all know
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
what is happening on the island.  
 
“A baby was just born!” 
 - Kasper 
 
There are several clubs on the island dealing with different things - like the wooden boat club.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
The island has its own residents’ association where they discuss what is important in relation to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
living on the island; internet connection, ferry plan, social events etc. This association also have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a board which speaks on the behalf of the inhabitants, when communicating with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stakeholders. Furthermore, the island has its own mailing list where people can communicate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with each other and ask for help or assistance if needed. Inhabitants often bring food or alike
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the mainland to their fellow islanders if needed. 
Around 50% of the working people on Fejø work on the mainland and around the other half
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
work on the island. It is approximately 50-100 people in both cases. The people working off
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the island most often work in the bigger cities surrounding the island. Those people need to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
take the ferry to and from work every day and so do the school children from 6th grade and up.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
On the island, people work on the big fruit farms, they work at the psychiatric rehabilitation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
centre located on the island, at the school and grocery store and they work as artists and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
craftsmen. 
Most often the people on the island buy few groceries in the island grocery store, but shop big
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the bigger cities on the mainland. The people working off the island shops in the bigger
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stores on the mainland, like Netto, after work. The people working on Fejø do however not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have the same possibility but instead go to the mainland by ferry one or two times per week to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shop in the bigger and cheaper grocery stores. The aforementioned mailing list is also used if
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
people need something from the mainland, but are not going anytime soon. Then people write
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on the mailing list, asking if anyone is on the mainland anyway. This often works out. Lastly
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the local grocery store offers to bring groceries to elderly with poor mobility, living on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
island. 
SEJERØ EXPERT INTERVIEW 
The interview (Appendix 3 & 4) with the island representative of Sejerø, Lone Nielsen, was
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
done on Sejerø in Lone’s private home. Like Kasper, Lone is an expert in the island where she
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
lives, and the questions for her are the same as for Kasper. 
Page 25 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:27==
 
Sejerø has a population of around 350 permanent residents and approximately 500 vacation
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
homes spread around the island. This means that, depending on the time of the year, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
amount of people being on the island can vary quite a bit. The island of Sejerø is placed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
Northwest of the island of Zealand and lies in the municipality of Kalundborg. The island can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
only be reached by ferry, which departs from each side of the island 4-5 times per day. The trip
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
takes approximately one hour. In the summer period, where the island is most visited, the ferry
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
departs 5 times per day but this is cut down to 4 times in the winter - a time where it is not rare
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
   
 
     
 
     
 
 
for the ferry to be cancelled due to bad weather. The island do however have its own snow
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
clearing meaning that infrastructure on the island itself is not damaged even though winter
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
weather is bad.  
The people living on the island has a quite high average age and most newcomers to the island
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are pensionists and elderly. Most often the people moving to the island have started owning a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
vacation home, but move there permanently when they stop working. It is not often that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
people with kids move there but sometimes it happens. 
 
“We have actually had a family with kids move here a year ago!” 
 - Lone 
 
According to Lone it is okay for the community that most people moving to the island are
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly, because most often these people are socially strong and very willing to participate in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
island community and social life. That the average age on the island is quite high is clearly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
expressed when talking about ferry booking, which is often done ‘the old way’. 
 
“The elderly still books the ferry on the phone - not through the internet.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
They do not know how to do it.”  
- Lone 
 
Sejerø has its own school where children can stay through 7th grade. Hereafter they need to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
continue in 8th and 9th grade on boarding schools somewhere else. Other than a school, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
island has an elderly home, its own emergency service and a grocery shop, where people buy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
their groceries. It is not common that people shop off the island, because of the relatively long
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
trip to the mainland. For christmases the islanders sometimes go to the mainland to buy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presents, and other christmas related things, but most often people stick to the island - either in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
the local grocery shop or online shopping. 
Only 1-2 people of the total 350 permanent residents on Sejerø works off the island. The rest
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the employable residents work on the island; typically with either agriculture, as workers, in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
the grocery shop, school, childrens place or elderly home. The small amount of people working
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
off the island is also one of the reasons why it is not common to shop on the mainland.
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Generally people do not go on the mainland unless they have something important to do E.g.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
having a dentist or hospital appointment or going to visit family. 
 
“If you do not have a dentist or hospital appointment then there are no real
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reason to go.” 
- Lone 
 
The island have a strong community with several different clubs dealing with interests of the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
islanders, as well as working on solving problems, issues or shortcomings. Besides the social
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:28==
 
clubs, the island has an island council in which important subjects are discussed. The most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
talked about subjects for the meetings are infrastructure, the ferry, housing and newcomers,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the island harbour. On the island there is a general understanding that the municipality of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kalundborg does not do enough for the Sejerø and this is why islanders themselves work and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
fight for their needs and wishes. This has evolved into some kind of do-it-yourself culture with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a distrust to the municipality. 
 
“If something needs to be done, you have to do it yourself. The municipality
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
does not help.”  
 
“We just raised 5 million from Realdania for renovating the harbour”  
 
“Our road man has been cut to only working a half day per day instead of
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
full time some years ago”  
- Lone 
 
The community also gathers to help out individual people if they are in need of help. Some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
years ago a farmer living on the island hurt his back and were unable to work in his fields. To
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
help out the farmer the community got together and formed a group to help do the work in his
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
fields.  
These close relations between islanders living on Sejerø also leads to some form of gossip on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
island. If you do something bad or makes a mistake, then you can be sure that the community
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will let you know. According to Lone however, the gossip is not necessarily a bad thing but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
more a sign of the community caring and being interested in one another. 
 
“Many people say there are a lot of gossip in small communities - but
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
sometimes it is positive. It does not have to be negative when talking to each
     
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
other - it could be to help out.”  
- Lone 
 
ISLAND EXPERT INTERVIEW CONCLUSION 
The data from the interviews, with the island expert of Fejø and Sejerø concerning the islands’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and residents’ characteristics, are assumed to be representative for all of the danish small islands
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the Association of Danish Small Islands. All islands have a relatively small population and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
are all non-bridged (SaDS, link), meaning that they are not physically connected to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mainland. Generally, the islands also have a higher average age than the mainland in Denmark
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
(Juul & Steiner, 2017). Both of the islands are situated near Zealand but Sejerø is positioned
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
substantially further away from the mainland than Fejø. Still though, the islands’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
characteristics are very close to each other. 
The average age on the two islands are respectively 58 and 55 years (Juul & Steiner, 2017). In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
comparison the overall Danish average is 42,5 years (Juul & Steiner, 2017). This is a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
substantially higher average age than the country average and actually some of the highest ages
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in Denmark. The two islands do furthermore have a quite small population with Sejerø having
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
344 permanent residents and Fejø having 462 (SaDS, link). In the interview with the island
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
representative of Fejø, Kasper mentions that Fejø also positions itself very close to the country
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:29==
 
average every time there is an election. A research (Danmarks Statistik, 2015) confirms what
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kasper told at the interview and also shows that Sejerø has similar voting tendencies - close to
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
the country average. The islands have none, or close to none, population growth but the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people, who actually does move to the islands, do it because they want the peace and quiet
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
away from the big cities. 
Both islands have a very social community with everyone knowing everybody. This is expressed
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
in the high amount of social clubs on the islands and the fact that island residents help out each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other if one is in need. These social tendencies are also present in the way islanders work
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
together to solve island problems or improve general island living. This is something that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
respective municipalities accordingly do not contribute with and cuts in services are recurring.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
This means that islands have somewhat of a do-it-yourself culture, where things are taking care
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of ‘in-house’. Especially infrastructure and ferry-services are something that islanders are very
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concerned with and continually work on improving. 
Boiled down the island characteristics are as follows: 
ISLAND CHARACTERISTICS 
 
●
Average age: 56,3 years (country average: 42,5 years) 
●
Political point of view: Almost identical to country average 
●
Occupation: Pensionist, vocational education or middle-level higher
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
education 
●
Fejø: 462 permanent resident, Sejerø: 344 permanent residents. 
●
High number of clubs and associations 
●
Very tight and social community 
●
Do it yourself culture with municipality distrust 
●
Inhabitants want peace and quiet living 
●
Inhabitants value nature 
●
Repeating topics for discussion: ferry and infrastructure 
●
Recurring cuts in island services. 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:30==
 
HEARING IN THE DANISH PARLIAMENT 
The hearing in the danish parliament took place in 2016 and was initiated because of postal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery difficulties and problems on the member islands of the Association of Danish Small
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Islands (ULØ, 2016). All 27 islands in the association were asked to describe the postal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
difficulties on the respective islands, and out of the 27, 18 gave their opinion.  
At the time of which this master thesis is written, the hearing is two years old and one could
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
questions it’s relevance. In order to confirm or disprove the relevance of the data, the secretary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the Association of Danish Small Islands has been contacted (Appendix 5). For this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
confirmation, the secretary leader, Lise Thillemann Sørensen, is assumed to be an expert in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
islands of which she works for. Lise lives on one of the islands herself and deals with the 27
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
islands and their interests on a daily basis. As seen in Appendix 5, Lise is asked to give her
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
opinion on the hearing and its relevance today and she confirms that the issues and problems
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emerged from the hearing are still existing and relevant. This confirmation from an expert on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the topic enables the data to be used for this thesis, even though two years has passed since the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hearing. 
At the time of the hearing (ULØ, 2016), the Danish Parliament had just increased the allowed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
time of delivery on regular mail to danish households (TV2 Nyheder, 2016, link). This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regulatory change and decrease in postal service has quite certainly also led to more complaints
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the danish small islands, as they have from all over Denmark, but not all difficulties
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
originates from this change in law.  
After confirmation of the relevance of the data from the hearing, the Secretary Lead, Lise,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
noted, that at some islands, postal delivery difficulties have worsened (Appendix 5). Because of
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the aforementioned regulatory change, two islands, Hjarnø and Nekselø, do not receive any
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mail to the islands at all. Instead the two islands each have a mailbox situated at the mainland
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
harbour, where all mail is delivered to. It is the islands’ own responsibility and job to pick up
 
 
 
   
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the mail, which naturally requires a journey by boat. 
Of the 18 islands giving their opinion in the hearing, 11 have problems or difficulties with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
postal service on the islands (ULØ, 2016). One of the themes of issues being mentioned by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
several of the islands has to do with the geography. Because of the geography and infrastructure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the non-bridged small islands in Denmark, the logistics related to servicing the residents are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different from that on the mainland, leading to problems and difficulties in the deliveries.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
These problems are in turn experienced by the island residents.  
 
The statements and issues expressed in this hearing (ULØ, 2016) is the foundation for research
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
on delivery difficulties on the small non-bridged islands. The concrete experiences and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
problems will be discussed in the coming section.  
 
 
Page 29 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
CURRENT FLOW 
In this part all data from the previous sections are used for analyzing the problems and issues
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
related to the postal system on the small non-bridged islands. The analysis is conducted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
through the development of an experience journey, and thus the concept of experience will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also be discussed. As a result of the analysis, personas summarising the needs and values of the
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
users are presented. Finally, the key issues related to the use case will be introduced. 
When reading this section, Poster 1 can throughout be used as visual representation of the
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analysis and findings.  
 
Page 30 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:32==
 
EXPERIENCE 
When talking experience, Desmet & Hekkert define product experience as all experiences in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
human-product interactions (Desmet & Hekkert, 2007). The human-product interactions are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not only the physical interactions, but also non-physical interactions, like thinking of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
product. It might also be instrumental interactions, which is physical interactions that do not
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
directly operate the product - a thing like playing with a pencil for de-stressing. When talking
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
about experience itself, Desmet & Hekkert propose a model for mapping out different
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
experiences. On the circumplex model, pleasantness, which ranges from unpleasant to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pleasant, is mapped horizontally, and arousal, ranging from activated to calm, is mapped
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
vertically (Figure 3).  
 
 
Figure 3: ​Circumplex model of core affect with product 
relevant emotions. (Desmet & Hekkert, 2007) 
 
All
emotions
relevant
for
product
experience
is
mapped
in
the
model
on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pleasantness/arousal scale and can range in power from the most neutral, in the center of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
model, to the most powerful in the outer edges of the model. These emotions are defined as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
core affects and changes in these, caused by human-product interactions, are what is defined as
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
product experience. There are three types of product experience which are all integrated in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
user-product interaction. These are aesthetic experience, the experience of meaning and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emotional experience of the product - all intertwined and related to one another (Figure 4).
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The aesthetic experience is defined by the visual and sonic look and feel of a product, where the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
experience of meaning is things like associations, interpretations and symbolic significance of a
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
product. The emotional experience is the emotions like hate, fear, love and desire which are all
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the interpretation by a single person.   
For a product to be used as intended and for it to be adopted and be operational for the user,
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the product must be usable. The usability of a product is directly linked to the product
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
experience, hence the three levels of experience - aesthetic, meaning and emotional - must be
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
considered when designing a product or a service for it to work in the specific context. The
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experiences can however only be considered if they can be placed in the correct context and
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with the relevant users. 
 
Page 31 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
 
“Experience is not a property of the product but the outcome of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
human-product interaction, and therefore dependent on what temporal and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dispositional characteristics the user brings into the interaction.”  
- Desmet & Hekkert, 2007 
 
What Desmet & Hekkert say is that because people are different, it is important that a product
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
     
 
   
 
or service is designed with respect to the potential user group. This is why an analysis, as
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
described in previous chapters, is necessary work before initiating the real design process. 
 
 
Figure 4: ​Framework of product experiences. (Desmet & 
Hekkert, 2007) 
 
EXPERIENCE JOURNEY METHODOLOGY 
As described in the introduction, the goal for this project is to design a new experience journey
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
for island residents needing postal service in the form of autonomous delivery drones. In order
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to discover opportunities for creating better experiences in the journey, the current journey of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the postal service needs to be analyzed. As described in previous section, the current way of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery is different from that on the mainland, due to the non-bridged islands’ geography and
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
infrastructure. The main difference is the fact that these islands have no physical connection to
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the mainland, meaning that they can only be reached by boat. Also the fact that many islands
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have a resident and well-known mailman differentiate island postal logistics from that on the
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mainland.  
To analyze the existing situation, the current experience journey, for postal services on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
non-bridged small islands, is mapped out from the point of view of the island residents.  
In relation to the customer decision journey, or simply customer journey, the experience
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
journey maps experiences within a given domain, which might consist of several organizations,
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rather than only the relationships between customers and a specific service (Kalbach & James,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
2016). In experience journeys interactions with stakeholders, which are not directly linked to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:34==
 
the product or service, are included because of the possibility that these relationships could
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have an indirect effect on the interplay between people and product or service. 
The method for doing the experience journey is the Philips Experience Flow mapping (Philips,
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
2014). The tool of Experience Flow mapping by Philips was initially developed for a improving
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
patient experience, by using of ambient lighting technology, in a medical center in the United
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
States. Today the tool is still used by Philips to create holistic user experience designs in
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hospitals around the world, but is however suitable for mapping out experience in other
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
complex service systems than healthcare. The Experience flow mapping provides a holistic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
image of the entire stakeholder experience and helps identify opportunities for experience
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design at different touchpoint along the journey (Image 4). 
 
 
Image 4:​ Philips experience flow by Philips 
 
In the experience flow, the interactions between user and service are described as touchpoints.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
After the making of the experience flow, these touchpoint can be analyzed to discover
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
opportunities, in which user experiences can be improved, and users be influenced directly. 
In the Philips Experience Flow there are no real guidelines to how the experiences should be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mapped out or how experiences and organizations/stakeholder should interact in the mapping.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Neither which data to include. Therefore it must be an assessment by the designer, what data is
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
relevant for the specific experience journey and thereby what to include in the mapping.  
Other than mapping the aforementioned experience flow, in relation to the postal deliveries on
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
the islands, the workflow of the people handling deliveries will also be mapped out. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workflow will be mapped out with the different processes of the work of the mailmen, and will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
help to get a better understanding of the delivery system. This understanding will in turn
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provide knowledge to show where there will be room for improvements in the delivery process.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
Furthermore, this workflow mapping will indicate how the introduction of a delivery drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
can affect the system and in which way it should be implemented.  
 
The data for the mapping originates from the stakeholder research; the user studies, interviews
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and other research collected in the scoping phase of the project. This data put together
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provides the full picture of the context in which the project moves. For this project the data
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
originates from the interviews with island representatives (Appendix 2, 3 & 4) the data from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
the hearing in the Danish Parliament (ULØ, 2016), interview with logistics company employee
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Appendix 6 & 7), interview with Secretary Leader of the Association of Danish Small Islands
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Appendix 5) and various data from desktop research.  
Page 33 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:35==
 
CURRENT EXPERIENCE FLOW 
IN GENERAL 
Overall, the experience flow for the current situation is divided in four different sections; the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
actual experience flow, for users of postal services on small non-bridged islands, the delivery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workflow for mail distributors, and the sections with associated experience insights (Poster 1).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In addition to these three sections there is a small section with info boxes and personas. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workflow is separated in different locations, going from top to bottom, where the top is the
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
island and the bottom is the mainland, furthest away from the island. Furthermore, going from
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
left to right, the experience and workflow moves through a timeframe, beginning at the left
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
and ending at the right.  
Experience insights are grouped in a way that they are representative of different parts of the
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
journey E.g. ‘Defining’ phase or ‘Dispatch & Return’ phase. Beneath each experience insight,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
representative cites from different research are presented. Lastly, workflow insights from a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
logistics company are given - also representative of different phases in the journey.  
The delivery workflow consists of different scenarios of delivery, with different actors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
performing the task. Overall in the workflow, there are seven different actors handling delivery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of mail to the small non-bridged islands. There are four different actors from PostNord
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
handling daily mail, newspapers and magazines, two different from parcel delivery companies,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
like GLS or UPS, and one actor from a parcel shop situated on an island. In brief the mailmen
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are as follows. 
 
Resident Mailman 1: This mailman is an employee with PostNord and
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
distributes daily deliveries of mail and parcels to households on islands. A
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
mainland mailman ships the mail, by boat, to the resident mailman who in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
turn pick it up at the island harbour. Because of this dependency, the
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mailman is affected by delays of the mainland mailmen and/or ferry.  
 
Resident Mailman 2: This mailman is also an employee with PostNord
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
and distributes daily deliveries of mail and parcels to households on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
islands. This mailman is not having mail shipped to the island but instead
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
picks it up on the mainland. Therefore the mailman is required to travel
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
back and forth with the ferry to the mainland, as well as needing to drive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
to and from the mail logistics centre. Needless to say, this is a time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
consuming journey with many possibilities for errors or delays.  
 
Mainland Mailman 1: This mailman is likewise an employee with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PostNord and distributes daily deliveries of mail and parcels to households
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on islands. This mailman lives on the mainland and picks up mail at the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
mainland post terminal before departing for the island. Like Resident
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mailman 2, this mailman is required to travel back and forth with the ferry
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the mainland. Again, something which is both time consuming and
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
with many possibilities for errors or delays.  
 
Page 34 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:36==
 
Mainland Mailman 2: This is the last mailman who is an employee with
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
PostNord. Opposite to the above mailmen, this mailman does not deliver
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mail to island households but instead has a mainland route with one of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
stops being the ferry harbour. At the ferry harbour this mailman delivers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the island mail which in return is shipped to Resident Mailman 1 by the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
ferry.  
 
Parcel Logistics Delivery Guy 1: This mailman, or delivery guy, is an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
employee with one of the Parcel Logistics Companies like GLS, UPS og
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DHL. This mailman does not deliver parcels on the islands, but instead
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drops off island deliveries at parcel pick-up spots, for island residents to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pick up themselves, or on the island harbour in a shed, for a mailman
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
colleague, or island parcel shop keeper, to pick up.  
 
Parcel Logistics Delivery Guy 2: This mailman, is also an employee
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
with the Parcel Logistics Companies GLS. This delivery guy handles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
household distributed deliveries on islands, when enough parcels have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been collected by Parcel Logistics Delivery Guy 1 at the mainland
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
harbour. Consequently this is not a trip being undertaken every day. Like
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
above mentioned mailmen, this mailman is required to travel back and
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
forth with the ferry to the mainland. Again, something which is both time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
consuming and with many possibilities for errors or delays. Furthermore,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this parcel delivery guy only delivers to a few island households, making
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
the trip even more laborious compared to the number of deliveries.  
 
Island Parcelshop-keeper: This is more of a mail distributor than an
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
actual mailman. This island parcel shop operates like the ones on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mainland, where
island residents can pick up parcels, typically being
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivered with GLS. Where this differs from mainland parcel shops is that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
the Island Parcel-Shopkeeper needs to pick up mail on the mainland him-
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
or herself. This implies that the Island Parcelshop-keeper is required to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
travel back and forth with the ferry to the mainland where parcels are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
picked up at the mainland harbour.  
 
There are four different triggers in the experience flow, setting of different journeys and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workflows in the overall use case. One trigger sets off the journey of having regular mail sent to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the mailbox at a user household. The trigger can be set off in different scenarios E.g.
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subscribing to bank, insurance company, or simply existing in the modern society can trigger
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the event of having mail sent to the house of a user. To elaborate, this is mail sent to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
household of a user, and it is mail being sent automatically every day or on a regular basis.
 
   
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Typically it is invoices, notifications or messages from stakeholders associated with users, or
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mail from the municipality, state or alike.  
The second trigger is a user subscribing to a daily, weekly or monthly newspaper or magazine,
 
 
     
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that ought to be delivered on a specific day; typically the day of publishment. This type of mail
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is shipped automatically to the customer and should be delivered on a certain day - either
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
Page 35 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:37==
 
because the information in the newspaper or magazine carries some kind of news value or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
because it is of interest of the subscriber to receive the media on a specific time.  
Trigger three starts when a user shops and buys something online, that needs to be shipped.
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This type of mail needs a user to prompt for a shipment each time a delivery journey is
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
initiated. This would typically be from ordering something online or having something
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shipped from a second hand deal. This type of mail is typically shipped with some kind of
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
parcel delivery company like GLS, UPS or DHL, but can also be from PostNord.  
The fourth and last trigger is different from the other triggers in that the user does not prompt
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
for a delivery but instead dispatches or returns mail him- or herself. This trigger comes from a
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
user needing to dispatch a letter or a parcel, or from a user needing to return a good that is
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
   
either broken, not fitting, or alike. 
‘EVENT’ PHASE 
The event phase basically consists of nothing more than three of the triggers prompting the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mail or parcel logistics system for a delivery. As described in above section, the way that triggers
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
prompt for mail is different from one another. One trigger needs the interaction of a user each
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
time a delivery takes place, while the two others only need the user to prompt for a delivery one
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
time, initiating a stream of incoming mail. Trigger 3 has a few more steps in the journey
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
compared to trigger 1 and 2, as users go through an online shopping part of the journey, before
 
 
   
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
defining the method of delivery in later steps (Image 5).  
 
 
Image 5:​ Trigger initiated by online shopping or similar. 
(Poster 1) 
 
‘DEFINING’ PHASE 
In the defining phase, there is a touchpoint where the user and delivery company have an
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
encounter. In this touchpoint the user defines the type of delivery for the given trigger case. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
trigger 1 and 2, the user will in most cases only be able to select household delivery while in
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
trigger 3, users will in many cases be able to choose between different types of delivery and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
various logistics companies (Image 6). Because of the geography and infrastructure of the small
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
non-bridged islands, some companies, either the logistics company or the business offering the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shipped good, does not do household delivery. This phase of defining the method of delivery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will be where users are either granted or denied certain types of delivery approaches. In some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cases users can either decide another way of delivery, or choose to pay an extra fee for having
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
island shipment enabled, if a certain delivery method poses problems. There are five ways of
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
having mail or parcels shipped when living on a small non-bridged island:  
 
●
Household delivery where mail or parcels are delivered to the door of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
household. 
Page 36 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:38==
 
●
Delivery to the island harbour. This is a service being offered by
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
companies that do not offer household deliveries on non-bridges islands,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
but is not something that users can actively choose instead of E.g. delivery
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to a parcel shop.  
●
Delivery to the mainland harbour. This is only for large shipments such as
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
building materials or for the two islands that do not have household
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distributed mail from PostNord. 
●
Delivery to an island parcel shop. Not all non-bridged islands have a parcel
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
shop situated on the island but some local grocery stores offer the service -
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
typically in collaboration with GLS. 
●
Delivery to a mainland parcelshop. Islands that do not have their own
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
local parcel shop, or if the local parcel shop does not support a certain
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
delivery company, can pick up parcels here.  
 
 
Image 6:​ Touchpoint of users defining method of delivery. 
(Poster 1) 
EXPERIENCE INSIGHTS 
When examining the experience insights from the user studies, there are two issues concerning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this phase of the journey.  
The first issue concerns the situation that island residents are not able to receive mail or parcels
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from all logistics companies. As stated above many delivery companies do not deliver to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
islands, and if they do, it is often associated with an increased delivery fee. This is true to many
 
   
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
of the parcel logistics companies like UPS, GLS and DHL. Because of this lack of delivery,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
island residents are sometimes prevented from ordering from certain websites, only offering
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery with these companies.  
 
“Only PostNord delivers to non-bridges islands. The other companies do not
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
if you do not pay a lot - some will not even offer you the service.”  
- Kasper Tøgern 
 
The seconds issue is about the island residents not being able to have mail or parcels delivered
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from websites from foreign countries. When ordering goods from websites from foreign
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 37 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:39==
 
countries, and even some Danish as well, addresses for the small islands are sometimes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unknown and therefore the system cannot offer delivery. As with the aforementioned delivery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
issue from parcel logistics companies, island residents are, because of this address-issue,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sometimes prevented from ordering goods from certain websites. A statement from an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interview, with one of the island representatives, explains that one island resident has found a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
way of getting around this delivery problem by having mail shipped to PostNord, instead of his
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
home address, when ordering from eBay.  
 
“The grocery shop owner’s son often takes delivery of something from UPS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
who cannot deliver to the island. He has found out that he can have them
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deliver the package to PostNord and then they will bring it to him”  
- Kasper Tøgern 
 
Even though this method of having goods delivered works, it is not a viable solution for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
   
 
 
 
 
island residents. Furthermore, it would be fair to assume that not all island residents knows of
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this way of getting around the system, hence they will still not be able to have goods delivered
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from certain logistics or ecommerce companies.  
‘PRE-DELIVERY’ PHASE 
In the pre-delivery phase most of the delivery workflow takes place, which implies that this is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
the step with the most complexity in the delivery (Image 7). As mentioned in previous section,
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
there are seven different actors handling the deliveries for the islands. In total four of these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
seven people travel back and forth with the ferry in order to complete their deliveries. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mailmen that do not travel back and forth, instead have an exchange of mail, which is handled
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
by either themselves or some ferry personnel. Naturally this adds a lot of complexity to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
workflow with numerous elements needing to collaborate and parts that are dependant on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each other. If one element fails, all are affected.  
 
“We cannot deliver the parcels as planned og we do not have time to wait for
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
a ferry.”  
- GLS representative 
 
Page 38 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
 
 
Image 7:​ Workflow of mailmen on non-bridged small 
islands. (Poster 1) 
 
Naturally, when this is the phase with most of the workflow happening, as well as the phase
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
with the most complex workflow, this is the most time consuming, and herein expensive, part
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the process for delivery companies. Expensive because mailmen often need to take the ferry
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
back and forth to the island, and expensive because of the time consumed on driving to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rural areas in which these islands are located. One GLS representative informs that in peak
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery periods, normal delivery guys cannot cope with the increased load of mail, why the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
company in return needs to put another vehicle into action with only a few deliveries per
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
mailman.  
 
It can be in peak periods like November and December, where Christmas
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rush is on where the original car does not have time to go all the way to the
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
rural areas. Then, as a company, we need to bite the bullet and put in
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
another delivery car with only 5-10 drops and then we lose a lot of money per
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
day. 
- GLS representative 
 
In the pre-delivery phase there are three different touchpoints related to the interactions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between users and delivery service (Image 8). Two of the touchpoints are all related to users
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
meeting the mailman. This can be physical meetings with a residential off-duty mailman,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
somewhere on the island. This meeting might happen at the local grocery store, in one of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
island associations, or other island locations. Furthemore, this meeting with the mailman
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
might also be on an emotional level, through talks and interactions with fellow island residents,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concerning mailman or delivery system. As described in the section on island characteristics,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the communities are small and tight and residents have a tendency to gossip, meaning that talks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
about one another is common. These touchpoints, dealing with mailman meetings, are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
situated in journey initiated by all triggers in this phase.  
In the flow related to Trigger 3, where an island resident decides to buy something online, the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
users are furthermore able to receive information regarding status of delivery and tracking of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 39 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:41==
 
the parcel. This is the last touchpoint in this phase of the journey and the channel in which this
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
information is received is either on a phone or computer - typically a smartphone. 
 
 
Image 8:​ Touchpoints during the pre-delivery: ‘Hearing 
about mailman or delivery system’, ‘Receiving info on 
delivery status’ & ‘Physical meeting with off-duty 
mailman’(Poster 1) 
EXPERIENCE INSIGHTS 
As mentioned in the section on island characteristics, the island residents are very social and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have a tight island community, where everybody knows everyone. This unity reflects in the
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
way that island residents perceives the mailman delivering mail to the islands, and consequently
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
how the touchpoints addressing the encounter are perceived. The mailmen living on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
islands are familiar to the residents as they are part of the daily community on the islands.  
 
“The postal service drives every day, she brings newspapers. We have a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
resident mailman.”  
- Baagø representative 
 
Furthermore they are supported by the community, if any discrepancies between delivery
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
authorities and mailmen should occur. In cases where resident mailmen are either cut in time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
or being mistreated, the community is on the mailman’s side and in turn discontented with
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mainland postal authorities. As pointed out in earlier section on island characteristics, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community possesses an us-against-them mentality, with a general distrust to authorities;
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
herein the government and municipality. This discontent and dissatisfaction with mainland
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
postal services, and opposite support for the resident mailmen, adds to the distrust against
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mainland authorities. 
 
Here on Askø/Lilleø we can unfortunately only join the sad notion, that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery of mail is very unstable. The mail distributors, who comes from the
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mainland, is both kind and service minded, at least when they show up.  
- Askø/Lilleø representative  
 
Even though the actual delivery of mail and parcels, on the islands, is not directly influenced by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
the well being of the resident mailman, the experience of the postal system is still being affected
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
by this matter. The same is true when it comes to the subject of mail being shipped to the
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
island, for the residential mailmen to distribute. Island residents experience that these deliveries
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are often flawed, late or irregular. In mainland neighbourhoods, without the tight island
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 40 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:42==
 
community, the assumption is that the postal system will be perceived in a different way.
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Instead of experiencing the actual problem in the delivery chain, like island residents do, one
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could speculate, that mainland residents instead will experience the issue related to them
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
directly - that being the problem of having mail delivered irregular or late. In the tight
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community of small non-bridged island, the problem is however perceived differently. Because
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
the resident mailman is close to the rest of the community, the people do not only experience
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the issue of having mail delivered irregular, but also the cause of the problem; that mail is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
shipped irregularly.  
 
“Mandø has its own mailman and the delivery on the island works
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
flawlessly. Where we repeatedly has experienced problems are partially with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the shipment of mail to the island …”  
- Mandø representative 
 
‘DELIVERY’ PHASE 
Every household on the non-bridged islands receive household distributed mail from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PostNord, who are obliged to do this from a contract with the Danish government. This is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
except from Nekselø and Hjarnø, which are having mail from PostNord delivered to a mailbox
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
on the mainland harbour, because of their population being below ten. After having
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distributed mail to island households, the different mailmen heads home - either to their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
residence on the islands, which applies to the resident mailmen, or to the mainland distribution
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
centre, which applies to the mailman and parcel delivery guys. Naturally the mailmen, needing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to go back to the mainland, needs to take the ferry, which again is time consuming and a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
complexity-adding element. As is true in the ‘Pre-Delivery’ phase, one of the issues with this is,
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
that if one element fails, the whole workflow is affected - if the route of delivery takes longer
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
than planned, the mailman could miss the ferry going home. 
 
“The mailman informs that he cannot make the ferry back to the agreed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
time he apparently has with the post office.”  
- Aarø representative 
 
Like in the previous pre-delivery phase, the journey, initiated by the trigger related to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ecommerce, has a touchpoint related to the receival of information from the delivery company.
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In this phase, users are able to receive information on their phone or computer, when the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parcel has arrived at the place of delivery. 
Also, like in the previous touchpoint, the users might have a physical meeting with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
mailman. This time with an on-duty mailman delivering mail along the route. The meeting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with the mailman can either be at a resident household or somewhere else along the route.  
 
 
Page 41 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:43==
 
‘PICK-UP’ PHASE 
In this phase the delivery workflow has ended; the mail or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parcel has been delivered to the requested destination and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different mailmen have headed to their end destination -.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
either home or the logistics centre. 
Nonetheless, the island residents must now pick up their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requested good at the location of which the parcel or mail
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has been delivered (Image 9). As mentioned in the ‘Defining’
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
phase section, depending on the company responsible for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery, and the type of delivery, the locations for picking up
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the mail are: 
 
●
Household pick up, where the mail or parcels are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivered to the door of the household - typically
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
in the mailbox. 
●
Pick up at the island parcel shop - on the islands
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
with a local parcel shop. 
●
Pick up at the island harbour. 
●
Pick up at a mainland parcel shop. 
Image 9:​ Pick-up touchpoints from the 
top: island parcelstore, island 
harbour, mainland parcelstore. 
(Poster 1) 
 
These different pick-up possibilities each represents a touchpoint, where the users interact with
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
the place of pick-up. This is the interaction of user and postal system in relation the pick ups.
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There is more to it than just the physical interaction, when picking up mail in the mailbox,
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parcel shop or in one of the other places. Also the delivery steps leading up to the pick up of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mail affects the touchpoint related to the pick up. This could be the delivery time, or the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
compliance between actual time of delivery compared to the demanded. The location of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pick-up might furthermore affect the residents’ impression on the touchpoints in the ‘Pick up’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
phase. It could be assumed, that island residents will have a better experience if they are only
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
required to pick up the mail or parcel in their mailbox at their household, than needing to take
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
the ferry to the mainland in order for picking up something there. 
EXPERIENCE INSIGHTS 
One of the major issues which island resident experience, in relation to postal deliveries to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
islands, is the issue of not having mail or goods shipped all the way to the island. This is
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
something that island residents experience with both PostNord and the different parcel
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery companies. As described previously, two of the small islands do not have their regular
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mail distributed to their households with PostNord any longer. Instead it is delivered to a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
   
special mailbox on the mainland harbour requiring island residents to pick up mail themselves. 
 
Page 42 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:44==
 
“Two of the islands now have a mailbox on the mainland harbour instead
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
of having their mail distributed to their households on the island. It is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Hjarnø and Nekselø.”  
- Lise, SaDS 
 
The parcel logistics companies, that do deliver to island residents, only deliver to the mainland
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
harbour or the nearest parcel pick up shop - which might be on the mainland, several hours
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
away from home. In this case island residents need to pick up parcels on the mainland
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
themselves, resulting in long, time consuming journeys - sometimes without the possibility of
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
taking public transportation. On an island like Fejø, some of the residents have an emailing list,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where they can let fellow islanders know, if they have something on the mainland to pick up.
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This way, if someone from the island is at the mainland anyway, they can bring the good to the
 
   
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
island.  
 
“You have to pick it up yourself or get someone else from the island to pick it
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
up for you”  
- Kasper Tøgern, Fejø 
 
Besides the issue of not having mail or goods shipped all the way to the island, the island
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
residents also have problems with picking up day-to-day shipments like newspapers, magazines
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
or Quick-letters. Island residents experience problems with newspapers and magazines being at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
their disposal too late. Obviously this is a problem, as newspapers and magazines contains a
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
   
news value, which is not as valuable if received on the day of publishment. Sometimes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
newspapers are even days late, resulting in great dissatisfaction from islanders, which in some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cases have cancelled their subscriptions. 
 
“The one who is on the ferry brings newspapers and mail and distributes it,
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
but it is working very irregularly and no regular adverts.”  
- Bjørnø representative 
 
Also so-called Quick-letters have been experienced arriving too late. Quick-letters are a letter
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
type delivered by PostNord, which is more expensive than regular letters, but in turn reaches
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
its destination the coming working day after dispatch (TV2 Nyheder, 2016). Some companies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are required to receive mail on a day-to-day basis, meaning that if Quick-letters are late, it is a
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
       
problem and a restriction for island-situated businesses. One way of mitigating late mail is by
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
going to the mainland and picking it up yourself. This is of course time consuming and an
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
annoyance to island residents.  
 
“On the island there are independent companies, like agriculture and other,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which need mail every day.”  
- Femø representative 
 
 
 
Page 43 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:45==
 
‘DISPATCH & RETURN’ PHASE 
In the ‘Dispatch & Return’ phase, the fourth and last trigger, in the island resident journey, is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
situated - that is, the user needing to dispatch mail or a parcel for some reason (Image 10). The
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reasons for needing to dispatch could be: 
 
●
Needing to return a good 
●
Needing to dispatch a letter 
●
Needing to dispatch a parcel 
 
 
Image 10:​ Trigger 4, related to the need for  dispatching  or 
returning a parcel or letter. (Poster 1)  
 
Like in the ‘Pick Up’ phase no delivery workflow takes place as the mail or parcels already have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
been delivered to the requested destination. Like in the previous phase, the user has a more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
active part, compared to the initial journey phases. In the ‘Dispatch & Return’ phase, the user
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
is initially required to find packaging, pack the mail or parcel for dispatch, and mark the good
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with delivery address. Hereafter, the island resident needs to deliver the mail or parcel to a valid
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
place of dispatch. Depending on where the island resident lives, and what needs to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dispatched, there are several options for shipment locations. The options are: 
 
●
Dispatch from a local island-placed parcelshop. This is only for the islands
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
with a parcelshop and only applicable for the the certain logistics
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
companies being represented in the shop - typically GLS.  
●
Dispatch from the island harbour mailbox. The islands have a big red
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
mailbox, like in the rest of the country, for dispatching ordinary letters
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with PostNord. Quick-letters and parcels cannot be sent from this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mailbox. 
●
Dispatch from a mainland-based parcelshop or mainland post office.
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
From here island residents can dispatch parcels and/or Quick-letters. 
 
Equally, if the users need to dispatch from the island or the mainland, they need to travel from
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
home in order to ship the parcel or mail. Like in the previous ‘Pick Up’ phase, it is necessary for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
the island residents to take the ferry and back in order for them to dispatch a good on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
mainland. These interactions between the user and the postal system, in relation the the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dispatch and return of goods, as listed above, are the last touchpoints in the journey. As is true
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
of the phase of picking up goods, the dispatch and return location might affect the impression,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that island resident have, of the touchpoint in the ‘Dispatch & Return’ phase. Again, it might
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
be assumed that island residents will have a better experience if they are only required to
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 44 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:46==
 
dispatch or return goods from the island, rather than needing to take the ferry to the mainland
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and back.  
EXPERIENCE INSIGHTS 
The island residents experience some issues related to the dispatch of mail. As described above,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
some types of mail or parcels can only be shipped from the mainland, which requires island
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
residents to travel back and forth between the island and mainland - something that might take
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
several hours. This is true to parcel dispatches, at islands that do not have an island-based
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parcelshop, and to dispatches of Quick-letters with PostNord, which must be dispatched from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a post office. In the ‘Pick Up’ phase, an island representative states, in relation to Quick-letters,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
that island businesses are dependant on the ability to receive daily mail. The same issue is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
present in the dispatch of Quick-letters - that island businesses as well need the ability to
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dispatch day-to-day letters. Without the possibility of having a post office nearby, island
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
residents and companies are required to do long journeys in order to dispatch a Quick-letter.  
 
”Q-letters cannot be sent as they must be delivered to the nearest post office
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
which is a half day of travel away. On the islands we need effective daily
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mail service because we do not have the alternatives as the cities”  
- Femø representative 
 
Another problem, in relation to the dispatch of mail, is the dispatch of parcels. This is both the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
dispatch of normal parcels but also the dispatch of goods for return. As with the Quick-letters,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the issue is, that island residents often are required to dispatch parcels from the mainland. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
means that it is necessary for them to drive to the mainland and back, including a ferry trip, in
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
order for them to do the shipment. As described before, this is often a time consuming
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
journey.  
 
”A guy needed to return a broken ipad. Apple would send a box for him to
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
return the ipad in but the company delivering the box did not deliver to Fejø.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
This never got solved and the guy never returned the ipad.”  
- Kasper Tøgern, Fejø 
KEY ISSUES 
ISSUES, EXPERIENCE FLOW 
In Table 3, the seven key issues, being experienced by island residents in relation to mail and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parcel delivery on the small non-bridged islands, are listed. In all seven issues the core affects,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experienced by users, are described with product-relevant emotions as proposed by Desmet &
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
Hekkert (Desmet & Hekkert, 2007). The emotions will be used as design cues in the coming
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
design process. The issues are all derived from analysing the experience journey of the current
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
situation and are used as the basis for the discovery of opportunities. 
 
Page 45 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
 
Issues 
Cites 
Core emotions 
Issue 1:​ ​Parcel delivery 
companies do not deliver to the 
island 
“Only PostNord delivers to non-bridges islands. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other companies do not if you do not pay a lot -
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
some will not even offer you the service.” - Kasper
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Tøgern, Fejø 
Irritation 
Disappointment 
Issue 2​:​ Some websites cannot 
find island addresses in the 
system 
“Packages ordered from a foreign country is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
difficult to have delivered to the island” - Lone
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Nielsen, Sejerø 
Irritation 
Disappointment 
 
 
Issue 3:​ ​Distrust against the 
postal system 
”The other day our usual mailman was told that he
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should not bring mail for us anymore. The next day
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a counter-order came so now we do not really
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
know where we stand.” - Barsø 
Irritation 
Disappointment 
Issue 4:​ ​Unstable and irregular 
mail system to islands 
“Mandø has its own mailman and the delivery on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the island works flawlessly. Where we repeatedly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has experienced problems are partially with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shipment of mail to the island …” - Mandø 
Irritation 
Disappointment 
Issue 5:​ ​Pick up of mail and 
parcels often requires island 
residents to travel to the mainland 
“You have to pick it up yourself or get someone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
else from the island to pick it up for you” - Kasper
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
Tøgern, Fejø 
Irritation 
Isolation 
Boredom 
 
Issue 6:​ ​Day-to-day shipments are 
often late or not possible at all 
“... For the same reason we have cancelled our
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
newspapers because it is not attractive reading 3
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
days old newspapers.” - Hjortø 
Irritation 
Disappointment 
Isolation 
 
Issue 7:​ ​Dispatch of mail and 
parcels often requires island 
residents to travel to the mainland 
”Concerning dispatch of parcels, the problem is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that the nearest parcel shop is 25 km away in Ribe.
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
There are no means of public transportation to and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from Ribe.” - Mandø 
Irritation 
Isolation 
Boredom 
Table 3:​ Issues and related core emotions 
 
ISSUES, DELIVERY WORKFLOW 
Even though this thesis is about user experience in relation to users of the mail system on
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
non-bridged islands, the system in which the use case operates, must be considered holistically,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
meaning that the workflow of mailmen, connected to the island deliveries, must be considered.  
As mentioned earlier, the delivery workflow in this context is very complex, resulting in time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
consuming processes, which inevitably is expensive. Other than being time consuming and
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expensive, the complex workflow is likewise a source of error. Thus, the complexity of
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workflow, will in the end affect users of the mail services, because of the increased possibility of
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
errors. As seen in the interview with the GLS representative, as well as in articles with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PostNord, (Finans, 2007, link) the delivery companies are trying, in various ways, to mitigate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the increased cost related to servicing rural areas. Also from the interviews (Appendix 2, 3 & 4),
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
and statements coming from the islands, (ULØ, 2016) it is clear that delivery companies try to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
cut the cost E.g. by cutting resident mailmen time. Because of this, it is reasonable to suggest,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
Page 46 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:48==
 
that delivery companies in the future again will try to cut costs associated with servicing these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
areas. If cost is cut by delivery companies, without the introduction of a cheaper delivery
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
method, services for the non-bridged islands will decrease, which in turn could worsen user
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experiences. Because of this, in order to better user experience, the delivery workflow, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
overall business case, for the final solution, must be taken into consideration.  
ISSUE 1: FERRY TRIPS 
Several of the mailmen and delivery guys related to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
island deliveries, travels back and forth between the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mainland and the island, which is a time consuming task
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
(Image 11). As mentioned earlier a ferry trip to one of the
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
small non-bridged islands can take from 15 minutes and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
up to 3 hours. Either way it is a lot of time consumed
 
   
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
doing nothing - also when considering that the mailmen
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
will most likely have to wait at the harbour before each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ferry trip. Furthermore, changes in the time plan on a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
delivery route might have an effect on the mailman's
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ability to make the ferry back home. This causing even
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more time wasted. 
Image 11:​ Different mailmen handling 
island deliveries need to take the ferry. 
(Poster 1) 
ISSUE 2: HAND-OVER WORKFLOW 
The resident mailmen that are not required to pick up mail at the mainland, instead are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shipped mail via the ferry. This delivery is dependant on a mainland mailman delivering the
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
island mail at the mainland harbour. From here it will be shipped with the ferry, by the ferry
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
personnel, to the island. This workflow obviously has a lot of dependencies, and the operation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
will be delayed if one item should fail, resulting in late distribution to the island residents. In
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the issues mentioned by the island residents, this is actually a problem being experienced on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
several islands. 
 
Page 47 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:49==
 
PERSONAS 
PERSONAS THEORY 
Personas are a way of presenting and compiling data from user studies, to summarise the values
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and needs of users (Boeijen et al, 2012). A persona is a fictional character representing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
whole or parts of a user group with similar needs and values. Typically more than one persona
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is created in order for the full width of the user group, with all their associated needs and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
values, to be presented. Different characteristics in the data collection is grouped and the most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
distinctive traits are picked to represent the users. Typically the user group do not have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
identical needs and values, which is why several personas often needs to be created, in order for
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
important characteristics to be represented. Each persona will have a name and certain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
demography, like age, job and family status, and additionally a description of the lifestyle,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
background story and frustrations of the fictional character - all representing real life user data.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The combined number of personas should in total represent all important aspects of the user
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
group in question and the distinctive traits important for the design task.  
Besides being a tool for compiling user data, the personas can, later in the design process, be
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used for evaluating designs, by testing if solutions fit the different personas representing the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
user group elements. 
The data used for creating the personas originate from the interviews with island experts, Lone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and Kasper, and from the research on island demography.  
THE PERSONAS 
Name​: Kirsten Jensen 
Age​: 76 
Profession​: Retired/pensioner 
Relationship​: Married w. husband at same age 
Lifestyle​: Quiet living with few modern habits 
Background story​: Kirsten is a pensioner who have lived on the island for most of her life.
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
She and her husband have kids and grandchildren living on the mainland and visits them
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approximately once every month. She is not good with computers and does not have a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
smartphone. Because she is not good with computers, she never orders anything online and
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
only receives ordinary mail, the newspaper, and a weekly magazine with the mail. She likes the
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quietness and the calm tempo on the island and she appreciates the informal talks with other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
island residents at the local grocery store. She is on first-name terms with the grocery store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
personnel, the postman and other local figures. In her free time she joins the local knitting club
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and drinks coffee with fellow pensioners on the island.  
Frustrations​: Kirsten is frustrated and annoyed that she often receives her newspaper and
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
weekly magazine late and considers cancelling the newspaper subscription. She is furthermore
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
dissatisfied with the proposal that the ferry should only be able to be booked online. Generally
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
she is displeased with the perpetual cuts on the island from the municipality and other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
governmental institutions.  
 
 
 
Page 48 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:50==
 
Name​: Henrik Nielsen 
Age​: 48 
Profession​: Carpenter 
Relationship​: Married with two children 
Lifestyle​: Quiet living with some modern habits 
Background story​: Henrik is a carpenter living on the island with his wife and one of his
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
children. His other child has moved to the mainland to attend school. Henrik has lived on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
island for 15 years and do most of his carpentry on the island. He welcomes modern
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology and has a relaxed attitude towards computers and smartphones but is not first
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
mover on anything. Henrik enjoys the tight community on the island and the fact that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
everybody knows everyone. He also enjoys the nature, the peace and quiet and the fact that he
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can afford a house on the island with loads of space. In his spare time he works on boats in the
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
local wooden boat club and is furthermore active in the island council where he fights to
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improve island living conditions.  
Frustrations​: Henrik is frustrated that he cannot always order things from Wish because
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
logistics companies do not ship to the island. He is also frustrated that Quick Letters often has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more than 1-day shipping time and that he needs to go to the mainland to pick up and dispatch
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parcels at GLS - a trip which can easily take several hours. Henrik can also be frustrated with
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the fact, that he needs to pick up construction materials on the mainland harbour and cannot
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have it shipped all the way to the island. 
 
Name​: Jacob Thillemann 
Age​: 37 
Profession​: Programmer 
Relationship​: Married with three children 
Lifestyle​: Partially self-sufficient nature living 
Background story​: Jacob is a programmer who just recently moved to the island with his wife
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and three children. They did so in order for them to fulfill their dream of living in the nature
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
and being able to grow and breed their own food. Before moving to the island, Jacob lived with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
his family in an apartment in the outskirts of Copenhagen but grew tired of the city living and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stressful lifestyle. Jacob appreciates the nature and when not working he likes to be outside
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with his family to take care of their farm. He loves the great amount of space where he and his
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
family can enjoy the nature and dream of being able to be completely self-sufficient from his
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
home farming. 
Frustrations​: Jacob is frustrated that he cannot order gadgets from all around the world as he
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
was used to when living in Copenhagen, because logistics companies do not ship to the island.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Moreover he is tired of needing to go to the mainland to pick up parcels, because it is both
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
energy and time consuming. Jacob is also frustrated that he cannot have organic meal-boxes
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivered from Aarstiderne because they do not deliver to non-bridged islands. 
 
Page 49 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:51==
 
ENVISIONED 
FLOW 
In this section the framework for the proposed drone delivery concept is introduced, along
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
with the touchpoints and related opportunities for the experience-driven design concepts. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rich emotions design methodology for stimulating positive emotions is discussed and the idea
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
generation approach is presented. Lastly, the design concepts for the key opportunities are
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
introduced, using the aforementioned ​rich emotions​ theory.  
When reading this section, Poster 2 can throughout be used as visual representation of the
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analysis and findings. 
 
Page 50 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:52==
 
THE GENERAL DRONE FRAMEWORK 
As described in the literature study, the biggest concern for people, in relation to drones for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
commercial purposes, is the issue of privacy - namely having drones fly over private property
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and people. Furthermore, as described in the section on island characteristics, island residents
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
value the peace and quiet aspects of the islands. Also the nature itself, and the fact that islands
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are far from the rush of bigger cities, is an attribute which island residents appreciate. Because
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of these traits, concerning island residents’ values, the assumption is, that drones must not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interfere with the quietness or natural environment of the islands. This assumption, together
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with the findings from the literature study on the issue of privacy, suggests that drones for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery purposes should not take off or land in or near people’s private plots. Consequently,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the drone will not be able to perform household deliveries on the islands, but instead do
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
centralized deliveries with predefined takeoff and landing spots.  
Because mail cannot be household distributed with the delivery drone, the mailmen from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PostNord will still have an active role in the delivery of mail to island households. However, in
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
order for the drone delivery system to make sense, the delivery workflow, as described in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
current experience journey, must be improved. Consequently, the mailmen’s trips back and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
forth between island and mainland must stop. Therefore the idea is, that the islands must have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
their own resident mailman hired by PostNord for delivering mail to households. Mail being
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transported from the mainland to the island with the delivery drone (Image 12). Mail and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parcels coming from other parcel delivery companies will also be delivered to the mainland
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drone station where they in turn will be flown to the island station.  
 
 
Image 12:​ Drone delivers mail til the island, to be 
household distributed by resident mailman. (Poster 2) 
 
At this station island residents can pick up mail in the same way as with the PostNord
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pakkeboks being used in bigger cities today. Also like the Pakkeboks, users are able to dispatch
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mail. From the station, dispatched mail will subsequently be transported with a drone to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
mainland drone station, and be picked up by mainland mailmen. If mainland-based drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
stations are positioned in the proximity of a post office, one could imagine, that Q-letters can
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be picked up, before a certain time during the day, by a mailman, and be delivered to the post
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
office. This way, island residents would have to possibility of dispatching Q-letters from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
island. 
The solution, with the aforementioned predefined take-off and landing spots, is close to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
Skyways
idea
as
proposed by Airbus and CAAS, where drones have predefined
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 51 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:53==
 
three-dimensional aerial corridors as well as landing spots (Airbus, 2017). Opposite to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Skyways, drone stations should instead be situated in places with low density in population
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and at a distance to houses and buildings. In the case of delivery to the small non-bridged
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
islands in Denmark, a drone station for take-off and landing should be placed somewhere
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
suitable, where it will make no disturbances to island residents. On the mainland, there should
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be a similar drone station - also at a distance to populated areas and buildings. A suitable place
   
 
 
   
     
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
on the island will be in a place without any nearby houses, but with good infrastructure,
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
making it easy for island residents to pick-up and dispatch various form of mail and parcels. On
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the mainland the same criterias for a suitable drone take-off spot applies as on the island - the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
spot must be near good infrastructure and at a distance to houses and buildings. Furthermore,
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
the mainland spot needs to be at a proximity to the island, enabling drones to fly the distance
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
without charging, but at the same time as close to postal logistics centres as possible. As
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
described in the literature study, the DHL Parcelcopter 4.0 is able to fly approximately 100
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
kilometres without charging, enabling various possibilities of mainland spot locations (DHL,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2018, link).  
As mentioned in the section on drone capabilities, drones of today are limited in their weight
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
capacity. The drones, with a range suitable for servicing these kind of islands, can carry a
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
payload of up to 10 kilograms. This limits the drone in several ways. One way is, that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery drone will not be able to carry several loads at one time. It can carry several letters at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
   
one time, but perhaps not several parcels. On the islands there are however a relatively few
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
number of permanent residents, so the assumption is, that this will not restrict the system in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
any higher degree. Another limitation of the drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system, due to the weight carrying capacity, is the
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
restriction from transporting parcels above 10
 
 
 
 
 
 
kilograms. These parcels cannot be transported
 
 
 
 
 
 
with a drone to the islands with the drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specifications of today. The idea is, that these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parcels instead should be delivered to the mainland
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
harbour, where they can be picked up by the island
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resident themselves or be shipped to the island with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ferry. As described above, the idea is, that no
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mailman should need to travel back and forth to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
island, which is why the two aforementioned
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solutions are proposed. In relation to these large
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parcels, the assumption is, that parcels of this size
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are a very small part of the total share of packages.
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Because of this assumptions, the idea is, that island
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
residents’ experience, of the total drone delivery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system, will not be substantially affected by this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
limitation. 
Image 13:​ DriveNow car with the name, 
Anne, ready to be booked. From DriveNow app. 
 
Lastly, in the literature study, studies find that drones for commercial purposes must be able to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be identified. Therefore, the delivery drones should be colored in a recognizable color and be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
marked with a number, similar to those on airplanes (Image 14). Furthermore, with inspiration
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 52 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:54==
 
from the car sharing company DriveNow, the drones should be marked with a name, unique
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
to every drone (Image 13). The idea behind the name is to establish some sort of familiarity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
with the drones in order for it to be adopted into the tight island communities. 
 
 
Image 14:​ Airplane registration number 
TOUCHPOINT, ISSUES & OPPORTUNITIES 
As presented in the Current Experience Journey, there are several touchpoints along the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience flow, where users and product interact in various ways. The different issues being
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experienced by the users are all connected to one or more of the various touchpoints and leads
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to several opportunities where issues can be solved. To discover the key opportunities, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience flow has been analyzed, together with the proposal for the new drone delivery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solution, as proposed earlier.  
In Table 4, the different issues are coupled to the touchpoints where users experience the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
problems. The key opportunities (KO) are the places with the best opportunities to solve the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different issues experienced by users.   
With the proposal of the new drone delivery system (Poster 2)(Image 15), many of the former
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
touchpoints has been removed and new touchpoints has been added.  
 
 
Image 15:​ Envisioned experience flow & delivery workflow. 
(Poster 2) 
 
Page 53 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
Touchpoints 
Issues 
Key Opportunities 
1​. Defining 
method of 
delivery 
Issue 1​: Parcel delivery 
companies do not 
deliver to the island 
Issue 2:​ Some websites 
cannot find island 
addresses in the 
system 
KO1: Mainland postal services can deliver to mainland
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drone station. From here the drone can deliver the mail, or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parcels, to the island situated drone station. 
KO2: Instead of delivering to addresses on the island,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which some web pages cannot find, users can have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deliveries sent to the mainland based drone station, which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from here can be transferred to the island. 
2​. Hearing about 
mailman or 
delivery system 
Issue 3:​ Distrust 
against the postal 
system 
KO3​: The new drone solutions can be advertised to island
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
residents through word-to-mouth.  
3​. Receive 
notification of 
delivery status 
Issue 4:​ Unstable and 
irregular mail service to 
the islands 
KO4.1​: As early in the delivery process as possible, users
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can be assured through notifications, that deliveries will be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivered in time. 
4​. Physical 
encounter with 
off-duty mailman 
Issue 3​: Distrust 
against the postal 
system 
 
 
5​. Physical 
encounter with 
on-duty mailman 
Issue 3​: Distrust 
against the postal 
system 
Issue 4​: Unstable and 
irregular mail service to 
the islands 
 
6​. Receiving 
notification of 
delivery 
Issue 4:​ Unstable and 
irregular mail service to 
the islands 
 
 
7​. Receiving mail 
at home 
Issue 4:​ Unstable and 
irregular mail service to 
the islands 
Issue 6​: Day-to-day 
shipments are often 
late or not possible at 
all. 
 
 
8​. Picking up mail 
at island parcel 
shop 
 
Issue 4​: Unstable and 
irregular mail service to 
the islands 
This touchpoint is, with the new drone delivery service,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deleted as it becomes redundant. 
 
9​. Picking up mail 
at harbour 
Issue 4:​ Unstable and 
irregular mail service to 
the islands 
This touchpoint is, with the new drone delivery service,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deleted as it becomes redundant. 
 
10​. Picking up 
mail at mainland 
parcelshop 
Issue 4​: Unstable and 
irregular mail service to 
the islands 
Issue 5​: Pick up of mail 
and parcels often 
require island residents 
This touchpoint is, with the new drone delivery service,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deleted as it becomes redundant. 
 
Key opportunity in touchpoint X! 
Page 54 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:56==
 
to travel to the 
mainland. 
11​. Dispatching 
mail at island 
parcelshop 
Issue 7​: Dispatch of 
mail and parcels often 
requires island 
residents to travel to 
the mainland. 
This touchpoint is, with the new drone delivery service,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deleted as it becomes redundant. 
 
12​. Dispatching 
mail at island 
mailbox at 
harbour 
 
Issue 6:​ Day-to-day 
shipments are often 
late or not possible at 
all. 
Issue 7​: Dispatch of 
mail and parcels often 
requires island 
residents to travel to 
the mainland. 
Key opportunity in touchpoint X! 
 
13​. Dispatching 
mail at mainland 
parcelshop 
 
Issue 7:​ Dispatch of 
mail and parcels often 
requires island 
residents to travel to 
the mainland. 
This touchpoint is, with the new drone delivery service,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deleted as it becomes redundant. 
 
X​: Picking up and 
dispatching mail 
at the 
island-based 
drone station 
 
KO5​: Parcels and mail can be picked up at the island based
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drone station. Touchpoint 10 will be deleted and a new
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
touchpoint where the users interacts with the drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
station, under pick-up of mail and parcels, will come. 
KO6​: Day-to-day dispatches can be delivered by users to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the island drone station, and from there, through the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drone delivery service, be delivered to the mainland drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
station. From here it can be picked up by mainland
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mailmen and continue through the delivery system. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interaction between user and service will be in a new
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
touchpoint where the users interact with the drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
station, under dispatch of mail and parcels. 
KO7​: Parcel and mail dispatches can be delivered, by users,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the island drone station, and from there, through the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drone delivery service, be delivered to the mainland drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
station. From here it can be picked up by mainland
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mailmen and continue through the delivery system. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interaction between users and service will be in a new
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
touchpoint where the users interacts with the drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
station, under dispatch of mail and parcels. 
Table 4:​ Touchpoints with related issues and key 
opportunities 
 
 
Page 55 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:57==
 
THE DESIGN 
DESIGN METHODOLOGY 
ENRICHING EXPERIENCES WITH NEGATIVE EMOTIONS 
Normally when designing for experience, you are trying to create pleasurable emotions and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
positive appeal in the product or service in question. S. Fokkinga & P. Desmet (Fokkinga &
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Desmet, 2013) are however proposing the idea of enriching product experiences rather than
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stimulate positive emotions, meaning that emotions, that are a mix of both positive and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
negative, are cultured. The prime example of a rich experience is the experience of riding a
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
   
rollercoaster, which is something that is terrifying but a the same time cheerful. Fokkinga &
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Desmet describe a model for all life experiences, in which some are the so called notable
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experiences (Figure 5). These notable experiences can be either notably unpleasant or notably
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pleasant emotions. The notably pleasant experiences are seperated in two parts; the ones that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are highly favorable, like winning the lottery or relaxing on a holiday, and the rich experiences,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
like the rollercoaster example. The rich experiences are experiences with a mix of both negative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
and positive emotions, but in the end are experienced as valuable. Another example of a rich
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
experience could be to volunteer as a cleaner after a party, which by all standards is a tedious
 
 
 
 
     
 
   
 
 
 
 
     
 
task, but in return receive respect and joy from friends as well as increased self-respect. 
 
 
Figure 5:​ Rich experiences with other life experiences. 
(Fokkinga & Desmet, 2013)  
 
The safe seats on a rollercoaster and the idea that the amusement park have things under
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
control, as well as knowing of your virtues, when cleaning after a party, are considered as being
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
the protective frame. The protective frame takes away the unpleasant aspects of the experience,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which is otherwise loaded with negative stimulus, making the user able to enjoy beneficial
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aspects. This safety frame is the third element in the explanatory framework of rich
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experiences. The first element is the actual negative stimulus, like being looped in a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
rollercoaster or having to clean away beer bottles. This negative stimulus in turn transforms the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
user’s perception of the world around him, and the attitude which transforms the view on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 56 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:58==
 
himself. This transformation is the second step of the explanatory framework (Fokkinga &
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Desmet, 2013). 
This framework can in return be adapted for the use of stimulating good product experience,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by rearranging steps in which the framework is used. In the first step the designer chooses
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which negative emotions to provoke in relation to a desirable way, that attitude and perception
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the user should be transformed. For example, if you would like to better an experience that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is otherwise boring, it could be an idea to provoke a thrilling experience with fright. Second
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
step is to find a suitable way of evoking these rich emotions. Going back to the example of
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
evoking fear to better a dull experience, a way of generating fright could be to create some
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
physical danger, like adding the fear of falling. The last step is to add a protective frame, in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
order for the negative emotions to be reversed. In our example it could be to add safety gear in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
order for the user not to actually fall from a height. There are four ways of adding this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
protective frame: 
 
●
The detachment frame, which ​“... is constructed by altering the stimulus of
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
the negative emotion in such a way that users are only confronted with a
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
representation of it.” (Fokkinga & Desmet, 2013) 
●
The safety-zone, which ​“... is constructed by physically distancing users from
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
the negative stimulus, so they are literally or figuratively in the ‘safe zone’.”
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Fokkinga & Desmet, 2013) 
●
The control frame, which ​“... is constructed by increasing the amount of
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
control that a user has over the interaction with the negative stimulus,
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
taking into account any skills and abilities that the user already possesses.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Fokkinga & Desmet, 2013) 
●
The perspective frame, which ​“... can be constructed by providing a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
perspective on the wider implications of the negative stimulus or the user’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reaction towards it.” (Fokkinga & Desmet, 2013) 
 
In the article Fokkinga & Desmet bring a model for the three-step application of ten rich
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience qualities, which can be used as a guideline for experimenting with rich experiences
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
and negative emotions. (Fokkinga & Desmet, 2013) 
IDEA GENERATION 
Design suggestions for the different touchpoints are made through simple brainstorming
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sessions (Boeijen et al, 2012). Moreover, as mentioned in the previous section, the overall
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
framework for the brainstorming session is based on the rich emotions found to be suitable for
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each touchpoint (Appendix 22-27). To put it in another way, the brainstorming sessions’
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
purpose has been to come up with ideas that can stimulate the rich emotions intended for each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
touchpoint. Furthermore, as described in the literature study, there are some important factors
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when it comes to people’s acceptance and engagement in the drone technology. These findings
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
are also important to have in mind. However in the brainstorming itself, to keep an open
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mind, these design limitations are neglected, in order for ideas not to be limited.  
The brainstorm itself was done with the attendance of the author of this thesis only. For each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
touchpoint, an introductive brainstorming session was done with the purpose of discovering a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
diverse range of ideas. Afterwards these ideas were reviewed and the most interesting ones were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 57 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:59==
 
reiterated through another brainstorm. Finally the best ideas from here were sketched in order
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
for them to again be reiterated but in the end also for them to be more concrete.  
After the brainstorming sessions and sketching of the different ideas, several solutions for each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
touchpoint were produced. In order for an overall concept of design to be concretized, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
selection of the various ideas had to be combined.  
For this selection, the method of a morphology chart was used for combining the partial
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
touchpoint-based ideas into one suggestion for a solution. The morphology chart arranges
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
solutions to sub functions, in this case ideas for touchpoints, in a simple matrix, making the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
process of doing principal solutions easier and more manageable (Boeijen et al, 2012). The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
principle solutions are all created on the basis of the personas representing the different users
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on the small non-bridged islands. For each persona, a principle solution was created, by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
envisioning what the concerned persona ‘would have wanted’. From the three different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
personas, three different principle solutions was designed (Figure 6).  
 
 
Figure 6:​ Morphology chart with different principle 
solutions: Red: persona Kirsten, Green: persona Jacob, Blue: 
persona Henrik, Yellow: final solution. (Appendix 12) 
 
As described earlier, the persona, Kirsten, does not trigger the journey resulting in online
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
purchases or similar. Consequently selections of sub functions in touchpoint 1 and 3 from this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
 
 
persona can be ignored. Suggestions for solutions in touchpoint 1 and 2 are the same for all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
personas, thus no combination of principle solutions are necessary. In touchpoint 3 and 4 the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
final principle solution is created on a basis of similarities between persona choices, overall
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
island characteristic knowledge, and literature findings. 
 
 
Page 58 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:60==
 
FINAL DESIGN 
One could argue that the implementation of the drone service itself will solve many of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
issues experienced by users using the delivery system. Solving the issues does however not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
necessarily create good user experiences in relation to the delivery drone system, and this is the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
reason for proposing ideas for the new envisioned journey (Poster 2). 
TOUCHPOINT 1 
OPPORTUNITIES & EMOTIONS 
In touchpoint 1, which is the interaction between user and delivery system when defining the
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
desired mean of delivery, there are two key opportunities. These opportunities are only related
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the journey initiated by trigger 3, also implying that design proposals must work for only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
persona 2 and 3. The key opportunities are: 
 
●
KO1: Mainland postal services can deliver to mainland drone station.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From here the drone can deliver the mail, or parcels, to the island based
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drone station. 
●
KO2: Instead of delivering to addresses on the island, which some web
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pages cannot find, users can have deliveries sent to the mainland based
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drone station, which from here can be transferred to the island. 
 
For the opportunities above, there are some related issues. These are the issues of not being able
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to have goods delivered to the island from certain suppliers and not being able to find island
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
addresses in some web pages. Core emotions experienced by the users in relation to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aforementioned issues are listed below. 
 
●
Irritation 
●
Disappointment 
 
According to the circumplex model of core affect with product relevant emotions, as proposed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
by Desmet & Hekkert, these emotions are in the position of activated and unpleasant (Desmet
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
& Hekkert, 2007). To better the user experience, the design must instead promote core
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emotions opposite to that of the negative experience, which, in the circumplex model, are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emotions in the field of calm and pleasant. Suitable emotions, in the calm and pleasant area,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
opposite to those of irritation and disappointment can be satisfaction, joyfulness and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fascination.  
To be able to design for one of these emotions, when using the theory of rich emotions, a rich
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
quality (Fokkinga & Desmet, 2013) that adds either satisfaction, joyfulness or fascination must
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be selected. A suitable rich quality for this purpose can be the eerie quality, which might add
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
some unpleasantness in the form of anxiety, but at the same time the positive emotion of being
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fascinated. Being in a dark, yet safe place, or seeing something that nearly resembles a human
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
being, but still is not, can all create eeriness with people.  
Another suitable rich quality to design for, when seeking to create the pleasant and calm
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emotions as described above, is the thrilling quality, which people might get when riding
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rollercoasters (Fokkinga & Desmet, 2013). As in the case with rollercoasters, the thrilling
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 59 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:61==
 
quality adds fright with people, but at the same time might create the experience of joy, which
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would be suitable for the two opportunities. 
SOLUTION 
Touchpoint 1 is the place in the experience journey where user and delivery system meet
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through the definition of delivery methods - typically, having purchased something online.
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Thus, the channel, in which this interactions takes place, is usually a computer or smartphone.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
Hence, a solution would be suitable in this media.  
The general idea behind the delivery drone technology on the small non-bridged islands is, in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
this touchpoint, to enable deliveries to the islands from all suppliers. This is achieved by the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
introduction of a mainland based drone station, which allows for delivery companies to cut the
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expensive journeys to and from the islands. Delivery companies can deliver to the mainland
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drone station rather than delivering to the island itself, and instead the delivery drone will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
handle the shipment to the island. This way, delivery companies can manage island deliveries
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
without ever having to go there.  
 
 
Image 16:​ Pop-up window appearing when choosing drone 
station as the nearest pick-up spot. (Appendix 13)(Poster 2) 
 
The idea for stimulating good user experience in touchpoint 1 is, as mentioned, based on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
rich emotions; the eerie and thrilling qualities. The concept is to present the user, prompting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
for the drone system as a mean of delivery, for an image or video of a delivery drone in action,
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
in combination with facts on the technology (Image 16). In the literature study it was found
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
that one of the key factors behind engagement in drone technology is perceived risk.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consequently the user cannot be presented with material, that makes the drone be perceived as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
risky or unsafe. Instead the user is presented with a photo or video of a drone in a real use
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
scenario. The assumption is that users hereby will not perceive the technology as unsafe, but
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
instead as something fascinating, even though they might be a little frightened or eerie by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
having a drone doing their delivery. This visual presentation of the drone also has the benefit of
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
demystifying the technology to people that are new to the system, which in turn could debunk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
myths or notions, that users might have, due to ignorance. All things considered, this should
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stimulate the desired core emotions of fascination, joyfulness and satisfaction.  
Page 60 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:62==
 
As seen from the pictures of the solution, the visual material of the drone technology is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
supposed to pop-up when opting for the drone station as a pick-up point. As mentioned, this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
window of information should, besides the visual material of the drone, present facts of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology, like speed, range, height etc. Additionally the pop-up window should include a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
shortcut to a unique website for the drone service, if users wish to obtain even more knowledge
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on the technology.  
TOUCHPOINT 2 
OPPORTUNITIES & EMOTIONS 
In the first second touchpoint, users hear about the mailman and delivery system from other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
island residents; friends, family or other relatives. In this touchpoint there is a key opportunity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
related to advertisement of the new delivery system, passed by word-of-mouth between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
residents. The opportunity is: 
 
●
KO3: The new drone solutions can be advertised to island residents
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through word-to-mouth.  
 
This opportunity originates from the issue of island residents distrusting the postal system on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the island and stimulate the following core emotions with users: 
 
●
Disappointment 
●
Irritation 
 
These core emotions are the same as users experience in touchpoint 1, as described previously,
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
     
 
 
meaning that they are in the category of activated and unpleasant. The opportunity for this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
touchpoint is concerning advertisement of the drone system to the island residents. For this
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
kind of advertisement, which is passed by word-of-mouth, the experience should stimulate
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emotions in the pleasant and activated category. It should be in the activated category because
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
of the assumption the advertisements like this should stimulate active emotions for it to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
passed more effectively between users. Emotions in this category of the circumplex model can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be the emotions of desire or inspiration, which might be appropriate for generating some sort
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of attraction towards the technology. In the theory of rich emotions, the indulging quality is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
ideal for stimulating these emotions with users (Fokkinga & Desmet, 2013). 
SOLUTION 
In this touchpoint of the experience journey, the users have a non-physical contact with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
postal system or mail man, through communication with other fellow island residents. Unlike
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in touchpoint 1 there are no real clearly defined channel, where these talks and this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communication happens, other than the exchange of information is passed through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
word-of-mouth.  
The issue present in touchpoint 2 is a general distrust in the postal system, due to unstable and
 
 
 
 
       
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unreliable deliveries on the islands. The introduction of the drone delivery system should
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
remove this unreliability by cutting away the time-consuming journeys to and from islands.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consequently this introduction should remove the foundation for the distrust towards the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery system, but one could speculate that this is actually the case. Therefore the solution for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 61 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:63==
 
touchpoint 2 should mitigate this consumer distrust, by stimulating emotions that ensures an
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increased user experience.  
As mentioned previously, in order to stimulate the desired emotions of desire and inspiration,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the design should induce the indulgent quality. The concept for doing this is to have an island
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
meeting, where island residents, who are the users of this delivery system, are lectured in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
incredible possibilities and advantages of the drone delivery technology (Image 17). The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
upsides and benefits of the drone system should be emphasized on this meeting, to the point
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where island residents feel spoiled. Furthermore, this island meeting should include food and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drinks to even further promote the feeling of indulgence. Other than stimulating this rich
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emotion, this informatory meeting also has the ability to inform and demystify the drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology - just like the solution in touchpoint 1. Again, like in touchpoint 1, this could
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
potentially remove ignorance with the island community and hereby debunk myths and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
notions.  
 
 
Image 17:​ Informatory drone meeting with island 
residents. (Appendix 14)(Poster 2) 
 
The meeting should be arranged and held by the operators of the drone delivery service. Similar
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
meetings, arranged by organizations or businesses, that wish to be on good terms with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stakeholders, or even wish to sweet talk them slightly, are typical in the industry. An example is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
IT companies inviting people to breakfast, for them to hear about AI, but in turn advertise
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their company at the meeting (Appendix 8). 
TOUCHPOINT 3 
OPPORTUNITIES & EMOTIONS 
In touchpoint 3, users receive information on the delivery status of their parcel or mail. Like in
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
the first touchpoint, this is only valid to journeys initiated by trigger 3 - the delivery flow
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
Page 62 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:64==
 
initiated by ecommerce shopping or similar. This also implies that persona 1 is unimportant in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
   
this context. The key opportunity related to touchpoint 3 is:  
 
●
KO4.1: As early in the delivery process as possible, user can be assured
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through notifications, that deliveries will be delivered in time. 
 
The issue related to the opportunity is the one concerning the unstable and irregular mail
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
service experienced by island residents. This experience stimulate the following core emotions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with users: 
 
●
Irritation 
●
Disappointment 
 
Opposite to the previous touchpoints, the issue related to this one, is present in multiple
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
touchpoints along the experience journey. In this touchpoint there is however a key
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
opportunity, because it is the first touchpoint featuring this issue. By addressing the issue in
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this touchpoint the users of the delivery system can be assured of an on-time delivery as early in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
the process as possible. 
As described in the section on touchpoint 1, the core emotions are in the position of activated
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
and unpleasant. As was true to touchpoint 1, to better the user experience, the design must
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
again promote core emotions opposite to that of the negative experience; calm and pleasant. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this touchpoint, you could however speculate that users, while actively waiting for their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ordered good, experience emotions such as boredom, positioning the experience in the calm
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
section of the negative core affects (Desmet & Hekkert, 2007). Thus it can be argued that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
design instead should promote core experiences in the activated and pleasant section of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
circumplex model (Desmet & Hekkert, 2007). Therefore, in this touchpoint, suitable core
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emotions, for the design to stimulate, can be desire and fascination. 
A suitable rich quality for promoting the positive core emotions, desire and fascination, is the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
indulging quality which, if done right, is able to boost desire with users (Fokkinga & Desmet,
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
2013). Furthermore, the feeling of indulgence is able to make users forget personal restrictions
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Fokkinga & Desmet, 2013), which is useful in the pre-delivery phase, where users are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
temporarily restricted from having their ordered good, due to the duration of shipment. 
SOLUTION 
Touchpoint 3 is the place in the experience journey where users receive information regarding
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their delivery; tracking, delivery status and similar. Like in touchpoint 1, the channel in which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
this meeting between user and delivery service takes place, is usually a computer or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
smartphone. Thus the solution to trigger 3 must be through this media. 
The solution for this touchpoint is an idea based on a concept from the car-sharing company
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
DriveNow. The concept from DriveNow is called Handshake and lets people, using one of
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their cars, share their car directly with another user (Appendix 9). The idea is, that when you
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have entered a destination on the car’s satellite navigation system, you can hand over the car to
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
another user at the destination, without having to park the vehicle. After entering the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
destination in the car, the user can opt for the Handshake feature and this way avoid having to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
park the car, but at the same time help another user. The idea for touchpoint 3 works in a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
similar way. When mail or parcels have arrived at the mainland drone station, the user receives
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 63 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:65==
 
a text message with the option of sharing the drone ride with another user (Image 18). If the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
user opts for sharing the ride with some incoming mail, belonging to another fellow island
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resident, the delivery is postponed, but if instead the user chooses not to share the ride, the
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery is completed immediately. The assumption is, that most user will opt for having the
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery done immediately, thus not sharing the drone ride with other users. Not sharing is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
something that people, as children, are told is improper behavior, but at the same time, not
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
sharing lets people keep whatever to themselves. This ‘going against etiquette’ could stimulate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the feeling of indulgence and thus the intended emotion of desire. If the user chooses to share
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
the ride, then this would be a kind of self-sacrificial act. This self-sacrificing quality could in
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
turn stimulate pride and increase self-respect with users (Fokkinga & Desmet, 2013). 
Image 18:​ Notification of delivery status with the option of 
sharing drone flight with another user. (Appendix 15)(Poster 2) 
 
Both principle solutions generated in the morphology chart by the personas, Jacob and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Henrik, have a variant of the shared ride idea in touchpoint 3. The message with the option for
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
choosing a shared ride in the principle solution of persona, Jacob, has an environmental aspect
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the reason for sharing, where the other principle solution for persona, Henrik, has human
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aspect to the sharing option. The assumption is, that the human aspect in the sharing option is
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
easier relatable, for island residents, than the environmental aspect. Thus, this is the reason for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
going with the sub solution in touchpoint 3.  
TOUCHPOINT X 
OPPORTUNITIES & EMOTIONS 
The new touchpoint is a substitution for the touchpoints, related to the interaction between
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
users and pick-up and dispatch places, in the current experience journey. The new touchpoint
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is established with the introduction of the island based drone station and addresses the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interaction between this and the users. Key opportunities related to this new touchpoint are: 
Page 64 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
●
KO5: Parcels and mail can be picked up at the island based drone station.  
●
KO6: Day-to-day dispatches can be delivered by users to the island drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
station, and from there, through the drone delivery service, be delivered to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the mainland drone station. From here it can be picked up by mainland
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
mailmen and continue through the delivery system. 
●
KO7: Parcel and mail dispatches can be delivered, by users, to the island
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drone station, and from there, through the drone delivery service, be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivered to the mainland drone station. From here it can be picked up by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
mainland mailmen and continue through the delivery system. 
 
Several issues are related to these key opportunities. Pick up and dispatch of parcels often
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
require users to travel to the mainland, and day-to-day shipments are often late - or not possible
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
at all. These issues stimulate the following core emotions with users: 
 
●
Irritation 
●
Isolation 
●
Boredom 
 
In the circumplex model of core emotions, the core affects that will mitigate the above negative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emotions might be fascination and joyfulness (Desmet & Hekkert, 2007). If these emotions are
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
experienced by users of the delivery drone system, the bored, isolated, and irritated feeling, that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
user currently have, will be counteracted by the suggested pleasant emotions.  
Much like in touchpoint 1, the core emotions of fascination and joyfulness can be achieved by
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the introduction of rich qualities; eerie and thrilling (Fokkinga & Desmet, 2013). By adding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
something that are perceived as being thrilling or eerie, the joyfulness and fascination can be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stimulated. 
SOLUTION 
The introduction of an island based drone station will in itself solve some of the issues being
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experienced in the touchpoints, related to pick-up and dispatch of mail and parcels. That is the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
issue concerning the need for trips to the mainland, in order for island residents to ship various
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
items, but also the issue regarding day-to-day shipments. With the introduction of the drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system, users are able to deliver mail to the island-based drone station, where parcels and letters
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in turn are transported, with drone, to the mainland-based drone station. From here mail can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be picked up by various delivery companies. Furthermore, day-to-day deliveries can be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivered to the mainland drone station and from there be flown to the island drone station,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hereby reducing the risk of delays due to ferry journeys and alike.  
As noted in the section on island characteristics, and as seen from the persona types, a large
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
part of the users of the postal system, on the islands, are elderly. Because of this, the drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
station, which could be perceived as relatively modern and technological, must accommodate
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly. Like with PostNord’s Pakkeboks, users of the drone station must operate it through a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
touchscreen interface (Appendix 10). Using a touchscreen can however be a complex task for
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
elderly people. Therefore there should be a voice guide, which is able to instruct people in how
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
to operate the system. A system like this is well known from public touchscreen interfaces such
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 65 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:67==
 
as ticket machine interfaces, Rejsekort interfaces or modern smart TV’s with voice guidance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
features. 
In order for the touchpoint, between user and delivery system, to increase user experience, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solution should stimulate the core emotions of fascination and joyfulness. Much like in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
touchpoint 1, for these emotions to be stimulated with users, the rich qualities, eerie and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thrilling, should be induced. The concept for the new touchpoint, besides the above
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mentioned qualities, is to use the drone and drone station itself as an attraction. The drone,
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
and the mechanism loading the drone with mail and parcels, should be visible behind a glass
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
window in the drone station, for people to see when not in action (Image 19). Like with other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
attractions such as zoos and aquariums, the idea is, that the drone station should be a place for
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
people to go sightseeing. Moreover, when users are actually picking up or dispatching mail
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the drone station, this idea, of the drone as an attraction, should also be a source of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
excitement. This activity of seeing the drone in real life should create the sought after eerie and
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thrilling feeling, which in turn should stimulate the emotions of fascination and joyfulness.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Like in previous touchpoints, the idea of demystifying the drone, and the idea of island
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
residents making the drone their own, is also something that is of importance in the solution.
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
This way, the perceived risk with users is mitigated and uncorrect notions can be cleared.  
 
 
Image 19:​ Window in drone station for a clear view of the 
delivery drone and loading mechanics. (Appendix 16)(Poster 2) 
 
On the morphology chart, every persona in touchpoint X has chosen a sub function related to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
using the drone station as a mean of attraction. The final concept for this touchpoint is a
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
combination of these ideas, in order to create the best solution, which also accommodate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
persona characteristics.  
 
Page 66 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:68==
 
ROBUSTNESS OF BUSINESS MODEL 
As described in previous chapters, the different delivery companies tries in different ways to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reduce cost associated with delivering to the small non-bridged islands. Resident mailman time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is cut, some of the smallest islands are having regular mail delivered no further than the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mainland, and parcels are delivered to mainland parcelshops. Because of this, it is of course of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
great importance to have a good business case, when proposing to substitute ordinary delivery
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
methods with drones. The drone model needs to be at the same price, or preferably lower
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
price, compared to nowadays systems, if the project is to be launched for commercial purposes.  
The calculation on the price, for a drone system as proposed, is based on the DHL
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parcelcopter 4.0 (Wingcopter) (DHL, 2018, link) which has a price of approximately 400.000
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
DKK. Furthermore, the calculation is based on the price for a single island, with a take-off spot
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
on and off the island, that has the capability of loading and unloading parcels to the drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
automatically. For running the drone delivery system, it is assumed that it needs a person in a
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
   
   
     
supervision centre supervising the operation, as well as a maintenance person maintaining and
 
 
 
 
   
     
 
 
 
 
repairing the drone. Furthermore, it is assumed that each maintenance and supervision person
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is able to look after 20 drones. Other assumptions for the operation can be seen from Table 5
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
(Appendix 11). 
 
 
YEARLY COSTS, DKK 
DEPRECIATION 
80.000 
POWER CONSUMPTION 
5,475 
MAINTENANCE 
25.000 
SALARY, SUPERVISION 
17.500 
SALARY, MAINTENANCE 
17.500 
DRONE STATION 
200.000 
TOTAL COST 
340.006 DKK 
Table 5: ​Yearly costs, drone delivery system  
 
As seen from Table 5, the total price of running a single delivery drone on an island, with a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
take-off station on and off the island, is 340.006 DKK per year. For this amount of money, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ordinary mailman is not substituted but instead helped, by eliminating the journeys travelling
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with ferry. The drone delivery system is furthermore able to eliminate ferry trips for both
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parcel delivery guys and island-situated parcelshop owners.  
Looking at the price estimates for the operating costs of today’s delivery system, the costs are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
about 100.000 DKK higher than the costs of operating the drone (Table 6). As described, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drone is however not able to substitute the mailman and parcel delivery guy completely, as mail
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
still needs to be household distributed, and parcels delivered to the drone take-off station. An
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
optimistic guess will be, that current costs will be able to be cut in half, meaning that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approximately 220.000 DKK should be added to the costs of operating the drone. This equates
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 67 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:69==
 
to a total drone delivery operation cost of approximately 560.000 DKK, making it 120.000
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
DKK more expensive than the delivery system of today. 
 
 
YEARLY COSTS, DKK 
DEPRECIATION 
16.500 
FUEL CONSUMPTION 
12.166 
MAINTENANCE 
22.000 
SALARY, MAILMAN 
320.000 
SALARY, PARCEL GUY 
32.000 
FERRY TRIP 
36.500 
TOTAL COST 
439.167 DKK 
Table 6: ​Yearly costs, current delivery system  
 
A large part of the costs associated with operating the drone, is the cost of the drone stations,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
which are assumed to cost 1.000.000 DKK a piece. A way of mitigating the increased cost of
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
operating drones, can be to have a central mainland based drone station servicing multiple
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
islands in the nearby surroundings. This could be done in the South Funen Archipelago, where
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
several small non-bridged islands are gathered in a relatively small area, as seen from the picture.
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Within this 20 km radius, 8 of the small islands are situated, meaning that one mainland-based
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drone station could service 8 island based stations (Image 20). This would decrease yearly
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
operating costs with 87.500 DKK per year, making the price of operation almost similar to that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the current delivery system, assuming that a single drone will still be able to service all
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
islands. 
 
 
Image 20:​ 20 kilometer radius in the South Funen Archipelago 
 
Page 68 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:70==
 
CONCEPT EVALUATION 
THE INTERVIEWS 
The idea behind doing the concept evaluation is to test out the different ideas in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
redesigned, or new, touchpoints (Appendix 18). The thoughts behind the concept are based
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on theories and decisions by the author, but user opinions might not be aligned with these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reflections. Thus, it is crucial to test out concepts, before continuing development of a project
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
to further increase completion.  
The aim is to test if solutions will stimulate the emotions which are intended for each specific
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
touchpoint. The concept evaluation will test out user experience in the following four
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
redesigned touchpoints for the drone solution: 
 
●
Touchpoint 1: The pop-up window with drone facts and possibility to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
obtain more information from website, when defining drone delivery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
point. 
●
Touchpoint 2: The island meeting with dinner and information on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drone delivery solution. 
●
Touchpoint 3: Notification of delivery status with the possibility of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sharing ride with another user. 
●
Touchpoint, New 2: Drone station with window for a view of the drone.
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Furthermore the possibility of the drone station being an island attraction. 
 
Before questioning respondents on the actual touchpoints, the general concept of the drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery solution has been explained.  
To test out each of the touchpoints, in relation to the context of the delivery journey, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience journey has been walked through with the respondents. Upon reaching each of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
touchpoints in the flow, the questions for that specific concept have been asked. The poster
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presenting the envisioned flow has thus been used as a boundary object for stimulating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
dialogue with the respondents. Furthermore, the poster depicts illustrations of the concepts for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each touchpoint, making the ideas more understandable.  
The concept evaluation has been done with individual island residents through informal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interviews and has been done in a semi-structured way with room for discussion outside of the
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
predefined questions.  
The interviews for the concept evaluation has been conducted with three respondents from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the island of Fejø and has been done individually.  
 
TOUCHPOINT 1 
Respondent 2 and 3 react to the illustration of the pop-up window with some uneasiness,
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
because of the illustration of the drone. When presented to the illustration, the first reaction
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from respondent 2 is: 
 
Page 69 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:71==
 
“I hope that it will not fall down”  
- Respondent 2 
 
Respondent 3 reacts to the illustration of the pop-up in a similar way as respondent 2. 
 
“Is my parcel really going up in this?!”  
- Respondent 3 
 
Respondent 2 furthermore associates the picture of the delivery drone with something that
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
arrives fast and states that you would expect that when seeing it. Respondent 3 is however a bit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
     
   
 
more sceptical about the idea of having a drone illustrated than respondent 2. She thinks that it
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
creates unnecessary unease with the users and would rather have the specifications of the drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
only.  
Respondent 1 would not really care about the pop-up and think that it is unimportant. It
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
   
would not make a difference for him and he would close it down immediately. 
 
TOUCHPOINT 2 
In the touchpoint regarding the informatory drone meeting, respondent 1 (Appendix 19) and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
2 (Appendix 20) would go. The main reasons for wanting to go, would be the free food and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the fact, that you are able to learn more about the drone delivery system. Respondent 1 and 2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
generally agree, that an informatory meeting like this would be beneficial for demystifying and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to become smarter. In regards to the food, respondent 2 thinks that free food would get a lot of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
people to attend, but do not think that food should be fancy. 
 
“... otherwise it can be it might be seen as a bribe. It should not be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
extravagant.”  
- Respondent 2 
 
Respondent 3 (Appendix 21) from the concept evaluation interview, do not think that she
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would go to the meeting. She thinks, it sounds like, it would only be an informatory meeting
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
on a topic that had already been decided. If she would go to a meeting like that, then she would
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
want the have influence on decisions. 
 
TOUCHPOINT 3 
All respondents in the concept evaluation would not share the ride with another user, because
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they do not see the reason for doing it. They all lack an incentive for sharing, like a financial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
gain or similar.  
 
“It might be a waste of drone-ride, but I would not care.”  
- Respondent 1 
 
TOUCHPOINT, NEW 2 
Respondent 2 and 3 really likes the idea of being able to see the drone through a window and
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
thinks that it would be a interesting place to go and see. With a smile, respondent 2 says that,
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
instead of going to the cinema, you could go and see the drone station.  
 
Page 70 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:72==
 
““There are not that many cinemas on Fejø, so you could go and take a look
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
at the drone”  
- Respondent 2 
 
“it would be a nice place to take your grandchildren to see”  
- Respondent 2 
 
Both respondent 2 and 3 would be curious about the drone station and think that it would be
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
inspiring to go and see - furthermore a good topic for conversation. 
 
Respondent 1 thinks that it is okay with the glass window in the drone station, but he would
   
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not really care and does not think it would matter. The main purpose is, according to Steen, to
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
have parcels delivered and to be able to send them. 
 
“In the first week I would perhaps go and see it, but not after that”  
- Respondent 1 
CONCLUSION TO CONCEPT EVALUATION 
As possibly can be expected with the first round of validation of a design concept, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
respondents’ reactions to the different ideas were not exactly as expected. The idea of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept is to stimulate rich emotions in the different touchpoint, which in turn should
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stimulate positive emotions. When not encountering the different touchpoints in real life, but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
instead are presented to mere illustrations of the things, it cannot be expected that experiences
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
are the same. Presumably, respondents will have stimulated the same emotions as in real life,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
but merely to a low degree. 
With this in mind, some of the ideas behind the touchpoints seem to have functioned more or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
less as expected, and some in a lower degree. The reactions from respondents in relation to the
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
touchpoints, and sought after rich qualities, can be seen from Table 7. 
 
 
 
Page 71 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:73==
 
 
 
Sought after emotions 
Reaction from 
respondents 
Conclusion 
Touchpoint 
1 
Thrill
and
Eeriness,
for
 
 
 
 
stimulating fascination and
 
 
 
joyfulness 
Two
of
the respondents
 
 
 
 
reacted close to what was
 
 
 
 
 
expected,
given
their
 
 
 
somewhat anxious reaction
 
 
 
to the idea. One of the two
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
did however think it created
 
 
   
 
an unnecessary unease and
 
 
 
 
did not like it. Oppositely,
 
 
 
 
 
respondent 1 did not react
   
 
 
 
to the concept.   
To stimulate the eeriness
 
 
 
 
with
respondent
1,
the
 
 
 
 
illustration
could
be
 
 
 
substituted with a movie
 
 
 
 
clip or a similar to increase
 
   
 
 
 
the
visual
impact.
The
 
 
 
 
protective frame (Fokkinga
 
 
 
&
Desmet,
2013)
should
 
 
 
 
however also be enhanced
 
 
 
 
for the negative emotion,
 
 
 
 
experienced by respondent
 
 
 
3 to be reversed.  
Touchpoint 
2 
Indulgence, for stimulating
 
 
 
desire and inspiration 
Two
of
the respondents
 
 
 
 
would like to go because of
 
 
 
 
 
 
the food and the possibility
 
 
 
 
 
to acquire information on
 
 
 
 
the
topic.
The
last
 
 
 
 
respondent did not want to
 
 
 
 
 
go because of the lack of
 
 
 
 
 
 
co-determination
in
the
 
 
 
drone solution. 
For two of the respondents,
 
 
 
 
 
the concept is assumed to
 
 
 
 
 
be on the right path and
 
 
 
 
 
 
they have reacted close to
 
 
 
 
 
what expected. To get the
 
 
 
 
 
last respondent on board in
 
 
 
 
 
the solution, the meeting
 
 
 
 
could
include
some
 
 
 
co-determination
in
the
 
 
 
solution; drone-color, name,
 
 
 
positioning of drone station
 
 
 
 
etc. This could possibly also
 
 
 
 
 
increase indulgence.  
Touchpoint 
3 
Indulgence, for stimulating
 
 
 
desire and fascination 
Neither of the respondents
 
 
 
 
could
see
any
idea
of
 
 
 
 
 
sharing the drone-ride with
 
 
 
 
another user. Thus, they did
 
 
 
 
 
not want to share.  
The
idea
behind
this
 
 
 
 
touchpoint
is
that
user
 
 
 
 
should not share the ride,
 
 
 
 
 
thus
stimulating
 
 
indulgence.
In
order
for
 
 
 
 
indulgence
to
be
 
 
 
stimulated,
users
should
 
 
 
however
go
against
 
 
 
etiquette somehow. Thus, it
 
 
   
should be clearer that they
 
 
 
 
 
are
actually
‘cheating’
if
 
 
 
 
they choose not to share. 
Touchpoint 
New 2 
Thrill
and
Eeriness,
for
 
 
 
 
stimulating fascination and
 
 
 
joyfulness 
Respondent 2 and 3 react
 
 
 
 
 
to the concept as hoped
 
 
 
 
 
and were both quite thrilled
 
 
 
 
 
with the idea. The other
 
 
 
 
 
respondent did not really
 
 
 
 
see the point and did not
 
 
 
 
 
 
have the desired reaction to
 
 
 
 
 
the concept.  
The reactions from two of
 
 
 
 
 
the respondents was quite
 
 
 
 
successful and somewhat of
 
 
 
 
a success for the concept.
 
 
 
 
 
For
onboarding
the
last
 
 
 
 
respondent,
other
 
 
strategies
for stimulating
 
 
 
the desired emotions could
 
 
 
 
be implemented. 
Table 7:​ Reactions from concept evaluation and conclusions 
in relation to the sought after emotions. 
 
 
Page 72 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:74==
 
 
DISCUSSION 
In this section the author will discuss the previous sections of this thesis, among which the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
theories, which are the basis for this thesis, will be discussed in relation to approach and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
suitability. Moreover, the analysis and design concepts will be discussed in relation to validity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and credibility. Lastly suggestions for further work of this thesis will be addressed.  
 
 
Page 73 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:75==
 
DISCUSSION ON THEORY 
The theoretical framework used for this thesis is primarily based on the theory of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience flow mapping, as proposed by Philips (Philips, 2014). This tool is designed for, and
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
used, by Philips to redesign complex service systems, like those one would find in hospitals. For
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
this thesis however, the system, concerning the delivery service, is not only redesigned, but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
disrupted with the introduction of the new technology. One could question, if the experience
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
flow concept still suits a design task like this.  
The experience flow maps out experiences in the system, in which users currently moves.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Emotions experienced in this current situation originates from the interplay between users and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the world in which they exist. With the introduction of a delivery drone, which many users
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
have never even heard of, let alone seen, can emotions and experiences from the ‘old’ system
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
still be used as design clues for the envisioned experience journey? After all, this is a whole new
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
technology, which users need to relate to, and several of the former situations, which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stimulated the emotions with users, have been removed. One could argue, with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
introduction of a disruptive technology like this, that the new situation is so completely
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
different, that emotions from the ‘old’ system no longer are valid. You could however also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
argue, that introducing a new technology itself, will not change the way users perceive the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
product or service in question. In this case, concerning the postal delivery system on the small
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
non-bridged islands, users generally feel irritated and dissatisfied with the service. Even though
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the introduction of a delivery drone might solve many of the problems being experienced by
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
users, one could argue that the general distrust will not disappear in parallel. Consequently, it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
would be fair to assume, that using the experience flow mapping tool, as a theoretical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
framework for this thesis, is justifiable.  
Other than mapping the user experience, the workflow of the mailmen, connected to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
island deliveries, is also mapped out. The reason for mapping out both flows is to understand
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
the interplay between user and delivery system. This is however a modification of the original
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
Philips Experience Flow tool (Philips, 2014), worked out by the author of this thesis, and one
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could question, if this alterations has worked out as planned. Mapping the workflow certainly
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
has provided an overview of the complexity of the delivery system itself. By displaying the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
complexity of the workflow, the places with room for improvements has been highlighted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
visually, thereby making it the intangible tangible. This way, in the design phase, the places
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with room for improvement were always obvious. This is however an understanding purely in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
relation to the workflow, but not the interplay with the experience mapping of the user. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
order for the mapping of both flows to be successful, the visualization should provide some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mutual understanding between the two. In order for the combination of the two flows to have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been successful, the interplay between the two must have provided some understanding of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
situation, which one flow in itself could not have. Thus the hypothesis is; if the interplay
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
between the experience flow and workflow has provided some holistic understanding, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
combination of the two has worked out. In the case where users experience the delivery system
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as being unreliable and irregular, the visualization of the workflow indeed provided some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding on the reason for these issues. The travel between island and mainland by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
various mailmen is clear from the workflow and this in particular is the reason for the problems
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
being experienced by users. Consequently it can be concluded that the merging of flows has in
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
fact proved valuable for this thesis.  
Page 74 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:76==
 
DISCUSSION ON ANALYSIS 
The aforementioned experience flow is based solely upon the user research made prior to the
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mapping. Therefore in order for the mapping tool to tell the accurate story of the users and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their experiences, as well as the context in which the user operates, the data collection needs to
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be of a substantial size. When Philips use the Experience Flow tool for designing holistic
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
patient experiences in the healthcare system, they use a multidisciplinary team for collecting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
data from workshops, interviews, shadowing, online community research and other (Philips,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2014). The various data collection tools are the basis for understanding the people and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
surrounding system. If on the other hand the data collection is not adequate, there is a risk that
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
     
 
 
the user and system might be misinterpreted, which could lead to flaws in the design.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Therefore it is essential that the amount of stakeholder research is sufficient in relation to
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
understanding user and context.  
One could question if a single person, in the timeframe of a master's thesis will be able to
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
collect an amount of data similar to that of the multidisciplinary team at Philips, thus having
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
sufficient data to provide a real life image of the context. This is perhaps a reasonable question
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
to ask and the answer will likely be ‘No’. For this thesis, the possible insufficiency applies both
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the data collection previous to the mapping, but also to the opportunity- and ideation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phases, where no stakeholders has been included. Furthermore, analysis on the island resident
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
characteristics were done on two islands alone. One could question if these two islands are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
representative to all 27 small non-bridged islands in Denmark. The two islands were picked
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
because of their differences in relation to geography and infrastructure, thus attempting to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
capture potential differences. Having said that, there is no assurance that data is representable.
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
These points, about data quantity and representability, are naturally sources of error, where
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analysis could have misled the design work.  
Other sources of errors relates to the literature study and participants in these. A large part of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
this thesis is based upon literature findings, which in turn are based upon answers, attitudes
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and responses from participants. The participants and respondents in the literature findings
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are from several places around the world. One could question if literature findings in that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
respect are comparable to island residents’ attitudes and personal opinions. The assumption is,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
that literature findings are comparable, but if they are not, this is a source of error.  
DISCUSSION ON CONCEPT 
In the study by Boucher (Boucher, 2016), participants take part in the workshop on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subject of acceptance of drones. In this study, participants conclude, that the use of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
commercial drones for delivery purposes is not an acceptable use case. Thus, one could
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
question the actual basis for this thesis - is it a viable use case if participants in this study oppose
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
this idea. The attendees in the study by Boucher (Boucher, 2016) are generally rather dismissive
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
towards the idea of drones in general, compared to participants in the other research. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
study also discusses the issue on privacy, and here the discussion is based on the use case
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
concerning urban drone flights. The assumption is, that this urban drone use case leads to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
negative attitudes with participants, thereby affecting their stance towards drones - herein,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
those for delivery purposes. The use case in this master’s thesis is in rural areas, with take-off
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
and landing away from populated areas. Thus, it is assumed that restraints from participants,
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
Page 75 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:77==
 
towards delivery drones in this use case, will be reduced. Consequently, the statements from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Boucher et al study, regarding delivery drones, are neglected in the final concept. 
The final concept itself is developed from the analysis of the current experience journey (Poster
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1). As mentioned previously, the experience journey is developed from the various data
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
collected during the framing of this thesis. Furthermore as noted, the amount of data, which is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
the basis for the experience journey, is lesser than the amount that would be collected in the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
industry. Therefore, one could question the validity of the final design of the experience
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
journey and sub solutions. As mentioned, if the data is either misleading or insufficient,
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
misinterpretations might occur, which in the worst case could translate into design errors. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
final design in this master’s thesis is not assumed to be flawed, but the fact that the amount of
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
data, which is the basis of design, is not on an industry level, has its limitations. Consequently,
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the final solution should be viewed as concept, or idea, on how to stimulate good user
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience in relation to delivery drones - not a final solution. 
In the concept, proposed in this thesis, the theory of rich emotions has been used for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stimulating positive emotions with users (Fokkinga & Hekkert, 2013). In some of the sub
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design proposals, the eerie or thrilling qualities are used for stimulating fascination and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
joyfulness with the users. In the design proposals, the drone itself has been used for stimulating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
these emotions. To put it in another way, the drone is used as a tool, in order for users to
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience thrill and eeriness. One could question if it is good idea to use the drone as a tool for
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
stimulating fright and anxiety, if the final goal is for it to be domesticated by the users. Also
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
taken into consideration that literature states, that perceived risk is a major factor in relation to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
   
 
 
customer engagement. One could question, if this stimulation of thrilling- and eerie qualities
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could actually increase the perceived risk with users. In the theory of rich emotions, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
protective frame, used for reversing negative emotions, should however counteract this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possibility. In the design proposal, the detachment- and safety zone frames are used for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reversing these negative emotions, and the assumption is, that these protective frames will be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enough for counteracting the negative stimuli and perceived risk.  
In the final concept, drone stations are used in the system of delivery. These drone stations are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
assumed to be relatively expensive, compared to other parts of the drone delivery system. One
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could question if these stations are necessary for the system to function, or if they can be left
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
out to save money in the overall design. Because of privacy issues, among others, the drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery system cannot do household deliveries, but still requires a resident mailman for that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
task. Household deliveries could quite possible have removed the need for a drone station, but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
that is not the case with centralized deliveries. This is to avoid the risk of theft of mail and
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parcels, and to protect it against the environments, when left by the drone. The smallest of the
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
islands could possibly have another solution than the drone station, where the drone delivers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mail in watertight crates or boxes. This would however still pose a risk of theft, even though it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
could be assumed, that this would not be an issue on these smallest islands. This idea has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
however not been included in the final concept proposal. 
The business model (Appendix 11) of the drone delivery system, as proposed in this thesis, is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
more expensive than the delivery system of today. A model where a single mainland-based
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
drone station services 8 islands is however proposed, making the current and envisioned
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery system similar expensive. This is however with the assumption that a single drone can
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
service all 8 islands. One could question, if it is reasonable to suggest that one drone is able to
 
   
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
service all islands. With the range of the drones of today, and with the distance between islands
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and mainland in mind, the drone might complete two island deliveries before needing to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 76 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:78==
 
recharge. This would prevent the drone of completing all morning deliveries within a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
reasonable amount of time, meaning that one will not be sufficient. Therefore, even though a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
single mainland-based drone station could support 8 islands, one drone will not be enough.
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consequently, the drone delivery system will either way be more expensive than the current
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
one.  
FURTHER WORK 
If this concept is to be developed further, the limitations, from this thesis has to be addressed.
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As discussed in the previous section on the analysis, because of the limitations from the fact
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that this thesis has been produced single-handedly, the user research and inclusion of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stakeholders during the design phase, has not been on a level as described by Philips in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
theory of experience flow mapping (Philips, 2014). In future work, more user research, in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
form of interviews, workshops and shadowing should be conducted, to be sure that analysis
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has discovered all patterns and nuances. 
The development of the final solution for the drone delivery system should as well be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improved, with the inclusion of various stakeholders and multidisciplinary engineers in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design phase. An introduction of a new and complex technology like delivery drones, require
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more work than can be done in a master’s thesis alone, which is why the project in the future
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
must go from design concept to finished design proposal. 
The responses from respondents in the concept evaluation must also be taken into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consideration if work on the delivery system is continued. Some of the ideas behind the
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept seem to have worked, but they must be reiterated to achieve desired results and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reactions from users. 
Lastly, as the drone delivery system is assumed to be more expensive than the current system,
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
further work could research in ways to decrease costs. This would require further analysis of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the system and interviews with various stakeholders and users to investigate in the possibility of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
eliminating island based drone station.  
 
 
Page 77 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:79==
 
CONCLUSION 
The goal of this thesis has been to investigate how user-experience-thinking can be included in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
a user journey related to delivery drones. Furthermore, look into what kind of use case is viable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
in relation to public opinions and technology.  
Through the literature it is found that use cases, concerning drones in urban environments, are
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
nonviable, with especially privacy being a major factor in the public attitude against this use.
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Instead, delivery drones, to be used in rural environments, are more viable. This is true in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
relation to public opinions, but also financially, where this is a more profitable business,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
compared to urban use. Furthermore, in relation to public opinions, the literature research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
found that users’ perceived risk in relation delivery drones is a major factor in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
domestication of the technology.  
To design for the rural use case, a location in Denmark, which could represent this type of area,
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
had to be found. Small non-bridged islands was found to be representable of these areas, as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
they have poor infrastructure, low population density and are far from bigger cities. By
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
researching the characteristics of these islands it was found that island residents are very social
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and have a tight community. Furthermore, in relation to demography, average ages are
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
substantially higher on these islands than almost anywhere else in Denmark. These findings,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
representative of island residents, were used for designing the experience journey concerning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the delivery drone system on the small non-bridged islands.  
The concept of an experience flow has been used for analyzing and designing, respectively the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
current and envisioned situation, in relation to postal deliveries. In order to attain the full
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
overview of the current delivery situation, the workflow of mailmen has been combined with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the flow related to user experiences. This alteration of the existing theory, by the introduction
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of workflows, proved useful for providing a mutual understanding of the interplay between
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
user and delivery system.  
Through the analysis of the current situation it was found, that users on the non-bridged
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
islands experience various issues related to the delivery system. These issues are mostly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
connected to the geography and infrastructure of the islands. The delivery system has a hard
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
time servicing the islands, resulting in cancelled service from some operators as well as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
irregularities and distrust from users. Likewise the island residents are often required to travel
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
long distances in order to pick up or dispatch parcels and mail. Because of these issues, island
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
residents experience disappointment and frustration. 
To turn around these negative emotions, a new experience flow has been designed with the use
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the rich emotions theory. The rich emotions theory has been used throughout the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sub-proposals for the design concept and has proved useful for improving user experience,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with the introduction of delivery drones. To conclude, an experience journey, with reference
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to literature findings, user-specific data and the rich emotions theory, has been developed in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
order to increase user experience, in relation to the introduction of delivery drones, on small
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
non-bridged islands in Denmark. 
 
 
Page 78 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:80==
 
REFERENCES 
Boeijen, A. van, Daalhuizen, J., Zijlstra, J., & Schoor, R. van der. (2012). Delft
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Design
Guide.
​Design
Engineering​.
 
 
 
 
http://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004 
 
Boucher, P. (2016). ‘You Wouldn’t have Your Granny Using Them’: Drawing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Boundaries Between Acceptable and Unacceptable Applications of Civil Drones.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Science
and
Engineering
Ethics​,
​22​(5),
1391–1418.
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://doi.org/10.1007/s11948-015-9720-7 
 
Boucher, P. (2014). Domesticating the Drone: The Demilitarisation of Unmanned
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aircraft
for
Civil
Markets.
​Science
and
Engineering
Ethics​.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://doi.org/10.1007/s11948-014-9603-3 
 
Chalupníčková, H., Bahenský, P., Sýkora, V., & Heralová, D. (2014). The Use of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Drones in Air Cargo Transportation. ​Economy & Society & Environment​. 
 
Clothier, R. A., Greer, D. A., Greer, D. G., & Mehta, A. M. (2015). Risk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Perception and the Public Acceptance of Drones. ​Risk Analysis​, ​35​(6), 1167–1183.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://doi.org/10.1111/risa.12330 
 
Cour-Harbo, A. La. (2018). The Value of Step-by-Step Risk Assessment for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unmanned Aircraft. In ​2018 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Systems, ICUAS 2018​. ​http://doi.org/10.1109/ICUAS.2018.8453411 
 
Danmarks Statistik. (2015). Folketingsvalget 18. juni - Danmark, Færøerne, Grønland.
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
https://www.dst.dk/Site/Dst/Udgivelser/GetPubFile.aspx?id=26329&sid=ftvalg2
015 
 
Desmet,
P.,
&
Hekkert,
P.
(2007).
​Framework
of
Product
Experience
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human-Product
Interaction.
​International
Journal
of
Design​,
​1​,
13–23.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://doi.org/10.1210/en.2017-00348 
 
DHL. (2014).​ Unmanned Aerial Vehicle in Logistics, 1–19. 
 
DHL (2019).​ Remote Area List 2019 
 
European Aviation Safety Agency, EASA. (2015). Proposal to create common rules
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for operating drones in Europe, 2–7. 
 
Finn, R. L., & Wright, D. (2012). Unmanned aircraft systems: Surveillance, ethics and
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
privacy in civil applications. ​Computer Law and Security Review​, ​28​(2), 184–194.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2012.01.005 
 
Page 79 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:81==
 
Fokkinga, S. F., & Desmet, P. M. A. (2013). ​Ten ways to design for disgust, sadness,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and other enjoyments: A Design Approach to Enrich Product Experiences with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Negative
Emotions.
​International
Journal
of
Design​.
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2004.1512 
 
JD.com (2016).​ Drone Delivery Program Factsheet, 1-2 
 
Joerss, M., Schröder, J., Neuhaus, F., Klink, C., & Mann, F. (2016). Parcel delivery:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
The
future
of
last
mile.
​McKinsey
Report​,
(September),
1–32.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://doi.org/10.1007/s00359-002-0310-1 
 
Juul, J. S., & Steiner, F. (2017). ​Et aldrende Danmarkskort - 25 års forskel på ældste og
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
yngste postnummer. 
 
Kalbach, J., & James. (2016). ​Mapping experiences : a guide to creating value through
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
journeys, blueprints and diagrams​. ​O’Reilly​. 
 
Khan, R., Tausif, S., & Javed Malik, A. (2018). Consumer acceptance of delivery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drones
in
urban
areas.
​International
Journal
of
Consumer
Studies​.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://doi.org/10.1111/ijcs.12487 
 
Lewis, P. (2011). You’re being watched: there’s one CCTV camera for every 32 people
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in UK. ​The Guardian​. 
 
Lidynia, C., Philipsen, R., Zie, M., & Human, Á. (2017). Advances in Human
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Factors
in
Robots
and
Unmanned
Systems,
​784​,
317–329.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-94346-6 
 
Mittendorf, C., Franzmann, D., & Ostermann, U. (2017). Why would customers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
engage on drone deliveries? ​23rd Americas Conference in Information Systems​, ​3 of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
5​. 
 
Philips. (2014). Experience Flows - Understanding People and their experiences to
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
deliver meaningful innovations. ​Inside Innovation​. 
 
Sandbrook, C. (2015). The social implications of using drones for biodiversity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conservation. ​Ambio​. ​http://doi.org/10.1007/s13280-015-0714-0 
 
Trafik- og Byggestyrelsen.​ Individuel tilladelse Post Danmark (2016). 
 
ULØ Udvalget for Landdistrikter og Øer. (2016). Bilag 25, Postservice på de danske
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
småøer. 
https://www.ft.dk/samling/20161/almdel/ULØ/bilag/25/1691163/index.htm 
 
 
Page 80 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
==PAGE:82==
 
Yoo, W., Yu, E., & Jung, J. (2018). ​Drone delivery: Factors affecting the public’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attitude and intention to adopt. ​Telematics and Informatics​, ​35​(6), 1687–1700.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2018.04.014 
 
Links 
Airbus (2017) 
https://www.airbus.com/newsroom/news/en/2017/11/skyways-urban-air-delivery-explored.
html 
 
CAAS (2018) 
https://www.caas.gov.sg/about-caas/newsroom/Detail/caas-easa-and-airbus-collaborate-to-ad
vance-safety-of-unmanned-aircraft-systems-in-urban-environment 
 
SaDS 
https://danske-smaaoer.dk/ 
 
DHL (2018) 
https://www.dpdhl.com/en/media-relations/specials/dhl-parcelcopter.html 
 
Erhvervsstyrelsen  
https://regionalt.erhvervsstyrelsen.dk/yderomraader-2014-2020 
 
Forbes (2016) 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/curtissilver/2016/12/15/amazon-prime-air-drone-delivery/#43
530faabb4a 
 
Finans (2017) 
https://finans.dk/erhverv/ECE9980457/postnords-hemmelige-oenskeliste-goer-det-dyrere-for
-danskerne-at-sende-post-til-udkantsdanmark/?ctxref=ext 
 
TV2 Nyheder (2016) 
http://nyheder.tv2.dk/samfund/2016-05-31-post-danmark-indforer-ny-service-send-brevet-i-
dag-fremme-i-morgen 
 
Zipline 
http://www.flyzipline.com/ 
 
X 
https://x.company/wing/ 
 
 
 
Page 81 of 82
Emil Nørgaard Lüthgens 
